FRAUD and OPPRESSION detected and arraigned.

Or An Appeal to the Parliament of England in a short Narative and Deduction of
several Actions at Law, depending in the Ordinary Courts of Justice in Holland
and Zealand, between diverse Subjects of the King of England, and the Subjects
of the States General of the Seven United Provinces.

With several remarkable Observations and Animadversions thereupon, by the
Creditors of Sr. William Courten, Sr. Paul Pyndar, Sr. Edward Littleton and
Willam Courten Esquire deceased.

Faithfully recollected and digested into a Method by G. C. a Lover of his
Country.

Whereunto are added Some necessary Advertisments concerning the improvement of
Navigation and Trade.

Printed Anno Domini 1676.

To the Right Honoble and Right Worfull:. The Lord Major of London; And the
Aldermen and Common Council of the City for the time being.
Right Honoble and Right Worfull:.
YOU were pleased to send a Letter of Recommendation, dated the 13th of
September. 1675. under your Citie-seal, to the Magistrates of Middleburgh, in my
favor, desiring their Lordships, to administer Justice with all Expedition,
according as the merits of the cause required, promising the like assistance,
and dispatch to any of their Inhabitants, who should have occasion to prosecute
any suits at Law in your Courts of Justice. What slender effects all your
forcible Arguments (concerning the maintenance of a good correspondence and
commerce) produced, the abstract of the proceedings thereupon will show.
Notwithstanding it was made known to the Burgermasters, that there is not a
parish in London, nor a County or City in England, where there are not
several Orphans, Widows and others (Creditors of Sr. William Courten and Sr.
Paul Pyndar) whose Complaints and Cries call aloud for satisfaction and
reparation from the Hollanders and Zealanders, that have taken the bread out of
their Mouths. I shall not make any long repetitions of the cases, the several
actions and pleadings being printed at large in French and Dutch by Mr. James
Boeve and my self, and published to the whole World (being necessitated
thereunto) for our Vindication in answer to a most scandalous Book set forth by
the Sons and Heirs of Mr. Peter Boudaen reflecting not only upon our persons,
but upon the Judicature of England, which the Lords of Middleburgh and the
Supreme Council at the Hague have wronged by their erroneous Judgments,
contrary to Law and Equity, and the practice of all other Nations.

I submit the whole Matter to Your favorable construction and interpretation:
Craving nothing more then Your good opinion, and just resentment of the Case in
a further recomendation to the Parliament. It being of most pernicious
consequence to all English men in their properties who daily trafficque into
Holland and Zealand to be rendered tenants at will (by such Presidents) to the
Magistrates of Middleburgh and Amsterdam. As to the Advertisments concerning
Navigation and Trade, I presume they will naturally fall under Your most
serious considerations, having now the fairest prospects under Heaven from
London, to all foreign Parts.

And that all prosperity and happiness may attend you and Your affairs in the
Honoble Government of the City under the most Ancient and Royal Charter
successively confirmed by the Crown of England, (amongst the rest of your
Votaries) shall be the daily prayers of him that is

Right Honoble and Right Worfull Amsterdam, August 10th. 1676. Your Most humble
and devoted Servant George Carew.

To the good Subjects of GREAT BRITAIGN, More especially to those that live in
the Kingdom of England, under the Government, and protection of that Crown.
Kind Countrymen.
IT is not the design of the Author (or any that claim under his Letters of
Administration by publishing these following Narratives and observations
thereupon) to create any new differences, but to put a Period unto the Old, and
prevent the like inconveniences and mischiefs upon mistakes for the future.

Now that the Reader may not lose his time, or trouble himself in perusing long
discourses without any pleasure or advantage; All things are contracted into
orders, acts and paragraphs, reduced under three heads, and this small volume
into three parts.

The first concerning particular actions at law depending between English men
and the Subjects of other nations in foreign Courts of Justice.

The second concerning Treaties of common Alliances, and Commerce between
Sovereign Princes and States.

The third concerning improvement of the trade and navigation belonging to
great Britaign and the Dominions thereof.

So that every man may take his choice at vacant hours to look into what place
his fancy and disposition leads him to. In the second part there are some
Speculations and animadversions intermixed upon diverse select Articles of Peace
and common Amity, that recriminate the actings of some persons, and demonstrate
the forgetfullness of others.

When Charles King of Sweden had regained his lands and Cities taken from his
Predecessors by the conquests of Christianus King of Denmark and Norway, It was
mutually agreed in a public Treaty that all the Prints and sculptures of
triumphs and trophies, which the Danes had in their houses of the former
victories against the Sweeds should be brought forth and burnt before the
Ratification of the peace in the open Marketplace, under great penalties for
any concealments, that the very thoughts of the Danish victories and Triumphs
might be razed out of the peoples remembrance. But the Hollanders have been so
unkind toward the English (which so often assisted them) that I cannot omit in
this Preface to let you know how they have published several books in Latin,
French, and Dutch, (yet publicly sold) with impressions of copper Plates and
sculptures, many whereof are sent into all parts of the World, presuming
thereby to intail both reproach and infamy upon the English Nation for ever.
Hornius the Historian Professor of Leyden, in his Book entitled Orbis
Politicus written in the year 1668. speaking of the forces of England, says:
De navali Anglorum Potentia nullum esse dubium, quippe in qua hodie post
Belgas, Gallos and Danos Caeteris Gentilibus sunt ei superiores: hoc autem A^.
1666. praelio Maritimo a Belgis Foederatis profligati, imperium quod
praetendebant Maritimum amiserunt.

Another Dutch Author in his Treatise de causis Belli Angliae, primi and
secundi, has filled his Book with many scandals and invectives against the
King and Kingdom.

A third who has written an Apendix to Cluverii Historia Mundi is not wanting
in his Calumnies upon particular persons and the Nation in General.

A fourth that writes in French, Le description Exact des guerres d'
Angliterre often Characterizeth the English for thievs and Cowards, and
mentions a brave answer that the States Ambassadors gave unto the King and the
Lord Chancelour Hyde during the treaty A^. 1662. Qu'en effet Mrs. les Estats
avoient fait paroistre devant le Monde l' estime qu'ils faisoient de l'amitie
du Roy, and plus, si (horse d' espoir) quelque inconvenients se donneroient par
la defaite de ces traitees il ne manqueroit rien a Mrs. les Estats pour leur
defenses.

Which the Hollanders do often boast of, and say, it did so terrify his
Majesty, that he presently concluded the Treaty of Alliance, and ratified the
same on the sixth of January 1663. old style.

The prints of attacking Chattam, and the sculptures of the 4 glorious
Victories in the last war, are lately engraven at Amsterdam, in the year 1675.
and hung up in many Barbers shops and Tap-houses; which renders England to be
as contemptible and poor in some men's eyes, as the Hollanders are insolent and
false in others. Who are not ignorant, that by several General Counsels at
Constance, Piza etc England was accounted the 4th part of Christendom? the
other 3 (viz) Germany France, and Italy, allways had due respects for that
little world encompassed with the main Ocean, in regard God and nature had from
the beginning designed Great Brittaign for the soveraignity of the sea. The
seven united Provinces were not then in Consideration (whose Land in the
Extent, exceeds not Yorkshire, and Kent) that now boast so much over us, Since
they have Magnified themselves by lessening others, and violating the Laws of
Common humanity and gratitude.

Yet these are the good people, that at all times, when they are pincht, and
brought under any necessity, or interrupted in their trade, call upon the
Subjects of England for help, and cry out to the Parliament to stand up for
their Religion and liberty, against the Enemies of the Dutch protestant
reformed Church and State: Although at the same time the Hollanders are in
strict leagues and confederacies with the popish Princes of Austria and Spain,
and in Combination with the Jews and Pagans to undermine the King of great
Britain and his Subjects in their trade and plantations in all quarters of the
Earth.

The old war with Spain for Religion is forgotten, interest now Governs the
world; and since trade is become the religion of Holland, and money their God,
no reason or Conscience can take place against them in civilactions, where
their interest is concerned; and in matters of State the French league with
England against those Israelites was cried down for a papisticall design.

After the last part with the Observations upon it, there follows the Authors
Advertisment and Protest in plain English for his damages, costs and interest;
who doubts not but to find Friends in England, that will be friends to Justice
for Justice sake, and as last undeceive themselves that have been so long
deceived by others.

Contracts lawfully made, cannot lawfully be broken; but if a covenant be
broken in a contract, the parties injured are left at liberty, And the
Hollanders are as well obliged to perform their treaties with Princes, as they
are prompt to break their Covenants with their Subjects.

Hague September. 2. 1676. I remain your Friend and Servant, G. C.

To the KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY. The humble petition of George Carew Esqr.
Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of Sr. William Courten and Sr. Paul
Pyndar Knights deceased. Assignee of Sr. Edward Littleton Baronet, Procurator
and Assignee of the Commissioners appointed to Execute a Commission under the
great Seal of England concerning Mr. Courtens Estate, on the behalf of himself,
and several others Proprietors and Creditors, your Majesty's good Subjects.
Shows.
THat the East India Company of the Netherlands did in the year 1643. take the
two Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura of London with all their
Goods and Merchandises, upon trading Voyages in the East Indies; and also all
the Books, Contracts, Writings, Bills of Lading and other Papers concerning the
same, contrary to Justice and Common right, which proved to the Damages of
your Petitioner and other Proprietors one hundred and fifty thousand pounds
Sterling and upwards, as by the several Depositions, Examinations and Reports
of the Judge of the High Court of Admiralty, and your Majesty's Advocates
General appears.

That in prosecution of Justice and reparation, your Majesty was most
graciously pleased particularly to own the said Cause, in a more Especial
manner in the Treaty A^. 1662. than all other Damages of that nature, to your
Subjects, in regard of the many services and Sufferings of Sr. William Courten,
Sr. Paul Pyndar and other Interessed, that had lent several great sums of
Money to his late Majesty your Father (of ever blessed Memory) at usual
interest, toward the ordinary Charge of the Crown, before the year 1640. which
remains yet unsatisfied; although most part of those Moneys (belonging to
Orphans and Widows) was taken up upon the Credit of the said Courten and Pyndar.

That upon the humble addresses of your Petitioner and Several of the other
Proprietors and Creditors in the year 1672. claiming under your Petitioners
administration, Your Majesty most graciously appeared again concerning the
Damages of the said Ships, holding your self obliged in Justice and Honor to
get satisfaction from the principal Offenders for the same: As appears by the
orders of the Council Table, and Reports of the Commitee of Lords, intimating
the Merits of the said Cause to your Majesty accordingly.

That notwithstanding all the orders, proceedings and especial grants, undere
the great Seal of England concerning the said Ships, Goods, and Fraights, the
Hollanders do still pretend, they are not obliged to give any satisfaction for
the same, being made a debt incumbent upon the Crown by the last Treaty at
London, whereby eight hundred thousand Pattacons are to be paid unto your
Majesty by the States General, at four equal payments; for which the Crown of
Spain stands obliged that they shall be paid accordingly.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays, that your Majesty would be most
graciously pleased to assign some part and proportion of the said Money,
(payable to your Majesty by the States) unto your Petitioner, toward
satisfaction of the said Damages and Losses concerning the said Ships as
aforesaid, or to grant him some assignment otherways toward the same. And upon
the States or Spanjards nonperformance, to permit your Petitioner with the
other Proprietors and Creditors to reprize their full satisfaction by the
natural force of your Majesty's Letters Patents, granted for that purpose.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray etc.
The Original hereof was Exhibited at Whitehall, in the Mond of June 1674.



Fraud and Oppression detected and arraigned, in a short Narrative, and
Deduction of several Actions at Law, depending in the Ordinary Courts of
Justice in Holland and Zealand, between Diverse Subjects of England, and the
Inhabitants of the States General of the seven United Provinces.
Sr. William Courten late of London Knight, Sr. Peter Courten his Brother, and
John Moncy of London Merchant, their Brother in Law, traded in Company to most
parts of the world, with a joint stock, for the space of 25 years and upwards.
In which trade and stock, Sr. William Courten had one half part, and each of
the other two a fourth. Whereupon they took up many great sums of money at
interest, in the city of London, and elsewhere, in his Majesty's Kingdoms,
which moneys were continued in the hands of the said Partners during their
Lives, as the proper debts of the said Company, which are not paid or satisfied
to this time.

The chiefest part of the said trade, consisting in Hollands, Dyapers, Damwsks,
and foreign silk Manufactures, there required always a great stock of moneys
and goods to be abroad in the hands of workmen and others, for which purpose
Sr. Peter Courten settled himself at Middleburgh in Zealand to correspond with
all the Factors, Weavers, etc. Where he also kept the general Books of the
said Company for the whole trade out of England; and John Moncy likewise kept
the Books of the said Company of all the trade and Negatiations in England,
wherein the goods of the several warehouses in London, were brought into one
journall and great book.

Sr. Peter Courten in the year 1630. Anno 1630.
died at Middleburgh, leaving his Nephew Peter Boudaen his sole Executor who
took possession of all the books and Estate abroad, and charged himself with
the accounts of the said Company, wherein Sr. Peter Courten stood indebted unto
the general Stock at the time of his death the sum of 122000. pounds Sterling
and upwards, the most part whereof being for moneys taken up at interest in
England as aforesaid, upon the Companies account and remitted to him
accordingly.

John Moncy, 1631.
with Margaret his Wife (Mother of the said Peter Boudaen) arrived at
Middleburgh at Boudaens house, whither they went purposely in the year 1631.
with the Balance of the books kept in England, to liquidate and settle the
accounts of the Company with the said Peter Boudaen (the only son of the said
Margaret by Matthias Boudaen her first husband) where the said John Moncy,
after he had advanced very far in that work, fell sick of a Lethargy, having
made his last Will and Testament (as is pretended) on the 17. of October 1631.
died the day following, in which will and Testament Sr. William Courten and the
said Peter Boudaen were nominated Executors, wherein was also mentioned to be
given the sum of 4000. pounds Sterling to the Children of the said Peter
Boudaen, likewise 4000. pounds to Sr. William Courtens Children, and 4000.
pounds to Hester and Susanna de Wire (the Children of John Moncys only Sister)
his Heyrs at Law, the Residue of his Estate to Margaret his Widow, after some
small Legacies to the Church and Poor. etc.

Peter Boudaen sent the said Will into England, where Sr. William Courten on
the 26. of July 1632. 1632.
exhibited the same, in the Prerogative-Court, and made probate thereof in
Common Form, the Court reserving the like power for the said Peter Boudaen.
Nevertheless Sr. William Courten left the Administration to Margaret the Widow
of John Moncy, who sold all the Goods of the Company in her own name, that were
in her custody, and received the moneys for the same, and the debts standing
out for the Companies goods, sold by her husband, and remitted 4000. pounds
thereof unto Peter Boudaen her son for the Legacies given to his Children by
John Moncy as aforesaid, before any debts of the said Company were paid, which
was not lawful for her to do, or for Boudaen to receive.

In the years 1633. 1633.
1634. 1635. and 1636. Peter Boudaen sent some part of the Companies Effects
abroad, unto his Mother in Flemish and Holland Linen, in his own name upon a
particular trade, and desired his mother that particular books should be kept
thereof, which was done accordingly, by James Boeve her servant, that had lived
with John Moncy and her self ever since the year 1628. The goods in that
particular trade sent into England amounting unto the sum of 16000. pounds
Sterling or thereabouts, was remitted from time to time by Bills of Exchange
unto the said Boudaen, as by the balance of the accounts in Mr. Boeves
Vindication appears.

Sr. William Courten having used all his endeavors to state the accounts of
the Company with Peter Boudaen, 1644.
being very sensible of the Companies debts, died in much sorrow and grief in
the year 1636. before the accounts were liquidated, at which time Sr. William
Courten stood indebted to several persons upon the Companies account the sum
of 56000. pounds Sterling, and unto others for the sum of 54600. l. upon his
own proper account, besides 35600. l. that Sr. Paul Pyndar had lent him in the
year 1635. upon his own and his sons Obligations. Sr. William Courten having
expended vast sums of money some years before his death in Expeditions to the
Barbados, which he first discovered, fortified, and planted at his own proper
Costs and Charges, and then was taken from him, and his Planters, by force and
violence, his Officers and Servants murdered and spoiled, under color and
pretense of a right and property in the late Earl of Carlisle and his
adherents, contrary to all justice and common right. As also in another good
enterprise with Capt. John Weddall, Capt. Nathanael Montney, Endimion Porter,
Thomas Kynaston, and other Participants to India, China and Japan, wherein
several Ships, Factories and storehouses were spoiled by the East India
Company of the Netherlands to the further damages of Courten, and his
Creditors, and the rest of the Proprietors.

Sr. William Courten having left his only Son and Heyr William Courten his
sole Executor, he took upon him the Execution of his Fathers will,
notwithstanding the great debts resting upon the Companies account, besides his
Fathers own particular engagements. Then Peter Boudaen sent Jacob Pergens into
England to assist and advise Mr. Courten in his affairs, or to intreague him
into some actions and accounts to his own prejudice. Whereupon he lent him the
sum of 2111. pounds 18. ss. out of the moneys resting in England upon Boudaens
particular trade, for which Mr. Courten did on the 3. of August 1636. give a
bond in the penalty of 3000. pounds for payment of the said money unto Jacob
Pergens, which bond was taken in trust for the use of Boudaen and his Heyrs, as
by a Declaration under the hand and seal of Jacob Pergens hereafter appears.

In the year 1637. 1637.
Mr. Courten sent a balance of the books kept in London unto Middleburgh,
wherein it appeared that Sr. Peter Courten, and consequently that the said
Peter Boudaen his Executor stood indebted to the general stock the sum of
122139. pounds Sterling, most part whereof being for moneys taken up at
interest as aforesaid by Sr. William Courten and John Moncy, and remitted by
Bills of Exchange to the said Sr. Peter Courten, who had contrary to his trust
bought several East- and West India Actions with part of the said money, and
expended more of it, in building great Houses at Middleburgh, which are enjoyed
by the Sons and Heyrs of the said Peter Boudaen. Notwithstanding the debts of
the Company are yet standing out, and the accounts of the Company still
standing open.

In the said year 1637. John White that was a Cashier to Sr. William Courten
addressed himself in way of Marriage to Hester de Wire (the Niece of John
Moncy) unto whom a Legacy of 2000. pounds was given as aforesaid, as also the
like Legacy unto Susanna her Sister, whose Estate was gotten into the hands of
the said Peter Boudaen. Whereupon John White demanding of some Friends, how he
should come by the portion, in case he should marry with the said Hester; David
Goubard, who was Witness to Mr. Moncys Will, and had been a Bookkeeper to Sr.
Peter Courten, advised Mr. White to make a show of questioning the said Will,
and the inventory of Moncys Estate, which he did accordingly: then Mr. Boudaen
used all means possible to break off the Match, which he could not do: so an
Expedient was found out to pay that Legacy with interest: then the dispute
rested (pro tempore) without further prosecution.

James Boeve Married with Susanna de Wire, 1638.
the other Sister, not doubting but to receive the like Legacy, and portion of
2000. pounds with interest, which was given by the said John Moncy, or so
appointed in the said will: but Peter Boudaen refused to pay the same,
pretending that he had none of Moncys Estate in his hands, nor had intermedled
with the same as Executor or Administrator, and so not liable by the Laws of
England to the said Legacy, where the Will was exhibited, and Mr. Courten
disclaiming the same, affirmed that Boudaen was a great debtor to the general
stock and to the Creditors of the Company, and therefore liable to the debts
and Legacies of Sr. Peter Courten and John Moncy.

In the Month of July in the said year 1638. Mrs. Moncy having sold all the
Companies goods, received moneys for the same, and disposed thereof to Sr.
William Courten and Others, she went to Middleburgh to end her days with her
Son Peter Boudaen, where she died in the year 1640.

William Courten indeavoring to preserve the credit and reputation of his
deceased Father, Administered his Estate some years after his death, in which
time he had persuaded the late Earl of Bridgwater and Sr. Edward Littleton to
be bound for 120000. pounds Sterling to diverse Persons in the Cities of London
and Westminster, where they had drayned all the Scrive^ers, and Brokers about
the Exchange, for the said money, that was employed toward payment of part of
Sr. William Courtens debts, and toward setting forth more Ships for the
East Indies, China, and Iapan to supply the Factories there, two Ships called
the Dragon and Katharin being richly laden, and strangely lost upon the Coast
of India.

Sr. Edward Littleton being pressed by several of the Creditors for payment of
the debts, Anno 1642.
William Courten on the 26. of April 1642. granted and assigned to him and his
Heyrs by deed enrolled in Chancery, all his manors, lands and tenements in the
Counties of Worcester and Gloucester for the indemnity and counter security of
Sr. Edward Littleton and his Heyrs, against the debts: And likewise all his
stock and Ships in the East Indies for the more speedy and certain payment
thereof. Soon after, Sr. Paul Pyndar earnestly pressing Mr. Courten for the
sums of 24800. pounds, the remainder of that money lent to his Father as
aforesaid, Sr. Edward Littleton and William Courten did by an Indenture
tripartite bearing date 19. of December. 1642. grant, transferr and assign the
Ships named the Hester and the Paradox and all their share and proportion of
stock and Merchandises therein, as also all theirffraights goods and stock in
several other Ships set forth upon trading voyages to the East Indies.
Nevertheless under certain conditions and provisoes, that the said 24800.
pounds should be satisfied and paid by several proportionable payments upon
returns of the said Ships (viz) out of the Hester 4000. pounds, out of the
Paradox 2000. pounds, out of the Bona Esperanza 3000. pounds, out of the Henry
Bona Adventura 2500. out of the Planter 5800. pounds, out of the Loyalty 5000.
pounds, and out of the Ship Unity 2500. pounds, and the Surplus to be disposed
by Sr. Edward Littleton and his Assigns, toward payment of the said debts for
which he stood engaged, as aforesaid.

The Ship Bona Esperanza and her lading was forcibly taken by the Officers and
Mariners belonging to the East India Company of the Netherlands, 1643.
in her passage between Goa and Maccao, and carried into Batavia, and there
without any Process at Law, converted to the said Companies use to the Damage
of Sr. Paul Pyndar, Sr. Edward Littleton and the Creditors, the sum of 75000.
pounds Sterling and upwards. And in the same year the Ship Henry Bona Adventura
with her lading coming on ground near the I^and Mauritius, was taken into
possession of the said Company, and also converted to their use, to the Damage
of the several Persons interessed and concerned therein, the sum of 12000
pounds of thereabouts.

In the same year 1643. William Courten absented himself from his Creditors,
and became insolvent, and was afterward declared to be Banckrupt in the Month
of September. 1643. within the intent and true meaning of the several Statutes
in that case made and provided, as appears under the hands of James Winstanley,
George Cotton and Thomas Bayles Esquires, Anthony Boys, Richard Norton and
Gervas Billiald, Comissioners appointed under the great seal of England, to
Execute the Commission awarded against the said William Courten grounded upon
the said Statutes made concerning Banckrupts.

James Boeve finding no appearance of money in England, applied himself to
Peter Boudaen in Zealand for the said Legacy who had Mr. Moncys Estate in his
hands, and Laid his action severally against him before the Magistrates of
Middleburgh, who admitted Boudaen to bring all the Exceptions that could be (in
pleading the Laws and Customs of England, where Mr. Moncys Will was exhibited
by Sr. William Courten) to avoid Mr. Boeves pretense, who was kept in Process
many Years together to his great Grievance and Expense, before any sentence
could be obtained, however Boudaen appealed from the same to the supreme Court
of Judicature at the Hague, where the cause is still depending upon further
vexations and dilatory practices, and proceedings of Boudaen and his Sonns, to
the ruin of Mr. Boeve and his Family, by neglect and loss of his Comissions
and other employment, to follow the said Process, as appears at large in
Boeves printed vindication.

William Courten the Heyr and Executor, being so involved in debts of several
natures, consults privately with Mr. John Rushout and other particular friends,
how to preserve something abroad from the reach of his Creditors (if possible)
for maintenance of himself and his family. And in order thereunto, first made a
Letter of Attorney with an assignment to Jacob Pergens of Amsterdam dated the
31. of October 164^. wherein is recited, that whereas Sr. Jacob Catts of Dort,
late Pensionaris of Holland, stands indebted unto Sr. William Courten in a bond
of 3000. pounds Sterling dated the 29. of July 1631. for payment of 2080.
pounds on the 12 of February following; And that the said William Courten being
indebted to the said Jacob Pergens for a great sum of Moneys he makes over the
said Obligation and debt of Sr. Jacob Catts unto the said Pergens, who
fraudulently recovered the same seven years after the death of William Courten
and his lady, as hereafter is mentioned.

William Courten made another Letter of Attorney or Procuration unto the said
Jacob Pergens, on the 27. of October 1645. 1645.
before John Maurius public Notary in London, reciting the Losses and
Damages sustained in the two Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura,
and therein gives a pretended power and Authority to the said Pergens to
recover and receive the Money and Damages of the East India Company of the
Netherlands, or to compound with them for the same, supposing that neither Sr.
Paul Pyndar, nor Sr. Edward Littleton would come to the knowledge thereof,
being sequestered and encumbered in other affairs and debts of the Crown. Unto
this Procuration were witnesses Maurice Thompson, and John Rushout (as appears
by the Register of the said Notary) who procured letters from the late Long
Parliament, to Mr. Strickland and Others in Holland in favor of Pergens.

William Courten having absconded himself three years in the Armies of the
King, and the Parliament, resolved to depart the Kings Dominions, and end his
days in Italy; but before his voyage, he got some moneys for his support of Mr.
Daniel Harvey, Mr. Thomas Coppin, and others, unto whom he had preingaged his
Lands. And then he nade another procuration, with an assignment, unto the said
Jacob Pergens (dated 10. of December. 1647. 1647.
) of all his right and interest in the said Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona
Adventura, reciting the particulars of all the Damages amounting unto the sum
of 85000. pounds Sterling or thereabouts; and that he was indebted unto thesaid
Pergens a great sum of money etc. The Witnesses to that Procuration were
Jeremy Whitaker and George Gawton, as by the Register of Joshua Maniett Notary
in London appears.

Sr Paul Pyndar and William Toomes coming to the knowledge of these fraudulent
practices, appeared before the said Joshua Maniett on the 11. day of February
1647. 1647.
English style, when Sr Paul Pyndar made a Procuration to Jonas Abeels Merchant
of Amsterdam to recover and receive the said moneys and Damages of the said
East India Company, belonging to him, concerning the said Ships Bona Esperanza
and Henry Bona Adventura, and their Lading, as aforesaid: whereunto were
Witnesses William Toomes and Richard Clay, as by the Register of thesaid Notary
appears.

William Courten within few days after arrived at the Hague in Holland, and on
the 27. of February 1647. old style, he made another pretended Assignment, and
Bill of Sale, to the said Jacob Pergens before Solomon van der Heyden, public
Notary, declaring therein a voluntary confession, that he had made over and
transported unto the said ^acob Pergens, all such right and action as
appertained unto him the said William Courten, from the East India Company of
the Netherlands, concerning the said Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona
Adventura and their lading, unjustly seized and taken away with all the
letters, Bills, Books and Writings from the Cape Merchant Masters, and Mariners
of the said Ships in the Straights of Malacca, and near the Island Mauritius,
by the Ships and Officers of the Dutch East India Company. Wherein was further
mentioned a power, and Authority, from the said Courten to Pergens to compound
and agree with the said East India Company, as he should think best, and most
fitting, and to receive the proceed thereof, in payment of what was pretended
to be owing, to the said Pergens. Provided that the said Pergens should pay the
surplus to whomsoever should have the right thereunto, which act was
underwritten by both parties, in the presence of the said Notary and two
Witnesses viz. Dominique Colien and David Goubard, as by the Register of Van
der Heyden the Notary appears.

Jonas Abeels having received the said Procuration and indenture of assignment
from Sr. Edward Littleton and William Courten to Sr. Paul Pyndar, 1648.
with instructions to proceed thereupon, he made several insinuations of his
quality, and Sr. Paul Pyndars interest, and likewise diverse arrests, in the
Month of May 1648. with interdictions, and prohibitions, that the Directors of
the said Company should not have any Communication or dealing with the said
Pergens, or pay him any money concerning the said Ships and their lading, as by
the several acts of the public Notaries and Officers, made at the Chamber of
the East India Company in Amsterdam, and by the Directors own showing more
particularly hereafter mentioned.

The Directors of the East India Company, nevertheless being met in a Committee
of seventeen, at their Chamber in Zealand, whereof the said Peter Boudaen,
brother in Law to the said Pergens, being one, he procured this agreement
following, to be made at Middleburgh on the 18. of September. 1649. 1649.


A Copy of the Instrument of Agreement between the Directors of the East India
Company of the Netherlands and Jacob Pergens, Translated out of the Low Dutch.
WHereas there are differences arisen between the honorable the Directors of
the licenced East India Company of the Netherlands of the one part, and Jacob
Pergens and David Goubard as well for themselves, as also having procuration
from the honorable William Courten, and Others interessed in the said
difference at London on the other side, concerning a certain Ship named the
Bona Esperanza, taken in the year 1643. near the city of Malacca by the
Officers and Ministers of the said Company (for some reasons moving thereunto)
with the said goods laden therein: As also several goods out of the Ship Henry
Bona Adventura happily driven upon the Island Mauritius, and from thence
brought to Batavia: Now so it is, that the aforesaid Jacob Pergens and Goubard
at the general Assembly of the Seventeen to make an end of the said
pretentions, esteeming the said pretenses at 100000. gilders, and hearing the
offers of the Assembly, to give 70000. gilders, they submitted the other 30000.
to the said Assembly, so they adjudged by these presents, to the said Pergens
and Goubard for all their said pretentions, and dependencies thereof, nothing
reserved, the sum of 85000. gilders, under that condition that they must give
good caution for all after Demands.

All which being heard by the said Pergens and Goubard, they consented and
accepted thereof, (bona fide) without any dissimulation, and hereof were made
two several acts, which were signed by both parties at Middleburgh in Zealand,
18. of September. 1649.

And was subscribed with these several names Jacob Pergens. David Goubard. I.
C. Hayman. 1649. Jacob Roch. P. Boudaen Courten. P. Carpentier. Pieter van
Santen. Adrian Besemen. Ian Vaericksz. Abbekerck. Hercke Iansz. Noortlant.


Whereupon Jacob Pergens gave a receipt for the said Money amounting unto
14166. l. 13. sh. 2d. Flemish which was about 8000. pounds Sterling; and Peter
Boudaen Courten gave an Obligation to save the Company indempnified from Sr.
Paul Pyndar, and others.

Jonas Abeels then summoned the Directors of the East India Company, 1650.
before the Sch^pens or Judges of Amsterdam, and concluded in his Process, that
the said Directors should be condemned to pay him the said 85000. gilders, in
right of S^. Paul Pyndar, relating only to the 5500. pounds aforesaid,
assigned upon those two Ships, Computing that with reasonable interest, it
might arife to the like sum of money, at that time. Then the Directors
summoned the said Jacob Pergens, and the said Peter Boudaen, to indempnifie the
Company from Pyndar. But in regard of the multitude of causes usually depending
in course upon the ordinary Roll in Amsterdam, no Strangers, after their first
instance, can be heard in judgment for several years. In the mean time Sr.
Paul Pyndar died, then Jonas Abeels died; afterward, William Toomes, the
Executor of Sr. Paul Pyndar, died: so the cause abating, the whole Damages and
Demands rested in Abeyance, until the Kings most happy restoration.

Several speculations of the Creditors, with some animadversions thereupon.
SOLOMON says that patience is a virtue. And oppression makes the wise man
mad: So that wisdom and patience, in some cases are inconsistent and cannot be
reconciled.

Before the Law of Property there was no theft, all things were then in
common. It was nevertheless natural, when any man had the fruits of his
Labor, taken out of his possession by another Man, he would take as much again
from the party, when he found opportunity to do it.

The Learned Writers of the Roman Laws affirm, that Justice delayed, is Justice
denied, and that Strangers are to be relieved by summar ways of proceeding to
avoid loss of time, after their first Damages suffered.

Its decreed in the sacred Written Law, that they which take away any thing
wrongfully from another, shall restore fourfold, which implies the Damages
sustained, for want of that which was taken away, and the costs in seeking
after it. And there can be no absolution, or peace, but upon restitution,
(where the Persons are able) and satisfaction given to the partys injured.

Oppression and unrighteousness, has made the Land Mourn; Amboyna was lately
shaken with Earthquakes, and Barbados visited with Hurricanes: And Batavia
anciently called Jaccatra (when the English possessed it, and had a third part
of the spice-trade by covenant) will, in due time, sink under the burden, and
spoils of other Nations; The iniquities of one Age will certainly fall upon the
succeeding generations. Foundations laid in blood cannot long continue.

Moneys and staple Goods drawn out of a Kingdom, into another Land without
account, turns to a double prejudice in lessning the power and strength of one
country, by magnifying another, in parting with weapons out of their own
hands, (Moneys being the nervs and sinews of peace and war.)

The Hollanders hold it for a Maxim, that all the world is a cheat, and
therefore they will have a hand in it.

The Jews, and other Renegado's, being a third part of Amsterdam, say, they
must live by their Wits, their Land being taken from them and laid wast and
desolate, for the wickedness and abominations of their Forefathers. They hold
it no sin to cheat Christians; And will usually pick their pockets of their
watches and money in the Synagogue, even at the same time when their Rabbi's
are reading of the Law.

IT is generally observed, in all Foreign parts of the world, that Englishmen,
who are most tender of their own Laws, liberties, and properties at home, are
as careless of their Rights, Interests, and Privileges abroad: some sad
Examples whereof are briefly demonstrated hereafter in this following Narrative.
James Boeve an Englishman, having married with Susanna de Wire aforesaid, one
of the Nieces and Heirs of John Moncy, finding no possibility of getting her
Estate, in England, removed from thence to settle himself in Middleburgh, where
he built a house, and Inhabited there in the said City, presuming to get
expedition of Justice sooner there, against Peter Boudaen, the surviving
Executor of John Moncy, then he should do, if he continued a Stranger: wherein
he was much mistaken, as it fell out in the prosecution of his Demands.

Sr. William Courten being dead, and Margaret the Widow of John Moncy also
deceased, William Courten the sole Executor of Sr. William insolvent and
fugitive; The said Boeve left without any other remedy, complained against the
said Peter Boudaen in the Prerogative-Court, where he obtained several
Citations, Mandates and Letters requisatory, directed to the said Boudaen and
the Magistrates of Middleburgh in order to procure an appearance from the said
Boudaen to take upon him the further Execution of Moncys will, or show cause
why Administration should not be granted (with the Will annexed) to the said
Boeve in right of his wife and her only Daughter: which was rejected by the
Magistrates of Middleburgh, who insisted upon the Custom of the City, that no
Burger should sue his fellow-Citizen before any foreign judicature: but for
what Boeve had to say against Boudaen, they ordered him to bring his action
before them, as his competent judges; which he did accordingly; where Boudaen
was admitted to stand fencing upon his guard and shifts for seven years
together, pretending he was no Executor to Moncy, that he had also abandoned
his Mothers Estate, and so not any ways liable to the Legacy by the Laws of
England, where the Will was Exhibited, and Moncys Estate administered: and that
he the said Boudaen had not intermedled therein as aforesaid.

John White and Hester his Wife, being informed what evasions the said Boudaen
had made, 1651.
concerning Mr. Moncys Will, his Estate, as also his debts and Legacies; And
having sufficient grounds and reasons to suspect that Mr. John Moncys Will was
forged and invalid; They entered the list, and took up the quarrel (de novo)
whereupon they procured likewise several Citations, Mandements, and Letters
requisatory, as Inhabitants in England, out of the Prerogative-Court, which
were all executed in due form and manner for summoning the said Peter Boudaen
as the surviving Executor of Moncys Will, Exhibited in the Prerogative-Court as
aforesaid, to prove the same by Witnesses, and to bring in an Inventory of the
Estate; all which acts and proceedings thereupon, are here omitted, in regard
they are briefly mentioned in the Magistrates Letter of Middleburgh to Sr.
Nathanael Brent, and the last decretall order of the Prerogative-Court
hereafter following.

Then Mr. James Boeve suspended all further prosecution upon his action and
demand, until he saw the Event of Mrs. Whites proceedings at Law, which
continued seven years at Middleburgh and the Hague.

The Contents of a Letter from the Burgermasters and Schepens of Middleburgh in
Zealand, to Sr. Nathanael Brent, Judge of the Prerogative-Court of England,
January the 12. 1651. translated out of the Low Dutch.
WE the Burgermasters and Schepens of Middleburgh in Zealand: To the right
Honble Judge of the Prerogative-Court in England Greeting. Whereas there was
lately delivered into our hands by Mr. Michelfelt A public Notary of this City
certain Letters requisatory obtained from your Honor by Hester White otherwise
de Wire, niece of John Moncy deceased, late of the Parish of Sr. Maryhill of
London Merchant; by which Letter it appears, that the said Hester, by her
petition to your Honor, sets forth that Peter Boudaen Merchant and Inhabitant
of this City, acknowledges that the said Moncy in his life time made his last
Will, and Testament, and therein nominated the said Peter Boudaen Executor for
the purposes mentioned at large, in the said Letter; And that your Honor
desired us to authorize, and appoint some learned Persons, to appear for the
said Boudaen before your Honor in London, or that we would cause him
personally to appear himself before your Honor, on the 30. day after the said
Citation, and insinuation made known unto the said Boudaen. And Whereas we are
willing to comply with your Honors desire, so far as from good Magistrates
and Officers may be required: We accordingly first sent for the said Peter
Boudaen, who appeared before us, and we understood from him, in brief, that the
said Moncy made his last Will and Testament according to the custom of these
Countries, which was confirmed by his death. And that he had nominated and
appointed in the said Testament Sr. William Courten and the said Peter Boudaen
to be his Executors; and that afterward on the 26. of July 1632. Sr. William
Courten made probate of the said Will, in the Prerogative-Court, as Executor,
and had an Act of Court to administer the Estate of the said John Moncy
accordingly: And the said Boudaen further declaring that he never administered,
in any manner, the Estate of John Moncy in London. And for as much as we do
find that this true information given to us does much impeach the proceedings,
whereupon your Honors Citation and Letters Requisatory, are grounded: And
considering that Reason and the Law of Nations expressly dictates, that no
Person may or ought to be impleaded, but before the Justice to whom he belongs,
and under whose jurisdiction he remains; And to prevent further Inconveniences
that might arise, to the disreputation, or prejudice, of either Courts of
Justice, because James Boeve has a Process before us to the same effect; And
to show that we esteem nothing better, then to avoid all kind of unlawfulness;
Therefore we thought fit to give your Honor notice of our considerations; To
the end your Honor might be pleased, to call back your Letters Requisatory, or
to consider the same as void, and to order the said Hester to bring her Action
before us, where she ought to do. And we do promise to return the same Equity
to your Honor upon any such or other reasonable demand, as good Friends and
Courts of Judicature so qualified, ought to do.

Given in the Court of Justice at Middleburgh. January 12. 1651. The
Burgermasters and Schepens of Middleburgh in Zealand.
And was subscribed, SIMON VAN BEAUMONT.


This Letter gave no satisfaction to the Judge, who did never meet with the
like contempt and delays* so the Court proceeded to a Decree upon the defaults:
as by the Register appears.

An Abstract of the decretall Order of the Prerogative-Court the 9. of March
1651. before Sr. Nathanael Brent, in the presence of Alexander Southwood Notary
Publicque Actuarius etc.
Hester White, alias De Wire contra Peter Boudaen Courten.
MR. Allen, Proctor for the said Hester alleges that John de Moncy, whose
pretended Will and Administration of his personal Estate, was by Process
instituted originally in this Court, he being an Inhabitant, an Englishman, and
having his dwelling house in the Parish of St. Mary-hill in London, at the time
of his death, who happened to die beyond the Sea.

That the said Hester is lawful Daughter of the only and lawful Sister of
the said John Moncy.

That Soon after the said Moncys death, Sr. William Courten, pretending that
the deceased made his last Will and Testament, and therein nominated the said
Sr. William Courten, and Peter Boud^^^, his Executors. The said Sr. William
Courten, willingly acknowledged and submitted himself to the judicature of the
Prerogative-Court in England, then named the Prerogative-Court of Canterbury.

That John Moncy, had, at the time of his death, sufficient goods and personal
Estate, within the jurisdiction of the said Court, wherein Sr. William Courten
took upon him the Execution of the said pretended Will, as one of the
Executors, and obtained Commission to administer the said personal Estate, as
appears by an Act of Court of the 26. of July 1632. reserving power for him the
said Peter Boudaen to do the like, when he should require the same, or be
called thereunto, he living out of the jurisdiction of this Republique.

That Sr. William Courten, died some years after he had exhibited the Will in
common form. And that the said Hester, as next Heir to the said John Moncy, had
obtained a Mandement and Citatory decree, on the 14. of October last, and
caused the same to be affixed in due form upon the Royal Exchange. That the
said Peter Boudaen, was also personally cited to appear in this cause, on the
20. day after the said Citation, to bring in the said Will, and to make probate
thereof according to Law, or else to show cause why Administration of the goods
and personal Estate of John Moncy should not be granted unto the said Hester
White, alias De Wire, (John Moncy dying intestate.)

Mr. Allen further alleging, that the said Hester White, having obtained
Letters requisatory from this Court to the Honorable and reverend Magistrates
of the City of Middleburgh in Zealand, (where the said Boudaen resides)
Requesting sub Mutuo vicissitudinis obtentu, that they would be pleased to
cause the said Boudaen to be cited to appear in London, in this Court, on the
30. day after that said summons.

And that this Mandament upon the 12. of January last, came to the hands of the
said Burgermasters and Schepens, who sent for the said Peter Boudaen, and gave
him knowledge thereof, and that no appearance is made in this Court, but wholly
neglected, refused, and denied: Wherefore the said Hester still pressing on,
for his appearance to justify the said Will etc. and no appearance being made,
the Judge at the Requisition of the said Allen, decreed and pronounced, that
Letters of Administration of the goods, Chattells, Rights, Debts, and Credits
of John de Moncy (as being dead intestate) should be granted to the said Hester
White, which was done accordingly.

Concordat in substantia cum Registro Exam: per THO: HINSON.

MEMORANDUM.
THat in the Island of Walcheren, there are three of the States of Zealand.
Viz. Middleburgh. Flushing and Ter-Veere, all much addicted to Controversies
and Caping, Middleburgh the chiefest, was much Inhabited by Strangers; who
formerly complained to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, that Justice was not
Administered to them impartially in that City: whereupon the Emperor made an
Edict (which is observed to this day) that there should be 12. Kies-heers,
elected by the Burgers out of the most able Merchants Strangers, and other
Inhabitants of that City not born in Zealand, who were to make choice of the
Magistrates and Schepens: And that there should be an Extraordinary Roll, or
Out-Land-Vierschare for Strangers only; Where they might exhibit their
Process, and be heard two days in a week, upon paying double fees, and be
dispatched in their affairs before Sworn Burgers themselves, upon the ordinary
Roll.

This institution at first, was very good, but since corrupted.

Peter Boudaen was a Free Denizon of England, bred up in Mr. Moncys house,
afterward he dwelt with Sr. Peter Courten, then after his death he became a
Kies-heer, an Elder of the English Church, and a Director of the East India
Company at their Chamber in Middleburgh, and so had such an influence upon the
Magistrates and Burgers, that no Execution of Justice could be done against
him, as by several presidents hereafter appears.

The advantages of Burgers are; that they cannot be arrested at the first
instance; nor sued in any other City of the United Provinces, but before their
own competent Judges at home; Yet Strangers lose the Privilege of Englishmen
when they become Subjects to another State; They put themselves out of the
protection of their own Prince immediately when they swear Allegiance to
another Prince or State. The Scripture says, no man can serve two Masters. And
the Crown of England never had worse Enemies, then Some of those that left the
Kingdom, to be Burgers in a popular State, and Contracted Aliances by Marriages
into dutch Families, etc.

As Justice is the Life of the Law, so Expedition is the Life of Justice, and
where there are Obstructions in the Current of Either, the Body Politic will
fall into a Consumption, as Middleburgh has done.

Truth and Justice ought to be prosecuted to the end, in all causes, where any
men have Law and reason on their sides, otherwise they Will betray their own
Countrymen to the like prejudice of suffering wrong when they live under a
Prince that is able to do them Right.

Hester White, 1652.
having gotten the Letters of Administration of the Goods, Chatells, Rights,
Debts, and Credits of John Moncy, under the Seal of the Prerogative-Court of
England; She went to Middleburgh and exhibited her Process, before the
Burgermasters and Schepens upon the Strangers Roll; as follows:

A Copy of the Declaration, Translated out of Low Dutch.
Hester White, alias De Wire, Contra Peter Boudaen.
HEster White, 1652.
alias De VVyer, appointed by the Keepers of the Liberties of England by
authority of Parliament etc. Administratrix of the goods and Chatells of John
Moncy Late of London, Merchant, Complains against Peter Boudaen, Heir and
Executor of Sr. Peter Courten, for as much as the aforesaid John Moncy was in
Company with the said Sr. Peter Courten, and Sr. William Courten his Brothers
in Law; and seeing the accounts of the trade are standing open, requires that
the books, papers and writings resting in the hands and Custody of the said
Boudaen, concerning the said Company, may be consigned into the
Secretary-Office, there to be inspected by both parties to form an account
thereout at a joint charge; and in case of debate, protests for Costs of the
Process, and all other Costs, and Damages already suffered, and to suffer.

Upon this demand, were all manner of delays, and Evasions used before Boudaen
would give, any answer, or make any exception in pleading, then at last he
disputed against her quality as Administratrix, and that she had no right to
demand any such account: whereupon this Sentence followed.

The Sentence of the Burgermasters and Schepens in the Cause of Hester White.
THe Burgermasters and Schepens of the City of Middleburgh, do declare, that
the plantiff in her quality, as she calls herself, Administratrix, is not
receive able as yet in her demand or conclusion, and do compensate the Costs on
both sides.

From which Sentence Mrs. White appealed to the supreme Court of Judicature at
the Hague.

Where she continued Five years soliciting the said cause at her great Expenses
and Costs after several Letters of recomendation from Olver Cromwell, to the
States General. Before any Sentence was given; and this at last was obtained
as follows.

A true Copy of the Sentence, pronounced by the high Court, of Judicature at
the Hague, An^. 1657. translated out of Low Dutch.
Hester White Contra Peter Boudaen.
ON the difference arrisen before the supreme Council in Holland, between
Hester White alias De Wire who is by the Keepers of the Liberties of England by
authority of Parliament appointed Administratrix of all and singular the goods
and Chatells, Actions and Credits of John Moncy late of the Parish of St.
Mary-hill, London, Merchant, in which quality, and for so much as is needful
empowred by John White, Complainant by writ of Appeal, and also Defendant, on
the one part. And Peter Boudaen Courten of Middleburgh in Zealand, cited in the
case aforesaid, and being Demandant in two Requests Civil, allowed by fore
going orders of Court, on the other part. The Court having heard the report of
Commissioners before whom both parties have appeared, and Seen a deduction of
the pleadings, and duly considered all the writings unto them exhibited: Giving
judgment in the name and behalf of the supreme Authority of the Earldoms of
Holland, Zealand, and Freesland, Provided, the above cited does within the
space of six weeks, before a Commissioner of this Court, Categorically declare,
that he is ready, in quality, and relation to his Mother, Heir to John Moncy
his Step-father, to answer in judgment, all such Persons that, have any thing
to ask or pretend against the Estate of the said John Moncy, whether Creditors,
Legatees, or others, reserving unto him the above cited such Exceptions and
Defenses as unto him shall appertain, yet so, as he may not assign such
Demanders or Pretenders, under pretext of the Laws and Customs of England, or
otherwise, upon any Executors, or Administrators which have been appointed, to
the Estate of John Moncy or their Heirs. And that he is also ready to satisfy
unto them the said Pretenders, and Demanders, whatsoever shall be adjudged unto
them, Declares, in such case; that the Complainant is not grieved by the
Sentence in dispute. But in case the above cited shall omit, or refuse, so to
declare, and perform, as aforesaid, the Sentence in dispute is anulled; And
giving judgment in such case, condemns the above cited to deposite, the
Books, Accounts, and Writings, in his possession, into the Secretarie-Office of
the City of Middleburgh, which concern the Partner-Ship, that has bin between
the aforesaid John Moncy, Sr. Peter Courten, and Sr. William Courten, to be
there by her the Complainant and those of her Council viewed, and an Account
stated thereout, in such case, reserving such right undiminished and
^nprejudiced, as the afore-cited or any other, may have by virtue of such Will
and Testament as the said John Moncy has lawfully made, as also the right of
those, that shall sustein the contrary, viz: that the said John Moncy died
intestate, without making a Will lawfully. With Compensation of Costs in this
suit, (for Reasons.) Pronounced the nyneteenth of May one thousand six hundred
fifty and seven.

In knowledge of me, Signed J. COENEN.

It is very observable that this Sentence is Nihil ad Rem, and very impertinent
to the Matter in issue. Notwithstending Olver Cromwell had written two several
Letters, to the States General, the contents whereof being likewise
communicated to the States of Holland and Zealand, as also to the supreme Court
of Justice, where the cause had depended five years at the great Expenses and
Costs of Mrs. White.

One special clause contained in Cromwells first Letter is as follows.
WE are informed also by our Council Learned in the Laws of England, and the
Laws of Nations, that your Magistrates and Ministers of Justice in Middleburgh,
have dared to be so, bold to controvert the Judicial Acts of our
Prerogative-Court, and have wronged the Judicature of England by their
unadvised and unrighteous Sentence against Mrs. Hester White the Complainant,
whose quality they have denied, wherefore we desire that you Will forthwith
cause the same to be reformed, by those Judges Delegates, where the appeal has
so long endured, that we may have no further grounds to give her remedy by
other Means. etc.


Peter Boudaen having sent the pretended Will into England, Nota.
to be duly registered, he concluded himself, and there was afterward no other
Competent Judge in the world, to determine the validity of that Will and
Testament of John Moncy, then the judge of the Prerogative-Court, for the time
being. The Supreme Court of Judicature at the Hague intermedled with that,
which was Coram non judice.

The issue was whether Hester White, was lawful Administratrix or not, Boudaen
was Legally cited, and after such contempts against a Judicature in England,
where he had so long Lived as a Free Deniz^n, and afterward during his trade
to England, enjoyed the benefit thereof at the Custom house and other places,
aggravates the offense beyond Measure. And such a president as this is an
Earnest of all Englishmens fortunes and Estates, that fall into the hands of
the Inhabitants or Burgers of Middleburgh and Amsterdam, or any other Cities in
Holland and Zealand.

The Process of Hester White, was to have an account of the Company stated in
the first place, which ought to have been done for satisfaction of all Persons
concerned, (Englishmen Especially) many Creditors of Sr. William Courten and
his son cannot find their proper remedy before the accounts of the Company
shall be stated, and for want of that, they are without Relief to this day.

Here Peter Boudaen is made an Heir to John Moncy, which is repugnant to the
Law of nature, and then decreed, that out of the Capital of his Mother, as her
Heir he shall satisfy all Pretenders against the Estate of John Moncy; which
is very irrational: For it is notoriousl^ known, that Mrs. Moncy: was a Woman
of very small Means, her Former Husband, Matthias Boudaen dying insolvent at
Rotterdam. And Peter Boudaen had always abandoned his Mothers Estate, until
the Wolf was hunted so close that he could not make any further Escape. Yet
rather then he would prove the Will by Witnesses, and account or adjust the
books of the Company, he procured this impertinent Sentence from the High Court
of Judicature at the Hague, and so would keep the whole Stock of the Company,
and other men's Goods and Moneys in his hands, and let the accounts of the
Company stand open, and the debts remain for ever unsatisfied.

It is most lamentable, to consider the miserable Conditions, of many Men Women
and Children, that Peter Boudaen has occasioned, by his wicked practices. Sr.
Peter Courtens last Will and Testament was made at Middleburgh on the 8. of
January 1630. who died the next day following, lea^ing Peter Boudaen his sole
Executor: John Moncys last Will and Testament was made on the 16. of October
1631. who died the next day after, and was Buried in the Choor-church at
Middleburgh, in the vault with Sr. Peter Courten.

There is a Law and Custom in Flanders and Brabant, grounded upon good reason
and foresight, that the last Will and Testament of any person, that is not made
twenty days before their death, shall be held null and void, which prevents the
designs of priests, Friars and others from great Legacies and donations.

In Scotland no Will or Testament is held good, when the party that makes it,
has not strength and senses to go to church, the market and the mill, that he
may serve God as well as himself and his friends.

WHat strength of senses Sr. Peter Courten and John Moncy had that died of
Zealand-agues, and sleepy diseases, the day after their last Wills, in a Muddy
Air, any intelligible man may conjecture, Especially since Peter Boudaen would
not prove Moncys Will by Witnesses, there being only a mark set in stead of
his name to it, who did in his perfect health and senses write as good and
Legible a hand as any man in Europe. But it was his fate to die of a Lethargy
in Middleburgh, who was a very active and healthy man in England, Nescio men's
Hominum fati sortisque.

It is convenient to show the Balance of the Companies books kept in England,
for the trade in Company drawing to a Period in the year 1632. There being no
more goods after that time sent upon the Companies account into England. The
goods formerley sent were not all sold, nor Moneys rereceived for them until
the year 1637. When the Balance of profit and loss was also sent to Peter
Boudaen, who would not be brought unto any account, (for moving reasons.)
Wherefore in the next following leaf Mr. Peter Boudaens Letter to his Mother
April 27th. 1637. concerning the accounts is printed, and the Balance of the
books kept in England also declared, with the Balance of Mr. Boudaens
particular trade.

SR. William Courten, after the death of his partners, was unwilling to
commence any suits at Law against Peter Boudaen concerning the accounts, and
Stock gotten into his hands. First, in regard he would not impeach the credit
of the Company, which traded upon other men's Capitalls. Secondly, for that he
was encumbered at Court, and in his new Undertakings to the East Indies. Thirdly
and lastly, for that Peter Boudaen and Mrs. Moncy his Mother had always made
fair promises that the books in Zealand should be liquidated, and repartitions
made of the Stock when the Companies debts should be paid, which are not yet
done: But left to the Six Sons and Daughters of Peter Boudaen unto whom the
Land-Pyrate, at his death, left an Estate in Moneys, Goods, and Lands, to the
value of 90000. pounds Sterling viz unto Peter Boudaen, John, Walter, and
Henry, Constantia, and Katharine Boudaen proportionably unto Each 15000.
pounds, before the accounts of the said Company were stated. Notwithstanding
old Boudaen, knew that all the visible Estate both Real and Personal of Sr.
William Courten, and his Son in England, was transferred and sold away toward
payment of their own and the Companies debts. Nevertheless the remainder of
both (amounting to the sum of 146000. pounds Sterling, principal Money)
continues yet unsatisfied, to the great shame and scandal of the Families of
Courtens and Boudaens, and dishonor to the Kingdom of England in suffering it,
while so many people in his Majesty's Dominions are undone for want of their
Moneys.

A Brief Account of Mr. Peter Boudaens Particular trade in Linen cloth sent
into England to his Mother after Mr. John Moncys Death, during the Space of 4
Years, viz. in the years 1633, 1634, 1635 and 1636. until the death of Sr.
William Courten, for which the moneys were remitted yearly to Middleburgh, and
paid to the said Boudaens order from time to time* as by the Books of accounts
appears.
For diverse Packs and chests of Hollands, Flemish linen, Cambricks, Lawns,
Diapers and Damasks according to the several Factories as they cost in Flemish
money 21052: 6: 6. and in Sterling money. 11483: 1: 6 Sterling The said goods
sold unto several Linen-drapers and others in London in parcells amounting in
all to 28417: 4: 2. Flemmish, which is the full and just sum of sterling money
15500: 5: 11 Sterling In debts standing out upon Banckrupts and others upon
desperate accounts amounting unto 1883-15-6 sterling money. The deductions for
Provision at I. per Cent for sale of the goods, and all other incident charges,
de^alked out of the said 15500-5-11 sterling, besides the debts standing out
upon Banckrupts and others, Peter Boudaen was gainer in Flemish money the sum
of 4202-17-3. Which in Sterling money is the sum. of 2292: 6: 4: Sterling
Which was made good to him upon the Balance of the accounts with I^^es Boeve
concerning that particular trade in the year 1639. who was servant to the said
Mrs. Moncy, and sold the said goods by her order for the proper account of the
said Peter Boudaen, notwithstanding it was Bona-fide the proceed of the
Companies Effects gotten into Bo^daens hands.

The Copy of a Letter sent from Mr. P. Boudaen to his Mother Mrs. Margaret
Moncy in the year 1637. translated out of Low Dutch into English.
CAptain Tiessen, I see, has his Answer from Susan: touching John White,
Honored Mother, i^ there no means to dissuade Hester? in truth that manner of
proceeding does not please me.

I fear that loss and shame will ensue, and my Father Moncys Estate will not be
found as is thought. The bad Debts and losses have not been writ off these many
Years; so that my heart aketh to think, that they, whose Father has caused so
great ^ loss to the Company, and for whom you have done as much as for your own
in their Education, should be so ungrateful to vex you in your old age. Could
Hester not be dissuaded by some Minister or other, or by Cousin Beck? for
(setting aside what is aforesaid) I understand it is a mean Match, he having
little or nothing, and settled in n^ calling, how can she do worse? and
principally I am sensible of the manner of proceeding, it being to question the
Will: wherefore I could have wished ^he were come hither with you; this also,
Mother, by way of discourse, in confidence that you will not report it to any.

If it be so (the trial of persuasion being made) that it cannot be hindered, I
pray that it may be deferred until my Brother Pergens and I come over: I think
we may find some way which may give quiet contentment. My Wifes condition, the
vexation with my Brother Fourmenois, and the Resolution of Examining the Books
as well my particular as touching the Company, and to bring them to a head,
hinders me that I cannot come: but I hope my Brother Pergens will not stay
long: God grant a good issue.

That matter admitting no delay, I hope Cousin Courten will assist and give you
the best council, even as I desired him the fourth present, as also Mr.
Ru^hout, and Mr. Godschalck will assist you: touching the Interest I think you
are not obliged, and it may remain compensated against the charges of
Maintenance by you, etc. Lowerstood, your obedient Son, and was signed, Peter
Boudaen Courten. The Superscription (...), to the Honored and discreet Mrs.
Margaret Courten, Widow of Mr. John Moncy, in her own hands in London.

This Translation, upon Collation made, is found to agree with the Original
Letter: Which I Attest,

Middleburgh the 25th. of April 1650. was signed L. Dou^relau. Not. Publ.




YEt, notwithstanding this Letter, Mr. Peter Boudaen, nor his Heirs could never
be brought to settle the accounts of the Company, who kept and still Keep all
the English effects gotten into their hands and have used all manner of
Sinister Practices, and Evasions from time to time, to avoid rendering any
account for the same, in contempt and reproach of the Judicature of England and
the Sovereignty of the Crown. Old Boudaen was much concerned that John White
should offer to question M^. John Moncys will, who died suddenly at Boudaens
house. Yett Boudaen would never make probate of the said will; Neither would be
Magistrates of Zealand ever admit of any Citations out of the Prerogative Court
of England to that purpose, although the will was Exhibited there in Common
form. And when administration of M^. John Moncys estate was many years
afterward decreed by Sr. Nathanael Brent to Hester White the next of kindred,
upon the said Boudaens contumacy who was nominated Executor in Moncys pretended
will and testament. The Ordinary Court of Justice in Middleburgh would not
allow her quality as Administratrix upon her demand of an account of Moneys
goods; Neither upon her appeal to the Supreme Court of Judicature at the Hague
from the Sentence against her at Middleburgh, would those Lords do her any
right or Equity in the Case of her administration. Such Judicial acts of the
Prerogative Court were never refused admittance in any other Courts of
Judicature in the world: and if this be permitted, no Englishman can be safe or
secure in his estate, that falls into the hands of Hollanders or Zealanders.

^he general Account, drawn out of the Companies Books kept in London,
containing the Mon^ys and goods sent and remitted out of England by Sr. William
Courten and John Moncy, unto Sr. Peter Courten, and Peter Boudaen of
Middleburgh. translated out of low Dutch into English. Sr. Peter Courten is
Debtor.
lb Sterling. ^^31. 21 March by rest of the beforegoing leaf brought hither
123028 19 ditto paid Adrian Hendricx for his bill at double usance a 35 ss 6 d
on Dom: and Charles van Acker 92 16 ditto paid ditto Hendricx for his bill at
double usance at 35 ss 6 d on Jacques Budier payable to Calberner 60 ditto paid
ditto Hendricx for his bill at double usance a 35 ss 6 d on Jaques Rob. and
Nichol. Iac. in Lisle 50 23 ditto paid Arnold Braems for his bill at usance a
35 ss 2 d on Nicholas Laoust payable to Calberner 120 ^^32. 4 April paid
Markus* Hooren per bill on Cornelis and Iochem Peter's payable to Jacob Pergens
30 14 ditto paid Samuel Bonnell per bill at 2 usance a 37 ss 4 d on Hendrick
Gerrards payable to de Baets 300 23 ditto paid John Bave for Jacob Pergens his
bill drawn at Franckfort the first of April at 2 days sight 30 26 ditto paid
Jacques Legatine per bill at usance for 400 V. a 60 d on Rene du Vernet payable
to Hen: Oliviers 100 28 ditto paid Adrian Hendricx per bill at double usance a
35 ss 8 d on Dom. and Charles van Acker 150 2 May paid Jacques Legatine per bill
at usance for 400 V. a 60 d on Rene du Vernet payable to Oliviers 100 11 ditto
paid Robbert Wattier per bill at usance a 35 ss 6 on himself payable to Jacques
Wattier 140 16 ditto paid Philip Burlamachy per bill at 3 usance for 4000 V. a
60 d on Laurenzo van Nelly payab. to Oliv* 1000 19 ditto paid Adrian Adriaensen
for 4 barrells of Gum delivered to Jacques de la Ronde 36 7 23 ditto paid John
Spick per bill Robert Wattier a 35 ss 4 d on Jacques Wattier 29 1^ 30 ditto paid
Philibert Vernat per bill at 36 ss 2 d on Peter van Heck in Antwerp payable to
van Daele 500 31 ditto paid Adrian Hendricx per bill at double usance a 35 ss 6
d on the Wid. Calberner payable to van Daele 150 ditto paid Adrian Hendricx per
bill at 3 usance a 35 ss 10 d on Dom. and Charles van Ackeren 488 ditto paid
Anthony Cabiron for Provision of 1200 L negotiated for Peter Stoffels 5 8 4
June paid Jacques Boeve per bill at usance a 35 ss 4 on Robert Wattier payable
to Jacques Wattier 78 7 7 ditto paid Philip Burlamachy per bill at 3 usance for
2000 V. a 60 d on Laur. van Nelly payab. to Oliviers 500 9 ditto paid Samuel
Bonnel per bill at 3 usance a 37 ss 3 d on John Elison payable to John van
Daele 200 13 ditto paid to Jacques Boeve per bill at double usance a 35 ss 4 d
on Robert Wattier payable to Jacques Wattier 258 18 19 ditto paid to James
Daniels by the order of Abraham vander Voort 1 ditto paid John de Ionge per
bill on John Rutte payable at 8 days sight unto Peter Boudaen 10 25 ditto paid
Giles van Brugh per bill Abraham vander Voort dated the 16 of May 10 ditto paid
Robert Newland per bill Peter Boudaen dated the 17 present at usance 110 1^ 27
ditto paid Leonard Houtman per bill at usance a 36 ss 8 d on Dierick vander
Perre payable to de Baets 250 5 July paid Peter van Thuyl per bill at usance a
37 ss-on the Here van Thienhoven payable to Boudaen 20 13 ditto paid John
Stephens per bill de Baets dated 19 May for the vallue of Jonas Abeels 200 15
ditto paid John Stephens per bill de Baets dated 24 May for the vallue of Jonas
Abeels 100 16 ditto paid Laurence Halstad per bill Peter Boudaen dated 24 June
for the vallue of Lucas Schorer 150 25 ditto paid Stephen Fitz per bill Peter
Boudaen for the vallue of ditto Fitz 30 3 Aug. paid John de Ionge per bill on
John Rutte payable at usance a 37 ss 9 d unto Peter Boudaen 10 4 ditto paid
Samuel Bonnel per bill at double usance a 37 ss 1 d on John Ellison payable to
de Baets 200 ditto paid Samuel Bonnel per bill at usance a 36 ss 8 d on John
Deloo payable to de Baets 100 6 ditto paid Thomas Warthrop per bill at usance a
36 ss 9 d on Daniel Burr payable to de Baets 200 8 ditto paid James Benfield
per bill Abraham vander Voort dated the 9 of July for the vallue of him 80 11
ditto paid Philip Burlamachy per bill at 2 usance a 37 ss 1 d on Carlo Latfeur
and Comp. payable to de Baets 500 129426-^^

THis action of account is aggravated with such circumstances of Fraud and
practice, that cannot be parralelled in any age of the (...) Peter Boudaen was
the son of Mathias Boudaen, that married Margaret the Eldest Sister of Sr.
William Courten, who fled with (...) Father for Religion into England out of
Meenen in Flanderrs in the Year 1567 being then but three Years old, afterward
she (...) with the said Mathias a man of poor Extract from Antwerp, who settled
himself at Rotterdam where he became Banckrupt, and (...) his flight toward
England was drowned near unto the Briell leaving his wife and two children (at
Roterdam) named Peter and (...) who soon after transported themselves to London
for relief from their Friends. Afterward Jacob Pergens a German borne (...)
^ayd Anna Boudaen, and was made a free Denizon of England where they lived many
Years together. And the Widow Margeret (...) aged 42 Years, past hopes of
Childeren having married with John Moncy the accomptant of S. William Courten
in the Year 1606. the (...) then begun.

Peter Courten the Brother settled himself at Middleburgh in Zealand, having
married the Widow of M^. Furmenois of Cologne (...) a son and a Daughter,
named Walter and Catharine, and bredd up the said Peter Boudaen his Nephew in
his house to be an (...) his books, and married him to Catharine his daughter
in Law against the consent of her Mother.

William Courten who raised his Fortune and Credit by the marriage of Hester
Cromelinck his First wife (the Daughter of Mr. Peter (...) a linen Merchant
from Cortrick) was a person of worth and honest principles. But being overladen
with Years and business trusted (...) integrity of his Brother and Nephew in
Zealand, and upon his death bed desired Mr. Pergens being then present that he
would assist (...) William Courten to setle the accounts which had not been
liquidated since the Year 1622 that the debts of the Company might be (...) lay
very heavy upon him and his Family.

Peter Courten dying in the Year 1630. left the said Peter Boudaen sole
Executor and John Moncy also died in the Year 1631 at M^. Peter (...) house in
Middleburgh, being arrived there to setle the said accounts of the Company, and
to Balance the books. However Peter (...) time away until the Year 1640 that
the Civell war began in England, then Soon after William Courten the Son
absented himself (...) insolvent.

(...) the Year 1650 a vigorous Suit was begun by John White and Hester his
wife Niece of John Moncy (concerning the said accounts) (...) until the Year
1660, justice being possitively denied both in Middleburgh and the Hague where
Boudaen was protected from (...) or even to suffer any inspection into the
Companies books Kept by Sr. Peter Courten, After the Kings restoration Mr.
Carew and M. (...) the list upon the same dispute, where they have been
Combatants ever since, and can get noe ground. Boudaens and Pergens having
(...) ^agistrates of Amsterdam, Middleburgh and the Hague to be their seconds
in dispite of Justice and the Kings recomendations. And (...) Peter Boudaen the
Father (who died in the Year 1668) and his sons having been directors of the
East India Company successively since the Death of Sr. Peter Courten Anno 1630
and also Elders and Deacons of the English and Dutch congregations in
Middleburgh, And Jacob Pergens a directour of the West India Company ever since
the Year 1643 and a member of the High Dutch Church in Amsterdam are so linckt
into such holy Fraternities and assemblies, that for their profession and
religion sake they must not be detected in their evil ways and courses.

As also the goods and Merchandises returned by Sr. Peter Courten and Peter
Boudaen according to their several Factories, since the Companies Accounts
were last liquidated: Faithfully posted out of the Original Books Kept by Mr.
Leonard Houtman, James Boeve and Peter van Dam, and brought over to the last
Folio Anno 1632. Sr. Peter Courten is Creditor.
lb Sterling. 1632. 6 April. Received of William Barlett by bill remitted by Jacob
Pergens from Franckfort 60 23 ditto Received of Abraham Dawes by bill remitted
by Jacob Pergens from Francfort 40 26 ditto per Lawns received in the Case No.
O. 280 half pieces 304 5 6 ditto per Lawns received in the Case No. X. 320 half
pieces 373 4 ditto per Cambricks received in the Case No. H. 276 half pieces
253 1 ditto per linen Cloth received in the pack No. 1. 15 ^/^ pieces 66 8
ditto per linen Cloth received in the pack No. 8. 15 ^/^ pieces 58 19 5 ditto
per Steel received by way of Dort 10 Barrells 126 14 May. Received of Nicholas
Pay by bill remitted by Jacob Pergens from Francfort 50 19 ditto per
Calve-skins Shipped by Peter Boudaen in the St. George 300 Dozen 270 ditto per
Hydes Shipped by Peter Boudaen in the St. George 550 hides 330 ditto per voyage
to St. Lucar for Butter, Beef, and Tallow laden at Rochell in the James 35 25
ditto per Lawns received in the Case No. E. 320 half pieces 265 8 31 ditto per
Steel received in one Barrel weight 1040 ss 21 18 7 30 June. per Steel
received by way of Dort 8 Barrells 100 16 ditto per Silk grograins received in
the Case No. I. 10 pieces 240 6 4 ditto per Silk grograins received in the Case
No. K. 15 pieces 235 10 ditto per Diaper received in the pack No. C. 52 pieces
114 15 4 ditto per linen Cloth for wrappers of the said pack No. C. 2 pieces.5
6 3 ditto per linen Cloth received in the pack No. B. 41 pieces 114 19 10
ditto per linen Cloth received in the pack No. 1. 31 pieces 100 18 5 2 July.
per linen Cloth received in the pack No. 2. 31 pieces 110 8 6 ditto per linen
Cloth received in the pack No. 3. 31 pieces 104 2 12 ditto per linen Cloth
received in the pack No. D. 41 pieces 127 8 1 26 ditto per Packet Cambricks
received in the Case No. 2. 166 packets 268 14 6 ditto per Cambricks received
in the Case No. 4. 130 half pieces 113 11 ditto per packet Lawns received in
the said Case No. 4. 88 packets 171 18 ditto per packet Cambricks received in
the Case No. 1. 76 packets 118 8 6 ditto per packet Lawnes received in the said
Case No. 1. 80 packets 134 5 9 ditto per packet Cambricks received in the Case
No. 3. 60 packets 253 9 27 ditto per Lawns received in the Case No. 1. 180 half
pieces? 205 17 6 ditto per Lawns received in the Case No. 1. 72 packets 129 16
6 ditto per diapers received in the pack No. E. 52 pieces 176 5 7 ditto per
linen Cloth for wrappers of the said pack No. E. 2 pieces 6 8 10 ditto per
Steel received by way of Dort 36 barrells 452 12 17 Aug. per Cambricks received
in the Case No. G. 276 half pieces 244 11 ^ ditto per Cambricks received in the
Case No. D. 272 half pieces 259 7 6 22 ditto per Silk grogains received in the
Case No. 13. 14 pieces 264 13 11 ditto per Silk received in the Bale No. 12.
138 masses 175 2 4 ditto per diapers received in the pack No. F. 52 pieces 175
11 4 ditto per linen Cloth for wrappers of the said pack No. F. 2 pieces 30
ditto per Cambricks received in the Case N^. L. 272 half pieces 259 8 6 ditto
per Cambricks received in the Case No. P. 280 half pieces 269 2 7287 10 4 per
rest to Balance this Account 122138 10 6 in all. 129426 00 10

There needs no other argument to show the unrighteousness of the Case, than
this plain demonstration: That S^. William Courte^ and his Son, who had real
estates and great capitalls, died insolvent indebted 150000 pound Sterling and
upwards: And that Boudaen and Pergens, who had little or nothing of their own,
are grown infinitely rich with other men's goods and money. Gotten into their
hands.

Yet the Hollanders and zealanders are so abominably vicious to report, when
any Englishman comes over to call them to account, that they are seditious
Persons, Desturbers of the peace, Enemies to the Welfare of their Country, and
Men of dangerous principles to hinder the good intelligence between both
Nations.

It is not only a vast loss and prejudice to many particular Families in
England, (to be thus kept out of their Estates) that have labored all their
lives to get something for their Children, whose bread is eaten by Strangers,
but also a loss to the Kingdom in General, that so much of the money and stock
of the Nation should be drawn out of the Realm to be improved against the Crown
by a people, that are the worst Enemies thereof.

But above all these sad circumstances, the grand Concern and Interest, the
Honor and reputation of the King and Kingdom, will be irrepairably lost if the
Boudaens and Pergens should not be compelled to come to account in this and
other Actions, and to render every Englishman his due who humbly begs for
relief therein at the Parliament, Doors.

Fiat Justitia, pereat Mundus. An Abstract of Mr. James Boeves Attestation at
London, the first of March. 1675, Old style.
HE Deposes that Sr. William Courten, Sr. Pieter Courten and John Moncy (who
married Margaret Courten the Widow of M^^thias Boudaen) did trade in Company to
all parts of the world: That Sr. William Courten had the half part in the
Trade, and Each of the Other a Fourth part. That the Books of the Trade in
England* were kept at the house of John Moncy; and the general Books of all the
Trade out of England were kept at the house of Sr. Peter Courten in
Middleburgh. That the Deponent James Boeve in the year 1628. came to live with
the said John Moncy, as Bookkeeper, and did write the accounts in the Companies
Books until the year 1637. And that several Goods of the Company were sold
for time in the month of December 1636. And that diverse Sums of Money were
received in the year 1637. upon the Companies account. That this Deponent did
send a Balance of the same Books to Peter Boudaen of Middelburgh the Heir and
Executor of Sr. Peter Courten, as succeeding him in the Company: which Balance
came to his hands, as appears by his Letter written from Middleburgh the 10th.
of April 1637. in these words, I have received the Balance; but several
particulars must be discharged one against another. That this Deponent did also
send the account of Sr. Peter Courten of all the goods bought by him, as also
the account of profit and loss written out of the said Books kept at London: By
which account Sr. Peter Courten stands Debtor the sum of one hundred thousand
pounds Sterling and upwards. That the accounts of the said Company have not
been liquidated and made even, nor any repartition made of the Effects of the
said Company.

This Attestation remains in the Register of John Maurius Notary Publicq in
London. And was also deposed before a Master of Chancery. Actum primo Martii
1675. in the presence of Robert Stamper and William Wightman.

An Abstract of the Attestation and Declaration of Mr. Jacob Pergens at
Amsterdam. The 23. of January 1676. New style.
THat He this Deponent, upon the desire of Mr. Peter Boudaen his Brother in Law
did make a voyage to the City of London in the year 1636. to assist William
Courten Esqr. with money, counsel and advice: And that He this Deponent did
furnish the said William Courten with two thousand one hundred and eleven
pounds and one shilling Sterling; for which he gave an Obligation dated the
third of August 1636. to the use of this Deponent, which was signed, sealed,
and delivered in the presence of John Rushout, Samuel Bonnel and John White,
who subscribed their Names as Witnesses thereunto. And this Deponent declares,
that the said Obligation was made in his name in trust for the said Peter
Boudaen, whose proper Money it was that he lent to the said William Courten.
And further declares, that He this Deponent has no right to the said Money,
nor ever had any right, pretense or interest therein: But that the said debt
and obligation belonged to the said Peter Boudaen, and now to the Sons and
Heirs of the said Peter Boudaen deceased. And that He the said Jacob Pergens
assigned and transported the said Obligation to them accordingly in full and
effectual form, to the only use and ^ehoud of them, their heirs and assigns
for ever, without any reservation in any manner or ways whatsoever.

In the presence of John Hoove and Marcelis Broen.
Actum at Amsterdam the 23. of January 1676. And is Registered in the Office of
D. Doornick, Public Notary, upon the Singel in Amsterdam.
NOTA. That this old bond made to Mr. Jacob Pergens in trust, was assigned by
him in the year 1675. to the Sons and Heirs of old Peter Boudaen to be brought
in reconvention aginst M. Carew who had several actions depending against them
for moneys due to the said Courten, besides the General account of the
Company, Which said bond M. Pergens had fraudulently made use of before in his
pretended claims upon Mr. Courtens Ships by consent of Boudaen: Notwithstanding
he was Bona fide indebted so many thousand pounds to Sr. William Courten and
his heyrs upon account of the Companies stock; as appears in the two foregoing
pages; wherein the said debt was to be discounted; it being the proper Money of
the Company that Boudaen had gotten into his hands, and so would not be seen to
repay it upon the account of the stock; but got Pergens to procure M. Courten
to give a bond to him as his particular debt, which must be discounted when the
books are balanced. Although in stricktnes of Law, that debt should come in
concurrence with other creditors of M. Courtens proper account. And the stock
of the Company should be only applied toward payment of the Companies debts.
Noe repartition being to be made before the debts of the Company are paid and
the books liquidated.

IT is further Remarkable that Peter Boudaen, who had always refused to settle
the accounts of the Company with Sr. William Courten Knight, John Moncy,
William Courten Esqr. Executor of Sr. William, John White, James Boeve,
Commissioners, or any other deputed in Law to call him thereunto, as Executor
to Sr. Peter Courten. Boudaen having renounced his Mothers Estate and the
Execution of John Moncys Will, until the Sentence pronounced by the Supreme
Court of Judicature at the Hague on the 19th. of May 1657. He then questioned
James Boeve for the said Moneys standing out upon his particular account from
Banckrupts and others as aforesaid, and for the Moneys that the said Boeve had
paid (by Mrs. Margaret Moncys order) to Mr. Jacob Pergens and others, which had
passed current for 18. years together without dispute.

THen James Boeve in the year 1660. prosecuted his action depending before the
Lords of Middleburgh to a Sentence for the Legacy of 2000. pounds given by Mr.
Moncy as aforesaid. Whereby the Magistrates confirmed the Will, and annihilated
Mrs. Whites Administration. But condemned Peter Boudaen to pay the said 2000.
pounds, with interest at 5. per cent: provided the interest should not Exceed
the Capital: whereof two parts was to be paid unto James Boeve, and the third
part unto his Daughter, born of the said Susanna de Wire, according to the
Contract of Marriage.

Then the King of England etc. sent his Letter of recommendation to the States
of Zealand, dated the 15th. of August 1660. requiring that Mr. James Boeve,
might have Execution according to the said Sentence: whereupon the Magistrates
ordered a referrence of the whole Matter unto three of the Lords viz. Mr.
William Quirinz, John Reygersburgh, and Huybrecht de Hase, to accommodate the
difference between both parties.

Nevertheless Boudaen appealed to the Hague, and procured a Sentence from the
High Court of Justice upon the 21th. of June 1662. that James Boeve should give
sufficient seucrity (before he should have Execution upon the Sentence at
Middleburgh) to repay all such sums of Money as should be found due unto the
said Boudaen, upon his Counter-Charges aforesaid, and by another Sentence of
the 16th. of May 1666. the High Court of Judicature reserved to Mr. Boeve his
action against Mr. Pergens for the 691. pounds 16. ss. 7. d. being Money found
paid unto him more then his due upon any account whatsoever. Which hangs in
suspense until this day upon those ^nconscionable practices. And the Sons of
Boudaen refuse to suffer any revision of the accounts to be made by Merchants,
knowing that Mr. Boeve cannot be chargeable with bad debts upon Boudaens
account, although Boeve had sold the goods by Commission as a Factor; much less
as acting under Mrs. Moncy^ Orders, unto whom the goods were consigned, by
Peter Boudaen her Son.

ANIMADVERSION.
THe Hollanders do boast that they have beaten the English (for some Reasons)
out of the Seas, Amboyna, Poleron, Syrinam, Guiny, Mol^cco's, Muscovia, Canton,
Maccao, Japan etc.
out of their Forts, plantations and Castles, Ships, Goods, Moneys, Storehouses
and trade in diverse places of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America. But to cheat
them out of their senses and reason, and beat them out of their Municipall Laws
and Customs in England, are Offenses so Insolent and Unpardonable, that no true
Englishmen, who have either courage or wit, can patiently suffer.

Advertisement to the Courteous Reader.
THe King of Great Britain, being restored to his Crown and Kingdoms, Several
of the Creditors of Sr. William Courten, Sr. Paul Pyndar, and Sr. Edward
Littleton, in the year 1660. made their applications to his Majesty by
petitions to be releived in the premises, against the East India Company of the
Netherlands, Sr. Jacob Catts, Jacob Pergens and Peter Boudaen. Whereupon
several references were granted and reports made. That Sr. Paul Pyndar, and
Sr. William Courten, having been great Servants to the Crown, and those that
claimed under them, great sufferers for his Majesty and his Father. The King
was obliged in Justice and Honor to recommend their cases to the States
General. More Especially the case concerning the spoil of the two Ships
aforesaid to have satisfaction and reparations particularly for that Matter in
an Amicable way, and for those other civil actions at Law, to require
Expedition in the Ordinary Course of Justice, which have been prosecuted
accordingly as hereafter is mentioned. Sr. Edward Nicholas then principal
Secretary to his Majesty, Renumerated of his own knowledge to the Earl of
Clarendon Lord High Chancellor of England, that Sr. Paul Pyndar served King
James and the Turkey Company, Eleaven years as Ambassador in Constantinople,
wherein he had much advanced the Levant trade, and English Manufactures. That
at his return he was a great Benefactor to St. Paul's Church. That he had
furnished his late Majesty with several Diamonds and other Jewels of the
Crown upon credit, besides several great sums of Money toward the ordinary
Charge of the Crown in supplying Ambassadors abroad, and other incident Charges
for the Honor of the King and Kingdom, before the unhappy war. That Sr.
William Courten had likewise furnished King James and his late Majesty with
diverse great sums of Money, before his death which were also unsatisfied;
Notwithstanding they had several assignations for the same upon the 4. entire
subsidies and the Earl of Straffords Collections upon Recusants, the Alum
Farm, the Sugar Farm Soap Boylers and Dyers etc. That Sr. William Courten had
improved the Navigation of England by discovering and planting the Barbados,
and also had laid good foundations for trading voyages in the East Indies,
China, and Iapan, which would have been very profitable unto England, if the
Dutch had not disapointed Sr. William Courten, his Heirs and Assigns, in their
lawful Enterprises, and so engrossed those trading voyages to themselves.

The said case concerning the two Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona
Adventura, with the proceedings thereupon being voluminous is contracted into
the two several Advices and Resolutions following, the first being drawn (by
Order of the said Lord Chancellor) and signed by the Most Eminent Lawyers of
England, and the second, by appointment of the East India Company of the
Netherlands, and the Pensionaris John de Wit, which was signed by the Most
Eminent Advocates in the Hague, in the year 1663: But in regard all the
Arguments and reasons of the English Lawyers and Ministers of State, were not
Effectual, Letters Patents for Especial Reprisalls were granted under the
great Seal of England which are also recited in Order after the several and
respective Opinions of the Lawyers and Advocates aforesaid, and some
Observations remarkable thereupon.

The Case faithfully stated by the Appointment of the Lord High Chancellor of
England, A^. 1663. for the Opinions of the most Eminent Common Lawyers and
Civillians in England.
WIlliam Courten, Anno 1641.
being Interessed in several Ships and Merchandises therein, they are put to
Sea on a trading voyage to the Indies, China and Japan.

William Courten being much indebted to several persons, 26. April. 1642.
and Sr. Edward Littleton being bound for him to them, William Courten grants
two of the Ships called the Paradox, and the Hester, and the freight, etc. due
to him for their service and employment, and all his stock, fraights etc. in
the other Ships; And the Policies of Assurance.

This Grant is made in consideration of xx. ^. and in general for other
considerations. Provided if that William Courten or his Executors, etc. pay the
debts within 27. Months, and save Sr. Edward Littleton Harmless, that the
grant then to be void.

William Courten and Sr. Edward Littleton reciting the first deed, 19. December.
1642.
and a great debt of 24800. ^ for a further security of that debt, grant unto
Sr. Paul Pyndar his Executors, Administrators and assigns, all the said Ships,
apparel, stock of Merchandise, and the Policies of Assurance, and all their
Interest therein, under diverse agreements; 3000. out of the Ship Bona Esperance.
the effect whereof, is: That Sr. Edward Littleton shall and may order and
dispose of the returns, for Pyndars satisfaction, by several proportions out
of each Ship, and the residue to be to Sr. Edward Littleton for the purposes in
the Indenture, and several other agreements; by all which it appears that Sr.
Paul Pyndar was not to have more then satisfaction of his debt; 2500. out of
the Bona Adventura.
but after that satisfied in such Manner as is expressed in the Indenture, the
benefit of the surplus was to be for Sr. Edward Littleton, and William Courten.

The debts for which Sr. Edward Littleton was bound, are not discharged within
the 27. Months, nor are yet discharged, as appears by the bonds and outlawries
upon record.

Then the Bon Esperanza, one of the said Ships, is surprised in a hostile
manner by the subjects of Holland, and the Henry Bonadventura, and her goods
also taken into their possession.

William Courten, Anno 1647. and 1648.
as is pretended, by subsequent bills of sale, assigns his Interest and all the
Stock, etc,* to Jacob Pergens, who makes Composition for the same in the year
1649. for 85000. gilders.

The Question propounded is, whether this assignment to Pergens be valid, and
the Composition made by him be good or no, or whether the grant to Littleton,
or by him and William Courten to Pyndar be good or no? WE Conceive that both
Questions fall into one: For if Littletons or Pyndars grant be valid, Pergens
grant and Composition is void against Pyndar and Littleton, and so a converso.

We Conceive that by the Common Law of England there can no doubt be made, but
that the Interest and Property of the ships and Merchandises in them, are
really and effectually conveyed, and transferred first unto Sr. Edward
Littleton, and then unto Sr. Paul Pyndar. And although it be so done under
certain Conditions or Provisoes and agreements, yet till performance of such
Proviso by Courten in Littletons Case, the Interest remained in Littleton, and
when that Condition was not performed (as to this day it is not) the grant
became an absolute grant. And Courten or his Assignee can never avoid it. And
as for Pyndars grant, it is absolutely good, but the person of Pyndar is
subject after satisfaction made to him of his debt, to give an Account, and
make satisfaction to Courten and Littleton. But that power of drawing Pyndar to
account no way lessens Pyndars right and property; he is perfectly
proprietarius by the Common Law of England.

And this being a Contract made in England by subjects of the Crown of England,
and touching their own Interest, we see not how it can be otherwise interpreted.

When Courten grants his Interest to Littleton, it has no Condition, but that
if Courten pay the debts within the time limited, when that time is expired and
no payment made, the legal Interest is absolutely out of Courten, and becomes
Pyndars, not as Assignee of Courten, but as Assignee of Littleton. Yet it is
true that Pyndar after satisfaction to him of his debts, was to make
satisfaction of the surplusage, but not at all till such satisfaction.

Then Courtens Assignee can have no more or greater Interest then himself had,
nor could transferr any property to Pergens, because he himself had no property
in the thing, but only a possibility and a power to call Pyndar to account for
the surplusage after satisfaction of Pyndars debt, and not before.

A Merchant of London may sell his goods in his Factors hands at Amsterdam; the
possession, by the Law of England, goes with the property. And where the right
and property is, there by the Law of England is the possession, unless some
other person obtains the actual possession as a trespasser.

Subscribed by John Maynard. Ben. Hoskyns. Edward Turnor. Sam. Baldwyn. Will:
Turner. Walter Walker. Timotheus Baldwyn. David Budd.


The Advice and Opinions of the Advocates and Professors of the Law at the
Hague, on behalf of the East India Company of the Netherlands, in the case
depending between them and the Administrator of Sr. Paul Pyndar, translated out
of the Low Dutch into English. Anno 1663.
WE whose names are hereunder written have seen a certain Copy of that Contract
translated into Dutch bearing date the 19th. of December 1642. Between William
Courten Esquire of the one part Sr. Edward Littleton Baronet, of the other
part, and Sr. Paul Pyndar of the third part; And a perfect Copy of the
Instrument of Procuration dated 27th. of October 1645. from the said William
Courten granted to Jacob Pergens; and a Copy of the Letters from the House of
Lords in Parliament dated the 20th. of March 164^ to the Resident Strickland in
favor of the said Courten; likewise two perfect Copies of Letters from his
Majesty of England, one to the Lords the States General, another to the
Resident in favor of Courten and his Assigns both written on the 9th. of
October 1647. Also the Authentic Copies of two Transports and procurations
from the said Courten, one dated the 10th. of December 1647. at London, and the
other on the 22th. of February 1648. here at the Hague granted to the use of
the said Jacob Pergens: likewise a Copy of the Insinuation (made by Jonas
Abeels, Procurator of the said Sr. Paul Pyndar to the Directors of the
East India Company of Amsterdam, dated the 25th. of May 1648. and of the arrest
made the first of October 1648. in the hands of the Company, and a Copy of the
Certificate from the Senators and Magistrates of the said City of the 7th. of
August 1654. with the assertion taken out of the Register of Causes Judicial
of that place in which the said Arrest was declared valid on the 13th. of
November 1648. and also a Copy of the Instrument of Renovation of the said
Arrest dated the 2th. of November 1649. and of the protest of the 11th. of the
same Month, and diverse proceedings out of the Register of Judicial Causes of
the said City dated respectively the last of May, 21th. of June, 13th. of
September, and the 8th. of November 1650. and of the 14th. of February 1651.
containing the Request of the said Abeels exhibited against the Directors of
the East India Company aforesaid; And the decree of the Schepens or Judges,
that the cause (saving the jurisdiction of the Court) should be in Statu,
besides some particulars out of the same Register dated 13th. of September
1650. containing the Request exhibited by the said Directors of the Company
against Jacob Pergens to be indempnified, besides two Copies taken out of the
Index or Repertory on the part and behalf of the English Merchants against the
people of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, by virtue of the 30th.
Article of the peace before the Commissioners therein nominated containing in
the first, a Petition of William Tombs Executor of Sr. Paul Pyndar, as to the
Ship called Bona Esperanza for the sum of 72546. L. and in the second, a
petition of the said Courten for the sum of 60000. L. and Moulton and other
Proprietors of the said Ship for the sum of 10000. L. Sterling; And a Copy of
the Letters from his Majesty of England dated the 21th. of March 1661/2. to the
Lords States General; And a Memorial of Sr. George Downing Resident, dated the
20th. of April delivered to the said Lords, and the answer of the said Lords to
the same; and even by the express proofs taken against the East India Company
in the name and behalf of the said Courten and others interessed by reason of
the loss sustained in the East Indies; and another answer of the Lords States
General to the Memorial of Sr. George Downing, and his Reply of the 13th. of
July; And a Latter memorial of the first of September last, exhibited by the
said Sr. George Downing, concerning all things belonging to the said Ships
called Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadventure, that the said Courten sent into
the East Indies; of which the first was confiscated, and the Goods of the other
driven upon the Island Mauritius, and part of them saved by the Officers of the
Company from whence these questions do arise: 1. Whether the Company,
notwithstanding the said Contract of the 19th. of December 1642. or
insinuations, protestations and Arrests, might not transact with the said
Courten, or his Agent Pergens for the sum of 85000. gilders on the 18th. of
September 1649. as was actually done? 2. Whether the said Pyndar, or now his
Administrator is not bound to stand to the said agreement made between the
Company and Jacob Pergens, Courtens Assignee?


We affirm (under Correction of better judgments) upon the said question, that
the Directors of the said Company were free to agree with Courten or his
Procurator, as by the transaction of the 18th. of September 1649.
notwithstanding the insinuation and protestation of the 20th. of May, and the
arrest of the first of October aforesaid.

And consequently that the said Pyndar or now his Administrator is bound to
acquiesce in the said agreement made respectively between the said Pergens, and
the East India Company.

For these reasons, that although the said contract of 19. December. 1642. was to
the said Pyndar under the title of a Bargain and Sale, yet it appears not that
there was any delivery of possession given by the said Courten or Littleton, to
transferr the property of the said Ships and Merchandises to Pyndar.

But on the contrary, the very expressions of Courten and Littleton are, that
they are pledged under a Condition, that Sr. Paul Pyndar at the return of the
said Ship Bona Esperanza, with the lading should be paid 3000. L. And of the
said Ship Bonadventure 2500. L Sterling, one half at one Month and the other
half at two Months after the return and unlading of the said Ships at London
or elsewhere; and these payments being made, it shouldbe lawful for the said
Littleton to have, hold, and enjoy all the rest of the said goods in his own
possession to the intention which in the said contract is more at large
expressed.

And it was expressly agreed and declared even between the said parties,
(notwithstanding that they had granted, bargained and sold the said Ships to
the said Pyndar) that he the said Pyndar should not any ways bear or suffer any
loss or Damage which should happen by reason of Shipwreck or otherwise. But
that these Damages (if any shall happen) (as the case fell out) were only to
be born and sustained by the said Courten.

Neither was there granted to Pyndar any authority to receive or sell any
Merchandise, returns or lading whereby he might pay the debts he had owing
before the said time of payment was expired: And the said Courten and Littleton
had not satisfied the said Pyndar the said respective sums, and in case of
satisfaction he is bound to render to Littleton the surplus and what shall be
remaining: And in case of Ship wrack or any other such like misfortune for the
security of the Moneys, the Instruments or Policies of Assurance were delivered
even upon the pretended title of buying (notwithstanding that in the said Ships
were secured 1100. pounds more by the said Policies then they owed Pyndar:
which more fully appears by the said Contract.

That those Obligations and other securities (even amongst those bonds of
Samuel Bonnell, mentioned in the said Contract to Pyndar) (notwithstanding the
pretended Bargain and Sale of the said Ships and Goods and Merchandise therein
mentioned and Policies of Assurances) remained and were detained by him, for
that about the end of the said Contract Pyndar covenanted with them in case he
should be satisfied the said debt, that he would deliver the said Bonds and
Assurances to Courten and Littleton.

By all which things it appears, that although the words of the said Contract
say, that Courten and Littleton had granted bargained and sold to the said
Pyndar the said Ships, Merchandise, Proceeds, and Effects, Policies etc. yet in
truth there is nothing else treated of or engaged by the said Contract then
security to the said Pyndar for his great credit given to Courten: For even the
meaning and intention of a Contract is more looked upon then the words: A l.
Iusutam D. d^ praescript. verb l. si un^ in prim D. Locati and L. si Ol^i cum
Gloss. Cod. ibid B. Bald. in L. cum d^tem in 2. Cod. de jure dot a Mant, de
tacit. and ambig. convent. lib. 2. tit. 2.
A: vid and Bald B. thence arises an Argument from the nature of the Act: For
to whom the nature of the Act, to him also the species thereof is granted: It
is the same concerning buying and selling, as in a perfect Contract, the hazard
is in the buyer: and knowing not the species of any Contract, the Grants
therein ought to be more looked after then the bare words: A Mantica teaches by
many examples and illustrates it.

WHEREAS now the Propriety, Possession, and Administration of the said Ships,
Goods and Merchandise remain in his hands to which before they did belong, and
consequently by the Contract he ought to sustain the Damage of Shipwreck and
other misfortunes, whereupon it was thought most just that he should have
liberty to trade with those. And because by his Agent he dealt with the said
Company upon more profitable terms then if he should bring his Action against
the said Company for satisfaction and should receive the Money secured to the
value of 5500. L Sterling: Whereupon if Pyndars Administrator upon no
foundation making composition with the said Company, a Question may arise
especially because the Lords Directors in respect of the Society have and can
acknowledge no other as Owner of the said Ships and Burden thereof then him
who is publicly so acknowledged to be, being much recommended by several
Letters, as well from the Parliament as the King of England, dated the 20th. of
March 1645/6. and the Ninth of October 1647. And that some considerable time
before the first Insinuation from Jonas Abeels in his said quality made the
25th. of May 1648. were in transaction.

1. As also the Administrator of Pyndar now has so much the less foundation to
expound or question the first agreement, for that the said Abeels did not
protest by his said Insinuation against the said agreement of Courten or his
Agent, but only against the payment of the Money to any other then to his
Master Sr. Paul Pyndar. 2. That the said Abeels on the first of October
following in the name of Sr. Paul Pyndar did Arrest and take care to detain in
the hands of the Directors all that which they (by the very words of the said
arrest) by Liquidation or agreement with the said Courten by reason of the said
two Ships ought to pay: which Instrument of arrest in the said manner was
declared valid by the Schepens or Judges: As appears by the Register o^ Causes
Judicial on the 13th. of November 1648. 3. Thirdly because on the second of
November 1649. Jonas Abeels in the name of the said Pyndar as having action and
transport from the said Courten and Littleton, did renew the said arrest in the
hands of the said Directors of the Company for all that they by agreement with
the said Courten for the said Ships and Goods ought to pay to the said Courten.
4. Fourthly because by the second Insinuation and protest of the 11th. November
1649. and by consequence after the transaction made with Jacob Pergens, Jonas
Abeels again renewed the first Arrests and Insinuations: And to make them more
effectual Sr. George Downing in his Memorial exhibited to the said Lords the
States General of the first of September last calls them lawful. 5. Fifthly
(which is greater and beyond all contradiction) because the said Abeels in
Court instituted his Process on the 20th. of May against the said Lords
Directors again in his said quality as Agent for Sr. Paul Pyndar as having the
action and transport of the said Courten and Littleton, concluded that the
Directors should acknowledge ordeny (Bona fide) the said tripartite Indenture
of the 19th. of December 1642. And by Consequence that the said Defendants
should be condemned according to the said Insinuations and arrests to pay to
him the said Demandant in his said quality and by provision to deposite 85000.
gilders, which they had undertaken to pay for the Damages and pretenses which
William Courten and others pretended for the said Ships with interest from the
day of the agreement to the effectual payment thereof, as more largely appears
by the said Instrument, which cause was offered or brought into judgment on
the 13th. of September 1650. in the said quality of Abeels against the Company
and left in Statu.
And the Lords Directors at the same time exhibited a petition to be
indempnified against the said Pergens in the same Cause: And the same Cause on
the 14th. of February 1651. as before was again brought into judgment, and
afterward brought into the same State as by the said Instruments it appears:
All which things cannot be reputed to be again controverted as to the said
agreement on the behalf of the said Pyndar, and because the Administrator of
his Goods by the last agreement made between the King of England and these
Provnices is to be satisfied, for all whereby the process was freed, (which is
and can be understood concerning the difference before the Judges of the City
of Amsterdam) by Jonas Abeels, in the name of Pyndar to be prosecuted against
the Company, so that we find no cause wherefore or how the Administrator could
now bring into question against the Company the transaction or Agreement made
with Pergens as the Procurator of Courten.

And moreover that the said Courten remained in full possession of the said
Ships and Goods laden in the same. And consequently it appears from them that
the altering of the Property and right of the said Ships was nothing else but a
pledge and security for the said Pyndar which is put into the Catalogue of
pretenses which the pretended set forth page 2. That Courten by his Friends and
Correspondents of the Company requested the Dutch in the Indies that they would
Command the Governor of the Isle Mauritius to restore the goods which were
saved out of the Ship Bonadventure.

And as for that which is said that another Ship was taken away by the Dutch
and there forfeited to the Damage of Courten, and page 8. for the account of
the said Courten in the Ship Bona Esperanza that it was laden with Indian
Merchandise there above expressed to the value of above 5000. L. Sterling, and
because at the time of the Contract made, the Ships were long before sent into
the Indies, therefore it cannot be that the possessions of such Merchandise
should pass by the said Contract from Courten to Pyndar: But he ought to be of
the same judgment that the hazard and Damage which fell out ought to be
charged on Pyndar, it agreeing with this Maxim Quaeque suo Domino pereat,
whereas it is contrary to the words of the Contract (because as aforesaid) all
Damages and losses ought to redound only to Courten, wherefore according to
the said Rule that every man that sends out, ought only to be understood
accordingly, which plainly appears in the beginning of the Contract, where it
is said that Pyndar was not content with the security of Bonnell, and that
Courten and Littleton were well inclined to give him such further security for
the payment of the Debt, and although they say that they did Grant, Bargain and
sell the Ships with their Burden and proceeding, yet (as we are informed) the
Ships did not belong to Courten or Littleton. And that the Burden, Wares and
Merchandises and Policies of Insurance, were of greater value then the debt of
Pyndar did amount unto: Also that the Merchandises at that time could not be
valued: And that Courten and Littleton after satisfaction to Pyndar out of the
Issues of the Ships should receive unto themselves Pyndars Obligations which he
kept to be delivered upon payment, being that he was not to be damnified, but
that the Damage and profit did only concern Courten: Also that the trading in
the East Indies was acted only in the name of Courten; and the name of Pyndar
(as in fact we are informed) was never therein known as the Owner of the Ships,
so that it is most certain that the said Pyndar could not in the said Contract
gain the Right of Propriety to the said Ships and Goods in question: Wherefore
it is an abuse to say that Pyndar has got the real right for the Sale of the
Ships and Goods, which at the time of the Contract were in the Indies, and upon
the Isle of Mauritius or Goa respectively, and afterward taken and drove
ashore. But allthough this is not to be believed but the contrary hereof may be
on urgent occasions showed out of the Statutes, and by the Doctors learned in
the English Laws A:

There was a Custom in England, A and, inter alios ex Skene^ in reg.
Majest^Scot. L. 2. cap. 18. Si donationem ipsam seisina fuerit subsecuta
perpetuo res manebit illi cui facta subdonatio and heredib. suis, si ver^ nulla
fuerit seisina subse^nta ex tali donatione nihil efficaciter peti potest, qui^
id intelligitur secundum Regni consuetudinem potius esse nuda promissi^ quam
aliqua vera donatio terrae vel hereditatis, sine seisina and possessione nihil
operatur, qui^ traditione dominium acquiritur and vulgo acceptum est chartam
sine seisin^ nihil Iuris tribuere, quia Charta nihil aliud est quam nuda
promissio, cum scil. quis permittit se daturum cujusm^di promissio nullam
inducit Obligationem: vulgo enim dicitur Nulla seisin^ nulla terra and l. 2.
cap. 33. verse. 14. Ille praefertur, qui seisinam obtinet, quia melior est
conditio possidentis. and 1. 3. cap. 10. verse. 2. Perficitur empti^ and
venditio cum effectu ex quo de pretio inter contrabentes convenit, ita tamen
quod secuta fuerit rei venditae vel emptae traditio and ^^dem lib. 3. verse. 1.
cum autem mobile vadum dicitur pignus quia res qu^ pignori datur cum fit
mobilis, pugno ^ive manu traditur, nam contrabitur pignus cum ejus seisina and
p^ssessio datur Creditori ut hic: dicitur quia rei interventus est necessarius,
sine quo non contrabitur Obligatio pignoris, qua tum demum oritur cum res est:
traditio ^andem sententiam late confirmat. Tho. Cragi^r in tract. de jure Angl.
l. 2. tit. 1. v. 42. in fin. Sine seisina data liberum tenementum Feoffagmento
dono vel locatione non transfer^ur, and tit. 8. verse. 19. ut donatio suis
numeris absoluta sit, traditione vel quasi confirmari debet; traditio autem vel
seisina; ^uot modis fiat alibi diximus. and l. 3. tit. 24. verse. 3. in qu^a
traditionibus and usu.
that where there is a simple transportation of moveable goods without delivery
they give the real right in them, yet that cannot be understood of Ships and
Goods out of England which cannot be accepted by the Buyer or his Agent, but
remain by voluntary consent in Custody of the first Owner, because of the
necessity of Commerce for the security of Contracts and avoiding of inevitable
and innumerable disputes there is a rule made amongst many Nations, for
movables have no consequences Mobilia non habere sequelam, and that the
Customs which are observed in England about that point cannot oblige other
Nations out of England, wherefore if the English should maintain that against
Foreigners, they would render themselves incapable of exercising any Kind of
Commerce with other Nations: and although an Englishman does ill in twice
selling of goods, yet that does not concern him to whom the goods are sold and
delivered: But what belongs (as its said) to the said Courten should be
forfeited to his Creditors (that is nothing to the purpose) first because (as
we are informed) the Declaration where it appears he was Banckrupt was not made
before the year 1650: And consequently after the Procuration and Transports;
And that the said Declarations by the Commissioners upon the Statutes against
Banckrupts afterward made cannot infringe upon that which was made before by
the said Company (Bona fide.)

Secondly because by the said Letters as well of the said Parliament as the
King of England, it appears, that the said Courten at the time aforesaid or
thereabouts was acknowledged for the Owner (with whom the said Company
compounded) and for that end recommended the cause of the said Courten to the
Lords States General: And for that the Company being Strangers were induced to
give Credit to the Letters of the Governors of England, whereby the said
composition and agreement was obtained.

Thirdly and Lastly, because the said Abeels himself as a Procurator of the
said Pyndar, consented that the said Company should deal with the Agents of the
said Courten; And prohibited only the payment of the Money to any other then
himself or Sr. Paul Pyndar; Yea, which is of a greater force, it is accorded
between the said Agent and the said Company when he was to conclude the
approbation or denial of the said Contract and the payment of that which was
promised in the said agreement by the said Company, as by the said Insinuations
and Acts before the Judges of the City of Amsterdam more fully and clearly
appears.

Thus it is advised by us at the Hague in February 1663. and subscribed by Wm.
vanden Kerckhove, Martin van der Goes, Johan Walbeck, Jacob van Stryen, Corn.
Caw, R. Burgersdijck, R. van Molaischot, Gasp. Fagel.
IT is very observable and to be remarked, that the Hollanders took the Ship
Bona Esperanza, in the year 1643. when the King was not in a condition to
protect his Subjects, so advantages were always taken to spoil us abroad while
the Kingdom was divided at home. The* Dutch East India Company being sensible
of Mr. Courtens Grants to Sr. Edward Littleton, and Sr. Paul Pyndar, before any
transaction with Mr. Pergens, Some of their confederates to get a colorable
pretense to compound with Pergens, who had no right or property from Courten;
notwithstanding the known rule in Law (Nemo plus juris in alium transfer
protest quam ipse habeat) did procure a Letter from the long Parliament to Mr.
Strickland, their Agent in the Hague to recommend the cause to the States in
the year 1647. in favor of Pergens. And to make a mock of the late King, did
also procure his Majesty's Letters to the States General in the year 1647. in
favor of Pergens likewise, when Sr. Paul Pyndar had discovered the fraudulent
practices of Courten and his Accomplices, which were timely interdicted by Jonas
Abeels. To add Fraud and Oppression to force and violence, are such
abominations no where to be found, parallel to Holland and Zealand.

They are worse then infidells, that provide not for their own families, but
they are worse than Pagans that do it out of other men's Estates, And will not
render an account for what they have gotten into their hands by mutual trust
and traffic or by fraud and force, which by the Laws of Common Humanity they
are obliged to do.

There was a laudable Custom amongst the Greeks of old, that when any
offenders, against the Divine or Humane Laws, fled for refuge into other
Cities, out of the Jurisdiction of Greece, they would apprehend as many of
their Citizens upon the first optunity, and put them under safe Custody, until
they should deliver up the fugitive parties to Justice. Such a good practice in
these days would spoil the two Holland Sanctuaries Cullinburgh and Viana, and
very much diminish the two chiefest Cities Amsterdam and Middelburgh.

If Advocates and Civilians in the Low Countries may be suffered to make
Commentaries upon our English Laws; or to give their Interpretations, and
Constructions upon Contracts, and agreements between the Kings Subjects,
concerning their own interest, and property. Westminster Hall, the Inns of
Court and Drs Commons would be of no use in any foreign causes; Englishmen
would have nothing more to lose, when their birthrights (the force and virtue
of English Laws and Customs) are taken away by the Hollanders: That takes
advantages of their own wrong.

Every one ought to take notice of another man's right, who intermeddles with
that wherein he has no property; the righteous man finding his own Sheep in
another man's pasture drives them to the pound until the Damages be
indifferently valued and satisfaction given accordingly: if the Hollanders and
Zealanders did the same, who have lived upon the spoils of all Nations, their
East India Actions would fall from a Noble to nine pence.

Upon their own showing, the East India Company of the Netherlands set forth in
their case, that William Tooms, William Courten, Capt. Moulton and other
proprietors in several petitions Claimed the sum of 142546. pounds Sterling
in pursuance of Cromwels Treaty Anno 1654 wherein the Damages arising upon the
spoils made out by the several depositions of the Factors and Mariners being
considered, (the damnum emergens and the lucrum cessans were both put into the
Balance of Justice and Equity) otherwise the Hollanders would make great
profit by other men's loss, not only in gaining the spoils, but engrossing the
Trade, and Navigation to themselves, as they did to Maccao and the River Canton
by taking away the Original Contract and Articles made between Courten and the
Viceroy of the Emperor of China at Maccao.

These aggravations (inter alia) caused this Patent following for Especial
Reprisalls to be granted under the several Conditions, Proviso's and
Limitations contained therein.

A Copy of Letters Patents, for Especial Reprisals from the King of Great
Britain, (under the Great Seal of England) Against the States General and
their Subjects, enrolled in the high Court of Chancery.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all Christian People to whom these
presents shall come, GREETING: WHEREAS our loving Subject William Courten
Esquire deceased, and his Partners Anno 1643. by the depredation and hostile
act of one Gailand, Commander in chief of two Ships belonging to the East India
Company of the Netherlands, was between Goa and Maccao in the Straights of
Malacca, deprived and most injuriously spoiled of a certain Ship named the Bona
Esperanza, and of her Tackling, Apparel, and Furniture, and all the Goods and
Lading in her, upon a very hopeful trading Voyage to China, which were carried
to Batavia, and there all de facto without due Process of Law confiscated; And
that also in the same year, another laden Ship of Our said Subject, called the
Henry Bonadventure, being come on ground near the Island Mauritius, was there
both Ship and Goods seized upon by some of the Officers and Ministers, and
Others under the command of the said East India Company, and utterly detained
from the right Owners, AND WHEREAS the said William Courten, and his Assigns in
his life time, used all possible endeavors to recover the said Ships and
Goods, and to procure further Justice against the Malefactors, and yet could
obtain no restitution or satisfaction, whereby they became to be much
distressed and utterly undone in their Estate and Credit: And that thereupon,
and upon the most humble supplication and Adresses of Francis Earl of
Shrewsbury, and William Courten Esquire, Grandchild and Heir of the said Sir
William deceased, Sir John Ayton and Sir Edmond Turnor Knights, George Carew
and Charles Whitaker Esquires, on the behalf of themselves and diverse others
interessed in the said two Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadventure, and in
the Estates of the said Sir William Courten deceased, Sir Edward Littleton
Barone^, and Sir Paul Pyndar Knight deceased, that We would take their Case
into Our Princely consideration. WE OUT OF A JUST SENSE We then had and still
have of their unjust SUFFERINGS in that business, both by Our own Letters under
OUR SIGN Manual to the States General of the United Provinces, and by Sir
George Downing Knight and Baronet, Our Envoy Extraordinary, to whom We gave
Especial command so to do, required satisfaction to be made according to the
Rules of Justice, and the Amity and good correspondence, which We then desired
to conserve with them firm and inviolable. AND WHEREAS after several ^dresses
made to the said States General by Our said Envoy, and nothing granted
effectual for releif of Our said Subjects, (whom We take Ourselvs, in Honor
and Justice, concerned to be satisfied and repaid) We lately commanded the said
Sir George Downing to intimate and signify to the said States, that We expected
their final Answer, concerning satisfaction to be made for the said Ships and
Goods by a time then prefixed and since elapsed, that We might so govern
ourselvs thereupon, that Our aforesaid Subjects might be relieved according to
Right and Justice; And yet no satisfactory Answer has been given, so that We
cannot but apprehend it to be, not only a fruitless endeavor, but a
prostituting of Our Honor and dignity, to make further Application, after so
many de^^als and slightings. AND WHEREAS John Exton, Doctor of Laws, Judge of
Our High Admiralty Court of England, upon Our Command, to certify to Us the
value of the losses, and damages sustained by the said William Courten and
Partners, whose Interest is now vested in Our loving Subjects, Sir Edmond
Turnor Knight, and George Carew Esquire and Partners, has upon full
Examination and proofs thereof made by witnesses in Our High Court of
Admiralty, reported and certified under his hand, that the same do amount to
the sum of one hundred fifty one thousand six hundred and twelve Pounds.

NOW KNOW YE, That for a full restitution to be made to them for their Ships,
Goods and Merchandises, of which the said William Courten, and the Assigns of
the said William Courten and Partners, were so despoiled as aforesaid, with all
such Costs and Charges, as they shall be at for the recovery of the same, We by
the Advice of our Privy Council have thought fit, and by these presents do
grant License and Authority under Our great Seal of England, unto Our said
Subjects Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, for and on the behalf of themselves, and other Persons interessed
as aforesaid, to equipp, victual, furnish, and to set to Sea from time to
time, such and so many Ships and Pinaces as they shall think fit. PROVIDED
always that there be an entry made and recorded in the Admiralty-Court of the
Names of all Ships and Vessels, and of their Burden and A^^^unition, and for
how long time they are victualled; And also of the Name of the Commander
thereof, before the same or any of them be set forth to Sea; And with the said
Ships and Pinaces by force of Arms to set upon, take and apprehend any of the
Ships, Goods, Moneys and Merchandises of the States General or any of their
Subjects, inhabiting within any their Dommions or Territories, wheresoever the
same shall be found, and not in any Port or Harbor in England or Ireland,
unless it be the Ships and Goods of the Parties that did the wrong. And the
said Ships, Goods, Moneys and Merchandises, being so taken and brought into
some Port of Our Realms and Dominions, an Inventory thereof shall be taken by
Authority of Our Court of Admiralty, and Judgment shall be given in Our Court
of Admiralty by the Judge or Judges thereof, for the time being, upon proofs
made before him, or them, that the said Ships, Goods, Wares, Merchandises, or
Money, did belong to the States General, or any of their Subjects as
aforesaid. That they shall be lawful prize to the said Sir Edmond Turnor, and
George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns as aforesaid, to
retain and keep in their or any of their Possesons, and to make Sale, and
dispose thereof in open Market or howsoever else, to their and every of their
best Advantage and Benefit, in as ample manner as any time heretofore has been
accustomed by way of Reprisall, and to have and enjoy the same as lawful
prize, and as their own proper Goods: SO THAT NEITHER Captain, Master nor any
of the Company, that shall serve in his own Person, or shall promote and
advance the said enterprise in manner and form aforesaid, shall in any manner
of wise be reputed or challenged for any Offender against any of Our Laws. And
that also it shall be lawful for all manner of persons as well Our Subjects,
as any other to buy the said Ships, Goods and Merchandises so taken, and
apprehended by the said Captains, Masters and others, and adjudged as
aforesaid, without any damage, loss, hinderance, trouble or molestation, or
encumbrance, to befall the said Buyers, or any of them, in as ample and lawful
manner, as if the Ships, Goods, Wares and Merchandise, had been come and gotten
by the lawful Traff^que of Merchants, or of just prizes in the time of open
War. PROVIDED always, that all Ships, Goods, and Merchandise, taken by virtue
of this Our Commission shall be kept in safety, and no part of them wasted,
spoiled, or diminished, or the Bulk thereof broken, until Judgment have first
past as aforesaid, that they are the Ships and Merchandises of the States
General, or some of their Subjects as aforesaid, And if by color of this Our
Commission, there shall be taken any Ships, Goods, or Merchandises of any of
Our loving Subjects, or the Subjects of any Prince; or State in good League, or
Amiey with ^s (except the States General) or their Subjects as aforesaid, and
the Goods therein laden, sold and embezelled or diminished, or the bulk thereof
broken in any Place before they shall be adjudged to belong to the States
General, or some of their Subjects as aforesaid, that then this Commission
shall be of no sufficient Authority to take the said Ships, Goods, and
Merchandises, or to warrant, or save harmeless such as shall receive, buy or
intermedle therein; but that both the prizes so taken, and the said Ship of
War, shall be confiscated to Our use. AND FURTHER We do hereby declare that it
is Our will and pleasure, that this Our Commission shall remain in full force
and power, to all intents and purposes, until the said Sir Edmond Turnor, and
George Carew, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as aforesaid, shall
by virtue thereof have by force of Arms apprehended, taken, seized, recovered,
and received from the said States General, or their Subjects, one hundred
fifty one thousand six hundred and twelve pounds, according to the appraisement
to be made by sufficient Appraisers upon Oath nominated and authorized in Our
said Court of Admiralty, of all such Ships, Goods, Wares, and Merchandises, as
shall be taken from the said States General, or any of their Subjects, by
virtue of this Commission, or shall otherways receive satisfaction of the Debt
aforesaid, by Composition (...) be made between those of the East India Company
of the Netherlands, and the said Sir Edmond Turnor, and George Carew, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns as aforesaid. NOTWITHSTANDING it so
happen, the present difference between Us, and the States General Repending
upon general ^eprisalls, may be agreed and composed, and that in the interim a
Peace and good Correspondence may be renewed between Us and the said States
General; In which case nevertheless, it is Our will and pleasure, that in the
execution of this Our Commission no violence shall be done to the ^ersons of
the said Subjects of the said States General, but only in case of resistance,
and that after in cold blood, the Subjects of the said States General, if hurt
or wounded, shall be used with all convenient office of humanity and kindness.
AND FURTHER Our will and pleasure is, that although it shall happen that all
hostility between Us, and the States General and Our respective Subjects shall
cease, yet this Our Commission shall remain, and be in full force and power, to
the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, as aforesaid, by virtue thereof to apprehend, take, and seiz by
force and Arms, so many more of the said Ships and Goods of the States
General, or any of their said Subjects, as besides the said sum before
mentioned shall countervail, satisfy, and pay all such Costs and Charges as the
said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns as aforesaid, shall from time to time make proof to have disbursed and
paid toward the equipping, manning, paying, furnishing, and victualing of the
said Ships, so licenced and Authorized as aforesaid, by this Our said
Commission to be equipped, manned, furnished, and victualled by the said Sir
Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
as aforesaid, for the purpose aforesaid. AND OUR WILL and pleasure is, and We
do hereby require Our Judge or Judges of Our High Court of Admiralty, for the
time being, and all other Officers of the Admiralty, and all other Our Judge,
or Judges, Officers, Ministers, and Subjects what soever to be aiding and
assisting to the said Sir Edmond Turnor, and George Carew, their Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns as aforesaid, in all points in the due Execution of
this Our Ropyll Commission, and to proceed to adjudications and adjudge all
Ships, Merchandises, Moneys, and Goods by virtue thereof to be taken according
to our Princely intention, hereby signified and expressed, and to take care
that this Our Royal Commission be duly executed, and favorably interpreted
and construed in all respects, to the benefit and best advantage of the said
Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, as aforesaid. IN WITNESS whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to
be made Patents. Witness Our self at Westminster the 19. day of May, in the 17.
Year of Our Reign.

BY THE KING.

THe several reasons and circumstances, that attended this Case, were
sufficient grounds and considerations for the King, to intail the grant like
the Laws of the M^des and Persians, that never change.

All Sovereign Princes, that have perused this Patent (printed in several
Languages) upon Mature deliberations, have held the clauses and limitations
therein, to be as generous as just, and ought to be a president in such cases
to all future ages.

The Earl of ^larendon, late Lord High Chancellor of England controverted those
two Especial clauses for continuance in the patent, several Months before he
gave his Fiat and recepi for the great Seal. Sir Robert Wyseman, Sir William
Turner, Sir Ieffery Palmer, and others of the Kings council learned in the
Laws, sufficiently satisfied his Lord PP, that it was both reasonable and just
(in this Especial Case) that the Patent should have those Especial grants, to
be in full force and Effect, both in times of Peace and War, until the
parties injured and interessed should be fully satisfied and repaired their
debt and Damages.

It is most certain that those grants and Contracts, which are made repugnant
to Law and reason, have a Nullity in themselves, as inconsistent to the very
being of common right and property (and many times such things have happened in
Treaties of Alliances between Princes and States.)

But when any difference and dispute, (concerning Meum and Tuum) have passed
the Examination of the High Court of Admiralty, Committees of Paliament,
Council Table, public Ministers abroad, and all other Offices of the
greatest trust in the Kingdom at home, and even at last reduced to that
certainty for satisfaction, by a sacred and judicial act under the great Seal
of England, how such a grant can be dissanulled without satisfaction, is a
paradox and such a president that cannot be found in any other age.

Especial Reprisalls are no breach of peace, being usually granted in times of
the Strictest Alliance and Amity between Princes and States. Wherefore it was
lawful for the King of Great Britain to establish such a Grant to his Subjects
(in this case) that should continue until satisfaction shall be recovered for
a Spoil and injury done to his Subjects in times of peace by the East India
Company of the Netherlands, who confessed the fact, and had by two of their own
Directors and Participants (Emb^ssadors in England) in the year 1662. concluded
and agreed in a public Treaty of Alliance and Commerce, that reparations
should be forthwith made for the same; But afterward upon their delays and
denial in the performance of that and other things, the Lords and Commons in
Parliament voted to assist his Majesty with their lives and fortunes, for
general Reprisalls against the United Netherlands, whereupon this Patent for
Especial Reprisall followed: Which is such a public grant (taken notice of
by the contrary parties) that can only be vacated by a Scire Facias when the
debt shall be recovered or satisfied by Composition or force, otherwise there
would be no security in the world.

Nevertheless the States General do pretend, they having subdued the King,
Lords, and Commons (a they say) during the treaty at Breda; That they are
Freed, and acquitted thereby, leaving the debt and Damages incumbent upon the
Crown and Kingdom, to give satisfaction to the Persons interessed and injured
as aforesaid.

It is necessary in this Appeal to make a little retrospect into former
proceedings, and give a perfect account concerning all Mr. Courtens Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments granted and assigned unto Sr. Edward
Littleton, as aforesaid toward his indemnity, and payment of the debts.
IN the Year 1653. Sr. Edward Littleton by several deeds of bargain and sale
granted all his Right Title and Interest in the Manors of Pyrton, Aunton,
Evesham, Severne, Stoake, Over-swell, and Lower-swell, and other Lands and
Tenements in the Counties of Worcester and Gloucester, unto George Carew, his
Heirs and Assigns, and to such other Persons as he directed and appointed in
trust toward satisfaction of the said Carew, and other Creditors mentioned in
diverse Deeds declaring the said trust.

Whereupon was discovered these encumbrances following upon the said Lands:
viz. 1. A settlement and entail upon Mr. Courtens Marriage with the Earl of
Bridgwaters Daughter. 2. Several Mortgages to Daniel Harvey, Merchant, Thomas
Coppin Esqr. Sr. William Curtius Knight, Giles Carter Esqr. John Rushout
Merchant and others. 3. A Claim of the Commissioners upon the Statutes against
Bankrupts. 4. A Claim of the Committee of Worcesterhouse, for Sr. Edward
Littletons delinquency. 5. and lastly, Several Extents and Seizures upon
outlawries against Sr. Edward Littleton and William Courten.


So that after all those difficulties were removed, and encumbrances considered
under several contracts and agreements with the respective parties, the said
Manors, Lands etc. were sold by Mr. Carew, soon after the Kings most happy
restoration, to the Persons following: viz. The Right and Equity of redemption
in Seavern Stoak, and other Lands (in Mortgage to the said Daniel Harvey) sold
unto Thomas, Lord Coventry, for 1200. The Right and Equity of redemption in
Lower Swell sold unto Sr. Robert Atkins, Knight of the Bath, for 1600. The like
in Over Swell sold unto Sr. James Rushout Baronet, for 300. The Manor of
Pyrton in present possession sold to the said Thomas Lord Coventry, for. 7500.
The Manor of Evesham with the dissolved Monastery, in present possession sold
to Mr. Edward Rudge, Merchant for 7500. The Manor of Aunton in present
possession sold to Thomas Foley Esqr. for 3600. 21700.

In whose possessions the said Manors, Lands and Tenements do remain at this
time, some of the said Purchasers having cleared the Mortgages, and other
encumbrances, which exceeded much more then the purchase money.

An account how the said 21700. L. was paid and disposed to the Persons
following. Paid unto Mr. Simon Smith by appointment of the Commissioners upon
the Statutes concerning Bankrupts in pursuance of Mr. Carews agreement and
articles with them for their Interest and title in the Lands, the sum of L.
2000. Paid unto William Courten the Grandchild and Heir for joining in the
sale of the Lands by fine and recovery the sum of 7000. Paid unto Mr. James
Littleton and others by Sr. Edward Littletons appointment the sum of L. 500.
Paid unto several Persons for disbursment in Law and other incident charges as
by the Particulars appeared, the sum of 1800. Paid to Mr. George Carew toward
his debt and Damages 3000. Paid to the Executors, Administrators and Assigns
of Sr. Robert Thorold, Sr. Anthony van Dijck, Alice Walcott, Eusebius Mathews,
Jeremy Elwes, William Bagott; Sr. Robert Ayton, Robert Davies and others
proportionably to their Debts the sum of 7400. 21700.

All the personal Estate of Mr. Courten in England was granted and assigned
before by the said Commissioners to John Pettyward and Thomas Birkhead, in
trust for the Creditors, which was divided amongst them, and yielded only 15.
Pence in the pound. Wherefore it may appear to all judicious and reasonable
men, that the Sons and Heirs of Peter Boudaen and Jacob Pergens who are so
rich, ought to come to a fair account for Sr. William Courtens Estate gotten
into their hands, or be required thereunto in a National way after all other
means hither to used, have proved so in effectual which hereafter is further
dec^ared.

It is to be remembered that a great question did arise in the case concerning
Mr. Courtens Lands, between Mr. Carew, Mr. Courten the Grandchild, and the
Commissioners upon the Statutes against Banckrupts; whereupon several suits
were co^^^enced many years, and at last was agreed by a reference unto Sr.
Orlando Bridgman and Sergeant Newdigate.

The Case was this
William Courten Tenant in tail, Bargains and sells his Manors of Pyrton,
Aunton, and other Lands in the Countys of Worcester and Gloucester in the year
1642. unto Sr. Edward Littleton and his Heyrs, and in the year 1643. becomes
Bankrupt. The Question was, whether the Estate-tail, that passed not by the
Bargain and sale, should be preserved, by the Law, for the Heyr in tail or
whether the Commissioners Grant by force of the Statutes against Banckrupts
(for the benefit of the Creditors) should bar the Heirs of Courten the
Bankrupt, or not.
SOme Lawyers pretended that it was Casus Omissus out of the Statutes, Others,
that it was within the common intendment of the Statutes, and true meaning
thereof to bar the issue intail; and that the Commissioners had the some power
by an assignment to bar the Estate-tail as the Heir had by a Fine: however no
purchaser would deal without the Heirs concurrence, which advanced the Price
several years purchase.

Nevertheless many Creditors, that ^ought their relief under the Commission
upon the Statutes against Bankrupts, were dissatisfyed and would not consent
thereunto, unless Mr. Carew would enter into Articles and covenants to
prosecute Mr. Pete^ Boudaen, and his Heirs for an Account of the stock in
Company with Sr. William Courten, that then might have equitable dividents
thereout according to the said covenants, and also of all other personal
estate of Sr. William Courten and his Sons beyond the seas, whereunto the Heir
was to renounce his Right and Administrations which he did accordingly.

Then the Commissioners in pursuance of the said Articles assigned all their
Right and Interest unto Mr. Carew in all the Actions and pretentions whatsoever
in the United Netherlands that belonged unto Mr. Courten.

And Mr. Carew also by consent and procurement of William Courten the
Grandchild had letters of Administration (de bonis non) of Sr. William Courten
with his Will annexed granted and coufirmed unto him, the said Carew, under
Seal of the prerogative Court of Canterbury: by virtue whereof these following
Processes were instituted.

The Process at the Hague.
George Carew Esqr. Plantiff Jacob Pergens Merchant, Defendant.
The Case.
Sr. Jacob Cats, late Pensionaris of Holland, became bound at London, according
to the Custom of England unto Sr. William Courten Knight by a Writing
Obligatory dated the 29th. of July, 1631. in the poenal sum of 3000. L.
Sterling, upon condition indorsed for the payment of 2080. L of the like money
on the 12th. of February following, which was continued at Interest after the
death of Sr. William Courten, who left his Son William sole Executor who
afterward (being insolvent) did by a Letter of Attorney with an Assignment
bearing date the 31. of October 1643. transferr and make over the said
Obligation and Money thereupon unto the said Jacob Pergens of Amsterdam under
pretense of a debt due to him. Whereupon Jacob Pergens obtained a Sentence in
the year 1661. for the said debt and damages, in the Provincial Court at the
Hague against Sr. Jacob Cats and his Heirs six years after the death of William
Courten the Executor, from which Sentence they appealed to the High Court of
Judicature: Then, pendente lite, George Carew, Administrator of the Goods and
Chattels of Sr. William Courten intervened in the cause and exhibited his
Request by Bill of Complaint to the said High Court setting forth his Right
according to the Law and Custom of England, where the debt was contracted and
the Bond made, and prayed that his interest might be preserved, and that the
Heirs of Cats might be ordered to pay the money to him in right of his
Administration, and that Jacob Pergens might be condemned to deliver up the
said Bond to the said Carew uncancelled, as an effect of Sr. William Courtens
Estate unadministred: whereunto Jacob Pergens made his Exception in writing,
that he was a Burger of Amsterdam, and so not liable to be sued in any other
Court at the first instance but before his competent Judges at Amsterdam.

Unto which Mr. Carew replied that Mr. Pergens was a free Denizon of England,
that he had his dwelling house in the Hague, when he was summoned before the
Supreme Court of Judicature which is the High Court of Chancery in Holland,
Zealand and Westfriesland. That all Strangers by instructions of that Court (in
such cases of Interventions) were to be admitted at their first instance, that
the Sentence in favor of Mr. Pergens before the Provincial Court was
erroneous: and that the High Court of Chancery was obliged to give Sentence
according to the Rules of Justice and equity practiced in England in matters of
the like nature. And that it was the custom of all Nations to give judgment
upon Obligations and Contracts according to he Law of the Land where they were
originally made. Yet notwithstanding those assertions and all other Arguments
and Reasons that were given upon pleadings; John de Wit, being a Kinsman of
Mr. Pergens his Wife, the Lords pronounced the Sentence following upon the
12th. of May, 1663. to the great amazement of the Advocates on both sides, in
regard the Case hereafter was agreed by the Court and sent into England for the advice and Opinions of the Common Lawyers, and Civil Lawyers there which was
subscribed by them in the presence of S. I. Wright and Ioh. Daniel, Notaries
Public. And them sent Expressly to the Lords at the Hague.

The Advice and Opinions, of the Judges, Doctors and Common Lawyers in England,
upon the Case aforesaid, transmitted to the High Court of Judicature at the
Hague.
CAjus Semproni^s per Chyrographum manu sua subscriptum Guiljelmo Courten
Equiti Aurato in summa duarum millium librarum atque sese ad usuras conventas
Praestandas ad Calendas Januarii long elapsas obligatus erat: Guiljelmus
Courten, Eques Auratus Testamentum condidit, in quo filium suum, natu maximum
Guiljelmum Courten, Armigerum, Heredem and Executorem instituit, and moritur.
Postea Guiljelmus Courten Filius, Haeres, and Executor institutus, factus est
Decoctor (Anglice a Bancfrupt) and praedictum nomen and Chyrographum cum totis
interesse and usuris Cajo Maevio, uni Creditorum assignavit and transportavit.
Sed Sempronius nullam partem debiti Cajo Maevio solvisse fertur, sed totum
manet insolutum, and postea Georgio Carew Haereditas jacens, and administratio
de bonis non administratis cum ultima voluntate annexa praedicti Guiljelmi
Courten, Equitis Aurati, decreto Judicis Committitur.

Quaeritur 1^. An praedictum debitum vel Chyrographum in quo Cajus Sempronius
stetit obligatus per leges Angliae Cajo Maevio assignari posset.

Quaeritur 2do. An Georgio Carew, cui Iudex Litteras administrationis de bonis
non administratis and haereditatem jacentem Guiljelmi Courten Equitis Aurati
commisit, praedictum debitum and Chyrographum juris debeatur.

NOs affirmamus praedictum Debitum vel Chyrographum Cajo Maevio male
assignatum, ac praedictum assignationem esse omnino inefficacem, atque inanem
ad agendum; Jure Angliae posset quidem Guiljelmus Courten, Filius and Haeres,
Cajum Maevium procuratorem pro dicto debito suo nomine ad agendum constituisse,
quod tamen mandatum erat revocabile and per mortem constituentis, nullum and
irritum.

Affirmamus Georgio Carew, cui Judex litteras administrationis de bonis non
administratis, and haereditatem jacentem D^i. Guilmi Courten Equiti Aurati
decrevit, praedictum debitum and Chyrographum cum totis usuris and interesse
jure Angliae recte debere. Signatum erat

G. Swiet. Guil. Merick^. Tim. Baldwyn LL Dr. Samuel Baldwyn. I. Vincent. Timo.
Keatlewel.


The Sentence of the High Court of Judicature translated out of Dutch into
English.
George Carew q. q. Plaintiff contra Jacob Pergens and the Heirs of Sr. Jacob
Cats Defendants.
THe High Court of Judicature in Holland have seen the Process and Writings
exhibited between George Carew appointed by the Prerogative Court of England,
Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of Sr. William Courten Knight deceased
(in his life time dwelling in London) Complainant of the one part, and Jacob
Pergens Directour of the West India Chamber Defendant on the other part. The
Court having seen the Requests, Answers, Repliques and Dupliques respectively.
Upon mature consideration of the Matter, doing right out of the Name of the
High Soveraignity and Earldom of Holland, Zealand and Friesland do admit the
Exception, propounded by the Defendant, and renvoy the parties before the
Defendants competent judges at Amsterdam, and do compensate the costs of the
Process on both sides (for reasons) thus pronounced on the 12th. day of May
1663.

In knowledge of me J. COENEN, Register.

Then George Carew summoned the said Jacob Pergens, before the Scheepens or
Judges at Amsterdam, and concluded in his Process that he should be condemned
to pay the Money and Interest, due upon the said Obligation to him the said
Carew, as an unadministred effect of Sr. William Courtens estate, allowing to
Pergens, all his costs and charges that he had expended about the premises.

Yett nevertheless the said High Court of Judicature did on the 14th. of
October 1664. pronounce a Sentence in favor of Mr. Pergens whereby they
ordered the Heirs of Sr. Jacob Cats to pay him the principal Money, Interest
and charges which amounted unto the sum of 4200. pound Sterling, and that
Perg^ns should deliver up the Bond to the said Heirs uncancelled with a
Procuration to sue the other Obligers in the said Bond.

However both parties proceeded several ^ears together at Amsterdam by
Answers, ^eplicques, Dupliques, rejoynders, and Exchanged writings, giving over
deductions and advertisments of right to the Judges in Amsterdam. Which Cause
is yet depending there; Mr. Carew Expecting daily a Sentence in his favor from
the Lords the Cause being so clear and plain to all judicions men that have
made any inspection into the said proceedings. But Pergens continnally
obstructs the same.

Here follows a Brief Narrative of the Process concerning the accounts of the
Company.
GEorge Carew in his quality as Administrator of S^. William Courten having
given procuration at the Hague in the Month of July 1662. to Mr. James Boeve,
to question the said Peter Boudaen concerning the said accounts, and to recover
of him and his Heirs or any other persons whatsoever, the unadminisstred
Effects of S^. William Courten, in the United Netherlands, whereupon James
Boeve in the said Month of July addressed himself to the said Boudaen at
Middleburgh in a freindly manner to settle the said accounts, who refused to
compl^e therein upon any terms.

Then James Boeve sent Mr. Deutrelaw a Public Notary, to insinuate his
quality under Mr. Carew by an authentic Act, and required a view of the
Companies Books kept by S^. Peter Courten, protesting for all Costs and
Damages etc. Whereunto the said Peter Boudaen only answered that he did hear
and see (as all Litigious persons in such cases do) and desired a Copy of the
said Insinuation and Protest, which was given him on the 2. of August 1662.
accordingly.

James Boeve then caused the said Boudaen to be summoned before the
Burgermasters and Schepen^ of Middleburgh: so this Process hereafter was
commenced on 6. of September. 1662. which is translated out of Low Dutch into
English.

The Process at Middleburgh.
James Boeve q. q. Plantiff. contra Peter Boudaen Courten Def^.
James Boeve empowered by Procuration from George Carew Esqr. being appointed by
the Prerogative-Court of England Administrator of all the Goods and Chattels
unadministred of Sr. William Courten, Knight, late of the Parish of St. Gabriel
Fanchurch in London, in that quality, Plaintiff, against Peter Boudaen Courten,
Heir and Executor unto Sr. Peter Courten, Knight, for that the said William
Courten, and Pieter Courten, and John Mon^y did trade in partner-ship, as by
the Books, Accounts, and other Papers appertaining to the said partner-ship,
which are in the possession of the Defendant, appears, that he should be
condemned to Consign or deposite all the said Books, Accounts, and other
Writings in the Secretarys Office in this City, there to be inspected, with
egress and regress thereunto, and to form an account thereout, at the General
Charge, and in Case of debate, demands Costs of the Process, as also for
hindrance, Costs, Damages, and Interest suffered already, and yet to suffer,
as by the protest.

Whereupon Abraham Smith, Proctor for Peter Boudaen, insisted upon Caution for
Costs of the Process.

Then Mr. Boeve did on the 21. of October 1662. pass an authentic Act for
Caution in presence of his Proctor John Rymsdike, whereby he bound himself and
his Estate both real and personal (according to the custom of the Country
in cases of debt) to be liable unto all Costs and Expenses, that the Court
should award or condemn Carew the principal Demandant to satisfy.

Extract out of the ordinary Roll of the City of Middleburgh in Zealand. The
Proctor John Rymsdike calls for acceptance of the caution on behalf of the
plantiff.

The Proctor Abraham Smith does the like for the Defendant.

The Burgermasters and Scheepens do order that other caution shall be given.
Actum 8. of November 1662.

Signed Ad. V. Brandehooghen, in absence of the Secretary.

Herein appears the greaetst Act of injustice that ever was offered to any
Stranger in the like Case. Although it is well known to all persons that
understand the Laws of England, and the Laws of Nations; That Executors and
Administrators are not Subject to Costs in suits of Law and therefore not
Liable to give Bail or Caution: Yet Mr. Boeve being desirous to remove all
questions and Scruples that might arise to delay the Process did pass an act of
Caution for Costs who was not only an Inhabitant of the City but a Burger of
Middleburgh, that had his own dwelling house there wherein he was seized in see
to him and his Heirs. Besides Boudaen had many thousand pounds of his in
Custody at the same time, and more over Boudaen was known by many of the
Magistrates to be indebted to S^. William Courten for vast sums of Money, yet
they ordered Boeve to find other security that were Burgers of the City that
had fast Goods there: Knowing that Boudaen being a Kiesheer of Middleburgh
(that is one that choseth the Magistrates) a Director of the East India Company
and an Elder of the English Church, no Citizen would engage as caution against
him, who had such an influence upon the Burgers. So the cause rested in statu
quo. And the wars with Holland coming on, Boudaen died before Mr. Carew made
any further prosecution therein.

In the year 1670. the Creditors of S^. William Courten hearing that Peter
Boudaen had left 90000. pounds Sterling (that is nine ton of Gold as they call
it in the Netherlands) amongst his Sons and Daughters, Mr. Carew was importuned
to send a general procuration to Mr. Mark Fletcher of Middleburgh. Merchant,
to revive the Process against the Heirs of Boudaen, and to prosecute the
actions depending against Jacob Pergens their confederate, for several great
sums of Money that he had gotten into his hands from the East India Company and
the Heirs of S^. Jacob Cats, upon pretended debts due to him and colorable
assignations from Mr. Courten. But in regard Mr. Fletcher was a Burger of
Middleburgh, and had some dealings with Boudaens and their Friends, he refused
at that time to proceed any otherways then by Frei^dly perswations which could
not prevail upon them.

In the year 1671. Upon new instances and complaynts of the Creditors to the
King and Council, his Majesty was most graciously pleased to send these
Letters following to the States General and S^. George Downing his Ambassador
then in the Hague.

A Copy of the Letter from the King of Great Britain to the States General.
A^ 1671.
HIgh and Mighty Lords our good Friends, Allies, and Confederates, We are
constrained by the many Complaints made unto us from our loving Subjects
(Members of our House of Commons in Parliament) Creditors of Sr. William
Courten and Sr. Paul Pyndar Kn^s. deceased to signify unto you that several
Effects of their Estates do remain in the hands of Mr. Jacob Pergens, Mr. Peter
Boudaen, Sr. Jacob Cats and their Heirs Executors or Assigns Subjects of the
United Netherlands, who do unjustly detain the same from the Complainants,
contrary to Common Right; And more particularly we are informed by new instance
made unto us by the Interessed, that three several suits have been depending
at Law in Middleburgh, Amsterdam, and the Hague for diverse years together, to
the great grievance and expense of the Creditors and Administrators of Sr.
William Courten and Sr. Paul Pyndar, where they can find no relief. And the
Defendants do aggravate the Injuries done to our Subjects by sinister ways and
means in causing Mr. James Boeve the Complainants Agent to be imprisoned and
there maintain him purposely to obstruct and delay the Demandants proceedings:
We cannot therefore conceal the resentments that We make of those indirect
dealings, more especially since it reflects upon our Honor that the Laws of
England are not permitted to take place in your ordinary Courts of Judicature
upon England Contracts, which (for the preservation of Commerce and mutual
Society) is practiced in all Nations of the World: We have given an order to
Sr. George Downing our Ambassador to let you understand the particular
instances with the circumstances thereof; that speedy and entire satisfaction
may be given answerable to the Rules of Justice: which we hold our self obliged
to Require. etc.

Written from our Court at White Hall, January 26th 1671. in the 24th year of
our Reign. Your good Friend C. R.


A Copy of the Kings Letter to Sr. George Downing, his Majesty's Ambassador at
the Hague. A^. 1671.
C. R.

TRusty and well-beloved, you will herewith receive our Letter to the States
General, and for your better Instructions in the contents thereof, We have
sent you a Copy of the humble Petition of our loving Subjects, concerning the
same, which we will that upon the delivery of our said Letters you fully
represent in our name to the said States, with the particular grievances
contained in the said Petition together with the sense we more especially have
so long laid under. And that for civil Actions, depending at Law, in the
ordinary Courts of Judicature, in the Provinces of Holland and Zealand, being
for matters not comprehended in the Treaty at Breda; We do expect your best
care and diligence herein with a speedy account thereof, and so we bid you
heartily farewell. Given at our Court at White Hall, 29th January; 1671.

By his Ma^^es Command I. Trevor.


But in regard Sr. George Downing could not get any answer to his Memorial
concerning the Flagg, the States General pretending they would give
satisfaction, if all other pretenses were brought in to be together treated on;
Sr. George Downing protesting to have Express order to treat of nothing, before
satisfaction was made about the Flagg; and the States declining it, he returned
for London, re infecta, and a Declaration of war soon after was published in
England.

Nevertheless, the Creditors of S^. William Courten, and his Son, as also of
Sr. Paul Pyndar and Sr. Edward Littleton and diverse other Proprietors and
interessed persons did not forbear their further addresses to the King and
Council concerning the premises, the several proceedings whereof are
mentioned in the three following pages.

Mr. Torriano, Mr. Warren, Mr. Westcomb, and other Merchants of London made
their Complaints and Addresses also to the King, to recommend their grievances
against the West India Company of the Netherlands, who pretend to be as great
Sovereigns, as the Members of the Dutch East India Company: That dares spoil
their neighbors if they trade with their Enemies, and Confiscate their Goods
for trading with their Friends. So that no Nation can be safe or secure against
those Animals, who make war and Peace with the Natives at Pleasure: And are
now upon settling a Colony to plant themselves in the Mayn Land of America in the
best air near unto Convenient Rivers and Havens, fit for Trade and Commerce, to
prejudice the English Plantations: Their Governo^^ Mr. Price, late English
Minister at the Hague, being a better Soldier then a preacher and more skilled
in Merchandising, then other Studies, having dwelt many years in Braziel under
the Government of the said West India Company, Endeavors to settle a new
Commonwealth in America, under the States of Holland. That will flourish in a
short time far beyond New England, if they be not cropped in the bud: but more
of this hereafter in the third part of this Book, wherein are recited the
States proposalls to all Planters, and the Abstract of the West India Companies
New Charter from the States General.

Observations Remarkable.
THe King of Great Britain that holds his Kingdoms only of God Almighty,
without the least dependency of any Potentate whatsoever, may by the Municipall
Laws of England, hinder any of his Subjects (born under his Dominions) to
depart his Realms to become Subjects to any other Prince or State in the world.

Great Britain being an Island planted in the Midst of the Ocean is envied by
Some, feared by Others, yet Liable to invasion by their Neighbors.

The Laws of Nature, and the dictates of reason, and Common Policy, oblige all
Men to defend the Land of their Nativity, and the Heritage of their Fathers.

The King of England as Common Parent of the Country, that has promised to
protect his Subjects, maintain the Laws, and preserve their properties, would
lessen both his power and Prerogative, by the loss of diverse Subjects and
their Families, English, Scotch, and Irish, (intended to be transplanted to
America by the West India Company and their Confederates) when they shall
become both Strangers and Enemies being seduced to swear Alegiance and fealty
to the States of Holland* and the West India Company, who are now upon a Treaty
with the Zealand Proprietors for the purchase of Syrin^m, to greaten themselves
against any other quarter of the universe.

The Order of Reference from the King and Council.
At the Court of Whitehall, the 22th. of March 1671/2.
Present The Kings most Excellent Majesty.
His Royal Highness the Duke of York. His Highness Prince Rupert. Lord Keeper.
Duke of Buckingham. Duke of Monmouth. Earl of Ossory. Earl of Bridgewater. Earl
of Sandwich. Earl of Bathe. Earl of Craven. Earl of Lauderdail. Earl of
Carbery. Lord Bp. of London. Lord Arlington. Lord Newport. Lord Holles. Lord
Ashley. Mr. Treasurer. Mr. Vice Chamberlain. Sr. John Duncombe. Master of the
Ordnance.
Upon reading this day at the Board the humble Petition of Thomas Kynaston,
George Townesend Merchants George Porter Esqr. and others, First Adventurers in
the joint stock with Sr. William Courten to the East Indies, of Sr. Richard
Mauleverer Knt. and Baront. Sr. John Ayton Knt. George Carew Esqr. and several
others, Creditors of Sr. William Courten, Wm. Courten his Son, Sr. Edward
Littleton, and Sr. Paul Pyndar Knts. deceased, and of Nicholas Warren, Richard
Wescomb, and George Toriano Merchants, setting forth the many great Losses and
Damages they have suffered by the Subjects of the United Netherlands in times
of Peace, Some by violence in seizing the Petitioners Ships and Goods in their
trading-Voyages; Others by unjust detention of the Petitioners Money and Goods
gotten into their hands by Commerce and civil Contracts, for all which the
Petitioners are left without remedy or relief, but by his Majesty's Prerogative
Royal and gracious Protection, which the Petitioners most humbly prayed his
Majesty would be pleased to grant unto them, and to require satisfaction and
Reparation to be given to the Petitioners by the States General and their
Subjects answerable to the several and respective Damages sustained by the
Petitioners. And that for the future a summary course may be taken for speedy
decision of all civil Actions and Differences between his Majesty's Subjects
and the Subjects of the States General by neutrall Persons, to the end Right
may be done them in the United Netherlands: It was Ordered by his Majesty in
Council, that it be, and it is hereby referred to the Rt. Honoble the Lord
Arlington, the Lord Ashley, Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Secretary Trevor, and Sr. John
Duncomb, or to any three of them to consider of the Petitioners several and
respective Cases (as true State whereof they are to present unto their Lops.)
and what satisfaction their Lops. shall conceive requisite for his Majesty to
insist upon, (when it shall be seasonable) for the said Losses and Damages.
And the same to report to his Majesty, that order may then be taken therein
accordingly.

John Nicholas.

The Report of the Lords Refferees to the King pursuant to the Order of the
Council table.
May it please your Majesty,
IN obedience to an Order made by your Majesty in Council the 22th. of March
1672/3. whereby it was referred to us to consider of the several Cases of
Thomas Kynaston, George Townesend Merchants, George Porter Esqr. and others,
first Adventurers with Sr. William Courten Knt. deceased, to the East Indies,
and of Sr. Richard Mauleverer Knt. and Baront. Sr. John Ayton Knt. and others
Creditors of the said Sr. William Courten and William Courten Esqr. his Son,
Sr. Edward Littleton and Sr. Paul Pyndar Knts. deceased; and what satisfaction
we should conceive requisite for your Majesty to insist on (when it should be
reasonable) for their Losses and Damages; and the same to report to your
Majesty, that Order might then be taken therein accordingly.

We therefore humbly represent to your Majesty, that as to the Case of the
Adventurers with, and Creditors of Sr. William Courten and his Son, we find
that two of their Ships (the Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bonadventure) were in a
trading Voyage, between Goa and Maccao violently seized, by the Dutch; The loss
and Damages of which Ships and their lading, and the Consequences thereof to
their several Factories, and Plantations settled in China, India, and Japan,
by Disappointment of Supplies and loss of Trade, amounting to one hundred fifty
one thousand six hundred and twelve pounds Sterling; as it appears ratified,
and reduced by your Majesty under your great Seal of England, in the year 1665.
whereby it was granted, and declared, that the said Damages should be reprised
in all times of Peace, or War, until the same Debt should be satisfied, or a
Composure made between the said Sr. William Courten his Assigns, and all
Persons interested and concerned with him and the East India Company of the
Netherlands.

We further humbly represent unto your Majesty, that in all Treaties and
Revolutions of times, the Damages aforesaid were particularly insisted on for
satisfaction.

We further humbly represent unto your Majesty, that in the same Order of
Council, there is also referred unto us the Consideration of Nicholas Warren,
Richard Westcombe, and George Torriano Merchants, who were Owners of the Ship
and Goods, Ann and Margaret, of which Charles Saunders was Master; which in the
year 1658. were laden with Hydes, Bees Wax, and several other Goods and
Merchandises, and in her Passage between Tunis and Leghorne whither she was
bound, was set upon by a Dutch Ship called the Gelderland, John Jacobson
Commander, several of her Men wounded, the Master killed, and the Ship and
lading taken and carried away: Which said Ship and lading, with the loss of her
Voyage and Damages sustained was adjudged by the Admiralty at thirteen
thousand pounds.

We further also humbly represent to your Majesty, that by the Treaty at Breda
Anno 1667. all Reparations are extinguished and cut off: Yet since that time
the States General of the Netherlands have not only been refractory in the
performance of any Agreement concluded on, but also have committed many
violences and Depredations, whereby they have wholly cancelled the Obligations
of all past Treaties and Agreements, and left your Majesty and your Subjects as
free in all Justice, and Equity, as if they never had been made.

And therefore we humbly presume to report our Opinions to your Majesty, that
it is now but just and seasonable for your Majesty to insist on Reparations for
your said injured Subjects for the losses and Damages aforesaid.

All which we humbly submit to your Majesty's greater Prudence. 29. June 1672.
Shaftesbury. Clifford. I. Duncombe.


The Kings Letter to the Duke of Buckingham, and the Earl of Arlington, in
pursuance of the Report.
The Superscription
To our Right Trusty and entirely beloved and to our Right Trusty and
welbeloved Cousins and Counselors and Ambassadors Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiaries to treat with our good Brother the most Christian King, and
the States of the United Netherlands.
Charles R.

RIght Trusty and entirely beloved, and Right Trusty and welbeloved Cousins and
Counselors we greet you well. Whereas we thought fit to refer the
consideration of the several Cases of Thomas Kynaston, George Townsend
Merchants, George Porter Esqr. and others, first Adventurers with Sr. William
Courten Knight deceased to the East Indies, and of Sr. Richard Mauleverer
Knight and Baronet, Sr. John Ayton Knight and other Creditors of the said Sr.
William Courten, and William Courten Esqr. his Son, Sr. Edward Littleton and
Sr. Paul Pyndar Knights deceased, and also of Nicholas Warren, Richard
Westcombe and George Torriano Merchants, to some of the Lords of our Privy
Council, and they having reported their Opinions to us, that it is now but
just and seasonable for us to insist on reparations for our said injured
Subjects for the losses and Damages they have sustained from the States
General of the United Provinces and their Subjects: We have thought fit in
pursuance thereof, and upon the humble suit of the persons interessed to
recommend their said Cases to you in the most effectual manner, that in any
Treaty, or Treaties, which may happen to be made with the States General of
the United Provinces, such provision may be made for their satisfaction, as you
Judge convenient, and may consist with the State of affairs between us, and as
is suitable to the Justice of their Cases, and our care to Protect our Subjects
in their just rights, as well as assist them in the recovery of them. And so We
bid you heartily Farewell. Given at our Court at Whitehall the 7th. day of July
1672.

By his Majesty's Command CLIFFORD.


IN pursuance whereof Mr. Carew, being desired by all parties to go Express for
Holland, with his Majesty's Letter and the other Writings and Papers concerning
the said claims, he procured a Pasport from the Commissioners of the States
General then at Hampton Court for himself and his servants to travel through
the United Provinces, which he did accordingly: but in regard the Treaty at
Utrecht did not take any effect, Mr. Carew, and Mr. John Sherland, in Company
with him, returned to the Hague, to advise with Advocates and Proctors that had
served the said Carew and Mr. Boeve in their Process at Law; Where they were
apprehended as enemies to the Country on the 6. of August 1672. Old style,
(their Baggage, Papers, and Writings taken from them) and by order of the
States of Holland kept close Prisoners for the space of twenty Months. A Brief
relation whereof appears in Mr. Carews Advertisment, and Protest, at the end of
this Book. In the Mean time all English men may remember, that at the instance
of the Spanjard, and other addresses made to the King on the behalf of the
United States, a peace was hastily concluded with the Hollanders, and no
satisfaction given or consideration taken of the Bona Esperanza, or for the
Henry Bona Adventura. Notwithstanding all the proceedings aforesaid, and those
opportunites of advantage, that Great Britain had then in their hands.

Many of the Creditors, and other Persons interessed being surprised at this
sudden conclusion of the Treaty at London with the Spanish Ambassador upon the
States Procuration. While the Lords Plenipotentiaries were upon consultations
about the same Matters at Cologne.

The said Creditors and Proprietors forthwith caused this following request to
be Exhibited to his Majesty at London in Mr. Carews name, and printed several
Copies thereof which they delivered unto diverse Lords and Commons in
Parliament.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble petition of George Carew Esqr. Administrator of the Goods and
Chattels of Sr. William Courten and Sr. Paul Pyndar Knights deceased. Assignee
of Sr. Edward Littleton Baronet, and the Commissioners concerning Mr. Courtens
Estate, on the behalf of himself, and several others, Proprietors and
Creditors, your Majesty's good Subjects of England.
Shows.
THat the East India Company of the Netherlands did in the year 1643. take the
two Ships Bona Esperanza^ and Henry Bona Adventura of London with all their
Goods and Merchandise, upon trading Voyages in the East Indies; and also all
the Books, Contracts, Writings, Bills of Lading and other Papers concerning the
same, contrary to Justice and Common rights, which proved to the Damages of
your Petitioner and other Proprietors one hundred and fifty thousand pounds
Sterling and upwards, as by the several Depositions, Examinations and Reports
of the Judge of the High Court of Admiralty, and your Majesty's Advocates
General appears.

That in prosecution of Justice and reparation, your Majesty was most
graciously pleased particularly to own the said Cause, in a more Especial
manner in the Treaty Anno 1662. then all other Damages of that nature, to your
Subjects, in regard of the many services and Sufferings of Sr. William Courten,
Sr. Paul Pyndar and other interessed, that had lent several great sums of
Money to his late Majesty your Father (of ever blessed Memory) at usual
interest, toward the ordinary Charge of the Crown, before the year 1640. which
remains yet unsatisfied; although most part of those Moneys (belonging to
Orphans and Widows) was taken up upon the Credit of the said Courten and Pyndar.

That during the late war Anno 1672. Your Majesty most graciously appeared
again concerning the Damages of the said Ships, holding your self obliged in
Justice and Honor to get satisfaction from the principal, Offenders for the
same. As appears by the orders of the Council Table, and Reports of the
Commitee of Lords, intimating the Merits of the said Cause to your Majesty
accordingly.

That notwithstanding all the orders, proceedings and especial grants, under
the great Seal of England concerning the said Ships, Goods, and Fraights, the
Hollanders do still pretend, they are not obliged to give any satisfaction for
the same, being made a debt incumbent upon the Crown by the last Treaty at
London, whereby eight hundred thousand Pattacons are to be paid unto your
Majesty by the States General, at four equal payments, for which the Crown of
Spain stands obliged that they shall be paid accordingly.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays, that your Majesty would be most
graciously pleased to assign some part and proportions of the said Money,
payable to your Majesty by the States unto your Petitioner, in satisfaction of
the said Damages and Losses concerning the said Ships as aforesaid, or to
grant him some assignment otherways in lie^ thereof; Or at least, upon the
States and Spanjards non performance, Permit your Petitioner with the other
Proprietors and Creditors to reprize their satisfaction by the natural force of
your Majesty's Letters Patents, granted for that purpose. And your Petitioner
shall ever pray etc.


But what Reference and Report was made thereupon, or what satisfaction was
promised, is left to the information of those who were the Persons that
solicited in that affair.

In the Month of May 1674. Mr. George Carew, being discharged of his
imprisonment at the Hague, went from thence to Middleburgh where he first
applied himself to John, Peter and Henry Boudaen in a freindly manner, and
desired them to settle the accounts of the Company, who still denied the same.

Then Mr. Carew in the Month of June following sent a Public Notary to them,
who insinuated Carews quality, with the former proceedings of Mr. Boeve, and
protested for all Damages and Costs in Case of any further debate or delays;
unto which the said Boudaens did answer only as their Father had done (viz)
that they did hear and see; and desired a Copy of the insinuation and protest,
which Mr. John Duyvelaer, the Public Notary gave them on the 18. of June
1674. accordingly.

Soon after Mr. Carew summoned all the Sons and Daughters of Peter Boudaen
deceased, before the Burgermasters and Scheepens at Middleburgh, and revived
the former proceedings as follow:

The Process begun Anno 1662. revived at Middleburgh, Anno 1674. and translated
out of the Low Dutch into English.
Extract out of the Ordinary Roll of the City of Middleburgh in Zealand.
GEorge Carew, Esqr. appointed by the Prerogative Court of England,
Administrator of all the goods unadministred of Sr. William Courten Knight,
late of the parish of Sr. Gabriel Fanchurch in London, in which quality
approving the proceedings acted by James Boeve, by virtue of procuration from
him George Carew Plaintiff, against John, Peter, and Mr. Henry Boudaen, and
Abraham Bischop, the husband of Catharin Boudaen, all of them dwelling within
this City, Item Mr. Walter Boudaen, Minister of Gods Word in Amsterdam, as also
Dame Constance Boudaen, dwelling also in Amsterdam, all of them Children and
Heirs of Peter Boudaen Courten their Father, who was Heir unto Sr. Peter
Courten Knight, in that quality Defendants, to be condemned to accept the
proceedings of the aforesaid Process, and to that end to appoint their Proctor
Acceptant, and accordingly to proceed with the Plaintiff pursuant to the last
Act, cum expensis, in case of Debate.

Abraham Smith, for John, Peter, and Henry Boudaen, as also for Abraham
Bischop, desires day, reserving his Exceptions and Defense.

Fiat upon debarr, and authorized to cite the other Defendants by letter to be
delivered by the Merchants Bode (or Messenger) within eight days after the
receipt.

Extract out of the Ordinary Roll of the City of Middleburgh in Zealand.
George Carew, qualitate qua Plaintiff,
John Boudaen, cum suis Defendants. Fol. 136.
Abraham Smith, propounds his Exception in Scriptis.

Abraham Smith, Proctor, denies that the Plaintiff has the quality which he
ascribed unto himself in this Process, and therefore propounds his Exception of
Non-quality, and concludes, for admittance thereof, and absolution of his
Instance with costs.

John van Rijmsdijck, Proctor, for the Plaintiff desires day this 26th
September. 1674.

Extract out of the Ordinary Roll in this City of Middleburgh in Zealand.
George Carew, qualitate qua Plaintiff,
John Boudaen cum suis Defendants.
BUrgermasters and Schepens, before they determine the propounded Exception, do
order the plaintiff to exhibit and deliver an Authentic Extract out of the
Register of the Prerogative-Court of Canterbury, whereby it may appear, that
William Courten the Grandchild of Sr. William Courten Knight, did on the 15.
of June 1664. appear within the said Court, and did voluntarily acknowledge,
and confess, that the Letters of Administration of all the Goods, Actions, and
Credits, which belonged unto the said Sr. William Courten Knight,
unadministred, were lawfully granted unto the plaintiff George Carew, after due
knowledge and examination of the matter, and that the Judge of the
Prerogative-Court had ratified and confirmed the same, and that the said George
Carew has thereby full power and authority, to ask, levy, and receive all and
every the goods of the said Sr. William Courten, as also to sue for all and
every of the same, to the end the matter in dispute may be determined in such
sort as shall be thought fit.

Actum the 20. of February, 1675. In absence of the Secretary, signed by Johan
Pieter van de Brande, junior Scheepen.

Extract out of the Ordinary Roll of the City of Middleburgh in Zealand.
George Carew, qualitate qua Plaintiff,
John and Peter Boudaen, cum suis Defendents.
Smith the Proctor desires Prolongation of 14. days.

Rymsdijck that his desire should be denied.

The Commissaries grant 14. days without further delay, the 19. of June 1675.

In the absence of the Secretary, signed by Johan Pieter van de Brande.

Extract out of the Ordinary Roll of the City of Middleburgh.
George Carew, qualitate qua Plaintiff,
John and Peter Boudaen, cum suis Defendants. Fol. 136.
ABraham Smith, Proctor for the Defendants and Excipients, having seen the Acts
which are produced, (according to the Order and Appointment of this Honble
Court, dated the 20. February last) by the plaintiff, says, that although
thereby it might appear, that the quality of the Plaintiff which he ascribes
unto himself as Administrator of the pretended unadministred goods of Sr.
William Courten the Elder, were sufficient, that nevertheless the Plaintiff
cannot commence any suit by or from the name of William Courten the Elder, for
that William Courten the Younger his Son Heir and Executor of the Estate of
William Courten the Elder, administered the Estate many years, and the said
Estate of William Courten the Elder (additione hereditais) is descended on the
said William Courten the Younger his Son; by whom only the Cause ought to be
prosecuted. Wherefore under Benefice of the said means, and others to be
deduced in this Process in time (if requisite) Concludes for absolution of this
instance. Cum Expensis.

Rijmsdijck the Proctor does debate the means alleged by Exception, as
frivolous and impertinent, Concludes that the propounded Exception shall be
rejected, and that the Excipients shall be ordered ilico, to answer to the
principal demand.

Abraham Smith persisteth by replycque. Rijmsdijck by duplycque. Actum the 5th.
of July 1675. and was signed

Iacobus Peckius Junior, Secretarius.

Then several of the Persons interessed in England, hearing that such
impertinent and vexations exceptions were brought in from time to time,
contrary to the practice of all Nations, they procured a Letter of
Recommendation from the Lord Major and Aldermen of London, to the Magistrates of
Middleburgh, dated 13. of September. 1675. desiring that those Frivolous
Exceptions might be rejected, and Justice administered with all Expedition
according to the Merits of the Cause.

Whereupon the Lords ordered that Deductions of the Process and Pleadings with
Advertisments of right on both sides might be given unto the Pensionaris or
Recorder Vander Helm, to report his opinion thereupon, to the whole College or
Court; and in pursuance thereof, this following Sentence was pronounced
accordingly.

George Carew q. q. Plaintiff
Peter Boudaen cum suis Defendants.
THe Burgermasters and Schepens doing right, do reject the propounded
Exception, and order the Defendants to answer unto the principal Demand, and
suspend stating of Costs until the end of the Process.

Actum the 26. of November. 1675.
From which Sentence, the Boudaens Appealed to the Hague only to gain 40. days
longer delay, and vexation; Then published in print a most scandalous Request,
and a Book throughout the Provinces of Holland and Zealand, against Mr. Boeve
and Mr. Carews proceedings.

Whereunto an answer being also printed by Boeve and Carew, the said Boudaens
and their Confederates caused the Englebrechs the Scout of Amsterdam, where
they were printed to seiz upon many of the Books, having before gotten an order
from the Magistrates of Middleburgh that they should not be printed or
published in that place.

The 40. days being expired; The Boudaens notwithstanding the Sentence
aforesaid, were permitted to propound more impertinencies in Writing, and
answered under the benefit of their peremptory Exception, as also of
Prescription unto which Carew replied; then they brought in several things by
way of Reconvention and Defalcation, and Exhibited diverse Copies of bonds, and
papers in the Month of February 1676. New Style, (but deposited none of the
Books of account, according to the Demand in the Process) whereof Carew could
not get any authentic Copies to instruct his Advocates for pleading; yet they
moved the Court in the Month of September. following, that the Cause might be
pleaded while Mr. Carew was attending his Process against Mr. Pergens at
Amsterdam which was brought on before Commissioners to examine the pieces and
report their Opinions to the Lords for their small Sentence and Determination.
But of the Consequences in both Causes, before the Magistrates of Amsterdam and
Middleburgh, particular accounts shall be given in the said Advertisment and
Protest hereafter made by Mr. Carew. Now follows the Second Part of this Book
concerning Treaties of Common Amity, Alliance and Commerce, between Kings,
Princes and States.

To the impartial Readers.
Gentlemen.
IT was generally observed in the days of Queen Elizabeth, that her Majesty in
all transactions at home and abroad, gave it in Charge to her Council, that
they should have a care of her Honor. In all Leagues or Treaties of Alliance
and Commerce, the benefits of either side should be reciprocal: but no Nation
in the World have been so industrious of late to undo themselves as the English;
Whose Lands and rents are reduced, their staple Goods and Manufactures
undervalued, their Gold and Silver wasted their trade and Commerce undermined,
their Laws and Customs contemned and Violated. And being Cheated of their
Moneys and Merchandises by their Neighbors in ordinary traffic, many of his
Majesty's good Subjects, are made contemptible and pore in the midst of peace
and plenty.

In all regulations of trade, and Treaties Marine, both parties should have
their respective Considerations of advantage; Yet certainly many mistakes have
been committed in several ages and revolutions of State in public Contracts
upon the English account, wherein the Honor and interest of the King and
Kingdom were mutually concerned, which might be regained, most gloriously upon
good opertunities. If all Englishmen had public spirits, and none would, be
so treacherous under a trust, to prefer their own particular profit, before
any national concernments.

The Hollanders upon all occasions of difference and dispute with England, do
fly for refuge to the treaty made between King Henry the VII. and Philip Duke
of Burgundy, in the Year 1495. long before Scotland was united to the Crown, or
that the people of the seven united Provinces, had fallen from their natural
Princes of the Houses of Burgundy, and Austria, into a Common wealth by
incouragments of others. And during the late war in the Year 1673. the States
in all their Declarations and Manifestoes appealed to the Parliament of
England, as Umpires between them and the King: one clause I cannot omit, in
regard I find it published in print in their Netherland Historian (viz) We the
States General do hereby in the uprightness of our hearts, and confidence of
our integrity, submit our defense to the Judgment of the English Nation in
general, and more especially to the High and Honoble Court of Parliament (as
representing the whole body of the Nation) whom we are not only willing to
make full Arbitrators of the unhappy differences between the Court of England
and us, but should also account it for the speediest way to a most happy
accommadation, if they would take the pains to make a right distinction between
the true interests of the Nation (whom they represent) and the crafty pretenses
of evil minded men. Now to meet them again in their own way cannot be denied
us, without prejudice and partiallity.

Wherefore I have recollected several Articles out of diverse Treaties of
State, upon which I have briefly discoursed, and made some speculations
thereupon, and then proceeded to the third Part, which concerns the improvement
of Trade and English Manufactures, etc.

Which if they find a good reception in England, I shall make a further
progres in the next Year, to gratify some Friends at the general Treaty,
where the English (although they are neither Principalls nor Parties) yet as
Lookers on may see how to hit a blot, or take a point sooner then the Gamesters
that plays.

Amsterdam September. 29. 1676. I am your Unfaigned Friend G. C.

Several remarkable observations upon diverse select Articles in Treaties of
Common Alliance and Commerce, concluded between Sovereign Princes and States.
Or The second Part of the Treatise continued by the Author.
Article XV. With Spain.
If any prohibited Merchandise or Goods shall be exported from the Kingdoms,
Dominions and Territories of either of the said Kings, by the respective People
or Subjects of the one or the other, in such case the prohibited Goods shall be
only confiscated, and not the other Goods; neither shall the Delinquent incur
any other punishment, except the said Delinquent shall carry out from the
respective Kingdoms or Dominions of the King of Great Britain, the proper Coin,
Wool, or Fullers earth of the said Kingdoms, or shall carry out of the
respective Kingdoms or Dominions of the said King of Spain, any Gold or Silver,
wrought or unwrought; in either of which cases, the Laws of the respective
Countries are to take Place.

This Article is not inserted amongst the select Articles between the Crowns of
England and Spain, in regard by the Bourgundian Treaty, when the staple was
kept at Calis, The Flemmings and Walons in Brugis and Gant wrought for many
English Merchants of the staple: but since they wanted a good regulation in the
trade of old and new Draperies at home, several English men have not only
lost their Wool, but the Cloth and Searges with the cost of Manufacture and
transportation.

And although it be death in Spain and Portugal to transport Silver or Gold,
as its felony in England to transport Wool, yet one it as frequently brought
in; as the other is carried out. This Article is handled at large, in the
proper place of the third part of this Treatise.

Printed in the Year 1676.

To the Merchants-Adventurers of England and all other Merchants, subjects to
the King of Great Britain.
COUNTRYMEN,
THere is a common saying in the Low Countries, that the Hollanders have gone
beyond all other Nations, in trading, treating and accounting. And that there
are three men in the States of Holland, all whose names begin with B. (viz.)
Beverning, Beuningen and Beaumont, that have overreached the seven Kings of
Europe (viz.) England, France, Spain, Portugal, Sweden, Denmark and Poland.
There is no general rule but may have an Exception, which I doubt not but you
will meet in some of the select Articles following, that concern only
Navigation and Commerce. As to other Leagues and confederacies (those matters
and reasons of State) I meddle not withal; The Hollanders are best able to
calculate the Expenses of those chargeable offensive and defensive Alliances.

Its an Aphorism of a very learned Author, that there be many things useful
to wise men, which were impossible for any man but a fool to invent, the same
fortune I hope modestly to obtain from my Countrymen that ponder well the
observations in the following treatise. It is possible that Monsr. Beverning
who is at present the Hollands Plenipotentiarie at Nimwegen, and Monsr.
Beuningen the States Extraordinary Ambassador in England, and Monsr. Beaumont
the Principal Secretary to the States of Holland, may understand the interest
of their own Country with the intreagues of trade and Exchange, better then
many other ministers of State, that have not had so much Leisure, from their
pleasures and recreations to fathom the depth of those mysteries.

The Seven United Provinces, Nota. That all spice is sold for Banck money, and
all Bills of Exchange are paid in Bank money which is worth 4 pound per cent
more then Cash, and so rises and falls according to the Course of Exchange
which the Banckers do govern.
having no materials of their own, built their fabric of trade upon seven
foreign Principal bases, whereby they raised a structure to such a Prodigious
height and magnitude that overtopt all their Neighbors. The first supporter
was freedom of conscience to all Nations which brought in the Jews the ancient
Merchants and Factors of the universe. 2. The free Fisheries upon the British
Coast. 3. The East India spice trade. 4. The Banck at Amsterdam. 5. The Caping
West India Company. 6. The Common Hackney Navigations, and 7. Manufactures of
Wo^l, Silk etc. from all which their excises for the public charge did arise
and enabled them to encounter other Nations that have suffered for their sloth,
credulity and wantonness.

There is one advantage more that the Hollanders have above all other Sovereign
Princes or States. Their Ambassadors and public Ministers being all members
of the East and West India Companies, they treat both as Principalls and
Parties upon all affairs of State, who are likewise incorporated as the
chiefest in the States General. Yel there may be three good acts and
ordinances of Parliament which would shake all those seven Principalls,
without any strokes or blows, especially if the two grand Enemies of England be
suffered to weaken each other a year or two longer. While the Merchan^^
Adventurers and others take money for Clothing and Victualling their Armies.
For there can not be a more sure and easy conquest then that which may be
gotten by Peace.

Antwerp November. 28. 1676. I continue Your affectionate Friend and Servant
GEORGE CAREW.

Six select Articles, taken out of the treaty of Alliance and Commerce,
concluded at London the 24th of February 1495. between HENRY the seventh, King
of England, and PHILIP Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, etc.
Extracted out of the Original kept upon record in the Chamber of Accounts at
Lisle in the Province of Flanders.
ARTIC. X.
COnventum est, quod omnes Mercatores tam Regni Angliae, Dominii Hiberniae,
Villae and Marescalliae Calisiae, etc. quam etiam Mercatores Terrarum and
Patriarum Brabantiae, Lanae, Coria, Victuali^ etc.
Flandriae, Hannoniae, Zelandiae, Villae and Terrae Mechliniae, and aliarum
Patriarum and Dominiorum Domini Archiducis praedictitam mercatores Lanarum,
Coriorum, Victualium, quam aliarum Mercantiarum quarumcunque, nec non horum
factores, familiares, negotiorum Gestores, and ministri poterunt deinceps per
terram pedestres aut Equestres, aut alio modo quocunque armati vel non armati
(dummodoarmatisimul incedentes quadragenarium numerum non excedant) cum and
sine bonis and mercantiis secure and libere ire and venire invicemque
communicare and mercari, emere, and vendere ac commercium facere and habere tam
de mercatiis Lanarum, Coriorum, Victualium, Armorum, Equorum, jocalium quam
aliis quibuscunque, ipsaque ducere and reducere, sive duci and reduci facere ad
Eorum libitum and voluntatem de Calesia and marchia ejusdem ac aliis
quibuscunque partibus Regni Angliae and Dominii Hiberniae in Brabantiam,
Flandriam, Hannoniam, Hollandiam, Zelandiam, Mechliniam, and alia Dominia
praefati Archiducis and econtra de Brabantia, Flandria, Hannonia, Hollandia,
Zelandia, Mechlinia, ac Dominiis praefati Archiducis in Villam and Marchiam
Calesiam, and alias quascunque Parts Regni Angliae and Dominii Hiberniae,
(...) and Ordinationibus locorum semper salvi^.
absque aliquo impedimento, aut prohibitione quacunque in contrarium, and
absque eo, quod propterea aliquam mulctam vel poenam incurrant, seu quod per
Dominos Patriarum, Terrarum, and Dominiorum praedictorum hinc inde redargui,
accusari, puniri, vel mulctari queant; statu^is and ordinationibus Locorum
semper salvis.

XI.
Item conventum est, Liber Mercatus Telonia solvuntur.
quod omnes Mercatores Regni Angliae, Dominii Hiberniae, Villae and Marchiae
Calisiae, etc. tam Mercatores lanarum, coriorum, victualium, armorum, equorum,
jocalium, quam aliarum mercantiarum quarumcunque nec non eorum Factores,
familiares, negotiorum Gestores and ministri, Nautae, magistri navium, and
marinarii poterunt navigare, ire, transire per mare, and aquas dulces eundo and
redeundo conversari, esse, and morari secure and libere in Patriis, Dominiis,
and Terris praefati Domini Archiducis, and etiam in Portubus and Littoribus
Patriarum, Te^rarum, and Dominiorum praedictorum per ipsum Dominum Archiducem
authorisatis in Villis, Nisi ubi Custumarii ^^cent Rebus hujusmodi.
videlicet, ubi Custumarii and alii Officiary Archiducales sunt ordinati ad
vacandum and attendendum pro and super introitu and exitu navium Mercatorum and
mercantium, and non alibi, nec in aliis locis cum Eorum bonis Mercantiis and
Navibus praedictis quibuscunque, and cum Mercatoribus Patriarum, Terrarum, and
Dominiorum praefati Domini Archiducis seu horum Factoribus, familiaribus, and
Negotiorum gestoribus and Ministris, nec non cum omnibus aliis Mercatoribus
cujuscunque nationis existant and Eorum Factoribus familiaribus, negotiorum
gestoribus and Ministris, de quibuscunque Mercantiistam Victualium, quam aliis
libere mercari, emere, habere, and vendere ac mercantias fruere poteruntque ad
and in praedictos Portus and Littora Patriarum, Terrarum and Dominiorum
praefati Domini Archiducis tam Eorum propria bona quam aliena ducere vel duci
facere, and ab ipsis Portubus seu Littoribus quoties^unque, quandocunque, and
quotcunque, voluerint secure recedere and redire, cum Eorum bonis Mercantiis
and Navibus praedictis quibuscunque: Et pari modo Mercatores Patriarum,
Terrarum, and Dominiorum praefati Domini Archiducis tam Lanarum, Coriorum,
Victualium, and aliarum Mercantiarum quarumcunque nec non Eorum Factores,
Familiares, negotiorum Gestores, and Ministri, Nautae, Magistri Navium, and
Marinarii poterunt de caetero secure and libere navigare, ire, transire, and
redire mare and aquas dulces, and eundo and redeundo conversari, esse and
morari in dictis Regni Angliae, and Hiberniae Dominio, Villa and Marchia
Calesia, etc. in Portubus and Littoribus ipsorum, per praefatum Dominum Regem
Angliae authorisatis in Villis videlicet, ubi Custumarii and alii Officiarii
Regis sunt ordinati, Ubi Custumarii and alii Officiarii.
ad vacandum and attendendum pro and super introitu and exitu Navium,
Mercatorum and Mercantiarum, and non alibi, cum eorum bonis Mercantiis and
Navibus praedictis, quibuscunque and cum Mercatoribus Angliae, Hiberniae,
Calesiae and Marchiae ejusdem, seu Eorum Factoribus, familiaribus negotiorum
Gestoribus and Ministris, de quibuscunque Mercantiis tam Victualium, quam aliis
libere mercari emere and vendere ac mercantias facere, poteruntque ad and in
praedictos Portus Angliae, Hiberniae and Calesiae, Tam bona propr^a quam ali^na,
tam eorum bona propria, quam etiam aliena ducere, vel duci facere, and ab
ipsis Portubus seu Littoribus, quotiescunque, quandocunque, vel quocunque
voluerint, libere and secure, recedere and redire, cum eorum bonis, mercantiis,
and Navibus, absque eo, quod ipsi propterea per Dominos Regnorum, Dominiorum,
Patriarum, and Terrarum praedictorum, seu horum Officiarios, quovis pacto
redargui, vel aliqua poena mulctari possint, seu quod per eosdem ipsis
mercatoribus aliquod damnum, praejudicium, vel impedimentum fieri possit, per
viam facti occasion guerrae vel depraedationis, aut attentorum, Rebus bonis
and M^rcantiis suis telonia quae ante 50. annos. Subditis li^et nova Telonia
impon^re. Victualia defendere causa necessitatis.
Factorum, vel fiendorum, vel alio modo ex causa quacunque: solvendo tamen
quantum attinet ad Mercatores, utriusque partis partium praedictarum pro rebus
bonis and mercantiis suis jura and telonia, quae ante quinquaginta annos
proxime elapos, statuta solita and consueta fuerunt, and non alia, and
nihilominus poterunt utriusque partis Principes in Dominiis suis, quoad
subditos suos talia jura and telonia, quae solverint de novo instituere:
poterunt etiam, non obstantibus praedictis, causa necessitatis Victualia and
justa and rationali causa prohibere and defendere, ne tale genus victualiun,
quod eis mage videbitur expedire a Dominiis extrahatur.

XIV.
Item conventum est, Piscatoribus utriusque Partis.
quod Piscatores utriusque Partis Partium praedictarum cujuscunque conditionis
existant, poterunt ubique ire, navigare per mare, secure piscari, absque aliquo
impedimento, licentia seu salvo-conducto: Et si contingat aliquos ex
Piscatoribus unius partis per fortunam, Principis subditis tam per Mar^ per
Terram liberum Commercium fore.
tempestatem maris, vim hostium, aut alio modo compelli intrare in aliquem
portum vel districtum alterius partis, ibidem pacifice and amicabiliter
recipientur and tractabuntur, solvendo in locis ubi applicabunt, jura and
telonia pradicta, and ab illis portubus and locis poterunt libere recedere, and
redire cum eorum Navibus and bonis, sine impedimento vel contradictione
quacunque, dummodo tamen per ipsos Piscatores non committatur fraus neque
dolus, seu per eos aliis damnum minime fiat.

XXII.
Item conventum est, Naves alterius subdit^rum libertatem haber^^
quod Nautae, Magistri navium, and Marinarii subditi praefatorum Principum post
adventum ipsorum ad portus unius vel alterius Principum Eorundem, poterunt
libere imponere and ligare eorum naves, tam oneratas and non oneratas, quam ad
querram dispositas dummodo non fuerint piraticae in eisdem portubus and
littoribus eodem modo, quo poterunt ipsius Principis Subditi proprii.

XXIX.
Item conventum est, Preterita Repre^^^^^ in suspens habeantur.
quod omnes and singulae litterae Represalliorum, aut demaria vel contra maria
ex Cancellaria, vel alia Curia Principum praedictorum, aut eorundem
praedecessorum, ad cujuscunqus prosecutionem vel ob causam quamcunque ante
concessae vel emissae in suspenso tenebuntur, nec poterit earum aliqua fieri
executio nisi super earum meritis habita cognitione indicta ad hoc per ipsos
Principes specialiter deputandum, aliter fuerit ordinatum, and pari modo omnes
and singulae depraedationes and violentae captiones super mare hinc inde ante
diem Octobris decimum tertium ultimum praeteritum factae similiter tenebuntur
in suspenso, nec poterit super iisdem aut earum aliqua actio intentari aut
admitti: nec litterae Represaliorum dari nisi super horum meritis habita
cognitione indica ad hoc per ipsos Principes specialiter deputandum aliter
fuerit ordinatum.

XXXV.
Item, Obligatio Nobilium and Civita^um.
ad securiorem and firmiorem tam amicitiarum quam Mer^ium intercursus
observantiam praefatus Dominus Rex, per suas litteras mandatum dabit speciale
Reveren ^dissimo in Christo Patri Domino Ioanni Cardinali Cantuariensi,
Anglorum Pr^ceres.
Archiepiscopo and Apostolicae sedis Legato, Reverendissimis in Christo
Patribus Domino Richardo Dunelmensi Episcopo, Custodi privati Sigilli, Domino
Thomae Wintoniensi Episcopo, Ioanni Denham Thesaurario Angliae, Thomae Domino
Marchioni Dorset, Ioanni Comiti Oxoniensi magno Camerario, Edmundo Comiti
Suffolck, Thomae Comiti Arundel, Thomae Comiti Derbiae, Georgio Comiti
Salisburgiae, Ioanni Wallis Vicecomiti Dabney, Aegidio Domino de Dabney, Ioanni
Priori Domus Sancti Ioannis Jerusalem in Anglia, Nomina Civitat^m Anglia.
nec non Majoribus, Baillivis Civitatum ac Oppidorum sequentium, Londinum,
Eboracum, Bristollium, Wintonium, Cantuaria, Rochestria, Southamtonia,
Santwicum, Doberium, Lima, Derthmouth, Plemouth, Hulla, Winchelsa, Bostonia,
Yermouth and Berwicum, quod se obligabunt and quilibet eorum se obligabit
informam sequentem: Omnibus Christi fidelibus praesentes has litteras
Inspecturis, Visuris, and Audituris, Ioannes Cardinalis Cantuarensis
Archiepiscopus, Richardus Dunelmensis Episcopus, Thomas Wintoniensis Episcopus,
Ioannes Dynham, Thomas Marchio Dorset, Ioannes Vicecomes Oxoniensis, Edmundus
Comes Suffolck, Thomas Comes Arundel, Thomas Comes Derbiae, Thomas Comes
Salisburiae, Ioannes Wells Vicecomes, Aegidius Dabney, Ioannes Prior Domus
Sancti Ioannis Jerusalem in Anglia, nec non majores, Baillivi Civitatum seu
Oppidorum de Londino, Eboraco, Bristolio, Wintonio, Cantuaria, Rochestria,
Southamtonia, Santwico, Doberio, Lina, Dormouth, Plemouth, Hulla, Winchelsa,
Bostonia, Yermouth, and Berwico, salutem in Domino sempiternam. Cum inter
Illustrissimum Principem HENRICUM, Dei gratia Angliae, Franciaque Regem, and
Dominum Hiberniae, ex una, and Serenissimum Principem PHILIPPUM, Dei gratia
Austriae Archiducem, Burgundiae Ducem, etc. ex altera partibus quaedam
amicitiarum, intelligentiarum and Mercium intercursus, mercatorumque
communicatio ac alia etiam eosdem Principes and subditorum suorum, Regnorum,
Patriarumque utilitatem concernentia, Tractatus and foedera de Data 24. die
mensis Februarij 1495. Londini, inita, conventa, conclusa, and finaliter
determinata fuerint, quos quidem Tractatus amicitiarum and Mercium intercursus
vidimus and intelleximus, ac hic pro insertis habere voluimus, noveritis nos
praefatos Ioannem Cardinalem, Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem, Richardum
Dunelmensem Episcopum, etc. Et majores, Baillivos Villarum sive Oppidorum
praedictorum ad Requestam and mandatum praefati Domini Regis, ac ad suarum
litterarum nobis in ea part directarum and deliberatarum, quas hic pro
insertis habere voluimus contemplatione in bona side promisisse, ac nos, and
quemlibet nostrum, haeredes and successores nostros praefato Illustrissimo
Principi PHILIPPO, Archiduci Austriae, Duci Burgundiae, etc. ejusque haeredibus
and successoribus sub hypotheca and obligatione omnium bonorum nostrorum
praesentium and futurorum obligasse, sicque per praesentes promittimus and
obligamus, quod effectualiter procurabimus, instabimus, ac quantum in nobis
erit, efficiemus quod idem Dominus Rex, ejusque haeredes and successores, omnia
and singula praedicta, tam amicitiarum quam mercium intercursus, omniaque and
singula eisdem contenta and specificata ben^ and fideliter tenebunt, and
observabunt, and perimplebunt, ac per nos subditos, Vasallos quantum Eos
concernit, ac inposterum concernet been and fideliter facient teneri, observari
and impleri, in contravenientes justitiam ministrabunt seu ministrari facient.
In cujus rei testimonium etc. Et pari modo Illustrissimus Dominus Archidux per
suas litteras mandatum dabit speciale Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Domino de
Bergis Episcopo Cameracensi, Nomina Procerum Belgarum.
Carolo de Croy Principi de Chimay, Phillippo de Burgundia Domino de Beures,
Ioanni Domino de Bergis, Ioanni Domino Egmundo Gubernatori Hollandiae, Willelmo
de Croy Domino de Chievre, Antonio de Rellin Domino de Emmeri, Baldwino de
Lannoy Domino de Molembais, Francisco de Busleyden Domino Praeposito Leodiensi
and sancti Donatiani, ac Ioanni de Tinas Denteville Domino Capitaneo de Brugis,
nec non Burgimagistris Villarum seu Oppidorum de Gandavo, Brugis, Iperen,
Dunkerken, Nieupoort, Antverpia, Bergis, Dordrecht, Delft, Leyden, Amstelredam,
Middelburgh, Zierickzee, Veeren, Meklina, Bruxill^, and Briela quod se
obligabunt, and quilibet eorum se obligabit secundum vim, formam and effectum
obligationis praedictae, mutatisque in ea part mutandis: quas quidem omnes and
singulas obligationes modo and forma praemissis conceptas decima quinta die
Maij proxime futura idem Illustrissimus Rex Angliae, in Ecclesia Beatae Mariae
Virginis Deputato vel Deputatis dicti Domini Archiducis tradet, deliberabit,
and tradi and deliberari faciet, and pari modo Illustrissimus Dominus Archidux
omnes and singulas obligationes modo and forma praemissis conceptas 15. die
Maij praedicta, in Ecclesia praedicta Deputato vel Deputatis ejusdem Regis
tradet and deliberabit aut tradi and deliberari faciet.

Collationne sur une minute du sus de Traite, qui est gardee dans la Chamber
des Comptes de Lille en Flandre, par moy soubsigne Conseiller and
Historiographe ordinaire du Roy, and Commis par sa Majeste a la Guard and
Direction des Litres Chartes, and Archives d'ille Chamber, le 22. Iuin 1675.

DENIS GODEFROY.

The said Philip, Archduke of Austria and Duke of Burgundy, was the only Son
and Heir of Maria de Vallois Duchess of Bourgundy, and Maxmilian Archduke of
Austria her Husband, who was Son and Heir of Frederick Emperor of Germany.
THe same Philip, afterward in right of Jane his Wife, the Daughter of
Ferdinando, and Isabella King and Queen of Arragon, and Castil was crowned King
of Spain in the year 1501, who left two Sons, by the said Jane, named Charles
and Ferdinando, the Eldest was crowned King of Spain in the year 1519 by the
Name of Charles the First of that Crown, and in the year 1520 was crowned
Emperor of Germany by the Name of Charles the fifth: His Son Philip the Second
succeeded him in Spain, and the 17. Provinces etc. and his Brother Ferdinando
in the Empire: Then Philip the Third succeeded in Spain; and after him Philip
the Fourth: and now Charles the Second, present King of Spain, (that was
begotten of Anna Maria Daughter of Ferdinando the Third Emperor of Germany,)
who is now married to Maria Teresia the Daughter of Leopoldus the present
Emperor of Germany, which he had by his First Wife Margaret the younger
Daughter of the said Philip the Fourth.

Lewis the Fourteenth of France having married the Infanta Maria, the Eldest
Daughter of the said King Philip by Isabella the Daughter of Henry the fourth
of France.

HE the said Lewis the French King now claims the Spanish Nerher-lands, or some
Part thereof, in right of Maria his wife, as Heir, at Law or for want of her
marriage portion promised at the Pyrenian Treaty upon renouncing her Right in
Bourgundy to the Spanish Monarchy, which at present (by an overruling
Providence) is brought very low.

THe said Bourgundian Treaty, (wherein all the 17. Provinces were included) was
ratified and confirmed by Charles the Fifth, and Henry the Eight, who bound
themselves and their successors for Ever to the performance thereof; And even
diverse of the nobility in the Low Countries, and the Cities of Amsterdam,
Midlebourgh, Dort, Bridges, Antwerp, Gant, Zirricksea, Leyden etc. and their
successors stand obliged as Guarantees; And also several of the Nobility and
Cities in England. Although the Government be changed, in the Low Countries the
Provinces and Cities remain; and there is the same Justice and Equity that all
the subjects and inhabitants of England should enjoy those rights Privileges
and Exemptions in the 17. Provinces provided by that Treaty, as the subjects
and Inhabitants of the 17. Provinces do respectively enjoy in England without
any exception restriction or distinction whatsoever.

Wheresoever the Souveraignity of the seven United Provinces remains. All
judgments Judicial arts and decrees of the supreme Court of Judicature at the
Hague do pass in the name of the High Soveraignity of the Earldoms of Holland,
Zeland and West-Friesland; and in Gelderland etc. the like; which were the
titles of the Duke of Bourgundy. In all their assemblies of the States
General, every Province takes place according to their precedence bearing the
same Coats of Arms of the Dukedoms, Marquisits, and Earldoms, so they cannot
in Justice disclaym the ancient covenants and contracts with England, since
they keep up the titles and other badges of Honor and Soveraignity of the
Provinces which were in the persons of Princes before they gave assignation to
the Strates General whose compacts with England in the Bourgundian Treaty as to
those Provinces are incum^ant upon the said States. Which if they shall deny,
there are further convincing arguments to reach them at the end of this second
part; that for some reasons are not put in practice in this juncture of
troubles in Christendom.

The said Treaty concluded between Henry the VII. King of England and the said
Philip Archduke of Austria and Duke of Bourgundy contained six and thirty
articles, the six before mentioned related chiefly to the regulation of trade,
Navigation and Commerce, the rest concerned the peculiar interests of Princes
(viz.) that no assistance should be given to Enemies of either side, no Rebels
to be countenanced, but removed and bannished, no Pirates harbored, etc.

PHilip the second confirmed the same Alliance, with Edward the Sixth and Queen
Mary (with whom he contracted a marriage) and also promised Queen Elisabeth to
send her aid and assistance toward regaining of Callis from the French yet he
kept not his word, but on the contrary fomented great troubles in Ireland,
while the French continually encouraged the Scotts to invade the Frontiers of
England purposely to make diversion from expeditions for France: then a Civil
war broak out in the Low Countries in the year 1572. where seven of the
Provinces having chosen old William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, to be their
Captain General to assert their rights and Privileges against the
innovations of Spain. After nine years contention in Arms / the United States
renounced the Spanish Government, in regard Queen Elisabeth could not prevail
by all her endeavors and Mediation to reconcile the King of Spain and the
States.

Then they offered themselves and their Provinces to be under the soveraignity
of Henry the third of France, (...) refused to be incumbed with such a
generation, Queen Elisabeth also denied any Souveraignity at Land (...) those
States, but after many suplications, her Majesty took them into her Protection
in the year 1585, who^ upon an open war followed between England and Spain,
and in the year 1588. The invincible Armado was despe^^sed by the English
Fleet, yet the war continued during her Majesty's Reign.

In the year 1602, the United States erected their East India Compagny: and
King James was at that time proclaim^^ lawful heir and Successor to the Crown
of England, who would never intreague himself in Leagues with (...) Hollanders,
that were at strife with all their Neighbors, but made a peace with Spain and
continued the (...) Alliance for Navigation and Commerce with all the 17.
Provinces pursuant to the Bourgundian Treaty. But as (...) Scotland his
Majesty demanded annual tributes for their Fishing and drying their nets at
Anchor upon the Sco^^ Coast: the same ought to be demanded upon the English
account, if the Privileges granted by the Bourgundian Trea^^ (in Liew thereof)
be not continued to the English Merchants in all the Cities, Ports, Harbors,
Roads and Na^^gable Rivers of the 17. Provinces, since the Hollanders and
Flemings do respectively enjoy the same in England with (...) any restraint
whatsoever.

In the Year 1609. King James and Henry the Fourth of France as Mediators
procured a truce and cessation (...) Arms for 12, Years between Spain and the
Hollanders.

Then the States of the United Provinces presently entered into a League
offensive and defensive with France (...) all events against England and Spain,
to maintain their free Fishing upon the Coast of Great Britaigne. (...) during
the said cessation of Arms, soon after King James had delivered (the Keys of
Holland and Zealand) (...) Cautionary towns, Briel, Flushing and Rammekins, A
war was fomented in Bohemia at the same juncture (...) the East India Company
of the Netherlands, did time their business to spoil the English Merchants of
their Plantati^^ Factories, and Spice trade at Amboyna, Jacatra etc. The stains
of whose blood will never be washed away. (...) true being ended in the Year
1621. the Hollands erected a West India Company by Patent to take the Spanish
(...) fleets and to make new Conquests in America. And also prosecuted the war
in Flanders for their Frontier Town^^.

After the death of King James, King Charles the first in the Year 1625. made
a League with the Hollanders offer^^^ and defensive against Spain and Austria,
and at the same time sent a Fleet of Ships to relieve the distressed
Protestanti^^ Rochell: whither the Dutch sent 20. Ships of war (intended
against Spain) to the assistance of France that defeated (...) Majesty's forces
at the Isle of Rhee.

In the Year 1630. the Spanjards desirous of a good correspondency with
England, offered satisfaction to the King demands, but the Hollanders would not
be included in any treaty: so a Peace was concluded at Madrid between philip
the Fourth of Spain, and Charles the First of Great Brittaign, with some
additions to the Bourgundian Treaty.

Then the Hollanders applied themselves to Cardinal Richelieuw, and renewed
their League offensive and defen^^^ with Lewis the 13. that they had made with
his Father Henery the 4. whereby the Spanish Netherlands were to (...) Equally
divided between Holland and France, while England stood still and remained
neutral. But after (...) years, the Hollanders growing jealous of such
Neighbors, they inclined to a Treaty at Munster, whereupon th^^ was a peace
concluded in the Year 1648. between Spain and Holland, leaving the French King
to shift for himself who continued the war with Spain and Austria until the
Pirenean Treaty in the Year 1659. where the Hollanders, for their own defense,
would have so much of the Spanish Netherlands as they had left / to remain as a
Butwork (...) them against France, and so procured the act of renunciation from
the Infanta of all her Right / and pretense to (...) Bourgundian Title: Yet
refused afterward, to suffer the French King to seize the Spanish Plate Fleet
for payme^^ of the Marriage Portion, that was Promised with the Infanta upon
her renunciation which is yet unsatisfied.

Wherefore in Justice and Equity the Hollanders, or Spain ought to pay the
Portion, otherwise the ^rench (...) has an action of unkindness against them
both: And under favor of the Honorable Author of the Buckle^^ State and
Justice in his Arguments Art. 3. page 70 and 71: Souveraig^s have Prerogatives
above private persons, who are tied to formalities of Law: Princes in such
cases (and in all cases of injury) give their own declarations at the head of
an Army: And having no supreme, they are their own competent Judges: yet
Neighboring Princes, as moderatours ought to interpose so far, that upon
payment of the Principal, the Penal^^ should not be exacted.

IN the Year 1654, at the end of the war between the Long Parliament and the
Hollanders, Oliver Cromwell concluded a treaty with the States General,
conformable to the Bourgundian Treaty, whereby all there Naviga^^^ Rivers were
made free to the English with all other Privileges whatsoever, as ample as
they were by the said Treaty in the Year 1495. But Cromwell presently made a
war with Spain, and so obstructed the English Navigation to Antwerp, Gent, and
all other Spanish Ports in the Netherlands until the year 1660. Nevertheless
in the 30. Article of Oliver Cromwels treaty it was concluded that all damages
and injuries done to the English in the East Indies, Muscovia, Braziel, and all
other places, since the Year 1611, unto the Year 1652, should be referred to
the determination of Commissioners, who received a list of all Damages, but
determined only that of Amboyna for 83650 pounds Sterling toward satisfaction
of the Heirs Executors and assigns of those persons that were murdered, and
spoiled at Amboyna which was paid accordingly; and all the rest were referred
to the Protestant Cantons of Switserland who never met.

In the Year 1658, a youngman in the City of Hambourgh threw a stone at one of
the Merchants adventurers / calling him and all Englishmen sons of Rogues, that
had murdered their King: whereupon the Merchant applied himself to Mr.
Bradshaw, Cromwells Resident there, who complained so highty to the
Magistrates, threatening them that his Master should block up the River Elve,
and burn their Ships in their harbor if he had not satisfaction for that
affront: so the Magistrates were forced to deliver up the Person to be
sacrifized at his pleasure, who upon some entreaties caused him only to be
whipped twice through the Exchange at noon day.

If great Brittaign was so terrible abroad in the time of an Usurper, what
should it be now, when the Lawful Souverain Lord and King sits upon his
Throne. If the subjects knew their own strength, and understood their own
interest?

BUt it will be objected, that since the Bourgundian Treaty the 17. Provinces
have been dismembered and divided into several Governments and Jurisdictions,
Some belonging to Spain, Others to the States of the 7. United Provinces and a
part unto France. And that even in Flanders and Brabant the two Spanish
Maritine Provinces, the Hollanders had gotten by their Conquests Sl^ce, Sass
van Gent, A^denburgh, Breda, Hulst, Bergen op Zoom, and other Frontier-Places,
which were confirmed to the States by the Treaty at Munster, when the King of
Spain released his right therein to the Hollanders. And that the French King
has since gotten by purchase and conquest in those two Provinces, Duinkirke,
Winoxberg, Do^way, Tournay, Lisle, Oudenaarde, Cortrick, Armentiers, Aylst,
Conde, Mastricht, etc. Many whereof by the Treaty at Ayx Capele were confirmed
to him by the Crown of Spain: this is answered before, that they are all
members of Bourgundy, and if they expect any of the Privileges and advantages
of the Bourgundian Treaty with England, they must reciprocally answer the like;
but the last Treaty Marine with Holland, and the Treaty at Madrid with Spain
puts all the chief matters out of doubt.

As it was the interest of England, in the time of Philip the Second, to curb
the pride of Spain (in dividing his Powers) by assisting the poor distressed
States of Holland etc. So it is now the Interest of Great Brittaign to hinder
the growth of the Hollanders that are swelled so high above their Neighbors by
the spoils of Other Nations, their East India trade, Fisheries, etc.

The History of those Times is fresh in the memory of many thousands that are
transported with wonder and astonishment, to hear that the Hollanders, did
lately fight with the two Royal Fleets of England and France in the open Sea,
and several Armies at Land. When they consider the days of old and read the
records of England how Richard the first conquered the Kingdom of Cyprus, and
Henery the Sixth was crowned King of France in the Cities of Paris.

THe general known Maxim is that Kings can do no wrong, therefore no action
of injury lies against a Sovereign Prince. They see with other men's eyes and
hear with other men's ears, and their Ministers are only accountable for all
Errors, who sometimes have taken wrong measures otherwise they could not commit
such gross and palpable mistakes as appears in their transactions concerning
the rights and properties of the subjects mentioned in the 15. Article of Peace
and Alliance between Charles the Second King of Great Britain and the States
General of the United Netherlands taken out of the Treaty concluded at London
the 4. of the September. 1662. and in the following Articles of the Treaty at
Breda.

Article XV. Translated out of the Latin Original.
IT is also agreed and concluded between His said Majesty of Great Britain, and
the said Lords States of the United Netherlands, That the Island of Pularon
shall be restored unto His said Majesty, or unto them whom he shall thereunto
appoint by a Commission under the Great Seal of England; and that so soon as
any one provided with such a Commission, shall arrive there and demand the said
restitution: Which that it may be effected with the more ease and certainty,
Commissions necessary for that end shall be delivered unto Him from the States
General, and the Netherlands East India Company, immediately after the
Ratification of this Treaty. And that by the restitution of the said Island of
Pularon, all actions and pretensions wherein ^he Subjects of either Party think
they have right for Losses, Injuries and Offenses committed upon each other in
India, (Hoe except^ quod scilicet qui se jacturam passos dicunt in du^bus
navibus (viz) Bona Esperanza and Bona Adventura. Poterunt litem inceptam
prosequi.)
and taken notice of in England before the 10 of January 1658 (with this
Exception, That they who say they have suffered loss in Two Ships, to wit, the
Bonaventura and Bona Esperanza, may prosecute the Suit already begun) shall
cease, be extinguished and annulled in the manner following:

That all Offenses, Injuries and Losses (except before excepted) which one part
has suffered, or can any way pretend to have suffered from the other in the
East Indies, whereof any notice has been given to the English at London, or to
the Netherlanders at the Hague, before the Twentieth day of January, 1659. New
style, or the Tenth of January, 1658. Old style; but in other parts of the
world on this side the Cape, if any actions or things whatsoever, that happened
before the publication and notice of the Peace concluded between both Nations
the 4 day of March 1653 shall remain utterly Cancelled and extinguished, so as
neither party shall trouble the other for any such Damage, Offense, Injury or
Detriment (except before excepted) but there shall be and remain a perfect
abolition of all and every one of them, and all Suits and Actions upon such
account shall be void and null: But other Damages, Offenses, Injuries, and
Detriments, which the English Nation either upon publik or private account, can
affirm to have fallen or been brought upon them by the Government of the United
Netherlands, or by the Companies or private persons subjects to that
Government; as on the other side what the United Netherlanders can upon public
or private account pretend to have fallen or been brought upon them by the
Government of the English, or by the Companies or private persons subject
thereunto, in the East Indies, before the 10 day of January, 16^8 or at least
whereof there Has no notice been given at London, or the Hague before that
day; and in other parts of the world after the publication and notice of the
aforesaid Peace in the year 1954 without any further distinction or exception
of persons, place or time, shall be submitted, as by this Treaty they are
submitted, unto the Examination, Arbitration and Decision of Commissioners or
Arbitrators, after the Manner, and under the Conditions following.

That Commissioners be appointed only for matters past, but not at all for
matters to come, which may happen after the day whereupon this Treaty is
concluded.

That their Commission directed unto past things only, as has been already
said, is not to contain any general Clause, but to be expressly confined and
limited to a special Catalogue, which shall be annexed unto the Commission, so
as they may by no means take cognizance of any other thing besides the Actions
set down in that Catalogue:

But that they may mutually agree thereupon, a Catalogue shall be made by both
Parties, and interchangeably delivered, that it may be punctually and duly
examined by either side: And if there be found in either of the Catalogues, any
things whatsoever relating to the East Indies, which were known in London
before the 10 of January, 1658 as to Actions of the English or at the same time
at the Hague, as to Actions of the United Provinces, or which happened in other
parts of the world before the publication and notice of the foresaid Peace in
the year 1654, or other Actions of such a nature as may not be thought fit to
be referred unto such Arbitration, they shall be rejected and expugned out of
the Catalogues.

Wherefore after each side is agreed upon these Catalogues, a whole year shall
be appointed, wherein all businesses contained in those Catalogues may be
accommodated and composed by friendly Conferences between his Majesty's
Minister, and the Commissioners of the States General at the Hague; And the
Pretenders or their Deputies thereunto appointed by special Letters of
Att^rney, shall be bound to make their appearance at the Hague before the end
of the Sixth month in the foresaid year: But that year being expired, all
those Actions about which the Pretenders or their Deputies were at the Hague
with an aim or purpose to have them brought unto a friendly issue (which they
shall be bound to prove by a lawful testimony of the King of Great Britain's
Envoy, and the Commissioners of the States General, or of either of them) and
which nevertheless have not been by that time brought to such an issue, shall
be referred to the said Commissioners, that they may be at last composed or
decided by them; which Commissioners, after the said year is expired, if there
remain any Actions uncomposed in such friendly manner at that time, shall to
that purpose meet at London, and they shall be Four on either side, instructed
and provided with Authority; and thenceforward this submission and progress in
and through all things, shall be carried on in the same manner as it was in the
year 1654, But so as the Arbitration upon these matters be not referred to the
Protestant Cantons of Swisserland.

AFter this Treaty, was so concluded; The persons interessed in the said two
Ships Bona Esperanza and Bona Adventura, persued their memorialls at the Hague
depending before the States General upon the Kings recommendation, but the
East India Company pretended that the words Poterunt Litem inceptam prosequi.
were to be construed as to a suite begun by Sr. Paul Pyndar at Amsterdam for
85000 gilders that Jacob Pergens had gotten by composition of the East India
Company upon a subsequent bill of sale and procuration from Mr. Courten, so
they put Mr. Carew to a vast trouble and Expense in Holland whereupon this
certificate followed, which the States slighted and said they knew how to deal
with Englishmen upon all accounts whatsoever.

The Certificate of the Kings Commissioners, concerning the original words.
Poterunt litem inceptam prosequi.
WE under written Commissioners for his Majesty of Great Britain in the
Treaty concluded the fourth of September 1662 at London with the late
Ambassadors of the States General of the United Provinces of the Netherlands
do hereby Testify affirm and declare, that the words (Poterunt Litem
inceptam prosequi) in the fifteenth Article of the said Treaty relating to the
Ships Bona Esperan za et Bona Adventura, was by us meant and intended that Lis
begun and now depending at the Hague in a Pollitique way between Sr. George
Downing Knight and Barronet his Majesty's Envoy extraordinary, and the Deputies
of the said States and no other. And that there was no mention ever made of any
other Lis begun and depending then that. And as to the construing of the said
words to have Reference to any Lis pretended to be now Incepta at Amsterdam
before the Eschevens there. We the said Commissioners do further Testify and
declare, that there was not any mention made during the time of the Treaty of
any such Lis incepta at Amsterdam, but indeed the said Ambassadors did
particularly and earnestly press that the business as to those two Ships might
have been left to the ordinary Course of Justice in Amsterdam, which was
absolutely refused by us the said Commissioners in the name and by order of his
said Majesty, and by his said Majesty himself (as he declared in Council) in
Conference with the said Ambassadors, and that with this Declaration, that this
business should not be removed out of the way it was depending upon the
several memorialls and proceedings at the Hague by his Majesty's order and
direction given in that case to Sr. George Downing which was mutually agreed
accordingly. In testimony whereof, we have hereunto subscribed our names and
affixed our Seals this nine and Twentieth day of May in the fifteenth Year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, Anno Domini, 1663.

Albemarle. L. S. E. Manchester. L. S. Denzell Holles. L. S. Cha. Berkcley. L.
S. G. Carteret. L. S. Edw. Nicholas. L. S. Will. Morice. L. S.


An Apology for the Original Proprietors, and adventurers, as also for the
Creditors of Sr. William Courten, Sr. Paul Pyndar, and Sr. Edward Littleton.
IN this case of the Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bona Adven^ura of London, The
King appeared, so highly for a Sovereign remedy and satisfaction beyond all
other cases whatsoever; that when the States Ambassadors Messieurs van Hoorn
and van Gogh desired their Credentialls to be gone re infecta in the Month of
August 1662. unless his Majesty would Mortify and Extinguish the injuries
Losses offenses and Damages concerning the said two Ships Bona Esperanza and
Bona Adventura. His Majesty presently ordered Sr. William Morice to prepare the
Letters Credentiall for his Royal Signiture, which was done and signed
accordingly, whereupon the Ambassadors desired another conference with the
Kings Commissioners, pretending their Masters had given them further
instructions by the last post, to accommodate the difference by an Expedient:
Which was a clause sent by John de Wit in Latin to follow after the
Mortification of all other injuries and offenses etc. in these Words: Hoc
excepto quod scilicet qui se jacturam passos dicunt in duabus navibus (viz)
bona Esperanza and Bona Adventura, Poterunt Litem inceptam Prosequi. Which was
a very slight Expedient to be accepted after 15. Months vigorous prosecution
by memorialls in the Kings Name for such an injury and offense committed
against the Laws of Common Amity. Whereby the trading voyages of Courten and
Company to China and Iapan were spoiled; A foundation laid by Patent for an
Indian Navigation beyond all enterprises that ever were undertaken by one
English men before Sr. Will. Courten and Company.

The Treaty being so concluded at London; The Kings Ministers both in England
and Holland pressed on for an accommodation of that affair according to his
Majesty's intention, but the East India Company of the Netherlands would not
come to any account for spoils (pro consequentia) having for some reasons not
only killed and wounded many of his Majesty's Subjects in the Bona Esperanza
but disapointed the factories by taking away their goods and embeazling all
their books and writings.

It is provided in the 15. Article that the Commissioners should not meddle
with any Damages or offenses to come after the Treaty was concluded, and also
that the progress of all things brought before the Commissioners and
Arbitrators should be carried on in the same manner as it was in the year 1654.
who concluded nothing (but Amboyna) of the great list of Damages, so that the
Dutch intended nothing as they reported at the Hague but to outwit the English.

The Kings Ministers nor any of the persons interessed and injured could get no
other answer from the States or the East India Company, but that those qui se
passos dicunt (although the fact was confessed) Poterunt Litem inceptam
prosequi only for the money; due upon Sr. Paul Pyndars assignation as if there
wanted a Treaty of State to empower any Englishmen to prosecute the East India
Company at Law in the ordinary course of Justice upon any pretense whatsoever.
Then the Creditors and Proprietors resolved unanimously together that the
Hollanders should not find them Children but men, and Englishmen, that would
not be contemned and derided by any Nation in the world, and would as soon lose
their lives as their livelyhoods, Honors or reputations: Wherefore they
applied themselves again to his Majesty, and also complained in Parliament, who
voted to assist the King in requiring satisfaction accordingly; afterward the
Lord Chancelour desired a conference with some of the persons interessed to
understand the merits of the case. Then Francis late Earl of Shrewsbury
appeared personally before his Lordship and protested that 2500 L Sterling all
the money left in the Family was lent to Mr. Courten upon the East India
account, Sr. John Ayton and Charles W^itaker did the like, Mrs. Bartlett Sister
of Endimion Porter, George Townsend and many others appearing for themselves,
and diverse O^phants and Widows, whose portions and Estates were all imbarqued
with Courten, Pyndar, and Littleton which aggrevated the offenses and injury
so far, that it was found absolutely necessary by the King and his Council to
pass an Especial Grant for Reprisall to remain effectual in all times until
satisfaction and reparation should be made for the debt and Damages awarded
for the said spoils injuries and Losses, as by the Letters Patents in the 25.
Page at Large appears, which is such an indispensible act, that cannot be
violated; And several neutrall Ministers of State in Foreign Courts upon
perusing the said Patent, and waighing all circumstances, gave this Character
of it; That it was an Act passed not only by King Charles the Great, but by
King Charles the Just.

Fiat justitia pereat mundus. Six select Articles of Peace and Alliance between
Charles the Second, King of Great Brettaign etc. and the States General of the
Seven United Provinces, taken out of the Treaty Concluded at Breda the 21. of
July Old Style, 1667.
III.
ALso, that all Offen^es, Injuries, Damages, Losses, which His said Majesty
and His Subjects, or the foresaid States General and their Subjects have on
either side sustained during this War, or at any time whatsoever heretofore,
upon what Cause or Pretense soever, be buried in Oblivion, and totally expunged
out of Remembrance, as if no such things had ever past.

IV.
Moreover, that all Ships, with their Furniture and Merchandise, and all
Movables, which during this War, or at any time heretofore have come into the
Power of either of the forementioned Parties or their Subjects, be and remain
to the present Possessors, without any Compensation or Restitution; so as each
one become and remain Proprietor and Possessor for ever of that which was so
gotten, without any Controversion, or Exception of Place, Time, or Things.

V.
Moreover, That all Actions, Suits, and Pretensions, whatsoever they be or in
what manner soever they have been restrained, circumscribed, defined or
reserved in any Articles of Peace or Alliance already made, (and especially in
the fifteenth Article of that Treaty which was Signed in the year 1662.) which
His said Majesty and the said States General, or their Subjects, may or would
prosecute or move against one another about such matter or things as have
happened during this War, or in any former times as well before as after the
foresaid Treaty of 1662, until the day of this present Alliance, be and remain
void, obliterated and disannulled; As His said Majesty and the said States
General shall declare, and they do hereby declare, That by virtue of these
Presents, they will for ever totally renounce, even as hereby they do renounce,
all such Actions, Suits and Pretensions for themselves and their Successors, so
as in regard of them nothing more may or ought ever to be urged on either side,
and nothing to be moved thereupon hereafter.

VIII.
It is also Agreed, That under the foresaid Renunciation and Stipulation, all
Letters whatsoever of Reprizal, Marq^e and Counter-Marque, both general and
particular, and others of that kind, by virtue whereof any Hostility may be
exercised for the future, ought also to be reckoned and comprehended; and by
the Public Authority of this Alliance they are inhibited and revoked. And if
any persons of either Nation, after such Revocation, shall nevertheless, under
pretense or authority of such Letters or Commissions already revoked, design
any new mischief, or act any Hostility, after the Peace is made, and the times
specified in the seventh Article are elapsed; they are to be looked upon as
disturbers of the Public Peace, and punished according to the Law of Nations,
besides an entire restitution of the thing taken, or full satisfaction of
Damages, to which they shall be liable, notwithstanding any Clause whatsoever
to the contrary, which may be inserted in the said Letters revoked as aforesaid.

XXIII.
That in case it happen during this Friendship, Confederacy and Alliance, any
thing shall be done or attempted by any of the Subjects or inhabitants of
either Party against this Treaty, or any part thereof, by Land, Sea, or
Fresh-waters, That nevertheless this Amity and Alliance between the said
Nations shall not thereby be broken or interrupted, but shall remain and
continue in its full force; and that only those particular persons shall be
punished, who have committed any thing contrary to this Treaty, by Land or Sea,
or other Waters, in any part of Europe, or any places within the Straits, or in
America, or upon the Coasts of Africa, or in any Lands, Islands, Seas, Creeks,
Bays, Rivers, or in any places on this side the Cape of Good Hope, within
Twelve Month space after Justice shall be demanded; And in all places
whatsoever on the other side the Cape (as has been abovesaid) within Eighteen
Months next ensuing after demand of Justice shall be made in manner aforesaid.
But in case the offenders against the Treaty do not appear, and submit
themselves to Judgment, and give satisfaction within the respective times above
expressed, proportionable to the distance of the places, they shall be declared
Enemies of both Parties, and their Estates, Goods, and Revenues whatsoever,
shall be confiscated for due and full satisfaction of the injuries and wrongs
by them offered; and their persons also, when they come within the Dominions of
either Party, shall be liable unto such punishments as every one shall deserve
for his respective offenses.

XXXII.
It is also agreed, If at any time it happen (which God of his mercy forbid)
that the Differences now composed between His said Majesty and the said States
General, should fester, and break out again into open War, that then those
Ships, Merchandise, or any kind of Movables of either party, which shall be
found to be and remain in the ports, and under the command of the adverse party
on either side, shall not for all that be confiscated, or made obnoxious to any
inconvenience; but the space of six months shall entirely be allowed to the
Subjects and Inhabitants of either party, that they may have leisure to
transport from thence the forementioned things, and any thing else that is
theirs, whither they (...) think fit, without any kind of Molestation.

Several Arguments raised upon these Articles, and diverse objections
thereupon answered in the 53. page hereafter following.

Three select Articles of Peace and Alliance between Charles the second King of
Great Brittaign, etc. and Frederick the third King of Denmark and Norway, taken
out of the Treaty concluded at Breda, the 21/31 of July, 1667.
I.
FIrst, It is Covenanted, Concluded and Agreed, That there be from this day a
perpetual, firm, and inviolable Peace between the most Serene and most Mighty
Prince Charles the Second, King of Great Britain, and the most Serene and most
Mighty Prince Frederick the Third, King of Denmark and Norway, between their
Heirs and Successors, and their Kingdoms, Principalities, Earldoms, Islands,
Cities* Forts* Lands, Subjects and Inhabitants of what state and quality
soever: And so as to maintain and promote each others good no less then their
own, and to avert and hinder with all possible study the damage and destruction
of one another. And in this respect it shall be free for the Subjects of either
King to exercise a Mutual Navigation and Commerce without molestation, and with
their Merchandises to come to each other Kingdoms, Provinces, Marts, Ports, and
Rivers, and there to abide and traffik.

III.
It is also Agreed and Concluded, That all Differences on both sides,
Suspicio^s and ill will, both on the part of the most Serene King of Great
Britain, and on the part of the most Serene King of Denmark, etc. and likewise
for singular the Ministers, Officers, and Subjects of them, be buried and
abolished by a perpetual Oblivion. And further from this present shall expire,
be annulled and for ever cancelled all Damages, Offenses, Injuries by word or
writing, that either the one has done the other, or has been suffered by the
one from the other, from the very first beginning of the now ceasing War to
this day, and the determined point of time wherein all Dissentions; Discords,
Differences and Enmities shall cease and be laid aside: By name, the Assault
and Defense made at Bergen in Norway, and in whole, whatsoever either followed
from thence, or does thereupon depend: in such manner, as that neither of the
said Parties by reason of any damage of this kind, offense, or charges, do
under any pretense whatsoever cause the other any trouble, much less for this
cause endeavor or attempt any kind of Hostility.

V.
All Ships, Goods, or the like, that in this turbulent season, in the heat of
this very War between both the abovementioned Kings and their Subjects, have
been taken by the one from the other, or that either Party has confiscated and
seized on the Goods and Pretensions of Persons or Subjects of the other Nation;
as also all the Expenses of War on both sides, shall be compensated by alike
mutual Abolition. In such manner, as are together comprehended in this
Compensation, those Debts of the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, which
have been on the part of Denmark confiscated; but in this sense, That whatever
Debts of this kind unto the Tenth Day of May Old Style, and Twentieth New
Style, by virtue of Confiscation or Reprisals have been by Subjects paid and
received, do remain utterly abolished and satisfied; and that it be not lawful
for the Creditors of such Debts for the future to pretend any thing upon this
account, much less to urge payment of such for any reason, or under any
pretense whatsoever. But of such Debts, as on the said day have not been paid
and received, it shall be lawful for the Creditors, Subjects of King of Great
Britain, to demand and prosecute the Payment, by the ordinary way of Justice.
Excepting nevertheless 120000. Rixdollars, more or less, (namely accruing from
a certain Controversy, which arose between Christian the Fourth of most
glorious Memory, King of Denmark and Norway, and the Parliament of England, by
reason of sending Aid to Charles the first of most glorious Memory, King of
Great Britain) for which the King of Denmark and Norway bound himself, and gave
his Bond to a Company of certain English Merchants Trading at Hamburgh, and
there either now living, or that have heretofore lived; Which claim of 120000.
Rixdollers or thereabouts, being confiscate, shall be now by virtue of the
present Treaty accounted as null, dead, and ^tterly abolished, in such manner,
that the Creditors of that Debt are not either now, or at any time hereafter
therefore to demand or pretend any thing. In like manner as is also Covenanted
and Agreed in most significant words, That no Pretension shall be at any time
made, by reason of Ships and Goods so seized, and Debt or Money lent, in such
manner as aforesaid abolished and confiscated; but that all shall on both sides
by a Solemn Compensation be for ever accounted as null and void: Yet so, that
Lands and immovable Goods be not comprehended in the aforesaid Voidance and
Annullation, but that they be without any difficulty or impediment restored
back to those, who before the denouncing of the present War were the Possessors
and Proprietors of them.

Six select Articles of Peace and Alliance between Charles the Second King of
Great Britain, etc. and Lewis the Fourteenth the most Christian King, taken out
of the Treaty, concluded at Breda the 21. of July, 1667.
I.
THat there be an Universal, Perpetual, True and Sincere Peace and Amity
between the most Christian King and the King of Great Britain, their Heirs and
Successors, and between the Kingdoms; States, and Subjects of both; and that
the same be so sincerely and seriously observed and kept, that one shall
promote the honor and advantage of the other; and that a faithful
Neighborhood, and secure observation of Peace and Friendship may flourish
again on every side.

III.
That all Offenses, Injuries, Damages, which either of the said Kings or their
Subjects have suffered from the other during this War, be buried in Oblivion;
so that neither in ^egard of them, nor for the Cause or Pretense of any other
thing, neither party, nor the Subjects of either, shall hereafter do or cause
to be done or made, any Hostility, Enmity, Molestation or Hindrance to ^he
other, by himself or by others, secretly or openly, directly or indirectly, by
color of Right or way of fact.

IV.
That the use of Navigation and Commerce be free between the Subjects of both
the said Kings, as it was anciently in the time of peace, and before the
Denunciation of the late War; so that every one of them may freely come into
the Kingdoms, Provinces, Marts, Ports and Rivers of either party, bringing
their Merchandise, and Conversing and Trading there without Molestation.

XVI.
That all Letters as well of Reprizal, as of Marque and Countermarque, which
hithertho have been granted on either side for any cause, shall be and be held
null and void; Nor shall any the like Letters be hereafter granted by either of
the said Kings against the Subjects of either; unless it be first made manifest
that Right has been denied, and unless he who desires Letters of Reprizal to
be granted unto him, do first draw and present his Petition to the Minister
residing in the Name of that Kingdom against whose Subjects those Letters are
desired; that he within the space of Four Months, or sooner, may enquire into
the contrary, or procure that satisfaction be with all speed made from the party
offending to the Complainant. But if that Kingdom against whose Subjects
Reprizals are demanded, have no Minister residing there, Letters of Reprizal
are not to be granted till after the space of Four Months to be reckoned from
the day whereupon his Petition was made and presented to the King against whose
Subjects Reprizals are desired, or to his Privy Council.

XVII.
Then to cut off all matter of Quarrel and Contentions, which might arise in
regard of the Restitution of Ships, Merchandise, and other Movables, which
either Party may complain to be taken and detained from the other in Countries
and Coasts far distant, after the Peace is concluded, and before it be
notified; All Ships, Merchandise, and other Movables which shall or may be
gotten by either side after the Subscription and Publication of the present
Agreement, within the space of Twelve Days in the Neighboring Seas; within the
space of six Weeks from the said Neighboring Seas unto the Cape of St.
Vincent, then within the space of Ten Weeks beyond the said Cape on this side
of the Aequinoctial Line, or Equator, as well in the Ocean and Mediterranean
Sea, as elsewhere; Lastly, within the space of six Months beyond the bounds of
the foresaid Line through the whole World; shall be and remain unto the
Possessors without any exception or further distinction of time or place, or
any consideration to be had of Restitution or Compensation.

XVIII.
But if (which God of his mercy forbid) the Differences now composed between
the said Kings should at any time fester, and break out again into open War,
the Ships, Merchandise, or any kind of Movables of either Party, which shall
be found to be and remain in the Ports, and under the Command of the adverse
Party on either side, shall not be Confiscated, or made obnoxious to any
inconvenience, but the space of six Months shall entirely be allowed to the
Subjects of either of the said Kings, that they may carry away and transport
the foresaid things, and any thing else that is their, whither they shall think
fit, without any molestation.

Seven select Articles, of Peace, Commerce, and Alliance, between the Crowns of
Great Britain and Spain, taken out of the Treaty concluded at Madrid the 13/23
May, 1667.
I.
FIrst, It is Agreed and Concluded That from this day forward there shall be
between the two Crowns of Great Britain and Spain, a General, Good, Sincere,
True, Firm and Perfect Amity, Confederation and Peace which shall endure for
ever, and be observed inviolably, as well by Land as by Sea and Fresh-waters;
and also between the Lands, Countries, Kingdoms, Dominions and Territories,
bolonging unto, or under the obedience of either of them. And that their
Subjects, People and Inhabitants respectively, of what condition, degree or
quality soever, from henceforth reciprocally, shall help, assist, and show to
one another all manner of Love, good Offices, and Friendship.

VIII.
That the Subjects and Vassals of the Most Serene King of Great Britain may
bring and carry to all and singular the Dominions of the King of Spain, any
Fruits and Commodities of the East Indies, it appearing by testimony of the
Deputies of the East India Company in London, that they are of, or have come
from the English conquests, Plantations or Factories, with like privilege, and
according to what is allowed to the Subjects of the United Provinces, by the
Royal Cedulus of Contravando bearing date the 27. of June, and the 3. of July
1663. and published on the 30. of June, and 4. of July the same year. And for
what may concern both the Indies, and any other Parts whatsoever the Crown of
Spain does grant to the King of Great Britain and his Subjects, all that is
granted to the United States of the Low-Countryes and their Subjects in their
Treaty of Munster Point for Point, in as full and ample manner as if the same
were herein particularly inserted, the same Rules being to be observed,
whereunto the Subjects of the said United States are obliged and mutual Offices
of Friendship to be performed from one side to the other.

IX.
That the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, trading, buying and selling in
any of the Kingdoms, Governments, Islands, Ports or Territories of the said
King of Spain, shall have, use, and enjoy all the Privileges and Immunities,
which the said King has granted and confirmed to the English Merchants that
reside in Andaluzia, by his Royal Credulas or Orders, dated the 19. day of
March, the 26. day of June, and the 9. day of November 1645. His Catholic
Majesty by these presents reconfirming the same as a part of this Treaty
between the two Crowns. And to the end that it be manifest to all, It is
consented. That the said Schedules (as to the whole substance thereof) be
passed and transferred to the body of the present Articles, in the name and
favor of all and singular the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, residing
and trading in any Places whatsoever within his Catholic Majesty's Dominions.

XX.
And to the end that all Impediments be taken away, and that the Merchants and
Adventurers of the Kingdom of Great Britain be permitted to return to Brabant,
Flanders, and other the Provinces of the Low Countries, under the Jurisdiction
of the King of Spain, Forasmuch as it has been thought convenient, that all,
and any the Laws, Edicts, and Acts by which the Importation of Cloth, or any
other Woolen Manufacture, of what kind soever, dyed, or undyed, milled, or
unmill'd, into Flanders, or the other Provinces, has been prohibited, be
revoked and disannulled, and that if any Right, Tribute, Imposition, Charge or
Money, has been, with permission, or otherwise, put upon Clothes, or any of
the fore said Woolen Manufactures so Imported (except the ancient Tribute upon
every piece of Cloth, and proportionably upon every other Woollen Manufacture,
agreeable to the ancient Treaties and Agreements between the then Kings of
England, and the Dukes of Bourgundy, and Governors of the Low Countries) the
same should be altogether void, and no such Tribute or Imposition from
henceforth imposed, or put upon the said Clothes or Manufactures, for no cause
or pretext whatsoever; And that all the English Merchants, trading in any of
the said Provinces, their Factors, Servants, or Commissioners, should enjoy
from henceforward, all the Privileges, Exemtions, Immunities, and Benefits,
which formerly have been agreed and given by the aforesaid ancient Treaties and
Agreements, between the then Kings of England, and the Dukes of Bourgundy, and
Governors of the Low Countries: It is therefore agreed That Deputies shall be
named by the King of Great Britain, who meeting with the Marquess of Castle
Rodrig^, or the Governor of those Provinces for the time being, or any other
Ministers of the King of Spain, sufficiently authorized in this behalf, shall
friendly Treat and Conclude hereupon; and also such further Privileges,
Immunities, and necessary Exemptions, suitable to the present state of Affairs,
shall be granted for the encouragement of the said Merchants and Adventurers,
and for the security of their Trade and Commerce, as shall be agreed upon in a
special Treaty, that shall be made between both the Kings, touching this
Particular.

XXVIII
And that the Laws of Commerce that are obtained by Peace, may not remain
unfruitful, as would fall out if the Subjects of the King of Great Britain,
when they go to, come from, or remain in the Dominions or Lordships of the King
of Spain, by reason of their Commerce or other business, should be molested for
case of Conscience, therefore that the Commerce be secure, and without danger,
as well upon Land as at Sea, the said King of Spain shall provide, that the
Subjects of the said King of Great Britain shall not be agrieved contrary to
the Laws of Commerce, and that none of them shall be molested or disturbed for
their Conscience, so long as they give no public scandal or offense; and the
said King of Great Britain shall likewise provide, for the same reasons, that
the Subjects of the King of Spain shall not be molested or disturbed for their
Conscience, against the Laws of Commerce, so long as they give no public
scandal or offense.

XXXIV.
That the Goods and Estates of the Subjects o^ the King of Great Britain, that
shall die without making a Will in the Dominions of the King of Spain, shall be
put into Inventry with their Papers, Writings, and Books of Account, by the
Consul or other public Minister of the King of Great Bitain, and deposited in
the hands of two or three Merchants that shall be named by the said Consul, or
public Minister, to be kept for the Proprietors and Creditors; and neither
the Crazada, nor any other Judicatory whatsoever, shall intermed^le therein;
which also in the like case shall be observed in England toward the Subjects
of the King of Spain.

Arguments upon the 3, 4, 5, and 8. Articles of the Treaty concluded at Breda,
between the King of Great Britain, and the States General.
THe Governors, Directours and high Participants of the East and West Indian
Companies of the Netherlands are the Magistrates of the chief Cities and Towns
in Holland and Zealand, whose Officers and Ministers abroad are those persons
that have acted and caused to be done all those injuries, offenses, damages,
and losses mentioned in the Third Article of the Treaty at Breda.

And all actions, Suits, and pretenses whatsoever, mentioned in the fourth and
fifth Articles of the Treaty, proceeded from the said Injuries, Offenses,
Dammaget and Losses, and were to be prosecuted in the Kings Name, as (Crimen
Laesae Majestatis) Capital Crimes against the Public Peace.

But under the notion of those Injuries, Offenses, Damages and Losses for
spoils and depredations, cannot be comprehended any private or particular
dealings between Man and Man, nor any Covenants, Obligations, Contracts, or
Merchants Accounts yet the Hollanders and Zealanders would have them applicable
to the General Words of all Actions, Suits, and Pretenses whatsoever, without
distinction of place, time, or things, as in the Case between Fletcher and
Pergens (wherein the States of Holland have by their Order on the 10. of
September last prohibited the Magistrates of Amsterdam, the Provintiall Court
and the Supreme Court of Judicature at the Hague from doing any ordinary
Justice for money received upon a Contract, and Assignation of 5500 pounds as
hereafter appears) and so at one blow would destroy all mutual Society and
Commerce. If the words should contain (or be understood) all pretenses
generally whatsoever, no Bills of Exchange, or debts contracted on either side
ought to have been paid, that were contracted or oweing before the Treaty. No
Action upon a particular and Civil account can be extinguished by general
words in a Treaty unless a confiscation thereof be first expressed in terminis,
or spe^ially as the King of Denmarks, debt upon obligation to the Merchants
Adventurers of Hamburg, who may expect in due time some answerable reparation,
from the Crown of England.

It iss against the rules of Justice and Equity, and all Moral principles to
hinder any man the ordinary course of Law in Civil and particular Actions. Its
granted that Sovereign Princes and States may renounce for themselves and their
successors all such Actions, Suits, and pretenses whatsoever that arise upon
Injuries, Offenses, Damages and Losses where they are brought in the Name of
the Sovereign Power or that must be moved in a way of State.

In all Acts of General Pardon there are several exceptions (and a Salvo
Jure) to particular men's interests.

In cases of Murder Appeals are brought sometimes at the suits of the party
after acquitall in the Kings Action.

Besides there is a Court of Conscience in all men's breasts, and no Sovereign
Power in the World can hinder any man from administering Justice and Equity to
his party, which remains in his own power to do; when he is convinced, that he
has don him wrong: But the East and West India Companies of the Netherlands;
will neither do right of themselves, nor be compelled thereunto by others, for
any thing in that great list of Damages against them mentioned in the 15.
Article of the Treaty 1662.

Now as to the 8. Articles, John de Wit wanted words to mortify that special
action, which remain upon record: Yet he says, it ought to be reckoned and
comprehended under the General Notification and extinguishment, (words never
found out before John de Wit was Chancellor of Holland, which came home to him
and his Brother at last) But how a Patent under the Great Seal of England
granted such waighey consideration can be revoked, John de Wit could find no
president without satisfaction.

It is true all other Injuries, offenses, Damages, and Losses remained in
nubibus and nothing was made clear and reduced to a certainty but the Bona
Esperanza, and Henry Bona Adventura, which without all doubt, will yet make a
good voyage, in time for the remaining Effects although they have met with many
storms and tempests.

The Copy of a Patent containing several Gracious Privileges lately granted by
the High and Mighty Philip the Fourth, King of Spain, etc. Translated out of
Spanish, in the year 1645. renewed and confirmed Anno 1667.
DON PHILIP, by the Grace of God, King of Castile, Leon, Arragon* the two
Sicilies, Jerusalem, Portugal, Navarre, Granado, Toledo, Valencia, Galicia;
Majorca, Sivilla, Sardinia, Cordua, Corsega, Murica, Jaen, the Algarves,
Algesira, Gibraltar, the Islands of the Canaties, the East and West Indies,
Islands, and firm Land of the Ocean Sea, Archduke of Austria, Duke of
Burgundy, Brabant, and Milan, Earl of Haspurg, Flanders, Tirol, and Barcellona,
Lord of Biscay and Molina, etc.

WHereas on the behalf of you Richard Anthony, Consul of the English Nation for
your self, and in the Name of the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, it
has been showed unto us, That by virtue of the Peace which is concluded in
this and that Realm, you do reside and trade in Andalusia, and specially in the
Cities of Sivil, St. Lucar, Cadiz, and Malaga, desiring us to be pleased to
confirm unto you the privileges, exemptions and faculties which do belong unto
you as well by the Articles of the said Peace, as by the Confirmations thereof,
and other Favors and Graces which our Lord and Father of glorious memory did
grant unto you, and all such others which have been given you by the Crowns of
our Realms of Castile and Portugal, and to command that they may be in, and for
all things observed and accomplished unto you without any limitation, and for
further assurance to grant them anew unto you, with the qualities, amplitudes
and declarations which shall be most convenient for you; and to set Penalties
upon such as shall contradict, and not observe them unto you; and to the end it
may be known what they are, to grant them Copies thereof, or of that which our
favor shall be: And we taking the Premises into consideration; and because for
the occasions which we have for our Wars, you have offered to serve us which
2500. Dukets of Silver, to be paid one Thousand ready money, and the remaining
one Thousand five Hundred in the Month of April of this Year; whereof the
Licentiate Francis Moreno, which in reversion of Don Anthony de Campo Rodondo y
Rio, Knight of the Order of Santiago, one of our Council and Chamber, and of the
Treasury, in your name, and by virtue of your power did acknowledge a Writing
of Obligation in form before John Cortez de la Cruz, our Notary, we do hold it
for good; And by these Presents, of our own motion, and certain knowledge, and
Royal and absolute Power, which we in this behalf will make use of, and do use
as an absolute King and Lord, not acknowledging any Superior in matters
Temporal, do confirm and approve the Privileges, Exemptions, and Faculties
which do belong unto you as well by the Articles of the said Peace, as by the
Confirmation thereof; and also the other favors and graces which our Lord and
Father dit grant unto you and others whatsoever, which have been given by our
Crowns of Castile and Portugal unto the said Subjects, in and for all things as
therein, and every thing and part thereof is specified, contained, and
declared, to the end they may be firm, stable, and of value, and be observed,
kept and accomplished unto you: For our deliberate intent and will is, that all
those of the said Nation shall enjoy thereof without any limitation, in such
manner, that during the time the said Englishmen shall reside in Andaluzia,
neither you nor they may be charged with any Office or public Charge, nor
Council, Tutorship, Curatorship, Receivers or Treasurers, although they be of
Customs and Millions, or other Services which concern our Royal Treasury; and
much less they may demand of you any Loans or Donations, or take from you any
Rights, or your Rents, Horses, or Slaves: And to do you the more favor or
grace according to that which is agreed by the said Peace, we do will and
promise that you shall and may deal and trade freely, and sell your Merchandise
and Fruits, and buy those of my Realms, and carry them forth, observing that
which is ordained and commanded by the Laws and Statutes which make mention
thereof, and paying to our Royal Treasury the Duties or Customs which ought to
be paid; prohibiting, as we do prohibit and command, not to take from you by
force any Merchandises, Wheat, or Barley, although it be for the making ready
or furnishing our Armies, Fleets or Gallions, nor for Purveyors or Stewards;
and the Privileges are to be concerning the Wheat and Barley according to the
Tun; and concerning the other things and Merchandises, as you shall conclude and
agree: but they may not take them out of your Possession until they have paid
for them, unless for the same there be leave given / that they do not molest
and trouble you. And forasmuch as many of you do treat to bring into the Ports
of Andaluzia, the City of Sivil, and other places, great quantity of New
Foundland-Fish, and other sorts of dry and salted Fish, because they are
Dictuals which are very necessary; and that you have been and are put to great
Charges, and are much troubled, We do will and command to be kept the Ordinance
of the City of Sivil, whereby it is ordained, that those which come in with dry
or salted Fish, there shall not be any Price or Rate set upon them, but they
shall be permitted to sell at such a Price as they shall think good; and it
shall not be necessary to manifest them any more then unto our Officers which
receive our Royal Rents: and if the Ships wherein the said Fish is brought be
great Ships, that they cannot go up the River, and that the same be put into
Barques or Lighters, the Judge of the Admiralty nor any other person may not
put any Waiters or Keepers into the Barques or Lighters at the charge of the
Owners of them.

And we do also command, That if the said Fish shall appear to be rotten, and
that it cannot be spent, that it be burnt, or thrown into the Sea; and that for
this cause there shall not be any Cause or Action commenced against the Owners
thereof, or persons which shall sell it, nor they shall not be imprisoned, nor
informed against. And forasmuch as the officers of the Customs, and others of
diverse duties which are received for the Fruits and Merchandises, do use when
any person does inform, to have the defendant imprisoned which shows himself
to be party, whereby happens to men of Trade great discrepit, charges and
vexations; Our will is, and we do command, That in the said Information there
shall be only proceeded against the Merchandises, and not against the persons;
but they shall be permitted (as we do permit them) to make; and they shall make
their defenses in the said Vexration. And forasmuch also, as according to an
Articles of the said Peace, which makes mention of matters in Religion,
notwithstanding that in some Suits they should declare whether they be Roman
Catholics or not, excusing themselves to give faith to others which they take
as parties or as witnesses.

We do also command, That concerning this matter there he not done, nor there
shall not be done, any thing with those which are born in the said Realm, but
only that the said Condition be kept and accomplished, and that no such
questions be put unto them, giving unto the oaths which they shall take in
Judgment Court, and without, the same faith and credit which should be given
in case they were Spaniards, and herein you shall not receive any trouble or
molestation nor there shall no grievance be done unto you: And whereas for the
justification of some causes, the Judges and Justices do pretend that the
Merchants of the said Nation should exhibit Books of their contractions or
dealings; we do will and command, that the Books of the Merchants of the said
Merchants of the said Nation shall not be taken out of their hands for any
cause whatsoever, but they shall keep and show them in their houses, to take
out the part which shall be appointed, and others shall not be demanded of
them, nor there shall not be any other Papers taken from them, upon penalty
that he which shall do here against shall be punished according to Law.

And forasmuch as the Merchants do dispatch the Merchandise from the Custom
house of the said City of Sivil of all Duties, and because there are many which
do make up a sheet, which is Subscribed and Signed by all the Officers, and
remains in the hand of the Alcayde of the Custom-house; for that by virtue
thereof, the Merchandises are permitted go to forth, which are in Fardels,
Packs, Trunks and Cases; and afterward when they have taken them forth, and
put them into their Houses and Warehouses, the chief Keeper of the Customhouse,
and the Officers of the half per Cent, do visit the House and Goods, troubling
and molesting them, demanding of them the dispatches, it seeming unto them,
that they may detain them, because they left the dispatch in the hands of the
said Alcayde of the Custom-house; we do prohibit and command, that the houses
of the said Merchants shall not be visited, nor the dispatches shall not nor
may not be demanded of them, in regard they have them not in their hands; and
this is to be understood, and is understood of houses which are within the
Walls of the said City; and to the end it may be known to you, which are of the
English Nation, there is to be delivered unto you copies of the said
Privileges and Exemptions with do concern you, and which were granted unto
you; as well by the Articles of Peace, as by any other manner. And for
execution and accomplishment of all Premises, we do command those of our
Council, and those of our Councils, Assemblies and Tribunals of our Court, and
the Presidents and Judges of our Audiences, Alcaydes, and Officers of our House
and Court, and Chanceries, and the Regent and Judge of the Court of Degrees of
the City of Sivil, and chief Alcaldes of the Precincts thereof, and all the
Corrigidors, Assistants and Governors chief Justices, and Ordinaries, as well
in the said Cities of Sivil, Cadiz, Malagar, and St. Lucar de Barameda, as of
all other Cities, Towns and Places of these our Realms and Dominions, and all
other Judges and Justices whatsoever, of what quality or condition soever they
may be, whom principally or incidentally may concern in any manner the
amplishment or performance of that which is contained in this Patent, that
presently so soon as they shall be by virtue thereof required, or the Copy
thereof Signed by a Notary public, that there be thereunto given as much
faith, as unto the Original: and that every one in the place where it shall
concern him do observe, and accomplish, and cause the same to be observed,
accomplished, and executed, in and for all things as therein is contained, and
they shall not in all nor in part put upon you any impediments, nor any other
difficulties or doubts, nor do any thing against the tenor and form thereof,
nor consent or give way that it be interpreted, limited or suspended in all or
in part, or that to the contrary be given any Sedidas, provisions, or other
dispatches; but for observation thereof, in the place which shall concern every
one, they shall give order, and ordain to deliver unto you those which shall be
necessary: and for more firmness and validity of the favor and grace which by
this our Patent we do grant you, and that at all times this favor may be
certain and sure unto you, you are to keep or have a Judge Conservator in
Andalusia, especially in the said Cities of Sivil, Malaga, Cadix, and St. Lucar
de Barameda, unto whom we are to give sufficient Commission for keeping and
accomplishing the said Privileges, Liberties and Exemptions, who shall
constrain and compel all and whatsoever persons, of what sort or quality they
may be that shall concern the said Nation, as well those which shall be
Defendants accused, as those which shall be Plaintiffs; although the persons
which shall accuse them, and which shall be accused by them, have private
Judges, as well by consent as agreement which they may have made by preeminence
or privilege which they hold, to the end the said Judge Conservator may only
take knowledge privately of the said Courts, and not any other Judge or
Tribunal, although it be by way of excess or notorious Justice, or in any other
matter or form; which Judge Conservator is now Doctor Don Francisco de Vergara,
Judge of our Court de les Grados, of the City of Sivil the time that he shall
assist therein, and in his absence the Licentiate Don Francisco de Modrano,
Judge of the same Court, who for the suits which shall be commenced in the said
Cities of Cadiz, Malaga, and St. Lucar, is to subdelegate his Conservatorship,
in the person which by the said Nation shall be propounded or named, that he
may effect the same to the conclusion, and they shall be referred unto him to
be determined: and of that which he shall determine, the Appeal is to be made
to our Council, and not to any other Court.

And forasmuch as our will is, that every one in his time shall have primitive
Commission, and Jurisdiction to protect and defend you concerning all the
contents of this our Patent, that all the same may be kept and accomplished in
the form which we do offer the same unto you, we have found good to charge, as
by these presents we do charge them with the protection and defense hereof: and
we do command them to see or peruse this our Patent, and the qualities,
conditions, pre-emmencies, and amplifications therein contaied, and to cause
all the same to be kept, accomplished and executed, in such form and manner,
and according as therein is contained and declared, without consenting or
giving way, that in all, or in part there be made into you any doubt or
difficulty, and before the said Don Francisco de Vergara, or in his absence
before the said Francis de Modrano (and not before any other Judge) privately
in the first instance, are to pass, and be followed all the causes and suits,
which concerning the premises, or any thing or part thereof shall be moved and
caused, and the execution and punishment of those which shall notbe obedient;
for our will is, that the knowledge and determination of all the contents in
this our Patent, is in all things privately to concern, and shall concern them;
proceeding in all things against those which shall be culpable, and executing
for the same the penalties, which are mentioned by law, reserving as we do
reserve, that appellations which shall be put in upon their acts and sentences,
to our Council, and not any other Court, without that any of other our
Councils, Tribunals, Courts, Chanceries, or any other Judges or Justices of our
Realms or Dominions, or whatsoever quality they be, may meddle, or shall meddle
sherewith, or in the use or exercise of the Inrisdiction privative in the said
first instance, which by this our Patent we do grant unto them, by way of
excess, appellation, or any other recourse or manner; the which and every of
them, we do inhibit and hold for inhibited, the knowledge thereof, and do
declare them for incompetent Judges thereof: for which and every thing, and
part thereof, we do give them the most sufficient power, and most ample
Commission, which according to Law is required and necessary, with the
incidences and dependencies, annex^ties; and after them the said English Nation
of the said City of Sivil, may name in the said Commission one of the Judges of
the said Audience, which the said Nation shall choose: and we do command the
President, and those of our Council of the Chamber, that presenting before them
their nomination (the case happening) to make void the said Commission, by
promotion or vocation of the said Don Francisco de Vergera, and Don Francis de
Modrano, or to dispatch it, in any other manner, by Ordinary, to him that shall
be therein nominated, in the form according, and as by this our Patent is
declared. And that it may be the better accomplished, we do from this time give
them power and authority, that they may Subdelegate, and they shall Subdelegate
this Commission, for the business and Suits which shall be offered in the said
Cities of Cadiz, Malaga, and St. Lucar de Berameda, in the person which by you
shall be propounded unto them, that they may substantiate them for a
conclusion, and remit the Suits and Causes unto them to be determined, in such
manner as they shall said good and convenient, for the security of that which
is contained in this our Patent. And we do charge the most excellent Prince,
Don Balthazar de Gharles, our most dear and most beloved Son, and do command
the Infants, Prelates, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Richmen, Commanders, and under
Commanders, Governors of Castles, strong Houses, and Plains, and those of our
Council, Presidents, and Judges of our Courts, Alcaydes, and Officers of our
House, Court and Chanceries, and all the Corrigidors, Assistants, Gouvernors,
Alcaldes, Majors, and Ordinaries, and whatsoever Judges and Justices of these
our Realms and Dominions, to observe and accomplish, and cause to be observed
and accomplished, this our Patent, and the favor or Grace which thereby we do
grant you, and against the tenor and form thereof, not to do or pass, now, nor
at any time, in any manner perpetually for evermore; Nor to consent or give way
to be limited or suspended unto you all or part thereof, notwithstanding
whatsoever Laws or Statutes of these our Realms and Dominions, Ordinances,
Style, Use, or Custom of the said Cities of Sivil, Cadiz, Malaga, or St. Lucar,
or any other thing which is or may be to the contrary; the which for this time,
for so much as concerns this matter, holding the same here for inserted and
incorporated, (...) it were word for word written, we do dispense, abrogate,
derogate, cancel, annihilate, and make uoid and of none effect, remaining in
full force and effect for all other things henceforward, And for this our
Patent, Jeronimo de Canence, Auditor of Accounts, in our chief Office of
Accounts, and our Secretary of the Mediaenate shall take a Copy, at whose
Charge in the account and reason of this right, And we do declare, that for
this favor you have paid the duty of the Mediaenate, which amounts to thirty
and five thousand one hundred fifty and five Maravediz is a Spanish coin,
whereof 32 makes a Royal of 2. the whole sum contains 30 pounds Sterling or
thereabouts.
Maravediz in Silver: which sum you are to pay from fifteen to fifteen years
perpetually, and in case they do accomplished or end, you may not make use of
this favor, until such time as it shall first appear that you have satisfied
this Duty. And you are also to pay the Judge Conservator, which shall be named,
his Salary, or to help to bear his charges, which he shall enjoy for his labor
or pains in the said business before you shall enjoy thereof, which is to
appear by Certificate of the Office of this Duty. Given in Saragosa, the
nineteenth day of March. Anno 1645.

Three select Articles taken out of the Treaty of Peace and Common Alliance
between Charles the Second, King of Great Britain, and the States General
Concluded at London the 9/19 February, 1673/4. with the Preamble and
deputations to the Commissioners of both parties taken from the Originalls in
Latin and French.
QUandoquidem, ut extingueretur funestum illud bellum, quod inter Serenissimum
ac Potenti^^imum Principem, Dominum, Carolum Secundum, Magnae Britanniae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Regem, fidei Defensorem, etc. and Cellos ac Praepotentes
Dom: Ordines Generales Foederati Belgii; nuper exortum, eriamnum flagrat, non
solum totius fere Christiani Orbis suspiria effligitaverint, sed praecipue
Serenissima Dom: Regina Regens Hispaniae, ex intuitu antiquae illius
necessitudinis and Amicitiae, quae inter Coronas Britannicam and Hispanicam
semper intercessit, eo operam suam curamque adhibuit ut dissidiis omnibus inter
Regnum Magnae Britanniae and Foederati Belgii Provincias, prorsus sublatis, Pax
quantocius restitueretur; Quumque Praedicti Ordines Generales Foederati Belgii
supra nominatum Serenishmum Dominum Magae Britanniae Regem tum per Literas suas
quam per nuncia repetita flectere conati sint, ut conditionibus Pacis aurem
animumque accommodare vellet; Atque ut Pacifica negotiatio facilius feliciusque
ad optatum exitum perduceretur Illustrissimo ac Excellentissimo Domino Petro
Fernandez de Iouar and Velasco Marchioni de Fresne, Majestati su^ Catholicae a
Cubiculis intimis, Et Serenissimi ac Potentissini Principis Domini Caroli
Secundi Hispaniarum, etc. Regis apud eundem Serenissimum Dominum Magnae
Britanniae, etc. Regem Legato extraordinario plenam potestatem dederint, ut
eorum nomine, atque ex eorum part pacem pro iis, cum praesato Serenissimo
Domino Magnae Britannie Rege tractaret and concluderet, toties memoratus
Serenissimus Dominus Magnae Britanniae Rex, qui non nisi firmae ac duraturae
Pacis causa hoc bellum primo suscepit, interpositionem supradictae Serenissimae
Dominae Reginae Regentis Hispaniae tanti fecit ut desideriis praememoratorum
Ordinum Generalium in hac part libenter accedere voluerit, adeoque ac Pacis
Tractatum inter Majestatem suam dictosque Ordines Generales ineundum
conficiendumque Deputatos Commissarios and Procuratores suos plena potestate
Munitos nominavit and constituit perquam fidelem and praedilectum Consiliarium
suum intimum Heneagium Baronem Finch de Daventrii, Magni Angliae Sigilli
custodem, perquam fideles and praedilectos consanguineos and Consiliarios suos
intimos Thom^m Vice-Co^item Latimer, summum Angliae Thesaurarium, Iacobum Ducem
de Monmouth Equestris Turmae pro custodia Majestatis suae Capitaneum, Iacobum
Ducem Ormondiae, Hospitii Regii Seneschallum, Henricum Comite^ de Arlington
primariorum Majestatis suae Secretariorum unum, and perquam fidelem and
praedilectum Consiliarium suum intimum Henricum Coventrii Armigerum,
Primariorum Secretariorum alterum; qui quidem Commissarii ac Deputati cum
Praefato Domino Marchione de Fresuo parem a praedictis Ordinibus Generalibus
Foederati Belgii Potestatem habente congressi and collocuti in haec demum pacta
capitulaque Tractatus and subsequentes Articulos concordibus animis mutuo
consenserunt conveneruntque.

VII.
Quod Tractatus Bredae conclusus Anno Domini 1667. sicut etiam omnes alii
praecedentes Tractatus per illum Tractatum confirmati renoventur, and maneant
in plena vi ac vigore, inquantum praesenti Tractatui nullatenus contradicunt.

VIII.
Quod Tractatus Marinus Hagae-Comitis inter parts utrasque Anno Domini 166^.
conclusus continuetur pro spatio novem mensium, post hujus praesentis Tractatus
publicationem, nisi per subsequentem Tractatum aliter provisum fuerit, interea
autem ut consideratio novi super hac re Tractatus ad eosdem Commissarios
referatur, ad quos commercium per Indiaes Orientales in Articulo proxime
sequenti referetur, Quod si tales Commissarii intra tres menses post primum
congressum suum in novum Tractatum Marinum ex voto non consenserint, tunc res
illa quoque ad Arbitrium ac dispositionem Serenissimae Dom. Reginae Regentis
Hispaniae referetur, eodem plane modo, quo Commercii Orientalis regulatio ad
Majestatis suae arbitrationem in dicto Articulo proxime sequenti referetur.

IX.
Eo quod a mutua and non turbata commercii ac navigationis liberate non solum
opulentia, sed pax etiam utriusque nationis summopere pendet, nihil magis curae
esse debet utrique parti, quam justa and aequa commercii regulatio, and
praecip^e in Indiis Orientalibus, and tamen quia res est maximi momenti and
multum temporis requiret ut firmi ac duraturi Articuli ad satisfactionem and
securitatem subditorum utriusque Partis conficiantur; Cum tamen languens and
poene intermo^^ens plerarumque Europae re ionum conditio non minus quam duarum
partium in hoc bello implicatarum ad prope^am hujus Tractatus conclusionem
anhelet, supramemoratus Serenissimus Dominus Magnae Brittanniae Rex votis and
desideriis praedictorum Ordinum Generalium accedere dignatur, ut ejusdem
consideratio aequali numero Commissariorum ab utraque part nominandorum
referatur, eisdem Ordinibus Generalibus spondentibus, ut illi, quos ipsi
nominaverint Londinum mittantur ad tractandum cum illis quos Majestassua
Britannicae pariter a part sua deputaverit, idque intra spatium trium mensium
post hujus Tractatus Publicationem; Numerus item Commissariorum utrimque
nominandorum sex erit personarum; sin autem post tres menses quam congressi
fuerint eorum conatus non tam feliciter successerint, ut Tracatus inde
concludatur, capita inter eos controversa ad arbitrationem Serenissimae Dominae
Reginae Regentis Hispa^^^ referentur: quae undecim Commissarios nominabit; Et
quodcunque major eorum pars determinaverit in differentiis non prius compositis
id utramque partem obligabit, proviso semper quod judicium suum declarent intra
spatium sex mens^^m a die quo primum congredientur, quod etiam intra spatium
erit trium mensium postquam Serenissima Domina Regina Regens Hispaniae
praedictum arbitrium in se susceperit.

Actum Westmonasterii 9/19 die Februarii, Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo
septuagesimo tertio-quario.

Signatum and Sigillum erat, (L:S:) H. Finch C. S. (L:S:) Latimer. (L:S:)
Ormond. (L:S:) Arlington. (L:S:) H. Coventry. (L:S:) Al Marquis el Fresno.


Sequitur tenor Commissionis seu plenae potestatis a part Serenissimi Domini
Magnae Britanniae Regis datae.
CAROLUS Secundus Dei gratia Magnae Britanniae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc. Omnibus and singulis ad quos presents literae
prevenerint, Salutem, Quandoquidem Illustrissimus and Excellentissimus Dominus
Petrus Fernandez de Ionar and Velasco, Marchio de Fresuo, Majestati suae
Catholicae a Cubiculis intimis, and Serenissimi a^ Potentissimi Principis
Domini Caroli Secundi, Hispaniae Regis apud Nos Legatus Extraordinarius jam
antea per Memoriale Nobis 10. die Decembris nuper elapsi exhibitum exposi^it
quantum Serenissima Domina Regina Regens Hispaniae defideraverit, ut Pax inter
Nos and Celsos ac Praepotentos Dominos Ordines Generales Foederati Belgii
restitueretur, in eoque Memorali cer^as quasdem conditiones praedictorum
Ordinum Generalium nomine pro Pace cum iis restauranda Nobis obtulit: Cumque
deinceps per liter as and nuncia reiterata dictorum Ordinum Generalium ad Nos
missa intellexerimus Eos perqu^^^ obnixe (...), ut dissidi^ inter Nos atque ^os
suborta componantur, and inimicitiis consopitis, armis depositis (...) Pace
redintegrat^ pristi^^ (...) supra-nominati Ordines Generales Nobiscum toluerunt
amicitia and bona correspondentia renovetur: Et cum eidem Domino ^archioui de
Fresno plenam ex ^orum part super pr^dicta Pace restabilienda Nobiscum
tractandi and concludendi Porestatem (...) ex Commissione sive mandato speciali
ea de re dictis Dominis Ordinibus Generalibus pr^fato Domino Marchioni de
Fresno concesso, d^to Hagae-Comitis duodecimo die Februarii nunc instantis
juxta stylum novum apparet; Nos quidem quibus nihil magis cordi (...) etiam ab
initio hujus Belli quam ut Populi utriusque Nationis beneficio ^aci^ and
Commercii liberate secur^ and aeque fruerentur pro summo quo supr^ nomi^atam
Sere^issimam Dominam Reginam Regentem Hispa^^^^ honor prosequimur, hanc
praedicti Domini Marchionis de Fresno interpositionem ex animo amplexam^r and
propositionibus ab illo pro^ecturis obviam libenter imus. Sciatis igitur quod
Nos spectatissimd per quam fidelis and praedilecti Consiliarii Nostri (...)
Henegaii^ Baroniis Finch de Daventrii Magni Nostri Angliae Sigilli Custodis,
perquam fidelium and praedilectorum Consanguiueorum and (...) Nostr^rum
intimorum Thomae Vice Comitis Latimer summi Angliae The saurarii, Jacobi Ducis
de Monmouth, Equestr is (...) pro Custodia Nostra Capitanei, Jacobi Ducis
Ormondiae, Hospitii Nostri Se^^schalli, Henrici Comitis de Arlington,
Pri^arior^^ Secretariorum Nostrorum unius, and perquam Fidelis and Praedilecti
Consilia^ii Nostri intimi, Henrici Coventry, Ar^^igeri Primariorum
Secretariorum Nostrorum alterius, fide, prudentia, industria and integritate
plurimum confisi, Eosdem fecimus, Ordinavi^^^ and Deputavimus ac per praesentes
facimus, Ordinamus and Deputamus veros and ind^bitatos Commissarios, Dep^^atos
and Procuratores Nostros; Dantes and concedentes iisdem omnibus sive quibusvis
quat^or vel pluribus eorum plenam and omnimodam Potestatem and authoritatem
pariter and Mandatum generale at speciale cum Praefato Marchione de Fresno ad
hoc sufficientem Potestatem habente de and super Pace ac Pristina amicitia
inter (...) and praedictos Ordines Gnerales restauranda renovandaque, nec non
de and super Commercii and Navigationis liberate stabilie^d^ utilissmis and
maxim convenientibus Articulis and Conditionibus communicandi, tractandi,
conveniendi, and concludendi, caeteraque omnia faciendi quae ad praedictos
fines faciant and conducant; atque super iis Articulos, Literas and Instrumenta
necessaria conficiendi, and a memorato Domino Marchione de Fresno petendi and
recipiendi; Denique omnia ea quae ad praemissa vel circae eadem erunt
necessari^ and opportuna expediendi; Promittentes bona fide and in verbo Regio
Nos omnia and singula quae i^ter dictos Nostros Procuratores, Deputatos ac
Commissarios aut eorum quatuor vel plures atque praenominatum Dominum
Marchionem de Fresno in praemissis facta, pacta and conclusa erunt, ra^a grata
and firma omni meliori modo habituros nec contra ipsor^^ aliquid aut aliqua
contraventuros, quin potius quicquid nomine Nostro promissum fuerit sancte and
inviolabiliter observaturo^ and observari curaturos. In cujus rei majorem fidem
and testimonium hasce literas manu Nostro propriae Signatos Magno Nostro
Angilae Sigillo communiri fecimus. Quae dabantur in Palatio Nostro de Whitehal
quinto die Februarii Anno Domini ^illes^^o sexce^tesimo septuagesmo tertio
secundum styl^^ Anglicanum, Regnique Nostri vicesi^o sexto.

Signatum erat, CAROLUSR.

Tenor Plenae potestatis a part Dominorum Ordinum Generalium datae.
LEs Esta^s Generaux des Provinces Unies des Pays-Bas; A tour ceux qui ces
presents lettres verront, Salut; Comme ainsi soit que pour sortir de la
funeste guerre don't presque toute la Chrestiente se trouve affligee and qui a
commis cet Estat avec sa Majeste de la Grande Bretagne, Nous avons cru devoir
profiter des soins que la Reine Regente d' Espagne, a bien voulu prendre pour
fair renover enter sa Majeste and cet Estat cetre ancienne amity qui a este
si avantageuse a l'un and a l'autre. Il a plu a sa Majeste d'employer pour cela
Monsieur Don Pedro Fernandez de Io^ar and Velasco, Marquis del Fresuo,
Gentilhomme de sa Majeste Catholic, and son Ambassadeur Extraordinaire au Roy
de la Grande Bretagne, lequely a fait de si bons offices and y a agy avec tant
de dexterite and de conduitte, que nous avons sujet de nous promettre un
tresheureux succes de la suitte de sa negotiation, fur tout si son Excellence
veut bien prendre la peine de joindre aux offices de mediation qu'il a employes
jusques icy, (...) qui restent encore a fair de nostre part and en nostre nom;
Et d' autant que Nous ne pouvons pas doubter qu' elle ne ve^^lle volontiers
contribuer tout ce qui dependra d' elle a procurer un si grand bien que celuy
de la Paix, and de son repos, no^^ avons bien voulu requerir ledit Sieur
Marquis del Fresno and en mesme temps l' authoriser; Ainsi que nous le
requerons and authorisons par les presents; luy donnants plein Pouvoir and
authorite special de conferer, negocier and traitter avec sadite Majeste le Roy
de la Grande Bretagne, ses Ministres, Deputez ou Commissaires une bonne Paix
aux conditions les plus utiles and les plus avantageuses que fair se pourra,
d'en convenir, les resoudre, arrester, conclurre and singer, and d'en passer
les Acts and Instruments necessaires en bonne and deue form, and de fair
generalement tout ce que nous pourrions fair si nous y estions presens, quand
mesme pour cela il seroit besoin de Pouvoir ou de Mandement plus special,
Promettans sincerement and de bonne foy, d'avoir pour agreeable ferme and stable
tout ce que par le dit Sieur Marquis aura este ainsi fait, negotie, promis,
accord, arreste and sign; Comme ayant pour cet effect plein Pouvoir de nous,
and de l'observer, accomplir and executer inviolablement en tous ses poincts,
sans jamais aller au contraire directement ny indirecteme^^, en quelque facon
ou maniere que ce soit, de l'aggreer, l'approuver and de le ratifier en la
meilleure form que fair se pourra; and dans le temps qui sera exprime par le
Traitte, nous en ferons expedier nos lettres d'approbation d'aggreement and de
ratification sans en fair fault. Done a la Hay en Nostre Assemblee sous
Nostre Grand Sceau, Paraphe du President and Signature de l'un de nos Greffiers
le douzieme jour de Feurier de l'An mil six sent soixante quatorzepunc; Paraphe
Gasp* Fagel. vt. Plu^ ^as, Par Ordonnance desdits Seigneurs Estats Generaux.

Sign, H. FAGEL*

Six select Articles of the Treaty-Marine concluded in the year 1674. between
Charles the Second, King of Great Britain, and the States General, with the
Preamble thereunto, to be observed in all parts of the World by Land, Sea and
Fresh waters.
WHereas by the Treaty Concluded at Westminster, the 9 of Febr. 1674. between
the Illustrious and most mighty King, Charles the Second, by the Grace of God,
King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith etc. And the
High and Mighty States General of the United Netherlands: it is agreed, by
the Eighth, and Nineth Articles, That six Commissioners to be named on the part
of the said Illustrious King of Great Britain, with the like number on the part
of the Lords the States General, to be sent to London, A Treaty should be
made, and whereas Thomas Lord Culpeper, George Downing Knight and Baronet,
Richard Ford, William Thompson Knights, John Jollif, and John Buckworth
Esquires, are to that End appointed, by the aforenamed Illustrious King of
Great Britain, As also that John Corver, and Gillis Sautin, Schepen, and
Council of the City of Amsterdam, Samuel Beyer, and Andrew van Vossen,
Council and Recorder of the respective Cities of Rotterdam, and Enckhuysen,
Pieter Duyvelaer, late Burgermaster of Middelburgh, And Michel Michelson,
Schepen and Council of the City of Flushing, Commissioners sent to London, on
the part of the Lords States General, have had several meetings, and debates
touching that matter, have finally by virtue of their full powers (to them
respectively given) in order to the aforesaid Articles unanimously Consented,
and agreed on the following Articles of a Treaty of Marine, to be observed in
all the several parts of the World, by Land, and by Sea.

Artic. I.
THat it shall and may be lawful, for all and every the Subjects of the Most
Serene and Mighty Prince, the King of Great Britain aforesaid, with all Freedom
and Safety to Sail, Trade, and Exercise any manner of Traffic, in all those
Kingdoms, Countries, and Estates, which are, or at any time hereafter shall be
in Peace, Amity, or Neutrality with His said Majesty; So that they shall not be
any ways hindered or molested in their Navigation or Trade, by the Military
Forces, nor by the Ships of War, or any other kind of Vessels whatsoever,
belonging either to the High and Mighty Lords the States General of the United
Netherlands, or to their Subjects, upon Occasion or Pretense of any Hostility
or Difference which now is, or shall hereafter happen between the said Lords
the States General, and any Princes or People whatsoever, in Peace, Amity, or
Neutrality with His said Majesty: And likewise, that it shall and may be lawful
for all and every the Subjects of the said High and Mighty Lords the States
General of the United Netherlands, with all Freedom and Safety to Sail, Trade,
and Exercise any manner of Traffic in all those Kingdoms, Countries, and
Estates, which are, or at any time hereafter shall be in Peace, Amity, or
Neutrality with the aforesaid Lords the States; So that they shall not be any
ways hindered or molested in their Navigation or Trade, by the Military Forces,
nor by the Ships of War, or any other kind of Vessels whatsoever, belonging
either to the Most Serene and Mighty King above mentioned, or to His Subjects,
upon Occasion or Pretense of any Hostility or Difference, which now is, or
shall hereafter happen between His said Majesty, and any Princes or People
whatsoever, in Peace; Amity, or Neutrality with the said Lords the States.

II.
Nor shall this Freedom of Navigation and Commerce be Infringed, by Occasion or
Cause of any War, in any kind of Merchandises, but shall Extend to all
Commodities which shall be carried in time of Peace; those only Excepted which
follow in the next Article, and are Comprehended under the Name of Contraband.

III.
Under this Name of Contraband or Prohibited Merchandises, shall be
comprehended only Arms, Pieces of Ordinance; with all Implements belonging to
them, Fireballs, Powder, Match, Bullets, Pikes, Swords, Lances, Spears,
Halberds, Guns, Mortar-pieces, Petards, Grenades, Musquet-rests, Bandeliers,
Saltpeter, Muskets, Musket Shot, Helmets, Corslets, Breastplates, Coats of
Mail, and the like kind of Armature, Soldiers, Horses, and all things necessary
for the Furniture of Horses, Holsters, Belts, and all other Warlike Instruments
whatsoever.

IV.
These Merchandises following shall not be reckoned among Prohibited Good^,
viz, all kind of Cloth; and all other Manufactures Woven of any kind of Wool,
Flax, Silk, Cotton, or any other Material; all sorts of Clothing and Vestments,
together with the Materials whereof they use to be made; Gold and Silver, as
well Coined as not Coined, Tin, Iron, Lead, Copper, and Coals; as also Wheat,
Barley, and all other kind of Corn or Pulse; Tobacco, and all kind of Spices,
Salted and Smoked Flesh, Salted and Dried Fish, Butter and Cheese, Beer, Oils,
Wines, Sugars, and all sort of Salt; and in general, all Provision which serves
for the Nourishment and Sustenance of Life; likewise all kind of Cotton, Hemp,
Flax and Pitch; and Ropes, Sails and Anchors; also Mast and Planks, Boards and
Beams of what sort of Wood soever, and all other Materials requisite for the
Building or Repairing Ships, but they shall be wholly reputed amongst Free
Goods, even as all other Wares and Commodities which are not comprehended in
the next precedent Article; So that the same may be freely Transported and
Carried by the Subjects of His said Majesty, even unto Places in Enmity with
the said States; as also on the other side, by the Subjects of the said States
to Places under the Obedience of the Enemis of His said Majesty; Except only
Towns or Places Besieged, Environed, or invested, in French Bloquees ou
investies.

V.
And that all manner of Differences and Contentions on both sides by Sea and
Land, may from henceforth Cease, and be utterly Extinguished, It is Agreed,
That all kind of Ships and Vessels whatsoever, belonging to the Subjects of His
said Majesty, entering, or being entered into any Road or Port under the
Obedience of the Lords the States, and purposing to pass from thence, shall be
only obliged to show unto the Officers acting in the Ports of the said States,
or to the Captains of the States Ships* or of Private Men of War (if any happen
there to be) their Passport, commonly called a Sea-brief (the Form whereof is
added at the end of these Articles;) nor shall any money, or any thing else, be
exacted from them under that Pretense; But if any Ship belonging to the
Subjects of His Majesty of Great Britain, shall in the open Sea, or elsewhere,
out of the Dominions of the said States, meet the Ships of War of the said
Lords the States, or Private Men of War of their Subjects, the said Ships of
the Lords the States, or of their Subjects, shall keep at a convenient
distance, and only send out their Boat, and it shall be lawful for them only
with two or three Men, to go on Board the Ships and Vessels of the Subjects of
His Majesty, that the Passport (or Sea-brief) of the Propriety thereof
according to the Form hereafter specified, may be shown to them by the Captain
or Master of such Ship or Vessel belonging to the Subjects of His Majesty; and
the Ship which shall show the same, shall freely pass, and it shall not be
lawful to Molest, Search, Detain, or Divert the same from her intended Voyage:
And all the Subjects of the Lords the States shall enjoy in all things, the
same Liberty and Immunity, they in like manner showing their Passport (or
Sea-brief) made according to the Form prescribed at the latter end of this
Treaty.

XII.
And whenever the Ambassadors of the said Lords the States, or any other
their Public Ministers, Resident at the Court of His Most Serene Majesty of
Great Britain, shall complain of the unjustness of Sentences which have been
given, His Majesty will cause the same to be Reviewed and Examined in His
Council, that it may appear whether the Orders and Praecautions prescribed in
this Treaty, have been Observed, and have had their due Effect, and will also
take care that the same be fully provided for, and that Right be done to the
Party complaining, within the space of three Months; And likewise when the
Ambassadors, or other Public Ministers of His Majesty, Resident with the
States General, shall complain of the unjustness of Sentences, the said States
will cause a Review and Examination thereof to be made in the Assembly of the
States General, that it may appear whether the Orders and Praecautions
prescribed in this Treaty have been Observed, and have had their due Effect,
and they will likewise take care that the same be fully provided for, and that
Right be ^one to the Party complaining, within the space of three months:
Nevertheless, it shall not any ways be lawful to sell or Unlade the Goods in
Controversy, either before the Sentence given, or after it, during the Review
thereof, on either side, unless it be with the Consent of the Parties
Interessed.

IN Testimony and Confirmation of all and singular the Premises, We the
Commissioners of His Majesty, and the Lords the States General aforesaid, being
sufficiently Empowered thereunto, have to these presents Subscribed Our Names,
and Sealed them with our Seals, At London; the First day of December; 1674.

(L. S.) Tho. Culpeper. (L. S.) G. Downing. (L. S.) Richard Ford. (L. S.) Will.
Thomson. (L. S.) John Jollife. (L. S.) John Buckworth. (L. S.) I. Corver. (L.
S.) G. Sautyn. (L. S.) Samuel Beyer. (L. S.) And. van Vossen. (L. S.) P.
Duvelaer. (L. S.) M. Michielson.


Sovereign Princes cannot study greater improvements for their Subjects, than
to provide good Rules and Contracts, in Public Treaties, for the freedom and
security of their Navigation and Commerce. But when Englishmen shall willingly
let go those benefits and advantages (through their own defaults) which are
made National rights by such Treaties, they do not only neglect their own
profit, but slight their King and Country that are able to protect them.

There are other things to be observed in these select Articles of the several
Treaties relating to trade and Traffic which are left for the present unto
the most serious considerations of the Reader, until I come to the third part
of my discourse concerning the further improvement of Navigation and the
English Manufactures: I shall only add this; That after King James in the year
1616. quitted the two English Garrisons at Flushing and Rammekins, the
Hollanders and Zealanders begun to straighten the Wheelings, and set a watch
upon that famous Navigable River the Scheld, (that God and nature had made
free) until at last the Hollanders built a Fort at Lillo, and since constantly
kept a man of war in the River, to obstruct the freedom of all English Ships
in their passage to Antwerp: Which place the States General might have taken,
as also Gant by their forces at Land, but it was not their business to take
those Cities, but their trade, and to lessen the English Navigation (by
improving their own) which is now set open again and made free by those Worthy
Patriots of their Country that were Commissioners for the King of Great Britain
in the two last Treaties with the Hollanders in the year 1674. Although the
Bargain was upon hard terms to release a regulation of trade in the East I^dies
for a Treatie-Marine and freedom to the Flemish ports which were in Common
Justice and Equity by the Bourgundian (...) and Spanish treaties open to the
English before.

Some further Speculations concerning the said Treaties, with several
Animadversions thereupon.
IN all the Articles of the Bourgondian Treaty there is no mention made of
striking the Flagg to the Kings ships, in regard it was such an Ancient right
and Custom adherent to the Crown of England, that it was needless to Express
such a Prerogative that by consequence was employed, however the Hollanders made
it a Moot point with Cromwell; The States having refused to strike unto the
long Parliament their younger Brothers. Yet Nevertheless it was agreed in
Cromwells Treaty, that the Dutch Ships of war and Merchants should strike to
the English Men of war; inferring from thence, that they were to give honor to
the Nation, from the old Dictate, quatuor Maria Vindico. And the words in
Cromwels Treaty were, that the States General and their Subjects should strike
in such Manner as was used in any former times whatsoever.

In the time of Queen Elisabeth, when any one of her Majesty's Small Ships
arrived at Rotterdam bearing the Standard of England, all the Dutch Ships
struck their Flags in the Harbor and Lowred their Topp-Sails, although there
was no Article to that purpose in the Treaty and League between the Queen and
the States; but those ancient rights were observed out of respect and honor
due to the Crown of England for keeping the seas free from Pirates and Rovers,
when the Bourgundians had not a man of war to resist them from dragging away
the Ships out of their Sandy and dangerous wads and Harbors, and for sheltring
them in hard and tempestuous Weather in havens upon the English Coasts. But
because the Hollanders were so unmannerly and forgetful in late days of their
duty and gratitude, this following Article was agreed upon in the Treaty
concluded at London 9 of February 1673. old Style.

Praedicti Ordines Generales Unitarum Provinciarum debite ex part sua
agnoscentes jus supramemorati Serenissimi Domini Magnae Britanniae Regis ut
vexillo suo in maribus infra nominandis honcs habeatur, declarabunt and
declarant, concordabunt and concordant, quod quaecunque naves aut navigia ad
Praefatas Unitas Provincias spectantia, sive aliae eaeque vel singulae vel in
Classibus conjunctae, in ullis maribus a Promontorio Finisterrae dicto usque ad
medium punctum terrae van Staten dictae in Norvegia quibuslibet navibus aut
navigiis ad Serenissimum Dom: Magnae Britanniae Regem spectantibus obviam
dederint, sive illae naves singulae sint, vel in numero majori si Majestatis
suae Britannicae aplustrum sive vexillum JACK appellatum gerant, praedictae
Unitarum Provinciarum naves aut navigia vexillum suum e mali vertice detrahent
and supremum velum dimittent, eodem modo parique honoris testimonio, quo ullo
unquam tempore aut in ullo loco antehac usitatum suit versus ullas Majestatis
suae Britannicae aut Antecessorum suorum naves ab ullis Ordinum Generalium
suorumve Antecessorum navibus. Yett Monsr. Peter Valckonier, in his History of
the wars of Europe since the year 1600 printed at Amsterdam, in the year 1675
Says it is an insolency in the English Nation to insist upon the Flagg and Jack.

It is acknowledged and agreed by all Kingdoms and Nations in Europe, that the
King of Great Britain is the most absolute Sovereign in his Dominions, in
regard his government is not divided by any supremacy of the Pope. Yet I do not
find that there is any provision made in Treaties with the United States of the
Seven Provinces, that the Orthodox Divines of England shall be permitted to
preach and pray in the English Congregations in Holland according to the rights
and Ceremonies of the Church of England; but on the contrary, the English
Congregations in Holland are supplied with Non-conformists, who are also bound
up by the Magistrates to the Presbiterian Forms and Doctrine, which renders the
King and Reverend Clergy so much despised and forgotten, as if there were no
such thing as a Church of England.

And the reflection is so much the greater, in regard the Roman Catholics, the
Jews, Lutherans etc. are allowed to use their proper Forms of Worship in their
Synagogues and Churches at Amsterdam, and other Cities in Holland, then as in
England the Dutch Ministers are not barred from their Presbiterian forms; being
without any prohibition of the Bishops in their respective Dioceses, wherein
the Dutch Congregations do assemble (viz.) at London, Norwich, Colchester,
Sandwich etc. Wherefore in Justice, Equity and Honor, the same Rights,
Privileges and liberties ought to be granted to the English in the United
Provinces as are given or granted to Dutchmen in England.

But it is objected by the Hollanders, that the Dutchmen in London etc. Do pay
their own Ministers, and purchase their own Churches; and on the Contrary, the
States do pay the English Ministers at Amsterdam with allowance of Churches
gratis, and repairs, therefore both Ministers and people are subject to their
Orders, and pray for the States as their Lawful Sovereigns before the King of
England, whom they do rather hate then love, many of them having married into
Dutch Families, whose interest they study more then the welfare of Great
Britaign: and yet can be so impudent to expect protection from the King in
times of trouble whom they will not obey in times of peace.

It might be answered, that if the King did send able Divines into Holland and
Maintain them out of the public Revenue of the Crown, it would answer the
Costs and Charges of the King and Kingdom in many respects, which might be
insensibly raised out of the paper-bill hereafter proposed to the Parliament:
Then there would be a distinction made between Friends and Enemies, Subjects
and ^rangers, espe^^^^ when all English men abroad should live under a
regulation both in Religion and Commerce conformable to the laws and statutes
of England, whose Children born beyond the seas are Naturallized by act of
Parliament in pursuance of their Royal Charter to Merchants adventurers. Here
I cannot omit the mentioning of one affront offered to the English congregation
in Middleburgh (that once had a Church in the Chief street when the Merchants
adventurers held their Court in Zealand) Where the Magistrates have taken half
the House belonging to the Idiots and Mad men and given it to the English
Congregation to assemble in, and converted the old English Church to an
Hospital.

It is no digression from the Matter of Trade to add one Paragraph concerning
the Judicature of Holland upon civil actions and differences of Meum et tuum
between man and man, whereof there is no provision made for Expedition in the
Cases of strangers, as is practiced in many other nations; The want whereof
has occasioned diverse losses and oppressions to the Subjects of Great Britain.

Many hundred instances may be given, wherein several Englishmen have quitted
just Claims and pretenses, rather then they would enter into process with
Burgers of Amsterdam etc, for that Burgers by the privilege of their Cities
cannot be arrested. 2 when they are summoned and the Cause put upon the
Ordinary roll it is Usually 36 months before it comes to a trial. 3 after a
Sentence, its commonly carried away to the Provincial Court by a Mandement. 4
after that, they for further vexation to strangers will appeal to the Supreme
Court of Judicature at the Hague, where it is held up several years longer,
and at last comes to a revision.

It many times happens that the Magistrates will persuade both parties at first
to referr the controversies to good men, as they call them, in Amsterdam (which
are chosen by the Magistrates) who will never give an Englishman more then one
half of his demands, let the cause and Damage be what it will. Wherefore to
avoid all delays, vexations and oppressions, a separate and provisionall
Article ought to be made, that all strangers both Englishmen and Hollanders
should respectively in Each Country have a summary way of proceeding before
Comissioners of neutrall persons for Ending of all actions and controversies
that might arise concerning trade and Commerce; whose determinations should be
final without further appeal. Unless to the Sovereign Prince or State of the
injured Subjects where the Matter in question shall exceed the value of 500
pounds sterling.

But here follows an insolent President beyond all Example, in an order of the
States of Holland dated the 10. September 1676. (upon Mr. Mark Fletchers case
hereafter mentioned) directed to the supreme Court of Judicature at the Hague,
the Provincial Court of Holland, and the Schepens or Judges in Amsterdam.
Without hearing of Mr. Fletcher, his Council or Atturneys, or any Englishman
concerned in the Cause.
Translated out of Low Dutch into English. The States of Holland and
West-Friesland.
Right Honorable,
We have Caused to be read in our assembly the Petition of Jacob Pergens
Citizen and Burger of the City of Amsterdam, relating, that although by the
successive treaties between this State and his Majesty the King of Great
Britain begun and Ended. The cause of Action and pretense which some of the
inhabitans of his said Majesty pretended to be due unto them for Damages which
the Officers and Servants of the East India Company of these lands should have
done many years since in the Indies unto two English Ships and their Lading
belonging to subjects of England whereof the one was Called the Henry
Bonadventure, and the other the Bona Esperanza was fully agreed and Concluded,
which notwithstanding one Mark Fletcher Englishman dwelling in Middelburgh on
the behalf of Sr. Paul Pyndar dwelling in England had been pleased of late to
revive that Matter, and Particularly to cite the Petitioner (who by virtue of
Power and Authority granted unto him had in the year 1649. long before the said
respective treaties received of the directors of the East India Company such
sums of Money as by the foregoing agreement was Concluded and Promised for the
said Pretense and Damage) before the Lords Judges of Amsterdam which the
Petitioner thought very strange being plainly against the said respective
treaties: Whereof the Petitioner thought he might Transgress by Entering into
any suit with the said Fletcher before the Lords the Judges of the said City
of Amsterdam, even as his thoughts were Confirmed by the advice of Several
persons learned in the law, but in duty bound to acquaint us thereof, sithence
the said Fletcher had attempted the violation and trespass against the said
respective treaties whithin the City of Amsterdam under our Dominion, to The End
as it behooveth us to maintain these and all other treaties within our own
Dominions, and to stop, hinder and defend whatsoever might be begun to the
Contrary so we might by the knowledge thereof be moved to provide by way of
State against the designs of the said Fletcher, And that the Petitioner giving
knowledge thereof by the said petition, and adding that Although by the 15.
Article of the Treaty between this State and his said Majesty concluded in the
Year 1662. The Cause of the said pretended Damage on those two Ships and their
Lading were then Excepted out of the General Clause of Abolition mentioned in
the said 15. Article and liberty given to the pretended Interessed to
prosecute their Process begun touching the same: That nevertheless afterward
the said Matter by the following Treaty concluded at Breda in the Year 1667
had another aspect and was then finally Ended. In such sort as by the said
treaty in the Year 1667 in the 5 Article more Especially was declared; That all
Actions and pretenses whatsoever reserved by any former Treaty of peace and
Especially by the 15 Article of the Treaty of the year 1662. for which Either
party or their subjects might institute their action, should from thenceforth
by virtue of the said Treaty be made null, obliterated and of no effect, So
that neither for that or Generally any other matters or Goods which not only
during the war but also at any former time before or after the Conclusion of
the said Treaty of the Year 1662. To the day of Conclusion of that following
Treaty should never be moved by the one or the other side herafter: more clear
or larger Expressions to Annul, make void and obliterate for ever the
Petitioners cause could not be uttered then was by the said 5. Article of the
said Treaty of the said Year 1667. And whereas after new differences arisen
again between this State and his said Majesty, another Treaty was made in the
Year 1674. At which time the said Treaty concluded at Breda in the said Year
1667 was again more particularly included, and confirmed by the seventh
Article of the said Treaty, saying that the said Treaty Concluded at Breda
and all former Treaties should thereby be revived and of full force:
furthermore the Petitioner praying that we would please to take this his cause
into Consideration and in pursuance to provide (...) you should be writ unto
and ordered in no wise to receive the said Mark Fletcher or any other person
whomsoever in Judgment touching the pretenses for the said two Ships and their
lading, but to refuse them all the ways of Justice touching the same, to the
end the said Fletcher and others may learn to reverence the Treaties made with
this State, and at least not to violate and infringe them before our face,
which being taken into our Consideration we have thought Good and resolved to
write these unto you, and to order that you do not hereafter receive the said
Mark Fletcher or any other Person whomsoever in judgment touching the said
Action or pretense, nor admit them, but to refuse them all the ways of Justice,
The moving of the said action or pretense being a public and Manifest breach
of the said Treaties of peace Concluded in the Year 1667 and 1674 respectively.
Whereunto trusting, we Commit you etc. Written in the Hague the 10. of
September 1676.

The States.

If the States of Holland dare be so bold in this Iuncture of time to make such
orders in particular cases (wherein so many Eminent members of Parliament are
concerned) what would not they do if they had continued those Ancient leagues
and Alliances with the Crown of France that were contracted with Lewis the 13.
and this present King?

A Brief Deduction of the case depending between Mark Fletcher of Middleburg,
Merchant, and Jacob Pergens of Amsterdam.
With the questions and resolutions thereupon.
WIlliam Courten Esquire, and Sr. Edward Littleton Baronet by their deed of
Assignment under their hands and seals dated the 19 of December. 1642. for
valuable considerations therein mentioned did grant and transfer (inter alia)
the sum of 3000 pounds Sterling unto Sr. Paul Pyndar his executors and
administrators out of the Ship named the Bona Esperanza and the sum of 2500
pounds out of ^he Henry Bon Adventura that were upon trading Voyages in the
East Indies.

In the year 1643. the East India Company of the Netherlands took both the said
Ships and their Lading into their possession and converted them to their own
use, without any process at Law.

In the year 1647. Sr. Paul Pyndar by Jonas Abeels demanded the said 5500
pounds of the East India Company, unto whom he insinuated his right of
Assignation.

In the year 1648. Jacob Pergens takes a subsequent deed of assignment of the
said Ships and Lading from the said William Courten upon pretense of a debt of
1000. pounds due to him from Sr. William Courten upon an obligation dated in
the year 1634. and covenanted to account for the surplus to such persons as had
right to demand the same from Courten.

In the year 1649. Jacob Pergens made an agreement with the East India Company
for 85000. gilders, and gave caution to save the Company harmless against
Pyndar.

Afterward, George Carew Administrator of Sr. Paul Pyndar assigned the said
5500. pounds with interest unto Mark Fletcher, in consideration of several
Bills of Exchange accepted and other payments to be made upon obligations; who
brought his action for the said money against Jacob Pergens before the
Magistrates of Amsterdam.

Whereupon Jacob Pergens in the month of August 1676. waved the jurisdiction
of the ordinary Justice in Amsterdam upon pretense of a Treaty made in the year
1667. at Breda, and applied himself to the States of Holland to stop the
proceedings at Law; who sent their order dated 10. September. 1676. to interdict
the Magistrates of Amsterdam; The Provincial Court of Holland, and the Supreme
Court of judicature at the Hague prohibiting them respectively from doing any
justice therein.

It being alleged in the said order, that all injuries, offenses, damages and
losses that the subjects of England had at any time suffered by the East India
Company of the Netherlands before that Treaty, were extinguished and discharged.

And moreover that all actions, suits and pretentions whatsoever for the same
that were any ways restrained, circumscribed, defined or reserved in any former
Treaty whatsoever, especially in the 15. Article of the Treaty concluded in the
year 1662. were also renounced by the King, and therefore it was a violation of
the Treaty to prosecute Jacob Pergens for the said money.

Then Mark Fletcher in the month of December. last exhibited his request to the
States of Holland setting-forth the mistakes and ungrounded pretenses in the
said order, and prayed that it might be revoked and the merits of the cause
left to the Law, as a particular action, no ways relating to the said Treaties.

And notwithstanding the King had formerly written to the States General in
the month of January 1671. expressly declaring that the said 5500. pounds was
not comprehended in any Treaty; And that The right Honorable Heneage Lord Finch
Lord high Chancellor of England. Sr. Richard Raynsford Lord Chief Justice of
England, and Sr. Francis North Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common pleas,
had signified their opinion to his Majesty under their hands (upon a reference)
on the 3. of November 1676. that the said 5500. pounds and other effects of Sr.
Paul Pyndars, and Sr. William Courtens Estates unadministred ought to be
prosecuted at Law. The Copies of all which were annexed to the said request to
the States of Holland, with the opinions also of several most Eminent
Advocates in the Netherlands to the same purpose. Yet the States still refuse
to give any answer to the same; and the Magistrates also of Amsterdam deny to
proceed in the said cause; although they are daily solicited thereunto.

The question is I. Whether the States of Holland are competent Judges in
matters of Law or not? II. Whether a particular action against Jacob Pergens
upon his covenant can be applicable to the offenses, injuries, damages and
losses mentioned in the said Treaties or not? III. Whether it be lawful for
Marcke Fletcher to prosecute his action at Law, in the ordinary Courts of
justice against Jacob Pergens for the said 5500 pounds and interest, without
any violation of the peace, or not?
RESOLVED
I.
THat the offenses, injuries, losses and damages mentioned in the said
Treaties, to be done and committed by the East and West India Companies of the
Netherlands against the King of Great Britain and his Subjects, were under the
Notion of capital crimes and misdemeanors against the common Alliance and
public peace, and are obliterated and disanulled by the King in favor of the
said Companies; no ways concerning Pergens or his particular case.

II.
When Jacob Pergens in his private capacity in the year 1649. treated
concerning the said Ships and Goods with the East India Company for 85000.
gilders, he made it his own particular act with the Company, and so became
accountable for the said money (and the trust reposed in him) according to his
covenant and contract with Courten. And the process of Mark Fletcher cannot be
any ways construed, interpreted or intended, to be comprehended in any Articles
of the Treaty at Breda, being a civil action reduced to a certainly, no ways
circumscribed, defined, restrained or reserved in any Articles of Peace
whatsoever.

III.
If any order of the States (Ex part) or of any Sovereign Prince under their
own construction should be of force to interdict Judges in the ordinary course
of Justice, that are sworn to do right between the Sovereign and the Subject,
as well as between private persons, it would not only entrench upon the Civil
Judicature of Cities, and Nations, but upon Estates and properties of
particular persons. It is granted that the Subjects of the States General are
pardoned and acquitted of general actions and pretenses arising upon spoils
and depredations before the Treaty at Breda. (such offenses, injuries, damages
and losses being extinguished and obliterated ex plenitudine potestatis by a
prerogative remaining in the King) And if any action should be brought by the
Subjects of either side, upon any such pretense of loss or damages, the
defendants might plead the Articles of the Treaty at Breda, in bar as an
exception to the action. And the Courts of judicature are the competent Judges,
whether it be a particular action, or such a pretense, that is comprehended in
the peace at Breda, or not.

A Schedule of actions depending in the ordinary Courts of judicature in
Holland and Zealand, not comprehended in the Treaty at Breda.
^ S. d. The action depending at the suit of George Carew (administrator of the
goods and Chattels of Sr. William Co^rten (...)) in the ordinary Court of
Indicature at Middleburg (...) Zealand (...) Peter Boudaen deceased, for one
hundred twenty two thousand one hundred (...) Shilling and six pence Sterling.
The balance of accounts in the (...) etc. of Sr. William Courten and Company,
is a particular action upon a civil account no ways comprehended or included
in any Article of public Treaties whatsoever. 122138: 19: 6 And likewise the
action in Middleburg against the heirs of the said Peter Boudaen for 1000.
pounds Sterling. given by John Moncy as a Legacy to William Courten Esquire
deceased. 1000: 0: 0 As also (...) other action for 100 pounds Sterling given
as a Legacy by Sr. Peter Courten to his Brother Sr. William Courten, both
prosecuted at the instance of the said George Carew. 100: 0: 0 Also (...)
action for 12500 gilders deposited by the directors of the East India Company,
into the (...) or Banck of Lending at Middleburg, as the proper money of David
Goubard deceased, against whose ^eyrs the suit depends, at the instance of the
said Carew. 1200: 0: 0 Also one other action for 3000, pounds Sterling against
Jacob Pergens for money lent by Sr. William Courten, (...) Sr. Jacob Cats Late
Pensionaris of Holland upon obligation, which depends in the ordinary Court of
judicature at Amsterdam, as the suite of George Carew who solicites there daily
(...). 3000: 0: 0 Likewise another action depending againt the heirs of Peter
Boudean before the high Court of Judicature at the Hague upon an appeal brought
by old Peter Boudaen from a sentence against him at Middleburg at the suit of
James Boeve for the portion of his wife given by John Mon^y; which, with
Principal, interests and costs, (...) unto 7000. pounds Sterling and upwards.
7000: 0: 0 As also the action aforesaid against Jacob Pergens at the suit of
Mark Fletcher for 5500. pounds, and mteien thereof since the year 1649.
amounting altogether to the sumus of 12000: 0: 0 12000: 0: 0 146438: 19: 6

Upon all which actions the said Jacob Pe^gens and the heirs of Peter (...),
and the other Defendants have used all delatory means and sinister practices
many years together, purposely* to detain the goods and moneys (gotten into
their hands in trust) to the oppression and ruin of many Families in England
as as by the printed deductions of the several cases at large appears: And are
grown so wicked and reprobate to report, that the said actions and sums of
money (arising upon covenants contracts, Bills of Exchange, obligations and
Civil Commerce at Land) are extinguished and discharged by the Treaty at (...)
under the notion of spoils and depredations upon his Majesty's Subjects at Sea
and foreign parts of the World.

Justice delayed is Justice denied, and where there is a persistency in it,
Nations as well as particular persons are concerned. The greivances and
oppressions reflecting more upon the Sovereign Power that suffers it, then upon
the ordinary Courts of judicature where such practices are permitted. (...) 24.
of December. 1676.
Several Advertisments, concerning the Hollanders, in reference to their
performance of Contracts and agreements in National Treaties and
Administration of justice in these modern Times.
THe French King, having granted License to a Company of Merchants of Diep, to
trade to the East Indies, did set forth the Ship called d' Esperance bound for
Bantam, where having bought her Lading of Pepper, the Dutch East-India-Company
sent some Ships, and fired the said Ship, which was burnt with all her Lading;
whereupon those of Diep demanded satisfaction by their Procurator laques Jacob.
A Sentence was pronunced at Amsterdam on the 20 of June 1625. whereby the
East-India-Company were only condemned to pay for a third part of the Pepper
laden and burnt with the Ship, each bale of Pepper valued at 4. pieces of
eight, as also one third part of the Customs and charges paid in Lading them
for their transportation, from Bantam, wherewith, the Merchants being
unsatisfied, the Matter was left in statu quo.

2. In the Year 1648. by the general Treaty concluded at Munster, It was
agreed, between the most Catholic King, and the Lords the States General of
the United Provinces, that a Chamber my party should be erected with power to
decide all manner of differences, and d^sputes which were between the Subjects
of either side, and these were to hold their meetings or courts interchangably.
First for a certain time in the Spanish Dominions, and then the like time in
the States Dominions, which was executed for a while, but afterward came to
nothing; interest and passion overruling, they decided very few disputes. The
Hollanders would have all things interpreted to their own sense: Presuming that
the strongest party could make the best construction of dubious Matters.

3. In the Year 1660. the Admiralty Court of Amsterdam confiscated a Ship
belonging to Lubeck, upon pretense of carrying contraband Goods to Portugal,
notwithstanding the Master made it appear that he was bound for Galitia and not
Portugal; and the Owners having obtained a review of the cause, All the seven
Delegates adjuncts, which were all of them Eminent old Experienced Advocates
and Lawyers, declared jointly, that the Sentence was Erroneous: yet those of
the Admiralty persisted and maintained the Sentence against the opinion of the
Adjuncts. A true Example of Passion and Interest: vide Aytzema, in his 9. Book,
Page 1082.

4. In the Year 1654. the Portugalls took the Reciif in Brazill from the
Hollanders, being the only place that the West India Company had left of their
Conquest in that Country, which was cause of a war between them and Portugal.
In the Year 1659. the good Ship called the Golden Sun of Nantes, Capt. Nicolas
la Breton, being at Lisbon in Portugal, was fraighted by Mr. Abraham Jacobs an
English Factor, residing there, and laden with salt for Ri^n de Ienero, in
Brazill, from wence he was to return again to Lisbon with sugar, Hides, Tobacco
and wood; being all of them free goods of the growth of that Country; and
notwithstanding there was a Provisionall Treaty of Marine agreed between the
French King and the States General, in the Month of June 1657. Art. 3. (viz.)
that a free Ship should free all the Goods laden within her, though they
belonged to the Enemies of Each other; Provided they were not contraband, nor
bound to any place besieged and blocked up: Yet this Ship was seized at sea by
4 Zealand private men of war, and sent to Flushing, and the whole Lading
confiscated. But Monsr. de Thou the French Ambassador then at the Hague,
complaining thereof to the States General, declared that the King his Master
would give reprisalls against them, if they repaired it not, whereupon the Ship
and all the Goods, properly belonging to the Captain and Mariners, were
restored, and his Freight paid, but all the best of the whole Lading, whereof a
great part belonged to the English Merchants, and Factors, remained confiscated
without satisfaction.

5. In like manner the said Zealanders viz Capt. Philip Ras Toussein le sage,
Matthew Quaerts and Alberf Iansen, Capers in company against Portugal seized
the Golden Sun St. Malo, Experience, and the Golden Falcon of London, in the
year 1660. all Laden with sugars, from Brazill, bound for Lisbon (upon account
of English Merchants and Factors resident in London and Lisbon, viz Abraham
Jacobs, Robert Carr, Thomas Bostock, William Peche, Robert Parker, Roger
Bradhill, Christopher Trenchard, William Nottle and William Trustell) where
they were obliged to pay the King his Customs, brought them into Zealand, where
the Ships and Goods were confiscated. Even as the Ship called Ann and Margaret,
belonging to Mr. George Torriano, Mr. Richard We^^comb, and Mr. Nicholas Warren
laden with Bees Wax and Hydes etc, was taken by Jacob Iacobson Commander of the
Ship called the Gelderland and confiscated against all Justice and Common
right, to the Damage of the English 50000 pound sterling and upwards.
Insolences and Robberies beyond all Examples of other Nations.

6. In the Month of August, in the Year 1672. there was laden in an English
built Ship called the Flying Hare of London^ whereof Captain Thomas Blake was
Master, Several fats of copper Kettles, hogsheads of spice and packs of Linen
Cloth to the value of 4000 pounds sterling and upwards bound for London from
Amsterdam upon account of Mr. Henry Hampson, Mr. Peter Harringhook, Mr. James
Brown, Mr. Hovener, Mr. Joseph Hill, Mr. Thomas Maiden and others all
Englishmen born, who shipped the said goods by the consent and permission of the
Lords of the Admiralt^ in Amsterdam, and paid Custom for the same. Yet the
Lords of the Admiralty of Friesland seized the said Ship in their Harbor in
her passage to the Sea and confiscated the said goods contrary to the 32
Article of the Treaty at Breda, Notwithstanding all the Examples and presidents
of diverse Ships and goods of both sides that were delivered by the King of
great Britaign and the States General in conformity to the said Article, after
that time.

7. In the Year 1674. A peace being concluded on the 9. of February, between
the King of great Britaign and the States General, It was agreed that all Acts
of Hostility should cease at the Expiration of 12. days after the Publication
(which was the 6. of March following from the Ness in Norway, to the Soundings
of the English Channel westward, and from thence to Tangier in six weeks. Yet
Notwithstanding, two private Men of war of Flushing (viz) Peter Marcus
Commander of the (...), and Daniel Schuyer, Commander of the Mearmaid, who had
knowledge of the Publication of the peace, and had a printed Copy thereof
aboard, did on the 10. of April following seiz and take the Ship called Joseph
of Bristoll, whereof Willam Jones was Master (coming from Virginia and bound
for Bristol) within the Soundings; which said Ship with her lading of Tobacco
they carried to Flushing aforesaid, and obtained an order of the Admiralty
Court to sell both Ships and goods, without hearing the Master or Claimors of
the said goods, contrary to the 16 Article of the Treaty of Commerce and Peace;
And some months afterward confiscated the Ship and goods, to the damage of
the Master and Owners 6000 pound sterling and upwards; although they gave in
evidence and clear Proofs that the Ship was taken within the Soundings;
whereupon the Claimers obtained an order for a review of the Sentence, which
review by agreement in the last Treaty of Marine, Article 12. is to be made
before a Committee of the States General at the Hague, and not before the
Lords of the Admiralty at Middleburgh: yet the Lords Magistrates of Flushing
(some of which are Owners of the Capers) will not submit thereunto: pretending
that they consented not to any such Article in the said Treaty: so the Case
remains in statu, as it appears at large by a printed Deduction thereof.

8. In the Year 1662, by a solemn Treaty it was positively agreed, that the
Island Poleron was to be delivered upon demand; And that satisfaction should be
made by Amicable conferences for the two Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona
adventura; but neither of them was performed. Whereupon Special Reprisals were
granted under the great Seal of England concerning those Ships; and in the Year
1667. by the Treaty at Breda the English were to be at liberty to depart with
their Families and goods out of Surinam but were obstructed contrary to the
Treaty; Hollanders being of Machiavells opinion, that Treaties of Common
Alliance bind no longer then the Convenience of either party obliges to
observe the conditions. Forbearance is no Payment. And there is nothing can be
restaurative or healing to the subjects of England in many cases, but a
sovereign remedy in Parliament for their relief.

9. In the last Treaty of Peace concluded at London, 1674. It was positively
agreed by the 9. Article that there should be a regulation of Commerce and
Navigation in all parts of the world, Especially in the East Indies; Which the
Hollanders say is implicitly done and provided for by the 5. Article in the
Treaty Marine concluded in the same Year: And that they have a declaration
apart from his Majesty or his Ministers of State that It is Satisfactory
concerning the 8 and 9. Articles of that last Peace made and ratified between
the King of Great Britaign and the States General, which mentions nothing of
the spice trade whereof the English Company had a third part by Covenant, nor
of any tribute for fishing upon the British Coast, (which the Hollanders say
was suspended upon the Prince of Orange his account) only It is directly
declared by the words of the 5 Article that the subjects of England may with
all Freedom and safety Sail through all Navigable rivers unto any Harbors or
Ports of Princes and States in Amity or Neutrality with England or the States
General whereof the Flemish Ports cannot be Exempted, or the Navigable Rivers
to them be stopped up, without an apparent breach of the peace. More clear or
larger Expressions could not be uttered to open the Scheld, than is
demonstrated in the 5. Article of that Treaty Marine.

IN the year 1666. A Fly-boat laden with salt and Brandy bound for Amsterdam
was seized near Portland-Bay and brought into Chichester (by Captain Tyrence
Byrne under a special English Commission for Reprisalls against the Hollanders)
Where the Master and Mariners upon Examination confessed they were bound for
Amsterdam, that the Ship was Dutch built, and lately named the God^lieve of
Brugis, that most of the seamen were Hollanders born and inhabitants there: Yet
the Ship and goods were claimed by Peter Gerrard on behalf of Mr. Michael
vander Planken, Andreas vande Bogard and Johan Neitz of Brugis; Whereupon the
Judge of the Admiralty decreed that there was good cause of seizure, and that
the Ship and goods should be restored upon Bayl to abide the sentence upon
hearing the cause, unto which the Captors consented, but the Claimers refused
to take the Ship and goods accordingly, having arrested the Captain for 1000
pound Damages by writ out of the Admiralty Court, who had given sufficient
Bayl to answer the Suit: Afterward the Ship and goods were Freed and restored.
Then Peter Victorine reclaimed the Damages on behalf of the said pretended
Proprietors of Brugis (Waving the Process against Capt. Byrne upon the arrest)
and exhibited Articles against Sr. Edmond Turnor and George Carew (whose
Commission Byrne had against the States General and their Subjects) in a new
Process jointly with Byrne and Jonathan Frost Owner of Byrne ship, and procured
Mr. Francklyn and Sr. Walter Walker to Frame an impertinent Sentence for 1800
pound sterling. Damages which was pronounced against all four for spoiling the
Voyage, Leakage of Wine and some imbe^ilment of salt and; Ropes although it
appeared that the whole lading cost not 300 pound sterling. From which sentence
Byrn and Frost appealed to the Ordinary Delegates. But Turnor and Carew
appealed specially by themselves, and Delegates with Adjuncts (Judges of the
common Law) being appointed, they craved a nullity of the Sentence against them
with Costs for vexation, more Especially for that it being repugnant to law and
reason that third persons should suffer for personal injuries when the
offenders (if they were guily) had given good caution to answer the Damage
upon the arrest; all which depends in Statu for the Judges resolution upon the
Process. This case is only added to show what Favors Flemmings and Hollanders
find in the Admiralty of England, notwithstanding Englishmen are so unkindly
treated at Flushing and Oastend.

IT is very remarkable that at the general Treaty in Munster A Peace was
concluded between Spain and the States of the 7. United Provinces on the 30.
day of January 1648. A memorable observation: That the Spanish King, Duke of
Austria, and Bourgundy, should extinguish and relinquish his right and
Soveragnity in those Provinces on the same day that the King of Great Britaign
was maliciously cut off from his Crown and Kingdoms by his own Subjects: And
that the French King, who had so long continued in leagues offensive and
defensive with the Hollanders against Spain, should be excluded in that Treaty,
and left in a Bloody war with Austria and Spain, contrary to the Dutch
covenants. And that now the French King who, claims the whole Spanish
Netherlands (in right of Mary daughter of Philip the Fourth his Wife, heir of
the house of Bourgundy) was before content by agreement to divide the same with
Holland. Indignities offered to Princes are not often remembered yet seldom
forgotten. The Privileges granted to Englishmen for discovering the North-East
passage to Russia were taken away at Arch Angel by the Grand Duke of Mosco
unhappily upon a letter from a Prince in Exile, to the great Damage of the
Russia Company, whose trade is since spoiled by the Hollanders. Even as the
East Countrey-trade, the Smyrna-trade, the Italian trade, and all Others.

Whosoever shall enjoy the Sovereignty and Dominion of the Spanish Netherlands,
or any part thereof, must be obliged to Ratify and confirm the Bourgondian
Treaty with the Crown of England, or be abandoned from the Liberties, benefits,
and Privileges upon the English Coasts, and the Advantages of those useful
Harbors, Ports and Havens, upon all occasions or Emergencies.

Hereafter follows the third Part of this Treatise.

Several necessary Advertisments concerning the improvement of Navigation and
Trade.

More especially the Manufactures of England, called the old and new Draperies.

ALSO Twelve select Articles of the Treaty at Munster concluded in the year
1648. (between the King of Spain, and the States of the Seven United
Provinces,) viz. 5th 10. 12. 14. 15. 16. 17. 63. 64. 66. 67. and 68th Articles,
which incroached so much upon the Spanish Netherlands, and the rights and
Privileges of England in their trade and Navigation,

Properly debated apart in this following Treatise.

Ius permanet semper nec unquam mutatur, Lex vero scripta saepius.

Printed in the Year 1676.

To the Honorable Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in the Parliament of England.
Worthy Senators,
YOu being the Third Estate of the Land, and most concerned to look into the
mysteries of trade and commerce; I presumed to dedicate this Third part of my
Book to the prospect of your most piercing sights and understanding. Pardon me
that I begin with an Allegory to tell you, that Trade the fair mistress of the
world has been courted by diverse Princes and Potentates of the greatest
Kingdoms and Empires that are now antiquated, or through their own neglects
forsaken. Old Rome and Carthage disputed the quarrel a long time for the
favor of that fair Empress until one of them fell by the sword. Grand Cairo
was the Mart of the East, before the Portugals found out a more Easy way for
the conduct of her Merchandises than by Caravans. The Ancient State of Venice,
that conquered three Kingdoms in their flourishing time of trade was first
lessned by Lisbon; Afterward Brugis and Antwerp were the chief Magazins for
goods and Merchandises of all sorts, until Holland blockt up those Flemmish
ports from the English Navigation by Sluys and Lillo. Yet this Beautiful Lady
will not be forced, she is as subject to change as the various habits and
dispositions of men are subject to alter. Wherefore of late, she resolved to
remove her station from Holland into a better climate amongst people of good
tempers and constitutions, and at last was inclined to settle her self in
England: knowing that Great Britain was best able to vindicate her honor and
reputation in all quarters of the Earth, if they would not fall into factions,
prejudice and passion at home, but court her like true Englishmen that are both
Soldjers, Gentlemen and Merchants. Now to leave the Allegory, and come to the
substance, there is a fair opportunity to lessen the Hollanders by keeping down
Amsterdam with a rising blow. It is most certain that England can subsist of it
self better then any other Kingdom whatsoever: And if the Ambition, Avarice and
Envy of other Nations had not prompted Englishmen to defend themselves by force
of Arms and Navall power, the lofty trees might have remained still as
Ornaments in the Groves and fields, and the Earth had not been so often ripped
open for Lead and Iron to pierce the bowels of poor Mortals.

But since the Laws of Nature teach all men to preserve themselves, and by
provision to prevent any others that might invade their interests and
properties, I have made bold to hint some things in these following
Advertisments concerning the better improvement of Navigation and English
Manufactures, that may be very useful toward the more Honorable support of
the Crown and Government, the increase of the public weal, and the diminution
of those Powers that have been both your Enemies already, and are likely to be
so again upon any occasion they can find for advantages to break with the Crown
of England. There is an old Byword in Spain, when they would afrighten or
quiet their infants, Beware-Drake and in France for that purpose they say,
Beware-Talbot; but the Hollanders dread nothing more then an union of the three
Estates of England in Compliance with the King, which God grant may continue
for the accomplishment of those Acts, which will Eternize the Glory and memory
of this Parliament to all future ages.

Right worthy Patriots Antwerp December, 15, 1676. I am Your most faithful and
obedient Servant GEORGE CAREW.

Several necessary Advertisments concerning the improvement of Navigation and
the Woollen Manufactures of England.
HEnry the fourth of France, soon after he came to the Crown, advised with his
council h^w he might abate the power and splendour of the Flemings, which so
often gave diversions to the French: Whereupon one of the Lords of the Council
answered him, that his Majesty should out of all the Women's thumbs who brought
in such an infinite treasure into the Netherlands from Spain and other Nations
by their spinning and weaving: But since that time the Hollanders and France
have so dismembered Flanders and Brabant that remained poor and industrious,
while the Grave Council at Madrid suffered most part of the rest to be lost
rather then they would enter into a League offensive and defensive with England
against their Here^itary Enemies; when France, Holland and Denmark were all in
open ware against the King of Great Britain in the year 1666. until the Treaty
at Breda which the Hollanders record in their Anualls for a most glorious peace.

The great encouragement for the setting up the Woollen Manufactures in England
proceeded from the multitude of Workmen, and their wives and Children that fled
out of Brabant and Flanders. Whereupon all the Flemish Women at home do
maliciously report of the female sex in England to this day, that they are
Lazy, Liquorish and ^^^^herous, and do even reproach the English Nuns in
Flanders with eating the fat of the Land, and doing no work pretending that
other Cloisters do more then get their bread, although they are of the best
families in the Low Countries and sufficiently endowed with Lands and rents
besides. But the Argument is against them: for spinning, knitting and sowing
are arrived to such perfections in England, that no Nation in the World exceed
English Women in those arts. Yet a strange fate attends all English
Manufactures which are fallen in their values to a wonder, and can not be
raised again to their former price but by a regular way of trading.

A particular Merchant shall never raise the price of Colchester Bays again,
that a Company in a short time may accomplish. The like may be done in Cloth,
Serges, ttersies etc. if men would go the right way to the Mar^e^, and throw
down the Bancks and Styles that were lately set up to the prejudice of the
public.

The great objections at London must first be taken away before I come to the
points of regulation in trade; Companies being generally looked upon in England
as Monopolies when the trade is carried on with a joint stock, which is a
vulgar error. As also a grand mistake in the Cloathi^r and others that exclaim
against the Merchants who deal with their own stocks respectively under a
regulation. The Grasicr the Fermer the Cloathier W^aver (...) etc. do still
allege that such Merchants will not only make forraigners their subjects, but
Englishmen the^ Slaves under a regulation; where they will give what they
please for all goods they export, and fell their (...) imported for what they
list: those shall be answered in order after the proposalls for regulation; and
then (...) demonstrations be given that all trade not regularly governed will
soon decay or be spoiled. In the mean time these things may be well observed as
follow:

1. That the Merchant never got more by English Manufactures then he did in
those days when he gave a good (...) for all goods at home. 2. That most men of
judgment find the greatest encouragement to buy when the (...) of England are
upon the rising hand. 3. The greatest losses which have scandulously happened to
the (...) Merchants in late years, have come by overtrading and cloying the
Markets at home, and abroad; which mischief extended to all men that had any
dependency upon trade. But there I meet with another objecion that the poor
must be kept at work or else they will be unveriable or perish for hunger: as
to this I shall also give an (...) answer; and likewise prescribe an infallible
remedy against that distemper, to the quiet and satisfaction of all poo^ies
both rich and poor.

It is granted that by the old rule in Manufactures, a quantity of Wool that
cost at the first hand an English Shilling, when it was wrought into Cloth fit
for Exportation, pei^^ed sir Shillings: so the public got 5 clear, which was
added to the stock of the Nation, although several persons might lose by their
ill management in trade.

This rule has lately met with several sad exceptions in England: although it
will bear the test in other Na^his as to several Manufactures, especally in
France (the Canker of Europe, that loughs at all the World, in s^^que cant
souce per ton) For example, in fine Dowlaces Since, Drugets and other Franch
Manufactures sent for Spain in great quantities to be transported from thence
to the Spanish West Indies, Five Shillings person is paid to the French King
upon all Strangers Ships that taks Brandy, Salt, Wines etc. from Franch.
the French Merchants will not take the (...) or any part of the effects in
Malago Mines, Fruits, Oils etc. but in Bills of Exchange and pieces of eight
that imriches a Kingdom more then the importation of any goods that are
consumed amongst themselves. But this will also meet with a material objection
as to the diminishing of the Kings Customs, the best supporter in the public
charge of in the navies royal. This shall likewise be answered in its proper
time and place.

The Hollanders in the fine thread and Linen (whereof there is a great
consumption in England) make a greater augmentation by the art and labor of
the workmen then the English do in any kind of Woollen Clothes, or Stufs;
nevertheless the Dutch will have their money remitted six or eight months
before hand to pay the Weavers, Sleachers, Upmakers, etc. so that there is a
vast disproportion between the Dutch Linen trade, and the English Mo^llen
trade. The Hollanders set their poor at work with English stock, and the
English goods are sold for time upon long payments in many places, which
beggars both the Cloathier and Merchant. Besides the advantages given thereby
to foreign Nations, that having so much of the English stock in their hands,
oftentimes make the King ^eild to dishonorable conditions in treaties of peace
to preserve his Subjects goods and moneys from confiscation.

Spice and Pickled Herrings (those two Dutch Mineralls) would support the
Hollanders if they had no other trade or Navigation to subsist upon: therefore
Englishmen that are so indulgent to the Hollanders do not rightly apprehend the
case, Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon and Mace, (which are all forcibly engrossed by
the Dutch) take one with another, cost the East India Company 5 stivers a
pound, and are sold for 55 stivers ready money in Banck: and Communibus annis
the spice brings in 300000 pounds into the Country by Cash from all Nations,
which must buy so much in Banck-money for the Company. The Callicoes and other
Indian Manufactures, Druggs, Saltpeter, Tin and Copper etc. this year imported
in 15 Ships amounted to more then a million of Sterling money besides: as
appears by the general Cargo of the Ships and their Lading hereafter mentioned.

I have observed in Mazeland-Sluys, Del^s-haven, Enckhuysen, Ziericksea,
Flaerding, Schiedam and other Fishing-Towns in the United Provinces, when the
Herring Bu^ses and Dogger-boats returned from their Voyages, there is the same
regulation in the Sale of their Fish, as is observed by the Spaniards in the
West Indies at the arrival of the Ships out of Spain for the Plate. First, an
inquiry is made by the General in the West Indies what goods are brought; then
such a price and value is set upon them according to the quantity of Silver
that is gotten that year out of the Mines. If it prove a plentiful year for
Silver, then there is a good price for the Manufactures and other Merchandises:
if not, it is otherwise.

The Herrings and Salt Codd when the Fishermen come home must be presently
sold, and the Magistrates of the respective towns set the prizes according to
the quantities that are taken, and they are all sold in a day or two, if there
were fifty Ships lading and upwards at a sail; in regard the money must be
distributed amongst so many hundred people in every place; as to Brewers,
Bakers, Coupers, Smiths, Ship-Carpenters, Net-makers, Tanners, Ropemakers, etc.
besides the poor Fishermen for their wages, according to their hire or
adventures of their labor, being both Seamen and Fishermen. And it is free at
those general sales for any man to buy that has ready money or credit in
Banck. Then the Merchants compute what quantity will serve for the consumption
of their own Towns in Holland, which are set apart; the rest stored up in
Pack-houses, and against Lent-Markets they are sent into France, Germany,
East-Countrey, Spanish Netherlands, etc. This last year the Fishermen made bu^
indifferent Voyages; the Shurks that hanted after the Herrings did so spoil
their Nets and devour their fish. From Scotland and Ireland great quantities of
Salt, Salmon and Herings are transported with diverse Manufactures, and other
stayle goods of those Countries unto Rotterdam and Camp-Veer: Although the
Chief consumptions for those goods are in Flanders, Brabant, and the rest of
the Spanish Nertherlands and confines of Germany. Then considering the several
tolls upon them in passing through the States territories, beside customs,
inwards, outward, and also into the Spanish ports afterward, and all other
petty charges, 10 per cent is lost out of the principal at the first which
might be all saved if the goods went directly to Brugis or Antwerp, under a
regulation and find ready money at the Market price for their lading.

Whereas now the goods being left in the hands of Hollanders for sail, 6 per
cent is presently allowed for money-advance to buy Dutch ^light Ships, ropes,
and takling, Flaf, Spice and Drugs etc. for returns; that inconclusion when
accounts are made up at the next voyage, which the poor Scotch and Irish are
obliged to make unto the same ports (or lose their effects left there) they
find so many bad debts and other defalcations; that upon the matter, with all
their Merchandise and Commerce they do but toil and work only for the
Hollanders.

England ought to be the Magazin for Scotland and Ireland, in regard the Crown
of England defends them both at Sea, and can furnish them both with all
foreign goods much cheaper then they shall fetch them from Holland; where many
times they are frozen up 3 or 4 months in the year, and have spent all their
money they got in the summer with their thin-sided Ships of Sardam whose tender
Ribbs are often broken with the Ice in the Southern Sea. The Scotch having
liberty to fail in forraign-built Ships will never build any good Vessels at
home or set their own people at work upon any materials that are useful for
Navigation. The Irish are as bad, and have the same qualities in destroying the
English Navigation by naturalizing Dutch Ships. As to my knowledge, a
Magistrate of Limbrick being at Flushing in the year 1675. gave 13. pasports
under his hand and seal of his office to several Zealanders for their Ships to
pass free as Vessels belonging to that Irish Port. But as for the Scotch, they
are so dextrous in that art, that several hundred pasports have been given out
at Rotterdam and Campheer in one year with blanks for the names of the Masters.
A French Privateer in the space of one month met with seven and twenty Ships
bound to France and Flanders all from Kercady a Port in Scotland; although 3
parts of the Seamen were Dutchmen, pet a Scotch Master hired from Rotterdam
colors both Ship and goods. Wherefore if there be not acts of Parliament made
in Scotland and Ireland as well as in England for the better regulation
concerning their Navigations where all their Ships and Pynaces ought to be
registered in every Port, and all Seamen and Fishermen from the age of ten years
to seaventy, duly entered with severe penalties and punishments upon all persons
that should transgress against those rules and ordinances there prescribed,
then Forraigners will still plough with English, Scotch and Irish heifers.

Now to the great shame of such Englishmen be it spoken who at home and abroad
have used all their endeavors possible to spoil the English Navigation:
Amongst many hundred examples, I will demonstrat one, whereby the Reader may
take his measures concerning the rest, and see how English men that should have
taken opportunity of the times to enrich themselves and their own Country, have
given the advantage to Strangers. I am unwilling to nominate in this place
several very considerable Merchants in London who have hired out their names
at Rotterdam, Dunkirk, Oast-End, and several other Ports where Strangers goods
have been shipped under their coverts, and even the Vessels owned for English
that never were in any English Port; yet they have passed courant oftentimes
for free Ships and free goods.

A Brief relation concerning Capt. Edward Cotterell, and several Merchants in
Rotterdam, Middleburg, Flushing, Camp-Veer and Duinkirk.
CAptain Edward Cotterell an Englishman who had formerly served in one of his
Majesty's Frega^s, being at Rotterdam in the month of December. 1675. with a
Merchant Dogger-Boat about eighty ton whereof he was called both Owner and
Master, which Vessel he had named the Edward and Olive of London was fraighted
at Rotterdam by two Brokers that dealt for French Merchants, and took in his
lading of Salt, Salmon, Soap, Sugar, Barrell-Codd, fine black Leydens Cloth,
Leydens Stuffs and Stockings with several sorts of spice and other goods to
the value of 3000 pounds sterling and upwards, who signed all the bills of
lading for Dunkirk whither he was bound under the Notion of a free Ship, yet
most of the Chief goods were shipped (as they pretended) upon Merchants accounts
living in London, and so bills of loading signed accordingly.

The Insinuation and Protest of Mr. George Carew: delivered to the Magistrates
of the Principal Cities and Towns in Holland and Zealand, who have voices in
the Government of those Provinces, and likewise to the Directors in the several
Chambers of the East-and West India Companies there respectively.
UPon the second day of February, in the year of our Lord, 1676. English style,
George Carew of Richmond in the County of Surrey in the Kingdom of England Esquire
Administrator of the Goods and Chattels, debts and credits of Sr. William
Courten and Sr. Paul Pyndar Knights deceased, (with there Willsannexed) and
jointly Assignee with others, of Sr. Edward Littleton, and likewise of the
Commissioners upon the statutes made concerning Banckrupts against William
Courten, Son and heir of Sr. William Courten, in right of all the goods,
Credits, and Effects whatsoever belonging to the said William Courten in any
parts of the world: and general Procurator of the Proprietors and Adventurers
with Sr. William Courten in his Enterprises to the East Indies, China, and
Iapan; In the several qualities aforesaid: The said George Carew personally
appeared the day and year abovesaid before me Godfrey van Hill, Notary Public
(sworn and admitted by the Sovereign Provincial Court of Holland,) residing in
the City of Amsterdam, and in the presence of the Witnesses hereunder written,
did solemnly and openly assert and declare the matters contained in the Aricles
following, and protest against all persons whatsoever hereafter mentioned in
the Provinces of Holland and Zealand, for all damages, costs, and Interests
already sustained or that may be sustained for or by reason thereof.

1. WHEREAS King Charles the first (of ever blessed memory) in the year 1635.
by His letters patents under the great Seal of England, for the reasons and
Especial considerations therein contained, granted License with certain
Privileges unto Sr. William Courten and a Select Company of Merchants of
London, and other adventurers in a joint stock with him to trade unto the
East Indies, China, and Iapan, and parts adjacent, in consequence whereof
several Factories were settled at Maecao, Canton, Carwar and other places, by
virtue of contracts with the King of Spain, and Viceroys in those other
Kingdoms, Empires and Dominions respectively.

2. That several unkind Offices being done unto Captain John Weddall and
Nathanaell Mountney Commanders of the two Ships named the Dragon and Catharine
by the Officers and Ministers of the East India Company of the Netherlands in
their Navigations upon the Coast of India from Port to Port on their trading
Voyages, and thre^^ning the said Weddall and Mountney, that if they arrived in
any places where the Dutch East India Company traded, that they would affront
them, and watch for their returning home, and by what accident or misfortune,
(which as yet is not publicly known or discovered) the said two Ships being
richly laden for the account of the said Sr. William Courten and Company to the
value of one hundred and sixty thousand pounds Sterling, and coming from Iapan
bound for England in the year 1638. So miscarryed, that from the time of their
departure to this day the Proprietors never heard what became of the men,
Ships, or Goods.

3. That afterward the said William Courten Son and heir of Sr. William, with
the rest of the Proprietors and Adventurers, in the year 1641. Set forth
(amongst others) the Ships named the Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura
with moneys and merchandise for supply of the said factories.

4. That William Courten in the month of April 1642. having assigned his share
and stock in the said Ships and Company to Sr. Edward Littleton for payment of
debts, and Sr. Edward Littleton in the month of December 1642. having assigned
several sums of money out of the said Ships lading and fraights unto Sr. Paul
Pyndar, the said Ships and their lading were surprised in the year 1643. by the
Officers of the East India Company of the Netherlands, who took them into their
possession with all the books, papers, writings, contracts and journals on
board, and detained and converted them to their own use, against all the Laws
of property and common right.

5. That William Courten in the year 1644. Absented himself from his Creditors
and became insolvent, yet combined with Jacob Pergens of Amsterdam in the year
1648. unto whom Courten made a subsequent assignment of his share and stock
aforesaid, which indirect practice being come to the knowledge of Sr. Paul
Pyndar and Sr. Edward Littleton, they intimated their right and property by
Jonas Abeels unto the East India Company of the Netherlands, interdicting the
Directors at their Chamber in Amsterdam from any transaction with the said
Pergens, protesting for all costs, damages and interests, as by the Notarial
Acts appears: yet notwithstanding in the year 1649. Pergens and the Directors
of the Company made a colorable agreement for Courtens pretense of Action, for
Eighty five thousand gilders, upon Caution of Peter Boudaen to indemnifie the
Company against Pyndar and others.

6. That in the year 1660. King Charles the Second being restored to His Crown
and Kingdoms, the Proprietors and joint Adventurers with Sr. William Courten
addressed themselves to His Majesty for relief concerning the said spoils and
damages, who recommended the same to the States General, and provided by a
special agreement in the 15. Article of the Treaty concluded at London, in the
ye^r 1662. that those damages and spoils should be Amicably composed by
conferences of State at the Hague between Sr. George Downing and the Deputies
of the States General for English affairs: Whereupon Mr. John de Wit and Mr.
Peter van Dam Advocate of the East India Company with several Directors had
sundry conferences and debates with Sr. George Downing in the years 1663. and
1664. in the Chamber of the States General: but the East India Company would
not come to any possitive Agreement concerning the said damages, then his
Majesty in the year following granted special reprisals unto Sr. Edmund
Turnor* and this Insinuant their Executors and assigns to be in full force and
effect until the sum of 151612. pound Sterling should be recovered with Costs
and Damages from the States General and their Subjects: as by the Copy of the
said letters Patents under the (...) Seal of England hereunto annexed appears.

7. That James Boeve at the request of this Insinuant, in the year 1666. gave a
Copy of the said Patent unto Mr. Peter van Dam to (...) the Company that they
might understand how His Majesty had granted a power out of himself unto (...)
persons, according to the Law of Nations, and so made the Sovereign demand into
a special grant upon (...) which there is no averrment,) whereof the Company
was obliged to take notice, and that nothing (...) or make void the said
Patent, but satisfaction of the damages or a composition with the (...) the
said grant, (wherein the King was not deceived) being such a Judicial Act no
ways repugnant to the Laws of God or Man, whereby those spoils and damages
done and committed in times of Peace and common Amity, should be recovered or
reprised in the like times, if the East India Company would not be inclined to
make restitution by amicable means.

8. That notwithstanding the advice and admonitions, the East India Company of
the Netherlands would not tak^ any Cognizance thereof, but on the contrary John
de Wit and others, upon the surprise at Chattam, presumed that such a solemn
grant could be mortified and extinguished by general words at Breda, without
other satisfaction then new aggravations, for which the land mourns.

9. That in the year 1671. the Proprietors and Interessed in the Bona Esperanza
and Henry Bona Adventura having made new addresses to his Majesty in Council,
the said Cause was revived by several orders, references, and reports, all
signifying, that the King was obliged in Justice and Honor to require
satisfaction from the States General and their Subjects for the said Ships
according as it was settled in the said letters Patents. The States General
having cancelled all treaties by breach of Covenants.

10. That in pursuance thereof, the Original Orders and Reports and His
Majesty's letters were sent express with this Iusinuant and others, to the
Plenipotentiaries from the King at Utrecht and Cologne to insist upon
satisfaction accordingly, the King having intimated therein, that His care in
this affair should be as much to protect his Subjects in their Just rights as
to Assist them in the recovery thereof, all which came to the knowledge of the
States General. The States of Holland having taken away the said papers and
orders from this Insinuant, whom they detained a close Prisoner at the Hague
twenty months, where he and his servants were affronted contrary to the Laws
of Nations having Pasports from the States Commissioners at Hampton Court. on
the 5. of Iulij 1672.

11. That to take away all differences and disputes concerning the said Ships
and their lading, the States General (as they do allege) in the last Treaty at
London agreed to pay 800000. Pattacons at 4. several payments, the first being
only made, whereof this Insinuant received fifty pounds from Alderman Backwell,
by order of the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Viscount Latimer, Lord High
Treasurer of England, and 150. pound from the States of Holland, toward his
extraordinary expenses and incident disbursments during his Imprisonment.

12. That the Insinuant upon his releasment (without any prejudice to his
further right and demands against all other persons,) assigned 5500. pound
Sterling to Mr. Mark Fletcher of Middleburgh, which money was resting in, the
hands of Jacob Pergens a trustee of Courten, (being particularly granted before
to Sr. Paul Pyndar) in lessening of the debt and damages concerning the said
Ships their fraights and lading, the payment whereof Pergens also obstructed by
extrajudiciall and impertinent orders of the States of Holland.

13. That although this Insinuant has the greatest confidence in the Justice
and Honor of the King (who can do no wrong) yet being obliged in this Case to
use his diligence wherein so many Families of Orphans and Widows are concerned,
(whose bread is eaten by strangers) the Insinuant therefore has not been
wanting to address his humble requests severally to the King of Great Britain,
and the States General concerning the same.

14. That this Insinuant being further obliged, by the importunities of several
Creditors claiming under his Administration to put your Lordships of the common
Council of the several and respective Cities and Towns in Holland and Zealand,
in remembrance, as also the Directors of the several and respective Chambers of
the East and West India Companies of the Netherlands, that until satisfaction
and reparation be made according to the true intent and purport of the said
letters Patents, the demands continue upon record (in statu quo) the price of
so much English blood and treasure already spent in the vindication thereof.

15. That the supreme Court of Judicature at the Hague having denied the
Insinuant admittance in a cause of intervention against Jacob Pergens upon a
bond of 3000. pound, wherein Sr. Jacob Catts late Chancellor of Holland stood
bound unto Sr. William Courten; The Insinuant was renvoyed or removed to the
Magistrates of Amsterdam as Competent Judges of Pergens, who had made his
exception of Burger-right, where the Insinuant was ordered to sue him;
Nevertheless both parties having proceeded in Amsterdam and brought the Cause
into a state for sentence, yet the Scheepens or Judges refused to pronounce the
same; Although the Insinuant constantly solicited the Lords thereunto
throughout the whole year 1676. Where at last they alleged that the States of
Holland had interdicted them from doing any Justice therein, as by the
deduction of the Case appears.

16. That the Scheepens or Judges of Middleburgh and also the supreme Court of
Judicature at the Hague, have severally delayed and denied this Insinuant and
Mr. John White and Mr. James Boeve, the due administration of Justice and
Equity upon diverse Judicial Acts and decrees of the Prerogative Court of
England whereby they were sufficiently empowered to require an account of Peter
Boudaen of Middleburgh Merchant deceased, and of his Sons and Heirs for several
vast sums of money drawn out of England by Sr. Peter Courten in Company with
Sr. William Courten and John Moncy upon their Linen trade and other
Merchandises, whereupon the Kings Subjects were not only defrauded, but the
Judicature of England wronged by those Sinister Practices, fomented by Jacob
Pergens, Pieter Boudaen and his Sons. The Insinuant therefore on the 6. day of
November, 1675. made an interdiction and protest at the several Chambers of the
East- and West India Companies in Middleburgh prohibiting the Directors in the
said Chambers to make any reparitions of moneys (Pendente Lite) upon any
Obligations or Actions unto Mr. John Boudaen, Peter Boudaen, Walter Boudaen,
Henry Boudaen, Catharine Boudaen and Constantia Boudaen, Sons and Daughters of
Pieter Boudaen, or to transfer or aleniate any such Action or Obligation
belonging to the said Boudaens or either of them, for that it appeared upon
record in England, (as a Capital offense for which Sr. William Courten was
committed to Prison) that several great quantities of gold (which Sr. William
Courten had taken up at interest of his Creditors) was transported to Sr. Peter
Courten at Middleburgh, who had indirectly employed the same in purchasing of
Original Actions in the East- and West India Companies, and that since his
death, the said Peter Boudaen and his Sons taking advantages of the Civil
wars in England and the Iniquities of these times, have wholly refused to
account for the sum of 122138. pounds Sterling gotten into their hands, as by
the balance of the Books kept in England appears, and notwithstanding the said
Insinuation, interdiction and protest was read up H. van Rijckegem Notary
Public in the Chamber of the East India Company at Middleburgh before Mr.
Gillis (...), Jacob Hoorn, Mr. Daniel Fannius and Alexander de Munck Directors
of the Company and ordered by the whole College to be registered in their Books,
and that this Insinuant did also on the 3. March 1676. new style, (...) a
presentation to the Magistrates of Middelburgh in writing to avoid all further
troubles and inconveniences, that (...) differences, and accounts might be
referred unto neutral Merchants and others there under mutual Obligations to
abide their award, and final determinations, yet the said Boudaens have
obstinately refused to come to any account, or to referr the same, but in
contempt of all Laws and Prosecutions, admonitions and recommendations
whatsoever do keep the Effects of Sr. William Courten, and his Sons Estates in
their hands, to the prejudice of this Insinuant and all other Creditors
claiming the same.

WHerefore this Insinuant, being also obliged by Sacred Oaths and Covenants in
the Prerogative Court to use his utmost endeavors for satisfaction of the said
Creditors (who daily quicken him by their memorials) does solemny protest, on
the behalf of himself and the rest of the Proprietors, and all other persons
whatsoever, (whose moneys were lent upon the several Obligations of Sr. William
Courten, William Courten Esquire his Son, Sr. Edward Littleton, the late Earl of
Bridgwater, Sr. Paul Pyndar, Samuel Bonnell and David Goubard, yet standing out
amounting unto two hundred and fifty thousand pounds Sterling and upwards) for
all damages, Costs and Interest sustained already or that shall be sustained
by reason of the premises, or any part thereof, against the worshipful
Magistrates and Common Council of the several Cities, and Towns in Holland
and Zealand, that have their deputies in those States Provincial, or Council of
State, Provincial Court of Justice, or Supreme Court of Judicature, at the
Hague respectively, and especially against the Magistrates of Amsterdam and
Middleburgh, and the Directors of the East India Company there; In Witness
whereof the Insinuant has hereunto set his hand the day and year aforesaid.

Declared and Subscribed in the Presence of George Carew. Robert Parker. Henry
Meoles. Godfrey van Hill Notary Public.


Mutatis Mutandis delivered in Dutch to the 18. several Cities in Holland,
(viz) Dort, Haerlem, Delft, Leyden, Amsterdam, Tergou, Rotterdam, Gorcum,
Schiedam, Schoonhoven, Briel, Hoorn, Enckhuysen, Alckmaer, Medenblick, Edam,
Munne^kedam and Purmerent.

Also to the 6. States or Cities in Zealand as follow, viz. Middleburgh,
Flushing, Camp-veer, Ter-goes, Zirickzee, Ter-tolen.

And to the 6. Chambers of the East India Company, viz. In Amsterdam,
Middleburgh, Rotterdam, Delft, Hoorn and Enckhuysen.

TO THE (...) Knights, Citizens and (...) Parliament assembed.
(...) Graves and Sr. John Ayton Knights, (...) Whitaker, George Carew, William
Hinton, Thomas (...) Crouch* and Richard Jones Esquires. Mary Loyd, Hester
(...) and Elizabeth Bartlet, Widows, Richard Toomes, John Gifford, William
(...), Eusebius Mathews, and Thomas Hamond Gentlemen. Mark Fletcher and James
Boeve merchants: On the behalf of themselves and many hundreds of His Majesty's
good Subjects of England, Especially concerned in the Cases annexed.
Shows
THat Sr. William Courten, Sr. Peter Courten, and John Moncy of London,
Merchants traded in Company many years together in the linen Manufacturs, and
other Merchandises, wherein Sr. William Courten had two parts of the stock, and
Each of the other a fourth part.

That Sr. Peter Courten settled himself at Middleburgh in Zealand, where he
drew many vast sums of money out of England, which were taken up at Interest
in London, and dyed indebted to the stock of the Company, the sum of 122138 --
10 -- 6. Sterling, as by the balance of the Books kept in England hereunto
annexed appears.

That Sr. Peter Courten left Peter Boudaen of Middleburgh Merchant his Nephew
sole Executour, who possessed himself of all the Books of account kept in
Zealand, and the Estate both real and personal of Sr. Peter Courten: and being
afterward questioned at Law by Mr. John White, James Boeve and George Carew
severally concerning the said moneys; The said Peter Boudane used all manner of
Sinister practices to avoid coming to any account, and took advantage of the
late times and troubles, to obstruct the ordinary Course of Justice during his
life, as his Sons and Heyrs have since done the same; Whereby the due
administration of Justice has been often denied, and the Judicial Acts and
decrees of the Prerogative Court, and High Court of Chancery, slighted and
contemned in the Ordinary Courts of Judicature in Holland and Zealand, to the
great oppression of your Petitioners and many Orphans and Widows, claiming the
Effects of Sr. William Courtens Estate, and his Sons, as also Mr. John Mancies
and Sr. Paul Pyndars gotten into the hands of the said Boudaens, Iycob Pergens
and other Inhabitans of Amsterdam and Middleburgh, as by the deductions of the
several Cases hereunto annexed appears.

Now forasmuch as your Petitioners are left without all other remedy (the
King's recommendations to the States General for justice being also slighted
and contemned) and it being of most dangerous consequence to suffer the
Judicature of England to be wronged, and the rights and properties of the
Subjects to be lost through the erroneous practices in foreign Courts of
Justice contrary to the Laws of Nations:

Your Petitioners do therefore most humbly pray, that your Honors would take
their Grievances into your most serious considerations: And upon Examination
thereof to represent the same, by special address to His Majesty, that some
speedy and Effectual relief may be had therein, according to the Merits of the
said Causes.

And your Petitioners shall every pray, etc.


