Poesis Rediviva: OR, POESY REVIVED.

BY JOHN COLLOP M. D.

Odi prophanum vulgus and arceo.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1656.

To the Right Honorable, HENRY, Marquis of Dorchester, Earl of Kingstone,
Viscount Newark, The Lord Pierrepont.
SI fuerint Moecenates, non defuerint Marones: Poetry revives quickened by the
beams of such a Sun, whom all the Muses acknowledge their Apollo; and Sun-like
you may gild even the lowest and most humble Valleys, yet neither impair your
height or luster; glance a more auspicious beam on this birth, which
Eaglet-like approaches the Sun for legitimation, the most piercing ray of your
judgment. I shall not after the mode of Dedications, cry cut of Iejunenes and
Sterility, and entreat a Patronage to my weakness; as not content to commit
error without a Patron, or recommitting it in an Apology: To gild a dunghill
would but exhale a stench; though the odours of Virtues charioted in Sunbeams,
may communicate their influences, and perfume the world. Nor wants Poetry her
Virtues; Stones, Trees, and wild Beasts, accompany an Orpheus, while he
mollifies the most obdurate, and stone-assimilating tempers; teaches the most
irregular pieces by his measures, to be squared by the rule of proportion, and
serve to the edifice of Virtue; produces harmony out of Natures discords, while
the most savage natures by his harmony, are reduced to consort: Civility dead,
Poesy revives: and though some object as the Lyrick to Maro, Quid si Threicio
blandius Orpheo, auditam moderere arboribus fidem, non vanae redeat sanguis
Imagini; Virtue now being only a vain and bloodless Image. Yet the love of
this Euridice stung by the old Serpent, teaches me a descent into this
homebred hell we carry within us; where foul tormenting passions reside like
furies; Lust is tied unto a wheel, Care and Envy, Vultur-like, feed on the
Heart and Liver, while Incontinence pours water into Sieves; Ambition rowls
stones up Mountains, and the dropsy of Avarice, Tantalus- like, is thirsty in
full Rivers. And though with Orpheus I cannot hope to unlearn Furies their
cruelty, and teach their eyes in tears to wear the Livery of Repentance; or
reduce the beloved Euridice: yet if I can ease any of their pains, by the
delivery, my Charity-will be brought to bed of her children, which I shall
desire your Honor a Witness to. Nor is Poesy unworthy of your Patronage,
which a Sir Philip Sidney has praised, our Seraphick Done used, the learned
Scaliger, and he who makes all praises modest, the excellent Hugo Grotius
labored in. Nay, even the Prophets were Poets, and Pagan Poets are cited by
the Apostles. And though Poesy be vinum daemonum, as the Father calls it, when
it inebriates men's minds with folly; yet it is flagellum daemonum when it
las^es them out of their vanity, tormenting them in their members. The
enriching of the people of God with the ornaments of Egypt, S. Austin applies
to Arts and Sciences invented by Heathen, but taken from them as the spoil^ of
Egypt, and converted to Gods service. It may be said of Poesy, as of S.
Cyprian, Lactantius, Victorinus, Hilarious, Quanto auro and argento, and vest
exiit ex Aegypto? Converted from Paganism to Christianity. Let an Atheist, like
Porphyrius, scoff at it, as borrowed from Gentilism; and an Apostate,
resembling Julian, prohibit humane literature in Christians, which none have
disrespected, beside those whose ignorance rendered incapable of it, or blacker
impieties court Oblivion. This could make an Octavius descend to the Lyricks
friendship; and a Lord Brook, as the most permanent Epitaph, desire to be writ
Sir Philip Sidneys friend. Friends to Poesy cannot want a memory, while Time
can keep a Register. Dignum laud virum musa vetat mori; and ego te meis
chartis carpere lividam opinionem totque tuos patiar labores? Whether your
anatomicall inspections to know your self both within and without, which
entitle you to that some have called the Physician, a wise man; or unridling
Aenigmaticall Law quirks? not only by using your fortunes with reason enjoy
them, but know the reason how you enjoy; or whether you unravel Nature to her
first Principles, and become of the Cabinet Council to the Worlds Monarch,
which styles you what others are miscalled, The most Honorable, who in the
worst of times dare be good; and when Ignorance is an Epidemicall disease, pass
untainted; make to use of your Eminency to become a State Weathercock, and
turn round with every wind; or resemble those Magnifico's, who Comet-like
sprung from fat and slime of earth, blaze and become portentous to Kingdoms;
while Ignorance is blazoned with Power, and Ambition and Avarice dressed out
with formalities of State: like Anticks in great houses carved with Honors,
and gilded with Titles, may attract admiration from vulgar heads: Yet wiser men
can make no greater use of then the Cynick of his statues, only to exercise
patience. But to you, (who have passed through the Temple of Virtue to that of
Honor, whose Honor is a Temple to enshrine Virtue, monopolizing more then
these want, whose glorious outsides, like Egyptian Temples, by introspection
afford nothing above an Ape.) As a tribute due to honor, I present these
besprinklings of a retirement, while Democritus-like I laugh at the shittlecock
world, and exquire the causes of the spleen in the beast, the Rabble; which
will invite some who Abderitanae pectora plebis habent, the mad Rabble, and
those Plebeian heads, who are a degree above them in their Clothes, not in
their intelligences, to accuse me of frenzy: Yet an Hippocrates (the more
refined spirit) will pass intainted with the air of popular displicencies,
since the Temples of Virtue and honor want not their sacrifices.

Your honors most humble Servitor and most affectionate Admirer, J: COLLOP.

Poesis Rediviva: OR POESY Revived.
The Poet.
WHat art? thought below wisemen* yet 'bove ages;
Can make sev'n lines, speak more then the sev'n Sages?
A name for Falkland, or th'Lord Digby fit?
Or the Elixir of Hugh Grotius wit?
Pacing in rithme no Poets makes; words fit,
High sense, soul quickening each part of it.
Phancies effluxions which with light do stream,
Each sentence gilding like a Solar beam.
No day can pass to write lends him no ray;
Nay makes even night vie splendour with the day.
To feed on trash has no green sickness Muse,
Through Wits obstructions a Cachexy shows:
No cup-froth'd fancy, sparkled wit from wine;
Sobriety waters virtues in each line.
None are born Poets, naturally some pace,
Shuffle in rithme, horse-like, without a grace.
His Helicon must flow from sweat of's brain;
And musing thoughts lend his Poetic vein;
Richer then those veins spring from heart of earth,
While Gold without an Ore he gives birth.
The Philosophers Elixir in each line,
Does in Epitome all that is rich confine.
Above the salts of Ciceronian wit,
Whose name can lend no grain to season it.
Nor Adages, nor Apophthegms new picked,
Bear-like nor formed, nor handsome 'cause their licked,
Vents only what mistaken Sages Coined,
With the disguise of verse on what is purloin'd:
Unhappy fate of Poets to be poor,
All begged, or borrowed from another store.
He must have ravell'd times, and Kingdoms through,
And when the world oreview'd, can make a new.
A Plato's Commonwealth who can outdo?
A Mores Utopia, and Atlantis too.
Can challenge Titians, or our Vandickes hand;
Upbraiding nature whose rich pieces stand,
Not Zeuxes-like, paint grapes that birds draw nigh,
But red with blood of Families drunkards fly.
Pierces like lightning, yet not hurts the skin,
Though melts ith womb the conceived Child of sin.
At the horror himself makes the Tyrant fear,
While he is transformed to Tiger, Wolf, or Bear.
'Bove the Theban Harmony can structure raise
To Abraham's Sons, teach even stones God to praise.
Make birdlim'd Avarice the Idol gold to leave,
Think It pale with guilt, or gilt ore to deceive.
Into a scorched Amorist ice convey;
Calm rage, while reason passions storms obey.
Embalmed with Odours virtue make perfume:
While putred vanity does in stench confume.
Tainted with sour breath, rotten vice decaies:
Virtue is always green like the Poets bays:
The Luxury of whose wit runs not to weeds;
But running up provides for knowledge seeds;
Who Eagle-like does on a Pyramid sit
'Bove passions tempests, and a flashing wit:
Above the Clouds secure does view the Sun:
And in a line like him inlightning run;
Nay with Ecstatick Paul does take take a ^light;
And with intelligences trades for sight;
Thus to the Echoing Angels Moses sung;
And David's harps to H^llelujahs strung;
In proverbs glorious Solomon's aray'd;
From clouds of parable the Gospel light displayed,
Nor would it blasphemy be for to deny
The whole Creation ought but Poesy:
When God in number made, and measure all;
May we not truly term poetical;
Six days the order in Creation show,
Not how God made, but we the worl'd made may know.
Less then a moment made it, a sit lux
Streamed out life, Essence, motion, times efflux:
The world as in a womb was in Gods mind:
Within himself all light, to make it outshin'd.
The Ridle destiny which unhinges brains,
Within him with whom all is present how remains?
Who preordains the things that present be:
It Is God descends to us by Poesy.
Paul with such knots as these Christ's Spouse has dressed,
Which to damnation the unstable wrest.
While Poet-like he acts the Carnal man,
They make him so, by their own lusts him scan:
Poets are Prophets, and the Priests of Heaven:
Though to Hels mimicks Idol Priests the names given.
Into Jerusalem Lord turn Babylons flame,
The objects vary, yet the passions the same.
Teach that love holiness which no holiness knew,
Let zeal inflame the hearts which lust did stew.
Thus holiness to the Lord we all may sing,
To write take pinions from a Cherubs wing.
On the Soul.
ENigma to the Philosopher and divine;
All the souls effects, none can the soul define.
All say the soul immortal, none do prove:
Nor life, nor arguments a belief can move.
How can the soul an act of the body be,
Which to the body gives existencie?
If out of matter souls result? can we
In natural souls prove immortality?
Or him who says mankind has one control,
Since every species can have but one soul?
If the soul's infused, how shares it Adams sin?
How with divinities the sin of flesh served in?
Or who in all ith shapes of men here move
Can souls that rational, or immortal prove*
Each species may give souls of grouth, and sense:
Vital and animal functions may dispense
Without infusion: wise as Banks his horse;
Then whom few better, we find many worse.
Who knows himself, knows all; he is wise indeed,
Who can retire within, and himself read.
Unhinging wiser brains shall nere stretch mine:
What Is the soul I care not Lord, so it be thine.
Whether the soul's traduced or infused,
It not concerns, but how by passions used.
Whom flesh does rule cannot what is soul is know,
Who'd know it with God must in acquaintance grow.
What is it Lord? it is thine; sure part of thee
Treating in humane flesh a Deity.
The soul's all in all, and all in every part:
So all in all, and in all Lord thou art:
By whom we live, move, be, and all things know,
Life, motion, essence, knowledge from thee flow.
Is It not a glimps of the spirit first made light
Which here is mufled in a Cloud of night?
When God but takes this veil of flesh away,
To him the light of lights, returns this ray.
The soul that works by principles of light,
Does while it is here it self to God unite.
Who here lays the vesture of his flesh aside,
From him Heaven glory, Earth cannot secrets hide,
Let contemplation give but wings toth' soul,
It in a moment travels to each pole;
Descends to the center, mounts to the top of the world,
In thousand places can at once be hurled;
Can fathom the universe, without touching it;
A Judge of states, Arts, nay, of worlds may sit.
But oh a soul immersed in flesh and blood,
Is lost 'midst wild beasts in a pathlesse wood,
Ambition wracks the soul; it is fooled by love;
Pleasure does melt, hope by a tickling move;
Anger now burns, then is reinflam'd by lust;
Despair depres^es, avarice does rust;
Now cruelty does obdurate to a stone;
And then revenge makes me more hard then one;
Envy now gnaws, and hatred strait her sours;
The fire of jealousy smothers all her powers;
Sorrow does lend me floods which fear turns ice,
I Am cold to virtue, hardened by vice;
Lord, see this bird of Paradise in a Cage,
Assailed by a mutinous tumuls rage!
See the daughter of thy bounty heavens own Child;
By passions rabble shall she be defiled?
Shall they the Scepter of her government take?
She is a Queen which thou her Kings did make,
The Kings daughter Lord was glorious within,
Let not her beauty be eclipsed by sin.
She (...) her fellows should be brought to thee,
Virtues and Graces should companions be;
A wedding garment Lord on her bestow:
Let her embroid^ed with thy graces go,
If with the white robe of innocence I cannot come;
Mix the purple of thy blood or martyrdom,
Since the soul's a ray that is borrowed of thy light,
Shall sin extinguish't in eternal night?
Lord let my soul return from whence it came,
Let not a spark of Heaven turn to hells flame.
The fruit of Paradise.
When that my soul by magique would aspire,
Prometheus ^ike fetch down Celestial fire;
Paul like to Paradise raped by the part divine,
Sure lust does me unto this tree recline;
While I descend, and the pleasures taste of sense,
The tree of life my Jesu's banished hence.
He must relinquish flesh and blood who will be
Made a partaker of divinity.
Man is a Garden, Jesus is within
The tree of life, which we do lose by sin.
Vittue makes Heaven, while Hell is made by vice,
Who lives like Enoch, walks in Paradise.
But he who follows the crooked ways of sin,
A Serpent to this Garden does let in;
To taste the fruits of sense does him entice,
Then sees his sin, and himself naked by vice.
While God his Saints with sanctity does cloth
The figleaves of Hypocrisy they loath.
Fallen midst the trees they seek to hide their sin;
But God ith conscience is who speaks within;
Our better thoughts of Paradise are the trees
Which they secluded are, whom sins can please:
Earth turned to earth, which if none do manure
It does sins fruits, thistles and thorns endure.
But see on water the spirit moves of love,
To make the first light did on waters move,
From the fount of Baptism, there do rivers flow
Which water Paradise, and make Heavens fruit grow.
The seed of life thus watered did die,
To raise up fruit for all eternity.
The tree of life was joined to deaths tree
To make the barren bare it God must be,
Into the ground thou Lord it cast, that we.
Fixed to thy root, may ever living be.
Thou Lord the Earth did open, that death might have
And's sister sin in life's Sepulcher grave.
Who to the world is tied, to the Cross is nailed,
His bones are broke, and he by death assailed;
But he is a good thief violence offers there,
The flaming sword keeps Paradise sure is prayer;
Or thy sprites Cherubins and the flaming sword,
Which keeps the tree of life is Lord thy word.
Since thou of life in Paradise art the tree,
Lord when thy Kingdom comes, remember me;
The bone thou gav'st us is with the Serpent joined,
Sin breaks the bones, which first with sin conbin'd.
The Serpents damned to dust which us betrayed,
Lift like a Serpent up in dust you are laid.
Sin Lord's a Serpent with a fiery sting,
Thou lifted up do to us medicine bring:
Thorns on thy brow Earths curse for him do wear,
Thou make them Lord a Crown by being there.
Thief like to the cursed tree i am nailed by sin;
Yet sin makes wounds to let thy mercy in.
Lord say the word, I shall be whole, or say,
Thou shall with me in Paradise be this day.
What Is always, every where, and all believe
Is truth, and only truth, which cannot deceive:
Where is it? unravel ages, all times read;
Since truth is one, why thus are none agreed?
Schisms gilded weather-Cocks all must pass for gold,
While the world truths lights does in dark lanthorns hold.
Men to the Meridian of their flesh and blood,
Religion Calculate; profit names it good.
See each Divine is but an Advocate,
As if Religion were temporal state:
They with illusion, forgeries, for it plead,
and do it like Lawy'rs, only to be fee'd
For what they plead, yet none can call their right;
They for Religion do without it wrire.
Witty impieties do the Scriptures reach:
Like the Tyrant who to's bed did wretches stretch;
Too long for cruel purposes, they slice:
Too short they wrack confession of their vice,
That truth can never vary, all agree:
Yer all place truth in their variety.
On the Moster's of the Science of defense in Controversy.
EAch Father sure's a Ianus, two ways looks*
One face Reformers have, one Papists Books.
Do they by follies issues their names gain?
They father spurious is^ues of each brain:
Now to the Protestant tuned, now Roman Key,
Do Echo like to every voice obey:
Ah! Echo-like yield an imperfect sound
Which cannot instruct a knowledge, but confound,
Whence most polemick truths as clearly note,
As the Lover's Mistress face in a Wanescot:
Or Wittingtons Maiorship by a chime of bells,
Which seem to tune to all wild fancy tells.
What though the Ruhets in the Roman head
Some truth's obstructed, is the bod^ dead?
Or cause not uniform, must no union be?
Belief in one Christ sure speaks unity.
Though various Colors in Christ's Coat be knit,
They make no seam, nor cause a schism in it.
But these are soldiers which do pierce Christ's side,
Cast lots for's Vesture, and his Court devide.
See in a mighty bulk their volumes swell!
Heavens way is narrow; sure these lead to Hell.
Homonymas wave, and skirmishing with words,
Or shadow fights, see what each book affords.
You these Tostati may with ease outvie
With a slight single sheeted Mercury:
Their tumid bodies only serve to tell
Poison within is, thus can make them swell.
Jesuit.
SEE, see the subtle texture of each line!
The Spider spins her curious web less fine.
Th'Spider infusing poison, thus takes th'Fly,
While in her web she weaves her destiny.
Beware of th'Net which from a Spider came;
Nor for the light of heaven mistake hells flame:
Like sacred bellows they the soul may blow,
Whether to make it to Contrition glow,
And zealous fervor, or to subtilize,
And make it to flames of Contemplation rise.
But ah! with soul on Contemplations wing,
Most deal as boys with birds do in a string;
Draw down on seeds of error for to feed,
Or by officious handling make to bleed.
A spark of heaven devotion may inspire;
Contentions flames are kindled at hells fire.
The Church.
THE Kings Daughters garment may discolored be,
Yet Schism's not made by the variety.
Embroidred with good works Christ's Spouse must go,
Wrinkle nor spot in Conversation show.
Where shadows do increase, the Sun declines;
Yet there will shadows be where the Sun shines.
Forms of Religion, where there is a light,
Where all is shadow, and no shadows night.
But oh while most 'bout Forms poor shadows fight,
They Charity lose, which is Religions light.
Who by disputes are drunk, and passions vexed,
Cast at Antagonists heads what they meet next.
The wildefire of Contention they increase,
And not by th'Milk of th'Word it cause to cease.
Who Is Pious, he is Orthodox; who loves sin,
He Heretic is: God nor his Church shares in.
Happy whose lives against errors do dispute;
Good lives convert, bad tongues can never do it.
Ith'Catholick house Churches like Sisters dwell:
Can Sisters Sisters for each brawl expel?
Men in each Church have Truth enough to save.
And to damn Angels enough Malice have.
The Polemick Protestant D.
TRuths more calcining Recollects ore-read,
To cure Truths wounds, Truth they afresh make bleed.
Itch of Dispute, the Scab of th'Church does breed:
How comes Truth for a Champion Falsehood need?
It from Contagion sprung, their Countries Plague,
A Wickliff, Husse, and Malcontents of Prague:
Waldo's Disciples, Albingenses too,
Must to the Muster of Truths Champions go.
Thus Homer to see Truth was lent strange eyes,
And Virgil taught for to Evangelize.
What though in Tenets all do disagree?
In opposition of one Church they be.
Churches like floting Islands in the Sea,
Carried on th'giddy waves of Vanity:
How wisely for your Hierarchy you plead,
Your Church to raise, who Church defacers need?
Who laid in Common Sacred and Profane,
To hedge these in, could you some Church-ground gain?
By th'Woman in the Wilderness understood,
As wisely as New England Brotherhood.
Christian, not Pagan Rome, must Babylon be,
From Babylonish garments are you free?
Where Rome is Babylon, all your Orders hence,
They Are Antichristian in a Brownists sense.
Rare art, to tie truth fast, twist ropes of sand,
Which every air of Fancy may disband.
If Christ's Coa^ no Seam, Church cannot Schism admit,
Ah then consider how your Knot you knit!
From what they hate, none think too far they run;
On rocks of error fail, while shelfs they shun.
The Pres^yter.
CAlvin and Viret, rare men, calculate
Religion to their Purses, and a State.
Churches, like Dens of Thieves, enriched by stealth,
A rare Utopia, Plato's Commonwealth.
And Scotia which from darkness takes her name,
Does by her nature now improve the same.
The aerie Presbyter tuned to Geneva Jig,
The Scotch Bagpipe is with wind, not wisdom big.
Of Reformation all th'arch botchers read,
Truths garment, botcher-like, for Hell they shread.
Peruse each Town, when you each Priest have tried,
You Will find they People well as Texts divide.
Hotch-potch, made up 'twixt Jews and Turks,
Cry destiny, are Abr'hams sons without his works.
He Is by Election one who it believes:
Sure God loves fruit, and not Hypocrisi's leaves.
Oh may you sons be doing Gods commands
With Jacobs voice, have no more Esau's hands.
These Jews the light they boast of Lord reveal,
May it shine out more then in Glowworm zeal.
The suffering Martyrs in the Apocalypse now,
These two were Bishops; Can you them allow?
Or did you know that Elders Bishops were?
The names of th'Beast should now your forehead bear.
These were the grapes these Foxes could not reach,
Which made them call them sour, against them preach.
The Elders and Susanna surely be
No less then of Presbytery prophecy.
God's Church a garden, Word's a spring therein;
Susanna soul, which there is wash d from sin:
Lust in the garden there does Elders place,
The soul would ravish, and Gods stamp efface.
While Cit and Priest, folly and knavery twine,
And a Scotch Primer must a shop book line:
Because deceit and lying is their trade,
Think nothing can be truth that ages said:
Nothing believe, but what is ith'stories writ
Of their own folly, squares to Cock-brain'd wit.
The Priest from's nest unplum'd, and callow hops,
Not learned above the gibrish of the shops.
Both serve sev'n year, and both with same intent,
That they false ware in darker shops may vent.
Having defiled his nest, unfledged chirps here,
Opening his sparrow mouth from ear to ear.
Hence all Religion is in mouth or ear;
It Is not Religion to do good, but hear.
Yet see the wondrous fruit often, though they teach,
None to act good, they have learned all to preach.
Resume thy black garb, wretch, it may be fit
To mourn your los^e of Tithes, and loss of wit.
Canonical Belt, sure wisdom, to you tied;
Ungirt, unblest, VVisdome and Fortune slide.
Prophanum vulgus. The People.
TH'Rabble's an echo made 'twixt Knave and Fool,
To work his ends, the politicians tool:
While he the Devils quilted Anvile is,
On which he frames all that we find amiss.
Divide and Rule; these Foxes heads divide
Best for Combustion, by the tails they are ti'de:
While th'routs a number there will errors be,
From God recession, who is Unity.
Who from the first simplicities teach them swerve,
Give them but bread of life to make them starve.
Most Nature call what Custom is of sin,
Virtue, not Vice, Nature implants within;
Lest it be done to them to do no ill:
Love, which the Law and Gospel does fulfill;
We leave the things, and about names make strife,
Nature exalted is a Christians life.
But oh from th'silver forge Diana comes:
Religious forms are stamped to Coin new sums,
Minted by passion, profit seduced zeal;
All must be damned, deny what they reveal.
Yet sure when Justice up her scales does hold,
For the forms sake these take no lighter gold.
Lord, let us strive thy Image for to bear;
The gold can never be light, thy Image there.
From th'dross of sin it must refined be,
Nor light with lusts can we take form from thee.
On servile Will, irrespective Election and Reprobation.
AByss of brightness, to whom light's a skreen,
Who by not being visible, best art seen.
Time is no time, if relative to thee:
Even an eyes twinkling's all Eternity.
Can he with whom all is present, pre-ordain?
Or what place for thy prescience can remain*
Less then a moment did the whole world make;
To understand it we need six days take;
And the seventh day thy goodness to admire,
Which in six thousand year we cannot acquire:
Six thousand years are as six days to thee,
And the seventh day eternal Iubilee.
What stranger stories, Lord, of thee we tell,
While we mete Infinite with Reasons ell?
If that I have no power, or a decree
Before or Will or Act has manacl'd me?
Do this, and live, God says, who cannot lie;
If that I cannot do it, he bids me die*
Can God design a treachery against Mankind?
Give him more light to make him the more blind*
Sin is defined what is contrary to Gods will;
Yet abridge ours, and he is the cause of ill.
What God does preordain, sure his will is:
If then the sin be done, the sin is his.
Thus nothing's left us to deliberate,
But follow th'duct of stars, obey out fate.
When sin's no longer sin, then it is free:
Who Is guilty, or o^dain'd, cannot 'voided be.
Sin that is contrary thus they make Gods will;
God to himself make contrary by ill.
Has God two Wills, one secret, one revealed?
Good in appeara^ce, is he ill concealed?
Yet these who made God but in outside good,
Themselves for more then beasts never understood.
They rational faculties do deny of th'Soul,
Who Will and Understanding do control.
If that we act not freely, where is our will?
How understand we? if we cannot fly ill.
Like Horie and Mule, we are held in with a bit,
Take will, and virtues essence, gone with it.
Persuasions, terrors, laws, are thus made vain,
Where all are bound up in a fatal chain.
Thus in this age we through excess of light
Bring on our selves more then Egyptian night.
Though God made all, sin's a non entity.
By making sin thus nothing, God they would free.
But oh! if nothing? why's man damned for th'same?
Damnation sure for nothing never came?
As from the Turks for fate they take advice,
They dream like theirs sure, carnal Paradise.
Lord, thou whose path's in deep, and way's ith'sea,
If I cannot thee contain, contain thou me.
By passing understanding, understood,
Know that thou only art, and only good.
Sectaries.
SEE of phanatique fowlers a fresh shole,
With baits of Liberty who decoy the Soul,
Copernicism these by their whimsies prove;
Where all are giddy, how can the Earth not move?
Schisms weathercocks, with every wind turn round:
That faith's as light as air which has no ground.
Camelion like with every object change,
Whose faith is fancy, how can he choose but range?
Snails of all Heresies which contract the slime;
Spunges which suck in all the dregs of time:
Mix with the puddle of their fancies wine
Of sacred Writ, entitle sin Divine;
Honying their poison, sugaring over their sin:
Without an Angel, Devil is within.
All these adulterers o^ Sacred Writ,
Each does a Concubine to his fancy fit.
A various gloss, on which his fancy set,
A spurious brood of Sectaries does beget.
All against Idolatry cry; yet all approve,
While they the Idols of their Fancies love.
Enthusiasticks.
What lust and pride spontaneous Devils do,
Must that the Spirit of God inspire in you?
Who doing ill, says th'Spirit acts within,
Surely he is one can consecrate his sin.
Gods Spirit in still winds, not storms does vent,
In flames of zeal, not flames of malcontent.
The primitive Christians weapons Prayers and Tears*
Truths two-edged sword instructs, not cuts off ears.
Like Daemoniack, most are used to speak
Out of their bellies, most of our sounds break.
Zeal of Gods Word was unto David meat;
Zeal of Gods Word is now the zeal to eat.
The zeal of Gods house the Prophet up did eat;
You Would eat Gods houses up, your zeal's so great.
To Abram sons, Lord, who can rear from stone,
Though they a stone Church hate, these stones make one*
Beraean.
DArkness rewards him who in th'Ark would pry;
Who peeps in Heaven for light may blinded die.
Faith is an eye which blessedly is blind;
Which in its blindness does all knowledge find.
A hand on earth, which stretched to God in heaven,
Whence all the treasures are of knowledge given.
Where Reason's blind, Faith prospectives should lend*
Where lame, Faith Reason must with wings befriend.
Though th'Elephant may swim, and Lamb here wade;
Approach not scripture, till a Lamb you're made.
Pretend not th'white stone shall be given to thee,
Not white like Lamb, but black by nocency.
It Is unity in faith, orderly zeal,
And active Charity, that must Heaven reveal.
Yet in devotion if thou art sincere,
You Are in the porch, rejoice, thy heaven is near,
Without the practique part, the Theory's vain:
Let aerie mysteries nere unhing thy brain.
On the Temple pinnacle should thee Belial perch,
To God you are neither nearer, nor his Church.
He Will say thou can not dash against a stone,
Yet every harder question's to thee one:
He Will plead by Scripture, tell thee of a Crown
He seeks to rob; does raise to cast thee down.
To thee the good thou read'st does not relate,
When thou do read but into life translate.
Fiduciarie.
BElieve, only believe, you are safe; if true:
If this enough! what action need I do?
For if assurance be a good estate,
To it, from it distinct, need life relate?
If my estate be safe, if not can lies
To make me happy, by belief suffice?
If faith, before repentance justify?
Since I am safe, need I on it rely?
It to the continuance cannot more relate
Then inchoation of so good estate.
In vain with Jews you Abraham Father call,
He knows you not, know not his works at all.
God can raise Abram Children out of stones,
Yet flints without their fire he never owns.
Their zeal must flame, light of good works must shine,
Naught without heat and light can be divine;
'Cause faiths of things invisible, think you
Faith without works invisible's only true?
If strong imagination faith must be?
Magique will prove the best Divinity.
In multiplicem Schismatis Hydram. Universal Leprosy.
SEe! how the schisms in nations do attrive
A florent age, by wa^s and ruins thrive.
View how the astonished world, does silent sit,
Wondering how Leprosy hides the face of it!
Dreaming like Constantine that an innocents blood
Could Lepers cure, baths in a purple flood.
Swords carve no way to Heaven, there is no spel
In guns against spirits; nor no charms against hell.
The thundering Legion entered Heaven by prayer,
This is the violence thieves gives entrance there.
Lillies and Roses both to Paradise come:
Candid by innocence, and by martyrdom;
Saints that are purpled, not by innocent blood:
The Dragon belches forth that purple flood.
Hear not the blood which does like Abels cry,
Lord hear thy Sons, who did like Abel dye.
Thou can the fury of the Sea assuage,
Lord still these waters, stop the peoples rage.
Thou out of nothing could create a world,
Se't to a Chaos by confusion hurled.
Who to make light did on the waters move;
Move on these waters and renew't by love.
On the Umbraticall Doctors on the Romish party.
HEll gates against the Church cannot prevail:
Who ere believed Christianity could fail?
But 'cause in clouds, must therefore be no Sun?
All truths in streams of Roman phancies run?
Unto the end God will his Church assist.
In what is needful, not phanaticks list.
If the Pope Cannot err, what need we Councels too?
In vain it is done by more, what few can do.
They who the Pope cannot err would teach, believe
Sure cheating others, cannot themselves deceive;
They write for haeresie, Popes deposed may be:
What needs the question, if all Popes were free?
The Roman Church's particular, Catholic too:
Surely the Roman Church not's one, but two.
Their Councell's, like the Pope, infallible be,
Means or the prophetic part from errors free.
Has fallible means infallible effects?
Or what needs means, if the spirit truth detects:
Councels cannot err, if to them Popes assent.
Sure before they are finished no confirmings meant.
If falshood's there, can their assent make it true?
If truth? it is so, should none assent thereto.
These all like empty purses open wide;
Yet naught within them, does but air abide.
On the fencers for Religion.
THeir pens have swords bin which the Church did wound,
Whence all these scars are on her body found.
Polemicks of Religion sure have writ,
Not for the truth, but exercise of wit:
While Scriptures, Fathers, Counsels, they do wrest.
As I name them, they use their names in jest.
B. Jewel.
THough streams of light from Jewels of luster fly,
Yet cracks, and flames meet the judicous eye:
And though well polished, and not rudely set,
Part of the Jewel seems but counterfeit.
Doctor Whitaker.
NOr from Whitaker does the Church reap more,
Where Is some good Corn, there is some with tares run ore.
Doctor Field on the Church.
ANd though the Church has gained a whole Field
With the best Corn, he does some Cockle yield.
Dr. White, Sir H. Lynd, Dr. Featley in answer to Lyndomastix.
WHite may be black turned: Lind's not so well lined,
That to his aid he need no Featly find.
Master Perkins.
What though a preacher Perk-in for the fight?
If not to preach, he story wants to write.
Doctor Usher
Usher to Lady truth has better bin,
Yet with black spots he brings her fair face in.
Master Chillingworth against Knot.
BUt Chilling's worth, of's enemy though hot,
Is praise-worth, to unty a Gordian Knot.
Master Brightman on the Revelation.
IN Revelations though a Brightman trade,
He many blinds, and none to see has made.
Master Mede.
MEde has some Honey, liquors like works, swells:
Yet nought's 'bove froth of fancy, which he tells.
Doctor Potter.
POtter-like to his name in dirt does trade;
Yet to hold truth, he has no verses made.
Master Cotton.
TO spoil good paper, make foul seroles in the same,
It Is pity in good ink bad Cotton Came.
He silent, by wild notions all might guess,
New England Church the Church in the Wilderness.
On Bishop Laud against Fisher.
When future ages shall grow up to Laud,
They Will give thy name it is due; and thee applaud.
Rome's Fisher in thy See could cast no bait,
But you secured the Fish from the deceit.
The Fisher struck grew wise; and silent too:
The Fisher like the fish, made mute by you.
The Spouse with decent rites, and order moved,
Her body had proportion to be loved:
In various colored garments, did her bring
With Ceremonies glorious to her King.
Thou reformation's rude draught up did fill,
And Primitive ex'llence Copy by thy skill.
At peace Jerusalem in her self seemed one;
And like Bizantium walls an entire stone.
But now the Pastor's gone, the sheep do stray,
To Romish Wolves, and schism tick Foxes prey.
Churches like Leda's twins do rise and set,
Like poor men's lands by theft, do patches get;
Swinish perfections all is aimed at now,
Parmeno-like to g^untle like a sow:
Apocryphal Priests teach no Canonical truth,
Who any learns it is out of the book of Ruth.
Unhappy men safe virtue we despise,
Too late complain grown by our losses wise.
On Doctor Hammond.
SEraphick Doctor, bright Evangelist,
Great light dispelling errors darker mist:
Thou lend'st no phrantique zeal; phanatick fire
To blaze Contention, kindle loose desire;
No fiery Luthers, no rash Calvin's zeal,
Who scarce love truths Antagonists reveal;
The knots of ridling destiny do undo,
To clear the scriptures, and Gods justice too:
Thou make the way so plain that fools cannot err:
Others their own, thou 'rt truths interpreter.
Thou to the Revelation lend'st a Key,
Where every word is thought a mystery.
Phanatique Cotton, Brightman, Napier, Mede,
To understand themselves a Comment need.
Thou clear'st the Roman Sea, yet wound'st her more
^hen those in blood drenched, made her the scarlet whore.
^e who some truths seeks, to advance by lies,
Against all truth, bold error fortifies:
Could Hippo's Bishop now survive, he'de be
Retracting still, not to detract from thee,
The learned St. Bernard would turn pupil too:
'Cause Bernard sees not all he'de learn of you,
Great Cyprians Master might thy scholar be;
And think himself less paraclete then thee.
Thou 'twixt a Stephen and Cyprian might decide.
Who texts can open, yet not hearts divide;
Oreteeming zeal a Heresy to refute,
Has warped a passionate Father to it.
Let others prize truths armor for the rust,
Love for the serpents sake, not truths but dust;
While streams of life phanatick phrantique mud
Thou clear'st, and make truths face there understood;
Thou have no Helena whom thou need'st to fence,
Which to secure do Castrate scripture sense.
Fools with the two edged sword themselves do wound:
On truths face scars make, which no Age make sound,
But our seraphick Doctor clears the word,
Secures the tree of life with the flaming sword;
Enthusiasticks boast this Ages light;
Had they but Hammon known, who could deny't.
The curse of thorns, sure spinous questions be
The Cherub knowledge, that must guard life's tree.
To a Lawyer who said, though men might speak against those that are called
Gospellers, none justly against them were called Lawyers.
Who canting learn, do only mean to cheat;
Sure law's in gibrish clothed, for deceit.
Amerc'ments made to fright the i^le suit,
Have thrived so well, that they invite unto't.
Natura brevium sure is lost, for we
Nothing in nature can but long suits see.
An Habeas Corpus waits on every suit;
A suits worth nothing, if no body's to it.
Suits for Westminster, now so numerous are;
Nor Judge nor Lawyer can them all outwear.
For Councel-Coyn; and countenance men disburse;
They satisfy revenge, and not their purse.
Both writs, and Courts of error are so many,
Take away these, and Law scarce admits any.
What though your Cook up all the Law does dress?
He makes a French Harsh, of a Harsh French mess;
The Laws a two edged sword by which men play,
And with their art, make it wound either way;
To tenter out their fancy, they stretch Law:
Wrack the name Lawyers, you will find liers aw.
My pen wants ink, state-tetters for to cure,
Nay the ink writ Magna Charta, health procure.
On Magna Charta.
THe Judge that others does by Law condemn,
Against himself a sentence gives in them.
The bench is silenced, even by Common Pleas;
The Judge himself, may have a Writ of ease,
Removed to the Kings bench from the Common Pleas;
The Cook himself, confessed he lost his fees.
Against himself the Justice swears the peace;
His office or his Conscience must cease;
There s no Aturney does procure a writ,
But ea ad sat. against him is in it.
And Jack who most for Magna Charta pleads,
Blearey'd with prejudice there no sacrilege reads.
With knowing loyalty who have optics strung,
If they have eyes to see, must have no tongue?
Must th'people have their right, no Churchmen theirs?
Sure wicked grown, of th'Promise they are no heirs.
The benefit of their Clergy pray them give,
They may grow better, and deserve to live.
The Law is Reason, but can it be had*
Men passionate grown, Passion is Reason mad.
And oh for th'Rout, who do the Law unsheath,
May to mad men a naked sword bequeath.
The Character of Loyal Friendship: To his Honored Coz. Euseby Petsant.
He Is free, who is wife, to ^ule himself does know:
Conquered, by patience conquer can his foe:
Whom enemies serve to polish, rust off file;
Envy's rust eats not in, or makes more vile.
These flails serve only husks off for to beat,
And to heavens granary render purer wheat;
More fertile grows, like to the bleeding Vine;
In fortunes night, star-like does brighter shine.
Thoughs's Masters fort's be lost, retains one still
Of brass within: is conscious of no ill.
Though fortunes Tennis ball yet mounts on high,
Cast on the earth, from thence to heaven does fly:
Grows best in the shade, like the triumphant Bay,
And green with virtue does his boughs display.
The frost of th'times to this Corns nutriment turns,
Who like a torch that is beaten, brighter burns:
Can smile at all the Pageantry of vice;
Poor virtue happier think, with her own price.
To Velvet Cushions no devotion pay;
Knows straw within, though their outsides be gay.
In giddy Tumults does engage no friends,
Whom servile fear betrays, or baser ends.
Will neither Protest, Covenant, or Engage,
Or sacrifice Conscience to the Rabbles rage.
Though the people waters th'wiseman is a Rock,
Unmoved does th'fury of the waters mock.
Pleas of Religion does no Hackney make,
To carry lusts, and ti^'d does them forsake.
Nor lured unto the fancy of the times,
To profit stoops, adopting others crimes.
Happy 'bove th'Lord, who plays at petty game
Rather then sit out, sits and votes his shame:
Whose presence for a testimonial serves;
No house can lower be then he deserves.
Who sacrifice Reason to Success, must rear
To Fortune Altars, pay devotion there.
In History no trifler but does know
At Virtues root, Envy a Worm does grow.
An Aristides, Phocion, Greece exiles;
Corialan and Scipio, Rome despoils.
It Is Kingly to do good, and suffer ill:
Since it is a Royal mode retain it still.
Kiss but the rod, your father leaves his ire;
Correction past may cast it in the fire.
It does but humble on your knees you bring,
And from an earthly teach to serve heavens King.
Of all your servants have the times left one?
Who serves himself, served best, and has got none.
Scorn scurrilous plaints; no mouth-granadoes vent
Against foes; above them placed, while you're content.
Who wants not that, which wanting, nature grieves
Cannot want, each one as much has, as believes.
Who to desire has naught, naught to admire,
The Magnifico on State Pyramids plac'd's not higher.
A Centuple retribution waits his loss,
Whom faith can teach to imparadise a Cross.
On Fortunes Rack we easily life despise;
Broke on her Wheel, who smiling suffer 's wise*
To the Son of the late King.
RUle over thy self, the Worlds Epitome;
Then Charles the Great, thus thou may greater be.
Not second Charles, but second unto none;
Not where he lost, gain where he gained a Throne.
See sixty Scottish Kings purpled with blood:
To be beast like for sacrifice crowned, is it good?
I lift each day a hand for thee in prayer:
To raise thee up by blood, I none can rear.
Of one days rule, a Tyrant hear complain,
Him happy call, dined, and resigned again.
Hear a fourth Henry tell his son, a Crown,
Did he but know the weight, he would slight it down.
Who carries loads on'shead, must ev'nly go;
And they who gain them Crowns, had need do so.
O who would wish a laden Asses pack?
Yet Honor galls, more then it galls the back.
The Worlds Magnifico's all day laden are;
With Conscience galled, to ground at length repair.
The world abounds with men that do abound;
That knows to do it, scarce a man is found.
Transported pride does God forget by pelf,
Her neighbor Avarice, th'Prodigall himself.
Hence ith'worlds bucket, like the Captives wheel,
As one goes up, another down does reel.
Honor's a shadow, interpose a cloud,
And a perpetual darkness does it shroud
In chase, then purchase we more pleasing find,
Too great for bodies, little for the mind:
Less then we would have, more then to use we know,
So both superfluous, and defective too.
In valor, strength, and Allies, who would trust,
Which Diamond*like are cut by their own ^ust.
What Is built on smoke, how can it lasting be?
The worlds Foundation's laid in Vanity.
See Otho fall, First Charles resign a Throne,
That Eagle-like he may mount heaven for one:
Though like a King of Jews, thou thorns do wear,
Rejoice with him, thy Kingdom is not here.
'Bout names we trifle, and forget the thing:
Would be a slave to slaves? Then be a King.
News for News to a degenerate Cavalier.
GEneva Brotherhood are turned Cavaliers;
Scot-like they will leather guns make of their ears.
The Dutch of Butterboxes will a Navy make:
If true, such ships as these they will not forsake:
Or some in healths say they will carouse up seas;
If so; to join with them will Roy'lists please.
Low Countries cannot want men as some do fear;
One there had Children for each day of th'year.
The Spanish too, with whiskers will invade,
Each hair is fork'd, worse then a two*edg'd blade:
The gallant French come too with braver shapes;
The English at first sight they will change to Apes.
What though the King in England Castles wants,
Morocco's King on Elephants Castles plants:
And for a Present, Castles manned will send:
VVee'll Castles too ith'Aire build, shall befriend.
The World ith'Moon too lately is found out,
It will with Lunaticks join, we need not doubt.
With fire from heaven thus Dover's in our power;
The Thames we will turn to flames, shall burn the Tower.
Is your Cause good? the primitive weapons take,
Of prayers and tears a thundering Legion make.
You every (...) in Oaths could breathe a prayer
With noise and threats, as if yours Thunder were.
Fools, who cast darts'gainst heaven, fell on th'Kings head:
Meek Lamb, for your sins he was offered.
Then times nor manners cry, but for your own
Bad manners such bad times had never been known.
Whose heir to land, he must be heir to wit:
Fools fortune have, but wise men guardian it.
The fools seed in his tail, wise man in's brain:
Thus wise men fools, and fools wise children gain.
The sons of Bulrushes, lechery of each fool,
Thus over your fortunes, and over you must rule.
Boast not of Titles, nor of generous blood;
What virtue gained, lose virtue; they are not good.
To a degenerate thing falsely called A NOBLE.
FIe! fie! Can nothing noble speak, 'bove Oaths,
Or th'Apish varnish of some modish Clothes?
Or to learn Jockey phrase, dialect of th^hound?
Whose virtue, like your own, is all in sound.
Or can distinguish Lanner, Lanneret,
Falcon, Iarfalcon, Gosshawk, and cry Ret;
Hares start, Deer rowse, that Partridge sprung is knows,
What Woodcocks be by's nose that is cup flushed shows;
Or to unkennel Fox can wisely tell:
Rare Gentleman highly bred, though scarce can spell,
And writes his Name in Text, with such a paw,
You Would swear 'twas catechized with the Devils claw.
Or th'Country air's too dull, he must to th'Burse
Of Blasphemy, Irreligions Nurse;
Where Is not a look but's baited for to cheat,
And not a tongue but's oyled for deceit.
Of's Families blood carousing cups here fill,
And bids it die, while he his Die throws ill.
Where theft's unpunished, pleasing murders be,
Got in a crowd of sin mad amity:
Or turns a City Chemist, di^t refines
To gold; in Manours, not Manners shines.
Taking a pattern b^ the Lord May'rs show,
Trimmed gay, and like a Pag^ant gilt does go:
Whom Law finds out before on it he looks,
Gains all his knowledge by his Mercers books.
Or peeps in France brave man, where he is no spy;
In riddling Statists Mysteries scorns to pry:
Yet re^urns A pe transformed Al-a-mode,
With Pedlers gibrish, and a Pedlers load.
Or in antipathy gets the Spanish shrug,
And looks as grave as th'man ith'Alehouse Iug:
Answers by nods, the stupid would seem grave;
Who nothing vents, must a strange fullness have.
The silent Ass might Lord ith'Lions skin,
But when he brayed, all knew an Ass within.
Affected gesture, and a sowrer look,
With graver voice, for wisdom would be took.
And peep up Statesman, though the wiser dead
Were never of's Counsel, nor has th'living read.
These are the Comets reared from th'fat of earth,
Presage Kings ruin, and the People death.
A Character of a Complete Gentleman. To John Cotton Esquire Heir to the Knowledge
and Virtue, as well as to the Honor and Fortunes of his Ancestors. To his Coz.
George Boswel Esquire rich in Desert as Fortune.
THou to the lame art legs, eyes to the blind,
They their own wants in thy perfections find.
Thou pluck'st no houses down, to rear thy own;
The poor Gods houses rear'st out of thy stone.
Thou to the poor giv'st bread, even out of stone;
And not to him who asks bread, give one.
Thy door is open, and thy heart so too;
Have both enough, and heart enough to do.
Thou not inclosest to fence out the poor,
But an enclosure art to keep their store.
Sheep eat no men, thy men thy sheep do eat;
In tears of others wil'st not stew thy meat.
To dogs the Childrens bread thou do not give,
Make thy dogs fat, scarce let thy servants live.
Thy father gives thee dirt, thou make it gold,
Virtue refines it to a better mold.
Gold the Suns child thou let'st the father see,
That it may make a child of light of thee.
Thou bragg'st no stem; think vice improves no blood,
Should vice or taint, or virtue speak not good.
For Honor, Conscience do not put to sale;
Or thy Religion steer by profits gale.
Imbib'st no dregs even in these lees of time,
A licensed ill can think no lesser crime.
Thou drink'st no health for to impair thy own,
By th'cup*Hush'd face think noble blood not shown.
By no rash humor swell'st the Kingdoms spleen,
From whose bulk th'leanness has of th'body been.
Where he who gains no Idol for his lust,
An Idol Fancy gets of Cits on trust.
While profit's th'Prophet that does teach it there,
Religion showed by darker shops like ware.
These not the world only, but think God to cheat,
Forge some new light, he is theirs by the deceit.
These take not thee, nor those Hawks towering prize,
While they can grovel in impurities.
Thy Reason is a Hawk, which takes a flight,
As if she would nest her in a Sphere of light.
What would a nurse more for her child heaven woo,
Then to have good, know how to use it too.
Nobility innobled. A Character of the most excellent Marquis of Dorchester,
Earl of Kingstone, The Lord Pierrepont.
IN Honors Sphere thou like a Sun art shown,
Impartest light, yet not impair'st thy own.
The Poets Phoebus, and Physicians too,
Nay ev^n Church lights have influence from you.
They who laid hands on others for to preach,
On them th'times hands lay for to silence teach.
Thy hands relieve the mischief others do;
They Are strangely tongue-ty'd cannot speak of you.
No gilt-tongu'd Lawyer but does plead for thee;
When you are but named, he has his Angel fee.
Physicians 'bove Catholicon thee quote,
Against times infection their best antidote.
Thou read'st the living, yet neglect'st not th'dead,
Have both in Books and Skeletons them over read.
But oh th'rich incense of each virgin prayer,
While parents virtues now made dowries are!
Stream to posterity honor in thy blood,
What vice nor th'times Contagion taints, is good.
Plaistred with blood no house on ruins built,
With others gold reared up, but thy own gilt.
'Bove Constellations may thy Coronet shine:
Honor her self is honored being thine.
Who the lost Ciphers the house of Lords complains,
While that perfections sum in thee remains.
On Thomas Lord Wentworth Earl of STRAFFORD.
SAy not the Army took the Kingdoms head,
For Charles in Strafford a long time was dead.
The King with his own hand himself did slay:
The hand took Straffords, took his head away.
How could his head upon his shoulders stand,
Gave leave to take the best headpiece in his Land?
None durst to knowledge Strafford dead pretend;
Wisdoms Monopoly with his head did end.
With the Wentworth; ah worth with thee was fled!
Ireland no venom, Strafford living bred,
Nor England Wolves, which could her sheep devour,
They placed him, would have placed them, in that Tower.
The silly sheep a league with wolves would make,
They ask their dogs, dogs gone, their lives they take.
Nor wanted Strafford guilt, though wanted Law;
He for his death, did his own warrant draw;
He drew the heads, took his; his case the same,
He gave himself the stab in Buckingham:
When he cried charge him high, should the Law fail,
The rabble that knows no Law will prevail.
Nor thrive they better his black Curtain draw,
They since have found necessity has no Law.
May none with greatness surfeit that succeed,
And for state physic be prescribed to bleed.
Whence the bloody issue, has run twelve year,
Lord let it stop while we by faith draw near.
Summum jus summa injuria in jure regni.
GOld Crowns are Coined by steel, and stamped by might,
Thus the Saxons, Danish, Normans, Tudors right.
The Roman Eagles ceased on their prey;
Their talons swords were carved the Empires way.
'Twas steel that gave the Spaniard all his gold:
By's Bilbo blades he does his Indies hold.
To edge blunt tools the Priest talks of the word.
It Is steel that conquers, not the two edged sword.
The Ottoman Moon had else bin in the wane;
Refulgent steel does it new luster gain.
The greatest injury is the greatest right:
Yet out of darkness God creates a light,
While Greece did make a Conquest of the world,
She with her arms her arts about it hurled.
Civility did with Roman Eagles fly;
To Tames a way to learn civility.
Who Conquers bodies, may he Conquer Minds;
And leave us men whom he like wild beasts finds.
Though he a Kingdom gains, we shall lose none;
When every man does in himself gain one,
Who is no prop to a declining throne,
Sins against his Kings in Earth, in Heaven his own,
He Is traitor helps a traitor to a Throne,
Yet who resists him on it may be one;
Martlets and Capets treasons thrones acqu ir'd;
Yet both so well ruled France, thought both inspired.
A petty notary ruled so well in Rome
The time of the golden Age, did the name assume.
Otho may sacrifice 'f all for public good;
Good with ten thousands losse's no right of blood.
On Poverty.
What art thou poverty, thou so much art fled
Christ spous'd thee living, us bequeathed thee dead:
Ambition never tenters thee on racks;
No vulture gnaws thy heart; plot thy brain cracks;
No emulous rival have; no hollow friend;
Do in the place you are born securely end:
By healthful hunger sauc'd meats happy be;
No table made a snare by gluttony;
By neighboring floods sav'st charges of excise;
Drink which the wise makes fools, can make thee wise!
No Dropsies fear; no Gout; nor no Catarrh;
Palate with body nere Commences war;
Thy body and thy Conscience both are clear;
Have nothing here to hope, or ought to fear,
No man to cut this shrub down, his axe whets;
Nor a self-wounding Conscience by regrets.
While others sport of winds; hoist into th'deep,
Along the shore he does securely keep.
The Ostridgs body hinders her wings,
While such a lark mounts up, with ease and sings.
Who desires little, he thinks little much;
Such as desires are, even our Riches such.
What dead thou can enjoy, alive despise.
Who sets his heart on others goods, not wise.
For this, ah this Princes changed Crowns for Cells;
He Is Crowned with joy; with whom contentment dwells.
The pleasures of the World.
Wise men's desires which of their souls are sails,
Should steer to Heav^n; while sighs send thifher gales;
And down on appetites like to fishes look;
Which run at rotten worms which hide a hook;
Begot of sense, which like abortives die;
With shame and grief season satietie;
Dreams which disturbance have, not rest of sleep:
Various as Children sporting at Bo-peep.
Of Sysiphus stone, or an Ixions wheel,
What Poets fancy, here we true may feel:
Felicities are floting Islands which retire:
As soon as we to touch them do desire,
Of ere relapsing actious life's a toil;
Where for one Rose, a thousand thorns us spoil.
See how from walnuts troops of silly boys;
Men pursue bubles, end before their noise.
Who said an egg the joys of the world confined:
Deceived not, though it broke, showed naught but wind.
Joy only tickles the outside of the skin:
Sweet waters Seas of bitterness run in.
What can we draw from the world, but buble swell,
Break, vanish, Dives lend no drop in Hell.
Pleasure's a wandering bird, does singing sit,
But fly's away when you would catch at it.
Would you of the world, the greatest pleasure know,
Pleasure condemn; it from contempt does grow.
A defense of Curiosity: an unsettled mind in unseled times; to weak Calumny
and proud ignorance.
THE world is but a Theater of ill;
Knaves, Fools, and madmen do the stage up fill;
Religion the vizard is which most put on
To act their parts; parts done, the vizards gone.
Which mimick gesture, and affected tone,
Few personate the part that is their own.
The shriveld's old wretch, acts the Giants part:
And the pent scul must the magazine be of art.
He Is more then an Apollo that can show,
T'en talk, preach, scribe of the things they know.
For birds sure it is strange happiness to be hedged,
There chirp and make a noise, before thei'r fledged;
What though to pillory'd truth I rescue go,
I this day books, the next I men would know;
Undo my self lest I might be undone;
There Is Parthian like by flight, some victory won.
What though I laugh at all, all laugh me:
Democritus blind, more then an age could see.
Eyes bloods hot red, Ictericks yellow spy;
Who thinks the stars twinckle, it is his own weak eye*
Thus I read men and books, and have a key
To each man's breasts, which is my Library.
All natures giddy imperfections read
Me lectures, and confirm in virtues Creed.
More then the gam'ster, sees the stander by;
This life's an art of casting of the die:
The world's the Inn, in which the cheaters meet,
Scarce life a passage has without deceit.
If Proteus-like I each day vary shapes;
To learn their natures it is, not imitate apes.
Spunges with error swol'n I use to squeese,
To know their filth, not drink in their disease.
Though heat 'bove dogdaies revels in my blood
To quench the lust-scorch'd Lecher lend a flood.
Orecharg'd with liquor nere a spung can spy
That I with liquor want an orecharg'd eye.
Yet none less then a Merlin must I fall?
Fools bolts are soon shot, must they wound me all?
When pride and folly do in judgment sit,
Can they vote less then treason in a wit?
See the silly herd of animals raise a cry!
Are pleased with the noise they make, yet know not why;
The birds which do in fortunes sunshine play,
A storm impending, Croak and fly away.
Dogs which with clamor flying heels pursue,
Turn and their tails shall complement with you.
I change my friend, often as I change my cloths;
Who'd not love rags, which thus can take these moths.
Who's gay without, thought only rich within;
Knowledge and follies shrine's no venial sin.
Plato's to me for all hence giddy crowd,
Under whose wings folly must only shroud.
Vant wretch, whom nature hudled up in have,
And all thy wisdom in thy riches placed;
At knowledge trial let her have her peers;
Know justice some paint blind, none without ears.
Would you in long Coats have all peep up sages;
In gravity and wisdom bafling ages?
I am too wise already, if that you
To understand me gain not wisdom to,
Plato's a friend, and Socrates is one,
But truth is more a friend, who leaves me none.
Could Bias that was wise deformed be?
Or could be poor, that had Philosophy?
Empedocles knowledge would to Heaven ally;
I Will into stars for new alliance pry.
Yet Thales-like, while I the stars do view,
Not fall ith well, to make your proverbs true.
Plato says, reason man discerns from beast;
Must, Gryphin-like, I gold pile in a nest?
Whereof thou have no use, wretch hoard up pelf:
He nothing has, has all, and not himself.
To's Son, if wife, the Cynick nothing gave;
Wisemen all natures treasuries open have.
What though a rouling stone gathers no moss?
For to be clogged with dirt's not gain, but loss.
I make the way to truth smooth, while I roll;
To keep dirt down, not gather'st use of soul,
The creeping things of the world are all below
A wise man's thoughts, whose only end's to know;
Not curious it desires, that he may know;
Nor vain to flash; and to the world it show*
Nor covetous knowledge does for profit seek,
But edify himself, and build up the week;
Inth' Sea of the world can he to steer right know,
Has only learned in some poor pond to row?
Thus a rash Pilot does to Sea resort,
In winds, and waves of error to make sport;
While the wise balanced with a richer freight,
Against storms of errors, counterpois'd by weight.
He should be wise a troubled Sea must enter,
And well poised too all in one bark does venture,
But oh in the world no other art I find,
Beside the tacking round with every* wind.
The Character of a good widow. Memoriae sacrum Heroniae adeo exoptatissimae
and medullitus dilectiss. materterae, Eliz. Boswel.
Epitaphie.
NEc vane dives, nec inani nomine nobilis,
Eliz. Boswel hic sepulta jaceo;
Divitibus specimen virtutis; viduis Continentiae;
Providentiae matribus; and haec nimis
Humanae inconstantiae speculum omnibus!
Quam eximiae fui pietatis, disce a liberis;
Quam diffusiva charitatis, audi a proximis:
Quam inexplebilis munificentiae, and a meis qu^re and ab alienis;
Quam spectatae fui fidei; opera te instruunt;
Quam famae adeo integrae, etiam hosts tibi indicant:
Quum neque jam mussitet invidiae aut Calumnia obmurmaret.
Quam intemeratae pudicitiae, non minus Casta
Quam Cauta viduitas edocet;
Primulae veris viduae, delicatulae, diviti,
Mihi soli Conjux non occubuit senex;
In quadriga liberorum charus aeque ac superstes:
Quibus heu tandem, ut bonis omnibus, flebilis occidi;
At nulli flebilior quam nepoti,
Qui monumentum and luctus, and pietatis, hoc posuit.
On the death of Mistress E. Kinesm, whom age had transformed to a Sceleton.
I Wonder not you are dead, but how could live:
Or to a Sceleton why they burial give.
Sure Pelican like to your own children food,
You first your bowels gave, and then your blood.
Or age refined thee, 'cause the way was strait,
And took thy flesh, to fit thee for Heaven gate.
Or twindled to a Child, 'cause none must venture,
But who is child-like, the heavenly Palace enter.
They live long, who live well: what meets in you
To live both long and well, is rarely true.
A parent not in empty name, but care:
Indeed a widow, yet no widow were,
Your* husband in your love to him survived;
Whose heart, flesh, life, was his, was he short lived?
Who would your praises fully but indite,
Does need an Age, long as you lived, to write.
To a painted Lady, a Calf spotted, lusts Idol, like the Idol of the Egyptians.
MAdam, why so fair? why so foul?
What can no less entrap a soul?
Art acts adultery in your skin:
When hell's without, ah what is within!
Who would dote on painted bliss,
Which melts away with every kis^e?
Or who would tie his love to hair?
Make love like it the sport of air.
The moon has spots, and so have you;
The emblems change, and you will so too.
Or you these foils for beauty wear,
'Cause Venus some feign, moles made fair,
Who gain a love, by seeming fair,
Their love, and beauty like fate share:
Love shifts, when you but shift your face:
Or outcomes, when you teeth displace:
Puppits which move by phancies wire,
Let the rich in fooleries desire:
Think you each hair in curls a hook,
Baited with powder fools are took.
To me the powd'ring of the hair
Makes you seem aged, and not fair.
Or like a sheeps-head's wool does show,
Who mates you, for a Ram must go.
Black patches do betray defects:
Beauty's best seen in her neglects.
Cupid in black in your face spread,
Mourns there for love and beauty dead.
And your half Moon in this black veil,
Shows you can change, though luster fail.
Or think you here Egyptians be,
For the spotted Calf may worship thee?
An Ape is, though no Apis shown,
Without your spots can make you one.
I search no pedigrees, nor care
Who owed your breath, or teeth, or hair:
Yet though in breath we Saba meet;
The smell's not well, smells always sweet.
Though paint and plaistring may be gins
To passengers, tempt to rotten Inns.
Ceruse nor Fucus e're can move,
Where Religion fixes love.
It Is neither marble, gold, nor paint,
But the Adorer makes the Saint.
To a Lady of Pleasure.
CEase, Phryne, cease, leave off thy Charms,
Leave the circling of thine arms.
Each circle is a Magic spell,
Would Devils raise in flesh to dwell.
Who's passionate with wanton love,
Unto himself a hell does prove.
By passions, Poets furies meant;
Their snakes were sins, which men torment.
Mischief with mischief's tangled in;
The twines of snakes are ways of sin.
Their skins are gay, but tails lodge stings;
Thus are the pleasures Venus brings.
These kiss like Judas, and betray;
And Crocodile-like, both weep and ^lay.
Thus Teile trees yield a pleasing shade,
But of their fruit's a poison made:
Or Sodoms Apples, th'fruits of sin,
Are fair without, and foul within.
To fish for Souls, Lust's hells gilt bait,
On which a sharper hook does wait.
Murder with Fornication twins;
Murder ends, what Lust begins.
The spurious issues of base wombs,
Where they have li^e receive their tombs.
Lust from the best things venom makes;
As th'Spider from the best herbs it takes.
Ensigns of peace translates to wars,
Where Souls have wounds, and Honor scars.
Her mouth streams honey, heart has gall:
Lust's sweets are thus embitter'd all.
When lustful Amorists fires do name,
Sure they anticipate here hells flame.
Who sin in's breast, a Devil keeps therein:
But Madg'len like they sev'n lodge, lodge this sin.
Where Lust does enter it the strong man binds;
It makes a Sampson weak, and so him blindes.
Here hairs are less then sins, lust takes the hair
As it did Sampsons, but the sin leaves there.
In the act of sin the tumid members tell
Lust is a venom, which can make them swell.
To his Lady Book.
COme, Book, my Mistress, neither proud nor coy,
The gay nor impudent Mymicks thee enjoy;
Nor all the empty revellings of vice
Ravish a sweetness, virtue's her own price:
Thou shall unlock me th'treasuries of the deep,
For me earths bosom shall her riches keep;
Which to an heavenly quintessence I Will refine,
As the last fire earth will for heaven calcine.
So bettered Nature shall my servant be:
Mine the Elixir of Philosophy.
Thus I the golden age again will bring;
From dregs of the iron age out gold shall spring.
Then I Will to th'Sky, it Atlas-like uphold,
While I th'Star-spangled Canopy unfold.
The Heavens a Book, the Stars the Letters be,
Where I will spell out ridling Destiny.
Then heavens twelve houses I Will to tenem^nts make,
And for them rent, will by Astrology take.
Hence I Will slide down into the silent grave,
And of the sleeping world the riches have.
Unravel Ages past, and from th'dark night
And Chaos of Confusion, force a light.
And quicken fire from ashes of each Urn,
Where hallowed tapers shall to light me burn.
The present teach, and future: Correct the age past;
It Is Knowledge Empire must to ages last.
The wise man is the King none can depose:
Can th'Cockatrice crush ith'egg, unking his foes.
Can rebel passions unto reasons bar,
Which menace Soul and Fortune with a war.
Then States and Churches, Fancy ravels through,
This Oedipus those Sphinxes can undo.
In Aph'risms truth imprisoned I Will set free;
Her th'bottom of the well cannot hide from me*
Nor the (...) of the Ottoman race,
To raise himself all others would deface.
I Will laugh at him with Aristotle's scolds,
Believes no light but what is dark lanthorn holds.
Or Galens scurf, thinks th'quintessence of art,
Who what Elixir was could never impart.
Can he of Natures privy Council be,
Show rooms within, who never did intrails see?
Strange Lapidaries price of gems would tell
Viewing the Cask, not what within does dwell.
Sev'n year of study thus of famine be,
The soul not sated with Philosophy.
All dream like Pharaoh, but no Joseph's here,
Egyptian Sages wise in vain appear.
See th'walking Library, whom men Doctor call,
A scold well disciplined, learnedly can brawl:
Like Cadmus soldiers notions in his brain,
By mutual quarrels have each other slain.
Has tympanies of terms, a Cobweb net
Of poisonous theses for a Fly can set.
Like the fish Sleve, which presents a sword,
Yet by inspection does no heart afford.
Though seeming vigor and acuteness be,
There is no heart in their Philosophy.
A shallow puddle does resemblance bear
Of Sun, Moon, Stars, and all heavens glory there:
Yet with a finger you may fathom it:
Seas are too deep for the Stagirites great wit.
He on his followers shallowness does intail;
From th'bottom of the well truth gets no bail.
Surely they dream, if dreams in fancy be:
Fancies are Maxims of Philosophy.
On Retirement.
I Leave the world, it me, yet not alone,
Nor left, have ages for my patrons known.
Or can I be alone, who treat with the world,
Which is within, yours to th'first Chaos hurled.
I only then to be alone begin,
When on my privacies Sciolists crowd in.
Thus I can pinion time, memory recruit;
From The Age snatch th'sickle, and reap Wisdoms fruit*
In th'Scheme of the world my own Nativity find,
And there gain eyes to see where Chance is blind.
The fool is solitary, wise* man never alone,
Who has himself, wants no companion.
Who serves himself is never served amiss;
Retirement Wisdoms Cousin German is.
Men live like caged birds, crowd and defile
Each other, while Religion's in exile.
Who leaves himself, it is he does living die;
Inherits worms, who here keeps company.
All do like worms on putrefaction prey,
Or in their actions rottenness display:
Remote from th'Sun, our days are there more long;
Digestion better, life and growth more strong.
Th'worlds glories scorch us, dazzle, or exhale;
Or sin turns Ethiop, or guilt makes us pale.
Yet when these scorch, retire, within's a Cave;
In our own bodies we may cooling have.
If Fortunes freeze, or more obscured be;
The souls within, a torch, light, warmth for thee,
Each sown Umbrella is, and his own sun;
Desert thy self, thy joy and light is done.
Thus you may gain what others strive to seem;
Let me gain Knowledge, others gain Esteem.
Man a Microcosm.
NAtures Compendium, th'worlds Epitome,
Our flesh is earth, our blood is as a Sea.
Have heaven in Knowledge; Soul of Gods a ray,
Which in the night of flesh breaks forth a day,
What light without, that knowledge is within,
Through the eyes the windows of our Souls let in.
To circle bout the world the blood's a Sun,
The Stars the senses, which their courses run.
Motions and perturbations of the mind,
Resemble tempests, thunder, lightning, wind,
Which in our ae^y Region do arise,
To cloud the mind, and so obscure the Skies.
These on the blood Commotions once begun,
We lose the effect of light by th'clouded sun.
Tumors like Meteors in our bodies rise,
The exhalations of impurities:
And in a Collique or Hysterique fit,
We feel pent wind a Earthquake make in it.
Congealed slime like Thunderbolts, we find
By heat of reins in clouds of flesh confined.
Our mind the day is, and our flesh the night,
Death is but darkness, and our life the light.
Of the Blood.
POets feign Phoebus blushing sets in red,
While he descends down to his watery bed.
Sure in these purple streams the Sun does glide,
And in his Crimion Chariot blushing ride,
While he does circle through the lesser world,
Through veins of earth in strange Meanders curled.
Now in a full tide channels does disdain,
Flows into flesh, and then ebbs back again.
Thus blood, Sun-like, gives motion, life and sense,
Spirit, and innate heat are naught from hence.
Distinct from Blood, who can the Soul ought call;
It Is all in every part, and all in all.
Though Nature seems restored by Cock-white broth,
It is a Sun beam Chariots in the froth.
Thus man cannot get a man, unless the Sun
Club to the act of Generation.
It Is light is life; 't may place change, never dies,
And by its nature only multiplies.
How of the body is the Soul the act,
When without it no body is compact?
Do we our senses borrow from the brain,
When before it our senses do remain?
Or is the heart or liver shops of blood,
When before either is a purple flood?
Here is that Plato's, here that vestal fire
Kindled by Sunbeams, which can never expire*
Take away heat, it is Cruor and not blood,
Streams of impurities issue with this flood:
Ouseinto flesh, and out by Ulcers run:
Yet never were blood, no nature took from th'sun.
Though blood-shews like a heat enameled cloud,
Corruption with discoloring don't shroud.
Lord, what is man thou should thus mindeful be?
Placing in him this tutelar Deity.
Water and Earth poor man, at best but mud;
By th'quickning ray of heaven turned flesh and blood.
When thou but take of heaven this light away,
That which before was flesh and blood, is clay.
Gods Tabenacle thus placed in the Sun,
That Giant races must with the whole world run.
On the Humors.
A Tetrasyncrasy must of humors be;
Nature from discords produce harmony.
How wisely the bloody mass is understood?
Two Cholers, black and yellow, phlegm and blood.
Phlegm is so crude it scarce bloods nature takes;
Blood Choler turns, but Choler never blood makes.
Yellow to black by heats exuberance tends:
Black into none, see where perfection ends.
When Natures work only Concoction is,
To gain perfection we arrive at this.
O happy age from imperfections free,
Perfections sure mopish or mad to be.
On the Elements.
TO answer Humors who four Elements chose,
Had need the fifth, their quarrels to compose.
Sure it is Love does all together knit;
Love made the world, and Love preserves it.
Things different are, but nothing contrary is,
But as intended, or it is remisle.
Ah! why should Med'ciners in their art agree,
Since Natures self's but Contrariety?
Against Phlebotomy to a Leech.
PHilosophy ends where Physic does begin:
It Is strangely true, for few admit it in.
Tell stories of Corruption of the blood;
What Is once corrupt, can it return to good?
To the habit from privation, how is recesse?
Phlebotomy's Key not loosing rottenness.
Or opening, cannot distinguish good from bad?
Would each blood-sucking Leech the knowledge had.
The treasury of life they would not exhaust,
Take th'price of blood, while life with blood is lost.
To Natures countermiinng not intent,
To let death in, and life out give a vent.
More merciful Turks thus blood do never spill,
Under pretense of help, nor do they kill.
Lest to his bloody art th'Leech too much trust,
To take him off we need from graves fetch dust.
For Phlebotomy.
THe Courses Nature does in Women take
To open veins, shall we in men forsake?
Where Nature dictates, who will not submit?
She keeps her Monthly terms to plead for it.
She Will argue a priori by the Nose;
And by the Breech a posteriori shows.
When Natures self does once turn Critical,
I pray resign, no Critics be at all;
Against all Phlebotomy who plead, sure jest:
In th'mood they plead for to refute it best.
A Piss-pot Prophet.
SEE th'man of Recipes how his Cloak is lined!
Sure th'insides rich, where we such linings find.
Can strut, not gravely, with an ominous look,
Like Mahomet when from th'Dove he Counsel took,
Consults with his Mustachio's before he is heard;
Surely he strokes his wisdom from his beard.
Your liver's foul, and stomach, pains ith'heart,
We Cardialgia call it men of art,
Your spirits natural; vital, animal be,
And l'me afraid, not from obstructions free.
Would of erratique griefs you causes know?
The head's the fountain, whence these streams do flow.
Your livers hot, cold stomach, thence to the brain,
Vapors a^ise in Clouds, shower back again.
You are hydroptick, nay, Cachectick too,
I strangely fear a discrasy in you.
Oh, oh my heart, my heart does down retreat
Their monstrous purges you (learned sir) repeat.
They Panchymagogi, and Catholicons be;
And Diaphaenicon th'rare Electuarie.
These are your purges man; the Bezar stone,
Brave Cordial, unto all but me unknown.
Have you a pain in the stomach? yes, back and head?
Lord Master Doctor where have you this read?
In The urine man* by this I even can know
Each step, and stair by which to bed you go.
Piss takes the form of parts as it runs through,
I could no better know, was I in you.
Hence looking-glasses, Chamberpots we call,
'Cause in your piss we can discover all.
Why this no less then Aarons brestplate is,
The Seminalities of all ills in piss:
To trust in this the College does forbid,
Vile men would prelate-like have knowledge hid.
I never durst approach the College near,
They Bishop like do place an Image there.
Their Idol- Harvy of the Serpents breed.
To break his head denis the woman seed.
VVe're wonderfully made the Scripture says,
Yet this wretch how we are made would show the ways;
Nay, Conjurer-like makes Circling in the blood,
I know not why, but sure it cannot be good.
What spirit it is he trades with is unknown
Distinct from blood he will no spirits own.
Out of five senses too he would persuade
He need add more, your senses are decaid:
And the world does senses want to fee deceit,
Both out of money and of life to cheat.
All like the frog to physic will pretend,
Would others cure cannot their own croaking mend.
To a Gigger to Padua, Valentia, and Leiden Doctors.
Who giggs to Padua, does Montpelier sent,
Creeps in, steals out, as if for theft he went*
If gains, sure steals in secret knowledge there?
Or the French inspires him, or Italian air?
Or the zany knowledge, waits on the Giants name?
Or the matter lurks in an impostum'd fame?
Or who is where wit is dealt, must need have share?
^eripatetiques Grand Philosophers were.
If you are Laden with exotique gold,
To come near the Tower of truth you may be bold.
For Custom-sake unto the College come,
Volleys of praise shall entertain you home:
Not gilt ore to deceive, with titles dressed,
Gold need not fear for to endure the test:
Gold's the Suns Child, why do ye fear the light?
See how the bats do fear, and love the night!
Unplum'd and bloodlesse by the light they are known,
In errors twilight flut'ring they are unknown.
A darker shop befits their fucate drugs,
These sucked not milk; but blood from stepdames dugs.
On Suburban-non Licentiates, who Foxlike call the College grapes sour.
YOu're all Licentiates; though no licensed crew,
And titles which you paid for are your due;
Though you by Doctors names entitled be,
Only to Folly in a high degree.
Letters of commendations fools may gain,
Which pockets carry, the wise man's in his brain.
Honor's the wise man's bride, fools act a rape.
The Colledge-fruits are sour like the foxes grape;
These like the Dogs in errors darker night,
Bark at the Moon, but cannot catch the light.
Professors might to the College pupils be,
Gain what you want, in knowledge a degree.
They in arts rudiments could instruct a sage,
Knowledge her self is here in pupillage.
Shine out great lights, your beams for life display,
While death portending Comets blaze and slay.
On the excellent Dr. Glisson.
HIc gliscit ars. Art may in vain intend,
Her nervs for knowledge, Glisson not her friend.
Knowledge enervate did and strenghlesse lie,
Til Glisson use did to the nerves supply.
The spirit more refined may now in vain,
Knowledge in the circle, not progress, complain:
Harvy, and Glisson, will force all confess
Knowledge by circling, now is in the progress.
The Sequestered Priest pidling in Physic.
Who's both sequestered here of state and wit,
He in revenge to the world would murder it;
Cries destiny, God Author makes of ill,
When by a cruel ignorance he does kill.
Iure divino will this calling have;
Luke a Physician the perogative gave;
Yet sure learned Bard, it will the contrary teach,
Not you Physicians, make Physicians preach.
The fugitive Chymick.
THe Knave turns quack too, blowed the chemist coal;
As if each blast, inspired their Theophrasts soul.
He talks of salt without a grain of wit;
But Mercury's sure in the lightness of his wit;
Nor does he want his Sulphur, he has got
Against the state no less then Powderplot.
Or good from bad by Pyrotechny take,
Or else you poison may for medicine make.
Yet the best things corrupted the worst be;
Heaven or hels spirits are in Chymistrie.
On sigils.
For art of memory, signs on Planets set,
Teach men themselves, and Planets to forget.
Are placed on Sigi^s, maladies to cure;
By monsters, Ague-like they are frighted sure.
If it is in matter, in all metalls power.
If in the form, the scorpion may devour.
More wisely Theophrast did (...) write
On^s Sigil; and for foolery it endite.
On the Astrologicall quack.
AT the College of the stars he did commence,
And Statesman-like will speak the houses sense,
Each house for man's use stranger herbs has got,
To them they essence property, seed allot.
But is it not strange; when they so numerous be,
How all do with a fewer stars agree?
Each pil and potion too has different sign:
Nature in the stomach sure now cannot refine.
Or is it since Heaven stand still, and earth turns round,
We here are giddy, there no truth is found?
The Heavens a book is, where men wonders read,
The stars are letters, most a Christ's Cross need.
Oglio of quacks.
WE souls and bodies Medicasters have,
Both are hereditary, Father fool, Son the knave.
The disease that is known, half cured some do say,
Now not to know it, to cure't's the ready way,
A fortunate Doctor though he has no skill,
Wisely can cure, before he knows the ill.
Nay, even his potion knowledge can instill;
Who Is cured by chance, a recipe gains to kill:
The triple toothed join with three recipes,
A sacred number can cure each disease.
Looking like the Sceleton stole from Surgeons Hall,
Having there Knowledge gain'd's Chyrurgical*
With Solomon's Key, and's Cabal quacks the Jew,
And the book whose name sure works Nebolahu.
Sputring-like the Country quack with terms of art;
Who by piss prophesying wonders does impart.
The words sent the Syrian King this wretch makes wise,
Another those were spoke in Paradise;
But oh see Locusts from the infernal pit,
Leech, Falkner, Huntsman, all for murder fit.
'Twixt man and beast there is now no difference made,
To the bestial part since reason man betrayed.
Physicians once were Children of the Sun,
Now night, and earth need cover what is done.
Wise Lacedemon would no quacks endure,
Themselves intitling unto natures cure.
A painter convert, Leech said Earth may hide
The faults I now make, the former were espied.
While Italy did to Adrian complain.
Under pretense of help, their friends were slain.
The Pope replied, the Land would be too great,
These you devour, least you your selves might eat.
Thus cruelty passing uncontrolled by Law,
Leeches by purse, and veins the heart blood draw.
Yet all Egyptian-like to Crocodiles pay
Devotion for requital do them slay.
On Noah Big's vanity of the Craft of Physic.
IN Noah Bigs ark truth shall nere be saved,
Since for one truth preserved he twenty waved.
While you would physic purge, and purges too;
We need a purge of hellebore for you:
Like the mad man living in a Seaport Town,
Thought all the ships came in the hav'n his own.
No ship but his at truths port has arrived,
In waves of error drowned, none else survived.
Yet while he is gleaning up Van Helmonts scraps,
And the Dutch hogs head long since broch'd new taps,
Had he apprentise to an Alewife been,
By yest fermenting ale he more had seen,
The humors to ferment had better shown,
Then what Van's stronger fancy brews or's own.
Yet it is no matter though all Sciolists be,
Knowledge in Physiques occult quality.
On Noah Biggs.
BY the spirit more though Chemistry can show,
Then by it Enthusiasts of the age do know.
Though ages dreamed, and the aged dreamers be,
We that are young men do no Visions see.
To glean truth see in Harvy Harves here,
Themselves in him the College pillars rear.
No more of every wind of fancy sport,
He gives them truth, and gives them reason for it.
Yet thou dear Biggs so well of ill have writ,
He who cannot praise thy truth, may praise thy wit.
On Fontinels.
WHat though Chymera's all defluxions be,
That need to have an issues midwifrie;
He that does good, though he the cause don't know,
There is no cause why he should less it do.
Corruption from a roweld horse does flow:
'Cause the Farrier knows not, why is it so?
Who truth immersed, would pluck out of the pit,
Not only peeps, but does exantlate it.
To the first moving vesicle tracts the blood:
Has ebbing, flowing, circling understood:
Whence our impurities spring, knows every mine:
Not fights 'bout words, but can the things define.
He who shows faults, to truth he is no friend:
But he who showing teaches to amend.
Had the acute Van-Helmont faults thus shown,
He had cured ours, and not have made his own.
Nor while he proves all issues to be vain,
Prove only so, the issue of his brain.
Let Us Scholars all to Patavie be sent,
Where they for giddy fumes, give hogsheads vent.
On Van Helmont.
IN luxury of wit there is more then needs:
And in the best of Gardens there is some weeds*
In Helmonts Paradise there is of life a tree,
By fruits of knowledge we may blinded be:
And while our imperfections we would smother,
Only some figleaves take to make a Cover.
What few do, seems to know of what he wilt,
Superfaetation has no abort wit.
'Bove Galens scurf, 'bove him whose scraps might feed
Sages, yet he a school boys latin need:
Yet to set the Kernel off, let the shel be foil,
If not much labor, Theophrast showed much oil.
But oh! while errors troops Van rashly charges,
Error him Captive takes, who truth inlarges.
On Doctor Harvey.
What can one pillar only be thy due,
The College pillar, and truths pillar too?
Had we Seth's pillar whose sight Joseph feigns,
Perusing thine, 'twould scarce requite our pains.
Non datur ultra Hercules pillars show,
Beyond a Hercules labors thou do go.
Seav'n headed Hydra, error multiplied
Thou need'st no Club, thy knife can soon divide:
Augean filths no work when vy'd with thee,
Do cleanse the Jakes of all antiquity,
All truths before thine, did like heat-drops fall.
Vanished so soon, scarce seen, or known at all.
Thou set'st up sail, swim's through the purple flood,
Which blushed before, 'cause never understood.
Thou circlest through our Microcosom, and we
Learn more then the world, our selves, new worlds by thee
Knowledge was eaten through with ages rust,
And the Serpent now would cheat us with his dust;
Most do an apple fancy, knowledge fruit;
Say but an Harvey, we assent unto't.
Yet here we knowledge gain withoout a death;
Death only opens us a way to breath;
Enabled by the cunning of his knife,
He Cherubin like does guard the tree of life.
Above the milky way in glory shine,
Lend humane nature luster more divine;
Those lesser stars, a, Peckquet, Bartholine
Lose all their glory, when by it vy'd with thine;
They babes in Physic by thy milk may please,
Thou open'st veins for cure of truths disease.
Art natures midwife, stripst her Callow brood,
And new attirest to enrich our blood
What need we pillars unto Harvey raise,
Who rears himself a Pyramid of praise?
To issue wanting Absaloms Pillars rear;
Each generation will give him an heir.
While drops of blood can channel in a vein,
Truth's bloody victory will him trophies gain.
On Dr. George Ent.
Perfumed with spices, when our Phoenix dies,
May from his ashes glorious arise.
Thy name speaks, being betterd by thy art,
Non ents in knowledge, may thy skill impart.
'Bove aged Dons whose bushes figure time,
Yet bea^ded Meteors all their lights from shine.
From lesser stars we do expect no light,
Nor Comets from the dregs of phancies bright;
Of truths succession may thou Herald be;
Proclaim her wars, her rights, and pedigree;
While we our Williams Conquest do proclaim,
Not Conqueror of a Land, but whole worlds name.
Entitled to it by each drop of blood;
Which posting round proclaims his title good;
From the Tyranny of ignorance them freed,
While his dissecting hand made errors bleed;
Great Harvy's second, teeming Natures friend,
To nature and her Midwife thy hand lend;
Open thou natures books, and teach them read,
Can only open veins to make truth bleed.
Lash whimp'ring folly; answ'ring at thy lash,
Whip her unti^ she gigs out all her trash.
Beat all the Hectors rise it h'whores defense,
Till prejudice is Captive led by sense.
Thou nothing do, if all do not outdo,
High treason against nature it is in you.
If from a Sun in Knowledge no light be,
Nature must suffer by non Entitie.
Less then perfection by thy name's not meant,
It Is only sinful folly's a non Ent.
On Doctor Brown. His Religio Medici and vulgar errors.
REligio Medici though the word Atheism call,
The would shows none, and the Physician all*
More zeal and charity* Brown in twelve sheets shows,
Then twelve past ages writ, or the present knows;
What Paracelsus bragged of does disclose,
He 'twixt the Pope and Luther might compose,
Though gut-inspired zelots bark at him,
He has more knowledge then their Sanedrim.
Or the Scotch pedant a worm in every book,
To maim the words and make the sense mistook.
Dull lumps of earth not yet concocted mud,
In natures count scarce Ciphers understood.
Let these lick up the indigested phlegm
Which Cruder stomach'd Sciolists belched before them:
Dog-like to vomits run and lick each sore,
Think learning to repeat what is said before.
While these can prize truths weapons by the rust,
Crawl with the aged serpent in the dust.
Shine out dispelling th ages darker night,
Knowledge makes only Children of the light.
Folli's unmasked, and errors bald pate show'n,
Brown others errors, otherswrite their own.
On Dr. George Bowl of Oundle.
NOr shall thou dearest Bowl oblivion take,
Since it is Apollo must a Poet make:
Thou every day do circ^e like the Sun;
A course for natures reparation ru^
Impart'st thy light to all, yet losest none;
Knowledge is the Suns Child, true Philosophers stone.
Thou can both trepane lungs, and open the heart:
Whilst thou thy own do to thy friend impart.
No dialect of nodds, thee Noddy speaks,
While the hogshead fears a vent, lest all out Leaks.
Or knowledge at the best seems in a tr^nce,
While plush is lined with sable ignorance*
Who'd not have's brain be trepaned by thee,
Thy own heads open, while thy tongue is free.
Nor thy self only but thy Art make friends,
While Artists discords in best music ends.
Thou Paracelsus make Galens friend;
While Chymicks now Botanicks do commend.
Mutual defects no longer they reveal;
Their own and others they conjoined heal.
Yet thou from neitheir packhorse-like take load,
Come life, come death, to keep both pace and road*
We owe thy errors, not to thee, but times,
We owe the virtues, far above their crimes.
He knows Bowl little, much him disapproves,
But knows him not at all who him not loves.
On the death of his inviscerately affected friend Richard Watson Esquire
Chyrurgeon to his late Majesty of England.
NEed they embalm, in Lead thus wrap thee dead,
My tears will re-embalm, my heart turn Lead?
Who take thy bowels out, sure take out mine,
They by a sympathy were no less then thine;
With an inviscerate dotage I did love;
Could not thy death ah then my bowels move?
Watson is dead, and with him buried art:
Ah who can cure the wounds made in my heart?
Who dying made could only living cure,
How could he die, and I no death endure?
Who could with Watson in dissections vy,
Who dying makes, his friend Anatomy.
Each part was his, grief will asunder take,
And of his art will me a monument make.
Could I survive, I Am quickened by his fame,
How can he dye who writes but Watsons name.
The Poetaster.
ALL are not Poets, who can pace in Rhyme,
And to an odd tune, can in ding dong chime;
Castalian nymphs and God Apollo name;
Don-Cupids fire, and a Sea-froth'd dame;
While they glean straw in Egypt for to raise;
Unto themselves strange pyramids of praise.
Though like to tulips they enameled be,
Yet the fools Coat is their best Liverie.
On pagan Gods and Goddesses who call,
Sure their Religion is poetical.
Nor should they the Vintage judge of pagan wit,
Who what they have but gleanings are from it;
Nor learned 'bove fooleries; rich above Romance,
Fit the price of vanity only to inhance;
A Fountain Tavern thus may Helicon be,
Nine wenches muses lending Poetry.
While Idol-Priests, who Poets do approve,
Themselves some Idol make, a wench they love.
Their wit like to their Venus, born of froth,
Is fit for fire, a Vulcan to betroth.
On Homer.
HOmer, who seemed to want the eyes of's mind,
Must now give light, in his own age was blind.
Some did his Iliads to a nutshel fit;
A Cherystone might have confined the wit.
The Gods know all; wise men sleep not all night,
One man must govern; many cannot do right.
To express drums, and trumpets verse is fit,
Yet knew no part of the war of which he writ.
(...).
A warlike tone, might children fright 'bove too.
Some Poets paint, licking what he did spew,
Vomits must need be fi^th; it is strangely true.
By the beam of light whom Plato could traduce,
Shall we in the Gospels Sunshine love his use?
Petavius Psalms, a Nonnus, Duports Job,
`For the Sanctuary who heathenism disrobe,
Refined to the Altar, bring the Idols gold,
Let these impressions make on tender mold.
Can Egypts garlic, we or onyons need?
On the milk of the word cannot our youth better feed?
On Scaliger.
NOr is a Scaliger fit the Scales to bear,
Weighing nor times, nor thee with equal care,
The Prince, and Father of all pagan wit,
Who thee de^pise, high treason act against it:
In thee his honored Maro did dispraise,
Whose sprig was only gathered at thy bays.
Surely he never did mean what he did write,
Not Hypercritick here but hypocrite.
On Musaeus.
But of Musaus sure he better writ;
In writing less he needs must show more wit.
Who writes not one loves song's, scarce wise; who more,
Unto Anticyra send for Hellebore.
The Spanish proverb only here is true,
He Is fool cannot write one Sonnet, mad writes two.
On Hesiod.
NOr can th'straw-gatherers of Egypt fit,
Us from their Poets more then vulgar wit,
Virtue with sweat's attained set on a hill,
Beggars with beggars; potters potters ill.
Bad counsel's worst to him who does it give;
We Are born of Gods: it is by them we live.
The mean's above the whole: See Hesiods flowers;
Are these like th'gardens watered by heavens showers?
On Theocritus, Mosius, and Theognis.
EUnica laughs at me, who'd kiss in vain:
Cupid stings men, by Bees is stung again.
A ^ool may sometimes opportunely speak;
Each fool may show this without reading Greek.
While that Pedants thus trifle time in trash,
They for their faults, not boys deserve the lash.
On Virgil.
NOr are the Latins more; the Aeneiads be
But Iliads; in' Georgicks Hesiods Plagiarie:
In his Bucolicks own's Theocritus Muse:
For other faults, time, and his death excuse.
But while he Dido wronged with falser fire,
His verse deserved the flames he did desire.
Tibullus, Gallus, and Propertius be
Froth'd like Loves Goddesses out of vanity.
These to Lusts Idols do but Altars rear,
And kindle flames of hell while we are here.
May Ovids books like him exiled die;
Lusts breath's infectious is in Poetry.
While Iuvenal against Vices do declaim,
He Vice gives birth, which else had lost a name.
Martial does twang, and well might sent of wit,
Did not obscenities rankness stifle it.
Chymerica Poesis. On the fight of a yellow skinned Lady.
What stranger agony's this? ah fire!
Ah! lightning quickens my desire!
Must I fall tamely? a gilt Fly
Entrap an Eagle! cruel destiny!
Cease roving thoughts, and center there,
Where love is fixed as in a sphere.
Would know why Morn does blushing rise?
From yellow skin the day break spies.
The envious Moon looks pale to see
Her skin glance beams more bright then she.
While Heaven embroidring stars admire
Her luster twinkling, they retire.
Some glorious light is sure within,
Thus shines through the Lanthorn of her skin.
Or is this Cupids yellow fire,
Since every glance inflames desire?
A sight could Icy Anchorets turn
To fire; and make even ashes burn.
Sure 'is some Phoenix, here must build a nest,
She has both flame, and spices in her breast.
The praise of a yellow skin: OR An ELIZABETH in Gold.
THe Sun when he enamels day,
No other Color does display.
Lillies ashamed thou should outvie,
Themselves from white to yellow die.
Thy arms are wax, nay honey too,
Color and sweetness has from you.
But when thy neck does but appear,
I think I view an Indie there.
Can passion reason then befool,
Where such an Emp'ress bears rule?
Thy yellow breasts are hills of fire
To heat, not snow to quench desire.
Ransack Peru, and Tagus shore,
And then vie treasure: thou wilt be poor.
Let wretches delve for yellow Ore,
A golden skin I ask, no more.
Sure Jove descending in a yellow shower
To rival me, thus gilt my Danae over.
To a Lady wadrring why I praised a yellow skin.
GIlt pictures Papists for devotion use;
To raise my fancy gilded skin I choose:
No face I see but ^ellow does commend;
An Angel is the fee does th'Cause befriend.
What mad man silver would to gold compare?
Shall we praise white before those that yellow are?
I praised a golden skin, but fancied there
The gold that real in her virtues were.
Or 'twas the Image I did there behold
Of what I loved, an El'zaheth in Gold.
Say not the yellow Jaundies in my eye,
Or that I new broach Magus heresy:
While in the Church was gold, there was more zeal:
Who gold from thence, sure did Religion steal.
Who picture Angels, make them golden wings;
As if it is Angel gold heavens blessings brings.
It Is wonder working gold we Angels call:
None think him blessed, no Angel has at all.
What though I ransack th'treasuries of the deep,
Know all that Nature does confined keep?
Want gold, though I know all, I nothing know.
Schoolmen say Angels teach all things below;
It Is gold makes honored, lovely, virtuous, wise,
Nay holy too: ah who would gold despise!
An Ass with gold but laden Towns may take,
Nay Kingdoms to her ears Idolaters make.
Was there a Swines faced Lady rich indeed,
The Jew would Christian turn, on swines flesh feed.
Yet some rich discontents call glorious hell;
What shall there not be heaven where Angels dwell?
That joys be current virtues Image take;
Let Love be th'gold where you the impression make;
Love yellow skin for golden may mistake,
Love's an Elixir gold of brass may make.
Love can the tag of a blew point make more,
Then all the riches pave blew Neptunes shore.
Love is the gold that with no fire will change,
No loss will alter, nor no time estrange.
To Aureola, or the yellow skinned Lady; asking who could love a Fancy.
Who could a Fancy love? who Fancy have.
None e're love wit, whom nature no wit gave*
Some say my Fancy's rich, you will love it sure;
My Fancy's you, can you your self endure?
Most fancy gold, and I a golden skin:
Who Is gold without, is she not rich within?
I from thy skin did make the break of day;
The Moon made pale you took her light away.
To yellow skin the Indies I Would confine;
Give every part the riches of a Mine,
Scorn but my fancy, thou again art poor;
Horses with Yellows shall be valued more.
I Will say the Yellow Jaundies does thee die;
Beggars with lice shall bear thee company.
Or yellow Oaker thus thee colored tell,
And send thee Customers such as Oaker sell,
An unlick'd Calf came into the world with dung;
Which yellow ever since about you hung,
Or with Childs cack thou since were yellow'd over,
'Cause shitten luck is good, have suitors store.
I made thee gold, it is I can make thee brass,
Current with Tinkers thou shall only pass:
Yet while thy flesh such company draw near,
Like the Cynicks gold, you may grow pale by fear.
You must be mine if you would golden be;
Know that a golden Angel is my fee.
To a refined Lady.
BUt come choice piece of Nature more refined,
Perfection to a quintessence refined;
I Will no more study the Philosophers stone,
Eugenia mine, the Elixir's sure mine own.
Please me my yellow girl, she shall thee touch,
I fancied gold, but then I Will make thee such.
On an Ethiopian beauty, M. S.
BLack specks for beauty spots white faces need:
How fair are you whose face is black indeed?
See how in hoods and masks some faces hide,
As if ashamed the white should be espied.
View how a blacker veil o'respreads the skies,
And a black scarf on earth's rich bosom lies.
When worth is dead, all do their blacks pur on,
As if they would revive the worth that is gone.
Surely in black Divinity does dwell;
By the black garb only we Divines can tell.
Devils never take this shape, but shapes of light;
Devils which mankind hu^t, appear in white,
When Natures riches in one mass was hurled,
Thus black was th'face of all the infant world.
What the world calls fair is foolish, it is allowed,
That you who are so black, be justly proud.
Of the black Lady with gray eyes and white teeth.
LIke to the grey-ey'd Morn, your sparkling eyes
Dart luster, while a sable clothes the skies.
And your white teeth resemble the milky way,
The glory of the night, and the shame of day,
Complain not then Nigrina of thy white,
Since stars shine brightest in the blackest night.
The praise of his Mistress.
ADmire no more those downy breasts,
Where Candors pure Elixir rests.
Praise not the blushings of the Rose,
Which th'Mornings mantle does disclose:
Nor subtle Lillies which outvie
Calcining arts choice Chemistry.
Let none extol the milky way,
Where night vies splendour with the day.
Nor pearls within Confinement keep,
More treasure then what paves the deep.
For if my Mistress but appears,
The sullied snow turns black with tears:
Swans seem to wear the veil of night,
And blushing Lillies lose their white:
The bashful Roses drooping die,
Bequeathing her their fragrancy.
The Galaxie checked in her pride,
A sable Cloud does mourning hide.
Ambitious pearl mounts to her ear,
And is made rich by being there.
And as we see the twinkling fire
Spangling heavens Canopy retire,
When Sol enamelling does display
His gildings to inaurate day:
Thus meaner beauties patches are,
Spots, nay foils to make her fair.
These lesser lights dimmed by her eye,
Twinkle, go out in stench, and die.
If you would know who this may be;
I neither know, nor eye e're see.
Sure Iris only must my Mistress prove;
The Rainbow has no color I cannot love.
On a Blew Point giv n ^y a Lady on Valentines day to her Valentine, and
preached against by a Parson who call'^ it a Rag of Superstition.
HEnce spout of zealous ignorance, in vain
Thou seek'st to taint true blew, 'twill never stain.
What a blew point the strumpets lace? Romes Rag?
Can think there is less Religion in each tag,
Then all the points you tenter into Uses?
While Codpiece zeal would point out hot abuses?
Your blewer pulpit stuff you did so disjoint,
I durst have swore you would never come to th'point.
Both earth, air, heaven, thee heretic could invite,
Could th'Saint once named make thee no proselyte?
The day she gave't, winged Quiristers took the air,
And joined to sing her praises pair and pair.
Her gift resembling Violets then appear,
Proud thus to usher sweetness into th'year.
Yet Birds cannot reach her praise, Violets her sweet,
Nor tell what glories in her blew point meet.
Do thou not see how th'blewer colored vein
Does b^th our spirits, life, and souls contain?
Or do not view how tinctu^'d thus the sky
Shows all that is rich in heavens embroidery?
Or do not know how purpled Judges sit,
As if they took their robes to vote for it?
Yet veins are useless vy'd, sky foul words weak,
To speak the gift, let th'Donor Angels speak.
Angels, ah Angels she is Seraphick sure,
Nature calcined her to that temperature.
Blew Garter Orders hence are vanished gone,
Blew points succeed, mists fly before the sun*
By box and a blew point a wiser age
Surely could nothing less then this presage.
They who their thoughts do elevate with drink,
Fancy refined, nothing but blew can think.
On the Refined Lady.
CHoice extract of thy Sex, where we
May find what is in it good in thee:
Of so refined a temperature,
Can you then Angels be less pure?
Impurerd eggs of flesh and blood,
Nature by dirt makes great not good.
When Nature made thee so refined,
Surely she portraict'd out the mind.
Nothing presents thee to my sense,
Speaks less then an Intelligence.
Who'd folio's of thy Sex read over,
Since in Epitome he finds more?
On the wearing of the Tag of her Blew Point.
THough like a Liquorish stick you're thin,
Yet all its sweetness is within.
Like Aarons Rod in virtues bud,
A tw^g in virtue 'bove a wood.
Sure Kings white wands but Emblems be
Of virtues which do reign in thee.
Some think by Magic Rods decline,
And by their head point out a Mine.
But oh more true none this twig see,
That richer Mines find not by thee.
Sure had Philosophers but you known,
They Would this Elixir thought their stone.
Since you're a quintessence can refine,
And make brass Tags prized 'bove a Mine.
While all that is glorious meets in you,
We pay to yours what is your due.
Who honor Saints, of them do love each rag;
Who loves the Saint, must honor needs her tag.
Had you but lived in a fonder age,
To your Blew Point they would gone a pilgrimage.
On Pentepicta: A Lady with enameled Teeth, black, white and yellow. F.W.
THe wiseman Teeth called flocks of sheep;
Sure Jacobs speckled flocks here keep.
Where teeth are checkered black and white,
Nay gilt too to enrich delight:
Her mouth open, you at Chesse may play,
With teeth resembling night and day.
Each fondling reach will praise what is white;
Is there in Choke such strange delight?
Give me the mouth like th'Temple floor,
With speckled Marble paved over,
Or oh more rich in gold thus set,
A row of pearl then one of jet.
On Flavia: A yellow hair'd Lady, E.W.
COme Eagles here your Eaglets try,
Where hair seems Sunbeams for the eye.
Was there but Persians here, each hair
Might call a Votary to his Prayer:
While every one emits a ray,
Brighter then those g^ld th'new born day.
Could age run back, and renew Greece,
They Would hither send for th'golden Fleece.
^n honor of this golden hair,
Sure Spain the golden Fleece does wear.
Though gone Hesperian Orchards be,
Your head preserves the golden Tree.
Should Goddesses but now contend,
A hair of it might th'quarrel end.
Who would not think her the most fair,
Who could deserve to have your hair?
Or is your head a hill of fire,
Since men f^el Aetna in desire?
Or Cupid of ^hy hair makes darts,
Which being fire inflames all hearts?
Or the proud Boy will captives hold
In fetters which are made of gold.
Nature presaging you would Empire have,
And rule over hearts, this Crown of Gold you gave.
On a Crooked Lady, M.V.
SUre Cupid of thy shoulders makes a bow,
From whence fly love shafts wounding al* thee know
See how the mimick Apes do shrug to bear
Resemblance with the bunch you carry there.
View how the supple hamm'd Dons cringing bend,
As by thy copy they their shapes would mend.
The enameled war drobe of rich Nature view;
All drooping imitate, an^ bow like you.
The bashful Roses shrink into their beds;
Lillies in emulation hang down heads.
Less then Celestial sure you cannot be;
The sky embrod'ring Bow resembles thee.
Heaven only thee a richer token bent,
And to enrich poor Mortals thee us sent;
That as the Rainbowe token is of love;
Earth may have one below, as heav^n above.
Hence as by age to h^av'n we nearer grow,
Age what thy youth arrives to lends a bow.
``'s Like thee he makes thy praise would sum,
To th'period of thy praise no pen can come.
The praise of Thick and Short.
IF the round figures the most perfect be,
Th'perfection of thy sex sure's most in thee.
Nature imperfect there is understood,
Where up to legs they run for want of blood.
Here Is no lank piece stuffed out with clothes to cheat,
Bag pudding like, you are all without deceit.
With thy broad shoulders there is no slender waste:
Lest it might fall in two, must be strait laced.
Each part's alike, thou art as thick as long,
Shoulders and waste have one proportion.
In parchment clothed, no skeleton here discovers,
To kill lust in them, death unto her lovers.
No bones stick out to threaten those draw near,
Sword-like through th'scabberd of the flesh appear.
Thy quavering flesh to all that do draw nigh,
At every touch presents an harmony.
Sure far above the Music of the spheres,
The harmony of the whole Globe in thee appears.
To Dionysia the plump Lady, S D.
FAt is too luscious when it is alone:
You fat, I lean, sure would do well made one.
How lovely's fat with lean when inter-lin'd?
Should we not lovely prove together joined?
Marr'age makes one of those before were two;
You may have flesh for me, I bones for you.
Scripture says woman made was out of bone;
But you are flesh, sure I a rib alone.
Oh might I be that rib so near your heart,
So near alliance death could only part.
Or you my flesh, I would thy spirit be,
To give new life, would actuate in thee.
Fat easily melts, sure hard you cannot be;
Love to melt you has kindled fires in me.
But should you fly, the flames must quench and die;
How can the fire be kept no fuel nigh?
While I do burn, should ^ou the fuel prove,
We Would send a light to ages how to love.
On Monocula, A one eyed Lady, M. W.
THe heaven at once has but one eye,
The Sun or Moon you with both vie,
Thus alley to Divinity.
Night and darkness make one day;
Chance that takes one, takes none away:
Thus Love and you at bo-peep play.
Don Cupid would an Archer be;
But wanting eyes took one of thee;
There needs but one to Archerie.
He for thy service keeps thy eye;
Can she want love, does love supply?
Whom you hate, with his shaft must die.
All they who lovers are, are blind,
Like will to like; you will servants find,
All lovers yours, choose to your min^,
She needs must aim well who keeps one eye blind.
To Eugenia, a defense of juvenile wildness.
NO troubled Sea of lust, no passions move,
Like storms, once deaf as corks, now hear of love.
What was I wild as S^a, inflam^d as air,
And deaf as Rocks, to the giddy Seamans prayer?
Know gravity's prodig^ous in a Child:
Natures inverted if ^e is not wild.
Bid the sprightly morn be sullen, and display,
No beam for to in^urate new born day.
That which to youth gives motion, growth and sense,
Is but the efflu^ion of a ray from thence.
'Cause young men visions see, and the aged dream,
Must tru^hs in youthful breasts more clearly stream
Age does the stinging panthers breath perfume
By time the Firtrees odours do assume:
Myrabolans and dates in bloom and bud,
Both noxious are, both in their fruit are good.
To prove wild youth makes good man the proverb take,
See how the wilder Colts best ho^ses makes!
Who Noy in Law, Butler in's art excels?
Who Julius or Severus paralells?
Th^se like new wine, would sally, fume and swel,
In reasons confines would not always dwell.
Priveling in drops and dirt view springs laid low:
Whence silver streams do swel, and rivers flow.
Know barren earth does Mines of gold obscu^e:
And viler shells do precious gems immure.
Come my Eugenia, thou shall me ^efine;
See how from dirt does spring a glorious mine!
View how the Phoenix hid in ashes lies!
See after mucky burialls plants arise!
A spring of virtue and of youth's in thee,
Shine out, and nature opes her treasury.
Colors in night dead quickened by the ray,
Of such a Sun will shine more bright then day.
See the sport of every tyrant wave a bark!
On passions deluge view a rolling Ark.
Come dearest Dove with Olive branch of peace,
The deluge of thy woes and mine shall cease.
Chemists say, who fix Mercury can make gold,
Fix me Eugenia thou art rich if it hold.
To a man of office under the L. K. who called detraction love, and Calumny
good Counsel.
GOld could buy offices, could it have bought wit,
You for your place, it had for you been fit:
But oh more happy times sequestered it!
No time can you sequester of your wit.
You Are a rare Courtier, if the proverb's true:
Nor want of pride, nor ignorance is in you.
And no bad statesman, you may Cope with the fame
Of Burleigh, Cecil, and wise Walsingame.
No Statesman must divulge what he does know,
You Are rarely wise who nere your wisdom show.
Your knowledge by your sentences I know,
Pray me some wisdom by your silence show.
Forth giddy pated surgeon, who would care
Thinks to cure wounds, exposing them to the air,
Counsel is balm, each folly is a wound:
Covered with balm, and kept close, thy'r made sound.
The ingenious Lady E. V. to I. L. contemning her age.
S^ay cruel youth, rash stripling stay;
Fear thou in snow to lose thy way?
Supposest the powd'ring of my hair:
'I is supposition makes us fair.
My brow in wreaths should never move
In thee disdain, but rather love;
Think but that art in pleats it laid,
And of it a fashion made.
Who fears winter with a fire?
I have more heat then in desire.
Look how the Elm and younger Vine,
Mark how the Oak and Ivy twine;
If thou wilt my vine, or Ivy be,
I Will be or Elm, or Oak to thee,
And if thy heat can melt my snow,
Those joys, yet ebb, will overflow.
The answer.
LIce complain not if I fly,
Since fate forbids a Sympathy.
Could Infant spring and winter meet,
I Would covet Lices winding sheet;
And wed a monument with thee,
A parchment clothed Anatomy.
Whom even but touched would ashes turn;
Nor cures your snow, if love ere burn;
Ner suppositions cold sweats free,
Where each touch prompts an Agony.
Importunate love dry oaks oreflies,
To wanton in Euphormia's eyes;
But thine affrighted in are fled,
To seek where he lies buried:
Whom Stibium thence can never raise;
Mazed art dispairs at times decaies.
A Palinode. On a resolution to do penance with Ashes.
HAppy chance which has me lent,
Deaths head to wait my time misspent.
Some in gold do Deaths head wear,
I view your looks; and read her there.
Since dust to dust we all must go.
He Is wise who timely can do so.
Thus ^ bequeath my sel^ to the grave
While death and I even portions have.
Thus holier Hermits choose their Cells,
An Anchoret in his grave thus dwells.
The Nun views deaths head, book, and grave,
Thus they have all, who nothing have.
If I the Lady loved refined?
Sure I must you by age Calcined.
If yellow praised, I praised you;
You jealous were, so yellow too,
I loved to traffic with the dead,
Books were like you, which I have read:
In them, as you, I times past find;
You Will Grandam Eve reduce to mind:
Of good and bad show me the tree;
Sure the fruits of knowledge are in thee:
Since in your parchmen^ skin must lie,
Strange records of antiquity.
But oh can youths flames so expire,
That I these records turn not fire?
Of thee I would no bonefire make:
Does flesh for fear thy bones forsake?
Why Palsies? fear not: who nigh lies
Each touch of thee him mortifies,
Blessed resurrection need he fear,
Continual Lent who thus keeps here?
Or woh'd disdain to take the bone,
Since all who marry have but one?
Here is true love, to wed a mind:
No body here to love I find:
Who marry flesh, they wed their lust,
Which Christians used to charm with dust,.
Which time turns all, turns you, and twice makes child;
Thus my youth and your age is reconciled.
Then why not we? come lets to Christ's Crofle row,
There learn spel Heaven, and we enough do know.
To Eugenia.
I Will to my Saint as (...) to a shrine,
Where sighs are gales for Heaven, each word divine.
I will not say that swans hatch in your breast,
For innocence there does keep a whiter nest.
Or how that blushing roses drooping die,
Bequeathing you more sweet their fragrancy:
The odours of your virtues are Perfume
Heaven lends from the (...) rose you none assume.
Or say Auroras rosy Cheek is died
With blushes thus to be by you outvy'd.
Could the morning blush, ^ure it would rather be,
To weakness of your sex to vye with thee?
Or that an envious palenesse Cynthia dies,
'Cause luster is (...) to your eyes.
Could what we fondly fancy Moon look pale?
You constant guilt and change might the look intail
Or that the twinkling Ministers of fire,
Spangling Heavens Canopy, at your sight retire.
If stars retreat it is they erraticks are,
In honors sphere you are a fixed star;
Should I the earth as I have Heaven re'd ore,
Twould be Eugenia but to love thee more.
On a retird Lady.
SSpring of beauty, Mine of pleasure,
Why so like a miser treasure?
Or a richer Jewel set,
In a viler Cabinet?
Virtue and vice
Know but one price
Seem both allied:
Nere distinguished if never try`d.
The Sun's as fair, as bright as you,
And yet exposed to public view:
Whom if envious grown, or proud,
Masks his beauty in a cloud:
The wind and rain,
Him back again,
In sighs and tears,
Woe till smiling he appears.
Love's winged, and hasts away;
Time is winged, and hasts to prey,
Love deluded may fly hence:
Retirement against times no fence:
He Will wanton there,
Dig Caves for care,
Make graves for love,
Where the blind boy nere durst rove:
Ceruse nor Stihium can prevail;
No art repairs, where age make's fail.
Then Euphormia be not still
A Prisoner to a fonder will.
Nor let us in vain,
Thus nature blame,
'Cause she confines
To barren grounds the richer Mines.
To a Lady singing, mistake me not.
S. SOmetimes I burn
And then to Ice return,
There Is no thing so unconstant as my mind,
I change, I change, I change with every wind.

A. Fly huswife vice,
Which can be fire and ice;
Go learn of the air, go practice in a stew,
Love nere proves false, proves false, that ere was true.

S. Perhaps in jest,
I said I loved thee best,
But 'twas no more then what I said before,
I vowed, I vowed, I vowed to twenty more.

A. He who in jest,
Could say he loved thee best,
Dares jest with Heaven, tempt lightness, play with fire.
True love, true love, can neither change nor tire.

S. Then prithee see,
Thou give no heart to me;
For if I cannot keep my own a day,
What hope, what hope, what hope, has thine to stay.
Then Prithe see,
Thou give no heart from me;
For since my own has learned at last to stay.
What fear, what fear, what fear thine will away?

Love winged.
HEnce fonder Amorists Belials Orizons ply,
Who laughs at your enameld perjury.
O how Volatile is your toy called love!
Which only constant does in changing prove.
As it begins with fire, it ends with ice:
Change is the portion of each child of vice.
All lusts felicities move on feet that reel:
Who Is tied to passion's tied unto a wheel.
The Sea's more faithful, which now curles in smiles,
And straight incensed in towering billows boyls.
Lust's'twixt a pot and glass then both more weak,
Each touch of male content in two's may break.
Who this day robs divinity to cloth
His Idol, will the next it strip and loath.
To one wondering at my various colored Mistress.
LOve is begot'twixt idleness and lust;
The mettle that is not used, cannot choose but rust.
These Codpiece loves but phancies are at best,
They nere show well, if not in colors dressed.
The vanity of Courtship devotion to relics asserted and confuted.
While with the wiser dead I monument have,
Intomb'^ with books, a study make a grave;
From that more terrene part below begun,
Vapors ascend, and obscure reasons Sun:
My better part turned Earth, from the dead I fly,
To read the living, and find remedy.
Where while a Doctors books I do turn over;
I view a book stand by with mourning cover.
I Am Pleased to see one like my self half dead,
Could live whose better part was buried.
When if the dead Doctor by his books had known,
I would read this which still his name did own.
What are you Lady like a Diamond set,
To put your luster off in mourning Jet?
Your Doctor sure did read you more then is books,
In them there is no physic like your looks.
An itch of Courtship revels through my veins;
A sight of broken meat a stomach gains:
O I could marry, was it done in have.
But I am cured when once the itching's past;
Yet for the itch no better medicine sure.
You cannot be less then a quicksilver cure;
I Would wed a wid^w ore her husbands grave;
VVe'd share, a foot he, I a hand would have.
Nay, pule not rather, let those pearls be strung,
And to enrich your neck in laces hung.
Widows at most should but one month complain,
The next should grieve they no new husband gain.
What difference is 'twixt maid and VVidow known?
Maid is a rose in bud, you are fairer blown.
Her April face now laughs, then straight does weep:
Their mutual courses, joy and sorrow keep.
A husband lost now raises Clouds of tears:
Hopes of one present then her smiling clears;
She neither silence knew, nor how to speak;
Yet the vessels cracked, how can it choose but leak?
Ah my dear husband he in peace is blessed!
He Is blessed indeed, with thee he could not rest.
I could no husband love, had I a new,
You could no husband love, your husband knew.
Ah I could die? to take the ready way;
Under a Soldier you would have entered pay.
We have no Portia's, Martia's, Iulia's here,
From Coats, Swords, halters, we no danger fear.
A wife, a widow, wife within an hour,
Women like Crocodiles weep for to devour.
They weep for more, not weep 'cause they are dead;
They fear that gone, they gain no other head.
Here widows faith is fleeting as her tears;
In counterfeit the sorrow's Livery wears.
What Proteus Polypus* or Cameleon do;
Or Poets feign of change in her meet true,
Who weep alone it is they who truly grew;
Who weep for others, it is but to deceive.
But lest this Widow too much grief endure,
Who grieves in jest, a jest her grief can cure;
She Will mump and mow, now gigle, then she will whine?
You Would think with laughter burst, or sorrow pine.
Thus Ladies tasters, waitingmaids who please,
Ladies your Servants cry, give kisses fees;
Which while they take, some skittish beasts are coy,
And turn from that they covet to enjoy.
'Twould cure the spleen, to see them pare their lips,
To writh their mouths, to th'wrigling of their hips,
But they are no Ladies, nor we servants sure,
Let dregs to dregs, and cracked cracked pieces cure.
Surely civility would be strangely placed,
Should these but brag, they could before Ladies taste.
Venus a Cat would to a woman change,
Her shape she could, her manners not estrange:
She peeping at a hole a mouse does spy,
And leaves her husband, and the hole draws nigh.
Thus dregs of frothing nature will be apes,
To Lads, yet no manners change with shapes.
A gilded fly of putrefaction bred,
By virtues death who gains a mourning head,
That from the dirt she her advance may show,
She Will cast her head up, and on tiptoes go:
A velvet Cushion stuffed out with straw,
In plumes of generous birds a chatring Dawe,
Makes Country hobnails on the stones strike fire,
While they her rus^ing petticoats admire,
Yet the subtle Fox knows the Ass in the Lions skin,
He hears her bray, and knows an Ass within.
With these froth-born like boys with froth we play,
First raise a buble, then we blow't away.
Talked I of Diamonds in a mourning jet,
To put them off for greater luster set?
Or how that fairer widows do disclose:
The sweets that do in^ich the new blown rose?
To attract straws we place that blacker jet:
To take some poor Iack-straw in black you are set.
Don't they deride who praise the frogs speckled skin?
The rose that is withered, or wormeaten in?
Your lips, nor cheeks do not partake of the rose,
The glory that you gain is by the nose.
But not so glorious sure, none near it come,
Which by the heat don't suffer martyrdom.
The Cynqiue humbly would to Statues beg.
And to each gilded post would make a leg:
Thus when we gilt toys see with Ladies clothes,
What Is Lady like we Lady will suppose;
And court Idolatry to the gay rags pay,
While fancy with these things of clouts must play;
Each Knot love knits; each pin must wound the heart;
And Oh it is rare per^ume if she but -- *
Scabs but embosse; or an enammels itch;
Pocks do ingrave; Carbuncles face enrich.
Has she a red, a black, or yellow skin?
O precious wench, ruby, jet gold's within.
We beauties call what may for Mormo's pass;
Or Acho like turn phrantick by a glass;
Or should a Conju^er in his room them place,
People would swear the Devil in each face?
Yet we these puppets move by phancies wire;
Even lay our selves in dirt to ra^se them higher;
Till raised, themselves and us they cease to know;
Abuse seems Courtship, who deride them woe:
We court bad faces not to please our sense,
But thus to mortify our Concupiscence.
Sometimes a deaths head a devotion rears,
To say a prayer, it kisle, and leave with tears,
I never see the ruins of a face,
But dust to dust I cry, and straight embrace.
Yet my embraces here in bed sh^el mere,
Brings husbands bones, or her own winding sheet.
But should my sins bring an untimely grave,
I Would a rare Monument rich embalming have:
My A^t should teach the snake new skin assume,
Or else i would bribe corruption with perfume.
Her gold, pearl, Diamonds should my Cordials be,
Against each touch would prompt an Agony.
Salacious birds lusts sacrifice should attend;
And spawning fishes should their Lecheries lend;
Potato, Skirret, and Eringo r^ot,
Satyrion Cod resembling should recruit;
I Would strength of earth, of beasts the marrow have;
At second hand i would give but what (...) gave.
But oh for dirt who would in Earth intomb,
Earth, Air, and Sea cannot fate a barren womb.
That gallant wretch which did up Holborn ^ide,
Presented with the choice of rope or bride;
With a reprieve a lovely piece he spies;
With sparrow mouth, frog skin, and ferrets eyes,
Whose barren womb, might but a brothel be,
Where twins are murder and Adultery:
Marriage and hanging both are De^tiny,
Cried give the easier, hangman let me die.
Brave soul, in honors Catalogue have room;
Better the cursed tree, then cursed womb.
Nuptials fill earth; virginity fills Heaven;
To barren Widows; ah what place is given?
Hence of corruption bred you gayer mothes;
No virtue know; but what you find in clothes.
Know no religion, 'bove a sundays dress;
No Heaven, but there where golden Angels bless.
Who you 'twixt froth of Cups and fancy Court,
It Is not to gain them love, but gain them sport.
Tired with the graver looks of Madam book,
Thus natures Pamphlets we in sport ore look.
When vines shall leave the Elm, with Colewor^s twine;
And serpents Court the Ash, thou shall be mine.
Anthus and Aegithus blood shall mingled be;
The panther and Hyena's skin agree;
The Oak, and Olive, Walnut, and Oak agree;
And masking nature leave antipathie;
Till then, from the Philosopher I Will vary,
Said beasts chose like, but man his contrary.
But if I needs my contrary must choose,
Of all thy sex I could not thee refuse.
Disgrace of Poetry hence, be thou his theme
Who whisling cools the horsetails of his team.
Let him cool thine by fanning thus thy breech,
Or else the horsewhip take to cure the itch.
Shine out bright stars in Honors hemisphe^r.
I Will raise my fortunes, ^x my fancy there.
Donec gratus eram. Horatii. A Dialogue betwixt two Lovers.
While that our souls and arms did twine
In amorous circling like the vine,
Should regal pomp with me but vie,
'Twould prove enameld slavery.
While no fond flames of loose desire,
Did warm thy breast with aliene fire,
Crowned joys with mine, but placed in scale,
No minuits joy could countervail.
Exotic Chloe rules my heart;
Learned to tempt souls to the ear by art;
For both could one death us suffice,
Love should make death a sacrifice.
An amorous youth with mutual fire,
Meets in complacence my desire,
For whom I once, nay, twice could die,
Could death admit security.
But what if Venus should return,
And fires that glow in ashes burn?
While she revokes to yoaks of brass,
Our Love's more brittle far then glass.
Though stars are then my love less fair,
Cork not so light, as thee, or air,
Rocks not so deaf, or angry Seas,
I^ true, I Would Court thee a disease:
To Lydia. Instar Lydiae Horatianae.
When men enrich thy neck with praise,
And glories with no rose displays,
Thy arms which wax do imitate,
My gall impostum'd swells with hate:
I burn while sots thy skin defile,
And rosebuds in thy lips do spoil:
To leave love-marks, trust me in vain,
They love not, who dare lips profane.
Ah be not prodigal of bliss!
Venus makes Nectar of a kiss.
Happy thrice, nay more, for ever:
Where loves chain is broken never;
Nor rash complaint, a linck can force,
While death su^s forth a long divorce.
E Martiale.
CRas te victurum, cras dicis, `posthume semper:
Dic mihi cras istud posthume quando venit?
Quam long cras istud? ubi est? aut unde petendum?
Thou say thou will to morrow live to morrow ever:
When will that morrow come, ah tell me? never.
How farr's that morrow? whence? where to be fetched?
What can the Parthians, or Armenians teach't
What has it Priams age? or Nestors years?
Is It to be bought? tell me what price it bears?
Thou say thou wil'st too morrow live, this day's too late;
Yesterdaies life, shoul d this days Antedate.
To Agatha an unfortunate piece of goodness E. P. a golden Mine obscured in
dirt:
DIrt and Gold are in one Mine:
A place of sin thou do refine:
For greater luster thus are set,
Bright Diamonds by blacker jet.
Come gaudy anticks, transformed Apes,
By virtues glass here mend your shapes:
Who would of virtue picture take,
He by this pattern must it make.
Come Haereticks of the sex, a sight,
Of her may make a Proselyte:
Her words against sin are charms, each look,
An Atheist to reform's a book.
If blessed are the meek in spirit?
If the peaceful the Kingdom shall inherit?
Where virtues, graces, blessings meet,
Shall not that soul be made complete?
They Are truly noble who are good,
Virtue makes noble and not blood.
If Parents virtues dowries are,
How rich is (...) must be your heir.
On Marriage.
THough for my fancy mistresses I choose,
Yet when I marry i will my judgment use,
When I my body wed, i will wed my mind:
Give me a love that sees, not lust that is blind.
For lasting pleasure who would take a flower?
Who beauty love; they love but for an hour.
Wed riches, they have wings, love with them flies:
An Ox is gilded thus for sacrifice.
Nor would I poverty nurse to malcontent;
The snake in the bosom iodg'd, with sting paid rent.
Nor while I fear't, for dirt take dunghill race,
How can they not be foul who dirt embrace.
I must have virtues, if not fortunes heir,
Since Parents virtues greatest dowries are.
Nor love I those who boast of generous blood.
But those whose generous actions prove it good.
Or will I wrong the ashes of the dead,
Disturb his bones while I his relick wed.
A widows lust may live whose love is dead,
The Leek has a green tail with a gray head,
Since Adam first was formed and then built Eve,
To rotten bones why should my young flesh cleave.
Who used to strike a League some blood did draw,
Who gain a maidenhead do renew the Law.
Love thus must enter, grow as we grow in years,
The garment's best long, as we need it wears.
Mexentius like they dead with living twine,
Who youth and age in marriage do combine.
They who this more then Gordin knot do knit,
Must tie two souls in one by tying it.
Like to Hippocates twins both laugh and cry,
Their hearts by the same strings tuned both live and die.
Passion must never enter reasons seat,
While fury enters loves in a retreat.
If drink like Circes Cup transforms to swine,
Then take no cups, a beast made she is not thine.
As Saints to Altars, so to bed repair*
Love has his Altars, bring chaste oft^rings there.
He gives not^s own gives not flesh's own made due,
Yet love can Temples make where Lust a stew.
That you may freely souls breath in each other,
Quench th'^rand in loves fire, love delights may smother
Hels firebrand jealousy send from whence it came,
Loves purer fire to Heaven sends purer flame.
He who will think his wife an ill can do,
Ill by suspicion he will instruct her to.
Study you virtue, she will studv thee,
Children will Copy to posterity.
So while love souls and arms together twine
In amorous circlings like two wanton Vines;
Like Vines made fertile, you may twist a line
So firm with love knots ages cannot untwine.
Knit that Knot wisely ages cannot undo,
Peter's Keys loose, and Paul's sword cut in two.
Where we must see, not hate faults who detects,
A crime in marr'age shows his own defects.
When she is mine should each part turn disease,
Her griefs must trouble not her self displease.
The scarface pock love deeper should engrave,
And not make holes where Love should burying have.
Or should a Leprosy revel through her skin,
To mak't more rich i would think it embroidred in.
Who for a case a Jewel would contemn,
A viler shell may lodge a richer Gem.
Though fair and foul i would make away to Heaven,
The fair's a picture for devotion given.
And if a fowler piece we cannot call Saint,
We Will use't as some to fright sin, Devils paint.
Yet know it is love or virtue must make fair,
Else nothing's so but as our phancies are.
It Is love a multitude of faults can cover,
Who'd know nor see no fault, let him turn lover.
Love does the body of the Church Cement,
Christ's Coat had no seam nor Church must have rent.
Christ's Coat and Church of wedlock emblems be,
Can it be marr'age where they disagree?
Sure they renew his Cross, gall, nalls and spear
His body rend who make divisions there.
Whom God makes one contention can make two,
You with your wife not one, Gods none with you.
While Adam s^ept, God him an Eve did make,
Passions must sleep while you a wife do take.
God took the rib which circumvolves the heart,
So near allied nothing but death should part.
A rib does soonest break to bend inclined,
Wives bend used gently, break when you are unkind.
Marr'age is contract man, there takes his bone,
Bone it is by Contract th'word implies be one.
To me imperfect Lord if thou add'st a bone,
Let th'fall from virtue make it no broken one.
On the World.
THe worlds a monster in whose will's a hell;
Where passions Devil-like tormenting dwell;
Where flattered senses placed in array;
The souls ruin menace, and our life's decay;
If men do good, it is 'cause they ill don't know:
Not virtues principle does instruct them so.
Who is no Monster does a Monster seem:
It Is only prosperous vice men virtue deem.
I thought folly to be wise, none do aspire
To knowledge, things unknown have no desire.
``Of darkness understanding is a pit,
Reason a shop of malice keeps in it.
His eyes two windows, let in loose desire;
Forges of flames, mouth bellows for hell fire.
Where th'veil is rent, which modesty did hide,
While th'bloods inflamed, and the tongue unti'd.
Even remedies turn diseases, none converse
To better others; but themselves make worse.
Garbs, modes, alliance, men like women c^eek,
Less value is then silence all they speak:
Hands Harpyes talons, bent for rapine are;
The Serpents sting he in his tongue does bear.
Each bout Corruption's busy as a fly,
Buz, make a noise, infect what they come nigh.
To virtue scandal, tinder lend to sin,
By th'gate of sense while evil enters in.
The souls surprised in a golden snare;
Coined for their profit, men's Religions are.
Poison of Asps within each lip does lie;
Each face a Vizard's of hypocrisy.
Breast sponge of filth, which should a temple be;
A Den of Thieves, Cage of Impiety:
For Faith does strong imagination own;
No God but Passion has, or th'Belly known.
He Is a rare man Restoratives can invent,
To make lust live, even where the flesh is spent.
Of raging lusts each breast's a troubled sea;
Inhabited by wild thoughts men deserts be.
Here th'Vulture envy gnaws upon the heart;
The Eagl^ ambition there makes th'liver smart.
The tympany o^ pride swells till it bursts;
Of avarice th'dropsie in whole rivers thirsts:
Of hell where Devils and the Furies dwell;
Sure th'prince of the world with his subjects here make hell.
The world's a monster, Lord, does menace me;
To Monsters tame's a conquest fit for thee;
The spear which pierced thy side may th'monster wound:
Or to thy Cross nailed in thy blood be drowned.
What though the old Dragon threaten to devour?
Against Iudahs Lion he can have no power.
In The shadow, Lord, of death how shall I fear,
If thou which art my life and light draw near?
On Our Father.
Who disobey, can I Lord, Father call?
Pronounce in heaven, my thoughts nere there at all.
It Is I my God have sinned against heaven and thee,
Blinded by sin so high I cannot see.
How shall he Lord say, Hallowed be thy name
Prophanes thy Image, takes in vain the same?
Thy names a sacrifice, Lord, which will require,
To hallow it of flaming zeal a fire.
But where of Lust's a furnace in the heart,
Of good desires can it a Lamp impart?
Or what is Lord, thy Kingdom unto me,
While the world, flesh, devil, here keep anarchy?
Yet Lord, it is every where, thy powers in hell,
But with Saints only do in mercy dwell.
Can I desire thy Will may Lord be done?
Which against thy Will after my own will run.
How shall I beg for bread, or it obtain;
For dogs, my Lusts, thy childrens bread would gain?
As I forgive, would I have thee remit;
Thou without mercy should in Judgment sit.
Revenge boils in my heart, but there does lie,
Alas, froze near my heart, cold Charity.
Would I into temptation not be led
Who run into it? am to virtue dead,
Unto my self temptation, a strange devil,
Incarnate made, a forge to frame out evil.
Tongue of the aged Serpent is the sting;
My lips are gates which unto death do bring:
But Lord, the Kingdom, Power, and Glory's thine;
Let th'Kingdome, Power, and Glory in me shine.
Thou Lord a Kingdom make where thou art;
A glympse of thine a Paradise does impart:
Lord by thy presence Heaven make in my heart:
So shall I Father cry which in Heaven art.
A Heav'n-inspiring zeal with the heart inflame,
A sacrifice mak't, to hallow Lord thy name.
Thy Kingdom come of grace; will shall be done,
In Earth as Heaven; while Earth a Heaven has won.
Then shall I daily be with Manna fed:
Have thee within Lord who art Heavens sole bread.
Then shall I be forgiven Lord, and forgive;
Cannot he want charity who with love does live?
Into temptation then I cannot be led;
Thou art th'door, truth, light, way, that I must tread:
How can from ill I not delivered be?
Who have a Rock, a Tower, a shield in thee;
Thine is the Kingdom, power, and glory's thine;
Oh shall I not have all when thou art mine?
Incerta poenitentia.
EAch day a market is, where we do buy,
Or unto sale expose eternity.
Each day's a ring with good deeds it engrave;
At the Lambs wedding you this ring must have.
Time golden Harvests each day does present;
The times to be redeemed that is misspent.
On the back of sin, sorrow and shame does wait,
Repentance hasts, never overtakes or late.
To all to grieve, few to repent is given.
Whichis begot like pearls of the dew of heaven,
Happy in this snow-water bath their soul;
It can the burnings of their lust make whole.
More weep for sin that sin does them forsake;
Then that by sin they God an enemy make;
Such water does augment, not quench Hell flame;
It Is true Contritions floods must quench the same,
Practice of lives not tongues must Christians make;
He leaves not sin, leaves it does him forsake.
He loves not God who for himself don't love;
Who Is glew'd to earth, shall nere know God above.
A Judas here impiety may veil,
With kisses, vengeance slow, yet sure, cannot fail;
He Will break in two, discover his black soul,
If timely penance wipe not sins black scrol.
Lord let me hear thy voice while it is to day;
Lest hardened in sins wilderness I stray.
Unto the fiery serpents sting I pray;
While I forsake thee Lord who art the way.
Certamors.
Watches, and clocks al but the last hour sound,
That hour should in our conscience be found
Sure death's a riddle; the tablet all unfold,
By none the meaning can of it be told.
Yet the soul surprised in lust, hell is her share:
Hell where of misery the Abysses are.
Hell th'Common-shore of all the filth of the world:
Where th'fewel of Gods wrath in fire is hurled:
Where the Salamander-lust shall bath in fire,
Which here anticipates Hell in loose desire.
On Earth by Euthymy who a Heaven don't find,
The Hell hereafter feels, has here in mind.
But oh where is Conscience virtues Correlate?
Which sugars tears, and survives even in fate?
Where Is that delicious torrent of delight,
Glancing in the Cage of flesh a heavenly light?
From the love of God this Alchymy redowns,
Iron to gold turns, and disgrace to crowns.
Can he want light, dwells in th'midst of th'Sun?
Thirst, from whose belly living waters run?
Would he have meat? thy flesh is meat indeed:
By faith on thee we may sweet Jesus feed.
Can he want clothing, Lord, may put on thee?
Nor medicine have? of Life thou art the Tree.
Who wants direction? thou a^t Lord the Way,
The Light, Door, Truth, to guide them thee obey.
Lord come unto my soul, bid it be thine:
So death shall have no power, when life is mine.
On the Resurrection.
ARise, my God, my Sun arise:
Arise, thy side
My sin does hide;
Thy blood makes pure,
Thy wounds me cure,
He ever lives, who with thee dies:
Arise, my God, my Sun arise.
Abysses on Abysses call:
Who God denies
First to him flies;
Where fiends could dwell,
And make an hell.
The first sees heaven of all:
Abysses on Abysses call.
See! ah see me purpled over!
The scarlets thine,
Though th'sin were mine:
Thine was the grave
My sins would have.
The rising thin^, I would implore.
See! ah see me purpled over!
In mercy, Lord, in mercy rise:
Emit a ray,
And make a day,
Where sins black night
Has ravished light.
Thou to the blind Lord first gav'st eyes;
In mercy, Lord, in mercy (...).
This day we Resurrection call:
Remove the stone,
My sins are one:
Ah buried in
The grave of sin:
Shall I no rising have at all?
This day we Resurrection call.
Come thou Abyss of sweetness, come:
Come my dear Lord,
Say but the word
Unto my Soul,
I shall be whole.
Thou for thy self mak^st only ^oom:
Come thou Abyss of sweetness, come.
Ad Animam.
QUid lenta cessas? ah moraris! I, pete,
Ignicule sancte Coelites.
Hinc, hinc, prophana, procul in anis, ^mpia,
Hinc execrata vanitas.
Io triumph! proh sona victrix! Io
Triumph, reboent aethera.
En! en reperta est! quae petita fletuum
Torrente pragma sedul.
En lota prodit! en nitens! en quam refert,
Puram creantis imaginem!
Io triumph; plaude Coelitum chore
Redeunte plaude prodigo.
Humana sileant? en loquuntur Angeli!
Quam digna sphaeris musica est?
The Leper cleans'd.
HEar, Lord, hear
The Rhet'rick of a tear:
Hear, hear my breast;
While I knock there, Lord take no rest.
Open! ah open wide,
Thou art the door, Lord, open; hide
My sin; a spear once entered at thy side.
See! ah see
A Na'mans leprosy!
Yet here appears
A cleansing Jordan in my tears.
Lord, let the faithless see
Miracles ceased, revive in me.
The Leper cleans'd, Blind healed, Dead raised by thee.
Whither? ah whither shall I fly,
To heaven? my sins, ah sins there cry!
Yet mercy, Lord, O mercy! hear
Th'atoning incense of my prayer.
A broken heart thou wilt not despise.
See! see a Contrites sacrifice!
Keep, keep, viols of wrath keep still:
I Will viols Lord of Odors fill:
O prayers, sighs, groans, and tears a shower;
This precious ointment forth i will power:
I Will 'noint, wash, wipe, kiss, wash, wipe, weep;
My tears Lord in thy bottle keep.
Lest flames of lust, and fond desire,
Kindle fresh fuel for thine ire,
Which tears must quench, like Magdalene,
I Will wash thee Lord, till I be clean.
The good Samaritan.
WHy art so sad my soul? ah why
Does sorrow make thy bones all dry?
Shall my sin speak so loud, and I not cry?
Thou good Samaritane save,
See, every wound's a grave,
Sins were the Thieves, let me thy mercies have.
See how the priests with them partake!
And by not pitying new wounds make.
Can pass with hearts unmoved though their heads shake*
Nor tears, nor wounds, can pity win:
Thy words the twopence; heaven Lord the Inn.
Thy blood the oil, must cure the wounds of sin.
Up, up my soul, make have, arise:
Yet be not rash, beware, be wise,
Heaven loves not a fools sacrifice.
The vale's for servants; sin unloose;
It Is holy ground; put off thy shoes;
An Isaac for an offering choose.
Let not an Ismael with him share:
So up my soul, up, offer there;
Besiedge, armed, enter heaven by prayer.
What though thy sins in troops like stars,
Have menaced heaven so o^t to wars?
Heaven conquering prayers atones the jars.
Rise Sun; stars shall appear no more.
See ah fresh sins like ^ands of the shore!
Penance lends floods to hide them ore.
Vox poenitentiae.
I, I, ah I thee Lord betrayed!
While sin strange insurrections made;
I, I, like him with lips durst kiss,
Who sought out's hell, at gates of bliss.
My sins ah scourges buffets are;
My sins ah thorns, thy temples tare.
My sin presents the spear, nails, gall,
Renews thy sweat, death, burial.
Yet while I Lord with Mary come,
Early with spices to thy tomb;
With balm of penance waiting there,
To offer odours up in prayer.
After repentant showrs of dew,
Angels my Sun's arise shall show.
Hark, hark, who is both the light and way,
Calls thee my soul, make have, obey.
Ah loads of sin and flesh! can I
A Camel pass a needles eye?
Say, oh say not! tha^ heaven gate
Too narrow is, or way too strait.
Faith and good works can dispossess,
Thee both thy Loades, of sin, and flesh;
And so convei'd on wings of prayer.
Thon may like incense enter there.
So shall thou find a way not strait,
He kneels who enters at Heaven gate.
Spirit, Flesh.
S. ARis^, make have:


F. VVhither? ah whither flies my soul so fast?


S. Heaven calls, obey.


F. It Is night; ah stay! it is night! thou wilt lose thy way,


S. The day springs rose.


F. Ah but thy sin black clouds does interpose!


S. Those penance clears;
The Sun succeds a sacred dew of tears,
See a full shower!
Heaven suffers voyolence by an holy Power,

F. Ah heaven is high!


S. Prayer lends a Jacobs ladder to the sky.
Angels descend,

F. Wrestle, ah wrestle! blessing crowns the end.


Soul and Christ.
C. SEE! see Grace with her widened arms!


S. No Adder's here,
To stop an ear,
Against soul engaging Graces charms.
Speak Lord, O speak, thy servant hears.

C. Come ye who thirst.


S. Lord give me first,
And in thy bottle put my tears.

C. The laden's called, haste my soul, haste.


S. Lord see not these?
Ah Mountains! Seas!
How? how? ah how are these o'repast?

C. To faith my soul, fly, fly, never stay:
Faith can cast these
Mountains in the seas:
Faith through a Red sea made her way.

S. Lord, though my sins like Mountains be,
A grain of Faith
Still Virtue has:
Thy blood sweet Iesu's a Red Sea.

Of Prayer.
AWay cold hypocrite, away:
Why art not heard? could ever pray?
Did heaven in flames of zeal aspire?
Like th'prophet carried up in fire.
What sympathy has day with night?
Communicates darkness with the light?
Where lust, revenge, and passion shrowds,
Can heaven be found through such black clouds?
Talk not of faith, the Devils do
Believe as much, know more then you;
Nay do more good, though none allow;
They at that Name thou slight'st, forced bow.
Could such works save, they thee outdo;
They have their fear and trembling too.
Would thou no more thine asking miss:
Learn then no more to ask amiss.
Thy self sweet Lord, thy self, I ask no more,
Heaven has no joy without thee, Earth no store.
To the Soul.
DUll soul aspire,
Thou art not earth, mount higher:
Heaven gave the spark, to it return the fire.
Let sin never quench,
Thy high flamed spirit hence
The earth the heat, to heaven the flame dispense.
Rejoice, rejoice,
Turn, turn each part a voice:
While to the heart strings tuned ye all rejoice.
The house is swept,
Which sin so long foul kept:
The peny's found for which the loser wept.
And purged with tears,
Gods Image re-appears,
The penny truly shows whose stamp it bears.
The sheep long lost,
Sins wilderness often crossed,
Is found, regained, returned; spare, spare no cost.
It Is heavens own suit,
Hark how it woo's you to it:
When Angels needs must speak, shall man be mute?
On the Nativity.
AH my dear Lord, what shall I give
To thee, who gav'st thy ^elf for me?
Since thou could die, how shall I live?
Shall I not daily die with thee?
This is the day which thou did make:
Teach me Lord, teach me to rejoice.
Shall I the shepherds Music take?
Or to thine Angels tune my voice?
My Bread, Life, Vine, Truth, Door, Light, Way,
All fullness meets my Lord in thee.
What can I worse then naught repay,
Thee heavens all made so low for me?
To thee both Prophet, Priest and King,
I have no treasury to open.
I can no spices off rings bring,
But Odours of an heart that is broke,
Lord, let this incense offered up,
As a sweet smelling savor be:
So of salvation I the Cup
Shall take, and call my God on thee.
Whilst Gold refi^'d, I tribute bring
My self thine Image to my King.
The Contents.
THe Poet, page 1 On the Soul, 4 The fruit of Paradise, 6 On the Masters of the
Science of defense in Controversy, 8 Jesuit, 9 The Church, ib. The Polemick
Protestant D. 10 The Presbyter, 11 Prophanum vulgus: The People, 13 On servile
Will, irrespective Election and Reprobation, ib. Sectaries, 15 Enthusiasticks,
16 Beraean, ib. Fiduciarie, 17 In multiplicem Schismatis Hydram: Universal
Leprosy, 18 On the Umbraticall Doctors on the Romish Party, ib. On the Fencers
for Religion, 19 B. Jewel, 20 Doctor Whitaker, 20 Doctor Field on the Church,
ib. Dr. White, Sir H. Lynd, Dr. Featley in answer to Lyndomastix, ib. Mr.
Perkins, ib. Dr. Usher, ib. Mr. Chillingworth against Knot, 21 Mr. Brightman on
the Revelation, ib. Mr. Mede. ib. Dr. Potter* ib. Mr. Cotton, ib. On Bishop
Laud against Fisher. ib. On Doctor Hammond, 22 To a Lawyer who said, Though men
might speak against those that are called Gospellers, none justly against them
were called Lawyers, 23 On M^gna Charta, 24 The Character of Loyal Friendship:
To his Honored Coz Euseby Petsant, 25 To the Son of the late King, 27 News
for News to a degenerate Cavalier, 28 To a degenerate thing falsely called a
Noble, 29 A Character of a Complete Gentleman: To John Cotton Esquire Heir to the
Kn^wledge and Virtue, as well as to the Honor and Fortunes of his Ancestors.
To his Coz. Geo: Boswel Esquire rich in Desert as Fortune, 30 Nobility innobled. A
Character of the most excellent M^rquis of Dorehester, Earl of Kingstone, The
Lord Pierrepont, 32 On Thomas Lord Wentworth Earl. of Strafford, ib. Summum jus
summa injuria in jure Regni, 33 On Poverty, 34 The pleasures of the world, 35 A
defense of Curiosity: An unsettled mind in unsettled times; to weak Calumny and
proud Ignorance, ^6 The Character of a good Widow. Memoriae sacrum Heroniae
adeo exoptatissimae and medullitus dilectiss. materterae, Eliz. Boswel.
Epitaph. 39 On the death of Mistress E. Kinesm, whom age had transformed to a
Skeleton, ib. To a painted Lady, a Calf spotted, Lusts Idol, like the Idol of
the Egyptians, 40 To a Lady of Pleasure, 41 To his Lady Book, 43 On Retirement,
45 Man a Microcosm, 46 Of the Blood, ib. On the Humors, 48 On the Elements,
ib. Against Phlebotomy to a Leech, ib. For Phlebotomy, 49 A Piss-pot Prophet,
ib. To a Gigger to Padua, Valentia, and Leyden Doctors, 51 On Suburban
non-Licentiates, who Fox-like call the College Grapes sour, 52 On the
excellent Dr. Glisson, ib. The sequestered Priest pidling in Physic, 53 The
fugitive Chymick, ib. On Sigils, ib. On the Astrologicall Quack, 54 Oglio of
Quacks* ib. On Noah Big's vanity of the Craft of Physic, 55 On Noah Bigs, 56
On Fontinels, ib. On Van Helmont, 57 On Doctor Harvey. ib. On Dr. George Ent,
59 On Dr. Brown his Religio Medi^i and Vulgar Errors, 60 On Dr. George Bowl of
Oundle, 61 On the death of his inviscerately affected friend Richard Watson Esquire
Chryrurgeon to his late Majesty of England, 62 The Poetaster, ib. On Homer, 63
On Scalige^, 64 On Musaeus. ib. On Hesiod. ib. On Theocritus, Mosius, and
Theognis, 65 On Virgil, ib. Chymerica Poesis: On the sight of a yellow skinned
Lady, 66 The praise of a yellow skin: or an Elizabeth in Gold, 67 To a Lady
wondering why I praised a yellow skin, 68 To Aureola, or the yellow skinned Lady;
asking who could love a Fancy, 69 To a refined Lady* 70 On an Ethiopian beauty,
M. S. ib. Of the black Lady with gray eyes and white tooth, 71 The praise of
his Mistress, ib. On a blew Point given by a Lady on Valentines day to her
Valentine, and preached against by a Parson who called it a Rag of
Superstition, 73 On the Refined Lady, 74 On the wearing of the Tag of her blew
P^int* ib. On Pentepicta: A Lady with enameled Teeth, black, white and yellow;
F. W. 75 On Flavia: A yellow hair'd Lady, E. W. ib. On a Crooked Lady, M. V. 76
The praise of Thick and Short, 77 To Dionysia the plump Lady, S D. ib. On
Monocula, a one ey^d Lady, M. W. 78 To Eugenia, a defense of Iuvenile
wildeness^, 79 To a man of Office under the late K. who called Detraction Love,
and Calumny Good Counsel 80 The ingenious Lady E. V. to I. L. contemning her
age, 81 The Answer, ib. A Palinode. On a resolution to do penance with Ashes,
82 To Eugenia, 83 On a retired Lady, 84 To a Lady singing, Mistake me not, 85
Love winged, 86 To one wondering at my various colored Mistress, ib. The vanity
of Courtship devotion to Relics, asserted and confuted, 87 Donec gratus eram.
Horatii. A Dialogue betwixt two Lovers, 92 To Lydia. Instar Lydiae Horatirnae,
93 E Martiale, ib. To Agatha an unfortunate piece of goodness E P. a golden
Mine obscured in dirt, 94 On Marriage, 95 On the World, 97 On Our Father, 99
Incerta poenitentia, 010 Certamors, rrecti 101 On the Resu^ 102 Ad Animam, 103
The Leper cleans'd. 104 The good Samaritan, 105 Vox Poenitentiae, 106 Spirit,
Flesh, 107 Soul and Christ, ib. Of Prayer, 108 To the Soul, 109 On the
Nativity, 110
FINIS.

