AN EXHORTATION OF THE Churches of Bohemia. TO THE Church of England: Wherein
is set forth The good of Unity, Order, Discipline and Obedience, in Churches
rightly now, or to be CONSTITUTED. WITH A Description premised of the Order and
Discipline used in the Churches of the BRETHREN of BOHEMIA. Written in Latin,
and Dedicated to his most Excellent Majesty CHARLES the Second, in Holland, at
his Returning into England; If possible it may be for an Accommodation amongst
the Churches of Christ. By J. AMOS COMMENIVS, the only surviving Bishop of the
Remains of those Churches.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Three Crowns over against the
great Conduit, at the lower end of Cheap Side. 1661.

depiction of King Charles II of England surrounded by a wreath, by William
Faithorne The Second CHARLES Heir to ye Royal Martyr
Who for Religion and his Subjects Charter:
Spent ye best blood, that unjust sword ere died
Since ye rude Soldier peircd our Saviors side
Who such a Father had; art such a Son:
Redeem thy People and assum thy Own.
C R II



TO THE High and Mighty Great Monarch of GREAT BRITAIN, CHARLES II. All
Happiness from above.
Most Serene King,
AS there is no such happy estate to be found in the affairs of men, wherein
there is not some thing wanting: even so, that Happiness of your Britany, with
which your return to your ancient Kingdom (through the procurement of the right
hand of the most High) has blessed it, is somewhat defaced, as by the overcast
of a cloud: which yet, through the mercy of God, and your wise and pacifick
Solomon-like moderation, there is life in our hopes may be dispelled: the Cloud
( I mean) upon the Church of Christ amongst you, now by the blessing of God in
a very flourishing condition, to which the sole controversy ( viz. of the best
Form of Church Government) vexatiously agitated for the space of one whole
generation: does even yet (although unanimous in the rest) threaten some
distraction, unless both the Governors of the Churches among themselves, and
your Self, (superintending, in Gods stead, the affairs of your World) together
with the great Senate of your great Council, do prudently by moderate Counsels,
dispose all things unto peace.

We Foraigners, in reverence to your Church (which the Everlasting Bridegroom
has decked for himself, with most excellent gifts, beyond many others) are
only able to pray for you: though yet we cannot but feel our selves obliged
unto more real offices of communion of Saints also, if any thing lay in our
power, which might conduce thereunto. And indeed, some excellent Persons of
your own, of both parts, have requested of me (who am the least in the House of
God, yet amongst the Petitioners unto God on your behalf, not the last) some
such thing; viz. To Communicate of what kind the Government of our Churches
has been, ever since it has been: if any thing may be received from thence
which may be of use unto peace and edification, I have done it, communicated,
and sent it, dedicated to your Church of Britain: But because it is not
convenient, that matters which concern the public good, be attempted by
private persons, and the Great God has appointed you, Great King, the Head of
the Nations of your World, and the Umpire of differences, as also the Defender
of his Church and Faith, I lay down this small Essay, whatever it is, at your
Majesty's Royal Footstool; most humbly beseeching, that you would be pleased to
comend this endeavor in my name, to the busy sticklers of the said
Controversy among you, that they may peruse it, and see if any thing may be
gathered, even from thence, to the asswaging of animosities, and the enlarging
of good affections. But in the public name of the Churches, and for the sake
of Christ, I entreat, that your Majesty would not suffer this one only
remaining difference in your Churches, to burst out into a new Schism: for the
glory of God, for the salvation of the Church, for your Kingdoms and your own
peace, for good example to the Churches of the whole world: So shall the King
of Kings establish your Royal Throne, and bless your self, with your Family and
Kingdoms, to flourish and endure.

To whose Eternal Protection, he with most earnest prayers commends your
Majesty, who is

An Exile of Christ's, but Your Majesty's most humble Servant, Johan. Amos
Comenius. The unworthy and only surviving Bishop of the Remnants of the Church
of the Brethren of Bohemia.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
IF thou art a Son of the Church indeed, here is a Legacy fallen to thee viz. A
Copy of a real Reformation: A Legacy, you will say, that occasions an enquiry for
Funeral Lamentation, who then is dead or dying? alas, alas, one of the
ancientest, soundest, purest Churches in the World. This is (says our Author,
Contra Haeres. l. ^. c. 3.
and Reginvolcius, and Aeneas Sylvius, who proved afterward P. Pius, and differ
but little from him) that Illyricum, planted by the great Dr. of the Gentiles
(Romans 15.19.) this is that Dalmatia watered by his Son and Evangelist Titus (2 Timothy 4.10:) This is that people which Ireneus their neighbor commends with
this Elogy, that they never did either believe or teach otherwise then as the
Apostles and Disciples. This is that (afterward called Slavonick Church) where
Hieronym was born, and where he and some of the Greek Fathers, Cyril, and
Methodius, bestowed their pious labors in the service of the Gospel: Of this
came those oriental Churches, out from which, by the means of the said
Worthies, the Gospel was transmitted into Croatia, Bosnia, Moravia, Polonia,
and Bohemia, where this Church took root most, till in the year, 1450. it ran
up to an head and fruit, and was formed into the unity of the Brethren of
Bohemia, by Wickliff, Jerome of Prague, and especially John Huss, from whom
they were called Hussites: One of them, in the name of the rest, calls J. Huss
Father in these words: Hussi Sancte cinis, gaude, gaude inter arenas
Per sobolem toto vivis in orb tuam,
Vivis and ostendis tandem hostibus ignea Verum
Tollere quod nequeat flamma minaxque rogus.
Dust of St. Huss rejoice in thine urn,
In us thy Seed thou do to life return:
Thou live to show to the world that thou can burn,
Nor can dire flames truth or thy zeal adjourn.


As for their severe Orthodoxy, simplicity, purity in the truth, as also
withal, their unity and integrity in the bond of peace and love, I refer thee
to the Testimonies of Bucer, Luther, Calvin, P. Martyr, Musculus, Zanchy, Beza,
Lasitius, Olevian, Vergerius, etc. wherewith thou will find this Author, as it
were, adorning this Churches Hearse, page 32, 33, 37, 49, 50, 52, etc. even
Maximilian the Emperor (though induced (by such as in the Courts of Princes
have the arts to tie their hands, and sway their Scepters for them) to afflict
this people by some Edicts, yet) page 49. acknowledges them, before all other,
the nearest conforming to the Apostolical Church. They were branded by the
mouth of profaneness and malice (which never speaks well) with the odious name
of Piccards, upon the account of their correspondence with those famous
Christians of the Valtoline: but we may truly say of them in reference to their
obedience to the Gospel, as our Savior said of such, Behold my Mother, Sister
and Brother: Read through, and you will say as much. This is the lamentation
thou inquire after, a Church, such a Church, so rooted, so spread, is fallen
as to the world, but as to God taken up into Paradise; and at her
transplanting, has let fall (as the Prophet his cloak on his Successor) some
of her fruit of Gospel Order among us: O! if thou have any bowels, as the Elect
of God, pity her ancient seat, tremble at the judgments of God which are like
to come on that place, which could not bear her precious fruit from which
Luther and our Author made a Prognostication of her fall, page 35. sure Germany
must drive heavily, deprived of such Chariots and Horsemen: If we have any pity
to our selves, let us lament our loss, and fear to miscarry upon the like rock
of inveterat opposition to a real reformation. Either we are beter or worse; if
worse (as we have just cause to think) then what will become of the dry tree,
if this be done to the green: If better, or nearer the pattern, then we must
smart worse, if we answer not our greater privileges; For he which knows his
Masters will, etc. O! that the tears and blood of this noble part of Gods vine,
might cure the leprosy of that part which is yet amongst us, that the light
which is put out there, may shine in our candlestick; that a Church dying at
home, may live here with us (nor indeed can any Church dye, or be put out (the
Kingdom of God must needs be above the prevailing assaults of the Kingdoms of
this world) but is only removed, Mat. 21.43. Rev. 2.5.) O! God forbid, that
that which cost this Church so much care and sweat, treasure and blood to set
before us, may not be only in testimonium, for a witness against us: If you
ask what that is? I answer, that is the Legacy it self, viz. a Copy of a real
Reformation: A copy, I say, and so no wonder, if it answers not to the original
adequately and exactly, it is rather matter of commendation, that it is drawn
so near to the life of Religion as it is: What this Brethren-Church would have
done, appears in J. Huss their first Bishops Apology, of which we read in the
reverend Authors preface; viz. the Law of Christ suffices for the Government
of the Church, without the additaments of humane Ordinances; but what
generation is that, that contracts not some soil in running through the puddle
of this world; we give them therefore allowance, according to Tertullian,
Unusquisque Patrum ex consuetudine sui seculi contraxit suam labem: We consider
the malignant influence the Pope has had even upon them, by reason of their
nearness of situation to them, and their frequent assaults upon them; and
wonder not that they were overawed (as they have been) with the prevailing of
custom (confirmed and enacted by Constantines zealous affecting and asserting
the Episcopal Dignity, which yet our Author strenuously invalidates in the
latter end of his Exhortation) and that Canon of the false Apostles (cited
Anno. page 90.) which of what authority it is (it being against even those
Apochryphal Canon of Greg. and Gratian;) as also of what validity the
Scriptures they bring for that kind of Episcopacy are, I leave to the
impartial Reader to judge: Not to say, that Zepperus speaks somewhat otherwise
of the German Episcopacy, lib. 2. cap. 10. But be it so, that in some
Ministrations of their Presbyterian Senate, they were something more Episcopal
then the rule will bear (wherein we assert them not) I would our Episcopacy
were as much Presbyterian as theirs; and our Presbytery as much in exercise as
theirs which yet might be, were all our Bishops well-affected, as they ought to
be, to that which is our Sovereigns glory and strength in the midst of his
Subjects, the Royal Proclamation, Indemnity and Indulgence: We indeed for
soundness of Doctrine (saving some Papaturient, Laudensian Prelates) are as
they; and for gifts perhaps (as our Author modestly acknowledges, Exhortation,
page 140.) beyond them, especially since the Episcopal gag has been by Act of
Act of Parliament taken out of the Churches mouth, whereby (blessed be God) we
have been for these last twenty years exempted from that fatal disaster, which
our Author piously inveighs against, under the notion of Imperial Papacy, and
Papal Empire, Exhort. page 28. but for union, and confirmation in the reality
of Reformation, Personal or Ecclesiastical, multa desiderantur, which yet we
find did obtain among them, and have been happily (as covenanted so)
endeavored in these Realms; our gracious Sovereign also graciously
condescending hereunto.

We have here a Copy, not of Grotian Cassandrianism, viz. as Erastianism, or
Congregational Brownism, nor yet of Lordly Prelatism, our Author condemns this,
Exhort. page 29. wherein he inveighs against the factious, or made-Religion of
scandalous Forms, Liturgies and Ceremonies, imposed ib. and alibi, and against
secular Dominion in Prelacy; which he says is one of those things which
Solomon says, the earth groans under, and cannot long bear, page 19. and
indeed against the root of this plant, or number of a man, the Divine ax and
hand has been, especially of late years, stretched out; nor can we believe the
wound to be cured, though we see it skinned over, considering, that
notwithstanding all the Divine dreadful visitations, yet the worm both in its
fruit and root, does yet again so revive with it self, giving life to nothing
but that which is against his Majesty's Royal Proclamation, Indemnity and
Indulgence. Surely they cannot have far to go under the load of the guilt of
former persecutions, and notorious corruptions, they having passed through so
much fire, and yet being not purged, but binding all mischief upon themselves
by self-invented Altar-worship, under which so many souls are fallen, and
crying out, How long Lord, how long? for with such sacrifices, not required,
the jealous God will not long be well pleased. See whether thou find a copy
of such an Episcopacy and Ministration here: No, you will find our Reverend
Author, as a faithful Physician, prescribing well to mollify and take down
this crusted excrescence of the Church, if possibly the Poison, and that which
was not in the beginning ( viz. all self-invented embasing, mixtures in the
Ordinances, Offices, Ministrations, Institutions of Christ in his Church) may
be purged out: If his operations be painful, we must thank our selves, an
intemperate Patient, makes a rugged Physician; and well it is, if any way we
may be healed and restored to the life of Religion, soundness of Doctrine,
health of Discipline, strength of Union, beauty of Order, vigor of the Spirit,
heat of Zeal, in the power of godliness: In order to which, behold this Bishop
presents us with a refracted, moderate, godly Episcopacy, wherein we have a
Bishop, 1. A degree for order, not of order. 2. For labor, not secular
Dignity, Dominion, Domination. 3. Having no more power but what is freely
delegated and devolved on him by the election and consent of the Ministers, not
some, but all concerned. 4. Performing Ordination ordinarily in a general Synod
and Jurisdiction in an Ecclesiastical Senate, to which he himself is subject.
5. Not countenancing maladministration, by admitting any unworthy person to
Orders, or the Lords Supper. 6. Without the leaven of Arminianism, page 52, 7.
Promoting the vigilance of Pastors in the exercise of Discipline. 8. Not
imposing snares on the Conscience by the made-Religion of Romish Liturgy or
Ceremonies, made necessary, Exhort. page 28, 29. 9. Not taking the wicked by
the hand, nor giving life to looseness, to bandy against a real Reformation;
but of vehement goodwill and zeal for the power of godliness: Would the Lord
bless us with such a Bishop, we would not contend, whether Bishop or no Bishop;
whether by election only, or by imposition of hands also; whether the rite be
essential and constitutive, or consecutive and declarative only of Ordination;
whether the consignation should be by the hands of one, in the name of the rest
(they being acknowledged to ordain Actu and Potestate) or by the hands of all
the Session, whether the prudentially invested Bishop be temporary or
perpetual; whether Ordination be an act of simple Office or of Jurisdiction (it
being acknowledged, that ad ordinem non gradum spectat ordinare;) and who shall
live when the Lord works this great work for us: But Reader, I will not wrong
thee, by withholding this Legacy much longer from thee, only give thee an
account of my purpose in preparing this book for thee: and I assure thee, and
all the world, that my design of making this book speak English, is not to
carry on any design, to smooth or please any party, but to advance the common
interest of Christians in promoting the union of the Churches (all but one)
which this discourse shows how it may be rendered practicable; if men would a
little unhusk themselves of their own singularities, divest themselves of those
prejudices they have entertained, and mind the things that tend to peace and
edification. The first motion to the said translation, was from a Reverend
Brother, whose travels in the work of Pacification, the following ages will
more gratefully acknowledge, then the present. The Translator thinks himself
sufficiently rewarded, with thine and his own edification, in the assured
knowledge of some momentous matters which are herein contained and
communicated; which are as follows,

1. That there have been, and are some in the world, that do evince to all men,
that the Gospel is not a Fable, but that the truths thereof do make real
impressions, and work strange changes upon the minds and conversations of men;
and that the Discipline of the Lord Jesus, where but so much of it is practiced
as is owned by all Christians, has that majesty and power with it, that it
needs not the whole secular arm to uphold it, nor fears the same power, though
it be against it: for the Church had never better Pastors and Government, then
in Persecution; nor ever thrives better, then when its Pastors do wholly attend
their flocks, and retrench themselves from Secularities, and Courtly
concernments, to mind the good of souls, the rebuking and suppressing of
wickedness, Heresy, Errors, Schisms, advancing Piety and Godliness in the
strict observation of the Lord's Day, expressing more zeal against the
Prophaners of the Lords name, and those that live so unlike Christians in the
world. I am but an obscure person in the world, I dare presume to say, that
this way to prosperity and establishment will never fail; but I do verily
believe, that there are not greater enemies in the world to Episcopacy, then
some Bishops; and that the ready way to throw it down, is to set themselves up,
with the praemunire of their Jus Divinum, and Secular Domination.

2. That it is possible to maintain Order and Decency in the Church, and
disparity among Ministers, without a rigorous imposing of Ceremonies and Forms,
or advancing Bishops into Superior Order above Presbyters: Let but Ceremonies
keep their proper place and station, and be looked upon as things indifferent,
and the use of them left free to Christians, we need have no more contest about
them: If it appear by experience in them that use them, that they do really
tend to Edification and Charity (as they must, or else they are nullities and
mockeries) the greatest part, I believe, of Ministers and Christians in England
will take them up (nor yet are we sure that even in Heaven we shall be all of
one size or posture) if there be such excellency, significancy and
teachableness in them, and yet no Superstition: Let them stand a while without
the bolster of penal Statutes, and let us see what ground they get: For if this
were done, that Ministers might use them, or not, as they find them most
convenient in times and places, possibly many, if not all Ministers, might
sometime use them. For suppose that a Minister were to preach at the Court,
some Cathedral or Oratory, that were trained up to these things, prudence would
direct him, upon such an occasion, and for that instant, to do many things
which he does not do in his own, or in an ordinary Congregation; as in
University he would use an hood, which it were ridiculous for him to do at
home: So if a Bishop were to preach in an ordinary particular Congregation or
charge, where the people were wholly strangers to the usages or forms of the
Court, College or Cathedral, if he came in the ordinary garb of the Minister
of the place, and preached in the ordinary mode of a country Minister, I
believe it would get him more reverence and esteem in the hearts of the people,
and tend more to unity and edification, then if he should come in his
(Pontifical) formal Procession, with a pompous train of attendants; For the
Apostle became a Jew to them that were Jews, that he might gain the Jews; and a
Gentile, to them that were Gentiles, etc. that is, in indifferent things; for
we abhor to think, that he would transform himself into more Religions in any
respect whatsoever. To this purpose, Augustine tells us, That he knew no better
course for a serious, prudent Christian to take in matters of Ceremonies, or
Custom, then to follow the example of the Church where he is; for whatsoever is
there observed, neither against faith nor manners, is a matter of it self
indifferent, and to be observed according to the custom of those with whom we
live. This was Ambroses counsel, I think, to Monica, Augustines Mother, When I
am at Rome (says he) I fast on the Sabbath day; but at Millain I do not; so do
you likewise, when you come to any Church, observe its custom, if you would not
be offensive to them, nor have them so to you: Which judgment of Ambrose,
Augustine says, he always looked on Tanquam coeleste Oraculum.

As for the state and pomp of that pretended Order, which is as the Alder in
our Garden, I Will tell you a story; There was a Garrison of Soldiers, and
diverse Commanders over them; amongst the rest, there was one a true Veteran,
that had been trained up in the School of War, under most of the Princes of
Christendom: This Captain, instead of those soft delights other Gentlemen and
Commanders wasted their time in, spent his inconversing with, and training his
Soldiers, would be upon the Guard when his turn came himself, no weather could
prevent it; his house instead of being furnished with silken beds, rare
looking-glasses, curious pictures, was stored with barrels of meal, rice,
pease, so placed low, that they served instead of chairs and stools, his rooms
hung with flitches and gammons of Westphaly bacon, dried beef, fish, etc.
materials with which he kept a constant table, and welcomed all his Soldiers:
in the Sum, was always in fight or service, and he had these Soldiers close to
him, they would go through fire and water with him: what men soever failed of
their duty, his never did, but were all of a knot, and unanimous in their
attendance upon him in any service. I Will only apply it thus, that would our
reverend Fathers of the Church be more upon the guard themselves, be employed
in the Churches duty, and not commit that Solecism in Government (which the
learned Bacon thinks one of the insolubilia) to do their work by deputation (of
a Chancellor;) would they instead of keeping distance, converse more familiarly
with their flocks, and step in now and then to a Country Minister on a sudden,
whom it may be they may find standing sentinel, and encourage him in his duty;
would they instead of giving and forcing on the people Quelchechoses of Forms
and Ceremonies, give them solid meat and nourishment, the pure Word of God, in
the institutions of Christ; suffer that only to be read, expunded, urged in the
Church; would they instead of making their houses Lordly Courts to fright poor
people and Ministers from coming at them, make them Oratories for Prayer, and
expounding Scripture of Gods institution, setting up catechistical and
expository Lectures so many days in the week, either by themselves or their
Chaplains, or calling in the assistance of some learned and pious Presbyters;
would they enquire in their Visitations after profaneness, and censure that
more deeply, then some have done nonconformity to self-invented will worship,
and encourage painful, conscientious Ministers, more then their Predecessors
have done lazy, idle drones: I durst become their bondsman, if one or both of
th^se two things did not follow, that all the godly, sober, religious people in
the Land, would become their fast friends, and strive who should do them most
honor; or else the Devil and all his Instruments would be as mad against them,
as they are now again already against the Puritans.

3. Once again, we see what it is that makes the Church glorious and unanimous;
viz. living up to the noble principles of Religion, in self-denial, humility,
piety, in all ranks of people: For till the love of the Lord Jesus, and the
desire of the salvation of souls, has taken more root in the hearts of Pastors
and Christians, we cannot expect any Settlement, Beauty or Order in the Church:
It Is not the priding of a man's self in the name of a Son of the Church, can
advantage Religion, no more then the Jews boasting they had Abraham to their
Father, did promote it among them: For our Savior tells them, when that cry
was loudest, the state of Religion was at the lowest among them: No, the
Church, the Spouse of Christ, is meek-hearted, and lowly, full of tenderness
and goodness, and her children indeed are like her: But they, which instead of
this spirit, fall a beating their Brethren, or scoffing or envying at them, may
indeed be in the Church, but yet as Cain in Adams, and Ishmael in Abraham's
family, only the spots and blemishes thereof.

4. Yet again, I observe the ligaments and soder of these Churches, to be their
mutual consent in Discipline, which we see required not only of Ministers, but
of all Christians: how necessary this is, experience does demonstrate: For the
first primitive Church had no other bond, nor have the Reformed Churches abroad
in many places any other; not but that the Patronage of Princes and Magistrates
is a great Strength and Bulwark to Religion; and that people are bound to bless
God exceedingly, when he raises up such Nursing Fathers for the Church to be
over it in the Lord. Yet we see, that mere Politic bands do snap asunder, and
make way for schism and division; especially, when the Prudential superior
Order of the Clergy do ride, and the inferior grind; for then they are apt to
take the first opportunity to unyoke themselves: But if a superiority among
Ministers in the Church on a prudential account, be thought necessary (for
Humanum institutum episcopatus non damnamus sed tantum negamus a Christo esse
Imperatum, as we say with Junius) let it be set up by the mutual consent and
choice of the rest, or the Body of the Ministry, and their obedience will be
more constant in the Lord, and more fixed, then by any subscription of oaths of
Canonical obedience whatsoever. In a word, let the poison, and what was not
from the beginning, be taken out of the Ordinances and offices of Christ in the
Church, and the power of godliness in good earnest endeavored, and this
Church, which is otherwise giving up the ghost, will yet through the blessing
of God recover and do well, and we shall have great cause to bless God for this
true Protestant Bishop Comenius his pious Endeavors, in laying this Book at
his Majesty's feet, as an expedient for an Accommodation, not with the Romish,
but the Reformed Churches. Which that it may effect is the earnest prayer of
him how is

Thy Servant in the Work of the Lord, JOSHVA TYMARCHVS.

Books printed for, and sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Three Crowns over
against the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheap Side.
Folio's.
THe History of the Evangelical Churches of the Valleys of Piedmont, containing
a most exact Geographical description of the place, also a relation of the
bloody Massacre, 1655, and a Narrative of all Transactions to 1658. Justified
partly by diverse ancient Manuscripts written many hundred years before Calvin
or Luther. By Samuel Morland. A Commentary upon the holy Writings of Job,
David, and Solomon; viz. Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of
Songs. Being part of those which by the ancients were called Hagiographa.
Wherein the diverse Translations, and Expositions of all the most famous
Commentators are propounded, examined and censured. By John Mayor, D.D.
To the Church of England: Hitherto tossed with diverse tempests, but now within
sight of the Haven of their Rest, Greeting in the Lord.
THe troubled state of Affairs, which is every where to be seen at this day, is
in it self sad; but yet (to them which do but heedfully mark the way of G^ds
works all along of old) it seems to speak the hope of some excellent change.

2. To wit, even as in the beginning of all things, God brought light out of
darkness, and a most beautiful order out of the confused Cha^s: So in the
course of his governing, whatever he suffers to come to pass, to the
disturbance of the Sons of men, all that he always turns to good unto them if
they be godly at least, to exercise them; if they be wicked also, frequently to
bring them out of the darkness of ignorance, into the fellowship of the light.
So that the Church evermore even by her very ruins may grow either bigger or
better.

3. Even in the many vicissitudes of that one people of Israel, if they be
observed, it is apparent that all their chastisements, captivities, removals
here and there, were always only fresh occasions of declaring the works of God.

4. Who is it which sees not that even Abraham the Father of the Faithful,
with travels, dangers and promises, in appearance a long time but vain, was
therefore so tired out, that his faith being thus trained up, he might learn to
bear up in h^pe against hope? and that the Church might have a very glorious
pattern of that Heroic faith, which utterly vanquisheth all the difficulties in
the World.

5. That therefore his seed was in such an horrible manner oppressed by the
Egyptian bondage, that in Pharaoh there might be taken an occasion to show
forth the power of God, and thereby the name of God in all the Earth: God
himself is his own witness, Exodus 9.16.

6. What could be more sad to see, then that the People of God being overcome
by their Enemies the Philistines, should lose even the symbol of the Presence
of God, and the hope of help from Heaven; viz. the most sacred Ark of the
Covenant? that this very Ark being taken by the enemies, carried by them in
triumphs, and brought into the Temple of Dagon, should be made such a laughing
stock before that Devilish Idol and Idolators? and yet even this very terrible
disaster and dispensation, to what excellent purpose did it serve, to set forth
the glory of God, and detect the vanity of Idols?

7. 'Twas sad, that the people of Judah, and in them the seed of David (to
which so great promises were made, even to all generations) and also many holy
men were led into the Babylonish Captivity; yet even there Ezekiel being raised
up to be a Prophet, with what notable Revelations did he illuminate the Church?
and Daniel by wonderful works and sufferings in the same place, how great and
many Kings and people did he bring to the knowledge of the true God? as it is
to be seen in his Book, Chap. 2. ver. 46, 47. and 4.1, 2, 3. and 6.26, etc.

8. The Plots of Haman against the dispersed people of God, the Jews, how far
did they proceed? they were doomed to perish all in one day, and yet this very
dismal exploit, how great salvation, joy, honor, did it bring to that people,
for a monument unto all Posterity of the Providence of God, as always watchful
for the good of his people? as is plain in the book of Esther.

9. How great was the rage of Antiochus against this people? but did it not
produce so many glorious Martyrs, Maccabean men of valor, with so many
excellent cordials to the Church, for the experience of Omnipotent Divine
Providence, directing all things according to its own pleasure?

10. The dispersion of the Apostolical Church at Jerusalem was very sad, and
yet it was nothing but the dissemination of the Gospel amongst other Nations (
Acts 4.8. etc.) The banishment of John into the Isle of Patmos, with how vast a
treasure of Prophecy did it enrich the Church?

11. Also, how many soever any time afterward, either assaults, or
persecutions without, or bickerings and contentions, heresies or schisms
within, brak^ forth in the Church; so many occasions evermore were found,
either of setting out the most glorious Army of Martys, or of compiling the
most famous Writings, and thereby confounding the wicked by the constancy of
the Saints, and the further irradiating the godly with the clearer light of the
Truth.

12. Finally, touching the last times of the World, which now are, although the
great Prophet our Lord has foretold terrible things; viz. That it shall come
to pass that we shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars, Mat. 24.6. That Nation
shall rise up against Nation, and that there shall be Famine and Earthquakes.
ver. 7. yet he has added, See that ye be not troubled, for all these things
must come to pass, but the end is not yet, (ib.) For the Gospel of the Kingdom
shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all Nations, and then
shall the end come, ver. 14.

13. Then let there be even now before our faces (through the violence of
second causes (howbeit to the very great grief of the godly) Nation dashing
against Nation, Kingdoms and Empires falling upon one another: Let the earth
tremble with horror, and let Cities, Churches, Schools, yea, and all places
private and public, be piled up in their own ruins; yet for all this, that
same God which formed the most beautiful Structure of the World, out of the
most rude Vast; which also he powerfully preserves, and wisely governs
hitherto for the sake of his Church, knowing how to produce even out of these
concussions, that which is better then we all can think; to wit (as he has
promised) that the Gospel may at last pass away from sharply chastised
Christendom, to the other Nations of the World: That so (as it was long ago)
our stumbling may be the enriching of the World, and our diminishing, the
riches of the Gentiles, Romans 11.12,

14. The consideration of this so much to be admired Eternal Providence, does
gently allay the grief which I have taken by reason of the ruin of the Church
of my native Country; of the Government of which (so long as she kept he^
station) the laws are here described, and set forth in view: Even my self alas,
being the very last Supe^intendent of all, am fain before your eyes, O Chu
ches! to shut the d^or afte^ me: And that I may shut it faith^u^ly, I
determined by this sh^^ meditation, to justify the Divine judicial proceedings
against us; as also to furnish my self, together with them which are yet left
of mine, and whosoever will take heed of miscarrying by our example, with some
comfort, and some advice.

15. For the deluge of most raging Pe^secutions for these forty years, has s^
defaced us, that in all Bohemia and Moravia, we have not verily so much as one
Church remaining, only some few relics of the flock dispersed through the
neighboring Kingdoms. Moreover, by reason of the continuance of our
Banishment, we are come to that pass, that near all the Pastors of the
Churches, all indeed without exception of the Presidents, Bishops,
Superintendents, Deacons and Archdeacons, are perished from among the living:
Saving only my self alone, who for the hope of a Restoration, being in the
year, 1632. chosen (according to the will and votes of the Church assembled in
a Synod) by the Presidents then, yet alive even now but one only (with a few
Ministers my Brethren, and one only Colleague out of Polonia) do survive
alone, during the good pleasure of the Author of life. For howbeit, upon our
la^t dispersion in Polonia, not full four years since, I endeavored by all
means my utmost, to prevent my being left alone the last of all; yet it pleased
not God to give success to the counsels hereunto given, for since that time,
those of the chief, which might have succeeded, are perished from among the
living.

16. But yet I would not have these things to be so taken, as if in my
solitude, and by my departure hence, I feared or foretold the final end of the
Church in my Country. I know, that the Church being founded upon the Rock of
Eternity cannot fail, viz. the Catholic: And yet examples testify, that
particular Churches are sometimes overthrown by the hand of an angry God, that
according to his good pleasure others may be planted, or else the same
otherwise: Yea, God himself attesteth, The end is come upon my people Israel, I
will not again pass by or spare them any more, Amos 8.2. and again, when the
destruction threatened was now come to Baruch, Thou said, woe is me now, for
the Lord has added grief to my sorrow: Thus says the Lord, that which I have
built I will pull down; and that which I have planted, I will pluck up, etc.
Jer. 45.3, 4. Finally, the Church her self being overthrown, speaking
concerning her self thus, Our end draws near, our days are fulfilled, our end
is come, Lam. 4.18.

17. Nor yet is it to be thought, that Elias offended when complaining that he
was left alone, he was afraid as concerning the Church: for in this his
solitude and carefulness, he was raised up with Divine Consolation, and also
instructed with counsel, for the appointing of his Successor, 1 Kings 19.14,
etc. which I also with full trust expecting from the same everlasting goodness,
(if notwithstanding God should call me to depart out of this life, without
present comfort, yet) will say with the last of those seven Maccabean Brethran
Martyrs, Let the anger of the Omnipotent which is come upon our generation for
ou^ sins, rest upon me and my Brethren, 2 Mac. 7.38. but if neither by this
prayer, I may obtain, that the anger of God should conclude in me, but at last
our Mother must also dye as there, (ver. 41.) What shall I do?

18. It is a cu^tom in use among the Heathen, that they which dye without an
Heir, transfer their fortunes to strangers, even whom they please; insomuch, as
some of their Kings, being the last of their line, have made the people of Rome
heir of their Kingdoms (so Attalus King of Pergame, Ptolomie of Cyrene, Egypt,
and others.) Why may not I also so provide for the making good of my trust, if
it should be the will of God, that I should be taken away without (any one such
as should succeed me) a Successor.

19. But then, to whom shall I transfer our goods, or what are those goods? for
all are lost. Nay, but by the Grace of God, there is yet something left to be
be^ueathed; neither are they all wanting to whom it may be disposed, both
friends and foes. Now then to foes we leave those things which are, or else may
yet be taken away; viz. outward good things, as Churches, Lands, Schools, etc.
yea, the lives also of th^se few of us which are yet escaped, if it so please
the World-disposing God: even as he was pleased t^ deal with Christ, who being
crucified, had not only his garments, but his very life given to the Soldiers
for a prey.

20. But to you friends (after the example of our eternal Master) we commend
better treasures, even our well-bel^ved Mother, the Church, take you now the
care hereof in our rooms, whatever it shall please God to do unto her, whether
to rest^re her amongst us, or when she is deceased at home, to ^^se her to life
elsewhere. You have just cause indeed to love he^, even when dead, who while^t
yet living, went before you in her go^d examples of Faith and Patience, even
now unto the third Generation.

21. But how shall I commend to you that which now is not to be found? what
charge can be given or taken of that which is not: I answer, it is no unusual
thing to erect Grave-stones for deceased friends, that their memory may not
easily wear away: Yea, and if in their lives they shined in acts of virtue, we
pourtray the countenance of those very virtues for a mirror to posterity.
Moreover also, God himself when he took away and laid waste his peoples Land,
City, Temple, because of their unthankefulness for his blessings, he would
still have the Basis of the Altar to be left in its place, upon which after
ages (when they should be returned to themselves, and to God) might build
again, Ezra 3. ver. 3. If then by the grace of God, there has been found in us
(as wise men and godly have sometimes thought, as will after in its proper
place be made to appear) any thing true, any thing honorable, any thing just,
any thing pure, any thing to be loved, and of good report, and if any virtue,
and any praise, care must be taken that it may not dye with us when we dye; and
at least that the very foundations be not buried in the rubbish of present
ruins, so that the generation to come should not be able to tell where to
find them; and indeed, this care is taken, and provision is made on this
behalf, by this our trust entrusted in your hands.

22. Indeed I reckoned this as already done, having some while since presented
you with the History of Johannes Lasitius, a noble man of Polonia, lately
printed at Amsterdam, containing (as his words are) memorable passages of the
Ecclesiastical Discipline, Customs, Decrees of the Brethren of Bohemia. Which
present, though they t^ whom it was commended, did testify by their loving
aspect and friendly speech, that it was not unacceptable to them, yet they did
acquaint me, that they in England judged it expedient that there should be
another piece written about the same matters, having a plainer title, viz. The
way of the Discipline and Ecclesiastical Order, in the Accord of the Brethren
of Bohemia. I answered, that that was published by our Fathers; which use not
to commend their own; and that this would rather be performed more fully and
exactly by some person of another Country, who upon that account might be an
Admirer of our Order; and which would give more ample satisfaction in these
things: But my friends were instant with me, and unanimously urged the putting
out of the formerly mentioned work; so that I made them a promise, I would
satisfy their desire in this matter.

23. I therefore save my credit, and behold here I send that which I was
requested, with manifold Copies! in the substance of the matter I have changed
nothing; it being not mine, but the Churches public piece: Only where it was
judged pertinent, and to good purpose, to set down some things of special
reference, that the close bands of that Order might be the better perceived,
and the practice more easily observed, I have there added some notes, more
fully explaining that which was briefly spoken.

24. And because the Preface seemed something dry and insufficient for the
information of Foreigners, I have premised a short Historical Narration; viz.
How that the Churches of Slavonia being planted by the Apostles themselves,
propagated by Hierom, Cyril, Methudius, took root especially in the Country of
Bohemia, and run up to a head and ripened in the Unity of the Brethren of
Bohemia: So that this may be useful for the better understanding of the sequel.

25. Farewell, Holy Brethren, and best w but the use of a double hour upon me,
while I ac^uaint you with the conflicts and sorrows of my Church, and
especially the ways of our Ecclesiastical accord. I commend you to the Spirit
of Grace, may he by that of the Apostle (Let a l things be done decent^y, and
in o^der) being written on your heart, compose, c^ncorporate, consolidate you
all (even the whole body, with his most glorious Head, and all the members of
his Political and Mystical b^dy, with one another, with the band of faith,
love, and eternal concord, even indiss^luble; that as Britain has been behold
of late, the sad tragical stage of Contentions, so now it may be a lively
pattern of Concord, to the perfecting of the power and glory of G^d, and the
happy treading down of the Enemies, under your Great Constantine, (not called
out of, but recalled into ^ritain, in s^ite of the Maxentians and Licinianus.)
Finally, to make your Church by the assistance of God, after so many shakings,
fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an A^my in Battel-Array,
even the mirror of all the Churches in the World, Amen Jesus Christ, Amen. So
prays from his whole heart,

The most vehement Solicitor of the Peace Order, and Salvation of the Church,
I. A. Comenius of Moravia.

A SHORT HISTORY OF THE Slavonian Church, PLANTED By the Apostles themselves,
enlarged by Jerome, Cyril, Methodius, taking root principally in the Country
of Bohemia, and running up to a head in the unity of the Brethren of Bohemia.
Pious Reader,
THose words of Christ the Everlasting Bride^ groom, touching his Bride the
Church, spoken as with admiration ( Cant. 6.9.) are well worthy of our
consideration (WHO IS THIS WHICH COMES FORTH AS THE MORNING, FAIR AS THE MOON,
CLEAR AS THE USN TERRIBLE AS AN ARMY OF BATTLE IN GOOD ARRAY?) as which,
whether taken in a divided, or a conjoined sense, afford us very excellent
Lessons.

2. If we take them in a divided sense, of the Catholic Church divided into
particular Churches; it is plain, that the Churches may, and ought to be so
distinguished and reckoned of, as they are really and truly in the account of
God: That is to say, as some Churches are novel, coming up but of late, the
Light whereof is as the Morning; so there be others of longer standing, having
the advantages of clearer light, as the Moon. Others also, joying in the full
day of Faith, Love, and Hope of Eternal mercy, even as the Sun. Others again,
over and above this glorious light within, sparkling terror outwardly to them
which are round about, as an Army well marshalled, ^^riking horror into the
Enemies, the very Battle being set, and Colors flying.

3. If we take the words in a conjoined sense, of the one only entire
Catholic Church, of which Christ speaks in the former verse, My Dove is but
one entire; without doubt we have insinuated the several ages and statures of
it, viz. that the light of the infant Church, newly come forth (in the Apostles
times) was verily the Morning: the godly mostly glorying herein, that the night
was far spent, the day was at hand, and it was now time to awake from sleep,
Romans 13.11, 12. 2 Pet. 1.19. at which time (the truth is) Divine Knowledge was
not improved as it was afterward: Neither was there such a clear and distinct
understanding of the mysteries of Faith, as there was after that the dotages of
the Heretics had exercised the wisdom of the Church; yet it sufficed them even
now as to this effect; viz. to cast off the works of darkness, and put on the
armor of light, and to walk honestly as in the day ( Romans 13.13.) as their
then zealous piety, shining in their Martyrdomes, plainly shows.

4. After this came the time of priming and waining light, as of the Moon, in
the days of the Heretics, with whom the Churches conflict was with various
success, one while the truth prevailing against error; another while error
against the truth, until the time that it suffered an horrid eclipse under
Antichrist.

5. But there was (by the Grace of God, and the benefit of a Reformation) a
restoring of the light which was extinguished in the Church, with a new
addition; and that was according to the promise made, Isa. 30.26. The light of
the Moon, shall be as the light of the Sun: There being a more through search
made after the truth, even to the very lowest foundations, then was ever known
in former ages.

6. Yet because the very Sun in our firmament (though nothing is more bright)
may, and sometimes does fail, Eccles. 17.31. and by the permission of God even
the Reformed Churches still again suffer the hour of darkness; the goodness and
wisdom of the everlasting Bridegroom gives us hope that it shall come to pass,
that the Church shall at last become terrible to her enemies; and intimates in
what way this shall be effected, to wit, if (through Gods blessing) differences
being ended, the Church shall sometime at length, so unite it self on every
side within it self, and knit together by the bands of Order, as that after the
manner of a well set Array of battle, she shall be impenetrable by her enemies,
but run through, rout and quash all contrary forces or powers whatsoever that
rise up against her.

7. And this is none other but that which the Apostle urges upon the
Ephesians, and requires of the Church now grown up, saying, Endeavoring to
preserve the Unity of the Spirit in the band of peace, etc. then further,
Ascending up on high, he gave gifts to men, some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for the compacting of the Saints, for
the work of the Ministry, for the edification of the body of Christ, until we
all come in the Unity of the Faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the full stature of Christ; that we be no more
children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by
the slight of men, etc. but carrying it sincerely in charity, may grow up into
him, which is the head, even Christ: From whom the whole body fitly joined
together, and compact by all the joints contributing from the inward
working-power, according to the measure of every part, obtains increase
suitable to the body, unto the building up of its self in love, Ephesians. 4.3, etc.

8. Whereof seeing we are in expectation from Divine goodness, why should we
not be rationally enquiring out the way of that Union and Order, on which there
is laid so great adress for the salvation of the Church? and mutually afford
one another participation and improvement both of Light and Order? It is pious
and praiseworthy not to be found slack in this matter.

9. As for me (into whose hand is now come an opportunity of bringing forth to
light in a new edition, the Order of the Church of the Brethren of Bohemia) I
apprehend it much to the business, to set before your eyes in the example of
this very Church, by what steps God is wont to lead on and perfect his people;
which whosoever of the godly reads, will easily find occasion seriously to
consider, the admirable method of Divine Providence about himself, as well as
about the Church.

10. God has done all things well, and made every thing beautiful in its
season, says Solomon, Eccles. 3.11. implying, that the works of God do always
proceed in a certain order, and step by step, from less to more; even the work
of Creation, the work of Redemption, the work of Sanctification, and the whole
course of Divine Providence about all things, teach us this very thing, and
especially the wonderful wisdom hereof, in enlarging the Tents of his Church
(which we have now in particular taken under consideration) evermore, either
unto greater bulk or beauty.

11. The Son of God could indeed (being come into the world in Humane flesh)
have made his Gospel known by himself to the whole world, in the full and
complete mystery of Redemption, but he was not pleased to do so, but ordained
some certain men Apostles; which going through the world, did publish among the
Nations, those Treasures of Divine Grace; and they committed the same Office to
others to succeed them, and they again to others, and so to the end of the
world, Mat. 28.20. 2 Timothy 2.7. Tit. 1.1.

12. For howbeit the light of the Gospel was even then by the very Apostles
sprinkled throughout the world, even to the ends of the earth (as Scripture and
Histories report) yet that light in some of those first ages, may seem to have
been rather as sparks catching upon some persons and families here and there,
then the full enlightening of the Nations. In the fourth Age indeed in
Constantine the Greats time, whole Nations began to Convert, and renouncing
Paganism, openly to profess the Christian Religion; and then afterward, the
Faith having been first received in the Empire of Rome, and other places, went
on constantly for twelve Generations (one Nation after another giving up their
names to Christ in Baptism) throughout Europe, Asia, Africa and America.

13. The succesful work of Divine Providence was very evident and remarkable in
founding the Churches of the Slavonick Counties, situate all along on the
Eastern parts of Europe: Among whom the plantation of the Gospel being planted
in the Apostles times, proved a fair crop in the fourth Century, and by degrees
extended it self in those parts, making the Churches there sometimes bigger,
sometimes better; it faring also with them now and then, as with the Moon,
still to have their light impaired by wainings, spots, and misty overcastings.
Let me briefly sum up the whole evidence hereof, as may serve to quicken us
even at this time to go forward from good to better, till we take up at length
with some, attainment worth the acquiescing in.

14. That the Gospel was planted in those Countries in the Apostles times, we
have the Apostle of the Gentiles for a witness, who writes thus to the Romans,
c. 15. v. 19. I have filled all places with the Gospel, even from Jerusalem to
Illyricum round about: And he tells Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.10. that Crescens went
into Galatia, Titus into Dalmatia: Now both Illyricum and Dalmatia are parts of
the Slavonick Country to this day; and that that Plantation did not come to
nothing, it is evident, in that Jerome being born at Strido, a City in
Illyricum, to advance the success of the faith received in his own Country,
translated the Books of the Divine Scriptures into their Mother tongue; by
means whereof the Slavonians were the first of all the parts of Europe that
were entrusted with the Oracles of God in their Mother Tongue. At this very day
do these Countries glory in that Translation, and will use no other, although
the language of that people be so much altered, that the common sort of them in
many things do not understand that ancient form of speech. Therefore their
Priests (the Ruttenians, and the Moscians) are fain to study that ancient
Language, as we do the Latin.

15. That the Churches in these Countries did very much increase, we may easily
gather from the sixth Synod of Constantinople, held in the year of Christ 680.
making very remarkable mention of the Slavonians, in these words, This Council
being at the best but low and obscure, expected the help of all, neither ought
that which one part does, be hid from the other; especially, for that it is
well known, that in the heart of the Countries, we have very many
Fellow Servants, both Longobards and Slavonians, which are still busily
scrupulous and inquisitive about this matter, etc. Whence it is plain, the
Slavonians were at this time Christians, and also such as abhorred
Image Worship, in as much as they durst not join with that Synod which stickled
for Images.

16. Moreover, in the Age next following, God opened the Door of the Gospel to
whole Countries of the Slavonians; and the occasion was this, The Bulgarians (a
Country of Slavonia) infested the neighboring Empire of Constantinople with
continual wars, till Michael the third being Emperor, made a peace with them
in the year 845. restoring to the King of the Bulgarians his Sister, which the
G^ecians had taken in battle. Now this Lady being in her Captivity seasoned
with the Christian Religion, prevailed with her Brother to renounce Heathenism,
and turn Christian. Hereupon his subjects following his example, embraced the
same faith: By this means, the Bulgarians became the first fruits of the
Slavonian Nations unto Christ. Other people in those Coasts or Regions about
Danubium, Greece and Italy, of the same Language, presently treading in their
steps; viz. the Moesians, Rascians, Servians, Bosnians, Croatians, etc. which
contributed much assistance to Cyril and Methudius, they being Grecian Bishops,
but ready and expert in the Slavonick Tongue. These passing on, and about the
year 861, entering into Moravia, (then by the Germans called Marcomannia) there
also they converted unto Christ Suatoplucus their King; and a little after that
Borivoius a Duke of the Bohemians. From thence the brightness of the Gospel
darted into Polonia, in the year of Christ's 65. the 71 year after the
conversion of the Bohemians, of the Moravians the 104. of the Bulgarians the
120. Fifteen years after this, in the year 980. the Russi, and the Mosci, and
the Slavonian Counties, turned wholly to the Christian Religion; Anna, Basil,
the Emperors sister, being given in marriage to Wlodimire a Kyoviensian Duke.

17. From hence it appears, that all these Countries converted by the means of
the Eastern Church, even the Bohemian too were Christianized with the Grecian
Rites and Forms. But the Pope of Rome, which even at this time lay in wait to
make a prey of all the Churches in the World, let slip no opportunity whereby
he might bring them under the yoke of his jurisdiction. What opportunities were
given, I must in brief relate, were it only for the sake of Bohemia.

18. Satan, the Enemy of our Redemption, raging at the beginnings of Salvation
in Bohemia, suborned, secretly plied his Incendiaries, by which that part
(those of the Nobility and Commons which stiffly adhered to Gentilisms) being
incensed and hurried into a Dog-like madness, presently banish Borivoius, and
then (his Nephew Wenceslaus, with his Grandmother Ludomilla, being dispatched
by Martyrdom) substitutes Boleslaus, a sworn Slave to Heathenish Superstitions.
By whom many of the Noblemen, and even all their Sacerdotes or Ministers, were
either slain or taken captive, and so imprisoned or banished, and driven into
the neighboring Provinces of Germany, until the year 940. when Otto the
Emperor coming upon them with an Army, cooled their courage, restraining their
fury, making Boleslaus restore the Temples, and call home the banished, and
take order that Children be initiated with Christian Rites, i. e. baptized.
Thus the Bohemians were first brought again under the power of the Roman
Emperor, and then presently fell into the snares of the Roman Bishop upon the
next occasion, which was in this manner.

19. Good Bolestaus (son of the Tyrant of that name) being desirous very much
to propagate the Christian Religion, founded a Bishopric at Prague, and
endeavoring ^o procure a person of great experience for the Pastor of that
late scattered Church, there was one Ditmar a Saxon, Canon of the Archbishops
See of Magdeburgh lately founded, commended and chosen. At the inaugurating of
this Saxon, was present the Archbishop of Moguntia (by the French called
Mentz:) But he prescribed to the new Bishop of that new people such Laws
(enjoining and giving him in charge (by express command from the Pope, the
Roman Liturgy in the Latin Tongue, as offended the Bohemians; and they not
enduring that Divine Service should be celebrated in an unknown Tongue, were
fain to seek at Rome by certain Agents (Bolehest, Mislebor, etc.) the wonted
use of their Mother Tongue in the holy things (in the year 977.) and they
obtained it. But that one generation passing, Gregory the seventh, called
Hilderbrand, took it away again by an inhibitory Edict sent to Wratislaus Duke
of Bohemia, in the year 1079. Which Edict in the very terms thereof, is extant
in the History of the Preservation of the Bohemian Church, chap. 5. Since that
time, there has always been a contest between the Bohemian and the Roman
Church; the one always putting on, the other always shaking off the yoke of
their Superstitions, even to this unhappy age of ours, wherein she is fain to
couch under her burden; which especially as to the chief passage hereof, it
will not be amiss briefly to relate.

20. The next age Coelestinus the Pope going about to obtrude on the Bohemians,
the command concerning the single life of the Clergy, his ^egate; viz. Peter
Cardinal of Lalavie, very narrowly escaped stoning by the Ministers and
Prelates of Prague, an. 1197. this is attested by Hag^eius a Pontificial Writer.

21. After this, that generation passing, there began to be ob^ruded on the
Churches the opinion of Transubstantiation, together with the Sacrilegious
communion of the Eucharist in but one kind: But in Bohemia this was not
imposed till the year, 13^1. when Charles the fourth King of Bohemia, and
Emperor of the Romans, changing the Bishopric into an Archbishopric, and
founding an University at Prague, sent over for Masters and Doctors out of
Germany, F^ance and Italy: So these being abroad trained up in the custom of
Communicating in one kind, began vehemently to urge it here; the Bohemians on
the other side not enduring this innovation, but stoutly setting themselves
against it.

22. Amongst and above all the rest of the zealots, there was a certain person,
descended of a noble Family, by name John Milicius, Canon of Prague, and
Preacher in the Cathedral Church: Which (with his Colleague Conrad Stickna)
vehemently thundered against the encroaching abuses which were so apparently
and notoriously contrary to the Word of God. Notice of this being given to Pope
Gregory the eleventh, he dispatches a Bull, whereby Milicius with his hearers
were excommunicated, he also being given over to the new Archbishop ( Ernest of
Pardubitz) to be corrected: Who presently committed Milicius to Prison; but
because of the fear of the people, he was set free again, and then banished, in
the year, 1366.

23. To be Successor to him, there was appointed Matthias Janovius of Prague,
Confessor to Charles the fourth: But he nothing daunted at the hard measure of
his banished Predecessor, perfi^s shotly to assert the Communion in both
kinds. Also, he solicited and persuaded Caesar to call a Council for the
abolishing of the many growing abuses. But then when Caesar began to negotiate
this busine^s with the Pope, the Pope was anygry, and so instantly urged the
compelling and suppressing of he busy Heretics; that Charles being infatuated
by the Authority of the Pope, banished his Confessor out of his Kingdom,
howbeit he had much place in his affection. Afterward he returned indeed, but
passed the remainder of his life in private, unto the year 1304. wherein he
dyed. It is testified, that a little before he dyed, he uttered these words, to
the comfort of his friends, The fury of the Enemies of the Truth, has hitherto
prevailed against us, but it shall not always be so, for there shall arise a
mean people without sword or power, which they shall not be able to deal withal.

24. It is worth the noting, that the Bohemians were not only acted by the S.
Spirit within, but also put on with the concurrence of the godly every where,
(observing and detesting the Abomination of Desolation) viz. from the
University of Paris and Oxford, where they traveled for the advancement of
Learning, and came away enriched with the light of sounder knowledge;
especially John Wickliff: Whose letter to John Huss, being then a young man,
written in the year, 1387. being the year before he dyed, I find yet extant in
some ancient Records, and here insert as follows.

Happiness, and what ever can be thought of, which is dear and desirable in the
bowels of Jesus Christ.
MOst dear Brethren in the Lord, whom I love in the Truth; and not I ^nely, but
also all which have known the truth: That truth, I mean, which by the grace of
God is, and abides, and shall be in you for ever. I joyed very much in the
Brethren which came from you, and produced a testim ny of your fa thfulness,
and that y u walk in the Truth. I hear Brethren, how Antichrist does vex you,
brin^ing many and various Tribulations upon them which believe in christ. It is
no strange thing it should be so with you, in as much as the Word of Christ is
oppressed by the adversaries in all the World, and that great, red, and many
headed Drag^n, mentioned by John in his Revelation, has sent out of his mouth
a great flood upon the Woman, to overwhelm her: But the faithful Lord will
certainly deliver his one only, loyal Spouse. Let us be st^engthened in the
Lord our God, and in his immense goodness, firmly believing, that he will not
suffer his dear ones to fall away from their godly purpose: only let us love
him (as we ought) with our whole hearts. Afflictions should never pr^ss us, if
iniquity prevail not. Let no distress or pressure therefore for Christ's sake
cast us down, seeing we know, that the Lord chasteneth whomsoever he receives
for his sons: For the Father of mercies is pleased to exercise us with many
troubles in this present life, that he may spare us hereafter. The Gold which
this Supreme Artificer cho^seth, he will here have it purified by fire, that
hereafter he may lay it up amongst his most pure, everlasting Treasures. We see
our time here is short, and swiftly passing away, but the life which we expect
then is blessed and eternal. Let us labor then, while we have time, that we
may be counted worthy to enter into his rest. What else, I pray do we beh^ld
here but grief, vexation, weariness; and which should affect the faithful most,
the contempt and treading under foot of the Divine Law? Let us then strive to
our utmost, abridging our senses of those transitory fading, vain things, to
attain those things which abide for ever. Let us observe the conversation of
our Fathers of old, see the Saints in both the Testaments, what st^rms and
tempe^ts they endured in the Sea of this World; what Prisons, what bonds, how
they were stoned, sawn asunder, and slain with the ed^e of the Sword, how they
went about in Sheep skins and Goats skins, etc. as the Epistle to the Hebrews
records at large: They all going the strait way in the steps of Christ, who
has said, Where I am, there shall my servant be. We therefore having such a
cl^ud of witnesses of the Saints of all former ages to compass us about, let us
lay a^ide whatever weight there is in us, and the sin which round besets us,
and run with patience the appointed race, looking to Jesus the Author and
Finisher of our faith, who for the joy set before him, endured the Cross, and
despised the shame. Let us remember him which suffered such contradiction of
sinners against himself, that we faint not in our hearts and fall away, but let
us with our whole heart seek help of the Lord, and fight manfully against
Antichrist his Enemy. Let us love his law in our hearts, and not he unthankeful
in his work: But in all things carry our selves with assurance, according to
the measure of faith which the Lord gives us, and be strong in the cause of
God, and the hope of the Eternal Reward.

Therefore thou Huss, my dear Brother in Christ, unknown indeed unto me by
face, but not in faith and love (for the uttermost ends of the earth cannot set
them asunder, which the love of Christ has knit together:) be strong in the
grace which is given to thee, fight as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, both by
word and work, Doctrine and conversation, and gain whom you can to return to
the way of the truth: Inasmuch, as the truth of the Gospel ought not to be
suppressed in silence, for the erroneous lying decrees and defections of
Antichrist: do you therefore rather, notwithstanding the designs of Satan,
comfort and establish the members of Christ, for that Antichrist shall shortly
by the will of God be finished, I am very much rejoiced, that in your Kingdom,
and other parts, God has so strengthened the hearts of some, that they suffer
Prisons, Banishment, yea, death it self, for the Word of God, and that with joy
too. Dearly Beloved, I have little else to write: I must needs assure you, That
I would gladly do any thing to strengthen you, and all the lovers of Christ's
Government. In the love of the Law of God, remember my most affectionate
salutation to them, from the bottom of my heart, especially to your partner in
the Gospel of Christ, entreating your prayers for me, and for the whole Church
of Christ. Now the God of Peace, which brought up from the dead our Lord Jesus
Christ, the great Shepherd of the sheep, by the blood of the eve^lasting
Covenant, make you ready to every good work, that you may do his will, working
in you that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

25. Huss being as now, Professor of the University, and afterward, Anno 1400.
made Preacher of Bethlehem, the University Church, he took heart very daringly,
to inveigh against those now overflowing Abominations, and weild open^y against
them the Sword of the Divine Word, with great applause among the people, not
only at Prague, but through the whole Kingdom. It very much revived his
spirit, that the same year Jerome of Prague being returned out of England, and
bringing over Wickliffs books with him, rooted up the present prevailing errors
with the like boldness in the Schools, as Huss did in the Church. Against these
pious designs, to clear the Church of the infection of Superstition, the
Academicks which were Foreigners (overnumbering yet, and overvoting the rest)
opposed themselves all they could, and passed a Censure upon Wickliffs
Articles. But the Bohemians debated the Prerogative of Elections with the Popes
Abettors; making it good, that it did belong to themselves as Natives, and not
to them being strangers. The debate being referred to King Wenceslaus, (son to
Charles) he gave sentence on the Bohemians side. Hereupon the Germans being
angry, went away from Prague by Troops (which occasioned the erecting of the
Universities of Lipsia and Erfurd) and the Bohemians chose and created Mr. Huss
Head of the University in the year, 1409.

26. The Monks being cast off by the King and the University, stir up the
Archbishop, and prevailed with him, July 16. Anno 1410. again to damn Wickliffs
Positions, and that his books should be burned. This abuse the ^cademicks
reflected upon them, with another. For the next year 1411. Pope John,
preclaiming wa^s against the King of Naples, sent Indulgences abroad to be
distributed to them which would take up arms for the Church party And one of
those Trash-merchants being come to Prague, caused the Monks to do their office
in pronouncing the said Bulls: Whereupon not only did many of the godly of the
common people publicly remonstrate against these doings, but the next day Mr.
Huss also exhibited Propositions against the superstitious Indulgences, and
openly showed the vanity of the Authors of them: And when nevertheless, that
Popish Trifler persisted, the whole throng of Studients rushing upon him,
forced away h s Bulls from him; and taking one of that gang out from among the
rest of his company, and dressing him up in a Harlots atti^e, with his breast
all stuck with Bulls, they tie him to a cart, and carry him about with shouting
acclamations: This old Wizard all the while alluring to himself with enticing
words and gestures, the rout that flocked about him, and distributing his
cursed Pardons to them. At length, in the midst of the Marketplace, they
burned all the said Bulls, together with the Letters of the Papists and
Prelates.

27. The Pope being enraged by all these doings, summons John Huss to Rome; and
because he refused (being dissuaded by the University and Nobles) to make his
appearance, Pope John the 23. prohibited by an Edict the Celebration of the
Sacrament at Prague; for that John Huss that excommunicated Heretic and
Impostor was there. Hereupon Huss seeing the Magistrate incensed, the common
people divided, and all things in a hurry and confusion, of himself withdraws
from Prague, and preached the Word of God from house to house, until such time
as he was cited to Constance, to give an account of his doctrine, he obtaining
the Kings Letters for his safe conduct thither; but how he with Jerome of
Prague was there treated by the Council of the Roman Synagogue, the story tells
us, viz. they both were burned, Huss in the year, 1415, July 6. and Jerome,
1416. May 30. etc. See their Martyrologie.

28. After this, Husses Works were put out in the Latin Tongue in Folio, and
Otho Brunsfels hav^ng by him some other Manuscripts of his printed them also in
Quarto, dedicating them to Mr. Luther, viz.

1. The Anatomy of Antichrist, Book 1. 2. Antichrists Mysteries of Iniquity. 3.
The Revelations of Christ and Antichrist. 4. The abolishing of Sects and
Traditions of men. 5. The Unity of the Church, and avoiding Schism. 6.
Evangelical Perfection. 7. The Mischief of Humane Traditions. 8. The Kingdom,
People, Life, Manners of Antichrist.
Some other Fragments, viz.

1. Of avoiding Contention in Dispute. 2. That the Apostles wrought with their
hands, being contented with little. 3. What it is to depart from the Faith. 4.
Explanation of Gen 49. Dan shall be, etc. 5. The Abomination of Desolation. 6.
The Mystery of Joseph and Pharaoh. 7. The Comparison of Unchaste Women with
Antichrist.
There is extant also in the Bohemian Dialect, which are not found in Latin,
as the Postils upon the Dominical Gospels, full of Spirit and zeal, against all
manner of corruptions in the Church of Christ, etc.

29. The Nobles of Bohemia and Moravia hainously resenting the blood and
execution of their Doctors by the Pope (contrary to the faith of his
Engagement) in the name of their whole body, send Letters, subscribed, signed
and sealed with all their hands and seals to the Council, charging it upon
them, that they had unjustly condemned their Pastor, an innocent person, and a
pious, holy, faithful Preacher of the Truth. Given at Prague, December. 21. 1416.
(the Authentic Copy of which Letters, as I am assured by faithful witnesses,
are kept in the ^ibrary of the University of Aberdeen.) The Synod returns no
answer hereunto, but writ to some which they knew were still in^oxicated with
the Roman Superstition, and set in places of pre-eminence ( viz. John of
Michelsberg, Alseus Skopek of Dubba, Albert of Koldits, etc) requesting and
adjuring them to do the commendation of the Roman Catholic Church to them, and
to the ^egat of the Council John Litomislene a Bishop, and that they would
assist them in beating down heresy. Given at Constance, March 22. in the year,
1417.

30. Thus the Bohemians being alarmed by the Council unto mutual discords,
strifes, brawl^, and animosities, were exaspered every day more and more, and
the Mass-Priests from their seats denounced the sentence of Excommunication
against the Hussites, and doomed them with curses, persecuting them, and
spoiling their Churches where ever they could. Hereupon in the year, 1419. July
30. there was so great a tumult at Prague, that the popular rage prevailing
there were twelve ancient Senators of P^ague, with the Governor of the City,
thrown out of the windows of the Governors House, to fall upon the spears point.

31. Not long after, Wenceslaus the King being deceased without Heir, Sigismond
his Brother (King of the Hungarians and Romans) took the Kingdom, and by
Delegates (for himself came not there till afterward with an Army) enacted many
things to the prejudice of their Consciences. By this means it came to pass,
that the Hussity (now so called) chose for their Captain John of Trutnow (Nobly
descended, educated at the Court, expert in War, whom because he had lost an
eye, they called Zisca, or one-eyed) which performed dreadful exploits, as is
known in story. This man pitching down with an Army in a stony Mountain place,
ten miles from Prague, built a wall about him, and so founded a City, which
would bear a battery if need were (as indeed there was need) and they called it
Tabor, i. e, a Castle.

32. For howbeit the new Pope, named Martin the fifth, chosen by the Council of
Constance, enticed the Bohemians by charming Letters sent to them, 1418. to
renounce the errors of the Wicklegians and Hussites; yet afterward, 1420.
Excommunication being denounced against them at Florence, he invited and
animated to Arms against them, Caesar, the Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Barons, Governors, Cities and Commonwealths; and adjures them by the
Wounds of Christ, and the happiness of every one of them, that with joined
forces they would set upon them, and utterly root out such a Sacrilegious,
cursed people.

33. Sigismond the King being inflamed with this Incentive, together with all
Germany, and the adjacent Kingdoms, prostitutes himself to be as Agitator on
the behalf of the Antichristian Tyranny; and a little after that same year,
enters Bohemia with a puissant Army, and infected it with war for ten years.
This is called the Hussian, or Hussites war: Of which Aeneas Sylvius (afterward
proving Pope Pius the eleventh) writes, that it would gain more admiration then
credit with Posterity; for designs were managed on their part without any
success, Zisca the Captain of the Bohemians always getting the better.

34. Besides, at home also the affairs of the Bohemians were in great
confusion: For some abetted Caesar and the Pope; others maintained the
Sacrament cause of the Cup: So that both were incensed unto onslaughts on each
other, with horrible outrage; the Papist especially raging against the greatest
Zealots against the Superstitious, as it is recorded in the History of the
Persecutions of the Bohemian Church, Chap. 10. where many instances of
Martyrdom are recited.

35. So that the Bohemians falling into Schisms among themselves, the greater
part of them, which was the worst, helped on the Persecution of the true
faithful Christians. They had been indeed all zealous in opposing Antichrist,
after the example of Mr. Huss: but now, by reason of his death, they being
destitute of some eminent, prudent, valiant Person to b^ their Captain, which
might keep the hurring rout in some good order, they fell a pieces one against
another, and stirred up cruel dissension among themselves; for the meaner sort,
both of the Laity and Clergy, only letting out their strength for the
Cup-communion (whence they were called Calixtini) were securely negligent of
the other points of Mr. Luther: But the Taborites (among whom Wencenslaus
Coranda, and Nicholaus Episcopius far excelled the rest) with a few others,
attempted to keep up simplicity and purity in all the Articles and Ceremonies.
The one part cried, we must not separate from the Church in all Rites; the
other, we will not endure any Superstitious Altars.

36. Some persons also stepped in under an hypocritical disguise, which to
promote the Kings and the Popes cause, widened the breaches, and traducing the
Abettors of more pure Doctrine, with the odious name of Piccardi, stirred up
the common peoples abhorrence of them. Now the Waldenses were called Piccardi,
who in former time being banished out of France, seated themselves in Austria,
and had been there branded with the name of the foulest Heretics: Nay, some
also there were that so powerfully wrought upon Zisca the Captain of the
Taborites, that he came over, and adhered to the Calixtini, and Persecuted the
said Piccardi with fire and sword, even as much as the very Pontificians did.
Thus tumultuously were all things in all places carried.

27. So that truly, it had been no wonder, if the Pontifical Faction had
utterly rooted out this people, they being at such variance among themselves:
But wonderful was the goodness of God, which so wisely overruled Humane folly,
that neither foes nor friends got any thing of which they could boast
themselves: For as often as the King came near the self-divided Bohemians with
his Army, so often did they, renewing peace among themselves, make good the
common cause with common strength; Zisca and Procopius both as one Captain of
the Taborites, having the chief conduct of affairs, and God granting them
wonderful successes and victories.

38. Now therefore the King and Pope seeing they could make no work of it by
force of Arms, betook themselves to fraud; and calling yet another Council to
Basil (in the year 1432.) there very fairly cog the Bohemians into a friendly
Treaty about these differences; and for their public security, they would
give them any satisfaction whatever they would desire. The Legates then being
sent to the Council, among whom of Divines, the chief were John Rokyzanus
Bishop of Prague, and Nicholaus Episcopius Bishop of the Taborites; of the
Statesmen, Procopius Holy, Duke of the Taborites, Wilhelmus Kostka Baron of
Postupira, etc. They were courteously entertained; and their Questions or
Positions being demanded, they offered four Articles, which they desired might
be granted them, or they were ready to make them good. The Articles were thus
formed:

1. That the use of the Cup ought to be restored to the people, and all the
holy things to be celebrated in their Mother Tongue. 2. That the Clergy must
have no secular Government. 3. That the Word of God must be freely taught. 4.
That public offenses must be publicly reproved.
The Popes Legate demanding, Whether they had any more? for he was told, that
they held, that the Orders of the Monks was from the Devil. Procopius answered,
Why, whence can it be, which is instituted neither by Patriarchs, nor Prophets,
nor by Christ, nor his Apostles, etc.

39. Then appointed they some on both sides, to hold the Disputation concerning
the Questions given, and the Dispute lasted full fifty days. Now when they
could not confute the Bohemians, they came to a friendly Composition; and all
things were so carried ( Rokyzan being charmed and he enchanting others with
the hope of an Archbishopric) that the said Articles were yielded to the
Bohemians, only, that they should promise to return to their obedience to the
Roman See, and to observe the Ceremonies thereof. This Transaction they called
Compactata, i. e. Articles of Agreement, or Covenants; and so the Legates were
dispatched from the Council, and the King into Bohemia, to acquaint them, That
the Bohemians were received into the bosom of the Church, and esteemed as dear
Sons thereof. They call a Convention of Estates, wherein Rokyzan sets before
them in much state of words, how that according to their own hearts desire,
they had now obtained those things for which they had so much wasted the
Kingdoms treasure; telling them, that now they had better thoughts of the King
and Pope, then sometime before, when they called them the Apocalyptical Whore
and Beast.

40. It grieved most of them, especially the Zelots of Tabor, that they should
thus swerve from Husses steps, and return into the Tents of Antichrist again:
So that they opposed the agreement what they could, and it came to blows again:
But herein the Taborites were worsted, and fain to yield, being so grossly
beaten out, that they could not rally to make any further head or attempt. So
that they had nothing left to defend themselves withal, save only the Sword of
the Word, and the Shield of Patience. This was done in the year, 1434.

41. In year 1435. Rokyzan was solemnly in the Convention of Estates chosen
Archbishop; but he taking it impatiently that his Consecration with the solemn
Rites, was put off by the King, and he deluded, began again, together with his
Faction, to busle against the injustice of the King and State, and domineering
power of the Pope: But fearing the King, he withdrew himself from ^rague for
three years. For a little after this time Sigismund dyed, and Albert his
Successor also within two years space, leaving behind him his Son Ladislaus,
who had been brought up with Frederick the Emperor.

42. Now here in the interregnum, and much more when Ladislaus being deceased,
George Podebrand (whom Rokyzan had fully at his lure) succeeded, began that
prophecy very much to be fulfilled, Manass^h shall devour Ephraim, and Ephraim
Manass^h, and both shall be against Judah: For the Pope with Interdicts,
Censures, Execrations, raved against George, and the Calixtins, they banding
back again upon the Pope and the Monks, even as good as they brought: but those
which were truly faithful, were oppressed between both, till those which
remained of the Taborites, were quite down and under foot.

43. For Rokyzan speaking them fair by himself and others, making them believe,
that he was still ready to yield, if they could make it appear, that the truth
was with greater purity on their part; and that he would not have himself, nor
any of his own party Judge of his cause, but that the Estates in their public
Convention, should take cognizance thereof, and give judgment thereupon; The
Taborites assented: And being confident of the goodness of their cause,
appeared with them at the Convention; where after many bickerings, Umpires were
chosen to give the ultimate verdict, to be confirmed by the Authority of the
Convention, so that it might not be lawful for either part to make any more
appeals, but forthwith be bound to fall to one part. They then coming to the
issue for agreement (it being so laid before) gave it for Rokyzan. The honest
and simple Taborites at last, perceived how they were abused by fraud, yet not
daring to do any thing against their Covenants, They promised consent in the
Rites, and when they were returned home, and were negligent to reform in the
Church ( i. e. which is all one as to immerse it again in Superstition) the
Viceroy George coming upon them with an Army, laid siege against the City, and
compelled the ^itizens to yield and resign up the Priests to their dispose. He
then committed them to perpetual imprisonment in the Castle of Podebrand and
Litz: Martin Lupacius with some others going over on Rokyzans side.

44. But when as for some years space, the Bohemians had in vain solicited the
Investiture of their Archbishop, and the Pope still refused to hearken to them
in this matter, unless Rokyzan would part with the Cup: (yea, moreover, 1448.)
sending the Cardinal of St. Angelo to Prague, under pretense of a Treaty, gave
order to surprise and force out of their custody the Compactata, or the
Covenant-Rolls, wherewithal he was fled; but being called back, was compelled
to restore them, and let them go:) Rokyzan resuming his stomach against the
Pope, justified it, that he was that great Antichrist spoken of in the
Apocalypse and Daniel. And we (says he) unless we fall off from obedience to
him, are an undone and a damned people: telling them, that they must have for
the way of Religion; not the Compactata, or the Scroul of Agreement, but the
Law of Christ: that all things of the Popes way were to be laid aside, as being
impure; and all things to be wholly reared up out of the foundations of the
Apostles: In a word, he so paid Antichrist, that most of them believed him to
be a second Huss, and were in expectation of no less then a full Reformation.

45. But because he did not put his hand to the work all this while, they of
his Auditory, which were more real, (of which the very chief was Gregory,
Rokyzans Nephew by his sister, a man of a Noble extraction) saying their heads
together, come to Rokyzan, lay open their troubles of conscience, and ask his
advice. He entreated them lovingly, and commending their zeal, produced them
some Tractates to read concerning the Abomination which was crept into the
Church, and so kindled their zeal yet more; but withal, adv sed them to silence
and patience. When yet again the third time, their number being now increased,
they were instant with him, that what he had declared for in words he would not
delay in very deed to perform, He answered, it was a business of great
concernment and difficulty, wherein nothing could be done suddenly, etc.

46. In the mean time, Rokyzan besti^s himself all he could against the Pope,
endeavoring also the joint consent of the Gre k Church: For because the decree
of the Florentine Synod (by which the Bohemians were again as Heretics cut off
from the Church) was come forth, there was holden at Prague (in the year,
1450.) a Convention of Estates, and a Synod of Priests. Now here it was, that
by Rokyzans advice, and the common consent of the Estates and the Clergy, an
appeal was made to the Greek Church, and Legates were dispatched away with
Letters to Constantinople. The Greeks when they had heard the Contents of the
Doctrine delivered by the Legates, they joyed in the mutu l consent; and
returning Letters to the Bohemians, confirmed them in the faith: Adding also, a
promise to ordain them Ministers for their Church. But these things lying yet
in hope, coming on slowly, giving some ground of hope, Rokyzan does again
animate his Clients, and openly gives them to understand, that it was hopeful
that a Reformation would even now shortly appear. For, said he, taxing the many
abuses, we do but touch some things which lie uppermost in the surface; but
they will appear shortly who will rip up the Foundations of Truth from the
bottom.

47. Thus when he had whiled of these godly souls unto the seventh year; being
again advised with, he said, He had now cast about all things in his mind, and
did not see what to resolve upon, unless to make a separation wholly, as well
from the Calixtines as the Papists; for now all was full of Abomination, and
the mischief was past cure. To the like effect was also the advice of Lupacius.
They said, then let us fall off, we will own, honor, follow thee for our
Leader, Doctor and Father. But he answered, You lay upon me, said he, a hard
task: you are too bold, the matter is full of danger, and the like.

48. Constantinople was now again in the year, 1453. sacked, and spoiled by the
Turks: at which time two of the dispersed Grecians escaping, come to Prague,
and there were made welcome by Rokyzan, he after much conference with them
about Religion, admitted them also to the Celebration of the Lords Supper. At
which, when they saw that here even amongst these, the simplicity of faith was
so much defaced in Superstitions, those good zealots were yet more troubled in
their minds, seeing what to fly, but not having what to follow.

49. Therefore they come again to Rok^zan, and beseech him for the sake of the
glory of God, that he would pity the souls of his beguiled people, and not
leave them in so great an apparent hazard of Salvation. But he good man, having
not so much courage, as to despise the (hitherto plainly vain) hope of
Arch-episcopal glory, and to choose shame and the Cross, with the people of God;
was now wrath, and upbraided them with their importunity, and bids them they
should let the business fall, and withdraw from him; that he would beg for them
of the King ( George Podebrand, which to gain the Crown, had sworn obedience to
the Pope) some place where they might live safely, and serve God with a pure
conscience.

50. And he obtained the Principality of Litica in the mountanous places of the
neighborhood of Silesia, whether presently the Citizens of Prague, both
Batchelors and Masters betake themselves; others both Commons and Nobles
learned and unlearned elsewhere thereabout, in great numbers, giving themselves
diligently to the reading of the Scriptures, prayer and works of piety. Their
Pastors were of the Calixtines which renounced the superstitions, and addressed
themselves after the form of the Apostolical simplicity; among which Micael
Bradacius Pastor of Zamberg, a pious and devout old man, was the chiefest.
These all called one another mutually, by the common and (to the godly) dear
name of Brethren and Sisters; by which means it was, that the title of the
Brethren of Bohemia is given to them by way of eminency even to this day.

51. They began indeed to call themselves The Brethren of the Law of Christ, as
well to distinguish themselves from the orders of the Papists (as also from the
Benedictines, Franciscans, etc.) as to insist upon the foundation of Mr. Huss,
viz. That the Law of Christ is sufficient for the Government of the Church
Militant, etc. But afterward when they observed it was drawn into a calumny
(the adversaries crying, that they founded a new Order of Monks) they left it
off, saluting one another not amiss with the title of THE BROTHERLY UNITED
CHVRCHES, or the UNITY OF THE BRETHREN. For as the Church is the company of
them which are called out of the world to partake of salvation, by Faith in
Christ, knit together by the Laws of mutual charity; even so Unity
Ecclesiastical is with us the company of Churches knit together in the Laws of
mutual love, for the mutual edification of one another, in the common
salvation; fully according to the mind of the holy Ghost, Psalm. 133. and Ephesians.
4. and elsewhere set down in the Scriptures.

52. But Satan was wroth, with those beginnings of the Church, undertaking a
Reformation according to the Laws of the Gospel; he therefore raised a new and
horrible tempest to overwhelm it; for the fame of this flying all abroad, the
Priests every where stirred up the people to hate them; Choke (they cried)
choke the spark least it grow into a flame. Rokysan himself (who one would
think strange) puts on the disposition of an enemy, and accuses them of
headstrong impiety; for there was no want of such as would traduce them to the
King and Consistory, with variety of imputations.

53. Hereupon it came to pass (in the year 1461.) that our Brother Gregory,
with some others, visiting the Brethren at Prague, they being assembled
together in a certain house were betrayed and taken: Where take notice of this
remark of providence; The Governor entering, stayed at the door of the room
where they were met, and bespake them in these words of Scripture, All you that
will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution: You therefore that
are here follow me to prison, for he was a good man, and meant well to the
business of the Brethren, but could not do otherwise because of the command of
his betters.

54. The King by reason of the complaints the wicked made of them to him, was
persuaded that the Brethren of the Taborites (as they called them) had some
plot in hand, therefore he commanded that that holy man Gregory should be put
upon the rack; but he falling into a deep Trance or ecstasy, felt no pain, and
so they left him upon the rack by the tormentors for dead. Rokyzan his Uncle,
coming in to him, and finding him dead on the wrack, lamented over him with
many tears, redoubling it, I would I were in thy place, O my Gregory, but he
afterward, coming to himself, related the vision, which in this wheel he had
seen; That he was carried into a most pleasant meadow, in the midst of which
stood a tree laden with fruit, and many kinds of birds sitting on the leaves,
feeding on it; there standing in the middle a youth governing the birds with a
cane, so that none of them durst get away out of order. In which sight without
doubt, God intended to give the picture of that Church whereof he was as the
Patriarch. He saw also other three men keeping the same tree; which six years
after when they were in very deed chosen by vote to be the Superintendents, he
remembered and assured us that they were the very same, by the very lineaments
of their faces, in that vision.

55. So Gregory by the mediation of Rokyzan was dismissed, but then Patents
came forth by the Kings order, inhibiting all the Pastors the ministration of
the holy Ordinances without the ceremonies, and threatening the punishment of
death to any that should dare to adminster without the said ceremon^es to the
Brethren, known by the now odious name of Piccardi. The Brethren therefore
being reduced to great streights, and as sheep bereaved of their shepherd, run
to Rokyzan, beseeching him by the glory of God and his own salvation, that he
would not desert that cause which he knew to be Gods, nor hinder the turning
away of many from the way of error, which they were earnestly providing for,
and that he would not by any means withold the known truth in
unrighteousness; That even the chief of all the Clergy in the Kingdom must give
an account of all, both things and persons wherewith they are entrusted, and
the like. But when they saw he was hardened, at length they took their leaves of
him, inserting these words in their last letter. Rokyzan, thou art of the
world, and wilt perish with the world.

56. At which words being vexed, he exasperated the King again against them,
and out comes new Patents in the name of the King and Consistory, That those
execrable persons should not be tolerated in any place of Bohemia or Moravia;
But (howbeit they were not wanting which would have them taken and put to
death) yet Jodocus Rosenbergius, Bishop of W^atislavia, dissuaded them from it,
giving this reason, that Martyrdom was as half-raw-rosting, which easily breeds
worms (meaning that the faithful multiplied by being diminished by martyrdoms)
and that they would be better reduced, if they were banished in all parts: For
when they are come to that pass (says he) that they know not which way to turn
themselves, they will return to their sound mind.

57. Upon this a sore Inquisition was resolved, and executed upon the Brethren,
and so hot it was, that most of them, especially the chief being dispersed into
the Mountains and woods, dwelt in caves or dens; neither yet there being
sufficiently safe, therefore they dared not to make any fire for kitchen use,
save only in the night, least the smoke going forth should betray them; and
then sitting about the fire in the sharp cold air, they would spend their time
in reading the Scriptures and holy conferences; and as often as they came forth
in the deep snow to provide them necessaries, least they should be traced, they
trod all in the same foot-prints, the last man drawing after him a Turpentine
bough to cover all, that it might seem to be only the track of some Countryman
drawing about some bush-wood. From this their dwelling in such lurking places
they were afterward in a scoff called Jamnici or Cavers.

58. Moreover these Brethren made a certain order among themselves, that the
Seniors should be chosen by votes, and have the ordering of affairs allotted to
them, and the rest promise to be ordered by them; then with the advice and
counsel of these, the chief (of them which were of the dispersion through
Bohemia and Moravia) being called, they held Synods in those mountains, and
made certain decrees, viz. How they should carry it among themselves, how
toward others, friends and foes, also Kings and Magistrates, and the like,
often setting apart times of praying and fasting among themselves with the
dispersed, and consulting out of the word of God about those things which were
needful for a reformation of life and Doctrine.

59. Their chief care was for Pastors of souls, where they should procure them,
when they which they now had were deceased; that to expect till some of the
Roman Ordination should out of love to the truth come over to them, was a
matter of uncertain hope: And they remembered that Rokyzan did often affirm
professedly, that all things must be reformed to the very foundations; that
therefore Ordination was to be set on foot at home, by that power which Christ
has given to his Church, That while they had some ordained among them, they
should ordain others, and they again others still to succeed them, and their
desires inclined much this way, as also their judgments. But there was one
thing which did strike their hearts with some fear, whether that Ordination
would be legitimate enough, if a Presbyter ordain a Presbyter without a Bishop,
and how they should be able to defend such ordination if it should be called in
question, either amongst others or their own.

60. At length after many perplexing thoughts for some years together, it was
agreed (in the year 1467.) that the eminentest men out of Bohemia and Moravia
of about fifty years old, should with many tears and prayers poured out to God
(resolve to make evidence of the will of God by lot) that he would be so
pleased to declare whether that which was propounded were acceptable to him,
and seasonable at that time. Then they by votes chose from among them nine men,
which they judged fit before the rest to take the office of the Ministry upon
them; and they put into the hand of a child (called into the Assembly, not
knowing what was doing) twelve hidden lots or schedules, and bid him distribute
to these nine; nine of them were blancks; EST, It is he, being written upon
three only; whereupon it might have so fallen out, that all the nine might have
had blancks, and this was to be the discovery of the negative will of God; but
so it came to pass, that those three that were written on, did alight into the
hands of three among them, viz. Matthias Kunwaldius, a most pious person,
Thomas Prelaucius, a very learned person; Elias Krenovius, eminent for singular
diligence and industry.

61. They embracing these with joy as given to them by a Divine hand, began to
consult about their confirmation, even by a new way of Ordination; and they
knowing that there was some Waldenses in the Borders of Moravia and Austria
(that they might consult for satisfaction of the scruples of the consciences of
others, as well as their own, both for the present and future) they send unto
them Michal Zamberg with two others to acquaint them with what they had done,
and ask their judgment concerning it: They light upon Stephen their Bishop
then, getting another Bishop, and some of the Ministers to be present with him,
declare unto them their original, the Articles of their Doctrine, and what
horrid things they had undergon in Italy and France: They also hearing,
approving and joying them upon the relation they made of their separation from
the Pope and the Calixtines: Yea moreover creating them three Bishops by
imposition of their hands they conferred on them power to ordain Ministers, and
sent them away.

62. Our Brethren were glad to understand these thlngs, and being desirous of
Christian Unity, they deliberate whether they might not fall in to make one
people and one Church with the Waldenses; They were very much taken with the
purity of their Doctrine, and their endeavor of a Christian conversation; but
it displeased them, that they concealed the truth and did not profess it
freely, but studying to evade persecutions, frequented the Churches of the
Papists, and communicated in their Idolatrous worship. It was resolved that
they would admonish them of this and some other things; therefore sending again
fit perso^^, they acquaint the Waldenses with these things. They testified
their good liking of their purpose to come into unity with them, giving them to
understand that as to the faults they charged upon them, they were neither
ignorant of them, nor did they excuse them, but confessed they were departed
from the ancient purity of their Fathers, and would bethink them of amending.
They agreed on both parts, that upon a certain time they would give one another
a meeting to take further order about the business; but before that time came,
the Papists, this being divulged, began to rage against the good Waldenses.
Stephen their Superintendent at Vienna suffers burning, the rest (the most of
them getting over to Marchia, and from thence) were scatterd to Moravia and
especially Fulneca.

63. And from this transaction of the Brethren of Bohemia with the Waldenses,
it arose that afterward they were also honored with the name of Waldenses: But
they would never own it, complaining often publicly in their writings That it
was given to them through a mistake. And herein they allege for the cause both
Truth and necessity; Truth because they took not their Doctrine from them, nor
were they the Authors that founded that Unity; nor yet were they reformed by
them, but they themselves desired to be reformed of their mischievous errors by
them. Again it was of Necessity, because they thought it prudence not to derive
upon themselves, but rather to decline the Decrees made and published by the
Magistrates against the Waldenses; yet withal, that they received from the
Waldenses power of Ordination, and thereby external Succession, they would
never deny, although for the present time it was their wisdom to pass over even
this in silence.

64. But it pleased God that the Brethren in Bohemia should be Fellow Sufferers
with the Waldenses in the Austrian Persecution: For George the King, solemnly
calling the Estates into a Convention (in the year 1468.) enacted a bloody
Statute against them, That every one of the Nobles in their respective
Territories of his Principality or Jurisdiction, should do his endeavor to
apprehend whom soever they could of the Piccardi, and severely punish them upon
occasion according to their pleasure, By this severity to compel the
separation. Hereupon there were sore Persecutions until the decease of George,
on March 22. in the year 1471. ( Rokyzan being dead Fifteen days before) And
now then the Halcion days seemed to return, God wonderfully preserving that
little Flock; By which means was fulfilled that Prophecy of Matthias
Gannovius, deceased a whole year before, Of a mean people to arise without
sword and outward power, which yet the enemies of the Truth should not be able
to prevail over.

65. For there succeeded to George, Wladislaus the Pole, a most meek Prince,
under whom things were like to be in a more quiet State, but that the
Adversaries stirred him up, and put him on, and yet this a good while in vain,
for although presently in the second year of his reign (1472) he suffered a
decree to pass for the rooting them out, yet receiving from the Brethren their
Apology, and supplication, that he would tolerate them in their native Country,
as faithful and quiet Subjects, seeking nothing but to please God, and their
King, and all men in that which is good, he presently checked it, as also many
times afterward, until the year 1508. Wherein they extorted from him, (very
much reniting) that kind of bloody instrument, yet still without any effect as
they intended. Amongst other Boutefeus, was Bohuslaus of Lohkowitz, Baron of
Hassenstein a most renouned Orator and Poet in his time, Secretary to the King;
in the fourth Book of whose Epistle written to the King, 1497. these words are
to be read, This most of all vexes me, that, that seditious faction, who under
King George and Rokyzan (though accused of Heresy) durst not so much as peep,
should now under a Catholic King so take root, and so far spread its branches,
that it can scarcely be rooted out, or pulled up by the strength of man.

66. The Brethren therefore seeing that Schism and sedition was laid to their
charge, and fearing least shortly they should be made to fly the Country,
advising with their Patrons (which at this time they had amongst the Nobles,
sent four men ( Luke Pragen, Mares Kokowetz, Martin Kapatnik, and Ca^par March)
to seek if any where could be found some people Worshipping Christ purely, to
whom they might fully join themselves, as to a true Church of Christ: They went
therefore (being liberally set out, and plentifully provided, by the Barons)
one to Greece, another to Moscovie and Russia, a third to Thrace and Bulgar,
the fourth to Asia, Palestine, Egypt, to make a search. They all returning home
make report that there is no place to be found, but where all things are very
corrupt, and that the Christians are full of vices, and superstitions, as if
they were all agreed herein.

67. Then the Brethren convene in a Synod, and cast about again what is needful
yet to be done: And that they might in the mean while, at least before God,
clear their Consciences of the guilt of Schism, and also put Posterity into
some certain way, they made a Canon, That if God shall yet any where raise up
pious Teachers and Reformers of that Church, they will join themselves to them,
etc. This was done, 1486.

68. But from whence to expect these, they being uncertain, they send again
Luke Prag, and Thomas German into Italy and France, to take a survey of the
Assemblies of the Brethren the Waldenses, that they might fully know how all
things were with them. But they bring tidings, that they find nothing but a
few remainders of the godly, lurking in private; and that they were Spectators
of the burning of some which were discovered and betrayed, among whom one was
Hierom Savanorala. The good Brethren the Bohemians saw there was nothing
remaining, but sighs to God for the Christian people, and constancy and
patience in bearing the Divine trials at home: And how great calamities they
suffered, even to the r ising up of Luther in Germany, the History of the
Persecutions of the Church of Bohemia from Chap. 21. to 28. relates.

69. In the mean time, the art of Printing, lately found out in Germany, began
to grow into frequent use, many less and greater, sacred and profane Books
coming forth in Italy, especially at Rome and Venice: The Bohemians therefore
resolving to use this so great a gift of God, mostly to salvation of souls,
about this time procured the Bible to be printed (the first of all Europe
again) at Venice, in their Mother tongue: A little after, the Copies being
dispersed at Noriberg once and again. At last setting up a Printing House at
home, they made many impressions, especially at Prague, Bolislavia and Kralice
in Moravia.

70. About the year, 1511. It was, that Erasmus of Rotterdam began to be famed
by the common vogue, as the Restorer not only of Languages, but also of more
pure Divinity: To whom the Brethren by two of their own ( Nicholaus Claudius,
and Laurence Wotik) send their Apology, dedicating it to King Wladistaus; and
printing it at Noriberg, in the year 1408 their request was, that he would read
over the Book, and ingenuously tell them of the faults therein, and they were
ready to correct them: But if he found nothing amiss therein, that he would
daign to commend it by his testimony, to vindicate the innocent from wrong as
much as in him lay. Some days after he answered, That he did observe nothing
amiss therein; but as for attesting such things under his hand, it seemed
neither safe for him, nor necessary for the Brethren; as well because they
which were prejudiced against them under the name of Piccardi, would not be any
thing the better satisfied concerning them by his testimonial; as also, that by
so commending them which all men had an evil eye upon, he should only effect
thus much, that by the prevalency of the Popish party, his writings would be
suppressed, and not come to hand, even such writings of his, as out of which he
commonly heard the seeds of true piety were gathered; and whereby rebudding
Religion, which was yet as it were in the bud or shooting, might by little and
little be much set forward, all men having now liberty to read them. Seeing
therefore his judgment and approbation given, would render them neither
better, not better esteemed, he thought it best to keep himself safe for some
better service to the Church. So the Brethren went on according to the Orders
they had made among themselves, to propagate the Kingdom unto more and more
purity.

71. Yet nevertheless, he gave testimony to the Brethren two ways; viz. First,
by the by, as it were, in his Preface to the New Testament; and then
professedly, in answering John Schletch, which calumniated the Brethren. In his
Preface to the N.T. he thus argues:

But he is a Divine for me, which not with his artificially perplexed
Syllogisms, Disputations; no, but with his affection, with his presence and
countenance, with his conversation, teaches us, viz. That a Christian must
despise riches, not place his confid^nce in worldly advantage, but wholly
depend upon God: Not revenge injuries, but bless them which curse, do good to
them which deserve evil, must love and tender all men, one and another, as the
members of the same body, and tolerate the evils, if they cannot be amended.
Must take, not for miserable but for blessed, them which are spoiled of their
goods, driven from their Demesus, and live in sorrows. Must reckon death
desirable to the godly, as that which is nothing else but a passage to
immortality. These things, if any one, I say, inspired by the Spirit of Christ,
preaches and inculcates, exhorts, invites, encourages, be he a ditcher or a
Weaver, be is a Div^ne indeed: And if he does these things also in his
conversation, whatever he be, he is verily a great Doctor. Wherefore let them
which are as Angels understand, that any man may excel perhaps in curious
discourse, and yet be no Christian: But to live like an Angel, free from all
impurity; this to gain by persuasion, this is the great work of a Divine. Does
any one interrupt me by cavilling at these things as dotages, as insipid stuff,
shallow, foolish businesses; in answer only thus, The shallow mplicities are
those things which Christ most what teaches, which the Apostles inculcate or
insist upon These businesses, how Idiot lik^ soever they be, are the very
things which has made, and left us upon record, so many true right bred
Christians, so many swarms of famous Martyrs. This barbarous, illiterate
Philosophy, as it seems to them, has been of that force upon the greatest
Princes in the world yea, many Kingdoms, many Nations, that it has born such
asway, and brought them into conformity thereunto: that which all the force of
Tyrants, all the learning of the Philosophers could never do. Neither yet do I
deny, but they may (if they please) speak wisdom too among them which are
perfect: But upon this very account, let the meaner, low rank of Christians
comfort themselves, that the Apostles, whether they skilled those subtilties or
no, let who can, take care to prove, I am sure they taught them not.

72. And for Schletch, whereas he had given a malicious Character of the
Brethren, Erasmus (performing as it were the Office of an Advocate for them)
makes this return upon him in writing:

That those Brethren choose their Priests themselves, it is not contrary to the
custom of the Ancients: For so was S. Nichalaus chosen, so S. Ambrose. That
those they choose are not so learned, is very tolerable, where the piety of the
Conversation makes amends for the want of more learning. That they salute one
another by the names of Brethren and Sisters, I do not see wherein it is
blameworthy: And I would, that among all Christians, that same compellation of
mutual love were still in use, That they give less to Doctors, then to the
Divine Books; i. e. ascribe more unto God then to men, is according to sound
judgment. As for their not observing holy days, their opinion differs not much
from that in Jeromes Century, though now the company of holy days is grown
almost beyond all number. 73. About a hundred years elapsing after the decease
of Huss, that the prophecy of that holy Martyr might be fulfilled (An hundred
years hence you shall answer for this before God and me:) God raised up Germans
Reformer, magnanimous Luther; who taking offense at the Papists impudency in
selling Pardons, began openly, and with great zeal to withstand their errors,
anno 1517. and indeed with greater success then any which were before him. Thus
was another Prediction of our Martyr fulfilled, To day you roast the Goose (Huss
among the Bohemians signifies a Goose) but there shall come a Swan which you
shall not be able to ^ost.

74. The Brethren very much rejoicing to hear of Luthers being up, and about to
reform the Church, sent to him, Anno 1522. John Cornu, and Michael Alb, to joy
him with the knowledge of the Truth which he had been taught; entreating him to
do what he could, happily to communicate and diffuse that same light through
the Christian world. By this means (though he was already very very courageous,
yet) they add vigor unto him, as he himself testifies in his writings to
Spalatine and others. After this, they again saluting him in writing, he
returns an answer to them in writing, an. 1523. in these words, We cannot yet
compass it here, to order the practice of Doctrine and a Holy Life, as we hear
it is with you; things are but green here with us, and go on very slowly, but
pray for us.

75. They also sent a second message by the same two persons, in the year 1524.
more fully to be informed of the state of Discipline in the recovering Church:
But having certain intelligence, that there was amongst them for the present no
regard thereof, they let fall their intercourse with Luther for the space of
eight years. Whereupon he also thinking amiss of them, began to speak more
hardly of some of the courses they had taken, in some Books of his then
written, which were called his Table talk.

76. But when George Marchio of Brandenburgh, Tutor to Ludovicus King of
Bohemia, made further enquiry of the Baron of Krajek, about these businesses of
the Brethren; they sent in writing their Apology of their Doctrine and
Ceremonies (1532.) which Luther took care to be printed. (commending it with
his elegant Preface thereunto) at Witterberg, 1533. and again, 1538. from which
time he and the Brethren were always very great all the while he lived. The
Adversa^ies in the mean while, maliciously snarling and flouting at it, as it
appears in Joh. Faber, at this time Bishop of Vienna; his Books, printed 1537.
wherein he thus writes, The Piccards, named also the Waldenses, vary much from
the Catholics, of whom Luther has often much changed his mind in his
writings; in some c^nsuting them as the worst of Heretics; in other again
writing to them, as one given over to Reprobate sense, sooths them and extols
them as the best of all Christians, commending in them the very things he
formerly condemned; and condemning the very same which he before had approved
in them.

77. In the year 1536. the Brethren visit Luther again, to deal with them about
the Discipline and Government of the Church. Luther (says the Historian
Lasitius) acknowledged that he was grieved, that in these first revivings of
the Gospel, he had admitted one with another promiscuously to the Lords Supper,
and that he did not settle Discipline amongst his people, like that of the
Brethren. The witnesses of these things which I relate for truth (says the
same Historian) were the very Brethrens Messengers themselves, but lately
deceased; viz. John Augusta the Brethrens Antistes, Erasmus Summerfield of
Tumice, a Nobleman, and George Israel, who himself told me these things, he
being then but young, but now a Bishop aged 80 years. ( Lasitius adds of his
own) But we must allow such a great man to forget himself at home in his proper
place, that is so taken up with conflicts abroad in breaking the Papal power,
and purging out the many corruptions of Antichrist: For what one man can mind
and do all things, at one and the same time.

All things as they should be, we cannot do all,
Nor yet to one do Gods gifts wholly fall.
As Luther himself writes in his Piece de Servo Arbitrio of Enslaved Freewil;
ripeness of man's knowledge has and does still come on by length of time. Add
this, many things are wanting in some, to be supplied by others. Thus far
Lasitius.

78. Now these Transactions with Luther being over, (writes the same man) there
came out of France to Bohemia two learned men, bringing commendations from the
Brethren the Waldenses, to acquaint them with the calamities of them which sent
them, by reason both of the continuance of the Hostile Persecution; as also
their difference arising amongst themselves, that giving them fully to
understand the better condition of the Brethren of Bohemia, they might receive
some consolation, and to carry i^ home to their own. To this end they stayed
with ours six whole months, seeing their Order and unity in all matters, the
diligent care of their Pastors over the flock, the observance of the youngers
to the Elders, and their daily performance of all kind of labors and
services, etc. as also ours beholding in like manner their pious Conversation
and zeal; and by these two were able to judge what the rest were. And inasmuch
as they found them sound in Doctrine and Faith, they admitted them into
Communion with them. So at length the beloved strangers take their leaves of
each other, with mutual consolation, etc.

79. The Divines of Strasburg having some counsels in hand for the repairing of
Ecclesiastical Discipline amongst themselves, write to the Brethren of Bohemia
(Anno 1433.) by the hand of Fabritius Capito, and received in writing an answer
thereunto again, Anno 1540. by the hand of Marvin Bucer; then the Brethren send
Mathius Erithreus, one of their own, to them. These Transactions are set down
by Lasitius, but it may suffice here, only to present you with some few
Elegancies out of the sayings of the most pious Divine Bucer. Ecclesiastical
Discipline (says he) is the Throne of Christ reigning in the Church: And when
Mathias entreated him to excuse his impolite speaking. Bucer answers, ^iety is
to be looked at in a Christian, not quaintness of speech; it is apparently from
the Divine hand, that you being not so learned, have yet so well a governed
Church. But as for us, though we may seem more learned, yet because we neglect
the care of Discipline, we profit very little; wherefore we are thinking by all
means how to settle it. And when Matthias (the Divines being now come together
to hear his message, was relating to them the usual way of the Brethrens Order
in the Church; Bucer not able to refrain from tears, turning to the Divines
sitting about him, said, Now verily this Hierarchy or holy Government, is
rather Celestial above, then Ecclesiastical here on earth. He also yet further
inserts in his Letter to the Brethren. Many (with us) have shaken off the yoke
of Antichrist, but yet refuse to take upon them the yoke of Christ, etc. I am
persuaded, that you alone are they, that at this day are found in all the
World, amongst whom only flourishes sound Doctrine, pure edifying, and
wholesome Discipline. I have perused the Confession you sentime, rejoicing very
much to find amongst you so great a luster of the Truth, and such Order and
Purity in your Administration. Great indeed is the goodness of God toward you,
in that you retain the Doctrine so pure, and have such disciples as diligently
take care to bring back the Discipline into the Church, as it were out of
banishment. Truly we are much ashamed of our selves, when we compare at any
time our Church with this of yours. And (publicly) in his Piece against
Latomus, in print thus, That way is surely the most excellent, which is
observed by the Brethren called the Piccards; who alone in all the World again,
still retain among them, together with the purity of Doctrine, also the
Discipline of Christ in force: The thing it self is so plain, that we cannot,
but as give them the commendation thereof, so praise the Lord, which has so
wrought upon them: Howbeit, those Brethren are lightly esteemed of some
Preposterous, though Learned men.

80. At the same time there wrote to the Brethren of Bohemia also two other
Divines, Fabricins Capito, and John Calvin, Pastor of the banished French
Church then at Argentorat. Part of Fabricius Letter runs thus, The Express of
your Faith which came to our hands, was very acceptable to us; it containing
your Church Order, absolutely the best that I find in our generation; in that,
together with a solid Confession of Faith, and right use of the Sacraments, it
bears the sweet savours of holy Discipline, and the watchful Pastoral care
among you of your Pastors. For Calvin's Letter, it is extant in the Volumn of
his Epistles, (under this title, To the Bohemian Pastors) of which these words
are a fragment, I heartily congratulate your Churches, upon which, besides
sound Doctrine, God has bestowed so many excellent gifts, whereof this is none
of the least, to have such Pastors to govern and order them, and such people as
are so well affected and disposed toward Government: To be constituted in so
excellent a sorm, adorned with the most excellent Discipline, which we worthily
call the most excellent, yea, and the only bond whereby obedience can be
preserved. I am sure, we find with us by woeful experience, what the worth of
it is, by the want of it; nor yet can we any way attain unto it. God bless me!
this very thing makes me often faint in my mind, and feeble in the discharge
of my Function; yea, I should quite despair, did not this comfort me, that the
edification of the Church is always none other then the work of the Lord, which
he himself will carry on by his own power, though all help besides fails. But
yet this is a great and rare blessing, to be assisted with other necessary
advantages; therefore I shall never take our Churches to be in any posture of
strength, or firm establishment, until we can be knit together with that nerve,
etc. This excellent man was not long after by prime choice, called to exercise
his Ministry in the Church of Geneva; where he erected this kind of
Discipline and it is famous at this day in all the World.

81. In the year 1542. was made another, and that the last application of the
Brethren from Bohemia unto Luther; and it was, not so much by Legates, as in
the way of a personal friendly Visitation: For John Augusta himself, the then
chief Antistes of the Unity, taking with him of the Ministers George Israel,
and of the Nobility, Joachimius Prostibore, comes to Witteberg, to understand
what hopes there were of the Gospel-Churches, their receiving and embracing the
Discipline (which the Strasburg Divines had expressed themselves so much
desirous of.) They being kindly embraced, relate how the Hussian Churches in
Bohemia and Moravia, being by degrees turned to Lutheranism (as they call it)
retained indeed the Doctrine of the Gospel; but reformed indeed nothing, as to
the endeavor of a Christian Conversation: That this redounded much to the
prejudice of our Churches, so well approved of by Luther and his Colleagues for
the care of Discipline: Whilst the Libertines boasting, that without the yoke
of Discipline, they could bring it so to pass, to enjoy the Gospel pure in any
other place, so that there are none that any more join themselves to us, yea,
and some depart from us. They therefore demand, Whether so great an abuse of
the Gospel may be suffered? Luther replied in the presence of all the whole
College of Divines, That Popery could not be subdued, but by rooting out all
those usages which savor of the yoke of Humane Superstition, and violation of
the liberty of Conscience; and that at this time especially, when they take
notice that all the world is making head against them, it must needs be granted
a matter of necessity for us, to withstand them what we can, and to repair
Discipline: That, to this end, he would seriously attend the business, as soon
as ever he could get any breathing time: For the Pope was at this very time in
confident expectation of a new Councils making disturbance in all places, etc.
to the like purpose. The Brethren then added, that they could not expect their
endeavors should come to any good effect (as they had formerly said in their
Letter to Luther, Anno 1523.) as long as they saw that in their Universities
and ^chools, so much care was taken of Science, and so little regard had unto
Conscience; entreating them, that whilst they set themselves to obviate
impendent dangers, they would seriously mind those more specially, which as to
the matter of Conscience, warlikely break in upon the Church, and overwhelm it,
etc. After this, when they had had about two weeks most familiar converse, and
mutual conference about their whole business, with Luther and the rest of the
Divines; being now ready to return from Witteberg, Luther entertaining them
with a feast, and in the presence of many of the Professors of that University,
taking his solemn and last farwell of them, gave the whole Unity of the Brethren
the right hand of holy Fellowship, parting with these words, Be you the
Apostles of Bohemia, and I with my Colleagues will be the Apostles of Germany.
Do you the work of Christ as opportunity shall be given you there, and we will
do it in like manner here, as we may have opportunity.

82. Some months after, the same year, Luther writing to the same Augusta,
inserts these words following, Moreover, I charge you in the Lord, that you
hold out with us to the last, in the Communion of the Spirit and Doctrine
wherein you have begun, and strive with us by word and prayer against the Gates
of Hell, etc. Commend me, etc. respectfully unto all the Brethren in the Lord,
at Strasberg, the day after S. Francis: Anno 1542.

This great soul'd Luther (notwithstanding all the importunities of the
Brethren for the restoring of Discipline, and the life of Christianity) not at
all displeased with them, persisted in friendly correspondency with them to the
end, expressing a gracious dear affection toward them, and toward the
business. Lasitius produces notorious witnesses, taking from the mouth of
Luther these words following, There has not arose any people since the times
of the Apostles, whose Church has come nearer to the Apostolical Doctrine and
Orders, then the Brethren of Bohemia: and again, Although these Brethren in
purity of Doctrine excel not us (all the Articles of Faith with us, being
sincerely and purely taken out of the Word of God) yet in the ordinary
Discipline of the Church which they use, and whereby they happily govern the
Churches, they go far beyond us, and in this respect are far more
praiseworthy: And we cannot but acknowledge and yield this to them, for the
glory of God, and of his truth; whereas our people of Germany cannot be
persuaded to be willing to take the yoke of Discipline upon them.

83. Absolutely, without doubt, this excellent man saw the mischief of the
first Error, and was very desirous it should be amended, but could not (being
constrained to divide his attendance between this and other conflicts with so
many monstrous abominations) sufficiently dispatch all things, as true hearted
men frequently apologize for him, Yea, and our Lasitius himself too (as was
said before, Sect. 77.) and for certain, he commended to God and his Successors
prayers and hopes of a further and more perfect degree of Reformation to be
attained. Howbeit, the accomplishment of his Hope hitherto fell short of his
prayers: For wthin three years and four months after these Transactions with
the Brethren he departed this life, There followed upon his death (says
Bucholcer the ^hronologer) a double War of the Divines, and also Civil wars of
the Evangelici among themselves. Alas! that we rested in vindicating the
Theory of the Doctrine of the Gospel, without the practice of Discipline. God
bless us, I could wish, the Brethren of Bohemia had been proved false Prophets,
when at the very beginning of this Reformation in Germany in their first Letter
to Luther, dated 1523. and frequently afterward they foretold these sad events
viz. upon this ground, because it prevailed in their Schools and Churches
(contrary to that Apostolical Protestation, 1 Cor. 1.1, 2.) to study knowledge,
rather then Charity and Edification: So that notwithstanding all that Bucer,
Melancthon, Hemingius, Saubertus, Arnd. J. Valent, the Andreas's, and many
other faithful men, acted by the Divine Spirit, could do, no remedy could take
place to rectify this distemper. Not that nothing at all was effected by the
endeavors of these holy men; but that nothing they could do, was sufficient to
quench the general flame of malice and profaneness. God amend it, even at
least, by this his smart, and general overflowing Discipline of his scourge.

84. To return to the Brethren, I will briefly touch that Persecution, whereby
after the Scmalcaldick war was ended, they also in Bohemia were oppressed. When
the Pope had reconciled the King of France to the King of Spain (the same being
now also Emperor, Charles the fifth) upon this Article or Condition amongst the
re^^, that both parties should turn their Forces against the Lutherans, it came
to pass in France not long after, that the Waldenses in the Province of Narbon
were cut off and destroyed: Caesar also prepared war against the Germans, which
beginning just after the death of Luther, ended the year following in the
overthrow of the Protestants: At which time Ferdinand dragged the Bohemians to
execution, for that they had refused to assist Caesar against the Prince
Elector of Saxony, punishing the chief of the Nobles with imprisonment,
banishment, or confiscation of goods: He raged most of all against the
Brethren, commanding their Churc^es to be shut up, and their Pastors to be
seized. The first that was taken, was the chief Antistes John Augusta which
with his Assistant James Bilek, was taken upon suspicion of corr spondence had
with Luther, yea, conspiracy: That his design in h^s coming to Witteberg, was
to dispossess Charles of Germany, and Ferdinando of Bohemia, that the Elector of
Saxony might be King of the Bohemians. Hereupon they committed them to the
cruel wrack to be tortured three times, and yet could discover no mention of
any crime (for indeed it was a mere malicious calumny) nor yet could have any
colorable reason to inflict any punishment upon them. They were left in Prison
full sixteen years, until the death of Ferdinando, July 25. 1564. and then at
length were dismissed.

85. Some of the dispersed Pastors and people came to Prussia and there were
graciously received by Duke Albert, assigning them these Towns, Guizina,
Dubrawn, Solduvia, Gardia, for their fixed habitations. There is extant
touching these a memorab^e Letter of Antonius Bod^nsteinus, a Lutheran Pastor
of Guizina (where the better part of the exiles took up residence) written to
Mr. Brentius; an exile also at this time at Basil, which Lasitius sets down
entire, Book 5. and wherein, among other things we have as follows, These
young men are of the number of those Brethren, which within these twelve
months were driven out of their own Country of Bohemia, and being exiles,
were received in our Prussia: Their Confession was published at Witteberg, and
commended by the judgment and approbation of Mr. Luther our Reverend Father
and Master of pious memory: They have not only their Doctrine consonant with
ours, but also some other things peculiar, such as with not small jeopardy of
Conscience, are wanting among us: Such watchful care of souls, as I never saw
more exactness, the most choice exercises of piety and repentance, both
Domestic and Ecclesiastic, honesty of conversation before men, and
righteousness; the true use of fastings, watchings, travels, prayers, brotherly
admonition, private counsels, Ecclesiastical censures, etc. that they are
justly matter of admiration to us all. And I do not think Prussia could have
had better guests or inhabitants to make welcome in the world again. Mr. Bucer,
a man of great judgment, is not afraid to extol them in his works, above all
the Churches in the whole Christian world, attributing to them that which he
does not to any others, and commending them to all the godly, even as a pattern
proposed for their imitation: The same have other choice men done, Luther,
Capito, Calvin: And truly, if there be any Churches extant, in which the
Discipline and gravity of Apostolical men, and all things framed after the
example of the holiest Martyrs can be found, they are for certain these little
Churches of the Brethren. I believe, this so holy a people, is sent of God into
these parts, to the end that others may be provoked by their example, and
bethink themselves thoroughly to amend those defects which yet cleave to our
Churches. It is a very sad thing, that the Gospel of God should be published
only for a witness to the world, etc. Given September. 15. 1542.

86. Thus Prussia blessed themselves with their new neighbors: Moreover, there
appeared also at the same time, another argument of the Providence of God on
his Churches behalf; in that these very exiles, as they made their way through
Polonia the greater, scattered there (as by the by, when otherwise taken up)
some seeds of the Gospel. For when they were to depart their own Country, not
knowing whether to turn themselves, better then to the Polonians, being
consorts of the same language; Being met together in a certain place in the
confines of Silesia, behold in one company there came thither out of the places
adjacent, about nine hundred souls in above a hundred and twenty Coaches: Nay,
so it was, not only in Silesia, but also in Polonia it self (thoug^ yet
adhering generally to the Papacy) they found more countenance then opposition;
D. An^reas Earl of Gork, Captain General of Polonia the greater, not only
permitting them to be entertained and lodged in the Suburbs all about
Postriania, but inviting them also into his Hereditary Towns (Samotuli, Kurnik,
etc.) insomuch, that they had yielded themselves to him as Subjects; but that
presently there comes from the King an Edict, (which a Popish Clerk had
procured by his solicitation) straightly enjoining, that they should be driven
out of Polonia: Whereupon they went forward into Prussia, yet not without
leaving upon the minds of the Polonians some desire after them.

87. For they having some Pastors with them, were ready for Divine exercises to
be performed freely (none hindering them) singing, praying, reading the
Scriptures, preaching, to which when as many flocked (as the mind of man is
desirous of that which is new) it could not easily be, but that God should open
the heart of more then one Lydia; also for that the year following, Matthias
Sionius an Antistes, following his people into Prussia, and through some
indisposedness being constrained to stay at Polonia, by the means of many
conferences had with diverse sorts of men upon occasion, there was no small
number of the Citizens and Nobility which gave themselves up to the Discipline
of the Brethren, and desired them to appoint a Pastor over them.

88. They gave them therefore for a Pastor, and ordered to go over to them in
Polonia, George Israel, one which had been wonderfully released out of Prison
at Prague, a man of right Apostolical spirit; and he propagated the Gospel of
Christ with such happy success, that in one six years he brought most of the
Nobility (among whom was the Right Honorable the Earls of Gork, of Ostroroge,
of Leszno) unto the knowledge of the Truth; and planting near forty Churches
(as Vergerius whom the Pope sent his Legate (of whom after) to view them,
computeth them d d govern them with that dexterity, that the Noblemen and
Ministers of Polonia the less, having received their Reformers at that time out
of Switzerland (and so called the novel Churches of the Helvetlan Confession)
began to be beholden to them for counsel, and to desire to be conjoined with
them.

89. But this matter did not please Mr. Lismaninus (now Arianizing) so that
upon this account, an appeal was made to the Divines of Tigurine and Geneva,
Anno 1556. by which means the Brethrens affairs were exposed to a new debate,
not only in Helvetia, but also (by the zeal of Vergerius) in all Germany and
Italy. The Helvetians approved their design of conjoyning, especially for the
sake of their Discipline. I have ready at hand diverse Letters written at this
time to the Poles, out of which it will not be out of the way to allege
something pertinent to the business now before us. John Calvin writes thus,
Your accord with the Waldenses, I hope will be to very good effect; not only
because of that blessing with which God is wont to visit the holy Unity, in
which the members of Christ grow up together; but also, for that the Brethren
of the Waldenses, it is to be hoped, will be of no small advantage to assist
you in your small beginnings, by reason of their expertness, wherein God by
much and long experience, has trained them up: Wherefore you must all
endeavor with the greatest diligence, to confirm this your holy communion wirh
them more and more.

90. And Wolfgang Musculus, one of the Divines of Berne, has these words, We
are very much delighted with that wonderful providence of God, in that he was
pleased some years since to transplant among you some Brethren, which they call
the Waldenses, when they were cast out of Bohemia, that they might be helpful
to your Churches in the knowledge and propagation of the Truth. This was not
intended by them which violently removed them from their habitations; neither,
as I suppose, did they themselves think of what God was then doing. But he
which many ways infatuates and muffles the wise men of this world in their own
devices, was thus pleased to provide no small relief for the tender
infant-state of the Church reviving amongst you. And a little after thus, I
must needs commend your Churches for the course that they have taken to join
with the Waldenses: For I hope by this means, you will be less divided among
your selves; or else the differences which arise, will be the sooner composed,
inasmuch as you may now hereafter be able in your teaching, to tell how hit
upon the certain form of Doctrine. And again, thus he, I judge that you have
done very prudently, in that you have embraced that form of Doctrine which is
so simple, and so consonant to the holy Scripture: that, as I remember, it was
unanimously agreed by the Churches, even when they were in other matters
divided among themselves, was fit to be printed and dispersed in our Germany.

91. Notorious is the judgment of Peter Martyr, at that time a Divine of
Strasberg, writing thus, I advise moreover, that the use of Discipline be by
all means as soon as may be brought into your Churches: For if it be not
received at first, when the desires of men after the Gospel are vigorous and
strong, afterward they usually abate, and growing cold, it will not easily be
admitted. And that all your labor is in vain without it, you may assure your
selves, upon the experience of very many Churches; wherein they being at the
first groundwork of Reformation, unwilling to take this wholesome yoke upon
them, could never after, by any good government, be brought into any order of
good life and conversation. Whereupon (and I speak it with much grief) almost
all things become unsettled, and threatening ruin on every side (God bless us;)
but it is a very grievous mischief, and the certain decay of the Churches, when
the nerve of Discipline is wanting therein: Nor can they be said truly and
solidly to enjoy and possess the Gospel, where either there is no Discipline or
where it is despised, and care not taken to keep it up. Certes, in the Gospels
and Apostolical Epistles, it is so punctually set down, that we must needs
acknowledge it not the least part of Christian Religion: They therefore seem to
be negligent of Religion, which part with so excellent a part thereof.

92. Zanchy, P. Martyrs Colleague at this time at Strasberg, in his to his
acquaintance, inserts these words, Be careful with all diligence, that together
with the preaching of the Word, Ecclesiastical Discipline also be restored in
your Churches; for we find daily by sad experience, what abundance of mischief
has risen in the Churches with us, and in all Germany, and how ill it bodes
daily, that Ecclesiastical Discipline is laid aside with us; without doubt, God
will severely judge them by whose means it is, that the use hereof is not
restored to the Churches.

93. After these Counsels were mutually imparted, some yet for all this,
troubling the state of Church affairs, so it was, that some of the Nobles of
Polonia the greater (among whom was the illustrious and right honorable
Palatine, for one, and the other were two Earls, James of Ostrorog, and Raphael
de Lezno) desiring to know fully how it was with the Brethren, took a journey
to them (they being about this time in the heart of Moravia) there to hold a
Synod. They joyfully arriving ( August 24.) plainly relate before them all, the
many and great things they had heard of them, about their true hearted
Hospitality, and singular Piety. There were more then two hundred of the
Clergy, and a great appearance of the Patrons, Barons and Nobles: here at that
time they created fifteen Ministers of the Word of God, six Conseniors, and two
Bishops; viz. George Israel, and John Blahoslaus, the one Superintendent for
the Polonian, the other for the Moravian Churches. Our Countrymen
congratulating their happiness (says Lasitius) entered into very close
Religious Fellowship with them.

94. The same year was printed (at Tubing in Sweveland) the Confession of the
Brethren, by the care of Paulus Vergerius an Italian, sometime formerly Bishop
of Justinople, and the Popes Legate in Germany (who owning the truth of the
Gospel, was banished upon that account, and was now with the Duke of
Wirtenberg, he having graciously entertained him.) This Vergerius, as
concerning the Brethren, in his Preface to their Confession writes thus, I
suppose it very necessary to declare wherefore, and upon what account I
published this hitherto not enough known Confession of Christian Religion of
the Waldenses, or (as they call them) the Piccards: When God lately called me
cut of Germany into Prussia, Lithuania and Polonia, being very desirous to see
and know the many and different Churches in diverse Countries, and traveling
about for some time in Polonia, there at length I alighted upon about forty
Churches, constituted after the Waldensian Form and Prescript: With which
Church I wa^ indeed very much affected, singularly satisfied and refreshed in
them, inasmuch as the voice of the Gospel sounded clear and harmonious among
them: And so too, that I was not able, shall I say, to observe, nay truly not
so much as in the least to suspect, that there was any error or controversy
either in the Doctrine, or amongst their Teachers; their Ceremonies most chaste
and pure, so absolutely removed from all Popish Superstitions and Cringings,
that there was not so much as any favor, print or mention of them remaining:
Their Discipline grave and strict, by means whereof, there was such renovation
and reformation of life, as did produce such fruit as could not but
acknowledge, that the root of it was none other then unfeigned sound
repentance, as could be most meet to be found in any Christian. But whereas I
writ about these things to the Brethren in Italy, and other Nations, and with
great joy related some of them to the most illustrious Princes of Germany, and
other chief Persons therein. Some knew not at all whether there were such a
people as the Waldenses in the world or no. Others exceedingly wondered what
should come into the heads of the Scythians, all Polonia, Russia, Moravia,
Sarmatia, to own scarce any other but the Waldenses Confession: Fearing, no
doubt, lest they should with their inventions infect and defile the pure and
holy Doctrine which they had lately embraced: for this cause which indeed is
very weighty, I thought it incumbent upon me, that the Waldensian Confession,
which at this time was hardly to be found or gotten, might be printed and
published; and I doubt not, but all that savor pure Doctrine, even at first
taste (as they say) will highly commend, not only their Confession, but the
Polonians themselves, and all others whoever they be, that have any where
received it into their Church, and so be obliged to pray to our heavenly
Father, that of his infinite goodness, he would please to maintain, increase
and speed more and more every day the Reformation of the Churches so happily
begun amongst them. Hereupon I thought good (besides the Testimony of Martin
Luth^r, a most reverend and holy man, which aprroved and extolled the
Church Way of the Waldenses) to subjoyn also the deserved attestation of many
other persons of very great Learning, Piety and Authority, especially of Philip
Melancthon, Martin Bucer, Wolfgang, Masculus; which seem to me to be yet more
taken with this same Confession then Luther. Howbeit, he in very plain and
serious words (as I said) extols it too. Now indeed, though I know how
considerable a person I am, yet I warn the Churches in Christ, newly replanted
these last forty years, that they be not taken up with this only, that they
have prevailed so far, as to root out Popish Superstitions and other
Abominations from them; but that they would also be diligent and sollicitous to
take care for the keeping of Peace, and Purity, and the genuine Doctrine of the
Divinity of the Son of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ; and not only so
neither, but yet further, for the introducing of the Discipline and a mortified
life, as may comport with such Doctrine. Hitherto Vegerius.

95. Moreover, sending the Brethren in Prussia this their Confession, he writes
thus among other things, The Princes in Germany wonder what took me in the head
to join my self to the Piccards; but when they hear me, they will supersede
their admiring. And a little after, I hope I have taken such a course, that
many in a great part of Europe will understand what the Waldensian Confession
is, and also be in love with it; which thing is altogether to be ascribed to
God.

96. Four years after ( March 19. 1561.) he wrote to the Brethren again in
these words, As the Spirit of God has overpowered me to break off from that
Adulterate Church of Antichrist, that it is now more then ten years, by the
grace of God, I separated from it: So it now still excites me to seek that
Church which seems to me the best, wherein to lay my bones, when I shall return
my spirit into the hands of my Heavenly Father. I am therefore bound hereunto
(if it be Gods will) not only upon my own account, but also to set a good
example for others: How mean soever I am, I have made my self a president, in
flying out of the Papacy, and indeed I abhor the Doctrine thereof with my whole
heart: Now I des^^e to make attestation, That I do not condemn the Doctrine of
the Churches wherein I am; but I rather cleave to those Churches wherein
Discipline is most strictly observed: I say, I cannot but approve of the other
Churches, but I would have withal, the other part of the Gospel; i. e.
Discipline too. I profess therefore, that I must needs prefer your Churches
before all other: And least any should think me to have been but lately of this
judgment; I call God to witness, I have ever been thus affected toward these
Churches, since my first taste of the Gospel; yea, and there be many that bear
me witness, that I have asserted them to my utmost. I might add, there be two
actions of mine which show me, as being of this mind: The one is, that I
allayed the fury of the most Sereno King of the Bohemians, Maximilian when he
was possessed with bitter prejudice against them, etc. In a word, if your
Churches please to receive me, I will heartily incorporate my self to them, and
dye with them, etc. and inasmuch as I have voluntarily renounced outward
advantages, I seek them not amongst you. The hand of the Lord has touched me
sore; my affections, endeavors and thoughts now run another way.

97. and writing in particular to John Rokitam, he adds, I desire nothing more
of my Heavenly Father, then that he would transplant me into the bosom of your
Church: For in brief, I prefer it before all other, and would freely give
public testimony of this my judgment thereof before them all. I doubt not but
my Noble Lord James (Earl of Ostrorog) will communicate to you some writings
about the Council of Trent. I apprehend the Spirit of God sets it much upon my
spirit to go to that Council; and truly (if they shall give me such security
for my passage as I demand) I shall not be able to refrain, but I must go.
There is danger indeed, lest they should serve me as they did John Huss and
Jerome of Prague. But I cannot bestow my life better then if I lay it out in
martyrdom. I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. I pray do my
salutations to our Brothers George and Peter, and all the rest of the Ministers
of the Word of God. I beseech you with my whole heart pray for me. Our Heavenly
Father increase the Celestial riches of his Spirit, and of Faith, in the hearts
of all his people, through Jesus Christ our Lord: Thus far Vigerius. But it was
not given to this excellent man to compass either of his desires ( viz. either
to be transplanted into the Church of Polonia, nor to be crowned with
Martyrdom) he being a little after by a fair natural death, translated unto the
Heavenly Mansions.

98. The Churches of Polonia the less in the interim, as it were, still tossed
up and down, could come to no establishment of Order: both a good part of the
Nobility, and they which were privily proselited from Italy, following
Arrianism in their judgments, and declining the yoke of Discipline: Concerning
which John a Lasco (a Baron of Polonia, which two years before laying down
Episcopal Dignity in his own Country, out of love to the truth traveled into
other Countries; and having performed the Pastoral office of a Pastor in the
Outlandish Churches, which sojourned at London, Embda, Franckfort near by
Maine, returned, being sent for into his Country, Anno 1566. in his Letter to
John Nigran (Antistes of the Brethren in Bohemia) and his Colleagues ( Anno
1558.) writes thus, We have yet nothing here among us in any settled Posture,
etc. but it is plainly a matter of necessity, that we must give you a meeting;
for we must absolutely obviate the various attempts of Satan, which with all
craftiness they make amongst us, to disturb the Church, and hinder the progress
of the Gospel: For there are that neither will in all Articles allow our
universally received Doctrine, nor willingly will submit to Ecclesiastical
Discipline; we must therefore have mutual consultation, to know how to deal
with men of this sort; and the Lord give his blessing to us, that our meeting
may not be in vain, etc. Thus that excellent a Lasco hoped well but was
frustrated, for they came together to no purpose, both this, and some years
after; all the Antitrinitarian Turn-coats (as yet hiding their poison, but)
always bending another way, according to that of our Savior, He which does
evil, hates the light.

99. This good old man a Lasco being taken up into his heavenly Country,
another Synod was convened in the Town of Xians, 1560. wherein the haters of
Truth and Order being very daringly bold, affirmed, That the Senior or
Superintendent was not to be chosen out of the Clergy, but out of the Secular
men, persuading themselves they could more easily instill their poison into
them. They pretended two Reasons, 1, That the Pastors had enough to do every
one with his flock. 2. Lest any thing savouring of Popery be still left among
them, which were separated from the Papacy. The Legates of our Churches which
were there, Laurentius and Rokita (not yet founding the depth of Satan in this
matter) nevertheless being required their opinion, said, Our custom anciently
carries it an other way; affirming also that Order with the Authority of
Scripture and Arguments: To which the Pastors agreed, the Nobles dissented and
there was a great stir.

100. At last the haters of Order broke out to that height, to affirm, That
there was to be had a more perfect Scriptural (...) f^^mation of the Church,
then that of the Brethren of the Waldenses. Arguments therefore were drawn up
by our men, that this very way of Reformation was such as was settled according
to the pattern of the ancient Apostolical Church, and that the most famous of
the Evangelici did attest it to be such at this day; nor was this out
Reformation rashly made, or by any one man, but whatever the grave and serious
Counsels of many could find to be best, whatever could be learned from
experience, what the temper of all times could afford, or custom could confirm,
that only was agreed upon to be admitted; why then should we try new and
uncertain experiments? since that in our experience now for these forty years,
we have sufficiently been deluded with, etc. rather then seen by humble and
obedient practice any fruit of the Gospel; as if the Gospel lay only in
Temples and lips, without reformation of life, the only suitable return for so
great a light of Truth. So true is the Testimony of Speratus Bishop of
Pomefania, of holy memory (now six years agone deceased) wherein he finding
things then not much otherwise, complains, We preach (says he) and do not our
people hear, and believe not. Well, unless the Evangelici of Polonia knit
together on all hands in the bands of order, nothing will be of any durable
standing for Posterity; now Order is, that some govern, and others obey, for
constant, mutual Edification.

101. But still they objected, That the Brethren did not open their Churches,
nor had they any full Communion of Saints, but administered the Sacrament to
some only which were of their own way, at their Devotion. To which answer was
made, Christ for bad to give holy things to them which are not holy; and that
Christianity must take its beginning at repentance, not at receiving the
Sacraments; nor is it according to the Institution of Christ, to pronounce
Absolution, save only to them that repent and believe: Both of which ( viz.
Repentance and Faith) that they be not superficial and counterfeit, there must
necessarily be a discovery made by examination had to that purpose in some
appointed fit season: And inasmuch as to attribute salvifical virtue to the
naked Elements, by reason of the work done, is the Basis of all error in the
Papacy, that that error cannot be corrected, unless by a certain trial, and
that not huddled over, till the secrets of hearts be disclosed, and the newly
converted be a long time carefully both informed and examined; that Cyril well
observed, that Christ did not presently commit himself to them which made a
profession of their faith in him; and that Chrysostom called them abortive
Christians, that were admitted to the use of the Sacraments, before they had
been learned and taught to renounce all things forbidden in the Decalogue: So
that it is the concern of a true Minister of Christ, that he makes not abortive
Christians, to insist upon the fruits meet for repentance, as requisite before
admission to the Sacrament, and that because there be three parts of the
Ministry, 1 Doctrine. 2. Keys: and 3. Sacraments. The Sacraments may not be
administered, save only to such as unfeignedly embrace sound Doctrine, and
subject their life and conversation to be tried by the Laws of Discipline: If
any man refuse this, how is he a part of the flock? and before he be a member,
how can he be joined or received as such? are the Constitutions of Order to be
disturbed, in favor of such Libertines as exempt themselves from all Law of
Order?

102. The things at that time more largely discussed are well known; yet it
seems there was then no such force in them, as to make the obstinate to yield:
Yea, the conclusions of that Synod were so drawn up, that it was plain to be
seen, that Politic and Carnal Prudence, got the better of Divine and
Spiritual wisdom: For the body of the Church was not formed as the Apostle
would have it ( Ephesians. 4.16.) that by the inward working power, it may increase
unto edification of it self in love: But it was with them, as the Apostle
forewarned ( ver. 14.) men being unstable, as children tossed and carried about
with every wind of Doctrine, through (Satan's) long experienced craftiness,
artificially to deceive: This, I say was apparently the Frenzy-like Arrians
spirit, everyday more and more impotently putting forth it self, and troubling
the faith and tranquillity of the Church: So that at last the Orthodox were fain
of necessity to be very watchful (to rid themselves of those unquiet spirits)
to gather up into a more close body, by the yet firmer bands of unity in the
Spirit.

103. For at length, the many Counsels of pious and wise men took place, so
that the Churches of Polonia the less, received th Order of the Brethren of
Bohemia; they constituting out of their number of their Pastors for their own
Churches (which were scattered all about the Provinces) five Bishops or
Presbyters (of Cracovia, of Sendomiria, of Lublin, of Russia, of Belsa) and so
many Compresbyters, with all the Solemn Rites used; as also, they were to be
ever after in the same manner chosen and ordained, even as Pastors also, and
Deacons or ^atechists, and Acoluthi or Readers; besides, they had in every
Church their Political Seniors, or Lay Elders, and Synods, Districtual five,
Provincial one) to be held every year: Which example the Churches of the great
Duchy of Lithuania followed, dividing themselves into six Diocesses, and under
so many Seniors and Conseniors: And because there yet remained some difference
in rituals, all the Churches among themselves at last, came to that moderation,
even in these things, that there seemed nothing to be wanting unto full
Brotherly concord.

104. Because yet nevertheless, the Jesuits in their clamoring and traducing
the Evangelici to the King, laid to their charge a chaos of Errors and Schisms:
They, as they had professed turned away from those open barefaced Heretics
the Arrians (named afterward Socinians, from Socinus a new Imposter;) so now,
for the better uniting themselves within themselves, they yet more fully engage
to one another a Syncretism, or mutual holding together, there being then
called about that time (by the indulgence of the most pious King Sigismund
Augustus) unto Sendomiria, all the Churches of the Evangelici, in a general
Synod, 1570. wherein consent in Faith and Christian Religion was established
between all the Churches of the Augustan, Bohemian, and Helvetian Confession.
The thing is notoriously known by the books of that consent, so often printed
in Poland, and Germany; and yet the Augustans afterward (being at appointed
Disputations diverse ways tempted by some of their own party in Germany) seemed
to step back.

105. To this issue did the moderate Councils of these Brethren of Bohemia,
come, at that time in Poland with the applause of all good men. It does me good
to remember one John Lasitsky, a Nobleman of Poland, and a learned; which being
then young (about four year before the agreement for consent abovesaid was
made) turned from the Papists to the Evangelici; and hearing that (besides the
Helvetian, or Switzerland Confession, already received in his own Country)
there were others of the Evangelici in Poland the great, of the Augustan and
Bohemian Confession, resolves upon a journey to thos^ Churches, to have
personal knowledge of them in all matters, that he might see what difference
there was between one and the other. He takes down with him into Germany and
France, some great Noblemens sons, and taking his journey as he had appointed,
visits the Brethren in Bohemia, making there a through enquiry, and setting
down all the memorable things which he observed: Whereupon afterward, he
compiled the History of them (entitled, Eight Books of the Original and
Transactions of the Brethren of Bohemia) wherein in the seventh Book, he
ascribed the consent of the Churches agreed at the Sendomirian Synod,
especially to the Brethrens moderation.

106. And of himself Lasitius reports thus, Taking a journey for the advantage
of my studies, unto Heidleberg, and afterward, 1571. returning from Strasberg
home, I turned a little out of my way in unto the Brethren at Prague and
Bolestavia: At which time their Superintendent in Bohemia was Calephus, a grave
and strict Christian, as they are all: but good God, with what great joy was my
heart ravished, to see these things which are now here written, and f^ithfully
related in the eighth book. Verily, surveying every thing diligently, and
enquiring into all things fully, methought I was in the Church of Ephesus, or
of Thessalonica, or some other of the Apostles own planting, beholding and
hearing those very things which we read in the Apostolical writings, in the
Epistles of Ignatius the Martyr, in Justins Apology, or Tertullians
Apologelick. Indeed they are very unjust and injurious to the Brethren, whoever
they be, they are acted by that malignant and envious one, that detract from
the holiness of their Conversation, or derogate from their faith, so productive
of good works; or whosoever any ways prejudices so good, so harmless, so
peaceable men. Bohemia is not aware, Moravia knows not, what kind of
inhabitants they have: If they did, they would have more respect and affection
for them then they have. Absolutely, they are of that worth, that the
Government of the whole Church (if we would look to have it holy and pure
returning to that flower and vigor of the Apostolical age) should be committed
to them: But all these wishes are in vain; the Churches beautified with right
Bishops, will never give in: Nor again, will those sheep of Christ, that are
now turned into goats, endure any Pastors, but like themselves; Babylon will be
jovial, and fear nothing, till in one hour be come upon her her appointed
plagues, which yet shall never touch Noah, Lot, Daniel, Tobias, God being their
protection. Thus this Defendor of that time, proceeds with too much art happily,
yet as may serve to quicken us, to carry our selves more warily, and look into
things more narrowly, attending not only outward appearance, but weighing all:
Possibly there may lie a most precious jewel under a shabid, fordid clod, it
being usual with God, to choose the foolish things of this world, the feeble,
the base, those of no account, and indeed which are, as if they were not, 1
Cor. 1. v. 26.29.

107. Lasitius sends this History, as soon as ever it was finished, from out of
Germany, to the Geneva Divines, to have their judgment upon it; as also to
John Laurence the Brethrens Antistes in Poland, writing thus concerning it, I
writ to Mr. Beza a relation of your affairs, that if he advises to it, they may
be published, and why not? Christ commanded that light should shine out, etc.
perhaps they may pass the press, till there may come forth something better,
for in the mean time the improved revenue of those talents which God has
bestowed upon you, will abound amongst many people to the glory of God. And
Beza to Lasitius thus, At last I return your Manuscript of the Churches of the
Waldensian Brethren, which you sent me to read, and give you my opinion of:
There be many excellent things in it, which I plainly admire, and I would we
had any hope to be able to introduce them into the Church: But there be some
other things I judge, that must not be be propounded for imitation, because we
must therein have regard to the present time and circumstances.

108. But let us return to the Brethren, and see how it is them at home in
Bohemia and Moravia; and truly, their affairs are much mended, under Maximilian
a peaceable quiet Prince, of a moderate judgment of himself, if he have a
moderate Council. Amongst, whose Privy Council, those which were most great and
gracious with him, was John Crato his chief Physician, a friend of the
Brethren. He at one time being alone with the King (which took him into his
Coach with himself, going to take the air of the fields for his health and
pleasures sake) and Caesar dolefully relating the many and great divisions that
were in Christendom; and at last asking of Crato, which of all those Sects he
thought came nearest the Apostolical simplicity, he answered, I know not,
unless if that be not to be yielded to the Brethren, which they call the
Piccards. Says Caesar again, Even I think so too. Whereupon Crato was bold to
persuade the Brethren, to dedicate their new Edition of the German salter
(which he knew they were in hand withal) to Casar. And so they did, Anno 1566.
whereas first they insert in the Dedicatory Epistle to him, that there was life
in that, and all good men hoped that his August Majesty would promo^e the
general Reformation of the Church; and hereunto they quicken him, by the
example of David, Jehosaphat, Josiah, Constantine, Theodosius, and so after
that they doubted not, for the furtherance of so public a good work, to
present His Majesty this mite, with all their whole talent, according to that
measure which God had been pleased to distribute any gift unto them; as it
plainly appears in the preface it self, being still prefixed to all the those
Books of Psalters printed ever since. It is very likely this pious Prince
wanted not a good will hereunto, if by the leave of their arts that beleagure
the Scepters of Kings, and tie their hands, he could have done any thing.

109. In the third year indeed of his Reign, 1565. the haters of the Truth work
out a new Persecution against the Brethren, abusing to that purpose the
Authority of the Chancellor of Bohemia, Lord Joachim of New-house, who going
to Vienna, made means by various importunate solicitations, that Caesar should
be constrained (though it were much against his mind) to agree to the putting
in execution of the Wladislavian Edict against the Piccards, with a new Mandat.
But the goodness of God watched on the behalf of his own, and would not suffer
this most excel^ent Prince either to be defiled with the blood of the innocent,
or to be sunk by the sighs of the oppressed: For as the Chancellor returned
back prepared, or furnished with the Broad-Seal, he was scarce yet out of the
gates of Vienna, but as he was going over the bridge of the River (Danubium;)
so it was, that the pillars giving way, the bridge fell asunder, and delivered
him to the waters to be ingulfed, so that he and his Retinue was drowned, six
horsemen only swiming out, and a young man of the Nobility, whom God preserved
even to decrepit old age, to be a lasting witness of this dreadful judgment;
who also professed the Religion of the Brethren, for the Vindication of which,
he had found God by experience at that time so vigilant. This man, as he was
swiming in the waters, spying his Lord wrought up from the deep, and scrabling
in the waters ready to sink again, got hold of his gold chain about his neck,
and held till the fishermen, which he saw were coming that way in a boat, came
and helped him out: So the Baron was gotten out, howbeit dead; but for the
Cabinet or Trunk wherein the In^truments of the bloody cruelty were laid up,
that was utterly lost in the waters, so that never man saw it after, neither
durst any man ever attempt the like mischief again. Thuanus also relates this
story in his 36 Book, and calculates this very case to be the fourth Id. of
December.

100. When the Copies of the Confession of the Brethren (even of the last
Edition at Tubinga) were so dispersed, that there were none to be had, it was
printed again at Witteberg, 1573. better then the former Editions, with the
ancient Preface of Luther, and the Epistle of Professors then yet living:
Wherein these words were inserted, We commend you and your Churches for bearing
so good a mind, that after the example of your Fathers, you place your care
and diligence, especially in this, that you may make proficiency in the
knowledge of Christ daily, and faithfully transmitting the precious trust of
the Word, wherewith you are charged, both to them that are about you, and them
that come after you: We approve also well of your holding up the strictness of
Church Discipl^ne, which is after the example of the ancient Church, without
superstition, or any snares imposed on the conscience, etc. Witteberg. Feb. 8.
1573.

111. Mr. Zanchy (now living at Heidelberg) having this Confession sent him by
Mr. Crato, returned in answer these words, Having heedfully and with great
content of Spirit, perused the Brethrens Confession that you sent me; not only
I perceive that your whole Doctrine is agreeable to the holy Scriptures, but
methinks I apprehend in you that sincere and true Christian piety, which is
from the very heart, inasmuch as you seem to make it your drift, not as some,
utterly to subvert and root out, without making any difference, even to the
very foundations, whatever is found in the Church of Rome, but to constitute
Churches after the true Apostolical, and by consequence, Salvifical Square of
Piety; rejecting what is to be rejected, correcting what is to be corrected,
and retaining what is to be retained, which indeed is the true and legitimate
way of Reforming Churches: And I would all Churches, in imitation of those our
very good Brethren, would diligently take the same course; so without doubt
there would be more Piety, Peace, Concord, Charity (whereby God is glorified,
and the Kingdom of Christ advanced) felt in our selves, and seen in others: And
to what end, I pray, is the whole holy Scripture, the preaching of the Gospel,
the administration of the Sacraments, the Institution of Discipline, save
only, that by these outward helps, we being sustained, held up, assisted
(through the operation of the holy Spirit in us) may profit more and more daily
both in faith and charity, in the endeavoring of good works and an holy life?
And (as the Apostle says) That the man of God may be perfect, being furnished
unto every good work: Therefore, howbeit I grant you in part, that which you
write, that in those there is more conscience then knowledge, yet absolutely I
do not; for those Weaklings seem to me to be wiser in their ignorance, then
many wise men with their multiplied knowledge, etc.

112. Lasitius subjoyns as touching the same Confession of the Brethren, the
testimony of Stanislaus Sarnicius (reckned by Starovolscius, one of the Century
of Polonian Writers, but he was a Minister of the Word of God of the Helvetian
Confession, and afterward the Superintendent of the Diocese of Cracovia) which
is after this manner, If any man asks me, what the Bohemian Confession differs
from the Augustan and Helvetian, I can make it out, that all the Confessions of
Germany and France, do design this especially, to refute and condemn the Popish
abuses; only the Confession of the Successors of Huss the Martyr, does not
only pull down what is contrary to, but also repairs and restores that
building of the new man by Regeneration, and of the Church well qualified.

113. Not much unlike was the judgment of the Divines of Heidelberg (then
piously solicitous about the erecting of Order in the Churches of the
Palatinate under Pious Frederick) as appears in their Embassy and Letters to
the Brethren of Bohemia: for Zech. Vrsin in his to Andreas Stephanus the
Antistes of the Brethren, writes thus, We are fully certified by your
Confession, both of your consent with us in all the heads of Christian
Doctrine, and also of your care and diligence to keep up a conversation worthy
of a Christian; and indeed upon this account we must needs joy you with an
happiness far beyond us: And we entreat you to help us in your prayers to the
Lord, that we may obtain his grace, for some further attainment of the beauty
of Christian Order amongst us also; and that we judging our selves, may not be
condemned of the Lord: for notwithstanding our prayers and endeavors many a
day, have been reaching hereunto, that something of better Order may at last be
seen amongst us; yet, because the name of Church Discipline (some imprudently
and importunately urging it, others bitterly and altogether rejecting it) is
become so odious, that a great part do not only decline it, but would have it
demolished; and we can scarce hitherto enjoy the name, or the least slight
shadow of Discipline: Therefore, with shame and grief, we are sensible, that
you ascribe more to us in your opinion, then is to be found amongst us (yet
this advantage we have by it, that from hence we apprehend you ply us as with a
spur, to quicken us to endeavor to be more answerable, the better to answer to
that good opinion which you and the rest of the godly conceive of us, etc.
Mart. 19. 1574.

114. Answer hereunto being received, the Church of Heidelberg dispatch to the
Brethren one Badius, with Letters to the same Antistes (written by Mr. Olevian)
to this effect, Mr. Vrsin showed me your Letters, and them of Mr. Languet,
whereby I understand, that you of a long time have vigorously laid at that
design, whereto also we aspire, namely, to place the beginning, middle, and end
of Religion, not in disputing, but in doing, i. e. in true conversion to God,
and solid faith in Christ. Let me therefore beg of you, not only in mine, but
in the name of the Brethren, which are here in the service of the Church, that
you would furnish this John Badius with understanding of the whole Economy or
Administration of your Church, and make him welcome, for he is a learned, and
very pious man. Mr. Vrsin and all the Colleagues salute you. At Heidelberg,
April 28. 1574.

115. Now what opinion the Divines of Heidelberg had of those things which
Badius observed in the Churches of the Brethren, is evident by Olevians Letters
again to Stephen, given Sept. 6. in these words, It cannot be expressed, what
high thoughts I have of that work of the Lord, which he has not only began,
but also carried on so many years in your Churches. The extreme corruptions of
this age, makes me and my Coleagues not a ^ittle desirous to confer with you
about the most excellent. Government of the Church; for we would so build, that
the building may stand firm for after ages, but we see how great differences,
and what sudden changes there are in those Churches, which are deprived of
their Privilege, and wholly depend upon the Civil power; unless we seasonably
obviate these evils, many of the godly will think (at least in a great part)
that they have run in vain; I mean, as to the stability of the building and the
preservation and propagation of the whole Economy of the Kingdom of Christ.
Wherefore we thankfully own what the Lord has given us, and we desire to make
more full acknowledgment thereof, and beseech the Lord, that he would supply us
with sufficient means hereunto to that purpose. Veri^y, when I behold the sad
face of the Reformed Churches in Germany, I am utterly afraid. I apprehend that
secular powers have been heretofore the Churches entreatments, but now in many
places they are turned into a kind of Dominion to domineer at their pleasure
over the Churches and the heavenly doctrine: Of the causes hereof this seems
not to be the least, that many Churches have too much given up themselves to
the Polities of the world, as if they were an essential part of the Kingdom of
Christ. Therefore I cannot but extol your way of edifying, who would have your
Churches so subjected to the Polities of this world, yea and to all men for
good, as yet to part with nothing of that liberty which Christ has purchased
for them with his blood.

116. Hubert Languet (mentioned before) was the Elector of Saxonies Legate in
Cesars Court at Vienna, a man of great authority, I find some letters of his to
Andreas Stephanus, and in one of them these words, The Pope fears nothing more
then our consent and uniting together, which is his sure destruction, if it can
be effected; but we have some unsound Divines amongst us which reject all good
counsels, and therein do much advance the Popes interest. I would have the
Churches of Bohemia, which you write, desire the Augustan Confession, first
join themselves with your Churches: But these things are belonging to the good
pleasure of God only; unto whom we must earnestly pray that he would defend
his Church against them which labor to dissolve it. Of the Gentleman D. of Z.
I think as you do; he seems to me to be of that sort of men, which prudently
and simply judge of things, as nothing at all biased by their affections, of
which there are to be found but very few. Tho most (and those not otherwise
wanting parts and ingenuity) being so hurried away with their affections that
they seem sometimes (when they give their judgment) to be destitute of common
sense. At Vienna 15. Feb. 1574.

117. There was come forth before this time an. 1572. the famous four-languaged
Bible of Benedict Arias Montanus printed at Antwerp, and not much after that
was the new Latin Translation of the Bible, of Francis Junius and Imanuel
Tremel, printed at Heidelberg. This put the Brethren upon preparing in like
manner a new version of the Bible in their own language, conformable to the
Original (for all that they had hitherto had was the Latin version) they
therefore set about this business, and in pursuance hereof they send to the
Universities of Wittenberg and Basil, some Candidates in Divinity to give
themselves diligently to the study, and thorough-knowledge of the holy Tongues.
To these was adjoined a Jew born, Lucas Helitz of Posnania a learned and pious
man, ordained also a Minister of the Gospel among us; and that these might be
able quietly to attend this sacred work, there was assigned them in the heart
of Moravia an accommodation for their dwelling together, viz. the Castle of
Kratlitz a Printing office being there also erected, under the patronage of the
Right honorable Lord, John Baron of Zerotin, having his Mansion in the next
adjoining Tower (called Namest.) This noble Lord bountifully maintained all
those persons and preparations at his own proper cost and charges; and God
blessed it so, that we now (if any part of Europe again) have the Prophets and
Apostles speaking in our langauge, and yet most purely and properly. They were
about this work (preparing the Translation pure, explaining it with
Commentaries, and writing it out in six Tomes fair for the Press) the full
space of fourteen years. The first part namely the Pentateuch coming out anno
1679. The second part, viz. The Historical Books, 1580. The third part, viz.
the Hagiography ( i. e. the Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes and Canticles.)
1583. The Books of the Prophets, 1587. The Apocrypha, 1588. then the sixth and
last part containing the New Testament, 1593. out of which afterward other
Editions were taken.

118. In the year 1575. Maximilian held a Convention at Prague, and he gives
his allowance that the Estates of the Kingdom which were for the Sacrament in
both kinds, should enter into a mutual engagement of fidelity to each other,
under the common seal or token of one confession. The Jesuits notwithstanding,
and the Pseudo pretended Hussites, acting to their utmost strength to hinder
it, but yet they could not: For whereas they in their Petitions and
Remonstrances, amongst other things, clamoured to this purpose; That the
Estates for both kinds were not unanimous in the Faith but nourished amongst
themselves the Piccards, Calvinists, Lutherans. The estates that they might
testify their consent, agreed together to draw up a Common Confession: To this
end making choice of certain Divines, and appointing also some of the Barons,
Nobles and City Officers to overlook the business: To these therefore the
Masters of Prague presented the Books of Mr. Huss, and the Synodical and
Parliament Acts for the Religion of the ancient Bohemians; but those which
embraced the Augustan Confession, (which were a great part of the Estates)
offered that same Confession as they that were of the Brethren offered theirs.
They compare both the sense and the form of speech, or phrase of both parts in
every Article of Faith, and put it into such a form, as both parties were able
and willing to subscribe it, not too much descending to particular subtle
Scholastic differences of Questions. Which Christian moderation and prudence
of theirs, did not only profit themselves, but also highly swayed many great
persons in Germany, and elsewhere. For Caesar ratified that Confession that was
offered him, and took all which did subscribe it into his royal Protection:
only what they petitioned for power to constitute the Consistory and the
University, he put off till another time; graciously promising them withal, in
the mean time, that he himself or his Son (which they had assigned to be his
Successor) would not be wanting to promote the Petition of the Estates.

119. Note, That this Confession of the Estates was written in the Bohemian
language, not translated into Latin, nor printed till the year 1619. at which
time it was presented to King Frederick by the University and Consistory of
Prague, therefore it is not extant in the Catalogue of Confessions; but that
which is found there under the title of the Bohemian Confession, is the
peculiar Confession of the Brethren of Bohemia, not this common one of the
Estates. There was care taken that they should be put down only in the German
tongue, and then submitted by the Council to the censure of the Divines of
Wittenberg, 1575: by the Lord Bohustaus Felix of Lobkowitz and Hassenstein,
chosen by the Estates to overlook that business. It was well approved of by the
Wittenberg Divines, who in their answer to this Baron in the German tongue,
among others have these words, Although this Confession be brief, and we easily
observe that the main design in drawing it up, was that the chief Articles of
Faith should be briefly, plainly and properly expressed to avoid all
superfluous prelixness, and jangling contention, about doubtful questions,
which happily some contentious spirits in our Germany, if this Confession come
forth in the German dialect will find fault with all: But as for us we cannot
but approve your Christian prudence and moderation; and plainly we would warn
you, that though in other places they should be of another opinion, yet that
you would not suffer your selves to be lead away from this holy and pure
simplicity, forasmuch as it is certain that the Churches are herein best
provided for, and such are more edified, reformed and kept in unity, where the
pure Doctrine of the Gospel is commended to Christians in simplicity, without
any curious affectation of subtilties, and the contentions arising thereupon.
As also David prays Psalm. 25. Thou shall keep me in simplicity and
uprightness, etc. Given at Wittenburg 3. November, Anno 1575.

120. Most excellent Maximilian being laid in the grave, 1576. his Son Rudolph
succeeded him, and treading in his Fathers steps until the year 1602. he
reigned in quietness, no man being troubled upon any account of Religion; but
this year by the secret machinations of the Jesuits managed by their Agents,
things were brought to that pass that Rudolph subscribed the Edict by them
drawn up to reinforce Wladislaus Act against the Piccards, and commanded it to
be published, but it effected no further mischief then to shut up the Churches
of the Brethren for a time: for the Patrons of the Brethren, the Nobles
protesting against it as not belonging to them, inasmuch as the Piccards were
not such as were therein described, easily obtained of Rudolph graciously to
connive at the slack observation and execution of his Edicts: neither was it so
lawful for the adversaries to urge them by the activity of the other Estates of
the Evangelici. It is also reported by credible Authors, that when in the
evening that very day 22 July a messenger bringing tidings that Alba Regalis
(the chief City of Hungary) was taken by the Turks, Rudolphe being very much
troubled said, I look^ for some such sad blow ever since I began to usurp Gods
Dominion which he has over the Consciences of men; alluding herein to a saying
of his Father.

121. And that it was never his intent but that the promises of his most pious
Father should be performed, and the lib^rty of Conscience established, he
sufficiently declared af^erwards, when as Anno 1609. he assigned the Estates of
the Kingdom which stood for the Sacrament in both kinds, (notwithstanding the
contrave^sings of the Pope and the Spanish Faction, as also of many of his own
Council) to reform the new Consistory, and the University as they should see
meet; adding moreover hereto his Royal Letters under his broad Seal to confirm
his grant hereof; giving moreover his allowance, that the Churches and Schools
which yet the Evangelici had should be contin^ed in their possession, and that
others should be built where there was need; forbidding that any of his
Subjects (whether temporal or spiritual) should be punished upon the account of
Religion: And took order that the Kings which should succeed him in the Throne
should be bound to the pious observation of those things. Finally he restored
the power of the Estates to choose from amongst them certain Patrons to be
keepers of this Liberty.

122. The Estates then reform the Consistory, and for unanimities sake they
make choice of some certain Ministers, by suffrage, viz. Three of the Hussites,
three of the Brethren, and as many of the other Evangelici; and adjoined to
them three Professors of the University; and enjoin to these Twelve select
persons the whole care of Ecclesiastical matters in all the Kingdom, and
inasmuch as it was now agreed on all hands, that the things formerly agreed
called the Compactata should be abrogated, and that the Churches should be
governed according to the rule of the Divine Law only: There was chosen to be
chief Administrator for the Hussites, Elias Scuda de Semanin, afterward to be
also chosen by the General Assembly of the Deacons. As for the Brethren (to
whom was permitted their way of Discipline for the better accord) it was
resolved that they should have the Administrator's next Colleague for their
Senior (yet with their good leave and consent) as long as the distinction of
that order should last. To whom also, as being genuine issue of Huss, the
Church called Bethleem (and famous for Husses p^eaching there) was granted by
the University: All which things were done to the public satisfaction and joy
of all good men; and all places were filled with divine praises. It being
generally written upon the Church doors,

Gods House stands open the Lions play, whilst Ralph
Blessed Maximilian pays this truth to the Faith.
123. After this, Religion grew more pure, false Hussitism being by degrees
removed throughout the whole Kingdom; that there was found scarce one of an
hundred but made profession of the Evangelical Doctrine. But alas! with the
liberty of Religion (as it uses to be) there thrust up also under it by little
and little licentiousness of life, and the bonds of Discipline (even where
before it had been in force to good purpose) were now loosed in a wonderful
manner: whereupon the godly most what did not like that liberty, which drew
with it carnal security, and some began to presage evil hereupon; and so it
was, for that horrible tempest under Ferdinando overwhelmed us, and that
prophecy was fulfilled, The bitterest bitterness is found in the sweetest
Peace.

124. For the Enemies of the Gospel being filled with rancor, turned to their
accustomed stratagems and treacheries, making and placing an Engine in secret,
which breaking forth, we were utterly overthrown, even that whole Church of
Bohemia, which had so many generations grappled with that Nimrod the Pope; so
that she must now take up her lamentation with the discomfited Daughter of
Sion, My Enemies hunted me as a bird, they have cast my life into the pit, and
covered me with stones; they have drowned me in the deep, and I am gone, Lam
3.52, etc. for Rudolph the Assertor of our liberty being taken away, and
counsels being on foot for the bringing about of the Council of Trent, that
they must begin with the Bohemians, they so handle the matter, as by extreme
vexations (in incroaching upon their sacred Laws and Privileges) they might be
provoked to impatience, and so to arms; that so if they could bring them to
that, they might have a just color to come upon them and suppress them, with
all the forces of the whole Catholic League, as Rebels against his Supreme
Majesty: And so it was, our sins prevailing against the righteousness of our
cause, and God permitting the Enemies at last to fill up their whole measure of
cruelty against his Saints among us.

125. For a victory being obtained, anno, 1620. the choice of the Nobility were
partly put to death, and partly dispersed; the Pastors of the Churches (as the
Authors of Rebellion) by a general Edict all banished; they then attempt first,
by glozing, to charm the people unto a change of their Religion; and after it,
by sundry terrors and torments they force them at length: when they had for
full six years handled a few in this manner, in the year 1627. they banish out
their Country the whole Nobility of the Evangelici, and go about to compel the
people, by prisons and tortures, to renounce the Cup, and promise obedience to
the Pope: at which time indeed there were very many ready, and also desirous,
rather to spill their blood then their souls; but they derided this resolution
and purpose of theirs, those new Sword-bearing Apostles, crying out, Caesar
thirsts not after your blood, but the salvation of your souls: For it was
concluded at Rome, that inasmuch as by the experience of an whole age it was
apparent, that letting blood to cure the feavor of the Lutheran Heresy, has
done no good, another course is now to be taken, by the means or benefit of a
Diet, i. e. by exile, prisons, and lingering distresses of all kinds.

126. By this Diet, in the space of forty years, it was come to that pass, that
in all Bohemia and Moravia, there was left to the Evangelici neither Church nor
School, nor any private exercise of Religion, nor the Holy Bible, their holy
Books being all burned, and all other Books helpful to promote the service of
God, where ever they could be found; and for those that (for the keeping of the
Faith of their Covenant with God inviolable) were fled out of their Country
and scattered through the Neighboring Kingdoms (being many thousands) either
through the calamities of a banished condition, had their hearts broken, so
that they superseded their constant mind; or by reason of the continuance of
their distress, were so wasted away, that the remainder of us here and there
are very small, as two or three bunches after the vintage is done; or two or
three berries on the uppermost top bough, after the shaking of the Olive, Jer.
17.5, 6. All our lovers forsaking us, and not enquiring after us: yea, even
when we enquired after them, they hardened their hearts against us, Jer. 30.4.

127. And we indeed endure the wrath of the Omnipotent, which we have justly
brought upon our Nation, 2 Mal. 7. but shall they justify their actions before
God, which forgetting the common cause of the Gospel, and their former ancient
Covenants, do not only not help them which perish for the common cause; but
also stir up and encourage the Babylonians against their Brethren and
Neighbors, and crying out as the Idumeans of old, Psalm. 173.7. Raze them, raze
them, to the very Foundation: Neither do others which promise and procure to
themselves peace remember, that the Bohemians having both first, and for so
many ages, hitherto constantly maintained the common cause against Antichrist
are such as whose cause in like manner at this time ought to be pleaded by
common joint help; so far at least, as that the light of the Gospel (where it
was first lighted and held forth in a public Candlestick) may not be
suffered, as it now is, quite to be extinguished

128. But alas, what remains to be done, by a Nation most sorely afflicted, and
that for this very cause, that ^he has more diligently adhered to the
Apostolical Doctrine, the footsteps of the Primitive Church, and the conduct of
the holy Fathers, being beyond all others, hated, assaulted, cast down, and
trodden upon, forsaken of her own, and finding no pity amongst men? but this one
thing alone, that crying out for help to the only Eternal God of Compassions,
with that perished people of God of old, she should say, For those things I
weep, mine eye, mine eye runs down with water, because the Comforter that
should relieve my soul is far from me: my children are desolate, because the
Enemy prevailed, Lam. 1.1.

Sion spreads forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her, the Lord
has commanded concerning Jacob, that his adversaries should be round about
him: Jerusalem is at a menstruous woman among them, ver. 17. The Lord is
righteous, for I have rebelled against his Commandments: hear, I pray you, all
people, and behold my sorrow, my virgins and my young men are gone into
captivity, v. 18. I called for my lovers, but they deceived me: my Priests and
my Elders gave up the ghost in the City, while they fought their meat to
relieve their souls, v. 19. Behold, O Lord, for I am in distress, my bowels are
troubled, my heart is turned within me, for I have grievously rebelled: abroad
the sword bereaveth, at home there is as death, v. 20. They have heard that I
sigh, there is none to comfort me: all mine enemies have heard of my trouble,
and they are glad that thou have done it; thou will bring the day that thou
have called, and they shall be like unto me, v. 21. Remember, O Lord, what is
come upon us, consider, and behold our reproach. c. 5.1. Our inheritance is
turned to strangers, and our house to aliens, ver. 2. We are Orphans, and
Fatherless, v. 3. Our necks are under persecution; we labor, and rest not, v.
5. Servants have ruled over us, there is none that delivers us out of their
hands, v. 8. The joy of our heart is ceased, our dancing is turned into
mourning, v. 15. Thou, O Lord, abidest to Eternity, thy Throne from generation
to generation, v. 19. Wherefore do thou forget us for ever? v. 20: Turn us to
thy self, and we shall be turned: renew our days as at the beginning, v. 21.
129. Nor was it much better in this age with the Slavonick Churches in other
Nations, we here being oppressed with the Papal yoke, they there with the
Turkish, or else overgrown with the manifold superstitions of the Greek Church.
Have mercy on thy Christian people, so many ways bruised and broken in pieces,
O Jesus Christ.

130. Now to what end are all these things recorded, is it not to comfort us?
remembering, that as of old in the times of the Primitive Church, no violence,
no torments, no executions, could hinder the propagation of Christianity; so
even at this time, that this extreme rage of Papal cruelty, shall not be able
to stop the course of the Gospel: forasmuch as, although the light thereof be
put out in some places, as amongst us, yet in other places it blazeth forth
with so much the greater luster: Neither is God other then he was of old, or is
his hand shortened, but he can still find out away to deliver his people out of
the Babylonish furnace, and to enclose his enemies in their own flames: Great
is our Lord, and great is his power, and of his wisdom there is no account can
be made, Psalm. 147.5. He does what he pleases, in Heaven and in earth, Psalm.
135.6. For the Lord will not put away his people for ever; but though he causes
grief, yet will he again have compassion, according to the multitude of his
mercies, Lam. 3.31, 32.

131. And for others, that they remembering these things, and seriously
considering how severely the Lord has corrected us (which were even the
portion of his inheritance) may learn themselves also to be afraid of the
judgments of God, who therein, for the most part, begins at his own house, 1
Pet. 4.17. yea, at his own Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 9.6. For whether they believe that
we came nearer to the Sanctuary then they, or themselves nearer then we, as to
the way of the purer Discipline, it is all a case, since that we came up nearer
to true piety: Truly, they which are so regardless of the life of
Christianity, must look to hear that of Christ, If these things were done to
the green tree, what shall be done to the dry, Luke 23.31. but and if they are
nearer the Sanctuary then we, surely then they must be attended with greater
plagues then we, unless they take warning, and repent by the means of our
example: For he to whom much is given, must be beaten with many stripes, Luke
12, 47, 48.

132. Some happily may think, that we have herein in short reported many things
in our own praise. But I answer, we have not commended our selves out of our
own mouths, but only related the opinions of others. I may therefore say,
with our great Master, If I bear witness of my self, my testimony is of no
value, there is another which bears witness of me, John, etc. (John 5.31, 32,
34.) I receive not my witness from men (says our Lord) but speak these things
that you may be saved, (v. 55.) i. e. that you may ponder the truth unto the
acknowledgement of it, and so be excited to give glory to God: Nor indeed have
we any other design in reciting so many testimonies, but that the godly Readers
may be incited to give so much the better heed in perusing this ensuing book,
and then to judge, whether so many grave Authors have (without all just ground
(on our part, as not at all answering the character they give of us) published
so great things concerning us, and thereupon to retain what is good amongst
them, or amend what is corrupt.

133. If we have formerly hitherto offended in hiding our talents, behold we
amend our fault, setting it now forth to public view: and if it now be our
lot, which was the lot befell that unthankful and slothful servant, to feel the
judgment of the Lord, saying, Take the talent from, and give it to him that
has ten, Luke 19.24. we must humbly say with David, It is the Lord; if he
shall say I will take no delight in us, behold here we are, let him do with us,
as it seems good unto him, 2 Samuel 15.26. And behold, O you Churches, which have
more talents, unto you do we here now deliver ours also, respectfully
entreating you to receive it of us, so as it may now bring in a greater
improvement or income unto the Lord, then it has done whilst it remained in
our hands. We read in Moses, that God commanding the Tabernacle to be erected
for himself, required free will offerings of the people (every man with whom
was found gold, and blew, purple, scarlet, or fine linen, goats hair, and red
skins of rams, etc.) and that the Lord inspired and moved the workmen to frame
their works therewith, Exodus 35.23. and even now, that we hear that men of
understanding are consulting about the erecting in the Churches the Throne of
Christ, viz. Discipline, and even the most excellent form of Church Government;
why should not every man find in his heart, as Moses speaks, v. 29. freely to
offer what he has (no man being able to offer what he has not) that so the
Artificers which the Lord does and shall raise up, selecting, digesting, and
polishing these preparations, may erect a Tabernacle to the Lord?

134. I believe verily that Luther, Bucer, Calvin, Musculus, Zanchy, Beza,
Olevian, Vergerius, etc. were Besalee^^ and Aholiabs, filled with the Spirit of
God, and able to judge what is more or less fit for the Divine work: But yet do
not you that are entered into their labors, suffer their judgments to forestal
or prejudice you, but judge impartially and freely of all things that shall be
offered to you: only withal remembering, that what is spoken or propounded by
the Apostolical Spirit, must be discerned by the same Spirit: i. e. here is no
place to seek for sublimated speech, or speculation of humane wisdom, but the
evidence or demonstration of the spirit and power thereof, etc. 1 Cor. 2.1.

135. But more of this after the matter it self has been premised; We will
speak as to men of understanding judge ye what we say.

Dan. 9.7. TO thee, O Lord, belongs righteousness, but to us confusion of face,
even to all that are near us, and them which are afar off, throughout all the
Countries whither thou have driven us, because of our iniquities.

Verse. 15. And now, O Lord, which have brought thy people out of the Land of
(Spiritual) Egypt, and have gotten thy self renown, as it is at this day.

Verse. 16. Let thy anger and fury be turned away from the Christians, which are
thy people.

Verse. 17. O, our God, hear the Prayer of thy Servant, and his Supplications,
and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary, for it is desolate, for the
Lords sake.

Verse. 18. Incline thine ear, O God, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold our
desolations: for we do not present our supplications unto thee for our own
righteousness, but for thy mercies sake, which are very great.

Verse. 19. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive; O Lord hearken and do, and defer not:
for thine own sake, O my God, for thy people are called by thy Name. Amen.


An EXHORTATION To the CHURCHES, PARTICULARLY, And by name that of England, now
piously solicitous for the most excellent Form of Church Government.
THus have you had an account of the Slavonick Churches, especially that of
Bohemia, and, the maine of that, the unity of the Brethren of Bohemia: to what
end, was also touched toward the end of the History (. 132, 133, 134.) viz:
that those, who endeavor the Reformation of Church-affaires, may even from
hence be furnished with some thoughts conducing thereunto. I shall now renew my
address to you with whom I began, O! you, the Churches of the Britane World.
Amongst whom your controversy about the most excellent way of
Church Government has been in agitation for the space of an entire generation,
and that even to the violent shaking of the whole State or Secular government.
Who would have thought it, that such a question so very inconsiderable at first
sight, could produce so great tempests, earthquakes, and flames. Herein it
has appeared, what the force of zeal is, which is once set on fire for God,
and Liberty of Conscience, whether it be right, or wrong: and how Circumspect
they had need be; that look to hear the whispering of the still Calm, and the
wholesome instructions of God himself.

When ever you shall once have an opportunity to determine among you this
affair of your so great concernment, (and it is the Interest of whole
Christendom to have it rightly determined) You, and by your means, the
Churches, must call upon God, that you all ( viz: your Pious David restored to
you, with the great Senate now sitting, and the Ecclesiastical Synedrim to be
convened, and whoever shall be entertained for Counsel in these sacred things)
may be governed by his holy Spirit, that your Consultations may have a good
issue, such as may be for the glory of God, and yours, and the Churches
salvation: Amen.

And because God in his ordinary course works by ordinary Means, and trust on
Divine Providence does not exclude, but include humane Prudence. It will be
needful, (after the seeking of Grace from above) that wheresoever any thing of
sober Counsel may be had, it may be prudently sought out, modestly
communicated, and diligently pondered, that so at last in the depth of wisdom,
that which is found most excellent, may be chosen, decreed, and settled. Nor can
there be wanting hope of good success, when it once appears, that you are
willing seriously to traverse the business, not to huddle it over, but, to
hear the many preparatory deliberations, (both those at home, and elsewhere
offered) and then after all things be truly sifted, to come to a Conclusion.
For the sighs of holy men unto God for you will not be wanting, as also,
neither good Counsels from all Corners to be suggested; God also will come in
with his direction and blessing.

Now, because the Catholic Church is one, whereof we are Citizens, even all
that believe in Christ, in whatsoever particular Churches, or Nations they be
dispersed: Communion of Saints requires, that, upon occasion we make a common
Collection of desires, and prayers, votes, and judgments, for the comfort and
advantages of undertakings for the common good. In confidence hereof I though a
Stranger, have yet adventured to speak my mind, and yet not mine, but the
Judgment of my Church, and of some pious wise men, Luminaries of the Church,
which have given Testimony to the Constitution of Affairs amongst us, as they
were, viz: that this way of Church Government, is the very same which Christ
instituted, and Apostles used; or else the nearest to it, and therefore it is to
be wished it were settled in all Churches. (See the premised History,. 76. 79.
80. 82. 85. 90. 94. 96. 106. 107. 108. 111. 112. 113. 115. 122.) But is it so
indeed?

We boast not of Perfection, which we know is not to be found on this side
Heaven; neither do we prefer our selves before others, being conscious of our
own defects. But that we may not be wanting to the Cause we have undertaken,
(and verily that which is any where good ought to be made common) we say they
which have given their approbation of this Church Government may seem not to
have been deceived: in that, First, so reverend men, cannot easily be said to
want Judgment, nor yet to be led aside by affection, such as sought to please
some obscure persons in the World, giving us just cause to fear, that in
extolling such, they did the rather impair their own reputation. This is
evident in Erasmus (Hist. 70.)

Yea, and if any man will but seriously weigh these things in the balance of
his own Judgment, he will scarce evade his being of the same mind: Viz. If he
considers, [a] that not any one, but many began this Unity, ( Histor. 45.
Annot. p. 78.) [b] and these not lead by self conceit, but the zeal of
salvation; [c] not out of luxuriancy of wit, but sensible and tender
conscience, (ibid) [d] not precipitantly, but with manifold deliberations for
many years; ( Hist. 47.99.) [e] not with presumptuous confidence of themselves,
but with fear and trembling, making many and heartbreaking Prayers to God to
this purpose, (48.50.60.) [f] and with great respect had to Judicious men,
seeking counsel, wherever any could be hoped or looked for: The Romans,
Greeks, Waldenses, Hussites, Lutherans, etc. (61.66.68.) [g] also with full
purpose to try all things, and hold fast that which was any where found good;
insomuch as they ordained it a Canon among themselves, if any appeared any
where better reformed, they would be obliged to join themselves to them: (67.)
In no wise therefore does this Unity savor at all of Schism. [h] Now all this
while, whatever they had collected among them, they so diligently and closely
stuck thereunto in their practice, that it may be said to be thoroughly proved
by the fire of Persecution for the space of two generations without
interruption. Neither yet has any thing to this day been found, which is
better, viz. more consonant to the Scriptures, and the practice of the
Apostles, or more for the satisfaction of the Conscience.

But moreover, we want not for these things more weighty, and as it were
demonstrative Arguments: As First, that this Church of the Brethren has all
along been such a body, as the Apostle would have the body of the whole Church
to be; a Conjunction of Saints, by the work of the Ministry for mutual
edification in the Unity of faith, and unto the exercise of unfeigned Charity
fitly framed together and compact, by that which every joint supplies, from the
inward working power ( Ephesians. 4.12.) for here, all are in this manner (some
being members of others) knit together, by common Laws unto common
edification: not by the charms of any outward Splendour, Wealth, or Honor, or
chains of any compulsory violence, but set together only by the inward working
power and glue of the same Faith, Love, and Hope.

Secondly, because such a Polity, as is that of the Brethren-Church, is of that
nature; that however it submits it self to the Polities of the World, yea to
all men for good, yet it will lose nothing of that Church-liberty, which Christ
has purchased for it with his own blood, (as Mr. Olevian observes Hist. 115.)
and which is more that it always comports with every well-constituted State,
and never disturbs it, (that which is altogether to be wished, seeing that the
State, and the Church, both combining for the welfare of humane Society, must
differ only as Outward and Inward.) For such a Church Government as this is
suitable to a Monarchical State, because it has Episcopacy; to an
Aristocratical, because it has a Senate; to a Democratical, because it has
Synods. Therefore Calvin, and Bucer (both for the Order of the Brethren, Hist.
79, 80.) being called unto diverse Places to reform the Churches, each of them
so applied himself, that he accommodated with the Secular government: Calvin in
the Commonwealth (of Geneva) constituting a Presbytery. Bucer in the Kingdom
(of England) leaving there (what he found) Episcopacy to continue, and remain.
But whether or no they did well to part asunder, things which when joined
together have a better operation, those thence arising, (and unto so much
mischief among the Brethren molesting) controversies and contentions give too
much evidence. Perhaps if they had hearkened to that of Solomon, a threefold
cord is hardly broken, they would not have had so much sad experience of those
breaches.

Thirdly, Another Argument of much validity for such a Form of
Church Government as this is: It carries within it self, antidotes against the
evils which may annoy it, viz. Order, and Discipline, whereby it either
prevents disorders, or else, if they steal in, suppresses them, v. g. [a] that
there is no place open for Ambition and Simony, no man running of himself, or
before another, but all coming when they are called, and going when they are
sent, not otherwise to another place, or at another time. Nor is any preferred
to any function at the pleasure of any one (with acceptance of Persons) but of
all; there being less hazard in the common judgment of all then of any one,
and because all are as any one, in their lyableness to err; they always
faithfully make him of their Counsel, which cannot err. i. e. God: First, in
all their Synods, before the Election of any Ministers (Pastors or Bishops)
making prayers unto God, joined with fasting an whole day (as Acts 13.2, 3.)
[b] As for Covetousness, the Antidote here is their very poverty, unto which
they are all accustomed, both by necessity it self, they being not allowed any
large stipends; and by the Laws, forbidding them the care of scraping riches
(See Annot. p. 98. 6, 7.) [c] the bar which is here put to Arrogance is, that,
this vice of pride being discernable as hateful, who ever bewrayes any swelling
thereof, puts a stop to himself in that very thing as to his own preferment,
[d] an Antidote against contentions is not wanting, here being the endeavor of
brotherly love in all: Or if any thing breaks out of humane infirmity, some
friends are always at hand for the reconciling thereof: [e] nor is here any
place for Heresy, or Heterodoxie, where none use to have any thing singular,
but all frame all things unto Consent, and Harmony, and where all are exercised
rather in the practice of Christian love, then in subtle speculations about
Faith. [f] Neither does any one by disputing, or writing, rise up against
another, (whereof there are sad examples in other places) because of the common
bands of Order, he neither dare nor can. (g) Lastly, there are no occasions of
curiosity, such as are vast Libraries, wherein busy bodies may at their
pleasure tumble, and dangerously involve themselves: for all are here taught
most what to delight themselves in books of Divinity.

Besides, the Apostle pronounces those Churches blessed where the servants of
God are received as the Angels of God, yea as Christ Jesus himself ( Gal. 4.14,
15.) Now it is Mr. Altingius's observation ( reading the Order of the Brethren)
that all things are there among them directed with singular care, unto Piety,
and due Reverence of the sacred Order. But if it be so; we have the true
Picture of the Kingdom of God, and hope of that blessing and life for ever,
promised to Brethren that dwell together in unity, and having all the ointments
and dews of divine grace in common.

If I had scope, I might write a large Commentary, how Christ founded that
spiritual Kingdom of his (which he is pleased to have in the World indeed, but
not of the World) and how it was administered by the Apostle; the easier to let
you see the enormities of those Christians, which dis-figure this spiritual and
celestial Kingdom, by trans-figuring of it into so many, worldly, earthly,
corporeal and carnal Forms, and what good has at any time to this day been
done, or not done, by so many new transformations and reformations, but I may
not dilate my self. I therefore bend my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that for the riches of his glory he would give you to be strengthened
with might in the inner man, by his Spirit, that being rooted in love, you may
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height; and to know the Love of Christ which passes knowledge, that you may
be filled, even unto all the fullness of God. ( Ephesians. 3.14.)

Some may say, by so much extolling the state of your affairs, what would you
have? would you persuade us to them? I answer, If these things be good, surely
they are communicative of themselves, and that they should be made common,
ought not to be matter of displeasure, but desire; and if it be well with my
soul, I cannot but say with Paul, I would to God, you were all as I am,
excepting these bonds of my Affliction ( Acts 29.29.) I seek nothing herein for
my Church which now is not, nor for my self which am entering upon my grave: But
for thee, O Catholic Church, the Mother of us all; whom I so love, and
reverence, that I cannot but wish, it were still better with thee, wherever,
however, and in what part soever it may be better. I was not born to be
factious, nor have I lived such, nor will I dye such, but will adhere to Christ
only, together with them which he has given to be my guides, or whereof he
has made me guide. I would it were given to all that call on the name of
Christ to persuade the same thing, that having Christ (only Christ, bare
Christ) for their leader, they may not know Paul, Apollo, Cephas, or any
whomsoever; and fixing to themselves the mark of that one salvation, and
eternal glory, they may supersede other vanities, (contentions about Primacy,
Predominancy, Titles, Revenues, as worldly impertinent vile rubbish.)

But dare you so mean a Person move such things? I answ. Give me leave to
indulge my grief, which consumes my bones, for the ruin of my Church, and the
Fear of yours. I say the ruin of the Church, both mine, which is now already
in its rubbish, and yours, which is in great danger unless the tender mercies
of God prevent you. O Christians, the love of Christ, and the desire of the
common salvation compels me thus to speak unto you. I do that which Job did,
when cast on the dunghill, saying to his friends about him, I teach you being
exercised by the stroke of God upon me, Job 27.11. If I take the boldness so to
exhort you, I adventure upon no more then is enjoined a duty to all Christians;
(1 Cor. 14.31. and 2.13, 11. and Heb. 3.13.) should I give counsel too? yea; by
the same Law with that very poor Citizen, and of no account, who yet, his
country being in danger was bound if he knew any thing, to bring relief
thereunto by counsel, ( Eccles. 9.17.) and with that Maidservant which durst
counsel her Lord, the General, 2 Kings. 5.3. Hear ye me which fear God; my
words shall not be wind, but substance, they shall not utter any private
matter, but that of the common salvation.

I well know the Genius of humane nature, how incident it is to every one of us
to please himself in his own, and to despise others in comparison with himself.
The Cedars will admire their height, the Oaks their strength, the Palm their
handsomness, the Figs, and Vines their fruit, but the Whin is contemned for its
shrubbedness, that even the beasts of the field can tread it under their feet,
( Judge. 9.) Be it then that the Bohemian Nation were the least of Nations, the
Bohemian Church the least of Churches, and the Bohemian Church of the Brethren,
the least part of that Country: what then will follow? that he that is great
can learn nothing of a little man? hear Christ, that Eternal Wisdom, what did
he when the great Apostles contended for the Prerogative of greatness in the
Kingdom of Heaven? he takes a little child, and setting him in the midst, said;
Verily I say unto you, unless you be converted, and become as a little child,
you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, (Mat. 18.1, 2, 3.) Make
application thereof, and you shall be your own teachers, O ye great Doctors! I
hope you all believe, that Christ is still with us, and will be to the end of
the World, to behold our behavior, and to hear our contentions about greatness
yet continuing. Nor must there be wanting some little ones, to be set in the
midst of the Great ones, and appointed to be their pattern.

Contend then O Great Churches, among your selves if you please, about the
Pre-eminence! whether the Grecian, or the Roman; the French, or the English;
the German, or Helvetian be the greater Church? strive about the notion of
faith, for Ceremonies, or Hierarchy, as fiercely as you can: Behold Christ
presents you in the midst with a little child, and (as Zanchy has it) an
Infant stripped of all pomp, and dressing, considerate for nothing but
simplicity, knows not any thing of preferring it self to others, quarrelling
with any, coveting weal^h and honors, only skill, to keep at home, to do its
own business, not to intermeddle in other men's matters; to serve God in spirit,
and truth, to look up to Heaven, to renounce trust in the Earth, and to fear,
and take heed of nothing so much as not to offend God or man by neglect of any
duty, and being taken up with these things, has learned to brook privacy of
life, and to bare contempt: In this manner if any man humble himself, the Lord
promises him a majority in the Kingdom of Heaven, ver. 4. and says, whosoever
receives such a little one in the name of Christ, Christ will receive him, ver.
5. but on the contrary, if any offend such an one, he threatens him with a
burdensome stone, and the bottom of the sea, ver. 6. and with all at once
denounces an eternal woe to all which avoid not scandals when they can, ver. 7.

And what else, did the Apostle inculcate on his factious Corinthians; striving
about fading to yes, and that even before Infidels. If we have (says he) any
cases of things pertaining to this life to judge, why set you not them to judge
who are least esteemed in the Church; I speak it to your shame, 1 Cor: 6.4.
What if the same Apostle to our shame should say even to you (as there to them)
O! O you (Corinthians!) that are wise, that are rich, that reign without us: (
ver. 4, 8.) For truly the things for which you contend, are only of this life.
Rank, Eminency, Possessions, Revenues, Authority, Repute, and the like
Prerogatives, but how small a thing is all this for you, which shall judge the
world ( v: 2. and 3.) which, are in expectation of the Throne of Christ; and
his blessed Kingdom to Eternity ( Apoc. 3.21.) So that, whilst you that are so
great contend about things so small, behold God sets before you some that are
contemptible, and of the lowest form, that you may begin even of them to learn
to do better. Those I mean which groaning under Christ's Cross, may thus
address to you that shine in glory. God has set forth unto you us as appointed
unto death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, to Angels, and to men,
we are fools for Christ, and you are wise in Christ, we are weak, but you are
strong, ye are honorable, but we are vilified, to this very time we both
hunger, and thirst, and are naked; and buffeted, and have no certain dwelling
place, and labor working with our own hands; being reviled, we bless, being
made as the filth of the World, and the offscouring of all things, etc. (1
Cor. 4.9, etc.)

Thus Paul minds them of these things in 1 Epist. to Cor. and what heed they
gave to him herein, appears in the second Epistle, where he once, and again
reproves them, that they despised his Apostolical meanness, and suffered
themselves to be led away from the simplicity of Christ, by them which were
addicted to pomp, and great swelling words, and full fed with large fat
morsels, and no wonder, for so it was with the Lord of the Prophets and
Apostles, that by reason of this meanness, and meekness, (^ Jsa. 42.1, 2.) his
cross and afflictions, he was so contemned, that he was counted unworthy to be
looked upon ( Jsa. 53.2, 3.) the World always looking after nothing, but power,
pomp, and splendour, does so love to deceive it self, and let the Godly take
heed, and beware of it. For the foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the
weakness of God is stronger then men; I God making choice of those things which
are base to the world, and nothing worth; yea even those things which are not,
to abolish those that are, that no flesh might glory in his sight, (1 Cor.
15.28, 29.)

However then I heartily wish you (O! you great Sticklers in the great
Churches) some great Joseph, which may bespeak his brethren with authority, why
fall ye out in the way? (of Heaven) ( Genesis 45.24.) or a Moses, to cry out to
you, men, and brethren, why do ye wrong to one another? ( Acts 7.26.) or an
Hezekiah, to charge you, as he did with royal Majesty the Levites, and Priests.
My sons do not swerve any more, for God has chosen you, etc. (2 Chronicles. 29.11.)
Or else a great Constantine who gently reproving his Bishops the Ministers of
Christ, burned all the books of controversies. Yet, what forbids, that I should
not tread in the footsteps of Christ? and setting before you, great Apostles, a
little child in the midst, and show you, what lesson you must learn of him.
What hinders also, but that the Apostles counsel may be urged, that quarrel
being arisen among you about those things which concern this life only, the
judgment hereof may be committed to them that are the lowest in the Church?
This will be of Divine right; whatever otherwise reason of State may suggest to
them, which understand not, nor will understand the State of the Kingdom of
Christ.

In confidence then of this Divine right, the Bohemian, though the least of all
Churches, and oppressed, entreats You, the Churches of greater Magnitude, to
supersede your contentions about matters so small, so fading, and of no value.
What? will you contend for the Prerogative of Place, and dignity? when Christ
did so straightly forbid his own, all desire of honor, and commanded, that he
that affected the primacy should be thrust back to the last place ( Mat. 20.26.
and. 23.11, 12.) for titles? when the meekest Lord condemned the Phylacteries
in the Pharisees as a piece of stinking pride, ( ib. 5.) and would have his own
count themselves sufficiently honored with the mutual compellation of
Brethren: ( ver. 8.) Do you strive about the higher understanding of the
Mysteries? when we are here, all but infants, scarce understanding the least
part of that which by the goodness of God we shall know, when we come to the
state of Perfection. Why may not the one of them that have an imperfection in
speech, have a good understanding of the other, or at least bare with him? Do
you contend for the right of Prebends? when Christ affirms it better to give
then to receive, ( Act. 20.) and interdicts all his own, which he sent forth to
preach the Gospel, the charge of the purse ( Math. 10.9.) subjoyning this rule,
ye have received freely, give freely: And verily that was matter of glorying to
the Apostles, that they preached the Gospel gratis, (even to the richest
Corinthians) that they might not be burdensome to any (2 Cor. 11.7. and 9.) and
it was the Character of a mercenary Preacher to strive to be rich of the
Gospel. ( ib. 20. and elsewhere often) Let the sincere Servants of Christ then,
imitating Christ, and the Successors of the Apostles treading in the steps of
the Apostles, glory in the Lord.

If you still stick at our smallness; we must say with Syrac. The Be is small
among winged creatures, yet the fruit thereof is the beginning of sweetness,
Syrac. 11.3. What more despicable then the Aunt? yet how often are we sent to
her as the Mistress of Prudence? And may not a little Commonwealth be in
greatest Order, and so a mirror to another which is greater? Be the boat
greater or less, I am only but one still, and the same, (as any understanding
man will say.) Verily, bigness is of no virtue, (unless happily to sink with
its own weight) all action flows from the form. My Predecessors did adventure
in the contentions of the Brethren of the Evangelici (in Germany, Helvetia,
Polonia,) in a brotherly way to interpose, and by the assistance of God, did
there do some good. Why may not we, the relicts of them, cry out against the
Relicts of contentioners? They durst move Maximilian the Emperor to a
Reformation of the Church, (Hist. 108.) why may not we the last, reduced to the
last entreat the same? Our blessed Martyrs Hus. and Hieron, in the midst of the
flames sung Psalms unto God, in confidence of the goodness of their Cause. Why
may not we be as them which inherit the same Cause to the last man; being to
triumph with Christ by his power, not only in the Bab^lonian flames, but beyond
them also, and the last flam^s of the World in the Judgment day.

But what would you have may some say? I answer, compassion; Compassion I say
on your selves, that you may not always thus destroy your selves: O Christians!
how destroy? even as Christ said, every Kingdom divided against it self is
destroyed, and a house divided against it self cannot stand. For you, O
Christian people, how variously, how furiously, how perniciously you are
divided, Heaven, and Earth can witness. I speak not of the dissentions of
diverse Nations, Cities, Families only, but even of the fallings of, and
fallings out of the same Nations, Cities, Families, so many ways amongst
themselves as is elsewhere scarce to be paralleld; as if you designedly had
conspired to act contrary to what Christ has commanded, that we should be one.
Mark, I beseech you, what Paul says: If the whole Church come together, and
all speak with Tongues, (as being taught of God strange Tongues) and the Idiots
or unbeleevers come in, will they not say you are mad? (1 Cor. 14.23.) But what
then would they say or do, if they could now see the whole Church consisting
of so many Christian Nations and parties met in one place; and all these
quarrelling, biting, slashing, and cutting of one another fingers, hands,
feet, heads, would not the unbeleevers say we were hurryed by infernal Furies?
And is it not thus? verily, this last Age, all the desks of Schools, and
Pulpits of Churches do nothing but contend, and create most bitter grudges
against one another; so many railing and reproaching writings flying up and
down in public against one another, as that the World at this day cannot bare.
All the Nations in Europe has done nothing for more then 40 years, but what
the Midianites of old did, when they were put into a frenzy at the sound of
Gideons Trumpets: Every man's sword being set against his fellow, they run one
another through, and so fall by their own mutual wounds, without the hand of
any other adversary. The Jews and Turks see all these things and laugh;
wondering how we should thus be given up to a reprobate sense, that ere their
sword comes to touch us, we dispatch our selves with our own weapons, and then
leave the rest of us to be a prey to them. Thus did Solomon the Turkish
Emperor laugh at us to our reproach and shame: who having taken from the
Christians 40 Kingdoms in Europe and Asia, when it was told him, that the
Christian Kings and Commonwealths had entered into a League between themselves,
and were about to prepare War against him: Holding up his hand, and dividing
and changing his fingers, says he, as much as I fear that these my fingers
will grow together, so much the uniting of the Christians together: and so it
was, for to stop the inundation of the victories of their then common Enemy,
they could not agree among themselves, nor yet can; but to overthrow themselves
they always agree: Especially of late, and with the greatest rage of all,
these last forty years, wherein so much Christian blood has been shed by the
Christians themselves, as was never in the memory of man spilt by a Foreign
Enemy, There is every where made such havoc of Christian Kingdoms, that we may
cry out with the Prophet, If the Lord of Host had not left us a seed, we had
been as Sodom and Gomorrah. Alas! Alas! Alas!

But O Christians! are these things the showing forth of your virtues to the
praise of him that has called you into his mavelous light? as the Apostle
speaks, and upon the account whereof, he calls you, a chosen Generation, a
royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, and a people which God challenges peculia^
to himself, (1 Pet. 2.9.) Alas! Alas! Come let us appear in that shape, wherein
he that formed us, has pourtrayed us as to the life, in reference to himself
and our selves. I mean, the Son of God, who being about to renew us after his
own Image, begins thus to speak.

[1.] Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven,
(Matthew. 5.3.) But O you Christians poor in spirit, where are you? Who is it not
now that being full of conceit of himself, says, I am rich, and have increased
my goods, and have need of nothing, Apoc. 3.17.

[2.] Our Savior goes on; Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the
earth (v. 4.) Meek ones, where are you? Christians indeed would possess the
earth, but it is by fire and sword, to divide it among themselves.

[3.] Blessed are they which mourn, for they shall receive consolation, (v. 5.)
But now a days there is scarce any Christian would receive comfort, but rather
they would want none; i. e. joying, and jovializing, and living delicately in
this present world.

[4.] Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they
shall be filled, (v. 6.) Where are such now to be found? To hunger and thirst
after riches, and fill themselves with the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and the pride of life, these are the general designs of men in all the
Christian world.

[5.] Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, (v. 7.) But to
deal unmercifully with, and to rage against one another by force and fraud,
these are now adays become the Christians Arts.

[6.] Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, (v. 8.) But we had
rather have the world, then be purged from the dregs thereof; we had rather be
luxurious then temperate; being become more effeminate then the Old world
before the Flood, or then Sodom and Gomorrha.

[7.] Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of
God, v. 9. And how peaceable we are, our quarellings, clamours, and furious
bickerings, whereby we destroy one another, speak.

[8.] Blessed are they which suffer persecution, (v. 10. etc.) Who believes
this? except a few, poor, little, foolish, simple, doting, despised common
people; the rest of the Christians would rather be Vultures, then Doves or
Chickens; Wolves, then Sheep; the mystery of the Cross is with them a thing
out of date.

Alas Christians, how little do we retain of a Christian, but the name only!
Even those which Christ said He has chosen out of the world, savor, speak,
seek now nothing else but the world; Alas!

And what do you Ministers of the Gospel, Masters of the Christian people, whom
Christ has sent to call his Elect out of the World? has he taught you to
bring his people up to this? Diogenes the Philosopher seeing an youth carrying
himself uncivilly, struck his Master, (says he) do you teach him no better
manners then so? The Christian people are your Disciples, O Pastors! you are
their Schoolmasters to bring them to Christ (1 Cor. 4.15.) are you not afraid,
least the Heavenly Diogenes (the Son of God) beholding, and so long bearing
with the so dissolute, and abominable manners of your Scholars, should at last
fall upon you with his strokes? verily he threatens it ( Jer. 23.1.) Woe to the
Pastors, that scatter the sheep of my Pasture, (and Ezekiel. 34.) Woe to the
Pastors, which feed themselves, eating the fat, and wearing the fleece, killing
the best, and yet not feeding the flock, not strengthening the weak, not
healing the sick, not binding up the broken, neither have ye brought again that
which was driven away, nor sought up that which was lost, but with force and
cruelty have ye Lorded it over my sheep, etc. As sure as I live says the Lord,
I will require my sheep at your hands, and cause you to cease from feeding your
selves; for you generally for the most part, (as sure as the Lord lives) feed
not, but only your selves, and there is no serious care of the salvation of
your people taken by you. None of you will be poor, but all must be rich,
wealthy, and wanting nothing, and how then should you teach others that blessed
Poverty of Christ? None of you is meek in spirit, humble, and yielding to
others, but you must have all yield to your selves, and who then shall learn
Christians meekness, and obedience? (that sweet and easy yoke of Christ) In a
word, you all decline the Cross; either that whereby your selves should
crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts, or the Cross, which when laid
upon you by others, you should patiently bear; and how then shall you frame
others to the likeness of a crucified Christ, you your selves not at all
conforming thereunto? Alas! All of Christ is become a Paradox to the Christian
people, because their Leaders so represent, or rather misrepresent him such an
one. Christ teaching them one thing, and they by their examples teaching them
quite another. Alas!

And let me speak also to you that are Gods Vicegerents, Kings, Princes, and
others set in the High Places, to preside with power to the Public affairs of
men. Do you never begin from your High Pinnacle (where God has placed you as
in the supreme watchtower) to take a prospect of humane affairs, to see what
may be mended? Of you it is said, The King sitting upon his Throne in judgment,
scatters away all evil with his eyes, ( Prove. 20.8.) Verily it is the
judgment of God, but given to you, whom therefore he has called Gods, and the
Sons of the most High, ( Psalm. 82.6.) It is yours then to sit upon the Throne,
but with your eyes open upon all things, thoroughly scattering away all evil
things: Why then do you endure so many to be and remain in the Christian World,
which is subjected to your power? Why do you not by the power of the Sword (if
Pastors by the power of the keys cannot or care not) restrain your Christian
people from those so many flagitious outrages? why do you not by coercive power
bring the Pastors, which are fallen into great disorders into order? why do any
of you permit them to Lord it over them, who are their Lords? why do you suffer
them, (whose duty it is to be yours, and the peoples Leaders in spiritual
things) to immerse themselves in earthly engagements? The Bohemians I assure
you were quick-sighted in this matter, which concluded in the Council of Basil,
that the Clergy must have no part of the Secular government, and this
conclusion they demonstrated irrefragably in a Disputation out of the
Scriptures, continuing for the space of fifty days ( Hist. 38, 39.) insomuch,
they obtained, that among them from that time, they should not be reckoned
among the Estates of the Kingdom, nor make a session any where in the
Conventions of the Kingdom, or their Political Judicatories, until that very
late overthrow of a Free Nation and Church, whereupon they were enacted to
reign, being preferred before the highest Order of the Nobility: But where now
shall that of Christ hold? But it shall not be so among you, Luke 22.26. Or,
may Christians choose whether they will hear Christ or no? But that voice came
down from heaven, Hear him. The Wise man observes, that there be three things
under which the Earth shakes, and a fourth which it cannot bear; viz. A servant
if he be suffered to reign, a fool if his belly be full, an odious woman when
she is married, and an handmaid that is made Heiress to her Mistress, Prove.
30.21, 22, 23. For absurd and intolerable is this turning of things upside
down, whereof why do you suffer the world and all Christendom to be so full, O
you Gods of the Earth, whom the Highest has enacted to sit on his Throne, and
to scatter away all evil with your eyes? Shall it never be wanting under which
the Earth must groan and tremble? Alas!

If ever were the time that you would be watchful, O Christians! now is your
time to watch; O! for the sake of the living God look about you! that he would
please to turn our heart to our Fathers, and our Affairs to that condition
wherein it was in the beginning; that the Lord may not come and smite the earth
with a curse, Mal. 4. ult. for truly we are come to that height of abomination
(even by mutual persecutions and butcherings of our selves) that as to those
very things wherein we think we do God good service ( viz. to sacrifice men,
John 16.2.) God swears he never commanded them, nor has it at all come into
his heart; and therefore that he will dissipate all these things, and overturn
all with his sword, etc. Jer. 16.4.

There was in the year 1529. made in Germany, a Protestation of the Princes and
Estates, against an Edict which came forth against Liberty of Conscience;
whence it is that even to this day the title of Protestants is given to the
Evangelici: but behold, it is now 130 years since; and yet there is not wanting
just cause of Protesting against such as tyrannize over the consciences of men!
not only those, which then, as now, designing to reign alone, would not suffer
any so much as to mutter; but at this day, against you the very Protestants
themselves, that even you also have filled all places with mutual violences,
and so you are doing still; whilst you are all zealous for Liberty of
Conscience, yet you are all in opposition against it among your selves; no man
enduring to tolerate another, which differs never so little from himself. Alas!
what will become of us? Shall it always be that our protestations contradict
out practices? What if God himself should enter a Protestation against us all?
That Christians are no Christians, because they do not keep the Commands of
Christ; that Catholics are no Catholics, because they seek not the welfare of
All, but of themselves only; that the Evangelici are no Evangelici, because
they live contrary to the rule of the Gospel; that the Reformed are not
Reformed, because going about to distinguish themselves by Ceremonies, they
differ not in their conversation. Alas! We are all out of the way: I also and
my people: Woe to us if we reform not.

Now God that he may frame us unto this Reformation, does not only protest in
his Word, Hear ye Heavens, and hearken you Earth, I have brought up sons, and
they have rebelled against me: but in his chastisements by bloody wars, and
other plagues, and that yet we should not be awakened? That yet Jonas should
transgress? that he, by reason of whom the sad Tempest was now raised to toss
and wrack all, should be lying still in the sides of the ship, fast asleep, so
utterly careless of the danger, which was now like to cast them all away? (
Jon. 1.5.) We all are as this Jonas, disobedient to God, by reason of whom, the
Depths of God's wrath are stirred up, even now ready to swallow up the ship of
all Christendom, although that of Jonas escaped: For there, though they were
such as worshipped other gods; yet in the common jeopardy, they were all in
common turned to their prayers, every one calling upon his god ( v. 5.) We that
worship but one God, even the very jaws of death cannot bring us generally to
turn to God; but some screeking, others are shouting, some perishing, others
are making merry; Alas! for the general confusion in our ship. And which is
more, there we find Jonas confessing his fault, and the rest, for the safety
of whom, he doomed himself to be cast away, not hasty to cast him overboard,
but seeking rather, if by any means they might save him: ( v. 10.) But we
imputing the cause of the Tempest one to the other, furiously post to
destruction every one his fellow, whom he can: Alas! there, to get the ship to
the shore, and save the nocent with the innocent, they all work as for life: (
v. 13.) But with us, some sweating at it even while they faint, others do
nothing, others again taking the Oars from them that would row, others again
if they seem willing to stir, yet some of them row this way, others that way,
all confused, there being nothing but tumults, brawlings, fightings; some being
so stark mad, that they make holes in the common bottom, resolving, that they
may see others perish, to cast away themselves, Alas, Alas!

What will become of us if we go on to take this course? of necessity the ship
wherein we all are must needs be lost; whether by the waves coming upon her
from without, and we be overwhelmed by the invasion of the heathen Nations; or
from within by our selves, being thus enraged unto our own mutual destruction.
Woe to thee O ship of the Church, that thou have such Ship-masters, such Oars,
such Pilots; God change our minds, and deliver us from this madness.

But then what counsel or hope is there? Much hope in the mercy of God, if men
would hearken to wholesome counsel? what is that? Such as we find in Jonas's
ship now ready to be cast away, but yet saved, and in the City of Nineveh, now
ready to be overthrown, but yet standing: First, that every offender, with
Jonah, should awake, and acknowledging his offense, humbly yield himself up to
the Abyss of God's judgments; perhaps by the same labor he may save others
from perishing, and himself also may find mercy: And then, that the Pilots of
this ship, the Heads of the Christian world, taking counsel together among
themselves for the common salvation, order all things well, whereby God may be
reconciled, and man may be brought into order: And last of all, that the whole
people, stirred up by the good example, and warning of their Superiors, would
suffer themselves to be reduced, and brought home again as to God, and
goodness, unanimously calling upon God, as they did both in the ship, and in
Nineveh; and leaving nothing undone, nor giving over, what ever it is, whereby,
they returning into peace with God, and one another, may take Oars, all as one
man, and strain all the sinews of their endeavors, to arrive at the Haven of
Deliverance.

But to come nearer the business, there are four Cardinal points of the
Churches safety, viz.

1. That the whole Christian People unite together. 2. That they be likewise
brought into order. 3. That they knit together with the bands of Disciples. 4.
And then be filled with the Spirit of life.
First, Let them unite, I say, that they be not any more as scattered sheep, or
a flock of Lions, Bears, Wolves, Serpents, and Basilisks, devouring one
another: but (as it is promised) peaceably lying down, and feeding together, the
tame or gentle, with the wild; the strong with the weak, etc. as one Flock
under one Shepherd; and yet not one so as a flock of Cattle, where all are
alike one with another, but as an Army well ordered, (Cant. 6.3.) as the
Kingdom of the Messiah, which was better governed then that of Solomon, (1
Kings 9. and 10.) as the City of the great King, ( Psalm. 48.3.) as the House of
God, (1 Timothy 3.15.) Lastly, as the living body, perfectly set with its various
members, for various offices, and put together with all the joints, and all
full of the Spirit of life, (1 Cor. 12.12. Ephesians. 4.14. etc.) without which the
rest (as union, order, connection) are all in vain; for let the parts and number
of them be full, and set comely in their proper places, and well knit together,
yet the body wanting only the soul, is nothing else but a carcass.

O you Christian people, dispersed through Europe, Asia, Africa, America, and
the Islands of the Sea, into so many Religions, Sects, Opinions, and multiplied
different Ceremonies, what else I pray are you now become, but as those bones
of Israel in Ezekiel, scattered abroad in the field of the world, ( Ezekiel. 37.1,
2.) O! that it would please God to bring on that day, wherein he will put forth
his omnipotent power among you; to command that there may be a noise and a
shaking, that so the bones may draw near one to another, and come together ( v.
7. this would be the union) Every one, the one to the other, (even in his
order) the sinews knitting all together, the flesh coming upon them, and the
skin covering them over ( v. 8. there would be the bands) and then the breath
come from the four winds, to inspire all that are spiritually dead, that they
may live ( v. 9, 10.) viz. the life of Christ, and who shall live when God does
this? Number. 24.23.

You vainly wish, may some say, things impossible, and which can never come to
pass; and yet we must wish what ever is good; and the holy Spirit teaches us
so to do (Psalm. 122.) that Jerusalem be one City well built, a City compact and
put together every way within its self; ( v. 3.) where all the Tribes of the
Lord go up together with one accord, to praise the Name of the Lord; ( v. 4.)
where there is set the Tribunal (of Christ, v. 5.) to preserve peace and
prosperity, as well within the walls, as in the Palaces; ( v. 6, 7.) where all
the Citizens of the Church are brethren, and friends in perfect peace, ( v. 8.)
studious to seek and procure the common good: ( v. 9.) he is therefore no good
Citizen of the Church, that does not seek, or at least desire and wish the
common good thereof.

Every man seeks after that which he loves, they say. I therefore, because God
has enamoured me with the love, 1. Of Unity, especially that of the Church. 2.
Of Order, especially in the Church. 3. Of Settlement, especially of the Church.
4. Life and Vigor, especially of the Church, cannot but be in pursuit of those
things with all my desires, and having lost the less, our Unity, Order, Bands,
Life, I cannot but pray for the greater, even the Unity, Order, Bands, and Life
of the whole people of Christendom, in as much as Unity in the Community, is
far better then community in paucity.

I would some greater and more famous Church, which is as a City set upon an
hill, ( Mat. 5.14.) yea, lifted up above the Hills, ( Jos. 2.2.) would begin,
and set an example to the rest: I mean of perfect co-implantation, perfect
Co-ordination, perfect connection, and perfect reformation, after the life of
Christ, as much as may be on this side heaven; for in these does the
perfection, beauty, and salvation of the Church consist.

We ought to pray for the Unity of the Church, because he, which could not
desire but that which was best, even he who is our Savior, sanctifying himself
to be a Sacrifice for us, prayed for this, and that with tears: Father, I
sanctify my self for these, that they also may be sanctified in thy Truth,
(Joh. 17.19.) even all, that shall believe in me: (20.) That they all may be
One, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, and that they may be One in Us
(21.) I have given them the glory, which thou gave to me, that they may be
One, even as also We are One: (22.) I in them, and thou in me, that they may be
made perfect in One, and the world may know that thou have sent me. (23.) Alas!
Christians, be afraid! having lost Unity, we have lost that, whereby the world
should know, that we are God's people, and that Christ was sent of the Father
to be the Savior of the world; had we kept this, we might have gained a
thousand worlds; O then, that yet, yet we may return unto Unity, that the world
may know, etc.

But what Unity do you desire? Even that which the Apostles began by the
Command, and Example of Christ, under whom the Church was one Heart, and one
Soul, Acts 4.32. i. e. there was no study to make and maintain parties, but the
same sentiment and consent in all, and the same design of common edification
(as among the members of the same body.) O that God would please so to give to
us, one heart and one soul, that all the Pastors with their several Flocks, and
all the Flocks with their several Pastors, the whole Clergy among themselves,
and the people among themselves, all, the Rulers with their subjects, and
subjects with their Rulers, and every Church with it self, and all the Churches
of the same Kingdom and Province within themselves, may all be but one body,
and one soul.

Open but your eyes, O Christians! how without Unity, there is in the very
foundation of the whole Fabric of the Church, no strength at all, but all to
tumble, and running to ruin. In all things Natural, Artificial, and Moral, the
only Base of Peace and Prosperity, is Unity, unto which all things, first, and
last, above, and below, on the right and left hand, must be so reduced, that if
one goes, all go: In such a frame has God made the world, and all and every
thing in the world, to wit, the body of every living creature, (yea, and every
Plant too) hanging together still with certain ligaments in every part. To the
like form of necessity must all humane Society (and the Church also) be
reduced; because where ever multitude is, there is confusion, unless that
multitude (by virtue of Order) be brought to an Unity; break but Unity, it is
unpossible but that the multitude should fall in pieces, and so to ruin: For
it cannot be otherwise, but that plurality (not united together with the band
of Union) must come to division, and from division to contention, and from
contention to confusion.

2. But Unity is not enough for the full safety of the Church, and therefore
Order must be added; because the Church is not a Body made up of Similar parts
(all of like nature and name with themselves and the whole) as an heap of Sand,
or a stack of Wood, or a flock of Sheep, or the body of a Snail, where it is not
enough that the parts are together; but such as consists of diverse members of
distinct places, scituations, forms, and offices; as we see in a House, City,
Army, and the Humane body; where every thing, the top, and the bottom, the
end, and the end, the middle, and the middle, according to their degree,
contains it self in its own place, and acts what it has in special charge in
its own sphere: and it must be thus, or else all is in a despairing case.

But what Order do we wish in the Churches? Such again as Christ has
instituted, and the Apostles observed, viz. That there should be some to
govern, and go before, and some to follow and obey, in a legitimate
subordination of the lowest to the highest: and especially, that every one
abide in the Calling wherewith he is called, not forsaking his station, nor
intrenching upon another, (1 Cor. 7, 17.) Christ has set us an example
herein; who (executing the Office of a Prophet in his life, of a Priest in his
death, and of a King in heaven) whilst he was yet in the exercise of his
Prophetical Office, and they would make him a King, he declined it; ( John
6.15.) they would have him take upon him to distribute outward possessions, he
refused it, ( Luke 12.14.) and he commanded the like to his Apostles, not to
intermeddle with secular affairs, ( Luke 22.26.) It is then confusion in the
Church, when persons called to Ecclesiastical Offices, shall entangle
themselves in Civil Ministrations, Possessions, Dominions, Judgments, Wars, or
contrariwise hereto. Of the former way of confusion, all see a plain instance
in the Papacy; where Churchmen having gotten into their hands the power of
both swords, exercise Spiritual and Secular Government. Of the latter, they
which are any thing well-sighted, may see it true in part of the Reformed
Churches; where those of the Civil Power have forced away the power of the
Spiritual Sword, out of the hands of the Pastors of the Church, and do not
indulge them the exercise hereof. To this purpose Olevian that godly Divine,
has an observation, which gives me occasion to give a seasonable and useful
warning to the Church of God; and indeed, such is the abominableness and
mischief of the danger I would give warning of, that a kind of necessity is
laid upon me, so that I must speak.

Thus Olevian (as before, Hist. Ps. 53. 115.) When I behold the sad face of the
Reformed Churches in Germany, plainly, I am all over set in a trembling; I
perceive Secular Powers have been the Accommodations of the Church; but now in
many places they are turned into Dominations, and they Lord it securely at
their pleasure over the Churches, and so over the heavenly Doctrine, etc. What
this means, John Valentine of Andreas, a choice Divine of the Lutherans (in his
Auguration Sermon or Speech at Tubinga in the year 1642.) tells us in these
words; The impotent Usurped Power of the Pope over Emperors, Kings, and all
power of State and Magistracy (which one may call by an unusually, but not an
unfitly name, Papal-Magistracy) with a Divine Spirit of Power; set at liberty
their Rights, Dignities, Crowns, and Scepters; and being restored, upheld them
by the Authority of the Divine Word. Now Satan easily perceived what an
incurable wound was given him, and how the very foundations of his Kingdom were
shaken by this liberty of the Magistrate restored; therefore superseding all
force and violence, he takes to his Arts, and Stratagems, and attempting that
which no man suspected, (an unworthy return indeed for so great a benefit)
instead of Papal-Magistracy (the Tables being turned) he institutes
Magistratical-Papacy, and foisted it into the Church, scarce, as yet, gotten
out of the Roman dungeon: Would you know what this word means? It Is sad indeed,
and that which is very prejudicial to the proceedings of the Church affairs; I
had rather you should have it in the words of Conrad Schlisselberg (formerly an
excellent Divine of Ours) than in mine own. Imperial-Papacy, says he, is the
confounding of the Church, and Civil Power; wherein the Secular Lords in Courts
and Cities, under pretense of keeping both the Tables, snatch to themselves the
Spiritual Sword, and make themselves Lords over the Church, and the Ministry
of the Word: Prescribing Forms of Obligation, and of Teaching, Praying, making
Sermons, Honoring the Magistrate, Taxing offenses and Errors, Administering the
Sacraments, and Keys, and setting up Ceremonies in the Church; such as are now
dangerous, doubtful, and contrary to the Word of God; and they will have to be
in their own, and their Courtiers and Senates hands, the Supreme, and
Dictator-like power of hearing, taking cognizance of, and determining all
Ecclesiastical causes, and of choosing, and calling Ministers, and
dis-officiating the same, whom, and when they please, whether the Church will
or no consent hereunto, or dissent; and all to this end, that themselves may
not be reproved, and admonished by the faithful Preachers, from the Spirit of
God, and that the Civil Peace (as they account it) may be preserved. Thus
Schlisselburg.

And John Valen. of Andreas, Printing on purpose a little Book, entitled Apap,
i. e Papa inverted; to show the prodigious abominations, and fatal effects of
that new Monster, Imperial-Papacy: That it is the most desperate crafty
stratagem of the Devil, to frame for himself of Ministers of the Gospel Masters
of State, and transform the Servants of Christ into Servants of men; and to
hang fetters upon the Prophets, to make them either dumb, or fearful to speak,
lest they should be Reprovers, (Ezekiel. 3.25, 26.) Chrysostom was in the right;
This is the cause of all evils, that the Authority of the Governors of the
Church is lost, and they be not had in Reverence, Honor, and Fear, ( Hom. 2.
on the 2. of Tim.) for verily, when the Magistrate will not be reproved,
neither will the people; For, Let Us but see the Mode Royal,
And who will not be Loyal?
And then the Church becomes such as it was in the time of the Prophets,
Licentious, Contumacious, and impatient of all Control: Let no man strive and
reprove another, for this people is as they that strive with the Priest, Hos.
4.4.

Whence it comes to pass, that in those Churches (where Imperial Papacy rules)
one of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven is neglected, despised, lost. I did
not know it, the Omniscient is my witness, and to this very day (for what has
an incurious man to do in another man's charge) for ought I know, I might have
been ignorant of it, but that some 14 years ago, by chance I came to the
knowledge of it: Excuse me as to the name (of place and person) and I Will relate
it to you in few words. It happened that in the chief City of Germany, I had some
speech with the chief Pastor of the Church in that place; He told me, he had a
good while longed for an occasion to know, whether a Book which he had read,
(viz. The way of the Discipline and Order of the Churches of the Brethren in
Bohemia) did contain the true story of that Church, or only a Model, how a
Church should be constituted? I asked, why he doubted it. He answered, because
I cannot imagine any such, Church should, or can at this day be found in the
world. I answered, 'twas an History, not a Fiction there related, and that
indeed there was really such Orders and Constitutions, though they were not
enough observed: and therefore now we that would not be governed thereby, are
under the chastisements of the Discipline of heaven. Says he, O happy you,
that had both the Keys, we have lost one of them, that is, the binding Key. We
are appointed to be such Stewards in the House of God, as are bound (as it
were) to set open the Barns, Cellars, Chests, and all Treasuries, and not at
all to shut them; so that we cannot but give holy things to dogs, and cast
pearls before swine. I have known (says he) some persons in my Congregation,
very profane, covetous, extortioners, drunkards, adulterers, admitted to
Confession, and the Supper, which must be by me absolved to day, and for
certain would be found to morrow returning to wallow in the mire: I told him,
they were not to be admitted unless they would engage to reform. He answered, I
tried that, but could not carry it on, they defame me as some new Papist, or
Calvinist, my life is bitter to me, etc. and so began to sigh and weep.

I tell you a true story before God, who is a most faithful witness; if happily
even by this, the enormity and deadly mischief, as well of the Imperial-Papacy,
as the Papal-Empire may be made manifest; for by the one, as much as by the
other, is the Order of the Church shaken, even in the very foundation, fin and
judgment being filled up to the measure by such breach of Order. Is there not
some likeness between the Papal Empire of the Evangelici, and that Micah of
Mount Ephraim, making himself a new God for his House, and having a Priest to
perform the Service as should be by him prescribed? ( Judge. 17.) Does it not
resemble the Policy of Jeroboam, setting up Calves to be his Gods, and Calvish
Priests to be Ministers, because (forsooth) the reason of State so required?
Mark, I beseech you, the Founders of the old and new Church, and the many
Reformers, and Transformers, their diverse (and even contrary) ways! God will
not be mocked; that which any man sowes, that he shall also reap. Aaron the
Priest, with Miriam the Prophetess, go about to shake off the Authority of
Moses their Prince, and they are punished by God with Leprosy, ( Numb. 17.10,
11.) King Vzziah again on the other side, casting off the Authority of the
Priests, usurps their office, and he is also punished by the same hand with
Leprosy, (2 Chronicles. 26 16.) Now then, whilst among Christians both these
offenses are committed, shall we wonder, if those of both the extremes be
avenged with a spiritual Leprosy, and other plagues? Would to God the Roman
Aaron with his Miriam (his Regulars) would confess their error, and render to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, contenting himself with that which is
allotted to him, the spiritual charge and care of Christ's Flock, ( John
21.15.) But behold in Aaron and Miriam some hopes of pardon (Numb. 12.15.)
which comfort we find not for the Imperial-Papacy; for it is written, The
Leprosy cleaved unto Vzziah the King, unto the day of his death, (2 Chronicles.
26.16.) I would therefore they would make haste to get them out of the Church,
( v. 15.) i. e. to restore the power of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
which is given to the Church from above, but by the corruption of men, and the
policy of the Devil, now taken away from it: Verily, it is high time to repent,
and repair the impaired Order of the Church.

3. I pass on to Discipline, as the Mean, Ligament, and Bond ordained from
heaven to keep the Church in Unity and Order. Christ calls it Salt, (Mark
9.50.) because as salt resists putrefaction, and makes food savoury and
wholesome; so the Discipline of manners heals corrupt manners, and makes us
careful to keep our selves within the bounds of our duty, and therein to work
out our own salvation with fear and trembling. It was not without cause that
our Lord said, Every man shall be seasoned with salt, and every sacrifice shall
be salted with salt; v. 49. and it must of necessity be understood of the
Discipline to be extended to every man which offers himself up a sacrifice unto
God: For the command of God is strict, ( Lev. 2.13.) Whatsoever thou offerest
to the Lord, thou shall season with salt: Thou shall not withold the salt of
the Covenant of thy God from thy gift: in every offering thou shall offer salt.
I would those Imperial Papists which would have their Churches to be without
all Discipline, and their sacrifices (themselves) without all salt, would
seriously consider, how in despite of God, exempting themselves from all
Discipline, they affect a most dangerous licentiousness of spirit.

But who shall administer this Discipline? Who shall apply this Salt to the
Sacrifices of God, (to sanctify all souls to God?) Christ makes the answer to
his Apostles, You are the salt of the earth, Matthew. 5.13. They are then to be
the Pastors of the Church, the Successors to the Apostles in their Office; They
therefore that wrest out of their hands the Church Discipline, would have them
to be salt without all savor: What is it to deceive a man's self, if this be
not it? To have food sweet rather then wholesome. After Christ had said, Ye are
the salt of the earth, he adds immediately, but if salt shall be as if were
not (rendered insipid, or lose its savor,) wherewith shall it be seasoned? it
is henceforth good for nothing, but to be cast away, to be trodden under foot.
Consider I pray, which of you would have your Salt (your Apostles) to be
without salt; such as yet you do (what in you lies) to make them to be in the
sight of God. O how deserving these things be of our utmost consideration!

But granting the necessity of Discipline in the Church; of what kind would we
have it? I answer, Such as Christ instituted, and the Apostles observed:
Watchful, strict, and severe, wholly spiritual, and for edification. Watchful,
to be extended to all that are exorbitant, though yet according to the degree
of the offense, ( Mat. 18.15.) Severe, to be exercised without respect of
persons, even them that are dearest to us, or them which are the principal
members of the Church, and seem to be most necessary: Concerning which, very
remarkable is the Order which Christ gives, that no man is to be spared, which
gives a just cause of offense: If any shall be to thee as thy right hand (says
he to the Church) directing, and governing all thy actions, ( viz. the
Presbyter himself, or Bishop, or Pope) or as thy foot, bearing thee up, (as the
Magistrate, and those in Power,) or as thy Eye, giving thee light, (as all the
sublime Doctors whosoever) cut off both those, and pull out this (says he) for
it is better for thee, maimed, lame, and with one eye to be preserved unto
life, then to perish with all thy members full and entire, ( v. 8, 9.) It is
better then, that by the vigor, and strictness of Discipline, the Church
preserve it self from scandals, should be small, obscure, and lame; than
tolerating scandals and enormities, to advance her self to never so much
largeness, wealth, honor, and glistering pomp in the world. Finally, the
Discipline of the Church ought to be proportioned to the Kingdom of Christ,
which is altogether spiritual, and therefore revilings, banishments, pecuniary
mulcts, prisons, stocks, gibbets, or capital punishments, (which are the kinds
of Civil punishment) are not the weapons of our warfare: but admonitions,
shame, terror, and last of all, delivering up to the Divine judgment, and to
Satan the Executioner thereof. Yet all these things not without an holy
design, viz. That others in the Church may fear, (1 Timothy 5.20.) and they
themselves which offend, may be snatched with fear out of the flames, (of sin
and death,) Jude v. 23.

It remains only, that and how, the body of the Church (being well united, well
ordered, and well knit together with the bands of reverence) must over and
above this, be all filled with the Spirit of Christ. This is yet a further
matter, and differing from the former: For any Philosophical College, or
Secular Commonwealth, (the Lacedemonian, or some other, yea, and Ants and Bees
too,) and the Synagogue of the Pharisees, may be a company well united, and
well ordered and knit together, and yet not be the body of Christ, the Church,
being destitute of his Spirit: For if any have not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his; (Romans 8.9.) What then is the Spirit of Christ? Even the Spirit of
the life of God, quickening them that are dead in Adam, (1 Cor. 15.45.) i. e.
turning to God them which are turned from God, and them which are transgressors
of the Law, to be obedient to the Law; and they that are fierce, to be mild,
humble, patient; in a word, making men new brought off from Satan, the world,
and the flesh, and offering themselves up to God alone, to do, and suffer all
his Will. This verily is the meaning of that which Christ speaks, If any man
will come after me, he must deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me,
(Matthew. 16.24.) and whoever cannot or will not do so, he denies, that he can be
his Disciple, Luke 14.26.32.

Because those mysteries of Christianity are commonly not at all, or
negligently taught; thence it is that most Christians know not what it is to be
Christians, much less are such indeed. Adam sways all, Christ very few; because
very few endeavor to put off the old man, and to put on the new, (which is
created after God) and to be transformed into him, and made one Spirit with
him, (1 Cor. 6.17.) and so to become by regeneration the Sons of God, and to
cease from sin, as he does: When as notwithstanding, the grace of God which
brings salvation in Christ, has appeared to all men, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we may live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world; looking for that blessed hope of glory at the appearance of
Jesus Christ, who has given himself for us to redeem us from all iniquity, and
to purify us to himself, a peculiar people, zealously studious of good works,
( Tit. 2.) Therefore it is to be earnestly desired and endeavored, that
Christians would at last begin seriously to be a people renouncing the world,
resigned to God, having their commoration indeed for a while on earth, but
their conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.10.

Thus as touching the salvation of the Church, I have let you understand (from
30. hitherto,) my desires, yea the desires of Christ, and all the Saints in
heaven and earth; and now, because there is no effect without its cause, and
what God ordinarily does, he does by ordinary means, Men; I demand now, if we
saw God at this day looking about for a man which should stop the gap, and
stand up in the breach, he were like to find any such? and whether, if he
found none, he would not pour down the fiery storm of his wrath? (as of old he
did, Ezekiel. 22.30, 31.) Or if we heard him say, Whom shall I send? Who will go
for us? whether or no there will be found an Isaiah, which may say, Behold here
am I, send me? ( Jsa. 6.8.) God have mercy, and send some, not Jsaiah's only,
which should in speaking be nothing else but for a witness, to further hardness
of heart, and ruin, ( ib. v. 9. etc.) but also Elias's, which may turn the
heart of the Fathers to the children, etc. (Matthew. 4.4.) O stir up also
David's, and Solomon's, Jehosaphat's, and Josias's, Zerubbabel's, and
Constantine's, etc. to be glorious repairers of the collapsed ruinous condition
of the Church!

And wheresoever in all the world God shall vouchsafe to raise up such, they
will also in like manner daigne God this honor, as to do nothing, but
according to the prescript of his Will: because this is no work of man to be
done after the wisdom of man, but his, who said to Moses, Look to it, and do
according to the pattern which I have showed unto thee, Exodus 25. v. 40. and to
Joshua, Turn not aside, to the right hand, or to the left, Josh. 1.7. That
therefore they may be assured, and the faithful people with them, that it is the
Lord, which repaireth his own house; they must take that of the Lord for an
everlasting rule, It was not thus in the beginning, Matthew. 19.8. i. e. Have a
care, that, that which is not of Divine Institution, but contrary thereunto, be
taken away, ( Matthew. 15.13.) and what ever is instituted by God, but through
carelessness of man neglected, or has by guile been changed, be restored, (
Matthew. 5.17. etc.) Let things indifferent remain indifferent; i. e. things
which only custom has brought in, if they be not prejudicial to piety, be
patiently born, and not without urgent necessity taken away.

Another thing to be piously observed, is, That nothing be done by Tumult and
Violence (against the consent of the Church, or any part thereof) but by the
common counsel and consent, lest there be given occasion of new breaches: Wise
is that counsel of wise Elihu; Let us choose us out judgment, and see among our
selves what is best, Job 34.4. Out of which place it is plain, 1. That it
cannot be otherwise, but that men sometimes will be of different apprehensions.
2. It Is not always necessary that they must be divided, there being given to
men a liberty of choice, as to the debating and determining of their affairs.
3. That that determination may and ought to be done patiently, or peaceably,
and with a rational deliberation. The best way then is, when any controversy
arises, (as there are too many arisen among us) that the parties be called
together, and patiently heard, and reason compared with reason, Scripture with
Scripture, until coming to the bottom of the thing, there remains nothing to
any, which he can justly desire, or rationally contradict.

I was upon it before (. 35.) to wish, that some greater and more famous Church
would try to undertake the business, ( viz. of a more full, and holy
Reformation, then can hitherto be found) and I cannot give it over in as much
as a beginning must some where, and by some be made, if we expect a Change of
Christianity for the better. Now because there is no Church to be seen under
the whole Heaven, which has more eyes upon it, and which is better supplied
with means conducing to so great an affair; nor where there does sway a more
adventuring zeal to seek out the things which are best; nor yet to whom God
has given such excellent opportunities, as are found in the Church of England.
I address therefore again to thee thou Spouse of Christ, and shall pray for
happy success to attend thy proceedings.

Verily, O thou English Church, thou art indeed in this our Age a City set upon
an Hill, which cannot be hid, ( Mat. 5.14.) where Christ the light of the World
darts his brightest beams, and wherein so many lightened Candles (Books of
profound spiritual wisdom) have been held forth in their Candlesticks: That
of your light so many Christian Nations borrow their light, reading your books,
and striving frequently to translate them into their own Tongues; that what the
Apostle in his time said of his Thessalonians, may be said of you; The Gospel
of God is amongst you, not in word only, but in power, and in the holy Ghost,
even in much abundance; and you are become the patterns to all that believe: 1 Thessalonians. 1.5, 7. Which grace we must not envy in you, but pray for your increase
therein, and imitate the zeal of your piety.

I said that you were supplied with means of a further Reformation before
others; because you having framed among you now for the space of an whole age,
Meditations of all the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and printed Books of
all such kind of subjects; you seem to have done as Solomon did the first six
years, when he was to build his glorious Temple unto God; seeking to get stuff
in a readiness, felling Wood in Libanus, squaring Stones, casting Vessels, and
carrying together Gold, and precious Stones, for the glory of the House of God:
As therefore the setting up of this at last, when he had fitted all and every
of the particulars, was no hard matter for Solomon; so neither will it be for
you, especially now, that you have such plenty of workmen, every one most
ingenious, conferring his Talent of activity hereunto.

For as it was there, there being so many thousand cheerful workmen, and among
them, so many of the most skilful Artificers, which (under the eyes and
direction of wise Solomon) striving in diligence to out-doe each other, quickly
dispatched and finished all; so it is plain to see this holy emulation working
also in yours, even all along through this Century (notwithstanding the
divisions always continued among you, about the Form of Church Government) in
which time, there have been made up, as well by a considerable number of
Reverend Bishops, ( Jewel, Andrews, Hall, Usher, etc.) as by other learned and
godly men, of them which appeared, and approved themselves to be the better
part, and more reformed from the superstitions; so many exact pieces, that I
think we may-affirm, that the heavenly Solomon permitted, and throughout during
the whole Century, tolerated those dissentions amongst his Workmen, to this
very end, that by their mutual emulation, all things might be done on all hands
with so much acuteness: Behold what remains, but that the like activity be used
on all hands, as zealously to make up, and finish entire those things which
have been hitherto wrought up by parts and parcels.

Hereunto also those opportunities, such as you have not had in all this
generation before, such as no Christian Nation ever hitherto enjoyed, may
induce you: For your late tempestuous State of affairs among you, being now
calmed, your Halcyon days returned, the Renowned Head of your Commonwealth
restored; the Fathers of your Country conspiring in common for the common
safety; the people also falling in with their earnest prayers to help you; and
your neighbors on every side blessing you with good speed; do you not believe
that the heavenly Husband speaks to his Spouse among you, as Cant. 2.11. The
winter is past, the rain is over, and gone, the flowers appear on the earth,
the time of singing of Birds is come, the voice of the Turtle is heard in our
land, etc. Arise my Love, my Fair one, and come away. In truth, the times you
now see, seem to be the very times of Solomon, wherein it is not all, that you
may every one sit under his Vine and his Fig Tree, but the House of God also is
to be built, all things necessary and requisite being now made ready; only
cease not to pray, That God would please to fill your Solomon full of the
Spirit of Wisdom and Zeal.

And God grant you may put together, and set up your hitherto prepared pieces,
after the example of Solomon's workmen, without the noise of Hammers and Axes,
(1 King. 6.7.) i. e. without any quarrelling, or violence, or mutual
circumventing one another by fraud, peaceably, heartily, successfully. Besides,
the Wisdom of Solomon minds you of this also in reference to your building now
in hand; The foundations and the Walls must be only of the most solid stuff,
Marble, ( v. 7.) The Cieling and Roof to cover all, must be of Cedar, (9. and
15.) and all to be at last covered over with Gold, (22.) i. e. what ever you
frame, (from the foundation even to the top) you must be sure, if it be
possible, that it be as Adamantine, cut out of the never to be shaken Rock of
the Word of God; or if any thing be added of humane reason, let it not be
otherwise then as of Cedar, straight, plain, of good savor and repute,
incorruptible, taken out of common received Principles; and then let all be
covered with the gold of pure charity, that all may approve themselves as
evidently directed to the mark of common edification.

And that the Scripture represents Solomon as studious of Gold and precious
Stones, 1 Kings. 10.10, 11. Even from this also it may be useful to observe,
that whatsoever it pleases God that we find rare and precious in spiritual
good things and gifts, that we should be desirous to make our own. This our
heavenly Solomon himself, in that Parable in Matthew. 13. v. 45, 46. has taught
us; The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant seeking goodly pearls, and
when be had found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all he had, and
bought it. Such Merchants were my Predecessors before the two last ages,
gathering all whatever was precious out of the mines of the holy Scriptures,
out of all Antiquity, and out of all the Churches in their time, as it is plain
in story. Such also were those men of Desire of the last Century before ours, (
Bucer, Zanchy, Vergerius, etc.) which in like manner trying all things, have
testified, that they found some singular precious pearls even among Ours: And
such Jewellers have you hitherto been, by the grace of God, lading in together
treasures of most precious Jewels, wherein you triumph, and many rejoice with
you. But in as much as our Savior says, To him which has, it shall be given;
assure your selves, that you having so much, shall have yet more added thereto,
if you go on to be diligent and inquisitive Merchants.

The most precious Jewel of all, more worth then heaven and earth, is but one,
Jesus Christ the Savior of the world: and there are also other particular
Pearls, the manifold graces of Christ; the sum of which perhaps God would have
represented by Vrim and Thummim, which properly what they were, the Jews, and
we with them, to this day know not, they being lost in the first Temple. But
not being to seek after the understanding of the words, we think we understand
what God means in the now Church thereby; viz. Light, and Integrity, or
Perfection; of this Christ speaks, Let your light so shine, etc. also, Be
perfect, as your Father which is in heaven is perfect Matthew. 5.16. and 48.

And verily, by the grace of God, you my well-beloved, have found the
resplendent Vrim, so that the Churches of so many Nations see your light, and
rejoice in it. Our Predecessors indeed, we must confess, were never honored
with so much light, being more solicitous about the Thummim; to wit, how they
might walk before God (as Abraham) uprightly, with what degree of perfection of
sincerity may in this life be attained to. Other holy Merchants have witnessed
as much, viz. That they found the Thummim (i. e. the rule leading men toward
perfection in Christ) among them in greater perfection, then could be found any
where else in their generation: Why should we despise their counsel, and not to
seek and scrape even among them also, to find either some gem, or some grain?
Let us do our best, holy Brethren, to have the light of Doctrine, and the Canon
and Rule of our direction in perfection, that so the Churches may have you, and
yours for an example: This will make much for the glory of God, and for your
honor too, in the day of Christ.

I commend to you in particular, a glittering pearl of Mr Olevian, out of the
premised Hist. 115. The late extreme corruption of this generation (says he)
moves me, and my Colleagues not a little, to have some conference with you
about the best way of Governing the Church; for we would so build, that our
Fabric may stand firm unto posterity: We see what great differences, and how
sudden changes are made in those Churches, which their Right and Privileges
being taken away, are wholly at the devotion of the Civil Polities: Unless
provision be timely made for the stopping of these evils, many of the godly,
even the greatest part, will conclude they have run in vain; and so on there,
many golden sentences following, most deserving, not only reading, but our
serious considerations.

And here even you also may take notice of some excellent pearls worth your
observation; 1. That in the design which you also now drive, whether of
Reformation, or Confirmation, you should be fixed and resolved, that what you
do, may be firm and durable for the generation to come.

2. To tremble at that word; what differences, what sudden changes are made,
where the Churches are deprived of their Right and Power.

3. That unless some timely course be taken to withstand these evils, (as
indeed we did not timely obviate them in Germany,) the godly will think, etc.
Ah! they do think, and feel it, and Luther while he was yet living felt it,
that they that were under the grace of the Gospel, were become worse, then they
that were under the rigor of the Papacy; as if the unclean spirit were
returned with seven spirits worse then himself, etc. And how could it be
otherwise, no bounds of Order and Discipline being set for preservation? and
the keys of Christ being more perniciously curtailed, then the Eucharist in
the Papacy.

4. As to which matter, we ingeniously acknowledge what God has conferred upon
you, and desire still more fully to acknowledge it, etc. and that in things of
such concern, counsels are by no means to be precipitated, but exquisitely laid
together; and God from heaven is to be called upon for counsel, with greater
vehemence then in any other thing that can be named.

As for that question which is chiefly controverted amongst you, concerning the
best way and Form of Governing the Church, I will say no more, having in the
Tractate of Independency, said what ever I thought could be said in this case
for accommodation and peace: Only thus much, That that golden rule of Christ,
of a Reformation in Life first, rather than in faith, and outward Ceremonies, (
John 7. v. 17.) is of golden use in this business; for that man, who-ever he
be, which seeks not himself and his own Interest, but Christ only, and in him
salvation, his own, and another's, will more easily discern what tends more or
less hereunto, being taught by that anointing within himself, which he has
from the holy Ghost, 1 John 7.20, 27.

But yet I query, Whether or no, if a Civil Society be well, and rightful,
preserved in one place by Monarchical Government, (where the people commit
their safety to some one person as the ablest and the wisest.) In another place
by Aristocratical Government, (where the care is committed to some few of their
own, as able and wise.) In another by Democratical Government, (where the
people govern themselves by turns.) Religious Society may not be in like manner
so provided for, i. e. whether Episcopal Government may not as well be endured,
where it has long been, as Consistorial where that obtains; and Presbyterial
or Classical, where that is in use: It seems probable it may be so, for as much
as every one of these Governments has some good in it, conducing unto the
public good, so it be guarded from abuse, v.g. The goodness of Monarchy is an
uniting virtue, preventing the ruin that may quickly arise from differences,
by reason of the multitude of counsels: The goodness of Democracy is a
diffusive virtue, suffering no member to be easily overslipt in the
dispensation of the common Cause or Interest: The goodness of Aristocracy is a
collective virtue, knitting together Superiors with Inferiors, and Inferiors
with Superiors; and causing many Members to keep themselves under one, and one
to diffuse himself unto many.. Hence some Nations have pleased themselves with
one, others with this, or that; and so it is at this day: and they all keep up
themselves in their several Forms of Government, the one, and the other; which
is an argument, that there is in each one of them a proper and peculiar virtue,
to contain humane Society within its due bounds, by the bonds thereof: Only
indeed, through abuse admitted, Monarchy easily degenerated into Tyranny,
Aristocracy into Oligarchy, and Democracy into Anarchy, which is worse than any
Tyranny.

But again, of all these 3 kinds of Government may there not be a
contemperation or temperature? which may make for the improving of that which
is good in each of them, and correcting of that which is evil. It may seem
possible by the Rule of Christ: This do, and leave not the other: And that of
the Apostle, Try all things and hold fast that which is good. Viz: by holding
in each of these Governments that which is excellent, that of a threefold good
may be made one very good. v. g. of Monarchy and Episcopacy, the uniting good
of Aristocracy, and Church-S^nat, the Collective virtue, of Democracy, and
Presbitery, the diffusive good. Of such a kind of temper, was the Commonwealth
of the Lacedaemonians, having one King, but to whom they put their Ephori, as
the Overseers of Actions, and the power of choosing residing in the
Common People: So in the Roman Empire, which was of great strength, the power
and strength was in the peoples hands, the counsel in the Senate, and the
executive part, or execution, belonged to the two Consuls: The like prudent
temperation is at this day to be seen in the Venetian Commonwealth, and in some
Kingdoms, especially that of England and Polonia: There is a King for Majesty,
yet therewithal a Senate consisting of the Optimates, or the Nobles, and there
is also the very Commonwealth it self by the Commons, their Legates, or
Representers, suffering nothing to be enacted touching themselves, without
themselves: And this course seems to excel all others for stability, having
remedies always in readiness in reference to all grievances whatsoever. Now
whether or no we may not see such a temperature also in the Ecclesiastical
State under the Apostles? when as there were for the management of businesses,
and deciding of controversies, 1. Apostles, 2. Seniors, 3. The Church. Acts
15.22. And whether or no it be any where more evident in our Age, then in the
Churches of the Bohemian Fraternal Unity, under Bishops, Consistories, Synods?
I leave it to the Churches to judge.

It is queried further, Whether or no those inconveniences and hazards which
have been found in this, and the other, and the third Government, and the
abuses and scandals of each of them hereupon, may be taken away. I answer,
Physicians will not think that there be any diseases of the body incurable, if
there be a skilful Physician at hand, timely to relieve Nature; therefore
neither let Christians despair as to the diseases of the Church, provided only
that the counsel of the heavenly Arch-Physitian be hearkened to and taken; they
advise to care and caution, that the disease get not a head by long
continuance, crying, withstand the Beginnings; but our High-all-Healer is able
to cure even the most inveterate, by reducing things to their beginnings (
Matthew. 19.8.) by virtue of which Rule, Let that be taken away from Episcopacy,
which was not in the beginning, and the Disease is cured. But what is that? 1.
Secular Domination. 2. Earthly Riches. 3. Pomp of Ceremonies; for Christ has
said, 1. Kings exercise Lordship, etc. But you shall not be so, Luke 22.25. 2.
Possess not you gold, nor silver, nor money in your purses, nor have you two
coats, Matthew. 19.9. As also God forbad earthly Possessions should be assigned
to the Priests in the old Testament; giving the reason also, I will be their
portion and inheritance, Numb. 18.20. Deuteronomy. 10.9. and 18.2. 3. Christ also
taught them to serve God in Spirit, and Truth, not in Ceremonies, John 4.23.
which thing the Apostles very much pressed.

But they assert themselves (in respect of their Wealth and Domination) by the
Donation of Constantine, He adorned the Church with such splendor, for the
honor of Christ, and therein set a good example of holy zeal for other
Christian Kings to follow. But the answer hereunto is manifold, 1. Do they not
know, can they not tell the story of a voice which as at this time was heard,
This day is poison poured out into the Church? Whatever any may make of the
voice, the thing is certain; That those endowments (being given and accepted
beside the Will of God) turned unto poison; Let the poison then be taken out,
and the Church will be well again. 2. Again, Grant it were Constantine's pious
zeal, yet it is evident, that it was not according to knowledge; for it was not
lawful for him to dispense with the Interdict of God, much less ought the
Servants of Christ to admit such things against their Lord's Will. Naaman the
Syrian in pious zeal offered Elizeus money, but with better zeal he refused
this Lumber, Gehezi took it, but it turned unto Leprosy upon him, 2 Kin. 5. I
would the servants (not of Elizeus) but of Christ, would at this time but
understand, what a foolish choice they have made, of an earthly instead of an
heavenly inheritance; and would begin to think of some course to cleanse the
Church of this Leprosy. 3. I answer, Constantine could not foresee the abuse
of this Donation, and the mischief that thereby would fall upon the Church: Now
the whole world sees it, and if he were risen again, and should see it,
undoubtedly his desire to restore the Church to her integrity, would put him
upon it, to retract what he gave, with a better good will then ever he gave it:
As happily Moses himself would have broken the Brazen Serpent, if he had seen how
it would be abused, (as when he saw the Idolatry of the people, he brake the
two Tables of the Law, written with God's own hand,) and in as much as Hezekiah
coming after him, did it piously as it were for him, 2 King. 18.4. why may not
godly Kings at this day piously also retract the liberal donations of their
pious Ancestors, now perverted by abominable abuses, and improve them to better
purposes?

As for the pomp of Church Ceremonies, God indeed in the old way of Worship
ordained such a thing, therein by shaddows to set forth the spiritual mysteries
of salvation (which Christ at his coming was to disclose) but seeing, that
since the coming of Christ they have been demolished, and levelled by so many
Apostolical strains, as claps of thunder, and flashes of lightning directed
against them, why should we bring them up again, still to make use of them?
Under the Papacy perhaps, where the light of the Gospel is once obscured, by
and in the barbarous generations, they may have seemed, or seem to be of some
use, at least with some colorable pretense; but in a Reformed Church, I
beseech you, what use can be made of them? Those which have been hitherto
retained in England (under the Reformed Bishops) have not the very Pontificians
themselves laughed at them unto scorn and derision? It is plain to be seen in
that Edward Weston's Theater of Life Civil and Sacred, (Printed at Antwerp,
1626.) p. 564. etc. where (having said that the Religion of the Protestants is
without all Religion, because they have no Sacrifice, Priesthood, nor Sacred
Ceremonies) he adds, Some Protestants indeed that they may not appear
absolutely impious, and irreligious, use our Missal and Breviary, selecting
what they please thereof for the Rubric of their Liturgy; and to make the
Form of their worship appear the more goodly, they have their Canonical persons
forsooth, and their Archdeacons, and so, after the mode and custom of the
Church of Rome, their Caps, and Hoods, and Holidayes, and such like stuff and
lumber, which they say they found in the Synagogue of Antichrist. By which very
thing it is apparent, that the Religion of the Protestants stands guilty of
stealth, and robbery, by which it first came into the world; or if they will
not be taken for thieves, let them still go for our Apes, and Antichrists, etc.
and so he goes on; These, with all their whole service, are derided and
scorned, not only by ours, but also by their own, etc. at last he set down the
judgment of one to this purpose: The English seem to have driven the Pope out
of their Kingdom in such haste, that they compelled him to leave his clothes
behind him, which they (as fools in a play) put on, with a kind of pompous
Ceremony of triumph, and so lead their Quite. O how we are abused by their
dallying and colloguing; they being Reformed, but not to any purpose: A goodly
Reformation it is, that they dare not carry it through.

It will therefore be a glorious thing for the Reformed Churches to come back
to the practice of Christ and his Apostles, leaving off the baubles of earthly
riches, honors, and pomp, (both Ecclesiastical and Civil,) to be taken up,
look after, and busy themselves about matters of an higher nature: Seek the
things that are above (says the Apostle) where Christ sits at the right
hand of God. Set your affections upon, and let your care be for things above,
not things on the earth; for you are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in
God, Col. 3.1, 2, 3. which if it be enjoined all Christians, much more them
which are set next under Christ, to be leaders unto others from earth to
heaven, and to whom the King of Kings has said, All power is given to me in
heaven and earth, go you ((...)) make all Nations my Disciples, Matthew. 28. i.
e. advance my kingdom, both by outward preaching unto all Nations, and by the
inward power of my Spirit, learning of me to live, not an earthly but a
heavenly life; O how invaluable and incomparable would this be, if you did but
know how much you are (advanced) above all earthly things: but alas! the
highest of the Bishops at this day, stick in the very first rudiments of the
Apostles, not aspiring unto any degree of high Apostolical perfection! What was
their first rudeness? To dream of Earthly Kingdoms, and Thrones with Christ,
where to sit on the right hand, and on the left. What their high perfection? To
count all things here as dung, for the excellency of Christ, and casting all
Worldly Interests behind them, to press forward for the prize of the High
Calling, ( Phil. 3.) and so to rejoice in the hope of future glory, and glory
in Affliction, the Cross, Martyrdoms, etc.

I would here lay down my Pen, but that this swelling excrescence of the Church
(by tract of time has gotten such an extreme hard crust upon it) that it seems
needful to ply it with oft-renewed-mollifying applications: Let it be taken
therefore how it will, I offer in the sight of the Church my desire of things
of the better sort: Now that which God makes and ordains must needs be better,
than that which man institutes; for the works of God are perfect, ( Deuteronomy.
32.4.) that which he establishes for ever: and the decrees which he makes, no
man may pass over, ( Psalm. 148.6.) behold then, whosoever they be among men,
which God does appoint to be guides of others unto heaven, all those he
absolutely declares in both the Testaments, that he would have them altogether
free from earthly cares: first straightly forbidding his people Israel by Moses,
to allot to them any inheritance amongst them; and then severely charging the
Priests themselves, that they should not admit of any such terrene possession.

And Christ did the same, for those which he chose for himself to be Messengers
to the Gentiles, he made leave their Nets, Customs, and all ways what ever of
getting gain; yea, and himself also being about to discharge his Commission in
reference to mankind, laid aside even his heavenly Riches Honors, Thrones,
(to reach that these at least are utterly incompatible) and became poor,
contemptible, and low, having not upon earth whereon to lay his head. Verily it
was to be fulfilled which was typified in David; who had no hopes to triumph
over Goliath, till he put off the Royal accoutrements, and addressed himself in
the habit of a Shepherd; and in Gideon, who being to discomfite the Midianites,
was first to dismiss his numerous Armed Forces, reserving to himself nothing
but his Lamps and Trumpets; and then, as Gideon said to his company, As I do,
so do ye: (Judge. 7.17.) So Christ bespeaks his, I have set you an example,
that, what I do, ye may do also; ( John 13.15.) Why do we not then imitate him,
if we would persuade our selves, that we are the Sub-Delegates of that Legate
from heaven? He, though they made him an overture of Regal Dignity, accepted it
not; ( John 6.) though they would proclaim him King ( Luke 19.38.) yet he
persisted, taking to himself no Title but that of Master (22.11.) being asked
whether he was a King; He made answer, My Kingdom is not of this World: Being
assured that there was reserved for him a Royal Throne in Heaven: Why not we in
like manner, having a promise of the same Throne? Howbeit, not unless we first
overcome, ( Apoc. 5.21.

Most certain then it is, that Episcopal pre-eminence consists not in this, to
possess vast Demesnes, to shine in Gold, to be surrounded with a Retinue, to be
carried in Coaches, or lie on Beds of Down, to be clothed in Scarlet, etc. but
to be deep in inward Piety of the heart, and profound in Divine Knowledge, with
Zeal for the Glory of God, and the Salvation of the Church, as also of improved
experience in the things of God; renouncing and abjuring our own private
profit; these are the things which make up the Pourtraiture, or Essence of a
true Bishop; and his outward Characters are many; to be much in Labor, and
Travel, in Watchings, in Hunger, and Thirst, in Fastings, and Solicitousness
for all the Churches; to be weak with them that are weak, and to burn when
others are offended; (2 Cor. 11.) and so to bear about in their bodies the
marks of the Lord Jesus Christ, ( Gal. 6.17.) and when he meets with one sick
of the (spiritual) Palsy, to say, Silver and Gold I have none, but such as I
have, I give thee, in the name of Jesus Christ, arise (out of the bed of vain
and sinful state) and walk in the ways of Christ, ( Acts 3.) In a Word, not at
all to savor Earthly things; for he which talks of the earth, is earthly; (
John 3.31.) but to show in word and works, that he is the Messenger of the Lord
from Heaven; who gives life to all, (1 Cor. 15.45.47.)

If Bishops and all they that discharge any Embassy for Christ, hope to be
such, verily their worldly additaments, earthly dominions, and secular honors,
must be taken away; for these are baits, which profane persons swallowing, and
being caught withal, crowd themselves into Ecclesiastical preferments, shutting
and thrusting out their betters: For it is vain that Bellarmine says, The Sea
of Rome either admits them which are Saints, or makes them such. It is more
truly retorted by another, that it either embraces them that are wicked, or
makes them such. For men cannot reach to such an height, but they must be very
worldly, ambitious, subtle to deceive by a thousand tricks more than are good:
Yea, if it be so, that happily some of the better sort fly so high, yet it is
almost impossible but they will be taken wi^h (a spirit of) giddiness, by
reason of the very height of their condition: And the same must be said of
every Bishops Sea set out with such pomp and riches, that these things either
are possessed by such as are ambitious, covetous, idle drones, and effeminate,
or else they soon make them such. These sweet poisons, (the pomps of Riches and
Honors) can hardly be drunk deeply off by any one, and he remain innocent.

Let no man say within himself, the Mendicant condemns them that have riches,
because he has none himself; for indeed, he which is out of the mist, can the
better see the cloud: nor yet need we to be so indigent, if modesty, and fear
of venomous dregs stood not in our way: I could tell you, the spirit of zeal
has sometime raised up them among us also, that by liberal Donation would have
settled sufficient large Revenues upon our Church for ever; (as in Moravia, B.
B. of Z. in Bohemia, Pr. of Rosenberg,) they were only finding out a way how
these Demesnes might with some color be made over to be possessed by some
others, so as yet the rents might be paid to the Antistites of the Unity: But
it was not accepted, both because it could hardly be concealed, but and if it
should have been known, it would have provoked envy; and because our Ancestors
dreaded the (not returning) footsteps, reckoning themselves to be but men, and
so liable also to abuse this worlds goods, but most of all, because of the
Divine Inhibition and Command.

God grant the Successors of the Apostles the Spirit of the Apostles, that
being fully persuaded that there is nothing urged but that which is
Apostolical, if happily the Church shall think fit otherwise to dispose of her
Benefices, yet none dare to have a thought of raising tumults or wars upon that
account (as they Mich. 3.5.) or cast off their charge; But rather be so much
the more instant, and cheerful in the work of their Divine Calling, in as much
as any fight or work is managed with the greater ease, when clogs and
encumbrances are removed. Did not the Apostles of their own accord (committing
the care of inferior matters to others, Acts 6.) choose to be Dispencers of the
Divine Word, and not of Tables? Let then the followers of the Apostles do the
same, esteeming it, that they are Stewards of those Spiritual, Heavenly, and
Eternal Treasures, a thousand times more than if they had the charge of earthly
riches.

Nor do these things tend thereunto; That the faithful Servants of Christ
should be defrauded of their Rewards, and Honors; but that they should learn
how to estimate as well their labors, as the rewards thereof, better then they
seem to know how to do it; which gaping so greedily after these outward things,
are carried with a cursed negligence and indifference, as to the internal and
eternal matters. God indeed liberally provided for his Ministers under the old
Covenant, appointing that the whole people should bring in to them all the
First Fruits of their increase, and all the Tenths, with their Free Will
offerings, besides (even all the best of their Oils, and Wines, and Corn, as
God himself says ( Numb. 18.12.) and yet he commanded them to look after
something higher; saying ( v. 20.) I am thy part, and thy possession; and
commanding the people that they reverence and esteem them as his Angels ( Mal.
2.7.) therefore let all Christian people know, that there is due to the
Messengers of God, maintenance; ( Mat. 10.10.) and reward, ( Luke 10.7.) and
reverence, as to the Angels of God, yea as to Jesus Christ, ( Gal. 4.14.) in
whose name and stead they perform the Office of Ambassadors, (2 Cor. 5.20.) O!
how happy the Church would be, if we could get back to the times of the
Apostles!

Come Lord Jesus, repair us after thy own good pleasure: Restore to thy Church
the Bands of Unity, Restore the beauty of Order, Restore the reverence of their
Government, Restore the fervor of thy Spirit; that the Kingdom of God may
suffer violence, as of old: Or if this last age be past cure, and incorrigible,
irreformable, take down the stage of the world, that we may enter upon that
Blessed Kingdom, where shall be Unity without Distraction; Order without
Confusion; Love without Intermission; and God shall be all in all for ever and
ever, Amen.

FINIS.

