IMPRIMATUR,

Jan. 21. 1673/4 C. Smith, R. P. D. Episc. Land. a sacris domesticis.

A COMPANION TO THE ALTAR.

Or, an HELP To the worthy receiving of the LORDS SVPPER, By Discourses and
Meditations upon the whole COMMUNION OFFICE.

To which is added, An ESSAY upon the OFFICES OF Baptism and Confirmation.

By THO. COMBER, M. A.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for John Martyn, at the Bell in St Paul's
Churchyard, and Richard Lambert, at York, MDCLXXV.

TO THE MOST REVEREND Father in GOD RICHARD By the Divine Providence Lord
ARCHBISHOP OF YORK, Primate of ENGLAND and METROPOLITAN.
May it please your Grace,
I Have often with much pleasure and admiration, observed how rarely every part
of Divine Service is suited to its proper Subject: whereof there needs no
better instance than that which is under our present Consideration: The
Communion is the most sublime Duty of Christianity, the Compendium of Religion,
the best opportunity for Repentance, the highest exercise of Faith, and the
strongest engagement to our Charity; and accordingly it is fitted with an
Office agreeable to its usefulness and grandeur, wherein the Directions are
full and perspicuous, the Exhortations vigorous and importunate, the Devotions
fervent and expressive of more than ordinary affections; an Office, wherein
equal regard is had to the Majesty of the Ordinance, and the advantage of the
Receivers, to the Custom of the Ancient and the benefit of the present times:
So that the illustration of this one Part of Liturgy, will contain Arguments to
convince the Negligent, Instructions to teach the Ignorant, and be the
properest method to prepare us for this Sacrament, to assist us in Receiving,
and to confirm us in all Holiness and Virtue afterward: yea I dare affirm,
that he who will conscientiously practice by these measures, can neither be an
Ill Man, an Unworthy Receiver, or an Enemy to that Church which affords him
such excellent means of Salvation.

Wherefore that these endeavors may be made public with more Advantage, I
have been bold to recommend them to your Graces Patronage, and that with great
reason. For their subject being of the highest Mystery, and their design to
adorn the most eminent Office of the Church, could no where be more justly
presented than to your Grace, who beside the Dignity of your Primacy, and the
honor of so High a Station in this Church, are so known a Lover and Patron of
all its Primitive Administrations: Besides, your Grace has a peculiar title to
the Author, as well as a Right in the subject of this Discourse; for he first
received the Holy Order of Priesthood, and the Power of Dispensing this
Sacrament (...) Ignat. ep. ad Smyr. Apost. Can. 39. Council. Laodic. Can. 57.
from your Graces Hands, to whom therefore he will ever pay the Reverence and
Observance due to a Spiritual Father Esto subjectus Pontifici tuo, and quasi
animae parentem suscipe: Hieron. ad Nepot. Ep. 2.
. In fine, I am obliged to make this Tender, by my Condition and my Duty, by
Gratitude and Affection: And your Graces fair Approbation of my first Essay,
encourages this to hope for a Candid acceptance, both as it is a Testimony of
my Respect, and as it may minister to the Devotion of those who approach to
Gods Altar.

My Lord,

There is nothing more useful to the friends of this Church, nor more
convincing to the dissenters from it, than to present her pure and Primitive
Order of Worship in its natural and lovely splendour, whereof by the Divine
mercy, I have seen some Experiments from my former attempt, and if this may
prevail also to undeceive the seduced, to amend the profane, and to elevate
the devotion of Pious Men, I shall have all I aimed at in this Work, only I
most gladly comply with this Opportunity to testify my self

Your Graces Most dutiful Son and most humble Servant, Tho. Comber.

THE INTRODVCTION. Of the Communion Service in general, with the reason and use
of this Undertaking.
. 1. WHatsoever benefits we now enjoy, or hope hereafter to receive from
Almighty God, are all purchased by the Death, and must be obtained through the
Intercession of the Holy Jesus. And for a perpetual memorial hereof, we are not
only taught to mention his name in our daily Prayers, John 14.13. and 15.16.
but are also commanded by visible signs to Commemorate, and set forth his
Passion in the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.26. wherein by a more forcible rite of
Intercession Fideles etiam inter orandum Christum afferunt Deo Patri victimam,
dum scilicet mente affectuque ad sacrificium ejus unicum feruntur, ut Deum sibi
habeant faciantque propitium. Anon. apud Med. Chris. Sacrif. Sect. 3.
we beg the Divine Acceptance. That which is more compendiously expressed in
the Conclusion of our Prayers [through Jesus Christ our Lord] is more fully and
more vigorously set out in this most holy Sacrament; Wherein we Interceed on
Earth in Imitation of and Conjunction with the great Intercession of our High
Priest in Heaven; Pleading here in the Virtue and Merits of the same Sacrifice,
which he does urge there for us. And because of this Sympathy and near Alliance
between these two Offices of Praying and Communicating, we find the Eucharist
in the purest Ages of the Church was a daily Act. 2.42. (...).
Companion of their Common Prayer. So that there is no Ancient Liturgy but does
suppose and direct the Celebration of this Sacrament, as constantly as the use
of Public Prayers: they being never separated, but in the Case of Novices, or
offending secluded Christians, who only had the benefit of the Petitions, but
were shut out before the Mysteries were begun. And though the iniquity of our
Age has made the Imitation of this sublime Example, rather to be wished for,
than expected: Yet the Consideration thereof may both humble us for the sad
decay of Christian Devotion; and also show us what Excellent reason our Church
had to annex so much of this Communion Office to the usual Prayers of all our
more solemn Assemblies.

. 2. As to the particular Form of this part of the Divine Service, Our Church
has taken the same liberty therein which others had done before them. For
since our great Master (who did Institute this Sacrament) ha^h not prescribed
any particular Form for the Administration thereof in holy Writ; there have
been in all the first Ages, many Liturgies composed suitable to the places and
times for which they were designed. Such are those which now bear the names of
St. Peter, and St. Barnabas, but especially the Liturgy of Jerusalem, called
from St. James, and that of Alexandria, named St. Marks, and that of the famous
Clemens: Most of which (though with some Corruptions) are still extant. And yet
notwithstanding St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, and St. Ambrose did every one of
them compile a several Liturgy for their several Churches: and yet all
different from the Roman Missal. So the Reverend Composers of the Common Prayer
have used the same freedom, extracting the purer and rejecting the suspicious
parts, out of all the former: And so have completed this model with so exact a
Judgment, and happy success, that it is hard to determine whether they more
endeavored the advancement of Devotion, or the Imitation of pure Antiquity.
For we may safely affirm, that it is more Primitive in all its parts, and more
apt to assist for worthy Receiving, than any Liturgy now used in the Christian
World. The style is plain, and moving, the phrase is that of the most genuine
Fathers, and the whole Composition most Pious, and proper to represent and give
luster to the duty; as we shall show in the several Particulars, when we have,
first, given some Account of the Reason and Use of this Undertaking; and
secondly, In a brief Scheme presented the Method of the whole Communion Service.

. 3. The design of this Tract is, that so Excellent an Office may be performed
with a suitable Devotion. And in order thereto, we have not only Explained all
the Parts thereof, but by proper Meditations and Prayers all along have fitted
it for the exercise of an Uniform Devotion, during the whole Administration. We
have indeed many admirable Books for our help in this Sacrament; but they being
generally designed for the Closet, the Affections which were elevated in
Private, are apt to grow loose and unactive when the Public Service does
begin. Whereas this Discourse, following the Order appointed for the
Celebration in the Church, does entertain the Devout Communicant all the way,
with most pertinent Meditations; Most of which by frequent reading them in
Private, may be made so familiar, that the hearing that part of the Office will
bring them into our minds in their proper seasons. For there will be little
opportunity during the Administration to use the Book, unless while the
Minister is distributing to our Brethren; all which time may be spent in those
Meditations upon the Form of Administration. And yet though we were obliged to
follow the Method of the Liturgy, we have endeavored so to contrive it, that
they who desire variety, or want other helps, may be assisted hereby in Private
also. So that you will here find directions, not only for your deportment at
this Sacrament, but also for your preparation to it, and demeanor afterward.
And though no part hereof be improper for such as would Communicate, to read,
or Meditate upon: Yet for your better advantage, we have added the following
Directions concerning the Order, wherein some special parts of it are to be
used, by such as desire to be Worthy Receivers.

I. When the Minister has given notice of the Sacrament, 1. For your
Instruction in the Mystery, and preparation, read Partit. I. Sect. VIII. all:
Part. III. Sect. II.. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and. 9.
2. If you find any unwillingness to come, read Part. I. Sect. IX. all.
3. If you are dejected so as to be discouraged from coming, read Part. II.
Sect. II. IV. V. all.

II. On the day before you are to Receive, 1. To direct and assist you, 1. In
your Preparation in general, read Part. I. Sect. II. all.
2. In your Examination, read Part. I. Sect. III.. 4, 5, 6, 7. and S. VIII.. 6,
7, 8. Part. II. Sect. I.. 4, 5, 6.
3. In your Confession, read Part. II. Sect. III. all.
4. In your resolutions of new obedience, read Part. I. Se. III.. 8, 9, 10.
5. In the Exercise of your Charity, 1. In Giving, read -- Part. I. Sect. VI.
all. 2. In making satisfaction, r. Part. I. Se. VIII.. 9. 3. In forgiving
injuries, read ib. --. 10. 4. In Praying for others, r. Part. I. Sect. VIII.
all.

2. To persuade you to be thankful for Christ's death, read Pa. II. S. I.. 7, 8,
9, 10.

III. On that Morning that you may approach 1. With Humility, read Part. III.
Sect. I. all. 2. With thankfulness, read Part. II. Se. VI.. 3. to 8. 1. At
Christmas, read Part. II. Sect. VI.. 8, 9. 2. At Easter, read ib.. 10. 3.
Ascension day, read ib.. 11. 4. Whitsunday, read ib.. 12. 5. Trinity Sunday,
read ib.. 13.

IV. At the time of the Celebration, 1. While the Elements are Consecrating,
read Part. III. S. II.. 7. to 13.
2. Before, in, and after the Receiving 1. Of the Bread, read Part. III. S.
III.. 3. to 10. 2. Of the Cup, read ib.. 10. to the end.

V. After the Sacrament, 1. If you would offer up your Self to God, read Part.
IV. Sect. II.. 5.
2. If you would pray for Grace, r. ib.. 6. 3. If you would do acts of
Humility, r. ib.. 7. 4. If you would give thanks, read Part. IV. Sect. III.. 3.
and Sect. IV. 3, 4, 5, 6.
5. If you would acknowledge Gods Mercy, read Pa. IV. S. III.. 4, 5, 6.
6. If you are afraid you shall fall off, and desire Grace to persevere, read
ib.. 7.


The Analysis of the whole Communion Office.
This Office may fitly be divided into Four Partitions. Partition I. Of the
more general Preparation to the Holy Communion. 1. As it is common to the whole
Congregation, being the Exercise of 1. Holy desires, in The Lords Prayer, Sect.
I. The Collect for Purity, Sect. II.
2. Repentance, in The Ten Commandments, Sect. III.
3. Prayer, in The Collects for the King [and Day.] Sect. IV.
4. Hearing, in The Epistle, Sect. V. The Gospel, Sect. V.
5. Faith, in The Creed, Sect. V.
6. Charity, in The Off^rtory and Sentences, Sect. VI. The Prayer for the whole
Church, Se. VII.

2. As more proper to those who are, or ought to Communicate, 1. The W^rning
before the Communion, S. VIII. 2. The Exhortation to the Communion, Sect. IX.

Partition II. Of the more immediate Preparation. 1. More generally, in The
Exhortation at the Communion, Sect. I. The immediate Invitation, Sect. II.
2. More particularly, by 1. Expressing our Penitence, in The Confession, Sect.
III.
2. Supporting our Faith, from The Absolution, Sect. IV. The Sentences, etc.
Sect. V.
3. Offering up our Praise^, in 1. The general Preface and Trisagtum, Sect. VI.
2. The particular Prefaces. Appendix.


Partition III. Of the Celebration, containing 1. The Communicants humble
Approach, in The Address, Sect. I.
2. The Ministers blessing the E^ements, in The Prayer of Consecration, Sect.
II.
3. His distribution of them, according to The Form of Administration, Sect.
III.

Partition IV. Of the Post Communion, concluding with 1. Prayers and Vows. The
Lords Prayer, Sect. I. The first Prayer in the Post-Communion, Sect. II. The
second Prayer in the Post-Communion. Sect. III.
2. Praises and Thanksgiving, in The Gloria in Excelsis, or, the Angelick Hymn,
Sect. IV.
3. Benediction, by The final Blessing, Sect. V.



PARTITION I. Of the more general Preparation to the Holy Communion.
SECT. I. Of the Lords Prayer.
Sect. 1. THere can be no fitter beginning for this Sacred Ordinance which so
peculiarly challenges Christ for its Author, than that Divine Prayer which ows
its Original to the same person. The Lords Prayer must be the most proper
Introduction to the Lords Supper. It seems our Savior intended it should be
joined to all our Offices of Devotion, because he ushers it in, with this
Injunction, Luke 11.2. When ye pray, Say, Our Father, etc. In Compliance
wherewith, as the Church has again placed it at the entrance into this
Service, so let us repeat with a fresh Devotion; Considering that these being
the Words of the Son of Agnoscat Pater filii verba. Cypr.
God, will, if duly repeated, make way for the Acceptance of all the rest of
our Petitions and Services. And as there is nothing can be more agreeably
united to the Intercession of Jesus in Heaven, in this our great rite of
Supplication, than that Prayer which himself has indicted: So the form it self
(as the Ancients did explain it,) does excellently agree Oration illa -- nihil
terrenum habet, sed omnia coelestia, and ad animum tendentia. S. Germ. Theor.
to this Mystery. Wherefore passing by its Analysis, and Discourse upon its
several parts, which we have done before, Compan. to the Temple -- We shall now
as more pertinent to this Occasion, by a brief Paraphrase direct the pious Soul
how to apply it to the present duty.

The Paraphrase of the Lords Prayer.
. 2. We confess O Lord we are not worthy to be called thy Servants, and yet
desire so to be united to thy Son by Faith, and to one another by Love, that
thou may be [Our Father] in Jesus Christ, by the visible remembrances of
whose Death on Earth, we set forth thy goodness [which art in Heaven] and not
to be seen with mortal Eyes. O let us so reverently celebrate this Mystery,
that [Hallowed] and adored by us, and all the World, may [^e thy Name] for the
Mercies of our Redemption. And let us by this Manifestation of our Saviors
love be won so fully to thy Obedience, that [thy Kingdom] of Grace being set up
in all our hearts, we may be ready against thy Kingdom of Glory [come] where
these outward signs shall cease, and we shall see thee face to face. In the
mean time let this, and every part of [Thy will be done] with the like
sincerity and Devotion by us thy Servants [in Earth, as it is] by thy holy
Angels [in Heaven] who are now attending upon, and desirous to look into these
Mysteries. But since we want that immediate fruition of thy glorious presence,
which those blessed Spirits do enjoy, [Give us] at thy Holy Table which thou
have prepared for us [^his day] that Bread of Life the Body of Christ, Et
corpus ejus in pane censetur -- panem enim peti mandat quod solum fidelibus est
necessarium. Tertul. de Orat. Ita Cypr. and Hieron. in Math. 6. etc. (...).
Theophil. in Math. 6.
which is as necessary for our Souls as [our daily Bread] is for our bodily
sustenance. And since thou have admitted us to Feast upon the remainders of the
great Sin-offering, Be pleased by virtue of that expiation to pardon [And
forgive us] fully and freely all [our trespasses] against thy divine Majesty:
[as we] moved by the experience of a greater mercy in this holy Sacrament, do
heartily [forgive those that] now, or at any time in word or deed [trespass
against us.] Finally when (with the expense of thy Sons blood) thou have
reconciled us to thy self, and to one another, Let not the Enemy renew the
breach, [And lead us not] into evil circumstances, lest we (forgetting our
vows) should comply and fall [into temptation] again, and so provoke thy Spirit
to forsake us: We are thine O Lord leave us not, [but deliver us] as Members of
thy dear Son, from all the snares of the wicked one, that we may be preserved
[from evil] spiritual, temporal, and eternal; And as a pledge thereof, do thou
in this Sacrament, to these Petitions set thy [Amen.]

SECT. II. Of the Collect for Purity.
. 1. THis Ancient and Devout Collect was retained, not without great Prudence,
as being a most exact and compendious expression of our desires of Purity. Nor
could it be more conveniently placed, since it is not only an excellent
entrance for the Communion Office, as the Discourse will manifest; But a very
proper Preface (even when there is no Sacrament) to the rehearsing of, and
examining our lives by, the Ten Commandments, to which it is immediately
prefixed. For if we hear the Law with an impure heart, Sin will take occasion
by Romans 7.8. Admonent enim saepe dum interdicuntur. Cypr. de Spect.
the Commandment, to cause thoughts of desire after, or delight in, the very
iniquity which is forbidden; And then how is it possible we should heartily
say, Lord have mercy, etc. Or Incline our hearts, etc. So that we are obliged
upon both accounts, earnestly to beg a pure heart. And that we may do it with a
more knowing Devotion, We shall open the particular Form, by the following
plain Division, Discourse, and Paraphrase.

The Analysis of the Collect for Purity.
Sect. 2. This Collect has 3. Parts. 1. The Reason of the Request, Gods
Omniscience, which is expressed 1 Affirmatively, Almighty God unto whom all
hearts be open, all desires known,
2. Negatively, From whom no secrets are hid,


2. The Request it self, viz. 1. The Matter of it, Cleanse the thoughts of our
hearts,
2. The Means, By the inspiration of thy holy Spirit
3. The end, 1. Internal That we may perfectly love thee,
2. External, and worthily magnify thy holy name,


3. The Argument used to obtain it, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.


A Practical Discourse upon the Collect for Purity.
. 3. Almighty God unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from
whom no secrets are hid] Of all the Divine Attributes, there are none so likely
to make us afraid in this our nearest approach to God, of coming with an
unclean heart, as his Omnipotence and Omniscience; And these therefore are in
Scripture phrase here set before us, to mind us, that we Jerem. 17.9. Psalm.
38:9. Cui -- omnis voluntas loquitur Missal Romans Psalm. 44.21: Job. 42.2. (...),
Petlaei versio. Lit. ex Heb. 4.13. Allusio ad victimas excoriatas and
suspensas, dum sacerdos exta scrutatur.
come before an Almighty and All-seeing Majesty; So that if any wickedness be
but imagined in the heart, desired by the will, or acted by the hand, in the
darkest night, or most secret corner, it is apparent to him, and he will
condemn us for it, unless we first condemn our own selves; Which Consideration
we may improve two ways. First, To show how necessary it is for us, to labor
for pure hearts, since we are about to draw near to him, who is so able to
punish, and so sure to discover the most secret sins, To whose power all things
are subject, and to whose Eyes all things lie open. If we were to pass the
strictest humane Examination, our thoughts would be unobserved and unpunished;
but we are now to pass a nearer Scrutiny; for in this Ordinance our God comes
into see the Guests, Math. 22.12. and as the Priest in the Temple to search the
very Inwards of those who are about to offer up themselves to him. Secondly, If
we complain that our hearts are deceitful, Jerem. 17.9. so that we have neither
strength to root out, nor skill to discover all the Corruptions that are lodged
there, Let us look up to him who is able to help us in cleansing this Augaean
Stable; for we may be assured, if he see it is our unfeigned desire to be
purified, his Omnipotence shall not be employed to ruin us, but to destroy our
Lusts; and his Omniscience not to find them out to our shame, but to our
amendment; And thus the same Attributes that did terrify us from rude and
impure approaches, will encourage us again to draw near, by showing us how we
may be cleansed.

. 4. Cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the Inspiration of thy holy Spirit]
This Petition is the Paraphrase of David's Prayer, Psalm. 51.6, 7. Make me a
clean heart, etc. and the moral of all those Psalm. 26.6. Lavabo ut rem divinam
faciam. Plaut. -- procul ite profani.
washings, used by Jews and Gentiles, before they came to the Altar: And it is
the more necessary for us, because we are not only entering upon the most solemn
part of Gods worship, but also in hope that Jesus himself is coming to lodge in
our hearts. Wherefore being conscious that we are overspread with the Leprosy
of Sin, while we are yet a great way off, Luke 17.12, 13. We cry out unclean,
unclean, Levit. 13.45, 46. And do call upon Jesus saying, Lord, if thou will
thou can make us clean, M^th. 8.2. For unless he cleanse us before we come
too near, He will either abhor us and our offerings; Or at least, those impure
thoughts like Abraham's Fowls, will steal away the benefit, and the Comfort of
our Sacrifice, and while our bodies are in the holy place, (...). Philo leg.
Allegor.
carry our minds after abominable things, leaving a Carcass before the Altar.
And therefore that no filthy imaginations may defile us, nor secular thoughts
disturb us, Let us pray to be inspired with that purifying Spirit, Psalm. 51.10,
11. which will not only eject, but keep out all evil affections, and preserve
the possession for the blessed Jesus. For he that took up a pure lodging for
our Lord in the Virgins Womb, must also prepare his Apartment in our Souls, if
ever we have his Company. It is not with Notions or sublime Revelations, but
with holy inclinations and pure affections, that we desire to be inspired;
which are more excellent in themselves, and more necessary for this Heavenly
Feast.

. 5. That we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy holy Name,
throu^h Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.] It is a great affliction to a truly pious
man, to find that his heart retains the least affection to iniquity, since he
desires to love God with all his Soul, and with all his strength, and to
worship him with all his power; But whilst sin has a party within, and is a
Rival to our Lord, We cannot perfectly love him nor worthily praise him, no not
in this holy Sacrament, in which we ought to profess, that we love nothing more
than God, nay nothing equal to him, and to show forth the greatness, and
goodness of our Redeemer to all the World. We are therefore taught to entreat
so earnestly for a pure heart, lest by any secret delight in wickedness, our
protestations of love should be adjudged feigned, and our praises, hypocrisy,
by him that sees we affect something more dearly, and magnify and esteem it
more highly, than we do God himself. We cannot indeed love God so much as he
deserves; but if we love him sincerely, that is accounted perfectly. And
although we cannot sufficiently set forth all the praise of which he is worthy,
(...) non semper (...), sed qualemcunque convenientiam denotat. Grot. in Math.
10.11. Been itaque Graeca versio Petlaei hoc loco, (...).
yet when we value him in our hearts above all things, we are accounted to
magnify him worthily, (...) non magnum efficere sed magnum praedicare Deum.
Psalm. 34.3. Act. 10.46.
that is suitably in some measure to his goodness. Now since it is such a
happiness thus to love and thus to praise God, we must desire a clean heart
(the necessary means thereof) through the merits, and for the sake of Jesus
Christ; and then we may be assured that so excellent a thing, asked for so
noble an end, and by so powerful and engaging a name, can never be denied to
us; and so this Prayer shall have its desired effect, Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Collect for Purity.
. 6. O [Almighty God] whose power is terrible to all that approach thee with
polluted Souls; because thou art that Majesty [unto whom] the thoughts and
imaginations of [all hearts be open] and apparent, [all Desires] and wishes
after any evil are [known] and evident, And the God [from whom no secrets] in
word or deed [are hid] or by any policy can be concealed. The remembrance of
our impurity makes us fear to draw near to thee, till we have implored thee
(who alone art able to help us herein) to [cleanse] and purge out all [the
thoughts] of evil, which are so commonly the Guests [of our hearts,] lest they
provoke thy pure Eyes to pass us by with abhorrency, and deprive us of the
comfort and benefit of this Communion. Blessed Lord prepare thy lodging in our
Souls, [by the inspiration] of those pure thoughts and Heavenly desires, which
are the fruit [of thy holy Spirit] and the Harbingers of the King of Glory,
[that we may] (as it is our unfeigned desire) at all times, and above all
things, most sincerely, and [perfectly love thee] that thou may have no
secret lust to be thy Rival in our hearts: [and] that we may also, especially
in this Sacrifice of Praise [worthily magnify] and agreeably set forth the
glory of [thy holy Name] in giving so illustrious a Salvation to us [through
Christ] Jesus, for whose sake we beseech thee to hear us, for he is thy Son,
and shall be [our Lord] for ever. [Amen.]

SECT. III. Of the Ten Commandments.
. 1. AS Moses by the special command of God did sanctify the people before the
first promulgation of this Law, Exodus 19.14, 15. So it is our care in the
preceding Collect, that all may be pure which are now to hear it; For Gods Law
is so holy, that such as have hearts defiled with the love of Sin, are neither
(...). Plato. Psalm. 19.8, 9.
worthy to receive it, able to understand it, (...). Plotinus. John 7.17.
Ecclus. 1.26.
nor likely to profit by it. Nor must any Man think these divine Precepts of
the Moral Law so appropriated to the Jewish Synagogues, (where they were
constantly with great reverence used) as to deserve no place in the Christian
Worship, Or at least that we need not so great preparations before they are
read to us; For our Savior has rather more strictly enjoined, than any ways
abrogated these Measures of Eternal goodness: And withal assures us that the
keeping of the Precepts is the way to Everlasting Life. Matthew. 5.19, 20. and
Chap. 19.17. So that all of us are concerned to know this Covenant, to which we
have engaged in our Baptism; this Rule by which we are to square our lives
here, and this Law by which we must be judged hereafter. And therefore it is
appointed that these Commandments shall be read in this place, while all the
Congregation is together, to the Catechumens as well as to the Elder
Christians; to those that do not, as well as to those that do Communicate; And
that immediately before the Gospel to make that the more welcome to us, when the
Law has humbled us by its Terrors. Wherefore we here present the general
Division of them, both to instruct the ignorant, and to afford all an
Opportunity to see their principal offenses against them at one glance, while
the Minister is reading them, or when we have no time for more particular
Examination.

The Analysis of the Ten Commandments.
. 2. The Ten Commandments are by Christ himself divided into Two Tables. I.
Table. Of Piety toward God. 1. As to the Object of Worship I. Com. Thou shall
have no other gods, etc. I Sins chiefly forbidden. Apostasy, Deifying the
Creature, Distrust of God.

2. As to the Manner of Worship, 1. In our solemn Addresses to God. II. Com.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc. II Idolatry,
Superstition, Slight and careless Worship.

2. In all other Acts that have respect unto him. III. Com. Thou shall not take
the Name of the Lord, etc. III Blasphemy, Swearing vainly, falsely,
Cursing, Profaning Holy things, Sacrilege.


3. As to the Time of Worship, IV. Com. Remember that thou keep holy the
Sabbath, etc. IV Neglect of the Sabbath, Holy Times.
Mispending them in Idlenes^, or Debauchery.



II. Table. Of Charity to our Neighbor. 1. Directing us in the Duties of our
several Relations, 1. Natural, as Parents, Children
2. Religious, Ministers, People,
3. Civil, Princes, Subjects,
4. Domestical, Masters, Servants

V. Com. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc. V Superiors Negligence, Pride,
Evil Example.
Inferior; Disobedience, Contempt, Resisting.

2. Forbidding us to do any injury, either 1. Indeed, against our Neighbor's
1. Life, VI. Com. Thou shall do no murder. VI Taking away Life, Quarrelling,
Anger, Revenge, Cruelty.

2. Chastity, VII. Thou shall not commit adultery. VII Adultery, Fornication,
Wanton Desires, Words, Behavior,
Drukenness.

3. Estate or Goods, VIII. Thou shall not steal. VIII Theft and Robbery,
Oppression, Cheating, Unjust detaining, Idleness.

4. Good Name. IX. Thou shall not bear false witness, etc. IX False
Testimonies, Lying, Slandering, Tale-bearing, Flattery.


2. Or in thought or desire. X. Com. Thou shall not covet, etc. X Covetousness,
Envy at others, Discontent with our own.





A Practical Discourse of the Ten Commandments.
. 3. It must not be expected that I should explain the particular Commandments,
which would too much swell this work; Only I shall undertake two things. First,
To direct how to use them for our profit when there is no Communion. Secondly,
And chiefly, how they may be used in private to help us in our Preparation for
the Blessed Sacrament.

As our natural Ignorance makes it necessary to teach us this Law of God in our
Catechism: So our aptness to forget that which is good requires that it should
be repeated in our public Service. It is dangerous either not to know or not
to remember these holy Commandments, which are proclaimed by our God, approved
by our own Consciences, and established with eternal rewards and punishments.
(...). Porph. de abst. 1. 8.
Whosoever therefore thinks it a trouble to hear them so often, neither
considers the weight of these divine Precepts, nor observes that his own
frequent breaches of them do show, that they are not read often enough to fix
them so in his mind as to procure a sincere Obedience. For till we do exactly
observe them, We do not know or remember them as we ought. Let us then
endeavor so often as we use them to receive benefit to our Souls thereby.

And to that purpose, First, You must with great humility receive them from the
Mouth of the Minister, as if they were spoken from Mount Sinai by God himself,
(imitating the tenderness of good Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.19.) and cast your selves
down upon your knees, for that is the most suitable posture for Criminals, who
are to petition for pardon; and thus listen to every Commandment with diligent
attention and a submissive Reverence. Secondly, Apply them every one carefully
to your ways, for since you have neglected to follow the direction of this holy
Law as your Guide, (...). Clem. Alex. Paed. 1.
it now becomes your Accuser; Rectum est index sui and obliqui.
and it may be an excellent opportunity to bring you to the knowledge of your
sinful Estate, and so unto repentance, because your gracious God does allow you
the liberty of second thoughts, and will not condemn you for these offenses, if
you condemn your selves for them. Ask then your own heart seriously at every
one, Have I not been such an one? Done this evil? Neglected this duty? And when
your Conscience Answers, Yes; then you must most passionately cry out* Lord
have mercy upon me, and forgive me this or that sin. Thirdly, Let the discovery
of so many breaches, and the sight of so vast a heap of guilt make you afraid
to add Sin unto Sin, Iterata enim lex sollici^iores reddit regligente. Ambr. in
Galat.
and to break these holy bonds any more, Hoc nos p^ssimos facit quod nemo vitam
suam respicit. Sen. Epist. 38.
for therefore have you lived at random, because you have not considered your
ways, nor compared them strictly with Gods sacred Law. But now that you are
freshly minded of your Duty, and reproved for your former Neglect, It will be
expected you shall be more afraid to transgress hereafter, and therefore
desiring never more to offend, say, Lord incline my heart to keep this Law. And
thus the hearing of the Ten Commandments may be an exercise of our Repentance,
and a means of amendment every day.

. 4. It is of excellent use frequently to compare our ways with Gods Law, for
so it would be our guide before we act, to put us upon our Duty; Our reprover
afterward, to bring us to Repentance; and our Monitor to prevent the like
misdoings for the future. But I am the briefer in this consideration, because
my main design tends to the Holy Sacrament; And also because the Church has
here placed the Ten Commandments principally as the Rule and Measure of that
Examination which St. Paul makes to be necessary before we eat thereof, 1 Cor.
11.28. For the same Apostle teaches us, that by the Law is the knowledge of
Sin, Romans 3.20. And experience also shows that there is no readier way to
discover our iniquities and humble us for them, than the serious application of
this exact Rule to our perverse and crooked paths. I shall therefore, Secondly,
Give Directions how we may so try our ways by them, as to prepare our selves
for this Heavenly Feast. To which purpose let it be considered, that this duty
of Self Examination, is never so necessary, as now when we purpose to receive
the Holy Communion: For it is but hypocrisy to seek a pardon for sins which we
never perceived our selves guilty of, and foolish presumption to make a
Covenant before we have weighed the conditions to which we are to be obliged:
Until we see the number and apprehend the heinousness of our transgressions,
and fear the vengeance due unto us for them, we are altogether unfit for the
Commemoration of his Death who suffered for our offenses. It is the sight and
sense of sin alone that will show us what need we have of so glorious a
Redeemer. This will show us our obligation to Jesus, and teach us heartily to
praise God for him, and passionately to beg an interest in him: whilst he that
does not discern his guilt, nor foresee his danger, is stupid and unmoved at
this amazing spectacle of a bleeding, languishing, dying Savior, and has no
love nor no fear, No tears nor no desires, No relenting or indignation for what
is past, Nor any vows and wishes as to the time to come; and shall be judged an
unworthy Receiver. So that if you desire comfort in, benefit from, or
acceptance at the holy Table, I charge you to be exceeding curious and diligent
in this Examination.

The Pythagoreans and better sort of Heathens did strictly call themselves to
an Account every night before they went to sleep, where they had been? what
evil they had done? or what good they had left undone? And shall not they
condemn those Christians who will not do the same once in a Month, or three or
four times in a Year; especially upon so solemn an occasion, and for so
excellent an end, as to procure a pardon sealed for all their misdemeanors?
The Rabbis persuade the devouter Jews to spend a whole Month together before
the Feast of Expiation, Buxtorf. Synag. Judaic. c. 18.
in examining all their lives, assuring them that all those offenses which they
discover shall be forgiven them in that great day: Which may more truly be
applied to this Ordinance. That holy Anchoret which the Patriarch of Alexandria
found in the Egyptian deserts, said, he had employment enough there (where he
had nothing else to divert him) for his whole life to judge and condemn
himself. And shall not we be justly condemned of the Lord, who think a day or
two, too much to be so employed? But I hope I need add no more to persuade to
so good a work. And therefore supposing this a sufficient Conviction to those
who have any care of their Souls; I shall proceed to direct how we must examine
our selves by these Commandments.

. 5. When the Minister gives warning of an approaching Communion, We must
contrive to have at least one whole day separated to this so necessary Trying
and judging our selves. And first, As this Law was given in the Wilderness,
Exodus 19.1. So we cannot use it in a crowd; but when we purpose thus to apply
it, we must retire from the World, and lay aside all secular business, Secessi
de populo, in me unicum negotium est mihi. Tertul. de pall. c. 5.
Psalm. 4.4. and carry our minds with us into some place of privacy, that we may
wholly attend this great work, which will take up our whole time, and employ
all our faculties. For we communicate so seldom, and generally live so
carelessly between one time and another; that our Sins are numerous, our
Consciences intricate, and many things forgotten, and all confused; So that it
is not for us to allege that the Primitive Christians did not use such
solemnity of Preparation; For they lived strictly, received daily or weekly,
and kept their Souls always in good Order: For which cause I suppose neither
were the Commandments appointed to be read in the Ancient Liturgies. Did we
lead such lives, we might be accepted with lesser and shorter preparatives. But
most of our hearts will tell us the case with us is far otherwise. Secondly,
Having thus chosen a time and place for the undisturbed proceeding in this
grand affair, we must resolve to spend it Fasting, Dan. 9.3. not only that we
may not be diverted, or lose any of this precious time by our meat, but that
our minds may be more spiritual, and more clear, our body more gentle, and more
at the command of the Spirit, Infirmitas carnis vigorem mentis exacuit, ut
affectis artubus, vires corporum in virtutes transferantur animorum. Salv. lib.
1. de prove.
that our hearts may be tender, and more apt to grieve for Sin, and fear Gods
wrath; as also that we may punish our flesh, for the gratifying of which, most
of our Sins have been committed; that we may acknowledge our selves unworthy of
our daily bread; And finally declare that we desire peace with God, more than
our very food, and do so earnestly hunger and thirst after Jesus, that we
forget our bodily sustenance. Thirdly, Begin this work with humble and hearty
Prayer to him that sees your heart, and must be your Judge. Beseech him to help
you to prevent his judgment by condemning your selves. Desire him to fix your
thoughts, strengthen your memory, and to work upon your affections; that you
may perceive how often, how heinously, and how long time you have offended, and
may with a relenting wounded heart bewail the same. Fourthly, After this rise
up, and meditate how merciful thy God has been, in not summoning thee to his
Tribunal as yet, and in giving thee this opportunity to prevent a sad and final
Doom. Remember thy heart is deceitful, and not willing to see its own baseness,
or to discover its own shame, nor apt to censure it self Prove. 21.2. Nemo non
benignus sui judex. Sen. de ben. l. 2.

Nemo suae mentis motus non astimat aequos.

Quodque volunt homines se been velle putant.


aright. And yet cursed are they that do this work of the Lord deceitfully,
Jer. 48.10. for it will be their own ruin. Wherefore resolve to set about it
with all possible sincerity and strictness, as believing thou may never have
another opportunity, but that thy next Indictment may be in another World; And
in the mean time, that an All-seeing God will come in at this Feast, to inquire
how faithfully thou have performed this Duty. And then fifthly, Set your self
seriously to look over all the Records of your Memory and Conscience. Call to
mind all Places you have been in, all Companies and Persons with which you have
conversed. Reflect upon your designs, your business, your pleasure and
divertisements, with all those circumstances which may represent unto you, all
your evil thoughts, words, and actions, and may set before you all the good
which you have omitted. And if any seem dubious, Quo praetergressus, quid
factum in tempore, quid non

Offensus pravis, date palmam and praemia rectis.


you must prove and try them, Lam. 3.40. That you may condemn them in your
judgment as well as recollect them by your memory. And do this as impartially
as is possible, judging the same of your own Actions, as you would, if they
were done by the worst of your Enemies. For your better help wherein the
following Table is contrived.

Sect. 6. Brief heads of Self-Examination upon every one of the Commandments.

I. Commandment.
. Though I have not Atheistically denied the Being of God or wickedly renounced
him by Apostasy; Yet,. Have I not loved, desired, and delighted in other
things more than God?. Have I not feared Men more than God; and sinned against
him to avoid their displeasure, or outward Sufferings?. Have I not trusted in
Man, and relied on outward means more than on God, in my wants, dangers, and
distresses?. Have I neither neglected lawful means, nor used unlawful means to
bring me out of them?. Have I not despaired of Gods mercy so as to neglect my
duty, or by presuming upon it, encouraged my self to go on in Sin?. Have I not
been fearless of the divine threatenings; And yet discontented with, impatient
under, and unreformed by Gods Corrections?. Have I not been unthankful for
goods things, or ascribed the praise of what I am, have, or can do, to fortune,
my self, or any other Creature? Lord have mercy, etc. And incline, etc.
II. Commandment.
Though I have not worshipped God by Images; Yet,. Have I not entertained
gross, and false Conceptions of God; and worshipped him so as is unbecoming his
Divine Nature?. Have I not failed in any of the parts of Religious Worship?.
Have I not either omitted or slightly performed Morning and Evening Prayer,
and reading the Holy Scriptures?. Have I not been indifferent and customary, as
to my coming to the Public Worship?. Have I not behaved my self there without
Reverence or Devotion, forgetting the Presence of the Invisible God, whom I
serve?. Have I not by design or carelessness neglected the Lords Supper, or come
to it ignorantly, rashly, and without preparation?. Have I not received it
irreverently, and without spiritual affection, or broken the vows and promises
I then made? Lord have mercy, etc. And incline, etc.
III. Commandment.
If I have not openly blasphemed the Holy Name of God;. Have I not slightly or
irreverently mentioned his Holy Name, or Attributes?. Have I not profanely
jested upon, or abused his holy Word?. Have I not violated holy Places,
Persons, Ordinances, or any thing peculiarly dedicated to God?. Have I not
taken Gods name in vain by common Swearing, or by Cursing my self or others?.
Have I not taken false, or unlawful Oaths; Or broken my lawful Oaths or Vows;
Especially my Baptismal Vow? Lord have mercy, etc. And incline, etc.
IV. Commandment.
. Have I not neglected the public worship of God on the Sabbath Day?. Have I
not misspent any part thereof in vain sports, idle discourses, complemental
visits, or unnecessary business?. Have I not permitted those under my charge to
profane it?. Have I not forgotten to praise God for the Creation, and
Resurrection, especially on this Day?. Or for his other Mercies in his Son, or
his Servants, upon the Festivals of the Church?. Have I not slighted these
solemnities, or abused them by debauchery? Lord have mercy, etc. And incline,
etc.
V. Commandment.
. Have I not omitted, or acted contrary to my Duty in those Relations wherein I
stand?. Have I not censured, envyed, or railed against, my Domestical,
Ecclesiastical, or civil Governors; instead of honoring, imitating, and
praying for them?. Have I not been undutiful to my Parents; disloyal to my
Prince; stubborn or unfaithful to my Master; fractory and unthankful to my
Minister; peevish, and unkind to my Yokefellow?. Have I been careful to
instruct and encourage in well doing, To reprove and chastise for ill doing
those under my charge? Lord have mercy, etc. And incline, etc.
VI. Commandment.
If I have not actually taken away the life of any person; Yet,. Have I not
made my Neighbors life grievous, concealed designs against it; or willingly
hastened his death, or wished it?. Have I not by fighting or quarrelling wounded
or maimed him, or drawn him to any vice, which might destroy his health, or
shorten his life?. Have I not been rashly and immoderately angry, or used
reviling and quarrelsom speeches, or harbored thoughts and purposes of Malice
and Revenge?. Have I not been intemperate in meat or drink; or any other ways
prejudiced my own health, or endangered my life? Lord have mercy, etc. And
incline, etc.
VII. Commandment.
If I have escaped the grosser acts of Adultery and Fornication; Yet,. Have I
not neglected to use the means to preserve my own and others Chastity?. Have I
not by gluttony and drunkenness pampered my body, or by cherishing unclean
thoughts, purposes, and desires, defiled my Soul?. Have I not run into any
occasions, or used any provocations of wantonness?. Have I not used or listened
to, filthy talking, or been guilty of immodest Garbs, or unchaste behavior?
Lord have mercy, etc. And incline, etc.
VIII. Commandment.
If I have not been guilty of notorious Felony or Robbery; Yet,. Have I not by
negligence in my particular Calling, run into debt, without hopes or purposes
of repayment?. Have I not wasted my own Estate, and ruined my Family, by
idleness or prodigality?. Have I not cheated my neighbor in buying, or
selling, breaking my Covenants, fraudulent writings, or falsifying my word?.
Have I not by violence or oppression, exacted of my inferiors, or by
unreasonable usury taken advantage of others necessity?. Have I not wasted or
imbezeled that which was committed to my trust, refused to restore the pledge,
abused what was lent, or denied that which was found by me? Lord have mercy,
etc. And incline, etc.
IX. Commandment.
If I have not before a Magistrate directly sworn falsely: Yet,. Have I not
accustomed my self to lying in my common discourse?. Have I not maliciously and
uncharitably raised or spread abroad evil and false reports of my Neighbor?.
Have I not encouraged such ill-reports, nor published the faults of another to
his disgrace?. Have I not undervalued good, or flattered bad men, and given a
false Character to please a friend?. Have I not suffered an innocent persons
good name to be traduced, when I had opportunity or power to clear it?. Have I
not by pride conceived, or by boasting uttered false things concerning my
self?. Have I neither sought unjustly to uphold, or wilfully to blast my own
Credit? Lord have mercy, etc. And incline, etc.
X. Commandment.
. Have I not secretly murmured at the Providence of God, as if others had too
much, and my self too little?. Have I not greedily coveted the Estate, honors
o^ comforts of my neighbors, nor sought by evil means to procure them to my
self?. Have I not envyed any, so as to be grieved at their prosperity, or to
wish or rejoice in their losses and calamities?. Have I not been apt to
undervalue all my own things, and neglected to give God thanks for them?. Have
I not too passionately pursued riches and honors, so as to neglect my Soul,
and Religion upon these accounts.
. 7. Whosoever has particularly and seriously asked his own Soul the foregoing
Questions, will be far from the vanity of the young Man in the Gospel, nor is
it likely that he will now have the confidence to say as he, Matthew. 19.20. All
these have I kept from my youth. For his own Conscience will tell him in most
inquiries that He is the Man; And accordingly the Church has provided the
Publican Confession, Luke 18.12. Lord have mercy upon us. Which now may be
fitly used, First, As an humble and dolorous Confession that we are Guilty,
very Guilty; For when the Prisoner falls down and craves Mercy; It shows he is
convinced of his fault, and in that phrase is supposed to acknowledge it.
Secondly, As a passionate, and earnest Exclamation for Pardon, which now
appears infinitely needful, when this black and dreadful Bill is set before us.
Yet lest all this should not be sufficient to produce that sorrow and shame,
which is necessary for this solemn Confession, but our hearts remain still
obdurate and unrelenting, Let every one lay before himself these
Considerations. First, Meditate of the nature of all these Sins of which thou
art guilty: They are the Actions of a poor helpless depending Creature done
against the holy Will, and most gentle and reasonable Commands, of that Majesty
who could destroy thee in a Moment, and whom Angels and all the World besides
exactly do obey. And besides, thou may upbraid thy self with the folly of
Anger, the fury of Revenge, the filthiness of Lust, and the shame of Lying, the
beastliness of Drunkenness, and the misery of Covetousness, the
unreasonableness of Pride, and the vanity of seeking humane Praise, the
restlesness of Ambition, and the vexation of a discontented mind. Consider the
malignity of all Sin, and the baseness of every particular, and surely it will
appear it was impudence and ingratitude, simplicity and madness in thee ever to
commit them. Secondly, Meditate of the number of them; And think that if there
be so much evil in one Sin, How deplorable is thy Case who have offended in so
many kinds? Oh how often have thou acted or designed, the greater and more
notorious wickednesses? And for (those which we account) the lesser, What is
wanting in the odiousness of the single Acts thou have supplied by frequent
repetitions; Few days nay minutes passing in thy whole life, in which thou do
not sin in these instances. I doubt not but thy memory now presents a vast
number to thee; but alas those that were never observed are far more, and those
that are forgotten are much more numerous than both, Yet these are all noted in
the Records of Heaven; So that if thou could apprehend this formidable Army,
it would lay thy confidence in the dust, and strike thee with amazement to
consider how many times thou have deserved Condemnation. Thirdly, Meditate of
the Desert of these Sins, viz. that the wages of (any, the least, unobserved,
or forgotten) sin is death, Romans 6.23. And then how many times have thou
deserved to be cut off? Consider how thou art by these transgressions exposed
to the wrath of God, and to suffer all those Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal
miseries, which the Righteous Judge of all the World has threatened in his holy
word. And if thy heart be apt to excuse its faults, on pretense of a corrupt
Nature, a violent Temptation, or a sudden surprise, and will not believe, or
fear that God is so highly displeased; then tell thy own Soul that for one
offense, the Angels were cast out of Heaven, and Adam out of Paradise, and He
that is the lover of Men, for lighter or fewer Crimes, does lay dreadful
Plagues and Miseries upon thy Brethren; And God is no respecter of Persons; He
spared not his own Son, when he stood in the place of Sinners, and shall He
spare thee? Oh look up to the Cross of Jesus, and behold his Agonies and his
Sorrow, hear his groans and cries, observe his anguish and his pains. Is not
God highly displeased with Sin, when he makes his own Son the Example of his
wrath, to his offending Servants? In short know, that if Repentance do not now
procure thy Pardon, thou shall have God and all Creatures thy Enemies, and
may justly expect Losses and Crosses, Poverty and Reproach, Diseases and an
evil Death; and (which is more horrid) to be deprived of the aids of Gods
Spirit, and the offers of Grace, and to be left in thy own hardness and
impenitency, as one that refuses to be reclaimed. And if any or all these have
not yet fallen upon thee, it is only because the Lord will try whether at this
time thou will seriously Repent; but thou art not acquitted, though he do
awhile forbear. Fourthly, Meditate of those Aggravations which make thy Sins
worse than those of other Men, and that will convince thee that thou deservest
no less. For First, Have not many of them been committed against thy knowledge,
and reason; and in despite of all the checks and reluctancies of thy
Conscience? Secondly, And although thou have made so many vows, and taken so
many resolutions, never to act them more; yea and engaged this upon the holy
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood: Yet have thou not entertained them again?
Thirdly, Have not all those mercies and favors spiritual and temporal,
wherewith thy Heavenly Father has courted thy Love, been abused by thee, and
cast away upon thee, when all this could not prevail, to make thee leave one
lust, or persuade thee to give over piercing him that has died for thee?
Fourthly, Have thou not proceeded in thy evil Courses, after all those Examples
of divine vengeance on others, and all those Calamities which Sin has brought
upon thy own self? Have thou feared any longer than the smart remained? Have
thou not made the Almighty almost weary of Correcting thee? and show thou
love thy Sin too well to be easily torn from it? Fifthly, And finally how
mischievous have the effects of thy transgressions been? They have dishonored
God, disgraced thy Religion, encouraged the wicked to persevere, incited the
innocent to follow thy steps, and offended weak and tender Christians. This is
indeed a sad story, and if we rightly apprehend it, may make the best to cry
out with trembling and deep contrition, Lord have mercy upon us! But lest this
dismal Account which will scarce fetch one sigh from a stupid Soul, should
overwhelm others in grief and desperation; I shall add, that we are not like
the Jew, who when the Law thundered from Mount Eball, could only sign it with a
dreadful Amen, For we look further, and beholding the Lamb of God, make bold to
crave mercy; the very acknowledgment of our Sin being wrapped up in a Petition
for Pardon; And the right use of all this is, not to affright us from Jesus,
but to drive us to him; to show not only how little we deserve, but how much we
need a pardon; It is to represent how far God can forgive, and how highly our
dear Redeemer has merited, seeing so great and deserved vengeance is yet
withheld, and the Gate of Mercy still kept open for such wretched Creatures.
Our design in this discovery of Sin is to convince us, that it is high time to
desist from adding to this infinite heap, that it is extremely necessary to
seek for Absolution, and that it will be an admirable engaging favor, if we be
again accepted. For Mount Sinah is the way to Sion, and the Law our
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. When therefore your heart is full of these
thoughts, and when hope and fear, sorrow and desire, are struggling within you,
In the midst of these Passions, bend your knees and begin to arraign your self
at the Bar of your merciful Judge, where humble Confession In quantum tibi non
peperceris, in tantum tibi Deus creed parcet. Tertul.
is the readiest way to Remission. Acknowledge therefore all you have found,
relate your shame and indignation at your self, your grief and anguish for all
your misdoings, entreat as for your life, and with all earnestness beg for pity
and pardon; remembering he never did cast off any that thus came to him. Your
Confession it self will be no other than a larger Paraphrase, of Lord have
mercy, etc. But if you require a form, the Church has made excellent provision
in that acknowledgment before the Consecration, See Part. 2. Sect. 3. Sect. 9.
to which the Reader is desired to turn, and while his heart is in this frame,
with great Devotion to recite that Form.

. 8. But that this is not all the use of these Ten Commandments, we may learn,
from the other part of the Versicle repeated after each of them, which is
David's Prayer, Psalm. 119.36. viz. And incline our hearts to keep this Law.
Which minds us of the next part of our Preparation for the Holy Sacrament to
which the Law is apt to minister, viz. Secondly, The Renewing of our Covenant,
and this will necessarily follow our Confession if it be sincere and the
language of a contrite heart. Since we now have discovered the vileness and
danger of our sinful courses, We must needs be full of indignation against
those ways, and cannot but wish we may never fall into the like circumstances
again. Nay God may expect that those who are so drenched in tears, and amazed
with fear, shall now study how they may keep the right paths of his Law
hereafter. And this was the principal end why you were put upon considering
your ways, that you might turn your feet to his Testimonies, Psalm. 119.59. And
if you be now desirous to do this, it is the best sign of your Repentance, the
surest evidence of your pardon, and the best disposition in the World for your
reception of these Mysteries; wherein it is Gods part to seal your Absolution
by the blood of his dear Son, and yours to give up your self entirely to his
Service for ever hereafter, since he has so graciously quitted the old scores.
So that there is no doubt but the true Penitent does now desire with all his
Soul to forsake his Sins and do his duty better. Only because he finds his
heart averse, and not easily inclined to this which (his Conscience tells him)
is his interest and his happiness; The Church has added this short but
significant Petition, to him that can turn the heart, and work in us both to
will and to do, That he would Incline, etc. Which Prayer that it may be said
with David's Spirit, Et oremus quod ille ^ravit, and quod oremus imitemur
effectu. -- si eramus sermon compatiamur and mente. S. Ambr. in Psalm. 119.
We must resolve to follow those good inclinations when it pleases God to work
them in us. And to that purpose, before we make this our solemn promise, we
must labor to bring our hearts to condemn the ways of Sin, and to approve of
the ways of Holiness, lest we should mock the Almighty, by begging his help in
that which we never intend to perform; and lest our vow should vanish into Air,
if we do not first consider the particulars to which we bind our selves. And
for our assistance herein, viz. that our Engagement may be advised and well
grounded, and our Prayers for the divine Aid may be hearty and sincere; We may
after our Confession (while our hearts are yet bleeding for our former
offenses) enlarge our thoughts into these or the like Meditations.

. 9. First to alienate our affections from Sin, that we may in earnest and for
ever renounce it, Let every one of us ask his Soul these Questions.

First, How little of either true profit or solid pleasure have I reaped from
Sin? The gain is cursed and entangled, the delight short, and unsatisfying,
ending either in vexation or a restless desire, which stays longer and wounds
deeper than ever the fantastic pleasure reached. How certain is it, that none
of these purchases can last beyond the short duration of my frail life? and how
little security have I that my death shall not be ere the next Morning?
Secondly, How great a trouble yet have I had all my life for this trifling and
uncertain reward? the gain was a shadow, but have I not thereby lost my good
name, or my health, my time, and my parts, the love of my best friends, and the
hopes of Gods favor? Have not these Sins hindered my Prayers, disquieted my
Conscience, set my Neighbors against me, and filled my ways with losses,
crosses, mischiefs and evil Accidents? Have they not often made me ridiculous
and base, hated and distrusted, and left me full of fears and sad expectations,
making my life uneasy, and my death far more bitter and more terrible?
Thirdly, But these are but the beginnings of sorrow; For is it not as sure as
God is true, that if I persist in them, I shall lose all my interest in my only
Savior? forfeit all my hopes of Heaven? and sell my title to the glorious
Kingdom which is full of ravishing and endless pleasures, and all abundance of
whatsoever heart can wish? And besides this insupportable loss, shall not my
Soul be condemned in the last dreadful judgment, and cast into the Region of
horror and darkness, anguish and torments that have no abatement, nor no end?
Why then, Oh my Soul will thou buy these vanities so dear? and be so abused by
thy Enemies, so ungrateful to thy dying Redeemer, and so mischievous and cruel
to thy self? Will thou ever be so foolish and so desperate to commit the like
again? Say then, O my Soul, I abhor and renounce these accursed delusions,
being almost enraged at my self that I have been cheated with them so long; My
reason is convinced, and my will persuaded, that thy ways are the Right:
Therefore, O Lord incline, etc.

. 10. Secondly, To engage our minds to all the Duties of Religion and Piety,
Justice, and Charity, that we may unalterably choose them, Let every one of us
meditate,

First, Why should I be backward to vow my obedience to the Laws of God? Are
they any thing else but a method of living well and wisely, free from fears and
injury? Do they not teach me to bear my self so that I may win the favor of
God and good men, and be safe in the best, and happy in the worst condition?
Can I wish my dearest Friend, or my own Soul, a greater felicity than to be
meek and patient, grateful and contented, temperate and industrious, just and
bountiful, to converse with God, rejoice with Angels, to imitate the Saints,
follow the blessed Jesus, and to seek Everlasting Joy? Secondly, Does God
require any thing impossible, unjust or unreasonable? Am I to bind my self to
any more than that which my Judgment and my Conscience (when I am serious) tell
me it is fit and expedient for me to do, although it had never been commanded?
Is it any more than that which all the wisest and best men, the friends of God
and the Darlings of Heaven have done with the greatest delight and pleasure?
and therefore it is the only proof of a generous and noble Spirit. Thirdly, Is
not my God the best of all Masters? who covers the infirmities, and strengthens
the weaknesses of his Servants? Can I fail to please him who begets the desire
and enables for the performance? and makes the way familiar and easy, pleasant
and inviting, and yet where there is a hearty endeavor does make many
abatements, and accept the will for the deed, Quia voluit, etiamsi non valuit
adimplere. 2 Cor. 8.12.
and who begins his assistances early, and continues them till he has
perfected this excellent work? Fourthly, Finally shall I not be rewarded with a
glorious Crown in Heaven, for being so wise as to choose to be happy on Earth?
Is not this the sure way to the enjoyment of God, the Society of Jesus, and the
Fellowship of glorified Saints and blessed Souls? to Eternal Peace,
never-ceasing Joy, to the most perfect and complete felicity which shall last
for ever, though the trouble of gaining it be but short, and transitory? Be
wise therefore Oh my Soul! and easily persuaded to choose thine own happiness;
And say, I desire and long to be acquainted with these paths of pleasantness, I
choose and love them all. O Lord incline our hearts to keep these Laws. And now
I hope it may be time to bend your knees again, and with a fresh bewailing of
your transgressions, and many acknowledgments of your Conviction, to renounce
and protest against all iniquity; especially, that by which you have been most
apt to fall; and also to vow and engage, that you will lead a holy life; which
you must do most seriously as in the presence of God; And finally looking unto
Jesus the purchaser of Pardon, and the giver of all Grace, most humbly beg the
holy Spirit, that you may be enabled to keep this pious resolution, since it is
your wisdom and happiness never to break it more; to which purpose say, Lord
write all these thy Laws in our hearts we beseech thee. That is, in our
memories and on our affections, that we might not offend against them. Psalm.
119.11. For if his Spirit ingrave them on our Souls, we shall with ease and
pleasure keep and do them. Ezekiel. 36.26. Wherefore let us beg this favor most
earnestly, and let us not doubt of being heard. For this is the first and
greatest part of the new Covenant; God has engaged, He will put his laws in
our minds, and on our hearts will he write them, Jerem. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. And
further, if we so sincerely pray for this grace of Obedience, it will engage
our Heavenly Father still more effectually to grant the last clause, viz. that
our Sins and iniquities he will remember no more.

SECT. IV. Of the two Collects for the King.
. 1. THE Kings Majesty is fitly prayed for after the Commandments, because he
is Custos utriusque Tabulae: and his Example is a great encouragement to the
good, and his Power a terror to the evil, and so may be a great furtherance to
the Observation of the Laws of God. And it does as conveniently precede the
daily Collect, for therein we beg all inward grace, and herein all outward
prosperity for the Church, which is always prosperous under good and happy
Princes. And although we had prayed for the King before, Comp. to the Temple.
yet we are enjoined to do it here again for these Reasons. First, Because the
welfare of the Kings Majesty is of so great and universal concernment to
Religion and the Laws, to Ministers and People, that no one Earthly blessing is
so necessary to be asked, or so advantageous when obtained. Secondly, Because
this is a distinct Office anciently used some hours after Morning Prayer, Vid.
Spar. Rational. p. 239.
and S. Paul seems to Command that we should pray for Kings, in all our
Prayers, and that first of all, 1 Timothy 11.1, 2. as we in this Service do.
Thirdly, Because it was ever the Custom, (not only of the Jews Ezra 6.10:
(...). Joseph. lib. 12. cap 17.
in the time of the Oblation; but also) of the Christians (...). Theoph. in 1 Timothy 2.

Oration pramittitur pro populo, pro Regibus, pro caeteris. Ambr. de Sacr. l. 4.
c. 4. Vid. Aug. Epist. 59. ad Paulin. and Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 2.


in the time of the Celebration of these Mysteries, to supplicate for their
Princes; as all Ancient Liturgies do attest. With unbloody Sacrifices and
Mystical Rites (says Eusebius) we endeavor to obtain the Divine mercy in
order to the common peace, offering up then to God, supplications for the
Church of God, and his Vicegerent the King, for his Interest, and his Children
beloved of God. De vita Constant. l. 4. c. 45. And sure it is prudent to ask
our greatest mercies often, and especially then when by the commemoration of
this All powerful Sacrifice, we may be most likely to prevail. Yet it is not
necessary to disturb the Prayer of Consecration, with this and the following
General Intercession as the Roman Missals do: but is much more conveniently set
here in the first place. I shall only add that these Reasons are given not so
much to satisfy inquiring Curiosity: as to show how reasonable and fit it is,
that we should again fall upon this Duty, with a fresh Devotion. To stir us up
whereunto here is new fuel in these varieties of Forms laid upon the Altar,
which will help us to break forth into holy Flames, if the good Spirit but
please to blow upon us.

The Analysis of the first Collect for the King.
Sect. 2. This Collect has three Parts 1. Of whom we ask [God] dedescribed by
1. His Name, Almighty God
2. His Supremacy, Whose Kingdom is everlasting
3. His Might, and Power infinite,

2. For whom we ask 1. In general for the Church, Have mercy upon the whole
Church,
2. In particular for 1. The King that he may be Pious, intimating 1. The
Cause, And so rule the heart of thy chosen Servant CHARLES our King and
Governor,
2. The Effect, that he (knowing whose Minister he is) may above all things
seek thy honor and glory,

2. The People that they may be loyal showing, 1. The Branches, 1. Fidelity.
And that we and all his Subjects (duly
2. Honor. considering whose Authority he has) may
3. Obedience. faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him

2. The ground of it, in thee and for thee, according to thy Blessed word and
Ordinance,



3. In whose name we ask Through Jesus Christ our Lord, who with thee and the
Holy Ghost lives and reigns, ever one God, World without end, Amen.


A Practical Discourse on this Collect.
. 3. Almighty God whose Kingdom is Everlasting, and Power infinite, have mercy
upon the whole Church. The entrance into this Prayer is a Confession of Gods
Eternal Supremacy, and Omnipotence, in the very words of Scripture, Psalm.
145.13. Dan. 4.34. Psalm. 147.5. thereby to lift up our hearts above the mutable
glory, and limited power of all Earthly Kingdoms, to him that reigns for
ever, and does whatsoever he pleases. Our Princes are many and not suffered to
continue by reason of death, Heb. 7.23. Be they never so great, or so good, so
dear or so useful, they must be taken from us. But our Supreme King is always
one, and Reigns throughout all Ages; So that Gods Church can never want a
Patron, to secure it in all the changes of this World; especially since his
power is as infinite, as his Dominion is endless, and his might has no limits
but his will Deo non posse nolle est, and posse velle. Tertul. in Prax.
. Upon the serious meditation whereof, we may with hope, and cheerful
expectations, ask for the Kings Majesty, who is the Head of this Church, and
for all the Members of the same, For this Everlasting and Almighty King is able
to furnish them all.

. 4. And so rule the Heart of thy chosen Servant CHARLES our King and
Governor, that he (knowing whose Minister he is) may above all things seek thy
honor and glory.] The blessings which are bestowed on the single members of a
Church, are the comfort and advantage only of a few; but if it may please God
to direct the King always to seek his glory, herein he shows mercy to the whole
Church, and blesses all the Nation at once. For the Princes Piety does put
such discouragement upon Vice, and cast so great a reputation and luster upon
Religion, that good men out of love will follow, and evil men for fear will
pretend to comply with, so excellent an example. And thus virtue becomes
public, encouraged and prevailing, but wickedness infamous and obscure, and
loses many of its followers; which is curiously expressed in the 72. Psalm.
Nor is there any one Earthly thing that the truly pious Christian does more
heartily desire. We beg with daily Supplications (says Lanctantius concerning
the most Excellent Emperor Constantine) that the Divine Majesty will always
preserve you, whom he has chosen to preserve us all, and that he will inspire
you with a heart always to persevere in the love of God, which will be
advantageous, and salutary to all, and will procure your endless happiness, and
the peace of all your Subjects. Lact. instit. in fine. Kings are the choicest
of Gods Servants, and in Scripture peculiarly styled his chosen, Psalm. 89.3.19.
So that we may presume to beseech him, to bestow more than ordinary Grace, upon
our dear Sovereign; whom God has so wonderfully restored to us, and so
mercifully preserved over us, that no Prince in the World has had such signal
testimonies of the favors of Heaven to him. We may pray therefore with much
hope, and we ought to beg with great Devotion, that God would rule over him,
who governs us; and guide him, by whose Counsels we are ordered, in such wise,
that he may ever have in his Eye the Power and Goodness of his great Master,
and always (know, that is,) consider (...). Romans 13.4. (...) v. 6.
by whom he is deputed, and bear himself continually as the Vicegerent of God,
by whom all Kings Reign: and in all his actings and Consultations that he may
aim at nothing so much, as the advancing of the Divine Glory, from whence all
his honor is derived. And surely herein our gracious King will firmly
establish his own Throne, and make all his Subjects happy. For that Wisdom and
Piety, Justice and Equity, which does set for Gods glory, and make so many join
in magnifying him, that has set so excellent a Prince over us, will be both
his and our extraordinary benefit. We will therefore ever Pray that our
Sovereign Liege may be above all concerned to continue his care, to defend the
Church, and execute Justice, that we may be happy under his shadow, and
after-Generations may call him blessed; to which every loyal heart and pious
Soul will most affectionately say, Amen.

. 5. And that we and all his Subjects (duly considering whose Authority he
has) may faithfully serve, honor and humbly obey him, in thee, and for thee,
according to thy blessed word and Ordinance.] We must not only look at the
Kings duty, but also be mindful of our own: For the happiness of a Nation
consists, not only in a Religious Prince, but also in Obedient people; And
therefore we are taught in the next place, to pray that not only we but all
that are under his Majesty's Dominion, may be loyal and faithful, humble and
obedient, revering his Authority, observing his Laws, and opposing all his and
our Enemies; That we may serve him with our Estates and Persons (if need be)
and never desert his interest, either for cost or peril: which Prayer we must
not only make, with respect to our temporal felicity; but as duly considering
that the Almighty and invisible Governor of the World, does not Rule us
immediately by himself, but by Kings to whom he has delegated his Authority;
So that they bear his Name, and act by his Power; Exodus 22.28. Psalm. 82.1.6.
Dii i. e. Judices qui potestatem Dei exercent. Ab. Ez.
And such as Rebel Quicunque obfirmat faciem suaem contra Regem, perinde est
ac si obfirmaret faciem contra Divinam Majestatem. Midr. Cohel.

(...). Clem. Constable.


do fight against God, Act. 5.39. oppose his word, and resist his Ordinance,
Romans 13.2. Wherefore we desire grace to obey, not only for fear of wrath, but
for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 11.13. that is, for Conscience sake, Romans 13.5. And
this will produce the firmest and readiest obedience to all the Commands of our
Governors; when we observe them as subordinate to the Laws of God, Ephesians. 6.1.
[in the Lord -- Sed intra limits Disciplinae. Tertul.

Quia -- poterant aliquid imperare perversum, ideo adjunxit in Domino. Hieron.
in Ephesians. 6.

Superiorum imperia Dura Declinanda sensim, and relinquenda magis sunt quam
Respuenda. Aul. Gell. Noct. At. l. 2. c. 7.


] as far as they do not contradict the plain will of the Almighty, and [for the
Lord] Romans 13.1. that is because of his Authority vested in them. And thus the
best Christian will be the best Subject. Let us therefore most fervently beg
that we may all be conscientiously obedient; and if we desire that heartily, we
shall not only obtain grace from God to be so, but this Petition is an evidence
we are already loyal. And were it sincerely put up by all, there could be no
Treason nor Rebellion harbored in our Breasts: but we should live in peace,
and please God, adorn the Gospel, Tit. 11.10. oblige the King, and declare to
all the World, that it is not only the Duty, but the Interest of Princes, to
defend the Religion of this Church, which makes the best men, and loyallest
Subjects in the World.

. 6. Through Jesus Christ our Lord, who with thee, and the Holy Ghost, lives
and reigns ever one God, World without end, Amen.] It was a false and
malicious calumny of the Jews, that the Kingdom of Jesus was inconsistent with
the Empire of Caesar; for Obedience to Kings was never so enjoined and asserted
before, as it was by Christ and his Apostles. And he himself has told us that
he is a King, but no Rival to the Monarchs of this Earth; For his Throne is in
Heaven, And his proper Subjects, Saints and Angels; John 18.36. (...). Eusebius.
He reigns, but it is with the Father and the Holy Ghost for ever. For his sake
therefore we may pray for the welfare of Temporal Kingdoms, who has power both
to dispense them on Earth, Math. 28.18. and to command blessings from Heaven on
them; especially on such Princes who are the Guardians of his beloved Church,
who own his Supremacy, and daily confess and praise Him, that lives and
Reigns for ever.

The Paraphrase of the first Collect.
. 7. Almighty God] who art always ready to help us, since thou art that King
[whose Kingdom is Everlasting, and] All sufficient to relieve us since thou art
in [Power infinite] We beg not single or small Mercies of so great a Majesty,
but beseech thee to [Have mercy upon] all the Members of [thy whole Church] And
especially that part thereof planted in these Nations, which will be truly
happy, if it may please thee so graciously to direct the Counsels [and so]
constantly to [rule the heart of thy chosen] and anointed [ Servant CHARLES by
thy Providence, and his undoubted right [our King and Governor: That He]
always remembering his Authority to flow from thee, and [knowing whose Minister]
and Vicegerent [he is] even the Deputy of thy Heavenly Majesty [may above] and
before [all things seek] by defending Religion, executing Justice, and showing
mercy, to advance [thy honor and glory] for he in so doing, will engage us all
to praise thee, for setting so wise and gracious a Prince over us. [And] to
complete his and our happiness; Grant [that we, and all] others whom thou have
placed in the condition of [his Subjects] seriously and [duly considering] that
for thy sake [whose Authority he hath] we owe him all duty and Allegiance [may
faithfully serve] him with our Prayers, Lives, and Fortunes, and also [honour]
him in his person, with our hearts [and humbly obey him] in his Laws by our
whole Conversation, so far as is possible [in thee] by the help of thy grace
[and for thee] and for thy sake, by a conscientious and exact Obedience
[according to] the Commands of [thy blessed word] the appointment [and
Ordinance] of thy Supreme Providence. O Lord let us be so happy to obtain this
[through] the Merits of our great High Priest [Iesus Christ] who has enjoined
this Obedience, and is [our Lord] who sets up Christian Princes on Earth to
rule under him, [who with thee] the Father [and the Holy Ghost] most gloriously
[liveth and reigneth] in Heaven [ever one God] in that [World] which is
[without end] and yet not forgetting us that are his Members, in this
changeable and uncertain World, for his sake be it so. [Amen.]

Of the second Collect for the King.
. 8. This Prayer is only added to help our Devotion, with a greater variety,
but being as to the main so little different from the former, it shall suffice
to remark, that the Petitions are here grounded on a never failing Matthew. 24.35.
Foundation, the word of God, viz. Prove. 21.1. The Kings heart is in the hand
of the Lord; as the Rivers of Waters, he turns it whithersoever he will.
Although the Kings heart be unsearchable to men, Prove. 25.3. and his purposes
seldom to be altered by any of his Inferiors; Yet Almighty God has showed many
instances Ezra 1.1. and 7.28. and 9.9. Neh. 1.11. Dan. 3.28. Rev. 17.17.
that he can change the Decrees of the greatest Monarchs, and as the Gardener
See Hammond on Psalm. 1.3.
by opening certain Sluices, can direct the streams of his Watercourse to
which part of his Plantation he pleases: So can the King of Kings, direct the
Counsels, and turn the designs of all mortal Princes, to his own glory, and the
prosperity of his Church. To increase our wealth at home, to secure us against
foreign Enemies, and defend us in the Exercise of the true Religion, is the
care of our gracious King, the Prayer of all good Subjects, and the end of
government it self, See 1 Timothy 2.2. Vt placidam and quietam vitam degamus cum
omni pietate, and honestate. Quid enim aliud est imperium nisi cura salutis
alienae? Ammian. Mercellin.
and therefore let us rejoice, that we have such a God to ask it of, and such a
Prince to ask it for, whose endeavors are a great encouragement to this
Petition. What is further requisite the following Analysis and Paraphrase will
supply.

The Analysis of the second Collect.
Sect. 9. This Collect has four Parts. 1. The Compellation Almighty and
Everlasting God
2. The ground of this Petition being God^ word concerning 1. His power over
Kings, W^ are taught by thy Holy Word that the hearts of Kings ^re ^n thy hands,
2. His Providence about them, and that thou do dispose and turn them as it
seems best to the godly Wisdom,

3. The Petition it self, and in it 1. For what is made, We humbly beseech thee
so to dispose and govern the heart.
2. In behalf of whom, of CHARLES thy Servant our King and Governor,
3. To what end, viz. 1. Gods glory, that in all his thoughts, words, and
works, he may ever seek thy honor and glory,
2. The Nations good, And study to preserve thy People committed to his charge,
in Wealth, Peace, and Godliness,


4. The Motives to make it effectual taken 1. From Gods mercy Grant this O
merciful Father,
2. Christ's merits, for thy dear Sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.



The Paraphrase of the second Collect.
. 10. O [Almighty] Lord [and everlasting God] who art infinitely powerful and
ever the same, We cheerfully call upon thee for our gracious Prince, because
[we are taught by] thy Spirit in [thy Holy Word, that the hearts] of all men,
yea even the Counsels and purposes [of Kings] which seem of all other the most
unsearchable and unalterable, yet [are in thy hands] and at thy Command: So
that thou can direct them to any good, or restrain them from any evil; [and
that thou dost] by thy overruling Providence [dispose and turn them] as the
Rivers of Waters: Giving such event to every design, [as it seems best to
thy] divine and [godly wisdom] by which thou do manage all the World.
Wherefore [we humbly beseech thee] thou great Moderator of Heaven and Earth [so
to dispose] the Counsels [and govern the heart of] our gracious Sovereign
[CHARLES thy Servant our] just and rightful [King and Governour] as may best
conduce to his and our mutual comfort. To which end let thy mighty power cause
[that in all his] purposes and [thoughts, words, and works, he may] most
religiously and earnestly [ever seek] to advance [thy honor and glory] by
defending thy Gospel, administering Justice, and making it his constant care
[and study to preserve] all his Subjects, who are [thy people] and by thee
[committed to his charge] in a most flourishing prosperity, that they may
increase [in wealth] and abound in plenty, continue in [peace] and dwell safely
in the profession of Religion, and in the practice of virtue [and godliness]
throughout all Generations. [Grant this] we beseech thee [O merciful Father] of
thine own gracious nature, especially now we plead in this Sacrament [for thy
dear Sons sake] and in remembrance of the Death of [Iesus Christ our Lord] and
our Redeemer. [Amen.]

SECT. V. Of the Epistle, the Gospel, and the Creed.
. 1. WHen to these Prayers for outward Prosperity we have added the Collect of
the Day (of which see Comp. to the Temple) as a Petition for internal grace,
and a fit preparation for the following Portions of Scripture, out of which it
is taken, and to which it commonly does refer: Then follows the Reading of
the Epistle and Gospel: And it is evident, that long before the dividing of the
Bible into Chapters and Verses, it was the Custom both of the Greek and Latin
Church, to read some select portions of the plainest, and most practical parts
of the New Testament, at the Celebration of the Eucharist, in imitation of the
Jewish Mode of reading the History of the Passover before the eating of the
Paschal Lamb. Buxtorf. Lexic. Chald. So that we find mention of reading the
Apostolical and Evangelical Writings in this Office, not only in the Liturgies
of St. James, St. Clemens, St. Basil, etc. but in Just. Martyr, Tertullian, St.
Augustine, and others of the Fathers; who most of them have their Homilies
still extant upon them. And Strabo affirms they were appointed by the first
Successors of the Apostles. Walafrid. Strabo, de reb. Eccl. c. 22.
For the Counsel of Valentia Sacrosancta Evangelia ante munerum illationem in
Missa Catechumenorum, in ordine lectionum post Apostolum legantur. Council. Val.
Can. 1. Anno circa 500. post Christum.
did only fix them to that place wherein now they stand, before the Offertory;
that so the Catechumens might have the benefit to hear them. For the particular
choice of them, they are the very Quintessence of the New Testament. And first,
The Epistles, are either plain and pressing Exhortations to some necessary
Christian Duties, or rare discoveries of Gods mercy, or gracious promises of
Pardon and Assistance. And they are first read in remembrance of that first
Mission of the Apostles, when they went before their Masters face to every City
whither Christ would come, Luke 10.1. that the Epistle may be as the Harbinger
for the Gospel. And sure it is fit, these being the words of the Servants, that
the last place and greatest honor be reserved to the words of their and our
Master. Secondly, For the Gospel, it is either some remarkable History of
Christ's Life, or Death, some Eminent Miracle, or some curious Parable and part
of his Divine Sermons; which is therefore last read, because the Epistles do
usually contain instruction in the Mysteries of Salvation, but the Gospel
presents the Example of Jesus, to the imitation whereof all our knowledge is
but subservient, Ephesians. 4.13. And to this may be referred surely that ancient
custom of standing up at the reading of the Holy Gospel, so frequently enjoined
by the forementioned Liturgies, Legitur Evangelium stantibus omnibus cum timore
and reverentia. Liturg St. Basil. Stantes audiamus S. Evangelium. Lit. St.
Chrysostom. Vide etiam Sozom hist. l. 9. c. 19. Constit. Clem. l. 2. Canon. Apostol.
61.
and so universally practiced among Christians, both to express an
extraordinary reverence to our Lords own words, and also that we may show our
selves ready to obey, by standing in a posture fit presently to execute his
commands, and to follow him whithersoever he calls us. The Gospel has such
affinity to Christ, that it is properly the word of God, and bears the name of
our Lord. Heb. 4.12, 13. 1 Cor. 1.24. To receive Christ, and to entertain his
word with Faith, is all one. Finally to believe the Gospel is called eating
Christ's flesh, and drinking his blood, John 6. and is a kind of spiritual
Communion; Wherefore it is fitly read before this Sacrament, and at the Altar,
even when there is no Celebration, because we must hearken to it with the like
reverence, receive it with the like joy, and return it with the like gratitude,
as if Jesus himself was sacramentally, or visibly present with us. For thus the
Greek Liturgy orders. Sapientiam and sermonem Dei hunc esse omnes credentes,
clamamus, Gloria tibi Domine. S. Germ. Theor. Et Liturg. S. Chrysostom. Gloria tibi
domine dicant omnes.
And the Ancients used to say before the Gospel, Glory be to thee O God, and
afterward, Thanks be to God for his holy Gospel (tanquam Christo praesenti) as
if Christ was then before their Eyes. Do you but endeavor to hear it with
Faith, so as you may obey and imitate, and then you shall have great reason to
break forth into the Divine Praises. If you remember the sad tidings of
Condemnation, which the Law lately sounded in your Ears; Oh how welcome must
the prospect of so sweet a Savior, and the news of so gracious a Pardon be
unto you! As for the particular use to be made of these Holy Portions of
Scripture; I refer the Reader to the Comp. to the Temple, Sect. of the
Lessons,. 8. having no opportunity here to pursue that subject.

Sect. 2. Of the Creed in the Communion Office.

. 2. As the Apostles Creed is placed immediately after the daily Lessons, so is
this after the Epistle and Gospel, since it is founded on the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, and herein we follow St. Paul's Method, Romans 10.10.
That as in the Gospel Quia ut per S. Evangelium cord credatur ad justitiam,
per Symbolum ore Confessio fiat ad salutem. D. Bern.
we have (...) the heart believed unto Righteousness, so in the Creed, we
confess with our Mouths unto Salvation: This Creed was composed in the second
general Council, at Constantinople, probably by the famous Nazianzen, An. Dom.
383. in the time of Gratian and Theodosius the Great, approved by 150. Bishops,
the chief of which seems to be Cyril of Jerusalem, and confirmed by the
Imperial Authority: it is sometimes called the Nicene Creed, because it differs
very little from that which was composed in the first general Council at Nice,
nor did this Council intend it for a new Creed, Custodiendam esse fidem 318.
Patrum qui apud Nicaeam, etc. Can. 1. Council. Constant. 1.
but only a fuller explication of some Articles, in order to a more particular
confutation of the Arrians, the Macedonian, Photinian, and Eunomian Heretics.
And this Creed has ever since been received and used in the Liturgies of both
Eastern and Western Churches; so that although we had the shorter Creed before
in the Morning Office, yet we here again repeat this. First with good
Authority. Secondly, For weighty Reasons. First, For Authority. To omit the
Command of God in the Case of the Passover, Exodus 12.43.48. That no stranger or
uncircumcised should eat thereof, we have clear evidence of the Primitive
practice, who never celebrated this Mystery till they had solemnly excluded
Quibus vescentes confessionem fidei suae addebant. Ambr. de Sacr. Diaconus
inter precandum clamat, Nullus Catechumenus, nullus auditor, nullus infidelis,
nullus Haereticus. Constit. Apostol. quod probat Sozom. Hist. Eccles. (...). l.
6. c. 25. (...). Dionys. Eccl. Hier.
all unbaptized, and unbelieving Persons, so that they never administered it to
any but those of the right Faith, (...). Justin. Mart. Apol.
using this as a Touchstone to try who might, and who might not, stay to
communicate, so that by the third Council of Toledo, about 600. years after
Christ it was positively commanded, That every Communicant should (after the
manner of the Eastern Church) repeat this Creed with an audible voice, that so
they may both show what Faith they profess, and that by right believing their
hearts may be purified and prepared for this holy Sacrament. Can. 2. ap.
Caranz. sum. Secondly, As for Reason we may assert the fitness of it upon these
Accounts. First, Since in this Sacrament we are to renew our Baptismal vow, the
Foundation whereof is to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, we
must not be admitted, till we have declared that we stand firm in the belief of
these Articles. Secondly, Because the Eucharist is the highest Mystery of
Christianity, and the sublimest privilege of a believer on Earth. The
Communicants, must not only hold the general Creed, but show themselves free
from every Heresy, and profess that they are in the strictest League of Union
with the Holy Catholic Church. Thirdly, Since this Ordinance is the highest
exercise and noblest Trial of our Faith, wherein we are to raise up our minds
above the sensible objects, to believe that which our bodily Eyes do not see,
(...). Chrysostom. hom. 2. in 2 Timoth.
and to receive all the benefits thereof by Faith alone; it is hugely necessary
that we should first train this grace by employing it on spiritual objects,
that in this divine office it may make a better flight.

. 3. How to improve the Creed, and to recite it every day with a new devotion
may be learned in the first Part, Compan. to the Temple. Disc. of Creed, Sect.
1. etc.
only we shall briefly remark the necessity, and the manner of using it aright
in order to the Holy Communion. First, You may remember that this Sacrament
does necessarily presuppose a firm and affectionate belief of every one of
these Principles, and is a superstructure raised upon this Foundation, so that
the least doubt or hesitancy in these main Articles will make the Soul lame in
the whole Performance; nor can you be a worthy receiver unless you do fully
believe the Majesty of the Father whom you have offended, the Divinity,
Incarnation, Passion and Resurrection of the Son, by whom you sue for Pardon,
as also the divine nature and sanctifying efficacy of the Holy Ghost, whereby
you hope to be enabled to keep your Covenant, and so in all the rest;
Especially since this Communion is the peculiar badge and cognizance of
Christians, wherein we do avow the Lord Jesus to be our Master, and publicly
own our selves Disciples of his Religion, for so both Jews and Gentiles by
eating of their several Sacrifices, did declare they were Servants of that
Deity to whom the Sacrifice was presented, 1 Cor. 10.16. And thus (as Athenaeus
tells us) the various Sects of Philosophy, had their Symposia and Commemoration
Feasts, wherein they did remember their Founder, and profess themselves
Abettors of his Opinions; in like manner do we protest our Faith in Jesus by
this divine Festival, and therefore it is necessary that we do first repeat the
proper Articles of this Religion, as the Rules by which we resolve to live, and
as such infallible truths for which (if need require) we will not refuse to
die. Secondly, Let us then devoutly say over this our Creed before the
Sacrament especially, and as we go along entertain every Article not only with
an assent of the understanding, but with the consent of our Will, and the
compliance of our affections, being not only confident of their truth because
God has revealed them, but delighted with their excellency, because they tend
to make us holy and happy; and then we shall believe them with a persuasion
stronger than can be built upon the Scholastical Demonstration; we shall adhere
to them closely and for ever, because they are amiable, and lead us to God and
immortality: Let us not think our Faith sufficient till we so believe in Jesus
as our Lord and Savior, that we are moved thereby to repent of our sins, and
cast our Souls on him for Pardon, and then we have spiritually communicated
already, we have obtained the benefits and perfected the designs of this
Sacrament, and done that internally and nakedly by Faith, which is more
solemnly effected in the Mysteries themselves. To which there is no better
preparation, than such a repetition of our Holy Faith.

The Paraphrase of this Creed.
Sect. 4. [I] confess with my mouth, and [believe] with my heart [in one God] a
pure and infinite Spirit, distinguished into three Persons; the first of which
is God [the Father] declared to be [Almighty] as he is the [Maker of Heaven and
Earth] Creator of the whole World [and all things] contained in any part
thereof, both [visible] as all bodily substances on Earth [and invisible] as
spiritual beings and Angels in Heaven.

[And] I also believe firmly [in one Lord Jesus Christ] the second Person of
the glorious Trinity, who is not as Angels or Men the adopted, but [the only
begotten Son of God] not created in time, [but begotten of his Father] from all
Eternity [before all] Ages of the Celestial or Terrestrial [Worlds]: Of the
same nature with his Father [God] begotten [of God] after a mysterious and
spiritual manner, as [Light] is kindled [of Light] not diminishing his Fathers
substance, and yet being [very God of very God] derived not as the Creatures,
for he was [begotten] and [not made] and is equal to God [being of one] nature,
and [substance with the Father] and of the same dignity and power; for he is
that Eternal Word [by whom all things were made] out of nothing.

I believe also it was this very Son of God [who] passing by the fallen Angels
[for us Men and for] the effecting of [our Salvation] and deliverance out of
the state of sin and death, in which we miserably lay [came down] unto this
Earth [from Heaven] and left his glory, for he took our nature [and was
incarnate] by assuming a body of flesh, like ours, only without sin because it
was conceived [by the] overshadowing of the [Holy Ghost] in the Womb [of the
Virgin Mary] so though he was still very God, yet he took the form of a servant
[And was made Man] living holily and working Miracles; till at last he was
unjustly condemned [and was crucified also] with intolerable torments, to
satisfy Gods justice [for us] and all Mankind, who were become liable to
Damnation: which cruel Death he endured [under Pontius Pilate] the Roman
President, by whose unjust sentence [he suffered] till he was really dead, [and
was buried, and] yet when he had paid the full price of our Redemption [The
third day] after his Crucifixion, by his divine power [he rose again] to life;
[according to] all those Prophecies and Types of him, before recorded in [the
Scriptures.] After which he conversed with his Disciples forty days [and
ascended] in their sight [into Heaven] where he is restored to all his glory
[and sits at the right hand of] God [the Father] interceeding for us. [And
he shall come again] at the end of the World [with glory] and Millions of
Saints and Angels [to judge] all men according to their works: [both the quick]
then living [and the dead] who departed never so long since; whereupon the
wicked shall be condemned to endless Torments, and the righteous received to
immortal joy, by the same Jesus [whose Kingdom] shall then fully begin, but
[shall have no end] but remain for ever, and ever.

And I believe] most firmly [in the Holy Ghost] the third person of the
glorious Trinity, who is also very God [the Lord and giver of] grace and all
spiritual [Life, who] is not made nor begotten, but [proceedeth from the Father
and the Son] yet is not less in dignity, as [who with the Father and the Son]
in all Offices of the Church [together] and in the same manner [is worshipped
and glorified] being the inditer of holy Scriptures, and he [who spoke by the
Prophets] in the Old Testament, and by the Apostles in the New.

And] finally [I believe] that the whole body of Christian people holding the
right Faith do make [one Catholick] and Universal, True, [and Apostolic
Church] in which Society [I acknowledge] there are great privileges, viz. [One
Baptis^] instituted by Christ, not only as a sign of, but a means [for the
remission] of all those [sins] which we are guilty of when we enter into this
Covenant. Wherefore being my self baptized, I hope for pardon and grace in this
life [And I look for] and expect, that my body though after Death corrupted and
turned to dust, shall be restored to life in [the Resurrection of the Dead] at
the last day, and I hope then for a Portion in glory [and the life]
Everlasting, and that I shall Reign in the blissful Kingdom [of the World]
which is [to come] after this is utterly dissolved, [Amen.] Lord, be it unto me
according to my Faith, Amen.

. 4. The Sermon which is here to follow, comes not within the Method we have
proposed, so that we shall only note, that it was appointed by Antiquity there
should be Sermons Council. 6. Constant. can. 19. Council. Mogunt. can. 25.
or Homilies Council. Vasense. can. 4. an. Christi 460.
every Lords Day; especially when the Lords Supper was Administered; Acts 20.7.
Post lectionem legis and prophetarum, Epistolarum, etc. Ordinatus-alloquatur
populum verbis Exhortatoriis. Constable. Apost. c. 4. Leo. 1. Sermon. 2. de Pasch.
Aug. confess. l. 3. cap. 3.
and surely this is the fittest place, since the Sermon is either an
explication of some Article of the Creed preceding, or an exhortation to the
following duty of Charity: But I do earnestly wish that when there is a
Communion, the Minister would suit his Discourse to that occasion; for to treat
of another subject then (although otherwise never so good) will too much divert
the minds of those, whose careful preparation has composed their thoughts for
this Ordinance, whereas if the Sermon be chiefly tending to raise them still
into a higher strain of Devotion for their communicating, it will be a word
spoken in due season, Prove. 15.23. and rarely improve their Souls, then made
tender by Repentance, and much more apt to receive impressions from all
representations of the love of Christ, and the means of our Union with him: Yet
withal the people must now hear with extraordinary attention, and receive with
great affection these holy Instructions and Exhortations, drawn from the Word
of God, to whom they are now about to approach in the nearest manner, and so
shall they find a great benefit also from this duty; but if they desire more
particular directions, see Comp. to the Temple Of the Lessons,. 4, 5, 6, etc.

SECT. VI. Of the Offertory and Sentences.
. 1. WE have now professed our Faith to God, and next we must give some
testimony to our Brethren, that it is not a dead Faith, but such an one as
works by love, Gal. 5.6. and is made perfect by Charity, Jam. 2.22. (...).
Ignat. ep. ad Ephesians.
Now there are three ways to exercise and express our Charity, 1. Dando, by
giving [here] 2. Orando by interceeding [in the Prayer for the Church
Militant.] 3. Remittendo, by forgiving [in the general warning.] The first and
most natural Act of Charity is to relieve the wants of the necessitous, with
somewhat which we can spare; and this the Apostle advises us to do every Lords
day, 1 Cor. 16.1. and by his Authority our Church invites us to give Alms so
often, whether there be a Communion or no: For this is now the only real
offering which we Christians can make, and is instead of those vast oblations
and costly sacrifices which the Jews did ever join with their Prayers, and it
is the proper means of acknowledging Gods Bounty to us, and supreme Authority
over us; wherefore Alms ought to accompany all our solemn supplications. And if
the Jews at this day do (instead of the daily Sacrifice which now they cannot
offer) give a small piece of money every day when they pray, much more ought
Christians so to do; Buxtorf. Synag. Jud. cap. 5.
to whom greater love is showed, and of whom larger Charity is required, and
yet we may complain with St. Basil, that, We know some who will fast and pray,
sigh and groan, yea and do all acts of Religion which cost them nothing, but
will not give one farthing to the Poor; what benefit is there (says he) of all
the rest of their Devotion? D. Basil. hom. 7. in Math. 19.
It is well observed that our Savior has enclosed Prayer between Alms and
Fasting, Math. 6. and therefore they are called its two Wings, without which it
will scarce fly so high as the Throne of God: However it is very necessary we
should give somewhat with all our more solemn Prayers, and yet because it is
nothing worth, if it be not given freely, Modicam unusquisque stipem Menstruo
die, vel cum velit, and si modo velit, and si modo possit apponit, nam nemo
compellitur, sed sponte confert. Tertul. Apol. cap. 39.
We do (as the Ancient Church did) persuade, and not command it from the
people, that they may have an opportunity of a Free-will-offering, not that
they should think it is left to their liberty by God whether they will give or
no; and yet upon this false persuasion, and the abuse of our Exhortation, this
Apostolical and excellent custom of Weekly Collections, is now generally (to
the grief of all good Christians) omitted and wholly laid aside.

. 2. The oblation of Alms which is at other times commendable, is at the time
of this Sacrament of love necessary, and by no means to be omitted, because our
Savior (with respect no doubt to the Holy Table, as Mr. Mede excellently
proves, Diatr. Holy Altar Sect. 2. p. 18. etc.) directs us to bring our gift
hither to the Christian Altar, Math. 5.23, 24. and St. Paul has joined the
Sacrifice of Alms to that of Eucharist, Heb. 13.15, 16. which our Savior
himself first practiced; for his custom of giving Alms at the Passover, made
his Disciples mistake his words to him that bare the bag, John 13.29. and it is
very probable, that at the time of receiving this Sacrament, were all those
large donations of Houses, land and money made, Act. 2.44, 45, 46. For when
those first Converts were all united to one Christ, Vt quibus erat unae fides,
esset una substantia, and quibus communis erat Christus, communis esset and
sumptus: Aug. de verb. Dom. Sermon. ^7.
and to one another in this Feast of love, their very Souls were mingled, and
then they cheerfully renounced their Qui animo animaque miscemur nihil de rei
communicatione dubitamus. Tertul. Apol.
propriety, and easily distributed their goods, among thos^ to whom they had
given their hearts before. It was only indeed in the Church of Jerusalem, where
they had all things common, but in other places where propriety was retained,
it is certain there were Collections every Sunday, 1 Cor. 16.1. that is, every
time they received this Holy Communion; and besides the money contributed for
the use of the absent, it appears, that every Communicant, who was able,
brought something and offered at the Altar to furnish out a Love-Feast (like
those Festival Solemnities of Families and Kindred among the Jews and Romans 1 Samuel 20.6. Valor. Maxim. lib. 2. cap. 1. and Ovid. Proxima cognati dixere
Charistia chari,

Et venit ad socios turba propinqua Deos. Fast. 2.


) and to make one common Table, where (after the Receiving) Rich and poor might
lovingly Feast together, 1 Cor. 11.21. Hither they brought Bread, Wine, Oil,
Milk, and Honey, and of all kinds of Gods Creatures, and presenting them with
great Devotion did agnize him Lord of all, as Irenaeus shows at large, the
footsteps of which pious Custom remained till the Council of Gangr. Can. 11.
and perhaps much longer; Et populu^ dat oblationes suas, i. e. panem and vinum.
Rubric. in offic. R^m. Vide and Raban M^ur. de instit. Cler. l.
although the most usual offering was money. Theodoret observes, Theodoret,
hist. tripart. l. 4. cap 17.
that Theodosius the Emperor when the time was come to offer, arose and
presented his oblation with his own hands. It was not determined how much any
man should give, but all men were exhorted, Oblationes quae in Altaria
consecrantur offerte, e^ubescere debet homo idoneus si de aliena oblatione
communicaverit. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 251.
and enjoined to offer 2. Council. Matiscon. can. 4.
something according to their ability, which if any neglected, the Fathers
censured them as unworthy Communicants. Dominicum celebrare te credis qui in
Dominicum sine sacrificio venis? D. Cypr.
Our penurious and uncharitable Age may blush at the liberal offerings of our
own Pious Ancestors, who Crowned the Christian Altars at these Sacraments, with
rich Vessels, and costly Vestments; and offered at the Holy Table Deeds, and
noble Donations, of Lands and Revenues, Charters of great privileges and
immunities, and all that might testify their love to Jesus and his Church, nay
in the very times of Persecution, they offered in such abundance, that it
appears by Tertullian, and St. Cyprian, these very oblations sufficed, 1. To
maintain the Bishops, Priests and Deacons; Secondly, To provide all necessaries
for divine Administrations; Thirdly, To feed and sustain Orphans, Widows, and
all the Christian poor, yea some of the Heathen also sometimes. I might add to
the reproof of our slackness, that in those days it was esteemed a great
punishment, fit to be inflicted on Murderers, Prostitutes, Oppressors,
Excommunicate Council. Elliberit. can. 28.
and malicious persons, Council. 4. Carthag. can. 93, 94.
to deny them the liberty of giving Alms at the Holy Table, by which they
thought themselves deprived of the Communion of Saints, though many now so
lightly inflict this upon themselves.

. 3. But if neither the desire of the present, nor the Example of the Primitive
Church will open your hearts, we shall in the next place set before you those
choice and most pertinent Sentences, in which God himself does by Precept and
Argument, Threatenings and Promises stir you up to this necessary Duty: but
because they are here set down for the most part as they stand in the Order of
Scripture, let the following Scheme show you the natural method of these rare
Collections.

The Analysis or Method of the Sentences.
These Sentences of Scripture are either 1. Instructions showing us, 1. The end
of this duty, viz. the glory of God, Math. 5.16.
2. The objects 1. Ministers which is proved, 1. By Similitudes 1 Corinthians. 9.7.
2. By Reason, 1 Cor. 9.11.
3. By Example, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
4. By Precept, Galat. 6.6, 7.

2. Poor, especially Christians Galat. 6.10.

3. The manner of giving, 1. As to the quantity of the gift, 2 Corinthians. 9.6.
Tobias 4.8, 9.
2. As to the disposition of the giver, Corinth. 9.7.


2. Injunctions taken from, 1. A positive and strict command, 1 Timothy 6.17, 8, 9.
2. A plain and cogent Example, S. Luke 19.8.

3. Exhortations as well in the 1. Affirmative because it is, 1. So reasonable
in it self S. Math. 7.12. 1 Timothy 6.6, 7.
2. So acceptable to God, Hebrews 13.16.
3. So profitable to us, 1. Here Tobias 4.7. Psalm 41.1.
2 Hereafter Mat. 6.19, 20. Hebrews 6.10. Proverbs 19.17.


2. As Negative declaring, 1. The present sin of omitting, 1 JOhn 3.9.
2. The future danger, S. Math. 7.21.




Sect. 4. The Sentences Explained and Paraphrased.
. 1. Math. 5.16. Our Savior exhorts all his Disciples to do Acts of public
Charity, not to gain applause to themselves, but for these two ends. First to
make men in love with goodness. 2. To engage them to give God the glory.

Paraphrase.] All you my Disciples are like stars high, useful, and observed,
wherefore [Let your] Charity and goods works, like [light, so] clearly and
amiably [shine before men] and set them so good an Example, [that they seeing]
the freeness, and feeling the comfort of those [your good worksi] may not so
much admire you for them, as that Spirit of Grace by which you are acted, and
so [may glorifie] and give all praise to [your Father which] gives you power
to do good, and that by the visible effects of his goodness, they may be
attracted to know and love him who ever [is in Heaven] and invisible otherwise
to mortal Eyes.

. 2. Math. 6.19, 20. As an encouragement hereunto, we should consider, that to
give Alms is the wisest way of providing for our selves, as appears first by
the uncertainty of that which we keep and lay up here on Earth. Secondly, By
the safety and certainty of that which by giving we lay up in Gods hands.

Paraphrase, ver. 19. Let not your care of providing for the future hinder your
Charity, for if you would be well provided for [Lay not up] the wealth which
you intend [for your selves] nor store up those [treasures upon Earth] where
you have not long to stay, but must leave them to be enjoyed by others; and
[where] if you stay and keep them they decay, for the [Moth] does eat the
Furniture [and rust does corrupt] the Silver and Gold, S. James 5: ver. 2, 3.
[and where] you will be likely to lose them sooner, because [Thieves] may
easily and do often Callidus effracta nummos fur auferet arca;

Quae dederis solas semper habebis opes. Martial.


[break though] ssrongest Walls and closest repositories [and steal] away that
which you had so carefully provided, and on which you relied for your future
subsistence.

Ver. 20.] Therefore do not thus think to keep your wealth [But lay up] that
which you would preserve [for your selves] and your own use, in a safer place;
namely by giving to the Poor, deposite your [treasures] in the hands of your
Father who dwells [in Heaven, where] they will be most sure, where [neither
Moth nor Rust] from within [do corrupt] your gift, before you come to enjoy it;
[and where Thieves] from without [do not] nay Satan himself cannot [break
through] the Walls of Heaven [and steal] away the charitable Man's Crown of
Glory. How then can you dispose of your money better?

. 3. Math. 7.12. This Sentence was by the Jews, Tobi. 4.15. and Gentiles Quod
non vis tibi fieri, alteri ne facias. Vid. Pub. Min. Sen. etc.
used to prevent injustice in the negative, viz. not to do that to others which
we would not have done to us; But our Savior has improved it into the
positive: What you would have done, do, etc. And thus it becomes the foundation
of Charity; As before he exhorted us to Alms-deeds, because they were
profitable, so now he presses them further. First, As most agreeable to Reason.
Secondly, As being the summary of Religion.

Paraphrase] When I advise you to give, I require no more than what your selves
must needs think most reasonable. Do but consider [whatsoever] that is which
(if you were Hungry and Sick, poor and naked, Captives or Oppressed) [you
would] expect or desire [that Men] of power and ability [should do unto you]
for your relief (namely to visit and feed, relieve and cloth, redeem and rescue
you) And [Do ye] if you have power and opportunity, but the same things, in the
same manner [even so unto them] which are in such distress; and this will be
accepted and rewarded as Religious also [for this is] the sum of all, Math.
22.40. Romans 13.8. Rab. Hillel cuidam petenti ut fieret Prosel. dixit, Quod tiib
odiosum proximo ne facias: Hoc enim est totum legis, caetera Commentaria. Talm.
tract. Sabbat.
that you are commanded to do to your Neighbor both in [the Law and the
Prophets] even to love him as your self.

. 4. Math. 7.21. Lastly, he that only keeps the Keys of Heaven, urges us from
the danger of resting in Prayers, profession of the right Faith, and receiving
the Sacraments, without doing act of Mercy, showing they shall be shut out from
thence for all their pretenses, who have not been Charitable.

Paraphrase] In the last judgment Day many will challenge my favor, upon the
account of their Profession, but I tell you [Not every one that] believes the
right Faith, and because he observes the Ordinances of Religion, confidently
(...). Just Mart. Apol.
[saith unto me] Thou art my Savior Lord] will thou not own me [Lord] who have
ever called thee Master (I say) it this be all, not any one of these pretenders
[shall enter into] the glories of [the Kingdom of Heaven] or be accepted by me
then [But he that doth] acts of Mercy and Charity, which is the command and
[the Will of my Father which] does good to all himself, and ever [is in Heaven]
whither I must not admit any, that do not please him, by being merciful.

. 5. Luke 19.8. If the Precepts and Exhortations work not on you, perhaps this
Example may, Behold a Publican (usually, the worst of Men) who had received
that Christ into his House, whom you are to receive into your hearts, by the
Words of Jesus wholly changed into justice and liberality.

Paraphrase] And while the Lord was Preaching of Justice and Charity [Zacheus]
a chief of the Publicans who entertained him [stood forth] before many
Witnesses [and said] of his own accord with great Devotion [unto the Lord]
Jesus: I confess I have loved the World too well, but [Behold, Lord,] thy
sayings have now wrought in me such a contempt of these things, that to show
how much I prize Heaven above Wealth, Lo [the half of my goobs] and great
Estate [I give] at Pesent to thee to be disposed [to the Poor] nor do I keep
the other half out of any love to Riches, but desire to do justly [And if] in
my exacting Office [I have taken any thing] more than was due [from any Man]
Poor or Rich [by false accusation] or bribery; Let him come and challenge me of
the wrong, and here [I restore him fourfold] which is more than the Law
requires, where there has been no denial nor alienation, Exodus 22.1, 2, 3, 4.

. 6. 1 Corinthians. 9.7. The next care of the Church is to show us who are the
objects of our Charity, viz. The Ministers, in the next five Sentences; And
secondly, All, especially the Christian poor, Gal. 6.10. First, The Ministers,
for it is evident by these places, and Heb. 13.10. as also by the Writings of
St. Cyprian, and all the Ancient Canons, Episcopus and Presbyteri inter
Diaconos, and relics clericos eas (oblatione scil.) dividunt. Can. Apost. 5.
Si quid ex collatione fidelium -- offertur, apud unum Clericorum fideliter
colligatur, and constituto tempore, semel aut his in anno inter omnes clericos
dividatur. Council. Bracor. can. 39. Vid. Council. Agathens. can. 26. and Decret.
Epist. Simplic. Pont. R. 3.
that the Clergy were chiefly maintained out of the oblations made at the
Communion until Ihe Piety of Christian Kings had otherwise provided, so that it
was very ancient to exhort the people at this Sacrament to liberality to Gods
Minister, from whom they did here receive so great a gift as the Body of Jesus
Christ: Nor is it fit to leave out these sentences now, because in many places
still, especially in Cities, and appropriate Churches, the Ministers chief
maintenance is Free-gifts, and Oblations especially at Easter; These parts
therefore of Gods word ought to stir up all People, not to think the bare Dues
sufficient, where the Minister has not an honorable Provision, but privately
(where the custom of the Priests sharing in the offerings at Church is now laid
aside) to give some considerable gratuity to him that ministers to them in
spiritual things. Now to the Texts, St. Paul urges liberality to the
Ministers. First, by Similitudes, for as to the dangers of their Calling they
are likened to Soldiers, 2 Timothy 2.3, 4.
as to their pains to Husbandmen and Vine-Dressers, 2 Timothy 2.6. Math. 20.1.
as to their love and care, Acts 20.28. Ezekiel. 34, etc.
they are compared to Shepherds. Now all these have profit, by that they labor
in. Ergo.

Paraphrase.] The office of the Ministry requires more pains and care than any
Profession, and therefore ought to be maintained at least as well as any: Now
[who goes a] Soldier to [warfare at any time] in defense of his Country [of
his own cost] Does not his Prince and Nation for which he fights give him
Wages? Or [who planteth] Vines, and dresseth [a Vineyard] that would think his
time well bestowed if he drinks not of the Wine [and eats not of the Fruit]
which grows [thereof? Or who feedeth] and waits on [a Flock] of Sheep, if
he gets no profit by them [and eats not of the Milk] and cloatheth not
himself with the Wool [of the flock] if he might not have this reward of his
care, he would soon be weary of his charge, and so may Ministers also.

. 7. 1 Cor. 9.11. Secondly, He proves it from Reason, because the people
receive from them greater and better things, which if they value according to
their worth, all that they can give will appear far short of a requital.

Paraphrase] It is most reasonable you should be bountiful to the Messengers of
Salvation, for [If we] Ministers in Praying for you, Preaching and Administering
the Sacraments to you [have sow] that Seed of Grace which will procure [unto
you] Eternal life, and have ever dispensed to you all [spiritual things] for
the good of your Souls [Is it] too much? or seems it [a great matter, if] in
requital for Heavenly blessings sown [we shall reap] some small part of [your
Worldly things] for the supply of our necessities?

. 8. 1 Cor 9.13, 14. Most of these Corinthians had been first Jewish Proselytes
and now become Christians; wherefore the Apostle sets before them the known
Example of the provisions for the Priests under the Law, ver. 13. and secondly,
Propounds unto them the Ordinance of Christ in the Gospel, ver. 14.

Paraphrase, ver. 13] The Ministers of the Gospel certainly deserve as much as
the Levitical Priesthood, and [Do ye not know] how honorably the Law provided
for them? for besides many free Cities, and Lands, and all the Tiths, it was
appointed [T^at they which] Which Scaliger proves to have been 19. parts out
of 100. De decim. ap. Critic. sacr. and Josephus notes there was enough for
above 5000. Priests.
were but Levites, and only [minister] and serve the Priests [about holy
things] should be nobly fed, and [live] plentifully upon the best parts [of the
Sacrifice: And] that the Priests which offer all Oblations, being [They who
wait] on the service of God [at the Altar] should have a large share of the
offerings, and the benefit of all consecrated things, so that they [are
partakers with the Altar] which only consumes Gods part, and the rest they
feasted upon.

Ver. 14.] Even so] for the same Reason, and by way of Analogy to this
Provision [hath the Lord] Jesus Per Traditionem non scriptam, ut plurimi
Veterum crediderunt: vel in Evangelio. Math. 10.10. Luke 10.7.
under the Gospel [also Ordained] and appointed [That they who] leaving all
other employments, betake themselves to [Preach the Gospel] and carry the glad
Tidings of Salvation, lest they be taken off by any Worldly care [should] be
furnished by the people and [live of] the rewards Evangelium pro donariis
quibus laetumnentium remuneramus. 70. 2 Samuel 4 10. 1 Cor. 9.23. See Medes
Diatribe, on 1 Cor. 9.14.
and offerings which Men make in token of their thankfulness for, and esteem of
[the Gospel] which is brought unto them, by the Ministers thereof.

. 9. 2 Corinthians. 9.6, 7.] If any ask now how much they must give to Ministers,
or the poor? The Apostle will not determine your Free Will offering, yet First,
He shows it is best to give largely, ver. 6. But secondly, Necessary to give
cheerfully, v. 7.

Paraphrase] ver. 6. Men's various abilities and the nature of a Free-gift, make
it unfit to prescribe a certain sum, only it is your interest to give as much
as you can; for [He that soweth] of this seed of Alms, but [little] in
proportion to His Estate [shall reap little] reward from God, [And he that]
having a heart fuller of divine love, [soweth plenteously] and gives largely
according to his ability, [shall reap] abundant blessings, Graec. (...)
Hebraismus pro copiose, Joel 2.21. See Luke 6.38.
and be rewarded most [plenteously] by that God, whose remunerations do agree
to the proportions, though they exceed the merits of all our Charities.

Ver. 7.] Which being seriously considered [Let every man do] in this Case of
Almsgiving, according [as he is] by Gods grace inclined, and [disposed in his
heart] But whether he give little or much, let him not spoil his gift in the
manner of giving. Let him offer therefore [ not grudgingly Qui donum dat facie
irata perinde est ac si noon dedisset. RR.

Nemo autem libenter debet quod non accepit, sed expressit. Sen. de benef. l.
1. initio.


] with repining that he has given so much [or of necessity] as if he had been
compelled to it, since that will certainly hinder the acceptance of his
Charity, whatever it be: [for God] (who gives freely to all) himself as well
as Man [loveth a chearful] countenance and a willing heart in the [Giver] and
then he is pleased with the gift.

. 10. Galat. 6.6, 7. Finally to give to Ministers is not only a matter of
Prudence, but an absolute Duty, for which here is first an Apostolical command,
ver. 6. and secondly to neglect it and yet hope for Heaven, is showed to be a
mocking of God.

Paraphrase] ver. 6. I charge you in Christ's name [Let him that] by Gods
Minister [is taught in the Word] of the Gospel the way to Salvation, give and
[minister unto him that teaches him] a part and share [in all] that he
enjoys of the [good things] of this life, toward his support.

Ver. 7. The Lord requires this as you hope for any reward at his hands,
therefore [Be not deceived] with vain expectations of happiness, if you neglect
so necessary a Duty, for though you may delude your selves, yet [God is not] so
easily [mocked] with your Hypocrisy, nor dispense^ with the obedience to his
Laws so lightly: [for whatsoever a man] gives and [soweth, that shall he also
reap] and receive; for they that give nothing here, shall have no reward
hereafter.

. 11. Galat. 6.10. We come now secondly, to show more fully who are the objects
of our Charity, besides the Ministers, viz. First, All men, since there is no
man to whom another may not some way or other do good, But secondly, especially
Christians.

Paraphrase] We have many objects of our Charity, and our life is short, and
our Estate, uncertain [while we have time] therefore and such an opportunity as
this Sacrament Prove. 3.28. ita and Phocylides.

(...).


which perhaps we may never have more [Let us] Christians imitate our Heavenly
Father, and [do good] even to Infidels, Heretics, or evil men Aristoteles
reprehensus quod viro malo dedisset, Resp. Hominem non mores respexi. Laert. l.
5.
, and in some kind show our Charity [to all men] who any ways need our help
[But especially] let us have regard to the wants, and give most largely [to
them that be] Children of the same Father, nourished at the same Table [of the
Household of] God, and Professors of the same [Faith] as Christ himself is the
Savior of all, especially of them that believe.

. 12. 1 Timothy 6.6, 7. To this may be objected: We shall become poor our selves
if we give so often, and to so many. Answ. Money is not a Christians Riches, but
content makes him rich here, and Godliness hereafter, ver. 6. Secondly, Our
wealth is not our own, nor can we carry it out of this World with us, ver. 7.

Paraphrase, ver. 6.] Be not ye Christians afraid to give liberally, as if all
your Wealth lay in perishing Gold and Silver. For [Godliness] and the peace of
a good Conscience [is] really the [great Riches] and molt valuable treasure.
For there is true Riches in the fear of God [if a man desire not Worldly
Wealth, but [be content with that] little competency which [he hath] He is
happier than in all abundance, for he has all which he desires whilst he
lives, and he shall need Earthly things no longer.

Ver. 7. Our happiness had need consist in something else besides outward
Riches, which we only have the use of here; [For we] were born naked, and so
[brought nothing] with us when we came [into this World.] These were all given
us by God, for whose sake we may well give part thereof; especially since we
must leave Job. 1.21. Da quod non potes retinere, ut recipias quod non potes
amittere. Aug. Epist.

Quae stutitia est illic relinquere, unde exiturus es, and eo non praemittere
quo iturus es? Chrysostom. in Math. 6.

Quod pauperi non dederis, habebit alter. Petr de Raven.


all the rest behind [Neither] when we die [may we carry any thing] of that
which we save [out] with us, so that it is our wisdom not to lay up all here,
from whence we are removeing, but to give of these things while they are in our
power, which we are about to leave for ever.

. 13. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Though the Apostle persuade all to do what they can,
yet if men of ability be negligent, here is First, a positive command to the
rich Merchants of Ephesus, pressed with this motive, that this is the best
provision they can lay up, in order to the obtaining Everlasting Life.

Paraphrase] It is most dangerous of all and wholly inexcusable for those of
ability not to give, wherefore [charge them who] by the divine bounty [are rich
in] the things of [ this World Locupletem te dicis and divitem -- Divitem te
sentiant pauperes, locupletem indigentes. Cypr.
] not to forget such as are in want, but [that they be ready] without asking or
urging, out of their abundance [to give] relief to the poor [And glad] when
Temporalia mihi das, restituam tibi aeterna. Aug. de Verb. Dom.
God (whose Stewards they are) affords them an opportunity [to distribute] some
of their Riches to the needy. This is the best use their Wealth can be put to,
being the [laying up in store] for them and theirs great blessings, and thus
they prudently make [a good foundation] on which they may build firm hopes of
their being secured [against the time to come] and when the rich and
uncharitable man is forsaken of his Wealth and Condemned, this will so prevail
[that they] who have been bountiful [may attain] through Gods mercy [eternal
life] which is more worth, than if they had purchased 10000. Worlds.

. 14. Hebrews 6.10. To give Alms is a sure foundation for Eternal Life, which
if any doubt, because so small a gift alas! cannot merit such a reward, the
Apostle proves it is sure to be rewarded in the persevering, becaule of Gods
Justice and the Truth of his promise.

Paraphrase] You need not fear a sure reward, for God has obliged himself by
his promise richly to requite it, and sure you believe that [God is not] nor
cannot be either so [unrighteous] to deny, or so mindless [that he will forget]
his promise; Wherefore he will repay all [your works] of Charity and all the
cost [and labour] which you have bestowed: He cannot but with great delight
accept this and all [that proceedeth] from that excellent principle [of Love]
to God and your Neighbor [which love] to your Brethren he accounts [you have
shewed] out of love to him, and purely [for his Names sake] because they
belonged to him. They were relieved by you [who have ministred] necessaries [to
the Saints] that were in need formerly [and yet] you are not weary of
well-doing, but (finding it pleases him) upon every Communion (or Lords day)
you still [^o mini^ter] to their supply.

. 15. Hebr. 13.16. This is to show further, that the Sacrifice of praise (even
in the Eucharist) being not alone sufficient, we must add the Sacrifice of
Charity, ( ver. 15.) and to assure us it shall be rewarded not only because of
the promise, but because it is so pleasing and agreeable to the very nature of
God.

Paraphrase] Though the legal Sacrifices be ceased, and Christ has expiated
our sins by that one Offering of himself, yet [to do good] to the Souls, [and
to distribute] of your wealth to relieve the bodily needs of your Brethren
[forget not] especially in your solemn Addresses [for with such Sacrifices] of
Charity, under the Gospel also, [God is] infinitely delighted and
[well-pleased] because therein we imitate his mercy; so that they will
recommend all the rest of our services unto him.

. 16. 1 John 3.17. As our Duties are not so acceptable, so neither can our love
to God be so real without Charity, to his Children and our Brethren in need,
whom he has left poor on purpose to try our love to him.

Paraphrase] He that pretends to Religion, and yet is uncharitable, is but an
Hypocrite, for [whoso hath] Money, Food, or Raiment, or any of [this Worlds
good] things, which he can spare from his own necessities, and is not moved to
pity, though he knows [and seeth] a poor Christian [his Brother] hungry,
destitute, and naked: if he [have need] and this unmerciful wretch cruelly
refuses to help him [and shutteth] out all thoughts that might breed
commiseration, or stir [up his bowels of Compassion] and so turn his Eyes [from
him. How] can such an one pretend or think there [dwelleth] any sparks of [the
love of God] (who is gracious to all) [in him] that is so unlike the divine
goodness, and so little regards the poor whom God loves?

. 17. Tobit 4.7. Having now sufficiently pressed this Duty, we do ex abundanti
(as the Ancient Church use to do) add two Exhortations out of the Apocrypha,
Apocrypha pertinent ad ubertatem cognitionis, Canonica ad Religionis
Authoritatem. Aug. de Civ. dei l. 18.
yet containing nothing in them but that to which the Canonical Scripture
bears witness. Here is first, An Exhortation almost the same with Deuter.
15.7. and Prove. 28.27. Secondly, A motive which is grounded upon Acts 10.4.

Paraphrase] I counsel thee frequently and liberally to [Give Alms] to the poor
out [of thy goods] which God has given thee [And never] be so cruel to hide
thine Eyes or [turn thy face from] the miseries, or complaints of [any poor
Man] But look with pity, hear with patience, and relieve him with speed [And
then the face] and favor [of the Lord] to whom thou must seek in all thy wants
[shall not be turned] in anger [away from thee] But he will pity and help thee
in all thy distresses.

. 18. Tobit 4.8, 9. This is also an Exhortation to Charity, and is added to
show it is indispensably the duty of all to give somewhat, more or less, ver.
8. agreeing with 1 Cor. 9.6, 7. before, and Mark 12.43, 44. Secondly, To assure
us it shall be rewarded bountifully by God, as above was said, 1 Timothy 6.18, 19.

Paraphrase] No Man can be excused from this Duty, for all that God requires
is to [Be merciful] and Charitable [after thy Power] and according to thy
Ability, and the Estate that he has given thee [If thou have much] wealth
therefore he expects thou should [Give plenteously] for a very small gift is
as nothing from a rich man: But [if thou have little] or no more than suffices
thy self [Do thy] endeavor by labor and [diligence] to get somewhat, and then
trusting in God resolve, cheerfully and [gladly to give] Ephesians. 4.28. something
out [of that little] which will be as acceptable from thee as greater gifts
from others.

Ver. 9. And this is no unprofitable course for rich nor poor [For so]
dispersing thine Alms [gathered thou] the surest riches [for thy self] Even the
love of God, and the Prayers of the poor, which are [a good reward] for a small
gift, and will do thee more good [in the Day of necessity] and at the hour of
Death, than all the riches of the World.

. 19. Proverbs 19.17. If there remain yet the least scruple touching the reward
of Charity, because it is bestowed on a poor man, who himself cannot make
requital, Here God does first acknowledge the Debt, and Secondly promise to pay
it.

Paraphrase] The money given in Alms is surer laid up and better bestowed than
that which we have in our hands, for [He that] by liberal gifts shows that he
[hath pity on the poor] whom God has left unprovided, though they cannot
repay him, yet he is sure to be well requited; because [He lendeth] it to him
from whom we receive all, even [to the Lord] whose peculiar care the poor are,
so that he accounts it done to himself, Math. 25.40. He owns Patrimonium tuum
Deo foenera, D. Cypr.

Habuisti me largitorem, fac me debitorem, habeam te foeneratorem. Aug. de
Verb. Dom.


the Debt [And look what he lays out] upon them in their want; He shall
receive an hundred fold for it. He may be confident [it shall be paid him
again] with large interest both on Earth and in Heaven, Mark 10.29, 30. And who
would not wish for such a Creditor?

. 20. Psalm. 41.1. Finally let us only be liberal, and we are here assured that
we shall not stay for our reward till the next World, but that we shall find
the benefit of our Charity, as soon as ever we begin to need it.

Paraphrase] Blessed] and happy shall [be te Man that] out of a charitable
heart [ Vatab. marg. Qui prospicit agroto.
provideth for] the necessities of [the sick] and weak in body; and considers
and relieveth the wants of the Poor [and needy] in Estate. As his bounty
delivers those poor Creatures in their Calamity, so [The Lord] of Heaven who
sees and remembers all such Deeds [shall deliver him] most readily, when he
also shall be poor or sick, or fallen into any straits [in the time of trouble
Visitatio aegrotorum liberat a gehenna. RR.
God will then think of him, and be his surest Comfort.

*** If the Congregation be large, and the Alms long in gathering, thou may
profitably read all or most of these Sentences, to enlarge thy heart and
quicken thy Charity, if the offering be short, yet read some of them before it
come to your turn; and then prepare your own Oblation, and the next Section
will teach you how to present it.

. 5. As these Divine Parcels of Holy Writ do move us to Charity and Alms-deeds
at all times, so especially at the receiving of this blessed Sacrament; for
which I will now suppose thou have prepared a large gift according to thy
ability, and art ready to offer the same with a chearfui countenance, and a
joyful heart, Offertorium enim olim cantari notant Rupert. de divin. off. c 2.
Isidor. de Eccl. offic l. 1. c. 14. ut ^im in esse vide 1 Chronicles. 29 9. 2 Chronicles.
29.27, 28, 29.
As an acknowledgment of the bounty of the Father who gave thee all that thou
have, (...). Liturg. S. Chrysostom. 1 Paral. 29. 14. (...). Philo.
and of the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who though he was rich, became
poor, that thou through his Poverty might be rich. Look not therefore on the
Bystanders, but lifting up thy Soul to God, and bowing down thy head, cast in
thy mite into this Treasury with these or the like thoughts.

O Lord, I give thee a small part of thine own, who have given me all my
Earthly Comforts; yea thy own Son out of thy bosom, to become my Salvation; and
have not disdained to adopt me an heir of thy Glories; Oh that I could give a
thousand times more, thy love deserves it, but this alas I give not as a
requital of thy favor; but a testimony how much more I owe unto thee: but my
Charities cannot extend to thee who need nothing, only sweetest Jesus, I do
gladly embrace my poor Brethren, thy Friends, whose Souls thou have purchased
with thy dearest blood, and made them with me Heirs of the same glory. I
rejoice that thou accepted so small a matter to them as done to thy own self.
Behold therefore, I beseech thee, a Soul so sick and leprous, poor and naked,
that it needs thy mercy, more than the miserablest Creature in the World my
Charity. Oh how many and how earnest Prayers do I need? Could I engage all the
poor on Earth (whose Prayers soonest pierce the Clouds) I need all this, and
much more to make way for mine acceptance; But O my Savior this is a Day of
grace, in which thou scatterest thy bounties. Wherefore remember my Soul, which
is undone without thy pity, and since thy mercies are infinitely greater than
ours, Lord do not pass me by; Far be it from me to think so meanly of thy love,
as to esteem my Alms the purchase of it. No, no, I do only by this small token
give thee the Livery and Seisin of me and all mine, and having vowed to pursue
a more plorious interest, and to seek thy Kingdom, I do renounce the riches of
this World, which I will never value, more than as they may serve to relieve
thy members, and make me friends, that I may be received into everlasting
habitations. Oh happy exchange, and admirable way of Gain! But so thou art wont
to deal with us O God, to accept trifles from us, and give glories to us,
great, and endless, and inexpressible; I adore thee O my Lord! and I love thee
infinitely, and because no Earthly gift can bear proportion to such unspeakable
goodness; I will give my Soul also, and it shall be thine for ever, Amen.

SECT. VII. Of the Prayer for the whole Church.
. 1. AS the people of Israel were wont to bring their gifts and Sacrifices to
the Temple, and by the hands of the Priest to present them to Almighty God: So
are we appointed to give our Oblations into the hands of the Minister of
Christ, who by virtue of his Office may best recommend them with Prayers and
Praises to the Majesty of Heaven; and yet we must not neglect to join with him
in these Supplications, both to beg the acceptance of our offering, and to show
that our Charity extends further than our Alms can reach, for the benefit of
these is received only by a few of our Neighbors, but we ought to love all the
World, especially our Christian Brethren, Sapientes sapientibus etiam ignotis
Amicos esse dixerunt Stoici ap. Cicer.
even those who do not need, or cannot have profit by our gifts: And how can we
express this better, than by recommending them all to the mercies of God, who
is able to relieve them all, and of whose bounty all have need: Which excellent
Duty, though it be to be done daily, yet at this Holy Sacrament it is most
proper, because we here behold the Universal love of Jesus, and are declared
lively Members of his Mystical body, and conjoined in the strictest bonds of
Union with all our fellow Christians: Besides, when can we more effectually
intercede with God for the whole Church, than when we represent and show forth
that most meritorious Passion on Earth, Eucharistia est commemoratio sola quae
propitium facit Deum hominibus Orig. Hom. in Lev.

(...) Dionys. Ep. ad Demoph.


by the virtue whereof our great High Priest did once redeem, and does ever
plead for his whole Church even now that he is in Heaven: This Sacrament
therefore has been accounted the great Intercession, and accordingly all the
ancient Liturgies did use such universal Intercessions, and Supplications,
while this Mystery was in hand, and in the time of St. Cyril, there was a
Prayer used Super illa propitiationis hostia obsecramus Deum pro communi
Ecclesiarum pace, pro tranquillitate Mundi, pro Regibus, pro sociis, pro
aegrotis, pro afflictis, in summo pro omnibus iis qui egent Auxilio. Cyril.
Catech. 5.
exactly agreeing with this of our Church; St. Chrysostom also says, That the
Priest standing at the Altar, did offer Prayers and Praises for all the World,
for those that are absent, and those that are present, for those that were
before us, and those that shall be after us, while that Sacrifice is set forth,
Hom. 26. in Math. For which cause our Communion Office in the Rubric before
this Prayer, appoints the Bread and Wine to be set upon the Table first, and
then stirs us all up with that solemn, Let us pray for the whole Estate of
Christ's Church, etc. And if as we are worshipping without, we remember him that
is praying within the Vail, and by imitating his general Charity, do unite our
supplications to his all-poweriul Intercession, we may no doubt obtain the
Iargest and the choicest blessings [in the Treasures of Heaven.]

. 2. The Analysis of the Prayer for the Whole Church.
. 2. This Prayer (as the beginning intimates) consists of Three main Parts,
with a Preface and Conclusion. 1. The Preface, showing 1. To whom it is made,
Almighty and Everliving God
2. On what ground we make it, Who by thy Holy Apostle have taught us to make
Prayers and Supplications, and to give Thanks for all Men:

2. Prayers for the Acceptance of 1. Our Alms, We humbly beseech thee most
mercifully (to accept our Alms and Oblations,
2. Our Petitions, and) to receive these our Prayers which we offer to thy
Divine Majesty:

3. Supplications and Intercessions made 1. Generally, for 1. The whole Church
together, Beseeching thee to inspire continually the Universal Church with the
Spirit of Truth, Unity, and Concord,
2. All its Members, And grant that all they that do confess thy Holy Name, may
agree in the truth of thy Holy Word, and live in Unity and godly Love.
3. Especially its Temporal Governors, We beseech thee also to save and defend
all Christian Kings, Princes, and Governors,

2. Particularly, for this Church viz. 1. The Governors of it, 1. Temporal, 1.
The King, Especially thy servant CHARLES our King, that under him we may be
godly and quietly governed.
2. The Magistrates. And grant unto his whole Council, and to all that are put
in Authority under him, that -- etc.

2. Spiritual, Give grace, O heavenly Father, to all Bishops

2. Ministers, and Curates, that they may both by their Life and Doctrine set
forth -- etc.
3. The People, 1. For the spiritual good of all, 1. In these Duties, And to
all thy People give thy heavenly grace, especially to this Congregation, -- etc.
2. In the rest of their lives truly serving thee in Righteousness and true --
etc.

2. For the Afflicted, Temporal Relief, And we most humbly beseech thee of thy
goodness, O Lord, to comfort and succor, -- etc.



4. Giving Thanks, by 1. Praising God for the Saints departed, And we also
bless thy Holy Name for all thy Servants departed th^s Life in thy faith and
fear;
2. Applying it to our selves, Beseeching thee to give us grace so to follow
their good Examples, that with them we may be Partakers of thy Heavenly Kingdom.

5. The Conclusion of the Whole. Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ his
sake, our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.


A Practical Discourse upon the Prayer for the whole Church.
Sect. 3. Almighty and Everliving God who by thy Holy Apostle have taught us to
make Prayers and Supplications and to give thanks for all men.] These two
glorious Attributes of Omnipotence and Eternity, so clearly distinguish God
from all Creatures, and are so properly the Character of an infinite Majesty,
that he is sometimes called the Almighty, Psalm. 91.1. Job 21.15. and sometimes
He that lives for ever, Dan. 4.34. Rev. 4.9. without any other denomination,
wherefore they are placed here, to strike a Religious reverence into us,
because of his infinite perfections to whom we make this Address, and yet also
to confirm our Faith, and excite our hope, that (though we petition for so many
persons and so great Blessings) we shall be heard by him who is mod mighty in
Power, and who has through all times preserved his Church, and though one
Generation goes and another comes, yet he ever lives, and is always the
same. But that which may still increase our hope is, that this Almighty and
Everliving God, is not only able to grant these Prayers, but has expressly
commanded us by his Apostle St. Paul, to make them, 1 Ep. Timothy 2.1. I exhort
therefore that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving
of thanks be made for all Men: Now had he not intended to grant them, he would
not have enjoined us to make them; shall Esther fear to speak or to speed when
the King commands her to ask, Chap. 5.3.? or will the Lord reject that Petition
which is drawn up by his own Direction? Behold how closely the Church has
followed the Apostles Directory; for here in this form we have (as the Analysis
does manifest) first Prayers, that is Petitions for Good; (...). Theophil. in 1 Timothy 2.
then Supplications, or deprecations of evil; in which are comprehended
Intercessions (and so not named here) that is desiring some good or some
deliverance from evil for others and lastly giving of thanks for mercies
already received; And surely all the Liturgies in the World ought to be
composed by this Rule, as ours most plainly is, for the Morning and Evening
offices do chiefly consist of Prayer; The Letany is in the first part
Supplication, in the second Intercession, and this Communion office may well be
accounted Eucharistical, being full of Hymns of Thanksgiving. This for the
kinds of our Requests; now the Persons for whom we are to pray are, all men,
which surely God commands in pursuance of those Precepts of Universal Charity,
of which this universal intercession is an excellent indication. For no man can
pray for all the World, if he hates any one person, he that prays for all, must
be in Charity with all, and it is also an effectual means to oblige all people
to us, and tame the furies of our Enemies, it being barbarous and highly
infamous to prosecute those that heartily pray for our good: And now if our
hearts be filled with true Christian Charity, such as is necessary for this
holy Communion, we cannot but rejoice to meet so excellent an opportunity to
express our desire of the welfare of all Mankind. Let us then with all possible
Devotion offer up this Sacrifice; Love this pious and prudent intercession,
which is enjoined by him that purposes to grant it, and printed by Charitable
Souls, who will infinitely rejoice in the success thereof, viz. the prosperity
of the whole Church.

. 4. We humbly beseech thee most mercifully [to accept our Alms and Oblations,
and] to receive these our Prayers, which we offer unto thy Divine Majesty] It
seems to have been the Custom when any Persons brought their Offerings to the
Altar for the Priest and the Pious Bystanders to say, The Lord accept thee,
Psalm. 20.3, 4. 2 Samuel 24.23. in imitation whereof, we do here beg the Divine
acceptance both of our Charity and Devotion; And that we may do it heartily,
let us consider, how much they need to be accepted with favorable allowances;
for first, If Alms and Prayers both be offered (as it is pity they should ever
be parted) though they do assist and recommend each other, yet we do not think
our gift has obliged God to hear our Petitions, nor our Petitions given such
privilege to our gift, as that we may boldly challenge God upon the account of
either, wherefore we desire him with favorable and gracious acceptance to
entertain them both. Secondly, If we respect the Alms alone, which we have
given, though it be owned by Gods goodness to be offered to himself, Prove.
19.17. and Math. 25.40. yet it were an arrogance not to be endured, to think so
Universal and excellent blessings were the purchase of our contemptible
oblation, which has no proportion in its own value to them, only if we present
it humbly, our gracious father will accept it as our acknowledgment of his
goodness, and a testimony of our Love. Thus therefore we pray that he would
accept our Alms, viz. in mercy, esteeming them not by their own worth, but by
the affection of the Givers. Thirdly, If we do only regard our Prayers, we may
soon discover how little they will avail unless the Lord accept them with
grace. As to those we have hitherto made, if we look back upon the many
wanderings and interruptions, the coldness and indifferency, the sin and
infirmity, that did mingle with them all; we shall see we had need heartily to
beseech God to accept them with benign interpretations, and to excuse the
imperfections of them: But if [these our Prayers] be meant of those Petitions
which we are now about to make in this Form; let us remember how great a
presumption it seems for us to ask for others; nay for all people, when as we
are not worthy to pray for our selves; yet let us humbly beg a candid
acceptance of these Petitions, which we offer, not as if we were fit Advocates
for all the World, but in obedience to his Command, who has bid us thus to
express our Charity.

. 5. Beseeching thee to inspire continually the Universal Church with the
Spirit of Truth, Unity, and Concord:] Among the several Prayers which were made
at the Holy Table it was particularly enjoined that they should pray for, The
Holy Catholic Church, extended from one end of the Earth to the other, which
the Lord had redeemed veith the precious blood of Christ; says the Author of
the Apostolical Constitutions; for the Sacrifice here commemorated was offered
for the Church, Acts 20.28. which is called the body of Christ, Ephesians. 5.23.
Colos. 1.24. but because the body without the spirit is dead, we therefore beg,
that as he once quickened the lump of Earth into a living Spirit, by breathing
into it the breath of Life, so he will please to inspire his Holy Spirit into
his mystical body, according as he has promised, John 14.16. and that not only
once, John 20.22. but that it may continually be supplied with vital
influences, by its Union with its Divine Head the Lord Jesus, the blessed
success whereof is noted in the three happy effects of this Heavenly
Inspiration. First, That the Church will be directed into all Truth by the
Spirit of Truth, John 14.17. and 16.13. 1 Epist. 2.27. and so be preserved from
Heresy. Secondly, That all the Members thereof shall agree in the same
judgment, and combine in the Unity of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.3. and so be secured
from Schism, 1 Cor. 1.10. Thirdly, That the affections of all persons in this
body shall be joined in perfect Concord, and tied in the Bonds of Love and
Peace, Ephesians. 4.3. for the prevention of hatred, wrath, and emulation: How
passionately therefore is this blessed Spirit to be prayed for? and how
necessary are all and every one of these? Truth without Unity is weak and
troublesome, Unity without Truth is dangerous and mischievous, Vnitas sine
veritate proditio est. D. Cypr.
and both without Charity are insignifcant, and cannot last long. Let us
consider the mischiefs which the Church has endured by false Principles,
divided Judgments, and opposite affections; that in the apprehension of our
want of this comprehensive Blessing, we may most vigorously beg this continual
inspiration, which may make the Church happy, by Unity in its Doctrine, Harmony
in its Discipline, and Charity, in the affections of all the parts and members
thereof.

. 6. And grant that all they that do confess thy Holy Name, may agree in the
truth of thy holy Word, and live in Unity, and godly Love.] This Petition is
but a further confirmation of the former; for when the several Members of the
Church live in Unity, Peace, and Love, it is the best demonstration that the
whole body is acted by the Divine Spirit, John 13.35. Josh. 22.31. for these
universal mercies are to be obtained by induction of particulars, and the
internal inspiration ought to be manifested by Acts of a visible Charity: Now
if we want affections wherewith to make this request, let us but view the
miferable effects which differences in opinions, and affections, have produced
in the Christian World; consider how thereby Religion has been disgraced, and
God dishonored, and all outrages have been committed, the Heathens are
scandalized and kept out, and the Christians who are within are hindered in
their Piety; and our differences are made wider by arguing; the more we dispute
Disputando de sacris accenditur tantum contentio. Sisin. in Eccl. Hist.
the less we agree, and while we contend for the Faith, we lose our Charity:
But this is the fault of the men and not of the Religion, for Jesus has left
us an impartial judge, which is his holy Word and is Truth it self, John 17.17.
by which if we would without prejudice or interest, suffer our Opinions to be
tried, Expellentes igitur hostile certamen ex verbis divinitus inspiratis,
solutionem quaestionum mente percipiamus. Constan. Mag. ad Patres Nicaenos.
Hist. trip. l. 2. c. 5.
it would happily compose all our controversies, or where a determination is
needless, teach several Churches to dissent with more moderation, and direct
particular persons to submit in such things to their proper spiritual guides,
and to live in godly and Religious love with their fellow Christians. Maneat
moralis benevolentia inter discordes sententia: Lemma Cardin. Rachel.
If any say that there is little hope that this still voice of Gods word should
be heard in the hurry of our contentions; or no likelihood of so sweet a
composure; I answer, That however, it is highly desirable, and therefore ought
to be prayed for; and (which is considerable) our Lord Jesus in that rare
pattern of his present Intercession in Heaven; the last Prayer he made upon
Earth for his Church, did pray, That all of his Religion might be preserved in
Truth and Unity, John 17.17.21. so that we are assured we beg the same here,
that he intercedes for above; and therefore if it should not be completely
granted, yet he that has asked this with a great Devotion, and endeavored it
to his power, shall have satisfaction in the Testimony of a good Conscience,
and has testified his unfeigned Charity to the Church, and his love to all the
Members thereof.

. 7. We beseech thee also to save and defend all Christian Kings, Princes, and
Governors, especially thy Servant CHARLES our King, that under him we may be
godly and quietly governed.] We have often prayed for the King already, but
principally respecting his Authority in the State, so we prayed for him alone
but now we consider him as a Principal Person in the Church, of which he is
under Christ Nutritii and patres Ecclesiae, Jesai. 49.23. (...). Aristot. pol.
3.
(as the Bishops of Rome of old confessed) the supreme Head: and so are other
Christian Christus Imperatori and omnia tribuit, and dominari eum non solum
Militibus concessit. Greg. Mag. Epist. 64. ad Theodor.
Princes in their several Countries wnom we therefore here do pray for also, as
St. Paul commands, 1 Timothy 2.2. and as the Ancient Church ever did in the time
of this Mystery: There are now three sorts of Rulers in the Christian World,
which are here expressed by three words. First, Kings; that is such as have
absolute Monarchies. Secondly, Princes, who have Royal Authority in lesser
Dominions, though not without paying some homages. Thirdly, Governors who
preside in Aristocracies and Commonwealths; these and each of these are or
ought to be supreme Presidents over Ecclesiastical as well as Civil Affairs in
the several Jurisdictions; and since their Power is employed to save and Deus
Op. Max. pietatis and justae Actionis quoddam quasi vinculum nos esse voluerit.
Theodos. Imp. Ep. ad Cyril.
defend the Church, she is obliged to desire the King of Kings to save and
defend them all, from Invasions and Rebellions, Treasons and all Mischiefs,
that they may not be hindered in the exercise of their most useful and pious
Authority: And if we prevail, many Millions will receive benefit thereby, and
every Christian Nation shall have its share in this Blessing. It happens (I
confess) sometimes, contrary to the wish of all pious Men, that even Princes of
the same Religion have differences with each other, but then we must at this
Holy Sacrament forgive our Enemies, and with the welfare of the whole Church,
only we must pray for the safety of other Kings no further than is consistent
with the welfare of our natural Liege, for whom we must pray [especially]
because under him we enjoy our Liberty and Religion, our proprieties and our
Peace, and if it please God to defend him, we doubt not, but we shall have
under him Quiet and peaceable lives, in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2.
that is in two words we shall be godlily and quietly governed; and thus our own
interest may move us earnestly to intercede for the safety of our Sovereign,
for the benefit is ours more than his.

. 8. And grant unto his whole Council and to all that are put in Authority
under him, that they may truly and indifferently Minister Justice, to the
Punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and to the maintenance of thy true Religion
and Virtue.] When Justice is purest in the King the Fountain thereof, it is
often corrupted in the streams, the subordinate Dispensers, for Mortal Princes
cannot see all with their own Eyes, Numb. 10.31. Heb loco oculorum, h. e.
Confiliarius. 70. (...), ut oculus nobis charus and necessarius. Fag. and Grot.
in loc.
nor Act all things with their own hands, and though they be said to judge the
Nation, Psalm. 72.2. yet the Mountains, or higher Magistrates, and the little
Hills, that is inferior Officers, do bring this Righteousness to the people,
who can seldom receive judgment immediately from the Princes mouth [ ver. 3.]
Wherefore since we must be more particular in our desires for the welfare of
these Kingdoms, it is necessary that we pray, for all that advise in the
making, and assist in the executing of good Laws, viz. for the Kings Council,
at large in Parliament (as the old Christians prayed pro Senatu) or more
strictly for the Lords of his Privy Council; who besides their Examination of
Causes in those places, and their influence upon the Royal Determinations, are
usually Persons enjoying the highest Dignities, and weightiest Offices of the
Nation. And because by them, and the lower Orders of Magistrates, all Causes
are decided, we are bound to pray heartily for them, that they may judge by the
Rules of Equity, [truly and indifferently] without mistake or partiality, and
have before their Eyes the great end of all Laws which is the punishment of
evil Doers, and the encouragement and reward of them that do well, Leges
improbos supplicio afficiunt, ac defendunt and tuentur bonos: Cicer. de leg 2.
Pius IV. Pont. R pingebat laures cum Virgis, cum hoc lemmate, Praemium and
Poena, pro sumbolo suo. Nic. Cau^sin.
1 Pet. 2.14. Romans 13.3, 4. And surely happy are the people that are in such a
Case, when their Counselors are faithful and prudent, their Judges deliberate
and upright their Officers careful and without rigor; for then the profession
of Religion shall be guarded, and the practice of Virtue encouraged; Innocence
shall be safe, and wickedness punished, nay all Vices made infamous, according
to the Will of God, the desire of our gracious Sovereign, and the wishes of all
this people, especially those who now at this Sacrament come to dedicate
themselves to Piety and Devotion; they have peculiar Reason to pray, that they
may be secured in their rights, and encouraged in their holy purposes, by the
due Administration of Justice, and the punishment of all that would harm or
hinder them; because their innocence does more expose them to the designs of
evil men.

. 9. Give grace O Heavenly Father to all Bishops and Curates, that they mat
both by their life and Doctrine, set forth thy true and lively Word, and
rightly and duly Administer thy Holy Sacraments.] The greatest gifts that the
divine goodness has bestowed upon the Sons of Men (says Justinian in his
Authenticks) are the Royal Power, and the Office of Priesthood. Both of which
are so contrived, that they are necessary not only for the Conservation of the
World, but for the mutual support of each other, Christus voluit ut Christiani
Imperatores pro vita aeterna Pontificibus indigerent, and Pontifices pro cursu
temporalium rerum Imperialibus legibus uterentur: Romans leg. c. pro Vener. tit.
de Feudis.
so that Princes (as Constantine does exprese it) are Bishops without, and the
Ecclesiastics within the Church, They guard and direct the Externals, while
these Order and Administer the Internals of Religion; Wherefore since God has
joined them in his Providence, we must not separate them in our Prayers, nor by
any means omit to pray for our spiritual guides, in this spirirual Sacrifice,
where the Ancients did particularly remember all the Orders of the Church: But
having spoken of this before ( Comp. to the Temp. Sect. 17.. 2.) we shall only
note the comprehensiveness of the Petition here made for them, which takes in
the main part of their office, viz. First, To set forth the holy Word of God,
both as it is the Truth, Joh 17.17. for the direction and instruction of the
ignorant, and as it is the lively Power of God unto Salvation Acts 7.38. (...),
Hellenis. pro. (...). Grotius. Deuteronomy. 32.47.70. (...) Ad Psalm. 19. ver. 7, 8.
for the Conversion of those that are dead in sin, which is to be done, as is
here intimated, not only by plain and affectionate preaching, but also by holy
and unblamable living, which does better explain Gods will, and more vigorously
excite the People to observe it, than the most learned Commentary, or the molt
eloquent Oration. Habent and opera suam linguam, habent suam facundiam etiam
tacente lingua. Cypr. de dupl. Mar.

Hic est qui quale habet verbum, talem habet and vitam, quoniam quae docet
agit, and quae agit, docet: Christiani de Origene, ap. Eusebius. Ec. hist. l. 5.
c. 3.


The second part of their Duty is rightly, according to the Institution of
Christ, and duly as the necessities of the Church require, to administer those
two Sacraments which are of Divine Ordination, viz. Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, which no other Order of men can lawfully dispense, so that if Ministers
should neglect the Celebration of them, or do it unduly, it would be a great
damage and discomfort to the Church of Christ. Let us therefore beg large
measures of Grace, for our Bishops and Pastors, that their Preaching may
convert us, their lives invite us to imitation, and their dispensing of the
Sacraments may comfort and strengthen us in all goodness: Let the Clergy pray
heartily one for another, for they understand the weight of this charge; and
let the people supplicate affectionately for their Ministers, because the grace
given to them, is for their sakes, and the benefit thereof finally descends
upon the Congregation: Especially let us all (when this most holy Sacrament is
to be Administered) join our Petitions for those who officiate here or
elsewbere, that they may perform so grand a Mystery to the glory of God, their
own comfort, and the benefit of all that partake thereof.

. 10. And to all thy People give thy Heavenly Grace, especially to this
Congregation here present, that with meek hearts and due reverence, they may
hear ano receive thy holy Word, truly serving thee in Holiness and
Righteousness all the days of their life] We have done well to pray for our
spiritual Pastors, but we must add this Petition also for the Sheep of their
Pasture, because the excellent gifts of Ministers do not profit, unless the
people also be endued with Heavenly Grace, Hebrews 4.2. though all the Seed was
good, yet it prospered according to the condition of the ground on which it
fell, and where the soil was not prepared it came to no perfection, though it
were sowed by Jesus himself, Math. 13. And sure it is a great pity that the
Gifts and Graces, the Time and Pains of so many learned and laborious Ministers
should be all in vain, and made ineffectual by the wickedness of those among
whom they live, which consideration makes the Priest here (as Theophylact
observes (...).
,) stand up as a common Father of the whole Church, and pray that all
Congregations of Christian People may increase in true Piety (in imitation of
the God he serves, who takes care of all): And yet he does intercede with
particular affections, and regard, for his own Auditory; praying that they may
profit by the present duties, and live holily ever after: But see how rarely
withal, the means of improving by the Word of God is couched in this request,
viz. to receive it with a meek and lowly heart, free from pride and
self-conceit James 1.21. (...). Ser. 1. Philosophus quaerenti quid primum
discipu is praecipere voluit. Resp. Fastum dep^nere ap. Arrianum.
, and to hear it with an awful Veneration, as believing it to be the word of
God. For he that is meek will be guided by its directions, and amended by its
reproofs; he that is reverent will tremble at its Summons, and give respect to
all its Laws. Let us then devoutly beg for all our Congregations these
necessary Graces of humility and godly fear, that so our Preaching may make
them holy and pure from all sin, Righteous and abounding in all good works,
when they hear it with reverence, and obey it with meekness; And that not only
now for our present comfort, but all the days of their life, to their own
endless happiness: And let us think how happy it were for the Christian Church,
if this Petition might prevail, to the total removal of that pride and
irreverence, stubborness and contempt, which make many Ministers preach, and
more people hear in vain.

. 11. And we most humbly beseech thee of thy goodness O Lord, to comfort and
succor all them who in this transitory life are in trouble, sorrow, need,
sickness, or any other Adversity.] Besides the spiritual wants for which we
have craved a supply in the former Petition, we know that many of our Brethren
are laboring under temporal Evils in this miserable World, and therefore we
must remember them as St. Paul teaches, H^b. 13.3. as being our selves also in
the body, that is, both by our nature and our sins, liable to the same
Calamities. And where can we so properly commemorate the afflicted, as at this
Sacrament of Mercy, wherein God is moved by the representation of his dear Sons
sufferings to pity all Mankind, especially those who by suffering are made
conformable to his Image, and in which Mystery we must express more pity and
Charity than our Alms can convey, which is to be done by bringing in a greater
Arm to their assistance; for our gift may bring some present allay to the
distressed, but if we can obtain the divine favor for them, they shall be
constantly supported, or speedily delivered, if that be best for them. At this
Sacrament therefore our Church enjoins us to pray for all in misery, and so do
the best and most ancient Liturgies, -- Vt infirmi convalescant Liturg. S.
Jacob.

Pro aegrotis, pro afflictis and in summa pro omnibus iis qui egent Auxilio.
ap. Cyril. ut supr.


(except the Roman Missal, where it is omitted in those Copies which I have
seen): But it is no where so piously, and fully expressed as here in this very
Petition. First, As to the manner of presenting this Request, we must most
humbly beseech God for them, in remembrance of our own just deservings to
suffer as much, and therefore we must pray for our afflicted Brethren, as a
pardoned reprieved malefactor would do, if he were to Petition for his
Associates: Nor must we ask for our own merits or theirs, but for his goodness
sake (Psalm. 25.7.) and because he is apt to show mercy. Secondly, As to the
things requested they are full, and significant, viz. That it may please the
God of all comforts, 2 Corinthians. 1.3. Chap. 7. ver. 6. to comfort all that are
in trouble or sorrow, and that he will help and relieve, We translate (...) by
[succour] Heb. 2 18. 2 Cor. 6.2. compare also 2 Samuel 18.3. Romans 16.2.
such as are in Poverty and Sickness, or as the words may well import, that he
will comfort, that is, support them under their troubles so long as they
continue; and finally to succor, that is rescue and deliver them, by putting a
gracious and happy end to their afflictions. Thirdly, The perfans prayed for in
general are those in this transitory life, the proper Scene of Miseries, and
the only place where sufferers are capable of the benefit of our Prayers: in
particular, those who are either first, inwardly afflicted with trouble, for
fear of some approaching Evils, or with sorrow in remembrance of some losses or
crosses lately sustained. Secondly, Outwardly distressed, whether in Estate, as
the poor and those in need, who want food, raiment, or habitations, or in Body
as those in Sickness, and Diseases, Pains, and Torments: We pray for all that
are afflicted in these or any other kinds of Adversity, and if we be lively
members of Christ's body, we shall do it with a great compassion, and a fervent
affection, as if we smarted with them, and shall deeply weigh how hard it would
be for us to bear the like burdens; and he that prays with such a sense does
both express a hearty Charity, and shall obtain relief for many poor Creatures,
through the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ.

. 12. And we also bless thy holy Name for all thy Servants departed this life
in thy Faith, and Fear, beseeching thee to give us Grace so to follow their
good Examples, that with them, we may be partakers of thy Heavenly Kingdom.]
Those Prayers for the dead which the Roman Missal has here added to this
office, our Church has prudently rejected, because they have no ground in
Scripture, Quidam putant non esse orandum pro mortuis eo quod neque Christus
neque Ap^stoli ejus successores haec scriptis intimaverint. Hug. Etherian. de
reg. an.
nor good foundation in the purest Antiquity, and also because they can do no
good to the wicked Quando instinc excessum fuerit, nullus jam poenitentiae
locus est, nullus satisfactionis: in hac vita aut remittitur aut tenetur. Cypr.
ad Demetr.

Qualis exieris ex hac vita, talis redderis illi vitae. Aug. in Psalm. 36. See
Eccles. 11.3.


who only need them, but are a disparagement to holy Persons, by supposing them
in a state of misery. Yet it is very probable, these Prayers did first arise
from the abuse of that Ancient Custom of the Primitive Church in the time of
Persecution, viz. to recite the names of those who had died for theFaith of
Christ, in the time of these Mysteries: But it was with no design to pray for
them Propterea Sanctorum inf i would morientium devote memoriam agimus, tam illorum
refrigerio gaudntes, quam etiam nobis piam in fide consummationem postulantes,
Orig. Com. in Job. 3.

(...). Chrysos. ad Hebr.


whom they believed to be already happy, Nullam habentes dubitationem beatam
illius animam esse in requie: sed ut fidem and dilectionem nostram ostendamus
in amicum nostrum charissimum. Epist. Carol. M. ad Offam R Merciae de Adriano
Pont R.
but to praise God for them, and to perpetuate their memory, to express their
Faith and confidence of their felicity, and to show their love to the very
remembrance of them, and finally to excite many to aim at the same rewards by
imitating so brave Examples. All which our Church does in the general here,
having cast away the corruption, and reduced the first design, by restoring the
Eucharistical Paryer which Donysius Eccl. hier. cap. 7. and many of the Fathers
do mention; so that we do not pray for any of the dead, but as we have great
reason we praise God for such of them as have departed in the Faith and fear of
God. The Apostle directs us to give thanks for all men, especially sure for
those whom God has obliged by his goodness so far, that not only themselves
but others can rejoice in their felicity, and therefore we cannot so
confidently praise God for any, as for those who have fought a good fight, and
finished their course, and are safely landed on the shore of a blessed
Eternity. While they are in the Battle, and the Race, and are tossed on the
Waves, there are many mixtures in their present condition, and foam uncertainty
as to the final event, so that if we should elevate our praises too much for
them, we should perhaps sing before the Victory, 1 Kings 20.11. We consider
that position of the wise Heathen, Nemo foelix ante Mortem, and so reserve our
chiefest praises till they have overcome all fear and danger, that there may no
sad note be mingled to interrupt the harmony, nor nothing else but a complete
joy Eccles. 7.1. Dies iste quem tanquam extremum reformidas aeterni natalis
est. Senec. Epis. 102.
. The Thracians were accounted wise because they rejoiced at the Death of their
Friends, as the day of their enfranchisement Val. Max. l. 2. c. 6.
from many Evils. And have not we Christians much more reason to praise God for
our faithful Brethren deceased, being not only sure (as they were) that they
are exempted from misery, but that they live in peace and endless glory? Now
this is so rational and so pious, so much our duty and our comfort, that it is
a wonder any should scruple the doing of it; for is there any more illustrious
Mercy, than that a poor sinful, frail Creature, shall be carried through the
dangers of life, and the agonies of Death; and by a full and free pardon
acquitted at the great Tribunal, and in a moment exchange his Corruptions and
Mortality for Robes of Glory, and the luster of an Angel? If we consider the
weakness of Man, and the power of his Enemies, the Armies of Temptations, and
Mountains of difficulties, before he can reach that blissful Crown, it is
little less than Miracle, that all men do not sooner or latter fall and fall
from the faith and fear of God What prospect in the World can ravish us with
greater pleasu^es, or raise in us higher admirations of the divine goodness,
than to behold those that were once as frail and sinful as we are now, advanced
above Satan's malice, or Deaths Power, and placed in the Regions of Joy, and the
Bosom of Jesus; that we might not tremble or think it impossible to come
thither also? Does not their felicity give life to our hopes, and become a
pledge of our own future glory? why should we not then rejoice with them, and
delight our selves with the very news of our Brethrens happiness? what other
Communion is there between us and those blessed Spirits; but that they (in
general) pity and wish well to us, and we praise God with and for them? And by
thus meditating of their most desirable estate we shall learn to despise Death,
and long to be with such inviting Company, nay languishing after the happy
enjoyment of such noble Society for ever and ever: Who can look up to these
Mansions, and not enquire for the path that leads thither, and be strongly
attracted to follow the steps of those who have so successfully trodden this
way before? This makes the pious Soul so passionately beg the divine grace,
that it may do as they have done, live as they lived, and die as they died, so
that what they are now, it may be hereafter. The Scythians (as Lucian relates)
kept the memorials of their brave Men with great joy, that so, many might
strive to become like unto them Simus inter exempla, quare deficimus, quare
desperamus, quicquid fieri potuit, potest, Sen. ep. 98.

Magnorum virorum non minus quam praesentia utilis est memoria: idem ep. 102.


. And St. Augustine says when any duty seemed difficult, he was wont to think
of the Saints of former times, and he imagined they derided his sloth saying,
Tu non poteris, etc. Can not thou do, what those Men, nay those Women once
did? that which has been effected is not impossible. Would we make this use of
our faithful Brethren departed, their memory and example would be as
profitable, as if we had their bodily presence with us; and the remembrance of
their glory would strongly excite us to follow their good example, till we came
with them to partake of that Heavenly Kingdom: in the mean time we shall never
want matter for to praise God in their behalf, since his truth and mercy to
them is, the confirmation of our Faith, the encouragement of our duty, and
gives us in contemplation, an antepast of our happiness before we come to the
full enjoyment of it.

13. Grant this O Father for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Mediator and
Advocate; Amen.] This general Conclusion of all our Prayers we should not
remark particularly here, but that the Mass has thrust in the names of the B.
Virgin, and other Saints -- Et omnium Sanctorum tuorum quorum meritis
precibusque concedas: in Canone Missae Romans
into the Supplications through whose Merits and Prayers they intercede even in
this place, where there is a lively Commemoration of the Death of Christ our
only Mediator, which is not only the holding a Candle to the Sun, but seems to
intimate that to plead in the Virtue of our Lords Passion is not sufficient,
that that intercession by which the Holy Virgin and all other Saints became
accepted by God, was not alone forceable enough. But we desire no other
Mediator, nor need no other Advocate, 1 Timothy 2.5. but our Lord Jesus Christ who
is here represented; nor do we doubt to ask all these Mercies for all these
Persons, since we approach our Heavenly Father with his dear and only beloved
Son in our Arms: wherefore let us bless the name of God, who has chosen such a
Master of Requests to present our Prayers, and put such an Argument in our
Mouths, when we approach unto him. Let us look to the holy Symbols, and
remember our great High Priest, while we offer up the Intercessions, with a
great humility, and a sprightly devotion, because our God will not, nay cannot
deny those that thus come unto him?

The Paraphrase of the Prayer for the whole Church.
. 14. O [Almighty and Everliving God, who] art able to help all Persons,
always, and in all things: We are unworthy to ask for our selves, and yet we
are encouraged to intercede for others, since [by thy holy Apostle] Saint Paul,
thou [hast taught us] in our daily Assemblies, [to make Prayers] to obtain
good, Intercessions, [and Supplications] to remove evil, in behalf of all the
World: [And to give thanks for] the Mercies received by [all men.] Believing
therefore thy willingness to grant these things, which thou command us to
ask [We humbly] disclaim our own Merits, [beseech thee] for Jesus sake, and by
the Virtue of his Passion here set forth [most mercifully] This to be omitted
when there is no Collection. **
to accept this poor acknowledgment of thy bounty, and testimony of our love in
these [our Alms] to the Poor [and Oblations] to thy Ministers, entreating thee
also to hear [and] This to be omitted when there is no Collection. **
to receive] all our former Petitions, especially [these our Prayers] for all
People [which we offer] as the evidence of our Universal Charity, most heartily
[to thy Divine Majesty] who art all-sufficient to supply the whole World.

To thy goodness therefore we come [Beseeching thee] though miraculous gifts
are ceased, yet [to inspire continually] with such grace, the whole body of
[the Universal Church] spread over all the Earth, that it may be quickened
[with the] most holy [Spirit] which teaches the Principles [of truth] and
produces [Vnity] in the Faith [and Concord] in the affections of thy people
[And grant that all] the Members of thy Church [that do] profess thy true
Religion, and [confess] to believe in [thy holy Name] laying aside their
animosities [may agree] all their differences, and so fully rest [in the]
infallible [truth of thy Holy Word] and its determinations of all necessary
things, that notwithstanding some lesser varieties, they may have mutual peace
[And live] as Children of the same Father [in Vnity] without Schism or Heresy,
in Charity [and godly love] without Malice or Envy among them.

And because thy Church cannot well subsist on Earth, without temporal
Guardians [We beseech thee also] in order to the common good [to save] the
Souls [and defend] the Persons and Rights of [all Christian] Magistrates, who
in their several Dominions have (or ought to have) supreme governance of the
Church, whether they be absolute [Kings] or free [Princes] or else Rulers [and
Governours] in popular States.

But as our duty, interest, and affection, do peculiarly oblige us, We pray
thee [Especially] to save and defend Him, who does acknowledge himself to be
[thy Servant] even [CHARLES our King] and Sovereign Liege: Help him so to
defend Religion, execute Justice, and subdue his Enemies, [that under him we]
and all his Subjects [may be] religiously and [godly] peaceably [and quietly
Governed] and accordingly be obedient unto, as well as happy in, so gracious a
Prince.

[And] that his excellent Laws may not be perverted in their Administration, O
Lord [Grant] such grace [unto his whole Council] with whom he advises in
making Laws [and to all] Magistrates and Officers [that are put in Authority]
to execute them [under him: That they may] deliberately weigh every cause, and
[truly and indifferently] determine it, so as to make it appear they do
[minister Iustice] and employ their Power [To the punishment of wickedness] and
greater Crimes, the correction of lesser enormities [and Vice: And the
maintenanc^] and defense of the Profession [of thy true Religion] together with
the Practice of all Equity [and Vertue] which is the endeavor of all Righteous
Magistrates.

But that Piety and Justice may be taught by the Ministers, as well as
outwardly encouraged [^i^e grace O Heavenly Father] for the same thy Son Jesus
Christ's sake [to all] whom thou have made [Bishops] and Governors, or Pastors,
[and Curates] over thy Flock. Assist them so in those sacred offices [that they
may both by] the holiness of [their life, and] the purity of their [Doctrine]
declare, and [set forth] the excellencies of [thy true] quickening [and lively
W^rd] so that many may be won to live according to it. And grant that they may
also orderly [and rightly] frequently [and duly Administer] both Baptism, and
the Lords Supper, which are [thy Holy Sacraments] And let them be particularly
assisted in the Celebration of the present mystery.

[And] that all their labors be not in vain, Do thou [to all thy People]
throughout the Christian World [^ive thy Heavenly Grace] to dispose their
hearts rightly to receive divine things [Especially] grant [to this
Congregation] and every person [here present] before thee, [that with meek
hearts] from a sense of their own ignorance [and due reverence] from the
apprehension of thy Authority [they may hear] attentively [and receive] by
Faith the directions of [thy Holy Word]: O Lord let them be converted by it,
and become real Christians [truly serving thee in] all the duties of Piety, and
[Holiness] Charity [and Righteousness] and continue in this Obedience [all the
days of their life] especially after this solemn renewing of their Covenant
with thee.

[And] further reflecting upon thy pity toward all afflicted persons for the
sufferings-sake of thy dear Son, [We] that yet are spared, do [most humbly
beseech thee] that (though we and our Brethren deserve to suffer) yet [of thy
goodness] thou will be pleased [O Lord] effectually at present [to comfort] and
speedily to deliver [and succour] not those distressed Creatures alone which we
particularly love or know; but [all them who] are capable of the benefit of our
Prayers, even all who [in this transitory life] the Scene of sorrows [are in
trouble] and fear of some approaching Evil, or in [sorrow] for some Calamity
already sustained. All that are in [need] and want as to their outward Estate,
or in pain and [sickness] as to their body: Or who are visited with some or all
of these [or any other Adversity] Oh pity and relieve them all.

[And] Finally, as we praise thee for all the Mercies which thou minglest with
the Miseries of this life, so [we also bless] and chiefly praise [thy holy Name
for] those who have no mixtures of sin, or sorrow in their Cup of pure and
perfect joy, even for [all thy] Saints and holy [Servants] who were once as
frail as we, but by thy grace are now [departed] out of [this life] but who did
live [in thy Faith and] die in thy [fear] never forsaking Religion, nor a good
Conscience. We rejoice in their happiness, and though we need not pray for
them, yet we cannot forbear [beseeching thee] for our selves, who are yet upon
the Waves, that thou will please [to give us] also the same [grace] which thou
gave them. That we may be able [so to follow their good Examples] in all
Piety and Charity while we live [that with them] and in that glorious Society
[we may] when we die [be Partakers] by the like Mercy [of thy Heavenly Kingdom]
and its unspeakable felicities. Hear us we beseech thee and [Grant this] and
all the rest [O Father] to thy poor Children, who make not our Requests in our
own Name, or trusting in our own merits, but [for Jesus Christ his sake] and
through the most prevailing Sacrifice of his Death here Commemorated: Nor do we
need or desire to use any other name, since he is [Our only Mediator] to make
our peace [and Advocate] to plead our cause, who also joins with us in these
Petitions; and therefore we hope thou will say to him and to us [Amen] and then
it shall be so.

SECT. VIII. Of the warning before the Communion.
. 1. IT is fit that great Mysteries should be ushered in with the solemnities
of a great preparation, for which cause God gave the Israelites three days
warning of his design to publish the Law, Exodus 19.15. and ordered their
Festivals to be proclaimed by the sound of a Trumpet some time before, Levit.
25.9. Numb. 10.2. The Paschal Lamb (the Type of Christ in this Sacrament) was
to be chosen and kept by them four days, to mind them to prepare for the
Celebration of the Passover, Exodus 12.3.6. And Christians having more and
higher duties in order to this Holy Feast, must not have less time, or shorter
warning; whereupon as good Hezekiah published by particular expresses his
intended Passover long before, 2 Chronicles. 30. so has our Church prudently
ordered this timely notice to be given, that none might pretend to stay away
out of ignorance of the time, or unfitness for the duty; but that all might
come, and come prepared also. It is needless to expect a President for this in
the ancient Church, their daily or Weekly Communions made it known, that there
was then, no solemn Assembly of Christians without it, and every one not under
censure was expected to Communicate: But now when the time is somewhat
uncertain, and our long omissions have made some of us ignorant, and others
forgetful of this duty, most of us unwilling, and all of us more or less
indisposed for it, it was both prudent and necessary to provide these large
Warnings and Exhortations, Cautions, and Instructions. For the Composures
themselves they are exact, and rarely fitted to be the Harbingers to this
blessed Sac^ament; and if we duly weigh and carefully improve them, they will
exceedingly help toward our Preparation, as will be evident enough (without a
Paraphrase) in the succeeding Analysis and Discourse.

The Analysis of the Warning before the Communion.
. 2. This Warning consists of three principal Parts. 1. Information,
concerning 1. The Time. Dearly beloved, on -- next I purpose, etc.
2. The Persons. to administer to all such as shall be religiously, etc.
3. The Matter to be done. the most comfortable Sacrament of the Body and Blood
of Christ,
4. The manner how it is to be done, 1. In Commmemoration, to be by them
received, in remembrance of his -- etc.
2. With thanksgiving both for 1. Christ's death, Wherefore it is our duty to
render most humble -- etc.
2. This Sacrament, But also to be our spiritual food and sustenance, etc.



2. Exhortation, in which note, 1. The ground of this Exhortation, viz. 1. The
benefit of doing it well, Which being so divine and comfortable a thing to them
-- etc.
2. The danger of doing it ill, and so dangerous to them that will presume --
etc.

2. The Pa^ts of it, which are, 1. To consider of 1. The Dignity of this
Sacrament, My duty is to exhort you in the mean season to consider, etc.
2. The danger of profaning it, and the great peril of the unworthy receiving
thereof:

2. To examine, directing 1. In what manner, and so to search and examine your
own -- etc.
2. To what end, 1. Purity, but so that ye may come holy and clean -- etc.
2. Acceptance, and be received as worthy Partakers.




3. Directions unto 1. The Penitent, to come fitly; who must 1. Examine
himself, The way and means thereto is, first, to examine your lives -- etc.
2. Confess to God, and whereinsoever -- there to bewail your own sinfulness,
and to confess, etc.
3. Satisfy the wronged, And if ye shall perceive your offenses -- but also
against your Neighbor, etc.
4. Forgive his enemies, and being likewise ready to forgive others that have
offended, etc.

2 The Impenitent, that they may not come so; showing, 1. The reason of this
Warning, For otherwise the receiving of this holy Communion, etc.
2. The Persons warned, Therefore if any of you be a blasphemer, etc.
3. The Warning it self, Repent you of your sins, or else come not -- etc.
4. The danger of despising it, Lest after the taking of that Holy Sacrament,
the Devil -- etc.

3. The doubting, that they may come with comfort, 1. Why this Advice is given,
And because it is requisite that no Man should come, but -- etc.
2. To whom it is given, Therefore if there be any of you, who by this means
cannot -- etc.
3. The Counsel it self, directing them 1. Whither to go, Let him come to me,
or some other, etc.
2. What to do, and open his grief,
3. For what benefit. 1. Absolution, that by the Ministry of Gods holy Word --
etc.
2. Direction, together with ghostly counsel, etc.
3. Comfort, to the quitting, etc. --






A Practical Discourse upon this Warning.
. 3. Dearly Beloved on -- next I purpose through Gods assistance to Administer
to all such as shall be religiously and devoutly disposed the most comfortable
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ] It is the manner of mighty Princes,
whose entertainment requires extraordinary preparation, to give notice by their
Harbingers to those places where they intend to lodge; and thus our Lord Jesus
when he came in the flesh had St. John Baptist for his Herald, to bid the World
prepare, Math. 3. and sent his Disciples as his Harbingers before his face, to
every City whither he intended to come, Luke 10.1. thus also his Messengers do
now proclaim his approach in this Sacrament, wherein he comes in the Spirit, to
Feast with us, Revel. 3.20. and to dwell in us, John 6.56. And oh how should
this awaken us to prepare! (...): Philo lib. de Cherub.
for what provision is sufficient to make for the King of Kings, who comes from
Heaven in pure love to visit us, and to do us good? Why should we not receive
the news with the same joy that Zachaeus expressed, when he heard that Jesus
purposed to be his Guest? since wheresoever he is well received, he brings
Salvation to that House, Luke 19.6, 7, etc. The Minister who has appointed it
in love to you, seems by his courteous salutation to be well-pleased that he
has so good tidings to tell you, and lest by ignorance or surprise you should
lose the benefit of this blessed opportunity, he gives you this timely
intimation, and fixes the very time as positively, as Man can or ought to do;
we have not the time to come in our own power, and so should always add, if God
please. (viz.) that our life or health shall last so long (...) Graeca Versio
Liturg. Angl. James 4.15. (...). Socr. (...). Plato in Alcibiade.
, and by his assistance, viz. if he vouchsafe to afford us grace, since we do
but [Administer] the outward part; Which short Parenthesis should also mind us
how dangerous it is to neglect wilfully this next Sacrament; because either we
may not live to have another opportunity, or not have the like grace and
assistance from God, if we despise this offer. This warning is given to all,
but yet in the very first clause is signified that we would not willingly cast
our Pearls before Swine, Sancta Sanctis, ut Diac. clamat. in Litur. Graec.
Math. 7.6. (...). Clem. Alex.
nor give this Sacrament to any but such as are religiously and devoutly
disposed, and for those who are so, they need not be pressed, or urged to come
to the Holy Table, since this most comfortable Ordinance does attract them
sufficiently by its own sweetness, it is most comfortable to pious Souls, and
they who have found it so, long for it, and this very warning is to them a
great pleasure and a sufficient invitation; But if filthly wretches who relish
nothing but Swinish pleasures, and are full of Earthly things, loath this
Honeycomb, or despise this Manna; it is no wonder; let it be no prejudice to
the mystery, nor no hindrance to our preparation, for if we upon this Summons
do immediately endeavor to procure religious and devout dispositions, we shall
taste the comfort of it more fully, than any words can express.

. 4. To be by them received in remembrance of his meritorious Cross and
Passion, whereby alone we obtain remission of our Sins, and are made Partakers
of the Kingdom of Heaven.] The necessity of this early and serious Warning is
here further showed from the two great Duties which all Christians are here to
perform. First, We are not to be idle Spectators of the Mystery, as they are in
the Roman Church, where if the people Communicate but once a year, it is
thought sufficient by the Lateran Council, and at other times they only look
on, while the Priest alone Communicates, Conc. Trident. Sess. 22. Can. 8. a
practice unknown to all Antiquity: But we are commanded to receive the Symbols
our selves in Remembrance, as St. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. of that one
offering, once for all, Hebr. 9.26.28. whereby Jesus has for ever perfected
them that are sanctified, Hebr. 10.14. It was the part of Jesus to offer up
that most meritorious Sacrifice once upon the Cross Offerimus quidem, sed
recordationem facientes mortis ejus, and una est haec hostia, non multae --
quia semel oblata in Sancto Sanctorum, hoc autem sacrificium exemplar illius
est. Ambr. Com. in 10. ad Heb.
, but it is our duty to keep a perpetual memorial, of that most valuable, and
never to be forgotten propitiation. For thereby alone (and not by the merits or
Prayers of Saints or Angels) our Salvation was obtained. Now if the pardon of
our sins, and the purchasing Heaven for us (who were Heirs of Hell) be the
greatest mercies, consider with what devout affections we should celebrate the
memorial of that which was the price thereof. How far did the deliverance of
Israel from Egypt, and the destroying Angel come short of this? and yet that
was thought worthy to be remembered with the solemnity of a Passover, so long as
the Nation did endure. We cannot then think that this can be remembered to the
end of the World (as it ought to be) unless we proclaim it early, and prepare
for it diligently, and celebrate it with the deepest resentments; alas we can
never imprint it sufficiently upon our Souls, without frequent and serious
Commemorations, and he does not understand or not consider the excellency of
this mercy of our Redemption, that does not wish it were written on his heart
in indelible Characters, and carefully set himself (upon this intimation) to
prepare to make the most grateful memorial of his enfranchisement by the Death
of Jesus.

. 5. Wherefore it is our duty to render most humble and hearty thanks to
Almighty God, for that he has given his Son our Savior Jesus Christ, not only
to die for us: but also to be our spiritual food and sustenance in that holy
Sacrament.] The second part of the Communicants Duty is to receive it with
thanksgiving; for if we are obliged to praise God for the least and most common
Mercies, then sure our ordinary praises are not sufficient for this, which is
the first, the greatest and the foundation of all the rest: when we remember
our unworthiness of such unspeak^able mercies we cannot but return our most
humble thanks; and when we reflect upon the benefit we have by them, surely we
shall offer up our most hearty praises: Because God has not only spared us
(when he might have destroyed us) and set ordinary food before us (as the King
of Israel did, 2 Kings 6.22, 23.) but he has ransomed us fully by the
Sacrifice of his Son, John 15.13. and made us a Feast upon the remainders of
this Sin-offering: this shows his Justice is fully satisfied, in that he
receives us into the nearest Unions: and our admission to eat and drink of our
Lords body and blood, is not only to show forth that there is a great expiation
for all the World, but to assure us that we may have an interest in it, and
shall be particularly forgiven, as the benefit of the Sacrifices of old were
supposed to descend upon all that were admitted to eat thereof. Now this pledge
of Gods peculiar love, and this seal of a gracious Pardon, does give such
courage and strength to poor Sinners, that the believing it is called spiritual
food and nourishment, and eating and drinking the body and blood of Christ: for
it even ravishes the Soul of the humbled Penitent to receive such a Testimony
of Gods being reconciled to him. Hence are all those ecstasies of joy which
holy Men here express, and God has on purpose instituted this Ordinance to be
a most solemn and mysterious manner of offering up these humble and hearty
thanks, for which cause it is called the Cup of blessing (...). Heb. 13.15.
(...), 1 Cor. 10.16. (...) Origin in Cells. l. 8.
and the Eucharist that is the office of Thanksgiving. Oh summon up therefore
all your powers, and labor so to affect your hearts with these incomparable
acts of the divine goodness, that you may here offer up his praises in the
highest key, and rejoice before him with the most aff^ctionate gratulations.

. 6. Which being so divine and comfortable a thing to them who receive it
worthily, and so dangerous to them who will presume to receive it unworthily,
my duty is to exhort you in the mean season, First, To consider the dignity of
that holy mystery, and the great peril of the unworthy receiving thereof.] This
Sacrament like all things that are high and fair, has excellency enough to
invite us to desire it, and yet danger sufficient to make us afraid to go about
it rashly: And here our spiritual guide having surveyed them both, makes a
faithful report, as Caleb and Joshuah did, Numb. 14.6, 7. he does not deny
there is hazard and pains in the attempt, but the honor and advantage does far
outweigh them both: It is (he considers) a Divine (...): Divinissimum
Sacramentum, vocatur apud Antiquos Patres.
thing (as the Ancients called it) to be a Companion of Gods Table, and to be
made partaker of his nature: and also it is the sweetest Mihi ante omnia and
supra omnia summa dulcedo. Romans Missal.
comfort in the World, to behold these lively representations of our perfect
expiation, to receive the pledges of pardon and immortality; so that humble and
devout receivers do often find their hearts transported with ecstasies of holy
joy, and ravishments of delight in the due performance of this duty. On the
other side our spiritual guide considers, that for the obstinate and profane,
for those that have sinned, and will sin, it is very dangerous to press into
this Celestial Banquet, for such presume merely upon the outward part, and
would fain persuade themselves, this will acquit their old scores, so that they
may more freshly begin to sin again; but God is not so mocked, and therefore
they provoke him, abuse the mystery, and delude their own Souls. Wherefore upon
the whole inquiry the Minister does exhort us to spend the time between this
and the Sacrament well, for if we come not to it, we lose this divine comfort,
if we come unworthily, we run into an unknown danger; he is unwilling therefore
we should be deprived of the comfort, or incur the mischief: And therefore he
does exhort us to prepare, for so we shall be sure of the advantage, and avoid
the Evil. Now there are two things especially to be done in this mean season;
the first is Consideration of the dignity of the Sacrament, which St. Paul
calls discerning 1 Corin. 11.29. (...). Just. Mart. Apol. 2. 1 Cor. 11.21.
the Lords body, that is making much difference between this and our ordinary
food. The second is that which St. Paul and we both call Examination, 1 Corin.
11.28. And these are no more than what every prudent man considers before he
set upon any great affair. First, He surveys the nature of the work. Secondly,
He examines his own fitness to undertake it. Thus did Solomon when he was to
build the Temple, 1 Kings 3.3.8, 9. and when a marriage with Saul's Daughter was
proposed to David; Seems it (says he) a light thing unto you to be a Kings
Son, etc. so must we meditate of this divine Ordinance and say to our own
Souls: O how dreadful is this place! Genesis 28.17. seems it a small thing unto
thee to be feasted with God, waited on by Angels, fed with the body of Jesus,
and refreshed with a Cup of that saving blood which has attoned the sins of
the World? What means this secret? that so poor a Wretch, and sinful a Rebel,
should receive so mighty a favor, and be received to so near embraces? How can
I approach to these Terrible Mysteries till I have pulled back the Veil, and
worshipped him that feeds my body to convey grace to my Soul, and makes that
stoop to the Eye of sense, which Angels cannot behold with open faces? The
Minister's considering this before, does not excuse us from considering it
also, but we our selves must (as he advises) consider withal the dignity to
make us full of desires, and humble; and the danger to put us upon the
strictest care and preparation; And if the peril of unworthy receiving do only
make us more diligent to come well, it becomes its own Cure, and the
consideration of this danger makes, that really there is none to those who come
humbly, esteeming this Ordinance as it does deserve.

. 7. And so to search and examine your own Consciences (and that not lightly,
and after the manner of dissemblers with God: but so) that ye may come holy and
clean to such an Heavenly Feast, in the marriage garment required by God in
holy Scripture, and be received as worthy partakers of that holy Table.] Having
spent some time in a serious contemplation of the dignity of this mystery, our
next duty is to search and try how we are fitted for it: we must not only
admire the Guest, but prepare and cleanse the House for his reception, and if
we have done the first part so, as that we have begot in our Souls a due esteem
of the blessed Jesus, we shall not dare to bring him into a filthy heart, the
receptacle of his Enemies and his Murderers. When Augustus found but mean
entertainment at the House of a Roman Citizen to whom he was invited, he
accounted it a disrespect to his Person, and in anger said, Sir I thought you
and I had not been so familiar: but our Lord is not offended at the meanness of
his treat, if there be no mixtures of uncleanness and iniquity. Pythagoras his
mystical precept, not to cast Bread into a draught (...).
, may fitly warn us not to put this Bread of Life into a Soul more odious to
the Eyes of God, than the receptacles of abomination can be to ours. How
careful was Joseph and Nicodemus to wrap his dead body in the purest linen?
and shall we show a less regard to his Person now that he lives for ever? But
surely no Christian need be urged to so plain and so necessary a Duty: only let
us note those excellent directions for the manner of doing it which are here
given us: viz. That which we must search is the the Records of Conscience,
which if we examine Salvatorem nostrum suscepturi totis viribus debemus nos cum
iplius adjutorio praeparare and omnes latebras animae nostrae diligenter
aspicere, ne forte sit in nobis aliquod peccatum absconditum, quod and
conscientiam nostram confundat, and oculos divina Majestatis offendat: Ambros.
de Sacram.
seriously and strictly we may find there an impartial account of all the good
we have omitted, and all the evil which we have committed, for there are those
remembrances, which will either accuse or excuse us at the holy Table, Romans
2.15. Wherefore we must take heed that we do not this lightly, only out of
Custom before a solemn time, or merely that we may seem to have done it; as
most men do, who only gently touch these sores, and give a slight and
superficial glance, at some of their greatest or latest committed sins, but
never care for searching into the bottom, and looking into the inward Corners
of their Corruptions. These, alas, are but Dissemblers with God: who only seek
for some matter to confess, and tell a sad story, without any sorrow or real
purposes of amendment, yet call this preparation, and come to this Sacrament
with expectations of pardon and acceptance. But truly we had as good do
nothing, neither God nor Conscience will so excuse us; we do but lose our
labor, and cheat our selves with a shadow for the substance, unless we do it
impartially, and with real designs to see our sins clearly, and be humbled
deeply for them, so that we may hate and forsake them for ever hereafter. Now
that our Examination may be thus performed, let us (as the wise man advises)
Remember the end and we shall never do amiss, Ecclus. 7.16. We must consider
therefore in the present case, That we are so to try our selves, First, That we
may come to this Heavenly Feast, holy, and adorned with the Wedding Garment,
Math. 22.2. that is, we must examine, not only till we see our sin, but till we
hate it, and instead of those filthy rags, have put on pure and pious
dispositions, which are that clean Linen, even the Righteousness of the
Saints, Revel. 19.8. for by these Ornaments are holy Souls fitted for that
Celestial Company which is to be met at this Solemnity. And secondly, another
end of our Examination is, that we may be accepted by God himself as worthy
Communicants, that he who sees the heart may approve the sincerity of our
Repentance; and the great King who comes in to see the Guests may by his
gracious estimation supply the defects of our performance, and call us worthy,
though strictly we are not so. It is not that men may think we have duly
prepared, but that the All-seeing God may receive us, that is treat us nobly,
and entertain us kindly (as the word to receive signifies, Math. 18.5. Act.
21.17.) at this Heavenly Banquet: And can we think a formal search will procure
these graces, or prevail for the divine acceptance: nothing less than a through
Repentance will suffice to this end, and how to perform that the next Paragraph
will discover.

. 8. The way and means thereto is first to examine your lives and Conversations
by the Rule of Gods Commandments, and whereinsoever, ye shall perceive your
selves to have offended, either by Will, Word, or Deed, there to bewail your
own sinfulness, and to confess your selves to Almighty God with full purpose of
amendment.] If all that has been said have convinced us of the necessity and
advantage of a strict preparation, and made us resolve to spare no pains that
we may come worthily; The Church has in the next place provided, the clearest
discovery of the way and means thereunto, which can be expressed in so few
words: This present Sentence is a direction to Repentance, which is the
preparation that Christ himself requires, Math. 3.2, 3. A duty that our sinful
life makes to be always necessary; yet the dignity of this Sacrament requires
it should be done with more than ordinary care now, so that here is a full
description of all its Parts. First, Examination for sin by the Rule of Gods
Commandmen^s, which 1 Cor. 11.28. is put to signify all the rest: but having
largely treated of this before, Part. 1. Sect. 3.. 5. etc. we shall only add,
that if we have done this well there will arise from it, Secondly, A sight of
sin, for by comparing our lives with the Rule of Gods Law we shall plainly
discern wherein we have gone aside, in greater or lesser matters: and we have
not searched enough, till we have found out all our ungodly, unjust, or
uncharitable actions, all our false or vain, filthy or profane, speeches, and
remembered as many as is possible of our evil, malicious, covetous, wanton and
proud thoughts; especially if the Will Fecit quisque quantum voluit: Seneca

Voluntas facti origo est, quae nec tunc quidem liberatur, cum aliqua
difficultas perpetrationem ejus intercepit. Tertul.


have consented to them, for then our thoughts are directly sinful, and if we
sin in will, the outward Act would follow but for want of opportunity: And
surely the serious consideration of all these will fill our hearts with sorrow,
and our Eyes with tears, which is the third Part, viz. Contrition, and the
bewailing of our own sinfulness. The sorrows of David, and the Repentance of
St. Peter, showed themselves in Floods of tears, and were too big to be
confined within, but we are apt to take off our Eye too soon, before we see our
guilt, or apprehend our misery, which makes our hearts so obdurate, and
unrelenting; yet if we lose the favor of our Patron, or are despoiled of our
goods, or follow a dear friend to the Grave, we fill the World with our
Clamours, and bewail our selves with great expression; but we offend God and
lose our Souls, and suffer Satan to rob us of our graces and our hopes, and are
as unconcerned as that Grecian Boy, who was silent and followed his Game, while
he saw his Fathers House rifled, but cried out when his sport was interrupted.
If ever we would shed a tear, can we have a sadder object? can we grieve for
any misery that equals this? especially shall we be unaffected when unfeigned
sorrow will obtain a pardon? If the baseness of sin do not move us, the
goodness of our Heavenly Father methinks should melt us, and when we feel the
weight, then let us ease our selves. Fourthly, By a sorrowful Confession of our
sins in Thought, Word, and Deed, with all their aggravations, with shame and a
great confusion laying open our sores to our Heavenly Physician; and this we
must do so as to show our need, and our desire of a Pardon, as also to declare
that we condemn these our evil doings, and resolve never to do the like again
Confessio enim satisfactionis consilium est, dissimulatio contumaciae. Tert. de
poen.
, if we may be forgiven for those that are past; for our Confession signifies
nothing, Confessio autem Erroris est professio desinendi: Raban. Maur. de inst.
Cler. l. 2.
if it be separated from, Fifthly, Unfeigned Purposes of amendment, Prove.
28.13. Who would value the submission of him that had injured him, unless his
Confession of his fault were a testimony of his sorrow, and an engagement not
to offend again? These purposes are the last, but the chiefest part of our
Repentance, without which it will appear our Examination was slight and
superficial, our sight of sin none at all, or very transient; our sorrow forced
and hypocritical, our Confession formal if not odious, because to confess and
not resolve to amend, is to tell the Almighty what we will do, not to bewail
that which we have already done. Wherefore let all the parts of our Repentance
aim at, and end in, these hearty purposes of new obedience: And since God has
given us so full directions, and so fair an opportunity against this Sacrament,
and several days time yet to do this in, let us resolve to go through all these
parts of a true Repentance, that so we may have our pardon sealed in this
Ordinance, and be admitted to renew our Covenant.

. 9. And if ye shall perceive your offenses to be such, as are not only against
God, but also against your Neighbor, then ye shall reconcile your selves unto
them, being ready to make restitution and satisfaction, according to the
uttermost of your Powers, for all injuries and wrongs done by you to any
others. When we come to Feast with God we must take all possible care that our
minds may be like the top of Mount Olympus, silent and serene, without the
least wind or storm of any Passion to disturb it; Our Repentance (as before)
must be so sincere, as to procure our peace with God; and our Charity (as we
are now directed) must be so complete as to reconcile us to all the World; and
so neither the amazing fears of Gods anger shall discompose us, nor the
confused motions of anger (...). Philo. leg. alleg. l. 2.
or revenge disquiet us, nor yet the sense of received injuries disorder our
Brethren, at this holy Feast of Love. For our Lord has instituted it to unite
his friends Contesseratio est mutuae dilectionis in membris Ecclesiae inter se:
Tertul.

Ignoramus sine pace Communionem: Hieron. ep. 62.


in the Bond of inviolable Amity: it is the Observation of Cato in Plutarch,
that public Festivals, Mensam appara, contentio sublata est: Proverb. Ben.
Syrae.
and common Tables are an excellent means to compose differences, and beget
Charity, and the Fathers believe that our Savior (though speaking in the
Jewish Phrase of being reconciled, before we offered our gift) Math. 5.23. did
directly aim at this Sacrament (afterward to be established) and by those words
did enjoin every Communicant to be reconciled to those who had any cause of
complaint against them, under the penalty of their being rejected by God. The
Jewish Doctors teach that the Lord will not forgive the injuries between a Man
and his Neighbor, unless the Persons be first reconciled: Hence it was that
the Jews were ordered to ask, and give mutual forgiveness before the Vespers of
the Feast of Expiation; and the Primitive Church would not admit those that
were at Enmity to this Holy Communion Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 93. Council.
Agathens. 2. Can. 31.
. Now because in all differences there are two parties, this Paragraph directs
the offending person what to do, the next him that is offended. First, He that
has given his Brother cause of complaint against him, is directed to go to him
that has taken the offense (whether justly or unjustly says Theophylact. in
Math. 5.) and endeavor to appease him, and if possible to win his love by
entreaties; and where there is a real injury, by acknowledging the fault, and
desiring forgiveness: Neither should any Man refuse to go first and desire
peace Dissensio ab aliis, a te reconciliatio incipiat. Seneca.

Nec Dicas ipsius est me convenire, hoc enim signum est superbiae cordis: R.
Jon lib. de Timor. ap. Capellum in Math. 5.


for fear lest it should be thought a disparagement to him, for (as the
Philosopher who first submitted did observe) he is the best and most honorable
Person, who first moves for Peace: nor yet may we neglect to go upon pretense
that we are the more wronged of the two, for be it so, yet let us imitate the
Example of God himself who is glorified in Heaven and Earth, in that he first
offers peace to his poor Creatures who have so highly offended him; he
beseeches us to be reconciled to him when he could easily destroy us, and can
it be our dishonor to be like God? It is possible the World may judge this to
be a poor Spirit, but what then? since it is honorable in the sight of God:
What if our Neighbor shall refuse this offer? We have done our part, and left
upon him the guilt of the Contention, and the blot of an implacable and
malicious Person; and whatever the event be, we have quieted our mind, and
imitated our dearest Master in our condescension and Charity, whose memorial we
come here to celebrate. But secondly, if the injury be great, and have hurt the
body, the fame, or the estate of our Brother, then a bare desire of
reconciliation in private is not sufficient, either to testify our sorrow, or
to make him satisfaction Si res aliena propter quam peccatum est, cum reddi
possit, non redditur, non agitur poenitentia, sed fingitur: August. ep. ad
Maced.
. But we must (as Zachaeus did) offer public compensation for all wrongs and
trespasses, and must make restitution of all ill-gotten or wrongfully-detained
goods, as far as our ability extends, and if the wronged party do require it:
because unless we please him we cannot please God Non condonatur peccatum nisi
restituatur ablatum. August. ibid.
who forgives offenses directly against himself without any satisfaction from
us, but does not remit those against men, until we have contented them, and if
possible obliged them to intercede for us: And Oh happy were it for
Christendom, if this were punctually observed, we should have fewer injuries,
speedier reconciliations, and more peace with God and one another; but whoever
does neglect his part of this duty, let him know that the hands full of rapine
and injustice, the mouths full of lying and slander, the hearts full of rancour
and malice, cannot receive the Lord Jesus, nor come to this Sacrament unless it
be to their Condemnation; wherefore let every man beware, and strive to make
peace.

. 10. And being likewise ready to forgive others that have offended you, as ye
would have forgiveness of your offenses at Gods hands, for otherwise the
receiving of the Holy Communion does nothing else but increase your Damnation.]
As the offending Party is by Jesus commanded to offer reconciliation, Math.
5.24. so is the offended also enjoined to be ready to accept it, Mark 11.25.
Luke 17.3, 4. Colos. 3.13. for the deep resentments of our wrongs, our fury and
purposes of revenge for small injuries, do often discourage those that have
offended, and keep them back from making their acknowledgments, and thus both
are equally guilty. The one for beginning the strife, the other because he will
not let it have an end, unless we shall say, that he that is hard to be
appeased, is the greater Criminal, because he perpetuates the quarrel, and
hinders Charity more than the first offense: If then we have been slandered or
affronted, wronged or oppressed, our duty is to show our selves willing and
easy to be reconciled, so that if the injurious Man or Woman come to us, we
must not stand too much upon terms ^r aggravations, nor require infamous or
unreasonable satisfactions, but as lightly as we can, must grant a Pardon,
Gravissimum poenae ^enus ^st contumeliosa ^^nia Seneca.
and if they do not come to confess the fault, we must excuse it, and im^^t^ i^
t^ their ignorance or mistake, and forgive them (...) our hearts, renouncing
all purposes of revenge; and ^h^ther they come or no, let us deal with our
fel^^w servant, as we desire God should deal with us; We have offended by many
and grievous sins, the Majesty of Heaven, and as we ask pardon always Hom^,
sine peccato es^e ^e^ p^^es, and vis tibi sempe^ dimitti, dimitte semper;
quantum vis tibi dimitti, tantum dimitte, quoties vis tibi dimitti, toties
dimitte, imo quia vis totum tibi dimitti, totum dimitte: Petr. Chrysol.
we should always forgive, as great things, as often, as freely, and as fully,
as we desire or need to be forgiven: which unless we do, Christ assures us our
own sins shall not be remitted: Math. 6.14, 15. and 18.35. and then we shall
have no reparation of our wrong neither from God nor Man, but by exacting a
smaller Debt, we bring the most terrible Creditor of all against us. Let us
then beware that our pride and threatenings, our difficulty of access, or
scornful receiving of our submitting Brother, do not hinder the Peace, and pull
upon us the Divine Vengeance for heavier provocations, Math. 18.34, 35.
Finally, we are taught that till Repentance have reconciled us to God, and
Charity to our Neighbor, it is dangerous and unsafe to come to this Mystery:
for it is bold and presumptuous for the obdurate sinner and the implacable Man
to think to Feast with Jesus the Savior of Penitents, and the Prince of Peace,
1 Cor. 11.29. He that upholds the quarrel, or refuses to repent, is in a state
of Condemnation, for his obstinacy against God, and his Malice against his
Fellow Servants, and if in that estate he presume to come to this Holy
Sacrament, he shall be the more surely if not more speedily condemned for this
impious profanation: Such a wretch indeed would have been sentenced (if he so
continued) although he had not come hither, but he does increase his sad
portion, by putting Christ's Body into a filthy Soul, and taking the holy
Symbols into those receptacles of rage and anger, cruelty and revenge, which
Jesus hates as the Infernal Pit: Which ought to make us all diligent to
endeavor after a true Repentance and unfeigned Charity, and to resolve to part
with our sins and our malice, and then it shall be safe, and blessed to us, to
approach: the terror is not to affright us from this Heavenly Feast, but from
impenitence and an angry spirit, which turn this food of life into very poison.

. 11. Therefor if any of you be a Blasphemer of God, an hinderer or slanderer
of his Word, an Adulterer, or be in Malice, or Envy, or in any other grievous
Crimes, Repent you of your sins, or else come not to that holy Table: lest
after the taking of that holy Sacrament the Devil enter into you, as he entered
into Judas, and fill you full of all iniquities, and b^ing you to destruction
both of Body and Soul.] The first Ages of Christianity considered how
positively our Savior had forbidden us to give that which is holy to the
malicious, and to cast this Pearl (as they interpreted it) of the Lords Body to
those that wallow in Swinish pleasures, Math. 7.6. and observed how plainly St.
Paul had described the danger of such if they should receive it, 1 Cor. 11.29.
Wherefore they did very strictly forbid all such to approach these Mysteries,
and by Canons of Councils, and the Sentence of Excommunication did keep back
all notorious sinners; And if any such presumed to come; the Jewish Priests did
not more zealously oppose the Kings offering Incense, 2 Chronicles. 26.17. than the
Christian Bishops did the profane accesses, even of the Emperors themselves
(to whom in all things else they submitted) Thus was Philippus the Emperor
placed among the Poenitentes, before he might be Communicated. Eusebius. hist.
Eccles. l. 6 cap. 25. Anno 246.
And Theodosius was resolutely kept back by the famous St. Ambrose Theodor. in
hist. Tripa^tita l. 9. c. 30.
till he had bitterly lamented the slaughter of the Thessalonians. St.
Chrysostom also protested he would dye rather than Administer this Sacrament
to the Unworthy. But besides all this when the Celebration was to begin, then
did the Deacon stand up, and proclaim, that all unbaptized, Infidels,
Heretics, etc. Nullus Catechumenus, nullus auditor, nullus infidelis, nullus
haereticus, Qui primam orationem perfecistis Discedite, pueros Recipite Matres,
Ne Quis contra aliquem: Constable. Apost.
should depart, and none to stay that had any quarrel, nor any to come in
Hypocrisy: which custom is imitated by our Church in this Denunciation,
wherein we most plainly show obstinate sinners their danger, as St. Peter did
to Simon Magus, Acts 8.21, 22, 23. we appeal to their own Consciences, charging
them to examine faithfully, and if they find themselves guilty, we warn them as
they love their Souls, not to come till they have repented. We do not finally
bid them not to come at all, but only to stay till they have repented; because
it may be useful (as St. Augustine notes) for such notorious offenders to stay
till another Communion, and to meditate, that their being excluded here on
Earth, whilst others enter in to have Communion with Christ, is the sad Emblem
of that Day, when (if they do not now repent) they shall see many holy Persons
go in and sit down with Abraham, etc. in the Kingdom of God, while they
themselves are cast out: So that whether by Excommunication or by this Warning
they are excluded for the present, it is the Ministers love to them, and is
intended only for their Souls health, Quid prodest non ejici e coetu piorum?
nam ejici, remedium est and gradus ad recuperandam sanitatem, ejectionem
meruisse summa malorum est. Cypr. de dupl. Martyr.
to bring them to repentance that they may be fit against another opportunity.
As to the sins enumerated, they are the most scandalous and heinous both
against God and Man, viz. Swearing and Blasphemy, Opposing or despising Gods
Word, Adultery and Fornication, Malice and Envy, with other grievous Crimes,
such as Murder or Theft, Drunkenness or Oppression, of which whosoever is
guilty, St. Paul affirms, they shall not enter into the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor.
6.9, 10. and therefore how can they be received to this Holy Table? It were
easy to show out of Tertullian, St. Cyprian, and the ancient Councils that
every one of these offenders were of old rejected, and not suffered ever to
come into these Mysteries, unless upon a very great Repentance, and public
humiliation, after five or seven years separation: Which pious Custom did make
very much for the honor of this Sacrament, and for the bringing such to
repentance, that so they might escape everlasting vengeance: The very Heathens
would not offer their Sacrifice until the Herald had warned all unhallowed
persons to depart, nor might the Sacrificer proceed till he were assured there
were none present but such as were duly prepared Hostis, Vinctus, Mulier,
Virgo, Exesto: (...). Stuckius.

Apud Graecos Sacerdos; quaerit (...) Resp. populi (...). Sard. de Mor. Gent.
l. 3. c. 15.


. Have we not then much more reason to enjoin the absence of all wicked
wretches from this Heavenly Mystery? And yet we imitate our Master herein who
did not by force drive out the Jews, John 8. but set their own Conscience upon
them: Even so Nos a Communione quenquam prohibere non possumus, nisi aut sponte
confessum, aut in aliquo judicio Ecclesiastico vel seculari, nominatum atque
convictum. Aug. Homil. 50.
we violently cast out none, unless public and convicted Criminals: But we
appeal to every Man's Conscience, and set before them the danger of coming with
wicked purposes, for so they imitate Judas, who notwithstanding that plain
Caution, Math. 26.24. sat down, with a heart full of Treachery, and
Covetousness, John 13.26, 27. but instead of being a partaker of Christ, Satan
did enter into him, and confirmed his wicked purposes, so that he came to
destruction of Body and Soul. Repent therefore, Oh you profane Wretches, being
warned by so terrible an Example, or else your judgment is inevitable; for if
you continue in these damnable sins, you die; and if you think to find favor
by laying hold of Christ's Body, you are mistaken Jerem. 11.15. Nunquid carnes
Sanctae, auferent a te malitias tuas? Vulg. Lat. Vide Math. 12.45. Heb. 10.26.
, for you profane the mystery, violate Gods Covenant, trample on the Blood of
Christ, to which you have no right so long as you live in open defiance to his
Laws; and if you will come thus, you give Satan more power over you, both to
corrupt you and to ruin you, yet if you stay away you cannot escape unless you
do repent, and if you would do that, after a while you might be received;
However we have delivered our Souls by giving you this warning, do not you cast
away yours by despising it.

. 12. And because it is requisite that no man should come to the Holy
Communion, but with a full trust in Gods Mercy and with a quiet Conscience,
therefore if there be any of you, who by this means cannot quiet his own
Conscience but requires farther Comfort or Counsel.] The desperate stupidity
of bold Sinners who will rush unprepared upon this Sacrament, has forced the
Minister to speak like Boanerges, in those thundering denunciations; yet lest
while he is rouzing those from security, the humble Christian should be
terrified into despair, the Church sends him like Barnabas, more gently to
treat with those who tremble at Gods word. To let such know that a lively
Faith, and quiet Conscience are as necessary preparatives for the Eucharist, as
either Charity or Repentance: And that the poor Penitent may not come without
these comfortable graces, he is advised to call in the aid of a spiritual man,
when his own endeavors will not produce this happy Peace. Contrition is the
most natural way indeed to procure a well-grounded Faith; and yet sometimes,
though we fast and pray, examine and confess, read and meditate, yet our fears
may expel the hopes of Mercy, and then all our endeavors will end in a sad
dejection of spirit, upon the discovery of our own vileness: In this Case our
doubts and sad apprehensions (though reasonable enough) may proceed too far,
insomuch that they may hinder that gratitude and joy, those praises and acts of
Faith and Love which we ought to express at this Sacrifice of Thanksgiving; and
if so, we must use some means to allay them, or else the duty will begin with
trembling, go on without pleasure, and end in scruple and greater
dissatisfactions. St. Paul has told us that we ought to be fully persuaded in
our minds before we do any indifferent thing, Been praecipiunt qui vetant
quicquam agere quod dubitant aequum sit an iniquum. Cicer. off. l. 1.

(...): Plutar.


Romans 14.5. and if we may not eat common things with a doubting Conscience, we
shall much more be condemned in our selves, if we do not remove these fears
before we eat of this Celestial food: Our own strength it may be is not
sufficient, but then we must not smother our trouble which is increased by
concealment but reveal it to our spiritual Counselors, who will joyfully serve
any afflicted Penitent, and neither God nor good Men will ever quench the
smoking Flax, or break the bruised Reed.

. 13. Let him come to me, or some other discreet and learned Minister of Gods
Word, and open his grief, That by the Ministry of Gods holy Word, he may
receive the benefit of Absolution, together with Ghostly Counsel, and advice to
the quieting of his Conscience, and the avoiding of all scruple, and
doubtfulness.] It is neither prudent nor safe always to rely upon our own
Judgment of our selves, for another Eye sees more of us, than is discerned by
our own. In the dangers of our body we consult the Physician, in the
intricacies of our estate we advise with the Lawyer, and in the Case of our
immortal Souls why do we not advise with our Spiritual Physicians? (...):
Theodoret. (...). l. 1.
for they are appointed to direct the ignorant, confirm the doubtful, and
comfort the disconsolate by Christ himself. We must not be ashamed of so
beneficial a duty since the Scripture commands it, James 5.16. and we have
Examples of those in Holy Writ, who did confess their Sins to St. John Baptist,
Math. 3.16. and to the Apostles, Acts 19.18. and in all the Primitive times the
Christians did frequently repair to their Bishops and Ministers, not only to
confess their faults, but to be satisfied in their doubts, and assisted in
order to a pious life: and were it now more often practiced, we should soon
perceive the great advantages thereof: It is certain this Office has been much
abused by the Romanists, among whom it is become formal, slight, and vendible,
an Engine to unlock secrets, and a suppletory to excuse all other parts of
Repentance, so that Confession to a Priest, is by most of the vulgar thought a
sufficient preparation for this holy Sacrament: but this ought not to cause us
wholly to reject it, since with us it is restored to its Primitive use, for we
direct all Men always to confess to God Quidam Deo, quidam sacerdotibus
confitenda esse peccata dicunt, quorum utrumque non sine magno fructu intra
Sanctam Ecclesiam sit. Council. Cabilon. 2. c. 13. Anno 813. ita Gratian de
poenit. did. 1. cap. 89.
but some also to confess their faults, and reveal their doubts to the Priest,
especially in these three Cases. First, When we are disquieted with the guilt
of some sin already committed; or secondly, When we cannot conquer some lust or
passion: or thirdly, When we are afflicted with any intricate scruples;
particularly, whether we may now be fit to receive this blessed Sacrament or
no: if any of these be our Case, then First, We must choose prudently,
preferring our own Minister, if he be tolerably fitted, or else we may elect
another that is Prudent and Pious, Learned and Judicious Facit enim justitia ut
nulla sit fraudis metus, facit etiam prudentia, ut nulla erroris sit suspicio.
Ambros. de off. l. 2. c. 8.
, one who may manage this weighty concern gravely and privately, and dispatch
it wisely and fully to our satisfaction: Being thus provided of a guide;
secondly, Let us deal sincerely and open our grief to him as fully and
impartially as we would do a wound to the skilful Surgeon, let not fear or
shame stop our mouths, for if the Minister be pious he will be secret and
compassionate, if he be discreet he will discover, whether it be an heavy
guilt, or a slight repentance, love of sin, or a strong Temptation, fear or
scruple that has occasioned this trouble. And so thirdly, He has threatenings
and promises, instructions and directions out of Gods Holy Word, which being
dexterously applied, and duly ministered, may be a perfect Cure: If the
Conscience be wounded with guilt, he has power from Christ upon our Contrition
to give us Absolution: if it be the fury of a passion, or the violence of a
temptation; his piety and experience has store of Counsel for the effectual
suppressing thereof: if it be doubts and fears, his learning and judgment
affords sufficient comfort and satisfaction, through the blessing of Almighty
God: Wherefore I do heartily wish we were more frequent in these applications
to our Ministers, it would argue that we were more concerned for a pardon, and
more sensible of our guilt; nay it would show we did perfectly hate sin, when
we could be content to suffer the shame of discovery, so we might have the
benefit of amendment; Consider how comfortable and how profitable it may be to
have the particular Prayers and Advice, the Judgment and Experience of an holy
Man of the sacred Function, especially at this time; No doubt it would make our
receiving more sweet and more safe, and gain us great comforts and
encouragements in order thereunto: And thus we see here is comprised in this
Warning so full directions in order to the address to the Holy Table, that
there needs no Paraphrase to make it plainer, only God grant us to be as
willing to do as we are able to understand these things, Amen.

SECT. IX. Of the Exhortation to the Communion.
. 1. OUR Lord Jesus has not fixed the time, nor determined how often we should
partake of his last Supper, that so we might have an opportunity to make it a
free will offering, and that he might by our voluntary and often coming, make
an experiment of our Love: But this gracious liberty has been perverted, and
some have from thence taken occasion to do it seldom, and others wholly to
leave it undone: We read that of old in the Church of Alexand^ia, many of the
people went out after the Reading of the Gospel, but John surnamed the
Almsgiver then Patriarch there, followed them out and sharply reproving their
neglect, said he came to administer the Eucharist to them, neither would he
leave them, till with him they all returned to the Holy Table. With such an
importunity do we here seem to follow those who do so unworthily turn their
backs upon these Mysteries. We find St. Ambrose, Si quotidianus est cibus cur
post annum illum sumis? Ambros. de Sacr. l. 4. S. Chrysostom. Ser. 3. in Ephesians.
Augustine. Epis. ad Januar. 118.
and St. Chrysostom, as also St. Augustine, in their times complaining of and
blaming the peoples omissions in this kind: But sure we have now much more
reason; since the neglect of this S^crament is grown far more common and
scandalous, some by ill principles glorying in their fo^bear^nce, others out of
Worldly carefulness excusing their absence* and the most as unwilling to take
p^ins being become too remiss. To redress which evils our Church has provided
this excellent Exhortation, both to convince us that it is our duty to come,
and to discover the danger if we wilfully stay away: The Order whereof the
following Analysis will show, and the discourse annexed will represent how
agreeable it is to so pious a design.

The Analysis of the Exhortation to the Communion.
. 2. This Necessary Exhortation contains Five Parts. 1. The Preface, being an
Indication of 1. The Persons invited, Dearly beloved Brethren,
2. The Time when, on -- I intend, by Gods grate, to celebrate
3. The Thing to which, etc. the Lords Supper,

2. The Invitation, calling them all, 1. Most plainly, unto which, in Gods
behalf, I bid you all that are here present;
2. Most earnestly, And beseech you, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that ye
will not refuse to come thereto, being so lovingly called and bidden by God
himself.

3. The Arguments to press it, being 1. A plain Similitude, urged by 1. Setting
it before us, Ye know how grievous and unkind a thing it is, when a man has
prepared a rich feast -- etc.
2. Appealing to us, Which of you in such a case would not be moved? Who would
not think a great injury and wrong done unto him?
3. Applying it to this Case, Wherefore -- take ye good heed lest ye
withdrawing your selves from this holy Supper, provoke Gods indignation against
you.

2. A full Answer to the Excuses, 1. In particular, concerning 1. Business, It
is an easy matter for a man to say, I will not Communicate, because I am
otherwise hindered with -- etc.
2. Sinfulness, If any man say, I am a grievous sinner, and therefore am afraid
to come, wherefore then do ye not -- etc.

2. In general, showing they are all 1. Base, When God calls you are ye not
ashamed to say, ye will not come? When ye should return -- etc.
2. Vain, Consider earnestly with your selves how little such feigned excuses
will avail before God.


3. A proper Example, setting out 1. Such like sinners, They that refused the
feast in the Gospel,
2. With like pretenses, because they had bought a Farm, or would try their
yoke of Oxen, or because -- etc.
3. Sadly doomed, were not so excused: but counted unworthy of the heavenly
feast.


4. An Exhortation to come, from 1. The Ministers care in 1. Preparing, I for
my part shall be ready,
2. Inviting them again, and according to mine Office, I bid you in the Name of
God, I call -- etc.
3. Urging them, I exhort you, as you love your own Salvation, that ye will --
etc.

2. The Love of Christ, And as the Son of God did vouchsafe to yield up his
Soul by death upon the Cross, for your Salvation:
3. The Obligations laid upon us by it, So it is your Duty to receive the
Communion, in remembrance of the Sacrifice of his Death, as he himself has
commanded.
4. The evil of neglecting, viz. 1. The Danger, Which if ye shall neglect to
do, consider -- how great injury ye do to God, and how sore punishment -- etc.
2. The Sin against God, when ye wilfully abstain from the Lords Table,
Men, and separate from your Brethren, -- etc.



5. The Conclusion, expressing, 1. The Ministers hope of them, These things if
ye earnestly consider, ye will by Gods grace return to a better mind.
2. His Charity for them, For the obtaining whereof, we shall not cease to make
our humble Petitions unto Almighty God our heavenly Father.



A Practical Discourse upon this Exhortation.
. 3. Dearly beloved Brethren, on -- I intend by Gods grace to Celebrate the
Lords Supper, unto which in Gods behalf I bid you all that are ^ere present,
and beseech you for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that ye will not refuse to
come thereto, being so lovingly called and bidden by God himself.] The Kingdom
of grace as well as glory, is likened in Scripture to a Banquet, Luke 14.16.
Math. 8.11. and the offers of both are named, our Calling or Invitation, Ephesians.
4.1. 2 Timothy 1.19. and we that now partake of his grace, and are hereafter to
enjoy his glory, are styled the called or invited Guests, Romans 8.28. by a plain
allusion to this Sacred Feast (the Epitome of the Gospel) wherein we are called
without a Figure, and invited to participate of the grace of God: And as it is
the Custom of all Nations 2 Samuel 13.23. 1 Kings 5.9. Job 1.4. (...) -- Hesiod.

(...). Theophylac. Com. in Luc. 14.


to invite those who are designed to partake of the Feast: So has the King of
Heaven now sent his Minister, Math. 22.3. Luke 14.17. most courteously to
salute us in his Name, and to bid us to that Celestial Feast, viz. the Supper
of the Lord which he has made ready for us: The notice is sent thus long
before, because we may prepare suitably to so great an Entertainment, and be
fitted for this, which is the highest Festival in the World. It is true we
receive the Message only from the mouth of a Servant, but it is in the name and
behalf of his great Master, Math. 10.40. Legatus cujusque est quasi quisque.
Dictum Rab.
whose Ambassador he is, so that God himself does beseech us by this
invitation, 2 Cor. 5.20. Haman reckoned it among his highest honors, that
Queen Esther, Chap. 5.12. had invited him to her Banquet, because it was a
signification of the most particular love and friendship, 1 Kings 1.10. and
ought we not to esteem it a greater honor to be requested to Feast with God,
and to receive so sure a pledge that we are his Friends? would it not be
impudent and ungrateful to reject the summons? There are many invited but the
preparations are sufficient for all the World, there is in Jesus Christ here
Communicated, peculiar provision for every Guest, and that very grace which
each single Person can need or desire: Wherefore all that are of Gods Family
(all not excommunicated and incapable) are now invited, high and low, rich and
poor: we are all Brethren, and our Heavenly Father will have us all (as
Lycurgus appointed his Spartans) to sit at the same Table together, to eat of
the same meat and drink of the same Cup, that we may not despise nor envy one
another, but become one Body and one Spirit. Now if it be demanded by what
Authority we Ministers do bid so many and so universally, when we may suppose
diverse to be unfit? We answer, it is our Masters Order Math. 22.9. to bid as
many as we find; for all either are fit, or ought to be so; and we cannot
distinguish, but the Master of the Feast will, so that every man must look to
prepare himself in such wise that he may be approved by the Master, as well as
invited by the Servant, for many be called but few chosen, v. 14. We have
before warned all to prepare, and now we proceed to be very earnest, with those
who are unfitted to make themselves ready; and with those who are ready to come
away. And surely it will be a huge reproach to us if it appear that Satan and
his Accomplices with a touch on the Shoulder Penulam il^ius ego vix tetigi and
tamen remansit: ap. Stuck^um de Conviv.
, or the slightest beckon, can oblige us to a Theater, or a looser Bacchanal:
and yet all the entreaties of God and his Ministers, can scarce obtain our
Company at this Heavenly Feast: But behold and blush! the Lord himself who is
so much above us, does beseech us, Revel. 3.20. the Ministers whom we have so
often denied, do importune us for Christ's Jesus sake (the most moving Oratory
of the meanest Beggars) and all this to engage us to come. In this Holy Feast
his love is manifested, his death remembered, his graces are dispensed, so that
if we have any love for Jesus, any r^membrance of him, or desires after him, we
cannot possibly neglect this loving invitation: such a denial may be
interpreted a disclaiming of our Redeemer, and an affront to that condescending
goodness which calls us only for our own benefit: Why is God so earnest, Isai.
4.1. Revel. 22.17. and his Ministers so importunate? but only because we are so
backward to our own good, and are hard to be entreated to do our selves a
favor; but let us relent at last and yield to so sweet an invitation, and so
plain an expression of the divine kindness to us.

. 4. Ye know how grievous and unkind a thing it is when a man has prepared a
rich Feast, decked his Table with all kind of provision, so that there lacks
nothing but the Guests to sit down, and yet they who are called without any
Cause, most un^hankfully refuse to come, which of you in such Case would not be
moved? who would not think a great injury and wrong done unto him?] Similitudes
taken from matters known and obvious, do most easily inform our understandings,
most strongly convince our judgment, and most vigorously work upon our
affections; Wherefore most of the wisdom of the Oriental Nations, and many of
our Saviors Sermons are delivered in this manner: and of the same nature is
this present metaphor, which is of divine Original, being used by Solomon,
Prove. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. and by a greater than Solomon, Math. 22. Luke 14.
mystically to set out, the baseness of rejecting such off^rs of grace as these
are. So we do now make a fair appeal to all that neglect the Lords Supper, to
which if they give a sincere Answer, it will be their own Condemnation. Imagine
therefore that these Absenters had prepared a noble and plentiful
entertainment; suppose their Table richly furnished with all varieties,
purchased with great care and cost, dressed with much pains and Art, and that
they only expected those, whom they had chosen out of all their Neighbors to
be their Guests, to whom they had designed to express peculiar kindness and
respect: Now if these after many invitations, should so far undervalue the
favor, and despise the Preparations, as to absent themselves without any just
impediment; Let these neglectors of Gods Table tell me, how deeply they
themselves would resent so unkind a refusal, and so apparent a scorn: Would it
not move their patience exceedingly? and could they not more easily put up many
injuries Patior facile injuriam si id est vacuum a contumelia: Pacuv.
than this one affront to their Courtesy? would they ever invite such unworthy
Guests again? If they had the Persons of these ungrateful men as much in their
power as themselves are in Gods, it is like they would make them know what it
was to throw so high a contempt upon them. How fearful was David of Saul's
displeasure for his absence from his Table where he was expected? 1 Samuel 20.4,
5. nor had he stayed away but for fear of his life. Daniel was careful to
conceal it from the King, that he did not eat of the Portion which he sent him,
Dan. 1.10, 11, 12. and refused it only because it was first offered to an Idol.
There are many offenses more hurtful to us, but none more provoking, since
F^stivals are made to signify our respect, and to engage the affections of our
friends (...),

(...) -- Hesiod.


, and who can endure to have his favor trampled on? We are sure the Criminals
themselves would be highly offended at this usage, so that let us in the next
place only desire them to apply it to the present Case.

. 5. Wherefore most dearly beloved in Christ take ye good heed, lest ye
withdrawing your selves from this Holy Supper, provoke Gods indignation against
you.] If we speak the language of our hearts we must confess, we would not
willingly be thus done unto, therefore by our Saviors Rule, Math. 7.12. we
ought not thus to refuse the invitations of a man Nemini suae injuriae leves
videntur. Solust. (...). Tob. 4.14.

Homo semper aliud in se fert, aliud in alio cogitat. Laber.


: and shall we deal worse with God, than we would have men do by us? if we were
so served we should think we had good cause to be moved, and do we well to be
angry? let us observe whether the Almighty have not higher provocations by our
denying to come to this mysterious Solemnity: For first, Let us consider who it
is that invites; not our equal, nor our superior in a few degrees; but the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who shows admirable condescension in that he
will admit us, and does grace us by this invitation with the greatest honor of
which we are capable. Ahasuerus might have taken it ill, if his Princes, Esther
1.3. and Herod, if his Captains, Mark 6.21. had not attended their Royal
Festivals. But for us to reject the Feast with God, is more impudent than for a
Beggar to slight the relief of an Emperor, more base than for a Malefactor to
refuse to eat at the Table of that King who had lately sealed his Pardon, and
were desirous to show him some more peculia^ token of his love. Secondly,
Consider we wha^ it is which is provided for us in this Feast, it is the Lamb
of God which takes away the sins of the World; And oh how much it cost to
furnish the Holy Table thus! H^aven was ransackt, and the Son of God taken from
the embraces of his Bosom, and clothed with r^gs of humanity, instead of Robes
of Glory, but this is not all, this Jesus must be slain with most exquisite
torments, he must smart, and bleed, and die; his body must be all broken, and
his vital blood poured forth, before he could become our Sacramental food: God
could more easily and with less expense, have slain all Creatures in the World
to treat us, but Heaven and Earth with all their store could afford no other
food but this, at which an offended God, and his sinful Creatures could Feast
together; nothing could make such a Sacrament, but the remainders of that
Sacrifice which expiated the sins of the whole World. And can we, dare we
refuse to taste, of that which was so dearly bought for us? Perhaps we think it
is but one dish. It Is true, but in this one it is verified, what the Jews
boasted of their Manna, Wisdom 16.20. viz. that it contains all kinds of tastes,
and suits it self to every Appetite. Christ alone is all in all, Meat and
Medicine. Pardon to the Penitent, light to the ignorant, strength to the weak,
and comfort to the troubled Spirit; he is all that we need or can desire: And
do we slightly pass it by? Thirdly, Add to this that we who are the Persons
invited, do own God for our God, and call Jesus our Lord; nay we have in our
Baptism vowed to be his Servants and Soldiers, so that to go back when he
calls, is treacherously to withdraw In versione Graeca Liturg. (...) (Vide
Hebr. 10.38, 39.) h. e. signis relictis, e bello aufugere.
from our Allegiance, and to break our Baptismal Vow: And besides we do starve
our Souls by depriving them of this Heavenly food, Vt perdunt propriam mortalia
corporia vitam,
Si nequeunt escas sumere corporeas;
Sic animae, nisi deliciis rationis alantur,
Dum verbi aeterni pane carent, pereunt.
Nam quid erit quod dira procul fastidia pellat,
Cum se ipso refugit Men's saturare Deo? Prosp.

so that we are false to God, and injurious to our selves, if we come not to
this Feast. Fourthly, Let us weigh the Reason why our Heavenly Father has
invited us hither, it is no ordinary Festival, but a most mysterious Rite,
wherein (because we are so unapt to be wrought upon (unless it be by sensible
In ratione sacrorum par est animae, and corporis causa, nam plerumque quae non
possunt per animam fieri, fiunt per Corpus: Servius ad Aen.
things) the Symbols which may be seen and tasted are contrived, to remember us
of our great expiation, to encourage us to rely upon it, and to express the
willingness of Jesus to pardon and receive us. We come hither to behold the
price of our Redemption, to embrace Christ with all his graces, and that we may
with all possible joy and gratitude surrender up our Souls, and all our powers
to his service for ever. We come to praise God, to pray for all the World, to
exercise the graces which we have, and to procure those which we want:
Wherefore let us take good heed, lest by abstaining and refusing this Divine
Ordinance, we be found rejecters of Christ, and despisers of the offers of his
grace; He that neglects that Ordinance wherein the whole design of the Gospel
is Acted by the prepared Communicant, wherein our Sa^^our is held out and
remembered, given and received, will scarce acquit himself by pretending that he
does all this by Faith at home; for if so, why do not we act our Faith in Gods
way? or why do we omit the solemnity? unless we would not be so publicly
obliged: We pretend we fear we shall offend God if we come: But do we not anger
him more by staying away without any endeavors to be fitted? Is not God tender
of having his love abused, and his Son despised? Can we think he will not be
displeased at us, whenas in this one act, we affront his goodness, and slight
our own Salvation?

. 6. It is an easy matter for a man to say I will not Communicate, because I
am otherwise hindered with Worldly business: But such excuses are not so easily
accepted and allowed before God.] If the Lord would dispense with our Obedience
as often, and as easily as we can find out an Apology for our neglect, we
should never do any duty at all: for he that is unwilling to obey, and desirous
to be deceived, shall never want excuses so long as Satan can suggest them; and
though they be slight and trifling, and such as we would not accept from our
Neighbor, yet we are so favorable in our own cause, that we fancy they are
sufficient to clear us before God; but alas such excuses do never make the sin
less, and yet they make the Sinner more apt to do evil, and more confident when
he has committed it: Wherefore the Church does prudently vouchsafe to examine
the most principal of those poor pretenses by which men are wont to put off
their Communicating, and to give them a particular answer. First Our Worldly
business, and appointments, our Company and concerns are such (we say) as
cannot at this time be dispensed with: And it is (though rarely, yet sometim^s)
possible some occasion may fall out which can not be put off, nor could not be
foreseen, and yet must not be neglected, and then it may for once excuse us:
but the Church minds us, that this is not so easily accepted by God (who knows
the true state of our affairs) as it is alleged by men (to palliate their own
unwillingness) For First, The Almighty sees that this Plea is often feigned:
because few men are so entangled in the World as not to be able upon a Weeks
notice to gain a day or two of leisure; do not these very men contrive to have
some portions of their time for Recreations and Visits, for Feasts and
discourse with their Friends? but if their Prince or their Patron should send
notice of their coming, they would throw all away to prepare for them; or if
they received intelligence of a cheap purchase or a good Bargain, a few days
were easily spared to accomplish those concerns, and why have they no time nor
leisure for this Sacrament? They could not be always so busy at the Sacrament,
but that instead of contriving their occasions so that they may come, God knows
that many choose and design to make appointments just then, that so they may
have this poor Apology. And for the Company that is with us, if they be good
they will attend us to the Holy Table, if but civil, they will not hinder us,
if they perceive we are resolved to receive; but if they do keep us back, they
are neither our Friends nor Servants of God, and so no matter for their anger,
nor shall we lose by their going away; it is not therefore our Company that
hinders us, only we use it to palliate our sloth and wicked aversation.
Secondly, It is always frivolous; for if we be now so busy, I wonder when we
shall be at leisure, the World says not yet, the flesh says the next
Sacrament, but the Devil says never; and both the former come to this at last;
for if we will not receive till we are so at leisure, as that we have no real
business, nor can pretend any, we shall never receive at all, will not Satan
find us employment, or excuses (think you) against the next Communion? if he
can so keep us off, we may be sure to be deprived of this Holy Feast for ever.
We do more easily allow an excuse now, because we hope to come to the next Qui
non meretur quotidie accipere, non meretur post annum accipere. Aug. in Math. 6.
, but how can we expect to live to another opportunity, who have so lightly
contemned this? May not Death seize us before the next Sacrament? and then we
shall in vain bewail our neglect, and curse that business that prevented the
minding the Salvation of our Souls. Thirdly, It is sometimes Impious; To say we
will not come because we are busy, is to cast a great contempt upon this
Divine Mystery, and is as if we said we will come when we have nothing else to
do; for if we know but of a Market, or an Entertainment, an opportunity of
merriment or recreation, we cannot attend at this Heavenly Fe^st. Do we not
witness to all the World, that we love our Body better than our Souls, our
Friends more than God, and Earth more than Heaven? If we had a due esteem for
spiritual things, is there any business so necessary as to repent, so
profitable, as to make our peace with God, so pleasant, as to receive the
pledges of his love? Or do we think when we choose the World and leave the
Sacrament, that the concern which we pretend, can make us amends for the loss
of our Souls? It is plain, such persons think Months and Years too little for
their affairs and pleasures, but as many hours are too much ^o spare to
remember Christ's love; and that they will despise the greatest benefits to
their Souls, rather than lose the least earthly advantage or delight. So that
these excuses are so far from being accepted by God, that they make the fault
worse, and discover the Person that uses them to be, ordinarily, an Hypocrite
and despiser of holy things, a stupid, Worldly wretch, and therefore either let
us bring a better excuse than this, or not dare to stay away; for this is
nothing before God, who knows we might contrive our affairs so as to come, if
we had a desire to partake hereof.

. 7. If any man say I am a grievous Sinner, and therefore am afraid to come,
Wherefore then do ye not R^p^nt, and amend?] The ground of both these
objections is an undeniable Truth, viz. that unless we have leisure and time to
prepare, and are in some degrees penitent, it is not fit to come to the Holy
Sacrament, but when we draw false Conclusions from these premises, merely to
hide our negligence, the consequence is only the more taking and more
mischievous, because it seems to be deduced from a Truth; And if we be wise and
careful of our own Salvation, we must not rely upon them how specious soever
they seem, till we have duly examined them. As for this second pretense of
staying away because of our sinfulness, it is alleged by three sorts of
Persons. First, By the scrupulous, who think it is humility, and a high esteem
of this Ordinance, that makes them stay away; they pretend they are unworthy of
it, and show more fear of God and Reverence to the Sacrament, because they do
not or dare not come to it: But sure (as St. Ambrose notes Sed aiunt se Domino
defer reverentiam, -- Quis est qui magis honorat, qui mandatis obtemperat, an
qui resistit? Ambr. de poen. l. 1. c. 2.
) it is an odd way to express their Reverence to God, by flying from his
embraces, and living in the neglect of his plain Commands. Our Savior says,
Do this; Luke 22.19. and if they did honor him as the Centurions Servant did
his Master, they would do it, Math. 8, 9. Can any that truly fears Gods
displeasure, be so confident while they disobey a plain Precept? if they were
rightly inform^d they should be as much afraid to stay from the Communion so
carelessly, as to come unworthily. I confess these are dreadful mysteries, but
it is to the Impenitent and Persevering Sinner, whose condition is fearful in
it self, and every Page in Scripture is terrible to such, but why then (says
the Church) do ye not Repent, and turn your scrupulous abstaining into a
penitent address? and then h^re is nothing dismal in this Holy Feast; for there
are none condemned for unworthy receiving, but such as deserve it for other
Iniquities, and (continuing in them) had been sentenced if they had never come
hither. Bullinger complains of the Anabaptists in his time, that they had made
so many scruples about the Lords Supper, and represented this lovely and
comfortable Ordinance so horrible, as to scare many good and tender Persons
from the use of it Hac ratione Coenam domini amabilem and gaudio plenam,
horribilem and tristem faciunt, ac aditum ad eam adeo coarctan^ ut pii quoque
homines ab ea abhorreant: adv. Anabap. lib. 6. cap. 9.
. But let our reverence to this holy Communion be showed rather by diligent
preparation, than captious scruples; for God will never cast any man into
Eternal Flames for striving to do his duty so well as he can, nor did Jesus
institute this Ordinance to be a snare to entangle Souls. Secondly, The truly
humble Christian also pleads this, and wishes with all his heart he durst come,
but he is kept off, by a deep sense of his own guilt, and great unworthiness:
To such I shall observe, that this Feast was not made for Angels and glorified
Saints, but for lowly and Repentant Sinners, it being a Seal of their Pardon,
or at least a most refreshing Declaration of Gods willingness to forgive for
Jesus sake. If their fear did only make them examine more strictly, repent more
heartily, and come more humbly to their Savior, it were filial fear, Sapiente
diffidentia non alia res utilior est mortalibus. Eurip.
Prove. 28.14. and the best disposition in the World for the Eucharist: but when
it drives them from Jesus Stultus est timor and reverentia minus prudens, qui
ad Dominum se vocantem and invitantem, non accedit, sed procrastinat. Gerson.
in Magnif.
who invites and calls all that are heavy laden, Math. 11.28. it is foolish and
unreasonable, and is mixed with some infidelity. Many of these Persons have
already the first part of preparation; viz. a true sorrow for sin: let them
therefore endeavor to add the second, that is, a lively Faith. If they say,
they are so sinful, they cannot believe there is any mercy for them; I ask,
why? is God so hard to Sinners? whom he does court and woo to turn to him,
protesting he desires not their ruin, but longs for their restoration? has
he not given his Son for Sinners, and sent his Ministers to them, and offered
his grace and glory also to engage them to return and live? to be afraid to
live in sin is something, but to be afraid to come in, when our heart is
humbled for it, and desirous to be quit of it, is most unreasonable: but let
them entertain better thoughts of God, and in all humility venture to approach;
if they stay in their sin they die, and if God should reject them they can but
die; but oh blessed venture! to commit their Souls to that infinite mercy,
which never did cast off any in this Case: they that are Sinners, and are
sensible thereof, either at present, or quickly, may be fit to come to this
Celestial Banquet; therefore let not the pretense of former sins keep any back,
who are now humbled for them. Thirdly, Those who live in open and notorious
sins, do also make this excuse, that they dare not receive the Sacrament
because they are so grievous Sinners. But to these we cannot give so gentle an
answer: For though they must not come so long as they are Drunkards and
Adulterers, Swearers or malicious, yet because they are thus by their wilful
wickedness, it does not extenuate but aggravate the Crime of absenting
themselves; because they have made themselves unfit. Were it not a strange
excuse in a Jewish Priest, daily to touch dead bodies, and so plead he was
excused from attending on the Sacrifice? would he not deserve a double
punishment both for wilful defiling himself, and then for making that a
pretense to neglect his Duty? It seems these men know they are Sinners, but
they make a mischi^vous use of their sight of their sins, viz. (not to excite
them to Repentance, but) to shelter them in omissions o^ Gods commands, and
spend the time which God gives them for Repentance, in making vain Apologies.
And yet some of these known Sinners do persuade th^mselves, that they reverence
these mysteries, and dare not profane them by coming to them, but nothing is
more false, for if they fear to offend God, why are they not afraid to live in
abominable sins which he hates? Is there more danger in receiving the
Sacrament, than in being drunk and adulterous, violent or revengeful? or do
they imagine nothing will damn them but this Holy Food? Alas it is not staying
from the Communion that will keep off Damnation, but a sincere and speedy
Repentance. Hence the Church hearing them confess they are Sinners, asks them
sharply why then do they not Repent? for then they might come hither without
danger; and truly if they repent not, they shall perish although they stay
away; so that if they could consider, God has brought them into a happy
necessity of repenting, for without that, if they come to the Altar, they die
as coming unworthily, if they forbear and continue in sin, they die also; so
that there is but one way left. We do not exhort men therefore to come in their
sins, but to cast away their sins that they may come worthily, and therefore we
give them notice so long before. If they say a week is too little time to do
this great work of Repentance in, let them ask themselves why they put it off
till Death, when perhaps they may not have an hour? and can such Persons be
sure that their Death is not nearer than this next Sacrament? If they think it
be too sudden to resolve to leave their Sins, let them blush to say they are
not yet resolved, and beware that the time do not come when they shall wish
they had done it sooner. It is possible that scandalous and habitual Sinners
cannot be fit against the next Communion, but then they must lament their
unfitness, and spend all the time they can, to be prepared for the next after,
and only forbear for once, that they may come with more Comfort ever after: And
to plead they are sinful, and never strive to amend, but to neglect Receiving
from time to time, is a Declaration that men have sinned, and will sin, and
intend not to be troubled with Repentance, or tied to a religious course of
life, and therefore they avoid this Sacrament as a thing which is inconsistent
with their purposes of going on in sin: Wherefore neither is this excuse
sufficient to hold us back.

. 8. When God calls you, are ye not ashamed to say you will not come? when ye
should return to God, will ye excuse your selves and say ye are not ready?
Consider earnestly with your selves how little such feigned excuses will avail
before God.] There are two sorts of those who absent themselves from the
Eucharist; those that are so bold as wholly to deny to come at all, and those
who more modestly put it off till another time; the first are arrogant, and the
second trifling; but neither the confidence of those, nor yet the policy of
these, can excuse them to Almighty God. First, Those who say plainly they will
not, must consider it is intolerable insolence thus to Answer their supreme
King and Master: our Lord Jesus does expressly bid us to do this, Luke 22.19. 1
Cor. 11.25. and (under the name of Wisdom) earnestly invites us to this Feast,
Prove. 9.2, 3, 4, 5, etc. he entreats us to accept his love, Revel. 3.20. the
Spirit says come, and the Church says come, Revel. 22.17. The Primitive
Councils disowned him from being a Christian, who did not receive at least
three times a year Inter Catholicos non est annumerandus, qui temporibus
Paschae, Pentecostes, and Nativitatis Domini non Communicaverit. Council. Ellib.
; and of old they Excommunicated those who coming to the Sermon, went out
before the Communion Laici fideles Ecclesiam ingredientes and scripturas
audientes, si non permaneant in Precatione, and sacra Communione, s^gregantur.
Can. Apost. 9.
. And our own Church does by her Canons strictly enjoin this Duty, and by her
Minist^rs frequently exhort us to it. The practice of the best Christians of
our own and elder times also, do all declare it is a duty imposed by God; and
are we not Ashamed to tell God and Men to their Faces we will not, after so
many M^ss^ges and Calls, and Commands from Christ and his Church? do we dare
give impudent denials? take heed, and consider, and with the stubborn Son in
the Gospel, though you have said obstinately you would not, yet now repent and
come, and wipe off your evil words, by better Deeds hereafter. Secondly, They
who defer their coming upon pretense they are not ready, must consider this
excuse can never serve but once, and must not be used by any man, that has not
begun to prepare himself, for otherwise they may put it off thus for ever, till
the Bridegroom comes, and then they shall have the fate of the foolish Virgins,
Math. 25.6, 7. etc. If they are not ready for the Sacrament, much less are they
ready to dye; and yet they do not live in safety till they are prepared for
Death, and so had need immediately to begin; have they not reason to set upon
their work who have much to do and little time? Our being ready is a good
Argument why we should speedily and diligently prepare, but no Apology for our
staying away; and truly he that will not labor to fit himself for this
Sacrament, will scarce repent upon any other occasion, and he that often says
he is not ready thus to meet Christ at his first Coming; will be strangely
surprised at his second, and doubtless be as unready then: Besides, are we not
told of these holy times long enough before? had we any love for Jesus we
should begin early to adorn our selves, as that Jewish Doctor who put on his
best habit on Friday in the Afternoon, and sat longing for the Sunsetting (the
time when the Jewish Sabbath begins) and said, Veni Sponsa, Come my Spouse, for
so he called that Sacred Day. The Church History relates that St. Catherine was
wont to long for the Communion, as the Child for its Mothers Breasts; but we
are glad of an excuse to shift it off, and neither desire it, nor prepare for
it, on purpose that we may say we are not ready. These are fine pretenses to
stop the mouths, and blind the Eyes of Men, and serve us to cozen our selves
with, but they are vain and insignificant before him that looks through these
thin Veils, and sees other Causes which keep us away from the Altar, which we
would gladly conceal; for God perceives that many which make these excuses do
really forbear the Communion, either because, 1. They love sin, and hate
Virtue, and resolve not to be engaged against the one, nor obliged too strongly
to the other; or, Secondly, They are unwilling to take that pains which a
serious Repentance and a due preparation do require; or, Thirdly, They harbor
some secret malice, and either are too proud to ask forgiveness, or too
revengeful to forgive: And therefore let no man think these or the like empty
Apologies will excuse him at Gods Tribunal.

. 9. They that refused the Feast in the Gospel, because they had bought a Farm,
or would try their Yokes of Oxen, or because they were Married, were not so
excused, but were counted unworthy of the Heavenly Feast.] If all this do not
effectually enough represent the danger of relying upon such pretenses, here is
added a plain Example in a Parable spoken by Christ himself, Luke 14.18, 19,
etc. which admirably suits this very Case: I doubt not but those Guests thought
their excuses as fair, as we can do ours. And when they had alleged such
weighty and important impediments, they did as little fear the Lords anger as
we are wont to do; Yet we see he was very wroth, Luke 14.21. Math. 22.7. and
because some preferred their profit, others their pleasure before his noble
Feast, he blotted them out of the list of his Friends and resolved never to
invite them any more. Let us beware by so fair a warning, and not dare upon the
like accounts to reject this Heavenly Feast, for in so doing we reject the
memorial of Christ's Death, the Symbols of his Body and blood, and the pledges
of his grace and love, and do as directly refuse Christ himself as we can do
upon Earth, because there is no Ordinance wherein he is so really present, and
by which he is so surely conveyed to the believing Soul; how fair soever our
Plea is, we seem to judge our selves unworthy of Eternal Life, Acts 13.46. and
God may not only sentence us as unworthy of this Holy Feast, but resolve we
(that value the enjoyment of him so little on Earth) are unfit to partake of
the Nec sibi posthac de eo honor blandiantur quo seipsos indignos
judicaverunt. Cod. de dign.
Celestial Banquet, or to enter into the Mansions of Bliss; for they that will
not remember his sufferings, ought not to share in his glories. It seems we
think it a small punishment to be counted unworthy of the Sacrament, for we
inflict this upon our selves, in our abstaining from it: but if God do esteem
us unworthy ever to have the grace of this Sacrament offered to us again for
our slight refusals, the doom is very sad, and without a speedy repentance, is
the Harbinger of a final rejection, from which God deliver us!

. 10. I for my part shall be ready, and according to mine Office, I bid you in
the Name of God; I call you in Christ's behalf, I exhort you as you love your
own Salvation, that ye will be partakers of this holy Communion.] Our Lord
appointed two of his Apostles to prepare the Passover, Luke 22.8. as an Emblem
of their Duty in after Ages to provide for this Holy Supper. For to them and
their Successors he has enjoined the care of its Administration, wherefore it
concerns the Ministers to take heed least by too seldom, and too few
Communions, or too short notice, they be not the occasion of the peoples
abstinence; for then they cannot justly reprove them, Sero advenis (inquit
Pomponius ad Ciceronem) Minime sero (respondit ille) nihil enim hic paratum
video: Plutar. Apotheg.
and they bring the guilt of this neglect upon themselves: Our Lord has made
them Stewards of his Household, and they must take care to give them their meat
in due season, Math. 24.45. For this Cause the Ancient Church appointed the
Priests in great Cities to have a Communion every Day, so that devout people
might always find the Table spread whenever they hungered after this Bread of
Life; and in such places our own Church still makes monthly preparations, and
also sends the Minister to the Altar upon every great Festival, on purpose to
mind the people that he is ready, if they were so also. But when the Table is
actually spread, methinks we should need no other Oratory, than those holy
Symbols to invite us, did we know our need of that food, and were we acquainted
with the pleasures of that Celestial Banquet, we should be attracted with the
very sight of the Elements, and long, yea languish to participate of them; and
sure they upbraid those wretches who go away, and turn their backs upon them;
but there are some who cannot or will not hear this still voice; and therefore
the Minister does once again, ex officio, invite us, in the Name of God who is
the great Master of this Feast, and in the behalf of Christ, who is the
precious food there provided, beseeching us that we will not by neglecting
affront the great God, and slight his dear Son; and further exhorting us by the
most cogent Argument, viz. for our own sakes, as we love our Souls, as we fear
to be Condemned, and wish for Salvation, that we will come. Cicero thought a
man might as soon run away from himself, as lose the desire after those things
which conduced to his own happiness Prius a se poterit quispiam discedere, quam
appetitum earum rerum quae sibi conducunt amittere. lib. de fin. 5.
. But we have some so wretched, who know there is no Salvation but by the
Sacrifice of Christ's Death, and no so proper and ready way to get an interest
in that Sacrifice, as to eat of the remainders thereof in Faith, and yet are
hardly persuaded by the most pressing invitations. But let us Consider, that by
frequent and long omissions, our devotion grows flat, our purposes wavering,
our Faith weak, and our Corruptions strong, the Enemy gets ground of us, and
the Spirit begins to withdraw from us: Men's deficit quamnon recepta Eucharistia
erigit ac accendit. Cypr. Ep. 54. ad Cor.
so that if we would go safely to Heaven, we must not too long neglect this
holy Sacrament.

. 11. And as the Son of God did vouchsafe to yield up his Soul by Death upon
the Cross for your Salvation, so it is your duty to receive the Communion in
remembrance of the Sacrifice of his Death, as he himself has Commanded.]
Although we be by Gods Ambassadors strongly entreated to come to this Holy
Feast, yet we must not think it left to our choice to hearken or to disobey,
for (if they should not invite us) we are obliged to come hither by the
strongest Bonds of reason and duty. For if Jesus thought our Salvation worth
his Death, do we think it too dear of a little preparation? is he willing to
bleed for our sins, and are we not willing to weep for them? shall he yield up
his Soul in the midst of the most dolorous agonies, and will not we yield up
our Lusts, and come to remember his love in this Holy Sacrament? Our Savior
has satisfied the divine Justice, obtained a Pardon, and done his part toward
our Salvation, but our part is still behind, viz. to sue out this pardon in the
Commemoration of his Death, and in this Communion of his Body and blood, to
apply his merits by Faith to our own Souls; And that we should Do this, was one
of his last and dying Commands, Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.25. and is it not our
duty to obey it? How wretched then are we, if we refuse to kneel and extend our
hand for this Pardon which was purchased at so vast a price? How unworthy are
we to have any part in this Redemption, if we disobey so small a Command, and
deny so easy a Request, of so dear a Master? His last Precept was to keep the
memorial of the last Act he did for us on the Earth, and sure it is our duty
never to let that be forgotten.

. 12. Which if ye shall neglect to do, Consider with your selves, how great
injury ye do to God, and how sore punishment hangs over your Heads for the
same.] If we be resolved in spite of all this, still to neglect this divine
Ordinance, the Minister can do no more than sadly tell us, First the
grievousness of our sin. Secondly, The greatness of our danger. First, We are
desired to consider the sin, which is called a great injury to God, even as we
esteem it to our selves when our Guests slight our invitation,. 4. It Is true we
cannot properly injure God, Job 35.6. by taking away any of his essential
happiness: Yet because we owe Obedience to him as our Sovereign Lord, we are
said to wrong him of his due, Debitum contrahitur quoties delinquitur, quod
debitum solvi in gehenna quandoque necesse est: Aug. Sermon. 126. de Temp.
Creditor est qui minus quam quod suum est habet, vel voluntario ut in
mutuatione, vel involuntario ut in Criminibus. Vide Grot. de sat. Chris. c. 2.
when we refuse to observe his Commands. And in this Case, let us consider
(before we resolve not to come) that hereby we shall rob our God of this solemn
part of his worship, reject a plain and loving command, despise the Passion of
his dear Son, slight his provision, refuse his invitation, grieve his Servants
by such rash and obstinate denials, and perhaps bring an evil report upon the
Ordinance it self, when men see we must be dragged to it. The Sacrifices of the
Erecynian Venus came of their own accord to the Altar, says Aelian. hist.
anim. l. 10. c. 1. But we are forced hither as to a slaughter house; is not
this a great injury to the Master of this divine Feast? But secondly, The
mischief in fine lights upon our own heads, for no man provokes this King, but
in so doing he sins against his own Soul, Prove. 20.2. God is just as well as
merciful, and severe to revenge the abuses of his love. He will not always pass
by this scorn, nor put up these affronts, but punish us perhaps temporally,
with losses, and crosses, sickness, or an evil Death, which careless neglecters
deserve as well as unworthy receivers, 1 Cor. 11.30. for so those Israelites
who laughed at Hezekiahs invitation to the Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30.10. were
carried into a sad Captivity within two years after, 2 Kings 18.9. And we must
not think presently we are safe, because as yet none of these Judgments have
seized on us, for they may hover over our heads, as the Arrow over Julians, and
at last pierce us to the heart; but if we do escape a while Si nunc omne
peccatum manifesta plecteretur poena, nihil ultimo judicio reservari putaretur,
si nullum puniret nec providentiam esse crederetur: August. de Civ. Dei, lib.
1. cap. 8.
from temporal miseries, he has more secret, and more sad means of punishing
us by spiritual evils, viz. by withdrawing his Spirit from us, and letting
loose Satan on us, by giving us up to a hard heart, and a reprobate mind; and
finally he can send us into those Regions of sorrow, where the extremity of the
torments will sufficiently make amends, for the deferring of the Execution. Oh
consider this ye that forget God, and do not by doing this injury to him, bring
the greatest misery upon your selves, for all this vengeance is due to you
while you live in wilful neglect of this blessed Sacrament.

. 13. When ye wilfully abstain from the Lords Table, and separate your selves
from your Brethren, who come to feed on the Banquet of that most Heavenly
food.] We must carefully distinguish those who absent themselves from the Lords
Supper, or else we shall condemn the righteous with the wicked, for this great
sin and heavy judgment belongs only to those who wilfully (...) est quod nec
provideri potuit, nec improbo sit animo, a (...), quod provideri potuit, non
tamen fit improbo animo, (...) quod destinato and imp^obo sit animo: Arist. de
art. Orator.
do abstain. There are some who forbear once or twice, and are not guilty, viz.
if they be under the Censures of the Church, or of their own Conscience, and
cannot yet make their peace: if they are laboring for the pardon of some
lately committed sin, if they be prevented by sickness, or surprised by
indispensable business; but such must with the pious Emperor Theodosius look
toward the Church with sad hearts, wishing they might receive; and accounting
the poorest Creatures there, happier than themselves, lamenting the occasion of
their present exclusion, and being never satisfied, until they can prepare, and
have another opportunity, and such will come with the greater appetite to the
next Communion. But those who wilfully abstain, are such as stay away from time
to time, and are glad of any excuse for it, who secretly wish they were never
obliged to come at all, and contrive to miss the opportunity, and will not be
persuaded nor convinced; it is these wretches who do first so grievously offend
God as was showed before, and of whom it is said now Secondly, they sin against
their Brethren, by a wicked separation; for this Ordinance is the badge of a
Christian, and designed to make us all one body, and bind us together in the
Bonds of Charity. They therefore that will not receive it, do cast away Christ's
badge, and cut themselves off from the body of the Church, and refuse to be
bound in the Bonds of Love; indeed they declare themselves no Members of this
blessed Society, who may say to such absenters as St. Peter to Simon Magus,
Acts 8.21. Ye have neither part nor lot with us in this matter. Now how evil a
thing this is, may appear in that they do what they can to discourage men from
receiving: and to breed scruples in the minds of those who do Communicate, yea
to cast a disgrace upon the Ordinance it self. But let them beware of cutting
themselves off, from those who are the Members of Christ, and so from their
part of eternal life, since it is just to shut them out from the Communion of
Saints in Heaven, who never would Communicate with them on Earth. There are
many holy Persons who do participate, but these do not, and so are in a
contrary way: if good men do well to come, why do they not follow them? if they
be in the way to Heaven, the absenters are going (I fear) to a worse place. It
may be there are some wicked persons who are crowded into these mysteries, and
some pretend they stay away because of them; But let us beware of the Pharisees
Pride, Isai. 65.5. in bidding men stand off, for we are holier than they; the
best men despise none, and usually think themselves the worst of all, and how
do we know, but they may be begun to be changed by Gods grace? however we are
not judges, but the Church; our duty is to fit our selves, not to make all
others so. We are to wish that all the Congregation were holy, but if all be
not, we must not lose our part in Gods Ordinances, because an Esau or Judas may
be there; if we be not like these persons in their Sin, we shall not fare the
worse for them; God can distinguish though we sit never so near in place, if we
be distant in our qualities he will accordingly dispense his favors: We must
converse with such sometimes in the World, where there is more danger they
should infect us, but here perhaps our devotion may do them good, but their
guilt can do us no harm.

. 14. These things if ye earnestly consider, ye will by Gods grace return to a
better mind, for the obtaining whereof we will not cease to make our humble
Petitions unto Almighty God our Heavenly Father.] Were the sin and danger of
neglecting this Holy Sacrament duly considered, there would be fewer offenders
in this kind, and if we have been guilty therein, whatsoever we have deserved
for former omissions, it appears our estate is not yet desperate, because God
has spared us, and given us this one invitation more; it is likely we heard
this Exhortation but slightly before, and resolved not to come however; but if
we will weigh it seriously now, and beg the help of Gods grace, there is no
doubt, but we may repent and amend. For we are herein courteously invited, and
earnestly pressed to come, our scruples are satisfied, our excuses showed to be
vain, our duty is made evident, and our peril of neglecting it fully expressed;
so that nothing but obstinate purposes to despise Reason, and Example, the
Injunctions of God, and the request of our well-wishers, can after this keep us
back. It had been just in God to have cut you off before, but since he still
calls, God forbid that we (Ministers) should sin in ceasing to pray for you, 1 Samuel 12.23. notwithstanding all the denials you have given us, since our Master
forbears, we will exhort you earnestly, and pray heartily for you still to him
who is Almighty to subdue your obstinacy, and our Heavenly Father, who is apt
to pity poor Sinners, and if you join your Prayers to ours, and consider as
well as pray, we are confident the success will be, that you shall lay aside
your idle excuses, and both resolve to come to the Sacrament, and be careful to
prepare for it, so shall all your former contempt be forgiven, and your present
addresses be accepted to your endless comfort. Amen.

PARTITION II. Of the more immediate Preparation.
SECT. I. Of the Exhortation at the Communion.
. 1. ALthough it be a great satisfaction to him that Ministers to see Gods
Table well furnished, yet because he seeks the profit of the Communicants as
well as his own pleasure, he not only endeavors by the former Exhortation to
increase their numbers, but by this to rectify their dispositions, that they
may be not only many but good: And howsoever this has been done before they
came to the Feast, it will seem necessary to do it again now they are come; if
we consider, either the danger of unworthy receiving, or the dignity of this
Ordinance, which is made more reverend by being veiled with many Coverings. The
Egyptians admitted none to converse with their Priests, and to know the
secrets of their mysteries, till they had been initiated by abstinence,
patience, and many labors, (...). Porphyr. de abst. l. 4.
supposing they would learn to value them by the difficulty of access; And so
those who entered into the Persian Rites of Mithra, (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 1.
in Jul.
were to be first approved by 80. degrees of Trial to be unpassionate and holy
Persons Nonnus Synag. hist. c. 5.
. The like difficulty of acceptance was practiced in the entertainment of
Scholars into Pythagoras his School Jamblic. l. 1. c. 17.
and in the admission of Novices into the Monastical Societies of old Cassian.
instit. l. 4. c. 3.
. And can we then think it too much to pass one Exhortation more before we eat
of this Celestial Banquet? We derive this necessary part of the Office from the
Greek Church, where (the Guests being placed) the Priest standing on the steps
to be seen of all, stretched out his hand, and lifted up his voice in the midst
of that profound silence, inviting the worthy, and warning the unworthy to
forbear (...). Chrysostom. hom. in 9. ad Heb. Ethic.
. Which if it were necessary in those blessed days, how much more requisite is
it in our looser Age, wherein men have learnt to trample upon Church
Discipline, and to come out of Custom at set times, whether they be prepared or
no? Every one hopes to pass in the Crowd, but knowing the terror of the Lord we
do again and again beseech our people, diligently to prepare themselves, before
he come to try them; And that this Exhortation may be effectual to this
purpose, this following Account may assist our devout improvement thereof.

The Analysis of the Exhortation at the Communion.
. 2. In this Exhortation we are incited to Two general Duties. 1.
Self-examination, by 1. Propounding it more largely, and showing, 1. The
Persons enjoined, Dearly beloved in the Lord, ye that mind to come, etc.
2. The Authority enjoining it, must consider how S. Paul, etc.
3. The Duty to be done, diligently to try and examine themselves,
4. The Time of doing it, before they presume to eat, etc.

2. Pressing it, with reasons taken from 1. The Benefits ^f worthy Receiving,
viz. 1. Participation of Christ, For as the benefit is great if-etc. for then
we spiritually eat the flesh of Christ, etc.
2. Union with him, then we dwell in Christ, we are one with Christ, and, etc.

2. The danger of unworthy Receiving, as to 1. The Sin of it, so is the danger
great, if we -- for then we are guilty of the body and, etc.
2. The Punishment following upon it, we eat and drink our own damnation -- we
kindle Gods wrath against us, etc.


3. Parting it, by an Exhortation unto the special Duties of 1. Repentance,
Judge therefore your selves, Brethren -- Repent you truly for your sins, etc.
2. Faith, Have a lively and steadfast faith, etc.
3. Reformation, Amend your lives,
4. Charity, and be in perfect charity with all men: So shall ye be meet, etc.


2. Giving of Thanks, assisting us, 1. By way of Consideration, declaring, 1.
The Necessity of it, And above all things ye must give most humble and hearty
thanks
2. The Object of it, to God the Father, the Son, etc.
3. The Subject of it, for the Redemption of the world by -- etc.
4. The Particular Reasons as well 1. Why for this Redemption, because of 1.
The difficulty of the Work, who did humble himself even unto the death, etc.
2. The Persons for whom, for us miserable sinners, who lay in darkness, etc.
3. The Ends for which it was wrought, that he might make us the children of
God, and exalt us, etc.

2. Why in this Sacrament, because of 1. The Reasons of its Institution, And to
the end that we should always remember, 1. the exceeding great Love, etc. 2.
and the innumerable Benefits which, etc.
2. The Author, He has instituted, etc.
3. His Design therein, as pledges of his Love, and for -- to our great and
endless comfort.



2. By way of Practice, in a Form, showing, 1. The Object of our Praise, To him
therefore, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
2. The Manner how to offer it, both 1. In Word, let us give, as we are most
bounden, continual thanks,
2. In Deed, by, 1. Resignation, submitting our selves wholly to his holy Will,
etc.
2. Obedience, and studying to serve him in true holiness -- all the days of
our life. Amen.






A Practical Discourse upon this Exhortation.
. 3. Dearly beloved in the Lord, ye that mind to come to the holy Communion of
the body and blood of our Lord and Savior Christ, must consider how St. Paul
exhorts all persons diligently to try and examine themselves, before they
presume to eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.] When the Guests of this
blessed Feast are now drawing near, and the King of Heaven is approaching to
survey them; The Minister out of a peculiar affection to those who have obeyed
his Masters invitation, salutes them in St. Paul's phrase, Romans 16.8. with
[Dearly beloved in the Lord] and in the style of the same Apostle; minds them
of the greatness of that work which they go about, even to share in the
Communion of Christ's body and blood, 1 Cor. 10.16. Their intentions are
commendable, and it is pity but such pious purposes should have their desired
success; Wherefore he does once more warn them to examine themselves before
they eat, a duty enjoined not by humane Authority, nor prescribed merely as the
advice of a Friend, but bound upon all by St. Paul himself, and by the Spirit
of God in him, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man, etc. says he, that is every man
examine himself, and so let him eat, etc. intimating that none might eat
without this renewed Examination, and because the Discipline of the Corinthian
Church was much impaired by the Schisms then within it; the Apostle obliges
every man to do it to himself, and that not with a slight inquiry, but so
thoroughly to search his own heart, that he might be able to judge Gr. (...).
Suidas.
whether he were fitted to come or no. The Magistrates of Sparta were wont to
examine all the Citizens how well they observed Lycurgus's Rules, honoring
those that were found blameless with the Title of Approved (...).
Persons; and shall we not think our pains well bestowed if our merciful Father
give that Character of us? I grant that after our strictest Examination, we
cannot bespeak our God with the confidence of the Grecian Wrastler, who
challenged Jove as he was just to give him the Victory, if he had duly prepared
all things for the Exercise, Clem. Alex. but yet the severer search we make
before we come, the greater Comfort, and the more success we shall have in our
approaches. Obj. But some will say it is too late for men to consider now, when
they are come to the Altar, and it is impertinent to urge it here, since all is
done that can be done in this matter in order to this Communion. Ans. Not so,
for if any have presumed to come altogether unprepared, it is not yet too late
to warn them of their sin and danger: And it were better for them to go out to
day, says St. Cyril, (...). Cyril. Hieros. praef. ad Catechum.

Melius est de media via recurrere quam semper currere male.


that they might come better fitted against the next opportunity, yea Christ
himself advises, Math. 5.23, 24. in some Cases to leave our gift before the
Altar, and retire till we are better disposed, intimating that it offends God^
less to withdraw even from the beginning of his service, than to proceed if we
are unfit: St. Ambrose knowing the Emperor Theodosius, to be guilty of blood
unrepented of, although he was come to the Church with purposes to Communicate,
sent him back from thence with a serious Exhortation to Repentance Recede
igitur and ne conare novo scelere scelus ante editum augere: in vit. D. Ambros.
. So also St. Chrysostom being disturbed by a malicious and impertinent
request just as he was about to consecrate the holy Symbols, went out of the
Church, and desired another to finish the mystery, which he durst not do, being
discomposed in his mind Palladius in vit. Chrysostom.
. Secondly, But if we have in any measure prepared our selves, yet is not this
Exhortation to be thought unseasonable, for as the most famous Orators, though
they had composed their Orations some days before, yet were wont privately to
recite them immediately before they spoke them to the People: so it becomes us
Christians to review the Records and sad Catalogues, which we saw yesterday;
and briefly to act our Examination over again, lest if the number and
heinousness of our sins be at present out of our mind, we should become as
obdurate as if we never had beheld them. What was done yesterday was to humble
us just now, and we are at this instant (...). Arr. in Epic. l. 1.
to give the proof what we did in private: and St. Paul's adding [and so let him
eat] seems to direct us to make this the immediate duty before our receiving.
Let us then remember afresh what we found upon our inquiry; and if we pass
directly to the participation from this review of our offenses, we shall no
doubt become so penitent and desirous of Pardon, as not to be judged
presumptuous Receivers.

. 4. For as the benefit is great if with a true penitent heart and lively
Faith, we receive that holy Sacrament (for then we spiritually eat the flesh of
Christ, and drink his blood, then we dwell in Christ, and Christ in us, we are
one with Christ, and Christ with us)] Although the command of God by his
Apostle is enough to require our obedience, yet it is here backed with two of
the most prevailing motives of all, showing that it is not only required of us
to examine our selves but necessary for us; and that we ought to do it for our
own sake (...). Arrian. in Epic. l. 2.
, 1. Because of the great benefits of worthy receiving. 2. The dreadful danger
of coming unprepared. And first, if we bring with us a penitent heart and a
lively Faith, the benefits are so many, and so excellent, that whosoever
considers them cannot but long for them, and they that obtain them may despise
all other pleasures, because they are as blessed as they can be on this side
Heaven: and are they not worth a little pains to dispose our selves for them?
They are surely most unworthy of them who will lose them, rather than submit to
the trouble of a sincere Examination of themselves. The particular benefits are
here expressed in the words of Christ, John 6.54, 55, 56. in that mystical
Sermon wherein he did secretly prepare the minds of his Disciples for this
Sacrament, shortly to be instituted, and clearly alludes to the same: The first
benefit is the spiritual eating Christ's body and blood. For the humbled Sinner
believing in the Incarnation, Death and Passion of Jesus, and receiving this
Bread and Wine, in token that God has given him for his sins, and that he does
rely on him as his only Redeemer; This does convey to such a penitent Believer,
all the benefits of the Birth, and the Death of Jesus; and as the Bread and
Wine being received do communicate to us all the strength and comfort that they
contain; so the worthy Receiver by apprehending and embracing a Crucified
Savior, draws persuasions of his pardon, and encouragement to his Graces, and
so has spiritually eat the flesh, and drunk the Blood of Christ, and hence
flows the second benefit, viz. His Dwelling or remaining in us, and we in him;
that is, when he have thus received our Savior, there is a blessed Communion
between him and our Souls, for he communicates of his fullness to us, and we
open our necessities to him, and Thirdly, hereby there is produced so near an
Union, that God esteems us as members of his dear Son, lays our sin upon him,
and imputes his satisfaction to us, and consequently all those benefits are
derived to us, which are mentioned by many, and found by the Devout
Communicant, hope of pardon, increase of Grace, assurance of our Resurrection,
and the expectation of Eternal Glory. O Blessed mystery! which do communicate
my Savior, and convey his Graces to me, which give me an interest in him,
and make me one with him, whom my Soul loves. How am I ravished with the
sweetness of this Heavenly Feast? how strongly do these benefits attract me? if
any pains or cost, trouble or difficulty, stand in my way, I will account the
pains to be pleasures, the cost gain, the trouble delight, and the difficulty
easiness, which leads me to such blessedness. O my Soul do thou not wish with
all thy Powers to be reconciled to God, to be one with Christ, and to be filled
with the Spirit? behold the means to accomplish all these desires; Do but
examine into thy own heart, till thou relentest for thy sins, and search into
Gods Mercy, till thou art persuaded of his love. And with this penitent
believing heart come, and partake of this spiritual Banquet, and (though thou
do not press thy Saviors flesh with thy Teeth, which would do thee no good,
yet) thou shall really partake of all the benefits of his Death, and become one
with him, and receive all from him that thy Soul does either need or desire.

. 5. So is the danger great if we receive the same unworthily, for then we are
guilty of the body and blood of Christ our Savior, we Eat and Drink our own
Damnation, not considering the Lords Body; we kindle Gods wrath against us, we
provoke him to plague us with diverse Diseases, and sundry kinds of Death.] The
fear of losing the former benefits, will be a sufficient motive to an ingenuous
temper to prepare; yet many are so obdurate, as to rush upon this Ordinance
without any preceding care. But that we may deliver our Souls, the Church
enjoins not only in the former, but in this present Exhortation also, that the
Minister shall warn them not to come in so rude a manner; the Heathen Man
allows not that any should worship their Gods en passant, (...). Plutar.
nor unless they had first prepared themselves at home; and can such addresses
be endured in the highest mystery of the best Religion? Let such from the mouth
of St. Paul hear and consider, First, The greatness of their sin, 1 Cor. 11.27,
and 29. Secondly, The severity of their punishment, ver. 30.1. Their sin who
come hither as to an ordinary solemnity, and eat of this as common food, not
considering that the Lords Body and blood here Nec se judicant nec sacramenta
dijudicant: sed sicut cibis communibus irreverenter sacris utuntur, lib. de
Card. op. Christi. ap. Cypr.
is in Scripture Hebr. 6.6. Chap. 10.29.
accounted Crucifying the Son of God again, as much as in them lies (...).
; putting him to an open shame, trampling upon him, and accounting the blood of
his Covenant as an unholy thing, they use him as his Murderers did, shedding
his blood, not with design to be saved by it, (...). Theophil. in 11, 1 Cor.
but suffering it to be spilt in vain. They receive no benefit by it, and yet
they make a memorial of it, which wounds Christ deeper than all the Cruelty of
his Crucifiers did; from them he expected no other, but from these he does,
Quid est autem reos esse, nisi dare poenas mortis Domini? occisus est enim ab
iis, qui beneficium ejus irritum ducunt: Ambros. in loc.
so that they are guilty of his Body and Blood, and shall be proceeded against,
as those that offer violence to the Lord Jesus: By eating and drinking of this
memorial of his Sacrifice, they own he has died for them, but by their
impenitence and perseverance in evil, they declare that they will not be saved
thereby: And thus this sacred and salutary Rite, which in its own nature would
assure their Salvation, and is designed by Christ to convey his benefits unto
them, (...). Theophylac. ut supr.
is by their unpreparedness and iniquity, turned into poison and a Curse, and
they being before fit for Condemnation, by adding this Act of presumption, they
do accelerate and confirm it. Secondly, Their punishment will be answerable,
for they may be sure it will inflame the wrath of God, to behold men so stupid
and insolent to his dear Son and their Redeemer; perhaps this wrath may only be
expressed in temporal punishments, shorter sicknesses, lingering Diseases or
sudden Death; so it was at Corinth, (...). Theophyl. ut supr. Febribus and
infirmitatibus corripiebantur and multi moriebantur. Ambros. in loc.
so were the Jews cut off who profaned the Passover, Exodus 12.15. and thus many
Apostates in the Primitive times were possessed by the Devil, for coming to the
Eucharist, before their reconciliation to the Church: but if the Lord forbear
showing these visible judgments, he has ways enough, and an Eternity coming on
to chastise this presumption. Wherefore ye bold and careless sinners, who come
in ignorance, or in malice, without Faith or Devotion, sorrow for former, or
purposes against future iniquities; consider what you do, and what you must
suffer, for coming in this unfitness; we tremble at the danger you run upon,
yet who shall pity those who might have escaped all the evil and gained
infinite blessings, only by a small preparation?

. 6. Judge therefore your selves Brethren that ye be not judged of the Lord,
repent you truly of your sins past, have a lively and steadfast Faith in Christ
our Savior, amend your lives and be in perfect Charity with all men, so shall
ye be meet partakers of these holy mysteries.] That which God and his Church
intend as caution to all that they may come better prepared, is by the slothful
and unbelieving made a pretense for their total abstaining; but these dangers
as St. Paul shows, ver. 31. might soon be avoided, if we would judge our
selves, for then we should not be judged of the Lord: Let us therefore set up a
Tribunal in our own Breast, (...) Theophylac.

Bonum judicium, quod divinum praevenit, quod divino subducit, volo praesentari
vultui irae tuae judicatus, non judicandus: Bern. in Cantic. 55.


and laying Gods Law before us, let our memory read the Indictment, and our
penitential thoughts urge the accusation, and that, till we be convinced and
plead guilty, so shall our Conscience pronounce the same sentence upon us,
which otherwise would more dreadfully have issued out against us from the
Divine Judicature. It will condemn us as foolish, base, ungrateful wretches,
deserving the wrath of God and Eternal Damnation; And when we are thus
convicted, we shall see it necessary by Faith to lay hold of Gods Mercy, and
further this will most effectually move us to amend our lives, Deprehendas te
oportet antequam emendes. Sen. Ep. 28. (...). Simplic. ad Epic.
and discover what need we have to forgive all Men, who our selves have so much
to be forgiven; so that it appears if we duly judge our selves, all the other
duties will follow in order: let the danger of unworthy receiving, therefore
only make us more strict in our Examination, for there is danger also if we do
wholly stay away. Vtrobique grande periculum, ideo mag^^ necessitas instat ne
indigni inveniamur* Bern. de ordin. vitae.
But the lesser hazard is on their side, who set themselves to do their duty in
the best manner they are able: If we have by due process condemned our selves
before, it will require less time and pains to review the sentence. Now, our
Souls will easily lie down in all humility and penitential acknowledgments at
Gods footstool, we shall long for mercy passionately, vow amendment sincerely,
and be at peace with all the World, so shall we be by God himself accepted as
worthy Receivers, and then all the terrors vanish, for there are better things
provided for us.

. 7. And above all things, ye must give most humble and hearty thanks to God
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for the Redemption of the World by the
Death and Passion of our Savior Christ, both God and Man:] To commemorate the
Death of Christ with thanksgiving, is the principal duty at this Eucharistical
Feast, Humiliation and Repentance are chiefly to be exercised before. But now
we are come to the Altar, we must above all things give thanks, for all the
foregoing Exhortations to examine, and judge our selves, are designed to bring
us with a clear Conscience, and an unburdened Soul, to sing Praises: For which
reason this Admonition does well follow the former, because those that have
searched most diligently for their sin, and those that have been most fully
convinced of it, and most deeply humbled for it; these will best apprehend
their need of the Death of Jesus, and offer up the most affectionate praises
for it: These will offer up most humble thanks, because they see their danger
and unworthiness, and most hearty, because they have the briskest perception of
this sweet and seasonable mercy. Draw near therefore ye contrite Souls, and
behold the Lamb of God dying for those sins for which ye have mourned, removing
that wrath at which ye trembled, let your sorrow be turned into joy, and your
fear into Faith and Hope. Come and offer up your best praises to the Father who
contrived this glorious Redemption, to the Son who effected it, and to the Holy
Ghost who gives us the benefit thereof: As every Person of the blessed Trinity
has joined in this noble work, let every person share in the praise; and as
all the World has been Redeemed, so let every man make his particular
acknowledgments. Behold how fit a Savior is provided; One that is God that he
might conquer, Man that he might suffer, and both God and Man, that he might
reconcile the Divine Majesty to humane nature. Praise ye the Lord! Thus in
general we do excite you to give thanks, and the next Paragraph will furnish
you with particular Considerations on which your gratitude may enlarge it self.

. 8. Who did humble himself even to the Death upon the Cross, for us miserable
Sinners, who lay in darkness and in the shadow of Death, that he might make us
the Children of God, and exalt us to Everlasting Life.] As the Jews had their
Paschal Hymn recording their miraculous deliverance from Egyptian Bondage,
Buxt. Syn. Jud. cap. 13. and the Ancient Christians their Commemoration of the
Lords Passion, at this Holy Feast: So our Church has here provided a brief but
clear description of the wonderful work of our Redemption, taken from Philip.
2.8. and Colos. 1.12, 13. thereby to supply every devout Soul with rare matter
for those humble and hearty praises which are here to be offered up, For in
these few words are contained these four Considerations. 1. Who it was that did
redeem us. 2. Whereby he did redeem us. 3. From what we were redeemed. 4. To
what Estate we are thereby brought. Each of which we shall so represent, as may
best beget, or exercise our Gratitude on this Occasion. 1. Let us consider the
dignity of our Redeemers person, who was the Eternal and only begotten Son of
God, far above all Principalities and Powers, higher than Angels or
Archangels, adored by all the Celestial Host. He was the delight of Heaven,
the joy of his Father, in whose Bosom he had perfect felicity, and should have
enjoied it to all Eternity whatsoever had become of us. He was most happy in
himself, and not concerned with us, ye^ no other durst undertake, no meaner
Person Ex personae celsitudine facti aestimatio augetur, Grot. in Johan. 13.3.
idem de satisfac. Christi. cap. 8. page 173.
could have accomplished our Redemption; and ought we not to be infinitely
thankful that such a Savior is given to us? 2. Let us further meditate by what
means he did effect this great Salvation. He could by one word create the World
out of nothing, but it cost more to redeem our Souls; This was not to be
accomplished till he stripped himself of his glory, descended from the
felicities of his Throne, and was abased into the condition of a man, yea of
the meanest of the Sons of Men. He took on him the form of a servant who was
Lord of all, and yet all this was not sufficient: He that did no sin must
suffer, he from whom all receive life must die, and that by the most cruel, and
tormenting, the most ignominious and accursed kind of Death, too base for the
meanest of Slaves, In Crucem milites tulit, and servilibus suppliciis semper
affecit, Jul. Capitolin. de Macrino. (...). Dion. de Sossio. Visum est
ignominiosa morte obscurare memoriam ejus. Joseph. Antiqu. l. 15. c. 1. Pone
crucem servo -- Juven.

Cur non honesto aliquo mortis genere affectus est, cur potissimum cruce, cur
infami genere supplicii, quod etiam homini libero, quamvis nocenti, indignum
videatur? Lact. inst. l. 4. c. 26.


too barbarous for the worst of Malefactors: Yet thus he was contented to
exchange the Music of Angels, and the pleasures of Heaven, for reproaches and
Agonies, scorn and tortures, that so he might expiate our offenses: But as C.
Marius when he showed his wounds (received for his Country) once in the
Senate House, so may I say now, What need is there of words when there are so
many bleeding Witnesses? He suffered more than we can conceive, or express,
more than the best of us would have endured for the greatest or dearest concern
in the World, only that we might suffer nothing: and will not this elevate us
into the highest Key of Praise? 3. Let us remember the Persons for whom Jesus
endured all this, and that will help to increase the wonder; it was not for
Angels or any of the Heavenly Orders, but for Creatures of a meaner kind, even
for us, the miserable Sons of Men, his Vassals by Creation, but Rebels and
Enemies against him by our Sins, for us who could not expect it, did not
deserve it, nor cannot requite it, for us who were Heirs of Hell, and Slaves of
Satan, unable to satisfy Gods Justice, fly his Anger, or bear his Sentence,
for us whom with Equity and honor enough, he might have left to perish for
ever: For our sakes he suffered all this, moved so far by his pity, till he
forgot all pity to himself, and took that load upon his own shoulders that
would have sunk us into the bottomless pit: He saw us wretched and miserable,
lying hopeless and helpless, reserved in Chains of Darkness to the judgment of
the great Day; and then he had Compassion on us, and broke our Bonds in sunder:
But there is one step higher still. 4. Let us behold the noble design and happy
consequence of this Deliverance, he has not only snatched us from the flames
of Hell, but made us Heirs of Heaven; not only pacified our offended Judge, but
engaged him to become our most gracious Father, so that he owns us for his
Friends, adopts us for his Children, and intends us to be partakers of his
endless joys. We are taken from our Dungeon into the Family of God, from his
Bar into his Bosom, and advanced to be like unto the Angels in glory and
immortality. Oh the height and length, the depth and breadth of the love of
Christ! Who can sufficiently admire it? that so great a Majesty should stoop so
low, and suffer so much, for so poor and so evil-deserving wretches, with
purpose to advance them to so blessed a condition; this is a subject fit for an
Angels Song-Praise the Lord oh my Soul, and let all thy powers be acted with
such love and wonder, that thou may break forth into all the expressions of
joy that admiration and gratitude can inspire thee with. Glory be to thee O
Lord most high!

. 9. And to the end that we should always remember the exceeding great love of
our Master and only Savior thus dying for us, and the innumerable benefits
which by his precious bloodshedding he has obtained to us, he has instituted
and ordained holy mysteries, as pledges of his love, and for a continual
remembrance of his Death, to our great and endless comfort.] Our merciful and
gracious Lord has so done his mavelous works, that they ought to be had in
remembrance, Psalm. 111.3. but especially this work of our Redemption, which to
forget were an ingratitude baser than Heathens or Publicans ever knew, Math.
5.46. and might almost compare with the Cruelty of his Murderers. Is it not
our greatest comfort, and our highest honor that we were thus redeemed by such
a Savior? Can we forget that precious blood, which was the price of our Souls,
and the purchase of Heaven, by which we obtain benefits more than we can
number, greater than we can sufficiently apprehend? Pardon and peace, the love
of God and the service of Angels, Victory over Satan, and the Conquest of
Death, the Conversion of Souls, and the fruition of glory do all spring from
it, with many, many more. The Choire of Heaven bless God for it, and Eternity
is designed to sing the glory of this excellent love, which had no pattern,
has no parallel, nor ever can it fully have an imitation, John 15.13. and Romans
5.7, 8. And is it possible now that those for whom all this was done, should
ever forget so rare a mercy, or neglect so cheap, Qui meminit, sine impendio
gratus est. Sen.
so mean a return, as to Commemorate it with thanksgiving? Reason would deem
this impossible, but experience alas shows it is too frequent, and both good
and bad do more or less let slip the memory hereof. Wherefore the holy Jesus
found it necessary to appoint this Sacrament to be the Worlds Remembrancer
therein. It has been the Custom of all Nations to preserve the memory of their
Hero's, and to perpetuate their deliverances by appointing public Games and
Festivals; thus Cities commemorate their Founders, and the Sects of
Philosophers their first Authors; yet all these being of humane Institution are
soon apt to decay: and beside they are without advantage to the Souls of men:
But our Lord has appointed a Commemoration of his Death and our Salvation,
that shall as far out-last, as it does outvy them all; A Celestial Banquet,
and worthy of so great so divine an Author. Which does at once represent our
Saviors Passion before us, and convey its benefits to us, it demonstrates his
love, confirms our Faith, mortifies our Lusts, it makes us like to Jesus, and
one with him; And how can we have more evident pledges of his favor? He knew
we were apt to forget him, and then we grow cold and dull, exposed to our
Enemies, and open to all mischief, wherefore he has contrived these mysteries,
that we might neither want the comfort of remembering his holy Passion, nor the
benefit of sharing in the merits of it. He had given himself for all before,
but now he gives himself to every particular Soul. Let us then take care duly
to receive these Tokens of his endless love, and they shall begin a joy which
shall never cease till our Lord in person shall appear in all his glory, and by
the brightness of his presence remove all these Vails and Coverings, and give
us leave to see him face to face*

. 10. To him therefore with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, let us give (as we
are most bounden) continual thanks, submitting our selves wholly to his holy
will and pleasure, and studying to serve him in true holiness and righteousness
all the days of our life: Amen.] By this time surely we begin to be melted with
these vigorous manifestations of the love of Christ, and our affections, big
with gratitude and admiration, begin to struggle within us, for therefore is
this representation made that we might remember it, and remembered that we might
celebrate it with Hymns and Eucharist; My heart is ready O God (says the pious
Soul) My heart is ready, Psalm. 108.1. Most seasonably therefore does the Priest
invite us to Praise the Lord with him just now, and summon us to this excellent
duty almost in the very words of St. Paul, Heb. 13.15. We have seen the
everlasting love of the Father, the unspeakable kindness of the Son, the
incomparable grace of the Holy Ghost, and our own infinite Obligations; Let us
therefore all join in offering up all possible Praise and Glory; let us begin
the Office with it, that it may warm our hearts and dispose them for all the
following parts thereof: And let us worship the blessed Trinity with such
sincere and hearty thanksgivings that the Choire of Communicants may be a
little Emblem of that of Angels, with this only difference, that they openly
behold that which we discern by Faith, but both they and we rejoice in it with
joy unspeakable and full of glory: But because, when we have done all we can,
we shall come far short, we must resolve, not only to make a few praises in
this highest part of our Devotion, but to perpetuate the duty to our lives end;
for our very life is too short, and all our Thanksgiving too narrow to
celebrate these mercies; let us strive therefore to imprint the love of Jesus
so deeply in our minds, that the memory thereof may never depart from us; but
be ever in us, and always dispose us to bless the Lord at all times, in all
places, and upon all occasions. And further since no praises of our Lips can be
sufficient, we are here prescribed another way to make our thanks to be
continual, viz. by glorifying God in our Lives. And this we may effectually do.
1. By resigning up our selves to the disposal of his providence. 2. By yielding
obedience to all his holy Commandments. 1. By our submission to his will we
glorify him by declaring that through these tokens of his favor, we are so
satisfied of his Wisdom and his Love, that we can be confident, that whatsoever
he shall appoint, is good for us; We tell all the World that whatsoever comes
from God, is just and holy, wisely ordered, graciously designed, and full of
mercy. 2. By our serving him in Holiness, we express how highly we are obliged
to him, how sure we are of the excellency of his Laws, and how fully we are
Conquered by his amazing love; and thus the praises of God are writ in plain
and real Characters, in the lives of contented and righteous men, so that all
the World may read them. The Eucharist is but for one hour, the Hymns will soon
be over; but by Submission and Obedience, we may glorify our God continually,
and every moment: Amen.

SECT. II. Of the immediate Invitation.
. 1. THE Guests being come, and the provisions ready, it was the office of the
Governor of the Feast [(...), John 2.9] to make them sit down, which place the
Disciples sustained in that miraculous feeding of the 5000. John 6.10. as an
Emblem that they, and their Successors should do it ever after in this
Celestial Banquet: Thus our Church, according to the Custom of the Primitive
Christians, orders the Priest to invite the Communicants to draw near: So in
that ancient Book which bears the name of Dionysius the Areop. we read the holy
Man used to say, Come my Brethren unto this holy Communion, Dionys. Eccles.
Hier. cap. 3.
: And in the Liturgies of St. Chrysostom, and St. James, Come near with fear
and Faith (...) Liturg. S. Chrysostom.
. And in the Constitutions: Coming in Order with reverence and holy fear (...)
Constit. Apost. l. 2. c. 57.
. Yet we do not only call men to this holy Feast, but withal we mind them again
of those qualifications, without which God will not accept and receive them. We
do not (says St. Chrysostom. Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 1. ad Corinth.
) exhort men to destroy themselves by impudent and rude approaches, but that
they may come with fear and purity unto the Lord: We tell them all, that unless
they have truly repented, and are in perfect Charity, and have entire purposes
of amendment, they can neither come with Faith, receive with Comfort, nor
depart with a blessing. In the Olympic Games the Crier by Proclamation
enquired, If any could accuse the Agonist to have been a Slave, a Thief, or of
Evil Conversation, for no such were allowed to strive there: But our Herald
(says the aforesaid Author) makes his appeal to our own Consciences, and makes
us our own Accusers: (...) Chrysostom. ad Heb. 9. Eth.
for every man best knows his own heart, and each one is most concerned for his
own safety, therefore let us be ingenuous, and deal truly between God and our
Souls in this affair, if our own hearts tell us we are not thus qualified in
any measure, we ought to forbear; if we be in any tolerable degrees thus
disposed, I may say as they once to the blind man, Mark 10.49. Arise, be of
good Comfort, he calls you: When the Servant calls you in the name, and by
the rules of his great Master, you are to repute it as the very words of Christ
himself, and to believe that he invites you. It is recorded as the great honor
of the famous Pindar Scholias. Graec. in ejus vita. and Lil. Greg. Giraldus
Dialog. 9.
, that the Priest of Apollo did by order from the God, invite him frequently to
Feast upon the remainders of his Sacrifices. But how much more honor and
Comfort has the true Christian, in being thus lovingly called by Jesus
himself; Come ye blessed of the Lord, draw near with Faith, and Feast with holy
Joy and Comfort. Let not the sense of former sins which you have repented of,
keep you back, but bring you hither more humbly, for the very next duty you are
to perform is to ease your Soul of those sad remembrances, by a meek and hearty
Confession; concerning which the Church gives you a full direction in two
words. 1. For the temper of your Souls, that you make it with humility and
Contrition. 2. For the posture of your Bodies that you do it upon your bended
knees, as Shimei confessed his Treason to King David, 2 Samuel 19.18. and as all
Criminals Petition mortal Princes for their Pardon. Put therefore your outward
and inward man into this posture, so shall you be fit to repeat the adjoining
Confession, to which we shall turn our discourse, when we have given you the
Analysis and Paraphrase of this Invitation, and so made it sufficiently plain
to all.

The Analysis of the Invitation.
Sect. 2. This Invitation consists of three parts. The Qualifications required
in those that are invited, viz. 1. Repentance. Ye that do truly and earnestly
repent you of your sins,
2. Charity. And art in Love and Charity with your Neighbors.
3. Holy purposes And intend to lead a new life, following the Commandments of
God, and walking from henceforth in his holy ways.

2. The Invitation it self. Draw near with Faith, and take this Holy Sacrament
to your Comfort,
3. A direction as to 1. The duty next to be done. And make your humble
Confession to Almighty God,
2. The manner of doing it. Meekly kneeling upon your knees.



The Paraphrase of the Invitation.
. 3. O all [Ye that do] sincerely and [truly] passionately [and earnestly
repent you of] all your former iniquities, and [your sins] which ye have
committed: And ye that have cast away all malice [and are in] a perfect state
of [Love and Charity with] every one of [your Neighbors: And] ye that
condemning your bypast folly, do resolve and [intend to lead a new life]
taking Jesus for your guide [following the Commandments of God] fully [and
walking from henceforth] unblameably [in his holy ways] in the name of Christ I
bid you that are so qualified, to [draw near] to this holy Table [with Faith]
in your Saviors mercy [and take this Holy Sacrament] the pledge of his love
[to your] great and endless [Comfort] only because you must have no secret
accusations of Conscience to disturb your joy in this blessed Feast. Open your
heart to the Lord once more [And make your humble Confession] with great sorrow
and contrition [to Almighty God] and that in the lowlyest posture [meekly
kneeling upon your knees] to beg your Pardon from the King of Kings.

SECT. III. Of the Confession.
. 1. BEsides those public Confessions in the reconciliation of notorious
Offenders to the Church, and those of the Closet performed by humbled Souls in
order to their preparation for this Sacrament; We learn from St. Chrysostom. that
all the Communicants were wont to join in saying the same general Prayer for
Mercy, (...) Chrysostom. Hom. 18. in 2. ad Cor.
and St. Aug. August. de salutar. dorum c. 33.
affirms, that when they received these mysteries, they first did fly to
Confession and Repentance, and what sins they found themselves guilty of upon a
strict survey of their actions, they did immediately purge away by penitential
acknowledgments: So that of old not only the Priest (as the Custom of Rome now
is) but every one of the people made an open Confession to God before the
Communion; it was indeed in general Terms In hac confessione non in specie, sed
in genere confitenda sunt peccata, quoniam ista confessio non occulta est, sed
publica: Innocen. l. 2. de mist.
, but omitted by none, because there is no Man but he has sinned, and he that
is not censured by the Church, nor liable by humane Laws, may yet be guilty
before God. The Death of Jesus is now to be set forth, and if we do not confess
those sins which caused that his bitter Passion, he might seem to suffer for
his own offense: Nor can we expect a public pardon sealed, till by Confession
we declare, how little we deserve it, how much we need it, and how highly we
are obliged for it. And by doing this one duty well, we shall renew the sense
of our sins, and enlarge our affections to him that died for them, we shall
move our God to forgive them Quando homo detegit Deus tegit, cum homo coelat
Deus nudat, cum homo agnoscit Deus ignoscit. Aug. in Psalm.
and give the best testimony of our amendment Somnium narrare vigilantis est,
and vitia sua confiteri sanitatis iudicium est. Senec. ep. 54.
. Now that we may thus offer up this exact and pious Confession; let us first
labor to understand it, and be affected with it, by the following explication.

The Analysis of the Confession.
Sect. 2. This Confession has five Parts. 1. An acknowledgment of our sins
showing, 1. To whom we do confess, Almighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of all Men.
2. What we do confess, 1. In general We acknowledge and bewail our manifold
sins and wickedness,
2. In particular. 1. The number. Which we from time to time, most grievously
have committed,
2. The kinds. by thought, word, and deed, against thy Divine Majesty;
3. The effects of them provoking most justly thy wrath adn indignation against
us.



2. An Act of Contrition for them expressed. 1. More largely. We do earnestly
repent,
2. More strictly in our, 1. Sorrow for them. and are heartily sorry for these
our misdoings:
2. Hatred of them. the remembrance of them is grievous unto us,
3. Trouble under them. the burden of them is intolerable:


3. A supplication for pardon intimating, 1. What we crave. Have mercy upon us,
have mercy upon us,
2. Of whom we crave it. most merciful Father,
3. In whose name. for thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ his sake,
4. How far our Petition extends. forgive us all that is past,

4. A Petition for such Grace as may be true, 1. In the duration of it. and
grant that we may ever hereafter,
2. In the Acts of it. serve and please thee in newness of life,
3. In the end of it. to the honor and glory of thy Name,

5. A general motive to them all. through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.


A Practical Discourse upon the Confession.
. 3. Almighty God Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, maker of all things, Judge
of all men.] When the glories of God were described before holy Job, he
immediately abhors himself in dust and ashes, Job 42.5, 6. and there is not a
more effectual instrument of contrition, than a serious prospect of the Majesty
whom we have offended, hence the Servants of God in Scripture do usually begin
their Confessions with the mention of the Divine Power and goodness, Nehem.
1.5. Dan. 9.4. And for this cause our Church has selected four most
comprehensive Titles, which do most clearly set before us, the Greatness and
the Goodness of that Lord against whom we have sinned. We will therefore
particularly consider them, First, As they contain matter of terror for our
humiliation. Secondly, As they express grounds of hope to encourage us to ask
Pardon. 1. We may meditate that he whose Laws we have broken, is an Almighty
God, infinite in Power, and terrible in his Anger, from whom nothing can defend
us but submission, and a great humiliation; It was desperate presumption to
offend him, and it is a strange stupidity and madness, if we now be void of
fear and sorrow: Are we stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10.22. if not, why did we
provoke him at first? or how dare we now stand out against him? 2. He is the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him he is the Father and Fountain Pater
Hebraice pro authore, vel font, misericordiae, ita Ephesians. 1.17. Job 38.28. etc.
of all mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. and by him he has expressed such an affection to
us, as all the World can never parallel, and have we thus requited him? by
profaning his name, disobeying his Commands, despising his love, and doing that
which his Soul hates? Oh monstrous ingratitude! 3. He is the maker of all
things, and so may justly challenge obedience from all the World, nor is there
any of his Creatures, but we alone, that are refractory to his will. Can there
then be greater injustice than that we should rob him of the service we owe
unto him, and abuse him by those very things which he has made to serve our
needs? 4. He is the Judge of all men, Genesis 18.25. at whose sentence we must
either be justified or condemned for ever, and yet instead of obliging him to
stand our Friend, we have even urged him to become our Enemy, and forced him as
he is just to pass a dreadful doom upon us: Let us lay all this to heart, and
his Power will show the Boldness, his Love the Baseness, his Title to us the
Injustice, and his Authority over us the folly of every sinful Act, and all
together I hope will melt our rocky hearts, and make us sincerely Penitent. 2.
That we be not too much dejected, let us review these Attributes again, and we
shall also find in them, motives sufficient to support our hope, and encourage
us to ask forgiveness: For first, He is Almighty, even absolute and supreme; so
that if he please he can forgive without control, and none can reverse his
Acts of Grace. Secondly, He is the Father of our dear Redeemer, and in him
loves us with an everlasting love, by him our Peace is made, so that through
him we may go with boldness to the Throne of Grace. Thirdly, He is the Maker of
all things, and of us among the rest. Now he hates nothing that he has made,
for his mercy is over all his Works, wherefore we may have good hopes that he
will pity and help the work of his own hands. Lastly, He is the Judge of all
men, Let us therefore now make our supplication to him, for it is yet the time
of mercy, Job 9.15. and he is now willing to help them whom he has redeemed
with his precious blood. Being thus prepared by meditating on these Attributes,
we may fitly begin to confess as follows.

. 4. We acknowledge and bewail our manifold sins and wickedness, which we from
time to time most grievously have Committed.] These two words to [acknowledge
and bewail] are taken out of Psalm. 38.18. For I will confess my wickedness, and
be sorry for my sin. And if (as St. Augustine notes) David's bare resolution to
do this, before the words were in his mouth, did obtain his pardon, Nondum
pronunciat sed promittit se pronunciaturum, and ille dimittit -- Vox nondum in
ore erat, sed auris Dei in Cord erat: August. in Psalm. 36.
how much more shall we be admitted to forgiveness who do actually perform them
both? They are indeed the proper parts of Repentance to be exercised in
Confession, and are both of them most reasonable and fit to be done just now.
1. What impudence were it to deny our sins before him from whom we cannot hide
them, and what folly to conceal them from him that would heal us and forgive
them Quis non invitaretur illi ad praemium confiteri, cui non possis negare
quod feceris? Cassiodor. in Psalm. 118.
? Are we ashamed to acknowledge them in the Church, and are we not afraid to be
charged with them before all the World Hoc in Ecclesia facere fastidis? -- ubi
nihil est quod pudori esse debeat, nisi non fateri, cum omnes simus peccatores,
ubi ille justior qui humilior. Ambr. de poen. 2. 10.
? Alas we are all Sinners, and he that confesses it most humbly shall soonest
become innocent. 2. And there is as great reason that we should [bewail] them
also, because here we see the wounds which they have made in the Lord Jesus.
When David saw his people dying by thousands for his sin, immediately he cries
out As Nisus in Virg. Aen. 9. seeing Euryalus his friend like to be slain. No
longer could he hide himself, nor see
So sad a sight, but cries at me, at me!
Behold my self who did the fact, am by,
Against me turn your steel, ye Rutuli!

I have sinned, I have done wickedly, but these sheep what have they done? 2 Samuel 24.17. And can we behold the innocent and immaculate Lamb of God, bleeding
and dying for our offenses, and not cry out with tears, Lord, what had thou
done, to be thus used? thou had acted no evil, nor was guile found in thy
mouth; sweetest Jesus, my sins were thy murderers, and thou sufferdest for my
wretchedness: If I may not weep for thee, Luke 23.28. yet let me weep for my
self who have brought all this upon thee. Now when your heart thus begins to
bleed with sorrow, and your mouth is opened to confess, behold what excellent
matter is here prepared! First, You are taught what you must acknowledge, viz.
All your Sins and Wickedness, your lesser as well as greater iniquities, Omne
enim malum etiam mediocre magnum est, Cicer. Tuscul. qu. l. 3.
for though they are many, and manifold, of several kinds and qualities, yet
they all agree in this, that they are all odious to God, and will be damnable
to you without repentance; Consider also, 1. How often. 2. How grievously they
have been committed. First, You have been raising this heap, and running on
this score all your life [from time to time] Hebr. de Die in Diem. Psalm. 96.
ver. 2.
that is, both continually as to duration, and frequently as to the repetition;
You have long been disobedient, and renewed these offenses every day, and every
hour, if not every moment, so that it is next to impossible to compute them;
they are compared to the hairs of your head, and the Sands of the Sea, both
which exceed humane Arithmetic; yet God that numbers our hairs, and reckons
the sands, can particularly accuse you for every one of these sins, and have
you not great reason then to acknowledge and bewail them? -- And the rather,
Secondly, Because they are not only many, but very heinous, and committed in a
most ( grievous Lam. 1.8. Heb. peccando peccavimus, Angl. grievously sinned,
quam phrasin nostri reddunt, Exodus 32.31. A great sin. Jer. 6.8. grievous
revolters, ubi Vulg. and C. Par. principes declinantium. Jun. and Trem.
contumacium contumacissimi.
) and provoking manner, in despite of mercies, and the means of grace, in
defiance of your own knowledge, and your Consciences, with so much ingratitude
and baseness, that it cannot but be grievous to your Heavenly Father to bear
it, and I hope it will also be grievous to you to consider it, and that when
you think thereon you will weep unfeignedly.

. 5. By thought word and deed, against thy divine Majesty; provoking most
justly thy wrath, and indignation against us.] Although it is impossible to
recite here all the particulars in which we have sinned, yet we should run into
the suspicion of Hypocrisy, if we did wholly rest in generals; wherefore the
Church sees fit to put our thoughts into some method, for the furtherance of
our penitential recollections, and how could that be better done than by that
brief, yet full division, so often found in the Ancient Liturgies, Peccavi
nimis cogitatione, locutione, and opere, Miss. Romans
and so much used among the Fathers, directing us to consider of the several
sins of our Thoughts, our Words, and our Deeds? For the Heart in which Jesus
should lodge, the Mouth by which he should enter, and the Hand with which we
should receive him, all of them are defiled; And Solomon tells us, that for
every secret thought, Eccles. 12.14. Christ, that for every idle word, Math.
12.36. St. Paul, that for every evil deed, 2 Cor. 5.10. God will bring us into
judgment. Let us therefore now prevent that by considering and judging our
selves. First, For the sins of our Thoughts, for our Cogitations are always
vain and roving, often haughty, wanton, or envious; sometimes revengeful,
mischievous, or Atheistical: and because these sins of the heart require no
determinate time or place to their Commission, and are acted without either
pains or assistants; Animi motus citra temporis moram fiunt, citra lassitudinem
perficiuntur, citra negotium consistunt, omnem temporis occasionem idoneam
habent. S. Basil. Conc. 3.
they are almost every where, and always done, and we may all cry out, Lord who
can tell how often he thus offends? Secondly, For the sins of our Words, which
are the superfluous scum of an evil heart; running over out of the mouth Math.
12.34. (...)

S. James 1.21. (...).


. Alas how many lies and slanders, Oaths and Curses, boasting, flattering, and
filthy speeches proceed thence? Beside infinite and innumerable vain words,
(...). Quod and fine utilitate loquentis dicitur, and audientis: S. Hieron.
all which the Jewish Doctors say shall be noted in a Table, to be produced,
and read before us in the hour of Death Vajikra Rab. Sect. 26.
. And a greater than they says, we shall give an account for them in the day
of Judgment, Math. 12.34. Thirdly, For our Deeds of Wickedness, all which are
open to God, and our Consciences, and many of them public and notorious to the
World: By these we have done great dishonor to God, brought much of scandal on
Religion, and done real injury to our Neighbors. Let us therefore reflect upon
all this, and consider that we have offended in all these kinds: and whereas we
should have glorified God in our Hearts, with our Lips, and by our Lives; we
have sinned (...) ^ry one of these ways, that is, as many (...) ar^ capable of
sinning against the Divine (...) and that our Confession may be more humble and
passionate, let us further meditate of the dreadful effects of such and so many
Sins: St. Paul informs us, they produce in God Indignation and Wrath against
us, Romans 2.8. And oh how terrible a thought it is, to think that God is angry
with us! this makes the Spirits of darkness tremble, and melts the heart of an
ingenuous Christian, into tears and mourning. But it may be we fancy (as
Basilides of old) that God will see no sin in us, or being so merciful however
will not be so much incensed at us, and so we shall confess with Agags vain
Confidence, 1 Samuel 15.32. that the danger of death is past: Oh take heed! When
God has said that he hates all iniquity, and vowed, yea sworn that he will
punish it, what madness and presumption is it, to think he is not just, or not
serious? This is so vain and so impudent, that it adds one greater, to all the
former sins Nemini itaque facilis sua causa fit; nullus difficilius evadit,
quam qui se evasurum praesumpserit: S. Salvian.
; and thus to hope against sense, and reason, and the truth of God, has been
the ruin of thousands. The Church therefore will have us to acknowledge that
we have deserved the wrath of God; yet not as the Athenians, who obliged the
Malefactor convicted by Law, to confess himself worthy of Death, that they
might ground the sentence upon his own words; but that God may upon our free
acknowledgment, most freely acquit us for Jesus sake. If we believe we have
merited the indignation of the Almighty, we shall fear it, and if we fear it,
we shall strive to escape it, and so we shall never feel it Hoc metueret
conscientia nostra si crederet -- si autem crederet, and caveret, si caveret,
evaderet. Cypr. de un. Eccl.
. And thus the Divine Anger may bring us to Repentance, and become the
Instrument of our Pardon Indignatio ejus non est ultionis executio, sed magis
est absolutionis operatio. Tertul. in Marc.
. Consider how great a miracle of Patience it is, that God has not begun with
us; how miserable we shall be if ever we fall into his avenging hands, and how
great a mercy it is that he is pleased to try us now once more: And if either
his love can draw us, or our own danger drive us by repentance into the Arms of
his Mercy, we may yet be saved, and his name glorified in our deliverance.

. 6. We do earnestly repent and are heartily sorry for these our misdoings, the
remembrance of them is grievous unto us, the burden of them is intolerable.] In
pursuance of our first general affirmation, we did before [acknowledge] and now
we do [bewail] our manifold sins. That is the first, and this the second part
of every just Confession; and surely when we have owned the facts to be so
many, and so abominable, we cannot but be exceedingly grieved for them, the
boldest Sinners being hardly so confident, when their crimes are discovered, to
say they do not repent of them; and therefore our hearts must be moved with
those passions which our mouths do here express in so many and dolorous terms.
First, We must repent most seriously and fervently Earnestly: Graeca Verse. Lit.
(...): Nota, verba duplicata in Hebr. passionem exprimentia, Nostrates reddunt
[earnestly] Job 7.2, etc. Jerem. 31.20. I do earnestly (or passionately)
remember him still.
, having indignation against our selves, that ever we did commit them, and
wishing again and again they had never been done. Secondly, We must be heartily
sorry for them, and if possible we must testify the real Passion which we
feel, by our tears. Bassianus could never look upon the Picture of his Brother
Geta whom he had slain, but he wept, as Ael. Spartianus reports; and can we
with dry Eyes behold Christ Crucified for our Sins? We do not read (says St.
Ambrose) what Peter said, but we do read that he wept bitterly; and there was a
mighty Oratory in those tears Interdum lachrymae pondera vocis habent: Ovid. 3.
de Pont. El. 1.
: yet if our temper be not apt to express it self in tears, we must be truly
sorry, and sometimes the heart may bleed when the Eyes shed not one drop.
Thirdly, We must look back upon them with a sad Remembrance: we acted them
rashly, in the hurry of a Temptation, not discerning the evil or the danger of
them; but now that we soberly view the guilt, the shame, and the misery
following upon them, the remembrance of them is grievous to us, as the murder
of Clitus was to the Grecian Conqueror, when his Wine was gone and his reason
returned, for then he was like to have done violence to himself for so base an
Act. Alas we have grieved our dear Father in committing them, and the
recollecting of that must be as grievous to us, as the acting of them was to
him. Fourthly, We must feel the heavy burden of them. Nullum onus gravius est
quam sarcina peccatorum, and pondus flagitiorum: Amb. Ep. 18.
In the day of our madness we never felt the strokes, nor discerned the load:
but now that we discover our condition, the grief, the shame, and the fear do
even sink us with the mighty pressure. Our Souls are greatly vexed, they go
stooping and bowed down, Baruch 2.18. they are a sore burden too heavy for us
to bear, Psalm. 38.4. and in this distress we pray with the Greek Church (...)
Liturg. Eccles. Graecae.
, O Lord stretch out thy life-giving hand, and lift us up, who are bowed down,
and lie grovelling upon the Earth, under a grievous and deadly burden: We can
hardly bear up under the weight of this momentany sorrow, and how then are we
like to endure the eternal Vengeance? Thus then we must be affected when we say
this Confession; for let us remember that we do not confess to instruct an
All-seeing God, but to humble our selves; And to reckon up our sins without
such contrition is but a renewed provocation: he that abhorred our wickedness
when it was done, will abhor us if we tell the story of it with an unrelenting
heart. Let him therefore not only hear the words of our lips, but the sad
groans of our penitent hearts, saying, (...) Philo legis alleg. l. 2.
Ah me! how long have I been sick of the Disease of folly? Miserable wretch!
can I excuse, or dare I deny any of this Indictment? the facts are apparent,
the Law is plain, and the sentence unavoidable. I must confess I have been as
unworthy and as grievous a sinner as ever the Earth bore, and I am amazed at my
self, for I am here liable to all that God has threatened to the greatest
offenders. Woe is me, I have no refuge, no sanctuary, but in the divine mercy,
and thither will I fly for succor.

. 7. Have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us most merciful Father, for thy Son
our Lord Jesus Christ his sake forgive us all that is past.] After the
Confession of our sin, and our hearty Contrition for it, most regularly follows
this supplication for Mercy: We have clearly represented our miserable Estate,
how we lie groaning and oppressed with an intolerable load of guilt and terror;
and he that commands us not to see our Enemies Beast lie under his burden
without relief, Exodus 23.5. will never suffer our poor Souls to perish under
this our grievous pressure, but will pity and help us; especially because we
do with so much Passion beg his Mercy, with redoubled Cries, Have mercy upon
us, have mercy, etc. We must not censure this as a vain repetition, for it is
the very words of David, Psalm. 57.1. and 123.3. and does rarely express our
great necessity, our earnest desire, and our imminent danger Repetitio ardorem
precandi denotat, and clementiam divinam commovet ad opem accelerandam: Muis.
and Gejer. in Psalm. 57.
: it is an importunity pleasing to our gracious God, Mark 10.47, 48. who is
ready to give his mercy as soon as we are fit to receive it; and when by our
urgent cries we show that we have found ou^ want of mercy; he rejoices in that
opportunity to bestow it: He is a most merciful Father, and the fountain from
whence all the pity in the World does flow and if men (who are often churlish
and unnatural) can scarce deny the cries, or abuse the expectations of their
Children, Luke 11.11, 12, 13. how much more impossible is it for our Heavenly
Father to reject so earnest and so necessary a request. The Prodigal no soone^
pronounces the word Father, Luke 15.21. but the res^ of his speech was much of
it interrupted by his Fathers embraces, charmed with that endearing name, which
as we here use on the same occasion, let us do it with like affections, and it
shall have the same success: Mercy is the first, but not the only thing we ask,
for we further beseech him to forgive us, and this will follow the other,
because the mercy of God is not a mere useless pity, or ineffective condoling
Misericordia est animi condolentis affecti^ cum additamento beneficii, ut
compatiamu^ proximo, and largiamus de proprio: August.
; but it immediately brings us help: for by removing our sin (the cause) it
soon takes away our misery, which was only the effect thereof: we desire
therefore his mercy may appear in our forgiveness, and we have a powerful
motive annexed; not for our Righteousness Non quia merui, sed quia egeo,
justitia meritum quaerit, misericordia miseriam. Bern.
, but for our Lord Jesus sake, whose Death is here set forth, and who has so
purchased mercy, as to satisfy justice Misericordia tunc est vera
misericordia, si sic facta est, ut justitia per eam non contemnatur, Chrysos.
hom. in Math.
. Wherefore we may most cheerfully ask a pardon in his name, even for all that
is past, because he has deserved mercy for all the World if they will receive
it, and there are Millions of Souls now in Heaven, that once lay under as great
a burden as we now do, who making their Confession and supplication in his
name, have for his merits sake been advanced to a state of glory: Let us ask
then also, and that with all possible fervency, considering how blessed we
shall be, when God has crossed out all our debts, and Jesus cancelled all our
Obligations; Oh how will this dispel all our Clouds of sorrow? how cheerfully
shall we stand upright and praise God in the following Office, when this dismal
load is thus removed?

. 8. And grant that we may ever hereafter serve and please thee in newness of
life, to the honor and glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.] In the same breath that we ask for Pardon, we must also Petition for
Grace to amend our lives, or else we affront the Holiness of God Non est
poenitens sed ^rrisor qui adhuc agit ^nde poeniteat. S. Bern.
while we pretend to crave his mercy; He that only desires forgiveness to be
quit of his present fear is an Hypocrite Improbus quo ad metuit omnia est
promissurus, fimulatque timere desierit similis est futurus sui: Cicero. 2.
Phil.
, and does not hate or grieve for his iniquity, but for the punishment annexed
to it, and when that fear cease will be as bad as ever: But I hope we have
truly felt the weight of sin, and duly apprehended the misery of having God to
be our Enemy, and if so, we shall be as desirous to be kept from future sins,
as we are to be delivered from our past offenses: We have seen how base, how
foolish, and how desperate a thing it is to displease the Lord; let us now
therefore beg it as a mighty favor, that we may hereafter please him, by an
obedience that may last for ever, and may extend to all parts of our duty, so
that we may be wholly changed into new Persons, and live in newness of life,
Romans 6.4. Proclus tells of one Eurynous, who died and was buried at Nicopolis,
yet some days after was taken up alive (...). Comm. in Plat. Rep.
and afterward did lead a much more holy life than he had done before (...).
Comm. in Plat. Rep.
. Even so should we who were dead in Law, and by the sentence of our own
Conscience, being now raised up again by the mercies of God, and the merits of
Jesus, walk after a new manner, in all religious and holy Conversation; so
should our deliverance be for the glory of his holy name through Christ Jesus,
for whatsoever Lusts we shall conquer, or whatsoever good we shall perform, the
praise must wholly redound to him, who did revive and restore us: And surely we
shall find it a most happy change, from the slavery of sin, the bondage of
Satan, and the fear of Hell, to be acquainted, with the pleasures of holiness,
the peace of a good Conscience and the love of God, wherefore though this be
the last, let it not be thought the least of these Petitions, but let us beg it
with such Devotion, as may attest our sincerity in all the other parts of this
Confession, so will our Heavenly Father grant them all to us through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Confession.
. 9. O [Almighty God] we thy poor sinful Creatures, full of anguish and
confusion for our offenses against thy Majesty, do make bold to come unto thee,
because thou art the [Father of our Lord Jesus Christ] and for his sake
inclinable to show us mercy; Thou art the [Maker of] us, and [all things] and
thou hate nothing which thou have made, but have pity on all the works of thy
hands; so that we are encouraged to make our supplication unto thee, O thou
[judge of all men] for it is in thy power for ever to acquit or to condemn us:

We tremble and blush to be found Sinners against so infinite a power and
goodness, but we must not add Hypocrisy to our disobedience; Wherefore [We
acknowledge] freely [and bewail] most bitterly [our manifold] offenses of all
kinds, from the least of our [Sins] to the greatest of our Crimes [and
wickedness.] All and every one of [which we] long and frequently [from time to
time] with many provoking aggravations [most grievously have committed:] O
Lord, who can tell how often we have offended Here call to mind some of the
greatest of thy particular sins in thoughts, words, or actions.
, [By thought] in vain and evil imaginations, by [word] in false, uncharitable,
or blasphemous speeches [and] by [Deed] in ungodly, unjust, or intemperate
actions? For alas by all and every one of these ways we have daily sinned
[against thy Divine Majesty] turning thereby thy loving kindness into
displeasure, and [provoking] thee to anger, we have given thee cause [most
justly] to let loose [thy wrath and indignation against us] to our utter ruin,
if thy mercy do not help us:

Our guilt is evident, our danger apparent, and our estate is most deplorable;
wherefore [We do] most passionately, and [earnestly repent] us, that ever we
did commit them. [And are heartily sorry] with all our Souls [for these our] so
many and so abominable [misdoings.] When we look upon the baseness and
presumption of these vile offenses [The remembrance of them] does pierce our
hearts with shame and sorrow, and [is] most [grievous unto us.] When we behold
thy Favor which we have forfeited, and Eternal Damnation which we have
deserved thereby [the burden of them] presses down our Souls, with a load of
terror and amazement that [is intolerable.]

Yet since thou call all that are heavy laden, we must not despair of thy
pity, but in this great distress we do beseech thee to [Have mercy upon us] and
since our necessity forces us to be importunate, we will cry again [Have mercy
upon us] We know thou art a [most merciful Father] though by sin we are
unworthy to be called thy Children, yet we hope thy bowels will yern upon us;
We lie prostrate and helpless, begging of thee [for thy] dearly beloved [Son
our Lord Jesus Christ his sake] and by the merits of his Cross and Passion to
[forgive us] freely and fully for [all that is past] from the beginning of our
life until this very moment.

Lord make us instances of thy mercy [And grant] when we have received so
excellent and undeserved a favor [that we may] be so engaged thereby, as that
for [ever hereafter] we may beware of falling back into the like sin and
misery: Convert us we beseech thee as well as pardon us, and enable us most
obediently to [serve and] most entirely to [please thee] by spending the rest
of our time [in newness of life] and all holy conversation; Which through the
help of thy grace, we do here vow and resolve upon; that this mighty change may
tend [to the honor and glory of thy Name] who have so wonderfully delivered
us: All which we most heartily beg [through Jesus Christ our Lord] to whose
intercession for us do thou say [Amen] and it shall be to us according to thy
word, Amen.

SECT. IV. Of the Absolution.
. 1. HE must be wholly a stranger to the Discipline of the Ancient Church, who
knows not how great a care was taken that no public offender might partake of
these mysteries, until by a long trial and a great humiliation, he had received
an Absolution as public as his crime had been, so that it was a mighty and
scandalous irregularity in S. Cyprians time Nondum poenitentia acta, nondum
exomologesi facta, nondum manu eis ab Episcopo and Clero imposita, Eucharistia
iis datur. Cypr. de laps.
that lapsed persons by the favor of the Confessors and Martyrs were in some
places suffered to Communicate without the solemn Absolution, which yet was
rectified afterward Vbique mysterii ordo servatur, ut prius per remissionem
vulneribus medicina tribuatur, postea alimonia mensae coelestis exuberet. Ambr.
in Luc.
. But this godly Discipline being now every where laid aside, it is so much the
more necessary to supply it by this general Confession and Absolution:
Concerning which in general, the Reader may consult what is said before,
Compan. to the Temp. SECT. IV.. 1. And as to this particular form it shall
suffice to note that it is in imitation of that ancient form of blessing,
Benedictio ista pronuncianda est a sacerdote stante, facie ad populum versa,
manibus elevatis alta voce, and in nomine Dei proprio: RR. ap. Fag.
Numb. 6.24. etc. being expressed by way of Prayer, as there, The Lord bless
thee, etc. And since it is certain, there is such a Power vested in the
Ministers of the Gospel, to support the spirits of a dejected Penitent, by
antedating his pardon in the name of God; there can be no fitter opportunity to
exercise this power, than now, when so many poor humbled Sinners are kneeling
before God and begging forgiveness at his hands. Then it becomes the Priest in
Confidence of his Masters Mercy to give them his best wishes and with more than
an ordinary Prayer to signify, as well as ask their pardon. You have said with
David, We have sinned, wherefore God has sent his Minister like another
Nathan, to assure you, that, He has also put away the iniquity of your sin, 2 Samuel 12, 13. And though David might by his Faith in the Promises have found
some Comfort, yet neither so sure nor so sweet a consolation as when he
receives it from the mouth of a special Messenger. So likewise if we would
choose to believe rather than dispute, it would be a powerful Cordial to every
troubled Spirit, by a particular Officer from the King of Heaven to be thus
saluted; and he that cannot value this Absolution from the Priest, can no other
way receive satisfaction to his doubts and fears, unless he expect to be
assured of his Remission by an immediate Revelation, or can be content to stay
till the day of Judgment for the Resolution of this great enquiry. Only let us
but be careful, that our Repentance be sincere, and then we may with much joy
hear the following Absolution, which very briefly we shall now explain.

The Analysis of the Absolution.
Sect. 2. The Absolution has three parts. 1. The Original from whom it
springs. Almighty God our Heavenly Father,
2. The ground on which it depends, His promise. 1. The motive to it. who of
his great mercy has promised
2. The matter of it. forgiveness of sins,
3. The conditions annexed to it, to all them that with hearty repentance, and
true Faith turn unto him.

3. The Petitionary blessing or Absolution it self, for 1. The Averting the
Evil of, 1. Sin. Have mercy upon you,
2. Punishment. Pardon and deliver you from all your sins,

2. The obtaining of good both, 1. Present. Confirm and strengthen you in all
goodness,
2. Future. and bring you to everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.




A Practical Discourse of the Absolution.
. 3. Almighty God, our Heavenly Father, who of his great mercy has promised
forgiveness of sins, to all them that with hearty Repentance, and true Faith
turn unto him.] The Spiritual Physician does here proceed most regularly in the
Cure of poor Sinners, that labor under a burden of guilt and sorrow; for he
first premises such Considerations as may dispose them to believe, that the
following Blessing shall be ratified, and the Absolution confirmed by a higher
Power. For first, He minds them that he who is Almighty, and only can forgive,
Mar. 2.7. is also their Heavenly Father, and full of Compassion toward them,
yea like as a Father pittyeth his own Children, even so is the Lord merciful
unto them that fear him, Psalm. 103.13. But of this before. Secondly therefore,
that he is not only engaged by his affections, but by his truth also to deliver
them; for he has solemnly promised ( Isai. 55.7. Ezekiel. 18.30. John 3.16. etc.)
that he would freely forgive and fully be reconciled to all such as unfeignedly
grieved for their sins, and wholly cast themselves upon his mercy, so that they
cannot doubt of a pardon if they believe him to be faithful that promised Qui
credidit promittenti, fidenter promissum repetit, promissum quidem ex
misericordia, sed jam ex justitia persolvendum: Bern. de gr and lib.
. It was indeed only his great mercy which moved him to promise this, because
he might most righteously have taken the first forfeiture made to his justice;
but now this gracious Promise is made by him that cannot lie, there is a
certainty of the performance: He knew that as the stroke of his Vengeance was
intolerable, so the expectation thereof was terrible and amazing; wherefore he
promised forgiveness, on purpose to prevent the despair of such as were willing
to amend, that by so great a favor he might engage them to obedience, and
encourage them in all the parts of duty: Yet because it almost exceeds belief
that ever God should receive such grievous Sinners, and they that are most
truly humble are most apt to Question this, therefore is all this premised, to
prepare them, with faith and hope to entertain that which follows.

. 4. Have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you from all your sins, confirm
and strengthen you in all goodness, and bring you to everlasting life through
Jesus Christ our Lord: Amen.] When Jesus was to raise up Lazarus from the dead,
he commanded the men who stood by to remove the stone from the Grave, and
afterward to unloose the Grave-Clo^hs: even so, though he only do give life to
Sinners Absolutio hominis in Dei miseratione, non in hominis potestate est.
Ambr. in Job. l. 1. c 6.
, yet he is pleased to use the Ministry of his Servants in the Dispensation of
their Pardon Nostrum est onera removere, illius exuere de sepulchro exutos
vinculis: idem de poen. l. 2. cap. 7.
. The Prayer is made by the Priest, but then it is directed to the Divine
Majesty: and though according to the ancient manner Misereatur vestri
omnipotens Deus, and dimittat vobis omnia peccata vestra: Missal.
, it be put into the form of a request, yet being grounded on the promise, and
agreeable both to the nature and design of God, it has a mighty force, and
ascends Heaven Cum privilegio: it is like the Fathers Blessing, which has
always been believed to convey as well as crave the Benediction; thus Isaac
blessed Jacob, Genesis 27.28, 29. in the Imperative Mood: God give thee, etc. Let
the people, etc. Be thou Lord, etc. And thus Jacob blessed Joseph's Sons, Genesis
48.15, 16. and the Lord accomplished all the particulars. Let it therefore
cheer your hearts, ye contrite ones, to hear this Blessing from your spiritual
Father; for behold it contains all that you do need or can desire. Are you
miserable? here is mercy: are you sinful? here is pardon: are you liable to
punishment? here is deliverance: are you desirous but unable to do good? here
is strength and confirmation: are you fearful of Death and Hell? here is Heaven
and Everlasting Life: And all this asked of God by one that he has
Commissionated to make this Prayer; so that your only care is, that your
Repentance be such as your Minister believes it to be, and then this Absolution
shall certainly be confirmed in the High Court of Heaven, and not one word
thereof shall fall to the ground.

The Paraphrase of the Absolution.
. 5. Let not the multitude of your sins discourage any of you who are truly
grieved for them, for I am bound to speak peace to you in the name of [Almighty
God] against whom you have offended, because he is [our Heavenly Father]
infinite in mercy and loving kindness; And you may believe this the more
firmly, since it is he [who of his great mercy] and pity to poor Sinners, so
freely and frequently [hath promised] to grant [forgiveness of sins] and a
gracious Pardon [to all them that with hearty Repentance] for their grievous
offenses [and true Faith] in his mercy and the merits of Jesus, do [turn unto
him] to seek remission, and obtain his favor: I his Substitute believing you
to be such, do according to mine office beseech and require this our gracious
Lord to [Have mercy upon you] and to pity your misery, as also to [Pardon] the
guilt [and deliver you from] the punishment temporal, spiritual, and Eternal,
due unto you for [all your Sins]: And when he has acquitted you, and so
engaged you to live more holily hereafter; Let him [confirm] you in the
purposes [and strengthen you in] the performance of [all goodness] and virtue:
so that finally he (for his mercy) may save your Souls [and bring you] safely
through all the dangers of this World [to everlasting life.] Let all this be
granted and made good unto you every one [through] the Merits and the
Intercession of [Iesus Christ our Lord] who has purchased all these benefits
for repentant Sinners. [Amen.] Be it so.

SECT. V. Of the Sentences of Scripture.
. WHosoever has been truly sensible of his sins and deeply humbled for them,
will find it no easy matter to believe that God has yet any favor for him;
for although it be most desirable, yet it is a happiness so strange and
undeserved, that it is often too big for the hope of a poor Penitent Proprium
hoc miseros sequitur vitium,
Rebus nunquam credere laetis,
Redeat foelix fortuna licet,
Tamen afflictos gaudere piget. Sen. Thyeste.

. Wherefore we must now labor by all means to beget in those that come hither
a firm persuasion of Gods mercy: for Faith is as necessary in a Communicant as
Repentance, the Ancient Church calling those properly the faithful Is igitur
vocabatur fidelis non qui baptizarus aut confirmatus est, sed qui Eucharistiae
sacris participasset: Albaspin. obs. l. 1.
who had received the Lords Supper. The Germans allowed none to come unto their
Sacrifices, who had lost their Shield Tacitus de mor. Germ.
; nor do we approve that any should come to this Christian Sacrifice who wants
the Shield of Faith; for how can they repent kindly whose hearts are not
softened with the hopes of mercy Nemo enim potest been agere poenitentiam, nisi
qui speraverit indulgentiam: Ambros. de poen. l. 1.
, or how can they delight in Jesus or give him thanks who doubt whether they
shall receive any benefit by his Death or no? Fears and misgiving thoughts,
trembling and despair must by all means be removed, before we feast at this
Holy Table: And for this reason our Church has subjoined these Sentences to
the Absolution. Some may be so scrupulous or so fearful as to question the
power or the fidelity of the Servant, but who can or dare doubt of the
Authority of the Truth of God (...) Clem. Al. strom. 5.
? Can any deny what he affirms in his own word? or shall any suspect that which
he promises with his own mouth? Be the Sinner never so much disconsolate,
surely it will revive him to hear the Majesty against whom he has sinned, so
kindly speaking peace unto him: Yet these Sentences are not to be thought a
different kind of comfort from what we had before in the Absolution, for these
are those Promises there mentioned, and are in pursuance of it, and a further
Confirmation to it. There is but one thing in that Act of Grace which the most
timorous person can doubt, viz. Whether it be certain that Almighty God has
promised forgiveness to such as they are? Now to satisfy this enquiry, here
are selected four of the most full and proper Sentences in all the New
Testament, containing in them the very marrow of the Gospel, so overflowing
with sweet and powerful comforts, that if duly considered, they will satisfy
the most jealous Souls, and cheer the most broken heart; if believed and
embraced, they will utterly banish all the Clouds of sorrow and despair. There
are, it is true, Sentences also in the Roman Missal, but those generally taken
out of the Psalms Deus tu conversus laetificabis nos. Et plebs tua laetabitur
in te, Ostende nobis, etc. Psalm. 85.6, 7. Sacerdotes tui, etc. Psalm. 132.9.
Miss. secund. usum Ebor.

Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini, etc. Psalm. 121.2. Benedictum fit nomen
Domini, Psalm. 113.2. sec. usum Sarum.


; for as their form of Absolution has no mention of the Evangelical promise of
forgiveness, so their Sentences are out of the Old Testament, and seem too much
to forget the Redeemer, by whom this Pardon is obtained. As for these Sentences
before us, they have (nor need) no other method, than that order in which they
lie in the New Testament, the words of the Master first, and those of his two
principal Apostles following them: only that we may derive seasonable comfort
from them, we will briefly discourse upon them severally.

. 2. Come unto me all that travel, and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you.
St. Math. 11.28.] This gracious invitation is the proof of the first assertion
in the Absolution, viz. that our Lord does promise forgiveness to all them that
with hearty Repentance turn to him. For whereas all Sinners do lie under a
heavy burden, yet the impenitent do not perceive it (...). Chrysostom.
. Only those that discern the baseness and foresee the punishment of their
iniquity, these travel, that is (in the ancient English) labor with great
pains, these are heavy laden therewith, and cry out that their sins are a
burden too heavy for them to bear, Psalm. 38.4. these therefore are they that
truly repent, who are oppressed with trouble and sorrow, shame and fear: And
Jesus, though he be the offended party, does most courteously call all such to
come unto him, that is, to believe that he is able, and willing to help them,
John 6.37. Heb. 11.6. and says, he will refresh them by taking this burden off
from them; for he has born it upon the Cross, Isai. 53.4, 6. nay taken it away
for ever, by satisfying the Divine Justice to which we were obnoxious; nor does
he require any merit in us to deserve thus to be eased, or expect any other
qualification, than only that we be sensible of our own Sin and Misery, and
find our need of his Mercy. Sweetest Savior, how excellent is thy goodness! we
cannot doubt thy power to ease us, because thou have born the sins of the whole
World: we may not question thy willingness, who call us to thee of thy own
accord, nor dare we suspect thy sincerity, who art Truth it self, and always in
earnest with poor Sinners. Our guilt made us think to fly from thee, but thy
melting voice has encouraged us to turn to thee, and laid us prostrate at thy
feet, groaning under the offenses we have done against thee, and now if thou
do pity us, we are safe, if thou art pleased, we are eased, if thou do
pardon us, the burden is gone; And if thou will take away this intolerable load
we shall then venture to come nearer, even to thy holy Table; there to receive
still more refreshment from thy mercy. [These are thy words O Christ, for thou
have spoken them, and they are mine because thou have spoken them for my
Salvation. -- O sweet and amiable words in the Ears of a poor Sinner, by which
thou invitest an indigent starved wretch, to partake of thy holy body. But who
am I, O Lord, that I should dare to come? -- the Angels and Archangels
reverence thee, thy Saints and holy ones fear before thee, and yet thou say
unto me, Come, etc. -- unless thou had said it, who could have believed it to
be true? unless thou had commanded it, who durst have attempted this
approach?] T. a Kempis de imitat. Chris. l. 4. c. 1.

The Paraphrase.
O ye of contrite hearts [Hear] with joy and wonder [what comfortable words] he
whose love you so much long for, even [our Savior Christ] himself [saith to
all] such as you [that truly] grieving for your sins, do turn to him] to find
mercy.

Lo, he pities you and most affectionately calls upon you, saying [Come unto
me] with a persuasion that I am able and desirous to help you. O [all ye that
travel] with much grief and pains for your sins, [and are heavy laden] with the
apprehensions of my anger against you for them, be not discouraged, for I will
bear this burden my self [and I will] by my sufferings make your peace with my
Father, and so [refresh you] according to your hearts desire.

. 3. So God loved the World that he gave his only-begotten Son, to the end that
all that believe in him, should not perish but have Everlasting Life. S. John
3.16.] The second Assertion in the Absolution is confirmed by this Sentence,
viz. that Almighty God will forgive all, that with true Faith turn unto him: If
he were willing to grant pardon on easier terms, yet a man void of Faith could
not receive it. It was an absurd practice in some places of old, to give the
Sacrament to the Dead, who had been surprised by mortal sickness, and prevented
to receive it living; but an ancient Council condemned this Placuit ut
corporibus defunctorum Eucharistia non detur, Dictum est enim a Domino,
Accipite, etc. Conc. 3. Carthag. Can. 6.
, because the Dead could not (as Christ commands) Take and eat it: And for the
same reason a Man without Faith cannot receive Absolution, because he is dead
Vnde mors in anima? quia non est fides; unde mors in corpore? quia non est
anima: ergo animae tuae anima fides est. Aug. in Johan.
, void of all spiritual life, and power to apprehend the benefit thereof.
Therefore if our sins and sorrows have wrapped us in such mists that we can
scarce discern the light of Gods countenance; let us thoroughly meditate of this
one Sentence, and the glories of it will dispel them all. For here it does
appear, that he first loved us and gave the noblest testimony of the biggest
affection to us; for he gave not a Creature, nor a Servant, a Prophet, nor an
Angel for us, but he gave up his Son, his only Son, to a cruel Death, for the
World, his Enemies, and liable to his justice, and all this for no other end,
but that we and the rest of this miserable World, might be freed from the
Damnation which we had deserved, and be advanced to that glory which we could
never have expected. And do we still question his willingness to save us? Did
he give such a price to purchase our Salvation when we were Enemies, and shall
we think he will cast us into those flames out of which we were so dearly
rescued, now when we beg his mercy? Did he send his Son on purpose to preserve
us, and will he lose his end in so glorious a work? Away ye misgiving thoughts,
dishonor not the incomparable goodness of God, has he not given more when he
gave his own Son for all, than to grant life to a few for his sake? Oh do not
question that Love which is sealed with such an Evidence, but believe, admire,
embrace it, and be thankful.

The Paraphrase.
Do thou fear, O my Soul, that God will not have mercy on thee? behold he
that best knew his Fathers mind affirms that [So] wonderfully [God loved] his
miserable Enemies, even all the Sinners in [the World, that he] when none else
could help them, freely [gave] up not some of his noblest Servants, but [his
only-begotten] and entirely beloved [Son] to die for them: And this he did [to
the end, that] we and such like poor Sinners, even [all that believe] this
Jesus is able and willing to save them, and so trust [in him] might be
delivered from the wrath to come; for all this was done on purpose that we
[should not perish] in endless Torments, [but have everlasting life] in his
Heavenly Kingdom. Doubt not then but this design shall be accomplished in thy
Salvation.

. 4. This is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be received, that Jesus
Christ came into the World to save Sinners. 1 Timoth. 1.15.] Although there
needs nothing to confirm what Jesus says, yet since he himself was pleased to
take his Apostles for his Witnesses, we have here brought in two of the
principal of them to avouch this excellent truth, viz. That there is mercy for
Penitent Sinners: And first, the certainty thereof is averred by Saint Paul,
who had found the experience of it, and was himself so great an instance
thereof, that he thinks ver. 16. no sinner will ever despair, that can but
consider how great an offender he was, and yet that he found mercy; whereupon
he does with great confidence assert this, as a tried and infallible Maxim, and
because all men have sinned, he propounds it as a Truth which every man is
concerned to receive as unquestionably, and believe as firmly, as the Cabala
Cabala fig. receptam doctrinam: qui docet enim apud Judaeos tradere dicitur,
qui discit recipere: Vid. Ham. annot. in 1 Timothy 1. and Drus. praeterit. l. 8.
was amongst the Scholars of Jewish Rabbis: And he urges this the more
vigorously because we are so apt to object, what such as we? shall we ever
partake of such a happiness? Yes such as you, for our Lord Jesus had no other
errand into this World, no other design in putting on our nature, no other end
in dying than to save Sinners. He came not to call the Righteous, Math. 9.13.
but to seek and save those which were lost, Chap. 18.11. and he assures us,
there is more joy in Heaven at the difficult and unexpected Salvation of a
Sinner, than at the more likely and more looked for glorification of many
righteous, Luke 15.7. But you say, you are grievous Sinners; Are not all the
World so? if there had been no Sinners there had needed no Savior: if Sinners
cannot be saved, no man did ever enter Heaven: if sin be unpardonable, Jesus
has died in vain: Do not argue against your own felicity, but be assured, if
you relent for your offenses, though you be a Sinner you may go with comfort to
him, for you are the proper object for his power and mercy.

The Paraphrase.
If any say they cannot hope, because they have been so great Sinners, let them
[Hear also what] one that had been once a great offender, even [St. Paul saith]
I have found (says he) that [This is a true saying] I do affirm it to be
infallible [and worthy of all men] especially Sinners [to be received] and
firmly believed, [That Jesus Christ] the Eternal Son of God, left ^s glory and
[came into the World] for no other end, but only [to save] such wretched
[Sinners] as I was, so that if they believe this, and come in to him, they
shall be delivered even as I also have been.

. 5. If any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our Sins. 1 John 2.1.] Finally, that
no shadow of a jealousy may remain, if any disconsolate Penitent shall yet
ask, how can these things be, John 3.9. the beloved Disciple does here show by
what means our Pardon is effected; We have sinned indeed against a glorious
Majesty who dwells in Heaven, whither we cannot come our selves, but we have a
Friend there, a Mediator to make our Peace, an Advocate (...). est ap. Targum
Job 16.20. and exponitur esse Oratorem bonum pro homine facunde dicentem. lib.
Musar. Advocatum bonum qui causam alicujus agit coram Rege a Mose Egypt.
notante Drusio.
to plead our Cause, who appears in our stead, and intercedes for our Pardon in
the High-Court of Heaven. If God had designed to let us perish, he would have
endured none to speak for us, much less would he have appointed us such an
Advocate, who has been acquainted with our infirmities to encourage us, and is
his well-beloved Son, to engage him, an Advocate peculiarly styled the
Righteous, as being wholly innocent and without exception; for one sinner
cannot effectually interceed for another, with him that hears not Sinners:
But above all he has paid our Debt, and was himself that Sin-offering which
made his Father so propitious and apt to be reconciled; wherefore he with great
Authority urges the merits of his own blood, by which God may save his justice
and yet forgive us: and is it possible he should be rejected? I know we did
very evil to offend, nor must we take encouragement from hence to sin more
easily Absit ut aliquis ita interpretetur, quasi eo sibi etiam nunc pateat ad
delinquendum, quia patet ad poenitendum, and redundantiam clementiae coelestis
faciat libidinem humanae temeritatis. Tert. de poen. c. 7.
. Only now that we have been deceived and are exceedingly grieved for it, we
are hereby encouraged to repent, and not to sit down under a sad despair; for
how can we perish that have such an Advocate and such a Propitiation?

The Paraphrase.
For the greater confirmation of your Faith [Hear also] and believe [what St.
John saith] viz. Although we ought not at all to sin, yet [If any man] be
betrayed, so that he do [Sin] he is not left to perish nor must he despair of
being forgiven, for [We] Sinners, who cannot approach to God our selves [have
an Advocate] in Heaven to plead our cause, whose interest is most prevalent
[with the Father.] For he is his only Son [Iesus Christ] and our loving Savior
[the Righteous] One, who never did offend. [And] besides [he is] the Sacrifice,
and [the Propitiation] whereby the Divine Justice was satisfied [for our sins]
and so may intercede most effectually by the merits of his own most precious
blood.

SECT. VI. Of the Prefaces and the Trisagium.
. 1. AFter we have exercised our Charity, Repentance and Faith: the next part
of the office is Eucharist and thanksgiving, which is so considerable a part of
our present Duty, that it has given name to the whole, and caused it to be
called the Sacrifice of Praise, and that we may Celebrate the Mystery with the
greater Joy, and offer up our Thanks with more Devotion, let us consider,
First, The Nature of this Ordinance, which is a Festival of joy. The Feasts of
the World are made for laughter and looser jollities, Eccles. 10.19: but this
is made for spiritual rejoicing. Cicero reproves it as a great incongruity in
Atticus, to come in a black Vestment, to the entertainment of his Friend C.
Arcius, and asks him, who ever came to a Festival Supper in Mourning? And thou
shall rejoice in thy Feast, says God, Deuteronomy. 16.14. When Aaron was in trouble
for the loss of his Sons, he durst not eat of the Type of this Sacrament, lest
he should displease God by eating in his grief Levit. 10.19. Vulg. Quomodo
potui comedere eam, aut placere domino in ceremoniis, mente lugubri? Chal. Par.
Quia occurrit mihi angustia: Agnoscit quod cum laetitia debet edere
sacrificium; potius itaque elegit omittere, quam cum moerore perficere. Munster
in loc.
. It is true, sorrow is a good preparative before, but if it stays upon the
spirit now, it is unseasonable, and indisposeth us for a material part of this
duty. To this we may add, Secondly, The practice of the ancient Church, for
even in the Apostles days they did eat this meat with gladness, Acts 2.46. and
it was always accompanied with Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, the
Praises of God being as St. Ambrose Reliqua omnia quae dicuntur, laudem Deo
deferunt: Ambr. de Sacr. l. 4. c. 4.
notes, a great part of this Office. And an Excellent Author has proved, that
for this Reason, the Primitive Christians did forbear to communicate in the
days of Fasting and Humiliation, as being incongruous to the joy which ought
here to be expressed Sacrificare Deo festivae celebritatis est, -- at quo pacto
moerori ac lachrymis indulgere, idemque simul exultari laetitia, ac triumphari
gaudio queat? Albaspin. ex Zonar. and Balsam. Vide l. 1. obs. 12. and 14.
. And for this cause they were forbid to show any signs of sorrow after the
Communion was over. And further to move us, let us, Thirdly, Look back to the
new assurances of our Pardon, and the late confirmation to our Faith and Hope
which we have now received; and as the poor Woman bound by Satan, as soon as
ever Jesus had unloosed her, did glorify God, Luke 13.12. so should we when we
are loosed from the bonds of our sins. If ever we duly felt the weight of them,
or apprehend the mercy of our deliverance, we are doubtless full of gratitude
and shall gladly embrace this occasion, to let our mouths tell the joy and the
pleasure which we feel within, upon so admirable a mercy. Lastly, Let us also
look forward, and consider that we are just going to eat of these Celestial
Dainties, and so must not with a greedy impudence fall to them, till we have
first worshipped and praised him that did invite us Non debet quis quasi
famelicus a cibo incipere, sed ante a laudibus Dei. Ambros. de Sacram. l. 6. c.
5.
; for Christ himself blessed God before he eat. Now if this has persuaded us
that it is our duty to praise the Lord just now, this incomparable form will
contribute very much to the elevating of our Devotion; for it is a pure and
genuine piece of Primitive Piety, so anciently and so universally received in
both the Eastern and Western Church (differing in other things) that we may
justly deem it to have been of Apostolical Institution. There is no ancient
Liturgy which has not almost the very same words: Let us lift up our minds and
hearts, etc. say the Liturgies ascribed to St. James, St. Basil, and St.
Chrysostom; Lift up your hearts, etc. verbatim in the Apostolical
Constitutions, lib. 8. which are ascribed to St. Clement. St. Cyprian also
particularly expounds this Preface, An. Christi 250. as will appear presently.
St. Chrysos. divides the public offices into three parts, Prayers,
Supplications, and Prefaces (...). Hom. 3. in 3. ad Colos.
, and when private Spirits attempted to make new Prefaces of their own, these
were forbidden to be altered, and the innovators censured by a Council Council.
Milevitan. Canon. 12.
. Not to mention how St. Ambrose proves the Divinity of the Holy Ghost from the
following Hymn Ambros. de Spir. Sanc. l. 3. c. 18.
. But to show that they deserve admiration as well for their intrinsic
Excellencies as their antiquity, we proceed to unfold the particulars.

The Analysis of the Prefaces and Trisagium.
Sect. 2. This Act of Praise has four distinct Parts. 1. The Resp nses in
which a general Act of 1. Preparation is Propounded, [Lift up your hearts,
and Accepted. We lift them up unto the Lord:

2. Tha^k^giving is Offered. Let us give thanks unto ^ur Lord God,
Embraced. It s meet and right so to do:


2. The gene^al Preface and Reason of this Duty, showing, 1. Why we do it. It
is very meet, right, and our bounden duty:
2. When. that we should at all times,
3. Where. and in all places,
4. To whom. give thanks unto thee O Lord, holy Father, Almighty, Everlasting
God.

3. The Exercise of this duty containing, 1. The Company with whom we join.
Therefore with Angels and Archangels, a d with a l the Company of Heaven.
2. The Act which we perform. W^ ^^nd and magnifi^ the glorious name eve^m re,
praising thee,
3. The manner of performing it by 1. Confessing God in his Holiness. and
saying, Holy, Holy, Holy.
Power. [Lord God of Hosts,
Glory. Heaven ^^d Earth art full of thy glory.

2. Giving praise unto him. Glory be to thee, O Lord most High. Amen.


4. Particular Prefaces and Reasons why we must praise God especially on, 1.
The Feast of the Nativity, 2. The Feast of Easter, 3. Holy-Thu sday, 4. The Fe^
^ of Whit-Sunday, 5. Trinity-Sunday,
for 1. Christ Incarnation. 2. His Resurre^tion. 3. His Ascension. 4. The gif^
of he Holy Ghost. 5. Revelation of the mystery of the Trinity.


A Practical Discourse on the Prefaces, etc.
. 3. Priest. Lift up your hearts: Answ. We lift them up unto the Lord.] Having
searched and tried our ways by Repentance, and by Faith turned again to the
Lord, we are next by the method of the Holy Ghost advised to Lift up our
hearts, Lament. 3.40, 41. They were oppressed with a load of guilt and fear
before, but as soon as that burden is removed, there is all possible reason to
lift them to praise our most gracious deliverer, such was David's practice,
Psalm. 25.1. such the Precept of the great Apostle, Colos. 3.1. and from these
Divine Fountains this Pious form of Exhortation was derived into all the
ancient Liturgies: It is capable of a twofold sense, yet both do rarely agree
to this place, and to this Ordinance. First, As it requires a strict and entire
attendance upon the duty in hand: thus St. Cyprian expounds this Preface Ideo
and sacerdos ante orationem praefatione praemissa, parat fratrum mentes dicendo
Sursum corda, ut dum Resp. plebs. Habemus ad Dominum, admoneatur nihil aliud se
quam Dominum debere cogitare: Cypr. de Orat. Dom.
, and St. Chrysostom Hom. de encoeniis,
, and St. Augustine Aug. de vera rel. c. 3
in like manner, viz. That dismissing all Worldly thoughts, we should wholly
fix our minds upon the Mysteries, and by Faith and Contemplation, look into the
Abyss of the Divine Mercy, till we be even ravished and swallowed up with
wonder, and have forgotten all other things. The very Heathens in all their
Holy Rites, (says Plutarch (...) Plutar. Coriolan. Ea v x hortabatur ut qui
sacra adirent, reverenter and attente id facerent. Lil. Girald.
) had a Crier who with a loud voice Proclaimed these words, Hoc Age. By which
they were warned to mind nothing but the Mystery, and that neither idleness nor
business might interrupt them; And is not this much more necessary in this
Celestial Feast? where there are so many of the best objects in the World as
will take up our whole man, and employ all our power if we do attend them.
Secondly, As it more directly respects the duty of praise which immediately
follows after; and thus it admonishes us to lift up our hearts to contemplate
the infinite Majesty and greatness, the admirable mercy and goodness of him
whom we are to praise, that when our Souls are transported with the divine
glories, no baser or mean thoughts may dare to approach or disturb the holy
pleasure; we are to praise God in the highest Laudate eum in Excelsis] sed cum
cogitamus quomodo illic laudetur, cor ibi habeamus, and non sine causa audimus,
Sursum corda: Aug. in Psalm. 148.
, to sing the song of Angels. Let us therefore elevate our thoughts to
consider, how that glorious Choir does sing this Hymn, that we may do it, with
a fervency and pleasure almost unison to them, and rejoice as if we were among
them; we are now going to do the work of Angels, and so must be above the World.

Answ. Now the Church has taught all her Children readily to obey this pious
Exhortation, and to answer, We lift, etc. as Psalm. 27.9. For the people being
now purifyed by Faith, are admitted also to bear their part, which they must
do, not by a bare repeating of the words, but an actual performing of the duty;
for it is not only a Promise, We will, etc. but a Declaration of what we are
now doing. Take heed, says St. Chrysostom. ye that in the time of the dreadful
mysteries are thinking or talking of Vanity. O Man what do thou? have thou
not promised the Priest who said, Lift up your mind and heart, and thou did
reply, We lift them up, Chrysos. homil. de encoeniis.
etc. The heart of holy men is daily directed to Heaven, and therefore when the
Priest admonishes them to lift it up thither, they may safely answer, We lift,
etc. Corda fidelium coelum sunt, quia in coelum quotidie diriguntur, dicente
sacerdote Sursum corda, secure Respondent, Habemus ad Dominum. Aug. de tempor.
ser. 44.
for where our Treasure is, there will our heart be also; And he that requires
Id. de ver. Relig. c. 16.
this duty of us, will enable us to perform it. O happy agreement when Priest
and people are raised up above this sublunary World, and ascended into the Holy
Mount, to converse with Jesus, with whom it is good to dwell for ever.

. 4. Priest. Let us give thanks unto our Lord God. Answ. It is meet and right
so to do.] When the Soul is thus lifted up, and enlarged by contemplating the
glories of God, it is then in right frame to celebrate his Praise; wherefore
the Priest improves the opportunity, and invites us while we are thus disposed
to give thanks, etc. Thus the Praecentor of the Jewish Choir was wont to call
upon the rest to join with him in the divine Praises, as appears by several of
the Psalms: Psalm. 34.3. and 81.1. and 95.1. and 96.1. And it may be from thence
this excellent Exhortation was taken at first, which has been retained ever
since Verbatim, both in the Churches of the East and West: as appears both from
the Liturgies (...) Liturg. Basilii, and ap. Cyril. Hieros. Ad haec inter sacra
mysteria ad gratiarum actiones convertitur. Cypr. de coen.

In ipso verissimo and singulari sacrificio gratias agere admonemur. Aug. de
spir. and lit. 11.


and the observations of the ancients upon these words. The Priest says, Let
us give thanks unto the Lord: And surely (says St. Cyril Cyril. Hierosol.
catech. mystag. 5.
) We ought to give thanks unto him, who has admitted us that are so unworthy,
unto such mighty favors, that being Enemies he has reconciled us, and
honored us with the Spirit of Adoption: And then you answer, It is meet and
right; for when we give thanks to God, we verily do a work that is just and
due. But when he granted so great a benefit, and gave us such good things, it
was not an Act of his Justice, but infinitely more than of right belonged to
us: thus he. St. Augustine applies it somewhat otherwise, but very well in this
manner. In the Sacrament of the faithful it is said that we should Lift up our
hearts, which is done by the gift of God; for which gift we are admonished by
the Priest to give thanks to the Lord our God, and the people answer, It is
just and right so to do Aug. de bon. perseverant. l. 2.
. And elsewhere Idem. de bon. Viduit. cap. 16.
. We do not attribute unto our selves the glory of this great good, viz. the
lifting up of our hearts. But we give thanks unto the Lord God, as we are
presently warned, because it is just and right so to do. Let us then give
thanks now for that which is past, the gracious promise of Absolution; Let us
praise him for that which is present, the Grace that elevates our hearts; And
bless him for that which is at hand, the Banquet of his Sons most precious Body
and Blood: for nothing is more agreeable to this Office, more fit for us to
give, nor more due for him to receive: And if you do from your heart confess
that the Lord deserves all honor and glory, the Priest may rejoice in the
success of his Exhortation; for that very acknowledgment is it self an Act of
Praise, in which both Priest and People are now agreed to join with all
possible Devotion.

. 5. It is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, that we should at all times,
and in all places, give thanks unto thee, O Lord, holy Father, Almighty and
Everlasting God.] These are still the words of Pious Antiquity, the dependence
whereof we learn from St. Chrysostom; for the Priest (says he (...) Chrysostom.
Hom. 18. in 2. ad Cor.
) having received their suffrage, does gather their Confessions together, and
then begin the Sacrifice of praise. Most joyful it is to the Holy Man to hear
such an acknowledgment from the Congregation, and that he may promote it as
much as possible, he does confirm the truth of so pious an Assertion with many
words, much of the same signification says Florus Repetitio sermonis est
confirmatio veritatis. Flor. Magister.
. Or (as others Dignum est quantum ad Dominum, quia ipse Dominus Deus noster;
Justum est quantum ad nos, quia nos sumus populus ejus: Innocent. Mist. miss.
l. 2.
) in general it is very meet, that is, most fit and reasonable to praise God.
And as to him who is the object of it, it is Just and Right, because he
deserves it; as to our selves who are the offerers thereof, it is our bounden
duty, because we are so infinitely indebted to him: If it were possible, we
should rejoice in him evermore, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. and bless him in all places, in
private as well as public; for he bestows mercy on us at all times, and in all
places; night and day, at home and abroad, in retirement and Company, in
sickness and health; we are indebted to him for our Creation and preservation,
for our Bodies and our Souls, for our Redemption, for the means of Grace, and
the hopes of Glory, so that we ought to give him thanks every moment. But at
this great Solemnity, we must unite all our Powers, and as the Christians were
wont of old, Bless him here for all together. If the most ordinary single mercy
challenges ^n Act of praise, how should we raise our gratitude to the highest
pitch now when we survey them all at once?

. 6. Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and all the Company of Heaven, we
laud and magnify thy glorious Name.] That the Angels were present at the
performance of divine mysteries has been the opinion of both Heathens and of
Christians (...) esse, dicit Plutar. lib. de Orac. Angelo orationis adhuc
adstante. Tertul. de orat.
; but that they are especially present at the Lords Supper, is generally
received. Flesh and blood (says St. Chrysostom. Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 10.
) is here made a part of the Angelick Choir: And again. Idem Homil. de non
contem. Eccles.
Consider O man near whom thou stand in these terrible mysteries, with whom
thou art about to worship God, with Cherubins and Seraphins, and all the
Heavenly Powers. And surely it will mightily exalt our affections, and stir us
up to the most vigorous devotion, to consider with whom we are to bear a part,
not only with the Priest but with Angels and with Archangels, and all the
Company of Heaven (...); Chrysostom. hom. 18. in 2. ad Cor.
: for Jesus by his Death has united Heaven and Earth, and designed all his
redeemed ones, to sing Hallelujahs with the blessed spirits above for ever.
Wherefore it is fit that in this Commemoration of his Passion we should begin
to unite our Voices to them, with whom we hope to praise God to all Eternity.
Only as we sing with them, let us sing like them, and not spoil their blessed
harmony by mingling flat and discordant notes. O with what delight and
pleasure, sincerity and joy, do they sing this Hymn, while they are ravished
with the prospect of the divine perfections! Could we but see their felicity,
and hear their Music, it would transport us above our selves, and make us
forget and despise all other pleasures to join with them. It may be we fear
that we cannot sing in so high a note, yet if we do it with like sincerity, our
lower key may grace the harmony and complete the Concord. Behold those blessed
Spirits, who had no need of any Savior, and who never did offend, do praise
God with incessant Voices for his mercy and love to us, and seem to invite us
saying, O ye Sons of men praise the Lord with us, and let us magnify his name
together. How then can we be silent? especially when our glorified Brethren,
Prophets and Apostles, Saints and Martyrs, do also bear a part in this
admirable Hymn. How justly do we style the object of these praises a glorious
Name* since all the World resounds its praise. To it Cherubin and Seraphin,
Angels and Archangels, continually do cry, Holy, Holy, Holy, and all the Saints
in Heaven and Earth do join to set forth the glory thereof.

. 7. Evermore praising thee and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts,
Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory: Glory be to thee, O Lord most high.]
This primitive and triumphant Hymn, was first taught unto the Prophet Isaiah,
Chap. 6.3. when he was admitted to hear it sung in the Quire of Heaven. But as
Procopias well observes, the Triple Holy could not fit the Jewish Synagogue,
and so was designed at first for the Christian Church, who confess the Holy
Trinity; wherefore it was again revealed to St. John, Revel. 4.8. and
afterward constantly used by all Churches in the Celebration of these
Mysteries, for it is found in all the Liturgies of St. James, St. Mark, St.
Basil, and fully in St. Chrysostoms thus: Before thee stand thousands of
Archangels, and many thousands of Angels, Cherubins, and Seraphins -- singing
the triumphant Hymn, chanting forth, crying and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord
God, etc. and the like appears in the Apostolic Constitutions, lib. 8. cap.
16. so that though some affirm that Sixtus the eight Bishop of Rome, brought it
first in use with the Latin Church about 130. years after Christ, yet
Nicephorus doubts not to say it was derived from an Apostolical Tradition,
hist. lib. 18. c. 51. The Grecians call it the Trisagium, because the word Holy
is thrice repeated, and of latter times do express it thus, Holy God, Holy
Strong, Holy Immortal (...) Sixth. Sene^. Bib. Sanct. l. 5. annot 58.
, Have mercy on us. And they have a Tradition, that they were commanded thus to
repeat it, by a Child which for some time was rapt up into Heaven, in the time
of a great Earthquake in the days of Theodosius junior, and Proclus the
Patriarch, and by so repeating it the City was delivered: However, it is
certainly an Act of Praise, wherein we worship and adore the whole Trinity; and
Galatinus Pet. Galatinus lib. 2. c. 1. de Jesai. 6.3.
says, it was anciently read in Jonathans Chaldee Paraphrase; Holy Father,
Holy Son, Holy Spirit: but as it is, nothing is more plain Non semel dicunt, ne
singularitatem credas, non bis dicunt, ne spiritum excludas, non sanctos, ne
pluralitatem aestimes: sed ter repentant and idem dicunt, ut etiam in hymno
distinctionem Trinitatis, and divinitatis intelligas unitatem: Ambr. de sp
sanc. l 3. c. 18. ita Epiphan. in Ancorat. and Procop. Gazaeus in Jesaiam.
than that every Person is acknowledged to be Holy, and all to be one Lord God
of Hosts, who commands the Armies of Heaven, and all the Creatures of the
World, whose Glory fills both Heaven and Earth. Which way can we look, or what
can we think upon that does not declare how great, and gracious their Creator
and Preserver is? and how can we then refrain from giving glory also unto the
Lord most High? In his nature he is holy, in all his works glorious; let us
praise him therefore with pure hearts, for he is thrice Holy, let us bless him
with a mighty vigor, that as the Angels make the Upper, so we may make the
lower Region Echo with his praise. It was long since ordained, that this Hymn
should be used every day, supposing the faithful would never be weary of so
sweet and desirable an employment Quia tam dulcis and desiderabilis vox. etiam
si die noctuque possit dici, fastidium generare non possit. Council. Vasens.
can. 6. An. 450.
. But surely it is most proper for this blessed Sacrament, that as every person
in the Trinity concurred to our Redemption, so every one may be adored in the
memorial thereof. The Father is Holy who gave us such a Savior, the Son is
Holy who effected this Salvation, and the Spirit is Holy who sanctifies us by
the virtue thereof, and yet these three are one Lord, to whom we must now with
most fervent gratitude offer up the Sacrifice of Eucharist and Thanksgiving. O
ye Heavenly powers that rejoice for the sake of us poor Sinners, we join with
you, and with joyful hearts over our Propitiation, do sing Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God, etc. Glory be to thee O Lord most high. Amen.

An Appendix of the particular Prefaces.

. 8. It is long since the daily and weekly Communions have been generally laid
aside by the people; for St. Chrysostom himself takes notice that ordinary
Christians in his time had appropriated their communicating to the greater
Festivals of the Church Chrysostom. orat. de B. Philogono.
, and some affirm that Fabian the Martyr did order those seasons especially for
all the faithful to receive Sabellicus and Volatteranus ad An. Christi 236.
. And truly a solemn time of joy, seems the most proper for the Celebration of
this Heavenly Feast: Now hereupon it came to pass, that as the Church was wont
at this Holy Table to give thanks for all mercies, so they did peculiarly
praise God for the mercy commemorated on that Festival upon which they did
Communicate, which doubtless was the Original of these particular Prefaces. In
the Roman Church there were formerly nine of them, to which Urban added the
Tenth (concerning the Virgin Mary) not till the year 1095. But our prudent
Reformers, have retained only five of the most ancient, which are concerning
the principal Acts of Christ; His Incarnation, Resurrection, Ascension, and
sending of the Holy Ghost; all which we may very properly bless God for over
this Commemoration of his Passion, because they are either the Precedents to
his Death, or the consequents thereof; only that of the Holy Trinity is added,
both as it is a fundamental Article of our Faith, and a great mystery, and
because many Sundays are reckoned by it. Now for the use of these we must note,
that as the greater Feasts of the Jews continued seven or eight days, so these
Prefaces are to be repeated some days after the great day to which they
principally belong, both that the mercy may be better remembered by often
repetition, and also that all the people (who in many places cannot Communicate
in one day) may join in praising God for it: Which being the great end of them,
the best method to promote that, and fit the receivers with peculiar praises
for these solemnities, will be to ground a devout Meditation upon every one of
these Prefaces; proper for those who do partake of the mysteries at any of
these Times.

A Meditation for the Communion at Christmas.
. 9. Welcome thrice blessed Day! the desire of all Nations, whose distant
glories made the Father of the faithful to rejoice, and whose approaches filled
the World with wonder and expectation: thou were ushered in with Angelick
Hymns, and celebrated ever since with Anthems of praise, because thou did
bring forth joy, and a Redeemer to Mankind. Happy am I that I have a Sacrifice
of Thanksgiving in my hand, to express the delight which my heart does feel.
This holy Table is the Altar upon which I offer my acknowledgments for all
mercies, and oh how many, how great are those which this day brings to my
remembrance! so infinite they cannot be expressed, and yet so excellent they
must not be forgotten: This day has reconciled Heaven and Earth, and made
contradictions friends, to find a way to help us, as if nothing might disagree
when man was at peace with God: O my Soul, summon all thy powers to admire and
worship: for all is Miracle, and the height of Wonder; Eternity begins to be,
the Maker of all is made himself, an infinite Majesty is shrunk into the
dimensions of a span; The word is made flesh, and God becomes Man, yet remains
God still. Here is a Mother who knew no man, a Son that had no Father on Earth,
a Child of Adam untainted with the Cantagion that infects all his Posterity, an
Infant honored with a new and glorious Star, adored by Kings, worshipped by
Angels, yet born in the condition of the meanest fortune. All hail sweetest
Savior, how lovely is thy condescension, how honorable thy abasement? thou
have more splendour in the Rags of thy Humility, than all the Grandeurs of this
World could give thee; thou art more a King because thou would be like a
slave for our sakes, and conquerest more hearts by thy stupendous love and
unparalled self-denial: O how shall I celebrate this great Solemnity?
wherewithal shall I set forth my gratitude for this most auspicious Day? I will
receive the Cup of Salvation, and with ravishments of delight feast upon that
precious Body and Blood which Jesus did this day assume for me. It is not
enough dearest Lord that thou wast born for me, unless thou art also born again
in me, and (as it were) become incarnate in my heart. In thy Birth thou wast
made one with us, thou did put on flesh, and were a partaker of our humanity.
And thou have appointed this holy Sacrament that I might be one with thee, be
replenished with thy Spirit, and a partaker of thy divine nature. Nor is it any
incongruity if I remember thy Passion and praise thee for thy Incarnation at
once, for as soon as thou wast born thou did begin to die, and the life which
was here begun (compared to that glorious life which thou did leave) was it
self a very Death; but therefore thou wast born, that thou might be capable
to suffer that death for us which thy Divinity could not feel, and thus thy
Nativity was the first Scene of thy Passion, for it introduced thy Death, and
that effected our Salvation, so that I will remember both together. For in both
thou have most admirably humbled thy self to the depth of misery; and yet I
doubt not but thou would have stooped lower if it had been either necessary
or possible; But there needs no more testimonies of thy love. Blessed Jesus! I
am already overwhelmed with these which are so strange and undeserved, so sweet
and ravishing, that my Soul could not contain, if it did not vent it self in
thy Praises. Therefore with Angels, etc.

A Meditation for the Communion at Easter.
. 10. O my soul, adorn thy self with the garments of gladness, prepare thy most
triumphant Hymns to go forth and meet this great returning Conqueror. Thou
did rejoice when he was pleased to undertake the Combat, and did celebrate
his entrance into the lists with Praises; how then will it ravish thee to
behold him come off with such success and honor? His warfare is now
accomplished, and he has passed through the scorn and cruelty of Men, the
malice and rage of Devils, the just but severe anger of God, yea the shadow of
Death, and the Regions of Eternal horror, and after all this thy Surety is set
at liberty, for he has paid all thy Debts, and cancelled all those dismal
Bonds, by which thou were forfeited to eternal Ruin: Thy Champion is
Victorious, and as the Trophies of his Conquest, he has the Keys of Death and
Hell, and leads them both in triumph vanquished and disarmed: Blessed be he
that comes in the name of the Lord: We receive thee dearest Savior as born to
us a second time, and this shall be thy Birthday also, the Nativity (though
not of our Emperor yet) of thy Empire, thy Restoration to a state of
immortality. Thy former Birth did show thee to be the Son of Man, but this
declares thee to be the Son of God, and now we know that our Redeemer lives;
he that loved us so infinitely as to dye for us, does now ever live to
interceed on our behalf; he that expressed such kindness to us in his Passion,
has so fully demonstrated his own Power in his Resurrection, that we are sure
he is as able as willing to deliver us. Let the Heavens rejoice and the Earth
be glad, for this is the Day that the Lord has made, a day to be had in
everlasting remembrance, a Time destined to jubilee and rejoicing: Behold how
nature is raising it self from the grave of Winter, and seems annually to
celebrate the memory of her Lords Resurrection in her green and fresh attire: A
season chosen by God for Festival, 3000. years ago, and observed ever since by
Jews or Christians, or both with the greatest solemnity. See how those blinded
Jews rejoice over their Paschal Lamb (in the midst of all their Calamities) for
the deliverance of their Fathers. But we have a nobler Passover, for a greater
deliverance; Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep
the Feast, and that upon the precious Body and Blood of the Lamb of God who was
slain but is alive again, and behold he lives for evermore. Wherefore I will go
to thy Altar with joy, and tell out thy works with gladness, O most mighty
Savior who have not only died for my sins, but risen again for my
Justification: and indeed what comfort could I have found in this memorial of
thy Death, if it had not been for thy Resurrection? this Sacrament would have
only remembered thy sufferings, and renewed my sorrow to think that so excellent
a Person had perished in the attempt of my deliverance; but now it is become a
Feast of joy, because it is an assurance of thy Resurrection, as well as a
Commemoration of thy Passion: And since thou live sweetest Jesus, we live
also, thy Resurrection raises our hearts from sad despair, it gives a new life
to our hopes, it makes our sorrows light, our labors easy, our lives,
cheerful, and our death advantage, because it has lost its sting and is become
the gate into immortality: We can charm all our fears and troubles with this
one word, The Lord is risen, yea the Lord is risen indeed: For thou have washed
us in thy own blood, and made us Kings and Priests to God, to offer up at this
thy Altar never-ceasing Praises. Therefore with Angels, etc.

A Meditation for the Communion on Ascension-Day.
. 11. I see O merciful Jesus, thou art content for our sakes to stay here upon
Earth, when Heaven longs for thy return, thou have these forty days denied thy
self the full fruition of thy glories, to dispel the sorrow and confirm the
Faith of thy Disciples, and yet at last their tears and embraces show how loath
they are to depart from thee: But behold the day of thy Triumph is come, and
the holy Myriads are sent to wait upon thee, the Heavenly Singers that go
before, cry, Open your selves ye everlasting doors, that the King of Glory may
come in, to whom the Angels which come out to meet him, answer in ecstasies of
amazement, Who is the King of Glory? and all the Chorus that follow after
reply, Even the Lord of Hosts, he is the King of Glory; and thus with hymns and
joyful acclamations, is Jesus welcomed to his ancient and most glorious Throne.
And now O my soul, why stand thou gazing into Heaven, he is too high to be
discerned, too bright to be seen with mortal Eyes, since Cherubins are dazzled
at his splendour. He is gone to his proper place, and ascended thither, whither
thy desires carry thee, and where ere long thou shall see him face to face:
Thou stand like Elisha, looking after him and lamenting thy Masters
departure, but he has left his Mantle behind him, even the mysteries of this
holy Sacrament, which to thy Faith is the flesh which he was clothed with all,
and is designed to convey a double portion of his spirit unto thee; so that it
appears he has left his Love with us when his Person was taken from us. Away
then with these sighs and tears, lament no longer the absence of thy Lord, for
he is in this Blessed Feast; he is here in his comforts and graces, here in his
merits and his love, and his spirit can Minister the same benefits hereby,
which his personal presence would have given thee; Go then with all possible
speed and taste of this Heavenly Provision, delight in it above all the
sweetnesses in the World, because it contains so many pledges and emblems of
thy glorious Redeemers love; when thou beholdest him that is thy head so
advanced, make haste to unite thy self nearer to him by partaking of his Body
and Blood, that thou may finally reign with him; in the mean time raise up
thy thoughts above this lower World, declare thy desire to be with Jesus, send
thy heart before, and protest if he had not left thee some little tastes of his
sweetness, in the repast of this holy Table by the way, thou could not have
endured so long without him: There is nothing which he loves comparable with
his Throne in Heaven, unless it be an humble and thankful heart, into which I
am about to receive him, and as the Celestial Quire welcomed him thither, so
will I receive him with joy into my poor Soul. Therefore with Angels, etc.

A Meditation for the Communion on Whit-Sunday.
. 12. I will go to thy Altar, O Lord with a New-Sacrifice of Praise, because
thou have given me a fresh instance of thy Love this day; thou art slow to
punish thy Enemies, but speedy to comfort thy servants! for no sooner was thy
misery changed into glory, but we received the greatest demonstration of thy
affections; no sooner did thou put on thy Crown in Heaven, but the Earth felt
the bounty of thy Dispensations: for it was not possible for thee, sweetest
Jesus! to let thy promise remain long unperformed, or the sad expectations of
thy Disciples unsatisfied: Being assembled therefore this Day with one heart in
one place, they are suddenly surprised with wonder, and inspired with a
Heavenly Power, such as they had never felt before; vigorous as a mighty wind,
chearing as the morning light, inflaming their hearts with zeal, and filling
their mouths with Anthems indicted in the languages of all the World: Oh
wonderful change! their ignorance is turned into learning, their mistakes into
infallibility, their fear into courage, their weakness into strength, their
sorrow into joy, and they in a moment made able to confound the Arts, and
conquer the oppositions of the Heathen World, and maugre all the devices of
Satan to set up the Kingdom of the Lord Christ: And shall not we praise thee
for these miraculous dispensations by which the Gospel was made known even to
us in these utmost corners, and last of times? Yes, holy Jesus, we will also
meet with one accord at thy Table, not doubting but thou would give us the
same measures of thy spirit there, if our duty or our necessity did require it:
it is enough to us that thou know our needs; more than will supply them we
dare not ask, less thou will not give: Thou have given us thy self, wherefore
we believe thou will not deny us thy spirit without which we can have no
interest in thee, nor benefit from thee. We come not, gracious Lord, with the
carnal Jews to devour thy flesh, but to partake of thy spirit which only gives
life, the flesh profits nothing: Behold thy Spirit has converted Millions,
let me therefore together with thy precious Body, receive here such proportions
of thy holy spirit, as may suppress my evil affections, revive my dead heart,
comfort my dejected mind, and turn my ignorance into knowledge, my knowledge
into practice, and make that practice so sweet and easy, that this may be a
day of joy to me also, solemnized in the white garments of sanctification and
rejoicing: And finally, let not this Heavenly Inspiration be only expressed in
ecstasies and holy fervors this day; but let thy spirit rest upon me and dwell
in me for ever; So shall I always have cause to bless thee for so incomparable
a gift. Methinks I feel already the force thereof bearing down my corruptions,
and its bright beams driving away the mists of sin and error. I find its flames
warming my heart with Zeal and Charity, and its quickening power opening my
sealed lips to show forth thy praise. Therefore with Angels, etc.

A Meditation for the Communion on Trinity-Sunday.
. 13. O admirable mystery to be adored in the profoundest silence; by the
contemplation whereof, when I am struck with amazement, I can learn humility
and discover my own ignorance: and I have the opportunity of exercising a
nobler Faith, than if I could comprehend it with my shallow reasonings and
imperfect demonstrations; The Trinity in Unity, and the Unity in Trinity has
been derided by the Heathens, and endeavored to be perplexed by the wits of
all kinds of Heretics; but it suffices me blessed Jesus, that thou have
revealed it, and thy Holy Church (divided in too many other things) has
universally agreed in this great Truth; And I am the more confirmed in it
because I learn by it to worship with a regular devotion; from hence I am
taught to pray to the Father, in the name of the Son, through the assistance of
the Holy Ghost; and as long as I live will I praise thee, and magnify thee in
this manner; I will bless thee particularly at this holy feast for so excellent
a revelation, for this Ordinance it self contains many things above my
understanding, and is all mystery. The Trinity is the Article, and this
Sacrament the Rite which do distinguish thy true Religion from all the Sects in
the World; wherefore by observing this Rite, I do embrace this Faith, and upon
the representation of thy death I do profess to live in it, and die for it,
resolving never to have other Lord: And when I find the Father giving, the Son
given, and the Holy Ghost dispensing that gift unto my Soul in this sacred
Communion, it shall be a greater confirmation to my Faith in this Divine
Mystery, than can be acquired from the most curious search into it: However I
am resolved my Reason shall vail to thy Word, and I will be content to stay for
a full apprehension of this sublime Truth, till I am advanced to a state of
Angelick Perfection, and come to behold the glories of the Trin-une God: till
then I will bless thee for what I know, and believe more than I can conceive;
and I will worship the same Majesty, which the Heavenly Quire does, in these
addresses. Therefore with Angels, etc.

PARTITION III. Of the Celebration.
SECT. I. Of the Address.
. 1. THE nearer we approach to these mysteries, the greater reverence we must
express. The very Heathen could say, men should be always best when they came
to the Gods (...) Pythag. ap. Plur. de superstit.
, and therefore so much better, by how much they come nearer: Our late
rejoicing might savor of too much confidence, if it were not allayed with this
Act of humility, which is the immediate Address to this holy Feast; There is
somewhat agreeable to this, some Apology or acknowledgment in all ancient
Liturgies, but that of St. James comes the nearest to this of ours. I come to
this divine and supercoelestial mystery, unworthy indeed, but relying on thy
goodness: And afterward: Turn not away from us sinners, who are celebrating
this dreadful and unbloody Sacrifice; for we trust not in our own
righteousness, but in thy bountiful mercy, etc. But in none so fully as in this
present form, can the devout Soul express its sense of its own unworthiness,
and its desires to taste of this Heavenly Banquet, as by our usual method will
be more clearly manifested.

The Analysis of the Address.
Sect. 2. The Address has two Parts. 1. An Apology for this our approach
showing, 1. The ground thereof. 1. Negatively. We do not presume to come to
this thy Table, O merciful Lord, trusting in our own righteousness,
2. Affirmatively. But in thy manifold and great mercies,

2. The persons coming. We are not worthy so much as to gather up the Crumbs
under thy Table;
3. What he is to whom we come. But thou art the same Lord, whose property is
always to have mercy:

2. A Prayer for a blessing upon it, noting 1. To whom we pray. Grant us
therefore gracious Lord,
2. What we pray for. so to eat the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to
drink his blood;
3. For what end. 1. A present advantage by the 1. Cleansing of our Bodies.
that our sinful bodies may be made clean by his Body,
2. Purifying of our Souls. and our Souls washed through his most precious
blood,

2. A continual benefit by an inseparable U^ion. And that we may evermore dwell
in him, and he in us. Amen.




A Practical Discourse upon the Address.
. 3. We do not presume to come to this thy Table, O merciful Lord, trusting in
our own righteousness, but in thy manifold and great mercies.] When Joseph's
Brethren were invited to his House, they durst not enter till they had made
their Apology at the door, because they esteemed themselves both criminal and
unworthy, Genesis 43.20. How then shall we that are greater offenders and more
unworthy, presume to sit down at the Table of the King of Kings, before we have
expressed our reverence and humility? It is his goodness indeed to do us this
honor, but then it is at least our duty to be so just, as to confess it is a
free and undeserved favor, agreeing rather to the nobleness of the giver, than
to the deserts of the Receivers (...). Chrysos.
: Now how can we better declare this than in the words of that favorite of
Heaven [ Dan. 9.23.] the Prophet Daniel, whose Prayer was heard before it was
finished, because he presented it not trusting in his own Righteousness but in
Gods manifold and great mercies, Dan. 9.18. And that we may speak these words
with the same sincerity, and make these addresses with the same sense of our
own unworthiness, Let us consider, 1. How dangerous it is to come to this Holy
Sacrament with a proud heart. For Pride is foolish (...) Theodoret. therap.
ser. 1.
and unreasonable in it self, dishonorable and injurious to God, offensive and
troublesome to our Brethren, hardening and mischievous to our selves, and
especially it is most odious and contrary to our Lord Jesus, whose humility we
are here to remember. Solomon accounts it an uncomely sight to see servants
riding, and Princes beside them walking on foot, Eccles. 10.7. But how much
more abominable is it to see such evil and base servants as we are, with proud
hearts pretending to celebrate the memorial of the greatest and best Master,
who humbled himself to the death of the Cross? if we are righteous why did he
suffer? if we be sinners why are we bold and puffed up? be assured that this
sin alone if there were no other, would turn this Banquet into Poison, or make
us at least incapable to receive any benefit from it. 2. Consider the great
dignity of these terrible mysteries; had we the purity of an Angel, and the
affections of a Seraphin, we could scarce be worthy to come so near to a most
holy and All-seeing God, to lay such claim to the blessed Jesus and all his
Merits, and to be so wholly united to him, as we are designing in this
admirable Communion. But thirdly, We are so far from such excellencies, that
our late Confession is yet fresh in our memories, wherein we did most truly
accuse our selves of many and grievous offenses, and our own Conscience will
check the vanity of all proud imaginations of our own merit, by discovering to
us that we have done very little good, and that very imperfectly, yet even that
also by the grace of God, and not by our own Power Debetur enim merces si
fiant, sed gratia quae non debetur praecedit ut fiant. Aug. in Julian.
. How then can we fancy our selves worthy to make this approach? Especially if
we remember, Fourthly, That our preparation it self, the only remaining
suppletory, has been very imperfect, if not deficient: and who is there that
can show such a tender heart, such strong desires, so lively affections, and so
vigorous a Faith, as this Ordinance does require? Upon all which accounts we
have no reason to come presumptuously, trusting in our own Righteousness; We
should be more likely to fly from this holy Table with shame and fear, but only
that we hear our God is merciful, 1 King 20.31. and that Jesus will in no wise
cast out those who come unto him, John 6.37. We have manifold and great
miseries, and he has manifold and great mercies, and by these we are invited.
Our own righteousness is nothing, the merits of others are insufficient for
themselves, but the compassions of God can never fail, to these we fly for
refuge, and oh happy venture, to take sanctuary in the divine mercy, where
there is no hazard Pulchrum periculum confugere ad Deum. D. Bern.
, but that he who is mercy it self should not pity us. Wherefore behold O Lord
we come unto thee; thou might indeed justly censure this approach of such
wretched Creatures to be the most daring presumption, but we beseech thee
condemn not the action, but behold the motives that drew us hither, even our
own miseries and thy mercies, and help us to supply in humility what we want in
worthiness, let our mean and just opinion of our selves, our bended knees and
broken hearts show, that we durst not have adventured so nigh if thy mercy had
not held out the golden Scepter to us.

. 4. We are not worthy so much as to gather up the Crumbs under thy Table: but
thou art the same Lord whose property is always to have mercy.] Our Savior
advises us even at an ordinary Feast, to take the lowest room, Luke 14.10. and
Solomon warns us not to put our selves too forward in the presence of a King,
Prove. 25.6. How much more then is it our duty to think the meanest place too
good for us at this Heavenly Feast of the King of Kings? How scornfully do the
great ones of this World sometimes look upon their poor Brethren, thinking
their footstool Jam. 2.3. Populus terrae, scabellum pedum Pharisaeorum.
Proverb. Hebr.
, or a place among their Dogs good enough for them, Job 30.1. and is there not
a much greater distance between God and us? When Mephibosheth was admitted to
King David's Table, he in great humility compares himself to a dead Dog, 2 Samuel
9.7, 8. but we have much more reason to esteem our selves as such, before the
Majesty of Heaven. Had we always been dutiful and obedient Children, we might
then have expected to have been fed at our Fathers Table, but we have been
Rebels, and therefore with Adonibezeks Captives might justly be made to gather
up the Crumbs, Jud. 1.7. under the feet of our great Lord; Nay by our Anger,
Luxury, Intemperance, and especially by falling back into our old sins Canis ad
vomitum rediens. Prove. 26.11. 2 Pet. 2.22.
we have behaved our selves like unto Dogs, and therefore how dare we challenge
the Childrens Bread? We may well confess with the poor Canaanitish Woman that
the Crumbs and Relics (...) Eurip Cress. (...) Arist. 2. de genesis
which are the part of Dogs are too good for us; That is, the common mercies,
of food and raiment, health and habitations, and the least measures of grace
and comfort: which are but small (...). Theophyl. in Math. 15. (...) Nazianz.
ep. 45.
considering the Power of God and his bounty to his own Children, but very
great considering our unworthiness. If the Lord will please but to give us
these necessary things, and to bestow so much grace and comfort on us as will
support us and encourage us in our Repentance, we will be very thankful,
although we be not filled with ecstasies and assurance. It is true this Heavenly
bread is too good for us, but only that our merciful Father is admirable in his
condescensions, he looks at our necessities but weighs not our merits, and
does most graciously receive us; wherefore we will lie down in the dust, and be
as vile as may be, before so good a God, our acknowledgments shall lay us as
low as ever our sins have done, we will profess we are unworthy of the least
favors, that so we may the better set out the divine goodness which
vouchsafes to give us the greatest; And no doubt they that thus humble
themselves sincerely, shall certainly be exalted, Luke 14.11. For our God is
always gracious and ever the same, whose property it is to have mercy upon
humble and contrite ones.

. 5. Grant us therefore gracious Lord, so to eat the flesh of thy dear Son
Jesus Christ, and to drink his blood, that our sinful bodies may be made clean
by his body, and our Souls washed through his most precious blood, and that we
may evermore dwell in him and be in us: Amen.] In the midst of these our
acknowledgments of our own unworthiness, we are seasonably minded that we have
a gracious Lord, who is apt to pity us, even when we are justly miserable. He
sees our bodies are defiled, and our Souls polluted, and both empty and void of
Christ, and he has appointed this Blessed Sacrament, on purpose to purify us
and unite us unto our dear Redeemer. Why then do we stand looking one upon
another, Genesis 42.1. and not rather look up to him that only can help us all?
will not our own necessities open our mouths? nor his tender mercies encourage
us, to call upon him to give us grace, that we may eat and live? We do intend
to eat, but we had better not eat at all, than not eat So 1 Cor. 11.28. (...),
So let him eat. Psalm. 26.6. So will I compass, etc.
as God requires, and So as to be bettered thereby. Now to the pure all things
are pure, but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, Titus
1.15. In vain therefore should we desire in the following Prayer of
Consecration that these Elements should become the body and blood of Christ, if
we did not first pray that we might worthily receive them. There must be a
change in us, or else though Christ's natural flesh and blood were here, and we
should eat and drink thereof every day, we could not partake of Christ Qui
discordat a Christo, nec carnem ejus manducat, nec sanguinem bibit, etiamsi
tantae rei sacramentum quotidie indifferenter accipiat. Prosp. sent. 341.
It is our eating with Faith and penitence, love and holy purposes, that makes
it to be Christ's body and blood to us; most wisely therefore has the Church
ordered, that before we pray for the Consecration of the Symbols we should
desire to be Consecrated our selves. Thus St. Ambrose in that Prayer said to be
used by him before he Communicated, says. O holy Bread which came down from
Heaven, and give life to the World, come into my heart and cleanse me from
all defilements of flesh and spirit, enter into my Soul, heal and sanctify me
within and without. Let us consider the spots and stains, the foulness and
diseases, with which our bodies and Souls are overspread, and then behold this
salutary and living Manna, which has power to restore us to an excellent
purity, and to make us amiable in the Eyes of God, and then we shall heartily
put up this Petition, we shall hunger and thirst after it, groan and long for
it Famelicus accedo, ne recedam impastus, and si antequam comedam suspiro, da
vel post suspiria ut comedam. August. Med. c. 39.
, as it is reported St. Catherine was wont to do, with the same passion that
the Child does for the Breast of its Mother.

Let us come then with most ardent desires, and summon up all our Powers; now
the Angel is so near who makes our Bethesda Medicinal, let us passionately cry
out and say, Lord have thou set open this Fountain, and will thou let a
wretched Creature die for thirst in thy presence? have thou prepared such balm
to heal me, and shall I languish here before thee? I know if thou will thou
can make me clean; here is the very instrument in thy hand. Grant therefore
holy Jesus that I may duly apply it, and rightly use it, and then it shall
prepare me for thee, and unite me to thee, by such inseparable Bonds as shall
never break, unless Eternity can have an end: Blessed are they that So eat thy
flesh, and So drink thy blood, So as thou requirest, and So as thy Saints of
old have done, for they have been cleansed at this Fountain, and here their
Union with thee first began. Oh happy season! Excellent opportunity! Lord let
me do it well this once, and I am thine for ever. Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Address.
. 6. Holy God! thou might justly wonder to see so many grievous Sinners
daring to come so near, but [We do not] impudently rush upon these dreadful
mysteries; nor do we [presume to come to this thy Table] where Angels do
attend, as if we deserved this Honor: [O merciful Lord] We do not approach
[trusting in our own Righteousness] for alas! we have done nothing which can
bear that name: [but] that which drew us hither was our confidence [in thy
manifold and great mercies] which exceed our manifold and great offenses. And
now that we are before thee, we must still confess (whatever favors thy
goodness heaps upon us) that [we are not worthy] by reason of our sinfulness
and backslidings [so much as] with the Dogs [to gather up the Crumbs] which
fall [under thy Table] not fit to receive the least mercies or measures of
grace from thee, much less to sit as guests before thy Majesty at this Heavenly
Feast: [But] yet we make bold to do this, because [thou art] not to be changed
by our sins, being ever [the same Lord, whose property is] to be unwearied with
well-doing, and never wanting in pity; and thou art wont [always to have mercy]
on those who confess their offenses, as we have done. [Grant] unto [us
therefore gracious Lord] by the present assistance of thy holy Spirit [so to
eat the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ] spiritually in this Sacrament [and]
so [to drink his blood] as that we may receive all the benefits of his Cross
and Passion, even [that our sinful] and defiled [bodies, may be made clean by
his] holy and immaculate [body, and our Souls] which are polluted in every
faculty [washed through his most precious blood] which takes away the sins of
the World; Let us be so wholly purifyed, that we may now begin to be
inseparably united to Jesus, [and that we] by Faith may evermore [dwell in him]
abiding in his love, [and] that by his spirit [he] may dwell [in us] always
[Amen.]

SECT. II. Of the Prayer of Consecration.
. 1. AFter all this Preparation, we need not ask with Isaac, Genesis 22.7. where
is the Lamb for the Burnt-Offering? for God has provided his own dear Son,
whose blood being already spilt, is so efficacious and all-sufficient that
there is now no need of any other, but this unbloody Sacrifice (...) Cyril.
cat. Mist. 5. incruentam oblationem, Liturg. 5. Marci: sacrificium absque
sanguine, Liturg. S. Basil.
to be offered, and that in memorial of that great Sin-offering which takes
away the sins of the World, 1 Pet. 2.5. And for this purpose Christ himself
has Ille mirabilem quandam victimam -- pro nostra omnium salute obtulit,
memoriam nobis tradens loco sacrificii continuo offerendam. Eusebius. praep.
Evang. l. 1. c. 10.
appointed these Creatures of Bread and Wine, ordaining that because they are
designed to express so great a Mystery they shall have a peculiar Consecration.
The ancient Greeks and Romans would not taste of their ordinary Meat and Drink,
till they had hallowed it, by giving the first parts thereof to their Gods
Romani and Graeci in convictu familiari ciborum particulis, and vino, in ignem
conjectis, libamina Diis dabant, Alex. ab Alex. genesis dier. l. 5. c. 21. (...).
Porph. de abst. l 2. c. 20.
. The Essens (...). Porph. ut supr. l. 4. c. 12.
and the Christians Tert. Ap. c. 39. Nec cibi sumantur nisi oratione praemissa.
Hieron. ep. 22. ad Eustach.
began their common meals with a solemn Prayer for a blessing: The Jews would
not eat of the Sacrifice till Samuel came to bless it, 1 Samuel 9.13. How much
more then ought we to expect the Prayers of the Priest over this mysterious
food of our Souls, before we eat thereof? especially since Jesus himself did
not deliver this Bread and Wine until he had Consecrated it by giving thanks.
There are some other parts of this Office which may upon some occasions be
omitted, Non prius discumbitur quam oration ad Deum praegustetur.
but this must never be left out, it being the most ancient and Essential part
of all; some learned Men do believe that the Apostles themselves in their daily
Communions, did ever use the latter part of this form from [who in the same
night, etc.] Alcuin. de divin. off. and it is most certain that no Liturgy in
the World has altered that particular. For in every Church the Priest repeats
the words of our Saviors Institution, and by those words the Consecration is
made Quomodo potest qui panis est esse corpus Christi? Consecratione:
consecratio igitur quibus verbis est? -- Domini Jesu, [and paulo post] ubi
venitur ut conficiatur venerabile sacramentum, jam non suis sermonibus sacerdos
utitur, sed Christi. Ambr. de sacr. l. 4. c. 4. ita D. Chrysostom. sermon. de Juda
prodit.

Vbi Christi verba deprompta fuerunt, jam non panis dicitur sed Corpus
appellatur. Aug. de verb. dom. ser. 28. ita Author de Card. op. Christi ap.
Cypr.


; for it is not the power of the Priest, but the efficacy of the Author, which
makes the Elements to become sacramentally the body and blood of Christ. S.
Chrysostom. hom. 2. in 2. ep. ad Cor. versus fin. The Roman Church indeed has made
large additions to this Primitive Form, so that it is not above a tenth part of
the Canon of their Mass, much of the rest being the names of Saints, and
commemorations of the dead. But these corruptions and innovations being
removed, our excellent Reformers have given us the Apostolical and Catholic
Form alone, only with a short Prayer to introduce it; and because all the
Communicants ought to join with the Minister therein, we will proceed so to
explain it, as may assist every ones understanding and devotion.

The Analysis of the Prayer of Consecration.
. 2. The Prayer of Consecration has Three Parts. 1. An Introduction, showing
the Reasons of this Duty, because 1. We have a dying Savior given for us,
Almighty God, our heavenly Father, who of thy tender mercy did give thy only
Son Jesus Christ to suffer death upon the Cross for our Redemption:
2. That Death is so perfect and meritorious, who made there, by his own
oblation of himself once offered, a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice,
Oblation, and Satisfaction, for the Sins of the whole World;
3. We are commanded to remember it, and did institute, and in his holy Gospel
command us, to continue a perpetual memory of that his precious death, until
his coming again:

2. A Petition for a Blessing on it, intimating 1. The Author of this Blessing,
Hear us, O merciful Father, we most humbly beseech thee; and grant,
2. The occasion of desiring it, considering, 1. The Act which we are about to
do, that we receiving these thy Creatures of Bread and Wine,
2. The Manner we intend to do it in, according to thy Son our Savior Jesus
Christ's most holy Institution, in remembrance of his Death and Passion,

3. The Blessing desired, may be Partakers of his most blessed Body and Blood:

3. The Consecration it self, reciting 1. The time when it was instituted, Who
in the same night that he was betrayed,
2. The Manner how it was Instituted, 1. As to the Bread, 1. The Preparation,
I. Took Bread, II. And when he had given thanks, III. He brake it,
2. The Administration, and gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take, eat, This
is my Body, which is given for you:
3. The Direction, Do this in remembrance of me.

2. As to the Wine also, 1. The Preparation, Likewise also after Supper, I. He
took the Cup, II. And when he had given thanks,

2. The Administration, He gave it to them, sa^^ng, Drink ye all of this: ^or
This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you, and for many, for
the remission of sins.
3. The Direction. Do this, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me.
Amen.





A Practical Discourse upon the Prayer of Consecration.
. 3. Almighty God our Heavenly Father, who of thy tender mercy, did give thy
only Son Jesus Christ to suffer death upon the Cross for our Redemption.] Our
blessed Lord has taught us to whom we should direct this Prayer, even to God
the Father, of whom he himself did first beg this blessing: and since the
foundation of this Ordinance was the Death of Jesus Christ, we do most fitly
begin this Prayer with a Commemoration of that Mercy; for how can we more
effectually move Almighty God to give his blessing to us in this Sacrament,
than by acknowledging his infinite love in granting so glorious a Redemption to
us? And he that spared not his own Son but delivered him up to death for us
all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things, Romans 8.32. He
that made him a Sacrifice for us, will certainly make these Symbols to
communicate him to us, if we be desirous and prepared to receive him: It is the
method of the divine bounty, to give his second mercies, merely because he had
freely given the first Cui initio ratio non fuisset praestandi aliquid, ei
praestamus, ob hoc quia praestitimus. Sen. de benef. l. 4. c. 15.
; especially when he finds the former thankfully accepted; so that we cannot
have a better introduction to this Petition, than the acknowledgment of Gods
goodness in first giving his own Son for us, especially if we make it with an
humble and gra^eful heart: Besides, it must need be a mighty strengthening to
our Faith, and a great encouragement to our hope of prevailing in this request,
when we have first remembered so rare an experiment of Gods mercy already
received: Let us therefore most thankfully confess the incomparable bounty of
our Heavenly Father in giving his only Son to suffer for our Redemption, and
then we may with more confidence, beseech him to sanctify these Elements, that
they may be his body and blood to us, because the divine appointment has made
them to be the means, whereby we may become partakers of the benefits of that
Holy Passion.

. 4. Who made there by his own Oblation of himself once offered, a full,
perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of
the whole World.] As we have declared the bounty of the Father, so now we must
acknowledge the merit of the Son; before we did set forth the admirable love of
the giver, and next we magnify the incomparable worth of the gift, for God did
not evidence his love to us, by any insignificant testimony, but by giving us
the most real and inestimable benefit in the World: The Death of this Savior
which he gave us, though suffered but once, was so infinitely meritorious, as
that it was sufficient to satisfy for the sins of all Mankind: And where is it
more proper to set forth that one all-sufficient Sacrifice in all its glories,
than here? where we come peculiarly to celebrate it with our highest Praises,
and to make an everlasting memorial thereof: If we regard the persons for whom
this was done, it is a Sacrifice, if we respect him that did offer it, it is a
free Oblation, if we consider him to whom it was offered, it is a satisfaction,
and in every one of these respects it is full, perfect, and sufficient, or
particularly it is a full satisfaction, a perfect Oblation, and a sufficient
Sacrifice; not like the legal Offerings, for the sins of one kind, or the
offenses of one Nation, or of one Person, but for the sins of all the World.
Let none therefore mistake, or imagine we are about to Sacrifice Christ again
(as the Roman Church falsely teaches) for that is not only needless and
impossible, but a plain contradiction to St. Paul, who affirms, that Jesus was
to be offered but only once, Heb. 9.26. Chap. 10.10. and 12. and by that one
oblation (...) Theop. in 10 Hebr. v. 12. Illo sacrificio singulari a peccatis
omnibus mundaremur. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 7. c 31.
he has for ever perfected them that are sanctified, ver. 14. so that there
needs no more offering for sin, ver. 18. And besides, if we think that in this
Sacrament Christ is daily offered up, it seems, we do not believe that which he
did on the Cross to have been sufficient, and so we should exceedingly derogate
from that most meritorious Sacrifice, to which we pretend to do honor by this
Commemoration; nor shall we make any difference between the all-saving Death of
our Savior, and the daily offerings of Mosaic Institution, if this also be
continually to be reiterated. Wherefore we do deny this Communion to be any new
sacrificing of Christ. For there is but one Sacrifice (says S. Ambrose) not
many, and this is but the exemplar of that Ambr. in 10. ad Hebr.
This is only a memorial which the Lord has delivered to us instead of a
Sacrifice, says Eusebius Eusebius. praep. Evang. l. 1. c. 10.
. The Sacrifice need not be reiterated, it is sufficient to remember it with
Eucharist and Thanksgiving. Rejoice ye poor repentant Sinners, for the price is
paid by Christ, and accepted by his Father already; Acknowledge it gratefully,
and believe it firmly, express it with all the honor you can devise, since you
came to this Heavenly Feast on purpose to glorify the complete and absolute
satisfaction which your Redeemer has made. Let no man deceive you, for Christ
on the Cross assured you, that the work of expiation was then finished, there
is nothing left for you now to do, but only to pray that these outward Elements
may be so blessed as to convey unto you the benefit thereof.

. 5. And did institute, and in his holy Gospel command us, to continue a
perpetual memory of that his precious Death until his coming again.] The work
of our Redemption is so very excellent in it self, that it deserves a perpetual
memorial, and who so fit to direct the particular manner of remembering it, as
he that did so nobly accomplish it? and this is that very way which he himself
has instituted, so that we have a most direct and powerful Argument to move
our Lord to sanctify these Elements, because we celebrate this mystery in
obedience to his own Commands. Do this (says he) in remembrance of me, Luke
22.19. and we are bid to show forth the Lords Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.25,
26. And surely he will make these Symbols to be his Body and Blood to us,
because we are about to receive them purely by his Order, no doubt he will
establish that which he has wrought for us Grandis in rebus humanis est
praerogativae, ut aliquis operibus and beneficiis faveat suis. Amb. ser. 10. in
Ps. 119.
, Psalm. 68.28. for otherwise he would seem (says S. Ambrose) to abrogate that
which he has appointed: We are desirous as much as in us lies to be partakers
of his precious Body and Blood, and according to his command we are come thus
far, but we can only strike the Rock, it is he must bring forth the Water; we
must now stand still and see the Salvation of the Lord, for till he have
blessed the Bread and Wine we can go no farther. Now if this Holy Rite were a
mere humane device, we could hardly expect to have so great a grace and power
showed for its ratification; they that invocate God, for those that are falsely
called Sacraments, cannot so rationally hope to be heard, as we, who only
desire him to be favorable to the work of his Hands, and to prosper us in that
which we undertake by express Commission from the blessed Jesus. O let us then
revere this Ordinance which has so divine an Author, on which the Image of God
is so plainly stamped; let us with a mighty affection embrace our dying
Saviors love who was so much afraid we should forget him, and so desirous to
be ever with us: let us cheerfully go on without doubts or fears, knowing that
he who has bid us Do this, is able to make it, whatsoever he will, or
whatsoever we need; let us not startle at the difficulty of this Sacramental
change, but rest satisfied in the power of the Author and Enjoyner: let us call
on him earnestly, and then believe that he will so be present by his Spirit,
and his Grace, as that we shall feel the virtue and efficacy thereof from time
to time, from one Communion to another, even till we come to see him unvailed,
and face to face at his coming again in glory.

. 6. Hear us O merciful Father, we most humbly beseech thee, and grant that we
receiving these thy Creatures of Bread and Wine, according to thy Son our
Savior Jesus Christ's most holy Institution, in remembrance of his Death and
Passion, may be partakers of his most blessed Body and Blood.] We have now made
a sufficient Introduction to this great Request, by acknowledging the mercy and
merit of Christ's Death, as also by declaring the divine Original of this
Sacrament; wherefore in the next place we come to the Petition it self, which
is the very Grace before this Celestial food, and herein we follow the example
of Jesus, who though he was able by his very word to make the Elements what he
pleased, yet he did first give thanks or crave a blessing, to show us what we
must do (...). Theoph. in Math. 26.
. He had given thanks in order to the Passover before, Luke 22.17. and
therefore it is likely that he made a peculiar Thanksgiving now relating to
this mystery, Vid. Buxt. Synag. Jud. cap. 13.
for so the Jews were wont to have several forms for the Passover Super
Pacifica benedicunt cum comedunt ea hoc modo: Benedictus tu Domine Deus noster,
qui sanctificasti nos praeceptis tuis, and mandasti nobis comedere de
Pacificis. R. Salom.
, for the Peace Offerings, yea distinct Graces for the meat, and for the drink:
What the very words were, with which our Savior blessed God, is not recorded,
so that all Churches have used their liberty in the manner of expressing this,
with some variety in the Phrase, but as to the substance and design they are
the same; nor does any Liturgy want some such supplication. The Latin Church
says, We humbly beseech and entreat thee O most merciful Father, by Jesus
Christ thy Son our Lord, that thou would accept, and bless these gifts, etc.
in St. Ambrose. Make this our Oblation, valid, reasonable, and acceptable,
which is made for a figure of the body and blood of Jesus Christ. In the
Liturgy of St. Basil. We beseech thee, -- let thy holy Spirit come upon us, and
upon these gifts here set forth, to bless and sanctify them, etc. And to name
no more, in that called St. Clements. We offer to thee O Lord our King,
according to his institution this Bread and this Cup, -- and we beseech thee
vouchsafe to look graciously upon these gifts set forth in thy sight. Now it is
requisite that the whole Congregation should (in heart) join in this part of
the Prayer, to make it the more prevalent with Almighty God, Math. 18.19. And
to quicken us to ask with the greater Ardency, let us consider how great a
thing it is which we desire, how earnestly did Moses pray when he was to bring
water out of the Rock? how fervently did Elijah call on his God, when his
sacrifice was to be kindled from Heaven; but we do now beg a greater matter,
and for a much more noble end. We behold the Creatures of Bread and Wine, and
we know them to be as yet no more Antequam ergo consecretur, panis est. Ambros.
de sacr. l 4 c. 5.
. But we desire they may be made the body and blood of Christ to us; that
although they remain in substance what they were, yet to the worthy Receiver
they may be something far more excellent, which nothing can effect, but that
word Si ergo tanta vis est in sermonibus Domini Jesu, ut inciperent esse quae
non erant, quanto magis operatorius est ut sint quae erant, and in aliud
commutentur? Idem.
which made all things out of nothing: We are not now begging for the meat that
perishes, but for that which endures to everlasting life, John 6.27. yet we
ought to hope he will grant us this request, because we are about to partake of
this Ordinance, both in a right manner as Christ did institute it, and to a
right end, viz. for a memorial of his Death; we long after our Savior with a
mighty Passion, and in this manner he has chosen to communicate himself,
therefore we may cheerfully request, that by the receiving this Bread and Wine
which he has chosen, we may become partakers of his most blessed Body and
blood, for St. Paul assures us, the Bread thus blessed is the Communion or
Communication of Christ's Body: There needs no real change in the substance of
the Elements, for this participation is not by sense but by Faith. This lively
representation by the operation of the Spirit, gives us a fresh remembrance of
the Love and Merit of our Redeemers Passion, so that by Faith we lay hold upon
him, as the only satisfaction for our sins, and then the Power of God does by
these Symbols communicate our Lord unto us, and convey unto our Souls all the
salutary benefits of that great expiation. We have all the real effects, the
virtue and the comfort of receiving Jesus, though we do not tear his flesh with
our teeth: And if it may please God to make us partakers of the benefits of
Christ's Passion, we will not inquire into the manner, but we will believe,
because we feel the effects, and rejoice in the graces that flow from him; nor
shall we desire more.

. 7. Who in the same night that he was betrayed, took Bread.] The best pattern
for the Celebration of this mystery, is to be taken from the divine Author
thereof our Lord Jesus, whose Words and Actions are in this particular so
punctually related in the Gospels on purpose to direct us in this solemnity,
and when the Rite was disordered in the Church of Corinth, St. Paul 1 Cor. 11.
sends them to the first Institution, as to the Rule and Canon by which they
ought to rectify all that was amiss, and for this reason (as we have noted) no
Church in the World did ever omit these words of our Savior, by which they
believed the Consecration to be principally made. Wherefore let him that
Ministers pronounce them with great deliberation, and the profoundest
reverence, remembering he speaks in the person of Christ: And let each
Communicant think he is placed among the Disciples, in the presence of Jesus at
his first Supper; and since every Word and Action is big with Mystery, let him
fix both his Eye and his heart upon the Holy Table, and prepare to entertain
every particular with a suitable Meditation: And first when the time is
mentioned in which this Heavenly Feast was instituted, viz. The same night in
which he was betrayed 1 Cor. 11.23. (...) In qua nocte tradebatur. Litur. Clem.
In nocte qua tradebat se ipsum pro vita mundi. Lit. S. Basil. Perperam itaque
Missal. Romans habet. Qui pridie quam pateretur.
, even the last night which he lived in this mortal Body: Then consider, in
this manner:

Behold what kind of Love (O my Soul) is expressed by thy Redeemer! when our
sins, his treacherous servant, and his enraged Enemies, were contriving his
Death, he was designing an excellent benefit for us; the stream of his
affections was so strong, that no baseness or ingratitude could check it; we
might have expected that the horror of this dismal night should have made him
repent of his undertaking, and have put him upon reversing all his former
favors; but lo he adds a greater than ever he had given before, and appoints
this as a seal to confirm and convey the rest unto us: Thy Love was stronger
than death, and when all the terrors of thy dreadful Passion were in view, thy
Soul was so calm, as to be at leisure to institute this feast of joy and
gladness: surely I will entertain this Festival with the dearest regard I can
express, since it was one of the last Plerique mortales postrema meminere.
Caesar ap. Salust. Debetur maximo operi haec veneratio, quod novissimum sit,
Authorque ejus statim consecrandus. Plin. Panegyr.
and greatest Testimonies of the love of a dying friend: this blessed Legacy,
this parting remembrance shall be in my heart for ever.

Secondly, from the time we pass to the subject matter, out of which this
Ordinance was instituted, and that is Bread, such as we behold on the holy
Altar, which may (when we behold it) occasion such thoughts as these:

Blessed Jesus! how lovely is thy humility? thou have chosen to be represented
by Bread, and though some curious or costly preparation had been more agreeable
to thy Dignity, yet this does best express thy condescension; Bread is the poor
man's food, yet necessary also for the rich, the most ancient, constant,
universal and necessary sustenance of mankind, and therefore a lively Emblem of
thy all-sufficient and unconfined Love; it springs from the Earth, yet it is
the staff of our life, and given to strengthen man's heart -- stomacho fultura
ruenti. Horat. Jud. 9.5. Heb. Fulci cor tuum buocella panis. Vid. loc.
, Psalm. 104.15. and so it signifies that Body which thou did take from the
Earth, and gave for the life of the World: being contented it should be
beaten and bruised, winnowed and ground; yea and prepared by all the varieties
of suffering, that it might become food for our Souls. O that I may receive
thee by Faith, and then I know I shall draw the most salutary nourishment from
thee, and thou will as effectually be united to my Soul, as the Bread which is
eaten is to my Body (...). Galen.
. Let me eat this holy Bread in Charity, that as the many grains are compacted
into one Loaf Panes Hebraeorum ita magni sunt ut unus omnibus convivis
sufficeret. Grot.

(...). Diog. Laert. Pythag.


, so we being many fellow Christians, may all be united into that one body of
which thou art the Head: The meanness Simplicitas Sacramenti quibusdam derogat
effectus fidem. Tertul.
of the outward part, is not (to me) any disparagement to this blessed mystery,
but I rejoice that thou have chosen that which is so easy for all to procure,
in all places and at all times, because it is so necessary for all persons.
Lord do thou make it thy Body, and it shall be the Bread of Life to my Soul. I
see O merciful Jesus thou have taken Bread into thy bountiful hands, and behold
I faint for hunger, my strength is gone, my sight is failed. I languish for
this spiritual food, happy am I, who am once again come so nigh thee on this
blessed day of distribution. I beseech thee do not pass me by. As thou take
this Bread, so did thou take thy Body only to be broken in Sacrifice for us,
and in Sacrament to us, let me not therefore want my part.

. 8. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to his Disciples.]
St. Cyril advises that we should carefully receive the consecrated Elements,
and beware that we lose not the least part thereof, for the very filings of
gold are precious. But we should be much more solicitous to fix our minds so,
that we do not miss the least circumstance in this Holy Rite; because there is
none without a mystery. Thirdly, Therefore let us observe the Preparation which
was by Giving thanks, for Jesus did not enter upon the Administration till he
had first (as the Hellenists speak) Blessed the Bread, and Blessed God for it,
and it is very probable he did add some peculiar Praises for the Redemption to
be wrought by his Death, as also for this opportunity to commemorate it, and
convey the benefits thereof unto us which may furnish us with some such
Meditations:

And do thou O my Lord! give thanks for my Redemption, which cost thee so
much pain and agony? how much more then should I do so to whom all the
advantage does redound: thou had the bitter, but I the sweet, thou the
misery, but I the benefit thereof; and yet thou enterest upon it with
thanksgiving, to show how freely thou did suffer for our good, and to teach
us cheerfully to suffer for thy sake: if thou dressest thy self for death by
praising God in this holy Institution, shall I not compose my self for this
blessed Feast by giving thanks also? especially since by blessing God for it, I
shall bring down a blessing on it, to make it become the Bread of Life;
wherefore I do here join my Eucharist to thine, holy Jesus, and do bless the
Lord with all my Soul for this Heavenly repast. O show thy acceptance of my
Praises, by hallowing these Elements to the purposes for which they are
designed.

Fourthly, The distribution follows, viz. The breaking of the Bread, and giving
it to his Disciples; for although the breaking of the Bread do well set forth
the Torments of our Saviors Body broken and wounded on the Cross, yet there
will be a fuller opportunity to remember this in the Administration,. 8. and
11. and for the present it may suffice to observe, that among the Jews to break
ones bread to any, is as much as to distribute it to them, and make them
partakers thereof, Isai. 63.7. Lam. 4.4. Mark 8.19. And since the Lord does
this to thee, he does thereby own thee to be a servant of his Family, and a
Disciple of his School, and therefore thou may thus consider; O my fainting
Soul make have, behold thy gracious Master is dealing his Bread to those that
hunger and thi^st after Righteousness, and if thy desires be as great as thy
necessities, they will make thee fly to partake of his bounty; be not
discouraged with thy unworthiness, for he gives to all men liberally and
upbraids no man: It is a mighty honor to receive the meanest Token from the
Hands of a King, but here the very gift it self is both excellent in it self,
and a pledge of the Givers love (...). Arist. Rhet. l. 1. c. 5.
, who is the King of Kings and Lord of Glory: The gift is most profitable, and
the Giver most honorable. Dear Jesus, give me a share thereof and I will ever
value the Gift, and love the Giver; Declare me to be thine, by feeding me at
thy Table, thou who were content to be bruised and broken to satisfy my
offended God, oh be pleased to give thy self and the merits of this thy Passion
unto me, to satisfy my earnest longings, and it shall be so welcome that I
shall cry, Lord give me evermore this Bread.

. 9. Saying, Take, Eat, this is my Body, which is given for you.] Our Heavenly
Physician, being about to cure the Diseases of our Souls, having thus prepared
the Remedy, and presented it to us, he does first direct the use of it Medicus
non tantum curat sed etiam monet: Sen. ep. 94.
, and Secondly, Tell us what it is: We are not taught to carry it about to gaze
at, and to be adored, but to Take and Eat it: For Christ having made himself a
Sin-offering for us, desires that Sacrifice may be accepted as ours, and would
have us to share in the benefits thereof, wherefore he has made this a
Peace Offering as the memorial of it, and invited us to take and eat our
Portion, that so he may be one with us and we with him; And when we hear him so
lovingly call us to feast with God upon the remainders, we may very fitly fall
into these Contemplations:

There is indeed a mighty difference between the feeding of my Body, and the
refreshing of my Soul, that which enters in by the mouth, cannot of it self
reach thither, yet I am commanded when I come for spiritual relief to Take and
Eat, and I will not enquire but obey, because he that prescribes this method
can work wonders, and at once satisfy both Body and Soul, wherefore I will
perform the outward part, and at the same time lift up my Soul above these
visible representations, and being sensible of my offenses against Heaven,
while my mouth is chewing the holy Bread, my Faith Quod esca est carni, hoc
animae fides. Cypr. (...). Basil.
shall feast upon the satisfaction made by my Redeemers Passion until I find my
Soul is nourished with the Joy, the Peace, and the Comfort, which it draws from
thence. As he has made his Oblation mine by his designing it for me, so I will
make it mine also by a particular application; O strengthen my hand by a lively
Faith, and open my mouth by fervent desires, so will I take and eat this, and
rejoice in so lively an Emblem which leads me into that within the vail; and
while I am performing the bodily part, let my soul feel the spiritual efficacy
of thy grace, that I may not eat unworthily, or to Condemnation. Lord I feed
upon thy love, I lay hold upon thy Promises, I will take and eat these as well
as the material part, if thou will please to enable me so to do.

Furthermore, lest I should be mistaken, and either not understand, or not
believe the true worth of this incomparable gift, he is pleased to tell me what
it is. This is my Body (says he) which is given for you, and by that word he
makes it to be so, to every true Believer; wherefore the Minister ought to
pronounce this so reverently and so deliberately, that the Communicants may
have time to exercise their Faith; because their senses cannot discover any
material alteration: For the true understanding whereof, let me here digress a
little, for the satisfaction of such as are not prejudiced, nor contentious: We
know how stiffly the Roman Church contends for the literal exposition of this
Text, and what Tragedies have been acted upon those who did not so understand
it; but we have great reason to believe, That our Savior did not intend by
these words to change the substance of the Bread and Wine into his natural
Flesh and Blood, For,

I. The word, [(...)] This being Neuter cannot agree with [(...)] Bread which
is Masculine, and it is very probable that our Lord did herein (as in other
things) imitate that Phrase which the Jews used at the Feast of the Passover,
This is the Bread of affliction, which our Fathers did eat, etc. and This is
the Body of the Paschal Lamb which our Fathers did eat, etc. (as the Talmud
tract. de Pasch. declares): For as that was not the very Bread, nor the very
Lamb, yet they called it so, because it did represent and continue the memorial
of that, and was used to the same purpose; so in like manner, He calls this his
own Body, who was the true Paschal Lamb, because This Action does signify and
remember it, and by this Bread we are partakers thereof.

Secondly, St. Paul the best interpreter of his Master, expounds This is my
Body and Blood, by this is the Communion of my Body and Blood, 1 Cor. 10.16.
that is most plainly, This blessed Bread is that which will make you partakers
of Christ's Body, etc. and 1 Cor. 11.26. he calls it no more but Bread even
after the Consecration, ver. 24, 25. And the same Apostle Solet autem res quae
significat, ejus rei nomine quam significat nuncupari -- ut Petra erat
Christus, (Hebraeis), non signum Christi, dicit Apostolus. Aug. in Levit.
Quaest. 57.
says That Rock was Christ 1 Cor. 10.4.
; not intending to make us believe the Rock was Transubstantiate, but only that
it was the figure and symbol of Christ, and so might be called by his name.

Thirdly, Nor did the most ancient Fathers thus apprehend our Saviors meaning
when they called this the Antitype of his Body, the Type of a great Mystery,
the Figure of his Body; and a Symbol called by the name of his Body (...).
Nazianzen. (...). Cyril. Mys. cat. 5. Hoc est corpus meum, i. e. figura
corporis mei. Tertul. in Marc. l. 4.

(...) [viz. Ego sum panis vitae] (...) [viz. Hoc est corpus meum.] Theod.
Dial. cap. 8.


, and much more to this purpose.

Fourthly, Nor will this opinion of Transubstantiation, agree with the most
ancient Liturgies, for in the most genuine part of them, the Prayer of
Consecration, all those forms called from St. James, St. Clement, St. Basil,
and St. Chrysostom, do pray (after they have pronounced the words of Christ
This is my Body) that the Holy Spirit may descend and make that Bread (so they
still call it) the Body, and that Cup the Blood of Christ; Yea in the Roman
Church it self, one of the most authentic parts of the Canon of the Mass has
these words. That this Oblation may be made Unto us the body and blood of thy
most beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ: Which doubtless may be done without any
real change in the Elements themselves: Yea and in the last part of the Canon,
long after the Priest has said, H^c est Corpus meum (by which they suppose the
substances to be changed) they say, Through Jesus Christ our Lord by whom thou
do always create, sanctify, quicken, bless and give us these good things:
Which words being only applicable to the Bread and Wine, do show Haeretici
hujus seculi rident hanc Canonis particulam, eo quod post Consecrationem
adjecta sit, quasi ea verba intelligi nequeunt nisi de pane and vino, nam
Corpus and sanguinem Christi non semper Deus Creat. Durant. de rit. Eccl. l. 2.
c. 44.
that the ancient Roman Church did not believe the substances to be
annihilated, no not after the Consecration.

Fifthly, It was long before Rome it self did determine this Doctrine of
Christ's very flesh and blood being in the Sacrament Ante Lateranense concilium
Transubstantiatio non fuit dogma fidei. Scot. 4. sent. d. 11. q. 3. In Synaxi
sero Transubstantiationem definivit Ecclesia, diu satis erat credere, sive sub
pane Consecrato, sive quocunque modo adesse verum corpus Christi. Eras. not.
ad. 1 Corinthians.
, viz. not much above 400. years ago, nor was it only opposed by Berengarius,
but the Master of the Sentences Pet. Lomb. sent. l. 4. c. 12.
affirmed it was only a memorial and representation of the true Sacrifice, and
the famous Rabanus Maurus, An. 850. plainly holds Sacramentum in alimentum
corporis redigitur, virtute autem sacramenti aeterna vita adipiscitur. Rab.
Maur. de inst Cler l. 1. c. 3.
The outward part still to remain, and as Bread to be turned into the substance
of the Body; yea Scotus writ a peculiar Treatise against this then growing
Doctrine, which was condemned unjustly by Leo the IX. not to mention now the
Book of Bertram on this subject.

Sixthly, To this we may finally annex many cogent reasons why this
Transubstantiation is not to be believed: viz. Because it is needless for us to
expect to eat the natural flesh of Christ here, where we come to seek a
spiritual Union with him by Faith, and an interest in his Death, to which the
eating his flesh would nothing conduce. Again, it is contrary to the nature of
a Sacrament where the visible part must remain (as the Water in Baptism does)
to be a foundation for the inward and spiritual grace: And further, since the
Heavens must contain Christ's Body to the end of the World, it is impossible it
should be but one, and yet many, in several places at once, always whole, yet
often broken, received entire by every person, and yet then at the right hand
of God, existing before, yet Created by the Priest: We must deny our Reason as
well as our Senses, if we can believe so great and absurd Contradictions: Nor
is it imaginable if this were the intent of our Lords words, how he who was
then alive and sitting at the Table, could break and give himself, or be eaten,
and yet remain entire; and finally, since we see, and feel, and taste it to be
only Bread and Wine as to the substance still, unless we will deny this great
foundation of all our notions, yea and of our Faith also, we must not give
credit to so strange and monstrous a conceit: Yet still we do believe that
every duly disposed Communicant does receive really the Body and Blood of
Christ, in and by these Elements, but it is by Faith and not by sense. If we
receive them in the manner, and to the end which Christ appointed, they give us
a lively remembrance of his love and all-sufficient merit, and thereby invite
our Faith to embrace this Crucified Redeemer, as the satisfaction for our sins;
whereupon he (who is most ready to close with penitent Sinners) does by this
rite of his own appointing, give himself and the salutary benefits of his Death
unto such, and although the manner be mysterious, yet the advantages are real,
and the effect more certain than if we eat or drunk his natural flesh and
blood: But we have diverted too far, and therefore will reserve the Meditation
upon this part until we come to the Administration, Sect. III.. 3.

. 10. Do this in Remembrance of me.] Having told us what it is which is
presented to us, our Lord goes on to prescribe the manner how we must make use
of it, viz. as a memorial of him; The Ministers are to Do this which he has
done, even to bless the Bread and break it, and distribute it in remembrance of
his Institution: the people also are to Do this, that is, to take, eat, etc. in
Remembrance of his Passion; And this being the great end of the Institution,
the Ancients were wont always here to Commemorate all the principal Acts which
Jesus has done for us, especially his Death (...) in omnibus Graec. Liturg.
Memores passionis. Lit. Clem. Memorantes ergo and nos salutarium ejus
passionum. Lit. Basil. Memores glori^sissimae ejus passionis and ab inferis
resurrectionis, and in coelum ascensionis. Ambr. de sacr. l. 4. c. 5.
upon the Cross: Our Master desires us not to celebrate his sufferings with a
present expression of sorrow, but by a perpetual remembering of them, even as
the brave Germannicus lying upon his Deathbed, desired his friends not to
prosecute his Funerals with useless tears, but if they would show their love to
him, to do it by remembering his Will, and executing his Commands: Tacit. Let us
then do this last Command of our dying Lord, and remember him in these or the
like thoughts.

It is but too apparent Blessed Lord, how apt we are to forget thy dear love to
us, and thy bitter sufferings for us, our continual transgressions publish it,
and our present stupidity and indevotion do declare it. Praised therefore be
thy goodness for these lively Emblems of thy most meritorious Cross and
Passion; oh that we may behold them with the same affections, with which we
should have been moved had we been spectators of thy horrid Tragedy; so shall
they imprint the Characters of thy love so deep upon our hearts, that neither
time nor temptation can obliterate them! Behold we do here most affectionately
call to mind the humility of thine Incarnation, the merit of thy Death, the
power of thy Resurrection, and the glories of thine Ascension. And thus by
thine own appointment, Dearest Jesus, we do show our Thankfulness for thy
Passion, our Faith in thy Resurrection, and our hope of thy second coming In
commemorationem mei. i. e. hoc modo Mortem meam praedicabitis, resurrectionem
annuntiabitis, adventum sperabitis, donec iterum adveniam. Ambros. ut supr.
. We will commemorate thy all-sufficient sacrifice before the Almighty to
pacify his anger against us, before the World to testify our hope in a
Crucified Savior; and before our selves to renew our sense of thy
inexpressible love. We will Do this so often, and so sincerely, with so much
zeal and holy Passion, that if it be possible, neither we nor any others shall
ever become unmindful of Thee, and when we cannot have the Symbols before our
Eyes, the Impressions of them shall remain in our minds, and our lives shall
witness that we are not forgetful of thee.

. 11. Likewise also after Supper, he took the Cup, and when he had given
thanks.] The life of Man requires not only meat but drink also to sustain it,
and therefore Christ has set forth himself under both these, to show his
all sufficiency for the life of our Souls; And of all kinds of drink he has
chose Wine to represent his most precious blood: for this is called the blood
of the Grape Deuteronomy. 32.14. 1 Macc. 6.34. (...). Clem Alex. paed. l. 2.
, and in color comes the nearest to it; this minds us of Jesus who is the true
Vine, John 15.1. and of the Wine Press of his Fathers wrath, Isai. 63.2, 3.
wherein he was grievously pressed till all his holy blood, yea and his Soul was
exhausted: And as Wine was given to cheer man's heart Jud. 9.13. Psalm. 104.15.
Duo sunt liquores corporibus humanis gratissimi, intus vini, foris olei. Plin.
l. 4 c. 22. item ap. Homer. Il. (...). Odyss. b.
, and raise his decaying spirits, so was the blood of Jesus shed to revive poor
disconsolate sinners, with the hopes of the divine favor. It was the Custom
among the Jews for the Master of the Family after Supper to take a Cup of Wine
in both hands, and giving thanks to him that created the fruit of the Vine, to
drink to all the Guests as a Symbol of Charity, Fag. in Deuteronomy. 8.10. and among
the Gentiles also their Feasts were concluded Postremo Graeci Mercurio litabant
-- and bono daemoni, cui gratias agebant, (...). Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. c. 21.
and Schol. Aristop. Mos erat cum mensa auferenda sit, bono genio litare: Hoc,
hoc mensa claudatur scypho. Sen.
with a Cup offered to their good genius. But our Lord has spiritualized these
usages, and here we may behold him with hands and eyes lift up to Heaven,
Consecrating this Cup for an Excellent Mystery, that it may be a Cup of
Salvation and of Charity, and may be offered up with praise to the most high:
when therefore we see the holy Man beginning to bless the Wine also let us say
within our selves.

Oh what preparations is our gracious Master making for us, he thinks it not
enough to give us his blessed body, with the merit of all those torments which
he suffered in the flesh, but he is pleased to pour out his blood and his life
together with it, that we might drink thereof, and so (take as it were) his
very Soul into us (...) ^7.14. ita (...) llud Virgil. (...) vomit ille ^^^^tam
-- Secundum e^s (inquit) qui sanguinem animam dicunt.
. Alas we are faint and feeble, ready to die and languish, and he has made us
a Cordial with his own hearts blood; miserable wretches as we are, that nothing
less will help us, but oh how gracious a Redeemer have we that will not deny us
this! behold O Lord we thirst, and this Wine of joy makes us more Non facile
esuriens posita retinebere mensa
Et multum saliens incitat unda sitim. Ovid.

impatient to taste of this Cup of Salvation and Thanksgiving: thou that have
prepared it for us, make it thy holy blood, and then it shall cleanse our
Souls, and make us thine for ever.

. 12. He gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of this, for this is my Blood of
the New Testament which is shed for you and for many for the Remission of
Sins.] Since our Savior did give the Cup to every one of his Disciples, and
plainly commands both them and us all to drink of it Math. 26.27. 1 Cor. 12.13.
Et Vulg. Editio Pontificiis Authentica, 1 Cor. 10.17. addit -- Et de uno calice.
, we have cause to bless God that we are not of that Church, which has lately
Secundum antiquam Ecclesiae consuetudinem omnes tam corpori quam sanguini
communicabant, quod etiam adhuc in quibusdam Ecclesiis servatur. Aquin. in
Johan. 6.
robbed the people of half the Sacrament; and I wish that as the Legacy is
preserved to us entire, and a double portion provided for us, that we would
endeavor to receive with twice as much devotion, as they do. Furthermore, when
we hear the most efficacious words of Christ pronounced, we must exercise our
Faith, and not only join our desires that this Wine may become the Blood of
Christ, but with our hearts say Amen, for it is unto us according to our Faith;
if we believe, it is to us the Blood of Christ, and that which makes us
partakers 1 Cor. 10.16. -- communicatio sanguinis Christi. Vatab. idem in
Margin. annotae. vel participatio. Graec. (...).
of the benefits thereof: And although it be still Wine unto our senses,
because we naturally abhor to drink humane blood Similitudinem preti^si
sanguinis bibis, ut nullus horror cruoris sit, and pretium tamen operetur
Redemptionis. Ambros. de sacr. l^b 4, cap. 4.
, yet by the power of Jesus, and the mercy of God, it shall make our atonement
be accepted as fully for our expiation, as if our own lives had been laid down,
or our own blood spilt in a Sin-offering: For it is now to be esteemed as the
blood of the New Covenant, or Testament Math. 26.28 (...), h. e. proprie:
^^^guis novi foederis: (...) Grot. and Ham. ann^^. in Titul. and Beza in l^cum:
Latini autem Testamentum vertunt. Grotius.
. For the Original word signifies both: [(...)] In the first and common sense
it is used for a Covenant, and those of old were confirmed with blood Exodus
24.8. Haustu mutui sanguinis foedus faciunt: de Scythis Herodot. l. 4. Quod
idem refert etiam de Medis, ut and Solinus. Cap. 20.
, but this New Covenant between God and Man could not be made without it,
because God could not in justice grant remission, unless some blood were spilt,
the visible Soul being given as a ransom for the invisible, and this most
precious Blood of Christ is that which was shed to appease the divine anger,
and so to engage God to enter into this Covenant with us, wherefore it may be
called the Blood of the New Covenant: Secondly, This word also is used for a
Testament or Will Heb. 9.16, 17. Testamentum est voluntas defuncti Quintil.
Viventis nulla est haereditas. Digest. and Roman. J. C. dicunt Testamentum
morte confirmatur. Grot.
, and by this account we call the Gospel the New Testament, because it contains
our Lords Will, and therein he has left us as Legacies, his Merits, and
Graces, his Spirit and his Peace, and secured them to us by his Promise;
wherefore when we see this holy Blood, it is to us as it were the Seal of the
New Testament, because it shows us that the Testator has dyed, and
consequently assures us that all those promises shall be made good unto us,
especially that of the pardon of our Sins, for since we and many had deserved
Eternal Death by our offenses, this Blood was poured forth to procure a Pardon,
not for us alone, but for as many as had sinned, even for all the World, for
all (says St. Chrysostom) are many: When therefore we see this so plainly
represented in the pouring forth of the Holy Chalice, let us not only show a
high estimation of that most meritorious Blood which saves so many Souls
effectually, and has virtue enough to redeem all the World; but also actuate
our devotion in some pertinent Soliloquies after this or the like form.

Methinks, O my dear Redeemer, while thou art pouring forth thy most precious
blood, thou look on me with a Countenance mixed of pity and upbraiding, that
I should take so little care to save this Soul which thou have bought at such a
rate; Do I not behold those drops and streams to trickle down, that have sealed
the Covenant of Peace, and confirmed all the Promises of the Gospel, why then
am I not swallowed up with admiration, why do I not breath and pant after it; I
came not to quench my bodily thirst, but to wash my Soul in this salutary
Fountain, oh how freely it flows? how perfectly it cures? Lord let me taste
thereof! Make it unto me the blood of Jesus, for it is that my Soul thirsts
after; And now that thy powerful word has hallowed it, let me not by evil
thoughts or unbelief, malice or impenitence, make it to my self an unhallowed
thing; but as thou have fitted it for the mystery, oh fit me also to receive
it. I cannot now have any more low or common thoughts about it, I will by Faith
esteem it as my Saviors blood, and though I am unworthy of so divine a
Cordial, yet my Soul gaspeth for it, and without it alas I must die and perish.

. 13. Do this, as often as ye shall drink it in remembrance of me, Amen.] We have
here again a renewed injunction to Do this, and if we have any sense of our
Redeemers love, or any care of our own Souls, we shall not need to be pressed
to it, but shall desire to Do it often, and yet always to Do it well, not
Drinking it as common Wine, but as the memorial of his bloodshedding, in
remembrance of him and his inestimable kindness; but of this we have spoken
before,. 10. Only we must note that this Amen, in the end of this Prayer, was
anciently spoken 1 Cor. 14.16. (...). Atque ubi Praeses orationes and gratiarum
actiones absolvit. (...). Just. Mart. Ap. 2.
by the people with a loud voice; not only to show their joining in the desire,
that the Elements may become truly Consecrated; but also to declare their firm
belief, that they are now to be esteemed as the very Body and Blood of Christ;
Let us therefore here most devoutly seal all that the Priest has done, and
unfeignedly testify our Faith, by a hearty Amen. Lord it is done as thou have
commanded, and I doubt not but the mystery is rightly accomplished, I am
persuaded that here is that which my Soul longs after, a Crucified Savior
communicating himself to poor penitent Sinners. Oh let me be reckoned among
that number, and then I shall assuredly receive thee, holy Jesus! Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Prayer of Consecration.
. 14. O [Almighty God] infinite in Power, and wonderful in thy goodness, Thou
art [our Heavenly Father, who] to save us from Eternal Misery [of thy tender
mercy] and free Compassion [didst give thy only] and well-beloved [Son Jesus
Christ] not only to be born in our nature, but also [to suffer] a most grievous
and bitter [death upon the Cross] that his life might be [for our Redemption]
from everlasting Torments to which we were forfeited.

We believe and confess it was this thy Son [who made there] on the Cross [by
his own] voluntary [oblation of himsel^] to that accursed Death, though he was
but [once offered] in this manner, [a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice,
Oblation and satisfaction] to thy offended Justice, not only for the sins of
some times, or some Persons, but [for the sins of] all men that are, were, or
shall be throughout [the whole World] so that there is none but might upon
their Faith and Repentance be forgiven by the virtue thereof.

And because there needs no other Sacrifice for sin now, therefore our Lord
Jesus appointed [and did institute] this holy Sacrament to represent it. [And
in his holy Gospel] he does accordingly plainly [command us] to observe this
Rite, thereby [to continue a perpetual] and lively [memory of that his) most
meritorious and most [precious Death]; So that his love may be fresh in our
hearts [until his coming again] to judgment in the end of the World.

In obedience to this command we are now about to make this memorial of his
Passion, and that we may do it effectually [Hear us O most merciful Father]
Consider our need of this Heavenly food [We most humbly beseech thee] in whose
power it is alone to feed our Souls: [And grant that we receiving] with a true
repentance and lively Faith [these thy Creatures of Bread and Wine] which thou
have chosen to express this mystery, and partaking of them [according to thy
Son our Savior Jesus Christs] gracious intention and [most holy Institution]
namely [in remembrance of his] bitter [Death and] bloody [Passion] Let them
Communicate him unto us, that we by them [may be partakers of his most blessed
Body and Blood] and of all the benefits of his Incarnation and his sufferings.

But it is not in us to make these Creatures to be a Sacrament, wherefore we
will do as our Lord did, and say as he said; And be thou pleased to grant, that
the Words of Jesus pronounced by thy Servant, may have the same effect upon
these Elements, which they had when spoken with his blessed mouth [Who in the
same night that he was betrayed] to his Crucifyers, as one of the last tokens
of his love [Took Bread] the staff of life (as we now take this into our hands)
to resemble his taking our nature [and when he had] begged thy blessing (as we
do also) thereon, and [given thanks] showing how cheerfully he suffered for us
[He brake it] (as we this Bread) into many pieces, an Emblem of his broken and
wounded Body [and gave it to his Disciples] to whom he designed the benefits of
his Passion [Saying Take] this pledge of your Redemption most thankfully, and
by Faith [Eat] that you may be nourished by my Love, for [This is] the
Communion of [my Body] and shall make you partakers of it as it is a Sacrifice
[which is given] to God to satisfy [for you] Provided you [Do this in] a most
thankful [remembrance of me] and my all-sufficient Oblation.

Likewise also after] the Paschal [Supper] that he might give himself wholly to
us [He took the Cup] of Wine which makes glad the heart of Man (even as we
take this) [And when he had] begged thy blessing on it (as we now do) and also
[given thanks] that his blood was accepted for the life of the World [He gave
it to his Disciples] to declare he would freely pour out his blood for them
[saying Drink ye all] who desire a part in me [of this] Cup, and apply to your
selves the benefits of my bloodshedding [For this is] the Communion of [my
Blood] which seals the New Covenant, and is the Confirmation [of the
New-Testament] with the promises thereof: And it shall give you a right unto
them: for this is it [which is shed] to make Atonement [for you] in particular
[and for] as [many] as believe it to be sufficient [for the Remission of Sins]
Wherefore I charge you [Do this as often as] may be, and whenever [ye shall
drink it] let it be with great devotion [in remembrance of me] and of my love
in laying down my life for you [Amen.] It is finished, according to thy will.
So be it, and let all the people say, Amen.

SECT. III. Of the form of Administration.
. 1. WHen the time of distribution is come, the Guests must not rudely and
disorderly take every one his own part, 1 Cor. 11.14. because God is the Master
of the Feast, and (according to the Eastern Custom) he has provided Officers
to divide to every one their portion Genesis 42.34. 1 Samuel 9.24. Heb. (...): Esth.
2.9. fercula singulis apposita secundum morem Orientalem. Vide Ham. Annot. Luke
8. (a.)
. Wherefore the people are to receive this from the Minister, as from the hands
of God himself, and accordingly they ought to kneel in the most lowly manner,
as those do, who are to receive a favor even from an Earthly Prince: For it is
now the Custom of the Eastern and Greek Churches, of the Latin Church, and
Lutherans also, yea of all the World (says Erasmus) to receive kneeling, and
which is most considerable to us, our own Church (which has power to determine
these circumstances) has prescribed this posture, and withal declared it is
only for order and comeliness, and to express our humility to God, not to give
any worship to the Elements -- Non enim inclinaverunt carni and sanguini sed
tibi terribili domino. Lit. S. Chrysos.
: and it is a wonder any should refuse to receive kneeling, merely because the
Church enjoins it, since every considering and humble Christian would choose
that way if it were left indifferent. The whole time of Communicating is spent
in Prayers and Praises, and therefore sure we ought to be upon our Nemo carnem
illam manducat nisi prius adoraverit: August. in Psalm. 98.
knees, if it were only that we might be ready to offer up our Prayers to God.
It is highly probable that this gesture has obtained in the Western Church at
least 1200. years, and although of Old in the East they did stand Stemus been,
stemus in timore. Lit. Basil.
, yet it was with fear and trembling, with silence, and down-cast eyes, for
they groaned in spirit and kept their joy within (says St. Chrysostom. homil. de
encoeniis.
Chrysostom.) They came near (says St. Cyril (...). Cyril. Catech. Mystag. 5.
versus finem.
) bowing themselves in the posture of Worship and Adoration.

As for the Words of Administration some think they contain a double form. Both
the Old Roman form, and that which Calvin did prescribe, both united by the
Revisors of the Liturgy under Queen Elizabeth. It is most certain that the
Ancient Church did use the first words [The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ] in
the Administration. To which the people answered Amen Dicit tibi Sacerdos
Corpus Christi, and tu dicis Amen, h. e. verum, quod confitetur Lingua teneat
affectus: Ambros. de Sacram l. 4. c. 5. Vniversa Ecclesia accepto Christi
sanguine dicit Amen Aug. Resp. ad Oros. qu. 49, (...) Cyril. Catech. mist. 5.
; both to express their desire it might be Christ's Body unto them, and their
firm belief, that it was so. The next words, Preserve thy Body and Soul unto
everlasting life: as we are told by Durantus de Rit. Eccles. Cathol. l. 2. c.
55. were added in St. Gregory, lib. de Sacram. although the modern Missals have
altered this now: The other part Take and Eat, etc. have for their Author
Christ himself, who did Administer in these words: and if we should leave them
out (as the Roman Church does) we should have but half his form: And if we do
well consider the whole frame, it appears to be nothing else but a necessary
Paraphrase upon our Saviors Words, which does expound and sit them for every
ones private Meditation; for therefore the Church appoints all these words to
be repeated to each partaker, that every one may have time, and subject matter
afforded for his own particular Meditations; yet because all are not able
themselves to fix and to enlarge their thoughts, so as to deduce suitable
Soliloquies and Devotions to entertain themselves within the time of
Administration, we judge the most practical handling of this rare Composure
will be, to draw proper Meditations from all the parts thereof, when we have
first discovered the method in this Analysis.

The Analysis of the form of Administration.
Sect. 2. The form of Administration has three parts. 1. A Commemoration
declaring what it is. -- The Body Blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ Which was given shed
for thee,
2. A Petition that we may partake of the benefits th^^eof. Preserve thy Body
and Soul unto Everlasting Life.
3. A direction how to receive it 1. Externally. Take and Eat this Drink -- this
2. Internally. 1. In remembrance that Christ died -- Christ's blood was shed
for thee, 2. And feed on him in thy heart by Faith with thanksgiving. Be
thankful.




Discourses and Meditations upon the Administration.
. 3. We must now lay by all other thoughts and diligently compose our Souls for
the Acts of holy Communion, remembering that we must feast with God by silence
and Heavenly Contemplation. Let us now therefore consider how great a work we
are about to perform, let us think what benefits we shall lose, and what evil
we shall fall into, if we do it unworthily, what Comforts and advantages we
shall receive if we do it acceptably, let us call to mind what need we have of
the divine assistance, and pray with Sampson, Strengthen us, O Lord, only this
once, Jud. 16.28. Let us remember our sins afresh to humble us, and review our
wants: Both that we may have them ready to spread before our Lord, and that we
may thereby stir up in our selves most fervent desires after his Grace and
Mercy: And let nothing divert us from these thoughts, unless our Charity to our
Brethren. For when we hear the Minister use these words to the rest of the
Congregation, we shall do well most heartily to wish this holy Communion may be
life to every Soul, so that all who sit together at this blessed Feast, may
also meet in life everlasting: And as the Minister is drawing near to you,
consider the sound of his Masters feet is behind him, wherefore labor to
express the same reverence both in Soul and Body as you would do if Jesus were
visibly present with a train of glorious Angels: say as the Primitive
Christians did Porro moris erat Communicaturis dum accipiebant Eucharistiam
dicere, Domine non sum dignus ut intres sub tectum meum. Authore Origin, hom.
6. in diverse. ap. Durant.
, Lord I am not worthy thou should come under my roof! and at the sound of
his words let you heart leap within you for joy: and say, whence is it that my
Lord himself should come unto me? and then according as you have opportunity,
you may from these very words be furnished with most pertinent Meditations.

Meditations before the receiving of the Bread.
. 4. The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ.
An Act of Faith. O Eternal word of God, by whose power all things were made. I
will not ask how thou can give me thy flesh to Eat? because I am abundantly
satisfied in thy saying, This is my Body: since thou can make it become to me
whatsoever thou say it is Oportet igitur and non in sumptionibus Divinorum
mysteriorum indubitatam retinere fidem, and non quaerere quo modo? D. Bernar.
. I believe Lord help my unbelief! What though my senses assure me, the outward
substance and its accidents still remain Corporalis substantiae retinet
speciem, sed virtutis divinae invisibili efficientia probat adesse praesentiam.
Cypr. de coen. Dom.
? Yet my Faith and my Experience tell me there is an efficacy therein, beyond
the power of any other thing: Alas the flesh would profit me nothing, John
6.63. for he that is joined to thee must be one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. O let
these sacred Symbols therefore make me partaker of thy nature, and a partner in
thy merits, let them unite me to thee, ingraft me in thee, and make that body
mine which did suffer Death for me, and then I shall seek no further, but be
more happy than if I could understand all mysteries: Sure I am, This is thy
body in Sacrament, it communicates to us the blessings and benefit thereof, and
though presented in a figure, and by a holy Rite, yet it is to all its purposes
that which it does represent; I will therefore receive it as thy Body, and
esteem it infinitely above all other food, that I may not be judged for not
discerning thy Body. O let it be unto me according to my Faith. Amen.

An Act of Humility. I am a sinful wretch O Lord, and yet if I bid thee depart
from me, I banish all true happiness from my Soul. I long for thy presence, but
how shall I entertain thee? thou wast born of a pure Virgin, wrapped in clean
linen, laid in a new Tomb, and dwell now where nothing defiled can enter,
but never was there so unworthy an Apartment prepared for thee as my polluted
heart, into which I durst not presume to bring thee but that I know thou can
make it clean; However when by Faith I see that Body which all the Angels of
Heaven worship, I cannot but abhor myself in Dust and Ashes; I am amazed to see
such a Majesty come to visit a Sin-sick Soul in so poor a Cottage; yea I cannot
but tremble at thy presence, O thou King of Glory, because I am so overspread
with the filth of sin. But I will lament those corruptions which I cannot fully
purge away, and beseech thee not to despise me though I do deserve it. I do
profess my self unworthy, but thy condescension in stooping to me will be the
more illustrious Majoris enim pretii beneficium est quod praestatur indignis.
Salvian.
, and if thou have less delight in me for the present, thou shall have more
glory by me afterward, when thou have changed my vile body, and made it like
to thy glorious Body, according to thy mighty Power, Amen.

. 5. Which was given for thee.
An Act of Love. Holy Jesus, I am not worthy to touch this blessed Body as it
is thine, yet I presume to approach because thy Love has made it mine. This is
the Sacrifice for my Sins, the price of my Redemption, and that by which my
Soul was ransomed from Hell, and rescued from a dreadful Execution, it was
given for me, and it shall now be given to me: And have thou prepared such a
propitiation for me, and offered it unto me, which is dearer to thee than
thousands of Gold and Silver? Lord I am even ravished with thy Love, and
transported with affection to thee, who have regarded me a forlorn Creature,
and disappointed my Enemies that waited to see my fall: Dear Savior, I will
love thee with all my Powers, and strive and pray that I may love thee more and
more, as fervently as ever any of thy Saints have done, I will give my self
unto thee, and despise all other things in comparison of thee; and when I have
once tasted of this all-saving Sacrifice which was given for me, I am persuaded
that neither Life, nor Death, pleasure nor pain, things pr^sent or things to
come, shall ever be able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord, Amen.

. 6. Preserve thy Body and Soul to Everlasting Life.
An Act of Desire. O my Celestial food, the Bread that came down from Heaven,
how does thy sweetness, and my own necessities invite me? My body alas! is
liable to temporal, my Soul to Eternal Death, and behold here is the Medicine
of immortality, which will remove the sting of the first, and destroy the power
of the second Death, which will fill me with the graces which I want, fit me
for the glory which I desire, and advance my Soul and Body above the power of
Corruption: I feel a mighty hunger created in me, an Appetite kindled after
these incomparable dainties, which nothing but this Heavenly Manna can
satisfy; Behold I despise the meat which perishes and feeds for
destruction, and I long with a great impatience to taste of this Body of
Christ, of which I may eat and live for ever, which will make the Grave unable
to hold me, and Hell not to dare to shut its mouth upon me: O make no long
tarrying but give me now and ever this Bread, for I desire nothing but Christ,
and if I want this repast, I shall faint or die before I come to the Mount of
God.

A Meditation when the Bread is offered to us.
. 7. Take and Eat this.
An Act of Admiration. Whence is it, that my Lord himself should come to me? No
sooner does his voice sound in my ears, but my heart within me leaps for joy.
Oh blessed tidings to my poor Soul, almost famished with feeding on husks and
vanity, faint and languishing with grief and fear, and behold thou say, Take
and Eat, thou offerest thy self unto me, and command me to feast upon thy
own flesh, yea upon all thy Merits and Graces. Lord! thou reachest out most
freely that which I need infinitely, and that which I wish for above all
things. Adored be thy admirable bounty, in compliance wherewith (unworthy
though I am) I do stretch out a trembling hand, I do open my mouth, yea my
heart to receive thee: Open your Doors, O ye Gates of my Soul, and the King of
Glory shall come in; Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for behold thy King comes,
meek and lowly, to visit the meanest of his servants. Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

A Meditation while we Eat the Bread.
. 8. In remembrance that Christ died for thee.
An Act of Contrition. O my Soul, behold how thou have incensed the Majesty of
Heaven? see how he gives up the most innocent and most holy Jesus, thy best,
thy only friend, and his own dear Son, to be tortured and tormented for thy
Sins: O how cruelly was he scourged with whips, wounded with Thorns, laden
with the Cross, torn with Nails, pierced with a Spear, and rackt on the most
painful instrument of Death! His lovely Face is defiled with blood and
spitting, his Ears filled with taunts and curses, his Eyes drenched in tears
for the ruin of his Enemies, and his Soul amazed at the terrors of the divine
wrath; till at length all wounded, broken and bloody with many groans, yet with
admirable patience he breaths out his holy Soul: And yet whatever he suffered
was my portion. My pleasure has been his pain, my wicked life has caused his
bitter death. Wretch that I am, to live in such a manner, that nothing else
could satisfy or make my Peace! But here I come this day to call my sin to
remembrance; I will look on thee whom I have pierced, with a most tender and
sympathizing affection, and while I break this holy Bread with my Teeth, I will
commemorate how thou wast bruised for our iniquities, and how our offenses did
grind thee with grief and pain; Holy Savior I am angry at my self and full of
anguish, to see what I h^ve brought upon thee, I am sorry with all my heart,
that I have given harbor to thy Murderers: but I hope this most dismal
spectacle Est enim tanta vis crucis Christi, ut si ante oculos ponatur, and in
mente fideliter retineatur, ita ut in ipsam mortem Christi intentis oculis
adspiciatur, nulla concupiscentia, nulla libido, nullus furor, nulla potest
superare invidia. Origin. in 7. ad Romans
shall mortify in me all desires after Evil; and make me abhor all those
desperate pleasures, which must be so dearly paid for by thee, or else stand
charged upon my Account for ever. No, no, I will never crucify thee again by
renewing my disobedience, for I have done too much already.

A Meditation after the receiving of the Bread.
. 9. And feed on him in thy heart by Faith with thanksgiving.
An Act of particular Application and Gratitude. Hail holy Lamb of God, thrice
welcome art thou to a poor perishing Sinner, was it not enough that thou
should suffer so much for me, but thou will also give all the purchase of
those sufferings to me? thy loving kindness is truly admirable. Thou have taken
my sins on thy self and communicated thy Righteousness unto my Soul. Lord while
I believe and consider the benefits of thy Passion, I am revived and filled
with an unwonted vigor: My Conscience does accuse me of many and grievous
sins; but I do here most humbly and thankfully set forth this perfect
Sin-offering before thy divine Majesty, and I know thou can not except
against it, I believe it is sufficient to atone thy anger; what I owe he has
discharged, what I have deserved he has endured, so that for his sake I h^pe
thou will set me free: Blessed Jesus! how is my Soul refreshed, that it is thus
restored again to thy Fathers Love. Let Heaven and Earth praise thee and
declare the merit of this glorious Sacrifice, and I will bless thee while I
have my being, I will love thee because thou have loved me better than thy own
life; my heart shall feast with joy and Eucharist upon the pleasures and
Comforts, which I expect to draw from this Celestial food; I have received
thine immaculate Body, and it shall cleanse my sinful body, and teach me by the
virtue of so rare an example to relieve my poor Brethren for whom thou have
died: and to conquer my Enemies by my Charity, for thus thou have done to me:
And both my lips and my life shall set forth thy Praise; I begin to feel my
self one with thee already, and I will wait till I am perfectly united to thee
in Everlasting Glory. Amen.

Meditations before the receiving of the Cup.
. 10. The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.
An Act of Acknowledgment. It will not suffice me, Dearest Savior, to receive
thee in part only, for I must be wholly thine, and (blessed be thy Name) thou
art willing to be wholly mine also. Thou have already given me thy holy Body to
cleanse my nature, and now thou art preparing thy precious Blood to wash away
my guilt. My sins have poured out every drop thereof, wherefore thou presentest
it to me by it self, to show how truly thou did suffer Death for me. And now
O my Redeemer, thou have said this Cup is the Communion of thy blood, and thy
Truth is unquestionable, thy power is infinite, and thy love was such that thou
gave thy hearts blood for me, I will receive it therefore as the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant, the seal of all the Promises of thy holy Gospel, I have
indeed (vile Sinner that I am) drunk in iniquity like water, and therefore am
unfit to taste this Water of Life, and yet I shall perish without it, for I am
all over defiled, and this is the fountain which thou have opened to cleanse
us; I am scorched with the flames of evil Lusts, and unruly Passions, and this
is the Cup which thou have provided to cool and refresh us: O thou Medicine of
immortality, my Soul longs for thee, what value is sufficient for me to put
upon this Heavenly Cordial? how can I reverence it enough, since the God of
Heaven esteemed it a price sufficient for millions of perishing Mankind? Lord
let me taste and my soul shall live, let me wash in this Laver before I come to
thy great Tribunal, so shall I be whiter than Snow.

. 11. Which was shed for thee.
An Act of Repentance mixed with Faith. Was there ever so base a wretch as I
have been, who have accounted those sins small and trivial, yea and made them
my sport and pleasure, which have pressed down and wounded the holy Jesus till
he is all over drenched in his own blood! Woe is me I have easily committed
that, which nothing but these streams can wash away: O ye accursed Lusts, ye
have by wicked hands taken, Crucified and slain the Lord of Life, and if he had
not sustained your fury, ye had delivered me over to Everlasting Burnings; I do
abhor and detest ye all, how dear soever you have been to me, the sight of my
bleeding Savior has stirred up my indignation against you, and I will revenge
his blood upon you, by sacrificing you all at this Altar. How can my Eyes but
drop down tears of Contrition when they behold thee pouring forth Rivers of thy
Blood? but while I grieve to see thy bleeding wounds I must not forget for whom
thou did sustain them; thy Blood was shed for me, because my life was
forfeited; why art thou then so cast down O my Soul? will thou dishonor that
price by thy doubts and fears which God has accepted for all the World? cannot
that Sacrifice which appeaseth the divine wrath, satisfy thy Faith? Be not
afraid, only believe, and be assured he will not cast away those whom he has
bought at so dear a rate, for thee it was shed, for thee it is prepared, open
thy mouth wide and he will fill it.

. 12. Preserve thy Body and Soul unto Everlasting Life.
An Act of Supplication. O Lord I tremble at the apprehension of all those
Evils that stand between me and thy glory; behold the Grave gapeth for my Body,
the Infernal Pit threatens to swallow my Soul, and Satan is ready (were he
permitted) every moment to devour me; wherefore I beseech thee sprinkle me with
thy all-saving blood, that the destroying Angel may pass over me; let me drink
of this Cup of Life, and so shall my Body be free from Corruption, and my Soul
from Condemnation; Death shall be defeated, the Grave dismantled, and Satan
disappointed; Let me drink of thy precious Blood that I may receive thereby
abundance of thy Spirit, so shall my Body be hallowed into a sacred Temple, and
my Soul shall be replenished with such Graces that I can never perish; Sweetest
Jesus! how desirable are thy Provisions? oh let us not always languish without
them, but pity our dry and parched Souls, and water them we entreat thee, with
these living streams, for behold we thirst, and long with a mighty Passion to
drink of this Fountain of Life, that we may not faint in our journey to those
Rivers of pleasures, which are at thy right hand: Oh give us this divine
Cordial at present, and make it to us a Preservative for Body and Soul to
everlasting life. Amen.

A Meditation in the receiving of the Cup.
. 13. Drink this in remembrance that Christ's blood was shed for thee.
An Act of Commemoration. How chearing is this Cup to me, Blessed Jesus! which
was so dreadful unto thee; it was thy Agonies, and thy Wounds which afforded me
this Wine of Joy. Thou did find how bitter it was when thou were appeasing an
offended God, but I taste how sweet it is now that thou have made him a tender,
and reconciled Father; I receive this Cup O my Savior as a new pl^dge of thy
dearest love, for from those pits whence these Rivulets did flow, I can discern
thy heart bleeding in pity to my misery, and sick of Love: And since thou do
here give me a right to that great expiation which thou have made, I do most
humbly commemorate the same before the Father of Heaven, as the full
satisfaction for my innumerable debts; and I will remember the dolours of thy
Cross with a brisker sense than ever, because thou have made me drink of thy
blood and given me thy Soul, thy Life, and thy Spirit, so that now I will live
no more, but thou shall live in me, because we have mingled Souls, and thou
have joined me to thy self by the Communications of thy Spirit. O let nothing
separate that which thou have so graciously joined together.

A Meditation after the receiving of the Cup.
. 14. And be thankful.
An Act of Thankfulness and Resolution. Praise the Lord O my Soul, and all that
is within me bless his holy name, for now I find the Mercy and the Peace, the
Comfort and the Grace which flows from the Death of Christ, let all the World
know what he has done for my Soul, he has rescued me and many of my poor
Brethren round about me from the nethermost Hell: wherefore I will love thee,
holy Jesus! more than I can express, and I will love them for thy sake; And
since thou have given thy self, thy merits and graces to me, and sealed a New
Covenant with me in thy own blood, I do here bind my self by this sacred Cup,
to be sincerely thine Mos est regibus quoties in societatem coeant, implicare
dextras, pollicesque inter se vincire. M^x -- levi ictu cruorem eliciunt atque
invicem lambunt: id foedus arcanum habetur, quasi mutuo cruore sancitum: Tacit.
Annal. lib. 12.
. I will spend my time and strength in thy service, yea and Sacrifice my blood
to bear witness to thy truth if ever thou call me thereunto. I will never
betray nor forsake thee, but live and die with thee, for I have sworn and am
steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous judgments. Oh let me never unhallow
that body, nor defile that Soul in which the Lord Jesus delights to dwell, let
no Oaths or lying profane those lips, no Obscenity or Intemperance pollute
that mouth, by which those holy Symbols have passed: And methinks I feel new
desires and new hopes, my nature seems r^newed, my blood refined, my Soul full
of holy vigor, blessed be thy name for it, let thy mercy keep me in this happy
temper till I have accomplished all my resolutions. Amen.

. 15. By these and such like contemplations you must keep your minds employed
all the time that the Heavenly Banquet does continue, and if the Congregation
be numerous, and there be further opportunity, the devout Soul will easily find
more fuel to nourish these flames, viz. by considering the necessities of all
Mankind, the Calamities of the Church, the Miseries of the Sick, the wants of
the Poor, the condition of our Relations, Friends, and Acquaintance, and
recommending them all with an effectual Charity to Almighty God through Christ
Jesus: As also by lamenting its own unworthiness and indispositions, by
recollecting all its present wants both spiritual and temporal, by surveying
the difficulties and dangers of that pious course now undertaken, and by
calling upon the Father of Mercies, for grace and relief, for courage and
strength, for support and protection in order to each of these: So likewise by
doing Acts of mental Charity, to be put in Execution afterward, viz. Resolving
for the sake of Jesus to forgive and do good to our Enemies, to reprove
Sinners, instruct the ignorant, help those that are in need: And finally by
contemplating of the wisdom and advantage of a holy Life, the comfort and peace
of a happy Death, the joys and felicities of the life of Glory, with the
pleasures of those Souls that behold Jesus face to face; these and many more
which the good Spirit will offer, we must improve as much as the time will give
us leave, because to look about us, or to unbend our thoughts while the
Celebration is in hand, is a sign of a carnal heart and a base spirit, that is
weary of conversing with God; it is an affront to the blood of Christ, it
exposes us to Satan's malice, and prepares us for evil suggestions, which
unguarded Souls fall into sooner here than elsewhere; and to conclude, it will
make our Lord abhor us, the Spirit forsake us, and turn the Cup of Blessing
into poison and a Curse: Wherefore be very watchful that no evil or impertinent
cogitation do divert you, till the Post-Communion does begin, and then you must
have no other employment, but to join with the Minister in that part of this
holy Office also.

PARTITION IV. Of the Post-Communion.
SECT. I. Of the Post-Communion in general, and in particular of the
Lords-Prayer.
. 1. IT is a rudeness in manners to depart from the House of our Friend as soon
as the Tables are removed, and an Act of Irreligion to rise from our common
meals (...) Porphyr. de Essenis. de abst. lib. 4. Sect. 12. Gratias agere
debent and cum hymno a mensa devenire. Chrysos. hom. 83. in Math.
without Prayer and Thanksgiving. How much more absurd and impious then were it
for us to depart so abruptly from the Lords Table? Our Church has therefore
here provided this concluding Banquet of Prayers and Praises, imitating our
Saviors Pattern, who concluded his last Supper with that excellent Prayer,
John 17. as well as with that Hymn, Math. 26.30. (which is supposed to have
been the Paschal Hallelujah): and all Churches do finish this Heavenly Feast in
like manner as the following particulars will demonstrate: It is our part
therefore to take care that the vigor of our devotion do not remit, for we
ought to perform these duties also with the same affections; It is the first
Testimony which we give of that Piety that we have vowed, and if well done will
be like the digestion and turning this Heavenly food into spiritual
nourishment: We do not eat our common meat only to please our palate, but to
support and strengthen our nature, and to make us more fit for our employment;
in like manner we do not partake of the Blessed Eucharist to put us into holy
raptures at present only, but to strengthen our Souls and put them into better
frame for all Duties which we owe to Almighty God, so that now we must give the
first experiment of our having worthily received.

. 2. The Lords Prayer, is placed in the first entrance upon this part of the
Office, both in imitation of Antiquity Docuit Apostolos ut quotidie in Corporis
illius sacrificio, credentes audeant loqui, Pater noster. Hieron. in Pelag. l.
3. Vid. Aug. ep. 59. Greg l. 7. ep. 63.
, and because it cannot any where be used more properly. For having now been
made partakers of Jesus, and his Spirit, it is fit the first words which we
speak should be his, as if not we, but he lived and spoke in us, and surely
these divine words can never be more effectual, than when we have the blessed
Author of them so fresh in our memories, and have so lately set forth his most
meritorious Death. We have in this Sacrament received him, and we know that
unto as many as receives him, he gives them power to become the Sons of God, so
that we may all with one heart and voice now say most cheerfully, Our Father,
and apply every Petition to the present occasion in this or the like manner.

The Paraphrase of the Lords-Prayer.
O Lord who have now sealed our Adoption and made us Members of Christ, we make
bold to call thee [Our Father] and do lift up our hearts to thee [which art in
Heaven] to bless thee for this mighty favor, wishing that [Hallowed] and for
ever blessed may [be thy Name] throughout all the World: Thou have made us thy
servants now by grace, therefore O let [thy Kingdom] of glory [Come] as soon as
thou please: In the mean time, since we have been fed with Angels food, we
pray that [thy Will] may [be done] by us thy servants [in Earth] as readily and
as constantly [as it is] ever done by those blessed Spirits [in Heaven] We
cannot distrust thy Providence for Earthly things, since thou have given us thy
own Son, and fed us with his Body and Blood; wherefore we will only beseech
thee, to [Give us this day] so much as is necessary for our subsistence, even
[our daily Bread] to enable us to serve thee: [And ^orgive us] by the merits of
that prevailing Sacrifice, now commemorated, all [our trespasses,] by which we
have deserved that wrath which Jesus has endured. Lord pardon us therefore [as
we] by thy Example in this Feast of love, do freely [forgive them that] have
done any [trespass against us.] And do thou not only remit what is past, but
lest we lose our comfort and break our Vows, O [Lead us not] neither suffer us
to fall [into temptation] which we expect with more violence, now that we have
renounced the bondage of Satan. [But] we trust in thee O Lord and call upon
thee to [deliver us from] all [Ev^l] temporal, spiritual, and Eternal Note,
that the Doxology is here used because this part of the office is Eucharistical.
. [For thine is the Kingdom] over all, especially over us who have now sworn
Allegiance unto thee. Thou only have the might and [the Power] to secure us.
And therefore to thee shall all the Praise [and the Glory] be given by Men and
Angels [for ever and ever.] O do thou therefore to these our requests say,
[Amen] that we may also join in thy Praises: So be it.

SECT. II. Of the first Prayer in the Post-Communion.
. 1. THat the Eucharist was always concluded with a Hymn is observed by all,
but we affirm there were Prayers also made after it, as appears by that Prayer
of our Savior, John 17. and also from the Custom of the Jews who finished the
Paschal Solemnity with Prayers as well as Hymns Hoc ita gesto pater familias
precationes mensarias ad finem precari pergit. Buxt. Synag. Cap. de Pasch. 13.
. And for the Christians, St. Cyril warns them (...). etc. Cyril. Mystag. cat.
5.
not to depart till the last Prayer be done. Besides, the joint consent of all
the ancient Liturgies show, that all Churches had such Prayers. As for this
form, the principal clause thereof of offering up our Bodies and Souls, is
taken from St. Paul, Romans 12.1. and it is a main end of this Sacrament (though
the Roman Mass is wholly silent in it:) the rest of this Prayer (although the
words be modern) in sense agrees with many of the ancient forms, and is so well
contrived, as it may not only serve to exercise our devotion at present, but
teach how to demean our selves so afterward, that we may retain the benefits
which we have received, as the more particular consideration thereof will show.

The Analysis of the First Prayer in the Post-Communion.
. 2. This First Prayer consists of Three Parts. 1. A Supplication to the
Father, 1. For the Acceptance of our Sacrifice of Praise, O Lord our heavenly
Father, we thy humble Servants entirely desire thy Fatherly Goodness mercifully
to accept this our Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving:
2. For the Benefits of the Oblation made by Jesus Christ, Most humbly
beseeching thee to grant, that by the Merits and Death of thy Son Jesus Christ,
and through Faith in his Blood, we and all thy whole Church may receive
remission of our Sins, and all other benefits of his Passion.

2. An Oblation of our selves, by 1. A solemn Dedication, 1. The thing
dedicated, And here we offer and present unto thee, O Lord, our selves, our
souls, and bodies,
2. The end of the Dedication, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively Sacrifice
unto thee.

2. A Petition for Grace to make good this Vow, Humbly beseeching thee, that
all we who are Partakers of this Holy Communion, may be full filled with thy
Grace and heavenly Benediction.
3. An Act of Humility, expressed in 1. Acknowledging our unworthiness, And
although we be unworthy, through our manifold Sins, to offer unto thee any
Sacrifice;
2. Petitioning to be mercifully accepted, yet we beseech thee to accept this
our bounden Duty and Service, not weighing our Merits, but pardoning our
Offenses:


3. A Doxology to the whole Blessed Trinity, Through Jesus Christ our Lord, by
whom, and with whom, in the Unity of the Holy Ghost, all Honor and Glory be
unto thee, O Father Almighty, world without end. Amen.


A Practical Discourse upon the first Prayer with Meditations after the
Communion.
. 3. O Lord our Heavenly Father, we thy humble Servants entirely desire thy
Fatherly goodness, mercifully to accept this our Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving.] The devout Soul being newly refreshed with these Heavenly
Comforts, and even ravished with joy to find him whom she loved and longed
after, desires now an opportunity to express her gratitude; But alas what have
we to return, we can make no requital, only we must acknowledge the favor, and
offer up a Sacrifice of Praise for it; and since this is all we can do, we had
need do this very well; but if we reflect upon the manner, even of this
Oblation, we shall easily perceive there have been many defects, so that
without a merciful acceptance it could never avail us in the sight of God; how
apparent is it, that we have not praised God so affectionately and unfeignedly
as so infinite a mercy does deserve? Wherefore if we be really his humble
Servants, the first thought in our hearts, and the first word in our mouths,
will be the confession of our failings, even in the whole office from the
beginning to the end, for the Ancients called the whole Communion the Sacrifice
of Praise Ecclesia immolat in Corpore Christi sacrificium laudis: Aug. l. 1. in
advers. legis cap. 20.
, (as our Church here does) whereas the Romanists only call it a Sacrifice
Praesta ut hoc sacrificium, quod oculis tuae Majestatis indignus obtuli.
Missal. Romans
, without any other addition: but it is not the Sacrifice of Christ which we
here speak of, for that is always pleasing to God, and was absolutely perfect;
but it is our own Peace Offering, in Commemoration thereof in which there have
been many failings, and therefore we desire and beg that it may be accepted in
mercy, so that our infirmities may not deprive us of the benefit and the
comfort thereof, to which purpose let us thus Meditate.

When I compare thy acts with mine, Holy Jesus, I am exceedingly ashamed to
behold so vast a disproportion, thou give me thy merits and graces, thy life
and thy love at present, and have promised thy Kingdom to me in reversion, and
I have scarce returned this with the entire devotion of one half hour; Oh how
little is my obdurate heart affected, with the sense of my own guilt, the fears
of the divine wrath, or the apprehensions of thy sufferings? Yet Lord I do
desire, and did endeavor to praise thee, so that I hope thou will consider my
infirmities with much compassion, and measure my services not by the exactn^ss
of the performance, but by the sincerity of my wishes, so shall I be accepted
before thy Heavenly Father, and by the mercy of that acceptance be obliged unto
thee for ever.

. 4. Most humbly beseeching thee to grant, that by the merits and death of thy
Son Jesus Christ, and through Faith in his Blood, we and all thy whole Church
may obtain remission of our sins, and all other benefits of his Passion.] Our
Heavenly Father does not at any time require our praises, merely for the
advancement of his own glory, but that we may thereby be the more fit to
receive greater benefits from him (...). Chapter in Genesis hom. 52.
: thus in the design of this holy Sacrament, he does not only intend it as a
Sacrifice of Praise for the Death of Christ, but as a means to convey the
blessings thereof to us; Wherefore we must in the next place petition that we
may find the happy effects of our Lords Passion, and then we shall have good
grounds to turn this memorial thereof into Eucharist and Thanksgiving; We have
beheld that sacred body broken, and that precious blood spilt in a mystery,
which is sufficient to atone our sins and the sins of the whole Church; and we
have now perceived our own need of mercy, and we are in perfect Charity with
all Christian people, so that it is now most proper for us to pray, that that
so excellent a price may not be paid in vain, so glorious an offering may not
want its due effects: But that by this Sacrifice, as the meritorious and moving
cause, and by our Faith therein, as the instrumental, we and the whole Church
may find remission at the hands of God: This is the great end of our
Communicating, and if we would most earnestly entreat for it, we may thus
enlarge our selves.

Gracious Lord, we have beheld the efficacious and all-saving Sacrifice which
thy Son has offered for us, we have remembered it, and blessed thy name for it,
as well as we were able, though not so highly as we are obliged to do Gratias
agimus Deus omnipotens non quantum debemus, sed quantum possumus: Liturg. S.
Clement.
. For the benefits thereof are inestimable. Oh let them not all be lost unto
us, for want of Faith to believe and receive them! There is no want of merit in
Jesus to deserve, no want of mercy in thee to bestow remission; Oh let there
not want in us, or in any of those for whom Christ died, grace to accept this
Pardon. Behold Lord how we struggle under a load of guilt, a troubled
Conscience does perplex us, our remaining Corruptions oppose us, the decay of
our graces does deject us, and lo here is an effectual remedy for all these
Evils; help us we beseech thee every one, so to apply it, that both we and our
brethren whom we love as our own Souls, may find a blessed Cure; Who was ever
reconciled to thee but by Jesus? or who was ever so much thine Enemy, but this
holy Sacrifice has made their Peace? and shall it be ineffectual only to us?
Dear Father, let us find the efficacy thereof in our selves, and discern the
fruits thereof in all the members of thy Church, so shall we be engaged to
praise thee more and more for this great Salvation through Jesus Christ, Amen.

. 5. And here we offer and present unto thee O Lord, our selves, our Souls and
Bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively Sacrifice unto thee.] They that
are truly sensible of that infinite mercy which God has showed them, will not
think the praises of their lips a sufficient return, but when they have paid
them will still ask with David, What shall I return to the Lord for all the
benefits he has done unto me? Psalm. 116.11. if he required Sacrifice, Psalm.
51.16. they would give the fairest of their flock; yea if it were expected,
they would lay down their own lives in Sacrifice. But no other Sin-offering
besides that which Jesus has made, is desired by the Almighty; only, A body
has he prepared us, Psalm. 40.8. And St. Paul beseeches us by the mercies of
God to offer up that as a living, holy and acceptable Sacrifice; and
considering that our Savior has offered up his Body for us, this is no more
but our reasonable service, Romans 12.1. By this Apostolical direction
therefore, we do here make this Oblation of our selves, which (though wholly
omitted in the Mass) was anciently a considerable part of the Sacrifice to be
offered up at this Altar (called upon that account, mensam rationalem, by
Theodoret, Sermon. 6. de Prove.) and thence it is that Eusebius Eusebius. de praep.
Evang. l. 1. c. 10.
mentions it as an essential part of this office. We offer (says he) the
Eucharist with religious Hymns and Prayers to God for our Salvation; yea we
consecrate our selves wholly to him, and dedicate our Words, our Bodies and
Souls, to his High Priest: And because all that we have done hitherto is in
vain without this; we will first by several reasons evince the necessity of
thus offering up our selves at this Ordinance; and secondly, direct the manner
how it is to be done. First, we have many peculiar Obligations to this duty
just now laid upon us; wh^refore let it be considered; First, That our Lord
Jesus has here represented to us, how he has given himself for us, and
offered up his Body and Soul, to deliver our Bodies and Souls from everlasting
torments in Hell fire; And is it not most reasonable (according as the old
Roman Law determined Grotius de jur. Bell. and Pacis. lib. 3. cap. 9. Sect. 10.
) that he who is saved from Execution, and rescued from the Sword of an Enemy,
should spend that life which he has received, in the service of his deliverer?
We must now esteem our s^lves no more to be our own, since we are bought with a
price, 1 Cor. 6.20. such as the greatest lover never gave for the purchase of
his best beloved, even with the precious blood of Christ, and can we be so
ungrateful and unjust as not to consecrate our selves to his service who has
thus redeemed us? Secondly, He does in this Sacrament give himself to us,
intending to be with ^s, and dwell in us, wherefore it is most equal that the
Covenant should be mutual, and that we should give our selves to him: as we
must have him or nothing else will profit us; so we must give our selves to
him, or nothing else will please him Cant. 6.3. Domine, mea tibi oblata non
prosunt sine me, nec tua mihi sine te. Bern.
. If he please to make us happy in his desirable presence, We must dedicate our
bodies to be Temples (...)^ Hierocl.
of the holy Ghost; our Souls to be Houses of Prayer, and receptacles of holy
thoughts. Wheresoever this King of Glory comes, he must have all the Keys
delivered to him, and he must be Commander in Chief, so will he be content to
abide with us for ever; if so great a Prince shall condescend to espouse the
meanest of his subjects to be a sharer in his riches, and a Partner in his
honors, how can she do less than vow in all duty to be for ever and most
faithfully his? 1 Samuel 25.41. Thirdly, We have chosen him to be our Lord and
our Guide, as w^ll as our Savior, because his conduct as well as his pardon is
necessary to our Salvation, wherefore we have now taken the Sacrament, that is
the Soldiers Oath Sacramentum seu juramentum milita^e erat: Se streriue
fucturum quaecunque praeceperit Imp^rator. Vegetius. (...) Polybius. (...).
Dion. H^licar. l. 11. Et ap. Horat.

Non ego persidum di^i sacramentum, Ibimus ibimus, utcunque praecedes. Supremum
carpe^e iter Comites parati --.


, That we will obey, and do whatsoever our G^neral shall Command us to our
Power, and follow him whitherso^ver he shall lead us, not only through danger,
but Death it self; so that we are bound to give up our Souls and Bodies to the
conduct of our Triumphant Leader, who will doubtl^ss carry them both safely
through all the A^mies and Ambushes of the Enemy, and bring them to Everlasting
Glory. Fourthly, We have h^re received extraordinary testimonies of the divine
favor, and pledges of the love of Jesus, so that we are obliged in requital,
to give back the greatest and best gift that we have, and that is our selves.
When many of Socrates Scholars presented him with large donatives, poor
Aeschines came blushing to him and said, Sir, I have nothing to give which is
worthy of you, but I here offer unto you all that I have to give, viz. My self
Tu mihi magnum munus dederis, nisi forte parvo te aestimes. Sen. de ben. 1.
Prove. 23.26. Et Prosper Epigr. 15. Quid voveat Domino, quisquis been ^orde
volutat,
Ipsum se totum praeparet and voveat.
Major enim offerri nequit hostia mentis in ara,
Nec Christi ex templo suavior exit odor.

, and I beseech you to accept this present, considering, that though others
have given you more, yet none has left himself so little as I, who have given
you my self and all at once: To whom Socrates made this reply (even as Christ
will do, to those who present themselves to him) Thou could not have given me
any gift more acceptable than thy self, and it shall be my care to keep this
gift choicely, and I will return thee back again to thy self better than I
received thee. There needs no application, but that every Communicant do as
sincerely make oblation of their Souls and Bodies to God, for this the poorest
may give, and yet this is more acceptable than thousands of Gold and Silver: If
these reasons do convince us of the justice and the necessity of our making
this Oblation, we may learn in the next place from the very form in this
Prayer, how and in what manner it may be done, for we are taught therein,

I. What it is which we must offer, viz. our whole selves, not only our Bodies
but our Souls also Quod^si corpus, quo inferiore tanquam famulo utitur anima,
sacrificium est, quanto magis anima ipsa cum se refert ad Deum? August. Deinde
cum plena resignatione and integra voluntate offer teipsum in honorem nominis
mei, -- corpus tuum scil. and animam mihi fideliter c^mmittendo. Tho. a Kemp.
de imit. Christi. l. 4. c. 6.
, for we consist of both these, God has created and redeemed both, and each of
them in their capacity can do him service, wherefore we must give him both, or
he will accept neither Pectora vestra duanon admittentia curas, Juven. (...),
Macrob. Saturn.
, because he has no equal, he will have no Rival. All the members of our
Bodies, and all the powers of our Souls, our Limbs and Senses, our Will and
Affections, our Reason and Understanding must be dedicated to him; for so long
as any of these are under the bondage of sin, the rest cannot be entirely the
Servants of God, Math. 6.24.

II. To what end we make this Oblation of our selves. First, To be a reasonable
Sacrifice; The offering up of our Souls and Bodies, since we are rational
Creatures, is not like the Sacrifices of brute Beasts by dying, but by living
agreeable to the will of God, and the rules of right reason -- (...).
Epicharmus. (...). Socrat. ap. Stobaeum.
; for reason as it is enlightened in us Christians, does direct us to, and
approve of all things that are good, and does attest and confirm the Duties
which God requires. He therefore makes himself a reasonable Sacrifice, who does
live prudently and piously, and walk according to the dictates of the best
reason; he that is religious and just, sober and humble, meek and patient,
compassionate and charitable Qui innocentiam colit Deo supplicat, qui justitiam
Deo libat -- qui hominem periculo subtrahit, optimam victimam caedit. Min.
Foelix.

Vis Deos propitiare bonus esto, satis illos coluit quisquis imitatus est. Sen.
ep. 95.


, for these things are in themselves the most rational, and we have the
greatest reason, and the highest obligations to perform them. Secondly, We
offer our selves to be an Holy Sacrifice, that is, to be pure and spotless, as
all those offerings were appointed to be (...)^ Athenaeus.

(...)^ Suidas.


which were offered to the Divine Majesty: And as all such offerings were set
apart and sanctified, never to be accounted the owners Nullius autem (scil.
hominis) sunt res sacrae and religiosae, quod enim Divini juris est, id nullius
in bonis est. Justinian. instit. l. 2. tit. 1. Sect. 7.
, or to be used to any common or profane use afterward; so when we are
purified by the blood of Christ, and dedicated to God, it is with intent never
to use our faculties as the servants of sin, nor our members as the instruments
of unrighteousness any more; Our Eyes must not look toward wantonness, our
Ears must not hearken to vanity, our tongues must not speak lies or slanders,
our hands must not wrong nor oppress, nor our feet spurn the poor, neither may
our wit or reason, our passions or our will be the slaves of Sin hereafter. For
we are Holy, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. and if we unhallow our selves again, it is a
crime equal to Belshazzers sacrilegious drinking in the holy Vessels of the
Temple. Thirdly, That we may be a Living Sacrifice, for we do not vow to kill
or destroy our selves as some of the Heathens did in honor to their
less-deserving Deities; but we resolve to Sacrifice our Lusts Non enim sicut
tunc corpora pro corporibus immolanda: sed vitia corporis perimenda sunt. S.
Ambros. in 12. ad Romans
by mortification, because so long as they live, we are dead to the service of
God: We engage to be living Aqua viva Hebr. Dialecto, est aqua fontana,
ebulliens, perennis and jugiter manans.
that is, lively and strong, vigorous and persevering in all religious duties,
and that we will perform all kind of good works with such an alacrity, as may
express life and spirit; so that although we do not or cannot return the love
of Jesus, by dying for him as he has done for us, yet we will live to him, and
desire our life no longer, nor for no other end, than to advance his glory, and
do his blessed pleasure: And now if we do so far understand our own interest,
and are so really weary of the bondage of Satan, as to desire and long for a
better Master, and do wish unfeignedly that we may be accepted as the servants
of God, let us resign up and dedicate our selves to him in this or the like
form.

An Act of Oblation of our selves, or the form of a Vow after the Holy
Communion. O most merciful Lord God, I am amazed at the mighty fa^^^^s which
thou have showed to me a sinful wretched Creature! I cannot but acknowledge thy
goodness, although I can make no retribution, had I all the World at my
disposal, I could freely give it all to thee as a testimony of my unfeigned
gratitude; but I hear thy gracious voice saying, My Son give me thy heart: It
is not mine (dearest Lord) but me thou seek, sinful and miserable though I
am, yet I am that purchase for which Jesus has left his glory, laid down his
life, done and suffered all these things: O mavelous condescension! I am
nothing, I have nothing, I am void of all good, full of evil, and deserving thy
wrath, so that I abhor my self, and can thou delight in me? Be it so then,
for I will dispute no more with unsearchable mercy, I believe O my God and
wonder, I can no longer resist thy condescending and Almighty Love; I will with
all the joy imaginable give my se f to thee, for thou have but lately restored
me to my self. Alas I have been a Prisoner to Satan, a Slave to Sin, and marked
for destruction, but thou have procured my Pardon, my Liberty, and my Life,
requiring no more for so unexpressible bounty, but only that I will entirely
become thine; Had I the life of an Angel, the understanding of a Cherubin, or
the powers of one of the Heavenly Host, thou do deserve it all; I am sorry I
am no better, yet such as I am I do most freely surrender my self unto thee,
both Soul and Body, avowing that I will be no more my own but thy servant in
all things. My understanding shall enquire after thee, my will shall choose
thee, my affections embrace thee, my senses shall obey thee, my passions shall
be at thy command, and my thoughts shall be always of thee. O be thou pleased
to come and reign over me, take possession of me, for thou have won my heart; I
shall never be my own till thou have made me thine, but if now at last I may be
accepted, I hope I shall never be so unjust and ungrateful, so foolish and
absurd, so perjured and sacrilegious, as to rob thee of my self hereafter, or
wilfully to profane my Body or Soul any more: It is indeed a miserable gift
that I offer, a defiled Body, a stained Soul and corrupt affections; But it is
all I have to give, and all that thou requirest, and it will be freer and
better by being thine: Let me never have other Master, let me never sully that
which the blood of Christ has washed, nor sell that to Satan which Jesus has
bought for God. Grant me therefore gracious Lord that I may find by the
workings of thy spirit within me, that thou have accepted me, give me such help
from thee to confirm my hope, that I may always perform my Vows, and never rob
thee of that which I have dedicated to thee in the sincerity of my Soul; I have
sworn and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous judgments, I am thine, O
save me for thy mercies sake, Amen. Amen.

. 6. Humbly beseeching thee that all we who are Partakers of this holy
Communion, may be full-filled with thy grace and Heavenly Benediction.] There
are too many who are forward enough to promise great things (...) Theophylac,
in Math. 20.
while their zeal is warm, which they either do not intend, or do not take care
to perform Quid enim est turpin^ quam promittere quae praestare aut nolis per
ignaviam aut non possis per imbecilitatem? Drus.
. But the sincere Christian is not more ready to make his Vow, than diligent to
keep it; wherefore he considers that this will prove but a vain oblation,
unless he can obtain the divine grace and Benediction to enable him to perform
it, and accordingly his next care is to pray most earnestly for the aid of
Heaven, both for himself and his Brethren: We may perhaps be too confident and
secure, imagining the evil spirit to be cast out, and both Soul and Body
consecrated unto God, but alas how easily may the Enemy return and recover his
hold, if the grace of God do not preserve us: Let us therefore now consider how
prudently we have made this vow, and how blessed we may be in keeping it; let
us remember how often we have formerly been surprised, and what danger there is
of future failings; and finally let us think how impossible it is to stand
without the assistance of the holy Spirit, and then doubtless we shall hunger
and thirst after Righteousness, and accordingly (as he has promised) we shall
be filled, Math. 5.6. We shall not ask riches, honors, or pleasures; for we
have renounced them all, but above all things we shall desire the grace of God
and his blessing, whereby we may have power to keep our Covenant with him, made
upon the blood of Jesus, and this is that request which the Lord delights to
hear, and which now we have most need to make; and doubtless if we be sincere,
it shall be granted, to which purpose we may add this supplication as the
enlargement of the preceding Petition.

Behold O blessed Jesus! how many of thy redeemed ones are here returned to
their duty and allegiance, we have all vowed our selves thy servants, but we do
yet tremble in expectation of those most furious assaults which will be made
upon us by the Enemy, from whom we have withdrawn; and Alas! we have too often
returned again to folly; But if thou please to plant thy grace within us, and
send thy blessing upon us, we fear not his policy nor his power; We have
received that heavenly food which is the means to convey this grace; and we
know that by this Celestial Remedy many of thy servants have been dreadful to
the powers of darkness, and thou did never cast off any humble Soul; O bless
then this life-giving mystery unto us, that we may find such power and
strength, such courage and resolution flowing from thence, that we may all
stand firm to the purposes which we have made; Sweetest Savior we are now thy
servants; and O what quiet and comfort, what safety and joy, what honor and
pleasure have we under so gracious a Lord? how happy shall we be in enjoying a
freedom, from Anger, and Intemperance, Malice, and Revenge, Pride and
Covetousness, and all the furies which use to torture us? O mark us for thine
own therefore, and deny us not that grace which is necessary to make thee ours,
and us to be thine; if we feel not some effects thereof, we shall sink and die
for fear lest thou have rejected us and our Oblation. But who did ever seek
thee and did not find? who ever trusted in thee and was forsaken? or why should
we suspect thou should make us the first instances of such a severity? We are
sure in thee all fullness of grace does dwell. O let it now overflow, that of
thy fullness we may all receive, so shall we daily and always perform our Vows.
Amen.

. 7. And although we be unworthy through our manifold sins, to offer unto thee
any Sacrifice, yet we beseech thee to accept this our bounden duty and service,
not weighing our merits but pardoning our offenses.] To offer up the Sacrifice
of Praise is properly the employment of an Angel, and to make whole
Burnt-Offerings was the Office of the sacred Order alone. But we Christians are
every one so far become Priests as to be allowed to come near to Gods Altar,
and there we are admitted to offer the incense of our Praises, and to make our
selves a living Sacrifice: Yet the more favor we have, the more humility we
should express because we are unworthy of it, and we must not let our
presumption grow upon the stock of the divine condescension: Let us remember
therefore that Aarons Motto was, Holiness to the Lord, Exodus 39.30. and that
God destroyed his two Sons, for making bold to offer unworthily, declaring
thereby that he would be sanctified in those that came near to him, Levit.
10.3. so that we had need be exceeding humble, and with all possible lowliness,
confess our unworthiness; for alas we have been Enemies and Rebels, treacherous
and unfaithful, full of vain thoughts and vile affections, all which is most
apparent to him before whom we stand: so that we may justly profess if we had
not been encouraged by his love and goodness, and commanded by his own Precept,
we durst not have approached to these terrible mysteries. Yet since it is our
bounden duty, and a service so fit, so just, and reasonable, we may hope he
will accept us, not because we are worthy, or have done any thing to merit his
favor, but because he is merciful Non aestimator meriti sed veniae largitor.
Ambros. and Romans Missal.
and apt to forgive our failings: if he should take a measure of the worth of
our Sacrifice by the Holiness of the offerers Qui petit primo debet attendere,
ut pro suis meritis nihil accepturum se putet: sed de Dei misericordia tantum.
Bern. in sent.
, it is sure ours would be rejected, and therefore it is best for us to fly to
his mercy. For the best of Gods Saints (whose devotion far excelled ours) have
set us this Example, and found it the wisest and safest way. I confess to thy
goodness ( says St. Ambrose) that I am not worthy to come near to so great a
mystery, for my manifold sins. -- But thou can make me worthy -- Wherefore
although a Sinner, I come to thy Altar to offer the Sacrifice which thou have
appointed. Whose example we may follow by this or the like Act of Humility.

O thou all-seeing and most holy Lord God, I have been admitted to make an
Oblation of my praises and my self unto thee, and I am infinitely concerned
that thou should accept me therein, not for any merit in me, but for thy own
mercy sake. O my God thou know I have been polluted with Sin, undutiful to
thy commands, unfaithful to my promises, unmindful of my obligations,
confederate with thy Enemies, yea, and even in the time of these holy mysteries
so obdurate and confused, that I might justly fear lest my wretchedness should
make my Sacrifice an abomination. I blush that I am no fitter, I lament that I
should bring so many defilements where the purity of an Angel is scarce
sufficient: but I take sanctuary in thy most obliging condescensions, and
because I am so unworthy, I will endeavor to esteem my self as vile, as I
really am in thy sight; O do not look upon the deserts of a wretched sinner,
but remember thy own mercies, and accept what thou have required of me. And so
shall thy favor be more illustrious, because it is bestowed upon so
undeserving a Creature, and the sense of my unworthiness shall enlarge my
thankfulness, and make me praise thee more than if I had approached with all
perfections.

. 8. Through Jesus Christ our Lord, by whom and with whom, in the unity of the
Holy Ghost, all honor and glory be unto thee, O Father Almighty World without
end: Amen.] When the people prayed without, Luke 1.10. they directed their
faces toward the Temple, and the Priest who was there offering Incense; but we
have much more reason to lift up our hearts to our great High Priest who is now
entered into the Heavens, and does there present most perfect intercessions, and
unreproveable Mediations for us. We know our own services to be altogether
imperfect; wherefore we do here declare that our only hopes of Acceptance and
Pardon, is Through Jesus Christ by whom we are directed to offer the Sacrifice
of Thanksgiving, Heb. 13.15. as we here do in this present Doxology, which
comes very near to the ancient form used in this Office Audi quid dicat
sacerdos: Per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, in quo tibi est, cum quo tibi est
honor, laus, gloria, magnificentia, potestas cum Spiritu Sancto a seculis, and
nunc, and semper, in omnia secula seculorum. Amen. Ambros. de sacr. l. 6. c. 5.
and does glorify the whole Trinity, from every person whereof we have now
received peculiar testimonies of grace and favor, and I wish that we may do it
with a devotion proportionable to the great Obligations now laid upon us, and
then it will be accepted according to our desire. Amen.

The Paraphrase of the first Prayer.
. 9. O Lord] whom though we may make bold to call [our Heavenly Father] through
Christ Jesus, yet [We] esteem it our honor to be accounted [thy humble
Servants,] Having now finished this great mystery, we do most heartily and
[entirely desire thy Fatherly goodness] to pass by our failings therein, as the
infirmities of thy own Children, and beseech thee [mercifully to accept, this
our] Oblation of our selves, together with our Eucharistical [Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving] for the sufferings and merits of our Redeemer: [Most
humbly deseeching thee] who have given such a Sacrifice for us, and in this
holy Sacrament offered the benefits thereof unto us, That thou will please [to
grant] that it may not be in vain to us or any of thy people. But [that ^y the
merits] of the Passion [and death of thy Son] our Savior [Iesus Christ] which
we have now commemorated, [and through] a lively [Faith in his blood] which was
shed for us: Both [We] who have now Communicated [and thy whole Church]
throughout the World [may receive] a free Pardon and full [remission of our
Sins] And also obtain reconciliation and adoption, sanctification and power
against sin, assurances of peace, hopes of glory, [and all other benefits of
his] all-saving [Passion.]

[And here] at thy Altar, where thou have re-minded us of thy giving thy Son
for us, and where thou have offered to make a League with us in his most
precious blood, [We offer] not only the praises of our lips, which are too mean
a return for such favor; but we dedicate [and present unto thee O Lord] that
which thou chiefly requirest, and all that we have to give, even [our selves]
wholly and entire, all the powers of [our Souls, and] all the members of our
[Bodies] designing them absolutely to thy service, and intending them [to be a
reasonable, holy, and lively Sacrifice]* and therefore we have consecrated them
[unto thee.] And we hope thou will accept us for thine own, and never suffer us
to be enslaved to sin hereafter: And that we may keep this vow, we do here
crave thy gracious assistance, [humbly beseeching thee] to send thy holy Spirit
to take possession of our hearts, so [that all we who are partakers] of the
outward part [of this holy Communion] being made thine [may be fullfilled] and
replenished in Soul and Body [with thy grace] within us, [and] thy [Heavenly
benediction] upon us.

[And although we] confess thou may justly charge us to [be unworthy through]
the stain and the guilt of [our manifold sins] which mingle with all our duties
[to offer unto thee] so pure and holy a Majesty [any Sacrifice] of Praise, or
to make any Oblations before thee, [Yet we] have ventured in hopes of thy
goodness upon this ^acred mystery, and we do [beseech thee to accept this] our
imperfect endeavor, as a testimony of our desire to please thee, since it is
[our bounden Duty] to show forth the Death of Christ, and that homage [and
service] which thou command us to perform: Wherefore Dear Lord be thou
pleased with this so sincere, though poor acknowledgment, [not weighing] or
considering [our merits] by which we cannot pretend any right to thy
acceptance, [but pardoning our offences] which might cause thee to reject us:
Oh do thou deal thus with us [through] the Merits and Intercession of Jesus
Christ our Lord, by whom] as our Mediator [and with whom] as thy only Son [in
the unity of] and together with [the Holy Ghost] we desire [all honor and
glory] may [be] given [unto thee O Father Almighty] both now in this World, and
for ever in the [World] which is [without end] Amen.

SECT. III. Of the second Prayer in the Post-Communion.
. 1. WHen we communicate often, it may be very grateful, and sometimes very
helpful to our devotion to vary the form: for which cause the Church has
supplied us with an other Prayer, that so according to the temper of our
spirit, we may make our choice: This being more full of praises and
acknowledgments, will be most fit when our minds have a joyful sense of the
benefits received in this Sacrament; as the former consisting chiefly of Vows
and resolutions is more proper when we would express our selves in love or
duty: And yet we may use either of them at any time, because neither does the
former want Thanksgivings, nor this, Petitions for Grace: The Composition of
this also, is regular and judicious, pious and extracted out of ancient forms,
and (as the former Prayer) it will not only serve to close our Devotions within
the Temple Non est vera Religio quae cum templo relinquitur. Lactantius.
: but it offers very useful Meditations for the Closet also, after we return
home, as the ensuing method will demonstrate.

The Analysis of the Second Prayer in the Post-Communion.
. 2. This Second Prayer consists of Four Parts. 1. A hearty Thanksgiving for
the present Favor, describing 1. The Object of our Praise, Almighty and
everlasting God, we most heartily thank thee,
2. The Subject thereof, for that thou have vouchsafed to feed us (who have
duly received these holy Mysteries) with the spiritual Food of the most
precious Body and Blood of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ:

2. A free Confession of the Benefits assured thereby, 1. In possession, 1. The
Love of God, And do assure us thereby of thy favor and goodness toward us,
2. Union with the Saints, and that we are very Members incorporate into the
mystical Body of thy Son, which is the blessed Company of all faithful People:

2. In reversion, Eternal Life, And are also Heirs through hope of thy
everlasting Kingdom, by the Merits of the most precious Death and Passion of
thy dear Son.

3. An humble Petition that we may retain them: showing, 1. The Thing
requested, And we most humbly beseech thee, O heavenly Father, so to assist us
with thy Grace,
2. The Ends why we do request it, viz. for 1. Perseverance, that we may
continue in that holy Fellowship,
2. Fruitfulness, and do all such good works as thou have prepared for us to
walk in;

3. The Motive to obtain it, Through Jesus Christ our Lord:

4. A concluding Doxologie, to whom with thee, and the Holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory, world without end. Amen.


A Practical Discourse upon the second Prayer with Meditations after the
Communion.
. 3. Almighty and everliving God, we most heartily thank thee for that thou
have vouchsafed to feed us who have duly received these holy Mysteries, with
the spiritual food of the most precious Body and Blood of thy Son our Savior
Jesus Christ.] This Act of Thanksgiving may be expressed in various words, but
it must not be omitted after the Communion, and therefore it is put into both
these forms: We ought not at any time rudely to ask for blessings from God,
until we have prepared the way by Praises Arrogans oration si ab homine quid
petiturus, dicas statim. da mihi, hoc Peto. Debet inchoari oration a laud Dei,
ut sequatur supplicatio. Ambr. de Sacr. l. 6. c. 5.
. But having so lately received so great mercy, it would be unsufferable to
pray for more, till we have acknowledged that which is already bestowed on us:
And by confessing the former mercy in the very entrance of this Prayer, we do
both encourage our selves to ask, and expect further blessings Sequentium rerum
certitudo est praeteritorum exhibitio. Greg. in Evang. hom. 1.
: and we do also by our gratitude engage the Almighty to give us more Ascensus
gratiarum descensus gratias Cassiod. Efficacissimum genus est rogandi gratias
agere. Plin. Paneg. Indignus est dandis qui ingratus est pro datis. Aug. de
temp. 112.
. Besides, the very gift it self now imparted to us, is the greatest and the
best, the most sweet, and most necessary for us in the World: we bless God for
our daily Bread, our common food, how much more then ought we to praise him for
this spiritual food, which nourishes our Souls unto life everlasting? True it
is, that carnal and unworthy Receivers have little cause of joy Sacrificia non
sanctificant hominem (non enim indiget Deus sacrificio) sed conscientia ejus
qui offert sanctificat hominem pura existens. Irenae. l. 4. c. 34.
, for they have eat the Bread and drank the Wine, not discerning the Lords Body
and Blood; but those that prepared themselves by Repentance, and received by
Faith, those I say have fed upon the spiritual part, and therefore they have
the most reason with all their powers to bless the Lord in this wise.

An Act of Thanksgiving. It is a mighty favor to me, O my God, that thou have
made bread to grow out of the Earth to nourish my mortal body, but O how far
have thou transcended that mercy in giving me the Bread of Life from Heaven to
feed my immortal Soul; Whom was there in Heaven or Earth that I could have
wished for in comparison of Jesus Christ, and now thou have given him to me
whom my Soul longed for, and in him thou have given me all, for he is all in
all: He is the fairest of ten thousand, for whose sake I will trample upon all
that this World accounts desirable: O my Soul bless thou the Lord: I came not
to gaze at or taste of the outward part, but to satisfy the longings of my
sin-sick Soul, by laying hold of the merits of a Crucified Savior, yet I have
received the Sacred Elements* and thou have made them to me, that which I
needed and desired, even the Body and Blood of thy Son, I have received his
flesh in Sacrament, but his grace in reality Ideo in similitudine quidem
accipis sacramentum, sed verae naturae gratiam virtutemque conseque^is. Ambr.
de sacr. l. 6.
. And O how it fills my Soul with joy, to behold thy Majesty appeased, my sins
expiated, my peace made, and my Enemies vanquished; It revives my spirit, and
refreshes me, more than comparisons can express, more than any can apprehend,
but they that feel the like. O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his
name together: we should have thought it a great felicity to have beheld the
glories of Jesus at a distance, but he has now sent him home to our hearts,
wherefore we will declare his mercy for ever, Amen, Hallelujah.

. 4. And do assure us thereby of thy favor and goodness toward us.] When
St. John was to introduce the Institution of this Sacrament he does it with
this Preface, Chap. 13.1. Having loved his own, he loved them to the end, or
(as the word rather signifies (...). Johan. 13.1. i. e. (...) Theophylac.
) He loved them in the highest degree, intimating that this holy Communion is
designed as a testimony that he loved us with a most perfect love. And there
are many considerations which do most clearly show this to be an assured pledge
of the favor of God unto us: 1. If we consider it only as a Feast, it has
always been a token of great respect, and a symbol of entire friendship, to
admit (especially our inferiors) to our Table Mensae ejusdem particeps: quod
magnum amicitiae symbolum olim creditum. Grotius. (...)^ Philo.
: thus David expressed his kindness unto Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 9.7. and Joseph
to his estranged Brethren, Genesis 43.25. and no man willingly eats with those,
whose persons or manners he dislikes, Genesis 43.32. Besides, Feasts have been
esteem^d a means to reconcile those who have been at variance, whence it is a
Proverb in Ben-Syra, Spread the Table and the contention will cease: And is it
not matter of unspeakable joy to us who were Enemies, Rebels, and condemned
wretches to be thus invited to feast with the Lords of Hosts? Can we have a
plainer Symbol of his favor, than thus to be treated as his dear friends? 2.
But it is not an ordinary Feast, for it is a Feast upon the Body and blood of
Christ, which was the great Sin-offering. Now it was not lawful of old for any
(...)^ Porph. de abst. l. 4. Sect. 44.
to taste of the Expiatory Sacrifices, because those offerings could not wholly
abolish sin, nor remove the anger of God; he was not so perfectly reconciled by
them, as to give back the Offerers any part, on which they might feast with
him: But by the perfect oblation of Jesus Christ, it is evident, that the
divine Justice is fully satisfied, and therefore the flesh and blood of Christ,
is by God given back to us in Sacrament, that we may eat thereof before him,
and thereby be assured, that he will remember our sins no more: but this is
more largely described by others. 3. It will further appear to be a pledge of
Gods infinite love to us, if we consider, who it is that in this holy Rite he
gives to us, even Jesus Christ his dearly beloved Son. May we not say (as God
to Abraham, Genesis 22.12.) Now know we that thou love us, because thou have not
withheld thy Son, thy only Son from us: And justly may we argue with St. Paul,
Romans 8.32. He that has given us his own Son, how shall he not with him also
freely give us all things (...); Chrysostom. in Romans
? when he has given the greatest and best to us, to make us his Friends, shall
he deny us any lesser matters when we are reconciled? We may be confident there
is nothing which God values more highly than his own dear Son, and that his
design in giving him to us in this Sacrament, is, to be a testimony, how
infinitely he loves us, and how earnestly he desires our Salvation. 4. That
which adds weight to all the former is, the consideration of the Giver, who is
the God of truth, and is most sincere in all his dealings with us, so that we
may be assured of all imaginable reality on his part. And now how should it
fill our minds with joy, that we have such a pledge of his favor Non tam dono
lata est quam abs te datum -- id vero triumphat serio. Terent. Eun. 3.11. At
illa quanto gratiora sunt quantoque in partem interiorem animi descendunt, cum
delectant cogitantem magis a quo quam quid acceperit? Sen. de ben. l. 1. Sect.
15.
who is Almighty in power, and governs all the World, whose goodness fills
Heaven and Earth with joy. Were the gift never so mean, that were bestowed in
token of his favor and goodness, it ought to be esteemed above all things;
therefore let us thus acknowledge our gratitude for so excellent a gift, upon
so blessed an account, from so glorious a Majesty.

An Act of acknowledgment. Part. I. There are many O Lord, who are most
importunate to obtain thy favor, and unquiet till they receive some
testimonies thereof, and yet when their desires are granted, they are unmoved
and ungrateful. But I will endeavor to praise thee as heartily for these
manifestoes of thy love, as I desired them fervently. I acknowledge therefore
that I am full of wonder to find my self honored with the highest privileges,
and remarked with the most illustrious signals of thy endearing love; I begged
the mercy of gathering up the Crumbs under thy Table, and behold thou have
placed me among thy servants, and fed me with the choicest of thy preparations;
thou have offered unto me a Crucified Savior with all his merits and graces,
which is so great an assurance of thy good will toward me, that it were folly
and impudence to suspect it: O Lord thou have showed this token upon me for
good, that all my Enemies may see it and be ashamed; for all the Powers of
darkness are confounded to behold me a poor despised wretch, whose ruin they
gaped for every moment, thus to be made a Guest at thy Table, and treated as
one of thy dearest Children, or best beloved Friends: I will not be proud of
this honor because I did not deserve it, but I will rejoice in it, and bless
thy name for it, because it has revived my hope, and cheared my drooping Soul,
and I am persuaded this fresh testimony of thy favor shall engage me to love
thee with an unalterable affection: There was nothing in the World I desired in
comparison of thy Love, nor could I have wished a more certain pledge of it,
than thy Son and my Savior. Welcome O my dearest Redeemer, for thy own sake,
and thrice welcome as thou art the evidence of thy Heavenly Fathers love to me a
miserable Sinner. I will acknowledge it with delight as I am able at present,
and my whole life hereafter shall show, how deep a sense I have of this
inestimable goodness, and when life and breath does fail, it shall be the
subject of my Eternal Hallelujahs. Amen.

. 5. And that we are very members incorporate in the mystical Body of thy Son,
which is the blessed Company of all faithful people.] The second happiness
assured by this Holy Eucharist, is, that we are thereby united to Jesus, so as
to have fellowship with him, 1 John 1.3. and in St. Paul's phrase we do thereby
become members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bone, Ephesians. 5.30. for he
gives us himself to be our food, with intent that he may be one with us and we
with him Hoc Sacramentum ideo nobis datum est, ut Corpus Ecclesiae Christi in
terris cum Capite quod est in coelis coadunetur. Aug. Sermon. 8. ad fratr. in
Eremo.
. As some have made their Leagues of friendship by drinking each others blood,
thereby intending to sympathize, and as it were to mingle Souls; and since we
have been fed with that food, with which God feeds his dearest Children, and
have participated of that spirit which quickens the great mystical Body of
Christ, 1 Cor. 12.9. we may infer that we are living Members of the true Church
also: Let us therefore solace our selves with reflecting upon the happiness of
our present Estate. How little (says the Philosopher) should we be troubled
with care or fear if we were of the Imperial Family (...); Arr. in Epic. l. 1.
c. 8.
, and shall not our relation to God, and our Union with Jesus, cheer us much
more? What can he want that has such a Father and Friend? what can hurt him
who has such a Protector? how can he die whose life is hid with Christ in God?
Again, is it not an excellent felicity to be admitted to the blessed Society of
Apostles and Prophets, Saints and Martyrs, and to have an interest in the
Prayers, and a share in the hopes of all the excellent persons now in the
World? That pious Emperor professed he esteemed himself more happy in being a
Member of Christ's Church, than in being head of the Roman Empire; and if we
duly apprehend the favor which we have now received, we may thus express our
gratitude.

An Act of acknowledgment. Part. II. I bless thee with all my Soul, O my God,
for that thou were pleased to make me (who was by nature a Limb of Satan) to be
a Member of Christ and of his Church by Baptism, and yet when I had forfeited
that blessing by my transgressions, thou have admitted me to a nearer Union
with Jesus in these holy mysteries, than ever my Soul knew before; so that now
thou imputest my offenses to him, and communicatest his merits and graces unto
me. Alas what am I that I should eat of that meat and drink of that Cup with
which thou have feasted holy Souls, and entertained thy best beloved ones? My
unworthiness would tempt me to suspect the reality of such a favor, but I hope
thou will abundantly convince me, by granting that thy grace may work in me in
the same manner as it has done in thy Saints and Servants in all Ages,
producing in me eminent and exemplary virtues, and a plentiful increase of all
good works; so that following the steps of Jesus, and the Examples of his holy
ones, this now begun Union may be perfected, when I shall be entirely joined to
my glorious head and glorified Brethren, and make one in the Celestial Choire
to sing thy praise. Amen.

. 6. And are also Heirs through hope of thine Everlasting Kingdom, by the
merits of the most precious Death and Passion of thy dear Son.] The third
benefit which worthy Receivers have by this Sacrament is, that it does consign
them to a blessed immortality, and this follows from the former, it being
impossible any true Member of Christ should be left for ever in the Grave,
since the Head lives, the Members shall live also, John 6.54. Hence the
Fathers called it an Antidote against Death (...). Ignat. ep. ad Ephesians.
, and the means to make us partakers of our Lords immortality Clem. Alexandr.
paedag. l. 5.
. For Jesus does not only here refresh the Soul with a present Communication of
his graces, but does here Seal that Covenant also, one condition of which is,
that he will bring it to his glory: And therefore as Wax is little worth in it
self, yet when sealed and annexed to a Deed, by which an Estate is secured, it
is highly valued; so also whilst Carnal Persons discern nothing but common
Bread, and accordingly receive it in a careless or formal manner, the Devout
Communicant by Faith sees it stamped with the impress of Jesus, and receives it
with great joy, as the seal of that Covenant and Testament, by which the
Kingdom of Heaven is made over unto him: It does not put us into the Possession
of it at present, but it secures it to us in Reversion, and makes us Heirs in
hope, and that not in the vain uncertain hopes which Wordly men deceive
themselves withal Spes nomen incerti boni. Sen. ep. 10. ita est in humanis, at
in divinis nomen boni certissimi. Vid. Romans 5.5. Chap. 10.11.
, but it is a hope that will never fail nor make us ashamed, because it is
grounded upon the Truth of God, and upon the merits of the most precious Death
of Jesus Christ. God has promised it, and Christ has purchased it, so that
those who are beloved by God, and Redeemed by Jesus, cannot be excluded from
it. Our Lord (says St. Bernard) has a double right to this Kingdom, the one
by Inheritance as he is the Son of God, and that is sufficient for himself; the
other by purchase as he is our Savior, and this he here bequeaths to us: If
our hopes were built upon our own merits they might deceive us, but they are
founded upon the merits of the Sacrifice of Jesus now commemorated; let us
therefore with a firm Faith, and a mighty joy, receive from the hands of God
this pledge of a glorious immortality: And when we remember that it was our
Lusts which were the Death of this our dearest Lord, who has made over this
Inheritance to us, we must believe it to be our duty, as we are Heirs to his
Kingdom, to be the Avengers of his blood, or else the Law esteems us unworthy
of the inheritance Numb. 35.21. 2 Kings 14.5. Apud Abyssinos homicida traditur
ad propinquos interfecti, ut vindictam sumant. Bodin. method. histor. Indignus
censetur haereditate qui interfecti necem vindicare negligit. L. de haered. 17.
ff. de his quae. Cum tibi sint fratres, fratres ulciscere laesos: Ovidius.
. Let us therefore crucify them all on his Cross, and utterly destroy all our
Lusts, with great fury, when we remember the barbarous outrage they have
committed upon him, from whom our Title to the Kingdom of Heaven does descend:
which resolution together with our grateful acknowledgment, may be thus made.

An Act of acknowledgment. Part. III. Most merciful Jesus, although thou
reservest the f^ll manifestations of thy love to my Soul, till the glorious
Resurrection, yet as if thou were impatient of so long a stay, thou have sealed
at present thy gracious donative, and my comfortable Title to a never-fading
Crown. Thou have dearly bought it for me, and thou have freely given it to me:
wherefore I will vigorously endeavor after it, patiently wait for it, and
cheerfully expect it. Ah my dearest Savior, I am here vexed with Crosses,
oppressed with Enemies, troubled with corruptions, and tossed on the waves of a
thousand sins and miseries: But it is my comfort amidst all these sorrows, to
receive this assurance that I shall ere long be translated into a blissful
state, never to know sin or feel pain, to be in danger of Enemies, or fear of
Evil any more: Oh how it enlightens my heart and makes my spirit vigorous to
foresee the rest and peace, the joy and pleasure, to which I am consigned? the
glorious Society that waits for me? Oh how welcome shall be that blessed hour
that summons me to enter into the joy of my Lord? And whilst I stay I will
behave my self O my Savior! as the Heir of thy Kingdom, for I will destroy all
Murderers, be they harbored in the most private retirements of my Soul, I
will pluck these Lusts from thence, for they have crucified thee, and they
would still exclude me from those felicities which thou have offered to me.
Lord I will hate every thing that keeps me from Heaven, and love nothing but
what may further me in my way thither. I am resolved (by the help of thy grace)
to live as one that is above all the trifling pleasures and sorrows of this
lower World; and I hope to demean my self as an Heir of Glory, as one designed
to be a Companion of Angels, and to partake of thy bliss for ever and ever.
Amen. So be it.

. 7. And we most humbly beseech thee O Heavenly Father, so to assist us with
thy grace, that we may continue in that holy Fellowship, and do all such good
works as thou have prepared for us to walk in.] That goodness which has
bestowed so many and great favors upon us, has encouraged us to ask more Ex
perceptione praeteritorum munerum firma fit expectatio futurorum. Bern. de temp.
. And since we learn from St. John 1 Ep. 1. Chap. ver. 6. that we can have no
fellowship with Jesus if we walk in darkness, and since St. Paul assures us,
Ephesians. 2.10. that the end of our Regeneration through Christ is, that we may do
those good works which God has prepared for us to walk in: Therefore the
Church has taught us in the next place to pray for such grace as may testify
the truth of our Union with Jesus, and preserve the good things which we have
received: and in vain have we taken these pledges of love, in vain have we
sought to be united to Christ and his mystical Body, in vain are all our hopes
of Heaven, unless we do hereafter persevere, and bring forth good fruits Et
fides ipsa, ut nativitas non accepta, sed custodita vivificat. Cypr. Non
quaeruntur in Christianis initia, sed finis. Hieron.
. We were fed with this Heavenly food, not to fatten us with pride, but to
strengthen us for our journey, this being given us as a Viaticum or repast to
make us travel more cheerfully in our way to the Heavenly Canaan Vt Pascha
Hebraeis, ante iter per desertum. Exodus 12.10, 11. unde Philoni (...) dicitur.
Sacrificia propter viam, vide, apud Macrob. Saturn. lib. 2. c. 2.
. There was no other reason of Gods renewing us, and giving us new favors, but
only that we might walk in newness of life. Now because we cannot either
continue in this blessed Society, or do good works agreeable thereto, without
the help of Gods grace, we must most humbly beseech our Heavenly Father, who
knows our necessity, constantly and plentifully to assist us with his Grace,
that we may be such as Jesus is, and do so as the Saints have done to whom we
are united. He is a root full of all sweetness, and they all bring forth much
fruit who are engrafted in him, so that if we be barren of good works, we are
dead Branches, and have no true Communion with Christ, or our Brethren: Pray we
then with all possible fervency that we may never be cut off from this blessed
Society, nor want that grace which consolidates the Union. O what honor and
advantage, what pleasure and reward shall we have by our perseverance! Let not
sinful vanities entice us to leave this sweetness, let not the difficulty of
obedience, the fear of sufferings, nor the terrors of Death affright us from
it; but let us go on in the path which God has marked out, both for us and all
good Christians to walk in, so shall we come to the same blessed end, even
Everlasting Glory. But because so many men fancy their duty to be at an end, as
soon as they have praised God, made fair promises, and prayed unto him for his
Grace, and so grow remiss Improbus quoad metuit omnia est promissurus,
simulatque timere defierit similis est futurus sui. Cicer. 2 Phil:
yea and profane afterward, to the great scandal of this Sacrament, and the
ruin of their own Souls; We must now show that it is necessary we should
practice as well as promise Coneordet sermo cum vita, ille promissum suum
implevit, qui and cum videas illum and cum audias idem est. Sen. ep. 75.
, and endeavor after, and exercise the grace of God, as well as pray for it Et
oratione operatio, and operatione fulciatur oration. Hieron. in Thren. 3.41.
; or else all our Petitions are Hypocrisy Tanta sollicitudine petere audebis
quod in te positum recusabis? Tertul. Interdum enim obnixe petimus quod
recusaremus si quis offerret. Sen. ep. 95.
, and our carelessness will show we did but mock the Almighty all the while: Let
us therefore seriously lay to heart, 1. The sin and danger of basely relapsing.
2. Let us learn the means of a blessed perseverance. 1. The Sin appears by
these Considerations.

1. It is apparent folly and madness for us to cast away those hopes and
comforts which we have obtained with so much pains (...). Arrian. in Epic. l. 2.
, merely by inconsideration, or to please a base Lust, so that the Scripture
compares such to bruit Beasts Jerem. 8.6. 2 Pet. 2.21. Psalm. 49. ult.
. And verily Man being advanced to this honor, and yet not understanding and
valuing it, is worse than the Beasts that perish, for nothing is more brutish
than to lose peace of Conscience, the love of God, and the hopes of Heaven, for
the short and miserable pleasures of sin.

2. It is most base ingratitude to the goodness of God, and the love of Jesus,
to part with these tokens of the divine favor so easily. It was censured as an
infamous Act in that Epicurean Philosopher (whom Athenaeus speaks of l. 5.) who
having obtained of the Syrian King the privilege to wear a Purple Robe, and a
Golden Coronet, and to be styled the Priest of Virtue; gave all these soon
after to his Courtezan, and she was seen publicly wearing the Ensigns of his
Honor: Yet it is far baser so cheaply to give up the Testimonies of Heavens
Love; How vile a wretch is he, that when his wounds are healed, and his Peace
made with God, will tear them open again, and renew the breach so lately made
up? What can be more horrid than to throw those Souls wilfully into the
Portion of Devils, which Jesus has with so much sweat and blood rescued from
thence?

3. It is the immediate way to utter destruction, for what can save such an
one, who is so desperately in love with sin, that no mercy can oblige him to
leave it, no vows hold him from it? And as those who at their Baptism were
dispossessed of evil Spirits, upon their return to iniquity, were (as St. Cyprian
notes) possessed again Recedente siquidem disciplina recessit and gratia. Cypr.
ep. 75.

Ingens periculum ad deteriora redeundi. Sen. ep. 72. Math. 12.45.


: So we may be assured, the Devil will with more strength return upon those who
do wilfully or carelessly relapse after this sacred Communion, and they will
become more wicked, and more hardened than ever. And why should God withhold
such a person from destruction, who despises his favor, and is weary of the
Company of Jesus, and longs to be in a state of Evil. To this might be added,
that to fall off now, will show that the whole Duty was feigned and
hypocritical, and will cause God scarce ever to be willing to give us grace
again, if we thus abuse this; and it will show we hate the ways of God when we
cannot endure to be tied to them. But I hope this will suffice to convince us
of the sin and danger of not continuing in this fellowship, and of neglecting
to do those good works which God requires; Wherefore to assist our resolutions
of perseverance, let us observe carefully these few directions.

1. Immediately after we return from the Lords Table, we must not entertain any
business or Company, until we have first seriously considered the happiness of
our present Estate, as to the comfort, the hopes, and the peace which we now
feel, and then to consider the folly and the danger of quitting so desirable a
condition, and this we must meditate upon until we see it is our wisdom, our
interest, and greatest advantage to continue in this blessed Society, and these
good ways, where we may be so easy, so safe, and so rewarded; For many part
with their comfort before they ever considered the value thereof.

2. Be sure immediately to beg of God (as this Petition teaches) the
assistance of his Grace, to which purpose the annexed form may be used; and to
excite our devotion, let us sadly reflect upon our former backslidings, and
that we have the same frail nature Multos impedit a firmitate praesumptio
firmitatis: Aug. de verb. Dom. 13.
, our Enemies the same power and policy, and greater malice still: and if we
can pray heartily for grace to be good, it is a great assurance that we do
sincerely desire to be good Justa vita cum volumus adest, quia ipsum plane
velle justitia est. August. ep. 45.
. And it is the beginning of grace to wish earnestly for it Vt ergo desideremus
adjutorium gratiae hoc ipsum quoque opus est gratiae, ipsa namque incipit
infundi, ut incipiat posci: idem.
. Yea we serve such a Master as will be pleased, if we do what we can, and ask
of him what we cannot do, though we do not all we should: Only it must be
remembered that we must not only pray for perseverance just now, but every day
of our life also afterward.

3. Let us presently begin to do these good works, and to perform our Vows,
while our hearts are warm with these flames, for to morrow we shall be less
able, and perhaps less willing, and if we go not forward we shall go backward
Vnum e duobus necesse erit aut semper proficere aut prorsus deficere. Bern.
diverse. 36.
. And by doing Acts of Religion and Virtue, that will be pleasant and easy
which was thought difficult Quem unquam ista destituere tentantem, cui non
faciliora in Actu apparuere? Non quia difficilia sunt non audemus, sed quia non
audemus difficilia, Senec. ep. 104.
, only because we had not tried it: Besides, by denying our desires once or
twice, we shall perceive how much easier and sweeter it is to deny a Lust, than
to satisfy it; and by the success of these first attempts, we shall both give
Experiment of the grace received, and have somewhat wherewith to upbraid our
Souls afterward, if we grow remiss.

4. When we feel our zeal to cool, our devotion to decay, when we find our
selves less sensible of former sins, and that we begin to abate of our
watchfulness and care, we must renew our Addresses to these Mysteries, for if
we receive this Sacrament carefully and often, it is the best means to make us
persevere, and so it must never be omitted too long together.

A Supplication for the Grace of Perseverance. Blessed Jesus the Author and
finisher of our Faith, who art the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; thou
have given spiritual meat to those that fear thee, and wilt ever be mindful of
thy Covenant; But my goodness is as a Morning Cloud which soon passes, my
devotion flees like a shadow, and never continues in one stay. O do thou
establish me with thy free spirit, that I may not so easily forfeit my Comfort,
forget my Duty, and break my Vows as I have formerly done: How unwearied art
thou dearest Savior in doing well unto me? how constant in thy love? how
amiable and attractive are thy endless and unalterable Mercies? And shall I be
so ungrateful to thee, and so Cruel to my self, to forsake thee and my own
happiness. Alas I justly suspect my own weakness, I fear the power and policy
of my Enemies, I do with shame and sorrow call to mind my former returns to
folly, and I do most passionately entreat thee not to leave me to my self: I
have through thy goodness now obtained some measures of peace and comfort, my
eyes are enlightened, my heart is revived, my hopes are quickened, and my
purposes seem to be sincere. O grant that I may be as careful to keep these, as
I have been earnest to obtain them, that when I find the pleasure of thy
service, I may be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord. And I beseech thee give me constant and continual supplies of thy Grace,
that I may be able to perform whatsoever I have promised, and let not
forgetfulness or indevotion seize upon me hereafter. Let me hold fast that
which I have, and daily strive to gain more, and finally make me faithful to
the Death, so shall I receive the Crown of Life, for he that endures to the
end shall be saved: Amen.

. 8. Through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be
all honor and glory, World without end. Amen.] There is a mighty efficacy in
the name of Jesus, used by a devout Soul that has lately beheld the
Commemoration of his great Atonement. Through him we beg this Grace therefore.
And to him, together with the Father and the blessed Spirit, we offer up all
honor and glory, for the favors imparted to us in this Communion, which but
just now we did acknowledge; and these Prayers and Praises we have cause to
sign with an unfeigned, Amen. For we need the grace desired, and the blessed
Trinity deserves the glory ascribed, wherefore we say Amen. So be it: But of
this we have spoken before.

The Paraphrase of the second Prayer.
O Lord who art ever able, and always ready to help thy servants; being an
[Almighty and everliving God] whose power and mercy can never fail: [We] thy
poor Creatures, according to our bounden duty do [most heartily thank] and most
unfeignedly praise [thee for that] of thy infinite pity and bounty [thou do
vouchsafe] at this thy holy Table [to feed us, who have] with penitence and
Faith, devoutly and [duly received these holy Mysteries]: For therein thou have
refreshed our Souls [with the spiritual] and most desirable [food] of life,
thou have made us Partakers by Faith, [of the most precious Body, and] of the
most holy [blood of thy Son, our Savior Jesus Christ] which was offered for
the Redemption of the whole World.

We acknowledge, O Lord, that besides the present comfort of this inestimable
gift, thou have convinced us [And do assure us thereby of] that which (though
we do not deserve, yet) we esteem above all things, even [thy favour] thy
gracious designs [and goodness toward us] poor Sinners: And further, by this
holy Rite thou have declared us thy Children [and that we are very] certainly,
living [Members incorporate in] and united unto [the mystical Body of thy Son]
even thy Holy Church [which is the blessed Company] which are redeemed,
reconciled, and sanctified by Jesus, consisting [of all faithful People] in
whose Prayers, Privileges, and hopes we have now a happy interest, [And are
also] together with those thy servants, by this Seal of thy Covenant [made
Heirs through hope] already, [of thy Everlasting Kingdom] which was purchased
[by the Merits of the most precious Death and Passion of thy Dear Son] whose
sufferings are set forth, and the benefits of them conveyed to us in this
Sacrament.

[And] now lest we should lose these blessings again, by relapsing to folly as
we have formerly done [We most humbly] and earnestly [beseech thee O Heavenly
Father] for thy mercy sake [so] constantly and powerfully [to assist us with
thy grace] in all our endeavors to perform our Obligations and our Vows [that
we may continue] for ever [in that holy fellowship] with thy Son, and thy
Saints, to which thou have admitted us; [And do all such good works] of Mercy,
Piety, and Virtue [as thou hast] by the direction of thy holy Word [prepared
for us to walk in] who have professed our selves to be thy Servants.

All which we beg [through] the most powerful intercession of [Iesus Christ our
Lord] by whom we have received these and all other Mercies [To whom] therefore,
[with thee] O Father Almighty [and the Holy Ghost] three Persons and one God,
let there [be all honor and glory] ascribed, both now and [World without end.]
Amen. Be it so.

SECT. IV. Of the Gloria in Excelsis, or the Angelick Hymn.
. 1. TO conclude this Office with an Hymn is so direct an imitation of our
Saviors practice, Math. 26.30. that it is observed in all Churches, and has
been used in all Ages: And although the forms may differ, yet this is as
Ancient as any now Extant. The former part of it is of an Heavenly Original,
and was sung by the Angels at our Lords Nativity, Luke 2.14. and it seems from
thence it was transcribed into the Oriental Liturgies, for it is thrice
repeated in that of St. James. The latter part is by Hug. de S. Victor. l. 2.
said to be composed by St. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers, but by Rabanus Maurus
(who lived 200. years before the said Hugo) it is ascribed to Telesphorus about
the year of Christ 139. Certain it is, that it was added by the Ecclesiastical
Doctors (as we are informed by the fourth Council of Toledo Council. Tolet. IV.
Can. XII.
celebrated about 1000. years ago) and yet those are accursed by that Council
who shall reject this, or the Gloria Patri, or other Hymns, because they are
not verbatim in the Scripture, for (as is there well noted) upon that pretense
we might reject the most part of the Church Offices: It is also to be noted,
that (with very little difference) we find this Hymn in Clement's
Constitutions, l. 17. cap. 48. so that it is likely to have been of very
ancient use in the Western Church: And whereas in the present Roman Missal it
stands in the beginning of this Office, it is much more properly placed by our
Liturgy here in the end of the Communion; for every devout Communicant is now
even full of gratitude, and longs for an opportunity to pour out his Soul in
the praises of God, and how fit this Hymn is for that purpose, the Analysis and
following discourse will show.

The Analysis of the Angelick Hymn, or Gloria in Excelsis.
. 2. The Angelick Hymn has Two Parts. 1. The Angels Song, acknowledging, 1.
The Effect of Christ's Death, 1. Above, Glory be to God on High, and
2. Below, in Earth Peace,

2. The moving Cause of it, good will toward Men.

2. A Descant upon it, by 1. A Glorification of the Father, expressing, 1. The
Manner how we offer this Praise, We praise thee, we bless thee, we worship
thee, we glorify thee, we give thanks unto thee,
2. The Reason why, for thy great Glory,
3. The Person to whom, O Lord God, Heavenly King, God the Father Almighty.

2. A Supplication to the Son, who is 1. Confessed in his Titles, O Lord, the
only begotten Son, Jesus Christ, O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father,
2. Invocated by his 1. Office, to 1. Pardon, that take away the sins of the
World, have mercy upon us: Thou that take away, etc. have mercy, etc.
2. Hear us, Thou that take away the sins of the World, receive our Prayer.

2. By his Glory also, to pardon us, Thou that sit at the right hand of the
Father, have mercy upon us.


3. A Doxology to him also, together with the whole Trinity, For thou only art
Holy, thou only art the Lord; thou only, O Christ, with the Holy Ghost, art
most High in the Glory of God the Father, Amen.



A Practical Discourse upon the Gloria in Excelsis.
. 3. Glory be to God on high, on Earth Peace and good will toward men.] This
blessed Hymn the Church has learned from that Heavenly Choire which came to
celebrate our Lords Nativity, Luke 2.16. And since we have tasted the
Celestial Manna, and fed upon Angels food, it is fit we should join with them
in singing the praises of their Lord and ours; and as one of the Angelick Order
first began, and then a multitude of the Heavenly Host united their Voices: so
it was the Custom Angelicum posthaec sacrifex pater incipit hymnum, Inceptum
complet vociferando Chorus. Hildebert. Conoman. Episc.
of old for the Priest first to begin, and then all the Communicants to
complete the Harmony of this divine Anthem. It was first endited to set forth
the happy effects of that Redemption, which Jesus did undertake at his Birth,
and it does declare that it caused Glory to be given to God in Heaven, and made
Peace for poor Sinners on Earth, because it did engage the good will of the
Almighty toward Men; But all this was but expected and prophesied of then,
whereas now when the Merits of this Redemption are really and effectually
communicated to Penitent Souls in this Sacrament, those things are all
performed and accomplished, so that the worthy Receivers, have juster cause now
than ever, to sing Glory to God, in the highest note, who dwells in the
highest place (...) aliquando excellentissime: Math. 21.9. hoc loco terrae
opponitur: Grot.
, for he has now done us the highest favor, in making such Peace on Earth
Deus nobis haec otia fecit. Virg.
, and giving such testimonies of his good will toward us; No doubt the blessed
Spirits above, who sing at the Conversion of one Sinner, do give glory to God
in the highest now, when he has sealed his Covenant of Peace with so many; and
when they behold us all at peace one with another, and rejoicing in these
pledges of the divine favor: The Church rejoices to see so many poor Souls
revived with the hopes of Mercy Gaudet Ecclesia redemptione multorum, and
adstare sibi familiam candidatam spirituali exultatione laetatur. Ambros. de
Sacr. l. 5. c. 3.
, every heart is full of joy, and every Tongue is ready to bless the Lord for
this happy reconciliation; Oh let us strive to sing the Praises with an
Angelick Spirit, that so they above and we below, may make a lovely Concord,
and if our Devotion cannot rise to the same note, yet let our sincerity keep us
in an agreeable Key, and for the help of our affections, let us thus meditate.

O my Soul behold and blush to see the Angels who are almost unconcerned, sing
for thy felicity, while thou art silent and unmoved. The Heaven is calm above
thee, the Earth is quiet round about thee, and thy God has testified his good
will unto thee. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, admire and celebrate the Love of
Jesus, and the efficacy of that Sacrifice which has filled Heaven with Glory,
Earth with Peace, and all the World with Comfort. O ye Celestial Powers, it is
my concern to magnify him to whom you pay these Praises, for I have received
those Mercies which are the cause of your Joy; Wherefore I will join with you
and bless my God in the highest strain, and I will pray that I may extol him
more highly. O let all the Lords redeemed on Earth, and all the glorious
Spirits of Heaven, unite their Voices, till all the World do resound with his
Praise, who has restored Peace to us, and showed such good will unto men:
Hosanna in the highest.

. 4. We praise thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, we glorify thee, we give
thanks unto thee, for thy great glory, O Lord God, Heavenly King, God the
Father Almighty.] Having before propounded the subject of our Praises, we now
begin to descant upon it; and first we glorify the Father Almighty, to whom
the former Praises are primarily directed: And although we are taught with many
words to express our gratitude and our joy, yet none can censure this as a vain
repetition, because it is done in imitation of those Celestial Hymns recorded
in the Revelations, viz. Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and
Honor, and Power, and might be, etc. Revel. 7.12. and the like, Chap. 5.13. as
also, because every word here used is highly pertinent, and has its peculiar
and proper signification (...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
Philem. Poet. Graec.

. We praise God by setting forth his Greatness; we bless him by declaring his
goodness; we worship him with our Bodies, we glorify him with our mouth, we
give him thanks with our hearts, for the great glory which he has gotten to
himself by these his Mercies toward us: And further, the adding so many words
does well express the vehemence of our affections, and show that we are so full
of admiration and delight, that we know not well with what words to signify
the pleasure which we feel within us: And whilst we are repeating so many
Phrases, let our Souls be enlarged in comfortable reflections upon the goodness
of God, and then we shall not object against their number, but find a new
motion in our minds, to comply with every one of these Eucharistical words, and
use every one of them with devotion.

O God the Father of Heaven, whose mercy is over all the World, I am infinitely
pleased to behold the glory, and to hear the Praises, which thou have gotten by
thy mercy to poor Sinners, and I could even pour out my Soul in the
manifestation of that joy which my heart conceives, at thy so universal
Honor: Wherefore I will praise thee by acknowledgments, and bless thee with
Hymns; I will worship thee with the lowest reverence, and glorify thee in the
highest note; yea I will give thanks unto thee with all my Soul, for thy Pity,
and thy Patience, thy Mercy and long-suffering, thy Bounty and Loving Kindness
toward thy unworthy yet miserable Creatures; And as all men do share in thy
goodness I hope they will join in thy Praises, in singing that Song of the
Lamb, which is to be the subject of eternal Hallelujahs; Praise and Blessing,
Honor, Glory, and Thanksgiving, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, for
ever and ever. Amen.

. 5. O Lord the only begotten Son Jesus Christ, O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of
the Father, that take away the Sins of the World, Have mercy upon us. Thou
that take away the Sins of the World, Have mercy upon us. Thou that take
away the sins of the World, receive our Prayer. Thou that sit at the right
hand of the Father, have mercy upon us.] As the Father is the Object, so the
Son is the Subject of the Angelick Praises; wherefore in the next place, we are
to glorify him, who is remembered, and represented, given by God, and received
by us in this Mystery. It is usual at the Entertainment of great Princes by a
Herald to proclaim their Names, Style, and Titles, with great solemnity: Even
so the pious Soul which has now received her dearest Lord, does with a mighty
pleasure repeat all the names belonging to his Person, to his Nature, and his
Offices; and thereby declare, the Majesty and Glory, the Mercy and Goodness of
him whom she has now accepted for her Lord and King. And whilst we are setting
out his glories, we do also invocate him by all these honorable and endearing
Names, that he will employ his Power, his Interest, and Merits, to make our
Persons and our Prayers acceptable. We behold him dying for the sins of all the
World, and we cannot but beseech him to grant our Pardon; We discern him
sitting at the right hand of the Father, interceeding for us, and thereby we
are encouraged to beseech him to pity our miseries, and accomplish our
desires; His glory and our necessity makes us beg this with ingeminated cries,
and a redoubled importunity, saying (as he once in his Agony did) the very same
words: And thus we do at once provide for our own relief, and do honor to the
Blessed Jesus; for this part is so contrived, that it is a Confession of our
Faith, an acknowledgment of his Glory, a Prayer and a Tanksgiving all in one,
and thus we may reduce it to a practical Meditation.

How shall we express thy welcome into our Souls? Blessed Jesus! or how shall we
celebrate thy praise? We will remember what thou art in thy self, and what thou
have done for us, for thou art glorious enough in thy own perfections. O thou
Eternal and only begotten Son of God, equal to the Father, who art thy self
both Lord and God, How lovely art thou, O thou innocent Lamb of God, encircled
with millions of redeemed Souls whom thou have washed in thy blood! O how
illustrious a brightness shines round about thee, whilst thou art in the midst
of all thy happiness, interceding for poor Sinners! I adore thee, and long to
do thee honor, and I delight to see all the Angels of Heaven worshipping thee,
my Lord and my God. Have thou merited so much on Earth, and have thou so much
glory in Heaven, sweetest Savior! then sure I cannot perish. Behold how many
poor Souls are prostrate before thee, admiring and publishing the merits of thy
Death, and the power of thy intercession; hear our importunate Supplications,
and help us all, therefore, O Lord, that we may be able by experience to
proclaim thy goodness. Amen.

. 6. For thou only art holy, thou only art the Lord, thou only O Christ with
the Holy Ghost art most high, in the glory of God the Father. Amen.] This
Phrase [ thou only art holy] with some others in this Hymn, are taken out of
the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb, Revel. 15.4. as that [thou only art the
Lord] is from the first Ep. Tim. 6.15. (...). Apoc. 15.4. Vulg. Solus Pius es.
-- (...), 1 Timoth. 6.15. Non quod non aliis is titulus aliquo sensu tribuatur,
sed quia hoc quicquid est a Deo venit. Grot. in 1 Timothy (...). Responsor ad
Quaest. Graec.
. There are indeed holy Angels and Saints, and there are Lords many, 1 Cor.
8.5. Yet none of these have a propriety in this Title, because their holiness
is imperfect and derived; Only Jesus is Holy, in, and of himself, and of his
holiness all others do receive: He is Holy and Hallowed, because he halloweth
and sanctifies us, as the Liturgy of St. James paraphraseth it Solus tu
sanctus es, qui sanctificas, and sanctificaris: Liturg. S. Jacob.
. He only is that Lord (says St. Augustine Solus verus Dominus es qui Dominum
non habes. Aug. Confess. l. 10. c. 36.
) who has no other Lord above him; For he only with the Holy Ghost is equal to
the Father, God blessed for ever: And this is the reason why we exalt him so
highly, and pass by the Mediation of Saints and Angels, because none is so
holy, none so mighty, none so high in the favor of God, nor none so gracious
and loving to us, as Jesus is. This we do acknowledge therefore with all
possible joy and triumph, and it is a mighty rejoicing to our Spirits, that he
who has given himself for us, and is come to dwell with us, is so High and so
Magnificent: And while it does cheer our hearts to set forth his glory, our
Enemies are confounded. For while the Church triumphs the powers of darkness
tremble at the mention of his perfections: Let us then refresh our selves with
some such Meditation.

We have exalted thee O Lord as high as we can, and yet scarcely so high as
really thou art. We will apply our selves to thee only for Holiness, for thou
only art most Holy, we will seek for succor and protection from thee, for thou
art the supreme Lord of Lords, and we will not doubt of acceptance with our
Heavenly Father, because thou art a Partner in his Divinity, the highest
Favorite of the Celestial Court: Thou art the greatest and the best in Heaven
and Earth; and to my endless comfort, whatsoever thou art, thou have made thy
self mine, so that the greater thy glory is, the greater is my happiness, now
by Faith, hereafter by enjoyment: It Is true, I cannot see thee with my bodily
Eyes; but I admire and bless thee, I love thee with ecstasies of affection, for
thou art my Lord, and I am thy servant; I feel thy influence, and I believe thy
excellencies, so that I can rejoice in thee with joy unspeakable and full of
glory. Thou art the highest in thy Fathers favor, and in my esteem also, to
thee therefore with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, now
and for ever, Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Angelick Hymn.
. 7. O come let us join with the Heavenly Host, and sing Praises for the
Redemption wrought by Jesus, which brings so much [Glory to God] who dwells
[on high] from all the Saints and Angels: [and] which makes [on Earth] such a
blessed [Peace] by reconciling us all to God, and to one another; [and] which
also declares so great [good will] in the Almighty [towards Men] who had
perished eternally without his Mercy.

Holy Father, it is we that receive the benefit of this thy goodness, wherefore
[We praise thee] for the Power, and [we bless thee] for the mercy of this great
Salvation, [We worship thee] with our Bodies, and [we glorify thee] with our
Souls, for thou have redeemed them both. [We give thanks unto thee] with all
our hearts [for thy great glory] Which is given to thee by all the World. [O
Lord God] We acknowledge thou art our [Heavenly King] who have subdued our
Enemies; Thou art [God the Father Almighty] who have designed and brought about
this mavelous work.

We do also adore thee [O Lord] our Savior, remembering with delight, and
confessing with joy that thou art [the only begotten Son] of God [Iesu Christ]
the anointed Redeemer: And now [O Lord God] As thou art the most innocent [Lamb
of God] slain and sacrificed for our offenses, and as thou art the most dearly
beloved [Son of the Father, that] by thy holy Passion [takest away the sins of
the World] We entreat thee to [Have mercy upon us] and pity us: And again, we
beseech thee [Thou that take away the sins of the] whole [World] since we are
Sinners [Have mercy upon us] and forgive us: And once more we pray thee O [Thou
that take away the sins of the World] take away our sins, and [receive our
Prayer] which otherwise might be hindered by them: We know thou have the only
interest in Heaven, wherefore we do again beseech thee [Thou that sit in
great glory [at the right hand of the Father] that thou will [have mercy upon
us] and save our Souls.

To thee we make this application for pardon and acceptance, Blessed Jesus,
[for thou only art holy] in and from thy self. To thee we seek for succor, for
[thou only art the] supreme [Lord] of Lords [Thou only, O Christ] together
[with the Holy Ghost] the Comforter [art most high] in the favor, and a
Partner [in the glory of God the Father] constituting the holy and undivided
Trinity, which is blessed for ever. Amen.

SECT. V. Of the final Blessing.
. 1. OF the concluding the Ordinary Prayers with a blessing, we have discoursed
Comp. to the Temple, SECT. ult. But besides, it is apparent, that the people
were always dismissed from this Ordinance with a solemn Benediction, pronounced
by the Bishop when he was present Plebs -- ab Episcopo cum benedictione
mittatur. Council. Agath. can. 30.
, and in his absence by the Priest Populus non ante discedat quam Missae
solennitas compleatur, and ubi Episcopus non fuerit, Benedictionem accipiat
sacerdotis. Council. 3. Arelatens.
, yet so as none might depart till this was given by the one or the other:
Which Custom some would ground upon our Saviors practice, who after his last
eating with his Disciples, Luke 24.43. took his leave with a blessing, ver. 50.
The present form is taken out of holy Scripture, the first part is from Philip.
4.7. The latter part is a Christian Paraphrase upon the old form of Moses,
Numb. 6.24, 25, 26. for whereas the name of the [Lord] is thrice repeated
there, to note the Mystery of the Trinity, we have explained it by the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. And what is further observable, the following method will
declare.

The Analysis of the final Blessing.
Sect. 2. This Blessing contains a twofold wish. 1. For the Peace of God to
be in us, showing, -- 1. The Excellency thereof. The Peace of God which passes
all understanding,
2. The end for which it is desired. Keep your hearts and minds in the
knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

2. For the Blessing of God to be upon us, intimating, -- 1. Whence it must
proceed. And the blessing of God Alm^ghty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost,
2. How it is to be imparted. be amongst you, and remain with you always, Amen.



A Practical Discourse upon the final Blessing.
. 3. The Peace of God which passes all understanding, Keep your hearts and
minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.]
When St. Paul had directed us to make our addresses to God by Prayers,
Supplications, and Thanksgivings, Philip. 4.6. he immediately adds: And the
Peace of God -- shall keep your hearts, etc. ver. 7. So that he may seem to
have designed this to be a Conclusion for this very office. For we have now by
Prayers, Letany, and Eucharist Graec. (...). Phil. 4.7.
made our applications to the Divine Majesty. Wherefore the holy man by this
method, ought now to give us the Peace of God: We have begun in Piety, and
therefore we shall certainly end in Peace. Hence all Liturgies generally
conclude with the mention of Peace In pace Christi eamus. Lit. S. Jacob Reg.
MS. enim l^git (...). Phil. 4.7. (...). Chrysos. hom. de jejun. in Pasch. In
pace procedamus in nomine Domini. Lit. S. Basil.
. And there is not a more comprehensive blessing than Peace, nor a more
seasonable valediction after this Sacrament, whether we understand it of the
Peace which God has made with us, or of that which he requires of us. 1. If we
take it for the Peace which God has made with us, viz. for our Reconciliation
to him by Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. (...). Theophylac. in loc. Philip.
. and the internal Peace of Conscience following thereupon: It is so admirable
in it self, and it brings such comforts to the Soul which enjoys it, that it
not only surpasses all the gifts of Wisdom and Knowledge, but passes the
capacity of the highest Understanding to comprehend it: And whereas we do now
all pretend to know, and to love God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, the Minister
prays that we may find such comfort and delight in our Peace and Reconciliation
with God, that it may keep us firm and constant to this Knowledge and Love,
that it may win the affections of our hearts, and gratify the powers of our
Mind, so as to attract us to a further progress in the knowledge of so gracious
a God, and in the love of so dear a Savior. He prays that this Peace may make
us despise all the friendships of Sin, and engage us to seek after a further
acquaintance with God, and a nearer Union with Jesus Christ, so that we may
fall off no more to vanity when we have tasted these divine pleasures. 2. If we
take it for the Peace which God requires of us, viz. that Peace which (by his
command) we here make with our Brethren (which sense Theophylact also mentions)
it is very proper to wish that this Peace may keep our hearts also; For we are
all here joined in the Unity of the Spirit, and the Bond of Peace and Amity, as
a token whereof the Ancients finished these Mysteries with a kiss of Peace
(...). Justin. M. Apol. 2. Osculum Pacis, quod est signaculum orationis.
Tertul. de Or. Roman. 16.16.
, and supposed they had not received aright unless they all departed in mutual
Peace and Charity Quale sacrificium est, a quo sine Pace receditur. idem
Tertul. ibid.
. And this blessed Peace is both better than all gifts of understanding, and it
has a sweetness and pleasure in it that passes all Carnal knowledge, and none
can tell the delights of this Peace, but they that feel it. Wherefore when the
Minister sees you all united in this divine Peace, he prays that you may find
such comfort in this Amity and Concord, as to keep your hearts and minds firm
in loving that God who has made you all friends: That you may be so taken with
these paths of Peace, that you may desire to know more fully and to love more
fervently the God of Peace, and the Prince of Peace, who first directed you
into those bl^ss^d ways: In both Senses it is an apt and pious wish, that we
may not Apostatize nor fall of, and therefore we ought to join our own
Petitions to this Blessing, that so we may be constant to the end.

. 4 And the Bles^ing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
be amongst you, and remain with you always, Amen.] It is a principal part of
the Priests Office to bless the People in Gods name, Deuteronomy. 10.8. and he has
promised to bless those whom they bless, Number. 6. ver. 27. hereupon the Ancient
Christians departed not till the Priest had given them the Blessing Domine
benedic. Benedictio Domini super nos, semper, nunc and in secula seculorum.
Amen. in fine Liturg. S. Chrysostom.
. And the Congregation ought to receive it upon their knees as the Blessing of
their spiritual Father: And we are to believe it to be more than a bare Prayer,
because it not only begs but imparts a Blessing to those who are duly
qualified. We believe that God heard his Prayer in order to the Consecration of
the Elements, and why should we doubt of the efficacy of ^his Blessing
Benedicere populo non debet, qui Christum meruit consecrare? Hieron. ep. ad
Ruffin.
? We ought to believe that those whom Gods Minister blesses shall be Blessed,
and accordingly let us most fervently desire of God to ratify and confirm it:
For I assure you it is a most desirable thing: It is the blessing of God
Almighty which makes every thing to prosper; and particularly, it is the
Blessing of the Father as to our Preservation, the Blessing of the Son as to
our Pardon, the Blessing of the Holy Ghost as to our Sanctification; and all
this desired to be with us all at present, and to remain upon us for ever. O
happy Soul that receives this Benediction, what can such an one need or desire
more, than the Blessing of God and the favor of every Person in the Holy
Trinity, both now and for ever? and yet wheresoever the Peace of God has gone
before, this Blessing shall follow after: Receive it then with Faith and
thankfulness, and when you have done, worship and return home with joy, since
the Blessing of Heaven goes with you, and will never leave you so long as the
Peace of God does rule in your hearts, and may that be for ever. Amen.

The Paraphrase of the final Blessing.
. 5. Let the comfort which you find in [The Peace] and favor [of God] and the
sweetness of that amity made one with another [which passeth] and excels all
the gifts of knowledge, yea and surpasses [all understanding] to comprehend
it: Let this divine peace (I say) [keep] the affections of [your heart, and]
the powers of your [mind] firm and constant [in the knowledge, and] sincere in
the [love of God] our Father [and of his Son Jesus Christ] whom we have taken
to be [our Lord] and only Savior.

[And] let [the blessing] and favor [of God Almighty] which you all so much
need and desire: Even the Blessing of God [the Father] for your Preservation,
of God [the Son] for your Redemption, [and] of God [the Holy Ghost] for your
Sanctification: Let each of these at present [be amongst you, and] let them
[remain with you always] to your lives end. And may the Almighty say hereto
[Amen] and then it shall be so.

An Appendix of the Additional Prayers.
. 1. Lest there should be any thing left unasked in this excellent Office, the
Church has added six Collects more, to be used at the Ministers discretion:
Concerning which there is little to be said in the general, but that they are
plain and pious, and almost every sentence in them taken out of holy Scripture:
wherefore it will be sufficient, to give them their proper Titl^s, to manifest
on what occasion they may most fitly ^e us^d, as also to remark in the Margin
the places of Scripture, whereof they are composed, and finally by a brief
Paraphrase, to illustrate every particular.

I. A Prayer for Safety in all Worldly Changes.
. 2. When we apprehend any danger by reason of the sudden Changes, and sad
Accidents to which we and all the World are liable, there are two main
particulars which we are to beg of God for our security. 1. That he will always
assist our Prayers. 2. That he will direct us toward the right end. For so long
as we can pray fervently, and are going on in the right course to Heaven, we
are in no danger whatsoever may happen.

The Paraphrase of the first Prayer.
Be pleased to [Assist us] according to thy promise Romans 8.26.
, and and help us [Mercifully O Lord] that we may be sincere and devout [in
these] and all [our Supplications and Prayers] For we cannot be miserable so
long as we can fervently call upon thee: [And] thou that orderest every good
Man's going Psalm. 37 23
, order the Conversation Psalm. 50. ult.
and [Dispose the way Prove. 4. ult. ubi Vulg. and 70. addunt,
of] us who are [thy Servants] That we may Ipse autem rectos faciet cursus
tuos, itinera autem tua in pace producet.
still tend [toward the attainment of] our great end, even [Everlasting
Salvation:] for so long as we remain in the paths that lead thither, we are
safe: Wherefore do thou so direct us; [that among all the Changes] of this
uncertain World, and all the sad accidents [ and Chances Eccles. 9.11. Fortuna
est accidentium rerum subitus and inopinatus eventus. Lact Inst. l. 3. Sect. 29
] which may happen to us or any of thine Cuivis potest accidere quod cuiquam
potest. Pub. Sir.
in the course [of this mortal life] We and [they may] never presume or
despair; but [ever be defended] from all the mischiefs of those alterations,
[^y thy most gracious] Providence watching over us [and] thy [ready help]
afforded to us whenever we are in danger: All which we beg [through] the
prevailing Mediation of [Iesus Christ our Lord] who always interceeds for our
relief. [Amen.]

II. A Prayer for the Preservation of Body and Soul.
. 3. The former Prayer mentions the Evils from which we would be defended, this
declares what it is which we desire should be preserved; it is grounded upon
St. Paul's Prayer, 1 Thessal. 5.23. and may fitly be used when we fear or feel
any Temptation to Sin (as the other when we apprehended any danger.) For so
long as our hearts and bodies are kept in the ways of Righteousness, we may be
assured of universal, and continual safety.

The Paraphrase of the Second Prayer.
O Almighty Lord] Eternal [and Everlasting God] whose Power is infinite, and
always the same; Remember the frailty of us thy finite Creatures, and
[vouchsafe we beseech thee to] keep us wholly and throughout 1 Thessal. 5.23.
(...). Theophyl.
: [Direct] by thy Wisdom, [sanctifie] by thy grace [and govern] by thy
Providence [both] the affections of [our hearts] where sin is wont to begin
Spiritus enim dominatur, caro famulatur. Tertul. de Bapt.
, [and] the members of our [Bodies] by which it is too often accomplished:
Keeping them both [in the] right and pleasant [ways of thy Laws] assisting them
in the duties [and in the] holy and good [works of thy Commandments.] Let us
never stray from thy sure paths: so [that through thy most mighty Protection]
which is always over those that are exercised in well-doing, [Both here] in
this present life, [and ever] hereafter [We may be preserved] from all sin and
danger, and kept safe both [in Body and Soul] until we come to thy Kingdom:
Which we beg [through] his merits, who is [our Lord] to govern us [and] our
[Saviour] to deliver us, even for [Iesus Christ] his sake. Amen.

III. A Prayer for a Blessing upon the Word of God.
. 4. This short Collect is of excellent use, after the Sermon or Lessons in
public, as also when the Scripture has been read in private. And because it
is not the hearing of Gods word with our Ears, but the engrafting it in our
hearts, James 1.21. which makes it powerful to our Salvation, we ought always
after it to pray as here. 1. That it may take root in our hearts. 2. That it
may spring forth in our lives.

The Paraphrase of the third Prayer.
O Lord we have brought forth little fruit of all the excellent things which we
have hitherto heard, [Grant we beseech thee] therefore O [Almighty God] who
only give increase to this spiritual Seed 1 Corinthians. 3.6. Cathedram in coelo
habet, qui corda docet. Aug. in Ep. Johan.
, [That the words which we have heard this day] Preached or read out of holy
Scripture [with our outward Ears] which are so apt to let good things slip Nec
retinent patulae commissa fideliter aures. Pauci illam quam conceperunt mentem
domum perferre potuerunt: Sen. ep. 108.
, even that they [may through] the working of [thy Grace] which quickens all
things [be so grafted] and planted James 1.23. Graec. (...). Syriac. plantatum,
been, nam Verbum Dei saepe confertur semini. Math. 13. etc.
[inwardly in our] very [hearts] and affections, [that they may] never be
forgotten, but take root there, and [bring forth in us] so plentifully, that
our whole Conversation may abound in [the fruit Coloss. 1.6. James 1.22.
of good works] Which blessed effect of thy Word we pray for, because it will
not only tend to our benefit, but [to the] spreading of the [Honour, and]
setting forth the [Praise of thy Name] who have so happily reformed our ways.
Do thou therefore thus teach us [through] the merits and for the sake of [Iesus
Christ our Lord] be it so. [Amen.]

IV. A Prayer for Success in all our actions.
. 5. If we acknowledge Gods Providence, we must undertake nothing till we have
first asked his Counsel to direct us Ita Scipio referente. Plutar. Et ap.
Platon. (...) in Timae.
, and as we go on we must call for his assistance to further us, and when we
have done, we must wait for his blessing to Crown all with success: All which
we are taught to do in this compendious, and pious form, which is never
unseasonable: but very fit to be used, especially, in the Morning, before we
begin our work.

The Paraphrase of the fourth Prayer.
O God, our ways are not in our own Power Jer. 10.23.
, wherefore we commit them to thee who art able to bring them to pass Psalm.
37.5.
. And be thou pleased to [Prevent Prevent. vex media. Psalm. 88.13. in malo
sensu, Psalm. 18.18. in bono, 21.3. and Psalm. 59.10. Bonitas tua, O Deus meus,
antevertat [Vulg. praeveniet] me. Vatabl. Psalm. 79.10. Vulg. Antevertat nos
Misericordia tua. Vide item Hammond. Psalm. 21. ver. 3. Annot. [b.]
us, O Lord] before we expect it [in] the beginning of [all our doings] and
come early to meet us before hand [with thy most gracious savour] so that we
may begin things pleasing [and] then as we go on [further us] all the way [with
thy continual help.] And leave us not till we have accomplished them by thy
prospering our endeavors (...). Demosthen. Olynth. 2.
: So [that in] the performance of [all our works] since they are [Begun] by
thee and thy direction, [continued] through thee and thy assistance [and ended
Hinc omne principium, huc refer exitum. Horat. Carm. l. 3. Od. 6.

(...). Plato.


in thee] and with thy blessing, [We may] have continual cause to [glorifie]
and speak good of [thy holy Name] when we find how we prosper by trusting in
thee. [And finally] having advanced thy Glory in this short life, let us though
unworthy, and without any merit in our selves, yet [by thy mercy obtain] that
[everlasting life] where we may praise thee for ever [through Jesus Christ our
Lord] for whose sake we beseech thee to hear us. [Amen.]

V. A Prayer to supply the defects of our other Devotions.
. 6. When St. Paul had asked all he could for his Ephesians, he commits them to
him that was able to do more for them, than he could ask or think Ephesians. 3.20.
(...). Theophyl.
. And from thence we have taken this suppletory Prayer: being very proper for
the beginning or ending of public or private Supplications; because it sets
before us, 1. The incomparable Wisdom of God: 2. Our own Imperfections: And
thence deduceth, 1. A general Petition for Compassion, as to all the defects of
our Prayers. 2. A particular request for the adding of that which we omitted.

The Paraphrase of the fifth Prayer.
Note, this Prayer is very proper to be said to our selves, when we kneel down
at our first coming into the Church to Prayers.
O [Almighty God] the Original of all Power, and [ the fountain of all W^s^om
Proverbs 2.6.
] We make not our Prayers to instruct thee Math. 6.32. (...). Theophyl.
[who know our necessities] and all our wants [before we ask] of thee to
supply them: [And] who discernest [our Ignorance] and folly [in asking] hurtful
things, because we do not well know what is good for ourselves Vide Romans 8.26.
. Wherefore [We beseech thee] O merciful Father [to have Compas^ion upon us]
because of these [our infirmities] excusing the failings and supplying the
defects of these our Prayers. [And those things which] we have left out, being
checked by our Consciences [for our unworthiness] which made us that [we dare
not] pray for them; As also those things which for our ignorance [and for our]
spiritual [blindness, we cannot ask] not knowing they were good for us,
[vouchsafe to give] them all unto [us] of thy bounty which is wont to go beyond
Vberior semper est Dei gratia quam nostra precatio: Ambr. in Luc. Fides
aliquando recipit quod Oration non praesumit. Bernard. de grad. humil. Ex
gratia. 1 Reg. 3.13. Psalm. 21.4. Luc. 23.42, 43.
all our Petitions: Withold not any good thing because we are unworthy, but
give us all that we need [for the worthiness] and merits [of thy Son Jesus
Christ our Lord] who has deserved this grace for us, Amen.

VI. A Concluding Prayer for the acceptance of the rest.
. 7. There are three Qualifications of an acceptable Prayer. 1. That it be made
in Christ's name John 14.13. and 16.23.
. 2. That it be agreeable to Gods will 1 Ep. S. John 5.14.
. 3. That it be asked in Faith Math. 21.22. James 5.15.
. Now because it were impudent to expect to be heard upon other Terms, the
Church has here put them all together in this finishing Prayer, which is very
properly used after any of our Prayers, especially the Common Prayers, which if
we have said in Faith, we are sure the Petitions are according to Gods will,
and made in the name of Christ.

The Paraphrase of the sixth Prayer.
Almighty God who] in thy holy Word [hast promised] graciously [to hear] and
readily to answer [the Petitions of them that] according to thy direction do
[ask in thy Sons name] the only Mediator and Advocate of his Church; Relying on
this thy Promise [We beseech thee] most [mercifully to incline thy Ears] and
most speedily to return an answer [to us, that have made now] in our great
necessity, these [our Prayers and Supplications] and presented them [unto thee]
in the name of Jesus Christ. [And grant] us this last request, even [that
those] great and excellent [things which] trusting in thy mercy [we have
faithfully asked] Provided they be [according to thy will] and such things as
thou see to be good for us, that they [may effectually be obtained] by our
Petitions, and speedily bestowed on us: And this thy mercy in granting our
requests, will both tend [to the relief of] us thy servants in all our
[Necessities;] [And] also to [the setting forth of thy] own infinite [glory]
before all the World, who will perceive thy goodness toward us thy unworthy
Creatures [through Jesus Christ our Lord] In whose Name we ask, and for whose
sake thou give every good thing, by whom therefore all glory be to thee for
ever. Amen.

The End of the Communion Office.
A BRIEF DISCOURSE UPON THE OFFICES OF BAPTISM AND CONFIRMATION.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for John Martyn, at the Bell in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXIV.

TO THE REVEREND and WORTHY JOHN TILLOTSON Doctor of DIVINITY, DEAN OF
CANTERBURY, etc.
SIR,
I Do not imagine I shall discharge those Obligations which your Goodness has
laid upon me, but rather increase them, by the Presenting these little Tracts
unto you, for it will contribute to their Reputation, to be ushered in with so
worthy a Name, Place this before Page 357.
and add to their Authors Character, to be reckoned among the number of your
Friends: So that if this Tender be accepted but as the Testimony of my
Gratitude, I shall confess my self to be your Debtor still.

The Discourses are brief, that they may be of as general use, as they are of
Universal Concernment; The first, upon the Office of Baptism, showing as well
the Consent of this Church with the best Antiquity therein, as the several
duties of Parents, Sureties, and younger Christians, in order to the making and
keeping the Baptismal Vow. The Second, being a like Account of the necessary
though neglected Office of Confirmation, containing the Motives to persuade to
it, the Method of its Administration, and the means to profit by it: And I hope
they are so done, that they may be honored with your approbation as well as
your Name, for then they will be effectually recommended to all the judicious,
and raised above the censures of the less discerning: I shall only add, That as
I wish no others may measure the worth of these Papers, barely by their
Proportion (...). Demosthenes.
; so I will particularly request from your self, not to estimate the Respects
of the Presenter, by the Quantity of the Present In quo censendum nil nisi
Dantis amor. (...). S. Chrysostom. hom. in Johan.
; for though the Treatises are small, yet they are tendered with a great
affection by,

Reverend Sir, Your most obliged and most faithful Servant, Tho. Comber.

THE INTRODVCTION.
Of Baptism in general.
. 1. WAter has so naturally a property of cleansing, that it has been made
the Symbol of Purification by all Nations, and used with that signification
(...). Plut. quaest. Roman.
in the Rites of all Religions; The Gentiles washed before their Sacrifices
(...). idem. Lavabo ut rem divinam faciam. Plautus.
, and for the Expiation of their offenses Aquae vero adspersione corporis labem
tolli, and castimoniam praestari putabant: Alex. ab Alexandr. de Aegyptiis
sacerd. genesis di. l. 4. c. 17.
: yea Satan (who delights to counterfeit divine Institutions) had taught the
Heathens diverse kinds of Baptisms, as means of remission of their sins Nationes
extraneae -- viduis aquis sibi mentiuntur, nam and sacris quibusdam per
lavacrum initiantur, Isidis alicujus aut Mithrae -- certe ludis Apollinaribus
and Pelusiis tinguntur, idque se in regenerationem, ut impunitatem perjuriorum
suorum agere praesumunt. Tert. de Bapt. and Aug. de Bapt. in Donatist.
: The frequent washings of the Jews are known to all, and Baptism is no
stranger to them, for they Baptize such as are admitted Proselytes at large,
and when any of those Nations turn Jews, who are already Circumcised, they
receive them by Baptism only, with which Ceremony also, they purified Heathen
Women which were to be married to Jewish Husbands: And some of their own
Rabbis had said of old, That in the days of the Messiah there should be so
many Converts, that they should be forced to baptize them, because it would be
impossible to Circumcise them all: And this is that universal, plain, and easy
Rite, which our Lord Jesus adopted to be a mystery in his Religion, and the
Sacrament of admission into his Church; enjoining his Disciples and all their
Successors to use it to this end in all parts of the World, Math. 28.19. It is
true our Savior has not prescribed any more (in this Sacrament neither) than
the essential and necessary part, leaving the Rites and Circumstances of
Administration to the Determination of the Apostles and the Church: Yet without
doubt the form of Baptism was very early agreed upon, because all the
Christians in the World Quod universa tenet Ecclesia nec Conciliis constitutum,
sed semper retentum est, non nisi Autoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime
creditur. August. in Donatist. l. 4. c. 23.
almost, do practice it much after the same manner: The latter Ages had made
some superfluous Additions, but our Reformers have removed them, and certainly
restored this present office to a nearer Resemblance to the ancient model, than
any other Church can show: We have three several Offices of Baptism. 1. For
Infants in public. 2. For Infants in danger of Death. 3. For those of riper
years: But because the first is now most used, and the other two differ very
little from it, we shall make that the measure of the rest, and only treat of
that in particular: but first we must speak something to each of the three in
general, before we conclude this Introduction.

Of the public Baptism of Infants.
. 2. As Baptism was appointed for the same end that Circumcision was, and did
succeed in the place thereof, so it is most reasonable it should be administered
to the same kind of Persons; and as God commanded Infants to be Circumcised,
Genesis 17.12. so doubtless he would have them to be baptized; Nor is it necessary
that Christ should particularly name Children in his Commission, Math. 28.19.
it is sufficient that he did not except them, nor forbid to baptize them; for
that supposes he intended no alteration in this particular, but that Children
should be initiated into the Christian, as well as into the Jewish Religion.
Besides, if the Apostles had left Children out of the Covenant, and not
received them as Members of the Church, it is certain the Jews (who took such
care to circumcise them) would have made this a great objection to the
Religion, and have been highly scandalized thereat. Wherefore since Infants are
a part of all Nations, and we read of whole Households baptized, Acts 16.15.33.
1 Corin. 1.16. it is highly probable that the Apostles themselves baptized
Infants: only the Baptism of Men and Women converted from Paganism, being more
for the honor of Religion, and more illustrious, did obscure the Infant
Baptism, which being done with less solemnity, and at the same time with the
Parents, it sufficed to note it in general words. This we are sure of, that all
Antiquity affirm, that the Apostles did teach the Church to baptize Infants,
Pro hoc and Ecclesia ab Apostolis traditionem accepit, etiam parvulis baptismum
dare. Origin. hom. in Romans 6. Idem, Hom. 8. in Levit. 12.13. and Hom. 14. in
Luc. 2. Cypr. Epist. 59. etc.

Consuetudo matris Ecclesiae in baptizandis parvulis nequaquam spernenda est.
Aug. l. 10. de genesis c. 23.


by Tradition, as they did the change of the Sabbath and other things Quas sine
ullius scripturae instrumento, solius traditionis titulo, deinde consuetudinis
patrocinio vindicamus, Tert. de Coron. Mil. c. 3.
which the Church does observe as Religiously as if there were a written
command for them. Besides, the Ancient Constitutions do command it (...).
Constit. Clement.
. And about 200. years after Christ, St. Cyprian with 66. Bishops in Council
with him determined, that the Church had allowed of it, and therefore Children
had rather better right Quod cum circa universos observandum sit, atque
retinendum, tum magis circa infantes ipsos and recens-natos observandum
putamus. Cypr. Epist. 59.
to Baptism than Elder persons: And the Orthodox Fathers did press the
Pelagians (who denied Original Sin in Infants) with this Question, viz. Why the
Church did baptize them? The II. Canon of the Council of Milevis (to which St.
Augustine subscribed) finally pronouncing an Anathema against those who denied,
That Infants were to be Baptized for the Remission of Sins: Since which time it
has been universally practiced in all Churches, until some wild Enthusiasts of
late, revivers of old Heresies, presumed to oppose it. But it is not the giddy
attempts of such unstable Persons can shake this Holy Practice, which is so
reasonable, and so ancient, so beneficial to the Infants, so comfortable to the
Parents, yea and so great a security to Religion, by binding these future hopes
of the Church in early Vows of Piety: and that it may be carefully performed,
and in due time, we shall next show the necessity thereof.

Of private Baptism of Infants in Cases of Necessity.
. 3. Our Savior himself has said, that Except a Man be born again of Water,
and of the Holy Ghost he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.5. and
Mark 16.16. he makes Baptism as well as Faith necessary to Salvation: whereupon
the Ancient Christians did constantly affirm, that there could be no Salvation
in an ordinary way without Baptism Tertul de bapt cap. 12. Ambros. de Vocat.
gent. l. 2. c. 8.
; and whosoever died without it, their Estate was believed doubtful, unless it
were in such a Case as that of Valentinian the Emperor, whom St. Ambrose hopes
might be saved Ambros. de obitu Valentin.
by the desire of Baptism, because he had no opportunity. Upon the stock of
this Principle grew that great care, that no person might die unbaptized,
insomuch that it was allowed in danger of Death to baptize them who had not
past through all their Preparations; Provided, that they should answer more
fully if God restored them Qui in agritudine constituti baptisma perceperunt,
facti sani Fidei symbolum d^ceantur, ut noverint qua donatione digni sunt
habiti Council. Laodicen. Can. 47. Anno 364.
. The like care has our Church taken of little Children, for though the
require (according to the 59. Can. of the 6. Council at Constantinop.) That
they should be speedily and publicly Baptized in the House of God: yet in
Cases of extremity she admits of that which is done in private Houses, even
without Ceremony; upon condition there may be added more of the solemnity
afterward, when it is published in the Church: And that it may not be
neglected, we are taught, That it is certain by Gods word that Children
baptized, dying before they commit actual sin, are undoubtedly saved: For it is
certain by Gods word that Baptism is appointed for remission of sins, Acts
22.16. Chap. 2.38. and it is also certain, that all they whose sins are
forgiven, are undoubtedly saved, Psalm. 32.1. But Infants have no other sin but
their Original Corruption, which being remitted in Baptism, they are
undoubtedly saved: And it is plain the first Christians believed the same
Doctrine. For if the most notorious offenders be forgiven (by Faith) in their
Baptism (as St. Cyprian argues) how much more shall Infants who have no actual
sin, but only the Contagion of Death which they drew from Adam, and will the
more easily gain remission here, because it is not their own but others Sin,
which is forgiven to them. Epist. 59. The Fathers also of the II. Council of
Carthage Anathematize those that say, Children are not by Baptism delivered
from Hell, and made partakers of Eternal Life: The same is affirmed by St.
Augustine Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 16.
, Fulgentius Fulgentius, de fide, cap. 30.
, and all the Catholic Fathers: And the Heretic Hierax is censured for
denying it by Epiphanius Epiphan. l. 2. Tom. 2. haer. 67.
. But the Waldenses made it an Article of their Confession, That Baptism was
necessary to Salvation, and that Infants were saved thereby Hoveden Annal. ap.
Usher de Christian. Eccl. success. cap. 8. Sect. 34.
, and none have any reason to oppose so pious and so received a truth. I
confess some of the later Doctors, and the Assembly at Trent, have been too
positive in asserting the Damnation of Infants which die unbaptized (as if God
could not save without it) forgetting that it is commonly the Parents neglect,
and that it is they who despise the Covenant Non infans qui discernere necdum
valuit, verum majores ejus, qui id servare poterant, noverant, debuerant,
irritum fecerunt pactum. Beda in Luc. 2.
, and deserve the greatest punishment: And yet we may affirm there is no
promise for the Salvation of such, their Estate is uncertain if not evil.
Wherefore let no Parents (who love their own or their Childrens Souls) upon
pretense of Gods power or mercy, presume to neglect that which is so certainly
a means of Salvation; neither let them think it indifferent whether their
Children be baptized or no, for this springs from a dangerous mistake. And it
is evident (says St. Ambrose) how great a negligence and carelessness it breeds
in the hearts of Christian Parents concerning their Childrens Baptism, when
they think no harm can come to them, either by their own neglect, or the
Childrens dying before, De vocat. gent. l. 2. c. 8. If Children be weak, the
Parent must immediately endeavor to procure their Baptism; but if
notwithstanding all possible care, they die before, we must not then confine
the Almighty to the outward means, but believe he may save without, where he
did not give the opportunity: And in such Case the Parent may take Comfort in
his having done what he could, and ought to hope in the Divine mercy.

Of the Baptism of those of riper years.
. 4. In the Baptism of Persons who are of Age and Understanding, there is more
required than in that of Infants, for they being capable to receive
Instruction, to declare their Faith, and to exercise an actual Repentance, our
Church commands that they be first Taught and Catechized, Math. 28.19. which of
Old lasted all the forty days of Lent: and then that they be Examined
concerning their Faith and Repentance, Lu e 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. Finally the
Persons themselves are advised according to the Primitive Discipline -- (...).
Just Mart. Apol.

Ingressuros baptismum orationibus crebris, jejuniis, geniculationibus and
pervigiliis orare oportet, etc. Tert. de bapt. cap. ult.


to prepare themselves for this Seal of Remission, by Fasting, and Prayer, and
a serious Consideration of the Covenant into which they are about to enter.
This variety between their duty and that of Infants, has occasioned the
compiling of a peculiar Office, but alas there is too seldom occasion to use
it, for we see but few Converts to Christianity in these days, and may justly
lament the scandal which is given to the Unbelievers, by the wickedness and the
divisions of those whose manners are the disgrace of their Principles Aut haec
non est Christiana Religio, aut vos non estis Christiani: Dictum Hominis Pagani
S. Scripturam inspicientis.
. And it is sad to consider, that the several Sects of Christians, are more
concerned to diminish each others party, than to add to the whole Church H^c
sit negotium illis non Ethnicos convertendi, sed nostros evertendi; hanc magis
gloriam captant si stantibus ruinam, quam si jacentibus elevationem operantur.
Tertul. de praescrip. c. 41.
. The first poor despised Planters of our Religion, brought in thousands, and
in despite of all the Wit and Learning, Power and Malice which did oppose them,
they daily added to the Church of God; whereas now when we have all imaginable
advantages on our side, such is our sloth, that an Age scarce produces an
hundred Converts of Jews, Turks, or Infidels: Yet this office is sometimes used
for the unhappy Children of those licentious Sectaries who not content to
oppose all the prudent Institutions of the Church, have cast off both those
Sacraments which are of Christ's own appointing, by reason whereof those who
spring from them want their Baptism till they come to understand and hate the
accursed Errors of their deluded Parents; But on what occasion soever it is
used, the Person to be baptized may by this discourse be instructed in order to
so great a work, by altering some few circumstances, and applying all unto
their own Case: and it will be proper also for those who are Sureties to learn
here, how far their obligation does extend, yea all that are baptized may from
hence be instructed in and remembered of their great Baptismal Vow. For although
we treat principally of Infant Baptism, yet a little variation will make this
Discourse suit the other Cases. But before we begin with the several Parts, let
this Table give you the method of the whole Office.

SECT. I. Of the Preparation before Baptism.
The Analysis of the Office of Public Baptism.
. 5. The Office of Public Baptism is divided into Three Parts. 1. The
Preparation before Baptism, which concerns either SECT. I. 1. The Child it self,
1. Enquiring if it want Baptism, The first Question,. 1.
2. Showing the necessity of Baptism, The first Exhortation,. 2.
3. Praying it may be fitted for it, The two Collects,. 3, 4.

2. The Sureties in its behalf, 1. Encouraging them, by 1. The Gospel, and its
Application,. 5. 2. The Thanksgiving,. 6.
2. Engaging them, by 1. Persuasion, The Preface to the Covenant,. 7.
2. Stipulation, The Interrogatories and Answers,. 8.



2. The Administration of Baptism, which consists of SECT. II. 1. Devotions for
the sanctifying of 1. The Child, The Short Prayers,. 1.
2. The Water, The Prayer of Consecration,. 2.

2. Holy Actions, in The Form of Baptism,. 3, 4.
3. Solemn Declaration, The Reception of the Child into the Church,. 5.

3. The Close and Consequents after Baptism, being SECT. III. 1. A Recital of
the Benefits of Baptism, in The Exhortation to the Congregation,. 1.
2. Desires the Child may obtain them, in The Lords Prayer,. 2. The last
Collect,. 3.
3. Directions in order thereunto, in The concluding Exhortation to the
Sureties,. 4.



. 1. The first Question.
Quest. Has this Child been already Baptized?] This Question howsoever it has
been derided by ignorant or impious Persons, must by no means be omitted,
because it is necessary before we begin this great mystery that we be certified
it has not been done already, since it is a rite never to be repeated; for as
there is but one one Lord, and one Faith, so there is but one Baptism, Ephesians.
4.5. And because Baptism of old was called Illumination (...). Just. Martyr:
, therefore that place of the Apostle Heb. 6.4. Gr. (...): Syriac. Arab. and
Aethiop. semel baptizatos: and ita explicat Ambros. de poenitent. l. 2. c. 2.
, of the once enlightened, has been usually expounded of those that have been
once Baptized; and afterward did Apostatize: but besides what is intimated in
Scripture, the Ancient Church does positively condemn the repeating of Baptism
Council. 1. Carthag. Can. 1. Anno 330. item Council. 3. Toletanum.

Vnus omnino Baptismus est nobis, tam ex Domini Evangelio, quam ex Apostolicis
literis. Tertul. de Bapt. Renovatio per sacri baptismatis lavacrum secunda vice
fieri non potest. Ambros. in Heb. 6.


, provided the party were baptized in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost. And whereas the Council of Nice, Can. 19. S. Cyprian, and
Tertullian speak of Baptizing again those who had been baptized by Heretics,
it was because they esteemed their Baptism no Baptism Illis ideoque nec
Baptismus unus, quia non idem, quem cum rite non habeant sine dubio non habent,
nec capit numerari quod non habetur. Tert. de Bapt. c. 15.

(...). Cyril. Hieros.


, as not being performed in the Name of the Holy Trinity according to Christ's
appointment: So that it is absurd and impious to do this over again, and
therefore we ask this Question, which also may admonish the Minister and the
whole Congregation to be very serious and devout now in behalf of this present
Infant, since it can never more have the like opportunity for its Purification.
And as to those of riper years, it does highly require their care to do it
well. For, They cannot (says St. Cyril) come to this Laver twice or thrice, to
correct the Omissions of the first time; if it be ill done at first, it must
remain so for ever.

. 2. The first Exhortation.
Dearly beloved, for as much as all men are Conceived and born in Sin, etc.]
There is a mutual Covenant in this Sacrament between God and Man, but there is
so vast a disproportion between the parties, and so great a condescension on
the part of the Almighty (who designs only our advantage in it, and is moved
purely by his own free grace to agree to it) That it becomes us to begin this
Office with Prayer; and that we may pray with Understanding, this Exhortation
is premised, wherein we are taught, 1. The Reasons why we must pray for this
Infant. 2. What it is which we must ask in its behalf. 1. The Reasons are
introduced with a Courteous salutation directed not only to the Sureties, but
to the whole Congregation who are styled Dearly Beloved, because they are all
Christians, and invited to join because they were once in the same condition
(...) which Nature cannot give, even that this Child may be washed in Soul with
the Spirit, as well as with Water on the Flesh, and not only be listed in the
Register of visible Christians but have its name written in Heaven; Nature has
polluted, but it cannot cleanse, the Parents have transmitted Sin, but cannot
remove it; the Minister can provide Water, and perform the external Rite, but
it is above humane power, or the possibilities of Nature, to make these things
effectual to the Child's Eternal Salvation; wherefore we have the more reason to
cry most passionately to him that only can effect all this.

. 3. The first Collect for the Child.
Almighty and Everlasting God, who of thy great mercy did save Noah, etc.]
Being prepared with the former Motives and Directions, the Minister invites us
in the ancient Form, Let us pray: and goes before us in these two pious
Composures: in the first of which there are three Parts. 1. A Preface laying
down the encouragements to this Request. 2. The Request it self. 3. The End for
which we make it.

1. When the Preface has minded us that he whom we call upon is Almighty in
Power, and Everlasting in Duration; it does Commemorate the Ancient Types of
Holy Baptism, together with the Consignation thereof in the Person of our Lord
Jesus: that by Remembering what God has done by, and for, the Element of Water,
with respect to this Mystery, we may heighten our own Expectations, and learn
to hope for great things from it, and engage the Almighty to make the present
effect answerable to so early and so noble an Apparatus, as himself had made
thereunto. 1. St. Peter assures us, the Saving of Noah in the Flood, was a Type
of our Salvation by Baptism, 1 Peter 3.21. and many of the Fathers take notice
of it also In diluvio quoque jam tunc figura Baptismatis: Ambros. de ^acr. l.
1. c. 6. Baptismum (ut ita dixerim) Mundi. Tert. de bap. Cap. 8. Cyril. Hieros.
cat. 3.
, The Flood was the Baptism of the World, the iniquity whereof was purged by
Water, and all that was Corrupt was buried in that Universal Deluge, until at
last in token that the Evil was Expiated, the Dove did rest upon the renewed
face of the Earth, and was the Messenger of Peace to those who were saved by
those Waters. Thus our old Man is buried in Baptism and our Sins washed away,
yet so as the new Man is restored thereby, and sealed with the Holy Ghost. 2.
St. Paul affirms, that God did prefigure the Christian Baptism by the Passage
of the Israelites through the Red Sea, 1 Corinthians. 10.2. Which Tertullian
observes in these words. The people ready to leave Egypt, escaped the force of
Pharaoh, by going through that Water which drowned the King and all his Army,
which figure is more manifest in the Sacrament of Baptism Illud mare nostri
Baptismi figura fuit. Ambros de Mansionibus Israelit. and Cyril.

(...) Cateches. 3.


, for all Nations are delivered from the World by Waters, and leave the Devil
their former Ruler and Oppressor overwhelmed in them: de bapt. Cap. 9. Now if
God did twice save the whole Church by Water, on purpose to typifie the
efficacy of Baptism before it was instituted, we may very reasonably believe,
that now the substance is come, he will much more save a few Children or
believing Persons thereby. 3. And it is the more probable that we shall prevail
when we ask this mercy, because that Our Lord himself was pleased to honor
this Ordinance, by causing it to be Administered to himself by St. John in the
River Jordan, Math. 3.17. And He was Baptized (says St. Ambrose) not that he
might be cleansed, but that he might cleanse the Waters, that they themselves
being washed by the flesh of Christ which knew no sin, might have a right to be
used in Baptism ever after. Ambr. in Luc. 3. and the grace which it received
from him, it pours upon us Christians: idem Sermon. Domin. 6. post Pentec. Yet we
must not fancy as Tertullian and St. Ambrose note, that this Sanctification was
derived only to that one River (whereupon some of old, would be baptized no
where but in Jordan) For the Blessing was communicated (say they) to all Water
that should ever be used to this purpose. Now if the great end why Jesus was
baptized, were to Hallow the Water to this use, we may the more cheerfully
present our Petition, that the Party to be baptized may find supernatural
effects from this holy Laver.

2. The Petition therefore advanced upon these Premises is, First, For Gods
general Pity to be expressed toward this infant, because it is miserable by
nature and liable to his wrath. 2. Particularly, that he will please to wash
and purify it from all its Natural Pollutions by the living Water, John 7.38.
even his holy Spirit (...). Theophyl. in Johan. 3.
which alone can cleanse the Soul, and which gives the power of cleansing to
this Water. We pray that he who gave so many illustrious Types of Baptism
before its Institution, and at its first Original dignified it with the
presence of his own Son, that he will now look with Compassion on the original
misery of this Child, and wash it wholly away by his Spirit. 3. And we ask this
the more fervently, because there will follow so blessed an effect upon our
being heard, viz. 1. Privative: if it please him so to wash away the Sin of
this Child, it shall be delivered from Gods wrath, Math. 3.7. since his wrath
does not remain on those whose Sins are pardoned: but when the iniquity, the
cause, is gone, the wrath is removed also. 2. There will follow also positive
effects, even the Seeds of Sanctifying Graces, which will manifest themselves
in due time. The sum is, that if it be washed with the Spirit, it shall not be
left to perish in the general deluge, but be taken into the Church (as Noah
into the Ark Ecclesia est arca figurata: Tertul. de bap. In illa mirandae
capacitatis arca -- Ecclesia figuratur: Ambros. de voc. genesis l. 2. c. 4.
) and so be saved from the common destruction: and although this Child (as the
Ark Navicula illa figuram Ecclesiae praeferebat, quod in mari id est seculo,
fluctibus id est persecutionibus and tentationibus inquietatur. Tert.
of old) be tossed a while upon the troublesome Waves of this World, yet if
Faith be the Pilot, Hope the Sails, and Charity the Lading, no boisterous
Billows shall be able to overwhelm it, but it shall triumphantly and joyfully
ride over these Surges, until they have conveyed it safe to the Port of
Immortality. All these Graces are the fruits of that One Spirit, so that if
here it be received, all these happy effects will be the consequents thereof.

. 4. The second Collect for the Child.
Almighty and immortal God, the aid of all that need, etc.] To express our
earnestness and importunity we do again renew our Address, and in this second
Prayer we request, First, That this Child may be pardoned and regenerated.
Secondly, That it may be adopted and accepted by Almighty God, both which are
enforced with their proper motives. 1. The first Petition is ushered in by a
solemn Invocation, wherein we call upon God by all those Attributes which do
express his Power and Mercy: we confess him to be Omnipotent and immortal, 1 Timothy 6.16. the reliever of the needy, Psalm. 10.16. and 69.33. the helper of
those that fly to his Protection, John 6.37. He gives Eternal Life to
Believers, and raises those that are Dead, John 11.25. and therefore he is the
fittest to be solicited in behalf of a weak and helpless infant, dead in
trespasses and sins. Yea we esteem our selves happy that we have so great and
so good a God to come unto in its behalf: for here we do present him with an
object suitable to his Might and his Mercy; and since this poor Creature is so
miserable, but yet can neither apprehend its own misery, nor speak in its own
behalf, we our selves become its spokesmen, that it may be born again in this
Laver of Regeneration, and have all its Sins both pardoned and removed: and
doubtless so Charitable a Prayer from so many Hands, presented to such a God,
for so deplorable an object, cannot return empty. 2. The next Petition proceeds
further, and craves, that when the sin is removed, and the nature renewed, it
may be most favorably received by God, and adopted for his own Child. And
herein we seem to imitate that ancient custom prescribed by the Roman Law, in
that kind of Adoption which was called Adrogation Arrogatio autem dicta, quia
genus hoc in alienam familiam transitus, per Populi rogationem fit. Au^.
Gellius noc. At. 5. 19.

Et Justinian instit. l. 1. titul. 11. de Adop. Sect. 1.


, whereby a Child being to be adopted into a better Family, was admitted by the
approbation of the High Priest, and at the Intercession of all the people in a
public Assembly. Thus we who are already Citizens of Heaven, do all join in
requesting there may be one more added to our number, and received into the
Household of God: And the motive to this Petition is no less than Gods gracious
Promise by Jesus Christ, Math. 7.7. that if we ask, we shall have, which St.
Luke applies to the giving of the Holy Spirit, Chap. 11.13. and some of the
Ancients refer this promise to this very mystery: Nor can this promise be urged
more properly. For we have brought this infant to Heaven Gate, but we cannot
make it the Child of God, nor let it in, so that all we can do is to ask, and
seek to him to open the Gate, and to receive it, who has promised to hear the
Prayers of his Church. The External washing is but a temporal privilege, and
only makes this Child one of the number of the visible Church: But the Heavenly
washing of the Soul Aqua enim corpus abluitur, Spiritu animae delicta
mundantur. Ambros. in Luc. 3. Quod incorporale est invisibiliter abluatur: idem.
is an Everlasting Blessing, and does purify the Soul, and fit it for Eternal
Life Foelix Sacramentum aquae nostrae, qua abluti delictis pristinae caecitatis
in vitam aeternam liberamur. Tert. de bap. cap. 1.
. Its natural life is a miserable mortal life, a state of Bondage: But we pray
it may here be adopted to an Eternal life, and a glorious Kingdom through
Christ his Merits. Amen.

. 5. The Gospel and Exhortation deduced from it.
Hear the words of the Gospel, Mark 10.13. They brought young Children to
Christ, etc.] This portion of Scripture has been censured by some as improper
for this place, because the Children here mentioned were not brought to be
Baptized; but whosoever makes this Objection, does not well understand upon
what account this Gospel is placed here, and if they would take their measures
by the end for which it is made use of, they would retract so impertinent a
charge. Let it be considered therefore, that in the making of a Covenant, the
express Consent of both Parties is required Pactio est enim duorum pluriumv^
idem placitum seu consensus. L. 1. ff. de pactis.
. And this Covenant of Baptism being now to be made, between Almighty God and
this Child, it is requisite that before the Sureties engage in behalf of the
Infant, they should have some Comfortable assurances that God on his part will
be pleased to consent to, and make good the Agreement: Now though he be in
Heaven, yet his Ambassador the Priest in his Name does produce this place out
of his Holy Word (the Declaration of his Will) whereby it does appear that God
is willing to receive Infants into his favor, and has by Jesus Christ
declared them capable of that Grace and that Glory which on Gods part are
promised in this Baptismal Covenant; wherefore the Sureties need not fear to
make the stipulations on their side, since they have Gods Royal Word, his test
meipso, and as great assurances as Majesty uses to give, that there is no
impediment in Children to make them incapable of receiving that which he has
promised, and will most surely perform. It is very likely it might be a Custom
among the Jews to bring their Children to Persons of Eminent Sanctity to obtain
their Blessing; for St. Hierom relates, that when St. Hilarion passed through
Syria, the Men, Women, and Children, came flocking to him, and kneeling before
him they cried Barac, i. e, Bless us Hieron. in vita S. Hilarionis.
: which also is the manner of the East to this day Drusius quaest. Hebr. l. 2.
. But doubtless those who brought these Infants Luke 18.15. (...): Marc. 10.13.
(...). and verse. 16. cum accepisset eos in ulnas.
in their Arms, did conceive some hope our Savior was the Messiah, and because
the Promises belonged to them and to their Children, Acts 2.39. they came to
Jesus to desire he would pray for them and bless them, and thereby own them as
Members of the Covenant of Abraham. But his Disciples, either because they
heard their Master require Faith and Repentance from all that he did receive,
or else esteeming it below their Masters dignity, reproved those that brought
them: Whereupon our Lord checks their folly, and takes this occasion to show
that Children have a right to his Kingdom. The Kingdom of Grace the Church
consists of Children in Age, or in Manners, of them and such as they are, and
the Kingdom of Glory or Heaven shall be filled with Infants blessed by Christ,
and with Men become as little Children. He begins (says Epiphanius) with
Infants; but lest the Kingdom of Heaven should be thought only belonging to
them, be grants to those of every age (provided they be like unto them) that
they shall inherit it, together with them: But if these that are such as they,
be admitted to the Kingdom, how much more Infants themselves who are the
Patterns of those that be compared to them? Epiph. Panar. L. 2. Tom. 2. haer.
67. in Hieracitas. Another Ancient Author (a little otherwise, but appositely
enough to this Case) says, that Christ would not allow Jewish Children to be
kept from coming to him, because of such, i. e. of Christian Children brought
by their Sureties to Baptism, the Kingdom of Heaven was. Author libri
Hypognosticon, l. 5. And when Jesus has thus pleaded their Cause (who could
not speak for themselves) and declared that they are capable of the Kingdom of
Heaven, he establishes a perpetual Decree that none do presume ever after to
keep them from his Grace, since they are capacitated for his Glory; And then he
does bless them, according to the desire of those that brought them: and we are
to believe that the laying on of our Saviors hands was no empty Ceremony, but
did effectually convey a Blessing unto them Deus cum benedicit, facit quod
dicit. Augustinus.
, so that this also testifies they are capable of receiving Grace. From all
which Premises the Church in the Exhortation, does conclude, that the Sureties
may cheerfully promise that which belongs to their Part, since God by his Son
Jesus Christ has given such satisfaction that his Part shall be accomplished.
It appears both by the Words and Deeds of our Lord in this Case, that Infants
are beloved by him and by his Father, that he will receive them kindly, when
they are brought to him, that he will give them all the Grace and Blessing
which is needed by them or desired for them, it is evident that they are
capable of being adopted into the Church, and that the Kingdom of Heaven may be
estated on them, yea if they die after they have received Christ's Blessing, and
have done nothing to evacuate it, there is none more fit or likely to enter
into Everlasting Glory, whither we our selves cannot come unless we be like
unto them Tantum contingat nos virtutis puritate eidem similes fieri, ut
integritate morum eandem cum infantibus in Christo requiem consequamur. Basil.
Ep ^d Nectar. 44. de filiolo mortuo ejusdem Nectarii.
. Wherefore since Baptism is the only way now for Infants to be brought to
Christ, the Godfathers may be assured that God is well pleased with their
Charity, in bringing so fit an object for his Mercy, and they may perceive now
how ready our Heavenly Father is on his Part, which Mercy they must acknowledge
in the following Thanksgiving, and so proceed to seal their Part of the
Covenant in the Name of the Child as hereafter is directed.

. 6. The Thanksgiving.
Almighty and Everlasting God, Heavenly Father, we give thee humble thanks.]
The good News which is every where imparted by the Gospel, requires that it
should always be concluded with Thanksgiving. And this foregoing Portion does
peculiarly deserve it, for it declares the Humility, Mercy, and Condescension
of Jesus in admitting Infants into a state of Grace, and because we our selves
were once received in this manner, it does admonish us to renew our
acknowledgments for the mercy of our Christianity, upon this fresh occasion.
Plato is said to have blessed the Gods that he was a Man, not a Beast, a
Grecian not a Barbarian, and an Athenian amongst the Grecians: the Jews are
wont to Praise the Lord every Day that they are born of the stock of Israel,
and are within the Covenant of Abraham, Buxt. synag. cap. 5. But we have much
more reason to give Thanks to our Heavenly Father, who has acquainted us with
the Grace of his Gospel, and taught us the true Catholic Faith: and when we
make this confession of his Mercy to us, and to this now to be admitted
Christian, it is very fit we should pray both for our selves that we may make a
good progress in this true Religion, whereinto we are already entered, and for
this Infant that it may be effectually sealed for a Christian, and so prepared
to enjoy the Kingdom with those that have gone before in this Faith: this is
the most common and obvious sense: But we may confine this Thanksgiving to the
present occasion, Namely, That whereas God has in the Gospel foregoing made
known unto us his grace and good will toward Infants, and thereby begot in us
a lively hope and Faith in him, so that we are persuaded he will receive this
present Infant. First, We give him most humble thanks for it, And secondly, We
beseech him to let us know him more fully, and make us believe more firmly this
his merciful purpose toward this present Child, by Giving his Holy Spirit unto
it, as a new and further testimony of his Grace; For by so fresh an Experiment
of his Goodness, not only our knowledge will be increased and our Faith
confirmed, but this poor Infant also shall thereby be regenerated and made an
Heir of Glory: Wherefore we entreat him to fulfill his Promises unto it and unto
us, and to answer all our expectations through Jesus Christ, who though he
lives and reigns on high, yet despises not one of these little ones, but
admits their Angels daily to behold the Face of his Heavenly Father.

. 7. The Preface to the Covenant.
Dearly Beloved, ye have brought this Child here to be baptized, etc.] The
Persons spoken to in this Admonition, are the Godfathers and Godmothers, the
use of which in the Church of Christ was derived from the Jews as well as the
Initiation of Infants it self was; for it is certain, that the Rector of the
House of Judgment was to take care to baptize the Infants of Proselytes, and
accordingly was to be called their Father Gemara. tit. Chetub. c. 1.
: and there was one appointed to hold the Child in Circumcision called the
Master of the Covenant Elias Thisb. Rad. (...)
, and by the modern Jews (who use it to this Day) he is called the Surety Tum
puelli circumcidendi sive sponsor sive susceptor accedit: Buxt. Synag. Cap. 2.
. Who is to Answer also, as appears by that Relation of Rabbi Juda surnamed
Pious, who being Surety for the Child of a rich Jew of Germany, stood mute in
the midst of the Office, discerning (as they say) by a Prophetic Spirit the
Child would afterward turn Christian, wherefore he refused to answer his Part.
And very learned Men do believe this Custom to have been as Ancient among the
Jews as the times of Isaiah Ex hoc ritu profectum esse illum nostrum constat,
quo certi homines speciatim -- adhibentur testes accessus ad Christum and ad
Ecclesiam per baptismum, etc. Jun. and Tremel. in Jesai. 8.2.
, it being highly probable that those Witnesses, Chap. 8.2. at the naming of
his Son, were of the same nature with those we call Godfathers and Godmothers.
In the Primitive Church the use of them was so early, that it is not easy to
fix the time of their beginning, only the most ancient Fathers who speak of
Baptism, do mention them (...), Just. Mart. (...), Dionys. Areop. Sponsores
Tertulliano: Fidei -- jussores Augustino vocantur.
. Out of whom we might have abundant Testimonies, but that they will come in
more seasonably in their several places (where we speak of their Duty)
afterward: Only it may be remembered, Platina affirms, that Hyginus Decreed
Baptism should not be Administered without one such Surety at least; in vit.
Pontif. R. But besides the very nature of the Ordinance, especially as it is
Administered to Infants seems to require some such Persons in the solemnizing
thereof: For as Circumcision was a Covenant of old Genesis 17.13. and 1 Reg.
19.10. Foedus tuum deseruerunt: Vid. Gal. 5.4.
, whereby the Jews were bound to keep the whole Law, Galat. 5.4. So is Baptism
a Covenant (...) Nazianzen de Baptism. Sed and nunc nos paciscimur in Baptismo
ut abrenunciemus Diabolo, and operibus ejus, Hieron. in Psalm. 128.
also; wherein we Promise to obey the Gospel: Now because Infants cannot
promise for themselves, the Laws of all Nations have allowed them Guardians to
contract for them in secular matters, which contracts if they be fair and
beneficial, the Minor must make good when he comes to Age. And in like manner
the Church has given them spiritual Guardians to promise those things in their
Name, without which neither old or young can obtain Salvation; if they stay out
of this Covenant they are liable to perish; and they can enter into it no other
way, but by having some to engage that they shall stand to Gods terms. They
need the grace of Baptism, and yet they cannot express that Faith and
Repentance which are the necessary conditions of it, wherefore the Church has
found out this Suppletory, appointing some to undertake in their Name. And thus
Infants may receive the good things of Baptism by the Faith of those who
represent them (...) Responsor. ad Orthod. quaes. 56.
, even as (the Ancients note Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. 5. Theophylac. Math. 9.
) the Centurions servant was restored by his Masters Faith, the Man in the
Palsy by the Faith of those who brought him, and Lazarus though Dead was
raised by his Sisters Believing. But fully to this purpose Rabanus Maurus. In
the Church of our Savior the Salvation of Infants (which by their tender age
are incapable of renouncing the Devil or believing in God) is completed by the
hearts and mouths of those that bring them -- For it is manifest that as
Children drew those sins from others which are remitted to them in Baptism, so
also by others they may believe unto Salvation. And thus also if any dumb or
deaf Persons, who could neither hear nor profess their Faith, should by any
Christians be presented to Baptism; they are believed to be saved by the Faith
of the Offerers, for the infirmity of humane Nature cannot hinder the grace of
Almighty God. de instit. Cler. l. 1. c. 26. So that we ought to believe till
the Child be capable, the Faith of its Sureties is so far accepted for it, as
to entitle it to all the Blessings of the Covenant; and it is an excellent
Charity of the Church to lend them hands to receive such a mercy, without which
they must remain under the power of Death. There are other Reasons also given
of the Institution of Godfathers and Godmothers, viz. 1. For the security of
the Church that the Children shall not Apostatize, hence they are called
Sureties. 2. That every Christian may have a Monitor who was present and
concerned in his Vow, hence they are called Witnesses. 3. That the New Birth
may be better represented, by new and spiritual Relations, whence they are
termed Godfathers and Godmothers: For God and Nature have sufficiently obliged
the natural Parents already, yet for the greater care of the baptized's
Salvation, the Church has added two or three more, that if some neglect their
Duty, the others may supply their defects. Now to these Sureties is this plain
admonition directed, as an introduction to the Covenant into which they are
about to enter. And first it looks back and briefly remembers them what has
been done already. 1. They have presented the Child, and in the two first
Collects begged that God will accept it, Pardon it, Sanctify it, and make it
an Heir of his Kingdom. 2. On Gods part they have heard from the mouth of
Jesus, that this Child is capable to receive, and he is willing to give all
these blessings as well unto it, as to those of riper Years, provided the Child
be engaged to perform those conditions, without which God will not grant these
blessings to old nor young. Secondly, Therefore this Exhortation looks
forwards, and as briefly tells them what it is which the Lord expects from
them, viz. To become Sureties in the name of this Child, and to promise to him
in its behalf; First Repentance. Secondly, Faith. Thirdly, Obedience: Let them
therefore stand forth with seriousness and sobriety, remembering they are bound
to all these things already for themselves. Yet now God is pleased to accept
them as Bondsmen for a poor helpless Soul; in whose stead they stand, and
Covenant for it to save it from Hell, and to procure it a right to glory: the
particulars of which stipulation do next follow.

. 8. The Interrogatories and Answers.
I demand therefore: Do thou in the name of this Child renounce the Devil,
etc.] Almighty God has promised Eternal Life, but it is upon certain
Conditions, viz. of Faith, Repentance, and Obedience, and since the Master
requires these, the Servant cannot dispense with them, it were vain in the
Minister to offer, and impudent in any Person to expect Salvation upon other
terms Avidus ad mercedem, piger ad laborem, qua front speras quod promisit
Deus, qui non facis quod jussit Deus. August. de Sanct. 4.
. As God promises on his part, we must engage on ours, and he is willing to
deal with us after the manner of men, amongst whom In omnibus pactis,
stipulatio subjici debet, ut ex stipulatione actio nasci possit. Paulus jurisc.
2. sent. 22. Sect. ult.
all contracts are made by mutual promises: Wherefore he has placed the Priest
in his stead to take security, that this Infant shall observe the conditions of
the Covenant; and because it cannot Answer for it self, the Church has lent
unto it the tongue of its Surety to promise for it Accommodat illis matter
Ecclesia aliorum pedes ut veniant, aliorum cor ut credant, aliorum linguam ut
stipulent. Aug. in Act. 2.
. Since for want of Age Children (says S. Augustine Aug. de bapt. in Donatist.
cap. 24.
) cannot believe with the heart to righteousness, nor confess with the mouth
unto Salvation, therefore others answer for them, that the Sacrament may be
Administered completely to them, and this suffices for their Consecration,
because they cannot Answer. Where we may Observe, that this Baptismal Covenant
was always made by Question and Answer, which is taken notice of by all the
Ancients, and seems to have been the method in the Apostles days, because St.
Peter calls Baptism the Answer (or as the word rather signifies (...). Vulg.
Conscientiae bonae interregatio: Beza, stipulatio.
) The asking of, or concerning a good Conscience, 1 Peter 3.21. for there was
always Queries put to the party Baptized, which adult Persons did Answer
themselves, and Children by their Representatives, who are here to Answer in
the first Person (as the Advocate does speak in the Person of his Client) I
renounce etc. because the contract is made properly with the Child; And since
this is so solemn a Covenant, these Sureties must speak with a plain and
audible Voice Praeterea inutilis est stipulatio, si quis ad ea quae
interrogatus fuit non Respondeat. Justin. instit. l. 3. Tit. 20. Sect. 5.
to the several Queries, which we will now consider in Order, being four in
all. The first Concerning Repentance, and forsaking of Evil. The second and
third concerning Faith, and believing of the Truth. The fourth Concerning
Obedience, and the doing of that which is good.

Query 1. When we enter into League with God and become his Confederates, we
must have the same Friends and Enemies, especially because the same which are
Enemies to him are also Enemies to our Salvation; Nor can we be listed under
Christ, unless we engage to fight against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil
Neque enim potest esse quis Domini nisi prius renuntiaverit mundo. Ambros. Luc.
20. Vide Romans 6.18.22.
: And First, because Satan is the chief Agent in opposing our Salvation, and
all his Works tend to subvert us, we must Renounce him and all his Works, and
vow that we will never serve under him, nor do his Commands, nor entertain his
suggestions. Now this renuntiation was done in the Primitive times with great
Solemnity by such as were of Age and had been Converted from the actual service
of the Devil, and Idolatry: These did turn toward the West, and three times
repeat, I renounce, etc. and then spitting as it were in defiance of their old
Master, they were signed with the Cross, and marked for Christ's Soldiers, and
finally Consecrated with many holy Prayers called Exorcisms, to secure them in
the possession of Jesus, as may be seen in the Ancient Doctors Cyril. Cateches.
1. Ambros. de initiand. c. 2. Hieronym. in Amos 6. Dionys. Eccles. Hierar. c. 2.
. But now, since we commonly Baptize Children, many of these Ceremonies are
omitted; and yet the substance is retained still, because Children are by
nature slaves of Satan; and though as yet they have not been actually in his
service, yet they will be apt to be drawn into it, by the pomps of this
alluring World, and the Lusts of their Flesh; so that it is necessary to secure
them for God betimes, and engage them to take all these for their Enemies, viz.
1. The Devil. 2. The World with all its Pomps and Vanities, 1 John 2.16. for
who so loves these cannot love God; The sinful fashions and enticing gayeties,
the gaudy splendour of Riches, and all the Magnificence which ministers to Pride
and Vanity; these a Christian must renounce. He must not desire them greedily,
nor delight in them at all, nor use them so as to make him forget God, or
neglect the solid glories of a better World: if he be in Place and Dignity, and
be obliged to somewhat of Gallantry or Grandeur to distinguish him, and bear
Proportion with his Quality, he must be humble in the midst of all, and learn
to despise it and to understand the Vanity thereof, and must not exceed the
bounds of Moderation. Thirdly, The Flesh, that is, all the desires after filthy
or unlawful pleasures, all thoughts that do allure to wantonness or debauchery.
The Christian must not strive to please his Appetite, his Palate or his
Concupiscence, but does here vow, he will not please them but please God, and
in order thereto that he will confine his Carnal as well as Covetous desires,
within the bounds of Reason, Innocence, and Moderation. And this is a brief
Account of the first part of the Baptismal Vow, which together with the Answer,
I renounce them all, is so exactly Primitive, that it is very pleasant to
compare ours and the Ancient forms together, and thereby we shall perceive,
that although they somewhat differed among themselves, yet we have extracted
the marrow and substance of them all (...). Clem. Constit. Apost. l. 7. c. 42.
ita Dionys. Areop. Aquam adituri, sub Antistitis manu contestamur nos
renuntiare Diabolo, pompae, and Angelis ejus. Tertul. Coron. Militis. Repete
quid interrogatus fis, recognosce quid responderis: Renuntiasti Diabolo, and
operibus ejus, mundo and luxuriae ejus and voluptatibus. Ambros. de init. c. 2.
Quando te interrogavit Sacerdos Abrenuncias Diabolo and operibus ejus? Quid
respondisti? Abrenuncio: Abrenuncias seculo and voluptatibus ejus? --
Abrenuncio. Ambros. de Sacram. l 1. c. 2. Seculo renuntiaveramus cum baptizati
sumus. Cypr. ad Rogat. ep. 7. Primum interrogatur -- si Abrenuntiat Diabolo and
omnibus damnesis ejus operibus and fallacibus pompis. Raban. Maur. instit.
cler. l. 1. c. 27.
: The only remaining part of our Care is, that we do this with a Primitive
Spirit, that is, That we make this renuntiation with all sincerity, for we are
obliged to it upon our own Account; and that we perform it courageously,
remembering that the Powers of Hell tremble to see their designed Vassals thus
pass into the Tents of Jesus their invincible Adversary; and let us together
with this promise, unfeignedly wish in our hearts that this poor Infant may
never retract this beneficial Engagement, nor become a Slave to so Cruel a
Master any more, for his work is deceitful and his Wages Death, and Jesus has
now freed it from this Bondage into which it can never return, till it renounce
him who has made it free indeed.

Quer. II. and III. After the deserting and renouncing the Old Master, the next
act is to embrace Jesus Christ, and to declare him to be our new Master (...).
Constable. Apost. l. 7 ca. 47.
. For he has made Faith to be a necessary Qualification for Baptism, Mark
16.16. and before St. Philip would baptize the Eunuch, he asked him if he did
Believe with all his heart, and received his Answer, That he Believed Jesus to
be the Son of God, Acts 8.37. From which remarkable President, the Church does
ever since demand of all those who do enter into the Christian prof^ssion, if
they believe all the Articles which Constitute that Profession; and this was
done either by way of Question and Answer (...) Cyril. catech. 2. Credis in
Deum patrem omnipotentem? and dixisti Credo. Ambr. de sacr. l. 2. c. 7. Solenne
sit in lavacro post Trinitatis confessionem interrogare Credis in S. Ecclesiam?
credis in Remissionem, etc. Hieron. in Luciferian. Vid. Cypr. Ep. 70. ad
Januar. Ambros. in Luc.
, or else the party baptized (if of Age) was made to repeat the whole Creed Qui
gratiam baptismatis aditurus est, symbolum fidelium populo audiente recitat.
Augustine.
: But even a Child cannot be made a Christian, unless he be engaged to believe
as Christians do believe, which here by his Sureties he does promise; And they
may very well promise that the Child shall believe these divine truths, since
they were all revealed from Heaven, confirmed by Miracles, sealed by the blood
of holy Martyrs, and attested by the constant consent of the Universal Church.
This Child is not left at random, to take up its Religion by chance or
interest, but is here fixed in the true and unquestionable Verity, which will
lead it unto Everlasting Life, and it has confessed that Rule, which God has
given us to unite us in one Bond of Peace: But it is not only necessary that
the party Baptized do believe the Christian Faith, but he must desire to be
joined to that Society by the solemn Rite of Initiation; Wherefore it is
demanded, 3. Whether you will be baptized in this Faith, because God will have
no unwilling Servants, nor ought men to be compelled by Violence unto Religion
Nemini deinceps ad credendum vim infer liceat, Council. Toletan. Nec
religionis cogere religionem. Tertul. ad Scapul. Nemo se ab invito coli volet
ne homo quidem. Id. Apol. c. 24.
. And yet the Christian Religion is so reasonable, so sweet, and easy, so
profitable both as to this World, and the next, that the Godfathers may presume
to Answer, They will, for doubtless if the Child could understand the
excellency of this Religion, and speak its mind, it would say the same Words;
and if it be early instructed in the Principles thereof, it will soon come to
know how much it owes to those who have brought it into so happy an Estate.

Quer. IV. Finally, We are taught, that we are delivered out of the Hand of our
Enemies, to the end that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober
life, Luke 1.74, 75. Titus 2.11, 12. and that every one who is a Christian must
Depart from all iniquity, 2 Timoth. 2.19. so that none can be admitted into
this Holy Society, unless they do promise to live according to Gods
Commandments (...). Justin. Mart. Apol.
, because Baptism is an Engagement to live purely, as Greg. Nazianzene speaks,
and St. Paul says, they that are Baptized ought to walk in newness of life,
Romans 6.4. before any can be enrolled a Soldier of Jesus Christ, he must vow in
the Words of this Sacrament, to observe the Commands of his General Recordare
Tyrocinii tui diem quo Christo consepultus, in sacramenti verba jurasti.
Hieron. ad Heliodor.
: And though this Child cannot perform them at Present, yet if it live to years
of Discretion, it must either do the Will and walk by the Laws of God, or else
it can never come to Eternal Life, Math. 19.17. Wherefore as you promised they
should forsake all evil before, so now you engage they shall do that which is
good (...) Clement. Constit.
, without which neither they nor you your selves can be admitted to the Kingdom
of Heaven. Perhaps some will say, this is a hard saying; and such as had rather
dispute than obey, and are readier to question than perform their Duty, will
allege it is impossible to keep all the Commandments: but it is dangerous thus
to charge God (...). Basil ho 19. Mandando imp^ssibilia non praevaricatores
homines facit, ^ed humiles. Bern in Cant. Facere quod possis and petere quod
non possis (monet) Aug. de not. and great.
as if he were a hard Master, who though he binds us to our whole Duty, yet
will not exact more than we are able, and is contented if we do what we can,
and lament that we can do no more, and pray to him to strengthen us still to do
better; yet withal we are obliged to do all that God requires, and in
strictness are Sinners for every wilful neglect. The sum is, that this Child is
engaged to believe and live like a Son and Servant of God, because it is now
about to be adopted and sealed in this Holy Sacrament; Which is so solemn and
sacred a thing that it ought to be ushered in with this necessary and complete
Preparation.

SECT. II. Of the Administration of Baptism.
. 1. The short Prayers for Sanctification of the Child.
O Merciful God, grant that the old Adam in this Child may be so buried, etc.]
These Prayers are the Address to this holy Laver, and since the Covenant is now
made, it is fit the Minister should more peculiarly interceed with God for
grace to perform it; And these (as an excellent Author notes) do supply the
place of the Old Exorcisms, which at first, seem to have been certain Divine
(...) Cyril. praef. ad Catech.
Prayers collected out of Gods word, for the purifying of the Soul, and the
exclusion of Satan from thence. In like manner these short and pious forms are
made in behalf of the party baptized, that he may obtain the benefits of
Baptism, and be secured against the Enemy. The first being a Petition for
Regeneration, the second for Sanctification, the third for Power against
spiritual Enemies, the fourth for increase of Grace: All which are so necessary
that every one of them requires our devout joining in them.

1. The first Collect is taken out of Romans 6.4, 5, 6. where the Apostle
teaches us, that a principal end of Baptism is for the mortifying of the old
(...) Theophylac. ad Coloss.
Man, or old Adam, that is, for the destruction of Original Corruption, and the
extirpation of all evil concupiscence, which when it is slain and buried as it
were, then the new Man that is a gracious disposition does succeed by the
Spirits entering into us: and as of old the Baptized Person was plunged over the
head, and came up again like a new Person, as Jesus out of his Grave after his
Resurrection, so we pray (according to the ancient phrase Vetus Adam in Lavacro
^otus moritur and Novus cum Christo renascitur. Hieron. in Ruffin.
) That the Old Adam or corrupt Nature in this Child may be mortifyed, so as the
new nature may appear in it. That is, that it may be born again in this Laver
of Regeneration, and not only have the guilt, but the power of original
Corruption taken away also.

2. As the former Collect Petitions for the removing of the Cause, so this for
the destruction of the effects: for carnal affections, and inclinations to
Lust, Covetousness and Vainglory, do spring from Original Sin, and are the
Branches and Fruit of that Root of Bitterness; now if these remain they will
soon entice this new Soldier into the Enemies Quarter, and make him lust to
return to Egypt, notwithstanding all these Renuntiations; wherefore we pray
that the Spirit may root up these evil fruits, and plant in their stead
spiritual affections, Heavenly desires, holy purposes, the Love of God, etc.
that so it may keep its Covenant with ease and delight: We pray that the Lusts
of the flesh may grow weaker and weaker, like the House of Saul; and the Graces
of the Spirit stronger and stronger, like the House of David, 2 Samuel 3.1. or as
St. Paul speaks, That the Body (that is, the affections of the Body) may be
dead as toward sin; but the Spirit Life as toward Righteousness, Romans 8.10.

3. The third Collect goes further, and sues for spiritual strength, not only
that it may not be conquered, but may Conquer and Triumph over those Enemies,
which this Child has now defied; it seems indeed impar congressus, an unequal
match for a frail Man to contend with the flesh within, the Devil without, and
the World round about him, but Christ has overcome the World, John 16.33. and
(if we will use it) he gives us grace in Baptism to subdue the Flesh, and
defeat the Devil, who can do little when our Corruptions do not join with him
Diabolus plus confidit in adjutorio carnis quia est hostis domesticus. Bern.
Med. c. 4: Eva nostra, caro nostra: idem.
, therefore let us take the Shield of Faith Ephesians. 6.16. 1 John 5.4. (...)
Cyril. Catech. 5.
and follow our Victorious Leader, so shall we be Conquerours our selves, and
then we may pray the more cheerfully for this Infant; it is now like the
Israelites newly escaped out of Egypt, and will certainly be pursued, but we
hope it shall see all these Enemies Dead, and sing a Triumphant Song over them
in the Heavenly Canaan. We know that humane Nature has no such power of its
own, and therefore we beg it of him that is able to subdue all things to
himself; and O how blessed will this Child be if it be Master of its own
desires, and have learned to despise the World, and be able to stand against
all the wiles of the Devil.

4. The last Collect advances still higher, desiring that this Child (and all
other to whom this Salutary Rite shall be Administered) may not only cease to do
evil, but learn to do well, Isai. 1.16, 17. not only escape the pollutions of
the World, but add to their Faith Virtue, 2 Peter 1.4, 5. We pray that they may
be endued with Grace and Heavenly Qualities, Meekness and Charity, Faith and
Patience, Temperance and Sobriety, Zeal and Devotion, etc. so that they may
obtain Eternal Life, which though it be not due by the Servants Merit Vita
aeterna justitiae quidem stipendium est sed tibi gratia, cui gratia est ipsa
justitia: Aug. ep. 105. ad Sixth. Presb.
, yet shall be bestowed by the Mercy of the Master upon all that are so
qualified: Let us then earnestly beseech this blessed Lord who is the Fountain
of eternal goodness, and does govern and dispose of all things, to give
abundant grace to this his new Servant, so that it may have the comfort of
these graces here, and the reward of them hereafter, through his Mercy, which
Crowns in us that which he has first given to us, for Jesus sake, Amen.

. 2. The Prayer of Consecration.
Almighty and everliving God, whose most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ, etc.]
The word of God teaches us that the World was darkness, and a Chaos until the
Spirit moved upon the face of the Waters, Genesis 1.2. from whence the rude and
indigested matter received a quickening influence which produced that beauty and
order which we now behold: And as it was in the first Creation and Generation
of all things, so it is in the new Creation and Regeneration of a Christian,
the Spirit moving upon the Waters of Baptism gives Light and Life, and
brings in order and comeliness instead of the confusion and darkness which
Sin had caused: wherefore since there is so great a work to be done by the
Spirit, we must most humbly beseech, that the holy Spirit may return to its
ancient seat, as Tertullian speaks: It is true our Lord Jesus did sanctify
Water in general, to the mystical washing away of Sin; but when this particular
Water is to be used in so sacred a Ministry, and to so admirable purposes, it
is necessary it should first be sanctified by the word of God and Prayer, 1
Timoth. 4.5. that is, by repeating the Words of Christ's Institution, and by
Petitioning for the descent of the Holy Spirit, which are the two Parts of this
Prayer. Yet if any shall ask why we Consecrate the Water, and where we have an
express command in Scripture for it? S. Basil Benedicimus Aquam baptismatis, ex
qua autem Scriptura, nonne ex tacita traditione? Basil. de Spir. Sanc. cap. 27.
Answers, We do this as well as many other weighty things, because of the
Constant Tradition, and continual Practice of the Church, which is a sufficient
Warrant in matters so reasonable and pious as this is: Now that the Primitive
Christians did always use a Prayer for the Consecrating of the Water does
appear by many Witnesses Oportet vero mundari and sanctificari Aqua prius a
sacerdote, ut possit baptismo suo peccata hominis qui baptizatur abluere. Cypr.
l. 1. ep. 21. Venit sacerdos, Precem dicit ad fontem, invocavit Patris nomen,
Praesentiam filii and Spiritus Sancti, Vtitur verbis coelestibus -- Quod
baptizemus in Nomine Patris and Filii and Spiritus Sancti. Ambros. de sacr. l.
2. c. 5. In Ecclesia Aqua sacerdotis prece sanctificatur. Aug. de bapt. in
Donat.
, and which is more, their Prayer did consist of two principal Parts, (as ours
also does) viz. 1. The repetition of Christ's Word, Math. 27.19. and a Petition
for the Holy Spirit: Only the present form is somewhat fuller, having First a
Typical Allusion as to the Original of Baptism. Secondly, A recital of the
Institution thereof. Thirdly, A double request grounded on these premises. 1.
For the sanctifying of the Water. 2. For the right disposition of the Child to
receive the benefits conveyed thereby.

1. This great Petition is introduced by remembering a remarkable passage in the
Passion of Christ, viz. the flowing of blood and Water from his holy side, as
he was hanging on the Cross, which the Fathers say, was from no natural cause,
but that it was miraculous and a mystery; designed to signify, that as Sin had
entered into the World by the Woman (made by a wound in Adams side) So Salvation
came in by the two Sacraments of Water and Blood Aqua ad lavacrum, sanguis ad
potum. Ambros. de virgin. ad Marcellin. l. 3. idem in Luc. 23. and de Sacram.
l. 5. c. 1. item Tertul. de bapt. c. 16.
which flowed from the side of the second Adam; and therefore we follow
Antiquity in this application, and encourage our selves to expect great things
from him, whose suffering did occasion this Mystery, and who poured out his
hearts blood for us.

2. Our Lord did not only figure this Sacrament in a mystical manner, but after
his Resurrection by a plain and express Commission made it a perpetual
Sanction, That all Nations should be Baptized in the Name of the Father, etc.
Math. 28.19. Wherefore since it is by his Command that we go about this
Mystery, we do repeat the Words of our Commission to show that we expect the
inward part and the efficacy of all from him, who set us upon the work; And
since he is God blessed for ever, and now also glorified and invested with all
Power in Heaven and Earth, Math. 28.18. we believe his words Accedat verbum ad
Elementum and fit Sacramentum. Augustine. (...). Dictum Oraculi Pythii ap.
Herodot. (...). Philo de sacrif. Abel.
are sufficient to effect whatsoever he would have done in Baptism. There are
many believe that in this (as well as the other) Sacrament, the Consecration is
made by the divine efficacy of the words of Christ: Yet that we may not rest in
the repetition of the Syllables only,

3. Here is added the requests of the whole Congregation, who are all bound to
join in this great request, that it may be the more prevalent when so many who
are already Christian, do beg the holy Spirit, for the making these Waters
effectual to the party now to be baptized: And the two former particulars do
add much strength to this Petition, which we may thus Express. O thou who did
so livelily typifie this sacred Ordinance in thy Passion, and so plainly
institute it after thy Resurrection, let us not want thy Presence and thy
influence, now that we are going about it by express Commission from thee.
Behold we do all unite our most fervent desires that thou will by this Water
effect that which far transcends all humane Power, Amen. Now the things desired
are two. First, That whereas this which we have provided is but common Water,
yet upon our humble supplication he, will send down his Holy Spirit upon it
(...) Cyril. Catech. 3. Ita de sancto (viz. Spiritu) sanctificata natura
aquarum, and ipsa sanctificare concepit. Tertul. de bapt. c. 4.
, that it may signify, operate and effect all that ever any Soul received in
this holy Laver, and convey all the blessings of Baptism unto this Child. We do
not desire nor expect the Water should be changed in substance, but only
sanctified to a new purpose, and impregnated with a spiritual property for the
mystical washing away of Sin: And if the holy Dove did descend in the Baptism
of Jesus, who had no need of cleansing; we hope by the devout Prayers of the
Church, it will be sent to these Waters, which are to be used for the purifying
of a Soul most miserably defiled. Secondly, We pray for suitable dispositions
in the suscipient, as well as spiritual efficacy in the instrument, that not
only this Water may be hallowed to convey, but this Child fitted to receive
abundance of Grace at present, and may keep the blessings for ever which are
now bestowed on it. There are too many whose names are written in the Catalogue
of Christians, yea and their names written (it seems) in the Book of Life, who
yet are blotted out again because of their Apostasy, Revel. 22.19. and Chap.
3.5. A sanctitate ad immunditiam, a justitia ad iniquitatem, a fide ad
impietatem multos transire dubium non est. Prosper. resp. ad objec. 3.
and lose their Crown Revel. 3.2. Dominus non minaretur auferri posse coronam
justitiae, nisi quia recedente justitia, recessit and corona. Cyprian. de un.
Eccles.
: Wherefore we pray that this Child may not only be admitted into the number of
Gods chosen ones, but may make its calling and election sure, by adorning this
Faith, into which it is baptized, with Virtue and all holy Conversation, 2
Peter 1.5.10. Many have received abundance of Grace in this holy Laver, here
they have been adopted, and have persevered in that blessed estate to their
lives end: and we wish this Child may receive as much as any ever received, use
it as well as ever any used it, and keep it as long as ever any kept it. Amen.

. 3, and 4. The Naming and Baptizing of the Child. Name the Child, N.] All
things being thus Prepared, when we see the Minister take the Infant in his
Arms, it should mind us of the mercy of Jesus who in like manner embraced those
that were brought unto him, and we are to hope that he will as lovingly receive
the Soul thereof as his Minister does the body. And now the time is come to
give it a new name. Nature has taught the most barbarous Nations to impose
Names on their Children for distinction, and among the Civilized part of the
Heathen World, the Name was given upon a certain day Alexander ab Alexand.
genial. Dier. l. 2. c. 25. Varro l. 17. Nominalia, Romany dicuntur.
, either the Seventh, Eighth, Ninth or Tenth according to custom of several
places; But always with great solemnity, and among the Grecians not without a
Sacrifice. The Jews (it is well known) named the Child at Circumcision, Genesis
21.2, 3. Luke 1.59, 60. Chap. 2.21. and therefore the Christians named theirs
at Baptism: Alluding to that new name which Jesus promises to give to his
Servants, Revel. 2.17. Yea even Persons of riper Years did commonly change
their Names, as (St. Ambrose says) Saul, did in Baptism change his name to
Paul, Acts 13.9. At ubi pluvia super eum lavacri coelestis influxit -- necatur
persecutor, necatur and Saulus, vivificatur. Apostolus, vivificatur and Paulus,
usque adeo autem perdidit veterem hominem ut cum moribus mutaret and nomen:
Ambros. Dom. 1. Quadrag. ser. 2. Ordine 31.
The like might be showed in many others, especially where they had names
before taken from any Idol, or relating to false Gods: For it was forbid by
Christian Councils Council. Nicaen. can. 30.
to give Heathen Names to Children or others, but rather to give them the Name
of some Apostle or Saint; not that there is any fortune or merit in the name it
self, but that so the party may be stirred up to imitate the Example of that
holy Person whose name he bears: Now this Name (though it may be privately
resolved upon by the Relations, Genesis 28.29. Ruth 4.18. yet) it must be dictated
by the Godfather, the Witness of this new birth, the Surety who engages it
shall lead a new life; and then solemnly given by the Minister, because he is
in Gods stead, who we hope will give it a new nature also. We derive one name
together with our original guilt from our Parents, which ought to humble us and
mind us of our being born in Sin: But this new name we receive at the time of
our Regeneration, to admonish us of our new Birth, and our Heavenly Kindred.
This Christian Name was given us when we were listed under Christ's Banner, and
it is a badge that we belong to God, so that as often as we hear it, we should
remember the Vow then made in our behalf. The Custom of old was to write the
Soldiers name upon his Shield Inde prodiit jus imaginum -- and nomina militum
clypeis inscripta. Forerius in leg. 95. Vide Veget. de re militari. l. 2. c. 28.
by which he was engaged in honor not to lose that Shield, unless he lost his
life; Even so has God given us our Name and our Faith together, so that if we
Apostatize, our Name will be our Eternal Infamy: We have a new Name, let us
walk worthy of it and lead a new life Reatus impii est pium nomen. Salvian. de
Prove. l. 4. -- Cura esse quod audis. Horat. Epist. 16. Nomen tuum attend, esto
quod diceris. Hieron. ad Paul.
, either striving to make our name Exemplary, if there have been no Saint of
it, or else laboring to be like those of our Ancestors ( Luke 1.59. Vide Grot.
in locum) or of Gods Saints who have worn it worthily before us, so shall it be
recorded not only in the Churches Register, but in the Book of Life, and stand
there for ever: Amen.

. 4. The form of Baptism.
N. I Baptize thee, In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, Amen.] After the Name is given, there are three things considerable in
the performance of this Holy Ministration. 1. The Person who baptizeth. 2. The
Words. 3. The Actions used in Baptizing. 1. He that does Baptize ought to be a
lawful Minister, for Christ gave this Commission only to the Apostles, joining
the Office of Preaching together with it, so that unordained Persons may as
well presume to preach as to Baptize Petulantia autem mulieris quae usurpavit
docere, non etiam tinguendi jus sibi pariet. Tert. de bapt. c. 17.
. And therefore the Church of old forbad Women to baptize Mulier baptizare non
praesumat. Conc Carthag. 4. Can. 100. quibu^ Gratian and P. Lomb. de suo
addunt, nisi cogente necessitate.
, and Epiphanius accounts it ridiculous in Marcion and his followers to permit
Women to do this Office Epiphan. Panar. lib. 1. tom. 3. haeres. 42.
. So that our Church requires it be done by a lawful Minister: I know there are
some allegations out of Antiquity which seem to allow of a Layman to Baptize
in Cases of great necessity. But there are others of the Fathers who disallow
that practice; and certainly it is a great presumption for an ordinary Person
to invade the Ministerial Office without any Warrant; and as to the pretense
that a Child may be in danger, I suppose the Salvation of the Child may be as
safe upon the stock of Gods mercy without any Baptism, as with a Baptism that
is not commanded by God, nor has he made any promises unto it. So that where
God gives not opportunity of a Person who may do it aright, it seems better to
leave it undone. 2. The Words I Baptize thee, etc. were always the form of the
Western Church, and cannot be pronounced Emphatically by Midwives or such as
the Romanists sometimes permit to baptize, but do suppose a lawful Priest, one
to whom Christ has given Power to do this: The Eastern Church use a little
variation, Let N. be Baptized, etc. but the sense is much the same: howsoever
in the next words, In the Name of the Father, etc. all Orthodox Christians ever
did agree, because it is of Christ's own appointment, and unalterable; wherefore
when the Heretics presumed to vary from this form, they were censured by the
Church, and those Baptisms declared null which were not ministered in the Name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. I confess there were words put in to
explain, not to vary the sense (...). Clem. Constit. l. 7. c. 23. and fusius
ap. Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2.
. And the Orthodox took liberty to mingle a Paraphrase with them; yet surely it
is more prudently done of our Church to preserve the Words of our Lord entire
without any Addition or Diminution. Now by Baptizing in the Name of the Three
Persons is not only meant we do it by the Commission and Authority of God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; But that we do baptize them into the Faith of the
Holy Trinity, and do receive them into that Society of Men who are
distinguished from Jews and Turks, Heathens, and all false Professions in the
World, by believing Three Persons and one God: This is the great fundamental
Article on which all the rest depend, and to which they may be referred; so
that our very being Baptized into the Trinity, is an Argument we are
Christians, and a Profession of the Religion which Jesus taught. And the more
to illustrate this, St. Ambrose tells us, that when Men come to full Age were
Baptized, they asked them three several times, if they did believe in each of
the three Persons, and put them into the Water first when they professed their
belief in the Father, and again when they declared their Faith in the Son, and
a third time when they said they believed in the Holy Ghost: Ambros. de sacram.
l. 2. cap. 7. We may add that this solemn naming of the three Persons is a kind
of calling them to Witness from Heaven, that we may as it were profess before
these three Witnesses our unfeigned Faith, 1 John 5.7. And so we have the same
for Witnesses of our Faith -- obsignata in Patre, Filio and Spiritu Sancto: nam
si in tribus testibus stabit omne verbum, quanto magis dum habemus per
benedictionem eosdem arbitros Fidei, quos and sponsores salutis. Tertul. de
bapt. c. 6.
who make us the promises of Salvation, and sure we shall never dare fall off,
who have sealed our Profession in the Presence of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, wherefore let our words be established for ever. 3. We are to consider
the Sacred Actions in Baptism, which are the Dipping or Sprinkling of the Party
with Water. It is indeed very probable, that at the first Institution of
Baptism in those hotter Regions where it was ordinary to bath daily, the Rite
might be performed commonly by Immersion, but the Prudence and Charity of the
Church (knowing this not to be Essential to the Sacrament) did even there
appoint that Clinick Christians, that is, such who by weakness kept their Beds,
should only be sprinkled with Water, which St. Cyprian determines to be a
lawful Baptism In sacramentis salutaribus necessitate cogente, and Deo
largiente indulgentiam suam, totum conferunt Divina^ Compendia: Cypr. ad Magn.
ep. 76.
. And therefore for the same reason it may very well be indulged, to
tender-infants in these Northern Countries. For God will have mercy and not
Sacrifice; and the divine grace is not measured by the quantity of Water used
in the Administration. And yet because the way of immersion was the most
ancient, our Church does first prescribe that, and only permits the other,
where it is certified the Child is weak, although Custom have now prevailed to
the laying the first wholly aside: but it is not a matter worth contending for,
since sprinkling is sufficient. As for the Custom of Dipping or sprinkling
three times, Once at the naming of the Father, again at the naming of the Son,
and a third time at the naming of the Holy Ghost, it is very likely Non semel
sed ter, ad singula nomina in personas singulas tinguimur. Tertul. advers.
Prax. cap. 26. Cyril. catech. 2.
it was the general use of the Church of old, and they supposed it did very
well express the Mystery of the Trinity: But our Church has not enjoined it;
wherefore if it be used by any, it must not be urged as necessary; for when
some in Spain began to press and strain this Trine Immersion too far, it was
Decreed in a Council, Caeutum est ne in Hispania fiat baptismus nisi una
mersione. Council. Tolet. 4. Can 5.
That it was sufficient to do it once, because this did as well set out the one
God, as the other did the Three Persons. To conclude, we ought not to be so
much concerned for these outward and ritual parts, as for the Devotion of our
Hearts: Wherefore let the Priest minister herein with all possible Humility,
Reverence, and Sincerity, remembering that God is doing his work within, while
he is exercised without; and let the People behold the mystery with gravity and
wonder, thankfully remembering the like mercy once showed to them: And finally
let the Priest and all the People heartily say Amen, when the mystery is ended,
both to show they believe the Child to be rightly baptized, and to desire God
may ratify that in Heaven which we have done upon the Earth. Amen, so be it.

. 5. The Reception of the Child into the Church.
We receive this Child into the Congregation of Christ's flock, and do sign him
with the Sign of the Cross, etc.] Baptism is by the appointment of Christ
himself the Sacrament of our initiation and admission into his Church;
wherefore when any one is Baptized, it is requisite they should be solemnly
declared members of the visible Church, and when God has received them into
his favor and sealed them with his Spirit, as he ever does in this mystery
where there is no impediment; we may then very justly receive them into our
Communion, and sign them with the cognizance of Christ's Religion, as we do in
this present Form. 1. By Words. 2. By a Sign; concluding Thirdly with a
practical Application. 1. The Words are a solemn Proclamation made by a Sacred
Herald (according to the Custom in humane Creations, Investitures, and
Admissions to Honorable Orders,) declaring the party is now, and ought to be
reputed a Christian; and this ought to be spoken with a loud voice, that all
the Congregation may rejoice in beholding one more listed under Jesus Christ.
Now if we seek any Precedent for this in Scripture, methinks it may very well
be deduced from that solemn Proclamation made by God the Father, immediately
after the Baptism of Jesus Christ, Math. 3.17. This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased: As he by the Master, so we by the Servant are declared to
belong to God. He as his own only-begotten Son, we as adopted by him into the
Family of our Heavenly Father. Again St. Paul speaking of the Ephesians who
were baptized (which is meant by their being raised up together in Christ
Ephesians. 3.6. (...) Theophylac. in loc.
) he declares that whereas they were before Aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, ver. 12. they were now become
fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God, ver. 19. Our Lord
Jesus has rescued this poor Soul from the Bondage of Satan, he has found this
strange and straying Sheep, and has sent it home, wherefore let us joyfully
receive it. The Church on Earth is compared to the Moon, daily diminishing and
increasing, we see many of our Brethren do die and are parted from us, but God
has now filled the vacant places, and by these continual accessions the
visible Church shall be continued to the end of the World. Our Savior himself
is the great Shepherd, but under him the Pastors of the flock of Christ, are
to admit the Sheep into his Fold, and accordingly the Priest here says, We
receive, etc. and withal sets the mark of Christ upon the new Baptized Person,
declaring by Actions as well as Words the selfsame thing: Even that this Person
is of the Religion of Jesus Christ, and one of the Society that do profess the
same. But because this Signing with the sign of the Cross has been scrupled by
some, and reviled by others as abominable superstition, etc. I will endeavor
somewhat more fully to vindicate the Church in this particular, and to give
satisfaction to those whose prejudice has not made them inflexible: 2. The
Sign which is Ordered to be annexed to the foregoing Words, is the Sign of the
Cross, which seems designed from the beginning to some great mystery, for (not
to mention that it is the figure of Man's Body when the Arms are Extended) we
find that God did choose it to be the mark which should be set upon those who
should be saved from a common Destruction, Ezekiel. 9. ver. 4. And though the
Rabbis, the sworn Enemies of the Cross, do expound the Hebrew word Tau there
to signify a mark, I see no reason why the Christians should follow them,
having Translators Omnem autem super quem videris Thau non occidetur. Vulg.
(...) Aquil. and Theod. ita Explicat. Tertul. in Marcion. l. 3. c. 22. Origin.
Homil. de Epiphan. Hieronym. in loc. etc.
and the most learned Fathers against them, particularly St. Jerome, affirming
that it signifies the letter Thau, which in the old Samaritan Alphabet had the
form of a Cross: even as [T] among the Greeks, which (it may be from thence)
was the mark of the Living, and [T] was set in the Muster-roll after a Battle
against the names of the living Sixth. Senens. bibliothec. l. 2. Thau.
, as [th] was against the names of the slain. And further it is very remarkable
what is related in the Church History Ruffin. Eccl. Histor. l. 11. cap. 29.
Socr. l. 5. cap. 17. Sozom. l. 7. cap. 15. Niceph. l. 21. c. 16. Isidore l. 1.
Orig. c. 3.
, and observed by others Hor. -- Apollo Hieroglyph. cum notis Nicolai Caussini.
, That one straight line upright and another transverse, was an Eminent
Hieroglyphick among the Egyptians, and signified sometimes the one upholder of
all things, sometimes Eternal Life: which was so well known to the Worshipers
of Serapis at Alexandria, that when they saw this Figure of the Cross so often
used by the Christians, they did many of them believe, by remembering the
Ancient signification of the Cross among them, supposing it was a mysterious
prediction that the Christians were the Servants of the one true God, and were
in the right way to Eternal Life. But to come nearer, when our Blessed Redeemer
had expiated the Sins of the World upon the Cross, the Primitive Disciples of
his Religion, who (as Minutius Foelix affirms) did not worship the Cross, yet
they did assume that figure as the Badge of Christianity; and long before
material Crosses were in use they did with their finger make this sign, either
in the Air, or upon their Foreheads or Breasts, in their rising up and lying
down, going out and coming in, in washing, eating, etc. as might abundantly be
proved out of Tertullian, St. Basil, Cyril, and many others, but only that it
is too evident to be denied, wherefore we must condemn the purest Ages of the
Church, if we shall censure the making this sign to be idolatrous or
superstitious, and it may be become injurious to the Spirit of God, who did
work many Miracles in the first Centuries by the sign of the Cross, as is
apparent to all that are versed in the History of those Times. All this is
confessed by many who yet pretend that it was not used in Baptism: although
they allege no sufficient reason, why they might not have used it there, as
well as upon all other occasions. But as to the matter of fact, it seems to me
very plain, that the sign of the Cross was used in Baptism also, for Lactantius
speaking of the Converted Heathens says, They came under the Wings of Jesus
and did receive his great and noble sign upon their Foreheads -- which like the
blood on the Lintel causes the destroying Angel to pass over Lactant. Instit.
l. 4. c. 27.
: yea he calls a Christian one with a signed forehead: And Tertullian Mithra
signat illic in frontibus milites suos. Tertul. de praeser. adv. haer. c. 40.
says, that Satan not only imitated the Christians in the washing, but the
signing his Soldiers in the forehead: which shows it to have been then a known
rite of Christianity. St. Basil also affirms it to be an ancient tradition to
sign those with the sign of the Cross, who had placed their hope in Christ
Basil. de Sp. S. c. 27.
, that is, who were Baptized, which is also the meaning of those (in St.
Cyprian Ea part corporis notatur (Ozia sc.) offenso Domino, ubi signantur qui
Dominum promerentur. Cypr. de unit. Ecc. Vide Chrysostom. hom. 54. in Mat:
) who were signed when they were admitted to Christ; but most clearly St.
Augustine Credit Catechumenus in cruce Christi qua and ipse signatur. August.
in Gal. 6.14.
who tells us expressly that the Catechumens were signed with the Cross of
Christ in which they had believed. There is it may be some difference in the
time of making the sign of the Cross, for the Ancients seem to have used it
before the Act of Baptizing, whereas we use it afterward, the better to
content our scrupulous Brethren, who cannot justly charge us with making it
essential to Baptism, because the Rite as to the substance of it is finished
before we make the Cross, and we esteem Baptism in Cases of haste, no worse, as
to the effects, where it is celebrated without it. If it be alleged that it is
a signifying sign of humane institution, and so ought not to be annexed to a
Sacrament of divine appointment; I desire it may be remembered that the putting
white Garments upon the Baptized, and the Receiving the Infant into the Church
with a kiss Cyprian. l. 3. epist. 8.
, as now become one of our Brethren 1 Thessal. 5.26.
, with many others, were signifying Signs, and instituted and used by the best
Christians, and yet never any offense was taken at them; and a good Mythologist
will make every action and gesture to be significant. But I am now beside my
purpose; wherefore I will return to consider with how innocent intentions the
Church does use the Cross in this Office. When we receive any into the Society
of our Religion, it is certainly as lawful to declare it by a In nullum nomen
Religionis, seu verum seu falsum, coagulari homines possunt, nisi aliquo
signaculorum, vel sacramentorum visibilium consortio colligentur. Aug. in
Faust. l. 19. c. 11.
sign, as by words: And surely there is no Character or signature, so
universally known to be the mark of a Christian, as the sign of the Cross,
which makes St. Paul to put the Cross for Christianity it self, 1 Corinthians.
1.17, 18. Galat. 5.11. Philip. 3.18. because the belief of a Crucified Savior
is the proper Article of this Faith, distinguishing the Christians from Jews,
Turks and all kinds of Religion in the World. Wherefore when the Emperor was
Converted, immediately the Cross became the most usual badge Vexilla militum
crucis infignia sunt, Regum purpuras, and ardentes diadematum gemmas patibuli
salutaris pictura condecorat. Hieron. ep. 7. ad Lat.
, and of public use as a testimony of his being a Christian. Hence it is
called the Sign of the Faithful: the Seal to make us known by our Master: and
the Seal of Christ (...) Cyril. Catech. 13. -- (...) idem. (...) Epiphan.
haeres. 30. signum Dei. Cypr. ep. 56.
: Wherefore to sign with the sign of the Cross, is to declare the party to be
Christian; and as the Custom was of old for Servants to have their Masters name
in their Forhead, Caelius Rhodig. l. 5. c. 31. so we set the mark of Christ
there, to show they have taken Christ Jesus for their Lord, or if (as the
Church directs) we like the military application better, St. Chrysostom tells
us that the Roman Soldiers would sometimes in love to their General, burn his
Name upon their Skin; and Procopius affirms, that the devotion of some
Christians made them in like manner imprint the sign of the Cross upon their
Arms, Com. in Jesai. 44. but we by an easier Rite do sufficiently publish, to
what General they belong; Baptism is the solemn Oath which we take (...) Cyril.
praef. ad Catech. Vocati sumus ad militiam Dei vivi, jam tunc cum in Sacramenti
verba spospondimus. Tertul. ad Mart. Sacramentum verae religionis accipere.
Lact. Instit. l. 1.
when we are entered Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and then we first put on his
Badge, which is like the Ring that the Egyptians gave unto their new listed
Soldiers Aelian. histor. animalium. l. 10. cap. 15.
, with a device to mind them to fight manfully. And what more auspicious sign
could we choose than the Trophy of the Cross, since our Victorious Redeemer did
triumph over those Enemies which we have renounced by it, yea upon it, Coloss.
2.15. Ver. 15. (...), i. e. (...), Ver. 14.
so that it is a terror to the Devils (...) Cyril. Cateches. 13.
, and a great encouragement to the Christian, to remember he fights under that
Triumphant Banner, which has been so successful; it is a shame to follow such
a Leader Malus miles est qui imperatorem gemens sequitur. Senec. ep. 107.
with a faint heart, or to fly from these happy Colors, when we have so good
assurance that if we keep close unto them, In this Sign we shall overcome; the
Cross does show our Captain died for us, and therefore it does incite us to
follow him, unto the Death striving against Sin; and if we die in this service,
that Death shall be to us as it was to him, the way to a glorious and
everlasting life. Let the World deride a Crucified Lord, and Atheism mock at
the Cross of Jesus, we are so far from being ashamed of our Faith, that we
glory in nothing more than in the Cross of Christ, and therefore we print it
upon the proper seat of blushing (...) Cyril. catech. 4. Nec nos pudet
crucifixi sed ubi pudoris signum est, crucis ejus signum habemus. August. in
Gal. 6.14.
. To conclude the Ceremony is exceeding proper, and very innocent, used by most
Christians, approved by all the Ancients, and by some of the most eminent
Reformed Divines expressly Bucer and Zanchy.
, and condemned by no Church: so that if this Ceremony be rejected by any, they
ought to consider that the fault is in Scandalum ni fallor non bonae rei, sed
malae Exemplum est, aedificans ad delictum, bonae res neminem scandalizant nisi
mulam mentem. Tertul. de veland. Virgin. cap. 3.
themselves, not in the thing, at which offense is taken, but none justly
given, if the Church be but rightly understood; so that it will be much more
profitable for us all to join against real Idolatry and Superstition, than to
contend about the shadows of it, and we shall do better to live like him whose
seal is set upon us, and to fight against our spiritual Enemies, than for so
small an occasion to fall out with an excellent Church, and be at enmity with
our Fathers or our Brethren.

SECT. III. The Close and Consequents after Baptism.
. 1. The Exhortation to the Congregation.
SEeing now, Dearly Beloved Brethren, that this Child is regenerate, etc.] We
must not presently turn our backs upon God so soon as the Holy Rite is
finished, but complete the Solemnity by Thanksgiving and Prayer, and that we
may do both, not only with the Spirit, but with Understanding, the Minister
does here teach us what must be the Subjects of our Praises and Petitions. 1.
Our Praises must look back upon the Grace already showed, and the benefits
which are already given to this Infant, which are principally two. 1.
Internally it is regenerated. 2. Externally it is grafted into Christ's Church;
for which we must give hearty thanks to Almighty God. To which we must add, 2.
Our Prayers which must look forward upon the grace which will be needful to
enable it to live answerable to this Estate into which it is admitted; and this
we must beg of Almighty God also, or else the former blessings will be
altogether in vain. Now all this is so plain that no more would need to be
added, but only that some with Nicodemus are apt to say, How can these things
be? John 3.9. judging it impossible that so great a matter as regeneration can
be effected so soon, and by so mean an instrument Simplicitas sacramenti
quibusdam derogat effectus fidem, cum sumptu plurimo and pompis, idolorum
arcana sibi authoritatem conciliant. Tertul. de Bapt.
, as they account it: whereas the effect is to be ascribed to the Divine Power
of the Author, not to the intrinsic efficacy of the outward means: Yet in
regard we can never bless God heartily for a mercy unless we believe he has
bestowed it, we must labor to remove these scruples by a fuller Account of
this Baptismal Regeneration, that we may not withhold the divine praises, by
our doubting and unbelief. The word Regeneration is but twice (that I know of)
used in Scripture, first Math. 19.28. Ye that have followed me in the
Regeneration: where though (by altering the point -- followed me, in the
Regeneration when the Son of man, etc.) it may signify in the Resurrection:
yet as we read, it signifies the renewing of men by the Gospel and Baptism.
Secondly, Titus 3.5. -- he saved us by the Laver of Regeneration Graec. (...).
per Lavacrum Regenerationis. Vulg. Sir. Vatab. and Beza.
, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which is a Paraphrase upon that of our
Savior, John 3. Except a man be born of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God, ver. 5. And because Persons come to Age before their
Conversion, are first taught and persuaded by the Word of God, the Language of
Holy Writ enlarges the Metaphor, and says, such are Begotten by the Word of
God, 1 Cor. 4.15. and then Born again or Regenerated in Baptism. In like manner
speak the Fathers, who do constantly and unanimously affirm, that we are
Regenerated in or by Baptism In novam vitam lavacro aquae salutaris animatus.
Cyprian. de seipso ep. 2. ad Donat. Regeneratione coelesti Christo
consurreximus. lib. de zel. and livor. Lavacrum inde Dionysius vocat (...):
Vide Ambr. de Sacram. l. 3. c. 1.
. So that we must next enquire wherein this Regeneration does consist. And
first, whereas both Children and those of riper years are by nature dead in
Sin, so that they lie under the guilt and power thereof; our gracious Father
does here in Baptism Seal a Covenant with us wherein he promises to pardon
them, and when this deadly load is removed, the Soul receives as it were a new
life, and takes new hopes and Courage, being restored to the divine favor, and
being set free from the sad expectations of unavoidable condemnation for former
sin, Original in Infants, and both it and Actual, in those of riper years.
Before this Covenant we were dead in Law, and by the Pardon of our Sins we are
begotten again to a lively hope, and herein stands the first particular of our
Regeneration, viz. in the Remission of Sins, wherefore both Scripture and
Antiquity Luke 3.3. Acts 2.38. Chap. 22:16. Omnem autem enormitatem sceleris
baptismi sacramenta diluunt.
teach us that Baptism is the means for Remission of Sin, and hence they join
Pardon and Regeneration commonly together (...) Justin. Martyr.

(...) Cyril. Catech. 2.


, because this forgiveness puts us into a new Estate, and an excellent
condition in comparison of that which our natural Birth had left us in. 2. But
further by Baptism we gain new Relations, and old things being done away all
things become new. Hence the Jews called their Proselytes Newborn Children,
because they forsook all their Heathen Kindred; so we, although we do not
renounce our Earthly Parents because they also are Christian, yet we gain new
Alliances, for God hereby does become our Father, and Jesus our Master, and all
the Saints both in Heaven and Earth our Brethren, so that it is as if we were
born over again, since Baptism does entitle us to this Celestial Kindred: But
this is not all. For Thirdly, Our corrupt nature is changed in Baptism, and
there is a renovation effected thereby, both as to the mortification of the old
affections, and the quickening of the new, by the Holy Spirit which is hereby
given to all that put no bar or impediment unto it. This was the Ancient
Doctrine, who affirmed a real Change to be wrought Da injustum, insipientem,
peccatorem, continuo and aequus and prudens, and innocens erit, uno enim
lavacro malitia omni^ abolebitur. Lact. Inst. 3. 26. Vndae genitalis auxilio
superioris aevi labe detersa, in expiatum pectus and purum desuper lumen
infudit. Cypr. de seipso. (...). Cyril. catech. 3.
, and believed the Spirit to be therein bestowed as God had promised, Ezekiel.
36.25, 26. That he would sprinkle clean Water upon them, and they should be
clean from all their filthiness, and then a new heart would he give them, and
put a new Spirit within them. And it is manifest, that in the first Ages of the
Church, there was abundance of gifts and graces miraculously bestowed upon
Christians in their Baptism, and no doubt if the Catechumens of our days who
are of Age, would prepare themselves as strictly by Repentance, Fasting, and
Prayer, as they of old did, they should find incomparable effects of this
sacred Laver, if not in as miraculous measures, yet to as real purposes, that
is, they should be truly regenerated, and their hearts changed by the influence
of the Divine Spirit. But some may doubt whether Infants be regenerate in this
sense, because they are not capable of giving any Evidences of their receiving
the Spirit, nor does there any immediate effects of their Regeneration appear,
hence the Pelagians denied it, but they are therefore condemned by the
Milevitan Council Can. 2. and confuted by St. Augustine ad Bonif. l. 3. It is
confessed they can show no visible signs of spiritual life in the operations
thereof, no more can they of their having a rational Soul, for some time, and
yet we know they have the power of reason within them; and since all Infants
are alike, either all do here receive a Principle of New Life or none receive
it; wherefore I see no reason why we may not believe as the Ancients did, that
Gods Grace which is dispensed according to the Capacity of the Suscipient, is
here given to Infants to heal their nature, and that he bestows on them such
measures of his Spirit as they can receive; for the malignant effects of the
first Adams sin, are not larger than the free gift obtained by the second Adams
righteousness, Romans 5.15.18. And if it be asked how it comes to pass then, that
so many Children do afterward fall off to all impurity? I answer, so do too
many grown Persons also, and neither Infants nor Men are so regenerated in this
life, as absolutely to extinguish the concupiscence: for the flesh still will
lust against the Spirit Baptizatus caret quidem omni peccato; sed non omni
malo, remanet siquidem concupiscentia. Aug. advers. Julian. Dimittitur
concupiscentia carnis, non ut non sit; sed ut in peccatum non imputetur: id. de
Bapt. and Concup. l. 1. c. 5. -- ad agonem manet, non consentientibus nihil
omnino nocitura: idem de remiss. l. 2. c. 4.
: but then God gives the Spirit also to lust against the flesh, Gal. 5. He
leaves the Corruption to try and exercise us, but so that he engages to enable
us to get the better, through this new nature planted in us, if we will improve
it, and follow the Dictates of his holy Spirit; but by neglect or wilful
complying with the flesh, we may lose this grace again; Our Gracious Father
has already done his part, and will do it more and more as the Child shall be
capable and willing to receive it; and if this seem strange to any whose
Opinions are taken up from later Definitions of Regeneration, let them dispute
with holy Cyprian (not with me) who says, Eadem gratia spiritualis quae
aequaliter in Baptismo a credentibus sumitur; in conversatione atque actu
nostro postmodum vel minuitur, vel augetur. Cypr. ep. 76. ad Magnum.
The Grace of God is equally distributed in Baptism, but it may either be
diminished or increased afterward, by our Acts and Conversation. The sum is,
That Baptism does seal a Pardon to us for all former Transgression, and begets
us again to the hope of Eternal Life; that it restores us to the favor of God,
and gives us a new Relation to him; and finally it heals our nature by the
Spirit hereby conveyed to us: and though all this be upon condition of our
keeping our part of the Covenant, yet that makes not Gods mercy less, nor ought
it to diminish any of our Praises, but only it must make our Prayers at present
more earnest, and the Child's care hereafter more strict, to make this its
calling and Election sure. This is I hope the sense of our Church as well as of
the Primitive, and if so, it will not be material to a judicious Christian for
any to say it does not agree to some modern Systems. The other Parts of this
Exhortation we shall not need further to explain here, because we mentioned
them in the beginning, and there are no objections against them, and they are
all repeated in the ensuing Collect, where we will speak more practically of
them.

. 2. Of the Lords Prayer.
Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.] Whenever we pray we are Commanded to
say, Our Father, Luke 11.2. because whatsoever we need is comprised in that
divine form: and when this leads the way, it prepares God to hear all the rest,
giving efficacy to them and supplying the defects of them; But still we must
apply it to the present occasion: And now let us consider we could never say,
Our Father, with respect to this Infant before, whereas the whole Congregation
being about to Petition for this new Member of their Society, and lately
adopted Child of God, may fitly now say, Our Father which art in Heaven: and
since he has given to it and to us the Holy Name of Christian, we ought to
pray that this his Name may be Hallowed in our lives, and that his Kingdom of
Grace may be completed by these daily accessions till the coming of his
Kingdom of Glory; in the mean time that all we his Earthly Children may do his
will and submit to his Providence, as those in Heaven ever do: We must pray
that God will henceforth take a Fatherly care of this Infant among the rest of
his Children, Giving both to it, and to us our daily bread: And that he will
please to forgive to it its Original, and to us our Actual Sin, even as we are
engaged in a Covenant of Charity, and promised to forgive all the World as one
of his prime commands. Finally, we must beseech him to defend both it and us
from the Temptations which we have renounced, that so we may not fall into the
Evil of Sin or Punishment, nor fall off from the Grace in which we stand. All
which, for this new Brother of our Society which yet cannot pray for it self,
and also upon our own Account, we must conclude with a hearty Amen.

. 3. Of the last Collect.
We yield thee hearty thanks most merciful Father, for that it has pleased
thee, etc.] As the foregoing Exhortation did persuade us to conclude this
Office with Praises and Prayer, so here the Church has prepared an excellent
form to express both, and according to the method there prescribed, here is
First, most hearty Thanksgivings for the benefits of Baptism. 2. Most humble
Petitions, that the Party which has received them may walk answerably. 1. We
begin with Acknowledgments and Praises in imitation of the Jews, who when the
Child is Circumcised, do use to say, Blessed be the Lord our God who has
sanctified us with his Precepts, and commanded us to bring this Child into the
Covenant of Abraham Fagius in Deuter. 10.6. Buxtorf. Synagog. cap. 2.
: But this Child enters into a better Covenant, established upon better
promises, so that we have more cause to bless God than they; nor ought we to
Question whether the Grace of the Sacrament be received or no, since the Church
of old did ever suppose it, even in Adult Persons, because they knew the Lord
was ever ready on his part, and had promised to be with his Church to the end
of the World, in this very Administration, Math. 28. ult. Hence in the East
they sung after Baptism, the 32. Psalm. Blessed is he whose iniquity is
forgiven, etc. and St. Ambrose says, the Priest spoke to the Person Baptized
in this manner: God the Father Almighty, who has regenerated thee by Water and
the Holy Ghost, and forgiven thee thy Sins, etc. which shows, that the Ancients
did not question the effect of the Sacrament, no not in Persons of Age, until
their future Conversation declared they had broke their Covenant; how much more
then ought we to believe this, in the Case of Infants, who can put no
impediment to the Grace of God, and are all alike, so that either all or none
receive these blessings? Now the particulars for which we bless our most
merciful Father, they are Three; all of them acts of free Grace, and effects of
a mighty favor, and all of them highly beneficial to the party on whom they
are bestowed. First, That it has pleased God to Regenerate this Infant with
his Holy Spirit; which is an invaluable mercy: For whereas it was by its first
Birth guilty of Original Corruption, and liable to Eternal Death, in this
second Birth that guilt is done away, and that Obligation to Death cancelled,
and so shall ever remain, unless it fall under it again by actual disobedience.
And whereas it was defiled and corrupted in the principles of its being
deprived of the image of God, under the Power of Sin and the Dominion of the
Flesh, in a servile wretched condition, so that it could never have pleased
God, Romans 8.8. nor conquered its evil affections, nor had it any assistance or
strength so to do: But now it is born of the Spirit, and purifyed in the inward
Man, and the image of God is begun to be drawn anew, it has a new principle
put into it which will resist the flesh, and may wholly in time subdue it; it
is in Covenant with God, and has promises of aid from him, so that its nature
is healed at present, and shall be sanctified throughout hereafter, if this
Grace be not expelled again: it was an Object of divine wrath, a Vessel fit for
destruction, a corrupt abominable Creature; but now it is beloved, purifyed and
restored, it is admitted to a state of Pardon, put into a Capacity of pleasing
God, and Conquering all its Enemies, and it has as fair possibilities of
glory, as the best of Gods Saints (which now enjoy it) once had. Oh let us
bless the Almighty for this change, for from such beginnings Eternal felicity
uses to spring, and this little seed by the divine influence and careful
cultivating, will thrive and grow into a state of perfection and immortality.
2. We must praise him that he has adopted it for his own Child, which is a
consequent of the Regenerating it, for God adopts none for his Children till he
has first sanctified Pythagoraei vocant Deum (...) Hierocles.
them and made them in some measure like himself. Now how excellent a favor is
this also? that so poor a Wretch, whose Kindred was Worms and Corruption, if
not evil Spirits, should so freely be adopted by the King of Kings, not because
he wants Children of his own (the usual reason of Adoption Adoptio solet fieri
(...) Aulus Gellius. Divus Augustus amissis liberis, nepotibus, exhausta
Caesarum turba, adoptione domum desertam fulsit. Senec. Consol. ad Marc. Sect.
15.
) for besides the Holy Jesus, the Blessed Angels are all Sons of God; nor yet
because he deserved this favor, was this Child Adopted: But of his own
infinite goodness Our Heavenly Father takes the Slaves of his Enemy, whose
lives are forfeit to his Justice, and not only pardons them, but makes them his
own Children, and thereby gives them the best freedom, even the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God Eum servum quem Dominus actis intervenientibus
filium suum nominaverit, liberum esse constituimus. Justin. institut. l. 1.
tit. 2. Sect. 12.
, Romans 8.21. and intitles them to a Portion of his Grace, and also an
Inheritance in his Glory, and a right to the Crown of Life. Oh who can parallel
this mercy, or how can we sufficiently express it? Lastly, We are to give
thanks that this Child is made a Member of the Church; it is a rare mercy that
the great Husbandman should take this dead Branch of a wild Olive, only fit to
be fuel for Eternal Flames, and graft it into the true Olive, Romans 11.17. so as
to make it partake of the same Spirit, and grace which is derived from the Root
into the most flourishing and fruitful Branches: That this Stranger should be
incorporated into the Society of Christ's Holy Church, and made a Denizon of the
New Jerusalem (...) Chrysostom.
. The Chief Captain purchased his freedom in the Roman City at a very great
rate, Acts 22.28. and it was formerly thought a reward for the greatest merits
to give them the Privileges of a Roman: but behold one that could deserve
nothing, most freely made a Fellow-Citizen with the Saints, and of the Household
of God, Ephesians. 2.19. admitted to all the Franchises and Immunities that belong
to the Communion of Saints: Blessed be God! Could this poor Infant understand
its own happiness herein, or were it able to express it self, it would most
passionately sing praises, and be ravished with Admiration, at so mavelous
bounty and condescension: but since the Child cannot do this as yet, let us (to
whom the like favor has been showed) lend it our Tongues and Hearts to bless
the Lord at present, and let us really rejoice in remembrance of our own Mercy,
so that the Name of his Majesty may be magnified as it ought to be, Amen. 2. To
our Thanksgiving we must add Petitions and beseech Almighty God, that it may
not receive this Grace in Vain. And herein also we have a President in the
Jewish Rites, where the Circumciser having ended the Circumcision, says, O our
God and the God of our Fathers, strengthen and preserve this Infant unto his
Parents, etc. and as he has entered into the Covenant of Circumcision, let him
enter into the state of Marriage, and good Works: But our Prayers are more
spiritual, viz. for inward Grace rather than outward Blessings, and good
Reason, for all these benefits will vanish, unless they be afterward improved,
they will not have their full effect, unless the Conditions be performed.
Neither we nor the Primitive Church do believe them to be so regenerate or so
endued with the Spirit, but that by sloth and wilful iniquity they may be
deprived of all again; their Corruptions are not so mortified, but that by
compliance and base negligence, they may revive again, so that the last Estate
shall be worse than the first, and it shall be more tolerable for Heathens than
for vile Apostates. Wherefore we beg most humbly and earnestly, that this Child
may live as one upon whom such great favors are bestowed. The Words of these
Requests are St. Paul's, Romans 6.4, 5, 6. and ver. 11, 12, 13. and the Phrase is
frequently used by the Fathers in this Case. The sum of them is, to desire that
whatsoever is shadowed in the Outward part, and signified in Rite, may in
Substance and reality be fulfilled Baptismus salutaris est, si perfectum est in
cord quod factum est in Corpore. Augustine.
, and that whatsoever the Scripture affirms to be the duty of all baptized
Persons, may be particularly performed by this Child; That as this Child has
in figure imitated Christ's Death and Resurrection, so it may hereafter live, as
one dead unto sin and all the desires of it, but alive unto righteousness, and
ready to execute all the commands thereof; That as it is baptized into the
Faith of Christ Crucified for Sin, so it may mortify and kill all its corrupt
affections, until it have utterly abolished all the powers of Lust and
Concupiscence, and brought the flesh in subjection to the Spirit. We pray that
it may not renew the guilt that is remitted, nor fall back into the bondage
from which it is delivered, that it may not defile what God has cleansed, nor
expel what he has given; but when it comes to understanding, that it may make
use of the Grace that is offered unto it, and improve the beginings planted in
it, and live like one of Gods Children, and one of the Society of Saints; and
then we are assured that it shall not only have an Interest in the merits of
Christ's Death, but feel the power of his Resurrection; and finally, it self
also shall rise again in the Resurrection of the Just, of which this Mystery is
a pledge Baptismus itaque resurrectionis pignus est and imago. Ambros. in Romans
6.
. We do most ardently therefore desire this Infant may lead a holy life; for if
it live like Jesus on Earth, it shall live with him in Heaven; if it be an
obedient Son, it shall not fail of the Inheritance; if it follow the steps of
holy Saints, it shall go whither they are gone, and with them at last sing
Hallelujahs in Everlasting Glory. And oh what pity is it, that when this Child
is set in the right way thither, when it is put into such a state, that neither
former Guilt, nor future power of Sin can stop its passage, if it hold fast the
Grace received; what pity is it (I say) that it should fall off and lose all
again? And yet too many do thus Apostatize, and exchange Life for Death,
Liberty for Bondage, and Heaven for Hell, whose sad Catastrophe does stir us up
most heartily to pray, that this poor Infant may never do the like, but through
the Continuance of the grace of God may lead the rest of its life according to
this blessed beginning for Jesus sake: and let all the People say, Amen.

. 4. The concluding Exhortation to the Sureties.
Forasmuch as this Child has promised by you that are his Sureties, to
renounce, etc.] The Church has always had an especial care that this Vow of
Baptism may be conscientiously performed; And in regard that nothing tends more
directly to the securing of Holiness and Religion, here is added endeavors to
our Prayers for the fulfilling thereof. In the first Ages when those of riper
years were Baptized, the Exhortation Alloquimur recenter baptizatos, ut animos
accendamus sive ad virginalem integritatem, sive ad continentiam vidualem, sive
ad ipsius thori conjugalis fidem. Aug. de Civ. dei l. 1. cap. 27.
was directed to the Persons themselves, and there are many excellent Tracts of
the Fathers made upon that occasion: But now that Children are most commonly
the Subjects of Baptism, who are not yet capable of Admonition; here is a
serious and earnest Exhortation made unto the Sureties: Which if it be well
considered, will show how base it is for any to undertake this Trust merely in
Complement, how absurd to put little Children (whose Bond is not good in humane
Courts) upon this weighty Office, and also how ridiculous for those who have
taken this duty upon them, to think they can shake off this Charge again, and
assign it over to the Parents: which are the evil Customs of this Licentious
Age: It is sure, that if this Institution of Godfathers and Godmothers were
prudently undertaken, and well performed, there could not be a more effectual
means to repair the decay of Christian Piety; and therefore it is very
lamentable to behold how slightly men enter upon it, and how little they do
regard it afterward. For remedy whereof I wish that all Sureties would well
weigh this Excellent Exhortation, which contains, First, A review of what they
have done. Secondly, A direction concerning what they are to do. Thirdly, A
reason why it is so necessary that these things should be done by them. 1. They
have engaged for a Minor unto Almighty God, the God of truth, and the Judge of
all Men; they are become Sureties and Bondsmen Quicunque viri, quaecunque
mulieres de sacro font filios spiritualiter exceperunt, cognoscant se pro
ipsis fide-jussores extitisse. August. de Temp. Sermon. 136.
for this Child unto the Majesty of Heaven; and it is a heinous Crime to deal
falsely with him Eccles. V. 2.4. Quam gravia vincula promittere Deo and non
solvere. Ambros. in Luc. 20.
, and he will in no wise be mocked: You have undertaken that this Infant shall
renounce the Devil, believe in God, and serve him, and though the Child's wilful
Apostasy does not forfeit your Bond, yet your own negligence may, if you do
not endeavor to instruct and amend him; God knows it is not in your power to
give the Child's Grace, but it is in your power to teach and to admonish, and if
you will not do so small a matter, the Child is lost through your default, and
it is apparent you care not what you promise to Almighty God; for the least
that a Bondsman can do is to call upon the Debtor to discharge what is owing,
nor can there be a more easy condition than that the Surety shall be free, if
he do but often admonish him that he is bound with to pay the Debt. Consider
therefore all you that are concerned, what you have done, and then it is easy
to gather from thence what you are obliged unto: 1. To teach these Children the
nature of their Baptismal Vow, and this was of old appointed even as to grown
Persons when they had been baptized in haste, in Cases of imminent danger, they
were to be taught afterward, what favor God had done them, and what duty they
owed for the same Qui in aegritudine constituti baptismum perceperunt, facti
sani, fidei symbolum doceantur, ut noverint qua donatione digni sunt habiti:
Council. Laodicen. Can. 59.
: Much more is it necessary in the Case of Infants; wherefore, The Godfather or
Godmother (says an ancient Author) ought to signify to those whom they have
received from the Font of Regeneration (when they come to Age) what Promises
they have made for them -- that they may study not to live unworthy of the
Salvation provided for them, but may fulfill by their own performance what they
have promised by the mouths of others: Walafrid. Strabo de reb. Eccles. cap.
26. St. Augustine also warns them to instruct and correct them whom they have
answered for Quos enim ex baptismo suscepistis, docete and castigate: Aug. de
rect. and Cathol. convers.
: and the Synod of Mentz Compatres spirituales filiolos suos Catholice
instruant: Synod. Mogunt. Can. 47.
has a peculiar Decree in this matter. But if there were no Authority, it is
highly reasonable and absolutely necessary, for how shall they believe in him
of whom they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a Teacher? Romans
10.14. It is impossible they should keep this Vow if they do not understand it;
wherefore you must begin early and inculcate often to them, what you did for
them, and upon what terms they stand with Almighty God, which you cannot better
do, than by making them learn and understand the Church Catechism, the first
part of which is an Excellent Account of this Solemn Vow, plainly and briefly
showing both what God promised to them, and what they by you promised to him,
together with other particulars for their better keeping of the same. This is
the first part of the Sureties Duty; The second is that they do bring them to
the House of God more fully to be instructed and advised; for Faith comes by
Hearing, Romans 10.17. Sermons are appointed to convince the Judgment, persuade
the Will, and move the Affections of such as have been initiated in the first
Principles of Religion. And here they shall be exhorted and reproved, and
continually kept in mind of their Duty; so that Experience shows that those who
neglect to hear Sermons Alphius foenerator solebat dicere, Optima nomina, non
appellando mala fieri. Columella de re rustica, l. 1. c. 7.
, do grow worse and worse, and fall into damnable neglect, even forgetting that
ever any vow was made by them or for them, running at last into Atheism and
open Profaneness. Thirdly, But because Sermons will do little good until a
good foundation be laid, they must privately teach them, First, The Creed which
they have promised to believe. Secondly, The Lords Prayer that they may have
help from God against the Enemies which they have renounced. Thirdly, The Ten
Commandments which they are engaged to keep, and all these in the English
tongue, lest they patter them over as ignorant Papists their Ave Mary's, and do
not understand them. These must be taught the poorest, being indispensably
necessary; but then where Children can read, their Godfathers must teach them
in private all things that may further their Salvation, and also bring them to
be Catechized by the Minister where they may be taught more fully. Fourthly,
They must endeavor that their Parents bring them up in Virtue and the Fear of
God: for without this all knowledge is unprofitable, and therefore they have
just Authority to advise these Children to do well, and to reprove them for
doing ill, yea to admonish the Parents also if they neglect their Duty. Lastly,
Lest any should think this is more than needs, the Exhortation ends with a
Cogent Reason, showing the necessity of this care, viz. Because the main end of
Baptism and the design of all the Rites in it, is, that we may be real
Christians, that is, lead holy Lives, and become like unto Christ Quid est
Christianus? similitudo Dei quantum possibile est humanae naturae; si
suscepisti Christianismum, festina fieri similis Deo. Basil. Hexam. Hom. 10.

(...). Hierocles.


, whose name we are Baptized into, and whose Religion we have undertaken: if we
do not live the more free from Sin, and do more good works, we might as well
have been Unbaptized, yea it shall be more tolerable for Turks and Infidels.
You Godfathers and Godmothers have done the Child little kindness, if you look
after it no further, you have assisted it in vowing and engaging to be the
Servant and Soldier of Jesus Christ, in abjuring and renouncing all
Wickedness, and will you not do something to procure it may perform these? Be
assured that Baptism will neither do you nor them good, unless it make you more
holy afterward, but will be the aggravation of your Condemnation. Wherefore I
will conclude with a threefold Admonition. 1. To Parents, who must choose such
Sureties as may be assistants to them in their weighty Charge, and must be
either so pious to bring up their Children well, or so humble as to be willing
to be told of it by those whom God and the Church has made their Supervisors.
But if Parents be proud and scornful, or take such advice in evil part, they
are doubtless guilty of the breach of this Vow. Secondly, To Sureties, Let them
not be discouraged from this pious undertaking, by the Duty attending on it,
for it is uncharitable to refuse it, and others have done it for us; we are
bound to all these things for our selves, and every Christian must reprove his
offending Brother, yet by thus engaging we become an instrument of our
Neighbors Salvation, nor shall we need to bring any guilt upon our selves, for
we may easily deliver our soul; And when we do become Sureties, we may declare
to the Parents, that it is our Duty and Resolution to endeavor the Salvation
of this Child. Let them take it well or ill, let us not displease God and
endanger our own Souls Amici vitia si feras, facis tua. P. Mim. Vtiliores sunt
plerumque inimici objurgantes, quam Amici objurgare metuentes: Aug. ep. ad
Hieron. Molesta veritas, siquidem ex ea odium nascitur: sed multo^ molestius
obsequium, quod peccatis indulgens praecipitem ferri amicum sinit. Cicero.
for fear of giving them offense; Let us resolve we will anger them rather than
connive at their Child's ruin: It is a cruel and mischievous modesty to be
ashamed to speak for God where two Souls are concerned, our own and his for
whom we are engaged. Let not others negligence be a President or excuse to us,
for we see Religion almost lost, while none take care of Childrens Religious
Education: And if Sureties do instruct, exhort, and reprove their Charge, they
have done their part, and must leave the success to God. Thirdly, To those that
are Baptized, You must be thankful to and reverent toward your Sponsors, and
give them leave to reprove you, taking all in good part from them, and being
desirous to learn your Duty. And let us all that have received this Sacrament,
Remember our Vow unto our lives end, for it will arm us against Sin (...)^
Ignat. Ep. ad Polycarp.
, to consider how solemnly we have renounced it; and Luther tells us of an Holy
Virgin that conquered all the Devils Temptations, by Crying out, I am Baptized,
I am a Christian. If we fall off to an Evil Faith, or Wicked Life, we are not
only disobedient or deceived, but perjured and forsworn; and we forfeit all the
Grace that we had begun to receive, and the Glory to which we were sealed. Let
our lives show we did obtain some Grace in Baptism, by early beginning to
cultivate that good Seed, before it be choked with the Weeds of evil Lusts. Let
the younger labor to keep out sin by speedy applying themselves to good
exercises, and the elder labor to regain by unfeigned Repentance their former
Purity, remembering from whence they are fallen; so shall Baptism not only let
us into the way to Heaven, but be a means to keep us in the same, till we come
to the enjoyment of a blessed Immortality, Amen.

A Brief Discourse upon the Office of Confirmation.
THE Conclusion of Baptism being an Admonition that the party Baptized may be
brought to Confirmation, would have obliged us to treat of this Rite there; but
because the Church has made it a peculiar Office, we may allow it a peculiar
Discourse, and it does most fitly follow that of Baptism, being so nearly
allied to it, and in pursuance of that great Vow to the observance whereof we
are all so strictly bound: only before we enter upon the Parts of this Office,
we shall first survey the Original thereof.

Although our Lord Jesus did not expressly institute Confirmation as he did
Baptism and the Holy Eucharist, and so it is not properly a Sacrament; yet
Aquinas fancies the reason why this had no positive institution, was, because
the Holy Ghost (which is herein to be communicated) was not given till after
Christ's Ascension, John 7.39. yet in his promising the Holy Spirit to his
Disciples, and to remain with his Church for ever, John 14.16. he seemed to
suppose that there should be some Rite instituted by them for the perpetual
Collation of the Spirit. The first Converts indeed whom the Apostles Baptized
were confirmed by the immediate Hand of God, and he by miraculous gifts of the
Holy Ghost sealed their Baptism, and attested the Religion into which they had
entered: But it was not long before the Apostles were appointed to Minister in
giving the Holy Spirit to the newly Baptized, and then they instituted the Rite
of Laying on of hands: and God was pleased so far to approve their institution,
that he did actually give wonderful measures of the Spirit to those on whom
they laid their hands, thereby honoring the Governors of his Church, and
engaging all the Members thereof to be subject to them, and to be at Peace one
with another: This appears from that famous instance, Acts 8.14, 15, 16, 17.
where when the Samaritans had been Converted and Baptized by Philip the Deacon,
they did not receive the Holy Ghost, until St. Peter and St. John had Confirmed
them Id quod deerat a Petro and Johanne factum est, ut oratione pro eis habita
and manu imposita, invocaretur and infunderetur super eos Spiritus Sanctus;
Quod nunc quoque apud nos geritur: Cypr. ep. ad Jubai. ita Hieron. in Lucif.
Innocent. l. 1. ep. 3. etc.
, from whence the Fathers generally deduce this Practice: But that this was
generally constituted among the Apostles is evident because St. Paul meeting
with some Baptized Persons at Ephesus, did in like manner lay his hands upon
them and confirm them, Acts 19.6. of which he minds them, Ephesians. 1.13. In whom
also after that ye believed ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of Promise:
And so we may justly believe he did in other Churches, whereupon he says to
those of Corinth, 2 Corinthians. 1.21, 22. Now he which Confirms us Graec. (...).
with you in Christ, and has Anointed us is God, who has also sealed us, etc.
And when this great Apostle comes to reckon up the Fundamentals of Religion,
Hebrews 6.1, 2. amongst them he places, The Laying on of Hands, which cannot
well be meant of the Imposition of hands in absolving Penitents, since that is
included in Repentance before, nor yet of Ordination which is one of those
Mysteries of perfection to which St. Paul goes on, Chap. 7. But in regard it
follows Baptism, and is a Doctrine to be taught to Catechumens or young
beginners, it is most likely to be meant of Confirmation, and so it is
interpreted by St. Chrysostom, The Doctrine of being prepared to receive the
Holy Spirit, which is given by imposition of hands. St. Cyprian also applies
that of our Savior, John 3.5. of being Regenerated with the Spirit as well as
with Water, to this Mystery Tunc enim plene sanctificari and esse filii Dei
possunt, si Sacramento utroque nascantur, cum scriptum sit, Nisi quis natus
fuerit ex Aqua and Spiritu, etc. Epist. 72.
. Which is so often alluded to in Scripture, and so plainly to be proved from
thence, that those who disallow it, are forced to pretend, that this
Apostolical Usage, Laying on of Hands, was only a Personal Privilege, and was
to cease when miraculous inspirations did not accompany it. But besides that we
might argue that the Spirit is to abide in the Church for ever, and that
Christians have and need it now, though not in such wonderful measures, yet as
really and effectually to the purposes of Sanctification, as any had it then;
wherefore there is no reason the Rite of Communicating it should cease; besides
this I say, we can easily Confute this pretense, by showing that the Church did
in every Age continue this Custom of Confirming after Baptism, which proves
they did not imagine it was a Temporary Institution. We might here allege the
Testimonies of Dionysius, and Clemens Romanus, as also the Epistles of Urban
and Melchiades Dionys. Eccles. hierar. cap. 4. Clement. Constit. l. 3. c. 17.
and Epist. 4. Urban. Epist. ad omnes fidel. Melchiad. Epist. ad Episc.
Hispaniae.
, which though they are not so ancient as their pretended Authors, yet in their
due place are not wholly to be rejected, these therefore we omit as being
liable to Exception: But we find in Eusebius, that the Asian Bishop, not only
Baptized but Confirmed the young Man which St. John delivered to him Eusebius.
Eccles. hist. l. 3. cap. 17.
. Tertullian who lived in the second Century plainly affirms, That they laid on
hands after Baptism to invite the Holy Ghost Dehinc manus imponitur advocans
and invitans Spiritum Sanctum, de Bapt. cap. 6.
. And elsewhere, The flesh is sealed, that the Soul may be defended, the flesh
is shadowed by imposition of hands, that the Soul may be illuminated by the
Spirit Idem de Res. carnis Cap. 8.
. About fifty years after, St. Cyprian is most express. Upon those (says he)
who have been baptized in the Church, and received Ecclesiastical and lawful
Baptism, the Holy Ghost is invocated and poured out, Prayer being made over
them, and hands laid upon them: and more to the same purpose Qui in Ecclesia
baptizantur per Praepositos Ecclesiae offerantur, and per nostram orationem,
and manus impositionem Spiritum Sanctum consequantur. Epist. ad Jubaian. 73.
. About the same time was that Epistle writ by Dionysius of Alexandria
mentioned by Eusebius Eccles. histor. l. 6. cap. 45.
, wherein he says, that though Novatus were Baptized, yet being not
consummated with the seal of Confirmation, he could not receive the Holy Ghost.
To this may be added the 77 Canon of the Council of Eliberis, which requires
the Bishop should confirm by his Benediction, those who had not been Baptized
in his presence: For it is to be noted that when the Bishop was present, and
the Person baptized was of full Age, the Rite of Confirmation immediately
followed Baptism; Which otherwise (in the Western Church especially) was
deferred for some time after. The next Authority may be derived from the
Council of Laodicea, An. 365. which (...)^ Canon. 48.
says, That the Baptized must after he anointed with the Heavenly Unction,
that they may be partakers of the Kingdom of God. And nothing is more full than
St. Ambrose, who lived about 20. years after, Who puts the young Christian in
mind of the Spiritual Seal which he had received Accepisti signaculum
spirituale -- signavit te Deus Pater, confirmavit te Christus, etc. lib. de
initiand. cap, 7.
. And tells us this spiritual Seal was, when (after Baptism) the Holy Ghost was
poured forth at the invocation of the Priest Post fontem superest ut perfectio
fiat quando ad invocationem Sacerdotis S. Sanctus infunditur. de Sacram. l. 3.
Cap. 2.
. And in another place Comment. in Hebr: 6. initio.
, By Imposition of hands it is believed the Spirit may be received, which is
wont to be done after Baptism, by the Bishop, for the Confirmation of Unity in
the Church. His Contemporary also S. Basil records, that Eubulus and he were
confirmed by Bishop Maximus. And to conclude, St. Hierome a man of the same Age
speaking of Confirmation says, This Observation by the Authority of Scripture,
was derived upon the Bishops for their honor -- and if there were no Authority
of Scripture, the consent of the whole World in this matter would have the
force of a law Hieron. Dialog. advers. Luciferianos.
. It will be needless to descend lower, where testimonies grow still more
numerous; only we may add, that Confirmation in our sense is allowed by the
Lutheran Churches Confessio Saxonica de Confirm.
, and constantly practiced in Bohemia Comenius Annot. in Ration. discipline.
Eccles. Bohem. cap. 3. Sect. 3.
, nor is it condemned by any sober Protestants. And therefore, as our Church
has prudently and piously retained it, we ought to have a high Veneration for
it, especially since we are all baptized usually in our infancy. And that
(whenever we are partakers of it,) it may be really effectual to us, we will
briefly consider the way of its Administration, beginning with the method of
the whole Office.

The Analysis of the Order of Confirmation.
The Order of Confirmation has Three Parts. 1. The Preparation for it, by 1. A
serious Admonition, in The Preface, To the end that Confirmation may be
ministered, etc.

2. A solemn Stipulation, in The Interrogation, Do you here, in the presence of
God, etc.
and Answer, I do.

3. Acts of Praise, in The Versicles, Our help is, etc.
and Responses, Who has made, etc.

4. Supplication for the gifts of the Spirit, in The First Prayer, Almighty and
everliving God, who have vouchsafed to, etc.


2. The Rite it self, as to 1. The Act, or the Ceremony, viz. Laying on of
Hands.
2. The words which do accompany it, The Solemn Benediction, Defend, O Lord,
this Child, etc.


3. The Conclusion, being 1. More general Petitions, in 1. The Versicle, and
Response, The Lord be, etc. And with thy, etc.
2. The Lords Prayer Our Father, etc.

2. More peculiar to the Occasion, in The Proper Collect Almighty and
everlasting God, who make us both, etc.
The last Collect, O Almighty Lord, and everlasting God, etc.

3. A Benediction, viz. The final Blessing, The Blessing of God Almighty, etc.




. 1. The Preface.
To the end that Confirmation may be Ministered to the more edifying of such as
shall receive it, etc.] Our Church is so far from esteeming Ignorance to be the
Mother of Devotion, that there are all endeavors used that every Office may be
performed with understanding, to which purpose this (as well as other Offices)
begins with a Preface, wherein those who come to Confirmation are taught what
they are about to do, and what is required of them, for this is most agreeable
to St. Paul's great Rule, 1 Corinthians. 14.26. Let all things be done to
edification, that is, to the most profit and spiritual advantage of those who
partake of these Mysteries. Now as to this of Confirmation, in the present
Greek Church it is always done at the same time with Baptism, even to Infants
as well as Adult, for fear they should die without it (...). Gabriel Episcop.
Philadelphiae.
; and in the Roman Church Infants were confirmed very soon after Baptism, upon
the persuasion that they were not perfect Christians without this Aquinas sum.
3. p. quaes. 72. artic. 9.
. In England about Lestrange Alliance of Divine Office. Ex Edmundo Cantuar. de
Baptismo. Anno. 1230.
400. year ago, Children were usually Confirmed at five years of Age: Which was
sooner than they could apprehend the design, or do the Duties of this
Ordinance; wherefore now, in the Latin Churches especially, Children are not
admitted to be Confirmed till they be of fuller Age, that so opportunity may be
given to the Parents and Godfathers, and to the Rectors of the Church, to
instruct and admonish them more diligently in the Faith which they have
professed in Baptism; Cassander consult. cap. 9. The Assembly at Trent appoints
it be administered between seven and twelve years of Age; and a Synod at Milan,
Anno 1565. positively forbids the Confirming of any under seven: But because
there is great variety in regard of the difference of Childrens Capacities, and
manner of Education; therefore the Old Canon Law fixed no time, but required
they be of perfect Age De consecrat. distin. 5. can. ult. jejuni, etc.
, which the Gloss does ill to interpret Twelve-year-old, since the meaning is,
That they be of competent years to profit by Confirmation. And in the same
manner does our Church nominate no year, but appointing it be done only to such
as are come to years of discretion, and are well instructed in the Catechism,
for how can Children renew their Vow, unless they understand what it is? It was
formerly promised for them, and now they are to engage, that they will renounce
all Evil, believe the Articles of the Christian Faith, and keep the
Commandments of God; wherefore it is absolutely necessary, that they first
understand the reasonableness of their Renunciation, the truth of the Creed,
the meaning and extent of the ten Commandments, together with the use of Prayer
and the Sacraments for obtaining Grace to observe them, or else they can never
make a prudent, or a lasting Resolution; The promise was made by others when we
were altogether incapable, but now that God has spared us to years of
discretion, it becomes our own Duty, and we must by deliberate choice take it
upon our selves; and as this Preface notes, those are the two great ends and
benefits of this Duty. 1. That every one may expressly consent to the Covenant
in which he is so highly concerned. 2. That he may before God and many
Witnesses engage to perform his part thereof. Not much unlike this is that
Custom of the Jews, of bringing their Children before the Congregation at 13.
years old, when they have learned the Law and the Misnah, and their daily
Prayers, whereupon they are declared Sons of the Precept, and henceforth to
answer for their own sins, and so the rite ends in Praises and Supplications,
Buxt. Synagog. Jud. cap. 3. Considering therefore here is so great a work to be
performed, Ministers, Parents, and Godfathers must most diligently prepare
those under their Charge for it, and they who are to be Confirmed, must examine
themselves if they can freely and willingly make this Vow without any reserve
or hypocrisy, and consider how they may keep it; and that some Days before be
set apart to this purpose is very convenient, for it was an old Order that all
should fast before they came to so weighty a Duty. We must not dare to come for
Company merely, or for fashion-sake, nor let it be said of us as Sidonius did
of Theodorich, His worship of God is such, that every one might perceive, he
showed that observance, rather out of Custom, than for any Reverence to
Religion, Sidon. ep. 1. for then we shall not only be condemned by Men, but by
God also.

. 2. The Interrogation and Answer.
Quest. Do ye here in the presence of God, and of this Congregation, renew the
solemn Promise and Vow, etc. Answer. I do.] The most ancient and universal way
of obliging our selves by Words, is Stipulation, that is, by a Question and
Answer, which is the most approved by the Roman Laws, because it gives the
Party to be obliged, opportunity to consider what he is to bind himself unto,
and so may give a deliberate Answer. Justinian. Institut. lib. 3. Tit. 6.. 1.
Which method was anciently used in Confirmation, wherein we are asked by the
Highest Minister of Religion, the Bishop himself, whether we will renew our
Baptismal Vow Inde olim vocatur (...)^ Constitut. Apostol. lib. 3. cap. 17.
. And to this he solemnly charge us to answer as in the pres^nce of God and
the whole Congregation; and for greater security, one Godfather or Godmother is
peculiarly required Pro eo qui promittit solent alii obligari qui fidejussores
appellantur, quos homines accipere solent dum curant ut diligentius sibi cautum
sit. Justinian instit. lib. 3. tit. 21. Sect. 1.
, as a pledge of our sincerity, and to be a continual Monitor to us to keep our
Vow, as well as a Witness of our making the same. So that it behooves every one
who is to be Confirmed, to consider well, and answer sincerely, lest he affront
God to his very Face, who discerns the Heart, yea lest he abuse his Witnesses,
and the whole Congregation who will testify against him at the Dreadful Day of
Doom. We were every one obliged before, but in regard that Vow was made by
others for us, and long since, when we were incapable, it is thought fit by the
Church there should be a Novation (as the Civil Law calls it) that is, that we
should renew the Obligation in our own Names, that so the Vow may have the
greater force upon us: But it is so much our Interest and Advantage to consent
to Gods terms and engage our selves in his Covenant, that if we know our own
benefit, we shall need no urging to it, but as soon as we hear the blessed
Question shall heartily and thankfully agree to it Fides suadenda non
imperanda: Bern. in Cantic. 66. Nemo cogitur ut credat invitus. Cassiodor.
variar. l. 2.
. There are indeed many Duties to which you do bind your selves, but without
them you cannot have Eternal Life. So that it is no more than if the Bishop
should say thus: Since you cannot be saved unless you renew your Vow, etc. will
you renew it and keep it, that you may be saved? who would not Answer, I will:
You have been spared now by Go^ to those years that you can consider, what
benefi^s you ^ill have by making and keeping it, and what sad miseries you run
into by breaking it, so that it may justly be expected you shall upon good
grounds say, I agree to it with all my Heart, before God and all this
Congregation; And when you have engaged, remember as the Greek Church speaks to
the Catechumen after his solemn promise to be A Christian, The Bonds are now
sealed, and Christ has received them who is in He^ven, mind your promise, and
fulfill your Engagement, which will openly be produced at the Day of Judgment.
-- Take heed you blush not at Christ's dreadful Tribunal, where all the powers
of Heaven tremble, and all mankind stands to be judged -- where the Devil will
be present to accuse you, saying, Lord this wretch in word renounced me, but in
deed was my servant. Then Angels shall sigh* and Holy Men shall bewail your
Misery. But Father nor Mother cannot help you; Brethren and Friends will not
own you, but every man shall be naked and destitute -- Consider therefore and
provide for your own safety: Euchologion Graecor. in Orat. ad faciendum
Catechum.

. 3. The Versicles and Responses.
Upon the hearing of this good Confession, The whole Church express their joy
and their desires it may be confirmed, in some of the Words of David's Psalms,
which are often used in Ancient Liturgies, and are very properly inserted here,
that the whole Congregation may join, I. In the profession of their Faith in
God. II. In the giving glory to him. III. In begging acceptance from him. The
particulars follow.

I. Psalm Cxxiv. 7. Our help stands in the Name of the Lord. Answ. Who has
made, etc.] When we consider how at our Admission into the Covenant of Grace,
The snare (of the D^vil) was broken, and we were delivered, ver. 6. we are
admonished to confess it was by the Help of God, and to prevent spiritual Pride
the Bishop minds us we cannot keep this promise by our own strength Sed ne
putes te viribus tuis hoc posse, attend cujus est opis: August. in loc.
, but we may have Help from him who made Heaven and Earth, and therefore ought
not to despair.

II. Psalm Cxiii. 2. Blessed be the Name of the Lord: Answ. Henceforth World
without end.] And since the Name of this glorious Lord God has been our only
help, and shall be so for ever, Have we not all possible reason to magnify and
praise his Name now our selves, yea and to desire that it may be Blessed and
glorified to all Eternity? for he pitied and visited us, he redeemed and washed
us from our Sins in the Laver of Regeneration, and in the fountain of his Sons
Blood, and he has now increased the number of his professed Servants. Oh that
his Mercy may be remembered for ever and ever.

III. Psalm Cii. 1. Lord hear our Prayers. Answ. And let our Cry come unto
thee.] From the Remembrance of his former favors we are encouraged to ask for
more, and in this Humble manner, we crave Audience of the King of Heaven before
our Supplication begin. The Bishop is going to pray and cry to God on our
behalf, and we and all the Congregation are about to join with him in Prayers
for the good Spirit which we need, and in earnest Cries to be delivered from
the Evil Spirit to which we were in Bondage; first, therefore we crave
acceptance, and desire that by his Answering our Requests we may perceive our
Cry has come unto him; or as St. Augustine observes, the Phrase is doubled to
show the vehement desire and fervent affections of the Petitioners In
geminatione affectus petentis est. Aug. in locum.
. Wherefore we must speak this with an earnest Devotion, so shall we (no doubt)
make way for the following Prayer to pierce the Clouds.

. 4. The first Prayer.
Almighty and Everliving God, who have vouchsafed to regenerate these t^y
Servants, etc.] Before the Imposition of hands there was a Prayer made for the
gifts of the Spirit to be poured forth upon the party to be Confirmed, as
appears by the Testimonies of S. Cyprian, Tertullian, Ambrose, etc. before
cited: For although the Spirit do go along with the Water in Christian Baptism,
yet the Apostles thought it necessary to lay their Spiritus autem Sanctus in
sola Catholica per manus impositionem dari dicitur: Aug. in Donat. de Bap. l.
3. c. 15.
hands on the Baptized that they might receive the Spirit in greater measures,
and the Fathers thought it was particularly given by this Rite. Nor is it any
wonder (says one Raban Maurus de institut. Cleric. lib. 1. cap. 30.
) if a man have a double Unction in order to receiving the Holy Ghost, since
the Spirit was twice given to the Apostles themselves, John 20.22. Acts 2.4.
especially since the Spirit is given to several purposes (as the former Author
notes) viz. In Baptism, to consecrate an habitation to God; In Confirmation, to
declare that the sevenfold grace of the Holy Ghost is come into us with a
fullness of Sanctity, Wisdom, and Virtue. Or, as Eusebius Emissenus sermon. de
Pentec. In Baptism the Holy Spirit gives what is sufficient to make us
innocent, but in Confirmation it gives increase and makes us gracious. In
short, there the Spirit was bestowed to cleanse us from sin, here to adorn us
with all its Graces Albaspin. observat. lib. 1. 25.
. According to which Ancient Doctrine this Prayer is Composed; First, to
acknowledge the former gift, and then to Petition for the second, in the very
words almost of that Ancient Prayer which came between Baptism and Confirmation
in the Greek (...)* Euchologion. Graecor. page 355. offic. S. Baptism.
Liturgy. Blessed art thou O Lord God Almighty, -- Who now have pleased to
regenerate this thy new enlightened Servant, by Water and the Holy Ghost,
granting him a pardon of all his voluntary, and involuntary Sins: Do thou O
Lord and merciful Governor of all, bestow upon him also the seal of the gift
of thy Holy, Omnipotent, and ever to be adored Spirit, etc. And it is very fit
we should praise God for the Grace of Baptism, before we beg that of
Confirmation; especially because the washing of us from Original Sin in the
holy Laver, did cleanse and prepare us that we might be pure Temples for the
Holy Ghost to dwell in; the greater measures of the Spirit now begged, are but
in pursuance of the former mercy. The Lord did then consign us to the Spirit,
and now we pray it may visibly exert it self: He then lifted us as his
Soldiers, and we have been ever since by Catechizing trained, Genesis 14.14. and
now are going into the Field against our spiritual Enemies, so that we shall
need more visible and more efficacious assistances; wherefore we pray for all
the gifts of the Holy Spirit, which in the Old Greek and Latin Translations
are reckoned up to be seven, Isai. 11.2. and from thence are transcribed into
this Prayer, and these seven are put for all, because the Scriptures describe
the gifts of the Holy Ghost by seven Spirits, Revel. 1.4. Chap. 4.5. and 5.6.
whence also we often read in the Ancients of the sevenfold Grace of the Spirit
Ambros. in Luc. 9. item Raban. Maurus, lib. 1. c. 30.
, and the number Seven is put for the Holy Spirit it self Septenario numero
significatur Spiritus sanctus. August. de Civ. dei, l. 11. c. 31.
. But for these seven here reckoned up, it is certain they were in the same
Words repeated in the Office of Confirmation as long ago as St. Ambrose his
time, who says, Remember that thou have received the Spiritual seal* the
Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and strength, the
Spirit of Knowledge and Godliness, and the spirit of holy fear Ambros. lib. de
initiand. c. 7.
. And in another place Idem de Sacram. lib. 3. cap. 2.
, It remains after Baptism (says he) that we be made complete, when upon the
Prayer of the Priest the Holy Spirit is poured into us, the Spirit of Wisdom,
etc. as before. Where he further instructs us that all gifts and graces belong
to the Spirit, but these are the most Eminent and Principal, so that they are
put for all the rest. We must not be too curious in the particulars, since many
of the Words seem to be synonymous, yet we may thus distinguish these seven
gifts: 1. The Spirit of being wise in Spiritual things. 2. The Spirit of
apprehending what we are Taught. 3. The Spirit of prudent managing all our
Actions. 4. The Spirit of power to execute all our religious purposes. 5. The
Spirit of discerning between good and evil. 6. The Spirit of Devotion in Gods
service. 7. The Spirit of Reverence to be expressed toward God in our whole
Conversation. These are the blessed gifts for which the Bishop prays, that we
may be wise and apprehensive, prudent and courageous, discreet in our choice,
devout in our duties, and pious in our Lives; and if these can be obtained we
may be assured all graces will spring from these Roots, Charity and the love of
God, Humility and Watchfulness, Faith and Holiness, Meekness and Patience,
Temperance and Chastity, and what not? Let us therefore kneel reverently, and
join devoutly with the Holy Man, let us open our hearts by earnest desires, and
stretch out the hands of Faith and Hope to receive these so much needed, these
so inestimable gifts; and let us not doubt but God will hear his own Servant,
and gratify our desires; Christ has promised to give these gifts to us, and
others have received them in the use of this very means, so that if we ask
heartily, and believe firmly, God will by the same means give them unto us also.

. 5. The laying on of Hands.
The imposition of Hands is one of the most ancient Ceremonies in the World,
observed by Jacob in the giving of his blessing, Genesis 48.14. and by his Example
ever after practiced among the Jews in Benedictions, in conferring of all holy
Offices, Numb. 27.18. and to many other purposes in their Religion; whereupon
our Lord Jesus used it also when he blessed little Children, Math. 19.13. as
well as when he healed the sick, Math. 8.15. and the Apostles adopted it to be
the Rite, for Communicating the Spirit in Confirmation, Acts 8.17. which was so
regularly observed, that it gave name to the whole Office, which is called,
Laying on of Hands, Hebrews 6.2. as we noted before, and not only St. Augustine
August. in Donat. de Baptis. lib. 3. cap. 16.
, but most of the Latin Writers call it usually Imposition of Hands; nor was
Confirmation ever Ministered without Laying on of Hands Dehinc manus imponitur
advocans and invitans Spiritum Sanctum. Tertul.
. The Roman Church of late has left it out, and instead thereof use anointing
and giving the party a Box on the Ear: But our Church has restored this
Essential and Apostolic Rite; and as upon Moses laying his Hands upon the
Seventy Elders, God put his Spirit upon them, Numb. 11.17. so we hope he will
impart it to us when the Bishop lays his hand upon us, See Numb. 6.27. and
therefore we kneel most humbly that we may receive it. It was anciently the
manner for the Bishop to lay both his hands across on the head of the
confirmed, not only in imitation of Jacob, Genesis 48. but with allusion to the
Death of Christ in whom we believe, and from whom we receive the Holy Ghost.
But this is now laid aside. It may seem more strange to some, how our Reformers
came to omit the Ceremony of anointing with Oil, used so anciently in the
Latin Church, and in the Greek also, that it has caused the whole Office to
be called Chrism, or Anointing, and by that name it is called in some very
ancient Canons: But it must be considered, that this Oil or Chrism is not of
Apostolical Institution, nor use in Confirmation, but was added after their
times in allusion to that Oil unto which the Holy Spirit is compared, for its
healing and flaming qualities: and I am apt to believe this anointing was first
added to the office of Baptism, but not used in Confirmation till afterward,
which has occasioned diverse to mistake, who apply many places of Antiquity
where the Baptismal anointing is mentioned, as if they belonged to
Confirmation. However this Chrismation is accompanied with much superstition in
the Roman Church, and has excluded the more ancient Rite of laying on of
hands; so that our Reformation has restored the Primi^ive Ceremony, and
rejected the Anointing, well-knowing it was not essential to this Office, nor
used by the Apostles, so that if any shall object there is a deficiency in our
Confirmation, he may say there was a defect in that of the Apostles also, since
we do all that it is recorded they did. Nor is our Church more careful to keep
to the Apostolic pattern in the Ceremony, than in the Person who performs this
Rite; appointing it only to be done by a Bishop, because though Philip had
libe^ty both to preach and to Baptize, yet the Apostles only could confirm,
Acts 8.14, 15. Chap. 18.6. and thereupon the Ancient Church did ever reserve
the honor of disp^nsing this Administration to the Bishops their Succ^ssors,
as all the Fathers with one consent testify (...)^ Dionys. Eccl. hier. cap. 5.
Ad confirmationem unitatis in Ecclesia Christi, a Pontificibus fieri solet.
Ambros. in Heb. A solis Episcopis: August. quaest. 44. in N.T. (...)^ Chrysostom
homil in 18. Act.
; and though St. Ambrose mention the Presbyters in Egypt, who consign in the
Bishops absence Ambros. Comment. in Ephesians 4.
, yet we may gather from St. Augustine August. Quaest. 101. in Vet. and Nov.
Test.
, that is meant of their Consecrating the Elements; and if any where else we
read of the Priests Anointing, it is usually meant of the anointing in Baptism;
For that of Confirmation was ever thought to be the Bishops Prerogative. But
then as the Bishops have the sole honor, so they have also the whole Charge of
this Duty Non est dignum ut inde exigis honorem. unde refugis laborem. Bern.
Ep. 87. See the Lx. Canon of our Church.
, and since it must be wholly undone, if they perform it not, the Church has
enjoined the frequent Administration thereof unto those Reverend Fathers, whose
peculiar privilege of Confirming, is apt to beget a greater Veneration of it
in the minds of devout people, and to make them expect nobler effects from that
Office, which none but the highest Minister of Religion can Celebrate.

. 6. The Benediction.
Defend O Lord this thy Child (or this thy Servant) with thy Heavenly Grace,
that he may continue thine for ever, etc.] The present Church of Rome is very
Magisterial in the Words of this Rite, for the Bishop says, I seal thee with
the sign of the Cross, and I Confirm thee with the Oil of Salvation: the Greek
is something more modest, saying only, The Seal of the gift of the Holy Ghost.
Eucholog. But ours is the humblest form of all, being an earnest supplication
to show that the Bishop does not pretend to give the Spirit from himself Deus
dat Spiritum Sanctum, non enim humanum hoc opus, neque ab homine datur, sed qui
invocatur a sacerdote a Deo traditur, in quo Dei munus est ministerium
sacerdotis. Ambros.
, but he begs it of God, whose Steward he is, and the instrument to convey it
to us. It is probable also, that it was most anciently done by Prayer, since
St. Augustine says, Imposition of hands was a Prayer made over a person Manus
autem impositio^ quid est aliud, nisi oration super hominem? August. in Donat.
de bap. l. 3. c. 17.
; and St. Ambrose notes, that even St. Paul himself was not so bold as to
communicate the Spirit autoritatively to his new Converts; but he begs it of
God for them, Coloss. 1.9. Impetrare optavit, non imperare praesumpsit. Ambros.
de Spir. Sanc. l. 1. c. 7.
Now the party confirmed ought cheerfully to hope this Prayer shall be
accepted, and while the Bishops hand is over our head, we ought to meditate,
that God himself will keep us in the shadow of his hand, Isai. 49.2. and that
by this Rite is signified, that the Lord will stretch out his Hand to Defend us
against all our Spiritual Enemies. We have given up our selves to be his
Servants, and the Hand of the Lord is with us, Luke 1.66. that is, his Spirit
is upon us, and if we keep close to him, none can pluck us out of his hand,
John 10.28, 29. but we may continue his for ever; Satan will assault us, the
World will allure us, and the Flesh will entice us, to break this Vow, but the
Holy man prays we may be defended by the Spirit of grace, so that we may never
fall off, as too many have done. It is a comfort to see so many Dedicating
themselves to God, but it is also a sad consideration, that scarce one of
twenty remember this engagement, but they first forsake God, and then he
forsakes them for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Oh then let us pray, that neither we nor
any of our Relations may prove Apostates or Backsliders, but that we may remain
under the divine protection, and continue his to our lives end: For if we keep
united to this Living Root, we shall not only live, but flourish, grow, and
bring forth more and more fruit, John 15.2. The Grace now imparted, is of that
nature, that if we cherish it, we shall increase daily therein, and therefore
the Bishop prays we may not only have the Spirit at present, but that we may
grow in Grace every Day, even until we be fitted for glory, and be partakers of
Gods Heavenly Kingdom, as the Council of Laodicea speaks. And since so
excellent a Prayer is made by so eminent a Person, with so ancient a Rite, let
every one for himself, and every one for his Children, Servants, or Friends,
add thereto a most affectionate Amen.

. 7. The Versicle, Response, and Lords Prayer.
The Lord be with you. Answ. And with thy Spirit. Our Father, etc.] We have
fully discoursed of these Devotions, Comp. to the Temple, Part. I. and shall
only note here, That the Parties Confirmed, having professed their Faith, and
vowed Obedience, ought now to be saluted as Brethren, and are to be reckoned
among the Faithful, as being sealed with the Seal of God, and now belonging
unto his Family (...). Gregor. Nazianz.
. The Spirit has been given to them, we pray therefore it may remain with
them. The Bishop desires the Lord may assist them in blessing his Name for
these Mercies, and they mutually pray the Lord may assist the spirit of the
holy Man, who is praying for them. And then all most fitly join in saying the
Lords Prayer, Which the whole Church says, and shall say unto the end of the
World. August. retract. lib. 1. cap. 19.

. 8. The Proper Collect.
Almighty and Everlasting God, who make us both to will and to do those
things that be good, etc.] Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing, John
15.2. and the better sort of Heathens confessed, that the power to do good as
well as the will to choose it, was from Heaven (...)^ Pindar. (...)^ Hierocles.
; which Truth as it is expressed in St. Paul's words, Philip. 2.13. is made the
foundation of this address. We have heard these Persons willing to choose, and
ready to promise that which is good, wherefore we confess God gave them the
will, and he can only give them Power to perform that which they have promised;
and since he has made them willing already, we hope he will make them able
also; for though the will be good, yet if it produce no suitable actions, it
will but aggravate their Condemnation, and that is the reason why we pray so
often and so earnestly for them. The Bishop has now in imitation of the Apostles
(as all Parties confess Hic unus locus abunde testatur hujus ceremoniae
originem fluxisse ab Apostolis. Calvin. in Heb 6. Exempla Apostolorum and
veteris Ecclesiae vellem pluris aestimari: Zanchius. Vide Chemnit. Examen
Concilii Trident. part. 2. de confirm.
) laid his hands upon these Persons, and as Christ showed his favor to little
Children, Math. 19.15. by laying his hands on them, and expressed his love to
St. John by the same sign, Revel. 1.17. So the Holy Man has laid his hands on
these as a token of Gods favor, and therefore he is concerned to pray that it
may not be an empty and insignificant sign; but that the Hand of God may be
over them for ever, even when his hand is removed, and that Gods Spirit may be
always with them; which Petitions are well Paraphrased by that Prayer of the
Greek Church, Lay thy mighty hand upon him, and protect him by the power of thy
goodness, keep this holy Seal inviolable, and vouchsafe to bring him to Eternal
Life, and to fulfill all thy good pleasure (...)^ Eucholog. in offic. ablut.
post S. Baptism.
. For thus it is desired here, that the Hand and Spirit of God may continue
with us, the one to assist us in the understanding, the other to help us in the
performance of the Divine Word, till we come to everlasting happiness. The Word
of God shows us the way to Heaven, The Spirit makes us to understand and obey
the Directions thereof, so that if God hear this Prayer, we cannot miss of that
blessed end. And here we must observe, to what end the Holy Ghost is given us
in this Ordinance, not to make us able to speak with Tongues, but to know the
Word and do the Will of God. It is the saying of the famous St. Augustine: The
Spirit which is now given by imposition of hands, is not attested by temporal
and sensible miracles, as it was at first, for the commendation of our Faith
while it was young, and to enlarge the beginnings of the Church. For who does
now expect that those on whom hands are laid, for receiving the Holy Ghost,
should presently begin to speak with tongues? but yet the divine Love is
understood to be secretly and invisibly inspired into their hearts by the Bond
of Peace which enables them to say, The love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Spirit which he has given us. August. de Bapt. in Donat.
lib. 3. cap. 16. So that we must not despise Confirmation in our Church, though
it be not attended with miraculous effects, which have been ceased above twelve
hundred years; though it impart no gifts, yet it communicates Graces, which are
much more desirable; if hereby we gain the Defense of Gods peculiar protecting
hand, and the influence of his Spirit, that we may understand our duty and
practice it, so as to go on safely to the possession of Eternal Life, we shall
have cause to rejoice that we came to it; and be obliged to give glory to Jesus
who with the Father and the Holy Ghost lives and reigns, ever one God World
without end, Amen.

. 9. The general Collect and final Blessing.
Both these Parts of this Office are expounded in the end of the Communion
Service; The Collect is added here because the Ancients believed that
Confirmation was a Preservative to both Body and Soul (...)^ Cyril. Catech.
mystag 3.
, so that after it we may fitly pray, That God may direct, sanctify, and
govern both our Souls and Bodies, so that we may not stray from his
Commandments, and we make it a new Prayer, if we say it with a new Devotion,
and apply it to this Occasion. The Blessing concludes all Offices, and
particularly ought to end this, in regard it is the Epitome of the whole
Administration, which is only a more solemn Benediction, and therefore we must
most humbly receive it, and most firmly believe it, that it may be made good
unto us, Amen.

The Conclusion.
Thus we have represented a Rite in it self Primitive and Pious, in its
Administration pure and separate from all that Superstition had added to it, in
its End so excellent, that it is commended by Christians of all persuasions,
and yet alas (however it comes to pass) too much neglected, to the grief of all
good Men, the scandal of the Church, and the great detriment of Religion.
Wherefore we cannot leave it till we have pressed the constant observation
thereof. The Romanists indeed pretend to prefer it before Baptism Hoc
sacramentum perfectivum esse Baptismi, asserit Aquin. sum. 3. p. qu. 72. art.
9. majori veneratione venerandum and tenendum quam Baptismus. Did. 5. de
consec. can. de his.
, but must we give it no honor because they give it too much? It is not in our
Church set to vye with Baptism, but as of old appointed to pursue the same
design, and ordered to make the Baptismal Vow more solemn, and more regarded.
We do not absolutely deny Salvation to all that want it, but we judge it a
great sin to despise it, or wilfully to neglect it; And we think it highly
concerns the Church and every particular Person to be careful it be not
omitted, and that for these Reasons: I. Because it tends very much to advance
the knowledge of Christian People, who are more obliged to teach and to learn,
when so solemn an Account is to be given. II. It conduces to the increase of
Piety also, and lays fresh engagements upon every one to avoid Evil and to do
good, obtaining withal the Spirit for their assistance therein. III. It is an
excellent means to preserve the Churches Peace, and may prevent many from
falling into Schism and Heresy, by laying a good foundation at first, and by
rescuing the younger from the dire misfortune of Evil guides. IV. It does
effectually confute the clamours of Anabaptists against our custom of baptizing
Children before they can understand; for if this be added, we have the benefit
of Baptism against the danger of Death, and yet the same security they pretend
to who defer it till riper years. V. Hereby we shall agree with the Apostles,
with the Catholic Church in all Ages, with all those wise and holy Men who
have enjoined and practiced this Rite, and believed great benefits were
received thereby: Which Considerations I hope will have their due effect upon
all that are concerned. And I. That the Reverend Fathers of the Church will
imitate the Piety of the Primitive Bishops, and not esteem it a trouble to go
into the Country to confirm Non quidem abnuo hanc esse Ecclesiarum
consuetudinem, ut ad eos qui long in minoribus urbibus per Presbyteros and
Diaconos baptizati sunt, Episcopus ad invocationem Sancti Spiritus manum
impositurus excurrat. Hieron.
, since they will thereby bring so much good to the Church, and beget in the
minds of the People a singular affection to their Persons, and a great
Veneration of their Office. II. That Parents and Godfathers who stand obliged
by the Baptismal Vow, will be careful to obtain a discharge from the Bonds they
have entered, and when they have done their Duty in fitting their Charge for
Confirmation, I hope they will not repine at a little trouble and charge, but
rather go to the Bishop, than want so great a benefit to themselves and to the
Child. III. I hope that Ministers will be ready to promote it, considering that
when they have fitted their Catechumens for this Office, and brought them to
it, they are excellently prepared to receive the benefit of all their after
labors, and may well hope to give a good account to God of them. Finally, I
wish this serious Advice may encourage all persons who want Confirmation, of
what Age or condition soever, to desire it, and wait for an opportunity of it,
and that it may direct those who come to it to perform their part acceptably,
and so as to gain the benefits of it. And also that it may warn all who have
been Confirmed, To keep the grace thereof (as St. Cyril speaks) entire and
without spot in their heart, daily increasing in good works, and walking in all
well-pleasing to the Author of their Salvation Christ Jesus, to whom be glory
for ever and ever Cyril. Catech. mystag 3.
. For nothing can more adorn this excellent Rite than the holy Conversation of
those who have been partakers thereof.

FINIS.
A TABLE Of the chief Heads in the Communion Office.
Of the Communion Office in general.

the Analysis of the whole Office.

PART. I.
SECT. Parag. Page. Of the more general Preparation to the Holy Communion. Of
the Lords Prayer. I.. 1. 1 the Paraphrase. 2 2 Of the Collect for Purity. II. 1
3 the Analysis. 2 4 the Practical Discourse. 3 etc. 4 etc. the Paraphrase. 6 8
Of the Ten Commandments. III. 1 9 the Analysis. 2 the Practical Discourse
containing directions and heads of Self-Examination. 3 etc. 11 Of the two
Collects for the King. IV. 1 32 the Analysis of the first. 2 34 the Practical
Discourse. 3 etc. 35 the Paraphrase. 7 39 the Analysis of the second. 9 42 the
Paraphrase. 10 ib. Of the Epistle and Gospel. V. 1 43 and of the Nicene Creed.
2 46 the Paraphrase of it. 4 50 Of the Offertory and Sentences. VI. 1 53 the
Analysis of the Sentences. 3 58 Discourses and Paraphrases of them. 4 etc. ib
Of the Prayer for the whole Church. VII. 1 75 the Analysis. 2 the Practical
Discourse. 3 etc. 78 the Paraphrase. 14 97 Of the warning before the Communion.
VIII. 1 101 the Analysis. 2 the Practical Discourse. 3 etc. 103 Of the
Exhortation to the Communion. IX. 1 127 the Analysis. 2 the Practical
Discourse. 3 etc. 129

PART. II.
SECT. Parag. Page. Of the more immediate Preparation. Of the Exhortation at
the Communion. I. 1 155 the Analysis. 2 the Practical Discourse. 3 etc. 157 Of
the immediate invitation. II. 1 173 the Analysis. 2 175 the Paraphrase. 3 176
Of the Confession. III. 1 ib. the Analysis. 2 178 the Practical Discourse. 3
etc. ib. the Paraphrase. 9 192 Of the Absolution. IV. 1 194 the Analysis. 2 196
the Practical Discourse. 3 etc. ib. the Paraphrase. 5 199 Of the Sentences of
Scripture. V. 1 200 the Discourse and Paraphrase on Math. XI. 28. 2 202 the
Discourse and Paraphrase on John III. 16. 3 204 the Discourse and Paraphrase on
1 Timothy I. 15. 4 206 the Discourse and Paraphrase on 1 John II. 1. 5 207 Of the
Prefaces and Trisagium. VI. 1 209 the Analysis. 2 212 the Practical Discourse.
3 etc. 213 Appen. Of the Particular Prefaces. 8 221 Meditations for the
Communion at Christmas. at Easter. on Ascension day. on Whitsunday. on Trinity
Sunday.
9 223 10 225 11 227 12 228 13 230

PART. III.
SECT. Parag. Page. Of the Celebration. Of the Address. I. 1 232 the Analysis.
2 233 the Practical Discourse with Meditations. 3 etc. ib. the Paraphrase. 6
240 Of the Prayer of Consecration. II. 1 241 the Analysis. 2 the Practical
Discourse with Meditations. 3 etc. 244 the Paraphrase. 14 268 Of the form of
Administration. III. 1 270 the Analysis. 2 273 Discourses and Meditations upon
it. 3 ib. Meditations before the Receiving of the bread an act of Faith. an act
of Humility. an act of Love. an act of Desire.
4 274 275 5 276 6 277 when it is offered to us an act of Admiration. 7 278
while we eat it. an act of Contrition. 8 ib. After Receiving the bread an act
of Gratitude. 9 280 Before Receiving the Cup an act of Acknowledgment. an act
of Repentance. an act of Supplication.
10 281 11 282 12 283 In Receiving the Cup an act of Commemoration. 13 284
After Receiving the Cup an act of Resolution. 14 285

PART. IV.
SECT. Parag. Page. Of the Post-Communion. Of the Lords Prayer, with a
Paraphrase. I. 2 289 Of the first Prayer. II. 1 291 the Analysis. 2 Discourses
and Meditations upon it. 3 etc. 292 the form of a solemn Vow. 301 the
Paraphrase. 9 307 Of the second Prayer. III. 1 309 the Analysis. 2 Discourses
and Meditations upon it. 3 etc. 311 Containing an act of Thanksgiving. 3. Acts
of Acknowledgment. A Prayer for Perseverance.
312 315 etc. 326 the Paraphrase. 328 Of the Angelick Hymn. IV. 1 329 the
Analysis. 2 the Practical Discourse with Meditations. 3 etc. 331 the
Paraphrase. 7 337 Of the final Blessing. V. 1 339 the Analysis. 2 340 the
Practical Discourse. 3 ib. the Paraphrase. 5 344 An Appendix of the additional
Prayers. 1. for safety in worldly changes. 2. for Preservation of body and
soul. 3. for a blessing on Gods word. 4. for success in all our actions. 5. to
supply the defects of our other Devotions. 6. for the acceptance of all the
rest.
2 345 3 346 4 347 5 349 6 350 7 352 The Chief Heads in the Office of Baptism.
Of Baptism in general. 1 etc. the Analysis of the whole Office. 5 Of the
Preparation before Baptism. I. the first Question. 1 the first general
Exhortation. 2 the first Collect for the Child. 3 370 the second Collect for
the Child. 4 373 the Gospel and Exhortation. 5 375 the Thanksgiving. 6 379 the
Preface to the Covenant. 7 380 the Interrogatories and Answers. 8 384 Of the
Administration of Baptism. II. the short Prayers for sanctifying the Child. 1
391 the Prayer of Consecration. 2 394 the naming of the Child. 3 398 the form
of Baptism. 4 401 the Receiving the Child into the Church, and signing it with
the Cross. 5 405 Of the Consequents after Baptism. III. the Exhortation to the
Congregation. 1 412 the Lords Prayer after Baptism. 2 418 the Last Collect. 3
419 the last Exhortation to the Sureties. 4 425 Of Confirmation in general. 432
Of the Preface to the Office. 1 437 the Interrogation and Answer. 2 439 the
Versicles and Responses. 3 441 the first Prayer. 4 443 the laying on of Hands.
5 446 the Benediction. 6 449 the Versicle, Response, and Lords Prayer. 7 450
the proper Collect. 8 451 the general Collect and final Blessing. 9 453 the
Conclusion. 454

ERRATA, thus to be Corrected.
PAge 1. line 17. read repeat it, p. 18. l. 4. r. good things, p. 20. l. 6. r.
refractory, p. 37. l. 5. r. set forth, p. 46. l. 21. r. with the heart, p. 66.
l. 28. r. dispenses, p. 75. l. 18. r. his office, p. 84. l. 31. r. their
several, p. 95. l. 8. r. languish, p. 97. l. 13. r. disclaiming, p. 121. marg.
l. 14. r. summum, p. 133. marg: r. (...), p. 140. marg. r. coarctant, p. 141.
l. 29. r. at present are, or, p. 145. l. 5. r. being not ready, p. 159. l. 19.
r. of what we did, p. 162. l. 29. r. is here, p. 177. marg. l. 7. r. docum. p.
228. l. 22. r. go to thy Altar, p. 244. l. 29. r. grateful heart, p. 265. l. 3.
r. which makes, p. 291. l. 26 r. teach us how, p. 310. l. 14. r. with in, p.
311. marg. l. 14. r. gratiae, p. 320. l 27. r. thy murderers, p. 326. marg. l.
7. r. difficilia sunt, p. 343. l. 11. r. his blessing.

And note, that in several places, especially the Analyzes [Sect.] is printed
instead of this mark [] which stands for Paragraph. And the little letters
directing to the Margin are often set after the points of the sentence they
belong to; besides some lesser mistakes.


