CHARITY Commended, OR, A Catholic Christian Soberly Instructed.

By J. C. M. D.

Quicquid deficiunt alia unica supplet charitatis gratia quae in aeternum non
deficiet. St. Ber. LONDON Printed, and are to be sold at most Booksellers
Shops, 1667.

TO THE READER.
PAper Kites on all sides fly high, born up with the air of popular applause,
and wind off fancy to the admiration of plebeian heads; though the
prayer-toyes of idle children while they misuse paper, and mispend time, are of
as great value as the elaborate pieces of most polemicks: whose books are the
disguises of faction and diseases of Charity, by irreligious disputes of what
they miscall religion, drawing that blood which should quicken the heart of
Religion from men's hearts into their heads, leaving their hearts destitute of
zeal to God and mutual dilection; and filling their hearts with choler, which
produces that phrantick zeal which discomposes the world; or stuffing them with
ph^egm which lulls them into a Lethargy of indifferency in religion; or raising
those melancholy vapors which cause these Epileptick paroxisms in quaking
enthusiasts: Hence comes this morris dance of religions, and the glorious body
of Christianity, minced into factions makes but an Olio, distastefull to Jew or
Gentile* and it would be a wonder to have a Jew converted to Christianity, to
what sect soever he was converted, the other would condemn him: and this might
not seem a way to come to God, but a path to Belial, and even amougst
Christians I have known not a few whose too forward zeal to find out religion
has carried them out of all religion: when their fiery zeal had made a blaze,
it went out in the stench of Atheism. The specious name of Catholic has
biassed no lesser numbers to Rome, but the spiders web of papal infallibility
spun fine by school wits not strong enough to hold them, finding the lines
drawn from bowels poisoned with self-interest: breaking this Cobweb net, they
disdain all religions as religations to ensnare: and believe religion not above
a state trick; or a vizard to fright Children, and cheat the world: since the
world varies dssguises as frequently as it changes interests.

A giddy minorage instructed me to make prodigious sallies, and join with these
Babell builders, to try if I could elix truth out of so great a confusion of
Languages: but the fruits of my curiosity proved not above the Apples of Sodom,
I was discomposed by the noise rather then edified by the tongues, and taught
with Octavian to cry out, utinam nescissem literas: to wish often that I had
been ignorant of letters, since they could not furnish me with the knowledge of
Christ's Cross, I retired within to seek that at home which I could not find
abroad: and having anatomized others in vain, I now dissect my self rather then
be inexperienced: here I find not those antipathies which I meet in others: I
seem constellated for all Countries, and could live peaceably under any
national Church, though I would not join with any schism which is made to
color over a rebellion, while a monstrous zeal, player-like takes a vizard
which he rejects his part once acted: for this indifferency, though
Erasmus-like, I am hung up betwixt Heaven and Hell, and renounced of all
Communions, yet Conscientiae satisfeci, nihil in famam laborati, sequatur vel
mala dum been mereor. By being charitable to all, I cannot deserve evil of
any; and I hope no national Church so ill but may deserve my charity: the first
sally of my pen intended nothing beside an Apologeticall Epistle, and by an
autops^e, or self-unravelling to satifie my self; and a Romanist of him, of
whom he had talked much, and knew little (proposing neither order, or method,
it being my Province to unravel the mysteries of riddling nature, rather then
the disguises of Antic Polemicks, but my glib pen found it easier to engage
then to retreat, and while the multitude of my own thoughts oppressed me, the
fear of my own disability would not suffer me to betray the succors which
reason offered, even the whole militant Church, lending the weapons of
Antagonists, and offering the Canons of the Church against them; which I shall
bring in with the flag of defiance to no Christian Communion: neitheir make use
of the forces to gratify any faction, for all carry the Angels motro, glory be
to God on high, and goodwil toward men. I introduce Charity, neither maimed
nor mutilated; Since she is enriched with a plenteous offspring which she holds
within the arms of Christian Communion: I would not deprive hereof any of her
Children, whom none can truly express, it they do not describe her with her
arms full; and although the Papist term; it, it is mistaken, yet mistaken
charity is to be preferred before none, and should heady and shallow
Enthusiasts misconstrue it, yet the learned and more refined spirit, who is
more blear-eyed with prejudice, or squints to self-interest will afford me that
charity which I afford all; to whom as Vespasian to A^ollonius, I conclude with
an (...).

To a Learnd Romanist.
APologies serve only to multiply Discourses, and the itch of dispute becomes
the Scab of the Church: Controversies being either the Ebullitions of
indigested Idleness, symptoms of distempered zeal, or inebriations of
Passion, while men in distractions ly idle, seriously foolish, or drunk with
dispute, forget the Holy Ghost to talk of an holy Church; and by relinquishing
their Charity lose the Communion of Saints: most Polemick Divines being no more
to be believed then Lawyers, who have least right to that they plead for, and
do it only for the fees of promotion, while the people are wrung by the
ears, they easily remitt their earrings, to rear a golden Calfe to worship,
or forge one out of silver, each Country being as able as Ephesus from a silver
forge to produce a Diana. Who fancy profit raise Idols of their Fancy: gain
profits by maintaining, and Prophets to maintain them. And no coin can be so
adulterate as not to pass current, if it be but stamped with the face of
Religion. I would not act high treason against heaven by adulterating my Kings
Coin, or by an uncharitable clipping of it take away the Crown, and obscure
the Image of my Redeemer; or by a pruriginous affectation of scribbling increase
the Scab of Church or State; or that the Luxury of my fancy should like the
ranknes of other's wanton out into weeds in the garden of the Spouse. If error
would not triumph over tacit truth; silence argues no assent, and introduces no
supposition of guilt; though all may accuse the sallies of a prodigious
curiosity, none should the excursions of a rasher pen; the spitle cast on me
from inane and jejune noddles should only mortify my quick silver, and it
heal the itch of my curiosity, the ink which I have took from the pens of
all ages be applied to cure the tetters of my own dilating vanity and not
profus'd on others. Male de te loquuntur sed mali, men speak evil of thee,
but evil men, was the comfort of a wise man, which I must not be entitled to
whom you can discommend; you for whom ever silenced enmity studies
commendations, they who cannot approve your judgment, admire your knowledge;
say you have a greater Library in you, then you have lost, yet have you lost a
greater Library then the County which you enrich with your self a Panoply of
knowledge can glory in. I could not bewa^le but rather congratulate such a
loss: For should the hot zeal of some Jack Straw of Reformation raise a
combustion might fire half of our Anglican Libraries, (nay was even your Roman
Vatican in a flame with half of the worlds Libraries, which by kindling the
flames of contention by disordering the Universe seem to antidate its
combustion) if a tear could quench the fire, I should number it among my
sins at the expense of so much water to redeem them.

Error is of a teeming Constitution, this Hydra's heads multiply by amputation,
there is no end of writing of Books the wisest of men dead said, and the
wisest of men living lament. Study is a wearinesss to the flesh, I wish most
men's studies were not only a wearines to their own but all flesh the effect of
few men's wit and most men's idleness, while there is nothing new under the Sun,
not only books but men are transcribed, men are lived ore again: the
Pythagorean Metempsychy is verified: the revolution of planets reduce the same
constitutions, same errors: hence Learning is in the circle and not in the
Progress: error has altered her modes and garbs with times, someties more
gaudy, better painted, trimmed and dressed to become more tempting, but still has
carried her old rotten body through all her veils and disguises d^scoverable to
a curious inquiry. That which sends occasion to opinion to proclaim most men
knowing, administers to me no infrequent suspicion of their ignorance,
multitude of books, variety of notions like to Cadmus Soldiers by mutual
quarrels destroy each other. Light and darkness both met in the Chaos, but
it was a work of omnipotency to separate them. I cannot be induced to believe
either the greatest reader or writer, the best Clerk-men write much of little,
because they know not how to comprehend much in little: a fly buzzes more about
nothing, then a Be with all her honey; most write much to instruct the world,
they know little, the Iliads of their labors may be comprised within a
nutshell, and that nutshell cracked found without a kernel. Uoluminous Tostati
dilude the mountains of our hopes with a ridiculous mouse, who placed in
competition with a single sheeted Mercury may be orevalued, while in floods of
words scarce occurs a drop of reason, and these by malice only impostum'd
Authors betray their own corruption, or their tumid bodies of controversies
are only symptoms of a drscracy, and show an Hydropsick constitution in
Religion.

But while these scrap-gatherers pick reversions from common places, and poor
truth imprisoned for her plain dealing, fed at the Alms basket of
uncharitable times is scarce kept from famishing, for you a reputed treasury
of knowldge to cast no mite into her treasury; while these standing pools
retain corruption, you who are an ambulatory Library, not to stream with
excellence, and like the Philosophers Elixir have as some say the price of al
things in Epitome; yet you your self know no value, this is a miracle which
may refute yours and their adversaries who can believe miracles have a
cessation: But lest you Sir should be lost in your Laborynth of your own
praises as the world in admiration of your intricate excellence, be pleased to
know Sir, that the opinion of what you know cannot make you speak wisely of
what you know not, and the Prerogative of greatness is no privilege for
unworthiness; he may be evil himself who speaks good of another upon
knowledge, but he can never be good himself who speaks evil upon suspicion
of any one: though you are pleased to say I make a jest of Religion, yet
produce one jest which did not give an earnest of truth. I must confess I have
not loved a solemnity in folly, or serious Ildenesse, like children to contend
with a passions vehemence for cock pins and hobbyhorses; if I have admitted
that no^i bonum ludere cum sanctis, it was only when they were dressed like
unto Bartholmew Fair babies in a garb only to be made sport with; (honor
their ashes which have been temples of the Holy Ghost, treasuries of knowledge,
and Cundit pipes of salvation, and neither my pen nor tongue shall bedrible
their ashes, which to speak Philosophically may retain some perfume of their
sanctities. I am not ignorant of the stories of Gervase Montanus, Babylas, nor
all the names which sanctify your year, or with their own bloods are writ in
the Rubric of the Church: But yet I must believe, Honorandi sunt Charitate non
servitute, and that best honor we can do them is to imitate their virtues and
not belly their ashes, and make banquets for the serpent the father of lies,
which thus may be said to have food out of the dust, which not to administer
cannot entitle me to your livery, viz.

A Heretic in Divinity, a Heretic in Philosophy, and in Physic, but not to a
Physicians religion which you can please your self by calling Atheism, but if
you were acquainted with much felicity as to be entitled to the knowledge of
Dr Brownes Religio Medici, you might be induced to believe a Physician still
may prove an Evangelist, and I hope I shall not prove besse by bringing you the
good tidings of the Religion you have lost; and though it be true as you say, I
am none of the young men who see visions, yet I am content to give you the
honor of an old man who dreameth dreams; not that you have truth revealed to
you sleeping, but are content to snore in your errors; and please your self
with the imaginations of truth, Chymera's of your own distracted fancy, or
the dream of melancholy Monks: if I recede from any, it shall be by their
receding from themselves, and as Apostasy is but a recession, and Heresy which
you inculcate an election, I am content with S. Paul after the way you call
here sie to worship God by, election of truth without supposing it taken (...)
in Thyestiles expugnatio civitatis, but more especially the holy city of God,
his holy Catholic and Apostolik Church militant on earth and triumphant in
Heaven, yet I may that which is patient in the purgatory of your errors.

And though you are supposed a Golia^h able to defy a whole host of Isreal's, ye
a poor contemptible boy whose best company has been sheep, silly creatures
in a wilderness of error, if when a Lion roared on him, one of yours E. S. I.
who like a Lion goes about seeking whom he may devour, he took him and rent
with his own arguments, shall he not dare to encounter you out of the slender
scrip of his own reason; and with pebbles drawn from a brook of clearer
testimonies aim at your forehead that (...) or (...) pontificiall
infallibility in the head of your Church, and then amputate it by the two edged
sword of verity, and the whole host of delusion your Catholic body of error,
cui fumus pro fundamento shall evaporate, yet by wrinkling and shrinking truth,
I shall not bring the Church in that narrow compass to give private spirits
leave to ruffle her, or make her less Catholic or not infallible, which could
she be, she might cease to be holy; nor could I be persuaded that the
pontificiall robes carried holiness to the Lord, that Vrim and Thuminim
perfection and light were relative to the Miter, and the lips of that high
Priest only carried knowledge, I could fly the bosom of the common mother, but
since from distempered parents we exuge poison, not nutriment, you must give
leave to decline those breasts which flow not with the sincere milk of the
word, and believe the body distempered, and of a richetty constitution: whose
head so exceeds the proportion; had infallibility a tie above the, intention
of a Priest in Collation of orders; to the proof of which, though I cannot
express the exactness of pedantism in quotation, yet I shall not be warped
from that may express ingenuity, and satisfy a pretender to it in a rural
retirement, having no book but one of an imperfect edition, forced to read my
self, ubi multa desiderantur and a desunt nonnulla, but nothing that may inform
of truth, though I can make use only of some confused notes for the
engraphical part of memory, yet in the agraphical part I shall not show so
great a deficiency in the Mnenon^cal Art as may render truth suspected; truth
shall be my aim, I may fly high, rove, yet never far from the mark, and
perhaps escape the fa^lts of most Polemicks, who resemble a piece of Arras,
where there is much in representation, and nothing in reality: or Plutarchs
heartlesse fish with a sword assimilating body, want both vigor and acuteness:
the discourses of umbraticall Doctors on all sides like bodies bred in the
shade, cannot endure the Sun, or a shower: in their more serious retirements
affecting nothing beyond Domitians humor of catching of flies: which I shall
without torture enforce them to confess: Could you but dispossess your self
of prejudicacy; truth is a garment that time can wear; who pretend to
greyheaded error, rather d^scredit it then patronize it. Lay aside those great
names of Seraphick and Angelick Doctors; look not on any Religion through the
optics of blear-eyed prejudice, as I am confident you make not yours squint to
self-interest.

I have neither given up my name to regal or papal supremacy, neither
protested, covenanted, or engaged to any faction; he who aims at truth by the
Roman, or any other bias, will never come nere the mark: the fire of self-love,
as it is kindled by the breath of the Father of lies so it partaketh of the
quality of his flames, to be without light: since it keeps us in darkness to
our selves, and an imperception of the true dimensions of others. This liking
or disliking of others, is but the spurious issue of philautie which
undervalues al, meets not in a compliance with the humor: some natures as
Seneca observes, are so shady, as they think every thing turbulent and stormy,
that is even, in a meridian l^ght. Some like to old rusticks are content to
meet in the Church porch of tradition to talk of mundan a affairs, which care
not to enter into the Church to serve God in his Ordinances: others resemble
young Novices which creep into the Church by holes to angle and ring the bells
backward, neglecting the key of trad^tion: others by curious inquiries are put
into a whee^, and are circled so long betwixt proving the Scripture by
tradition and tradition by Scripture, till the Devil find a means to dispute
them into infidelity; and make them believe neither. Most men's lips and pens
open wide like to a monilesse purse; nothing comes out of this* and what is
worth nothing out of them: yet this nothing must be placed in competition with
nothing less then salvation: the tradition of the Church must be a
satisfactory proof to believe by Divine faith, (if we may believe a Papist)
Scripture, Gods word. If we ask why we must believe? it is replied: because
the Church is infallibly governed by the holy Ghost: if we inquire how? they
run to revelation guilty of enthusiasm which they object to others: or if they
offer to prove it by Scripture, as most do, it is an acknowledgement that the
Scripture is of higher proof then the Churches tradition: thus these
impertinents touch neither Heaven nor Earth, in their discourses they open an
entry into a room, but shut it presently. Some elate tradition above Divinity:
the principles of any conclusion must be of more cred^^ then the conclusion it
self: the Articles of Faith, the Trinity, Resurrection and Communion, if the
conclusions by which they are proveable is Ecclesiastical trad^tion; it must
follow that the Churches tradition is of more credit, when the Faith of the
Articles must be finally resolved into the veracity of the Churches testimony.
Others depresse tradition even below humanity; are so far from equalizing it
with rational d^scourses, as they prefer the dreams of phanaticks before the
Churches tradition: without which a railing Song thrust upon an evil air, is
not worse music then the confused notes which some entitle the harmony of
Scriptures; and if they know Gods Law by heart, they have no heart to his Law,
and after all these pretenses of Knowledge and illumination, like to the
Egyptian sages can produce nothing but frogs and blood: Nor do the Exotique
Seminaries furnish us better then the weeds which the rankness of our own soil
has cast up: Apostolical pruging-hookes are exchanged for Sanguinary
instruments, involving the world in blood, and staining their own lives* at
the^r deaths leaving nothing behind but a memorial of some hideous impiety:
while with styles solemnly religious, and even Seraphical devotions we find
more principl'd in Caesar Borgia, and Nicholas the Florentine then Elemented in
Religion, not erecting a Spiritual Kingdom for Christ, but a temporal for the
Pope; which he honest good man, solemnly vows and protests against; for all the
Bishops of Rome at their Creation, make a solemn vow and confess to observe
inviolably all Ordinances made in the first eight general Counsels, in which
is provided that all Causes be determined by the Bishop of the same Province
where they are begun.

This might check the exorbitancy of the Roman See, and confine Tibur within
her own limits, if sober men having neither the inebriations of passion or
self-interest might be judges: Neither might that impertinent question of
triflers trouble the world: Where was your Religion before Luther? (retorted
ingeniously by S. H. Wotton to a pragmatical Monk) where yours is not to be
found now, in the word of God: But I may modestly and charitably aver, where
yours was if you have any, and where much of what you call fundamental in
yours, now is not to be found in the word of God. S. Hie^ in Psalm. 133.
Ecclesia non in parietitibus Consistit sed in dogmatum veritate: Ecclesia est
ibi ubi fides vera: one impertinent question is not ill required with another,
when a Romanist is asked where the Churches visibility and their judges
infallibility was, S. Hier. ad Lucif. post med. tom. 2.
Cum ingemuit totus orbis and Arrianum se esse miratus est; and even the
infallible Guide, Liberius even a Pope decoyed into Arr^an^sm: or while he was
intainted, if a Pope was what you would have him, an infall^ble Judge, is he
not to be believed, when he answers the Emperor with an esto quod solus sum,
Th^od. l. 2. Hist. Eccl. dialog. inter Constant Imper. and Lib. pap. 16.
non tamen fidei causa periclitatur: olim tres soli sunt reperti qui regis
mandata resisterent. If a particular Nation do what the whole world did, sigh,
and wonder at her self so soon turned Leper, it need not be the wonder of a
wise man? they who sacrifice their Religion to successes must set up Fortune
for a deity; which I believe is the World Idol, who Persian-like adore the
rising Sun; and not like Israelites; they will not believe God as much in the
Cloud as in the Pillar, though the one is the more glorious object. Can an
intelligent man suppose religion dead in the Primitive persecutions, because
buried alive in the Caves? or ours lost because some of ours are necessitated
to imitate them, and you, if you have any Religion in this Kingdom? yet this
meeting with weak judgments, and strong passions against the time, has gained
not a few Proselytes to Rome, and some seemingly learned, Vin^. Lir. Cont.
Haer. c. 23. and 24.
whose error like that of Origin, and Tertullian magna suit in ecclesia dei
tentatios

While the Priest which should be the lungs of the Church to receive in the
influences of Heaven, and temper the heart of Religion, sucking in the
contagious air of popular phancies are tainted; and have brought an hectic
fever in the body Ecclesiastic, subjecting it to continual heats by the
exasperation of malignant humors, through the obstructions of self-interest,
ignorance and the gross matter of ambition: but I shall endeavor to try
these lungs, and let out the purulent matter which occasions the heat of
disputes and cold fits of Charity, infallible Symptoms of a Consumpti^n in the
body of Religion: and though there may be Physicians more experienced; yet the
Domestic Doctor is always called into Consultation, as best acquainted with
the Constitution: there may be perfumes which may deceive those who converse
with putrid lungs at usual distances; yet I, who have been intimately
Conversant with Priest and Parson, and even protostickler of Schisms, which
have attriv'd florent an Age with Civil Wars, dissected men living as well as
dead, having read both men and books, may prescribe opposite remedies, having
those (...) mollifying praeparations which Hippocrates requires his Physician
to have upon all occasions: And though I have arrived at Knowledge by
prodigious curiosities; yet if we believe Alchymists, he who can fix
quicksilver may make gold: and I doubt not God of his mercy will fix me
volatile as Mercury, and produce that Elixir, which by its fluxion may convert
the most obdurate metal into Gold; and having wandered long out of the Ark, not
knowing where' to rest my foot for the deluge of errors, I may from the tops of
the Mountains, the holy Fahers, return with the Olive branch of peace to the
Ark, Gods holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church; from which only Ravens fly,
those birds of prey, whose delight is in ruin, and (...) devour mankind; which
is far from him, who is a friend to all, and yours by an inviscerate dilection,

J. C.
Medici Catholicon.
Sect. 1.
MOst Polemick Divines Cometlike rise out of indigested matter, from the vapor
of History, tenter'd Scripture, and fragments of Fathers, these exhalations
blaze and become portentous to Commonwealths by their apparitions: it is the
art of Scripture, which every one challenges to himself; and the body of
Religion which every Mountebank dares dissect; and those nobler parts whose
discovery should be to the melioration of mankind, are slashed and Cauteriz'd
by cruel ignorance; and similar parts, which should exact a gentle and well
experienced hand anatomized by the hand of self-conceit, and blinded passion,
are so mangled and disproportioned, that there is nothing opened above their
own follies, who pretend to anatomize others.

An Anatomist must be able to discover the order, situation, substance, temper,
relations, and confederate entercourses of parts contained, and continent, the
different Cells, and different bowels, how roof'd, and how partitioned, know
all the wheels and Clockworks of the heart, the mystique causes, what pullies
close, and what dilate, what secret engines tune the pulse, when by a well
ordered chiming, it shows what time health keeps in the body: Can demonstrate
all the Maeanders and bypath of sporting nature, where obstructions have
lodged, where maladies bred; and by such patterns instruct how to remove the
accretion of malign humors, by prescribing opposite remedies for prevention of
such ensuing inconveniences, and rectifying the present purging those impurer
humors which convert the food of life into poison: restoring those windy
constitutions which are inflated with their own emptiness ^ccasion'd by
weakness, and the obstructions of ignorance, vent nothing above noise and
stench, curing the Hydrophodia in those who fear to look in the waters of life,
by teaching to delight in the Scriptures, and healing the sting of the old
Serpent, which Tarantula-like produces giddiness, only curable by harmony of
Fathers, Councels, Scriptures in the Church. And not having gleaned up a few
simples in the garden of times, where weeds and flowers spring up together,
poison as well as physic, observing neither quantity, nor quality, suppose he
is enriched with Panaces, and Catholicons can cure the distemperatures of
constitutions that he understands not: having weighed his compositions in the
deceitful balance of his own lighter fancy, where there is no grain of wit,
though some unnecessary scruples may intermix with the composition of folly,
which may make it seemingly oreballance truth, and pass current with the
multitude, and weigh all by their own lead; and easily are induced to swallow
the most bitter pill, when gilded ore with profit and seeming complacencies.

The people like the Planet Mercury, are good in conjunction with the good, and
bad with bad, but to nothing resembling better then to wheels, who by turning
round continually, are fit to carry on all designs, if an H^^resiarch, whose
head has some gingling phancies, lead the way forehorse-like; others as
brainlesse as horses follow, the wheels are drawn glibly on while they are well
greased, when they want the grease of maintenance, only creak, make a noise,
and disquiet the world.

Sect. 2.
Most Polemicks, while they have too rashly charged the body of error, have
made themselves her Captives; and lent Antagonists Trophies of their rashness:
Though truth is a strong fort inconsideration may become a traitor, and expose
it to the mercy of an enemy. Most men are so drunk with dispute and inebriated
by their passions, that they cast at Antagonists heads all they can lay hold
on, not fearing a rebound, or what weapons they administer to their own ruin:
show the weakness of their adversaries with so much of their own, that they
lend opportunities to error: they permit the wild bore in their Vineyards,
would keep out the Foxes; and open a gap for the Foxes would expel the Wild
bore: they whose malice named the Bishop of Rome Antichrist, their weakness
opened a door to the Brownist, to bring in their own orders as rivolets from
that See into the praemunire of Antichristian. While Rome would prevent
dissentious, they are forced to dissent from themselves; admit that overgrown
monster, tyrannons infallibility, like the Wild Bore of the Forest to lay wast
Gods Vineyard, grown cruelly subtle by age and confidence in his tuskes, gores
all that stand in opposition, ^oming with mali^e, ambition, and Avarice, and
wallowing in impurities: they who dissent from these, have not learned to agree
with themselves: each one has his distinct Idol, different Concubine, various
gloss, on which their phancies set produces a brood of sects. While they
adulterate the Scripture, and seem to approve that which they so much decry,
while they wed themselves to the Idols of their own fancy, become the greatest
Idolaters: or confirm Copernicism with their whimzies, the Earths motion by a
continuity of giddiness.

Sect. 3.
With the Lyrck, Nullius addictus jurare in verba magistri, me quocunque rapit
tempestas deferor. Neither shall I put gall in the ink I write of Religion
because others sour their language* If I open sores, the launching shall be
only to let out their corruption, or take away the proud flesh that keeps the
wounds of the Church from healing. And though I may confess with S. S. Be^.
Ser. de resurr.
Bernard, Non sit major superbia, quam ut unus homo toti congregattoni judicium
suum praeferat tanquam ipse solus spiritum Dei habeat: yet it is a different
thing for a man modestly in some points dis-satisfied to propose quaeres, not
to a Congregation only, but the Catholic Church: and a sober man may without
trenching on irreligion, or the least touch of madness or insolency, dispute a
matter of Religion with the Roman, or Church, or Prelate, as Irenaeus with
Victor, modesty accompanying, Eusebius. l. 5. Hist. Eccl. c. 26. and Socrat. l. 5.
Hist. c. 22.
and a desire to fist out truth free from vanity and purposed opposition, even
against a particular Church, though to dispute an ^ Article of Faith, what the
Catholic Church has always believed, is what S. Austine calls insolent
madness. But in other things, Consent of Nations, Authority confirmed by
Miracles, and Antiquity of S. Peter's chair, S. Aug. Cont. Bon. de Bapt. e. 4.
Contr. Fund. c. 4.
and succession from it, motives to keep in the Catholic Church must not hold
against demonstration of truth; quae quidem si tam manifesta monstratur ut in
in dubium venire non possit, proponenda est omnibus illis quibus in Catholica
teneor: Ibid. c. 4.
ita si ali quid apertissimum Evangelio^ they have opened the gates and made
the way that went before us: non Domini nostri sed duces fuere: truth lies open
to all; it is no man's several: patet omnibus veritas; nondum est occupata:
multum exilia etiam futur is relicta: dissentire licet, sed cum ratione: non
mihi credendum sed veritati.

Sect. 4.
Though I cannot look upon the Pope with that dreadful apparition, Papal
infallibility sifted.
which some affrighted with the horror of their own imaginations, who character
him by a Virgils Polyphemus, monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens, cuilumen
ademptum. Or some sad and distorted phancies flutering betwixt the twilight of
ignorance and self-conceit bandy against the name with prejudice, as it nothing
could result from thence might not taint the odor of virtue and innocence; yet
could I but believe infallibility to be the Prerogative of the the pontificial
chair; I might believe with the Schoolmen, sin a nonentity, that Pontificial
impurities passing for nothing, the chair might be secured from rasher
imputations, Alphonsus contra hae. lib. 1. c. 4.
St. Irenaeus might not accuse a Victor, S. Cyprian a Stephen; S. Athanasius a
Pope Liberius for Arrianism; A Martin in Chron. cen 17.
all that pretend to goodness, Heresy in an Anastatius, H. Blond. dec. 1.
lib. 9 Bergomensis Martin in Chron. Sabel. Naucl. Marian Scot. stella,
Palmerio; Platina, Blondus, Vincentius, Henricus de Erfordia.
Honorius, John 22. Necromancy in a Silvester; Magic in a third Paul; a John
the 8th 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. as if the name which implies gracious, could
import a concatenation of mischief, they being linked together in with the
7th. impurities,
Boniface, for the most part entering like Foxes, living like Lions, Blondus
lib. 3. dec. 2. Anto^ius 1. 16. c. 1. ex Iohanne de Col^a mina Sabellicus
Na^clerus Platina.
and dying like Dogs: and non montes parturient ridiculum murem, sed secundum
ridiculum morem, in the eight John, Ranulphus l. 5. c. 3^. Baleus Cent. 2. c.
30. c. 3. 10. Volateranus.
and Bened^ct the 9th. supposed to appear in the shape of a Monster after
death, Martinus in Chronico, Marianus Scotus Sigeb. Platina Bergomensis, etc.
because in all his life he appeared not less then a Monste^ in all his
Actions: a 6th. Urban could drown five Candinalls for revenge, Martinus
Polorues in Chronico, Platina and Petrus Demi^nus.
andas if this had been too little, let loose a deluge of impiety, the 5.
Cardinal virtues suffering for name sake. But these are modest, vey'd with
witchcrafts incests, cruelties, of a sixth Alexander; Idolatrous sacrifices in
a Marcelln; Diabolical applications in a Celestine; inhumations and such
ridiculous pieces of cruelties in others, that even Paganism is charitable, and
Mahometism it self comparatively virtuous: Should I omit a 10th. Leo's (that
Father of Christendom in long Coats, who before the times, others do arrive at
age, had attained to be Father of all the Aged, a Pope at twenty) quantum
peperit nobishaec fabula Christi, and after a dispure, de anima and redit in
nihilum quod fu^t ante nihil: but I would sally no further, shrowds best befiit
the dead, and by a candid retrogradation, to draw a white veil of innocence
over those who should have been nursing Fathers to the Church; yet let me tell
you Sir, (...) how assents he to Christ in his words, Benedict 9. Silveste^ 3.
Gregorius 6. Cent. 11.
who dissents from him in his works? Three blazing Comets conspicuous in the
Roman Horizon at the same time, it would be strange if they should produce no
alteration in the Ecclesiastic body, three Popes cohabiting at Rome, three in
diverse Countries, a schism for forty years, Popes at the French and German
devotion, Ambition and Corruption to the attaining the Papal dignity (as
Platina) being more prevalent then a Christian life it would be a miracle above
any Legends pretend to, that Contrariety should r^concile, mutual
Contradictions render infallible, while the Church music must be only set
out of such discord.

Antipopes not only in competition for, but opposition to the pontificial
dignity; of the Popes infallibility, see your own Gerson, Occham, Almain,
Echius, Hosius Pigh^us, Waldensis at quarrel: about Original of Spiritual
power, Abulensis, Turrecremata, Franciscus de victoria, Alphonsus de Castro:
men whose very names speak battle and writings not much unity.

(...) will scarce prove a Rock of defense which implies a stone as well as
Rock, and the twelve Apostles were all stones which went to the foundation of
Christianity. No man, not warped by prejudicate ignorance, but may admit a
primacy as great as those Princes, his Holiness dignifies with the titles of
the most Catholic, or most Christian.

Peruse the Spanish Edicts, and you shall find Cardinal Baronius book
asserting Papal jurisdiction by King Ph^l^p, lest it might raise the flames of
contention in his Subjects, made it self a Subject of the flames.

Peruse the Constitutions of the Gallican Churches; nay even now see them
menacing to ordain Bishops for Portugal, the Pope refusing.

Reslect upon this darling Flanders, and find Bruxels lately tearing his bull
for a defamatory scroll, by one rent to prevent many.

Take a view ^of Germany, her Henry's, Fredericks, 1. 2. here you shall find
the story of the Eagle and Fox verifyi'd if the Eagle touches but a Popeling,
the Fox fires his nest.

See the Eastern Empire, whose substance was lost, fighting about shadows nay,
the substance of Religion and Christ's Image, charity for a wooden one.

Finally, let us look home and sweep our own doors from the ^irt which would
cleave to them: the first appellant here in England was Wilfrid, Archbishop of
York in the reign of Egbert and his Son Alf^ede; the Popes Nuntio's in his
behalf were returned with a Complement of honoring for grave lives, Spelman
Conc. an. 705.
and honorable aspects, but they would not' sent to their Legation.

See Anselms Contest about appeals to Rome, Malin lib. 1. de gest Paul A^glor.
answered with a Consuetudo regni mei est a Patre meo instituta ut null^us
praeter licentiam Regis papa appelletur: qu^ Consuetud^nem regni toll^t
potestatem quoque and Coronam Regis violat: Siquis inven^us fuer^t litter as
vel mandatum ferens Domini papae, etc. Capiatur and deo eo ^^cut de^ Regis
traditore and Regn^, etc. if it was treason then, reason will ^carce expect
thee Reward of loyalty now should atte^d his missaries.

These you will not deny, such as you call Catholic, and cannot wonder if in
those times they menaced ponere murum pro Domino rege, Math. Paris An. 1246.
they now place one pro republica, and better learned by time: Now with the
Grec: an Church they answer, we know your pride; cannot satisfy your A^arice;
and therefore leave you to your selves.

For his Patriarchate, B. Bilson.
by Gods Law he has none in this Land; for 600 years after Christ he had none,
for the subsequent 600. intent to greater matters, he would have none, above
or against the Princes sword he can have none; to subvert faith, or oppress
his brethren, it is fit he should have none; you must seek further for
subjection to his tribunal, this Land owes him none.

Finally to bring you home, and truth home to you; reflect upon your own Rome
in the time of budding Christianity, Polycarp in Anicetus time comes to Rome,
yet makes no appeal.

Justin Martyr lives at Rome, and lends no suspicion of such power: he names a
prefect of the brethren; In Apol. 2. Cont. Triphon. E^seb. lib. 5. c, 26.
calls all Christians Highpriests; and so he being one, may attain a
pontifical dignity. Iren^us calls Soter, Anicetus, Hyginus, Pius, Telesphorus,
Xistus Presbyters. Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 23. lib. 5. c. 16.
Dionysins Corinthius calls Soter a Bishop. Apollinaris tells of Asiatick
Churches excomunicating without the Roman. Lib. 5. c. 3.
The Gallican Churches in a dissension of Alcibiades and Theodotus not only
appealed to, Lib. 5. c. 23.
but the Roman Victor was opposed by Polycrates, an Ephesian Bishop. Nay, even
the name of Universal Bishop was so great a stranger to Rome, S. Greg. lib. 4.
Ep. 76. 83. Ep. 78.
that a Pope though it designd the coming of Antichrist, was a name of
blasphemy, and to admit it, was to lose the Faith; and no Sciolist in History
but may discern if the Foxes tail had not been peeld to the Lions skin, his
Holiness might have now been but a petty Chaplain, and squared his Religion to
some magnifico's trencher* and he may thank Saint Paul's sword, which has more
advantaged him then the Cross keles of St. Peter.

Sect 5.
Who would be tied to that infallibility, which instead of adorning, has so
daubed the Gospel, that Christianity may be suspected for a Fable, and al
relig^on pass for state policy, while quatenus Cathed^a doceat, this Nymph
Egeria must inform the Roman Numa, and to resist it be no less treason, quam
tentare arcana imperi? and yet his Holiness silence such prodigious pieces of
masking foolery, golden Legend, Bridgets Revelations, Metaphrastes Saints,
Monkish Chymaera's, and pious frauds, which for excellence and probability may
parallel Lucian's true History, render Pantagruel Orthodox, make Don Quixot for
the transportations of his fancy pass in opinion for a S. and a Gusman may be
canonized for a knave by revelation; as well as a Ronsard tenter our Saviors
miracles to an analogy with Hercules labors, and your Divine Ar^sto make Saint
John a groom to feed an Hippogriph with Celestial Oats.

Indulgence to vice shames virtue out of countenance: and the thread of
falsehood interwoven with the gold of verity makes even truth pass in the
supposition of counterfeit.

Who would believe the treasury of Pontificiall merits exceeds his Peter's
pence, since no penny, no Pater noster, no our Father, the Pope, with Peter
sure will scarce hold current at Heaven gate?

Or believe a Purgatory above unnecessary injunctions, and a fire in it above a
Culinary one, which he maintains by it in his Kitchen, since he seems an
adversary in the way, and who agrees not with him quickly, is cast into Prison,
and scarce gets out till he paies the uttermost farthing.

Or the Priests, when they cry edite and bibite de hoc omnes, and devour all
themselves, lie not?

Or mumming may not seem Religion, where Religion may seem but a mask of
Anticks?

That lies and phancies be necessary for salvation, since who believes them
not, Trent Council salutes with an Anathema?

Or the Popes have not been the greatest Schismatiques, since they have made
more Schisms, then others Churches have Articles of Faith.

That two Popes when they both do contradict each the other, are both of them
infallible?

Or injoyning several Bibles, I must peruse neither?

That the people was not mocked by subtle divisors, who instead of milk to
instruct their souls, milked their purses with the fictitious milk of the
Virgin Mary, L. Her. Hist. H. 8.
visible in twelve places in the time of Henry the 8.

That Saint Wilfrid's needle which opened to the penitent, and closed to the
guilty, was not the needle, the Camel, Cable might pass through, the rich man
to Heaven since, who gave most was always the most innocent.

Or a rood moving like to a Puppet by wyre, and weeping the tears of a bleeding
Vine, gained not the Priests the blood of the grape, by inebriating the people
with folly?

In stead of showing of our Saviors blood the price of Mankind, while they
took a price for blood, shut up in Crystal, a darker veil might not better
befit their impiety, belying the value of humanity with Ducks blood of no value.

That John the Baptist, the voice and way to heaven, may not be mistook for a
po^^er of hell, since what they feign of their Ceroerus, seem verified of him,
three heads shown at three several places. While a piece of Bechets shirt must
impregnate sterile women the mortifications of the flesh may not seem seminal
pollutions, which like to Ave^rhoes Bath could procreate at di^tance, or
nocturnal effluxions sanctified by inherency in his vestment, like the
unguentum armarium by the effluviums of atoms may do miracles.

Finally, nails, Bechets penknife, boots, dirt, S. Laurence coals, and trash
fit only to be found in Kites nests, must necessarily show a
green-sickness-like Constitution, and obstructions in Religion.

Sect 6.
These though venial to vulgar constitutions, who cannot go above the capacity
of instilled notions, cannot be pardonable to K. P. W. M. L. B. your self; men
who seem constellated for learning, who do nothing if they outdo not others.
God expects no splendour from the lesser stars, but if the Sun should not
irradiate, it would seem a conspiracy in Nature: it is not sufficient for such
to be carried in the stream of every idler fancy, biased by lead, but eminent
in virtue, fortune and knowledge, propose Excellency for a Mistress, and
Perfection for an aim. Amuze not your selves for splendid nothings to gather
cockles on the shore, but lanch into the deep, and fetch home treasures above
the In^^es, the everlasting Mines of Knowledge: Place your tabernacle in the
Sun, and not in the shadow; in the substance of Religion and not form, lest you
lose the essence of Religion, Charity to others in opinion, and the substance
of Charity in your fortune; as the shadow of Religion, so gain the shadow of an
estate, broken as your knowledge. The people whose credulities illimitable may
promiscuously swallow any thing, have Diana's out of every silver forge, are
spunges ready to suck in all the lees of fancy and dregs of ages; may believe
in a stock, garlic, onyons, a God for no God, all the absurdities of an
Alcoran, a Moon descending into Mahomets sleeve, the Angel Adriels death and
Gabriels bridge, Celestial generations by the smell of a Citron, an act of
coition prolonged to a Jubilee of fifty years, or any thing while they are
tools to a Machiavell and he the Devils instrument may not lend occasion to
wonder. But that a Auicenne, a Geber, and the learned Arabians should
prostrates their beliefs so tamely to every fardle of foolish impossibilities
and you have a vote for those Legends, which make a Ta^mud and an Alcoran seem
modest, when you have a clew within your self, which may extricate you from
this Maze of folly, this is an inexcusable piece of ignorance in you, which
might be venial in me, since the disfigurements on the face of truth, Junior
indoctrinations, and minority of years, instructed by the ill complexion'd zeal
of most professors, might suffer me to toil in a Labyrinth of error, truth not
attained to but by exantlation, having only time to peep into the Well, and
not e puteo latentem eruere veritatem, view truth only by the glass of vain
imagination, measuring truths image by my own: Finally consider what needed the
Fathers Cautions against Haeresie, and hard Conflicts with Heretics;
Christendom torn by distempered Counsels, Ter. de praej. vincen. Lir. de Haer.
as that of Ariminum, and the two of Ephesus, the whole world Arrian to the
amazement of it self, and all this time the either envious or ignorant, never
call for the necessary assistance of the Pope, and teach the ignorant world how
the Bishop of Rome was infallible.

I shall not deny with some Sciolists of ours, Peter's residence at Rome, a
Bishop of the Jews, as Paul of the Gentiles; and believe them as little in
this as in the two witnesses of the Revelation, Eiph. l. 1. adv. Carpar. l. 4.
c. 6.
the two Jewish Bishops, pros. de prom. and produe. impren. c. 5.
which some please to fancy themselves; Sab. Ennead. lib. 72.
some the Albigenses and Waldenses, Eusebius. in Chr. pr. 10. Nicronis 14.
Ignat. epist. ad Tract.
as truly as the fraternity of New England is the woman in the Wilderness:
(...), in Ep^phanius, (...) see^ in Eusebius time, Petrus and Paulus Apostoli
in Roma, in Prosper: Peter's concertation whith Simon Magus at Rome; his
Constitution of Clemens, confessed by such a cloud of witnesses, not easily to
be blown away with every wind of fancy.

Our Fencers in Religion, need not make falsifying strokes to hit the Roman
head, since by rasher overtures their Antagonists by their own play lay their
head open to have the infallible brains knocked out; if they fence not with
Saint Paul's sword as well as ward with Saint Peter's Keys: Truth is like the
Lake in Africa* which one time or other discovers all that is cast into it.

Sect. 7.
I cannot be induced to believe the Pope, Antichrist with some, who believe
nothing but what is writ in the stories of their own ignorance, and calculate
all Religion by their own vertiginous pates* weighing not the consequences of
bringing their own orders into a praemunire of Antichristian: the Enthusiasms of
the Lady Elianor Davis, and the prophetique accomplishments of Rice Evans, who
makes a Parliament Antichrist, sitting in the Temple of God, viz. the house was
once a Chapp^ll, are as probable and rational discourses as most in Brightman,
Mede, Napier, Gresner, Witta^her, Cotton, etc. or should any one make a Jack
daw Antichrist, perking on the Pinnacle of a Temple like Belial, and exalting
himself above all that is called God. viz. Gods worship in the Church: A Romish
Priest some years since informed me for a secret that Antichrist was born and
now lived in Babylon about twelve years old, disputed Christlike with learned
men to admiration, could speak as soon as he was born, having Daemon^ack-like
learned to speak in the belly. Another showed the time of his coming, his
firing of Rome* and the Popes name that should oppose him: some believe him
with us now, Gaffar^ mon. curios^ 152.
and is a sending forces against Rome the year 1655. fatal to Italy.

Sect. 8.
If Antichrist shall come, (...) according to the working of Satan, in all
power, signs, and lying wonders, Simon Magus (...), Satan's first born, as Saint
Peter, and as Euseb^us (...). Eusebius. l. 2. cap. 12.
may resemble him, i^ to command fire to come down be any property of his?
Arnob. adver. Gent. lib. 2.
Arnobius will inform v^derant currum Simonis, and quadrigas igneas Petri^re
difflatas and nomin^to Christ^ Evanuisse, etc. if to exalt himself above all
that is called God belongs to him? Just. mart. Ap. 1. Irenaeus, Philaster,
Epiphanius, Theodoret.
he said all Nations worshipped him as God, though they gave him various
names, do^uit seipsum esse qui apud Judaeos quasi filius apparuerit; in Samara
auter^ quasi pater descenderat, and in reliquis Gentibus quasi spiritus Sanctus
adventaver^t; The God of the Jews, one of the Angels, and Simon himself, the
Father who made the Angels: if to sit in the Temple of God as God denotes him?
the Samaritans called Simon (...) worshipped (...) with incense and sacrifice:
who can doubt him, by the Samaritans worshipped in places set apart for Gods
service, and so (...). If the man of sin be an opposite term for him: he
called his wench Helena his lost sheep; having left her in a Brothel, ad hanc
descendit pater summus* and carrying her back to his Palace, ad hominem salutem
respexit, had respect to humane health, and salutem hominis dixit esse liber
ationem ab Angelorum imperio, qui-ipsos ad bonas actiones urgerent, nec
promitterent agere quae vellent* the (...) or mystery of iniquity may quadrate
with the impiety of his followers the Gnostics as well as (...), or (...) man
of sin or adversary with Magus, if to deny Christ to have come in the flesh,
may be appropriated to Antichrist; the Gnostics denied Christ to have been
born, lived, or died, but in apparition.

Apostasy may be applicable to their relinquishing Christianity, to comply
with persecuting Jews, that which impeded the mystery of i^iquity, the
Apostles compliance in some judaical observances; the swift destruction, see
performed, These. 1. 5. 2. Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 18.
(...) in a moment they were utterly destroyed by the breath of Christ's mouth,
brightness of his coming; one denoting the Evangelicall power in the mouth of
Peter and Paul personally opposing him, and Christ's coming to take judgment
on the Jews, and his favorites the Gnostics, who adhered to them in the
persecution of Christianity.

Sect 9.
This with our incomparable Doctor Hammond does carry more probability then the
whimzies of Brightman, who will have the Martyr Antipas antipapas; though he
suffered in Domitians time, must be an Antipope, or some men's fantastic
humor of Anagrams where Doctor Chatterton may come as near the number of the
Beast as Calixtus, whose name the Parsons torture in revenge of their deprived
lechery: or (...) where they serve the fancy of Irenaeus, to that he did not
apprehend: or Saint Hierom, Tertullian and Chrysostom about the Apostasy: it
would be well, if with those Fathers they would ingenuously confess their
ignorance of Antichrist, and not byasse them to their phancies to call what
they fancy not Antichristian: Nor is the whimzey of the Romanists and some
Fathers more rational, who would have him of the Tribe of Dan; and the text of
Dan, a Serpent in the way lies like a Serpent in the way to seduce them out of
the ways of truth; as if there were any Jew expected a Messiah from that Tribe
when there was never any that expected him not from the Tribe of Judah: the ten
Asiatick Kings which Daniel saw must be the same with Seleucus, Nicanor,
Antiochus, Soter, Anto. Theos. Seleucus. Callinicus, Ptolomaeus Evergetes,
Seleucus Ceraunus, Antiochus Magnus, Ptolomaeus Philopator, Antiochus
E^piphanes. Whit. in thesi pro posit. and defens. in Cant. die Comitiorum.
the ten horns in the Apocalypse, and Antiochus Epiphanes must be the Pope,
heaping up gold and silver ( id est) adorning the Temples with gold and silver:
extolling himself above God, viz. more zealous to have his own constitutions
performed then Gods: the same arguments being applicatory to all Magistracy as
well as the Pope Phanaticks have took notice of them to name them
Antichristian, and the Churches have been robbed out of zeal, while sacrilege
has been encouraged, the unhappy companion of rash reformation; and if they
are ushered in by rebellion, and attended by sacrilege a wise man need not
wonder at either: while all think they are nearer to God by being further from
each other: he that deserts the Romanists seldom stops till he has orerun all
Church-fences by renouncing discipline; and our Precisian Proselytes (as I have
known not a few) rarely prove not Jesuited Papists, and out of the phrantick
zeal called Conscience, brand their brethren with the names of Antichristian,
etc. when men should hate corruption which depraves Religion, run from it, and
not from Religion: Atheism and irreligion gather strength while the ship of the
Church tossed with blasts of error indangers splitting in the waves of
contention: there is in all national Churches truth enough to save men, but I
fear malice enough to damn envn Angels: who resists any of their phancies, has
the spirit of Antichrist, though Antichrist in Divinity resembles the Elixir in
Philosophy, many rules are prescribed, but few, if any have attained the
Philosophers stone; and though the Pope in hew and cry for him, might be taken
on suspicion by the marks a Pope has set on a him, yet suspicion entering the
actions-plea, there wants proof to maintain the Plea.

Sect 10.
The motions of these superior bodies was in excellent order and perfection,
til exhalations from the gross and putrid matter of ambition produced horrid
trepidations, and became precursors of prodigious calamities, while they
grovel'd here for truth, and traded away the stock of Christian Charity for
fictitious coin, minted by passion, mutable affection, or seduced reason to
prefer the pageantry of the world before the simplicity of the Gospel: and
to blaze like Meteors with the vapor of an empty name, rather then shine like
stars in an Orb of Sanctity, irradiating by their benigner influence, the
horizon of Christianity: yet some good patriarchs maugre envy, triumph in
innocence, the beams of their Sanctity too glorious to be orecast with the
mantle of blind malice, though clouded and interwoven with specious pretenses.

Sect 11.
I can find Lillies and roses, Popes candid with innocence, and purpl'd with
Martyrdom, whose blood became the seed of the Church: D. in vit Pontif. 33.
while Christian Rome as well as Pagan had her foundation in red ruins, the
foundation of Christianity laid with the blood of Martyrs.

Amongst those, some please themselves by naming Nimrods, Abaddons, and
incurable Babylonians; I can find one die for the loss of a terrene Jerusalem,
as well as others neglect a celestial. A Peter Marron alias Celestine the 5. so
busied about his prayers, Stella and Platina.
that he can neglect to be called O holy Father in Earth, to cry our Father in
Heaven; be persuaded out of a triple Crown here to ascertain one hereafter.

A third Benedict, Test. Blon^. dec. 1. lib. 9 Martinus in Chronic^
who can weep to be chosen. A Deodate a Sicilian Monk which being chosen, gave
none ever occasion to weep.

Agathon and Theodate reported to cure Leprosies by kissing, Platina and Liber
pontificalis Cent. 78. 480.
as well as others by their ill breath cause the Leprosy of Schism orespread
the face of the Church. Sigebert Marianus Scotus. Guliel Nubrigensis l. 2. c.
6. Cent. xij.


A John giving sight to the blind, as well as others of the name blinding.

A fourth Adrian, an English man, converting Norway, as well as others
perverting Nations.

A Gregory so charitable, as to call Anglos Angelos and de ir a liberandos who
called us Angels, I have no cause to believe him an evil one* Cambdens remains.
since an Angel of darkness would not have sent Angels of light to deliver us
from the wrath to come, which he himself might expect in utter darkness: who
sent Ministers to give us light, and both his name and acts speak him to
invigilate for the good of souls.

A Stephen whom the Earth was scarce thought worthy to bear, Vid. John Stella
Diaconus Plat.
carried on men's shoulders, because he supported the Church on his own.

A Paul visiting Widows, and Orphans, by night lending light in darkness. A
ninth Leo entertaining Christ, as well as a tenth casheering with a quantum
nob^s peperit haec fabula.

Finally, a good as well as a bad Silvester, Constantine, Onuphrius Platina,
dec.
Honorius, Severinus, a 1 Leo 2. 3. Martin Agapitus. 2. whose religions cannot
be named, nor pure, nor not undefiled, since the Apostle names it so to visit
the widow and Orphans: conclude, fuit Sergius vir sanctissimae vitae grataeque
conversation^s, ante pontificatum and in pontificatu, Platina.
in pauperes liberalis; in amicos and familiares jncundus, in delinquentes
Clemens; in Contumaces modestus, cantae praeterea prudentiae fuit, ut in toto
pontificatu nihil reprehenal gubernantis negligentia possit; in deum enim omnem
mentem Convertens quod facere pontifices omnes deberent just atque C^nt. Ma.
Cent. xi. p. 5. 20.
integre omnia, ex animisui sententia been nature a and mo^^bus inst^tuti
gubernabat: extant and ejusdem apud Scriptores praeclara encom^a: and this by
the Confession of the now quoted Pope: Antichrist making Centur^ators.

Sect 11.
In Tertullians time, heathens used to say, see how these Christians love one
the other? now even Turks exprobate us with a See how these Christian dogs are
divided! while most resemble the envious man in the Fable, who would put out
one of his own eyes that his enemy might be deprived of both; rather deny
themselves part of that light, then their Antagonists should have any; like men
who have the yellow Jaundise in their eyes, will apprehend no color beside;
their own superelevated devotion must be Antichristian in the holy
Sequestrations of Monachism; and even the Apostles themselves Antichrists,
while Episcopacy is the mystery of iniquity: all sides hear either
Antichristian or Heretic, manifest truth and reason may be Heresy as to
maintain an Antipodes, or the souls traduction, or such an imper^inent trifle,
as whether the Lord had brethren; in vain Christians may pray that the
partition wall betwixt Jew and Gentile may be taken away, if they take not
away these uncharitable partitions between themselves.

Sect 13.
I am so far from hating the Pope, that I would kiss his foot if his nails
were but so pared, that he would not make blood run about all the mouths in
Christendom: though I can please my self with their phancie, who tenter Pa^a to
confess in Capital letters like his off^nces: a Presbyterorum Ambitiopepe^it
Ant^chr^stum, and believe they have made many Antichrists; not only men of
sin, but adversaries to Christianity: while they have toyld in mysterious
iniquity, made titular holiness band to impiety; or serve only to
obstetricate degenerate actions: producing ill shapen Monsters, whose
prodigious births trouble and discompose the world, while instead of the
desired honor Juno, Ixion-like he grasps a cloud, and begets Centaurs.

Yet some grains of lightness must be allowed, gold having greater occasion
of trial. Ambition is apt to creep into the most refined devotions, and
persons consecrated to the Altars are not free: while there are men, there will
be vices* and one common place will serve to declaim against all times: though
we may discern cracks in the purest metalls by the luster that streams from
them; yet if our eyes turn inward, we shall encounter with so much humane
fragility, pity will shame pride, and we shall rather lament our own then
glory in aliene miscarriages: if the Church of Rome like the woman in the
Gospel be taken in adultery, and every one has a stone to cast at her, should
we observe our Saviors rule, and the guiltless cast the first, we might all
retire into our own dark souls to hide us; and leave her alone to Christ, who
of his mercy may release her with a sin no more.

Sect 14.
Though I am persuaded I may believe in God, Of the Creed.
and yet not introduce that Egyptian piece of darkness, by mantling the the
Creator as they their Eneph, an old man in blew circumscribing ubiquity and
painting invisibility, and so drawing under line the incomprehensible, and sin
against his effence; yet I could as easily be induced to assent to this, as to
a fiduciarie Solifidian, have a Creed for servile will, irrespective election
and reprobation, which might suggest irreverent thoughts of Divinity; while we
affix tyranny to the most just, and partiality to him who is no respecter of
persons, and sin against his attributes.

Faith, Hope, Charity, Fear, Confidence, Honor and Worship, Prayer, and praise
must be the affairs of that Jacobs Ladder which ascends to Heaven, and learns
us to commerce with the attributes and essence of God. I believe all my belief
will be irrite, my heart unpossess'd with the sincerity of his power; or my
life warped with a Nonconformity with it in the practice of Celestial virtues;
he who gives God not all, gives him nothing at all; to bepiece for God, and a
piece for the world, is to be all for the world: he excludes him from all, who
concludes him at all: or can he detest sin, makes God the Author of it? or
dread the appearance of evil, who intails a necessity on it? or who believes a
parity of sin, can he admit a conscience in any? fear to strain at a gnat or
swallow a Camel, who perceives no difference in either?

Sect. 15.
I can believe in Jesus Christ, yet not daily make one with the Pontifician; or
think that my fancy can make him mine with the fiduciary.

May we show him our King while no disloyal sin or rebel lusts holds out
against him; but every thought and action paies him the tribute of obedience;
and vows good life and repentance, like so many oaths of supremacy, acknowledge
our allegiance. May we every day to our high Priest bring the incense of
prayer, and odours of good works, think no daily sacrifice Mass, or Popish
oblation, no Church sup^rogations; nay, not even Christ's sufferings or his
satisfyings for us, satisfactory, if we abuse his grace into wantonness: this
will by a clew of piety and humility teach us to extricate our selves from the
Labyrinths of impiety, and approach our reward, the Crown not of our works but
of his graces.

While we acknowledge him a Prophet, bow down and worship, bringing our reason
into Captivity to Faith; and since a Prophet like Moses bring him the Jewels
of Egyptians riches of nature, give God our strength for bulls, sacrifice the
Calves of ourlips, and bring the innocence of Doves and Turtles to his service.

May we pass over Jordan in Baptism* feed on the Manna of Gods words, and not
languish after the fleshpots of Agypt, be seduced by fleshly lust? but if the
fiery serpent of our sins sting us, look up upon him who was lifted up with
healing under his wings; and have respect to the fruits of the land of promise,
that blessed Canaan, not being discouraged by the Giants of our sins; but lift
up our hands with Moses, strengthened by the two Tables, the Commandments of
God till we overcome them; and having the Corner stone, Christ Jesus to support
us in our weakness (who will not fail them who rely on him in all their
conflicts with the world, the flesh and the Devil) we may subdue the enemies
of our peace, who hinder us in our progress to the promised Land.

Sect. 16.
I may believe him conceived of the Holy Ghost, yet may safely neither believe
the Popes and some Pontificians, nor the conceptions of our Enthusiasticks of
the holy spirit.

I can believe Christ born of a Virgin Mary* yet need not believe a Virgin
Mary's Temple born by Angels to Loretto; nor doubting the truth of the Virgins
milk, with which the Popish Priests impose on the vulgar, may impose the stigma
of infidel on me, and deprive me of the milk of the word of truth.

He who had respect unto her humility, will not have respect unto them who too
much humble her; since the glory of Heaven overshadow'd, and the Bridegroom of
our souls shined forth from the closet of her womb.

Nor exalt them, who her that was humbled in her own eyes, exalt in theirs
above their Creator; Casheer his name to admit hers in the Psalter, while an
Ave Mary can bring a Te deum Laudamus out of fashion, and Christ himself must
still be in pupillage.

May we all provide innocent, spotless, and Virgin hearts for a Savior to be
born in; so that we all may have by the overshadowing of the holy spirit a
right Conception of him, whose Conception could not be without it, Mat. 12. v.
50.
and be accounted for the mother and brethren of the Lord, while we do the
will of his Heavenly Father.

Sect 17.
I could wish that Christ still suffered not under a Roman Governor, but
instead of a Pilate, he would be a good Pilot, no longer steer by the gales of
profit, or the Whirlewind of ambition, which may ingulph the bark of the Church
into an Abyss of misery; but calming the troubled Sea of his own lusts into
moderation, the winds of error, and waves of false Doctrine may cease; and the
leaky vessel of the Roman Church by the pump of Faith, and sincere repentance,
may arrive at the Haven of eternal security: in vain like Pilat he may seek to
wash his hands from the guilt of Christ's blood, while he can embrue them in the
blood of Christians, and suffer his Polemicks to plant thorns on Christ's brow,
spinous questions; and with the mock pageantry of state make Christian Religion
ridiculous to Jew and Gentile.

Neither the Clergy though their name implies lot, should as relative to their
name and Christian warfare, Souldier-like cast lots for Christ's Coat;
neglecting internal purity, quarrel about the supervesture, external
ceremonies of Religion, while their tongues sharp as spears pierce Christ's
sides through their brethren: who is still crucified by Jews, and betwixt
thieves who rob Gods word, while we apprehend, examine, accuse, condemn, shame
and crucify one another; when we should rather crucify the flesh with the
affections and lusts thereof; as pride, envy, malice and contention; conforming
our selves to the Image of a crucified Savior, and not to the crucifyers of a
Savior by our vices: since some truths, though seemingly precious, are not so
placed in competition with Christian-charity, peace, and communion with all,
who are fellow members of Christ's body. We must relinquish that which is
valuable, rather then him who is above all value: while dissension can renew
his wounds in his members.

Dull, phlegmatic and Plebeian constitutions are not only subject to
paralytique, but even apoplectick distemperatures: sometimes they tremble and
discompose Religion in their jealous furies; and sometimes are superstitious
and supine, and stupid in trivial and ridiculous fooleries.

Resembling Apes and Dotterells more apt to imitate mops, mows, and
gesticulations then virtues: while others are madder then those who are ashamed
of humanity, because Apes have some resemblance with humane nature.

Sect 18.
Cannot any one be persuaded Christ descended not into Hell (since a S. Cyprian
averrs this Article neither in the Roman or oriental Symbol, and Tertullian
takes no notice of it, and Sh^ol and his (...) implies the grave,) without
descending thither? May I leave the works of Hell, pride, malice, and
uncharitableness, by works of light treat with God, where he is in Heaven, by
believing Christ was in Hell will not much advantage me in the way to Heaven,
though my uncharitableness to a misconceiving brother may warp me toward Hell:
Hell is described by the valley of Hinnom, where sacrificed children, weak ones
in Christ while their tongues are kindled at Hell fire, who with trifling
differences make schisms in the Kingdom of Gods Church and Communion, which
Saints should have for the service of Christ their King the Lords anointed
against the powers of darkness.

Sect. 19.
May not any one believe in the Holy Ghost, though he should not fancy the
picture or the senseless story of the Doves want of gall, or the holy spirits
nonappearance in that shape, but only hovering like a descending Dove? Oh
doubt the infallible pontificiall, and enthustiasticks spirit, one being
repraesentative of the other, where murder, revenge, Adultery, and treasons are
Cohabitants, and by a necessary illation must pass for the fruits of that
all-disposing spirit, consecrate impiety, and make villainy precious, while God
himself must be introduced witness to a lie.

May we have the innocence of Doves in our Conversation; the mourning of
Turtles in the sorrow for our sins, and a delight in the streams of life, the
holy Scriptures as the Dove in the waters; finally all the resemblances with
the Dove which imitate the gifts of the holy Ghost, that the holy spirit may
dwell in us which is pictured in the shape of a Dove.

Sect. 20.
Will it not suffice to believe a holy Church, and not to believe in it? since a
Saint Cyprian informs me, God is only to be believed in: or believe not a
Church or Christian can be out of the Catholic Church, since all men and
Churches make up but one Catholic: and the notion of Catholic introduced in
opposition to the Jewish Church, may not as oppositely be opposed to the Roman,
who like Jews presume a monopoly of Gods mercy? the light of ages, light of
nature, supernatural light of Scripture must only shine in their dark
lanthorns; and all blind who believe things not only above reason but against
it; while a part must be greater then the whole, a particular Church, the
Catholic; resembling the madman, who lived in a Seaport town, called all
ships his own which arived at the haven: All Bishops, who have either writ,
appealed, or communicated with theirs, must have sworn vassalage to the Papacy.

Sect. 20.
Or that communion of Saints was an article of levelling, taken up pro
necessitate temporum, since Saint Cyprian takes no notice of it in his time,
and (...); Praising God, and having all things common was the Saints communion.

May we all be members of one body, while we show a mutual sympathy; partake
of the same head, by obeying Christ's directions, cemented together with his
blood, and knit by the unity of his spirit: though every part may conduce to
the good of the other, none can so supererogate, as the other may be useless:
similar nor dissimilar breeds no contrariety, but all parts comply to the
service of the whole; no dissimilitude of site, motion, ceremony, divide, but
the gangreen of sin only enforces an amputation: ne pars sincera trahatur.

The eyes are not incensed against the feet for not seeeng; nor does the ear
commence a quarrel with the hands for not hearing; or the back parts about the
faces uncovering, since decency of one part is the indecency of another; every
part not made for it self but for others, and all to the captivity of the head,
in compliance of whose dictates, we must expect an unity in the body: But an
uniformity would prove a monster above a sober expectation, above the
chymaera's or phantasms of Enthusiasts, who damn all the world, that,
weather-cock-like, turns not round with their own vertiginous heads. Scimus
quosdam quod semelimbiberint nolle deponere, S. Cypr. 1. 2. Ep. ^
nec propositu^; suum facile mutare sed salvo inter collegas pacis and
concordiae vinculo quaedam propria apud se semel usurpata retinere; nec nos vim
cuique facimus, nec legem damus* was the opinion of Saint Cyprian. I could wish
those, who pretend most to be of his opinion, would challenge a little of his
charity.

Sect 22.
For forgiveness of sins, I as little believe a Solifidian, as a Romish
Priest, that attrition by absolution becomes contrition; the one while he
deceives himself by a lie, or the other, while he imposes upon others, secure
neither from being deceived: they may send to the father of lies, but lying
will scarce bring to the God of truth, since none can be implanted in the death
of Christ, who bring not forth the fruit of this tree of life, nor partake of
the resurrection to life everlasting.

He that will be saved must keep the faith, (...), sound in faith and free from
reproach in conversation, holy as well as whole; and so his holiness himself
may be proved the most fallible; and though they violate the sense of the word
while they render it inviolate, yet God grant that they may keep it inviolate,
no more writh and wrench it to rivet in their own ambitious designs; and we
may keep it so undefiled, that Momus himself may not carp at our lives: since
Christ's death is mentioned for our regeneration, birth for mortification,
resurrection, for our rising in newness of life, that we may enjoy the
communion of Saints, remission of sins, and resurrection of our bodies to
eternal life.

Sect. 23.
There are but a few credenda, petenda, and agenda, where I cannot avoid an
Anathema, non credendo, non opponendo: I will seek security, embrace verities,
all hold, if I cannot those wherein they differ* though sometimes enterlacing
discords graces the best Music, yet a quiet error is rarely not to be
preferred before an unruly truth, and crochets and quavers prove unseasonable,
when they disturb the plain songs of peace; and it is better a son of the
Church should be unknown, then, what they report of the viper, he should make
his way through the bowels of his Mother; or a Millstone hung about his neck,
and he buried in the depth of his imaginations, rather then they soar in the
narrow way, and keep weak brethren from heaven.

It shall not trouble me with Delrio, whether the old Serpent was a Viper; with
Bonaventure and Comestor, a Dragon; or with Eugubinus, a Basilisk: or with
others, a common Snake: it shall trouble me rather to continue the delusion of
the Serpent, by endeavors of propagating error: that Adam tasted forbidden
fruit may trouble me, what fruit, shall not; I shall number it among the
fo^bidden fruits of knowledge, which so many wiser heads have made
disquisitions after, and would have truth satisfied by the relish of their
palats.

Sect 25.
Whether our Saviors Crown was made of Paliurus, or a piece of it visited
Glassenburie, and the precursor of his death, turns an Angel of his Nativity,
blooming every Christmas day, is not worth a disquisition: I could make a Rose
by moistning dilate, and by rendering again insuc^ous close: may I rather avoid
those thorns, the curse of my sins, which may render me incapable of both.

Whether Durantes distick of the Cross be true, need be no part of my creed.

Pes Cedrus est, truncus Cupressus, oliva supremum
Palmaque transversum Christi sunt in cruce signum.
May I partake of no corruption like the Cedar, in mourning for sin resemble
the Cypress, by fertility in goodness, assimilate the Olive: so shall I
flourish like a Palm, even in the storms and pressures of this world, mount
upward, by taking up the Cross, and following, be partaker of him who was
crucified. Prudent symbols, and pious applications, may have an influence upon
ingenious conceivers, which may elevate devotion: but on the mad rabble,
melancholy Monks, and ignorant Priests, they have no other efficacy, beside
warping to Magical applications, and miraculous expectancies: Tho. p. 345. ar.
2. c. persuam essentiam.
It shall not trouble me whether the soul of Christ, in triduo mortis, went
into Hell really, as Thomas Aquinas believes; or virtually, and by effects
only, Durand in 3 dij. 22. ques. 3.
as Durand; or whether the soul of Christ did descend really and in essence
into the lowest pit of hell, and place of the damned, or really only into the
place or region of hell, called limbum Patrum, Bella^. l. 4. de Christo. c. 16.
Sect. 25.
and then but vertually from thence into the lower hell.

The Father, to him who asked what God did before he made the world, (answe'rd)
Provide hell for such curious scrutinists as you are. Non per difficiles Deus
ad be atam vitam quaestiones vocat, etc. in absoluto nobis and facili est
aeternitas Jesum suscitatum a mortuis credere; and ipsum esse Dominum
confiteri. I will not procure a certain purgatory to my self here to make
stranger guesses of an uncertain one hereafter: or whether the inventor of it,
Orig. lib. 1. (...), cap. 6.
Origens purgatory, which could even purify Devils, and reform them to Angels
of light: or the differing purgatory of S. S. Greg. Nis. Orat. demortuis. p.
1066. Cypr. l. 4. Ep. 2. emendari igne.
Gregory Nissen* St. Cyprian, or St. Austin carry a greater probability, or the
Roman purgatory, which took a platform from neither. I can believe, I may find
a way to heaven without taking purgatory in my way: S. Aug. lib. 21. civ. dei.
c. 17. Greg. Naz. Orat. ^in. th. (...). S. Hier. on 66. Psalm. credimus. Boethius
lib. 4. pros. 4. puro.
or else the Fathers before Gregory the great might mistake, never any one was
directed that way with above an ut puto verisimile arbitramur, S. Greg. in
Psalm. 3. paenitent. Prin^.
till he came in with a scio: And though I know not as much as Gregory, this I
may presume to know, the place in Saint Paul, wracked so often to confess a
purgatory, 1 Cor. 3. 12.
may be applyable to it, being a building of hay and stubble; and have the
charity to believe the foundation laid in Christ, faith in him, and love of
him, the groundwork, though in the superstructure may be some light aerie
phantasms, stubble and straw, which in the day of trial shall vanish, yet he
shall be saved, so as by fire, through, (...).
or out of fire, dross vanishes, but gold shall abide the fiery trial in the
day of the Lord.

Sect. 27.
Rogula fidei una omnino est sola illa immobilis, and irreformabilis, according
to Tertullian; and if your Occham is to be credited, nec tota Ecclesia, nec
concilium generale, nec summus Pont^fex potest facere articulu^qui non fuit
articulus, etc. Therefore if any thing be fundamental after the Church
defines, it must be fundamental before: for deductions are not prime and
native principles, nor superstructures foundations: that which is a foundation
to all, cannot vary to different Christians, in regard of it self, for then it
could not be a common rule to any nor could the souls of men acquiesce on a
tottering foundation, a trice foundation, as common to all, must be firm unto
all; in which sense the articles of Christian Faith are fundamental, and not
what men please to define; for as Irenaeus, quum enim una and eadem fides sit,
neque is qui multum de ipsa dicere potest, plus quam oportet dicit, nec qui
parum ipsam minuit: if every thing defined by the Church be fundamental in the
faith, the Churches definition would be the Church-foundation, and so by
consequence the the Church could lay her own foundation, and the Church have an
absolute and perfect being before her foundation laid.

If the too preposterous zeal of the Roman Church since she grew to her in
controlable greatness, had not rashly determined those things to be matter of
belief, which for many centuries passed only for pious opinions: Christendom
might have served God in an holy fire of zeal and spiritual fervency, which
now sacrifices myriads of souls to Belial in the flames of contention: what a
sight is it to see writers committed together by the ears for trifling
ceremonies, and beggarly distinctions, tanquam pro aris and focis, incensed,
none are affrighted at their noises, and loud brayings, under Asses skins;
scioli and smatterers, in Divinity only busy in the skirts and outsides of
learning, and yet will admit no salvation but by a compliance with their
vertiginous pates: wise men should know, as the body has certain diseases,
that are with less evil tolerated then removed (as to cure a Leprosy with
the blood of a child) so it is better a trivial error should dilate it self,
then children of the Church should perish, while some error may be disseminated
with less inconvenience then discovered: the use which wise men should make of
other men's lapses, is to avoid a precipice: and the advantage pious men should
make of these great flaws in Christianity, is not to join with them that make
them: nor to help to dislocate these main bones in the body, which disjoynted
cannot be set.

Sect 28.
The uncharitable dealings of Christians with Christians, cannot induce me to
be uncharitable to any; I must believe with St. Hierom, Haeretici fiunt, non
quod Scripturas contemnunt sed quod non intelligunt; it is ignorance and not
the contempt is the cause of most, if not all of our separations: The Sheba's
of separation, all the Trumpeters of sedition may alarm the rabble, that
brainless horse, to battle, to trample down order, and break the ranks
discipline with a separate your selves from Idols; curse you Meroz, curse you
bitterly: What society has light with darkness: Come out of Babylon my
people: with a hundred such places of Scripture racked, and by an invention,
witty in cruelty, tortured to confess, something may patronize their black
designs, wringing blood even out of the Gospel of peace.

Which have as little relation to Christian societies as a Lo here is Christ!
Lo there, go not out after them! racked so frequently to confess them
Antichrists, who correspond not to the whimzies of every phanatique: denoting
such as Judas, Theudas, Arthronges, and Barchosba, Impostors, who pretended to
be Messiasses sent for the delivery of the Jews out of the hands of the Romans:
and if it was possible, would deceive the Elect, the Jewish Christians, which
are forewarned, but as the Calvinists, it is impossible for them to be
deceived, who are the Elect: and as the Romanist who are in their Church, the
treasury of all truth, cannot be deceived.

But if the Elect can scarce be saved, what shall become of the ungodly? if the
Christian Jew, who washed with Christ's blood, speaks better things then that of
Abels, what will become of them against whom it cries worse then that did
against Cain? while they themselves could cry, Let it be upon us and ours: if
the Elect (as the Papist) the Catholic with all his indulgengencies, masses,
rosaries, and abstinences can scarce be saved, what will become of those who
are out of the Communicative line of Gods mercy, his Ark, City, our holy
Apostolic and Catholic Church?

If the Elect (as Fiduciaries) they that can believe they shall be saved, can
scarce believe it so strongly, but that an intervening scruple of an
obstreperous Conscience may damn them, what will become of a Papist, who
believes in a God of wood, a God of bread, who says, we can have no
assurance, since by faith we are saved? thus the stream of life is made the
puddle of phanatick interpretations; while all like the Tyrant, who fitted
wretches to his bed, hack, maim, and mutilate, or stretch and tenter the
Scripture to adequate them to inhumane purposes: and Heaven it self must admit
no room beyond the capacities of their empty noddles. Vain fuellers fit only
to feed the flames of contention, out of whose embers are even raised combusti-

Sect. 29*
Though Heaven gates be narrow, I cannot believe them so strait as most sects
would make them, should I not believe one lie with the Fiduciary, or many with
the Pontifician, not easily induced to believe heaven the purchase of fonder
imaginations. Charity would persuade me it is even a receptacle to those, whose
uncharitable opinions have mutually condemned and secluded each the other,
(...).

The practice of our lives, not tongues must make us Christians: we must be
rather so by entering into imitation of Celestial virtues then curious
inquiries.

May we flourish in verity, which is the root; in humility, which is the
flower; and well doing, which is the fruit of the tree of life.

Sect. 30.
Those aerie mysteries which have unhinged so many Cardinal heads, shall not
extend my Pericranium. God grant I may for futurity learn to do something,
rather then hear others talk about nothing; which if they bring not into the
praemunire with the fool in the Psalmist, who said in his heart there was no
God; yet I have said in my heart with the Psalmist, all men are liars, and
every one deceives his neighbor: I must believe as in Epiphanius time, (...)
and (...) Piety or impiety must only distinguish Orthodox or Pseudodox: we
glory and are inflated with the names of Churches, while we lose the power of
godliness, soul of Religion, and prerogative of Christians, Christ's Legacy,
Charity.

Sect 31.
Faith may lay a Foundation, but we may hope in vain, for that building which
is made without hands, if charity here lays not her hand to make a
superstruction: those Babel-builders who think to reach Heaven by another way,
produce nothing but confusion of languages; impenitent confidence will
shipwreck in an Ocean of infirmity; when penitent despair which expected to be
ingulph'd into an Abyss of miseries, wasted with gales of sighs, and Seas of
tears, may arrive at a Port of everlasting security: the Scripture says,
Heaven is taken by violence, but it is a strange fancy the world takes up, that
it may be taken with impudence: fronti nulla ^ides, may admit a double sense:
though a Judas may veil impiety with kisses, yet if a timely repentance
prevents not he may break in two, and discover his black soul naked.

I cannot believe that Faith justifies, works justify, or both: yet we are
justified by faith, by works, by both: the conditions, not causes of our
justification: and the conditions not performed, it is impossible without this
righteousness to see God. I will not say Christ cannot save, though the
Scripture says, Christ could do no miracles in his own Country; not because
he was less potent, but they were more incapable: where impenitence keeps the
door; mercy cannot enter: it is not material whose Communion they boast of, or
disclaim, who have fellowship with the unfruitf^ll works of darkness: since
Idolaters, drunkards, liers, Adulterers; no dogs and unclean person shall enter
into the City of God; or be partaker of the benefits of his holy Church.

Sect 33.
Of all graces the Apostle makes the greatest of charity, and the world least;
of that charity which antidates Christ's presence here in his members: and
outdates the other graces in futurity, when faith and hope shall be swallowed
up in an abyss of ravishing realties, that which was but a Lamp here, will be
then a star enlightened by the Sun of righteousness: a Lamp here with the oil
of faith and light of good works, converting sinners from the darker ways of
iniquity, shall shine like the stars in glory hereafter, and not such who
compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte, and make him worse then themselves:
who tith mint and annise, boggle at trifling formalities, and forget the
greater mysteries of salvation.

Sect 34.
Self-interest opens the floodgates of dissension to drown the humble valleys
of peace: men esteem opinions because their own: all adore the Chimaera's of
their own private brains; call light darkness, and darkness light; presume
they have the most glorious stars for their Conductors, when they are only
ignes fatui, which misguide to a precipice of flames. Gods fire gave light and
burned* Hells fire burns without light; who leave the light of truth, and heat
of charity to live in flames of contention, deserve that fire without light:
even the best Apostles dissented; knowledge nor piety can amputate all
differences; but wisdom and charity must prevent their prejudices.

Sect 35.
Not every light and aerie error in disputable Doctrine, and points of curious
speculation, can be a just cause of separation in that admirable body of Christ
his Church, or of one member from another: He gave his natural body to be torn
on the cross, that his mystical should be one: and as Saint Austin, he is no
partaker of divine charity, that is enemy to this unity.

All these divisions are disguises of charity, and vizards of factions, a
pageantry of pompous folly, or preposterously inflated knowledge: and though
they mask in the names of Papists, Protestants, Reformists, sub-Reformists,
A^omist, Familist, Fa^san. on Ep. ad Sempr. quare ab haeretico homine noster
hac appellatione dividit, cum Catholicus nuncupatur Christianus, mihi nomen
Catholicus vero, Cognomen illud me nuncupat, istud ostendit, hoc probor, illo
signi^^cor. Appellatio Catholici congregat homogena etc. S. Aug. int. Cont.
F^nd. c. 16. S. Cyp. de unit. Eccl.
Brownist, etc. the Church of God can have no music to set out such discords.
My name is Christian, and my surname is Catholic; by the one I am known from
Infidells, by the other from heretics and schismatick^: the name of Catholic
congregates what is homogeneous, and dissipates what is heterogeneous, both in
the Court of heaven, and in the Court of the Church.

He cannot put on the garments of Christ, Vi^cent Lirinens^s libr* adv. Haer.
c. 27.
who rends and divides his Church. Catholic is every where the same; that
which is trusted to thee, not that^ which invented by thee; which thou have
received, not imagined; a matter not of wit but doctrine: in which thou art not
to be Author but a retainer: not to lead, S. Aug. lib. 4. de bapt. Cont. Donat.
c. 24.
but follow: that which the whole Church holds not instituted by Counsels, but
retained, is rightly believed Apostolical tradition, such as the Creed,
Sacraments, etc.

The ancient consent of holy Fathers is not in all questions of Divine Law,
Vincent Lirinen. c. 3. Liban. Haeres.
but only in the rule of Faith by us with exact study to be sifted out and
followed: there are some things in which the best defenders of the rule ( Salva
fidei compage) agree not, S. Aug. Cont. Iul. Pet, c. ^.
but one thinks better and truer then another. Every error denies not Christ
the foundation, or makes Christ deny it, Holkot in 1 Sent. q. ad. 4. K.
and thrust it from the foundation: not every error in those things which are
of faith, is either infidelity or heresy; if men differ; it is no more then
they have done ever: pious men even in differences may preserve charity entire:
^concord which is the effect of charity, est un^o voluntatum non opinionum.
Some Churches build after the Italian fashion with a flat top; Thom. 2. 24. 37.
A^. 1. c.
others with wide windows to let in the air, and catch the applause of the
world; some build Babel-like and will have their head reach Heaven, and if
their confusion of languages impeded not might be near allied: others of the
Synagogue fashion will admit nothing but round, and limit Heaven in their
narrow conventicles: it could be wished that all would be what the Apostle
exhores, 1 Cor. 1. 11.
of one mind; but it is not to be hoped wh^ile the Church is triumphant over
humane* fragilities, which here hang thick and close about her; the want of
peace, and unity even where Religion is pretended, proceeds from men and
humors, B. ^. Cont. Fisher s. 58.
rather then things and errors to be found in them* Episcopacy squares with
Monarchy: Presbytery with Aristocracy, independency with Democracy; men made
Religion lackey to self-interest, and State policy; the great Turk walking in
his Garden with a Bashaw, who wondered he would suffer the Christians
distracted in Sects to orespread his Empire* asked how he liked his Garden?
answering, it was admirable for the variety, replied: would thou deny me that
in my Empire, thou admirest in a Garden? am not I Emperor of them all?

Sect. 36.
I can join prayers with a Papist, if his be offensive to God, mine may be
pleasing; can hear a French Hugonot with his hat on, uncovered; receive with a
Dutchman kneeling, while he uses the irreverence of his breech; yet separated
in my charity from neither: nor would I be in my mode rather then scandalize
any: it is no less then phrensey for the misposition of a trencher to refuse a
banquet, or be ungrateful to an Host. Nay, I could take an Host with a
Romanist, Hoc totum pendet ex principiis Metaphysicis and Philosophicis and ad
fidei doctrinam non esse necessarium Suarez in 3. Theoph. dis. 50.
as well as a Wafer with a Calvinist. If he believes a real body, I believe
not less in energy, a Communion of the body and blood of Christ, a
participation by every reception of his merits and passion, and the virtues
really communicated to a worthy receiver.

Sect. 2.
It has been ever thought convenient says Saint Gregory, that there should
be in unitate fideid versa Consuetudo, that eating of mea^s offered to Idols,
totally restrained the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, 1 Cor. 10 17.
seemed permitted to the Church of Corinth if no man challenged it; and that
which was urged upon the Cor^nthians, was not imposed upon the Galatians; Gal.
1. 9. Col. 5. 2. 1 Cor. 11. 4.
to show every one is obliged to observe the rites of his own Church, lest they
come under the Anathema of contentious and turbulent: yet this inhibited not
that Saint Paul might become all to all, that he might gain some; and who will
gain any to Christianity, must not play at petty games in Religion, adhere to
Bonatus his humor, confine truth to places, as if she loved corners: or as if
the Church which resembles the Moon, could like Mahomets Moon be brought down
to show tricks in a sleeve: the good Monica, Saint Austines Mother, Aug. Conf.
who bathed the Leprosy of her Son in a Jordan of tears ( ut non potuit perire
tantarum lachrymarum filius) was content to relinquish her African customs at
Milan: They who have gigg'd to Geneva for platforms, and Rome for Trinchets,
have brought home matter to fewel-contention, none to kindle zeal: May none
follow exotic forms here: a Spanish garb is ridiculous with us, and the
English mode reputed an affront in Spain: No wise man will be angry if in his
travells he meets modes not corresponding with his humor, and he is mad, who
returning, will keep none company without they pluck down their house, and
rebuild them to the model of his fancy, who taylor-like travells to dress
Apes.

Sect 38.
The Religion of our Souls must imitate the reason of our bodies; Vinc. Lir.
which in the process of years, may evolve and explicate their numbers; but
the bodies are one and the same: there is nothing produced in the maturity of
age which did not latitate in the minority of children: yet who would endeavor
to fit the clothes and shoes of puerility to a gygantick foot, or body.

The apparel of Christ's Spouse is her rites; time and place may produce as
great a variety in her fashions as in the worlds garb of clothes, and modes of
the world; though some may adorn more, none alters the constitution of the
body: it would be a mad humor in the Spaniard to commence a quarrel, because
the shorter wiskers of another Nation upbraided his mustachio's: Or the French
with the Spanish, 'cause the constancy of their habits might seem in derision
of their levity: or both with a Nation which was servile to the fancy of
neither.

Those great Calciners of Religion, and reducers to the Primitive patterns need
nothing above their own examples to condemn them.

They must join with the Levellers in a Communion baptize in Rivers with the
Anabaptist; make life a pennilesse pererration with the Franciscan; may spend
both oil and labor, dawb but not cure bodies like the Apostles; have regard to
washing of feet, yet continually be defiled in their ways; Confine themselves
to Sandals, say, who use shoes are shod with iniquity, and walk in the
footsteps of the ungodly; since they recede from the primitive pattern* and
call this recession Apostasy: or lean upon one the other at the Lords Supper,
Cyp. lib. 1. Epis. 2. lib. 4. Ep. 8. in Ep. ad Caecilium.
and lie down at the Table, and take it after Supper.

The same things are not decent at all times: babes milk is unfit for ripe^age,
and the nurses Gibrish an undecent cialect for a Tutor; the stones of the
foundation unfit for roof or walls: Our Master builder Christ, employed
tongues, Prophets, Prophetesses, Evangelists his not still employing bids us
acquiesce, while his silence exacts ours, which not assented to, introduces
nothing but a profitlesse clamor, causeless malice, and endless contention.
The Apostles which were forbid to carry money in their girdles, had afterward a
Judas with a bag and the prohibition of clubs and staves was not so strict a
rule, but that a Peter was found with a sword. Howsoever the Novati an Bishops
^rr'd, they could not err in the Canon of indifferency: for if Anselm is to be
believed the multitude of ceremonies is so far from infringing, as they
commend the unity of the Church, while all believe in one Christ. In the
Primitive Church, somefasted one day, Test. Eusehex Iren^o.
some two, some more, other forty hours, computing day and night. In Italy
some abstained forty days, others used abstinence twenty, In Epist. Theoph.
cent. 2. 120.
others seven days, in relation to the creation, and some forty hours, in
relation to the forty days our Savior fasted: And if Socrates is to be
believed, Socrat. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. c. 22.
nor Gospels nor Apostles imposed observation of days, but the liberty was
referred to the Church.

The Church of Rome and the African distributed Sacramental bread the
Alexandrian Church permitted the people to take it: Tertul. lib. de Cor.
militis.
Africa and Rome mixed wine with water, Dionysius Alexand. ad Christum Eusebius. 1.
7. c. 9.
and colder Regions drank it pure. Cypr. lib. 2. Ep. 3.
See the contentions about Easter, Eusebius. Iraene.
till the Roman victor overcame all; but never could subdue the opinion of a
proud Prelate, and a disturber of the Churches tranquillity.

Some lifted up their hands to heaven, as if they intended a pious violence;
some their feet, quast in coelum podibus ire, Tertul. in Apolog.
others threw themselves prostrate, as if they intended a rebound: some cast
their eyes up, as if through those windows, Clemens in ult. stromat.
they would let our their souls unto their Redeemer; some fixed their eyes upon
the ground, by contemplation of earth, to have an introspection into their own
unworthiness: some beat their breasts, as if they would dislodge sin, and open
a door to their hearts for the King of glory to enter. Since the love of God is
linked with our neighbor, he who uncharitably condemns him, may lose the link
of his own salvation. May none that pretend to the name of Christians, through
the faintness of the constitution of their Religion, moulder into sects, or
through the brittlenesse of their phancies, crumble into division, and then
like a heard of silly animals, make a noise, and please themselves with the
noise they make, yet know no reason why they make it.

But defisting from fruitless and hellfuelling clamors, may we all with the
good Polycarpus day and night, with a still voice, Epis. Smyrn. Eusebius. lib. ^.
c. 15.
like the breathing of Gods Spirit, humbly invoke Gods mercy for the peace of
all Churches, spread over the face of the universe. And in our sehismes,
neminem judicantes aut a jure communionis si diversum senser it amoventes:
entertaining the charity of holy S. Cyprian, nor judging, nor excommunicating
our brethren, because they will not permit their reason to be overweigh'd,
perhaps with some unnecessary scruples, in the fallacious balances of lighter
imaginations: calling our Brother Racha, witless, or vain for dissenting, and
thou fool belched out so often in virulency, may endanger judgment and hell: In
vain we may repair to the Altar, use outward forms and ceremonies, and neglect
love, which is the perfection of the Law.

Sect. 39.
Christ's spouse is an Army with Banners: as order to an Army, so is discipline
to a Church. Though Troops do not move according to the discipline of War, it
is not less an Army. Confusion may prejudice the success, it cannot the name.
Though discipline is as an hedge to a Vinyard, or resembles the wall to a City,
or proportion to a body; yet a Vinyard is not less a Vinyard for the defect of
an hedge, nor the wall makes a City, or some misproportion or dislocation of
parts, bring the body under the notion of incorporeall. I shall not cavil at
what we want to the complement of my desires, but praise God for what we have,
that may conduce to his glory.

Sect. 40*
I love to see Lent, the springtime of sanctified resolutions, and times
houreglasse filled with the dust of mortified concupiscence, flow in lectures of
mortality and repentance; while every good Christian verifies what is feigned of
the Phoenix, in a bed of spices, in odours of devotion, kindled by the
declining beams of the true Sun of Righteousness, can quicken out of ashes, an
acceptable sacrifice to the Father of all lights. Yet if my absteining from
flesh will raise an evil spirit in my brother, I will abstain even from that
abstinence may starve his soul, and not neglect that devotion which may feed
my own.

Sect. 41.
Church music would elevate my devotion, and make my ravished soul in an
ecstasy, treat with the God of harmony; and in my opinion, Religion, like a
modest Matron, may make use of those ornaments, which vice misuses; and their
zeal is strangely out of tune this can distemper, which if the stories of
Hippocrates, Terpander, and Timotheus are to be credited, in the extremities of
phranticks could once do miracles: but if that music which can appease an
evil spirit in a Saul, can raise it in another, we must be content without the
Kingly Prophets Harp, Lute, and Organ, relinquish that music which can un^une
a Brother, and think no harmony good, enterlac'd with such dilcords, as the ill
disposing of him for whom Christ dyed.

Sect. 42.
I have no prejudice by Surplice, Cope, Hood, all the Priests garment, may be
interwoven with holiness to the Lord, putting on of these, may consist with
the putting on of the new man, and the Breastplate of righteousness, external
glory, with internal holiness. A Surplice to me can emblematize innocence,
and the keeping the supervesture of my flesh unspotted, that clothed with
virgin purity here, I may keep those virgins company, which in long white robes
of innocence follow the Lamb. Yet I think of these ceremonies, as Augustus of
the Roman Senator's Glasses, who condemned a slave to his fish ponds for
breaking one of them, whom Caesar rescued, and broke the rest, saying, They are
fine things, yet not worth a man. Yet I have observed, none are so ready to
take offense, as they who are most proclive to give it; imperious, petulant,
and envious sciolists, and to fear to offend them, is not to have respect to
the weak in faith, but strong in passions.

Sect. 43.
At the glories of the Church, I am apt with Bonaventure, astonished at the
sight of the French Queen, to cry out, If an earthly Queen be so glorious, how
glorious is the Queen of heaven? Or with the Father at Rome, If an earthly
Cities glories be such, how great are the glories of the celestial Jerusalem?
The splendour of these instructing my thoughts to think of him, who is interred
into the holy of holies: and could not easily believe him to be of any
Religion, who could spoil the glory of houses consecrated to Gods service, to
enrich his own: and could wish, they who seem so much to abhor Idols, would not
commit sacrilege; and fear, that Eagle-like, snatching coals from the Altar,
they will fire their own nests.

Yet golden Priests, with wooden Chalices, are to be preferred before wooden
Priests with golden.

All who cannot have the convenience of outward Ordinances, may they have
regard to inward holiness, adorn themselves with graces, fitting the Temples
of the Holy Ghost, from the Altars of their hearts, send up the Incense of
their Prayers to him, that dwells in a house not made with hands. And we who
agree not about a Terrestrial meeting, may meet in a Celestial; while all
worship him whose dwelling is in the heavens: And yet, where two or three meet
together in his name, he will not fail (who cannot fail of his promise) to be
with them on earth. Yet I could wish, that those, who even appear before men
with fear and trembling, would not appear before their Maker like mountains:
nor any would rush into Churches, Quis ferat populum in Templum irruente^ (...)
in haram sues? certe non obsunt populo ceremoniae, sed prosunt, ^ modus in eis
servetur, and caveamus ne (...) loco ^abeanture, hoc est, ne praecipuam
pietatem in ill is collocemus.
like to swine into a sty, there gruntle, and make a noise and run out again,
to wallow in a puddle of impurities; Rhen^^us annot. in Tertul. de Cor. militis.
nor any like idle boys, when they should be learning a lesson in Christ's
school, get books they understand not, and look on gayes, make devotion by
pictures. The people on both sides may be bells of good metal, but are so
miserably rung out of tune, that they give notice of nothing but combustion:
some oreburden Gods service, and others leave it naked, as if, because one man
had swelter'd himself to death by too many cloths, another was privileged to
starve himself to death with nakedness. God of his mercy grant the rabble may
no more ring changes, but all chime in to his worship.

Sect. 44.
I know Episcopacy, Salmas. B. Blondel.
the primitive pattern, even the Antagonists by contradicting affirm it, what
by their own concessions dilated it self over the universal face of Religion,
envy not mussitating, or calumny daring to detract, in the beginning or about
the middle of the second centurie must necessarily imply it, then no
innovation, without we will imagine all the world sopite in error; (...). lgn.
ad (...). Epist. ad Sempr. sic in Epist. ad Trall. philad and passim in omnibus
ep. Vnum scire debes, siquis cum Episcopo non ^it, in Ecclesia non esse S.
Cypr. Ep. 69. Filius impius qui contemptis Episcopis and Dei Sacerdotibus
relictis constituere audet aliud altar. S. Cypr. de unit. Eccles. and Epist.
76. Ep. 40. etc.
and those holyer flames of zeal, which could transport the Martyrs with
fervent desires of being carried in fiery chariots of persecuting adversaries
to Heaven, and administer no light to guide them upon Earth; and truth had
wanted Champions, if some, like the Fox, who had lost his tail should not have
persuaded beasts to a conformity to that which might deform them.

Weak calumny, nor proud ignorance draws so black a veil, as we cannot discern
the Lawn sleeves; if their own impious ambition have sullyed them, I have tears
to wash, rather then dirt to cast with others; and by going backward, would
willingly draw a sheet of Lawn candid with innocence over the nakedness of
these Fathers: and not with cursed Sons expose their shame. Those Foxes which
called these grapes in Gods Vineyard ^owr, were they who could not reach them.
Doglike in the night of clouded reason bark at the Moon, who could not come
near its height and luster: no rich man turns Leveller, who introduced a parity
in the Church, were those whose deficiencies lent no possibilities of their
office^* they called to the hills with Mahomet to come down to them; but
finding their labors irrite, they would not like him take the pains to go up
by degrees of perfection, but set the rabble to Level: Episcopacy was made for
a remedy to Schism, Hieron ad Evag. In Schismatis remedium factum est quod
postea unus Electus qui caeteris praeponeretur unusuquisque ad se trahens
Ecclesiae tumcam r^mperet.
if we will believe Saint Hierom: the remedy taken away, it can be no wonder if
Paroxisms of Schism do concusse and discompose the tranquillity of the body of
Religion: yet though I venerate Episcopacy as much as I hate a disease, I could
not love idleness in pompous Pageantrie; solemn ignorance blazoned with power;
ambition and vanity dressed up with formalities; should I believe a St. Ambrose
in a non aliunde haereses abortae ^ut nata schismata quam inde, quod sacerdotes
non veneranur.

Yet a devont Saint Gregory, a holy Polycarp, an indefatigable Saint Austine, a
learned Nazianzen, eloquent Chrysostom, a meek Cyprian, and a resolute Saint
Ambrose, etc.

Such Bishops as these shining in sanctity of life, and doctrine, in the might
of the Bridegrooms absence, would irradiate Christ's Spouse; and not in their
diocesses like to prodigious Meteors, show more of distance and terror, then of
light and Celestial virtues: if the Primitive Copy be so blotted that it
cannot be taken out, I should be sorry; and those Lawn sleeves I could love
whited with innocence, I could not approve purpled with blood: we^ bogle at
names, neglect poor truth naked; and yet may entertain her in a disguise:
superintendent may imply as much overseer as Bishop, and Presbyter, the Elder
of the Church was a Bishop; I shall not be troubled by what name we are
instructed to serve God, or what style we reject: so we reject not him who is
the high Bishop of our souls.

Sect. 45.
Men of eminent parts are for Episcopacy, and take away the golden ball of
honor and preference, and few will attain to the mark, or any eminency of
knowledge. Men of indifferent call for parity, conscious of their own defects,
of attaining any degree of excellence. The inferior, whom nature hudled up in
have, and neither Art nor Knowledge rectified are for the huddle: that by
violating the well linked chain of Government, disorder and confusion making
inrodes, they themselves indistinguish'd, may pass in the crowd; and with
these it is no wonder if How the Cobbler or pragmaticall Jack the Sopeboyler
have more friends, and would find more Suffrages then Bishop Laud.

The people by the Prerogative of nature act simply, lose their judgments, and
dislike all but that which is but naught; and there was not such variety of
beasts in the Ark, as there is of beastiall natures in the rout; but more
especially when the beast turns censorious; and even among the gentry there are
some scarce a degree above them a company of Plebeian heads, whose difference
is in their cloths; not understandings: and therefore it is no wonder, if in a
multitude of such Counselors there may not be safety: while folly has more
votaries then wisdom, and voices, not judgments are weighed, knowledge may be
easily outvoted* and had not a Lord Protector interposed, we by a fatal
experience might have seen Church and State reformed into nothing, or a strange
spiritual Government Hence the wiser Politician has made it tentare arcana
Imperii treason; and not unpolitick Princes have rather tolerated the Tyranny
of Rome, then lent occasion to their subjects to take a platform by Geneva; for
these popular reformations are so exact, that if one stone be defective, they
seldom leave till they have plucked down the whole building, Tacit^^.
in plebe nec veritas nec judicium inter faedam potentiu^ a ^ulationem, and
praeceps prostratorum odium manibus, stud^is and incond^tis motibus omnia
miscent. Most are governed by Crude opinion, and as they are informed like or
dislike, they know not what and do all in aemulation. An Aristides, Phocion,
Themistocles, Camillus' Coriolanus, Scipio; with whom merit is treason, and
virtue is guilt, it is no wonder if they must be sacrificed to the rabble, as
if it was even sin enough to have preserved the ungrateful.

He who silenced Rome, and checked the exorbitancy of Popery, our incomparable
Primate, by polishing and filling up the Sciagraphy or rude draught of
reformation to a lively resemblance of Primitive excellence, falls by those he
had preserved: he fenced the Church with discipline; walled the City of God
with Ceremonies against the incursions of irreligion and profaneness and made
the Church militant move in order like an Army with banners terrible to her
enemies: while by decent rites he gave proportion and comeliness to the
Spouse, presenting her to her King in a garment of diverse colors.

If in Horace's justum and tenacem propositi virum, nor ardor c^vium prava
jubentium, mente quatit solida, best Characters.

He staid till the times grew up to him, S. Edward Deering.
(as no friend of his confessed) and would not be lured to the phancies of the
times: natus e q^er^n non esalice; and so not complying with every wind of
error, like a bending willow, but a sturdy Oak of reformation, giving shelter
to the Sons of the Church against Roman tempests and phanaticks blasts, though
he was at length forced to yield to the Ax, yet not to be cast into the fire:
for though he was numbered with the transgressors, like him whom he followed in
the highway of the Cross, his red evening I doubt not was the praecursor of a
glorious day, illuminated by the beams of the Sun of righteousness: and
howsoever that excellent, though* unfortunate Primate fell, Saint Paul's will be
a monument of his Charity; which should the preposterous zeal of time deface
his book against Fisher will be an Epitaph to express his constancy to
Religion, which maugre the iron teeth of time; and black mouthed Calamy or
Calumny will continue: and though many with weak jugdements and strong passions
against these times, M Pullein the same at Rome. Mr. Fullam of C. C. in Italy.
Mr. Arthu^ Wilson in Flanders.
have stooped to the Roman lure, supposing conformity introduced here as a
Phosphor, or praecurfor of that glorious light called Popery: yet I could never
meet with any learned Romish Priest, though acquainted with not a few, that
would not confess that Rome had lost her greatest enemy; and the English
Church within her head in Laud: too crabbed a piece to be ever brought to
square with the Romish building.

Sect. 46.
Preaching brought Religion in, and has carried it out of the world; some
think all Religion in the ears, and none in the hands; to see Christ in the
flesh, Jerusalem in her glory, and an Augustine in a Pulpet, was esteemed a
wish of a pious transc^ndency: may we feel Christ in the spirit; see Jerusalem
the holy City of his Church in her glory; whose walls are of precious stones,
piety, chastity, meekness, and temperancy, etc. adorned with all the glories
of Celestial virtues, and I could be content without satisfying the itch of my
ear, though with a Saint Austine: A Boniface could be a traitor to his Prince;
a coal of Hell; an incendiary of mischief, by blowing the flames of contention,
and raising a combustion in his Country; yet neither the beams of light,
effluxions of piety, streaming from this great luminary; nor the living water
issuing from this great Fountain in Gods Church could quench the flames of
ambition, or kindle zeal in his so pass^onate an Auditor. A master would think
that servant distracted, who would desire to hear his will often, and always
do his own: yet such is the madness of the world, if they hear an Ambassador
from Heaven patiently, though they list themselves to serve the world, flesh,
and devil, they oblige God, and unserviceable to these, Heaven must entertain
them, when perhaps instead of a Celestial Ambassador, they have only heard
schisms, trumpeter.

Sect. 47.
Yet such an Orator as a Saint Austin, or Saint Chrysostom migh represent vice
so formidable, that frighted at the horror of her own shape, the Camelion
vanity which changes into all shapes, but white, may renounce all for the
Candor of innocene, the lust-scorch'd Amorist may feel an Icy chillness steal
through all the veins; a Magdalens legion may depart with all Hell flames;
though she keep her passion, may change her object, and Heaven have a Temple
where Hell had a brothel: the wind and Waves may still obey Christ's voice,
while ebullitions of rage and storms of passions, hearing Gods word in his
Ministers are calmed into obedience: Avarice may scatter her Idol-Gold to
entertain the Image of her Savior; Cast her bread upon the waters, not that
they may return; but bring him who is the bread and water of life: Good
resolutions might be thus confirmed; vice eradicated, devotion elevated, and
zeal infused by the ear, may give it a durable consistence in the Soul: make it
so enamored with the Manna of Gods word, that it might not languish after the
fleshpots of Egypt, and carnal concupiscences. This was the custom of the
Jewish Church: in the Christian intimated by a word of exhortation in the Acts
to meekness, continence, and all the virtues which bracelet-like must adorn
Christianity, which the defects of the Auditory, the times or propriety of Text
suggested; and not to raise doctrinall points according to the whimzies of
every Cockbrain Sciolist, who is seven year at an Academy, has like Pharoahs
dream produced nothing but seven years famine: or having sented Doway, St.
Thomas, or some Romish fair, where having purchased a few trinkets, and a
little gibrish may by order tu^^ Hocus Pocus, juggle or make a Puppit-show in
Religion; introducing superfluous definitions which fuel contention; excite
rebellions, hatred, animosities, calumnies, contempt of superiors,
disseminating error, and infusing prejudice; tantum religio potuit suadere^

Preachers like winds have influence on the people, compared to waters.

May none think salvi^icall preaching consists in state-invectives, but in
teaching their auditors, decline the Islands of sin, and thrust into the fair
havens of grace and glory.

Sect. 49.
Prayer is that sacred negotiation man has with God, the art of imparadising
our souls, the Jacobs Ladder, by which we may bring down Angels, and wrestle
till they bless us: We may hear God speak in a Preacher, we speak to him in
our Prayers. It cannot be obedience to hear our Masters command, but do his
will. Thus with Enoch, we may walk in Paradise, and if we cast aside the mantle
of mundan employments with Elias, mount up in a fiery chariot to heaven. Gods
house should be called a house of prayer, but most make it a den of thieves:
Not taking heaven by violence in prayer, but offer violence on earth. Gods word
is robbed of its efficacy, and the Priests by that advantage turned
mony-changers, and expose Doves to sale, Gods innocent children in the Temple,
as if these Doves could not mount up toward heaven, unless they were sealed;
they are blinded in an unknown tongue, or entitle Gods spirit to blasphemy, or
battologie, or ready to offer the sacrifice of fools, or make fools a
sacrifice.

Sect. 50.
I have no prejudice to public Liturgy because the name may import sacrifice
and Nature have some affinities with the Letanies in Mass: I could wish they
might not challenge a greater affinity by an ite missa est, a period; and the
Roman by an ite missa est ignorantiae pars, might challenge a greater affinity
to what was ours; while Physicians have their Catholicons, Panchymagogy, and
Panaces Soldiers their Magazines, and Panoplies: that spiritual Physicians
should be unprovided, and Christ's soldiers unarmed to resist the wounds of
sin, or wounded, want balm in Gilead: Could it be inconsistent with faith, it
could not with reason: this might cement the body of the Church, preserve the
communion of Saints, obstruct vanity, by sealing up the fountains of
impurities, taking away the leisure which may administer occasions to sin: But
if we cannot all agree in uniformity in Gods service, yet God grant we may
introduce no deformity into his worship; but agree all with one mind to serve
him: none make long prayers to devour Widows houses, or Gods house a Widow,
while with zeal, unlike David's, the zeal of Gods houses ^ats, them not up, but
their zeal eats up Gods houses.

Sect. 51.
I shall not deny, a confession may be sometimes necessary to man as well as
God. Tertullian urget in lib. depoenitent. ex aliquot Cyprianis locis apparet
ut Ser. 5. ae lapsis and lib. 3. Epis. 14. and frequenter fieri jubet lib. 1.
Ep. 3.
If some sores have fester'd by rash exposures, others have wrankled by unhappy
concealments. There may be good Samaritans, who* when we fall among thieves,
sins which rob us of Gods mercies, may comfort us with the wine of Gods Word,
and power the oil of his Holy Spirit into our wounds* which they cannot, if
they be not opened. But these traders in indulgencies, and picklocks of state,
instead of curing us of our wounds, have robbed us of our clothes, the garment
of Christ's righteousness, by teaching us relinquish our own, and then have
exposed our nakedness to the cold air of an uncharitable world. Though we have
Priests that pass by carelessly, Levites which only shake their heads, may we
rely on that good Samaritan, who, when we had fallen among thieves, powered the
oil of his precious blood into our wounds, and left us two pence, his two
Testaments, for our security, in the Inn of this world.

Sect. 52.
I cannot be so much an Iconomachist, as to think all image making Idolatry,
it is eminently true of graven and molten, which after the c^remonies of
consecration, was by the Gentiles conceived bodies of inspired Deities.
Pictures by Gods own appointment lawful, as the cherubims; or if unlawful to
the Jews, the commandment is as little relative to Christians, as the Sabbath;
as little understood, as the taking Gods name in vain, meant by forswearing:
Yet he who keeps the seventh day to praise God for the Creation as the first,
in memorial of the Redemption; or he who is so far from using Gods name in
vain, by forswearing it, as he will not misuse it in vain conversation, or
hates so much an Idol, as his eyes will not treat with a picture. I honor him
for his zeal, I wish I could as well commend him for his charity, and not
misapprove him for his ignorance. We should not offend weak ones, yet some are
so weak, that all things offend them: madder then he who persuaded himself he
was made of butter, the sunshine of the Gospel terrifies them, and the least
scintillation of charity seems dangerous. Others have the weakness of
children, whom nothing but rattles and pictures will please; take away these,
they grow querulous, baul and disquiet the whole household of faith.

Sect. 53.
The bra^en Serpent, the emblem of our Savior, curing the sting^ of the fiery
Serpents, our sins, while we wander in this wilderness of error, may be
erected. But if the old Serpent creeps into the body, and tempts to Idolatry, a
Monk, like an Idols Priest, can give responses from a rood, and make it move by
a wire to induce a puppet-play in religion: a presto be gone befits both the
Jugler and his Hocus: 2 Ephesians. Con. 2 Canstan. Eleboris Canon 26. Council. Carth.
had not four Councels condemned them, and a jury of Fathers, Basils and
Eus^bius testimonies on their side mistook: Athanasius, Chrysostoms, and
Damasus suffrages for them suspected: therefore with Saint Hierom, nos unam
tantum veneramur imaginem, Canon 14. Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 4. Hieron. in Ezekiel.
4. and 16.
Jesum nempe Christum, qui est imago patris. Though Basil says, the honor due
to the abstract, is due to the pattern; if any one can show such an image of
Christ, as Christ is of the Father, Epiph. haer. 79. A. 34. de moribus Eccl.
lib. 1. cap. 10. de Consen* Eccles.
we will worship, else we may believe with the Father, Errare omnino meruerunt,
qui Christum non in divinis codicibus, sed in parietibus quaerunt: Or as
Irenaeus says, where Pastors became dumb, there Images became their Pastors.

These books of the unlearned, though made use of by Paulinus Bishop of Nola,
since wooden Priests leave the rabble as unlearned as their books, it is better
the images of Christ be defaced in Churches, then the image of Christ should be
defaced in the people, which should be the Temples of the holy Spirit.

But if any be lawful, sure the picture of the Father cannot, being a piece of
intolerable folly, which in our fecunditie of sects, may tempt a weak brother
to reimbibe the humor of an Anthropomorphite. God who loves decency in his
spouse, is so jealous of his honor in her, that he cannot approve that fucated
face of Religion, which may shame honesty out of countenance: This Italian
wash, and Spanish die, disfigures the face of Religion, whose grace is
simplicity. What Caesar of his wife, can we believe Christ should expect less
of his spouse, to be free not only from crime, but even suspicion.

Sect. 54.
Superstition which makes such a noise, the worshipping of Demons, or
Superstitum Cultus, the worship of the survivor to dead men's souls, as little
as Idolatory, an Image inspired by a Devil, has relation to Christians, the
part of that commandment which forbids adoration, bowing down, or corporal
worship to an Idol seems to intimate a tribute due to God: the worshipping God
in spirit and truth, placed in opposition only to that in the Mountain and
Jerusalem, impugns not this, who redeemed both body and spirit, expects
reverence from both: Our spirits not less, such by corporeal allegation, even
corporal worship is in spirit and in truth. Henry Burtons Jesu-worship
Idolatry, proved the ridiculous nonconformist an Idolater, who could Idolize
his own fancy. Most of our Polemick Divines more Andab^tarum pugnant, their
valor proceeds from their ignorance, hacking and hewing fellows which play
prizes with the two e^g'd sword of Scripture, and care not how they maim and
mutilate Christian communion, rather then not retain the aerie name of Masters
in the science of defense. Yet the decryers of Idolatry are the greatest
Idolaters, covetous persons, who would be gilded over with promotion* and made
worshipful, like petty thieves, they care not what hedges they break, so they
may warm their own fingers: take away the fences of the Church, to fence their
own broken fortunes. Ceremonies are the hedge that fences the substance of
Relgion, from the indignities which prophanes, and sacrilege too frequently
put on it. While the divines of England have preached down ceremonies, they
have pulled up the hedge, and not only let in Foxes into their Vinyards, but
opened a gap for the sheep to wander out of pasture of the Church, and become a
prey to Romish wolves seducing them in sheeps clothing. It is true, that
inter^all worship of the heart is the greatest service of God; but external
worship of God, in his service, is the great witness to the world, that our
hearts stands right in the service of God: take away this, and what light is
there left to shine before men, that they may see our Devotion like a
dayspring from above, or a star guiding wise men to Jesus, and glorify our
Father which is in heaven? The Kingdom of heaven, his Church, without civil
order and comeliness, religious exercises will be disorderly and confused, like
the first Chaos, Ge^. I.
God made in the beginning void, and without form, and whose face darkness
covered.

Sect. 55.
That Romanists deny Christ's humanity by transubstantiation, make irrite his
death by merits and satisfaction, Credat Judaeus Apella, non ego. Christian
charity will lend me no such deductions. A Chrysostom, Theodoret, Isych^us,
Euche^^us, and some Primitive Fathers, with a (...), Vide Cent. Magdebur. Cent.
5 page 517. Chrysoft. ^0 15. Euch. lib. 2. in Genes.
if not a (...) transfiguratio^, conversion, mutation, translation,
transelementation, transition, if not a transubstantiation, generally believed
a mystery, a matter of faith, not sense, to be believed, not grossly phancy'd
if they have lent so^e an occasion of error, shall administer to me an occasion
Charity; though both within and without the pale of the Church, it may afford
opportunity to scandal, not to be redeemed by a fictitious miracle of an
Hoasts conversion into flesh, when Christ's body is no longer present then the
form of bread remains, how is Christ's body in the miracle, when the Species
being gone, it is no longer a Sacrament?

I love not such acute disputing about Christ's body as the killing of 1000. in
a battle, and at Beziers 60000. how can we not dread Christ's appearance, who
singe his Livery, Charity? who spilt his own blood to prevent the effusion of
ours.

Neither was a hudler of reformations tongue less cruel to his brethren, then
the Papists sword with an Ego Sacramentarios haereticos omnes and aeterna paena
afficiendos duco. That which was given to unite into Christ's body should not
divide from it: we must not dispute about Seals, while we lose the Covenant: it
shall content me it is an Eucharist, not Axapist.

May Christ's body be present to all by a worthy communication: and none forget
him who commands it to be done in commemoration, he dyed for them; and so
crucify him again by crucifying one the other. Whatsoever the consequences be
of subtle brains, the consequences of worthy receiving will be salvation: may
we all have sursum corda, St. Ambros de Sp. San. lib. 3. c. 12.
since a Saint Austine believes nemo d^gne manducat nisi ^prius adoraverit; and
a Saint Ambrose, we must worship Christ in the mysteries, as the Apostles him
in the flesh.

He who injoins a worthy Communion under penalty of damnation, will not damn me
sure for believing too worthily of what I receive: Transubstantiation nor
Consubstantiation monopolize the real presence which no worthy communicant can
be without. May all show he is really present, and communicated, while we
receiving, praise God, and have charity with all; do become one with him,
though not uniform with all: if we agree not in the way of serving him, yet all
agree that serving is the way to him: I may be troubled that a brother shall
refuse to put on the rob^ of Christ's righteousness, but never be angry with
him for not putting it on after my fashion: but could wish all would use that
which is least offensive to them without a (...), ^spencaeus lib. 4. de Euchar
adoratione. c. 3.
and quando Christiani adorant quod edunt, fit an^ma cum Philosophis, may be
opinion of not a single Averroes.

Sect. 56.
Most inflated with the opinion of their own knowledge, swell into
controversies; others with the impostumations of their own malice are tumid and
angry; open the one, and you shall find nothing but flatulency; and launch the
other, and there will issue forth corruption: justification, whether by faith
or works, or both? has len^ such occasion to contention, as men have renounced
him who can only justify, Christ, who is Love: when justification is an
acception of our persons, and a remission of our sins, it is an Enigma deserves
an Oed pus to unmask, how we accept our own persons, and remit our offenses.

May we all like the wise Virgins provide our selves with the light of Faith,
and oil of good works: being called into Gods Vineyard, consider we are to
work, not talk: none suppose the finer threads spun from the Cobwebs of
subtiler imaginations can hold Salvation, but all provide that triple cord
twisted by faith, hope, and charity, which cannot be easily broken.

Sect. 57.
It has been the fancy of not a few, that Christ came to fulfill the Law, and
nothing has been reserved for Christian duty but a Creed, and in via salutis
ambulas, a magical Faith may oblige Heaven, and produce no less then miracles.

Christ's Law is (...) if we may believe the Fathers a new discipline, Loz. lib.
2. Macar. l. 37. p. 442.
a spiritual Law accomplishing, extending and painting to the life the
sciagraphy, or imperfect draught of Mosaical perfection, that forbids the fires
of illegal concupiscences, this to fly even the very smoke by avoiding the
occasion: that inhibits the ablation of our brothers blood, this the commotions
of our own: the strictest of judaical observance or phylacter'd Romanists, who
fringe Christian Religion with ceremonies, may be silenced with an except your
righteousness exceed that of the Pha^^sees, You cannot, enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven.

Those which who say, Christ has fulfilled the Law, and think that the crying
a Lord, Lord, may entitle them to Heaven; may be dismis'd with I know you not;
if they will not cover their brothers nakedness, cloth their imperfections*
give an Alms as well of their knowledge as fortunes, can break a commandment,
or teach others to break; though they give up their names to factions: May
miss their names in the book of life. Christ has not done so much that we
need do nothing: There is a treasury in the Church to de^ray humble and
penitent sinners; but not to cast away upon Prodigalls: whatsoever the Keys of
the Church are of, this I am confident; every man has the power of binding and
loofing, sins bind, and repentance looses; yet though every Christian is
entrusted with the keys Christ must be the Door, through which they must enter
into salvation: they must unload themselves of iniquity, and knock by a
spiritual fervency before they enter the narrow gate, ( Peter's Keys without
this) and the confidence of a Lord, Lord, encounter with a discedite, nescio
vos: and meet with the punishment of the idle servant while they hide their
Talent and accuse their master of hardness; weak and unstable souls, who wrest
the Scriptures to their own damnation, that I do not speak in the person of a
Carnal man by Saint Paul, must be tentred to a Saint Paul; could not that they
have Saint Patro^ to impiety, (...) if to live according to nature is the part
of one that has not believed not to arive so high is below a Pagan. Justin.


Sect. 58.
The poverty of Franciscans, abstinence of Carthusians, zeal of some
Recollects, chastity of Nuns, devotion of Pilgrims, Anchorets* etc. Support the
papal dignity beyond Jesuiticall Sc^omachies, Homonyma's, Logomachies, and
circulations, and while these ignes fatui seduce, and are seduced into
precipices by the Phanatick fires of there own imaginations, these sealed Doves
may take occasion by their blindness to mount toward Heaven: for I cannot be
so uncharitable as not to think these empty instruments may make a pleasing
sound in the ears of the Almighty. I cannot look on them so, with blear-eyed
prejudice, as I can not discern an Hilar^on, Antonius, Paulus, Eustochium,
Marcella, Paula, exercised with watchings, clothed with Sackcloth* and fed by
fastings with the bread of life: a Sain Hieron, Saint Basil, Saint Chrysostom,
Saint Austin sounding an Alarm to the battle, and encouraging to take up these
arms of Christian warfare, Emperors Kings, Princes, and Potentates casting down
Crowns and honors at the feet of the Lamb, following Christ in the high way of
the Cross, Myriads concomitating, who preferring Christian humility before
mundan complacencies, in Gales of sighs, and Seas of tears have been
transported to an Haven of eternal security: the partial fancy of the
prejudice biased centuriators that Monachisms antichristian, or the petticoat
zeal of some rash reformers, who entitle the Locusts of the infernal pit,
shall not teach my pen a sally out into scurrility, or dash in strains of
pollutions; marriage fills the Earth, and if virginity fills not Heaven, I may
boldly affirm it prejudices not the way thither. I am neither of Vigilantius,
or Jovinians mind, that either riches are to be preferred before poverty, or
marriage before Virginity: and though I think marriage both honorable, and
lawful in the Clergy, yet I am of the L. Bacons opinion, Charity can hardly
water the ground where it must first fill a Pond; and that many men believe not
themselves what they would persuade others; less do the things they would
impose; least know what they most confidently boast; they only set the sign of
the Cross over their outer doors, and sacrifice to the gut and grain in their
inner closets, and I must suspect the Sun of righteousness declining among
these once not impious orders, where the shadows so far exceed the substance.

Sect. 59.
Monachism prevails not so much in the sustentation of Popery: as what is
called Arminianism might against it. I cannot think Bernevelt less the tongue
and Genius of Holland, because they could separate both from the body Politic:
nor that they enlarged not ignorance while they confined Grotius, and learning,
and excellence suffered no less then by an Ostracism in this admirable Hugo.
Men born to raise the Low Countries, a pitch of excellence above their
neighbors, had not the envy of their neighbors conspiring with headstrong
ignorance, cast them below themselves; but that which raised a tumult there,
and gilded a war here, has subdued even the Conquerors: There is scarce a
soldier but defends it; and by it repels, not introduces Popery into the Land.

Sect. 60.
Calvin lends more occasion to make Romish Proselytes then Ignatius Loyola: and
the Gomarists of Holland expelled not Popery with Arminanism, but opened a gap
for the wild bore to lay wast their Vineyard, whose entrance is by servile
will, irrespective Election, and irreprobation paritie of sins, the
consequences of which to some more refined wits may seem to exceed the
absurdities of a Talmud, Alcoran, and Popish Legends: asperse the deiety with
Tyranny, juggling, and partiality; entitle goodness it self to sin; while God
is made Author of iniquity, take away virtues essence by absuming will; the
Gospel promises, and force of Laws, confound the rational faculties of the
soul, adequate humane nature to bestiall, leave us to obey our fate, and follow
the duct of stars: and teach such a trumpeter as the Jesuit Campian, who could
only sound to battle, set others gether with noise, and have himself no
weapon, or Trumpeter-like without a point, not come to the purpose, or can at
most but scratch the face of Charity, and disfigure Christian communion with
quorsum corruption and haeretica contagio? ni^i ut qui sol^ side gloriam rapturi
sunt, in omnium tur pitudinum caeno volutati, noturam accusent; virtutem
desperent; praecepta deonerent: as if these phancies were only broched to vent
irreligion and impiety, by accusing nature despairing virtue, and deonerating
precepts, ot wallow in the mud of impurities: yet these may be deducible from a
Saint Augustine; their own Dominicans; and a stream of interpreters; while the
Camells are forced to swim by the reason of the depth of the Enigmaticall
Apostle; and even the Roman Oracle himself dares not be more confident then
the Delphian, gives only dubious responses, etripode. Nay, it is affirmed in
their Angelick Doctor Aquinas, who if the Elogies of three Popes carry credit
quot articulos edidit, Jo. 22. in Literis Canonizat. Urban 6.
tot miracula; in jungimus ut ejus doctrinam tanquam veridicam and Catholicam
sectem ^ni and ecce plus quam Solomon hic: who with trifling arguments
concludes, Innocent 5. in Serm^ne
for that the envy of which they would fix on the reformation.

In some distempers, who feed the body, feed the diseases: if the too indulgent
hand of some too officious Parent, instead of help, has reached death to her
beloved children, while zealous ignorance in a supposed antidote, administers
poison (we know what a discracy the Roman Mother by rasher indulgences, has
reduced the body Ecclesiastic, if the preposterous zeal of other Churches,
has begot an atrophy in some constitutions, while ignorantly they take away
Laws, terror, persuasions, make us loath food, or think our selves incapable)
it would be a strange Law would punish with death the rash zeal of a mistaking
parent, in the ruin of a child, with the same medicine she cured others. Quos
praedestinavit ad finem praedestinavit ad med^a. Endeavor to make your Calling
and Election sure, may counterprise the poison in some, and strength of nature
work it out in others. God of his mercy send the oil of his holy Spirit, that
by the holy anointing, the tumors of venomous malice, may subside in all.

Sect. 61.
The Satyr in the Fable, seeing his Host blow his fingers to heat them, and his
broth that he might cool it, renounced his society. We are all too Satyricall,
have too much of a Satyrs nature in us, the beastiall part so far exceeds
humanity, that we renounce communion, for that which might be rectified by
reason. That which can infrigidate an Italians zeal, may inflame a frozen
Islanders devotion. Urban the eight, demanded by a Cardinal, why he preferred
one for Nuntio, whose capacities had arrived to no higher eminencies, then the
trash and refuse of mankind, before a quick and refined piece, in whom nature,
as in an Elixir, had placed all that might enrich in the mysterious
excellencies of state, replied: This Eagle would not be lured to flies, and
those higher elevations of fancy, would only render him incapable of himself
and others; who measure other men's thoughts by their own, will prove ill Judges
both of themselves and others.

Sect. 62.
From those whom I am divided in opinion, I will not prove a Separatist in my
charity; I shall contend in nothing, but not to approve my self contentious.
As I am an English man, I will use the liberty which God has permitted me: was
I a Spaniard, or Italian, I would think with Erasmus* si quid tyrannidis quod
tamen non cogat ad impietatem, satius est f^rre qu^m seditiose reluctare, nec
esse pium, nec esse rutum, de potestate, publica sinistram concipere aut serere
opinionem, etc. Singularity not so precious as to cost the quiet of a Mother,
neither should I be troubled with those squibs and erackers, the noise and fire
that flies up and down, the stories of hell, for not confessing God before men:
to confess the God of peace, the best way is to bepeaceable. I am not of the
Gnostics humor, to deny God in the time of persecution, and worship Idols,
which the mistaken places of these Scripture wire-drawers import. I should
suppose I denied God a common Father, and persecuted the truth, should I so wed
my self to the Idol of my own fancy, as not to worship the true God after
any form.

Sect. 63.
Errors are more worthy of pity then hate. Reformations have been so
tumultuous and refractory, that quiet error to sober Christian might seem to be
preferred before unruly truths. All Churches betwixt invitation and menace,
would persuade resignation of faith to a simple obedience; to believe our own
without enquiring into others, cannot satisfy conscience. Damnation by all
visible Hierarchies (every mouth smutcht with hells firebrarnds) is thundered
against them, which believe any Doctrine but theirs. It cannot be fit to
believe God inspired this Church and no other, since mankind is come from the
same carnal Ancestors, and God the common Father. Must we believe our Priests
call their Doctrine faith, or argue controversies? if argue, how much time and
wealth must we expend? by learning languages, reading Authors, unravelling
ages, examining Fathers, conferring expositions, and reconciling
contradictions, travailing over countries, pilgrims on earth, and at last we
may be strangers to heaven; come as short of it, as life of examining all. To
embrace all opinions, is as impossible, as to learn or number, since they are
as numerous as the sand, which has an analogy with their foundations. To
reject all must relish of a stranger impiety, when one way all other serve God;
though it would be a folly to leave a Meridian light to follow the ignis fatuus
of every phanatick brain. We then that are Layicks must build upon such
infallible grounds, that whatsoever superstructures of faith be raised, these
may support them. All conclude virtues so eminent, that it includes the rest,
ceremonies, rites, volumes tend to it, and no Sacrament but finally resolves
into it; all essentialls of Religion close in our faith, and love of God, by a
pious life, and mutual charity, by fraternall dilection amongst Christians;
among the propitiations for sin* contrition for it, repenting to God, and
satisfaction to our neighbors, all believe necessary, heaven or hell,
recompense or castigation, attendants of good or evil life: with these the
Lamb may wade to an haven of perpetual felicities, while the swimming Elephant
cramped with difficulties, drowns, or meeting with the quicksands of
controversy, is swallowed up in an Abyss. These indubitable verities may not
only prevent the inroads of impiety and Atheism, usher in repentance, and
reduce men from aerie controversy to solid virtue; and dispose to concord, since
we agree in eternal causes, why should we disagree in trivial? these common
truths being firmer bonds of amity, then any thing emergent out of traditions
should dissolve in any, who uses not Religion for a cloak, while profit is as
the body, for whose ease he changes it at pleasure: or as the thief, whose
quotidian prayer was, that God would prosper him in his theevery, which he
called the work of his vocation; and having enriched himself with spoil,
praised God for the blessing his endeavors: Or seek their own, and not
Christ's, while religion so zealously pretended, is made but a stalking horse to
shoot at other foul, upon which their aim is set. While men change Religions
more licentiously, then a sober man would his clothes, and put them on, alike
ashamed, to seem naked, and in some times perilous, to be found without any.

Sect. 64.
I have not been much troubled with the toy of the worlds Religion,
Weathercock like, to turn round with every gale of profits toties quoties
vertitur annulus Politicus, have not sought Religion for ends, but made it the
end of my curiosity. I should not think Christ the less Christ for being
sprinkled over with blood, or suffering not the scarf of Christian warfare:
but I believe the Jesuits Martyrologie, like our Foxes, where weakness and
ignorance has many Martyrs, but God few Saints. Christ is still crucified
between thieves; I wish a timous repentance may not only make one, but both
good, and poor truth may be rescued from the pillory of phanatick interpreters,
nor have her ears bored through with a Roman Ecclesia, and a Pontifex maxmimus
in Theology, like the (...) in Philosophy, one bafling Religion, the other
cashiering Reason with a contra negantem princip^a, take a view of those
bulwarks of human knowledge, which have past impregnable in the esteem of ages,
elated even above divinity, while divinity by the Schoolmen has been brought
to the touchstone of Philosophy: and when you find these mountains have
traveled with a ridiculous mouse, having scarce left an infallible maxim,
beside an Humanum est errare, think what it is to be infallible.

Sect. 65.
Reflect upon the great Hagarite, who conquered more of the world, then his
Master Alexande^, by his reason subdued ages; yet see this praecurs^r Christi
in naturalibus sicut Johannes in gratuitis, as some have termed him,
discomposed by Telesius, degraded by Campanella, bills of accusation brought in
against him by B. Chartes, Bacon, Digby, Hobs; nay by all pregnant wits, and
teeming constitutions, who have deserved to be a secretioribus naturae
consiliis, by the nobility of extracts in Chemistry, or arrived to the
exquisiteness of parts, by anatomicall inspections, found guilty, and exploded
after so great a revolution of ages.

In medicine, see Hippocrates alter the Ancients, Galen him, Paracelsus both,
Van Helmont dissenting from all; lacteall veins found out by Asellius, enlarged
by Pecquer in dogs, by Bartholine in men, and the knowledge of them arrived to
the Zenith in the elaborate pieces of that great Master of generation and
circulation, Doctor Harvey: the Liver has lost his office, the Senses their
seat, and the use of the Nerves now only found out by Doctor Glisson.

View the decay of nature against the opinion of all ages, contradicted by
Doctor Hackwell, whose arguments are so irrefragable, that nature must seem to
admit a stranger decay in him assents not to it.

Let us contemplate Heaven, Earth, and Sea, and all of them will instruct us of
human fallibility. The Jews calculated by the Lunar account, Pythagoras by the
Solar, and Copernicus rectified both. Divert toward Astrology, Astronomy, and
Geometry, and see how the Professors by a stranger improvement have verified
what they call themselves Mathematics, see the Sea ruled by compass, which
the land makes no use of, and the Land proved as giddy as her inhabitants,
since Copernic^sm is aprov'd by all. Unravell Lycostenes Apothegms^, Erasmus
Adages, Cicero's jests, all the wisdom of Roman, and Grecian, and if you find
nothing among Flores Poetarum, Wits Commonwealth, and the Elixir of the Sages,
which may outvie the Urbanities of a common wit* Cease to be so passionate an
admirer of Antiquity.

See the Antipodes confessed by all, which the poor Bishop Vergilius asserting,
by the fiery zeal of Pope Zachary was committed to the flames, to instruct how
infallible the Roman Oracle is, in condemning that which all do maintain; and
he himself maintained an Antipodes in his life, his footsteps being opposite
to those of meek and pious Ancestors. If these be dissatisfactory, unspread
what elapsed times have rolled up: and as in a piece of Tapestry, you shall see
Snakes lasciviating among Roses, and this Linsey-Wolsey interweaving truth with
falsity, the fashion of all ages. There has never wanted some, who blinder
then Moles, Vid. D. Brown. Pseud. Epid.
have persuaded Moles have wanted eyes, Lampreys have many, Snakes at each
horn; Cameleons living by air* Ostriges by Iron, Salamanders in fire, Coral
obdurate by air, Crystal congealed Ice, Mandrakes resembling men, with two
headed Serpents* Centaurs* Gryphins* and a Phoenix, which Noah took no notice
of, while he took all into his Ark by pairs, Pigeons and Horses without gall,
Elephants without joints, Swans entertaining death with melody, and all the
masks of ridling nature in sympathies, and antipathies, Oak and Olive, Walnut
and Oak, Cock, Lion, Spider, Toad, Panther, Hyena,, and the stork, an enemy to
Kingdoms* and sympathizing with free states, to which by her presence she
testifies an approbation. To these, falling of Salt, crossing Hares croaking
Ravens, tinckling ears, and burning chins, ridiculous and petty observances,
which call for agonies and cold sweats, the glorious sunshine of the Gospel
having not dispelled these darker clouds of benighted ignorance, or lighter
mists of aerie fancy. Our Savior with long hair is mistaken for a Nazarite:
Saint Hierom is pictured with a Cardinals Hat, as if his head had Prophesied of
the invention which should succeed in the time of Innocent the fourth: the
story of Goats blood dissolving Diamonds, resembled so often to our Saviors;
the figment of the Phoenix, inferred to quadrate to his death and resurrection,
Hercules labors his miracles: Nay, even the Mythologies of Paganism are
induced for comments on Christianity, that it is no wonder if Religion should
be suspected for fabulous; Antesignanes of schism and faction, buffet, revile
and wound Christ in their brethren; or Hell may have a Factor, neither Turk,
Jew nor Christian, who may write of three impostors.

Not only an Agamemnon sacrifices an Iphigenia, but a Jeptha, by Translators
is introduced sacrificing a daughter, showing obedience by disobeying him* who
abhors the bloody sacrifices of Gentilism.

Who could believe the stories of Saint George, Saint Patrick, Saint David,
etc. and might not have a Creed for Homers Rodomontado's? who Saint Benedicts,
Saint Frances, and Saint Dominicks Lives, Gregory's Dialogues, Saint Bridgets
uncouth dreams, like the Apocalyptick accomplishments of Rice Evans, Jacob
Israel, Sedgwick, and Hannah etc. and wonder at Ovids Metamorphosis.

To omit the diseases in opinion of Christians, which have brought so strange a
distemperature upon Charity it can be no wonder, if that Charity which Christ
left to perfume the world, and those odours of Christian virtues, which should
embalm and preserve untainted the body of Religion vanish: and neither the
Haggard of reason, nor lure of Religion keep men upright from reeling into
Atheism.

Some are cried up for miracles, that he who would correct, must make but one
blot whose chiefest art is to apparel lies handsomely, that though their
nakedness might seem deformed, their dressing might attract readers: and these
men of eminency by the Prerogative of their parts, seem only to deserve the
highest degree in Bethlem. College, having arrived to the aim of madness,
though hear nothing less then then Angelick and Seraphick, and think with
extatick Paul, they have attained the third Heaven. Sure this obnubilation of
verities, and darkness of humane nature, was the penalty for the taste of the
forbidden fruit; which deprives of Paradise the pleasures of knowledge; that
man who desired what was prohibited, should be deprived of that knowledge which
was granted: and so having introduced a multiplication and confusion of
Sciences, he should be punished with the amission of true knowledge, which was
the same of all things.

This is that Cherub, guarding Parad^se with a flaming sword, which obcaecating
the conscious minds of men with the splendour of his light deterrs them from the
secrets of nature and verity of the universe: true knowledge even in humane
things having no more a being, then the Philosophers mater^a prima, which is
only in Terms.

Sect. 66.
Now let us retreat from humanity, whose Motto is humanum est errare and review
Divinity, ubi verum non variat, yet we shall find variantes de vero: and when
Gods word is not a Lanthorn to their feet, and the Church the guide, go out of
the way, stumble and are benighted with error.

See Saint Cyprian a Rebaptist; Origin an Anthropomorphite; Tertullian a
Montanist; Saint Na^^anzen an Angelist* Eusebius an Arrian; Papias, Justin*
Millenaries; Saint Hierom a Mongamist a Saint Augustine need a book of
recantations; Concilium Ariminense conclude with Arrius, In cap. quarto. Extr.
de divortiis in cap. 1. did. 31.
Ephesinum with Eutyches; a Tyrian condemn an Athanasius: a third Stephen in a
Council rescinding the Acts of Pope Formosus; a tenth John in a Synod at
Ravenna, the decrees of Stephen; A Pope Pelagius, and the first Gregory, an
Innocent the third, and a third Celestine, so much contradicting each the other
about divorces, that no rational man would believe infallibility wedded to the
Pontificiall chair, should no bill of divorce be issued forth by the Councels
of Constance and Basil, both general, both allowed; the first by Pope Martin
the fifth; the second by Eugenius the fourth, their bills be at them, one say,
the Council can err, not the Pope; the other, the Pope and not the Council;
the Canon of the Council of Ferrara, Decretum de 4. Conclusionibus.
contrary to the Council of Florence; the one, the Council was above the Pope;
the other, the Pope above the Council.

Pope Alexander condemned Peter Lombard in a Council of 300. Bishops, Innocent
the third acquitted him: Pope Pelagius* and Gregory thought the name of
Universal Bishop n^men Blasphemiae, and to admit it, nihil al^ud quam fidem
perdere; Boniface and their successors have assumed the title: if none of these
have erred, error is something, which the World has not learned to define.
Stapleton confesses, vix ullum peccatum (haeresi excepta) cogitari potest quo
illa seeds turpiter maculata non fuerit: but if it cannot be tainted with
Haeresie, in vain their Polemicks have broached those trifling questions, Io.
de Turre crem. lib. 4. par. 2. e. 20. Bellar l. 2. de Romans Pon. c. 30. Cui.
tract. de auth. pap. and Conc. c. 20.
whether a Pope may be deposed for Haeresie: but Biel grants they may fall into
it: Stella and Almain, that they have fallen, and ceased to be heads of the
Church and in the time of his Vicars defection left Christ to look to his cure
himself: that Christ promised the keys to Saint Peter is true: but as true
that he did it to the rest of the Apostles: Mat. 16. 18.
so to their successors as well as his; Mat. 18. 18.
so it is to thee and them, Ioh. 20. 22.
and not to thee to exclude them: (...) Theophyl. in Mat. 18. S. Chrysostom.
unless some will fancy Heaven-gate so easy, as they might open and shut
without the ke^es, si hoc tantum Petro d'ctum, non fuit hoe Ecclesia, St. Aust.
tract. 50. in St. Io.
if a Saint Austine may credited: Christ prayed that Peter's faith might not
fail, viz. in application to his personal perseverance; S. Prosper l. de vo^.
^ent. c. 24.
if the Fathers are worthy of belief, for papal infallibility had no
appearance hence in any except in Popes, whose eyes squinted toward
self-interest for a 1000 years.

The Pope infallible, the unnecessary trouble of calling Counsels might be
spared: neither have they washed the Aethiop fairer, who have trifled about the
infallibility of Councels: it is one of their maxims, a general Council
cannot err, if it be confirmed by the Pope, it cannot be confirmed till
finished, if finished, it has erred, or not erred; if erred, the Pope ought
not to confirm falsehood; if not erred, it was truth before he confirmed it; and
at best his assent is but signum pro causa: or a Council must be either
infallible by the means, or the prophetic part, the conclusion; the means,
humane learning, fallible means may have fallible effects, or if by the
conclusion, the spirit makes no use of means: they must either make means
useless, or open a gap for Enthusiasts to ruffle the Church.

Where two or three are convened, Christ is in the midst of them to concede
what he shall think fit for them, not they fit for themselves: a general
Council may be supposed not to err, led by the spirit of truth in Scripture,
and not presuming to lead both spirit and Scripture: no Father having to deal
with Heretics, entitled Councels infallible. S. Aust. lib. 1. Bap. Cont. Denat.
The letters of Bishops according to Saint Austine may be disputed by more
learned Bishops, national Counsels by plenary; and even plenary may be
amended, the former by the later: that only which is found in Scripture, may
be neither doubted nor disputed. The comforter shall abide with them, Jo. 14.
16, 17. Isid. on Jo. 12.
and lead them into all truth, viz. the Holy Ghost that lead the Catholic
Church not into all curious truths, in or about the faith, but all truth
necessary to salvation, in which the Catholic Church cannot err; for if it
could err, it could not be holy.

Sect. 67.
Now let us peruse a little of the Elixir of the Fathers, which some
Pontificians sure rightly understood, would turn al into Catholic Gold, in
which we may believe them, but never that it is able to convert one intelligent
man to be a Papist.

Illa Ecclesia quae fuit omnium gentium jam non est periit, S. Aug. in Psalm.
101.
apostavit? hoc dicunt qui in illa non sunt: O impudentem vocem! illa non est,
quia tu in illa non es? vide ne tu ideo non sis, nam illa erit, etiamsi tu non
sis. O vocem abominabilem and detestabilem, etc. hanc praevidit spiritus Dei,
ecce ego vobiscum sum usque ad Consuminationem seculi.

Sed forte ista civitas quae mundum tenuit universum aliquando evertetur?
absit. S. Aug. in Ps. 47.
Deus enim fundavit in aeternum; si Deus fundavit in aeternum, quid times, ne
cadat? Portae inferorum non praevalebunt contra eam: S. Chrysostom. in Ps. 148.
quod si non cred^s verbo, ipsis operibus creed. Multo facil^us m^hi
persuaderem Christo non esse credendum, S. August. ad Honoratum. S. Aug. in
Epist. Ioh. and Cont. Petilium in unit. Eccles. S. cyp. de unit Ecclesiae.
quam de illo quidquam, nisi ab his per quos credidissem esse credendum* Deus
posu^t in sole tabernaculum suum, qui contra Lucernam in candelabro positam
oculos claudunt, quid amplius dicturus sum quam caecos esse: Quomodo
impur^ss^me Diabole Ecclesiam te posse putas de^jcere? adulterari non potest^
sponsa Christi; incorrupta est, Pudica est; domum unam novit; unius cubiculi
Sanctitatem casto pudore custodit: Hoc Ecclesiae proprium est, S. Hilari. us.
ut tum vincat cum laeditur, tum intelligatur cum arguitur, tum obtineat cum de
seritur.

Haec ergo navis Ecclesia est, S. Ambrosius.
quae si quotidie saeculum istud tanquam aliquod pelagus fortiter infestum,
nunquam elid^tur ad saxum, nunquam mergitur ad profundum; super petram fundata
Ecclesia nulla tempestate Concutitur; nullo turbine ventisque subruitur?

Quorsum haec! S. Hieron.
what a flood of Fathers is here without a drop of reason? who ever denied God
would have a Church spread ore the face of the Earth; yet this implies that the
Roman is only Catholic, a Monopoly of heaven, and mercy by usurpation of the
name: or because the Rivers of life shall not cease (while time flows) to
stream in the City of God, his holy Catholic Church, they lose their current,
if they stream not in the channells of Romish phancies.

Who would not with Saint Austin, rather believe nothing of Christ, then the
Gospel of Peter, Bartholomew, Nicodemus, the Acts of Paul and Tecla, etc.
ridiculous figments of giddy heresy, where the Devil in an Angel of lights
shape, would have brought darkness in fashion; this implies not sure, we must
not believe the true Gospel, without it is ma^gin'd with Pontifician notes,
and fenced with profit-angling baits of phanatick interpreters.

Gods Tabernacle is in the Sun, and he has a Church like the Sun, shining with
light, and eminent in virtues: who see not this light in a candlestick, or so
great a mountain as Gods Church, Christianity more eminent then all other
Religions, with the Father I could call them no less then blind. I should
think them hallucinate, could not see through the disfigurements of truth, and
veils of ceremonies; a face of Religion in the Romish Church, but desperately
blind, could see no other, and after he had received the fantastical garb,
would shut his eyes, and think it immodesty to view poor truth naked.

I may believe with Saint Cyprian, the Devil cannot deject the spouse, who
leaves not Christ's bed to lie with Adonis, or exchanges Christianity for
Paganism, the joys of his Spirit, for the salt waters of Mundan complacencies,
or the pure stream^ of life, for polluted puddles of phanatick interpretations.

I can assent to Saint Hilary, Persecution is the Churches seed: to Saint
Ambrose, the Church is a Ship secure in storms: to Saint Hierom, a Rock* which
winds nor waves move. Yet believe these sayings have no other relation to the
Roman Church, then the Roman has relation to the Catholic Church, by being
part of the whole body of Christianity, of which Christ is the head.

Sect. 68.
Papists, while they bring in the Fathers in vizards, may terrify some weak
ones; but the vizards once plucked off from the faces of the Fathers, the
children whom they have afrighted dare play with them, and wise men conclude
the cause not honest, which needs a disguise, since the confines of truth is to
be naked.

Ignatius called the Roman Church (...), Ignatius on p. 100: (...).
most chaste and Metropolis of the Region of the Romans, and wishes those things
may be firm which they teach. May the Roman Church be firm to what it then
taught, and then may all firmly believe what she teaches; and though not in a
power (...), which Ignatius was ignorant of, but (...), which he mentions, be
President.

Polycarp communicated with the Roman Church, Polycarp. Anno Dom. 120. Eusebius.
lib. 5. cap. 24.
though disagreed about Easter, was content to pass over rather a trifling
formality, then renounce his charity: who instructs us nothing of their Roman
power may instruct us in the power of Godliness, not to relinquish Christian
communion, for trivial observances.

Irenaeus praises the Roman faith, Irenaeus Eus. Anno Dom. 150. lib. 3. cap. 3.
succeeding with Episcopacy: yet oppugns Victor: sure he dreamed not of
Pontificiall infallibility.

Saint Cyprian says, the Romans are such, Navigare audent ad Petri Cathedram
and Ecclesiam principalem etc. nec cogitare ^os esse Romanos, ad quos persidia
habere non potest accessum. Cyp. lib. 1. Epist. 3.
to whom perfidia cannot have success, which scarce will imply error in faith
or misbeliefe; but malicious falsitie in matter of trust and action, such as
Faelicissimus and his accomplices hasted to Rome with against Saint Cyprian.

Saint Hieroms orbis Major urbe may dismiss him, and his zeal to Presbytery,
confirm no friend to Papal glory. For Saint Austin, he is quoted to call
himself rash, detestable, and strangely imprudent in a Council to resist
them, with whom Christ could only be to the consummation of the age. Saint
Cyprian in a schism is packed to hell se judice, macula istanec sanguine
abluitur, nec pas^ione purgatur, inexp^abilis culpa non erit fidei corona sed
perfidiae poena. He opposed Pope Stephen, and Saint Austin, and he, being both
of the African Church, dyed excommunicate from the Roman; Baronius Anno 419.
Binius in notis ad Epistol. Bonifacii 2. ad Eulalium.
and if a Saint Greoories prayers brought them not from hell with Trajan, to
bear him company, we may misdoubt a been esse to those Romanists invoke as
Grandees in the Court of heaven; if extra Ecclesia parietes Romanae non sit
salus: Hier. ad Evargium Presbyt.
But God be praised a Saint Hierom comes to their rescue with a non altera
Romanae urb^s Ecclesia alteratotius orbis aestimanda est. Gallia and Bithynia
etc. unum Christum adorant: unam observant regulam veritatis, si authoritas
quaeritur, orbis major est urbe? ubicunque fuerit Episcopus sive Regio, ejusdem
meriti est, ejusdem sacerdotii, potentiae, divitiarum, and potestatis gradus
and paupertatis hum^litas, sublimiorem vel inferiorem Episcopum non faciunt;
omnes Apostolorum successores sunt.

Sect. 69.
If the Roman Church be a branch, she cannot be the Root, though an elder
sister, she can be but a coheir: we need not cry out with Esau, Have thou but
one bles^^ng, O my father? Nor is it the essence of the Church, nor the
representative part in a synod, but the vertuall power in the Pope and his
Cardinals, which are the Elixir, by whose virtue the name of Catholic is
derivative. To be blanched with Innocence, or gul'd with Martyrdom, to carry
the Enfigns of the Lamb, are nothing worth, without the cross keys of Saint
Peter; the Purple of Christ invaluable should we deny the Cardinals scarlet
Robe: Who mocked Christ more then the Jews, who clothed him in it with a hail
King, while the exorbitancy of their power takes away his, plants Thorns in
Christianity, and buffets him in his members; who by uncharitable censures have
not only separated Protestants from their communion, but Russian, African,
Asiatick, Grecian Churches, where some praise God in the flames, while these
lasciviating in the sunshine of Gods mercies, have kicked against Divinity, and
retiring into the shade, bellowing like mad beasts, have preferred forms and
shadows before the light and glory of Religion: yet if we will believe what
their Bulls roar, ten times their number is damned for not being Catholics for
sooth, since every Christian under pain of damnation must be subject to the
Roman Bishop. Who taught us, Our Father which art in heaven, forbids us an
enclosure, and he who intends a Monopoly, will leave out Christ with his
brother. The name of Catholic in the Creed placed in opposition to the Jewish
enclosure of mercy, it will be strange if universal should now turn
particular, and by not retaining the fancy of a particular Church, a man could
not be of the universal; and yet every Church has a particular fancy: and it
is probable, all generally fancy by an audi Ecclesiam, and in the Commission,
dic Ecclesiae, what Christ never intended.

If thy brother trespass against thee, tell the Church, viz. a company of
Christians; and if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as an
heathen or a publican; cite him before the Gentiles tribunal, as thou would
an heathen or a publican. It is true, there is but one true Faith, one true
Church, but both Faith and Church is the Cathol^ck Christian, not the
particular Roman; and this Catholic Christian Church, he who will not both
hear and obey, the particular Church where he lives, so far as it dissents not
with the universal in my opinion, is worse then pagan or publican.

Sect. 70.
The Catholic Church is Gods house; Omnis Ecclesia virgo Appellata est. S.
Aug. tr. 13. in S. John.
all National Churches are in this universal house as so many daughters, to
whom* as Christ's Vicegerents, the care of the household is committed by God the
Father, and the Catholic Church the mother of all Christians. If sisters
disagree in a family, will the Father and the Mother, God and the Church, eject
one child, because that an other is petulant and waspish: or has Christ given
power to Rome, because she is an elder sister, that she, or her steward the
Bishop should cast out of the family which she pleases of the children of the
family, for telling stories of an elder sisters, or stewards enormities.

Romana Ecclesia particularis, Bell. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 9.
according to Bellarmine; and without there be two Roman Churches, there cannot
be both a particular Roman Church, and a Catholic. No sense will admit the
Roman Catholic* she is not universal, so not Catholic in extent; not entire
in Doctrine, in things belonging to the foundation, so not Catholic in
belief, nor the prime Mother Church: Jerusalem was that, so not Catholic as
fountain, head or root of the Catholic.

Sect. 71.
Catholica autem quae diffusaper universum orbem. S. Cyril. Hieros. catech c.
18.
That Catholic Church which all Nations shall flow unto, Kings and Queens
shall be nursing Fathers and Mothers, shall suck the milk of Gentiles; this is
the way which the fool cannot err, when the wisest may mistake; there is
universality, antiquity, succession, and unity here are unquestionable, while
all agree, if not in manner, yet matter of belief, have the same limbs of
Christian warfare that Constantines (...). This is the Arc of the Covenant,
Cant, 6. Mar. 3. Ephesians. 5. Cor. 12. 1 Timothy 3.
holy City, fructiferous Vine, direct way, sole Dove, excelse mountain,
celestial Kingdom, John 4. S. Aug. de unit Ecc. St. Cyp. de unit Eccl. S.
Ambros.
spouse and body of Chirst, the house of God, gate of Heaven, a pillar and
firmament of verity, a light in a Candlestick, a Tabernacle in the Sun, a ship
secure in storms, a rock, which though the winds of schism arise, and waves of
heresy beat, cannot be moved: here the sayings of Fathers,, writhed by Papists
to rivet Saint Peter's tattering chair are all verified: S. Aug.
that which was the Church of all ages is apostated, perished this they say who
are not in her, see lest thou may not be, she will be though thou art not: in
vain he says* he has God for his Father, St. Aug.
who will not acknowledge the holy Catholic Church for his Mother since in the
expans'd arms of her charity, she entertains the whole body of Christi^nity.

Be wise my soul, lay thee a foundation here: so though storms arise, and waves
beat, thou shall not be moved; the quicksand^ of heresy shall no more swallow
thee up, the waves of schism warp ^hee to irre^l^gion, or byasse thee toward
Atheism.

Sect. 72.
There can be no cause, to make a schism or separation from the whole Church,
for the whole Church cannot universally err in faith, for if it could, it
would cease to be holy: neither can all the members of the militant Church
err, either in the whole, or an Article of faith; if they could, there could
be no union betwixt the head and members, and so no body, no Church: The Church
of the Elect, is in the Church of them that are called, and the invisible
Church in the visible; or else the invisible Church is tied to no duty of
Christianity; for all such duties are required of the Church, and performed as
it is visible: and consequently, if the whole Church of the Elect cannot err in
fundamentalls, the whole visible Church cannot err in which the Elect is. St.
Aug. Ep. 48.
It Is manifest out of Saint Austin, ipsa est Ecclesia quae intra sagenam
dominicam cum malis piscibus natat, A malis piscibus cord semper and moribus
separantur and corporalem separationem in li^tore maris in fine saeculi
expectant. S. Aug.
grana sunt inter illam paleam quand^ area cum videretur tota palea putabatur.
There are bad fish in the net of the Lord, from which there must be ever a
separation in heart and manners* but a corporal separation must be expected at
the seashore, in the end of the world. And as the spirit of a man does not
quicken any member of the body, but as it is united to it; so neither does the
Spirit of God any member of the Church, but being united in the bond of peace.

Sect. 73.
I have weakened the lights of my body to introduce knowledge by by these
windows of my soul; lost my self to find others, to magnify my age. I will
not boast I have outlived Emperors, Popes: Having lived above five times over
the time which dispatched five Emperors, and five Emperors, and five Popes,
viz. Galba. Otho, Vitellius, Aescus, Pertinax: Anno Do. 1275. 1276. Gregory 10.
Innocent 5. Hadrian 5. John 20. vel 21. Nicholas 3.
If he lives only long who lives well, I am the shortest liver. I have served
twice Jacobs time to a more deceitful Master then Laban, an impious world:
young in years, old in folly, a Labyrinth, riddle, bubble, nothing. The reward
of Jacobs servitude was blessed, mine cursed: could produce only spotted
actions, checkered with the guilt of my own black imaginations, who have been
carried about with the air of my own fancy, that I might not be transported
with the wind of every phanaticks error; discomposed my fortune to settle my
mind. Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed Magis am^ca veritas. If truth be not
more my friend then any one my memory can challenge a familiar acquaintance
with, I may modestly presume my self destitute of any: while I have moved upon
quicksilver, and whe^l'd upon the incertainties of giddy chance, a Polypire,
Ephorine, and Philaetic become all with all, not that I might gain others with
the Apostle, or gain of others wi^h the world, but gain my self: And though
this itch of my curiosity may produce bad blood, by exasperating malignant
humors; yet I shall skin my own sores over by so good a conversation, and by
no rash exposures of aliene sores to the air, I shall endanger the wranckling
of any into malcontent. I shall not relinquish my part in our elder Brothers
legacy, the love that Christ bequeathed us, for the greatest of Mundan
inheritances: for if my barns were full, my soul could not take her ease,
should I disease my brother. I might fear with a Thou fool, hac nocte, in the
night of error, illuminated by no beam of Gods grace and mercy, from a darker
action, to be cast into a darker dungeon, for having no mercy on him for whom
the light in darkness rose. I would snatch a Brother out of the fire with fear
and trembling, and not commit to flames with rigor and malice. The Spanish
devotion shall prescribe no rule to mine, who hanged up thirteen Indians to the
honor of Christ and his twelve Apostles.

Sect. 74.
I am not of the Tyrants mind, oderint dum metuant: as I would incur no man's
hate, so I would lend an occasion to no man's fear, since invention witty in
cruelty should not wrack a confession, that may prejudice another. I would not
endanger a Priests life to save mine own. Bellum cum vitiis, Pax cum hominibus
is my motto. I hate no Sect, but pray for all, that like Sampsons Foxes divided
by the heads, they may not be tied together by the tails in the country they
reside, to raise a combustion; or Snake-like, return a sting for entertainment:
and can wonder, that the twilight of nature, and noctiluce of reason in
Heathens, should outshine the Sunbeams of the Gospel in Christians: while
History presents us with an Aristodes, a Phocion, and Themistcoles, who though
their bodies suffered by an Ostracism, would not exile out of their minds that
piety, which was due even to an ungrateful Country. One asked, What he would
wish to his country for their ingratitude, answered, Never to want an
Aristides. The second commanded his sons to forget their Fathers injuries; and
the third dyed rather then he would revenge his own: Ly^urgus.
and could wish the Athenian Legislator, might even prescribe a Law to
Christians, who for blindness returned light, who instead of retaliating the
loss of an eye, administered light to the Author, by opening the eyes of his
understanding.

Sect. 75.
I would convince by reason, make no conviction by Law, make a confiscation of
error, not goods, though I seek not their goods, but the good of their souls.
Persecution is a seeds-time of error, as well as of truth. The Norfolk Arian
could laugh at the stake; and though none can dye well who live not so; no one
can live so ill as cannot dye desperately. The old Roman humor of braving
death, sleeps not with Paganism: Rome has still her Scaevola's, dare court
the flames, and have a hand in every combustion: no part of the earth can make
a breach, for which they can want a Curtius, who to make it up, will not
ingulph himself in misery. Some with Augustus can die in a complement, more
with Tiberius in dissimilation: No Priest, but Galba-like, will offer his neck
with a feri si ere sit populi Romani; while with Vespasian they can smile with
an ut puto Deus fio. A Garnet may be Sainted even for a powder plot. And some
resembling Otho's friends, will die for society, while they, like him, murder
themselves, under pretense of being public victims.

Sect. 76.
I would bring tears to quench, rather then fuel to the flames; not cause
others to be disembowelled, but could even disbowell my self by an inviscerate
dilection. Show excrementatam liquidiora tam crassiora non solum pectoris sed
religionis anatomiam. To reclaim these Traitors to reason, who believe heaven
can side with factions, and omniscience cannot discover these disguises of
charity. He who commands us. to let our light so shine before men, that they
may glorify our heavenly Father, commands us not to light men for his glory.
And though he, whom we must pattern, was a light in darkness, in usum nocturni
luminis: Nero like, non proponit cremandos Christianos: These fires may show
hell flames, but to show a way by their light to heaven they cannot, to
mortify the flesh thus, is not the way to quicken the spirit. We must rather
inform Eliah like, in fiery chariots of zeal, to mount up to heaven. Lend them
examples to live well, not precepts to contend. Christ would not own those
spirits who would have fire come down from heaven to destroy adversaries: He
sent down fire from heaven to save, not destroy his enemies; in cloven tongues
to divide truth, not divide by falsehood; who are divided in their ways, show
whose footsteps they follow, the Devil, whose feet are cloven. He whose fiery
zeal for the least dissension calls his brother to do penance in ashes, it must
needs be so far from the spirit of God, as it is manifest his alliance is with
the old Serpent, whose food is in the dust. The holy Father told the
revenge-meditating Catholics, against their blood-thirsty enemies, the Arians,
in the reign of the good Theodosius, that Christians are not to recompense
evil for evil, but bless them that curse, pray for them that despitefully
use; yet if they cannot arrive to this perfection, yet must at least leave
revenge to God, who in his time will repay it. God fan is in his hand, I will
not snatch it out: where God has an Harvest, Belial will have a seeds-time:
the wicked one will sow tares by night: men benighted in black, and wicked
ways are disposed to imbibe the seeds of error: God grant the light of Heaven
may so shine in us, that men may be converted from the darkness of their
ways, and we may pluck up error, not them; we must not question his will, who
permits them to grow till harvest: he that knows his own, it shall be my only
endeavo^r he may own me for his: and not for raising flames of contention here,
be cast into unquenchable fire hereafter. I will not renounce Christ because a
Judas bears him company: nor any Christian communion, because a Judas may have
his hand in the dish: but rather strive I my self prove no Traitor, draw near
with my lips, my heart remote from him and cry hail Master, when I think to
recrucifie him in his members: Alas poor souls, though a Judas may veil
impiety with kisses, the irrepentant wretch will dissipate and discover his
black soul naked. I will note them that make contentions and avoid the
contentions, not the men till three or four times admonition: if Physicians
were to fly from the sick, we should gain little skill, and have a poor
profession.

Sect. 77.
I can converse with a Jew with no passion beside a sorrow; lend tears to
mollify him, and not fire to obdurate; and should he encounter my ear with a
buffet, and bid me turn the other to express Christianity, I should not with
that Christian, with a do as you would be done by, requite: but by my Saviors
example* for my sake buffeted, pray for him who knew not what he did: it is a
strange humor in some Christians, to pray for the conversion of those Jews
they will not admit into their society to effect it by a peaceable
cohabitation. We might teach them by their Chaldean Paraphrast their Messiah;
and by R. Jonathan, or R. Shimeony Son of Ishas, or R. Moses the Son of Nicar;
or R. Haccodesh, show how R. Shahadiahs 1200. years, R. Solomon and R. Jehudas
1390. R. Elias 4230. years are expired, and no Messiah come. Judas the Son of
Marbaeus; Theudas Arthronges, Barchosba, the Senior and Junior imposing even
upon their Rabbis: the Bethlem which they confess to be the place of their
Messiahs birth, having now no being, their groundless phancies may vanish like
it, while we show him who had a being with it: who died for his people; whose
hands and feet they pierced; and for whose Vesture they cast lots; who was
humble and sat on an Ass; after 62. weeks slain; showing the cause of their
miseries, because they sold the innocent for silver, and the poor for shoes.

The same day Christ was taken, their City taken, entered at the Brook Cedron,
on the same feast day, same time of the year, thirty Jews sold for the price
they sold him. We might show their Rabbines their letter, and learn their grave
Fathers Christ's Cross row, we could lend them light out of darkness, while
even a Pagan could confess aut Deus Naturae patitur aut machina mundi
dissolvitur, Dionysius Areop.
we could inform them by the rending of their Temple, not to divide from the
Church; which opened wide to instruct them of him, who was ordained to enter
into the holiest of holies, even Christ Jesus the High Priest, though they
trifle about Nazarite and Nazareth, we could dilucidate who was Natsar, the
branch of the root of Jesse: but oh in vain we may tell them of him who is
love, when we want it toward one another: how can they believe us to be heirs,
when we have lost his Legacy. Defective not only in dilection he bequeathed
his, but even that love he commanded to enemies: (...) or ill savor in Jews so
often inculcated, as if lies could sweeten them; and make not Christianity
stink in their nostrills worse then they in ours: for crucifying Christ.

May all Christian Churches sweep their own doors from pride and malice, and
uncharitableness which are engendered by trifling questions, and unnecessary
disputes, the dirt and trash which clings to them; and keeps them from
entrance, who are without. Lo the Jews who look for a sign, and Gentiles who
inquire after wisdom, may find both: and all Christians by reforming
themselves, S. Chrysostom. Mat. 13.
may act no less then miracles for the conversion of others.

Si ex avaritiae in liberalitatem transieris, s^ccam and mancam manum
recuperasti: si theatralibus ludis spretis relictisque caetos Ecclesiasticos
petieris claudicanti pedi incolumitatem: si oculos tuos ab aliena forma, and
meretricum aspectu revocaveris caecum te illuminasti: si diabolicos cantus
despexeris, and eorum loco spirituales Psalmos dediceris tum loqueris qui antea
mutus esses haec maxima miracula signa eximia: such signs and miracles as
these might call home the Jews: and bring in the plenitude of the Gentiles: so
may their souls desire to enter into our secrets, and their glory be joined to
our assemblies; while all Churches having their Lamps trimmed with the oil of
good works, by the light of faith may lead to the Bridegroom, who bids the
Bride come; and if she has not the soundness of interior charity, all the
gummes and spices of alms and prayers do not sweeten her breath to her divine
Lover: Odours after which the Bridegroom runs and smells them when he
kisses her with the kisses of his mouth.

Sect. 78.
It was the saying of the Doctor of the Gentiles, If any man be contentious,
we have no such custom; nor the Churches of God. I could wish those who call
themselves the Churches of God, had no such custom as being contentious:
fighting about shadows, forms of Religion, while we lose the essence of it,
which is Charity: May every one abound in his own sense, and God of his mercy
give every one sense to abound to his glory: May blindness be the mother of
devotion in the Papists; and though pious frauds are used to induce zeal, may
they be zealous without fraud: May light occasion no darkness in the
Reformists, and peeping into the Ark, not strike them with the Leprosy of
evil works. May the Motto of both be non loquimur sed vivimus: contend in
nothing but who shall most glorify God: and our light may so shine before men,
that they who are without, may be brought to glorify our Father in Heaven, by
being brought into his Church, the Kingdom of Heaven here on Earth; May all
hunger and th^^st after righteousness: and even Enemies by administering thy
blessings one to the other, heap coals on each others head, till they melt into
mutual affection, and obsequiousness to thy Law.

May none without think worse of Christ because his Coat is divided, embrace
those truths all hold; and all hold nothing to differ one from another: may all
within seek rather grounds of aquiescence, then excuses of dissatisfaction:
truth in differences like Gold in oar, wheat with chafe; none may neglect Gold
because there is dross; or grain for the intermixture of off^ll: but all united
into the same body may become one with thee, who art the bread of life; and
refined from the dross of mundan corruption by the fire of this holy spirit
bear the Image of our King: May he who boasts of the Church remember, no
unclean thing can enter into the K^ngdom of Heaven: and he that b^eaketh the
least of the Commandments shall be the least in the K^ngdom of Heaven, of little
repute in his Church. May they who cry, who shall lay any thing to the change
of Gods Elect, live, so that no body may have any thing to lay to their charge:
and while they boast, they are above all law, by sin come not under the
premun^re of any: while they are Kings (as they pretend) whose hearts are in
Gods hands, may they not be slaves to their own lusts, and the Devils servants:
may the Co^monalty be no more an Oglio of knaves and fools, and tools to the
Politician; nor he the Devils quilted Anvile on which he frames all sin; but
both may be instruments of Gods glory; finally may the Gentry have an use for
estates above gilding their imperfections: and Papists abov an annual
Composition for their follies^ and not love to their purses make their
Antagonists irreconcilable with their persons: and may I have no emnity with
any thing but my self: who though I have not found what I may define friend, I
know not what I may truly call Enemy beside my self: by the rules of Christian
warfare, I am obliged to fight against the World, the flesh and the Devil: I
find a world in my self: and a Devil in my flesh; which if I could but
conquer, I could look down on those petty acquisitions of the nicknam'd
worthies which were kneaded up with dirt and blood, as something below my self.
Legion is not only renewed in me, but Legions of Devils, as if they had not a
lesser world to conquer and colonize, are entered into me: I find a Lapland,
Finland, Gothland, and the storms they raise there in my passions: the various
shapes in which they familiarise with their votaries, do but resemble the
disguises of my curiosities, vy'd with which the Mythologies of Paganism, in an
Achelous, Proteus; Polypus, Cameleon may seem sober verities.

Nor could I be less then a world in whom all the Monsters of Africa have
convened, and all the African tincture in my blacker impieties. I have had the
blindness of America to sacrifice to the Devil ne noceat, by complying with
aberrances: having with Asia lost a real Paradise by Euthymy: could challenge
affinity with Mahometism, and dream of a Paradise in carnal concupiscencies.
Nor has any part of Europe been defective to the complement of this Microcosm:
Papist, Reformist, Subreformist, Familist, Atomist; all the phancies which
crumble into factions, and mince into divisions, while old time is forced to
chew the cud, and raise up the stubble and chafe of whimzies, swallowed
fourteen ages past have concentred in me: and met in this Mass of antipathies
I carry about me.

Lord teach me to know my self, so I shall not desire to exchange wisdom with a
Solomon: lend me the auxiliaries of thy holy spirit, to subdue my self; and I
shall be more a Conqueror then Alexander: by hating my self, instruct me how I
shall love thee, and by loving thee, I shall be sure not to hate my brother.

FINIS.

