THE CHURCH HISTORY Cleared from the Roman Forgeries And Corruptions found in
the COUNCILS and BARONIUS: In Four Parts.

FROM The Beginning of Christianity, to the End of the Fifth General Council,
553.

By THOMAS COMBER, D. D. Dean of DURHAM.

For we have not followed cunningly devised Fables,

2 Pet. I. 16. LONDON.

Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Robert Clavell at the Peacock at the West End
of S. Paul's, 1695.

Imprimatur,

Martii 2. 1688/9. T. Alston R. P. D. HEN. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in GOD, THOMAS, (By Divine Providence) Lord
Archbishop of YORK, PRIMATE OF ENGLAND, AND METROPOLITAN.
May it please your Grace,
THere is nothing more Pleasant in it self, nor more Useful to those of the
Sacred Function, than the Study of Ecclesiastical Antiquity: But yet many of
that Order have not the Advantage or the Opportunity to acquire this Knowledge
from the Original Authors, and therefore are forced to seek it in the Roman
Editions of the Councils, and the Modern Historians of that Church: Where every
thing is misrepresented and placed in so False a Light, that its hard to find
out what is Truth. Some of the genuine Remains of Antiquity they have
concealed, but they have falsified and altered more, and added so much to the
Primitive Records, especially in the first Four Centuries, that near Three
Parts of Four (both in Baronius and the Councils) are modern Forgeries,
manifest Legends, and impertinent Excursions into Sophistical Vindications, of
the later Doctrins and Practices of Rome. It would therefore be a Work worthy
of this excellent Church in so Learned an Age, to make an acurate Collection of
that, and only that which is true and certain in the Primitive History and
Councils. It Is true, diverse Eminent Men have made some steps toward it; but it
is too great an Undertaking for any One Man to accomplish, as appears by that
generous Project of Dr. Thomas James, Proposed to the Most Learned Primate of
Ireland, to employ a Select Company of both Universities, with due Assistances
and Encouragement for the perfecting this Design: Wherefore in the mean time,
it may be serviceable to gather together some Materials for so Noble a purpose,
and that first encouraged me to make these Observations as I was Reading the
Annals of Baronius with the Councils: Which I have (by the Advice of some of my
Friends) Methodically digested in this little Tract; and I hope it may be
useful, not only to direct such as apply themselves to this kind of Study, but
also to confirm others of Our own Communion in their firm Adherence to their
Excellent Religion, when they see so many plain Evidences, That all the Roman
Churches Pretenses to Antiquity (both in Doctrine and Worship) are founded on,
and maintained by little else, but those Forgeries and Corruptions, by which
they Imposed upon the Ignorant and Easy World for Six or Seven Centuries
together. These Pious Frauds (as They counted them) did indeed then advance
their Interest, and establish their Errors; but now when they are detected by
this Discerning Generation, they prove their utter Shame; and did not Secular
Advantages and Implicit Faith, or Fear and Inquisitions hinder those under
their Yoke from being acquainted, or however from owning these unfaithful
Actings of their Spiritual Guides; These Discoveries would not only secure Our
People, but make many Converts from Them.

But (My Lord) whatever the Work or the Success be, I am obliged to lay it at
Your Graces Feet, as the first thing I have made Public since Your Graces happy
Advancement to the Government of this Church, whereof I am a Member, and
wherein by Your Graces Influence I shall study to serve the
Primitive-Protestant-Church of England. Which I beseech Almighty GOD to defend
from all its Enemies, and long to preserve Your Grace, to be a Support and an
Honor to it. So Prays,

MY LORD, Your Graces most Dutiful Son and Servant, THO: COMBER.
York, Aug. 20. 1689.
THE Introduction.
WHen Campian long ago undertook to defend the Roman Cause, he boasted, that He
was strengthened with the firm and powerful Guard of all the Councils, and that
all the General Councils were on his side Campian. december rat. page 24, and 30.
. Which vain Brag the Writers from the Roman Church do frequently repeat to
this very day. But he that with Judgment and Diligence shall peruse their own
allowed Editions of the Councils, will easily discover the falsehood of this
Assertion: For there is such adding and expunging, such altering and disguising
things in the Body of the Councils, and such excusing, falsifying, and
shuffling in the Notes, that a Judicious Reader will soon perceive these
Venerable Records, truly set down and explained, do not favor them. But these
Corruptions are carried on with such Confidence and Cunning, that an
unexeperienced and unwary Student, may be imposed on by this specious show of
Venerable Antiquity: For their sakes therefore, it is necessary to take a short
view of that Fraud and Policy, which is so commonly made use of in those
Editions of the Councils which pass through the Roman Mint, especially in those
which are in most use among us, viz. The Edition of Severinus Binius Edit.
Binii Council. omn. Colon. 1618.
, and that of Labbe and Cossartius Edit. Lab. and Cossart. Paris, An. 1671.
, wherein Binius his Notes are printed verbatim. Which useful design was begun
by a Learned and Ingenious Gentleman, in a Tract entitled Roman Forgeries,
printed at London, An. 1673: But that Author does not follow the exact order of
Time, nor does he go much beyond the Nicene Council, and even in that Period he
left out many plain Instances; And whereas he died, before he had proceeded any
further; I resolved to begin where he left off: But for Methods sake, and to
make thid Discourse more entire, I have begun with the first Century, and so
proceeded according to the order of the several Councils (only writing more
briefly upon the Three first Centuries, which were largely treated of in that
Author before) deducing the account of these Impostures down to the end of the
Fourth Century, and showing (as I go along) what Artifices have been used by
the Editors and Annotator to dress up these Ancient Evidences, so as to make
them look favorably upon their great Diana, the Supremacy and other
Corruptions of the Roman Church. To this end they have published many spurious
Councils, many counterfeit Canons and forged Decretals; and for such as are
genuine, they have frequently altered the Text, both by Additions and
Diminutions, and have so disguised the Sense by partial and fallacious Notes,
that it will be evident (by the Remarks here made upon them) their business in
the publishing these Volumes, was not to promote the Truth, but to serve a
Party. Nor can any thing else be expected from Binius his Notes, which (as he
owns in his Preface) He took out of Baronius, Bellarmin and Possevin: The
design of which three Men (says Richerius an ingenuous Sorbon Doctor) is
evident to all Men to have been no other, but to prove the Pope was appointed
by Christ to be the absolute Monarch, and Infallible Judge of his Church
Richer. Praef. ad hist. Council. page 4.
. And since the Notes chiefly follow Baronius, we have, as we go along, in
every Period noted several of the designed Falsehoods, and of the
Contradictions, Errors and Mistakes in his Annals. Which History is so full of
Forgeries, false Quotations, and feigned Tales to set up the Credit of the
Roman Church, and its corrupt Opinions and Practices, that to discover them all
would require almost as many Volumes as his Annals make: So that we must
content our selves with some of the plainest Instances which fall into this
Matter of the Councils, and will set them in a clear Light, and show they are
as contrary to Reason, as they are to true History. Which Undertaking we hope
will be many ways useful: First, It will tend to the ease of those who intend
to read over the Tomes of the Councils, or the Annals of Baronius, and save
them much time and pains by presenting the principal Errors of those great
Volumes at one View, which they would spend a long time in searching after, if
they were to gather them up as they lie dispersed. Secondly, It may be very
useful to those who desire to be rightly informed in the Controversies between
us and the Roman Church, because it will give them a clear prospect of what
Councils and other Antiquities are Authentic, and may be allowed for Evidence
in this Dispute; wherein our Adversaries have so little regard to their own
Honor, that generally one half of their Evidence is such as they have either
forged or corrupted. Thirdly, It will be necessary (by way of Antidote) to
prepare those, who by reading Books so full of Infection, may by these
plausible Falsifications be in danger to be seduced into a great esteem of the
Opinions and Practices of the Roman Church; when they find so many seemingly
ancient Tracts and Councils brought in to justify her in all things, and see
(by this false Light) all Ecclesiastical History and Records so modelled, as to
persuade their Readers, That in the purest Christian Times, all things were
believed and done in the Catholic Church just as they are now at Rome. But when
it shall appear, that all this is a continued Series and train of Impostures,
it will render their Notions and Practices, not only suspected, but odious, as
needing such vile and base Artifices, to make them seem agreeable to true
Antiquity.

To this it may be Objected, That diverse of the Modern Writers of this Church,
and especially the most Learned, do now own diverse of these Forgeries which we
here detect to have been spurious, and therefore it seems needless to prove
that which they have already granted us. I reply, That none of them own all
these Corruptions, and diverse of their Authors cite them very confidently to
this very day, and still the things themselves stand in their most approved
Editions of Councils, and the Remarks are only in Marginal Notes. But since
they were believed in those Ages, while their Supremacy and other Novel
Doctrins were setting up, and were urged for good Proofs, till these Opinions
had taken root; it is not satisfaction enough to renounce that Evidence, of
which they now have no more need, unless they disclaim the Doctrins also to
which they first gave Credit: And till they do this, it is fit the World should
know by what False Evidence they first gained these Points. For, if a Man
should get an Estate by Bribing his Jury and his Witnesses, it is not enough
for him to confess these Persons were Suborned, unless he restore the Ill
gotten Lands; and till he restore them, he ought to be upbraided with his
Bribery, even after he has acknowledged it. Secondly, It may be alleged, That
Junius, River and Daille abroad; Perkins, Cook and James at home; have taken
great pains on this Subject, and that the Learned Author of the Historieal
Examination of the Authority of General Councils, printed at London, 1688. has
already handled this Argument. I Answer, That the Six former are chiefly
concerned in the Tracts of particular Fathers, and make few Remarks on the
Councils: The last indeed keeps close to the Great Councils, but passes over
the Small ones; and any who compares this Discourse with that, will find the
Design, the Method and Instances so different, that this Discourse will still
be useful in its kind, as that will be also: For here, in an acurate Order, all
the Frauds of that Church are put together throughout every Century, not only
what have been observed by others, but many now first taken notice of, and not
observed before. And indeed, the Instances of these Frauds are so many, that we
have been forced to give but brief Touches upon diverse of the Particulars, and
could neither enlarge upon single Instances, nor adorn the Style; our business
being chiefly to direct the younger Students in Ecclesiastical Antiquity; and
if our Remakrs be but so clear as to be understood by, and useful to them, we
have our Aim. And it is hoped this may suffice to prove, That the genuine
Records of Councils do condemn the Modern Doctrine, Worship and Discipline of
the Roman Church, and that whatever in these Editions of them seems to
countenance those things, are Forgeries and Corruptions devised on purpose to
set a false gloss upon their Modern Inventions. The Methodical Discovery
whereof may convince any unprejudiced Man, That Ours is the truly Ancient and
Catholic Religion, and Theirs a Device of later times, which cannot be rendered
any way agreeable to the Primitive Writings, without innumerable Impostures and
Falsifications.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Roman Forgeries, IN THE VOLUMES OF THE COUNCILS, For
the First Three Centuries.
PART I.
CHAPTER I.
Of the Forgeries in the First Century.

. 1. THE Volumes of the COUNCILS in the Edition of Labbe and Cossartius, begin
with diverse Tracts; and in Binius's Edition with several Epistles, designed to
prepossess the Reader with false Notions of the Popes supreme Power over
Councils, and his Parties high Reverence for them, as also of the Protestants
having corrupted or else rejected the greatest part of them: But this whole
Discourse will sufficiently show the notorious untruth, both of their boasting
concerning Their own side, and of their Censures concerning Ours. In the
Account of Scripture Councils, where they pretend to recite the words of
Scripture, they add, for to give color to their new Supremacy, That Peter
stood up, as the Principal and Head Lab. Tom. III. page 18. and Bin. Tom. I.
par. 1. page 1.
; And again, as the Supreme and Head Ibid. page 20. Bin. page 2.
. S. Luke in the Acts, Chap. VI. 2. says, The Twelve Apostles gave the
multitude leave to elect Seven Deacons. Binius's Notes say, They had this leave
by the favor and grant of Peter Bin. page 1. col. 2. F.
. S. Luke, Chap. XV. declares, That the Question about Circumcision was finally
determined by S. James, who also cited Scripture for his determination, ver.
16, 17. But Binius's Notes say, This matter was determined, not by Scripture,
but by the Suffrage of the Apostles, and by the Judgment of Peter Lab. page 20.
Bin. page 2. col. 1.
. The same Notes a little after tell us, That this Council committed the care
of the Circumcised Converts to Peter Lab. page 21. Bin. page 2. col. 2.
; which was a poor Preferment for that Apostle, if Christ had made him Supreme
Head, and committed to him long before the Care of the whole Catholic Church.
To these Passages of Holy Scripture the Editors have tacked a sabulous Story of
the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lab. page 24. Bin. page 3. col. 2.
; but they do not Cite one genuine Ancient Author, to prove it: That Book which
bears the Title of Dionysius Areopagitus being invented many Ages after, as
Learned men on all sides now agree.

. 2. That Ancient Collection of Canons, which were decreed by the Apostolical
Men in diverse Synods held during the Times of Persecution, is published by
these Editors under the Title of The Canons of the Holy Apostles; and their
Notes affirm, They were made by the Authority of the Apostles Lab. page 53.
Bin. pug. 14. col. 1.
; yet they are not agreed either about their Number or Authority. They print
LXXXIV Canons; but the Notes say, only the first Fifty of them are Authentic,
but the rest may and ought also to be received, since they contain nothing (Two
of them excepted, viz. the 65th and 84th Canons, which contradict the Roman
Church) but what is approved by some Popes, Councils and Fathers ibid. Lab. and
Bin.
. Now, if (as they say) the Apostles made them, their Church has been very
negligent to lose the certain Account of their number, and it is not very
modest to pretend to try the Apostles Decrees by Popes Councils and Fathers;
yet it is plain they make no distinction between the first Fifty and the
following Thirty four, rejecting all that oppose their present Doctrine and
Practice, as may be seen in these Instances.

The Sixth Canon forbids a Bishop, Priest or Deacon ((...)) to put away, or be
divorced from his Wife on pretense of Religion: The Notes pervert the Sense of
this Canon, as if it only forbid Clergy Men to cast off the care of providing
for their Wives; and prove this Sense Lab. page 53. Bin. page 14. col 2.
by a false Title, which Dionysius Exiguus put to this Canon in his Version
many Centuries after, and by an Epistle of Pope Clement the First, which all
Men own now to be spurious, and by an Epistle of Pope Gregory, who lived in the
Year 600; as if the Sense of Dionysius and Pope Gregory, when Single life was
superstitiously pressed upon the Clergy, were good proof, that Clergy Men did
not live with their Wives many Ages before that superstitious Opinion was heard
of. It Is certain the Greek Clergy are Married and cohabit with their Wives,
according to this Apostolical Canon, and the Fifteenth Canon of the Sixth
General Council: And it is not unpleasant to observe, That these Notes cite the
Second Council of Nice, to prove there were no Canons made in the Sixth General
Council; yet that very Nicene Council often Quotes, and highly approves the 82d
Canon of the Sixth General Council, as giving some Countenance to their
Image Worship. So that their wresting this Canon Apostolical from its genuine
meaning Vid. Beveridg. Not. Council. Tom. II. page 18.
upon such slight and false Evidence, is in effect rejecting it.

The Ninth Canon orders All the Clergy and Laity who are in the Church, to
Receive the Sacrament, unless they have a just Excuse Lab. page 55. Bin. page
15. col. 1.
: But the Roman Church allows the People generally to stand by and look on; and
therefore though this be one of the Authentic Canons before said by them to be
made by the Apostles, after some shuffling to restrain it (contrary to the very
words of the Canon) only to the Clergy: The Notes say, This whole Decree was
made only by Human, not by Divine Authority, and is now abrogated by a contrary
Custom. So that if a Canon of the Apostles themselves contradict a Corrupt
practice of their Church, it must be abrogated and rejected.

The 17th Canon says, He that keeps a Concubine shall not be in any Order of
the Clergy. The Notes cite some of their Doctors, who affirm, That this Crime
does not make a Clerk irregular Lab. page 56. Bin. page 15. col. 2.
; and, that this Canon is now revoked. The Annotator himself is of Opinion, It
is only public keeping a Concubine, by reason of the Infamy which makes a
Clergy-mans Orders void: Wherefore such Sinners have now more favorable
Casuists at Rome, than the Apostles or Apostolical Men were.

The 65th Canon, though it have as good Evidence for it as any of the rest, is
rejected by the Notes Lab. page 60. Bin. page 17. col. 2.
; because it forbids Men to fast on Saturday, which is now a Fasting-day at
Rome. The Notes say, No Father mentions this Canon; but presently own, That
Ignatius, Clemens Romanus, the Canons of the Sixth General Council, Gregory
Nyssen, and Anastasius Nicaenus, (to which we add Tertullian Tertul. de jejun.
adv. Psycl. cap. 14 and 15.
,) do all speak of Saturday, as a Day on which Fasting was forbid. The Notes
confess also, That the Eastern-Church, and the Church of Milan in S. Ambrose
time, allowed not Fasting upon Saturday Aug. ad Januar. ep. 118. cap. 2. and ad
Casulan. Ep. 86.
; yet after all, they will not grant this Canon to be genuine, only because it
is very unlikely that the Church of Rome should contradict a Canon of the
Apostles, whereas we have already seen, it makes no scruple to contradict them,
if they agree not with their practice. The Notes indeed say, but without any
proof, That Rome received the Saturday Fast from Peter and Paul; yet they grant
soon after, That after the Heresy of Marcion was extinct, the Roman Church did
not only lawfully, but piously Fast on Saturday. So that this was a private
Custom of the Roman Church, in which it differed from all other Churches, and
they know not when it began, nor who it came from; yet for such a Customs sake
they reject an Apostolical Canon.

The 69th Canon expressly enjoins the Wednesday Fast; and the Notes say, That
many Fathers mention it as of ancient Institution; yea, these Notes affirm, It
was certainly a Fast of the Apostles instituting, being observed by the whole
Church, and not appointed by any Council, but spoken of by Authors of greatest
Antiquity Lab. page 6. Bin. page 18. col. 1.
. Well then, I hope the Roman Church (whose Customs are all said to be
Apostolical) do keep this Wednesday Fast; They tell you, No: This Wednesday
Fast in their Church is changed into the Saturday Fast: And so farewell to this
Canon also.

Lastly the 84th Canon gives us a Canon of Scripture, which does not agree with
the Trent Canon, for it rejects Ecclesiasticus from being Canonical, and
mentions not Wisdom, Tobit, Judith, nor (in Old Copies Dr. Cosens Histor.
Canon. Chap. 4.
) the Book of Machabees, which the Roman Church now say are Canonical
Scripture: And this is the true reason why the Notes reject this Canon Lab.
page 61 Bin. page 18. col. 2.
: They allege indeed some other frivilous reasons, such as, the leaving out
the Revelations, and putting in Clements Constitutions: But it seems very
probable to me, that it was not the Greeks (as the Notes suggest) but that
Impostor (who gave these Canons a false Title and called them the Apostles
Canons) which for carrying on his Pious Fraud, left out the Revelations, being
not written at that time, when he would have us believe these Canons were made;
and He also put in the Constitutions, which are forged in the name of the
Apostles, who were to be set up as Authors also of these Canons: And if that
were so, this 84th Canon being cleared from those two Corruptions, is an
Ancient and very Authentic Record of the true and genuine Books of Holy
Scripture, but the Romanists reject it, as being a good evidence against their
New Trent Canon.

3. To these Canons are joined a pretended Council of the Apostles at Antioch,
first put into the Tomes of the Councils, by Binius, and continued by Labbe
Lab. page 62. Bin. page 18. col. 2.
; one Canon of which allows Christians to make an image of Christ: But this
notorius, and improbable Forgery was never heard of in any Author, till that
infamous second Nicene Council, which wanting proofs for Image Worship from
genuine Antiquity, impudently feigned such Authorities as this pretended
Council.

. 4. The Pontifical or Lives of the Popes (which begins here) bears the Title
of Pope Damasus; but the Notes say Damasus was not Author of it, being
evidently patched up out of two different Authors, containing contradictions
almost in every Popes Life. So that no account is to be made of a Writing so
different from it self Lab. page 63. Bin. page 19. col. 2.
: Now if this be (as it certainly is) a True Character of the Pontifical, Why
do these Editors print it? Why do the Notes so often cite it as good Hisstory?
Why do their Divines quote it as good Authority to prove their Modern
Corruptions to have been primitive Rites Harding against Jewel, page 53. Dr.
James corrup. of Faith, par. 1. p. 22.
? Since it is a manifest Legend, and contained at first nothing but the bare
Names and continuance of the several Popes; and was filled up by Isidore
Mercator, who forged the Decretal Epistles, with many improbable Fictions
unsuitable both to the Men and Times, for which they were invented, and
designed to be a ground for those Decretal Epistles; and to make the World
believe, that all the Popes were considerable for their Actions in all Ages, as
Dr. Peirson has excellently proved in his Learned Post humous Dissertation
Cestriens. dissert. posthum. lib. 2. cap. 1, 2. etc.
: Yet not only these Editors of the Councils print this corrupt Legend, but
their very Breviaries and Missals generally appoint the Lessons out of it, on
the Festivals of these Ancient Popes; publishing in the very Church in time of
Divine Service, these Fictions for the true ground of the Peoples Devotions on
those Days: I confess Binius out of Baronius has Notes upon every Pope' s
Life, and rejects commonly some part of it; but then it is such passages as no
way concern the opinion or practice of the present Roman Church: For the
passages which do agree thereto (though equally false) he generally defends,
yea cites them to prove their Modern Faith and Usages: But as we come to the
several Popes Lives, which these Editors make the grand direction in
Ecclesiastical Chronology, we shall observe the many and gross Errors contained
in it; We begin with the Life of S. Peter, whom if we do allow to have been at
Rome, as this Author reports, yet we cannot believe he ordained three Bishops
for his Successors there in his Lifetime, viz. Linus, Cletus and Clement: Nor
that he was Buried in three several places, in Apollo' s Temple, and besides
Nero' s Palace in the Vatican, and besides the Triumphal Territory, which this
fabulous Writer affirms: Nor will the Annotator admit that S. Peter could be
Crucified by Nero in the 38th year after Christ' s Passion, which was three
years almost after Nero's own Death.

. 5. The next place, (ever since P. Crabs Edition) is by the Roman Editors
allotted to a Treatise of the Popes Supremacy Lab. col. 65. Bin. page 20. col.
2.
, writ of late Times by some manifest Sycophant of the Roman Church, yet placed
here among the Venerable Antiquities of the Apostolic Age, to clap a false
Biass on the unwary Reader; and make him apt to believe (that which Richerius
said is the main design of Bellarmin, Baronius and Possevine in all their
Works, viz.) that the Pope was made by Christ the infallible and absolute
Monarch of the Church Richer. praesul. ad histor. Council.
; but the Tract it self makes out this high Claim, chiefly by the Decretal
Epistles, which are now confessed to be Forgeries; And by the Sayings of Popes,
who were not to be believed in their own case John. V. 31. nemo sibi and
professor, and tellis. Tert. in Mar^^n. lib. 5.
: To which are added some few Fragments of the Fathers falsely applied, and
certain false Arguments, which have been confuted a thousand times. So that the
placing this Treatise here, serves only to show the Editors partiality to
promote a bad Cause.

. 6. The Pontifical places Linus as S. Peter's Successor; but the Notes confess,
that the Fathers are not agreed about it Lab page 72. Bin. page 24. col. 1.
: They own that Tertullian, Epiphanius and Ruffinus make Clement to succeed
Peter; and the (...) Learned Bishop of Chester proves, Linus was dead before
Peter Cestriens. diss. 2. cap. 2.
. Irenaeus does not say (as the Notes falsely cite him,) that Linus succeeded
Peter in the Government of the universal Church Iren. adv. (...) l. 3. c. 3.
; but only that Peter and Paul delivered the Administration of that Church to
him, which they had founded at Rome; Which they might do in their Life time,
while they went to preach in other places: The Epistle of Ignatius to Mary
Cassibolite, and the Verses attributed to Tertullian, which they bring for
proof of this Succession, are confessed to be spurious Tracts: St. Hierom is
dubious, and upon the whole matter, there is no certainty who was Bishop of
Rome next to the Apostles, and therefore the Romanists build on an ill Bottom,
when they lay so great weight on their personal Succession.

. 7. The like Blunder there is about the next Pope: The fabulous Pontifical
makes Cletus succeed Linus, and gives us several Lives of Cletus and Anacletus,
making them of several Nations, and to have been Popes at different times,
putting Clement between them. Yet the aforesaid Learned Bishop of Chester,
proves these were only two names of the same Person Cestriens. diss. 2. cap. 1.
; But the Notes attempt to justify the forged Pontifical, by impudently
affirming Lab. page 74. Bin. page 25. col. 1.
that Ignatius, (Anacletus contemporary) Irenaeus, Eusebius, St. Augustine and
Optatus, were all mistaken, or all wronged by their Transcribers, who leave out
Cletus: But every Candid Reader will rather believe the Mistake to be in the
Pontifical (which is a mere heap of Errors) and in the Roman Martyrology and
Missal, which blindly follow it, rather than in those Eminent and Ancient
Fathers: And every one may see the Folly of the Romish Church, which Venerates
two several Saints, on two several Days, one of which never had a real Being;
for Cletus is but the abbreviation of Anacletus his Name.

. 8. After this we have the Life of Clement, wherein the Pontifical makes him
succeed Cletus, under those Consuls which were in Office the next year after S.
Peter's Martyrdom, though he had assigned 23 years to Linus and Cletus, his
pretended Predecessors Lab. page 75. Bin. page 25. col. 1.
; which years must all be expired in one years compass, if this Account be
true; and one would admire the stupidity of this Author, who though he had
placed S. Peter's Death so many years before Clement's Entrance, as to leave
room for two intermediate Popes; yet here again repeats his old Fable of S.
Peter's delivering the Bishopric of Rome to Clement; a sufficient proof there is
neither Truth nor Certainty in the pretended Personal Succession of the first
Popes.

. 9. From this Pope Clement down to the time of Syricius, who lived 300 years
after him, there are printed in these Editors, after every Popes Life, diverse
Decretal Epistles, pretended to be writ by the several Popes, and Vindicated by
Binius's Notes annexed to them: Which were received in the Western Church for
many Hundred years together as the genuine Decrees of these ancient and pious
Popes, transcribed into the Canon Law; and cited for many Ages to justify the
Usurpations, and defend the Corruptions of the Roman Church, to determine
Causes and decide Controversies in Religion: And yet they are all notorious
Forgeries; so that since Learning was revived, diverse of the most Eminent Roman
Writers have rejected them. Card. Cusanus affirms, That being compared with the
times in which they are pretended to have been Writ, they betray themselves
Cusan. de Concord. Cath. l. 3.
. Baronius calls them, Late invented Evidences of no Credit, and Apocryphal
Baron. An. 865.. 7. and An. 102. 6, 7
; yea, Labbe and Cossartius have in their Edition a Learned Preface to them,
proving them to be forged Labbe page 78.
: And in their Margin write almost against every Epistle, This is suspected;
This is Isidores Wares, etc. and also note the very places of Authors who lived
long after these Times, out of which large Passages in them are stolen
Verbatim. Which clear Confession of our Adversaries may make some think it
needless to confute them, and unnecessary to charge this Forgery upon the Roman
Church: But I cannot think it sit wholly to pass them by; because Turrian the
Jesuit had the Confidence to defend them all as genuine; and Binius in his
Edition, not only Vindicates them by a general Preface Bin. page 26. col. 1.
, but by particular Notes labors to prove most of them Authentic; and Labbe
himself prints those Notes at large in his Edition, so that such as do not look
into his Margen, may be deceived. Besides, this Confession of some Romanists
comes too late to compensate for the injury done to the Truth, by their
Churches approving them so long: And they still keep up the Supremacy, and all
their corrupt Practices and Opinions, which were set up and cherished by these
Forgeries; they now take away the Scaffolds, when the Building can stand alone;
they execute the Traitor, but enjoy freely the benefit of his Treason.
Moreover, while some Romanists condemn them, others go on to cite them for good
Authority: Harding brags, he had proved many Points of Faith by the Epistles of
Clement Damasus, Julius Melchiades, Pontianus, Sixtus, Soter, and Symmachus
Hard. against Jewel, page 22.
: Dr. Tho. James shows the particular corrupt Doctrines and Practices, which
the late Roman Writers defend by the spurious Epistles of Clement, Marcellus,
Marcus, and Hormisda Dr. James Cor. of Fath. Part I. page 4, 20, and 69.
: And the Learned Cook with infinite diligence, has cited the very Places of
the Modern Champions for the Roman Opinions, and showed what Doctrines and
Practices they do maintain by these Forged Epistles Rob. Coci Censura Patr. per
totum.
. It is also well known, that the Late Scriblers for that Religion do follow
Bellarmin and Others, in citing these Decretals for good Authority, and that
the Canon Law is in a great measure composed out of these Epistles; by which,
Causes are determined at this day in all Popish Countries: Therefore till the
Romanists raze them and the Notes in their defense, out of the Volumes of the
Councils, and expunge all the false Notions taken hence, out of their Canon
Law; yea, and leave citing them in their Disputes with us, we cannot think it
needless to show the apparent Forgery of them; but we will not enlarge so as to
disprove the Particulars, but put together here our Evidence against them all.

. 10. These Epistles, though pretended to be writ in the first four Centuries,
were never heard of in the World till near 800 years after Christ: About which
time came out a Collection of Councils under the name of Isidore Hispalensis;
but whereas he died An. 636, and this Collector mentions the XIth Council of
Toledo and the Sixth General Council, which were held near Fifty years after,
this appears not to be the Work of that Isidore, but of one Isidore Mercator,
and it was first brought into France by Riculphus B. of Mentz, in which
Collection these Decretal Epistles first appeared; but the Learned Hincmarus of
Rheims immediately discerned them to be an imposture, and Writ against them, as
Baronius confesses Baron. Annal. An. 865.. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
: But though he own the Cheat, he is not willing to grant the Roman Church had
any hand in it, yet that is as clear as the Forgery; because Hincmarus was
hated and prosecuted by the Pope, and forced at last to Recant his Censure of
these Epistles; and not long after Benedictus Levita having Transcribed diverse
Passages out of them into his Capitulars, got them confirmed at Rome, which
could not but cherish so advantageous a Fiction that supported the Supremacy,
which they then did so hotly stickle for; and therefore though they came first
to the Birth in Spain; some conjecture they were all Hatched at Rome, whose
evil Designs and Interest they are contrived to serve: But the Age was so
Ignorant when they were Invented, that there is such infamous and convincing
Marks of Forgery upon them, as makes it very easy to prove the Cheat beyond
any possibility of doubting; and we will here put the principal of them
together under their proper Heads.

. 11. First, The Style of these Decretals shows they were not writ within the
four first Centuries, wherein (at Rome especially) they writ Latin in a much
more Elegant Style than is to be found here, where the Phrases are modern,
harsh, and sometimes barbarous, so that the Reader is often puzzled to reconcile
them either to Grammar or Sense: As for Example, Pope Victor's Second Epistle
Lab. p. 595. Bin. page 79. col. 1.
, which of old began with Enim, and was mended by Binius with Semper enim; but
still there is false Latin in it, viz. aliquos nocere fratres velle Rob. Coci
Censurae page 33.
. The like barbarous Style may be observed in the two Epistles of Pontianus
Lab. p. 622. Bin. page 90, and 91.
, and in many others: But the genuine Epistles of Cornelius, preserved in
Eusebius and S. Cyprian Ep. 3 and 5. Cornel. Lab. page 683, etc. Bin page 111,
112, 113.
, are writ in a more polite Style; and as Labbe notes, These Epistles show how
much good Money differs from counterfeit, and how much Gold excels Counters: The
like difference there is between the Style of that genuine Epistle of Clement
to the Corinthians Edit. Lab. page 116.
, and those silly Forgeries put out in his Name in the very Front of these
Decretals Lab. p. 82, etc. Bin. page 27, etc.
; from whence it undeniably follows, That the Decretals were not writ in the
Ages wherein the Latin Tongue flourished, nor by those Popes whose Names they
bear. And this is further manifest by diverse Words, which were not used in the
time of these Popes, but are often put into these Epistles: Such is
Religiositas for Piety, and Universitas for the World, in the Decretals of
Dionysius Lab. p. 827. Bin. page 158.
; such is Miles for a Servant, and Senior for a Lord, in the Decrees of Pope
Pius Lab. p. 576. Bin. p. 71. col. 2.
, which are Words not heard of till the time of the French Empire, in that
sense: Such is the Phrase of making Oblation to redeem men's Sins, and the Name
of the Mass in Fabian's Decrees Lab. p. 650. Bin. page 101.
. Pope Gaius his Decretal Epistle mentions Pagans, but that Name was not used
for the Gentiles till Optatus Milevitanus his time, who first used it in that
Sense, says Baronius Lab. p. 925. Bin. page 172. col. 2.
. Moreover, innumerable places in these Epistles mention Primates and
Patriarchs, Archbishops and Metropolitans, etc. which Words were not used in
the Christian Church in the time of those Popes, who are pretended to have writ
about them; As for Example, The first Epistle of Clement Lab. page 91. Bin. page
30. col. 2.
, the second Epistle of Anacletus Lab. p. 526. Bin. page 47. col. 2.
, and many others; but no Christian Writer ever used the Word Patriarch for a
Christian Bishop till Socrates Scholasticus, who writ An. 442 Beveridg. Annot.
in Council. Nicen. Tom. II. p. 52.
. In like manner we find the Word Apocrisary in Anacletus's first Epistle Lab.
p. 511. Bin. page 42. col. 2.
, and also in the second Epistle of Zepherine Lab. p. 606. Bin. page 82. col. 2.
; yet Meursius in his Glossary cannot find any elder Authority for it than
Constantine's Donation (forged after that Emperor's time), and owns the Name
was not heard of before, Gloss. p. 43. The Name of Archdeacon also is in
Clements second Epistle Lab. page 98. Bin. page 34. col. 2.
, and in Pope Lucius's Decrees Lab. p. 727. Bin. page 131. col. 2.
; but the Office and Title did not come into the Church till many years after:
And finally, the Name of a Diocesan for a Christian Bishop, is put into
Calixtus second Epistle Lab. p 612. Bin. page 85. col. 1.
, but was not used in that Sense till long after his time. All which prove
these Epistles were writ in the later barbarous Ages, and not in the time of
those Popes, whose Names they bear.

. 12. The same may be proved Secondly, by the Matter of these Epistles, which
is no way suitable to those grave and Pious Popes, who lived in times when the
Church was pestered with Heresies, and oppressed with Persecutions; yet these
Epistles do not either confute those Heresies, nor comfort the Christians under
Persecutions; But speak great Words of the Roman Supremacy, and of Appeals, of
the exemption and privileges of Bishops and Clergy Men, of splendid Altars and
rich Vessels for Divine Administrations, and the like, which make it incredible
they could be writ in an Age of suffering: Instances of this we have in
Clements first Epistle Lab. p. 91. Bin. page 30.
; where he Orders Primates and Patriarchs, to be placed in such Cities as the
Heathens, of Old had Arch-Flamins in: Whereas the Heathensthen had Flamines and
Priests in all Cities: His third Epistle Lab. p. 103. Bin. page 36. col. 1.
is directed to all Princes greater and less, and Commands them to obey their
Bishops: Whereas all Princes in the World at that time were Gentiles: The like
absurdity appears in Calixtus first Epistle, where he gives Laws to the
Emperors and all others professing piety Lab. p. 609. Bin. page 83. col. 2.
, as if Heliogabulus and Caracalla had been under his Command: And in the
second Epistle of Sixtus, Ano. 260, who threatens to Excommunicate the Princes
of Spain, who spoiled their Bishops Lab. p. 822. Bin. page 157. col. 1.
, though all Princes then were Heathens: Marcellinus also in a time of
Persecution, under a Heathen Emperor gives direction what is to be done by an
Emperor professing the true Faith Lab. p. 934. Bin. page 176. col. 2.
; Who can imagine, Anacletus Anno Dom. 104, should speak of Priests in little
Villages, and of Cities which anciently had Primates and Patriarchs, or tell us
in Trajans time, That Rome had cast away her Heathen Rites Lab. p. 528. Bin.
page 49.
? Or that he should affirm the Christian people were generally Enemies to their
Priests; and Command the Bishops to visit the Thresholds of S. Peter's Church
(before it was Built Decreta ejus Lab. page 532. Bin. page 51. col. 2.
?) Is it likely Euaristus the next Pope, should declare, That Children could
not Inherit their Parents Estates, if they were not Baptized by a Christian
Priest Lab. p. 533. Bin. page 52. col. 1.
; or suppose Churches and Altars consecrated long before the Memory of any Man
in the Parish Lab. p. 541. Bin. page 54. col. 1.
? Could Pope Xystus in Adrian's Persecution brag, that Rome was the Head over
all Bishops, and also a Refuge to such as were spoiled by Christian People Lab.
p. 558. Bin. page 62. col. 2.
? Were there in Pope Hyginus time, (as his Decrees pretend) More Churches and
larger than the Revenue belonging to them could repair Lab. p. 568. Bin. page
67. col. 2.
? Is it propable Pope Pius should complain Anno 158, That Christians should
Sacrilegiously take away whole Farms dedicated to Pious Uses? Yet this
complaint is found in his second Epistle Lab. p. 574. Bin. page 70. col. 2.
; And Binius Notes justify this by a forged Decretal of Urban the First, and by
proving that in the time of Constantine (140 Years after) the Heathens had
taken Houses from the Christians: The Decree for Vailing Nuns at 25 years of
Age must be of later time, because it is certain no Nuns were veiled then, nor
were any under Sixty years Old allowed to profess Virginity Cestriens. diss. 2.
cap. 6.. 16. etc.
: When all Christians were so constantly present at Divine Offices, and
received the Sacrament Weekly; what need was there for Pope Soter to decree, No
Priest should say Mass unless two were present, and that all should Communicate
on Maunday-Thursday Lab. p. 587. Bin. page 75. col. 1.
? How could there be Secular Laws forbidding the People to conspire against
their Bishop, as Calixtus Decretal pretends Lab. p. 612. Bin. page 85. col. 1.
? or how could he mention the Laws of the Roman and Greek Emperors, so long
before the Empire was divided Ibid.
? Had Bishops in Pope Urbans time power to Banish and Imprison the
Sacrilegious? or had they high Seats in the form of a Throne, Erected for them
in Churches, as his Epistle pretends Lab. p. 618 Bin. page 87. col. 2.
? Could the next Pope by his Decree hinder Heathens and Enemies to the
Christian Clergy from accusing them? as the first Epistle of Pontianus gives
out Lab. p. 623. Bin. page, 90. col. 1.
. Antherus Epistle charges Bishops in those times with changing their Churches
out of ambition and covetousness Lab. p. 634. Bin. page 94. col. 2.
, even while nothing but Martyrdom was to be got by being a Bishop: And Fabian
is made to charge the Faithful, with spoiling their Bishops, and citing them
before the Lay Tribunals Lab. p. 636* Bin. page 95. col. 2.
; which is not credible of the Christians of that Age: Cornelius his genuine
Epistle says; The Christians durst not meet at Prayers in any known Rooms, no
not in Cellars under ground Lab. p. 682. Bin. page 113. col. 1.
. But the Pontifical and one of his Forged Decretals, pretend that this same
Pope had liberty to Bury the Apostle S. Peter's Body in Apollo's Temple, the
Vatican and the golden Mount, that is, in three places (I suppose) at once Lab.
p. 668. Bin. page 109. col. 2.
: Lucius a Martyred Pope makes it a wonder, that in his days Churches should be
spoiled of their Oblations and Ministers vexed Lab. p. 721. Bin. page 129. col.
1.
; Pope Stephen threatens to make Slaves of Clerks, who accuse their Bishop, and
forbids Laymen to complain of the Clergy Lab. p. 732. Bin. page 134. col. 1.
; Does it consist with the poverty of those Ages, for Eutychianus to decree
That Martyrs should be Buried in Purple Lab. p. 913. Bin. page 167. col. 2.
? or with its charitv, for the same Pope to forbid Christians to pray for
Heretics Lab. p. 921. Bin. page 171. col. 1.
; when our Lord bids them pray for their Enemies? I should tire the Reader and
my self, if I proceeded to Rake together any more Instances; and these may
suffice to show, That these Epistles were not writ in those early Ages.

. 13. Thirdly, The same may be proved from the many Absurdities found in these
Decretals, arguing the Author to be Illiterate and Ignorant; Whereas the Popes,
whose Names they falsely bear, were prudent and Learned Men; however well
skilled in Holy Scripture: Yet Anacletus is made to say, that the Apostles
chose the LXX Disciples Lab. p. 527. Bin. page 48. col. 2.
, which the Gospel affirms were chosen by Christ himself: He also weakly
derives Cephas (the Syriac Name of Peter, signifying a Stone) from the Greek
word (...), and says it signifies a Head, and proves Peter's Supremacy by this
silly mistake Lab. p. 529. Bin. page 49. col. 2. Vid. Causab. in Baron. page 98.
: It looks very ridiculously in Pope Antherus in his Epistle to say, it is not
fit for one in my Mean condition to judge others, nor to say any thing of the
Ministers of the Churches Lab. p. 630. Bin. page 92. col. 2.
; but indeed the Forger stole these Words out of S. Hieroms first Epistle to
Heliodorus, and foolishly applied them to the Pope: The Decretal of Stephen
tells the Gallican Church, what the Holy Apostolic and Universal Church had
undertaken to observe, as if they had been no part of the Universal Church Lab.
p. 729. Bin. page 132. col. 2.
: But nothing is more Ridiculous than the foolish Expositions of Scripture,
which Popes ought to interpret Infallibly; but these Epistles make Pope
Alexander prove, that Holy Water does sanctify, by Heb. ix. 13, 14. where the
Ashes of an Heifer are said to Purify the unclean, and the Blood of Christ to
purge the Conscience: And he interprets Hos. iv. 8. where the Priests are said
to eat up the Sins of the People, of blotting out their Sins by their Prayers
Epist. Alex. 1. Bin. page 57, and Ep. 2. Bin. p. 59.
; Pope Pius proves Bishops are only to be judged by God, because (John II.)
Christ drove the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple with his own hands Lab.
p. 571. Bin. page 68. col. 2.
. Pope Anicetus proves, Priests ought to shave their Crowns, because S. Paul
says, It is a shame for Men to have long hair, 1 Cor. XI. Lab. p. 581. Bin.
page 72. col. 2.
; which the Apostle speaks of Laymen as well as Clergymen, and so the same
Logic would prove, that Laymen also should shave their Crowns. Pope Soter
proves, that Nuns must not touch the Holy Vessels, by S. Paul's saying, 2 Cor.
XI. He had espoused the Corinthians (both Men and Women) to one Husband, even
Christ Lab. p. 584. Bin. page 75. col. 1.
. Pope Stephen proves, That Bishops cught not to be disturbed, by that place in
the Psalms, The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handy work Lab. p 732. Bin page 134. col. 1.
; And to name no More, Pope Foelix is very happy in that he can make out, That
we ought not to persecute and disturb Our Brethren, from Romans V. 1, 2. When we
were Enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son: And from Math.
X. Fear not them which can kill the body, etc. he proves, We must not persecute
nor disturb Preachers and Doctors, because their Souls do not dye with their
Bodies Lab. p. 906. Bin. page 164. col. 2.
. All these impertinent Inferences from Holy Scripture, show the Forger of
these Epistles was some ignorant and impudent Impostor; but none can suppose
those holy Primitive Bishops would abuse Scripture and themselves at this rate.

. 14. Fourthly, this further appears, From many Quotations in these Epistles,
which are taken verbatim out of Authors, that lived and writ long after all
these Popes were dead, in whose Names these Epistles are forged; wherefore they
could not write them. Now this infallible Mark of their Forgery appears first,
in that these Epistles do all generally cite Scripture, according to S. Hieroms
Translation De Marca makes this an insallible Note, that these Epistles are
forged. De Concord. lib. 3. cap. 5.
, which was not made in their days; yet Clement in his 4th and 5th Epistles,
Euaristus in both his Epistles, Telesphorus in his Decretal, and indeed all the
rest of them who have occasion to quote Scripture, do use the very Words of S.
Hierom, and that sometimes for a whole Page together, as the Reader will find
by comparing these Quotations with the Vulgar Latin Bible. But Learned Men know
that the Latin Fathers, who lived before S. Hierom's Translation was extant,
used another Version very different from that, and even Pope Cornelius in that
genuine Epistle of his, which is preserved in S. Cyprian, does not follow S.
Hierom's Translation Lab. p. 68^. Bin. page 113. col. 2.
; but his Forged ones do: Which is a Proof undeniable, That he who Forged these
Epistles, lived after S. Hierom's Translation was grown common. Besides;
Anacletus is made to cite a long Passage verbatim out of S. Hierom's Epistle to
Nepotian, which was writ almost 300 years after his time Ep. 3. Anacl^ti, Lab.
529. ^in. 49.
. Pope Eleutherius cites a Law out of the Theodosian Code, Judicantem cuncta
rimari oportet, etc. Lab. p. 588. Bin. page 76. col. 1.
, which was made 300 years after this Popes death, and this convinced Contius
and Baronius, that this Epistle was Forged after Theodosius his Reign; yet
Binius has the Impudence to say, Perhaps the Code borrowed this Passage from
the Epistle; but Labbe is so ashamed of this bold Falsehood, that in his Margen
he writes, Binius in this is mistaken; and he had reason for that Note, since
this is not the only place in the seigned Decretals where the Code is cited.
Labbe owns that the second forged Epistle for Pope Eutychianus quotes a Law
verbatim out of Cod. Theod. lib. 9. Tit. (...), and 2. Lab. p. 917. Bin. page
169. col. (...).
. Pope Zepherine also cites Imperial Laws and Edicts, Forbidding Men to cite a
Bishop despoiled of his goods, into any Secular Judicature, till all were
restored Lab. p. 606. Bin. page 82. col. 2.
the same Passage also is cited out of the Secular Laws in Pope Stephen's
second Epistle Lab. p. 732. Pin. page 134. col. 1.
. But it is most certain there could be no such Laws in these Popes times who
lived under Pagan Emperors; nor a Law to forbid the People to conspire against
their Bishops, which yet Calixtus cites in his second Epistle Lab. p. 612. Bin.
page 85. col. 1.
. Moreover, Antherus cites a long Passage, word for word, out of S. Hierom's
Epistle to Heliodorus Lab. p. 630. Bin. page 92. col. 2.
; Pope Lucius is made to use (as Labbe confesses) the Words of his Successor
Agatho, in the Sixth Council of Constantinople, 300 years after Lab. p. 721.
Bin. page 129. col. 1.
: And yet Bellarmin cites this place of the Forged Epistle twice, to prove the
Pope's Infallibility, Bell. de Romans Pontif. l 4. c. 3. and de Verb. Dei, lib.
3. cap. 5. Pope Sixtus the Second, His first Epistle is stolen most of it out
of Ithacius and Varimadus, who lived many Ages after him Lab. p. 820. Bin. page
156.
. In Eutychianus's first Epistle, there are two whole Pages transcribed out of
his Successor, Pope Leo's 97th Epistle Lab. p. 914. Bin. page 168. col. 1.
: And Gains his Decretal Epistle, steals two large Passages from the same Pope
Leo's twelfth Sermon on the Passion, and his 97th Epistle Lab. p. 925. Bin.
page 172. col. 2.
. Finally, whosoever will take pains to observe Labbe's Margen shall find, that
he with great diligence has marked in the Margen of all these Forged Epistles,
the very places of later Authors out of which they are stolen, and transcribed
by their cheating Composer, who patcht them up together out of the Writings of
S. Hilary, S. Hierom, Pope Leo, Innocent, Gelasius, and Gregory, etc. who lived
many years after all these Popes were dead, which is an Unanswerable Proof,
that they could not be writ by those whose Names they bear.

15. Fifthly, Those Popes could not but know their own Times; and if they had
writ them, they could not have been mistaken in Chronology, or in the Date of
their Epistles; but the Forger of them had so little skill in the Times for
which he invented them, that he is almost every where erroneous in his
Computation. The two first Epistles of Clement are written to S. James after S.
Peter's death; yet it is confessed by Binius, S. James dyed six or seven years
before S. Peter. Binius would solve this by saying, The Name of James crept
into the Title instead of Simeon; but alas! the Name of James is repeated
often in the very Body of the Epistles, and that proves them Forged Lab. p. 82.
and page 98. Bin. page 27, and page 34.
. The Names of the Consuls also by which most of these Epistles are Dated, must
have been right if they had been writ by these old Bishops of Rome, who could
not be ignorant of the true Consuls in their own time; but alas! they are so
generally false, that Binius in his Notes, in vain labors to excuse some few
of them, and is forced to own the rest to be false; so that Surius was more
cunning to leave all the Consuls Names out of his Edition, Because (he says)
Calvin takes occasion from thence to despise all the Epistles Praesat. Laur.
Surii ap. Lab. Tom. 1. page 13.
; and doubtless the Dates are as true as the Epistles, both having sufficient
Marks upon them of a Modern Impostor, unskilled in those Times. And it is
evident, that the Pontifical names the same false Consuls, so that either one
Author forged the Popes Lives and their Epistles, or the Inventer of these
Epistles took the Consuls Names so constantly from the Pontifical, that he
imitates him in false-spelling the Consuls names, and in joining Men who were
never Consuls together; yea, because that Fabulous Pontifical usually Names no
Consuls, but those in Office at Every Popes Entrance and Death, This Forger of
the Epistles dates them all either by the first or last Consuls of every Pope,
as if all the Popes had only written Epistles in their first and last years: A
Few Examples of these Errors shall suffice.

The Pontifical makes Pope Euaristus to enter when Valens and Vetus were
Consuls, and to be martyred when Gallus and Bradua were Consuls, and so the
Forger dates his first Epistle by the names of his first Consuls, and the
second Epistle by the Consuls of his last year: But alas! both the Pontifical
and Epistles are woefully mistaken, since Euaristus (as Baronius proves) entered
the 13th year of Trajan, that is, fourteen years after the Consulship of Valens
and Vetus, and two years after the Consulship of Gallus and Bradua; so that by
this Account he writ Decretal Epistles long before he was Pope Lab. p. 532.
Bin. page 51. col. 2.
: So also, whereas Pope Alexander really sat in Adrian the Emperors time, and
Trajan was dead before his entrance, yet one of his Epistles is dated with
Trajan as one Consul, and Helianus as the other; but these two were never
Consuls together Lab. p. 542. Bin. page 55. col. 2.
: And his second Epistle is dated by the Consuls of Adrian's first yea^,
whereas Pope Alexander came but into his See in Adrian's third year. I will not
trouble my self with any more Instances, because there are none of these Dates
true, and many of them with the Pontifical (which guides the Forgery) so grossly
false, as to make Popes write Epistles before they were chosen, and after they
were dead Exempli gratia, Telesphori Ep. 1. A(...)ceti Ep. 1. Zepherin. 1 and
2. Pontiani Ep. 2. Fabiani Ep. 3. Cornelis Ep. 1, 2. and in mult^^ aliis.
; which is an undeniable Evidence, that the Inventer of these Epistles was a
Modern Cheat, ignorant of the true Times both of the Consuls and the Popes.
There are other Errors also besides the Dates, which show, the Bungling Author
of these Epistles neither understood Chronology nor History. The Pontifical,
before it was corrected, had made Anicetus Pope, Pius his Predecessor; and
therefore Pius his third Epistle does not reckon him among the Priests at Rome,
but puts in Eleutherius as one of Pius his Presbyters Lab. p. 576. Bin. page
70. col. 2.
, who was but a Deacon in the time of his Successor Anicetus Eusebius. hist. lib.
4. cap. 22. and Brev. Romans Ma(...) 26.
. The same Epistle makes Cerinthus the Heretic to be alive, and busy at Rome
in seducing Men, An. 166; yet Binius before tells us he was present in the
Synod at Jerusalem An. Christi 51, at which Synod, if he were but Nineteen
years of Age, he must in Pius his time have been 130, which is incredible; but
Binius says, this may be believed, because the first Epistle of Pius mentions
Hermes (named by S. Paul, Romans XVI.) who set forth a Book about this time An.
158; which Hermes, if he were but only 34 year old An. Christi 62, when S. Paul
writ his Epistle to the Romans, must be 130 years of Age, when he set forth
this Book; but in conclusion, the Story of Hermes and his Apocryphal Book is a
mere Fable, stolen out of the Pontifical Lab. p. 572. Bin. page 68. col. 2.
, and Binius has no way to defend one of these Fictions, but with another
equally absurd. Again, Pope Victor is made to summon one Theophilus (Bishop of
Alexandria) to a Council at Rome; but there was no Theophilus Bishop there in
Victor's time, Severus was then Bishop of that See, and this Theophilus was
Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine Lab. p. 593. Bin. page 78. col. 1. Eusebius. lib.
5. cap. 22.
; but if Victor had really writ this Epistle, he could not have made so gross a
Mistake: In like manner Antherus Epistle mentions one Eusebius, as then Bishop
of Alexandria Lab. p. 630. Bin. page 92. col. 2.
, who was not Bishop there till two or three Ages after Dodwel. ap. Cestr.
diss. 2. cap. 6.
. The first Epistle of Pope Fabian, dated in his first year, mentions Novatus
the Heretic coming out of Africa to Rome, and seducing Novatian, with others
Lab. p. 636. Bin. page 92. col. 2.
; but Baronius out of Eusebius and S. Cyprian assures us, that Novatus came not
to Rome till Fifteen years after Baron. An. 238.. 9.
. Wherefore these Epistles were devised by a later Author, who knew neither the
History nor Chronology of those Ages for which he invented these Epistles; but
had only the Fabulous Pontifical in his eye, and follows it in all its Errors
and Absurdities: So that since the Pontifical makes Pope Hyginus an Athenian,
Pope Pius an Italian, and Pope Soter born in Campania; Isidore forges three
Epistles for H^ginus, To the Athenians; for Pius, To his Italian Brethren; for
Soter, To all the Campanians: And when the Pontifical falsely devises several
Superstitious Rites, begun in the corrupt Ages, and other Usages, to have been
first appointed by some of the Ancient Popes, the said Isidore upon that always
forges an Epistle in those Popes Names to enjoin those Rites; and hence Pope
Alexander writes an Epistle about Holy Water Epist. 1. Alexander.
; Sixtus, about none but the Clergies touching Consecrated Vessels Sixti Ep. 2.
; Telesphorus, about keeping Lent Seven Weeks Telesphor. Ep 1.
; Pius, about keeping Easter upon Sunday Pii Ep. 1.
; Anicetus, about Shaving Priests Crowns Aniceti Epist 1.
; Calixtus, about four Ember Weeks Calixti Epist. 1.
; and so did other Popes, whereas most of these Rites were settled long after,
and only prove these Epistles were forged by Isidore.

. 16. Now though it be so apparent and undensable, that these Epistles are
Forged, and consequently of no Authority; yet the Roman Church has made great
use of them in the Ignorant Ages: For Binius notes all along in his Margen,
what Sections of them are transcribed into their Canon Law; and even in later
times their Writers against the Protestants do commonly cite their Infamous
Impostures, to prove the Supremacy of the Pope, his Infallibility, and right to
Appeals; as also for the exemption of the Clergy, their Celibacy and Habits,
and to prove their Mass with its Ceremonies, Auricular Confession, Apocryphal
Books, Tradition, Chrism, Veneration of Relics and Martyrs, etc. and Cook in
his Censura Patrum, has noted the several Epistles, and the Authors which cite
them, saving us the labor of instancing: And therefore we will only make a few
general Observations upon this matter, and so dismiss these Forgeries.

Observe. I. That since the Romanists have no other genuine Ancient Authors, to
prove these New Doctrines and Practices by; but are forced generally to place
these apparent Forgeries in the Forefront of all their Authorities, we may
conclude these Points of their Religion are all Innovations, unheard of in the
Primitive Ages; so that Isidore was forced to invent these Epistles almost 800
years after Christ, to give some show of Antiquity to them; and these Points
were in those Ignorant Times mistaken by this means, for Primitive Usages and
Opinions, and so got footing in the World under that disguise; but now that the
Fallacy is discovered, the Doctrines and Practices ought to be disowned as
well, as the Epistles on which they are built.

Observe II. There are many other Points of the Roman Religion, which are not so
much as mentioned in any of these Forged Epistles, such as Worship of Images,
Formal Praying to the Saints, and to the Virgin Mary; Transubstantiation,
Half-Communion, and Adoration of the Host, Purgatory, Indulgences, and
Justification by Merits, with some others. Now these are so New, that in
Isidore's time, when he invented these Epistles they were not heard of nor
received, no not in the Roman Church; for if they had, no doubt this Impostor,
who was so zealous to get Credit for all the Opinions and Usages of that Church
which he knew of, would have made some Popes write Epistles to justify these
also, and his silence concerning them makes it more than probable, that these
were all invented since the year of Christ 800.

Observe. III. Though the later Romanists frequently cite these Forged
Decretals, yet no genuine Author or Historian for Seven hundred years after
Christ did ever Quote or Mention them, no not so much as any of the Popes
themselves in all that Period. Now it is morally impossible so many important
Points should be so clearly decided by so many Ancient Bishops of so Famous a
Church, and yet no Author ever take notice of it. And doubtless when the Popes
attempted to be Supreme, and claimed Appeals about the year 400, Zosimus and
Boniface, who quarrelled with the Eastern and African Bishops about these
Points, and were so hard put to it for Evidence, as to seign some private
Canons were made at the first general Council of Nice, would certainly have
cited these Epistles, which are so clear Evidence for their pretenses, if they
had either seen or heard of them; but they do not once name them in all that
Controversy, which shows they were not then in being; yea, those who know
Church History, do clearly discern, that the main Points settled by these
Epistles, were things disputed of about the Seventh and Eighth Centuries, a
little before Isidore's time; and therefore these Forgeries must never be cited
for to prove any Point to be Ancient or Primitive.

. 17. Obs. IV. Though the Inventer of these Epistles was so zealous a Bigot for
the Roman Cause, yet many things are to be found in them, which contradict the
present Tenants of that Church. For whereas the Pope now claims an Universal
Supremacy even over Jerusalem it self; Clement's first Epistle is directed to
James the Bishop of Bishop's, Ruling the Hebrew Church at Jerusalem, and all
the Churches every where founded by Divine providence Lab. page 82. Bin. page
27.
. Anacletus first Epistle orders all the Clergy present to receive, under pain
of Excommunication Lab. p. 511. Bin. page 42. col. 1.
; which is not observed now in the Roman Church: Pope Telesphorus orders a Mass
on the Night before Christmas, and forbids any to begin Mass, before nine a
Cleek Lab. p. 562. Bin. page 64. col. 2.
; But Binius confesses their Church does not now observe either of these
Orders: Pope Hyginus forbids all foreign Jurisdiction, because it is unfit,
they should be Judged abroad, who have Judges at home Lab. p. 567. Bin. page
66. col. 2.
; So the third Epistle of Pope Fabian, appoints that every Cause shall be tried
where the Crime is committed; which passage is also in a genuine Epistle of S.
Cyprian to Cornelius Lab. p. 698. Bin. page 119. col. 2.
. And all foreign Jurisdiction is again forbid in Pope Felix his second Epistle
Lab p. 906. Bin. page 164. col. 2.
, which passages do utterly destroy Appeals to Rome, unless they can prove all
the Crimes in the World are committed there: The second Epistle of Fabian
allows the People to reprove their Bishop if he Err in matters of Faith Lab. p.
640. Bin. page 97. col. 1.
; the same Liberty also is given to the People, in Cornelius second Epistle
Lab. p. 671. Bin. page 110. col. 2.
; which seems to make the People Judges in Matter of Faith, a thing which the
Modern Romanists charge upon the Protestants as a great Error: From these and
many other passages we may see, that these Impostures do not in all Points
agree with the present Roman Church.

. 18. I have now done with the Epistles themselves, and proved them to be
apparent Forgeries; I will only give the Reader some cautions about those
partial Notes, printed on them both in Binius and Labbe, which though they
frequently correct, confute and alter diverse passages in these Epistles; Yet if
any thing look kindly upon the Roman Church, they magnify and vindicate it;
but if it seem to condemn any of their Usages, they reject and slight it: For
Example, Pope Pius cites Coloss. XI. 18. against worshipping Angels, and the
Notes, reject both S. Hierom's and Theodoret's Exposition of the place, as
Reflecting on their Churches practice, adding that S. Paul condemned Cerinthus
in that place, for giving too much Honor to Angels; Yet Binius soon after
tells us that Cerinthus was so far from Teaching they were to be Adored, that
he thought they were to be Hated as Authors of Evil Not Bin. in 1. Ep. Pii.
Lab. page 571. Bin. page 68.
. Pope Zepherine cites the Apostolical Canons for the Privileges of his See,
and says there were but Seventy of them Lab. p. 605. Bin. page 81. col. 2.
: But Binius in his Notes says he refers to the Seventy third Canon: Yet if
the Reader consult that Seventy third Canon, the Pope's See is not named there;
yea, that Canon forbids a Bishop to Appeal from his Neighbor Bishop, unless it
be to a Council: Out of Calixtus fust Epistle which Labbe owns to be a manifest
Forgery; Binius Notes cite a Testimoy for the Supremacy, calling it an evident
Testimony and worthy to be Noted Lab. p. 609. Bin. page 83. col. 2.
; Pontianus in his Exile brags, ridiculously about the Dignity of Priests, in
his second Epistle Lab. p. 624. Bin. page 90. col. 1.
. And Binius his Notes vindicate this improbable Forgery by a spurious Epistle
attributed to Ignatius, which says -- the Laity must be subject to the
Deacons: but Binius cites it thus -- The Laity, of which number are all Kings,
even the most Christian Kings, must be subject to the Deacons; by which
falsifying the Quotation, he makes the meanest Deacon in the Roman Church
superior to the French King: Again, in the Vacancy after Fabian, the Clergy of
Rome and S. Cyprian writ to each other Lab. p. 654. Bin. page 103. col. 1.
: Where though the Roman Clergy write with all respect to the Clergy of
Carthage, and give them humble Advice, not Commands; yea, and thank S. Cyprian
for his humility, in acquainting them with his Affairs, not as Judges of his
concerns, but Partners in his Counsels. Binius notes that these Letters do
sufficiently show the Prerogative of the Roman Church -- and that S. Cyprian
not only desired the Counsel, but submitted to the Judgment of Rome. The first
Epistle of Cornelius tells a false story out of the Pontifical about his
removing the Bodies of S. Peter and Paul; and though Binius own this part of
the Epistle to be Forged; Yet in his Notes on the Pontifical Lab. p. 667. Bin.
page 108. col. 1.
, he strives to reconcile the differing ways of relating this Fabulous
Translation, and slies to Miracles to make those Lies hang together. Cornelius
third Epistle is genuine, being preserved in Greek by Eusebius, and yet Binius
prints a corrupt Latin Version with it, which where the Greek speaks of one
Bishop in a Catholic Church -- Reads it -- in this Catholic Church; and the
Notes Bin. p. 112. col. 2.
impudently prove by this Corruption, that the Pope is the sole Bishop of the
whole Catholic Church: Of which Labbe was so much ashamed, that he prints
Valesius's Latin Version of this Epistle, wherein the ground of Binius his
Observation is quite taken away. S Cyprian has several Epistles printed among
the Decretals, wherein are many things which overthrow the Roman Supremacy and
Infallibility, upon which no remark is placed, but an obscure passage wherein
S. Cyprian says, that whether he or Cornelius should be the Survivor, must
continue his Payers for the afflicted Christians Lab. p. 703. Bin. page 120.
. There it is impertiently noted, That the deceased pray for the living: Pope
Stephen's second Epistle asserts, Primates were in use before Christianity Lab.
p. 732. Bin. page 134. col. 1.
. Binius in his Notes out of Baronius, says Herodotus confesses the same
thing; but Labbe declares that some body had imposed upon Baronius, for there
is no such thing to be found in Herodotus; and Adrian in Vopiscus (his other
Authority) evidently speaks of the Christian Bishop of Alexandria Scriptor.
Histor. August. page 960.
: Wherefore Pope Stephen, or he that made the Epistle for him, was mistaken: It
is an impudent thing also in Binius to note upon one of S. Cyprian's Letters
about Basilides and Martialis, You see the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome: For
these two Bishops were justly condemned in Spain, and unjustly absolved by the
Pope, after which S. Cyprian condemns them again, only certifying the Bishop of
Rome that he had justly nulled his Absolution; so that we may rather note, You
see the Primacy of the Bishop of Carthage Bin. p. 136. col. 1.
. Pope Eutychianus first Epistle following the Erroneous Pontifical Lab. p.
914. Bin. page 168. col. 1.
, Orders that only Beans and Grapes shall be offered on the Altar: Binius says
this is the Fourth Canon of the Apostles, whereas that fourth Canon does not
name Beans, and the Third Canon forbids all kind of Pulse to be offered on the
Altar; so that the Impostor was deceived, and Binius becomes Ridiculous by
attempting to defend him: I shall not need produce any more instances, these
will suffice to warn those who study the Councils, not to rely upon any thing
in these Notes, which are so full of partiality and Errors, of weak reasonings
and false Quotations, of ignorant and wilful Mistakes, that there is little
heed to be given to them.

. 19. I doubt I have been too tedious in discovering the Forgeries of these
Decretal Epistles; but the Reader must consider they take up the greatest part
of this first Period in the Volumes of the Councils, and we have here
considered them all together: And now we have nothing to observe in this
Century, except the Apostolical Constitutions, which are left out in Binius,
but printed in Labbe, in Greek and Latin, next after Clement's genuine Epistle
to the Corinthians: Now the Constitutions are a very ancient Forgery, compiled
about the end of the Fourth, and beginning of the Fifth Century, of the Rites
of which Ages they give a very good account, and have little or nothing in
them, to justify the more Modern Corruptions of Rome; for which cause it is
likely Binius omitted them: But if we know before hand that the Apostles did
not make them, nor Clement Bishop of Rome collect them, and can pardon the
boldness of making the Apostles the speakers, they are useful to be read, as a
writing composed in the Fourth or Fifth Age.

CHAP. II.
Of the Forgeries in the Second Century.

. 1. THis Period begins with the Life of Anacletus, who was made Pope, as they
say, An. 104. but the Fabulous Pontifical brings him in, the 10th Consulship of
Domitian, that is, just upon the fictitious Cletus his death, and before
Clement entered, who yet is there said to be his Predecessor; so blundered and
uncertain is that ignorant Writer; yet, except what he says, no other Author
mentions any deeds of Anacletus; and though Binius in his Notes affirm,
Anacletus was most famous for many eminent deeds (s), yet he cannot name (a)
Lab. p. 511. Bin. page 42. col. 1.
one of them.

Euaristus his Life follows, whom the Pontifical and the Breviary of Sixtus the
Fifth Lab. p. 532. Bin. page 51. col 2.
, make to have been Pope in the time of Domitian, Nerva and Trajan; but Binius
out of Baronius takes upon him to correct both the Pontifical and the Roman
Office also, assuring us he began in the 13th year of Trajan; but alas! these
first Bishops of Rome were so obscure, that nothing but their Name is upon
Record in Authentic Authors. And what is said in the Pontifical, and the Notes,
concerning their several Parents, Countries, times of sitting in that See, and
all their Actions almost, are mere Impostures of later Ages, as the Learned Dr.
Pierson proves in his afore-cited Posthumous Dissertation.

Alexander's Life is next, wherein Binius again corrects the Pontifical and the
Breviary; which say, He Ruled the Church in the days of Trajan Lab. p. 541.
Bin. page 55. col. 1. Brev. Sixth. 5. in Ma^^ 3.
; affirming, he entered not On the Papacy till Adrian's time: But there was more
need to Correct the Breviary of his Infallible Church, for those fabulous
Lessons it orders to be read in the Church on this Popes day, about Alexander's
converting Hermes a Prefect of Rome, Quirinus a Tribune and Balbina his
Daughter, who also is Sainted; yet after all, there were no such persons in
those Offices in Rome at that time Cestriens. dissert. pos^hum. diss. 2. cap.
7. page 227.
; and the whole Story is a Fiction taken out of a fabulous Tract called the
Acts of Alexander, yet this Legend Binius's Notes defend.

Of Xystus, the next Pope, nothing is memorable, but that he is said by the
Pontifical to be a Martyr. Eusebius says, he died in Adrian's Twelfth year,
and mentions not his Martyrdom Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 5.
; but Binius contradicts him, and will have him to suffer in the 3d year of
Antoninus Lab. p. 554. Bin. page 60. col. 2.
; and this without any Authority for it, but his own.

Telesphorus, according to Eusebius, was the Seventh Pope from St. Peter, and
came in the Twelfth year of Adrian Eusebius. ut supr.
, that is, An. 130. But Binius following the Pontifical, makes him the Eighth
Pope, and says he entered the Third year of Antoninus, that is, Twelve years
after; and in the Notes on his Life Lab. p. 559. Bin. page 63. col. 2.
, upon the Pontificals saying, he Ordained Thirteen Bishops in his Eleven
years, he observes, that these Bishops were to be sent into diverse parts of the
World; from whence (he says) it is clear that the Pope was to take care not of
Rome only, but the whole World. But first, no inference from so fabulous an
Author, as the Pontifical, can be clear: And secondly, if there were so many
Bishops really Ordained by Popes, as the Pontifical does pretend, there are but
Sixty three Bishops reckoned by him from S. Peter's death to this time, which
is near 100 years. From whence (if we grant the Matter of Fact) it is rather
clear, That the Pope Ordained only some Italian Bishops near Rome; for
otherwise when so many Bishops were Martyred, there must have been far more
Ordained for the World in that space of time.

Hyginus, the next Pope, began (says Eusebius) in the first year of Antoninus;
but Binius says, he was made Pope the Fifteenth of that Emperor; the Reader
will guess whether is to be trusted: The Pontifical could find this Pope
nothing to do, but to distribute the Orders of the Clergy, which Pope Clement
(according to him) had done long before Lab. p. 565. Bin. page 65. col. 2.
.

. 2. From the Notes on Pope Pius Life Lab. p. 568. Bin. page 67. col. 2.
, we may observe there was no great care of old taken about the Pope's
Succession: For Optatus, S. Augustine, and S. Hierom, with the Old Pontifical
(before it was altered Cestrieus. diss. 2. cap. 11. page 65.
, place Anicetus before Pius, but the Greeks place Pius before Anicetus; and in
this Binius thinks we are to believe them rather than the Latins. The rest of
the Notes are spent in vindicating an improbable Story, of an Angel bringing a
Decree about Easter to Hermes the Popes Brother, who writ a Book about keeping
it on the Lord's Day; yet after all there is a Book of Hermes now extant that
has nothing in it about Easter; and there was a Book of old writ by Hermes,
well known to the Greeks, and almost unknown to the Latins (though writ by a
Pope's Brother) read in the Eastern Churches, and counted Apocryphal in the
Western: But we want another Angel to come and tell us, whether that now extant
be the same or no, for Binius cannot resolve us, and only shows his Folly in
defending the absurd and incongruous Tales of the Pontifical.

Anicetus either lived before or after Pius, and the Pontifical makes him very
busy in Shaving his Priests Crowns, never mentioning what he did to suppress
those many Heretics who came to Rome in his time; but it tells us he was Buried
in the Coemetery of Calistus Lab. p. 579. Bin. page 72. col. 1.
, though Calistus (who gave that Burial-place a name) did not dye till Fifty
years after Anicetus. But Binius (who is loath to own this gross Falsehood)
says, You are to understand it in that ground which Calistus made a
Burying-place afterward; yet it unluckily falls out, that Amcetus's Successor.

Pope Soter was also Buried (according to the Pontifical) in Calistus his
Coemetery; and afterward Pope Zepherines's Burial-place is described to be not
far from that of Calistus, so well was Calistus's Coemetery known, even before
it was made a Coemetery, and before he was Pope.

Eleutherius succeeded Soter, and as the Pontifical says, he received a Letter
from Lucius King of Britain, that he might be made a Christian by his Command;
which hint probably first produced those two Epistles between this Pope and
King Lucius Usserii Antiq. Brit cap. 4, 5, etc. and ap. Spelm. Tom. I. Council.
, which Binius leaves out, though he justifies the Story, of which it were well
we had better Evidence than the Pontifical. This is certain, the Epistles were
forged in an Age when Men could write neither good Latin, nor good Sense; and I
am apt to fancy, if Isidore had put them into a Decretal, they would have been
somewhat more polite; so that it is likely these Epistles were made by some
Monks, who thought it much for our Honor, to have our Christianity from Rome.

. 3. This Century concludes with the bold Pope Victor, of whose excommunicating
the Eastern Bishops (for not agreeing with him about Easter) we have a large
account in Eusebius Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. cap. 23, 24, etc.
; but of that there is nothing in the Pontifical; only we are told he had a
Council at Rome, to which he called Theophilus (Bishop of Alexandria) and
decreed Easter should be observed upon a Sunday, etc. Upon this hint, and the
Authority of a better Author, we grant there were at these times diverse
Councils held about keeping Easter: But the Editors of the Councils (though
Eusebius be the only credible Author which gives an Account of them) presume to
contradict him. For Eusebius makes the Council at Caesarea in Palestina to be
first, and makes Theophilus of that City, and Narcissus of Jerusalem,
Presidents of it; but the Editors (for the honor of the Pope) place the Roman
Council first Lab. p. 596. Bin. page 79. col. 1, 2. Vid. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 22.
, and upon the bare Credit of the Pontifical (who mistook Alexandria for
Caesarea) say, That Theophilus was present at it; whereas Eusebius says, This
Roman Council was the Second called about this Question, consisting of the
Bishops about Rome. Secondly, The Editors place the Council of Caesarea,
affirming out of a suspicious Fragment of Bid (who lived many Centuries
after,) That it was Called by Victor' s Authority; whereas Eusebius (as we see)
assigns other Presidents to that Council; yea, they entitle all the other
Councils about this Matter, Under Victor; though in Eusebius they are set down
as independent upon one another, The Bishops of each Country Calling them by
their own Authority. And though Binius's Notes Lab. p. 598. Bin. page 80. col.
1.
brag of Apostolical and Universal Tradition; The Bishops of Asia produced a
contrary Tradition, and called it Apostolical, for keeping Easter at a
different time; which shows how uncertain a ground Tradition is for Articles of
Faith, when it varied so much in delivering down a practical Rite through
little more than one Century: And the Asian Bishops persisting in their Custom,
and despising Victor's Excommunication, proves, They knew nothing of his
Supremacy or Infallibility in those days. We grant Victor was in the right as
to the time of Easter, and that which he and other Councils now agreed on, was
agreed upon also at the Council of Nice; but Binius stretches it too far when
he pretends, That general Council confirmed Victor's Sentence of Excommunition:
For Victor's Authority is never urged in the Nicene Council, nor his
Excommunication mentioned; and we know from Eusebius, That the Bishops of his
own Opinion severely reproved him for offering to pass so rash a Sentence, and
to impose his Sense upon remote Churches: So that thus far there is no genuine
Proof of any Supremacy exercised or claimed by the Roman Church; for the
Decretals, which only pretend to make it out, are notorious Forgeries.

CHAP. III.
Of the Forgeries in the Third Century.

. 1. THis Century begins with the Life of Pope An. Dom. 203.
Zepherine, who Sat Eight years, says the Pontifical; but the Notes tell you,
He Sat Eighteen, which is a small Error in that fabulous Author: Yet the
Editors believe upon his Credit, that this Pope ordered Vessels of Glass to be
used in the Mass Lab. p. 603. Bin. page 81. col. 1.
; and the Notes prove it by Pope Gregory the Great, who lived Four hundred
years after this time. However, if we allow the Matter of Fact upon the
Testimonies of S. Hierom and Epiphanius; it will follow, That in those Ages
(when they used Glass Cups) they did not believe Transubstantiation; for if
they had, they would not have ventured Christ's Blood in so brittle a Vessel,
but have forbid the use of Glasses, as they have done in the Roman Church since
this Opinion came in among them Daile de cult. relig. ap. Latin. lib. 2. cap.
22.
.

Under this Pope the Editors place an African Council, and say it was
Reprobated; yet they cannot make it appear, that this Pope so much as knew of
it. Nor was his Advice or Consent at all desired in that case, which was never
disputed at Rome till Pope Stephen's time (as themselves confess) viz. Fifty
years after this. Council was held; from whence we learn, That every Province
in this Age believed they had sufficient Authority to determine Controversies
in Religion among themselves, without the Consent of the Bishop of Rome.

. 2. Though the Pontifical be guilty of many Errors in the Life of Calixtus,
and mistake the very Emperors under which he lived and died, the Notes gloss
them all fairly over Lab. p. 608. Bin. page 83. col. 1.
, and correct them by the Roman Martyrology, which often follows the
Pontifical, and is as fabulous as that. However we are told, That Calixtus was
buried Three Miles out of the City; because the Law of the Twelve Tables forbid
the Burying of a dead Body within the Walls. Now I would know, if this Law were
in force, how that can be true which the Pontifical and the Notes affirm and
justify, That S. Peter, Linus, Cletus, Euaristus, Sixtus, Telesphorus,
Hyginus, Pius, and Victor, were All Buried in the Vatican? And what shall we
think of the Miracles done by their Relics and at their Tombs, if no Body know
where they were first Buried?

Pope Urban, the Successor of Calixtus, is said in the Pontifical Lab. p. 617.
Bin. page 87. col. 1.
, to be Buried in the Coemetery of Praetextatus, which could not then be any
Coemetery at all, because Praetextatus was not Martyted till the Persecution
under Maximinus, which happened many years after: And if the Story of S. Cecily
in the same Author, be no Truer than his Chronology, the Romanists worship a
fictitious Saint.

The Pontifical is forced to feign, That the Emperor Alexander Severus was a
Persecutor, contrary to his Character in all Histories of Credit; and this only
to make us think, that Calixtus, Urban, and Pope Pontianus his Successor, were
Martyrs. However though Eusebius knew not of their Martyrdom Eusebius. hist. lib.
6. cap. 15, 17, and 22.
, the Roman Church adores them all as Martyrs, and have peculiar Days dedicated
to their Memories.

Antherus (as the Pontifical says) Sat Twelve years and One Month; and the
Notes say, that he Sat only one Month Lab. p. 629. Bin. page 92. col. 1.
; so that there is but only Twelve years mistaken in this Popes Life: And if he
was Pope but one Month, doubtless his Secretaries had need be very swift
Writers, or else they could not gather many in his time. However Binius will
make it out, for he brings in a Poetical Hyperbole, Of those Scribes, who could
write a Sentence before a man had spoken it; and so were as quick at guessing
as writing; and applies this in very serious earnest to this Pope's Notaries,
to make us imagine, there were many Acts of Martyrs writ out in this
short-lived Pope's time.

. 3. Pope Fabian, as Eusebius relates, was chosen by occasion of a Dove's
lighting on his Head, when the People were met to elect a Pope; of which
remarkable Story the fabulous Pontifical takes no notice, but tells us, That in
this Popes time Novatus the Heretic came to Rome Lab. p. 638. Bin. page 95.
col. 2.
; that is, say the Notes, Above a year after Pope Fabian was dead, after the
Vacancy, and in Pope Cornelius' s time; with such absurd Comments do these
Gentlemen delight to cover the Ignorance and Falsehood of their Historian; but
such Excuses do only more expose him. In this Pope's time were two Councils
held, one in Africa, the other in Arabia, and they Entitle them both under
Fabian; yet the only Authors, who mention these Councils, do not say Pope
Fabian was concerned in either of them Lab. p. 650. Bin. page 101. col. 2.
, and therefore they were not under Fabian.

After this Pope's death there was a Vacancy of more than one whole year, which
the Editors, to slatter the Papacy, call (in the style of Princes) An
Interregnum; but alas! their admired Monarchy, was now turned into an
Aristocracy, and the Clergy governed the Roman Church; to excuse which flaw in
their visible Monarchical Succession, the Notes say, The Members next the Head
knew it was their parts, to do the office of the Head: Which notable kind of
substitution, if it could be made out in the Body Natural, Beheading would not
be a Mortal punishment; however, they must say something to make us believe
there was always a Visible Head of the Catholic Church, or at least a Neck and
Shoulders, which stood for an Head, till Cornelius was chosen Pope: And they
called a Council (as they pretend) in this Vacancy, and writ a Letter of their
Determination to all the Churches in the World, that they might all observe
what the Empty Chair of Peter had ordered Bin. p. 107. col. 1.
. But if any one read the Letter it self, it will appear that this Council was
only a voluntary Assembly of the Clergy in Rome, and they met only to confirm
S. Cyprian's Opinion, and only writ their Letter to him; but never pretended
either to be Judges over Cyprian, or any other part of the Catholic Church.

Pope Cornelius his Life follows, for whose Character we are more obliged to S.
Cyprian's Epistles, than to the Pontifical, which invents an idle Story of a
Dialogue between Cornelius and Decius the Emperor; and though the Notes own
Lab. p. 565 Bin. page 108. col. 1.
, That Decius (who is here pretended to Martyr him) dyed the same Month in
which Cornelius entered; yet they will not own the Story to be false, but boldly
put in the Name of Volusianus into their Margen instead of Decius. However, the
Breviary Breviar. Sixth. 5. 16 dic September.
retains the Fiction of Cornelius suffering under Decius, as it does also the
Fable of his Translating the Bodies of S. Peter and S. Paul: But let any
considering Man compare the different ways of telling this Sham Story, and he
will easily discern, that the Notes cannot reconcile them without flying to a
Miracle Lab. p. 567. Bin. page 108. col. 1.
. It is evident they have told us, the Body of S. Peter was in the Vatican,
when Pope Victor was there Buried, An. 203: And there is no Author of Credit
mentions their removal into the Catacumbae, and so consequently no reason to
believe they were fetched back from thence in a time of Persecution. Pope
Gregory lived 350 years after this, and was very apt to credit feigned
Miracles, and he differs much from the Pontifical; so that probably the whole
Story is forged, by those who long after began superstitiously to adore the
Relics of Saints. However, it is read in the Roman Church September. 16. and
many devout People on the Credit of this Legend make Pilgrimages, and offer
Prayers and large Gifts, to the Shrines of these two Apostles, of whose true
Relics they can have none, because their real Graves are not known.

In this Pope's time there were two Councils holden at Carthage, two at Rome,
and one in Italy; all which in the general Titles are said to be held under
Cornelius Lab. p. 714. Bin. page 126. col. 1.
; though the Notes assure us, That those two at Carthage were called by S.
Cyprian's Authority, and that the Italian Bishops made a Decree of their own,
besides that of Cornelius at Rome. The Roman Councils indeed were holden under
Cornelius, as being Bishop of that City; but we may observe, He did not
Authoritatively confirm the Sentence of the Council of Carthage, but only
consented to it. We may also Note, This African Council calls not Pope
Cornelius Father, but Brother, and writes to him as one of their Colleagues;
yea, they do not except Cornelius, when they Decree, That if any of their
Colleagues agreed not to their Sentence, he should answer it at the Day of
Judgment Lab. p. 718. Bin. page 128. col. 1.
. Moreover, in the same Letter there is an evident Testimony, that the People
in those days were prepared for Martyrdom, by receiving the Eucharistical Cup
Lab. p. 717. Bin. page 127. col. 2.
; which being now denied to the Laity, the Editors pass it by without a Note;
yet soon after, where the Council plainly speaks of Confessing the Name of
Christ before Persecutors; they have this impertinent Marginal Note, From this
and other places, the necessity of Confession is confirmed: As if this belonged
to their new invented Auricular Confession.

. 4. The Notes find diverse Faults in the Life of Pope Lucius, yet they would
palliare the grossest of all; for the Pontifical says, He was Beheaded by
Valerian; the Notes affirm it was by Gallus and Volusiunus; and yet the same
Notes tell us, The Pontifical (in saying it was by Vulerian) may be very well
and truly expounded Lab. p. 720. Bin. page 128. col. 2.
. The Reader must understand, It may be so expounded by such kind of Notes, as
are designed to make gress Errors seem great Truths.

Pope Stephen, who succeeded Lucius, fell out with Cyprian and the African
Bishops, about the re-baptizing of Heretics, which (though it were the only
memorable thing in this Popes Life) the Pontifical never mentions: And the
Editors are are so used to put into the Title of all Councils, Under such or
such a Pope, that in this Popes time they style those very Councils, Sub
Stephano, which were called without his knowledge, and which condemned his
Opinion Lab. p 751. page 760, etc. Bin. page 137, 141, 145, etc.
, as may be seen in the Councils of Carthage, Iconium, and Africa, where (so
easily may Tradition be mistaken) the Re-baptizing of Heretics is asserted to
be an Apostolic Tradition, though it were contrary to Pope Stephen's Opinion,
and the Tradition of the Roman Church. And when Stephen on this account
presumed to Excommunicate the Asian Bishops, Firmilianus (Bishop of Coesarea)
in a Letter to S. Cyprian Lab. p. 751. Bin. page 141. col. 2.
, Despises his Sentence, compares the Pope to Judas, complains of his
Arrogance, and esteems those to be very silly who took the Roman Bishop's word
for an Apostolical Tradition; from which that Church in many Instances had
departed. Moreover, He calls him a Schismatic, and affirms, he had by this rash
Sentence only cut himself off from the Unity of the Catholic Church. S. Cyprian
also, and his Africans Lab. p. 765. Bin. page 147. col. 2.
, condemned this Pope as a Favourer of Heretics, an Enemy to the Church, and
one who writ Contradictions, and was void of Prudence; describing him as an
Innovator and bringer in of Traditions, contrary to God's Word, as one who
obstinately presumed to prefer human Doctrines before Scripture. I grant Pope
Stephen was in the right in this Controversy; yet doubtless, if these Bishops
had believed the Supremacy, and Infallibility of the Pope and his Roman
Council, they could not have used him at this rate: And the Editors are so
concerned to cover this rough usage, that they reprint an Epistle of S.
Cyprian's Verbatim Lab. p. 740. and page 764. Bin. page 136. col. 2. and p.
146. col. 2.
, after this Quarrel was grown hot, which was writ while they two were Friends,
and contains very kind Words to Stephen; which Blind is only to make us think
that Cyprian submitted to the Pope at last, though it is apparent he never did
so: Again, the Reader may note that Labbe here prints a Tract of some Ancient
Author, to justify the Pope's Opinion; but though there be many good Arguments
for it from other Topics, the Argument from Tradition, and the determination of
the Roman Church, is not urged in the whole Discourse Lab. p. 770.
, which shows that these were no Arguments allowed in this Writers time: Lastly
whereas the third Council of Carthage, severely censures Pope Stephen for
taking upon him as Bishop of Bishops, and for compelling his Equals by
Tyrannical Terrors to obey him Lab. p. 786. Bin. page 149. col. 2. and p. 154.
col. 2.
: Binius impudently notes upon this, that the Pope was called Bishop of
Bishops, to him was the last Refuge in Matters of Faith, and his Determinations
were received all the World over as the Oracles of the Holy Ghost: Which is
from his Usurping a Title and Authority, to infer he had Right to them; and to
prove that all the World received his Determinations, from a Story which shows,
that half the Christian World rejected them.

. 5. The Life of Sixtus the Second, in the Pontifical is one heap of Errors,
for the Author seems to mistake him for Xystus the Philosopher; and as the
Notes confess, make Decius raise a great Persecution against the Church, Eight
year after he was Dead. He also places Valerian before Decius, supposing them
to Reign together, and saying Sixtus was Beheaded by Valerian in Decius's time
Lab. p. 819. Bin. page 155. col. 1.
; now Decius was slain two year before Valerian was Emperor: Yet the Notes
labor to color over all these Contradictions, to Salve the Credit of their
Missals and Fabulous Maityrology.

Dionysius the next Pope, is said to have been a Monk, upon the credit of the
Pontifical Lab. p. 827. Bin. page 158. col. 1.
; the Notes add that he Lived a Solitary Life, before his Election; yet the
Modern Monks have given over that Primitive Custom, and now crowd into great
Cities: But the Pontifical is so miserably mistaken in the Consuls in this
Popes Life, placing those for his last Consuls who were so, two years before
those he Names for his first Consuls, that nothing can be believed on this
Authors credit. Under this Pope the Editors have feigned a Council at Rome, to
which Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria was Cited, and so far obeyed the Order, as
to write an Epistle to clear himself, for which they cite Athanasius Lab. p.
830. Bin. page 160. col. 1.
: But we must never trust their Quotations where the Supremacy is concerned,
without looking into the Authors they cite: And Athanasius only says Dionysius
of Alexandria was accused at Rome, and writ to the Pope to know the Articles
complained of, who sent him an Account, upon which he vindicated himself by an
Apology: But what is all this to a Roman Council, or a citing Dionysius
thither? There were also two Councils at Antioch, about this time as Eusebius
tells us Eusebius. hist. lib. 7. cap. 22.
; But the Editors of their own Head put in that the first of them, was
appointed by Dionysius Bishop of Rome, to whom the chief care of the Church was
committed -- Whereas Eusebius never mentions this Pope as being either
concerned in the Council, or consulted about it: but if they will have it under
Dionysius, then we may infer, that this Pope approved a saying of this Council,
viz. That they knew of no other Mediator between God and Man but only Christ
Jesus. The Second Council of Antioch is entitled also, Under Pope Dionysius:
Yet it appears by Eusebius Eusebius. hist. lib. 7. cap. 24.
, that this Pope knew not of the Council, till they by their Synodical Epistle
informed him of it after they were risen: And in that Epistle they join him,
and Maximus Bishop of Alexandria together as Colleagues and equals, not desiring
either of them to confirm their Decrees; but acquainting them with their
proceedings, they required them to show their consent by writing Communicatory
Letters to Domnus, who was put in by them, Bishop of Antioch, in the Room of
Paulus Samosatenus, ejected for Hersie; and though this Domnus his Father,
Demetrianus had been Bishop of Antioch before, yet we hear of no Papal
Dispensation to allow him to succeed there: We may also observe, that
Firmilianus (who in Pope Stephens time so much despised the Popes Authority and
Infallibility) is by this Council called a Man of blessed Memory: By which we
see how little any Ancient and genuine Councils do countenance the Supremacy of
the Roman Church, and what need they had to forge Evidence, who would have it
taken for a Primitive Doctrine.

. 6. That Foelix the First was a Martyr, is proved only by the Pontifical, and
the Roman Martyrology which often blindly follows it: but why may not the
Pontifical be mistaken in the Martyrdom, as well as the Notes confess it to be
in the Consuls Lab. p. 903. Bin. page 163. col. 1.
? And the base Partiality of the Notes appears soon after in citing a place of
S. Cyprian, as if he desired to know the Days on which the Martyrs suffered,
that he might offer a Sacrifice for them by Names on their Anniversaries Cypr.
lib. 3. ep. 6. vel epist. 37. page 81. vid. Da^le de cult. relig. Lat. lib. 3.
cap. 3. page 352.
; whereas Cyprian speaks of the Confessors who died privately in Prisons, of
whose Names he desires to be informed, that he might celebrate their Memory
among the Martyrs: Now there is a great difference between S. Cyprian's and the
Protestants practice, to Commemorate the Saints departed; and the Roman way, of
offering the Sacrifice of the Mass for the deceased: Yet the Notes would suborn
S. Cyprian to give in evidence for this corrupt practice.

Pope Eutychianus lived not long before Eusebiu's time, and he says he only
sat ten Months Eusebius. hist. lib. 7. cap. 26.
; The Pontifical allows him thirteen Months, but the Notes boldly say he was
Pope Eight years Lab. p. 913. Bin. page 167. col. 2.
, and this only upon the Names of two Consuls set down in the Pontifical, and
the credit of the Roman Martyrology; but since these two are scarce ever right
in their Chronology, we ought to believe Eusebius rather than the Annotator and
his despicable Witnesses.

His Successor Gaius lived in Eusebius's own time, and he affirms he sat
Fifteen years Eusebius. hist. lib. 7. cap. 26.
; but the Pontifical allots to him Eleven years only, and so does the Breviary
Brev. Roman. April. 22.
; both of them making him Dioclesian's Kinsman, (which Eusebius knew nothing
of;) The Notes out of Baronius contradict them all, and ascribe to him Twelve
years, making him Dioclesian's Nephew; and yet the Pontifical says both that
he fled from Dioclesian's Persecution, and died a Confessor. Yet was Crowned
with Martyrdom with his Brother Gabinius; which Nonsense Baronius and the
Notes also defend.

. 7. This Century is concluded by the Uunfortunate Marcellinus, who as the
Pontifical tells us, did Sacrifice to Idols Lab. p. 930. Bin. page 174. col. 2.
; and S. Augustine in the Notes plainly supposes it to be true: Yet the
Annotator (who dares not deny it) labors to Amuse the Reader by saying, this
Story may be plainly refuted and proved false by diverse probable Reasons out of
Baronius; but because their Mis^als and Martyrology do own the thing, he will
not go that way to Work: What then? Does he clearly charge the Infallible Judge
with Apostasy? No, he says, He seemed to deny the Faith by External acts,
(that is, Sacrificing to Idols;) Yet by his Internal acts, (it seems Binius
knew his thoughts) he did not believe any thing contrary to the Faith: And
truly this is an early Instance of Jesuitical Equivocation: But we may make the
same Excuse for all the Apostates in the World; and it is plain the Notes care
not what they say, to protect their dear Infallibility against the most
convincing Truths.

About the very time of this Pope' s Apostasy was held a Council at Cirta in
Africa; and though S. Augustine, the Author from whom they have all they know
about it, say not one Word of Marcellinus, Yet the Editors and Annotator both,
put in these Words, that it was under Marcellinus Lab. p. 936. Bin. page 177.
col. 1, 2.
; Where I cannot but wonder, that (since they have invented a Council in the
same year to set poor Marcellinus Right again, after his Apostasy;) they did
not place that Council first, and then their re conciled Penitent might with a
better Grace, have sat at Cirta and Condemned such as fell in the Persecution.

But the most Infamous Forgery, is the Ridiculous Council of Sinuessa Lab. p.
938. Bin. page 178.
, devised by some dull Monk, who could write neither good Sense nor true Latin,
inspired only by a blind Zeal for the Roman Church, whose Infallible Head must
be cleared from Apostasy, though it be by the absurdest Fictions imaginable:
For he feigns this Apostate Pope met Three-hundred Bishops near Sinuessa, in
Dioclesian's time in a Cave, which would hold but Fifty of them at once, and
their business was only to hear Marcellinus condemn himself, and to tell him he
could be Judged by none. The two first Copies of this Council were so stuffed
with Barbarisms, false Latin and Nonsense, and so contrary to each other, that
some Body took Pains out of both to devise a third Copy, and by changing and
adding at pleasure, brought it at last to some tolerable Sense: Surius and
Binius print all three Copies, but Labbe and the Collectio regia leave out the
two Originals, and only publish the Third, dressed up by a late Hand, which in
time may pass for the true account of this Council. But the two first Copies in
Binius, yet extant, will give the Reader a good proof into what depths of
Ignorance the Monks were fallen, when such Unintelligible and Incoherent stuff
as this, and the Letters Forged between the Council of Nice and Pope Sylvester,
(which are in the same Style,) were designed to support the Roman Supremacy and
Infallibility. I shall not reflect upon the Absurdity, of making the Pope his
own Judge, when he denies the Fact, nor the Contradiction of the Councils,
saying often They must not judge him; and yet declaring soon after That they
have Condemned him Bin. p. 179. 180, and 183.
: Whoever will but read this Council over, shall find diversion enough, if
Blunders and Dullness be diverting to them. I shall therefore principally note
the gross Partiality and Fallacies of the Notes, in coloring over this
barefaced Forgery: First, the Annotator accuses the Century Writers, and
English Innovators for rejecting this Rare Council as a Forgery of the
Donatists, he should have said of the Romish Monks; yet he makes more
Objections against it, than he himself can answer: Protestants wonder that
Three-hundred Bishops should dare to meet in times of Persecution: He replies,
a far less number did meet on a slighter occasion Fifty years before, which is
but a very indifferent Proof: Well, but to magnify the occasion, he says, By
this Pope's fall, not only the Roman Church, but the whole Christian Religion
was in extreme danger; and in the President of the Catholic Faith, the very
Foundation of the Church was shaken and almost ruined: Yet a little before he
had told us out of S. Augustine, that Marcellinus's fall did no prejudice to
the Church, and had affirmed that the ill Deeds of Bishops may hurt themselves,
but cannot prejudice the Churches Orthodox Doctrine Bin. p. 175. col. 1. 2.
: Again, he proves it could not be an Invention of the Donatists, because they
never knew of it; yet presently he owns they objected it to the Catholics, and
therefore must know of it, all that S. Augustine says, being only that they
could not prove it: After this Baronius and he say, that no Writer does mention
this City of Sinuessa, nor is there any Memory of such a place or Cave: Which
is a great mistake in them both. For Livy, Cicero, Ovid, Martial and Pliny, do
all speak of Sinuessa Ferarij Lexic. Geograph. p. 199.
, and Alexander ab Alexandro, mentions a famous Highway, leading from Rome to
this City Al. ab. Alexand. genesis dier. lib. 3. cap. 13.
. And if an Earthquake have since Overthrown it, that will not prove there was
no such City then: all the Wonder is that these Gentlemen should defend a
Council for genuine, which they thought had been held in Utopia: The Notes
proceed to tell us that Very many most Learned Men, (not Heretics, I suppose)
by very strong Arguments have labored to prove these Acts spurious: But he
(who values no Arguments against the Supremacy,) not only thinks them not to be
false, but judges them worthy of great Esteem for their Venerable Antiquity,
and for their Majesty which extorts Reverence even from the unwilling: Now
their Antiquity cannot be proved by one Old Author, and their Majesty is so
little, that they extort Laughter and Contempt from the gravest Reader: Let us
therefore hear his Reason for this Approbation, it is because they are believed
by general consent of all; (He forgets that he said but now, very many and very
Learned Men did not believe them;) And because they are received and retained
without any Controversy to this Day, in the Martyrologies and Breviaries of the
Roman and other Churches Brev. Roman. April. 26.
: So that at last, all the Authority for this Council is the Roman Martyrology
and Breviary; which are Modern Collections, out of the Fabulous Pontifical and
other Forged Acts of Martyrs; And though their own Learned Men by good
Arguments prove the things to be false, yet if they be Read in a Breviary, etc.
these Falsehoods become true, and Catholics receive them without Controversy:
Yea, they cite the Transcript of a Forgery to prove the Original to be a Truth.
Again, the Notes say it is no prejudice to the Truth of Marcellinus his fall,
though the Africans did not know of it, nor S. Augustine, no nor any of the
African Church: Yet in the next Page it is observed, That there are very many
Names of the Witnesses which prove his fall, which are peculiar to the African
Christians: Now if these Names were peculiar to the Africans, then these
Witnesses were of the African Church Originally, and then it is Morally
impossible, that they should never tell none of their Countrymen, of so Famous
a Transaction: The Notes confess that these Acts often mention Libra occidua;
which is a Word invented after the Empire was divided into East and West: And
thence the same Notes infer, these Acts were not writ in those Ancient times;
yet they make it a wonder, that they were not seen in Africa in S. Augustine' s
time or before: Which is to wonder that they had not seen them in Africa,
before they were written: It puzzles the Annotator to make out an excuse for
that ridiculous Falsehood in these Acts, that Marcellinus was led into the
Temple of Vesta, and Isis, and there Sacrificed to Hercules, Jupiter and
Saturn; because these Gods were never placed, nor Worshipped in the Temples of
those female Deities: Nor can he allow what the Acts say about this Council,
being held when Dioclesian was in his Persian War; for he affirms it was held
Two years after that War, when Dioclesian had divested himself of the Empire,
and lived a private Life; But then the Acts make Dioclesian to be present, and
in Rome when Marcellinus did Sacrifice; and at this rate the Pope would have
laid two years at least in his Apostasy, which the Annotator must not endure.
To conclude, we now see, That a Council held no body knows where nor when,
concealed from all Ancient Authors, writ in later times, full of Barbarisms,
and Nonsense, Falsehoods and contradictions, if it do but pretend to make out
the Supremacy and Infallibity of the Pope, and set him (while he was an
Apostate and falsely denied the Fact,) above a Council of Three hundred Innocent
Bishops; if it do but say the Pope, though never so wicked, cannot be judged by
any but himself: This Council shall be published by the Roman Editors, and
vindicated by partial Notes, as if it were a most genuine and Authentic Truth:
From whence it is plain, That these Editors, and especially this Annotator has
no other measure of Truth and Falsehood, but the Interest of the Roman Church,
which they resolve to promote, though it be by the most unjust means. And this
may suffice to observe for the Third Century.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Roman Forgeries, IN THE VOLUMES OF THE COUNCILS, For
the Fourth Century.
PART II.
CHAPTER IV.
Of the Forgeries in the Fourth Century.

. 1. THis Century begins with the Life of Marcellus, An. Dom. 304.
a Pope so obscure, that Eusebius's Chronicle wholly omits him Lab. Tom. III.
page 947. Bin. Tom. I. page 185. col. 2.
; and Theodoret knew nothing of him, nor of Pope Eusebius, but makes Melchiades
immediate Successor to Marcellinus Theod. hist. lib. 1 cap. 3.
. It is very observable, that these two unknown Popes, in the Notes on their
Lives, are said to have sat Seven years between them: And the Pontifical says,
There was a Vacancy of Seven years after Marcellinus, which Vacancy is also
asserted by Anastasius Biblioth. by Luitprandus, Abbo Floriacens. Cusanus, and
Genebrard Richer. de Eccles. potestate cap 3. page 46.
. And though Baronius's and Binius's Notes, deny this Seven years Vacancy, it
is upon mere Conjectures: The Scandal of so long a Vacancy no doubt, setting
some of the old Parasites of Rome on work, to invent two Popes Names and put
them into the List, from whence probably they have been foisted into O^tatus
and S. Augustine, two Latin Fathers, while the Greek Authors (which these
Forgers Understood not) do continue Uncorrupted: And truly nothing but the
Names of these two Popes remain; for no good Historian mentions any one Eminent
Act done by either of them; however, the Annotator had rather fill up his Scene
with empty Names of Feigned Popes, who did nothing for Seven years together,
than let the Reader suppose the Catholic Church could so long want its
pretended Head. But though the Notes allow not the Authority of the Pontifical
for the Vacancy, they trust it for the fictitious Story of this Marcellus his
Life, and would have us believe, That in a time of Persecution this Pope
appointed Twenty five Churches in Rome, to Baptize Converts and Bury Martyrs
in; and though the Laws and Customs of that City then, forbad to Bury dead
Bodies within the Walls, we are to believe that the Tyrant Maxentius (who made
all these Martyrs, and persecuted this very Pope) consented to his breaking
this Ancient Law. On the Credit of the same Pontifical we are told, That a
certain Lady, called Lucina, dedicated her House to this Pope (while He was
alive) by the Title of S. Marcellus; and that the Emperor turned it into a
Stable, and made the Pope his Beast-keeper there, where Naked, and clothed
with Sackcloth, (they are the Words of the Pontifical) He soon after ended his
days, the 17th of the Kalends of February Breviar. Romans Jan. 16. page 674.
. Which Fiction the Roman Breviary orders to be read to the Credulous People of
that Communion for Lessions; and tells them, That Marcellus writ an Epistle to
the Bishops of the Antiochian Province about the Roman Primacy, and to prove
Rome to be the Head of All Churches, and that no Synod should be held without
the Pope's Authority. But this Epistle Lab. p. 94^. Bin. page 186. col. 1.
is owned by Labbe to be a Forgery, patched up out of diverse Modern Authors,
citing the Vulgar Latin Version, and dated after Marcellus his death: And it is
very strage, That times of Persecution should be a proper Season for a Pope to
wrangle for his Supremacy: Yet this Notorious Forgery says, Christ ordered S.
Peter, to Translate his Seat from Antioch to Rome; and that the Apostles by
Inspiration decreed, That all Appeals should be made thither, and no Council
held, but by the Authority of the Roman Church. For which cause Binius
vindicates it with Notes as full of Falsehood as the Epistle it self Lab. p.
950. Bin. page 187. col. 1.
: His first Note of this Epistle being writ to one Solomon a Bishop, is an
oversight, and belongs to the first Epistle of Pope Marcell^nus Bin. p. 175.
col. 2. Baron. An. 296.. 5.
. His next Notes about the Primacy and Power of Calling Synods, cite an
Apostolical and Nicene Canon for it; but no such Canons are to be found. He
quotes also two Epistles, one writ to Pope Foelix from Alexandria; another writ
by Pope Julius, to the Eastern Churches, for proof of this Supremacy; and the
same Annotator afterward owns them both to be Forgeries Bin. Not. in Epist.
Foel. p. 499 and Not. in Ep. Julii, page 385.
. He falsely says, Dioscorus was Condemned at Chalcedon, only for holding a
Synod without the Pope's Consent; whereas he is known to have been accused of
many other Crimes. His Text of Fasce oves, is nothing to this purpose; nor will
Pope Pelagius his Word be taken in his own Cause. His Story of Valentinian
makes nothing for the Pope, more than any other Bishop; Yea, the Bishops
desiring him to call a Council, shows, They thought it was His Prerogative; and
Nicephorus relates his Answer to have been, That he was so taken up with State
Affairs, that he had no leisure to enquire into those matters Niceph. lib. 2.
cap. 3. and Whitak. de Council. page 51.
: Wherefore after all this elaborate Sophistry, to justify a false Assertion
of a Forged Epistle, the Annotator has only showed his partiality for the
Pope's Power, but made no proof of it.

The second Epistle of this Marcellus (to the Tyrant Maxentius) is also a
manifest Forgery Lab. p. 951. Bin. page 387. col. 1.
; part of it is taken out of his Successor Gregory's Epistles, writ almost
Three hundred years after this; and it is highly improbable, That a persecuted
Pope should falsely, as well as ridiculously, to a Pagan Emperor, quote the Laws
of the Apostles, and their Successors, forbidding to persecute the Church and
Clergy; and also instruct him about the Roman Churches power in Calling Synods,
and Receiving Appeals; and cite Clement's Forged Epistle as an Authority to
Maxentius, That Laymen must not accuse Bishops. The Notes indeed are unwilling
to lose such precious Evidence, and so pretend, That Maxentius at this time
dissembled himself, to be a Christian; but this Sham can signify nothing to
such as read the Epistle, where Marcellus complains, That he then persecuted
him most unjustly, and therefore he did not pretend to be a Christian at that
time; and consequently the whole Epistle is an absurd Forgery: And so is that
Decree subjoyned to it, which supposes young Children offered to Monasteries,
and Shaved or Veiled there; Customs which came up diverse Centuries after this.

. 2. The Canons of Peter, Bishops of Alexandria Lab. p. 967. Bin. page 189.
col. 1.
, are genuine, and a better Record of Ecclesiastical Discipline, than any Pope
to this time ever made; the Reader also may observe, the Bishop of Rome is not
once named in these Canons; and they plead Tradition for the Wednesday Fast,
contrary to the Roman Churches pretense, of having an Apostolical Tradition, to
Fast on Saturday.

The Council of Elliberis in Spain, is by Binius An. Dom. 305.
placed under Pope Marcellus; which Words Labbe leaves out of the Title Lab. p.
967. E. Bin. page 191. col. 1.
, and justly; for if there were such a Pope, the Council takes no notice of
him, nor is it likely, that Rome did know of this Council till many years
after. Yet it is both Ancient and Authentic, though Mendoza in Labbe Lab. p.
1030.
, reckons up diverse Catholic Authors, Caranza, Canus, Baronius, etc. who either
wholly reject it, or deny the 34th, 35th, 36th, and 40th Canons of it, which
condemn the Opinions now held at Rome: And though Binius (because Pope Innocent
approves it) dare not reject it; yet he publishes Notes to make the Reader
believe, it does not condemn any of their Opinions or Practices.

The 13th Canon speaks of Virgins, who dedicated themselves to God; but
mentions not their being Veiled, or Living in Monasteries; which Customs came
in long after, as the Authors cited in the Notes show Lab. p. 983. D Bin. page
200. col. 1.
.

The 26th Canon calls it an Error, to Fast upon Saturday: But the Notes are so
bold as to say, The Error which this Council corrected, was the not Fasting on
Saturday; whereas even these very Notes confess, That the Eastern Churches, and
most of the Western, (Rome, and some few others excepted) together with the
African Church, did not Fast on Saturday, but Wednesday; yea, those they Call
the Apostolical Canons, and Clement's Constitutions, do both establish
Wednesday Fast, and condemn their pretended Apostolical Churches Saturday Fast;
and if diverse in Spain (as the Notes say) in S. Hierom's and Pope Innocent's
times, did not Fast on Saturday, and others then needed Arguments to settle
them in this Roman practice: It may be gathered from thence, that in the time
of this Council, the Saturday Fast was esteemed an Error, as it was also in
that Age almost in all Christian Churches, and so the very Words of the Canon
import, which Baronius saw, and therefore Baron. Annal. An. 305.. 49.
only says, There is mention of the Saturday Fast in this Synod; and so passes
it, knowing it plainly contradicted the Roman Churches Tradition.

The 34th Canon (under pain of Excommunication) forbids the lighting Wax
Candles in the places where the Martyrs were Buried (q); which agrees with the
(p) Lab. p. 985. E Bin. page 201. col. 1.
Sentiments of the Primitive Church Daile de cultu Lat. lib. 2. chap. 15.
. Lactantius condemns Lighting Candles in God's Worship by day, as a Paganish
Superstition Lactant. Instit. lib. 6. cap. 2.
. S. Hierom faith, It was used in his time only by such as did it to humor the
silly Vulgar, who had a Zeal without Knowledge Hieron. ad Ripar. ep. 53.
. Yet the Notes confess this is the Custom of the Roman Church; for which only
cause some of their Doctors reject this Canon (since nothing must be Authentic,
which condemns their Novel Superstitions) and these Notes make a miserable
Blunder to excuse the matter; but we are not concerned, whether (with the
Annotator) these Candles in the Daylight disturb the Spirits of the Living
Saints, by seeing an Heathenish Rite brought into the Church, or (with
Baronius) displease the Saints Deceased, to behold so Superstitious a thing
vainly devised for their honor. Since it sufficiently appears, the practice is
novel and absurd, and (though now used at Rome) condemned by the best
Antiquity. The Notes also give us one extraordinary distinction Bin. Not. in 34
and 35 Can p. 201. col. 2.
, between the Souls of deceased Saints in Heaven, and those in Purgatory; which
latter sort, if they had been Saints, one would think should need no such
dreadful Scouring.

The 36th Canon determines, That Pictures ought not to be in Churches; and that
none may Paint upon Walls that which is worshipped Lab. p. 986. Bin page 201.
col. 2.
: Which so expressly condemns the Roman-Worship of Pictures and Images, that the
boldest Writers of that Church reject this Canon; but others (as the Notes say)
would gladly expound it so, as to assert the honor and worship due to Holy
Images; (which is a notable kind of Exposition, to make a Canon assert that,
which it confutes:) But such transparent Fallacies deserve rather derision,
than serious Arguments. Sanders and Turrian observe, That these Fathers forbid
not Images, which Christians might take away and hide; but Pictures, which they
must leave exposed to Pagan abuses. But might not this have been prevented, by
hanging up their Pictures in Frames? and are not large Images as difficult to
be removed and concealed as Pictures? Yea, does not the present Roman Church
adore Pictures as well as Images? so that still this Canon condemns them.
Martinez fancies, This Council forbid Painting on the Walls, lest the Pictures
should be deformed by the decay of those Walls: But he forgets, that the
Council first forbids them to be any where in the Church; and were not Walls as
subject to decay in the time of the Second Nicene Council, as they are now? And
had not those Fathers as great an honor for Pictures, as these at Elliberis?
yet the Nicene Picture-Worshipers, order them to be painted on Church-Walls.
Martinez adds, That as times vary, human Statutes vary; and so the Second
Council of Nice made a quite contrary Decree. What! are Decrees of Councils
about Matters of Divine Worship, only human Statutes? what will become of the
Divine Authority and Apostolical Tradition, pretended for this Worship of old
at Nice, and now at Rome, if the Orders against it and for it be both human and
mutable Statutes? It is well however, that the Patrons of Image Worship do own,
they have altered and abrogated a Primitive Canon, for one made Four hundred
years after, in times of Ignorance and Superstition; and we know, whether of
the two we ought to prefer. Baronius is more ingenuous, who says Baron. An.
305.. 45.
, These Bishops at Elliberis chiefly endeavored, by strict Penalties, to
affright the Faithful from Idolatry; wherefore they made the 34th, 36th and
37th Canons; and by comparing the First Canon with the Forty sixth, it appears,
they dealt more severely with an Idolater, than an Apostate. From whence we
infer, That Pictures in Churches tend to Idolatry, in this Councils Opinion.
Albaspinaeus (whose Notes Labbe here prints Lab. p. 998
) would enervate this Canon, by saying, It forbids not the Saints Pictures; but
those which represented God and the Holy Trinity. But it is not probale, these
Primitive Christians were so ignorant, as to need any prohibition about such
blasphemous Representations of God's Majesty. And he brings no proof, but his
own bare Conjecture for this limitation of the Canon; which Fancy (if it were
true) would prove, That the Saints were not worshipped or adored in that Age,
because nothing that was worshipped and adored, was to be painted on the Walls;
and if that be meant only of God and the Trinity, then nothing else but God and
the Trinity was adored in those days: Finally, the former part of the Canon
destroys this limitation, by excluding Pictures in general out of Churches.
These are the various Fallacies by which these partial Editors, would hide the
manifest Novelty of their Churches, Worship of Pictures, which cannot be
defended by all these Tricks.

I will only add, That this genuine Ancient Council in the Fifty third Canon,
Orders, The same Bishop who Excommunicated a Man, to Absolve him; and that if
any other intermedled, He should be called to an account for it Lab. p. 976.
Bin. page 196. C
; without excepting the Pope, or taking notice of Marcellus's pretended claim
of Appeals.

. 3. In the Year 306, was a Council at Cartbage against the Donatists, which
never takes any notice of the Pope; yet they put into the Title of it, Under
Marcellus Lab. p 1379. Bin. page 202. C
. But there is a worse Forgery in the Notes, where S. Augustine is cited, as
saying, That Cecilian (Bishop of Carthage) despised the Censures of the
Donatists, because he was joined in Communion with the Bishop of the Roman
Church, from which all Catholic Communion, was ever wont to be denominated: But
this is Baronius his false gloss, not S. Augustine's words, who only says, --
because he was united by Communicatory Letters, both to the Roman Church,
wherein the Principality of the Catholic Church had always flourished, and to
other Lands from whence the Gospel came to Africa Aug. cp. 62. Tom. Il. p. 150.
Vid. Baron. An. 306.. 40.
. Now there is great difference between a Man's being a Catholic, because he was
in Communion with Rome (then Orthodox) and with other Churches; and his being a
Catholic merely for being in Communion with the Roman Bishop, which is the
modern and false notion of the word Catholic, among Papists, in our days: But
Binius was so convinced, that S. Augustine's words confuted Baronius's
Paraphrase, that he cunningly leaves them out, to make this commodious Sense of
them go better down with careless Readers.

. 4. The next Pope Eusebius, was so obscure, (as the Notes on his Life declare)
that no Writer mentions any thing of him that is memorable Lab. p. 1380, Bin.
page 203. col. 1.
; and it is probable, there never was such a Pope: Yet the Pontifical says,
The Cross was found in his time, upon the 5th of the Nones of May, which is the
very Day on which the Roman Church now celebrates The Invention of the Cross:
And the Third Decretal Epistle of this Pope, was devised on purpose support
this Story; yet both Baronius and Binius reject it for a Fable, even while
their Church still observes that Holy Day. There are Three Epistles forged for
this Name of a Pope, all which Labbe owns to be spurious Lab. p. 1381. Bin.
page 203. col. 1.
; and I need not spend much time to prove it, since they cite the Vulgar Latin
Version, and are mostly stolen out of Modern Authors, (as Labbe's Margen
shows) having only one Consul's Name for their Dates, because no other was
named in the Pontifical. Besides, the first Epistle uses the Phrase, Pro
salvatione servorum Dei, which is not the Latin of that Age; and talks of
Rigorous Tortures used among Christians, to make Witnesses confess Truth. The
second Epistle repeats the foolish Argument, of Christ's whipping the Buyers
and Sellers (many of which were Laymen) out of the Temple, to prove, that God
alone must judge Priests; and out of a much later Roman Council, (suspected
also of Forgery) speaks of the Peoples not judging their Bishop, unless he err
in Matters of Faith --; and discourses of Edicts of Kings, forbidding to try an
ejected Bishop, till he be restored to his place. The third Epistle has the
Fable of the Invention of the Cross, and all other Marks of Forgery on it; yet
Bellarmine cites it to prove, the Pope's Succession to S. Peter, in his
Universal Monarchy; and to make out Confirmation to be a Sacrament Bellarm. de
Pontif. Romans lib. 2. cap. 14. and de Confirm. lib. 2. cap. 3.
So little do those Writers value the credit of any Evidence, if it do but make
for their Churches Authority, or support its Doctrines.

5. The Seven years Vacancy being now expired, Melchiades was chosen Pope, and
Sat Three years and Seven Months, according to the Pontifical Lab. p. 1394.
Bin. page 209. col. 1.
; and though the Ecclesiastical Tables (as they call them) generally follow
this Author; yet Baronius here by them corrects the Pontifical, and allows
Melchiades only Two Years and Two Months: But all this is Conjecture, for he
grants the Consuls in the Pontifical are so false, that they cannot be
reconciled to Truth Baren. An. 311.. 43.
; whence it follows, That the Decretal Epistle ascribed to this Pope, whose
Matter is taken from the Pontifical, and whose Date is by those who were not
Consuls till after Melchiades's Death Lab. p. 1400. A. in Marg.
, must be false also: Yet the Notes defend this Forged Epistle, and Bellarmine
cites it for the Supremacy, and for Confirmations being a Sacrament Bellarmin.
ubi supra (c).
, whereas the beginning of it is stolen out of Celestine's Epistle to the
French Lab. p. 1395. D, E.
; it quotes the Vulgar Translation, and cites an Apostolical Privilege granted
to Rome, for the sole right of Trying Bishops; to justify which, The Notes
cite the 73d and 74th Apostolical Canons; but those Canons, order Bishops to
judge an offending Bishop, and make the last appeal to a Synod, without taking
any notice of Rome, or of this pretended Privilege. Again, this Feigned
Epistle impudently makes Confirmation more venerable than Baptism; and the
Notes defend that bold Expression: But we cannot but wonder, (since they
assert, That Bishops by Gods Law have the sole power of Confirming;) the same
Men should grant, That the Pope can give a Priest leave to Confirm, Which yet
(they say) changes not the Divine Right of Bishops Lab. p. 1400. Bin. p. 211.
col. 2.
; That is in plain terms, One man's sole Right may be delegated to another, by a
Third person, without any injury to him who had the sole Right.

After this follows a Council at Rome under Melchiades, wherein the Pope, by
delegation from the Emperor, is joined in Commission with Three French Bishops,
(who are called his Colleagues) to hear the Donatists complaint against Cecilian
Bishop of Carthage Lab. p. 1401. Bin. page 212. col. 1.
, and Constantine not only received the Donatists first Appeal, and delegated
this Cause to Melchiades and his Fellow Commissioners; but upon a second
Complaint, ordered this Matter to be heard over again in a French Council,
which the Pope in Council had determined. Now this so clearly shows, that the
Pope was not Supreme Judge in those days, that Baronius and Binius are hard put
to it, to Blunder this Instance: The Notes say, Constantine was yet raw in the
Faith; and yet they say also, He knew by God's Law, nothing was to be done
without the chief Bishop. But they are forced to prove this by a false
Translation of Constantine's Epistle to Melchiades Lab. p. 1407. Bin. page 212.
col. 2.
, the words of which in Greek are, (...), which in their Version is, As the
most holy Law of God requires; but Valesius's Translation (which Labbe gives
us) is, As is agreeable to the most Venerable Law; That is, (as all men know)
to the Imperial Laws: So that Constantine only says, He had ordered the
Accusers and Accused, all to appear at Rome before these delegated Judges, as
the Venerable Laws (which order both Parties to be present when a Cause is
tried) do require; and by the help of a false Translation this occasion is made
use of, to make the Credulous believe, That God's Law required all Causes
should be tried at Rome: Whereas it is apparent by this Instance, That a Cause
once Tried there before the Pope, might be tried over again in France, if the
Emperor pleased.

The two following Epistles of Constantine out of Pithaeus his Manuscript Lab.
p. 1430. Bin. page 213.
, are very suspicious; the first speaks more magnificently of Christ than one
who (as they say) was so raw in the Faith was like to do: And in it Constantine
is made to decline Judging in Bishops Causes; which is a protestation against
his own Act, and contradiction to the second Epistle, wherein He declares, that
this Episcopal Cause shall be tried before himself: Nor is this first Epistle
Recorded in Eusebius, or agreeable to Constantine's Style; so that we suppose,
that was devised by such as designed to persuade Princes, That Bishops were
above them: For which purpose Baronius here cites a Law of this Emperor to
Ablavius Baron. An. 314.. 38, 39.
, Giving men leave to choose Bishops for their Judges, and not allowing them
after that to appeal to Secular Courts; because they had been heard by Judges
of their own choosing: But Baronius perverts this, to signify, That Bishops
were above Secular Judges by their ordinary Jurisdiction, whereas they were not
so in any Cause of this kind, but only when they were extraordinarily chosen
Arbitrators; and so Sozomen expounds this Law.

. 6. We are now arrived at the time of Pope Sylvester, An Dom. 314.
who living about the time when Constantine publicly professed Christianity,
and being Pope when the Nicene Council was called; yet no Author of Credit,
records his being much concerned in these grand Revolutions: Upon which the
Annalist, and our Editors rake into all kind of Forgeries, and devise most
improbable Stories, to set off Pope Sylvester as very considerable; but we
shall look into the Original of the Emperor's becoming a Christian, which will
discover all their Fallacies.

Constantine was born of Christian Parents, and brought up under them, and was
Thirty years old when he entered on the Empire. And from the Year 306 Baron. An.
306.. 14.
He professed openly he was a Christian, Making Laws to encourage Converts, and
to suppress Paganism throughout his Empire, Building and Endowing Churches, and
granting great Immunities to the Clergy; yet all this while He took no notice
of Marcellus, Eusebius, or Melchiades, S. Peter's Successors, and pretended
Monarchs of the Church. After Seven years having Vanquished Maxentius at Rome,
they say, He gave to the Pope his Palace of the Lateran Lab. p. 1394. Bin. page
209. col. 1. Baron. An. 312.. 82, and. 85.
: The Notes cite Optatus for this; but he only says, A Council of Nineteen
Bishops met in the Lateran; but it does not follow from thence, that
Constantine had then given the Pope this fair Palace. Again, Baronius (without
any ancient Author for it) says, That Constantive gave S. Peter thanks for his
Victory over Maxentius; yet at the same time he affirms, He was yet a Pagan,
and durst not by his Acts declare himself a Christian Baron. An. 312.. 58, and.
62.
. Very strange! Were not Building Churches, settling Christianity by a Law,
giving his Palace to the Pope, and (as they say) Fixing the Trophy of the Cross
in the midst of Rome Bin. p. 208 col. 2.
, Acts sufficient to declare him a Christian? No, He must be a Pagan Eleven
years after this, and a Persecutor; yea, in the year 324 He was so mere a
Heathen as to know nothing of the Christian Rites, but what an Egyptian taught
him. After he had openly professed this Religion Eighteen years, He had forgot
it all, and turned so great a Tyrant, that Pope Sylvester (who had no great
mind to be a Martyr) ran away into the Mount Soracte, or was banished thither:
But Constantine, after He had been Ten years Pope, never had heard of him, till
being struck with a Leprosy (mentioned in no Authentic Writer) two glorious
Persons, whose Faces he knew not, appeared to the Emperor, and ordered him to
send for Pope Sylvester to cure him; who (when He was come) first showed
Constantine these two glorious Persons were S. Peter and S. Paul, and then
Cured him; made him a Christian, and Baptized him. Which idle and
self-contradicting Romance is magnified by Baronius's and Binius's Notes; but
we will now confute it as briefly as we can.

. 7. First, This whole Story is devised, to exalt the Glory of the Roman
Church; to make Men believe the Pope could work Miracles, and that the first
Christian Emperor was Baptized at Rome: But then it casts such a blot upon
Constantine's Memory, and feigns such odious and incredible things of him, as
no wise Man can believe concerning a Prince, who S. Augustine says, was a
Christian Eight years before this Baron. An. 316.. 59, and 62, 63.
. And whoever reads in Baronius, the History of the first Ten years of
Sylvester, from An. 314 till An. 324, and observes what glorious Things he
says of Constantine's Religious Laws, his Piety to God, his Zeal for
Christianity, his Respect to Confessors, and his Bounty to Bishops; his taking
part with the Catholics against Heretics and Schismatics: He can never believe
this scandalous Story of so excellent a Prince. But in all this Period of Time,
Baronius himself cannot find one Evidence, That ever Constantine had any
correspondence with Sylvester, and therefore Christianity was settled in the
Empire without the Pope's help: To cover which great Truth, some dull (but
zealous Monk) long since invented this Sham Story, to save the Credit of Rome;
and the Annalist and these Notes strive to defend it.

Secondly, This Fable chiefly relies on the Credit of the Pontifical, (so often
proved false) and upon the repute of Sylvester's Acts: But the Annotator at
first ominously Charges them both with Falsehood Lab. p. 14 16. Bin. page 217.
col. 1.
; the former mistakes the Time of the Vacancy, and the latter (he says) is
wrong in making Melchiades ordain Sylvester a Priest, he being Ordained by
Marcellinus long before. Baronius also confesses, That these Acts of Sylvester
are so false in many particulars, that it shakes the Credit of the whole Baron.
Annal. 311.. 59. and An. 315.. 10, 11, and 12. and An. 324.. 41.
. But it is very strange, after he (who is so concerned for their Reputation)
had found so many Flaws in them, he should justify them even where they
contradict all the Historians of the Age; which can spring from nothing but a
Resolution to maintain every thing which made for the Credit of the Roman See.

Thirdly, The Notes say not only the Acts of Sylvester, but Zosimus and Sozomen
do both attest this Story: Now first, Zosimus was a Pagan, and Baronius and
Binius confess, He tells many Malicious Lies of Constantine, for suppressing
the Heathen Religion; and though they confute the rest of his Calumnies, they
defend his Relation of Constantine's Baptism, as sounding something like those
forged Acts Baron. An. 324.. 17.
; and though his Account of it reflect as much upon Constantine, as is
possible; yet the Annalist and Annotator labor to prove this Spightful Heathen
to be a truer Historian, than Sozomen, Socrates, or Eusebius, whom they
represent as Liars and Flatterers, not to be believed against Zosimus. Yet
there is a mighty difference between this Pagan's History of the Baptism of
Constantine, and that in Sylvester's Acts: Zosimus says, It was a Spaniard,
named Aegyptius, lately by the Court Ladies brought acquainted with
Constantine, who advised him to be Baptized; and this the Notes say was Hosius;
yet it is plain, Hosius was Constantine's Intimate Friend, and his Legate into
Egypt Twelve years before (z). Besides, (x) Baron An. 312.. 91.
Zosimus does not name Sylvester, and only designed by his Relation to blacken
Constantine, and represent Christianity as a Sanctuary for Villainies, which
could not be expiated among the Pagans: But the Acts discourse of a
Persecution, and a Leprosy, and make Peter and Paul the Advisers of
Constantine's Baptism; and their business is only to set up Sylvester's Name.
And the Stories (like all Falsehoods) do not hang together: As for Sozomen, he
is no Evidence for Sylvester's Acts, nor does he once name that Pope in the
place cited Sozom. hist. lib. 1. cap. 5.
. He only confutes the scandalous Stories, which Zosimus had falsely told of
Constantine, showing how improbable it is, that this Emperor (after he had
Reigned nigh Twenty years) should need a New Conversion; and how unlikely it
must be, that the Pagans would not have found out some Rites to expiate him,
that so they might secure him in their Religion: So that he is a Witness, That
these Reports of Constantine were false, and invented by Malicious Heathens,
and so far as Zosimus and Sylvester's Acts agree, he confutes them both; and
since he lived within an Hundred years after this time, while some alive might
possibly remember these Passages; His early denial of these Fictions is better
Evidence against them, than Baronius and Binius's Testimony for them, after
Thirteen hundred years; to serve a Turn, and do Honor to that Church they
resolve to Magnify.

Fourthly, The Notes speak of Sylvester's Returning to Rome in great glory;
which is not mentioned in Zosimus nor Sozomen, and only relies on the Credit of
these Acts Lab. p. 14 17. Bin. page 217.
: Which have no Evidence to Attest them, but Pope Adrian, who perhaps forged
them; or however, first produced these Acts in the Second Nicene Council, Four
hundred and Fifty years after Sylvester's time, to prove the use of Images in
Constantine's Days. But the very Acts declare, That Constantine (who had Built
and Adorned so many Churches, and if Images or Pictures had then been used,
must have seen the Faces of S. Peter and S. Paul) did not know the Faces of
these two great Apostles, till Sylvester showed them their Images. Whence we
infer, That the Acts are no good Proof for Images, if they were Authentic; and
their being first cited in an Ignorant Council, made up of Forgeries and False
Stories, gives us good Reason to believe them Spurious.

. 8. The Annotator in the next place asserts confidently, That Constantine was
Baptized at Rome by Sylvester, Anno 324 Lab. p. 14 17. Bin. page 217. col. 2.
: But his Proofs are very weak, viz. First, He cites a Roman Council for this,
held the same year: But the Style of that Council is so barbarous, the
Sentences so incoherent, and the Matter of Fact so false, that Labbe owns it is
a Forgery, and Binius confesses it is suspicious Lab. p. 15 44. Bin. page 256.
; so that this can be no evidence: Nor Secondly, Anastasius Bibliothecarius,
who lived Five hundred and Fifty years after this time, and was a mere
Sycophant of the Popes, to set up whose Supremacy (then newly hatched) he stuck
at nothing, and that spoils his Credit. Thirdly, Zosimus is a malicious Lying
Writer, as to Constantine; and though he do say, Constantine was Baptized at
Rome, he does not affirm, that Sylvester Baptized him: Fourthly, Sozomen only
relates Zosimus his Story to confute it; so that not one of his Witnesses do
prove the matter: Yet these Authors with a weak Conjecture, That Constantine
could not have been present in the Nicene Council, if he had not been Baptized
before (which we will presently confute) is all the Evidence that Baronius and
these Notes can give for this incredible Story: But on the other side, there
are many clear Proofs, that he was baptized at Nicomedia, a little before his
death.

First, Eusebius (who lived at that time, and knew Constantine very well, and
writ his History soon after) does affirm this: And if it had been False, many
then alive who could remember it, would doubtless have exposed him for so
manifest a Fiction. The Notes say he Forged this Story in favor of
Constantius; but he must be very Ridiculous, if he would be obliged by a Story
of his Father, which many hundreds as well as himself, must have then known to
be a Falsehood; And Eusebius must be as silly as he was knavish, to invent a
Fable so easy to be disproved by living Witnesses: But the Notes wrong
Eusebius, when they say, he reports that Constantine died Impious and alienated
from the Catholic Church; For Eusebius says he made a most Christian and Pious
end: However Eusebius by this Testimony brings upon himself, all the Rage and
Spite of Baronius and our Annotator, who upon all occasions Blast this Holy and
Learned Writer, to whose pains they and all the Christian World are infinitely
beholding; and though while Eusebius's History continues, it be almost the only
true Record used by Baronius in complling his Annals; yet he and Binius in
every Page almost do revile him as an Arian and a Writer of Lies: But there is
so much Malice, and so little probability in the Accusation, that their own
Writers and ours also do vindicate Ensebius from these Slanders Valesij. praes.
ad edit. Eusebius. Dr. Cave life of Eusebius. page 31.
, and we could easily confute these Calumnies, but only that in this Relation
he is so certainly in the Right, that we need not consider his Opinion in other
things, but will show as to this particular he is supported by the best
Evidence imaginable. For

Secondly, Theodoret also says, that Constantine was Baptized a little before
his Death at Nicomedia Theodoret. hist. lib. 1. cap. 32
; and though that Eusebius, who was Bishop of that City, was an Arian, yet he
dissembled his Heresy while Constantine lived, and the Emperor had restored
Athanasius, contrary to this Bishop's mind; wherefore though he was forced to
make use of an Arian Bishop to Baptize him, being taken ill in that City, yet
it will not follow that Constantine died an Arian: Moreover that Constantine
was Baptized at Nicomedia, is attested also by Socrates Socrat. hist. lib. 1.
cap. 26.
and Sozomen Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 32.
; and also by the Chronicles of Isidore and S. Hierom Baron. An. 324.. 47.
, and by S. Ambrose in his Funeral Oration for Theodosius; Yea, Athanasius and
a whole Synod at Ariminum, do expressly declare, that Constantine was Baptized a
little before his Death; that is, Thirteen years after this pretended Baptism
at Rome Athanas. de Synod. page 243. Epistol. Synod. Arim. ap. Socrat. lib. 2.
cap. 29. and Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 17.
, which last Testimony Baronius and the Notes presume to corrupt, and contrary
to all the best Copies, and the necessary Sense of the place, put Constans his
Name into the Text instead of Constantine: So that in fine the only Question is
now, Whether we will believe these two Modern partial Writers, with those most
Fabulous (but as they call them most approved) Acts of Sylvester, first cited
by Pope Adrian 450 years after: Or we will believe the concurrent Witness of
all the Ancient and Eminent Writers of that and the next Ages; to whom if we
give Credit, then Constanstine's Baptism at Rome by Sylvester, is a mere
Forgery devised for the glory of the Roman Church, and for that only reason so
eagerly defended by this Annotator and the Annalist.

. 9. Together with this Fable we must also reject the Fiction of Constantine's
Leprosy, which was invented only that Sylvester might cure it Lab. p. 1419.
Bin. page 218. col. 2.
; and therefore the Notes prove it very slenderly, viz. First, By those Acts of
Sylvester, in which they confess there are many Errors Vid. ibid. and Baron.
Annal. 324.. 97.
: Secondly, By a Roman Council, which is as manifest a Forgery as the Acts
themselves: Thirdly, By a Metaphorical expression of Gregorius Turonensis, a
credulous Writer, who lived 300 years after this, and yet even he does not
expressly affirm it. Fourthly, But the Annotator tells us the Gentile Historians
do confirm this, though he names but one, viz. Michael Glycas, who unlucklily
proves a Christian Monk, living in Sicily, Anno 1120, about 800 years after
this time, and long after Adrian and his Nicene Council had dispersed
Sylvester's Acts, out of which Glycas took this Fable upon Trust: So that at
last he only proves the Acts, by the Acts themselves and by Pope Adrian; and
that is all the Authority he has for this feigned Leprosy, which Disease no
Writer (of Credit and Antiquity) says Constantine, ever had; no not that
Malicious Zosimus, who raked up all the Odious things against this Emperor he
could devise; and if ever he had been struck by Heaven with Leprosy, no doubt
he would have Blazed it abroad with great Pleasure.

. 10. The Book of Constantine's Munificence, is grounded on the Fable of his
Baptism, and seems to be Forged by the same Hand with Sylvester's Acts: So that
we ought also to reject it as a Fiction: Anastasius, who put it out, was the
Pope' s Library Keeper; and whether he made it, or found it in the Vatican,
that Shop of Lies (as Richerius calls it) the Credit of it is invalidated, by
reason, no Author of Repute or Antiquity, mentions any of these Gifts: It says
blasphemously, Constantine gave a Savior sitting five foot high (so it calls a
dead Image Lab. p. 1420. Bin. Not page 219. col. 1.
;) But if this were true, why did not Adrian cite this in his Nicene Council?
Or why did this Emperor' s Sister write to Eusebius Bishop of Coesarea for an
Image of Christ, when Sylvester could more easily have furnished her? and by
the way, the Notes fraudulently mention this Message Not. Y. Bin. page 219.
col. 2. and Lab. p. 1421.
, but do not relate how severely Eusebius reproved that Lady for seeking after
a visible Image of Christ: The Annotator also cites Paulinus to prove this Book
of Munificence; but he writ near 100 years after; and though he speak of a fine
Church of S. Peter in Rome; yet he says not that Constantine either founded or
adorned it: Baronius attempts to prove this Book by mear Conjectures, by the
Forged Acts, and by Nicephorus, a late Author, whom he often taxes for Fictions
Baron. An. 324.. 72. and 75.
; but he can produce no ancient or eminent Author for it: And yet it is
certain, if Constantine, had given so many and so great gifts to the Head City
of the World, some of the most Famous Writers would have Recorded it: Besides,
the Cardinal himself rejects both the idle Story of S. Agnes Temple, (attested
by a Fiction ascribed to S. Ambrose) told in this very Book Baron. An. 324..
107.
; and the apparent Falsehood of Constantine's now burying his Mother in one of
these Churches, who was alive long after Idem, An. 324.. 114.
: So that by his own Confession there are diverse Falsehoods in this Book; and he
had been more Ingenuous if he had owned the whole to be (as it really is) a
Forgery.

. 11. The Editors now go back to the Council of An. Dom. 314.
Arles, held (as they say) Anno 314 Lab. p. 1425. Bin. page 220. col. 1.
: And it troubles them much, to ward off the Blows which it gives to their
beloved Supremacy: For it was appointed by the Emperor, upon an Appeal made to
him by the Donatists, to judge a cause over again, which had been judged before
by Melchiades and his Roman Council; (the Pope in Council it seems, being not
then taken to be Infallible:) It Is true, in the Title, which these Editors give
us, this Council directs their Canons, To their Lord, and most Holy Brother
Sylvester the Bishop, and say, they had sent them to him, that all might know
(the Pope not excepted) what they were to observe: So that though in Respect
they call him Lord, yet they Style him also a Brother, and expect his obedience
to their Decrees; nor do they (as the Notes pretend,) desire him to confirm
these Canons Lab. p. 1434. Bin. page 223. col. 2.
; But only require the Pope who held the larger Diocese, that he would openly
acquaint all with them, as their Letter speaks: That is, as he was a
Metropolitan, to give notice of these Canons to all his Province, which was
then called a Diocese; and Baronius is forced to point the Sentence salsly to
make it sound, toward his beloved Supremacy Baron An. 314.. 68.
. So in the First Canon, Pope Sylvester is ordered by this Council to give
notice to all, of the Day on which Easter was to be observed: That is, he was
to write to all his Neighboring Bishops under his Jurisdiction about it, not
as the Notes say Lab. p. 1434. Bin. page 224. col. 1. Baron An. 314.. 58.
; That he was to determine the day, and by virtue of his Office to write to all
the Bishops of the Christian World to observe it: The Council had ordered the
Day, and command the Pope to give notice to all about him to keep it. And in
the Famous Nicene Council, The Bishop of Alexandria (living where Astronomy was
well understood) was appointed first to settle, and then to certify the day of
Easter; yet none will infer from hence, that he was the Head of the Catholic
Church, because he had this Duty imposed on him, which as yet, is more than the
Council of Arles did put upon the Bishop of Rome: Again, the Notes are very
angry at the Emperor, for receiving the Donatists appeal from the Pope and his
Council, which they say Constantine owned to be an unjust and impious thing Not
in Council Aret. Bin. page 221. col. 2.
; but they prove this only by a forged Epistle mentioned but now, 5. But it is
certain Constantine, (though a Catechumen, which they pretended was impossible
at Nice) was present in this Council, and so he must act against his
Conscience, if he had thought it unjust, and impious to judge in Ecclesiastical
Causes: And in this Emperor' s Letter to Ablavius, he says; God had committed
all Earthly things to his ordering: and in that to Celsus he promises to come
into Africa, to enquire and judge of things done both by the People and the
Clergy Baron. Ann. 316. 62.
. And indeed Constantine, by all his practice sufficiently declared, he thought
it lawful enough for him to judge in Ecclesiastical matters. Finally, the Notes
say the Bishops met in this Council, at the Emperor' s request Lab. p. 1423
Bin. page 222. col. 2.
; Now that shows it was not at the Pope' s request; but indeed Constantine's
Letter to Chrestus, expressly Commands the Bishops to meet; The Notes also out
of Balduinus or Optatus, (or rather from an obscure Fragment cited by him) say,
Sylvester was President of this Council; Baronius adds of his own head --
namely by his Legates Baron. Ann. 314.. 51.
, which guess Binius puts down for a certain truth: But it is ridiculous to
fancy that a pair of Priests, and as many Deacons in that Age, should sit above
the Emperor, when himself was present in that Council; So that though we allow
the Pope' s Messengers to have been at this Council, there is no proof that
they presided in it: We shall only add, that instead of Arians in the Eighth
Canon, we must Read Africans: or else we must not fix this Council so early as
An. 314, at which time the Arians were not known by that name.

. 12. In the same year is placed the Council of Ancyra, which the Editors do
not (as usually) say was under Sylvester, but only in his time Lab. p. 1455.
Bin. page 225.
; and it is well they are so modest; for doubtless he had no Hand in it; the
Notes confess that it was called by the Authority of Vitalis Bishop of Antioch
Lab. p. 1478. Bin. page 232. col. 2.
: Balsamon and Zonaras say Vitalis of Antioch, Agricolaus of Caesarea, and
Basil of Amasea, were the Presidents of it Beveridg. Council Tom. I. page 375.
. Yet not only Leo the Fourth, but the famous Council of Nice, approved of this
Synod called and carried on without the Pope' s knowledge or leave: There is
but one Canon in this Council which contradicts the Roman practice, viz. The
Ninth, which allows Deacons to Marry and continue in their Office, if they
declared at their Ordination that they could not live Single: This Canon
therefore Baronius and Binius strive to corrupt with false Glosses: The former
says, We may by this Canon see how firmly Ministers single Life was asserted,
not only in the whole Catholic Church but in the East Baron. Ann. 314.. 88.
. Now it is very strange, that a private Canon of a Provincial Council, which
allows one Order of Ministers to Marry, should show it was the Opinion of the
whole Church, that none might Marry: The latter in his Notes affirms That, this
among other Canons solidly proves, that not only Priests, but Deacons (by the
Apostolical Law) were bound to Live without Wives Lab. p. 1478. Bin. page 223.
col. 2.
: But the Apostles certainly allowed Deacons to have Wives; and this Canon was
made on purpose, that they might live with their Wives, if they pleased: The
Notes proceed to say, That Deacons ordained against their Will, and protesting
they could not contain, were by these Fathers permitted to Marry after their
Ordination, provided they left off all Sacred Administrations, and did not
Communicate among the Priests in the Chancel, but among the People: Which is an
impudent falsification; There being no word of being Ordained unwillingly; nor
any reason why they should be Ordained, who were to be reduced presently to
Lay-communion: Yea, the Words of the Canon are express, that if they did Marry,
they should continue in their Ministration (...). Vid. Bever. not. Tom. II. p.
175.
; So that these Editors make no Conscience, to make these ancient Records to
contradict themselves, rather then let them seem to oppose their Churches
present practice: For which vile purpose there is another trick in the Notes on
this Council; For whereas the Eighteenth Canon speaks of Lay-persons which
Vowed single Life, (as many had done in times of Persecution) and afterward
broke their Vow, that these were to be counted Bigamists; The Notes Bin. p.
233. col. 2.
on this Canon, put these Words of the Thirteenth Canon, Those who are of the
Clergy, etc. Before their observation on the Eighteenth Canon, on purpose to
make the Reader think the Clergy in those days, Vowed single Life as they do
now at Rome.

. 13. The Council of Naeccaesarea (according to these Editors) was under
Sylvester Lab. p. 1479. Bin. page 233.
, who is not once named in it, nor does it appear he knew of it: They might
also have left out Leo the Fourth's approving it Five hundred years after,
because the Notes say, The Council of Nice allowed it, which is much more for
its Credit Lab. p. 1489. Bin. page 236. col. 2.
. The same Notes say, The first Canon orders the same thing, which was decreed
in the Thirty third Canon at Elliberis, and the Ninth at Ancyra: And if so,
that is not, (as they falsely gloss the Canon of Ancyra) That the Clergy should
live Single, or be reduced to Lay Communion? For in that Canon some of the
Clergy are allowed to Marry, and to continue to minister as Clergymen still.
And the true Sense of this Naeocaesarean Canon is, That whereas in times of
Persecution, when Marriage was inconvenient, many Priests promised to live
Single: Now these only were not allowed to Marry afterward Vid. Beveridg. Not.
in Council. Nicen. Tom. II. p. 180.
; but when the Church had Peace, the Nicene Council left all Clergymen free,
to Marry or not, as they pleased; which shows, That when the Reason of this
Canon ceased, they believed its Obligation did so also. The Fifth Canon forbids
a Catechumen, who falls into Sin, to enter into the Church: By which the Notes
say, That Baronius had sharply censured Eusebius Vid. Baron. An 324.. 49.
: But it is plain, that Baronius shows more Malice than Wit in that Censure:
Eusebius only relates Matter of Fact, That Constantine was present in the
Nicene Council, and he (with all ancient Authors) agrees, That Constantine was
yet a Catechumen; where then is the Crime? Do not Baronius and Binius both
agree, that Constantine was present in the Council of Arles, Ten years before
his pretended Baptism at Rome? And if it be said, This Canon forbid it: I ask,
Whether it be probable, that an Emperor (who, as Baronius says, was Solutus
Legibus, Above the Civil Law) should be proceeded against by a Canon of a small
Provincial Council? Wherefore Eusebius his only Crime is, That he tells a
Truth, which happens to contradict the Lying Acts of Sylvester, and
consequently the Interest of Rome, for which the Cardinal and Annotator can
never forgive him.

The next place is assigned to a Roman Council, under Sylvester, wherein there
was a famous Disputation between the Jews and Christians, before Constantine
and Helena; but in the Notes Lab. p. 1491. Bin. page 237. col. 1. Vid. Baron.
An. 315.. 12.
we are told the Story is utterly false, only attested by Sylvester's Acts,
which Swarm with Lies, as they are now extant; (yet out of these Acts, as now
extant, is the Forgery of Constantine's Baptism at Rome taken;) and therefore
Baronius and Binius reject this Council as a mere Forgery. But why do they not
reject Constantine's Baptism, as well as this Council, since both rely on the
same Author? The Reason is plain, That makes for the Interest of the Pope, and
This no way concerns; and so it may pass for a Forgery, as it is.

. 14. On occasion of Arius's Heresy now breaking An. Dom. 315.
out at Alexandria, there was a Council of an Hundred Bishops called by
Alexander, Bishop of that City, to Condemn him; which first Council of
Alexandria (the Editors say) was under Sylvester; but it does not appear that
this Pope knew of it till Three years after Lab. p. 1492. Bin. page 237. col. 2.
, An. 318; at which time Alexander gave notice of this Council (not to
Sylvester by name, as the Notes falsely suggest, but) to all Catholic Bishops,
and in particular to the Bishop of Constantinople. But for fear the Reader
should observe, That more respect was showed to that Bishop, than to the Pope,
the Editors have removed these Epistles of Alexander into the Body of the
Nicene Council, and only give us Notes upon them here, in which the Annotator
out of Baronius turns the Charge of Lying and Forgery, of which themselves have
been so often convicted, upon us, whom they falsely call Innovators Baron.
Annal. 318.. 18. Bin. page 239. col. 1.
. Four years after followed a Second Council at Alexandria, which the Notes
hope to prove was under Sylvester Lab. p. 1493. Bin. page 239. col. 1.
, because Athanasius says, This was a General Council, and says, Hosins was
there: Upon this Baronius, fancying nothing could be a General Council unless
the Pope were present Personally or by his Legates, conjectures Hosius was the
Pope's Legate, and in that capacity presided in this Council Baron. An. 318..
22, etc.
: And the Notes positively affirm this Dream for a certain Truth. But
Athanasius calls many Synods General, which were only Provincial; and it is
plain, he had not the modern Roman Notion of a General Council, because he
never mentions Sylvester, nor does he say, Hosius was his Legate. But even
Baronius owns, that Hosius was Constantine's intimate Friend, and his Legate
into Egypt six years before Baron. An. 312.. 91, and 92.
; and Socrates says, He was now again sent thither as the Emperor's Legate;
and no doubt, if he did preside in this Council, it was not as Sylvester's
Legate (whom no ancient Author records, to have had any hand in this Council,)
but as the Legate of Constantine. After these two Councils is placed a Letter
of this Emperors to Alexander and Arius, taken out of Eusebius, but is
misplaced by the Editors; since it is plain, it was written in the beginning of
the Controversy about Arius, and not only before Constantine understood any
thing of the matter, but before these Councils at Alexandria: But Baronius and
the Editors place it here Bin. Not. p. 240. col. 2. and Baron. An. 318.. 91.
on purpose to Rail at Eusebius, as if he put out an Arian Forgery; whereas it
is a great Truth, and Constantine may well be supposed to write thus, before he
was rightly informed in the Case; therefore those Gentlemen do not hurt
Eusebius's Reputation, but their own, in accusing him so falsely, upon the old
Grudge of his not attesting their Forgeries, devised and defended for the
Honor of the Roman Church.

15. The Council of Laodicea (though it do not appear any Pope knew of it till
after it was Risen) they resolve shall be held under some Pope; the Title
says, Under Sylvester Lab. p. 1495. Bin. page 241.
; Labbe's Margen says, Under Liberius, An. 364, or 357; or, Under Damasus 367:
Whereas in truth it was under no Pope, and being placed in the old Collections
of Canons after those of Antioch, and also mentioning the Photinians, it must
be held long after the Nicene Council Beveridg. not. Tom. II. page 193.
: But it was falsely placed before the Nicene Council by Baronius (our Editor's
main Guide) to secure the Book of Judith by the Council of Nice's Authority
Richer. hist. Conc. lib. 1. cap. 3. page 128.
. And the Reasons given for this early placing it are very frivolous: For
first, The softening of a Canon of Naeocaesarea is no certain Mark of time.
Secondly, This Council rejects Judith out of the Canon of Scripture, and so did
the Council of Nice also; for though S. Hierom, when he had told us, This Book
is not of Authority sufficient to determine Controversies; adds, That the
Nicene Synod is read, to have computed it among Holy Writings Hieron. Ep. CXI.
Tom. III. p. 34.
. S. Hierom only means, They allowed it to be Read for Instruction, but did not
count it Canonical; for doubtless he would not have rejected Judith, if that
Council had received it into the Canon. And he says elsewhere, The Church
indeed reads Judith, Tobit, and the Macchabees, but receives them not among
Canonical Scriptures Id. Ep. 115. ibid. p. 39.
; and again, A man may receive this Book as be pleases Idem Ep. 10. Tom. I.
page 96.
. Herein therefore the Council of Laodicea does not contradict the Council of
Nice at all, as these Notes falsely pretend. Thirdly, This Councels decreeing
the same things which were decreed at Nice, without naming it, is no Argument
it was held before that of Nice; nothing being more ordinary, than for later
Councils to renew older Canons without citing the former Councils for them.

The Notes on the Second Canon at Laodicea (which supposes Penitents, to make
their Confession by Prayer to God, and mentions no Priest) would willingly
grast the use of their modern Sacramental Confession, to a Priest, upon this
ancient Canon Lab. p. 1523. Bin page 248. col. 2.
; but it rather confutes, than countenances that modern device. Their laboring
to expunge the Photinians out of the Seventh Canon, since all the old Greek
Copies have these words Beveridg. Not. Tom. II. p. 193.
, is merely to justify their false Date of this Council. The Annotator on the
Fifteenth Canon confesses, that S. Paul Commands all the People to join in the
Hymns, and that this Use continued to S. Hierom' s time; yet he owns their
pretended Apostolical Church has altered this Primitive Custom grounded on
Holy Scripture; and that for very frivolous Reasons Lab. p. 1524. Bin. page
249. col. 1.
. But let it be observed, That this Canon forbids not the People to bear a part
in the Church Service; but allows them not to begin, or bring in any Hymns into
the Public Service. The Seventeenth Canon speaks of the Assemblies of the
Faithful in two Latin Versions, and the Greek is (...); yet because the worst
Latin Translation reads, in Processionibus; the Notes impertinently run out
into a discourse of their Superstitious modern Processions; for any thing
serves them for an occasion, to make their late Devices seem ancienter than
they are Lab. and Bin. ibid.
. The Thirty fourth Canon mentions and censures those, who leaving the Martyrs
of Christ, go to false Martyrs; And the Fifty first Canon mentions the Martyrs
Feasts: Upon which the Notes Lab. p. 1526. Bin. page 250. col. 1.
most falsely infer, That the Martyrs were then adored with Religious Worship:
But this is only his Invention. The Canon speaks not one word of Worshipping
Martyrs; but only, whereas the Orthodox Christian Assemblies were generally in
the Burial places of true Martyrs, where they offered up Prayers to God: Some
it seems began to make separate Meetings in Places dedicated to False Martyrs,
and therefore the properest Note here would have been, to have set out the Sin
of Schism, and the Pious Fraud (as they call it) of feigning false Martyrs, of
which their Church is highly guilty. The Thirty fifth Canon expressly forbids
leaving the Church of God, and calling upon Angels; which they say is an hidden
kind of Idolatry, and forsaking Christ the Son of God, to go after Idolatry.
And Theodoret, who lived soon after the true time of this Council, says, Those
who were for Moses' s Law, which was given by Angels, brought in the Worship of
them; which Error reigned long in Phrygia and Pisidia; and therefore the
Council of Laodicea, in Phrygia, did by a Law forbid the Praying to Angels
Theodoret. in Coloss. cap. 2.
. Which Canon does so evidently condemn the Roman Churches Prayers to the
Angels as Idolatry, that the former Editors of the Councils impudently
corrupted the Text of this Canon, and put in Angulos, for Angelos Edit.
Merlini, Pet. Crab. and Barth. Caranz.
, as if the Council had only forbid Praying in private Corners; whereas not
only the Greek, but the oldest Latin Copies, and Theodoret, have Angels: But
our Editors and Annotator having Baronius for their Guide, venture to keep the
true Reading [Angels] in the Text, and put [Angles] into the Margen, hoping by
false Notes to ward off this severe Blow Lab. p. 1526. Bin. page 250. col. 1.
. And first, The Notes dare not produce the place of Theodoret at large; then
they strive to blunder the Reader with a distinction of Dulia and Latria, which
can signify nothing here, because the Canon and Theodoret both say, It is
Praying to Angels which is forbid; and that the Romanists certainly do. Again,
Baronius censures Theodoret for saying, That such Heretics as were for Moses' s
Law, brought in ANGEL-Worship: But why does he not censure S. Paul, who says,
That those who were Jewishly inclined, and observed differences of Meats,
New Mons and Sabbaths, were the Inventers of Angel-Worship Coloss. II. ver.
16, 17, 18.
? The Angelic-Heretics in Epiphanius and S. Augustine, who came in afterward,
did not (as the Notes represent them) say, That Angels were to be worshipped
with the Worship due to God alone: Only as the Romanists now are, so they were
inclined to Worship Angels Aug. de haeres. Tom. VI. page 4. m.
; that is, by Praying to them. However, we Protestants say with Theodoret, We
neither give them Divine Worship, nor divide the Service due to the Divine
Majesty, between them and the true God Theod. de Curand. Graec. Off. Sermon. 3.
: And when the Romanists can say this honestly, and leave off Praying to them,
we will not tax them with this Canon. Baronius has one Device more, viz. That
the Angels, which this Council says, must not be Worshipped, were not good
Angels, but Devils and the Genii, adored by the Pagans; For (says he) the
former Canon receives the Worship of the true Martyrs, and rejects that of
false Martyrs. To which I Answer, first, It is false (as was showed) that the
former Canon receives the Worship of any Martyrs, true or false. Secondly, Why
does not this Canon call these Pseudo-Angels, as the former called those it
rejected, Pseudo-Martyrs, if the Prohibitions were of the same kind? Did ever
any Christian call Devils, Angels, without some addition, as Evil Angels,
Apostate Angels, etc? Besides, in that Age when this Council was held
(according to Baronius) the worship of Demons and the Tutelar Spirits, was
public, not secret Idolatry; so that it is manifest, this Canon speaks not to
Pagans, but Heretical Christians. And Theodoret shows, That it was those
Angels, who gave the Law of Moses, which were hereby forbid to be Prayed to;
and I hope neither Binius, nor his Master, will say, these were Devils:
Wherefore this Canon plainly says, Praying to good Angels, (as They of Rome
now do) is Idolatry.

To conclude, The Sixtieth Canon of this Council, is the most ancient Account
of the Canon of Scripture, that ever was made by any Christian Synod, being the
same which the Church of England holds at this day; for it leaves out all those
Books of Judith, Tobit, Wisdom, etc. which we account not to be Canonical; but
our Annotator finding so Primitive a Council contradicting their new Trent
Canon, and not being able to reconcile the difference, passes this remarkable
Canon by, without any Note.

. 16. The reproachful Obscurity of Sylvester in this time of Action, in all
other Christian Churches, puts the Editors upon giving us an heap of Forgeries
together, to color over the Pope's doing nothing Remarkable for Nine or Ten
years: First, We have an Epistle of the Primitive Church, and Constantine's
Munificence Lab. p. 1528. Bin. page 250. col. 2.
: But Gratian, and the former Editors of Councils, cited this as a Decretal
Epistle of Melchiades, to prove the Pope's Supremacy, etc. whereas the Forgery
is so gross, that our Annotator affirms it to be a Fiction of Isidore
Mercator's, patched up of Fragments stolen out of the History of the Nicene
Council, the Council of Chalcedon, and S. Gregory's 24th Epistle, and woefully.
Mis-timed Lab. p. 1530. Bin. page 251. col. 2.
: Yet being used to cite such Forgeries, (after this Confession) he will not
let it go without making some use of it; for he Notes, that what is said here
of Constantine' s Donations to Melchiades and Sylvester, is very true, and may
be firmly proved by Optatus Milevitanus. Very strange! Optatus mentions no
Donation of Constantine to either of these Popes, Vid. supr.. 6. and therefore
the Reader may note, That false and weak Inferences or Quotations from manifest
Forgeries, are Firm Proofs with Baronius and Binius, when they make for the
Roman Interest; but the best Canons of the most genuine Councils are of no
value, when they make against it.

After this follows that odious Forgery, called Constantine's Donation, wherein
he is pretended to make over to the Pope, the whole City of Rome and all the
Western Empire, with all kind of Ensigns of Imperial Majesty, and all manner of
Jurisdiction; which Ridiculous Fiction (Nauclerus says) Antoninus rejected in
his Chronicle, because it is not extant in any ancient Author, but only in the
Decretals Naucler. Chron. genesis XI. page 604.
. But our Editors print it without any Note of its being false; yea, with Notes
upon it, to prove it either true or very probable Lab. p. 1534. Bin. page 251.
col. 2. and p. 254. col. 1.
. And Baronius introduces it with many Stories, to make all that concerns the
Popes temporal Greatness credible to an easy Reader Baron. An. 324.. 117.
; yet at last, to secure their Retreat from so indefensible a Post, He and the
Annotator make it a Fiction of the poor Greeks: I shall therefore, First, prove
it a Forgery; and, Secondly, make it out, That not the Greeks, but the Pope's
Creatures devised it. First, That it is a Fiction appears from diverse
Arguments: For, First, who can believe Constantine, so unjust, first, to give
Rome and the Western Empire to the Pope, and then to one of his Sons? Or who
can think the Pope so tame never to put in his Claim? Secondly, This Edict is
grounded on the idle Story of Constantine's Baptisin by Sylvester, which out of
Sylvester's Fabulous Acts is related at large in it; but those Acts being (as
was showed) a mere Forgery, this Edict must be so also. Thirdly, It represents
Constantine, who was born and brought up under Christian Parents, and had
settled Christianity before this, as a mere Heathen, till he met with Sylvester
at this time. Fourthly, It pretends the whole Senate and all the Nobles joined
with the Emperor, to give the Pope this Power. But besides the folly of
Constantine's delegating more Power than ever he himself had, it is most false
to suppose, That the whole Senate at this time were Christians; for many of
them continued Pagans long after Constantine's Death. Baronius indeed (out of
Sylvester's Acts) affirms, That none of the Senate was converted before the
Year 324 Baron. An. 324.. 76.
. Forgetting that he had told us, Diverse Senators had given up their Names to
Christ Twelve years before Id. An. 312.. 75, and 76.
; and that one or both of the Consuls were Christians two years before this Id.
An. 322.. 1.
. So ill a Memory had the great Cardinal, when his Cause obliged him to defend
a Lie. Fifthly, It speaks of the Emperor's intending to build a City, and call
it by his own Name, in the Province of Bizantium, and his Resolution to
transfer his Empire thither; and yet before this, the Edict had reckoned up
Constantinople by name, and Jerusalem, as two of the Five Patriarchates, and
given Rome Jurisdiction over all the other Four. Lastly, It is Dated in the
Fourth Consulship of Constantine with Gallicanus, whereas Licinius was his
Colleague in his Fourth Consulship, which was in the Year of Christ 315, that
is, Nine years before the time fixed by Baronius for this pretended Baptism;
and that clearly shows the Story to be all Sham, as all modest and learned Men
of the Roman Church do now acknowledge: But Baronius, and our Annotator,
considering not barely the falsehood of this Edict, (for that alone would not
discourage them;) but observing also, that it destroys the pretended Divine
Right of the Pope's Supremacy, grant it at last to be a Forgery, but say, It
was devised by the Greeks. Secondly, Therefore I shall show the Falsehood of
that Accusation: For, First, they charge Balsamon with publishing it; Now he
did not write till An. 1180, yet the Notes out of Baronius do confess, that a
Pope quoted it An. 1054, (that is, near an Hundred years before Balsamon was
born) to justify his Superiority over the Greek Church; and therefore Balsamon
was not the Inventer of it: Secondly, It does the Greeks no good, for it gives
the Pope power over all their Patriarchs, and reckons Constantinople as the
last and lowest Patriarchate, so that the Forger could not come out of that
Church. Thirdly, It is grounded on the fabulous Acts of Sylvester, writ in
Latin, and feigned in the Western World; and its whole design is to advance the
Pope above all Bishops, Kings, and Emperors; and therefore no doubt it was
advanced by a Friend of the Popes. Fourthly, The Notes confess, That a Pope
first set up this Edict, to prove his Universal Supremacy, (not considering
with Baronius, it seems, that it weakened his Title) and the grave and learned
Men of the Roman Church received it as Authentic for many Ages after. We add,
That till the Reformation they cited it, and writ in defense of it; and though
now their Point is gained they begin to renounce it, yet the Advantage that
Church got by it, shows, that they were the Forgers of it; yea, it seems Anno
1339 one Johannes Diaconus, a Member of the Roman Church, was thought to be the
Author of it. Fifthly, Whoever considers how unwilling the Cardinal and our
Annotator are to have it clearly rejected, will be convinced, that their Church
gained by it, and consequently invented it. They labor to prove, the Popes
temporal Power granted hereby, is both probable and true Lab. p. 1539. Bin.
page 254. col. 1.
: And though they own the French Princes, Pipin and Charles, who gave many
Cities and Countries to S. Peter, never mention this Edict; yet they argue from
their calling those Gifts, A restoring them to the Church, that they had
respect to Constantine's Bounty Lab. p. 1540. Bin. page 254. col. 2.
. These Authors also mention Pope Adrian's confirming this Edict, and quote the
Book of Constantine's Munificence (showed to be a Fable just now) to justify
it Lab. p. 1541. Bin. page 255. col. 1.
. They also would make out what it says of the Images of Peter and Paul, then
kept at Rome, by Eusebius, but cite him falsely, leaving out the main part of
his Testimony; viz. That it was only some who had such Images, and that these
imitated the Pagans herein; from whence it will not follow, That eminent
Christians then placed them in their Churches Lab. and Bin. ut supr. Baron. An.
324.. 40.
. In short, Though they dare not say it is true, yet they would not have it
rejected as false, because it gives their admired Church so much Riches and
Power; and therefore doubtless no Greeks, but some of their Church invented
this most notorious Forgery: And Aeneas Sylvius observes, That it was warily
done of the Popes, to let it be hotly disputed how far this Edict was good in
Law, that so the Edict it self might still be supposed valid Aene. Sylv. dial.
de Donat. Constantini.
, it being their Interest it should be thought so.

This feigned Donation is followed by a Roman Council under Sylvester, in the
Preface whereof Sylvester is falsely pretended to have called the Nicene
Council; and in the body of which there is a Canon, That none must judge the
Chief Seat; not the Emperor, nor Kings, nor Clergy, nor People. For the sake of
which two advantageous Fictions, Baronius and the Annotator, defend and
justify this Synod Baron. An. 324.. 29, 30, and 130. Bin. not. p. 260.
; though the Title be ridiculous, the Style barbarous, and the Matter of it as
void of Sense as it is of probability. Labbe indeed notes, That the Condemning
Photinus here shows, it was put together by an unskilful Hand Lab. Marg. page
1542.
, and rejects it as a Forgery very justly: For Photinus (as the Notes confess)
was not Condemned till long after Bin. p. 260. col. 1.
; nor were there any Christian Kings, but Constantine the Emperor at that time.
Besides, the Forger first says, None of the Laity were present; and yet in the
next Page affirms, That Calpharnius (Prefect of the City) was there, and that
Constantine and his Mother Helena subscribed it Lab. p. 1547. Bin. page 256.
col. 2. and page 257. col. 2.
; yea, Baronius himself observes, That this Council mistakes the Custom of the
Roman Church, where in that Age Presbyters use to sit in the presence of the
Bishops; but in this Fiction, they are represented as standing with the Deacons
Baron. An. 324.. 124.
. Moreover, it destroys the Donation (Lies seldom hanging together;) for if
Constantine had given the Pope such Supreme Power a few days before, what need
was there for these Bishops to grant the same thing; or however, why do they
not remember Constantine's late Gift? Lastly, Arius (who then gave so great
Trouble to the Church) is not mentioned here; not (as Baronius guesses) because
he was to be more solemnly Condemned at Nice the next year Baron. An. 324.. 27.
Lab. p. 1555. Bin. page 260. col. 2. An. Dom. 325.
; but because the Forger had nothing in his Eye, but merely to set off the
Grandeur of Rome.

. 17. We are now come to the First and most famous General Council of Nice,
wherein the worst and most dangerous of all Heresies was suppressed; and yet
the pretended Judge of all Controversies, and Supreme Head of the Church, had
so little share in this glorious Transaction, that it is very uncertain in what
Popes time it was called: Sozomen and Nicephorus say, it was in the time of
Julius Sozom. hist. lib. 1. cap. 16. Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 14.
; Others think it was in Sylvester's time; Photius affirms, it was in the times
of both Sylvester and Julius Phot. de 7. Synod.
, though unhappily Pope Mark was between them two: Yet this Council is
introduced by a Preface a la Mode a Rome, styled, The History of the Council of
Nice Lab. Tom. II. page 3. Bin. page 262.
, wherein (as well as in the Notes and various Editions of this famous Council)
all imaginable Artifice is used to abuse the Reader into a belief, That Pope
Sylvester not only called this Council, and presided in it by his Legates; but
also confirmed it by his sole Authority afterward. For the clearer Confutation
of which Falsehoods, we will consider, First, The Authority which convened this
Council. Secondly, The President of it, with the Order of Sitting in it, and
Subscribing to it. Thirdly, The Power which confirmed it. Fourthly, The number
of the Canons. Fifthly, The true Sense of them, Sixthly, The Forgeries for
Supremacy herein inserted. Seventhly, The corrupt Editions of the Council it
self.

First, As to the Authority convening it. The Preface says, Constantine
assembled it by Sylvester' s Authority Lab. p. 3. and Bin. page 262.
: The Notes affirm, -- it was appointed by the Advice, Counsel, and Authority
of Pope Sylvester; and again, -- Pope Sylvester, by his Pontifical Authority,
decreed the celebration of a General Council Lab. p. 63. C. Bin. page 291. col.
1.
. To prove these vain Brags, they cite Ruffinus (whose Version of this Council
they reject;) yet he only says, That Constantine convened it by the Advice of
the Bishops: However, this is Advice, not Authority; and Advice of the Bishops
in general, not of Sylvester in particular; and if any Bishops did give the
Emperor particular Advice, it was those of Alexandria and Constantinople, not
He of Rome. Secondly, They quote the Sixth General Council (held 350 years
after this of Nice, and in other things rejected by the Romanists) which says,
-- this Council was called by Sylvester and Constantine: But they quote falsely,
for that Sixth Synod puts the Emperor's Name first Bin. Tom. III. par. 1. page
194.
; and though they are no Evidence against Authors living in the time of the
Ni^ene Council; yet even this shows, they thought the Emperor's Authority was
chiefest in this Matter. The Notes also cite the Pontifical (which they have so
often rejected as Fabulous) and Sozomen, as if they said the same thing: But
for Sozomen, he never names Sylvester; but says, Pope Julius was absent by
reason of his great Age; and the Pontifical only says; It was called by the
Consent of Sylvester; not by his Authority; and indeed it was called by the
consent of all Orthodox Bishops: Wherefore there is no good Evidence, that the
Pope did call it. But on the other side, All the Ecclesiastical Historians do
agree, That Constantine Convened it by his own, Authority, and sent his Letters
to Command the Bishops to meet at Nice Eusebius. vit. Constant. lib. 3. cap. 6.
Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 8. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 7. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 17.
; and not one of them mentions. Sylvester, as having any hand in this Matter:
Yea, (to put us out of all doubt) the very Council of Nice it self (in their
Synodal Epistle writ to Alexandria, and extant in these very Editors Lab. p.
59. Bin. page 285. and Baron. An. 325.. 117.
) expressly declares, That they were Convened by Constantine's Command. Which
clear and convincing Proofs, show the Impudence, as well as the Falsehood of the
Annalist and Annotator, to talk so confidently of the Pope's Authority in this
Matter; who, if he had (as they pretend) Convened this Council, should have
summoned more Western Bishops, of which there were so few in this Council, that
it is plain, Either Sylvester did not Summon them, or they did not obey his
Summons.

Secondly, As to the President of this Council, and the Order of Sitting in it,
and Subscribing to it: The Preface and Notes falsely affirm, That Hosius, Vitus,
and Vincentius were all three the Pope's Legates, and Presidents of this
Council Labbe p. 3, and 65. Bin. page 263, and 291.
; and vainly think, if it had not been so, it could not have been a General
Council: But if this be necessary to the Being of a General Council, surely
there is some good Evidence of it. Quite contrary! The Preface to the Sardican
Council is of the Editors, or their Friends making, and so is no Proof:
Athanasius says, Hosius was a Prince in the Synods; but not that he was
President of this Synod, or the Pope's Legate. Cedrenus and Photius are too
late Authors to outweigh more Ancient and Authentic Writers; yet they do not
say, (as the Notes pretend) That Sylvester, by his Legates, gave Authority to
this Council: Yea, Photius. places the Bishop of Constantinople before
Sylvester and Julius, even when he is speaking of the Chief Bishops, who met at
Nice; and he is grossly mistaken also, because neither of the Popes did meet
there Photii Nomocan. page 163.
. Socrates only says, The Bishop of Rome' s Presbyters were his Proxies, and
present at this Counoil Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 5.
; but hereby he excludes Hosius (who was a Bishop) from being a Legate, and
does not at all prove Vitus and Vincentius were Presidents. Sozomen names not
Hosius, but these two Presbyters as the Proxies of Pope Julius; but reckons
that Pope himself in the fourth place Sozom. hist. lib. 1. cap. 16.
. Though these Notes in citing Sozomen (according to their usual sincerity)
place the Bishop of Rome first, and all the other Patriarchs after him.
Finally, They cite the Subscriptions to prove, these Three were Legates and
Presidents at Nice; but Richerius (a Learned Romanist) says, These
Subscriptions are of as little Credit, as the Epistle to Sylvester Richer. de
Council. genesis lib. 1. cap. 2. 6.
; and adds, That the placing these Presbyters before the Bishops, is a plain
Proof, That all these Subscriptions were invented in later Ages; because the
Pope's Legates never did precede any of the Patriarchs, till the Council of
Chalcedon Id. ib.. 8.
. As for Hosius, he had been the Emperor's Legate long before, and diverse of
the Ancients say, He was very Eminent in this Council; but not one of them
affirms, that Hosius was the Pope's Legate: This is purely an Invention of
Baronius; but he only proves it by Conjectures Baron. An. 325.. 20.
. The Truth is, Constantine himself was the President of this Council, and Sat
on a Gilded Throne (not as the Preface says falsely, Below all the Bishops;
but) Above all the Bishops, as Eusebius an Eyewitness relates Eusebius. vit.
Constant. lib. 3. cap. 10.
; and the Notes at last own, He sat in the Chief Place Lab. page 67. Bin. page
292. col. 2.
; yea, the Annalist confesses, He acted the part of a Moderator in it Baron.
An. 325.. 73.
. Richerius goes further, saying, It is clear by undoubted Testimonies, that
the Appointing and Convening of this Council depended on the Authority of
Constantine, who was the President thereof Richer. hist. Con. cap. 2. 2, 3, 4.
; and he blames Baronius and Binius, for wilfully mistaking the Pope's Consent
(which was requisite, as he was Bishop of an Eminent Church) for his Authority,
to which no Pope in that Age pretended. It is true, there were some Bishops,
who were Chief among the Ecclesiastics in this Council: Eustathius, Bishop of
Antioch sat uppermost on the Right-side, and opened the Synod with a Speech to
Constantine Theodoret. apud Baron. An. 325.. 54.
: Hence some (and among the rest Pope Foelix, in his Epistle to Zeno) affirm,
He was President of this Council Vid. Richer. hist. Council. lib. 1. cap. 2.. 8.
: Others say, The Bishop of Alexandria presided; and indeed all the Patriarchs
present, Sat above all others of the Clergy Phot. lib. de 7. Synod.
; yet so, as they all gave place to the Emperor, when he came in. And for the
Pope's Legates, Baronius and Bellarmin do contend in vain about the Places they
had in this Council since no Ancient Author tells us, they Sat above the Chief
of the Bishops: So that this also is a Forgery of the Papal Flatterers, to give
Countenance to their Churches feigned Supremacy.

Thirdly, As to the Power which confirmed the Canons of this Council; the
ancient Historians do suppose that Constantine gave these Decrees their binding
Power, and Record his Letters, to enjoin all to observe them Vid Socrat. Sozom.
Theodoret. and Ruffin. ut supra.
. And Eusebius who was there, says, that The Emperor ratified the Decrees with
his Seal Eusebius. vit. Constan. lib. 1. cap. 37.
; But the Annalist and Annotator seek to efface this evidence, by Railing at
Eusebius, and by devising many weak pretenses, to persuade the Credulous, that
Pope Sylvester confirmed this Council by his Authority; and both the Preface
and Notes tell us, that this Synod writ a Letter to Sylvester for his
confirmation, and that he called a Council at Rome; and writ back to Ratify
what they had done Lab. p. 6. and page 77. Bin. page 64. and page 299. col. 1.
: But whoever will but read these two Epistles, will find the Latin so
Barbarous and the Sense so Intricate, that nothing is plain in them, but that
they are Forged Lab. p. 68. Bin. page 348. col. 1.
; and Labbe's Margin tells us they are Fictions, nor dare Baronius own them to
be genuine Baron. An. 325.. 37.
; and though Binius cite them for evidence in his Notes, yet at some distance
he tells us, it is evident they are both Corrupted Bin. p. 348. col. 1. marg.
; and again he says, if they were not both extreme faulty and Commentitious,
they might be Evidence in this case Idem p. 365. col. 1. not. ad. Council. Romans
: But Richerius is more Ingenuous, and declares, That these Epistles are
prodigiously salse, The Forger of them being so Ignorant as to call Macarius,
(who was then Bishop of Jerusalem) Bishop of Constantinople: Yet our Annotator
cites Dionysius Exiguus for a Witness of these Epistles; whereas Richerius
shows, they were Forged by some Ignorant Monk long after Dionysius his time,
who mentions not the Pope' s confirming of these Canons; nor does he remember
these Epistles; but only says it was agreed, these Canons should be sent to
Sylvester Bishop of Rome Richer hist. Council. lib. 1. cap. 2.. 6.
; The Notes further urge, a Roman Council under Pope Sylvester, to prove his
Confirming these Canons; but that Council is a confessed Forgery it self, and
so proves nothing Labbe marg. page 412.
. Lastly, The Annotator here (and almost every where) cites Socrates his
speaking of an Ecclesiastical Canon, that no Decrees of Councils should be
valid without the consent of the Roman Bishop Socrat. histor. lib. 2. cap. 13.
. But First, Consent is not Confirmation; It is the privilege of every
Patriarch as well as of him of Rome, That a General Council cannot be held
without every one of their consents; but this proves not their pretended sole
and supreme Power of ratifying all Councils vested in the Pope: Besides,
Socrates here only Historically relates what Pope Julius said in his own Case;
and therefore the Testimony relies on Julius his Credit; and indeed that was a
peculiar Case, wherein, when the Cause of Athanasius was referred by consent of
all parties to Julius as Arbitrator, the Arians took it out of his Hands
against Athanasius his Mind; and judged it in a Council, to which Julius was
not at all summoned, which doubtless was very illegal and unjust: But yet none
can tell, where this Ecclesiastical Canon was made, which the angry and injured
Pope here cites; and therefore till it appear whence Julius had this Canon, we
must be excused, if we give no great Deference to it; and unless they could
prove it was Recorded before the Nicene Council, it is very impertinent to
expect the Nicene Fathers should Govern their Actions by it. So that we
conclude not Sylvester, but Constantine confirmed this Council.

Fourthly, As to the number of the Canons the Annotator also notoriously
prevaricates; He confesses that all the Greeks, and particularly Theodoret and
Ruffinus, assert there were but Twenty Canons made there; yea, that the Sixth
Council of Carthage, (within less than an Hundred years,) after a diligent
search in the three Patriarchal Seats of Alexandria, Antioch and
Constantinople, could find no more than Twenty Canons Lab. p. 71. Bin. page
395. col. 2.
: But the Notes conceal Gratian's naming no more but Twenty Canons, and his
saying, there are but only Twenty Nicene Canons to be found in the Roman Church
Gratian. did. 16. cap. 10. and cap. 13.
. For all this the Annotator boldly tells us, That the truer Opinion, (or
rather that which is most for the Popes interest) is, that more than Twenty
Canons were made there: But we will examine his and Baronius's reasons Baron.
An. 325.. 157. etc.
. First, They say there is no Decree about Easter among the Twenty Canons: I
reply, There is a genuine Epistle of Constantine's, in which this matter is
determined with the reasons for it, which is better than a bare Law without
Arguments, in a case which had been so much disputed Bin. p. 285. and Theod.
lib. 1. cap. 9.
; nor could they make any acurate Canon, about it till the exact time was
Calculated, which they referred (not to the Pope, but) to the Bishop of
Alexandria. Secondly, The Notes say S. Ambrose mentions a Canon made at Nice,
against Bigamists Ambros. ep. 82. ad Episc. Vercel.
; but Baronius himself confesses, that S. Ambrose only says, They treated of
this matter, but does not affirm they made a Canon about it. Thirdly, They
plead, there was a Decree about the Canon of Scripture made at Nice, (which is
not among these Twenty) because S. Hierom says, he had Read that the Nicene
Fathers computed Judith, among the Books of Holy Scripture. I reply -- S.
Hierom only says they computed it among Holy Writings, that is, (as we showed
before 15.) among Books to be Read for instruction, not to be quoted in
Dispute: For if S. Hierom had believed this Council did receive Judith for
Canonical, he would not have counted it (as he does to be Apocryphal; So that
this proves not that there were more Canons. Fourthly, The Notes affirm there
is no Canon now extant here, against a Bishops choosing his Successor in his
Life time; which S. Augustine says was forbid in this Council Augustine. Epist.
110.
; which is a gross Untruth, since the Eighth Canon forbids two Bishops should
be in one City; and the Notes own this was the very Canon meant by S.
Augustine, in the next Leaf Bin. Not. page 296. col. 1. and p. 297. col. 2.
: Liers should have better Memories: Fifthly, They say the third Council of
Carthage cites a Canon of Nice, forbidding to receive the Sacrament after
Dinner; but if the place be considered (as Richerius notes Richer. histor.
Council. lib. 1. cap. 3.. 13.
) that Council only refers to a former African Synod, which had decreed this,
and not to the Council of Nice. Sixthly, The Annotator speaks of a Canon about
Appeals to Rome, cited out of this Synod in the Sixth Council of Carthage, but
he was wiser than to tell us who cited this for a Nicene Canon; for it was Pope
Zosimus's Legate cited it, and he was convicted of a notorious Falsification
therein, as shall be showed in due place. Seventhly, He says there was a Canon
made at Nice; but not to be found among the Twenty, that a Cause tried in a
lesser Synod, might be judged over again in a greater; and for this he cites
the Fourth Epistle of Julius; but in his Notes on that Epistle Bin. Not. in.
ep. Julij. page 395. col. 2.
, he confesses this was no Canon made at Nice, but only it was matter of Fact;
in that this great Synod did judge Arius over again, who had before been judged
at Alexandria. Eighthly, The Notes say, Atticus, Bishop of Constantinople at
Chalcedon, did affirm, that the Nicene Council agreed upon a Form of writing
Communicatory Epistles, which is not among these Twenty Canons: I reply,
Baronius and he both own this Form was to be a Secret among the Bishops; and if
it had been put into a Canon, Heretics might easily have counterfeited these
Forms, and so the design had been spoiled Baron. An. 325.. 166. and Richer.
lib. 1. cap. 3. 14.
. Lastly, the Annotator cites Sozomen, to proves that the Nicene Council added
to the Gloria Patri the later part, As it was in the beginning, etc. Whereas
Sozomen Sozom. histor. lib. 3. cap. 19.
in that place only speaks of such as praised God in Hymns, agreeing to the
Faith delivered at Nice, but mentions no Canon or Form of words agreed on at
Nice, about these Hymns. So that after all this shuffling, it is very
impertinent for this Annotator to brag, that it is manifest there were more
than Twenty Canons made in this Council; and Nonsense to tell us, that the
Greeks who stiffly maintain there were but Twenty Canons, cannot deny but there
were more than Twenty: And for all his Confidence, neither he nor Baronius dare
defend those Eighty Canons, which Turrian has fathered on this Council; and
therefore whatever is more than these twenty, or differing from them, must pass
among the many Forgeries of the Roman Church

Fifthly, As to the Sense of those Canons, which oppose the Pope's Interest,
the Notes use many Impostures in expounding them. The Third Canon forbids the
Clergy to cohabit with Women taken into their Houses; unless they were so near
of Kin, as to avoid Suspicion and Scandal: Which plainly supposes, that they
might have Wives, because cohabiting with them, could give no Suspicion nor
Scandal: And since the Canon names not Wives, who were the most likely to dwell
with their Husbands, doubtless this Council did not suppose the cohabitation of
the Clergy with their Wives to be unlawful. Yea, not only Socrates and Sozomen
Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 8. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 22.
; but Pisanus and Nauclerus, later Romish Authors Pisanus ap. Bin. page 343.
col. 1. Naucler. Chron. page 606.
, relate the History of Paphnutius his Advice to the Council in this Point;
upon which the latter says, The Nicene Fathers allowed Priests to have Wives,
if they pleased: Which full Evidence against their Churches practice does so
enrage Baronius, that he not only denies this well-attested History, but lays
by the Character of an Historian, and falls (in his guessing-way) to dispute
against this manifest Truth Baron. An. 325.. 148, 149, 150.
. And Binius in his Notes Lib. page 72. Bin. page 296. col. 2.
out of him, says, This Canon expressly forbids Clergy men the Use of their
Wives, after they were entered into Holy Orders; rejects the History of
Paphnutius, and gives Socrates and Sozomen the Lie: But we shall leave the
Reader to judge, whether he will give more Credit to the Words of the Canon,
and these Ancient impartial Historians; or to the Corrupt Paraphrase, and
Impudent Assertions of these two notorious Sycophants, who have so often been
proved to govern themselves, not by Truth, but by Interest and Design. The
Sixth Canon reckons the Pope but Equal to other great Bishops, and limits his
Jurisdiction; at which the Annalist and Annotator are much discomposed, and (by
various Fictions and shuffling Pretenses) labor to pervert the true Sense of
this famous Canon. And first, They say, The beginning of it (viz. The Roman
Church has always had the Primacy) is wanting Lab. and Bin. ut supr. not. in
Can. 6.
: Whereas no Authentic Edition ever had any such beginning. Dr. Beveridge gives
us Eight several Versions, besides the Original Greek, which all want it
Beveridg. Council. Tom. II. page 50.
; and it is impudently done of Binius, to cite Alanus Copus, saying, That
Dionysius Exiguus' s Version had this beginning; since that very Version is
printed by Binius himself, without any such Preamble Lab. p. 45, 46. Bin. page
276.
; but it is all one to him, true or false, in his Notes, he makes a foolish
Paraphrase on this Forged Preface, about the Divine Right of the Pope to his
Supremacy; whereas the plain Words of the genuine Canon show, That this Council
grounded the Jurisdiction of these great Bishops only upon Ancient Custom
Richer. hist. Council lib. 1. cap. 2.. 11.
: Nor can it be gathered from this Canon, That the Bishop of Rome then had any
Superiority over him of Alexandria; the one being allowed as much Power within
his own Limits, as the other had in his. It is plain, The Great Bishops are all
here declared to be Equal, without any Exception or Salvo, upon the Bishop of
Rome's account; which would have been mentioned, as well as the Rights of the
Metropolitan of Caesarea are, when the Bishop of Jerusalem's Place is assigned
in the Seventh Canon, if the Council of Nice had believed, Rome had any right
to a Supremacy over all the rest. The Annotator is also angry at Russinus; and
though upon the Fourteenth Canon he says, Ruffinus set down the true authentic
Canons Lab. p. 75. B. Bin. page 298. col. 1.
; yet because his Version of this Sixth Canon limits the Pope's Jurisdiction to
the Suburbicarian Regions; He first falsely represents the Words of Ruffinus,
adding to them, -- which above all others are subject peculiarly to the Diocese
of the Roman Church; and then Rails at the Version it self, as evil, erroneous,
and proceeding from his Ignorance: But doubtless Ruffinus, who lived so near
the time of this Council, and knew Rome and Italy so well, understood the
Pope's Jurisdiction at that time, and the meaning of this Canon far better than
Binius; and therefore Baronius (after he had condemned the Version) yet strives
to accommodate it to their new Roman Sense. But there is full Evidence, that
these Suburbicarian Regions were only those Provinces which were under the
Prefect of Rome; that is, some part of Italy, and some of the adjacent
Islands; and these were all the Churches which were then under the Pope's
Jurisdiction: As may appear by the great difficulty which the succeeding
Bishops of Rome found in the following Ages, to bring Milan, Aquileia, and
Ravenna (Churches in Italy it self) to be in subjection to them: So that the
Pope was so far from having an Universal Supremacy then, that Balsamon is
mistaken in thinking he was made Patriarch of all the Western Church; for the
very Fifth Canon, which orders all Causes to be heard and finally ended in the
same Province where they happened, not only destroys Appeals to Rome, but shows
that no Bishop did then pretend to so large a Jurisdiction. Again, these Notes
frequently brag of that Version of this Canon, which the Pope's Legate cited at
Chalcedon Council. Chalced. Act. 16.
; wherein the aforesaid sorged Title of this Canon [The Church of Rome has
always had the Primacy] are quoted as part of the Canon it self: But the Acts
of that Council of Chalcedon show, That this Edition was discovered to be false
by the Constantinopolitan Code, then produced: And if the Fathers there had
believed this to be the true Reading, they would not immediately have
contradicted the first famous General Council, by giving the Bishop of
Constantinople equal Privileges with him of Old Rome: So that their Quoting a
false, baffled, and rejected Version of this Canon; rather pulls down, than
supports their dear Supremacy; to maintain which they have nothing but
Sophistry and Fraud, as the next Section will show.

Sixthly, Therefore we will consider the Impostures and Fictions annexed to
this Council, to give color to their feigned Supremacy: And first, because
Eusebius speaks little of the Popes, for he could not truly say much of them;
Baronius and the Annotator invent all the Calumnies against him imaginable; and
the former (though he have little true History in his Annals for Three hundred
years together, which is not taken out of Eusebius) Rails at him most unjustly,
as being an Arian; a malicious, fraudulent, and partial Writer Baron. An. 318..
46. An. 324.. 136.. 143, and. 152. item An. 325.. 192 etc.
. And Binius treats this great Historian at the same rate: But Athanasius
expressly says, That Eusebius of Caesarea subscribed the Orthodox Faith Athan.
Apol. cont. Arian p. 180.
. Socrates affirms also, That he agreed to the Faith of the Nicene Council
Socrat. hist. lib. 1 cap. 3.
. Pisanus, his Greek Author of the History of this Council, brings in Eusebius
disputing against the Arians Bin. p. 313. col. 2.
: And Valesius, in his Life, clears him from this spightful Accusation, which
these Men invent merely to be Revenged on him, for not countenancing the Pope's
Supremacy; which is not his Fault, but his Virtue, because there was no such
thing pretended to in his days. Secondly, These Editors publish a Letter of
Athanasius to Pope Marcus, with that Pope's Answer Lab. p. 287. Bin. page 326.
col. 1, and 2.
, among the Records of this Council; and the Annotator often cites them, to
prove the Supremacy and Infallibility; because the Roman Church is here called,
The Mother and Head of all Churches, and, A Church which had never erred; and
the Pope is called, Bishop of the Universal Church; yet their being Forged is
so notorious, that Bellarmin, Possevin, and Baronius Baron. An. Dom. 336.
reject them. Thirdly, They likewise publish in these Nicene Acts an Epistle of
Pope Julius, wherein diverse Canons for the Primacy are Fathered on this great
Council Bin. p. 328. col. 2.
: And Pisanus is so bold, and so vain as to defend this to be genuine, by an
Epistle of the Egyptians to Pope Foelix (owned to be Forged Bin. p. 499. col. 1.
), and by other Decretal Epistles, as false as this, which he defends; but it
is so manifest a Forgery, this of Pope Julius, that the Editors themselves
afterward reject it Lab. p. 483. Bin. page 391. col. 1.
. Fourthly, Whereas the Ninth Canon of Chalcedon allows the Clergy to complain
to the Primate, or to the Bishop of the Royal City of Constantinople; Notes are
put upon this to falsify that Canon, which say, That Constantinople is here
put for Rome Bin. p. 331. col. 1.
. Fifthly, Here is a Canon called the Thirty ninth of Nice, which faith, He
that holds the Sea of Rome is the Head and Prince of all Patriarchs; because he
is first, as Peter, to whom power is given over all Christian Princes and
People Lab. p. 303. Bin. page 337. col. 2.
, which must be a Forgery of some Roman Parasite, because it not only
contradicts the Sixth Canon of the genuine Council of Nice, but the Eighth of
these pretended Canons, which limits the Bishop of Rome's Jurisdiction to the
Places near to him Lab. p. 294. Bin. page 333. col. 1.
. However, the Editors say, Steuchus, Turrian, and Cope cite it; and they print
Turrian's Notes upon it, which affirm it to agree with the Sixth Canon of the
true Edition; and would prove it genuine by no better Evidence, than a Forged
Decretal of Anacletus Bin. p. 358. col. 1.
. By which we see, the most apparent Falsehoods shall be published and defended,
if they do but promote the Supremacy.

Lastly, We will make some Remarks on the Corrupt Editions of this Council:
First, That of Alfonsus Pisanus is so Fabulous, that Labbe for mere shame omits
it Lab. Marg. page 106.
; but Binius prints it at large, with all its Fictions and Impostures Bin. p.
300. col. 1.
; of which Richerius gives this Character, By this History of Pisanus we may
learn, not what the Council of Nice was, but what it should be to fit it for a
Jesuits Palate; for he has scraped together all the Falsehoods and Forgeries he
could find, for enlarging the number of the Canons Richer. hist. Council. lib.
1. cap. 2.. ult.
. But I must add, that there are diverse Passages in this Edition, which will
not serve the ends of the modern Roman Flatterers: For first, Pisanus his Greek
Author highly extols Eusebius Bin. p. 301. col. 2. and 302. col. 2.
; for which the Jesuit corrects him with a Note in the Margen. Secondly, The
Orthodox Bishop bids the Philosopher believe that which was written, but not to
regard things unwritten; because the Faith is grounded on Holy Scripture Bin.
p. 316. col. 1.
: Whereas the Margen cautions the Reader, not to think that this is spoken
against Ecclesiastical Traditions, though it be levelled at them. Thirdly,
Hosius does not subscribe (as the Pope's Legates here do) for Pope Sylvester;
wherefore this Compiler did not think him to be the Popes Legate Bin. p. 322.
col. 1.
. Fourthly, It is here said to have been declared at Nice, That every Bishop
under God was the Head of his own Church Bin. p. 325. col. 2.
. Fifthly, Here is printed that part of the African Bishop's Letter to
Celestine, wherein they blame his Legate for falsely citing the Nicene Canons
Bin. page 328. col. 1.
. So also the LXXX Canons were not invented by a Through-paced Friend to the
Roman Modern Interest, and therefore probably Baronius will not defend them
Baron. An. 325.. 53.
. The 8th Canon (as was noted) limits the Pope's Jurisdiction to such places as
were near him: The 24th and 66th of these Canons clearly declare, that some
Bishops had Wives Bin. p. 335. col. 2. and p. 341. col. 1.
, forbidding Bigamy, and compelling them to take their first Wife again. And
there are other like Examples which are not worth setting down, because they
are all forged in later times, as appears by their citing a fabulous Discourse
out of the Life of S. Anthony, falsely ascribed to the great Athanasius Bin. p.
302. col. 2. Vid. Rivet. Cait. sacr. l. 3. cap. 4.
, by their quoting a spurious Work under the name of Dionysius Areopagita,
which was (as all agree) writ after the Nicene Council many years Bin. page
336. col. 2.
: By their giving the Patriarch of Antioch Jurisdiction over the Archbishop of
Cyprus, who was always free from that subjection, as was declared long after in
the Council of Ephesus Bin. p. 337. col. 1. Vid. Council. Ephesin. Act. 7.
. Finally, Though this Pisanus do impudently reject the true story of
Paphnutius his advising to leave the Clergy at liberty to Marry; which History
is in his Author, and in Gelasius Cyzicenus also: Yet he magnifies a ridiculous
Fiction afterward of two Bishops, which signed the Nicene Faith after they were
dead and buried Bin. p. 347. col. 2.
. A Fable so gross, that Baronius rejects it, with a Note which I wish he had
often remembered, viz. That it was not usual Among Christians to confirm the
Faith by Miracles, which was attested by more firm Evidences of Holy Scripture
Baron. An. 325.. 182.
. Secondly, Turrians Edition of this Council repeats all these LXXX Canons, and
in his Preface and his Notes he vindicates them all; and yet the Tracts which
he cites to prove these Canons genuine, are owned to be spurious by all modest
Romanists, and his Arguments are so trifling they are not worth consuting. We
will only note therefore, that the 7th and the 40th of these Canons require,
that Synods shall be held twice a year, which (as Turrian confesses) agrees
not with the custom of the Roman Church Lab. p. 294. and page 303. Bin. page
353. col. 2. and 358. col. 1.
: And his Notes say, the 72d Canon differs from the 13th, and the 73d Canon is
contrary to the 49th Lab. p. 315. Bin. page 363. col. 1, and 2.
; but he will rather suppose the Holy Nicene Fathers contradicted themselves,
than own any of these Canons to be forged, because some of them seem to favor
the Pope's Supremacy. As to the Edition of Gelasius Cyzicenus, it is generally
a very modest account of this Council, and has not many Errors in it, but like
all other ancient Authors it speaks very little of the Pope; for which Reason
Binius claps it under Hatches, and will not produce it till the latter end of
his Second Tome after the Council of Ephesus, to convince us, That all Authors
are valued or slighted merely as they promote or discourage the Usurpations of
Rome.

. 18. To all these Impostures, contrived to misrepresent this famous general
Council, there is tacked a Third Council at Rome under Sylvester in the
presence of Constantine, wherein that Pope with 275 Bishops are said to confirm
the Nicene Council, and make two or three new Canons Lab. p. 412. Bin. page
365. col. 1. Baron. An. 325.. 199.
. But though it be certain and confessed by Binius and Baronius, that
Constantine was not then at Rome, though the Style be barbarous, and the Matter
frivolous, and the thing be a manifest Forgery contrived to carry on the grand
Cheat of Sylvester's confirming the Council of Nice; yet Barcnius and Binius
(who confess the Title to be false) labor to prove this Synod to be true,
though Binius be forced to justify it by the forged Letter of the Nicene
Fathers to Sylvester, and his Answer to them, both which in the next Column he
owns are false and feigned Bin. p. 365. col. 2 C
. And thus where the Supremacy is concerned, one Forgery serves for the
Evidence of another.

The Council at Gangra is genuine, and was an uncorrupted Remain of Primitive
Antiquity, till it fell into the hands of these Editors, who have put the name
of Osius, Bishop of Corduba, into the Title in their Latin Version; and though
that Name be not found in the Original Greek printed over against it; yet from
this Fiction of their own Lab. p. 414. Bin. page 366. col. 1.
the Notes impudently say, That this Synod was Convened by Sylvester' s
Authority, and from Osius his presence in it, Binius certainly gathers it was
celebrated under this Pope; but a little after he knows not in what year it was
held; and Baronius treats of this Council Anno 361, that is, near 30 years
after Sylvester's Death Lab. p. 427, and 428. Bin. page 371. col. 1. Baron. An.
361. 14.
. They tell us that Pope Symmachus in his 6th Roman Council approves this
Synod, but he mentions not Osius; however Baronius guesses, that the reason why
Symmachus approved it was, because Osius the Legate of the Apostolic See was
there; which groundless Conjecture and false Assertion, Binius in his Notes
turns into a positive Affirmation, viz. That Osius was there as the Pope's
Legate. As to the occasion of calling this Council of Gangra, it was to condemn
one Eustathius, whom Binius owns to have been a great Favourer of Monkish life,
and Sozomen says, he was a Monk Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 13.
; yea, the Synodical Epistle describes him as one who despised Marriage,
allowed not the administrations of Married Priests, who had a separate way of
Worship, and a different garb from others, making his Followers to abstain from
Flesh, profess Continency, and renounce Propriety Bin. p. 367, etc.
; all which are the very Characters of a Monk of the Roman stamp; and therefore
it is wonder that Binius should give Sozomen and himself the Lie, and say he
was no propagator of Monkery, and that it cannot be proved that he was a Monk;
yet at last he fancies Eustathius his Name was mistaken for Eutachus an
Armenian Monk Lab. p. 129. Bin. page 371. col. 2.
. All which Blunders are only designed to keep the Reader from observing, that
a Monk was condemned for an Heretic, yea, and censured for holding those very
Opinions, which now pass current among the Romish Friars For which end also in
his Notes on the 4th Canon, he says, The Heretics (that is, Protestants)
foolishly apply this Canon to condemn the Celibacy of the Clergy, whereas (he
says) it does not concern Priests who have Wives, but such as had Wives Lab.
p. 430. Bin. p. 372. col. 2.
. But I doubt it will prove the Romanists are the Heretics here: For both this
Canon, and the Synodical Epistle, have [(...),] which signisies a Priest who
now has a Wife; even as [(...)] 1 Cor. vii. 10. is those that have Wives, and
are actually married; and so the best Version of this Canon is Presbyterum
Conjugatum: For by it all those are Anathematized, who affirm, That men should
not Communicate, if a Married Priest say the Office: That is, this Primitive
Council Anathematizes the Modern Church of Rome, to hide the shame of which
just Censure the Notes quarrel with Our preferring the Translation of their
Friend Dionysius, who turns the word [(...)] Ministrante; before those Versions
which turn it by Sacrificante; as if Protestants did this out of a design to
blot out the Memorial of the unbloody Sacrifice Lab. p. 431. Bin. page 372.
col. 2.
; whereas that Greek word does properly signify Ministering and saying the
Offices of the Church, but no where is used properly for Sacrificing; and it is
apparent, that Protestants do most religiously believe the Sacrament to be an
unbloody Sacrifice, and as such, do make it a Memorial of Christ's one bloody
Sacrifice upon the Cross.

The Notes also blame these Eustathian Heretics for persuading the People to
give them the dispensing of their Alms intended for the Poor, contrary (says
Binius) to the Apostles Doctrine and Constitution Lab. and Bin. ut supra.
. Yet thus the Romish Friars do at this day, drawing the Peoples Alms to their
Convents under pretense of being dispensers of them. The same Notes are
mistaken in saying, That the Manicheans were forbid by their Doctrine to give
any Alms to the Poor: For S. Augustine (who knew those Heretics best) assirms,
That they only forbad their People, to give Meat or Fruits -- to any Beggar who
was not of their own Sect Aug. de mor. Manich. lib. 2. Tom. I. page 177.
. Lastly, whereas this Council condemns the Eustathians, for abhorring the
Assemblies and Divine Offices used in the places where the Martyrs were
commemorated, Can. ult. These Notes falsely pretend they were condemned, for
disapproving the Worship and Invocation of the holy Martyrs Lab. p. 434. Bin.
page 374. col. 1.
; whereas it is plain by the Canon, that the Martyrs were only Commemorated,
not Invocated nor Worshipped in those days; and the expression in this place, is
only a Phrase to signify the usual Assemblies of Orthodox Christians, which
were then frequently held in the Burying places of the Martyrs, and these
Heretics separated from those public Assemblies.

The Arians, to revenge their Condemnation at Nice, falsely accuse Athanasius to
the Emperor Constantine, An. Dom. 335.
who thereupon called a Council at Tire, which these Editors entitle, The
Council of Tire under Sylvester Lab. p. 435. Bin. page 374. col. 1.
. Yet all the Ancients agree the Emperor Called it, and their own Notes
confess as much: Only they pretend, He Called this Council contrary to custom
and his duty; but this is notoriously false, since Constantine had already
called diverse Councils, and particularly that of Nice. And as for Pope
Sylvester, he is not once named in this Council at Tire, which looks a little
odly upon the pretended Supremacy, that when the Catholic Cause lay at the
stake, we never hear one word of the Roman Bishop, neither in this Council, nor
in all the succeeding Letters and Councils relating to Athanasius, till that
Cause was afterward brought before the Pope, as an Arbitrator chosen by both
parties.

. 19. Pope Marcus succeeded Sylvester, and sat but eight Months; yet, that he
might not seem to have An. Dom. 336.
done nothing, The Forgers have invented an Epistle from Athanasius to this
Pope, desiring a true Copy of the Nicene Canons from Rome on pretense, that the
Arians had burnt theirs at Alexandria: To which is annexed Marcus his Answer,
who says he had sent him 70 Canons. Now Binius has often cited these
Epistles, to prove the Popes Supremacy and Infallibility, and to show there
were more than twenty Canons made at Nice, yet here His Notes bring five
substantial Reasons, to prove these Epistles forged; and Labbe notes, These
Wares of Isidore are justly suspected by Baronius, Bellarmine, and other
skilful Catholics, nor does Binius himself doubt of their being spurious Lab.
p. 469, and 472. Bin. page 382. col. 2, etc.
. Yea, it is remarkable, that this very Binius out of Baronius Baron. An. 336..
59, and 60.
here confesses, That he who Forged the Epistle of Boniface to Eulalius,
devised also these two Epistles, to consult the Credit of Pope Zosimus and Pope
Boniface, who had cited a Canon out of the Nicene Council, not found among the
genuine 20 Canons. From which we may observe, First, that Binius will cite
those things for the supremacy, etc. which he knows to be forged. Secondly,
That the great design of all these Forged Records of Antiquity was either to
cover the faults, or consult the honor of the Roman Church, which seems to
have both employed and encouraged the Authors of these Pious Frauds, because
her Pretenses could not be made out by any thing that was Authentic.

Julius succeeded Marcus in the same year, in whose Life the Pontifical
mistakes the Consuls Names, and feigns he was banished Ten Months, which
Baronius proves to have been impossible Baron. An. 352.. 2, and 3.
, He fills up this Popes story (according to his manner) with trisling matters,
and omits the only remarkable thing in his Life, which was his concern in the
Cause of Athanasius. In this Popes name several Epistles are published: The
First from Julius to the Eastern Bishops may be proved fictitious, not only by
the Confession of Baronius and other Learned Romanists Lab. p. 475. in Marg.
Bin. page 384. col. 1.
, but by diverse other Arguments. For is it probable, that Julius would Only be
solicitous about his Supremacy when he writ to the Arians, and not once reprove
them for their Heresy, nor their persecuting Athanasius? is it likely he
should cite the Council of Nice falsely, and feign so many ancient Decrees about
the Primacy of the Pope, and the Nullity of Councils not celebrated by his
Authority? This Forger says, Julius consented to the Nicene Council at the
time of its celebration; but the Romanists agree that it was held in Sylvesters
time. He imperiously forbids the Eastern Bishops to judge any Bishops without
him, and falsely tells them, They all had received their Consecration from Rome,
yea, with the fabulous Pontisical he mistakes the Consuls Name, and puts
Maximianus for Titianus. Yet by this Forgery the Editors would prove, that more
than twenty Canons were made at Nice Lab. Marg. page 477. Bin. page 385. col. 1.
, and (after Baronius had discarded it) Binius by frivolous Notes strives to
justify it as speaking big for the Supremacy Lab. p. 480. Bin. page 386. col.
1.
. Secondly, Here is the Eastern Bishops Answer to Julius, wherein though they
call the Pope Father, which was the usual Title of Bishops of great Sees; yet
they expressly deny his having any Authority over them, and affirm he ought to
be subject to the Canons, as well as other Bishops: So that there is no reason
for Binius his Brag, Lo, how they own the Supremacy Lab. Marg. page 482. Bin.
page 386. col. 2.
! For indeed they do not own it at all, and yet the substance of this Epistle
is genuine, being found in Secrates and Sozomen. The third Epistle from Julius
to the Arians, is owned by Baronius and others to be a Forgery Lab. p. 483.
Bin. page 387. col. 2.
; and Binius in his Notes upon it says, It is false, corrupted, and stolen
out of diverse Authors Bin. p. 391. col. 1.
, yet the same Binius infamously quotes it over and over for the Supremacy, the
Nullity of Councils not called by the Pope, and the number of the Nicene
Canons. The fourth Epistle of Julius comes not out of the Vatican, but was
preserved in Athanasius his Apology, and is by all accounted genuine, being
writ in an humble style, without any pretenses to the Supremacy Lab. p. 494.
Bin. page 391. col. 1.
. And here the Nicene Canon (about the re-hearing in a New Synod, a Cause not
well judged before) is rightly cited, without mention of any final Appeal to
Rome Lab. p. 495. Bin. ut supr. col. (...).
; The power of all Bishops is supposed to be equal, and not any greater power
to belong to him that is fixed in a greater City. Here Julius writes not his
own Sense, but the Sense of the Bishops of Italy, who were assembled in a Synod
at Rome, of which great City Julius being Bishop ought, by ancient custom, to
publish the Decrees of such Councils as were held in or or near that City Lab.
p. 513. Bin. page 395. col. 1.
; but Binius falsely infers from hence, That it was an honor due to his place,
to publish the Decrees made in all Synods. And whereas, when any thing was
under debate concerning Alexandria (the second Patriarchate) Julius says, it
was a Custom, to write to the Roman Bishop (who was the first Patriarch,)
Binius stretches this and says, It was both agreeable to the Canons and
Custom, that no Bishop should be judged till the Popes definitive Sentence were
heard Lab. p. 516. Bin. page 396. col. 1.
. The last Epistle also is genuine, and writ in a modest style, owning that
Athanasius was not judged by the Pope alone, but by a Synod of Bishops, whose
Judgment he supposes above his own Ep. 4. ap. Lab. Bin. page 396. col. 2.
, and by these two Epistles we may discern the Impostures of those other
Epistles, which are Forged about this time in the Names of this and other
Popes. The Decrees attributed to this Pope are not suitable to the Age, yet we
may note, the third Decree forbids a man to Marry his deceased Brothers Wife,
though his Brother had not known her: Which was shamefully broken by that Pope,
who gave License to King Henry the 8th to marry his Brothers Wife, and this
Decree justifies his Divorce Lab. p. 525. Bin. page 398. col. 1.
.

After these Epistles follows a Roman Synod, wherein Julius with 117 Bishops
confirm the Nicene Council; but Labbe says, it is a hotch-potch made up out of
many Authors, and put into the form of a Council by Isidore Lab. Marg. page
527. Bin. page 400. col. 1.
, and it is dated with the same mistaken Consuls, Felician and Maximian, with
which Julius his entrance into the Pontifical, and all his Forged Epistles are
dated (for his genuine Epistles have no date;) yet Baronius Baron. An. 337.. 67.
and the Notes gravely dispute about the time of this Forged Council, and the
Bishops which were said to be in it; merely to persuade the Reader, that the
Nicene Council needed the Pope's Confirmation; but since this Council is
feigned, it can be no evidence: And therefore Binius gains nothing by alleging
it in his Notes on the third Epistle, but only to show us, that one falsehood is
the fittest prop for another.

. 20. Athanasius being restored to Alexandria, calls a An. Dom. 339.
Synod there of all the Bishops of his Province, of which only the Synodical
Epistle is now extant, written as the Title declares, To all the Catholic
Bishops every where; yet the Notes from Baronius Baron. An. 339.. 2. and. 11.
say, It was writ particularly to Julius; whereas the Body of the Epistle
says, The Arians have written to the Roman Bishop, and perhaps (speaking to
other Bishops) they have writ to you also: So that this is a falsehood devised
for to make out the Supremacy, which is not countenanced by this Epistle,
wherein we are told, that Religion depends not on the greatness of any City:
Though the Notes say, That Bishops had Honors and Jurisdiction given them,
suiting to the dignity of the Secular Praefects of their several Cities; and
thence Alexandria was reckoned the second Patriarchate, and Antioch the third
Lab. p. 534. Bin page 401. col. 2.
, it follows naturally, therefore Rome was the first Patriarchate: But this
Inference they will not make: I shall only note that this Synod says, The
lawful use of the Cup of the Lord was to make the People Drink Lab. p. 547.
Bin. page 404. col. 2.
; from whence we gather, that the Roman Church (who denies the Cup to the
People) does a very unlawful thing, and leaves off the lawful use of the holy
Chalice.

The Council of Antioch, is by the Editors said to be An. Dom. 341.
held under Julius Lab. p. 559. Bin. page 407.
, yet it was called by Constantius on occasion of dedicating a new Church
there; and the Notes say, the Emperor not only called it, but being present
there, caused such Decrees as he pleased to pass in it Lab. p. 588. Bin. p.
416. col. 1.
; yea, it is evident they valued Pope Julius so little, that they judged quite
otherwise than he had done in the case of Athanasius, and therefore the
Romanists rail at this Synod as a Conventicle of Arians, and in the last Roman
Edition (says Richerius (g)) have left out these Canons as not favoring the
(x) Richer. hist. Conc. lib. 1. cap. 4.
practice of the Roman Court. However Baronius says, Among 97 Bishops, only 36
were Arians Baron. An. 341.. 4, and 5.
; and the Canons made here are excellent Rules for Discipline, having been
received into the Code of the Universal Church before S. Chrysostom's time,
confirmed by the Council of Chalcedon, allowed by S. Hillary, and (as Gratian
says) received by the Catholics; and the Learned Richerius has fully answered
all the Cavils of Binius and Baronius, by which they would invalidate them: So
that we need only make some few Remarks on this Council, and so dismiss it. The
12th Canon Orders a Bishop who was deposed, to appeal to a Synod of Bishops,
and allowed none to be restored, unless it were by a greater number of Bishops
than had deposed him Lab. p. 595. Bin. page 417. col. 2.
. But they exclaim against this as a device of the Arians, to take away that
Apostolical and ancient Law and Custom of appealing to Rome, which (they say)
was always observed till now: But hitherto they could never produce any such
Law, nor prove any such Custom; nor did S. Chrysostom ever appeal to Rome, but
desired to be restored by a greater Synod, as this Canon requires Socrat. lib.
6. cap. 16. Vid. Bever. Council. Tom. II. page 191.
, and when his Enemies made that impossible, then indeed he objected that this
Canon was made by Arians; yet the Canon remained in force, and was generally
received in that Age. Nor did the Sardican Council revoke it (as Binius falsely
says Lab. p. 597. Bin. page 418. col. 2. Vid. Richer. ut supr.
: For though they put a new Complement on the Pope, yet they did not take away
the ancient method of appealing from a lesser Synod to a greater. The second
Canon decrees, That such as come to Church to hear part of the Service, and do
not receive the Sacrament, shall be Excommunicated. This the Notes say was to
condemn the old Audian Heretics Lab. p. 596. Bin. page 418. col. 1.
; but it evidently condemns the new Roman Heretics, who since they exalted
their Wafer into a God, expect the People should only gaze at, and adore it
most part of the year, and excuse them, though they often go away without
receiving it. The 25th Canon forbids Bishops to commit the Treasures and Fruits
of the Church to their Kinsinen, Brethren and Sons: Upon which Binius has no
Note, knowing it reflected on the Roman Churches Custom, where the Popes
generally give all they can to their scandalous Nipotismo.

Next to this Council of Antioch, is placed a second Synod at Rome, under Pope
Julius, in the Cause of Athanasius Lab. p. 604. Bin. page 419. col. 1.
; but Baronius places it before that of Antioch, An. 340.. 1. And though the
Cardinal confess, That Athanasius and his Enemies by consent had referred this
matter to Julius his Arbitration, and that Athanasius came to Rome after this
Reference was made; yet he vainly remarks on this matter, in these words,
Behold, Reader, the ancient usage for injured Bishops, to come even out of the
East to the Roman Bishop for redress Baron. An. 340.. 2.
. But this is one of the first Instances, and was a mere Arbitration by
consent; and the ancient Usage since the Emperors became Christians was to
appeal to them, as these Parties had done, before it was referred to the Pope.
In this Roman Council it is pretended Athanasius delivered his Creed; but the
Acts of the Council being lost, and the Roman Archives being a repository
neither safe nor creditable, we can have no Evidence from thence of the Truth
and Antiquity of this excellent Composure. One thing however is remarkable,
that Baronius and Binius charge the Greeks with taking away those words [and
the Son] out of this Creed, and add, that they falsely pretended, this was a
late addition of the Latins Lab. p. 605. Bin. page 420. col. 1. Baron. An.
340.. 12.
. Yet Baronius himself owns, that the Western Church added these words [and the
Son] to the Nicene Creed, above an hundred years after Baron.. An. 447.
; so that they accuse the poor Greeks for keeping the Creed, as Athanasius made
it, and as their own Church used to recite the Nicene Creed for many years
after.

The year following Julius held a third Synod at An. Dom. 342.
Rome, and in it read the Letter of the Eastern Bishops, wherein they wonder he
should cite them to Rome, and so value himself upon the greatness of his City,
as on that account to take upon him to judge them concerning things which they
had determined in their own Synods. Nor durst Julius challenge any Authority
over them, by reason of the Eminence of his City Baron An. 341.. 56, 57.
: Only he pleads for Athanasius, who being Bishop of an Apostolical See, viz.
Alexandria, ought not to have been condemned by them, till they had writ to all
the Western Bishops, and especially to him as Bishop of the first See, that so
all of them, (viz. in Council) might have determined the matter according to
right Id. An. 342.. 28, 30.
. But Baronius and Binius turn this into their being obliged to write to the
Pope, and to receive what he had defined: And Binius infers, from the Popes
writing this Synodical Letter from a Council held in his own City of Rome
(though the Synod expressly command him to write the Epistle) That in respect to
the Pope, and according to ancient Custom, it was his right to publish Whatever
was agreed on in Councils Lab. p. 607. Bin. page 420. col. 2.
. But such false Consequences from Premises that will not bear them, only show
the Arguers partiality.

After this we have nothing remarkable, but a second Council at Antioch, held
by the Arians, yet bearing this Title under Julius Lab. p. 608. Bin. 420. col.
2.
, wherein the Arians made a New Creed, and sent four Bishops to give Constans
the Emperor and all the Western Bishops an account of their Faith, and they
met these Legates in a Council at Milain; and though it does not appear Julius
was present, yet Baronius makes as if this Embassy from the East was sent to
Julius, chiefly to desire Communion with him Baron. An. 344.. 4.
; and Binius says, They desired to be received into the Communion of the Roman
Church Lib. p. 614. Bin. page 422. col. 1.
. But the ancient Historians assure us, they desired not the Communion of the
Roman only; but of the whole Western Church, of which that was then esteemed no
more than one eminent part.

. 21. The Sardican Synod, which says some kind An. Dom. 347.
things of Rome, is prodigiously magnified by the Editors, who place an History
before it, and partial Notes after it, which are full of Falsities and designed
Misrepresentations: Baronius also spends one whole year in setting it off to
the best advantage; but all their Frauds will be discovered, by considering,
First, By whom it was called: Secondly, Who presided in it: Thirdly, Of what
number of Bishops it consisted: And, Fourthly, What Authority the Canons of it
have.

First, As to the Calling it, the Preface falsely states the occasion thereof:
For it is plain Athanasius did not (as that reports) leave the whole judgment
of his Cause to the Pope Lab. p. 624. Bin. page 423.
; nor did he (as is there said) Fly to Rome, as the Mother of all Churches, and
the Rock of Faith: This is the Prefacers mere Invention. For Athanasius went to
Rome as to the place agreed on by both sides for Arbitrating this matter; and
the other party so little valued the Pope's decision in his favor, that they
would neither restore Athanasius, nor receive him into Communion upon it; which
made Julius complain to the Emperor Constans, who writ to his Brother
Constantius about it; but that Letter did not produce this Council (as the
Preface fully sets out) but only procured a fruitless Embassy of three Eastern
Bishops to Rome. It was the personal Addresses of Athanasius and Paulus, Bishop
of Constantinople, to Constans (when they found the Pope had no power to
restore them) which caused both the Emperors to give order for this Council to
meet, as Sozomen, Socrates and Theodoret affirm Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 19. Socrat.
lib. 2. cap. 16. Theod. lib. 2. cap. 5.
. And the Bishops in their Epistle do expressly say, They were called together
by the most Religious Emperors Lab. p. 670. Bin. page 440.
: But Baronius fraudulently leaves out this beginning of the Bishops Letter
Baron. An. 347.. 31.
; and the bold Writer of the Preface says, This Council was called by the
Popes Authority: And the Notes offer some Reasons to justify this Falsehood,
yea, they cite the aforesaid Authors, who plainly declare it was called by both
the Emperors, to prove, it was called by the Pope; but they offer nothing
material to make this out. It Is true, Socrates says, Some absent Bishops
complained of the shortness of time, and blamed Julius for it Not. ad Council.
Sardic. Lab. page 685. Bin. page 445. col. 1. Vid. Richer. histor. Council. lib.
1. cap. 3.
; but that does not prove the Council was called by his Authority, only it
supposes, he might advise the Emperor to make them meet speedily; but still
that is no sign of full power.

Secondly, As to the President of this Council, The Preface says boldly, That
Hosius, Archidamus, and Philoxenus presided in the Name of Julius. But first,
it does not appear that Hosius was the Popes Legate, only as an eminent
Confessor he had a chief place in it; whence Sozomen says, Osius and
Protogenes were chief of the Western Bishops here assembled Sozom. lib. 3. cap.
11.
: That is, Osius as an ancient Confessor, and Protogenes as Bishop of Sardic,
where the Council was held; but as for Archidamus and Philoxenus, they are not
in the Latin Copies of the Subscribers Lab. p. 658. Bin. page 436. col. 1.
. And Athanasius only says, Julius subscribed by these two Presbyters; which
shows, that Hosius was not the Popes Legate (for he subscribed in his own name)
and that these Presbyters who were his Legates, were not Presidents of the
Council.

Thirdly, They magnify the number of Bishops also in this Synod, to make it
look like a General Council; where accounts differ they take the largest Baron.
An. 347.. 3, 4.
, and falsely cite Athanasius, as if he said it consisted of 376 Bishops, and so
exceeded the first Council of Nice Lab. p. 685. Bin. page 446. col. 1. Baron.
ut supr.. 75.
. Whereas Athanasius expressly reckons only 170, who met at the City of Sardica
Athanas. Epist. ad Solitar. p. 818.
; and when many of the Eastern Bishops withdrew, there were not one hundred
left to pass the Decrees of this Council. It Is true, Athanasius affirms, that
344 Bishops signed the Decree to restore him; but many of these hands were got
from Orthodox Bishops, who were not at the Council Idem Apol. 2. p. 767, and
768.
: So that this was never counted or called a General Council by any, but these
partial Romanists; for though the Emperor seem to have designed it General at
first Socrat. lib. 2 cap. 16.
, yet so few came to it, and they who came agreed so ill (the Eastern Bishops
generally forsaking it) that it is called frequently, A Council of the Western
Church, and so Epiphanius in Baronius describes it Baron. An. 347.. 42.
.

Fourthly, The little regard paid to its Canons afterward shows it was no
General Council. Richerius, a moderate and learned Romanist proves, That this
Council was not extant in Greek in the time of Dionysius Exiguus, so that he
and Pope Leo the 4th reckon it after all the Councils of Note: The Greeks
received not its Canons into their Code, and Pope Nicholas Epistle shows, that
the Eastern Church did not value its Authority, only the Popes esteemed it,
because it seems to advance their power Richer. hist. Council. lib. 1. cap. 3.
. The African Church of old valued this Council as little; for a Synod of
Bishops there (among whom were S. Augustine and Alypius) were ignorant of any
Sardican Council, but one held by the Arians. Baronius tries all his art to
palliate this matter Baron. An. 347.. 73.
; but after all his Conjectures it is plain, it was of no repute in Africa,
because when two Popes Zosimus and Boniface afterward cited the Decrees of
Sardica as Canons of Nice, the Fraud was discovered, and when they were found
not to be Nicene Canons, They would not receive them as Canons of Sardica, but
flatly rejected them; which shows, that these African Fathers did neither take
this Sardican Synod for a General Council, nor for an Authentic Provincial
Council: And therefore whatever is here said in favor of the Roman Church, is
of no great weight. However the Champions of Rome magnify the 4th Canon of
this Council, where in case a Bishop judge that he is condemned unjustly,
Hosius says, If it please you, let us honor the memory of Peter the Apostle,
and let those who have judged such a Bishop write to Julius Bishop of Rome,
that so (if need be) the Judgment may be reviewed by the Bishops of the
Province, and he may appoint some to hear the Cause, etc. Now here the Notes
talk big, and claim a Supremacy and Appeals as due to the Pope by Divine Right
Lab. p. 690, and 691. Bin. page 448. col. 1.
: But Richerius well observes, It is Nonsense, to ascribe that to a human Law
and Privilege, or to the Decree of a Council, which was due before to the Pope
by the Law of God Richer. hist. Con. lib. 1. cap. 3.
. And we add, that Hosius neither cites any Divine Law, no nor any precedent
Canon or Custom for this, but supposes it at the pleasure of this Synod to
grant or deny Julius this privilege: And yet if it were an express Law, this
being only a Western Synod, does not bind the whole Catholic Church. Besides,
it is not said, The Criminal shall appeal to Rome, and have his Cause tried
there; but only, that the Pope (if need were) might order the Cause to be heard
over again in the Province where it was first tried; and therefore Julius is
only made a Judge of the necessity of a Re hearing, not of the Cause it self,
which according to the 5th Canon of Nice was to be decided in the Province
where it was first moved. And this rather condemns than countenances the modern
Popish way of Trying foreign Causes at Rome by Appeal. To this I will add an
ancient Scholion on this Canon found in some old Copies: From this Canon the
Roman Church is much exalted with Pride; and former evil Popes producing this
as a Canon of Nice, were discovered by a Council at Carthage, as the Preface to
that Council shows: But this Canon (whatever they pretend) gives no more power
to Rome than other Canons, since it says not absolutely, that any who is
deposed any where shall have liberty to appeal to the Pope; for at that rate
the Sardican Synod would contradict the General Councils; it speaks only of him
who is deposed by the Neighboring Bishops and those of his Province, and
therefore does not comprehend the Synod of the Primate Metropolitan, or
Patriarch; so that if they be present, and the Sentence be not barely by the
Neighboring Bishops, the Pope may not re-hear it, as this Canon orders: And it
only concerns those in the West, Hosius and the Makers of these Canons being of
those parts; but in the East this Custom never was observed to this day Schol.
ap: D. Bever. Conc. Tom. II. p. 199.
. I shall make one remark or two more, and so dismiss this Council. The Preface
cites Sozomen, to prove, That Hosius and others writ to Julius to confirm these
Canons: But Sozomen only says, They writ to him, to satisfy him that they had
not contradicted the Nicene Canons Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 11. Lab. p. 625. Bin.
page 424.
; and their Epistle (which calls Julius their Fellow-Minister) Lab. p. 670.
Bin. page 440. col. 1.
, desires him, to publish their Decrees, to those in Sicily, Sardinia and
Italy, (which of old were Suburbicarian Regions,) but never speak of his
confirming their Decrees Lab. p. 662. Bin. page 437. col. 2.
. Yet in their Epistle to the Church of Alexandria, they pray them to give
their Suffrage to the Councils determinations Lab. p. 670. Bin. page 439. col.
2.
: Which, had it been writ to the Pope, would have made his Creatures
sufficiently triumph. I observe also, that upon the mention of the Church of
Thessalonica in the 20th Canon, the Notes pretend, that this Church had an
especial regard then, because the Bishop of it was the Pope's Legate; yet the
first proof they give, is, that Pope Leo made Anastasius of Thessalonica his
Legate an hundred years after; and hence (they say) Bellarmine aptly proves the
Popes Supremacy Lab. p. 692. Bin. page 448. col. 2.
: But the Inferences are as ridiculous as they are false, and they get no
advantage either to their Supremacy or Appeals by this Council.

. 22. The first Council of Carthage was appointed to An Dom. 348.
suppress that dangerous Sect of the Donatists; and though it bear the Title of
under Julius, yet this pretended universal Monarch is not mentioned by the
Council, or by any ancient Author, as having any hand in this great Work, which
was managed by Gratus Bishop of Carthage, and by the Emperors Legates Lab. p.
713. Bin. page 546. col. 1.
. In this Council were made fourteen excellent Canons, which possibly the
Romanists may reject, because they never asked the Popes consent to hold this
Council, nor desired his confirmation to their Canons; and whereas the Editors
tell us, Pope Leo the 4th (who lived five hundred years after) approved of this
Council, we must observe that the Catholic Church had put them into their Code,
and received them for Authentic long before, without staying for any
Approbation from the Bishop of Rome.

Soon after this, there was a Council at Milan, of which there was no mention,
but only in the Synodical Letter of the Bishops met at Ariminum, An. 359.
Baron. An. 359.. 16. Lab. p. 721. Bin. page 459. col. 1.
; who say, that the Presbyters of Rome were present at it; they say not,
Presidents of it: And there it seems Ursacius and Valens, two Arian Heretics,
abjured their Heresy, and recanted their false Evidence against Athanasius.
And either before or after this Synod (it is not certain whether) they went to
Rome, and in writing delivered their Recantation to Pope Julius Hosti Epist.
ap. Baron. An. 355.. 661.
, before whom they had falsely accused Athanasius, and who was the Arbitrator
chosen to hear that Cause, and so not as Pope, but as a chosen Judge in that
case, was fittest to receive these men's Confessions: Yet hence the Notes make
this Inference, That since this matter was greater, than that a Synod at Milan
(though the Roman Presbyters were present) could dispatch it, and lest the
ancient Custom of the Catholic Church should be broken, viz. for eminent
Heretics to abjure their Heresies only at Rome, and be received into Communion
by the Pope; they sent them to Julius, that having before him offered their
Penitential Letter, they might make their Confession, the whole Roman Church
looking on. All which is their own Invention; for the Authors from whom alone
they have the notice of this Council say nothing of this kind, and it is very
certain that there was at this time, no custom at all for Heretics to abjure at
Rome, more than at any other place, many Heretics being frequently reconciled
at other Churches. There was also a peculiar reason why these two Heretics went
thither, and it cannot be proved that this Council sent them; so that these are
Forgeries, devised to support their dear Supremacy, and so we leave them: Only
noting, That the Editors are not so happy in their Memory as their Invention;
for the next Page shows us a Council at Jerusalem, wherein many Bishops (who
had described the Condemnation of Athanasius, and therefore no doubt were
Arians) repented and recanted, and so were restored to the Churches Communion,
without the trouble of going to Rome on this Errant.

A Council at Colen follows next, which they say was in Julius his time, and
under Julius; yet the Notes say, they know not the time when it was held, only
the Bishops there assembled deposed a Bishop for Heresy by their own
Authority, without staying for the Pope's Advice, though they were then about
to send a Messenger to Rome to pray for them; so little was the Popes Consent
thought needful in that Age; and perhaps it is in order to conceal this seeming
neglect, that the Notes Bin. Not p. 463. col. 2.
(after they have approved far more improbable Stories, which make for the
honor of their Church) reject the report of this Message to the Prince of the
Apostles as fabulous, and we are not concerned to vindicate it.

The last Council which they style under Julius, was at Vasatis, or Bazas in
France; yet the Notes affirm, That Nectarius presided in it; the time of it
very uncertain Lab. p. 728. Bin. page 464. col. 1. and 2.
, and the Phrases used in the Canons of it, show it to be of much later date.
Besides this Council says, The Gloria-Patri was sung after the Psalms in all
the Eastern Churches; but Jo. Cassian, who came out of the East in the next
Century, says, He had never heard this Hymn sung after the Psalms in the
Eastern Churches Bin. Not. in Epist. Damas. and Hieron. page 506. col. 1.
: Wherefore it is probable this Council was celebrated after Cassian's time,
when the Greek Churches had learned this Custom; and yet these Editors place it
a whole Century too soon, because they would have us think that custom here
mentioned, of remembering the Pope in their daily Prayers, was as ancient as the
wrong date here assigned. In Labbe's Edition here is added an account Lab. a p.
729. ad page 739.
of three Councils against Photinus, on which we need make no Remarks.

. 23. Pope Liberius succeeded Julius, whose Life with An. Dom. 352.
the Notes upon it are very diverting, if we observe the Shifts and Artifices
used by the Roman Parasites to excuse him from Heresy. The Pontifical says,
He was banished three years by Constantius, for not consenting to the Asians,
in whose place Foelix was Ordained, and he in a Council condemned Ursacius and
Valens, two Arian Bishops, who in Revenge petitioned Constantius to revoke
Liberius; and he being thus restored, consented to the Arians and the Emperor,
so far as to persecute and Martyr the Catholics, and his Rival Foelix being a
Catholic, was deposed. But this Fable is not fine enough for the Palates of
Baronius and Binius, who are to dress a Story to make the Reader believe, that
neither Liberius nor Foelix erred in Faith while they were Popes. To confute
which let it be considered, that Binius confesses, Liberius consented to the
depriving of Athanasius, admitted Arians to his Communicn, and subscribed an
Arian Confession of Faith; as Athanasius, Hilary and Hierom, witness Not. ad 7
Ep. laber. Lab. page 751. Bin. page 470. col. 1.
; and there are Arguments unanswerable to prove, he was an Arian while he was
Pope Vid. Spalat. de rep. Ecel. l. 7. cap. 5.
; yea, Binius in his own Notes twice confesses, That he unhappily fell Lab. p.
741. Bin. p. 465. E.
; and that, he basely fell Lab. p. 743. Bin. page 466. col. 2.
. Yet to mince the matter, he adds, That by his Fall he cast a vile Blot on his
Life and Manners; and the Notes on the Sirmian Council say, By offending
against the Confession of Faith, and the Law of Justice, he cast a most base
Blot on his Life and Manners Lab. p. 783. Bin. page 479. col. 2.
. What can be more ridiculous! He erred in Faith, and subscribed the Arian
Confession, therefore the blot was upon his Faith; this did not concern his
Life and Manners. That Absurd Phrase is a mere blind to keep the Reader from
discovering a Pope turning Heretic: To which end they impudently say, It is a
false Calumny of the Heretics to say, Liberius was infected with the Arian
Heresy Lab. p. 741. Bin. page 465. col. 2.
. But I ask, Whether Athanasius, S. Hilary and S. Hieroin (who affirm this)
were Heretics? Or was Platina an Heretic, who says, Liberius did in all things
agree with the Heretics: To which the same Forgers have added, [As some would
have it;] but those are not Phetinus words, who says soon after, He was of the
same Opinion with the Arians Platin. in vit. Liber. p. 50. Eusebius Presbyter
urbis Romoe copit declarare Liberium Haereticum. Portitor. Sarish Aug. 14.
. And surely the Catholic People of Rome in his time took him for an Arian, and
as such would have no communion with him, and therefore we conclude he was an
Arian. As for Foelix, who was put into his place, Baronius and Binius would
excuse him by a false Latin Version of Socrates, saying, He was addicted to the
Arian Sect; but the Original Greek expressly declares, He was in Opinion an
Arian (...). Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 29.
. And it is certain, He was chosen by the Arians, and communicated with them,
Ordaining Arians to be Priests; and therefore the Catholic People at Rome
avoided his communion, and S. Hierom says, He was an Arian. As for the Story
of his condemning Ursacius and Valens, two of that Sect, there is no better
Authority for it, than the fabulous Pontifical. So that after all the devices
of Bellarmin, Bargnius and Binius Lab. p. 742. Bin. page 466. col. 1, and 2.
, to save their Churches Infallibility, we have two Popes at once falling so
notoriously into the Arian Heresy, that the Lay People disowned their
Communion: This is more than suspicion of Heresy in S. Peter's Chair, and
proves, that their infallible Guides for some years were Arian Heretics.

For this Liberius diverse Epistles are published, with a Preface before them,
which says, Two of them were feigned by the Arians Lab. p. 744. Bin. page 467.
col. 1.
; yet these two are found in the Fragments of S. Hilary, among which it is not
probable there should be any Fiction of the Arians. So that it is very likely
these two Epistles are genuine, but rejected by these Sycophants of Rome,
because they tell an ungrateful Truth, viz. That Liberius did condemn
Athanasius soon after he was made Pope. And if we consider how inconstant he
was, it is very probable that he might condemn Athanasius twice, first in the
beginning of his Papacy, as is said in these two Epistles, of which he
repented, and then writ that Tenth Epistle, to own he was in Communion with
Athanasius, and to tell him, If he approved of his form of Faith, it would tend
much to the settling of his Judgment Lab. p. 755. Ban. page 471. col. 1.
, which is an odd Complement from an Infallible Head. Secondly He condemned
Athanasius after his Banishment, of which more shall be said hereafter: But as
to the particular Epistles, we shall note, That in the first (which they say is
genuine) Liberius with other Bishops petition Constantius, to order a Council
to be held at Aquileia Lab. p. 744. Bin. page 467. col. 1. Vid item Ep. 2.
; by which we see the Pope had not then assumed the power of calling Councils.
When he writ the 7th Epistle (which they grant also to be genuine) no doubt he
was an Arian: For he calls the Arian Bishops, His most Beloved Brethren, and
declares his Consent to their just condemning of Athanasius, together with his
being in Communion with them, and his receiving their Sirmian Creed, as the
Catholic Faith Lab. p. 751. Bin. page 469. col. 2.
. So in the XIth Epistle (which is certainly genuine and recorded by Socrates
Socrat. hist. lib. 4. cap. 11.
,) the Notes confess, he was so easy, as to receive the Semi-Arians to
Communion, and to commend their Faith, as the same which was decreed at Nice:
But it is gross Flattery, to call this only, Being too easy; it was in plain
terms, Being deceived, and erring in Matters of Faith; which spoils their
Infallibility Lab. p. 757. Bin. page 472. col. 1.
, as it also does their Universal Supremacy; for Liberius in the same Epistle
to call himself, Bishop of Italy (referring only to the Suburbicarian Regions)
and saying, He was the meanest of Bishops, and rejoiced that those in the East
did (not submit to him, but) agree with him in Matters of Faith. Wherefore the
XIIth or (as Labbe calls it) the XIVth Epistle, which is writ to all Bishops,
is manifestly forged Ep. 14. Lab. page 760. Ep. 12. Bin. page 472. col. 2.
: And so are the two next, from Liberius to Athanasius, and from Athanasius to
Liberius, as both Labbe and Binius confess Lab. p. 763. Bin. in Notis page 474.
col. 2.
; yet in one of these the Pope brags of his Authority over the Universal
Church: But the Forger was so bad at Chronology, that while he strives to make
this Pope look like an Orthodox Friend of Athanasius, he absurdly brings him
in, even under Julian or Valens (in one of whose Reigns this Epistle was
written,) threatening Offenders with the Emperors Indignation, with
Deprivation, yea, with Proscription, Banishment and Stripes Lab. p. 767. Bin.
page 474. col. 2.
. I need not mention those Decrees which are attributed to Liberius, whose
Style betrays them, and shows they belong to the later Ages, and are placed
here by the Collectors, only to make them seem more ancient than really they
are.

In Liberius's first year it is said, There was a Council called at Rome by
this Pope, to clear Athanasius Lab. p. 769. Bin. page 475. col. 1.
; yet being sensible that their Authority would signify very little, they all
agreed to petition the Emperor for a Council to Meet at Aquileia, to confirm
what they had done at Rome. Anno 355. there was a Council at Milan, the Editors
call it, A General Council, because it was with Constantius permission, called
by Liberius, whose Legates also were present at it Lab. p. 772. Bin. page 476.
col. 1.
. But herein they grossly falsify, for Sozomen declares, That Constantius
summoned all the Bishops to Milan Sozom. lib. 4 cap. 8. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 29.
; and Baronius says, The Emperor called them together Baron. An. 355.. 2.
. Therefore if this was a General Council, it was called by the Emperor, and
not by the Pope: In the Notes on this Synod they say, Constantius being yet a
Catechumen, ought not to be present at a lawful Council. But this is Baronius
his device, to color over the Forgery of Constantine's Baptism before the
Council of Nice, there being no Canon forbidding a Catechumen to be present in
a Council, or in a Church, except only while the Sacrament was celebrating; so
that if Constantius had been bound by an Ecclesiastical Canon, there being no
Canon to hinder his presence in this Council, Baronius assigns a wrong cause of
his absence. Again, the Notes do very falsely suppose, That Foelix, though
chosen by the Arians, was a Catholic Pope Lab. p. 773.
: For he was Ordained by three Arian Bishops at Milan, as Atbanasius declares
Athanas. Epist. ad Solitar.
; and Socrates, as we noted before, faith, He was in Opinion an Arian. Nor is
it probable, when the Arians had got Liberius banished, for not complying with
them, they should choose a Catholic and an Enemy into so eminent a See; or that
the Catholic People of Rome should avoid the communion of Foelix, if he were
not an Arian. It Is true, Sozomen speaks of some who said, He kept to the Nicene
Faith, and was unblameable in Religion; yet he adds, -- he was accused for
ordaining Arians, and communicating with them Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 10.
. But this bare Report, raised perhaps by the Arians (who still pretended to be
Catholics, and hold the Nicene Faith) cannot outweigh such strong Reason and
Matters of Fact, as are here alleged to prove Foelix, not only a Schismatical,
but also an Heretical Pope.

The Dialogue between Constantius and Pope Liberius at Milan, (here published)
shows, That at this time he refused either to condemn Athanasius, or
communicate with the Arians, and was banished into Thrace for this refusal: But
the Reader may justly wonder he should never mention his Supremacy and
Universal Authority, when Constantius asked him, If he were so considerable a
part of the World, that he would alone stand for Athanasius; and when he
advised him, to embrace the Communion of the Churches Lab. p. 775. Bin. page
478. col. 1.
, how properly might he have here told him, he was Head of all Churches, and
those who did not communicate with him were no Churches? Again, Why does this
Pope offer to go to Alexandria, and hear Achanasius's cause there, which had
been twice judged at Rome? Surely he knew nothing of these last and highest
Appeals in all Causes: The Popes of after-Ages claimed this as a right of their
See; yet it must be granted, that Liberius was ignorant of that privilege.

. 24. The Council at Sirmium was called by Constantius, An. Dom. 357.
and consisted of Arian Bishops, who though they condemned Photinus his gross
Heresy, yet would not put the word Consubstantial into any of the three
Creeds, which they here composed, however the Editors call it, A General
Council partly rejected: Perhaps, because Pope Liberius approved it, who here
openly Fell into the Arian Heresy; and that, not by constraint (as the Notes
pretend Lab. p. 783. Bin. page 479. col. 2.
): For out of his Banishment he writ to the Eastern Bishops, assuring them he
had condemned Athanasius, and would communicate with them in their form of
Faith, and therefore he desired them to intercede for his release and
restitution to his Bishopric. The ambition of regaining which great place was
the cause of his Fall Baron. An. 357.. 33, 34, and 35.
, as Baronius confesses; and though that Author had produced diverse Ancient
Writers expressly testifying, That he subscribed Heresy Baron. ibid.. 32.
. Yet a little after he again denies, that Liberius was an Heretic; pretending,
that he only signed the first Confession of Sirmium, which was not downright
Heresy Id. ibid.. 37.
. Though elsewhere he says, Athanasius rejected all these Arian Forms (which
wanted, Consubstantial) as Heretical Baron. An. 359.. 10.
, and declares that the Catholic People of Rome esteemed Liberius to be an
Heretic, and would not have Communion with him, for which he cruelly persecuted
them. Nay, he brags of it as a singular Providence, that Foelix (who was a
Schismatical Pope in his Exile) upon Liberius's Fall, suddenly became a
Catholic and a lawful Pope, which still supposes Liberius was an Heretic, as
does also Baronius his Fiction of Liberius's speedy Repentance, and Foelix his
dying soon after his Adversaries return to Rome: For the Writers of that Age
say, Foelix lived eight years after Marcelin. ad Faust. and Hieron. Chronic.
; and for Liberius his Repentance, though many Authors expressly speak of his
falling into Heresy, none are very clear in his returning, or however, none
suppose it to be so long before his Death, as Baronius does; whose design in
this History is not to serve Truth, but to clear S. Peter's Chair from the
imputation of Heresy, and therefore he makes this out chiefly by Conjectures
Baron. An. 357.. 59. -- ad --. 63.
. The testimonies of Damasus and Siricius being parties and partial for the
honor of their own See, are no good Evidence if they did speak of his early
Repentance; but Damasus only faith, The Bishop of Rome did not consent to the
Faith of Ariminum: Baronius adds, This was Liberius. I reply, That Damasus was
of Foelix his party, before his own advancement to be Pope, and so it is more
probable that he meant Foelix. Again, the Catholic Bishop's Letter from
Ariminum only says, The Arian Decrees created discord at Rome Sozom. lib. 4.
cap. 17.
; that is, there were then two Factions there, one of which (and probably that
of Liberius) did agree to these Decrees, the other rejected them. Baronius adds
to the Bishops Letter, -- these Decrees created Factions, because the Pope of
Rome opposed them: But this will not clear Liberius, since both Factions were
headed by a Pope. Baronius goes on to tell us, that Sozomen affirms, Liberius
was turned out of his Church, for not consenting to the Faith at Ariminum Id.
cap. 18.
. I Answer, Sozomen must be mistaken in this, unless we feign a double Exile of
Liberius, which no good Author mentions, and which Baronius will not allow. As
for the Epistle of Liberius to Athanasius, it was writ no doubt before he had
condemned him, or else he ought to have confessed his Fault, as well as his
Faith to that great Man. I grant Socrates does say, That Liberius required the
Semi-Arians and Macedonians, to consent to the Nicene Faith in the time of
Valens Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 11.
; but this was Nine years after his return, and not long before his Death, yet
then Liberius was imposed on in Matters of Faith by these Bishops, whom he
calls Orthodox; for they were still Heretical, and did not heartily agree to
the Nicene Faith, so that his Infallibility was deceived: And though S. Ambrose
call Liberius [Of happy Memory] where he cites a Sermon of his; that is Vid.
Baron. Andal. An 362. page 58. and An. 371. p. 246.
a Phrase which the Primitive Charity used of some Men not altogether Orthodox
^: But it is a great prejudice to Liberius his Repentance, that though
Athanasius speak of him as having been once his Friend, and report his
Apostasy, yet he never mentions his turning Catholic again. Wherefore we
conclude, that all these Fictions, and falsifying of Evidence and slight
Conjectures in Baronius and the Notes, are intended only to blind the Reader,
and hinder his finding out an Heretical Pope, whose Fall is clear, his
continuance in his Heresy very probable, and his Repentance (if it be true)
came too late to save his Churches Infallibility, though it might be soon
enough to save his own Soul.

The Editors style the Council at Ariminum, A General An. Dom. 359.
Council, and yet dare not say, as usually, under Liberius, who had no hand in
it, for it was called by the Emperor Constantius, as all Writers agree Sulp^^.
Sever. histor. lib. 2.
; so that it seems there may be A General approved Council (as they style this
Lab. p. 792. Bin. page 482. col. 1.
, which the Pope does not call. Moreover, the Emperor in his first Epistle
orders the Bishops to send him their Decrees, that he might confirm them Lab.
p. 794. Bin. page 482. col. 2.(...)
; and though Baronius says this was done like an Heretical Emperor, yet the
Orthodox Bishops observed his Order, and call it, Obeying the Command of God,
and his Pious Edict Baron. An. 359.. 6. and. 15.
: Wherefore this General Council was both called and confirmed by the Emperor.
Again, Constanti^s in his Epistle declares, It was unreasonable to determine
any thing in a Western Council against the Fastern Bishops. Whence it appears,
he knew nothing of the Western Patriarchs claiming an Universal Supremacy over
all the Churches, both of the East and West; and for this Reason Baronius
leaves this genuine Epistie (recorded in S. Hilary's Fragments) out of his
Annals: We have also noted before, that though the Orthodox Bishops in this
Council (who must know the matter) say, That Constantine was Baptized after the
Council at Nice, and soon after his Baptism translated to his deserved Rest; as
the Ancient Historians read that Passage, and the Sense of the place shows they
could mean it of none but Constantine Theod. lib. 2. cap. 19. Sozom. lib. 4.
cap. 17. collat. cum Baron. An. 350.. 7.
; yet Baronius corrupts the Text, and reads Constans instead of Constantine,
only to support the Fable of Constantine's being Baptized by Sylvester at Rome,
and the Editors follow him in that gross Corruption: For they examine nothing
which serves the Interest of Rome. As for the Arian Synods this year at
Seleucia and Constantinople, I need make no Remarks on them, because the Pope
is not named in them, and so there is no occasion for them to feign any thing.
Only one Forgery of Baronius must not be passed over: That when Cyril of
Jerusalem was deposed by an Arian Synod, he is said to have appealed to
greater Judges, and yet he never named the Pope; the reason of which (Baronius
says) was, because the True Pope Liberius was then in Banishment Baron. An.
359:. 65.
; but has he not often asserted Foelix was a Catholic, and if Cyril had
thought fit, might he not have appealed to him? But it is plain by Socrates,
that Cyril meant to appeal to the Emperor and his Delegates, as all injured
Bishops in that Age had used to do.

. 25. Upon the restitution of Athanasius from his third Exile after the death
of George the Arian Bishop, An. Dom. 362.
he called a Council of Bishops at Alexandria, for deciding some differences
among the Catholics about the manner of explaining the Trinity, and to agree on
what terms Recanting Arians were to be received into the Church. And though
neither Athanasius, nor any ancient Historian take any notice of the Pope in
this eminent Action; yet the Editors out of Baronius say, It was called by the
Advice and Authority of Liberius Lab. p. 809. Bin. page 487. col. 1. Baron. An.
362. page 73.
; and to make out the notorious Fiction of this Popes calling this Orthodox
Council (even while he was an Arian) the Notes affirm, Eusebius Bishop of
Vercelles and Lucifer Calaritanus, as the Popes Legates were present at it;
which they take out of Baronius, who had before told us, That Lucifer
Calaritanus was at that time at Antioch, and sent two Deacons to Alexandria to
subscribe for him; yea, this Synod writes their Synodical Letter to Eusebius,
Lucifer and other Bishops, which plainly shows they were absent; though it
seems by Ruffinus, that Eusebius came afterward, and subscribed to what had
been agreed in the Council, and was by the Authority of this Council (not of
the Pope) sent into the East to procure peace among those Churches: Nor have
they any one Author to prove either he or Lucifer were the Pope's Legates, nor
any reason, but because they were employed in great Actions, though in that Age
('it is plain) the Popes were little concerned in any eminent business. Moreover,
they bring in a Fragment of an Epistle, writ (according to the Ancient Custom)
by Liberius at his Entrance into the Sea of Rome, to show his Faith to
Athanasius, as if it were written now, merely to impose on the Reader a false
Notion of his being at this time Orthodox, and concerned in this Synod. They
also cite another Epistle of Athanasius, to certify Liberius what was done
here; but that Epistle is no where extant in Athanasius's Works, but is cited
out of the Acts of the second Nicene Council, where there are more Forgeries
than genuine Tracts quoted; and besides, the Epistle is directed not to the
Pope, but to one Ruffinianus, and only mentions the Roman Churches approving
what was done here; but the Epistle being suspicious, it is no good Evidence,
and we conclude with Nazianzen, That Athanasius in this Synod gave Laws to the
whole World Baron. An. 362. Tom. IV. p. 66.
: And Pope Liberius had no hand in it.

About this time there were diverse Councils called in France by S. Hilary
Bishop of Poictiers, and the Catholic Faith was settled in them, one of which
was held at Paris, and the Synodical Epistle is extant Lab. p. 821. Bin. page
490. col. 1.
; yet the Pope is never named in it. Nor yet in that Orthodox Synod at
Alexandria, wherein Athanasius and his Suffragan Bishops presented a Confession
of their Faith to Jovian, then newly made Emperor Lab. p. 823, Bin. page 490.
col. 2.
, which shows, that Liberius either was an Heretic at this time, or else that
he was very inconsiderable: So that it is a strange Arrogance in the Editors to
say, that the Second Council at Antioch was under Liberius Lab. p. 826. Bin. p.
491. col. 1.
, when the very Notes say, it was called together by Meletius, and observe,
that many Arian Bishops did there recant their Heresy; a thing, which a little
before they pretended could be done no where but at Rome, in the Popes Presence.

Upon Valentinian's advancement to the Empire, the An. Dom. 365.
Eastern Bishops petition him to call a Council, and he (being then very busy)
told them, they might call it where they pleased: Which the Editors pretend was
a declining to meddle in Church Affairs, being a Layman: But the Bishops
Petition, and his giving them liberty, shows, that the right of calling
Councils was in him, and so was also the confirming them, as appears from the
Bishops sending the Acts of this Council (at Lampsacus) to the Emperor Valens
to be confirmed Sezen. lib. 6. cap. 7.
. The same Bishops also sent their Legates with Letters to the Western Bishops,
and particularly to Liberius Bishop of Rome, hoping Valentinian the other
Emperor had been in that City; but he being absent, these Legates, persuaded
Liberius they were Orthodox; upon which he writ back Letters in his own Name,
and in the Name of the other Western Bishops, to own them for good Catholics
Socrat. hist. lib. 4 cap. 11.
. Whence we may note, First, That the Eastern Bishop's Letter styles the Pope
no more but Colleague and Brother. Secondly, That Liberius calls himself only
Bishop of Italy, Liberius Ep. Italiae, and alii Occident is Episcopi: But
Baronius alters the Pointing, Liberius Episcopus, Italiae and alii, etc. by
that Trick, hoping to conceal this mean Title Ep. 11. Liberti ap. Bin. p. 472.
Baron. An. 365. page 153.
. Thirdly, The Pope here says, He was the least of all Bishops, and was glad
their Opinion agreed with his and the rest of the Western Bishops. Fourthly,
Yet after all these very Eastern Bishops were of the Macedonian party, as the
Title of their Letter in Socrates shows Socrat. ut supr.
. Baronius indeed leaves these words out of the Title, but he confesses they
were Semi-Arians: So that the Popes Infallibility, (as being imposed on by
Heretics in Mattets of Faith) loses more by this Embassy, than his Supremacy
gains by it, because the Legates were not sent to him alone, but to all the
Western Bishops. Fifthly, The Notes on this Council Lab. p. 830. Bin. page 492.
col. 1.
feign, that besides these Communicatory Letters, Liberius writ other Letters,
Commanding that ejected Bishops should be restored by the Apostolic Authority:
But this is one of Baronius his Forgeries Baron. An. 365. page 154.
. For S. Basil, and also Sozomen, cited by the Notes on the Council of Tyana
Lab. p. 836. Bin page 494. col. 1.
, mention not the Legates showing any other Letters at their return into the
East, but only the Communicatory Letters; and since it appeared by them, that
the Western Bishops judged them Orthodox, their Eastern Brethren did restore
them: And so also these Legates got the approbation of a Council in Sicily, as
they were returning home; for the Sicilian Bishops by mistake took them for
Orthodox, when they saw the rest of the Western Bishops owned their Communion
with them, and so approved their Confession of Faith; and therefore it is very
impertinent in the Notes to say on this occasion Council. Siciliae, Lab. and
Bin. ut supr.
, That the Authority of the Pope was so great, that if he admitted even
suspected Heretics to his Communion, none presumed to reject them. Whereas we
know that afterward, the People of Rome rejected even the Pope himself, for
communicating with Semi-Arians.

The next thing which occurs is a Synod in Illyricum, Convened at the request
of Eusebius Bishop of Sebastia, one of the Eastern Legates, who (while his
Fellows stayed at Rome) went into that Country, and prevailed with the Bishops
assembled there, to send Elpidius a Brother and Colleague of their own, with a
Synodical Letter to the Eastern Bishops; declaring, they would communicate with
them, if their Faith was the same with that of Nice. Now though this Synod do
not mention the Pope, yet Baronius and the Notes feign, That Elpidius was the
Pope's Legate Lab. p. 832. Bin. page 493. Baron. An. 365. page 155.
; whereas the Synod, the Emperors Letter, and Theodoret (from whom this Story
is taken) mention Elpidius only as a Messenger sent from this Council.

When these Eastern Legates returned home, there was a Council called at Tyana
in Cappadocia Lab. p. 836. Bin. page 494. col. 1.
, wherein they showed the Communicatory Letters which they had fraudulently
obtained in the West; upon which Letters, those who had been ejected as
Heretics, and particularly Eustathius of Sebastia, were restored to their Sees;
but neither Sozomen nor S. Basil say, this was done by any special Letters of
Liberius, or by any Command of his; yet if it had been so, this would spoil
this Popes Infallibility, it being certain these restored Bishops were
Heretics, who Liberius, poor Man! thought to be good Catholics, and he has the
more to answer for, if this were done not by his Consent alone, but by his
Command also.

After this we have the Life of Pope Foelix, about whom they differ so much,
that nothing is plain in his Story, but this, that little of him is certainly
known. The Pontifical in Liberius Life says, He died in peace; but here it
says, He was Martyred by Constantius, for declaring him an Heretic, and one
who was rebaptized by Eusebius of Nicomedia: Yet Constantius was not Baptized
at all till after Foelix his pretended Martyrdom, and he was Baptized then (not
by Eusebius, but) by one Euzoius. Again, The Pontifical allows him but to sit
One year and three months, and the Notes say, This is right, computing from
Liberius Fall to his Return; which (as Sozomen affirms) was but little before
Foelix his Death Lab. p. 843. Bin. page 490. col. 2.
: Whereas these very Notes tell us, a little before, that Liberius was above
two years in Exile Lab. p. 742. Bin. page 466. col. 1.
; therefore if he lived but a small time after Liberius's return, he must sit
above two years: But Marcellinus (who writ in that Age) tells us, Foelix lived
eight years after Liberius was restored; Which Baronius and the Notes would
conceal, to hide the Scandal that their Church must get by a long Schism, and
by an Heretical Pope, of whom they will needs make a Martyr, only upon the
Credit of the Pontifical, and a modern fallacious Inscription, pretended to be
found at Rome many Ages after, belonging to some Foelix, but which of them they
know not.

The Epistles ascribed to this Pope contain so many and so gross Untruths, that
Labbe notes, They are discarded by Baronius and other Learned Men, as Isidores
Wares Lab. Marg. p. 844, and 849.
; adding, That the third Epistle was stolen from Pope Martin the First, in his
Lateran Council Id. Marg. page 856.
. And though Binius very often cite the two first Epistles, yet in his Notes on
them he owns, they are of no credit Lab. p. 849. Bin. page 499. col. 1.
: For they Forge many Canons as made at Nice, and tell that idle story of the
true Copies of the Nicene Canons being burnt by the Arians Richer. hift. Con.
lib. 1. cap. 1.. 9.
. But it is certain the Forger of these Epistles was a Creature of the Popes,
because the Inscriptions of them are stuffed with false and flattering Titles,
and the Body of them nauseously and ridiculously press the Supremacy, and the
Universal Empire of the Roman Church.

. 26. The entrance of Damasus into the Papacy An. Dom. 367.
was not without Blood, for the People were divided, and some standing for
Damasus, others for Ursicinus, Damasus his Party being stronger, slew many of
their Adversaries in a Church, as all the Writers of that Age testify Am.
Marceli. lib. 17. Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 10. Hieron. in Chron.
; and though Ammianus be a Pagan Historian, yet it is very probable which he
writes, that it was not Zeal, but the ambition of living high and great, that
made Men contend so fiercely for the Papacy; for S. Basil himself about this
time taxes the Roman Church with Pride; and S. Hierom, the great Friend of that
Church, often reflects upon the pomp and luxury of the Clergy there: So that
the Notes on Damasus his Life do but glory in their Churches shame, when from
these Authors they boast of the Magnificence and Majesty of the Papacy Lab. p.
860. Bin. page 503. col. 2.
. The Fabulous Pontifical was for many Ages pretended to be writ by this
Damasus, and he who forged the Decretal Epistles, invented one to Aurelius
Bishop of Carthage Lab. p. 862. Bin. page 503. col. 2.
; wherein Damasus is feigned to send him (at his Request) all the Epistles writ
by the Popes from S. Peter, to his time, and this of old was the Preface to the
Decretal Epistles; but the Forgery is so gross that Binius rejects it, and if
his affection for the Papacy had not biassed him, he would also have rejected
all the Epistles, which are as errant Forgeries as this Preface. The first and
second Epistles written in Damasus his Name to Paulinus, and the Eastern
Bishops, are suspicious The third Epistle of Damasus to Hierom is evidently
Forged by some illiterate Monk; but S. Hierom's Answer seems to be genuine; yet
the Notes reject it Lab. p. 868. Bin. page 506. col. 1.
for no other reason, but because it truly supposes the Pope and his Clergy
were so ignorant, as to need S. Hierom's help to make them understand the
Psalms, and affirms, that Rome obeyed his directions in singing the Psalms, and
adding the Gloria Patri to them; whereas whoever considers the Learning and
Authority of S. Hierom in that Age, will not think it at all improbable, that
he should teach the Roman Bishop. And Binius is forced to cite this Epistle
wrong in his Notes, to get a seeming Argument against it; for the Epistle does
not advise them to sing the Gloria Patri after the manner of the East (as he
quotes it;) but to sing it, to show their Consent to the Nicene Faith. The
fourth Epistle of Damasus, to Stephen Archbishop of the Council of Mauritania,
with Stephen's Epistle to him, are owned by Labbe to be both spurious Lab.
Marg. page 869. Bin. page 506, etc.
. But since they magnify the Popes Supremacy, Binius justifies them both; for
whose confutation let it be noted, 1. That it is absurd to style a Man
Archbishop of a Council: Secondly, That in this Epistle is quoted a forged
Epistle of Foelix, owned by Binius himself to be spurious Bin. p. 499.
: Thirdly, That place of Math. XVI. is falsely quoted here, and thus read, Thou
art Peter, and upon thy foundation will I set the Pillars (that is, the
Bishops) of the Church: Fourthly, The later of them is dated with Flavius and
Stillico, who were not Consuls till Damasus had been in his Grave full twenty
year, as Labbe confesses; wherefore we justly discard these gross Forgeries
devised of old, and defended now only to support the Popes usurped Power. The
fifth Epistle says, The Institution of the Chorepiscopi was very wicked and
extreme evil; yet presently after it owns, they were appointed in imitation of
the LXX Disciples, and were at first necessary for the Primitive Church; it is
also dated with Libius and The disius, who were never Consuls in Damasus's
time, and finally Labbe owns, that much of it is stolen out of the Epistles of
later Popes Lab. p. 876. Bin. page 509. col. 1.
; yet Binius will not reject it, because it has some kind touches for the
Supremacy. The sixth Epistle to the Bishops of Illyricum passes Muster also
with him, though it be dated with Siricius and Ardaburus, who were Consuls till
30 years after Damasus was dead Lab. p. 882. Bin. page 511. col. 1.
. The 7th Epistle is dated with the same Consuls; yet Binius allows of it,
because in it the Pope pretends to give Laws not only to Italy, but to all the
World, though Labbe confess the Cheat, and owns it was stolen by Isidore out
of Leo's 47th Epistle Lab. p. 883. Bin. page 511. col. 2.
. So unfortunate is their Supremacy, that whatever seems to give any
countenance to it, always proves to be Forged. The Decrees attributed to this
Pope seem to have been the invention of later Ages; for it is not probable
Damasus would have Fathered a Lie upon the Nicene Council, in saying, It was
decreed there, that Laymen should not meddle with Oblations Lab. p. 885. Bin.
page 512. col. 1.
; or that he would say, Such as broke the Canons, were guilty of the Sin
against the Holy Ghost: Nor does his Decree about the Pall agree to this Age.
So that Damasus's Name has for better credit been clapped to these Decrees by
the modern Compilers, who are the Guides to our Editors.

About this time the Arians having the Emperor An. Dom. 369.
Valens on their side, began to grow bold; but Athanasius condemned them in
Egypt by diverse Synods, and upon his Admonition Damasus held two Synods at
Rome, in the first of which, Ursacius and Valens, two Arian Bishops were
condemned, and in the later, Auxentius the Arian Bishop of Milan was deposed;
not by the Popes single Authority, as the Notes and Baronius vainly pretend
Bin. p. 512, and 513. Baron. An. 369. page 190, etc.
, but by the common Suffrage of Ninety Bishops assembled with him, as the words
of Atbanasius, and the very Councils Letter plainly show. And though Baronius
here talks of the Popes sole Privilege in deposing Bishops, there are
innumerable Instances of Bishops deposed without the Popes leave or knowledge;
and Auxentius valued and believed Damasus his Authority so little, that
notwithstanding this Sentence of the Pope in Council, he kept his Bishopric
till his Death.

Apollinar is having disseminated his Heresy at Antioch, Au. Dom. 373.
complaint was made to Damasus of one Vitalis who held those Errors; but the
Pope (who had not the gift of discerning the Spirits) was imposed on by his
subscribing a plausible Confession of Faith, so that he writ on his behalf to
Paulinus Bishop of Anti^ch Baren. An. 373. page 301.
. It Is true, at the request of S. Basil, Damasus did this year join with Peter,
Bishop of Alexandria (who was then at Rome) in condemning Apollinaris in a
Roman Council Lab. p. 895. Bin. page 514. col. 1.
; but Nazianzen says, He did not this till be was better instructed in the
Points: For at first (as the Notes confess) this Pope took Apollinaris for a
picus and learned Man; and so beld Communion with him till he understood by S.
Basil' s third Epistle, that he was an Herctic. I know they excuse this by
saying, that S. Basil himself, and Nazianzen and S. Hierom were all at first
under the same mistake with Damasus: But then none of these ever were pretended
to be Infallible Jadges in matters of Faith, as Baronius holds Damasus was; so
that the mistake in them is pardonable, but upon Baronius Principles I see not
how Damasus his Infallibility can be secured, when he was so long deceived by a
Heretic, and was forced to be instructed by a private Bishop at last, even in
cases of Heresy.

The next year a Council was held at Valentia in Dauphine, the true Title of
which says, it was under Gratian and Valentinian (the Emperors;) but the
Editors put a new Title over it, and say it was under Damasus Lab. p. 904. Bin.
page 516. col. 1.
who is not once named in it; the French Bishops there assembled making Canons
for their own Churches, without asking the Popes leave, or desiring his
Confirmation.

Upon the death of Valens the Arian Emperor, while An. Dom. 378.
Valentinian was yet very young, Gratian managed both the Eastern and Western
Empire, and he makes a Law to suppress all Heresies, and to take away the use
of Churches from all such as were not in Communion with Damasus Bishop of Rome,
and Peter of Alexandria Sozom. lib. 7* cap. 4. Secrat. lib. 5. cap. 2.
Theodoret indeed (who as Baronius owns is much mistaken in his relating this
matter Theod. lib. 5. cap. 2. and Baron. An 37^. page 339.
) names only Damasus in his report of this Law; and Baronius cites the Law out
of him, merely to make it seem as if Damasus were made the sole Standard of
Catholic Communion, though the Original Law still extant Cod. (...). lib. I.
tit. I. de sum. Trin. Ll. I.
, and all other Historians, name Peter of Alexandria as equal with Damasus:
perhaps the Reader may wonder there is no other Patriarch named in this Law;
but it must be observed, that Anticch at this time had two Orthodox Bishops,
who separated from each other, Meletius and Paulinus, to make up which unhappy
Schism there was a Synod this year held at Antioch, under Damasus Lab. p. 908.
Bin. page 517. col. I.
, say the Editors; but in truth, under the Emperors Legate,, who was sent to
see a Peace concluded between these two Bishops by the advice of the Council
there assembled: And Damasus had so little interest in this Council, that
Meletius was generally approved for the true Bishop, and Paulinus (whose party
the Pope favored) ordered only to come in after Meletius his Death Socrat.
lib. 5. cap. 5. Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 3. (...). lib. 5. c. 3.
: So that since this Council acted contrary to the mind of Damasus, it is very
improper to say, it was held under him.

. 27. The second General Council at Constantinople An. Dom. 381.
was Called by the Emperor Theodosius, whom Gratian had taken for his Paitner
in the Empire, and assigned him for his share the Eastern Provinces; where this
pious Prince finding great differences in Religion, he Convened this Council to
confirm the Nicene Faith, to fettle Ecclesiastical Matters, and to determine
the Affairs of the Sea of Constantinople. This Council the Editors introduce
with a Preface or general History, and conclude it with partial and false
Notes, ho^ing to persuade the World, that it was both called and confirmed by
the Pope: For which end we read in the Preface, That Theodosius made a Law for
all to follow the Faith, which the Apostle Peter delivered to the Romans, and
which Pope Damasus preached Lab. p. 915. Bin. page 521.
; which shows, as if the Pope were the sole preserver of the Faith; whereas the
Law it self truly cited runs thus, -- which Pope Damasus, and Peter Bishop of
Alexandria, a man of Apostolical Sanctity, are known to follow Cod. Justion. ut
supr. and Baron. An 380. page 358.
. And in another Law of the same Emperors next year, those are declared to be
Catholics, and capable of Benefices, who were in Communion with the Bishops of
Constantinople, Alexandria, Laodicea, Tarsus and Iconium Baron. An. 381. page
384.
; and in that Law neither Damasus nor Rome are mentioned; which shows, it was
not the peculiar privilege of any See, for its Bishop to be made the standard
of Catholic Communion, but the known Orthodox Opinion of that Bishop who sat in
this or that eminent Church. The rest of the Forgeries in this Council, will
best appear by considering, First, By whom this Council was called: Secondly,
By whom it was confirmed: Thirdly, What Authority has been aseribed to it:
And, Fourthly, Whether the Canons and Creed ascribed to it be Authentic.

First, As to the Calling this Council, Baronius had twice guessed, but never
proved that Damasus moved Theod^sius to call it Baron An. 380. page 359. and
page 362.
; this the Preface improves and says, It was called by the Emperor, not
without Damasus his Authority; and the Title before the Notes, advance it
still, -- gathered (say they) by the Authority of Pope Damasus, and the favor
of Theodosius Bin. p. 540.
. But when this is to be proved, their Evidence is, pretended Monuments in the
Vatican, that Shop of Forgeries; the testimony of later Popes in their own
cause, and some very remote Conjectures and fraudulent Inferences: Yet at last
they a^firm, That none but a pertinacicus Heretic will a^^irm, that this Pious
Emperor, who was most observant of the Sacred Canons would call this Synod
Lab. p. 968. Bin. page 542. col. 1.
. By which bold Censure, they condemn not only all the ancient Historians, but
all the Fathers here assembled for pertinacious Heretics: For the Councils
Letter to Theodosius says, We were called together by your Epistle Lab. p.
946. Bin. page 533.
; and when they were to have met at Rome, they a^^irm, That Damasus summoned
them to meet there, by the Emperors Letters Ep. ad Damasum ap. Bin. page 539.
. S^crates also and Sozomen expressly say, The Emperor called this Synod at
Constantinople Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 8. Sozom. lib. 7. c. 7.
Theodoret also does a^^irm the same Theod. lib. 5. cap. 7.
, though the Notes strive to pervert his words: But Richerius, a Learned
Romanist Richer. hist. Council. lib. 1. cap. 5.. 1, and 2.
has fully cleared this Point, and showed that Theodosius called this General
Council by his sole Authority. And the Acts of the sixth General Council, with
Photius (cited falsely in these Notes) do only import, that the Pope gave a
subsequent consent to it, which is no proof that he was concerned in calling it.

Secondly, As to the confirming it, the Preface and the Notes considently aver,
That they sent their Acts to Damasus to be approved, and he did confirm them
Lab. p. 917. and page 967. Bin. page 521, and 541.
; yet they tell us, that Pope Gregory above 200 year after declared, That the
Church of Rome as yet neither had, nor received the Acts of this Council. I
know they would shuffle o^f this Contradiction, by pretending that Damasus
confirmed only the Matters of Faith, not the Canons: But first, Gregory denies
their having the Acts of this Council, and the Acts contain Matters of Faith as
well as Canons; Secondly, they can not show any proof, that Damasus made any
distinction: If he confirmed any thing, it was all; for if subsequent consent
be confirmation, then he consented to all, and confirmed all that was done
here. But in our Sense of giving an Authentic Character to this Councils
Decrees, Theodosius alone confirmed them; for the Bishops desire him, by his
Picus Edict to confirm the Decrees of this Synod Lab. p. 946. Bin. page 533.
: And they writ not to Damasus till the year after the Synod, and their Letter
was directed not to him alone, but to Ambrose and other Western Bishops with
him Theoder. lib. 5. cap. 9.
nor do they in it desire any confirmation from him or any of them, but say,
That they and all others ought to approve of their Faith, and rejoice with them
for all the good things which they had done; with which Letter probably they
sent (as was usual) a Transcript of all their Acts: And Photius says, That
Damasus, Bishop of Rome afterward agreed with these Bishops, and confirmed
what they had done Phrius de 7 Synod. cap. 2.
; that is, by consenting to it, which is no more than every absent Bishop may
do, who in a large Sense may be said to confirm a Council, when he agrees to
the Acts of it after they are brought to him.

Thirdly, The Authority of this Council is undoubted, having been ever called
and accounted the Second General Council, and so it is reckoned in all places
where the General Councils are mentioned, which Title it had not, as Bellarmin
vainly suggests, Because at the time when this was assembled in the East, the
Western Bishops met at Rome: For that obscure Synod is not taken notice of,
while this is every where celebrated, as held at Constantinople, and consisting
of one hundred and fifty Bishops, which were they who met in the East Lab. p.
967. Bin. page 541. col. 2
. As for Damasus, Baronius cannot prove he was concerned in it, but by we
think, and we may believe Baron. An. 380 p 359. and An. 381. p. 368.
; yet he elsewhere boldly says, Damasus gave it Supreme Authority Idem p. 382.
; and the Annotator makes it impossible for any Council to be general, unless
the Pope or his Legates be there. Now he and all others call this A General
Council: And yet he says, That neither Pope Damasus, nor his Legates were
Presidents of it, nor was he or any Western Bishop in it. Whence we learn, That
there may be a General Council, at which the Pope is not present, by himself,
nor by his Legates, and of which neither he nor they are Presidents.

Fourthly, As to the Creed and Canons here made, the modern Romanists without
any proof suppose, that Damasus allowed the former, and not the later: But if
he allowed the famous Creed here made, I ask, Whether it then had these words
[And from the Son] or no? If it had, why do the Notes say, That these words
were added to it by the Bishops of Spain and the Authority of Pope Leo long
after Lab. p. 972. Bin. page 543. col. 2.
? But if these words were wanting, as they seem to confess, (when they say, The
Roman Church long used this Creed without this addition) then I must desire to
know, how a Man of their Church can be secure of his Faith, if what was (as
they say) confirmed by Damasus in a General Council, may be al ered by a few
Bishops and another Pope, without any General Council? As to the Canons,
Damasus made no objection against them in his time, and it is very certain that
the Bishop of Constantinople after this Council, always had the second place.
For as the first General Council at Nice gave old Rome the first place, as
being the Imperial City; so this second General Council doubted not, but when
Constantinople was become new Rome, and an Imperial City also; they had power
to give it the second place, and suitable Privileges. Yea, the Notes confess,
that S. Chrysostom, by virtue of this Canon, placed and displaced diverse
Bishops in Asia, and the 4th General Council at Chalcedon (without regarding
the dissent of the Popes Legates) allowed the Bishop of Constantinople the
second place, and made his Privileges equal to those of Old Rome Vid. Council.
Chalced. Can. 28. and Subscrip. ibid.
; which Precedence and Power that Bishop long retained, notwithstanding the
endeavors of the envious Popes: And Gregory never objected against these
Canons, till he began to fear the growing Greatness of the Patriarch of
Constantinople; but when that Church and Empire was sinking, and there appeared
no danger on that side to the Popes, then Innocent the Third is said by the
Notes, to revive and allow this Canon again; by which we see, that nothing but
Interest governs that Church, and guides her Bishops in allowing or discarding
any Council: For now again, when the Reformed begin to urge this Canon,
Baronius and the Notes say, They can prove by firm Reasons, that this Canon was
forged by the Greeks: But their Reasons are very frivolous, They say Anatolius
did not quote this Canon against Pope Leo: I reply, It Is very probable he did,
because Leo says, He pleaded the Consent of many Bishops; that is, (if Leo
would have spoken out) In this General Council. Secondly, They urge that this
Canon is not mentioned in the Letter writ to Damasus. I Answer, They have told
us before, they sent their Acts to him, and so need not repent them in this
Letter. Thirdly, They talk of the Injury done to Timotheus Bishop of
Alexandria; but his Subscription is put to the Canons as well as the Creed, and
it does not appear that ever he or any of his Successors contended for
Precedence after this, with the Patriarch of Constantinople: And that the
Modern Greeks did not forge this Canon is plain, because Socrates and Sozomen
both mention it Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 2. Sozem. lib 7. cap. 8.
; and the Catholic Church always owned it for Authentic. Yea, in the Council of
Chalcedon it is declared, That the Bishop of Constantinople ought to have had
the second place in the Factious Synod at Ephesus, and he is reckoned in that
fourth General Council next after the Pope, whose Legates were there, and yet
durst not deny him the second place, in which he sat and subscribed in that
order, having first had this Canon confirmed at Chalcedon: So that all
Churches, but that of Rome, submit to this General Council; and they who
pretend most to venerate them, do despise and reject the Authority of General
Councils, if they oppose the ends of their Pride and Avarice. To conclude, Here
is a General Council called and confirmed only by the Emperor, assembled
without the Pope or his Legates, decreeing Matters of Faith and of Discipline,
yet every where owned and received as genuine, except at Rome, when Interest
made them partial, and still no less valued for that by all other Churches:
Which gives a severe Blow to the modern Pretenses of their Papal Supremacy and
Infallibility.

The same Year there was a Council at Aquileia in Italy, wherein diverse Arians
were fully heard and fairly condemned. Now this Council was called by the
Emperor, the Presidents of it being Valerian Bishop of Aquileia, and Ambrose
Bishop of Milan; but Damasus is not named in it, nor was he present at it in
Person, or by his Legates, though this Council was called in Italy it self, and
designed to settle a Point of Faith: But these Bishops (as the Acts show) did
not judge Heretics by the Popes Authority, but by Scripture and by solid
Arguments: And they tell us, It was then a Custom for the Eastern Bishops to
hold their Councils in the East, and the Western theirs in the West Lab. p.
980. Bin. page 545 col. 2.
; which argues, they knew of no Universal Monarchy, vested in the Pope, and
giving him power over all the Bishops, both of the East and West. For it was
not Damasus, but the Prefect of Italy, who writ about this Synod to the Bishops
of the East Baron. An 281. page 386.
: Nor did this Council write to the Pope, but to the Emperor, to confirm their
Sentence against Heretics; wherefore Damasus had a limited Authority in those
days, not reaching so much as over all Italy, and extended only to the
Suburbicarian Regions, out of which, as being Damasus's peculiar Province,
Ursicinus his Antagonist for the Papacy, was banished by the Emperor
Valentinian Baron. An. 371. page 235.
; and therefore Sulpicius Severus calls him not Orbis, but Urbis Episcopus
Sulpic. Sever. page 423.
, the Bishop of the City, not of the World; and speaking of Italy, he says in
the next Page, That the Supreme Authority at that time was in Damasus, and S.
Ambrose Id. page 424.
. To these two therefore the Priscillian Heretics applied themselves, when they
were condemned by the Council of Caesar-Augusta, or Saragosa in Spain, in which
Country the Sect first began; but when they could not get these great Bishops
to favor their Cause, they corrupted the Emperors Ministers, to procure a
Rescript for their restitution Lab. p. 1011. Bin. page 554. col. 1.
. Now it is strange that this Council of Saragosa should bear the Title of
[under Damasus,] and that the Notes should affirm, Sulpicius Severus plainly
writes thus: For if we read Sulpicius as above cited, we shall find that
Damasus knew nothing of this Synod till long after it was risen; so we may
conclude this Invention of theirs is only to support their pretended Supremacy.

. 28. From a Passage in S. Hierom, and the Inscription of the Letter writ from
the Council at Constantinople, An Dom. 382.
the Editors gather, That Paulinus Bishop of Antioch, Epiphanius Bishop of
Constantia in Cyprus, and Ambrose, with other of the Western Bishops, met at
Rome in Council this year, which they call the Fourth Roman Council under
Damasus Lab. p. 1014. Bin page 554. col. 2.
; who probably did preside in this Synod, as all Bishops use to do in their own
Cities; but he did not call this Council, for S. Hierom expressly says, The
Emperors Letters called these Bishops to Rome Hieron. Ep. 27.
. And the Synodical Letter of the Constantinopolitan Fathers tell us, That
Damasus desired Theodosius to write to them also of the East to come to Rome:
Which shows that Damasus could not summon them by his own Authority; but the
Editors and Baronius, out of a false Latin Version of Theodoret, have put in
the word [Mandato,] which word is not in the Greek, nor any thing answering to
it Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 9. Baron. An. 382. page 397. and Ben. page 539. col. 2.
; and it was foisted in on purpose, to persuade such as did not read the
Original, that the Pope had commanded the Eastern Bishops to come to Rome.
Again, though the Notes confess, the Acts of this Roman Council are lost, so
that it does not appear what was done there. Yet soon after they produce a long
Canon for the Popes Supremacy, and the Precedence of the Patriarchs; feigning
it was made in this Synod. But if the Canon be not a Vatican Forgery (which is
very much to be suspected) however it is Antedated one hundred and twelve
years, as Labbe confesses in his Margen; for he says, it was decreed under
Pope Gelasius, An. 494. Lab. p. 1014. Bin. page 554. col. 2.
. But the Policy of laying this Canon here, is to make a show as if Damasus had
then publicly declared against the Council of Constantinoples giving that
Bishop the second place; but their forging this Proof only shows, they have no
genuine Authority for it; yet if they could prove that the Pope disliked this
Precedence, since it is certain that Constantinople did take the second place
according to this Canon, that would only show that the Popes Authority was not
regarded. Which also appears in the Case of Flavianus, who (as the Notes
conjecture) was in this Roman Synod deposed, and Paulinus made Bishop of
Antioch: Yet still the greatest part of the World owned Flavianus for the true
Bishop of that See, and the Synod of Sides, where Amphilocius Bishop of Iconium
was President, directed their Synodical Epistle to Plavianus, as Patriarch of
Antioch Lab. p. 1015. Bin. page 556. col. 2. Baron. An. 383.
; so that the Editors should not have styled that Council, Under Damasus;
because they acted against his Mind: And so did the Eastern Bishops, who met
again this year at Constantinople, when the Pope had desired them to come to
Rome, and from this Meeting they writ that Synodical Epistle which the Editors
here print over again, and wherein they call Jerusalem, The Mother of all
Churches; a Title now by Usurpation appropriated only to Rome.

. 29. Siricius succeeded Damasus, but not without An. Dom. 385.
trouble; for Ursicinus, the Competitor of Damasus, being yet alive and at
Rome, was declared Pope by a great party, and Prosper's Chronicle makes him the
next Pope after Damasus Baron. An. 384. page 327.
; nor could Siricius get the Chair, but by a Rescript from the Emperor
Valentinian, which condemned Ursicinus, and established Siricius Baron.. An.
385. page 335.
. There is little or no notice of him before his Election, and though he sat
fifteen years (as the Pontifical and Platina,) or thirteen (as the Notes say)
there is very little worthy remarking done by him: And it is very probable he
was one of those ignorant Clergymen with which the Roman Church was so well
stored at that time, that S. Hierom says, Not one of them did so much as
pretend to Scholarship; but this illiterate Faction, who had proclaimed War
against all Learning, conspired also against him Hieron in Praef ad Didym. de
Spir. Sancto.
. For we have reason to judge this Pope to be of their Party, because S. Hierom
left Rome in disgust, as soon as Siricius came to be Pope; and Paulinus who
came in his time to Rome says, The City Pope proudly despised him Paulin. ad
Sever. Epist. 1.
; yea, Baronius owns, That Ruffinus, when he was fallen into Origen's Heresy,
imposed on the Simplicity of this Pope, and got Communicatory Letters of him
Baron. An. 397. page 32. ex Hieron. cp. 16.
; which also seems to spoil his Infallibility, for which Ignorance is no proper
qualification. Yet wanting real Matter in this Pope's Life, the Notes run out
into the story of the death of Monica, S. Augustine's Mother, saying, That when
she died, she was only solicitous to have the Mass offered up for her Lab. p.
1016. Bin. page 557. col. 1.
, and this they prove out of Augustine's Confessions; but the Fathers words
are, She only desired to be commemorated in the Offices, when the Priest stood
at the Altar. Now there is a mighty difference between that ancient Custom of
commemorating the Faithful departed, which is allowed by the Church of England,
and the Popish way of offering Mass for the Souls of the Deceased, a corruption
of much later date than S. Augustine's time.

For this Pope are published diverse Decretal Epistles, which are the first that
can pretend to be genuine; and if they be really so, it is plain, that their
Style is mean, the Arguments trifling, and the Scripture Proofs impertinent; so
that the Author was no Conjurer. The first directed to Himerius is very severe
against Marriage, especially in the Clergy: The Notes would persuade us, It is
not lawful Marriage, which he calls Pollution (as they say Calvin falsely
affirms Lab. p. 1022. Bin. page 559. col. 2.
;) but if we read the Epistle, he calls New Marriages (that is, the Marriage of
such as had been Widows) Pollution, as well as those Marriages which were
prohibited. Again, he foolishly attempts to prove, Clergymen ought not to
Marry, because S. Paul says, Those that are in the flesh cannot please God;
and though he confess it was usual for many Clergymen to live with their
Wives, he calls that cohabitation, the being polluted with carnal
Concupiscence, in his 4th Epistle: So that he is justly taxed with speaking
profanely of God's holy Ordinance, and of contradicting S. Paul, who excepted
not the Clergy, when he said, Marriage is honorable in all men, and the Bed
undefiled, Hebr. XIII. 4. And probably it was the hot and bold discourses of
Siricius and some other Writers of this time, which provoked Jovinian, not only
to stand up for Marriage, but to decry Single Life, the merit of which had so
possessed the minds of some great Men, that they resolved to condemn Jovinian
for an Heretic. As for the second Epistle of Siricius to the Council at Milan,
relating to this Resolve, it may be questioned whether it be genuine; but that
the style is harsh and barbarous is unquestionable. The Answer to this Letter
from Milan is evidently patched up out of diverse Authors who writ upon this
Subject. However S. Ambrose and his Suffragans there, call the Pope Brother,
even when they Complement him, as a great Master and Doctor Lab. p. 1024. Bin
page 560, and 561.
, which smells strong of the Forge; and if this Epistle were made up there,
then the Notes need not triumph so much, when it says, (upon Jovinians being
condemned at Rome) That the Bishop of Rome had looked well to the Gate
committed to him; that is (say they) the Gate of the whole Church of which
Christ made S. Peter's Successor the Door-keepers Lab. p. 1027. Bin. page 561.
col. 1. Baron. An. 390. page 536.
. But if the Epistle be true, it only commends the Pope for looking well to the
Gate of his own Church at Rome, as they had done to their Gate at Milan, having
turned him out of that Church before. The third Epistle of Siricius is like the
former for style and sense, yet the Editors will not reject it, because the
Pope says, He has the care of all the Churches Lab. p. 1027. Bin. p. 561.
col. 2.
; but let it be noted, that Aurelius Bishop of Carthage uses the same words of
himself a little after Bin. p. 577. col. 1.
, and there Binius notes, That Aurelius means, of the Churches of Africa only,
not of the whole World: So we may say justly of Siricius here, that he means,
He had the Care of the Suburbicarian Churches, not those of the whole World.
For the fourth Epistle (said to be writ from a Roman Council) calls the Pope no
more but a Primate Lab. p. 1029, Bin. page 562. col. 1.
, and that Title belonged to the Bishop of Carthage, as well as to him of Rome;
but indeed Labbe honestly confesses this fourth Epistle to be stolen out of
Innocent's Epistle to Victricius. The fifth and sixth Epistles are writ by
Maximus, an Usurper of the Empire, and seem to be genuine; but we need not
wonder at the Tyrants speaking so kind things of the Pope in them, since it was
his interest to Flatter the Bishop of that potent City.

. 30. This Maximus having seized on the Northwest parts of the Empire, summoned
a Council at Bourdeaux which the Editors without any ground style, under
Siricius) wherein the Bishops of the Ga^ican Church again condemned the
Priscillianists, and they appealed (not to the Pope, but) to the Emperor
Maximus Lab. p. 1030. Bin. page 563. col. 2.
) who was so far from favoring these Heretics, that at the instance of
Ithacius, a Catholic Bishop, he caused them to be put to death for their
Heresy: Which cruel Sentence so displeased Theognistus and other Orthodox
Bishops, that they Excommunicated Ithacius and all his Party, who had procured
these Heretics to be put to death; and S. Martin, S. Ambrose, and the best Men
of that Age, would not communicate with any of these Bishops, who had
prosecuted Men to death for Heresy; no not though Ithacius and his Adherents
were absolved from Theognistus his Excommunication in a Council which Maximus
had called at Triers. Now the Notes, fearing the Reader should observe, That
many Popes and Bishops of their Communion have done just as Ithacius did, viz.
persecuted, such as they call Heretics, to death, and delivered them up to the
Secular Magistrate to be executed, tell us, That it was not an ill thing in
Ithacius to procure the death of these Heretics, but his Fault was in the
violence of his Proceedings, and in his not interposing such a Protestation as
their Church uses on these occasions. Wherein, when they have made it necessary
for the Magistrate to put an Heretic to death, they solemnly declare, they wish
he would amend, and do not desire his Execution Lab. p. 1038. Bin. page 564.
col. 1. Baron. An. 386. page 451.
. But as this Protestation is a piece of notorious Hypocrisy unknown to those
Ages; so we may be sure so apparent a Sham would not have excused Ithacius,
whose Communion (as Sulpicius Severus shows) was renounced by S. Ambrose, S.
Martin and Others, purely because they thought it unlawful, especially for
Clergymen, to procure any persons to be put to death for their Opinion, though
it were Heresy. Wherefore these Holy Bishops, if they were now alive, must
renounce the Communion of the Roman Church for the same reason, for which they
renounced the Communion of Ithacius, even for their frequent procuring Heretics
to be put to death; and this is so plain, that all their shuflling Notes cannot
wash their Bishops hands from Blood, nor fit them in S. Ambrose and S. Martin's
Opinion, to celebrate the Eucharist with other Christians.

There had been (as we noted) a long Schism at An. Dom. 398.
Antioch, between Paulinus (of whose side was the Pope, and many Western
Bishops) and Flavianus, who was supported by the Eastern Bishops; and now
Paulinus dying, one Evagrius was irregularly chosen to succeed him, and keep up
the Schism; and though Flavianus was owned for the true Bishop by the second
General Council, and he it was who ordained S. Chrysostom, and obtained a
Pardon from Theodosius for those Citizens of Antioch, who had broke down the
Statues of that Emperor and his Empress; yet at the Instance of some Western
Bishops the Emperor was persuaded to cite him to a Council, which he had
called at Capua, in which S. Ambrose was present; but Flavianus not willing to
have his Enemies to be his Judges, did easily excuse his Non appearance to the
Emperor, and the Synod thereupon referred the Matter between him and Evagrius
unto Theoplalus, Patriarch of Alexandria, to whose decision Flavianus refusing
to stand, he appealed to Theodosius; on which occasion S. Ambrose writing to
Theophilus, wishes rather Flavianus had referred the Matter to his Brother the
Bishop of Rome, because (says he) you would probably have judged it (if it had
come before you) so as he would have liked Ambros. ad Theophil. ep. 78.
. Which implies no more, than that Theophilus and Siricius were both of one
mind in this case of Flavianus; yet on this slight occasion the Notes say, That
the Synod made Theophilus Arbitrator on condition, he should offer his Sentence
to be approved and confirmed by the Roman Church (...) ^039 (...). 564. col. 1.
: Which is a mere Forgery; for Theophilus was made absolute Arbitrator by the
Synod, and this is not the Councils wish, but S. Ambroses; and after all
Flavianus did not think a Western Synod had any power over him; and therefore
he rejected the Arbitration of Theophilus, the Council, and Pope Siricius also,
with whom though he did not communicate, yet he was always owned to be true
Bishop of Antioch.

. 31. The Second Council at Arles is supposed to be held about this time,
because the Followers of Photinus and Bonosus were there condemned: Wherefore
they say, It was in the time of Siricius; but under him it could not be, since
the Bishops there assembled do not name him, nor do they except the Bishop of
Romes Supreme Power, when they refer all Ecclesiastical Matters to the final
decision of their own Metropolitan and his Synod, and declare, that every
Bishop who receives a person Excommunicated by another, shall be guilty of
Schism. Yet the Editors are so apt to dote upon the Popes managing all
Councils, that they here style a meeting of the Novatian Heretics at Angaris in
Bithynia Lab. p. 1041. Bin. page 566. col. 2.
, A Synod under Siricius; and call poor Socrates a Novatian, for barely
relating a Matter of Fact concerning the Novatians.

At this time there was a great Council at Hippo, An. Dom. 393.
which the Notes sometimes call a General, and sometimes a Plenary Council,
because most of the African Bishops were there, and the Original dates it with
the Consuls of this year; but the Editors clap a New Title to it, saying, it
was under Siricius; who in all probability had no hand in it, nor knew any
thing of it: Yet here were made many of those famous Canons for Discipline, by
which the African Church was governed. But they are more wary in the next
Council of Constantinople, at which many Bishops were present, and among them
the two Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch; being summoned (in the absence of
the Emperor) by his Prefect Ruffinus; and they will not venture to say, This
was under Siricius, for the Matters treated on it wholly related to the Eastern
Church, and in that Age they rarely allowed the Pope to concern himself in
their Affairs: No nor in Afric neither, where (Anno 395) there were Councils
held both by the Orthodox and the Donatists, which are dated by the Consuls,
and no notice is taken of the Pope Lab. p. 1153. Bin. page 567. col. 2.
. We shall only observe, that upon one of these Councils the Notes say, It is a
mark of the Donatists, being of the Synagogue of Antichrist, that they named
the several Parties among them from the Leaders and Founders of their several
Sects, and were not content with the Name of Christians from Christ. Which Note
reflects upon the Monks of their own Church, who are called Benedictines,
Dominicans, and Franciscans, from the Founders of their several Orders.

In the Council of Turin, composed of the Gallican An. Dom. 397.
Bishops, they decided the Case of Primacy between the Bishop of Arles and
Vienna, without advising with the Pope, and determined they would not
communicate with Foelix, a Bishop of Ithacius his Party, according to the
Letters of Ambrose, of Blessed Memory, Bishop of Milan, and of the Bishop of
Rome. Now, here the Roman Advocates are much disturbed to find S. Ambrose his
Name before Siricius; and when they repeat this Passage in the Notes, they
falsely set the Pope's Name first, contrary to the express words of the fifth
Canon, and impudently pretend, That the Bishop of Rome, by his place, was the
ordinary Judge who should be communicated with, and Ambrose was only made so by
the Popes Delegation Lab. p. 1157, and 1158. Bin. page 568, and 569.
. But, how absurd is it (if this were so) for the Council to place the Name of
the Delegate, before his who gave him power? And every one may see, that this
Council was directed to mark this Decree principally by S. Ambrose his Advice,
and secondarily by the Popes; for at that time Ambrose his Fame and Interest
was greater than that of Siricius; yet after all, the Council decreed this, not
by the Authority of either of these Bishops (as the Notes pretend,) but only by
their Information, and upon their Advice by these Letters, which were not first
read (as they pretend) but after four other businesses were dispatched.

The Canons of diverse African Councils, held at Carthage and elsewhere, have
been put together long An. Dom. 397, etc.
since, and collected into one Code, which makes the time and order of the
Councils wherein they were made, somewhat difficult; but since the Canons were
always held Authentic, we need not (with the Editors) be much concerned for
their exact order, or for reducing them to the years of the Pope, because they
were neither called nor ratified by his Authority. Yea, the Notes say, It was
never heard that any, but the Bishop of Carthage called a Council there, his
Letters gave Summons to it, he presided over it, and first gave his Suffrage in
it, -- and that even when Faustinus (an Italian Bishop) the Popes Legate was
present Lab. p. 1163. Bin. page 573. col. 1, and 2.
. As for the particular Canons of the third Council, the Nineteenth says, That
the Readers shall either profess Continence; or they shall be compelled to
Marry; but they feign old Copies which say, They shall not be allowed to Read,
if they will not contain Lab. p. 1170. Bin. page 575. col. 1.
; the falsehood of which appears by the 25th Canon in the Greek and Latin
Edition, where this is said of the Clergy, (...); that is, Except the Readers,
which they translate, Quamvis Lectoram Bin p. 580.
, on purpose to make us think, that the command of Celibacy (upon which that
Age too much doted) reached the lowest order of the Clergy, even Readers;
contrary to the express words of the Canons. And to the second Council of
Carthage, where only Bishops, Priests and Deacons are under an obligation to
live single Bin. p. 571.
. Secondly, The 26th Canon of the third Council forbids the Bishop of the first
See, to be called by the Title of Prince, or Chief of Bishops, (Gratian goes
on) neither may the Roman Bishop be called Universal Lab. p. 1170. Bin. page
575. col. 2. and Gratian. Decret. part 1. did. 99.
. The Notes tax Gratian indeed for adding this Sentence; but if he did, it was
out of Pope Gregory, who says, That no Patriarch ought to be called Universal.
Besides, considering how apt the Editors are to strike out words not Agreeable
to the Interest of Rome, it is more probable that some of the Popes Friends
lately left these words out, than that Gratian put them in: And since this
Council forbid Appeals to foreign Judicatures with peculiar respect to Rome, to
which some of the Criminal Clergy then began to appeal Lab. p. 1171. Bin. page
581. col. 2.
, it is not unlikely these Fathers might resolve to check as well the Title, as
the Jurisdiction (then beginning to be set up) which encouraged these Appeals.
Thirdly, The 47th Canon in the Latin, and the 24th in the Greek and Latin
Edition, speaking of such Books, as are so far Canonical that they may be read
in Churches, reckon up some of those Books which we call Apocryphal, upon which
the Notes triumph Lab. p. 1177. Bin. page 580. col. 1.
; but let it be observed, that we grant some of these Books to be so far
Canonical, that they may be read for instruction of Manners; and also we may
note, that the best Editions of these African Canons leave out all the Books of
Macchabees and Baruch (which are foisted into their later Latin Copies Cosen's
History of the Canon p. 112. and page 113.
). And it is plain, the whole Canon is falsely placed in this Council under
Siricius, because Pope Boniface (who came not into the Papacy till above twenty
years after) is named in it as Bishop of Rome; yet after all these devices, it
does not declare what Books are strictly Canonical, and so will not justify
the Decree at Trent. Fourthly, In the 48th Canon of the Latin Version, the
Council agrees to advise about the Donatists, with Stricius Bishop of Rome, and
Simplicianus Bishop of Milan, not giving any more deference to one of these
Bishops than to the other, but looking on them as equally fit to advise them:
Yet the Notes boldly say, They advise with the Pope, because they knew he
presided, as a Bishop and Doctor, over the Catholic Church; but with the Bishop
of Milan only, as a Man every where famous for his Learning Lab. p. 1183. Bin.
page 584. col. 2.
. Which is a mere Fiction of their own, for the words of the Canon show, that
these Fathers did not believe either of them had any Authority over them, only
they desired their advice jointly, as being both Eminent and Neighboring
Bishops, and their prohibiting Appeals shows, they knew nothing of the Popes
presiding over the Catholic Church.

. 32. Anastasius was the last Pope in this Century, An. Dom. 398.
of whom there would have been as little notice taken, as of Many of his
Predecessors, if it had not been his good fortune to be known, both to S.
Hierom and S. Augustine, and to assist the latter in suppressing the Donatists,
and the former in condemning the Errors of Origin, for which cause these two
Fathers make an honorable mention of him. Yet in the African Councils, where
he is named with respect, they join Venerius Bishop of Milan with him, and call
them Their Brethren and Fellow Bishops Baron. An. 401. p. 128, and 129.
. As for the qualifications of Anastasius, S. Hierom gives him great Encomiums;
but it must be observed, that at this time Hierom had charged Ruffinus with
broaching the Heresies of Origin at Rome, and he being then at Bethlem, could
not beat down these Opinions without the Popes help. And indeed, when Ruffinus
came first to Rome he was received kindly by the last Pope Siricius, and
Anastasius did not perceive any Errors in Ruffinus or Origin, till S. Hierom
(upon Pammachius Information) had opened his Eyes; and at last, it was three
years before this Pope could be made so sensible of this Heresy, as to condemn
it: So that notwithstanding his Infallibility, if S. Hierom and his Friends had
not discovered these Errors, they might in a little time have been declared
for Orthodox Truths at Rome; but Anastasius condemning them at last, did
wonderfully oblige S. Hierom, and this was the occasion of many of his
Commendations. For this Pope are published three Decretal Epistles, though
Baronius mentions but two, and condemns the first for a Forgery, and so does
Labbe Lab. p. 1191. Bin. page 585. col. 2. Baron. An. 402. page 161.
; It is directed to the Bishops of Germany and Burgundy, and yet Burgundy did
not receive the Christian Faith till the Year 413; it is also dated with the
Consuls of the Year 385, that is, Fourteen years before Anastasius was Pope.
The matter of it is grounded on the Pontifical, which speaks of a Decree made
by this Pope for the Priests at Rome to stand up at the Gospel; which the
Forger of this Epistle turns into a general Law, and makes it be prescribed to
the Germans. The Words of it are stolen out of the Epistles of Pope Gregory
and Leo Gregor. lib. 12 Ep. 32. Leon. Ep 2. ad Episc. Ital.
; yet out of this Forgery they cite that Passage for the Supremacy, where the
German Bishops are advised to send to him as the Head. The second Epistle Lab.
p. 1193. Bin. page 586. col. 2.
is also spurious, being dated fifteen or sixteen years after Anastasius his
death, and stolen out of Leo's 59th Epistle. As for the third Epistle, it is
certain he did write to John, Bishop of Jerusalem, but it may be doubted
whether this be the Epistle or no Lab. p. 1194. Bin. page 586. col. 2.
; if it be genuine, it argues the Pope was no good Orator, because it is writ
in mean Latin; yet that was the only Language he understood, for he declares in
this Epistle, That he know not who Origin was, nor what Opinions he held, till
his Works were translated into Latin. So that any Heretic who had writ in Greek
in this Pope's time, had been safe enough from the Censure of this Infallible
Judge.

The Notes dispute about the fourth Council of Carthage, whether it were under
Pope Zosimus or Anastasius Lab. p. 1208. Bin. page 591. col. 1.
; but it was under neither, the true Title of it showing it was dated by the
Consuls Names, and Called by Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, who made many
excellent Canons here without any assistance from the Pope. The 51st, 52d and
53d Canons of this Council order Monks to get their Living, not by Begging, but
by honest Labor; and the Notes show, This was the Primitive use Lab. p. 1210.
Bin. page 592. col. 1.
; which condemns these vast numbers of Idle Monks and Mendicant Friars, now
allowed in the Church of Rome. The hundredth Canon absolutely forbids a Woman
to presume to Baptize; but the Notes (r), (because this practice is permitted
II. apr.
in their Church) add to this Canon these words, unless in case of necessity,
and except when no Priest is present. Which shows how little reverence they
have for ancient Canons, since they add to them, or diminish them, as they
please to make them agree with their modern Corruptions.

In the fifth Council of Cartbage, Can. 3. Bishops and Priests are forbid to
accompany with their Wives (...), that is, at the time of their being to
Officiate; but in their Latin Copies it is altered thus, -- according to their
own, (or, to their former) Statutes; which makes it a general and total
Prohibition: But the Greek words of this Canon are cited, and expounded at the
great Council in Trullo, where many African Bishops were present, as importing
only a Prohibition of accompanying their Wives, when their turns came to
Minister Lab. p. 1219. Bin. page 594. col. 2. Beveridg. Council. Tom. II. page
130.
; which is the true sense of this Canon, though the Romanists, for their
Churches Credit would impose another. The fourteenth Canon of this Council
takes notice of the feigned Relics of Martyrs, and of Altars built in Fields
and Highways, upon pretended Dreams and Revolutions; upon which Canon there is
no note at all Lab. p. 1217. Bin. page 594. col. 1.
, because they know, if all the feigned Relics were to be thrown away, and all
the Altars built upon Dreams and false Revelations pulled down in the present
Roman Church, (as was ordered at Carthage by this Canon) there would be very
few left to carry on their gainful Trade, which has thrived wonderfully by
these Impostures.

This Century concludes with a Council at Alexandria, which they style under
Anastasius Bin. p. 595.
; but it was called by Theophilus, who found out and condemned the Errors of
Origin long before poor Anastasius knew any thing of the matter. The Notes
indeed say, This Synod sent their Decrees to Pope Anastasius, to Epiphanius,
Chrysostom and Hierom: But though they place the Pope foremost, there is no
proof that they were sent to him at all. Baronius only conjectures they did,
and says, It is fit we should believe this Baron. An. 399. p. 85, and 88.
; but it is certain Theophilus sent these Decrees to Epiphanius to Chrysostom
and Hierom; and from this last hand it is like Anastasius received them long
after, because it was more that two years after this Synod, before S. Hierom
could persuade Anastasius to condemn these Opinions of Origin, which this
Council first censured: Wherefore it was happy for the Church, that there were
wiser Men in it than he who is pretended to be the supreme and sole Judge of
Heresy. And thus we have finished our Remarks upon the Councils in the first
four Centuries, in all which the Reader (I hope) has seen such designs to
advance the Supremacy, and cover the Corruptions of Rome, that he will scarce
credit any thing they say for their own Advantage in any of the succeeding
Volumes.

AN APPENDIX CONCERNING BARONIUS HIS ANNALS.
I. THE large and elaborate Volumes of Cardinal Baronius, are the main Guide to
the Editors and Annotator: From him they take the Dates of all Councils, and
out of him they have added diverse new Synods not extant in the older Editions
of the Councils, of which they can say no more, than to abbreviate Baronius:
From him they borrow most of their plausible Notes, by which they either paint
over that which seems for the Interest of Rome, or disparage what makes against
it; and therefore we have had often occasion to discover his Fallacies in all
that part of his Annals which concerns the Councils; but there are many other
notorious Frauds and manifest Falsehoods in that Author, of which I shall here
give some few Instances, which may serve as a Caution to all that read his
History, and also as a Direction by which they may in other Centuries find out
his manifold Errors; and I shall confine the Examples here produced to the
Fourth Century, because that is the most largely treated of in this Discourse.

It is evident, that all the Writers of the Roman side, for many Ages have
designed to impose upon the World; in that, their Disputants, their Publishers
of Councils, and Historians do all agree; for their Principles and Practices
cannot be maintained by plain Truth. The Methods used by Baronius, in his
Ecclesiastical Annals (which he writ purely to serve the Interest of the Roman
Church) may be reduced to these Heads:

First, His frequent quoting Forged and Spurious Tracts; such as the
Pontifical, the Acts of the Martyrs, the Ecclesiastical Tables (that is, the
Roman Missal and Martyrology) with other late and fabulous Writers, such as
Nicephorus, Simeon, Metaphrastes, Laurentius Surius, etc. And the Reader shall
find, he very seldom cites any other Authors to prove the Great Actions of
Primitive Popes, or the dignity of the Roman Church, and its pretended
Privileges: As also to make out the Miracles done by many of their Saints, and
to be evidence for the Invocation of Saints, Praying for the Dead, Worshipping
the Cross, Relics and Images; for the Merits of Celibacy and Holiness of
Monks, or other Superstitions. Some Examples of which in the Fourth Century are
these: He cites the Acts of Procopius, which he confesses need amending, to
prove the Adoration of the Cross Baron. An. 308 p. 30.. 19.
; he proves the same by the Acts of Gregory an Armenian Bishop, which he owns
do not satisfy many; and by Euthymius, a late Grecian Monk, An. 1180 Id. An.
311. p. 57.. 23.
. Thus he asserts Crispus his being Baptized with his Father Constantine, only
by Nicephorus, and makes out Constantine's use of putting an Image of Christ on
his Coyns, only by the Acts of Damasus, and by a Coin which he himself
confesses had been adulterated Id. An. 324. page 233.. 13, and 16.
. Constantine's Baptism in Rome is also proved by Anastasius Bibliothecarius,
who there has the false Character of an Acurate Writer Ibid. p. 237.. 30.
, and by the Acts of Sylvester, which he himself disapproves of in many things
Ibid.. 31.
; and suspects, that notwithstanding all these fabulous Authors, his Reader
will not credit the Story Ibid. p. 238.. 32.
. The Legend of S. Agnes and her Temple at Rome, he confesses, Was made by an
Unknown-hand under the Name of S. Ambrose; yet he gives a long relation of it
Ib. page 260.. 107.
. So when Eusebius, who writ acurately about the Temple built over the
Sepulcher by Constantine, says nothing of Pictures in it, he proves there was
such there by the second Nicene Council Baron An. 326. page 353.. 42.
. Eusebius's Greek Chronicle says nothing of the Invention of the Cross, but
some Forger has put it into the Latin Version of it; therefore Baronius cites
the corrupted Latin Translation to prove this Legend Id. ibid.
. The Miracles of S. Nicholas are all transcribed out of his Acts, which were
put together by Authors who lived above Five hundred years after his time, and
the genuine ancient Historians mention not one of them An. 326. p. 366.. 86.
. Eusebius says, Constantine dedicated his new City of Constantinople to God;
but Baronius chooses to follow a later Writer of little credit, viz.
Nicephorus; who says (in the Phrase of his own time) He dedicated it to the
Virgin Mary Ibid. An. 330. p. 396.. 4.
. He makes a discourse about the use of the Pall in the Life of Pope Mark; yet
he can cite no Author, but the fabulous Pontifical, to prove it was used in his
time An. 336. p. 458. 63.
. To prove the Arian Pope Foelix was a Martyr, he cites an Inscription
pretended to be found in a Grave at Rome (where such Frauds are common) about
Twelve hundred years after his Death An. 357. page 715.. 50.
; so he makes out the Martyrdom of diverse under Julian by an Oration of
Nectarius (which he confesses is corrupted) and by Nicephorus Annal. Tom. IV.
An. 362. p. 21, and 22.
: And a little after he tells long Stories of Martyrs at that time condemned by
Julian at Rome, which he proves by the Ecclesiastical Tables, and by the Acts
of the Martyrs; yet he owns Julian was not at Rome at this time Eod. An. page
84.
. Prayers at the Graves of the Saints he would establish by a forged Book of
the Lives of the Prophets, which he cites under Epiphanius's name An. 373. page
309.
: So he would make out Prayers for the Dead, used in this Age, by feigned
Writings, which are ascribed to Ephraem Syrus An. 378. p. 332.
. The Miracles ascribed to Damasus cannot be proved by one Author of Credit,
but are set off with the forged Acts of Damasus, and the modern Legends An.
384. p. 427.
. So also the Miracles ascribed to S. Chrysostom, are not taken generally from
any approved Authors, but from his spurious Acts An. 386. page 468.
; and (to name no more) thus he proves the Adoration of the Cross by an Homily
falsely ascribed to S. Chrysostom An. 397. Tom. V. p. 44.
: For his genuine Works do witness against this practice. And now that he did
not cite these Authorities out of ignorance, is plain from his Confession; for
he says of the Acts of the Martyrs, That we might better have wanted many
Truths concerning them, than have had such a mixture of Errors as makes the
whole suspected Baron. An. 307.. 33. p. 24. Tom III.
. And again, speaking of the Acts of Gallicanus, It is the manner of some to be
ashamed, to give a short Narrative of a great Affair, and so according to their
own Fancy they largely paraphrase on it Id. An. 330.. 51. p. 410.
: And yet again in his Preface to the Roman Martyrology he tells us, There was
a sad loss of these Martyrs Acts in Diocletian' s time, so that very few of
them are to be found, which may not in part be convicted of Mistakes Bar.
Praecap. ad Martyr. c. 3.
. But Melch. Canus is more ingenuous, and says, Diogenes Laertius writ the
Lives of the Philosophers more honestly, than the Christians have writ those of
the Saints Melch. Can. Can loc. Theol. l. 11. p. 333.
: Yet you rarely have any better Evidence than these, for most of the Roman
Doctrines and Rites. And though Nicephorus and the Modern Greeks be frequently
taxed by him, for giving easy faith to feigned Stories, and for gross Mistakes
An. 306.. 12. page 3. and Tom. IV. An. 363. p. 105.
; yet when they tell never such improbable Tales for the Roman Interest, then
they are cited with great applause. Now it is a clear evidence of an ill Cause,
when they can find no other Proofs but such spurious Writings as these; of
which practice I have here given but a few Instances; but the diligent Reader
will observe this to be customary with Baronius, not only in this fourth
Century, but in every part of his Annals.

. 2. Another Artifice is to corrupt the Words or the Sense of genuine Authors,
of which we will select also a few Instances, in the same Century. S. Augustine
barely names Peter as one whom the Pagans did Calumniate Aug. de Civ. Dei, iib.
18. c. 53.
; but Baronius brings this in with this Preface, That they did this, because
they saw Peter extremely magnified, especially at Rome where he had fixed his
Seat; and then he says, S. Augustine records this, etc. whereas this is his
own Invention, to set off the glory of Rome Baron. An. 313.. 17.
. So when Athanasius is proving, that the Fathers before the Nicene Council
used the word (...), and first names Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, and then
Dionysius Bishop of Rome Athanas. de decret. in Arian.
. Baronius says, He proves it especially by Dionysius the holy Roman Pope, and
by Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria Baron. An. 325.. 69.
, inverting the Order, and putting a Note of Eminence on the Pope, contrary to
the Words and Sense of Athanasius. Again, he cites Pope Leo (who is no Evidence
in his own Cause); and yet Baronius would make him say more than he does, even
where he says more than he should say: For he cites his 53d Epistle to show,
that Leo affirmed the sixth Canon of Nice, allowed to the Church of Alexandria
the second, and to that of Antioch the third Seat, which had before been
conferred on them by Rome. But the very words of Leo, cited by Baronius, show
this to be false; for Leo says not, that these Sees had their Dignity or Order
from Rome, but the former from S. Mark, the later from Peter's first Preaching
there Leon. cp. 53. ap. Baron. An. 325.. 28.
. Moreover, to make his Reader fancy the Roman and the Catholic Church was all
one of old, he mentions out of Epiphanius, Constantine's writing an Epistle to
all Romania, Which Name (says he) we sometimes find used for the Catholic
Church Baron. An. 319.. 6.
; whereas it is manifest, that Epiphanius both there and elsewhere plainly uses
Romania for the Roman Empire Epiphan. contra Manich. haer. 66. and contr.
Arian. haer. 69.
; and Baronius did not find it used either in him, or in any other ancient
Author, in any other sense. That Period in Optatus, which Baronius cites with
great applause (if it be not added by some ignorant Zealot of the Roman side)
is a scandal to the Learning of that Father, for he derives the Syriac word,
Cephas, from the Greek (...), and by that ridiculous Etymology would draw as
contemptible a consequence, viz. That Peter was Head of the Apostles; and again
he seems wilfully to pervert the Precept of S. Paul, Romans XII. 13. Distributing
to the necessities of the Saints; which in Optatus's Reading is, Communicating
with the Memories of the Saints; that is, (as he applies it) with Rome, where
there are the Memorials of two of the Apostles. I could wish for Optatus's
Credit that these weak Passages were spurious, or buried in silence; and the
Learned Baldwin is ashamed of this gross Error Opt. Milev. lib. 2. page 48.
Baldvin. notis, page 184.
: But Baronius thinks, though they make for the dishonor of the Father, they
tend to the Credit of Rome, and so he cites them in great pomp, and puts them
in a whole Line to make them look more plausible, -- the Head of the Apostles,
whence he was called Cephas (so Optatus: But Binius adds) deducing the
Interpretation from the Greek Word, for in Syriac it signifies an hard Stone
Baron. An. 321.. 5.
; and then glories extremely, as if Optatus had made Communion with Rome the
sole Note of a Catholic. Whereas in the next Page but one, Optatus goes on, --
You cannot prove you have any Communion with the Seven Churches of Asia, -- and
yet if you be out of the Communion of those Churches, you are to be accounted
Aliens. Which Passage Baronius very fraudulently leaves out Opt. Milev. lib. 2.
page 50.
, because it shows a true Catholic must not only be in Communion with Rome, but
also with all other Orthodox Churches,

To proceed, Even in spurious Authors he uses this Artifice; for that Forged
Book of Constantine's Munificence only says, He placed a piece of the Cross,
in a Church which he had built: But Baronius relates it That he placed it there
with most Religious Worship Baron. An. 324.. 105.
; and a little after he perceiving that Fabulous Author had supposed
Constantine buried his Mother long before she died, puts in of his own head,
But this (i. e. the putting his Mother in a Porphyry Coffin) was done afterward
Id. ib.. 114.
. Speaking of the Bishops returning home from the Council of Nice, he says,
They took with them the Rule of Faith, confirmed by the Pope of Rome, to be
communicated to their People, and to absent Bishops: But no Historian, Ancient
or Authentic, mentions any preceding Confirmation of the Nicene Creed by the
Pope, who was one of the absent Bishops, to whom it was to be communicated;
wherefore those words, Of its being confirmed by the Pope, are invented and
added to the story by Baronius Baron. An. 325.. 197.
. He observes, That Constantine confesses, he was not fit to judge in the Case
of Athanasius, because Ecclesiastical Matters were to be judged among the
Clergy: Which he proves by Constantine's Letter there recited; but
Constantine's Letter is not directed to the Clergy, but To the People of the
Catholic Church at Alexandria: And his Words are to the People who lived on the
Place, and knew the Matters of Fact; and therefore he says to them, It is
proper for you, and not for me to judge of that Affair Baron. An. 329.. 7, 8.
; so that Baronius forces his own Sense upon the Emperor. And when Theodoret
speaks of -- time for Repentance according to the Canons of the Church, he
adds, -- that is, for Satisfaction. Which Popish Satisfaction he would also
prove out of a Canon at Antioch, which only mentions confessing the Fault, and
bringing forth fruits meet for Repentance An. 341.. 43, and 44.
. When Socrates only says, Eusebius of Nicomedia' s Letters were received by
Julius after his death; Baronius thus enlarges it, Eusebius, who had fled from
the Judgment of the Roman Church was forced against his Will, being dead (as
Socrates says) to come to the strict Tribunal of God Vid. Socrat. lib. 2. cap.
13. Baron. An. 342.. 43.
. Where Athanasius says, I went up to Rome, that I might visit the Church and
the Bishop: Baronius ridiculously infers, that when we find the Ancients
speaking of THE Church and THE Bishop, they mean the Roman Church and that
Bishop, of whom, and in whom, and by whom are all other Bishops An. 349.. 6.
. Which Note is forced upon this place, for here Rome is named in the same
Sentence with the Church and the Bishop, and so it must be understood of the
Pope; but without any advantage to him more than it would have been to the
Bishop of Eugubium, to say, I went to Eugubium and visited the Church and the
Bishop. Again, S. Hierom says expressly, that Acacius substituted Foelix an
Arian to be Bishop of Rome in Liberius his stead. Here Baronius pretends some
Copies leave out the word Arian, and so he reads it, Substituted Foelix to be
Bishop of Rome An. 355.. 51.
; and because some such Parasites of Rome as himself, who would not endure that
ungrateful Truth of a Pope's being an Heretic, had left out this word, He
boldly asserts it for the true Reading; whereas not only Socrates expressly
says, He was an Arian in Opinion; but Hierom himself in his Chronicle affirms,
that Foelix was put in by the Arians; and it is not like they would have put
him in, if he had not been of their party. The Greek of Sozomen is no more but
(...), but Baronius improves this by a flattering Paraphrase in these words,
Lest the Seat of Peter should be bespattered with any spot of Infamy An. 357..
43.
. But it is a bolder falsification of S. Chrysostom, where he says (in one of
his Sermons, on a day celebrated in memory of two Martyrs, Juventius and
Maximus) -- (...); to pervert this by his Latin Version thus, The Martyrs which
we this day worship; whereas Chrysostom only says, The Martyrs which occasion
us to meet this day Chrysostom. Tom. V. p. 534. Baron. An. 362. page 48.
. Epiphanius expressly condemns those as Heretics who worship the Blessed
Virgin, and says, No man may adore Mary. Baronius will not cite this place at
large, but adds to it these Words, -- she is not to be worshipped as a God:
Which Falsification of the Father is designed to excuse their Churches
Idolatrous worship of the Virgin Mary Epiphan. haeres. 79. Baron. An. 375. p.
309.
. The restitution of Peter Bishop of Alexandria is by S. Hierom (whom he cites
with applause) ascribed to the late Repentance of the Emperor Valens: who
recalled (now at last) the Orthodox from Banishment; and Secrates only mentions
Damasus's Letters, which Peter took with him, approving both his Creation and
the Nicene Faith: Yet he from hence notes the Supreme Power of the Pope, by
whose order the Bishop of Alexandria was restored to his Church, in contempt of
Valens his Authority; and when he returned with the Popes Authority, the People
placed him in his Seat Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 30. and Baron. An. 377. page 325.
. Yea, after this he pretends to cite Socrates, as if he said, Peter was
received, being restored by Damasus Id. An. 378. page 335.
; yet Damasus did no more in all this matter, than barely to testify that
Peter was an Orthodox Bishop, and that he believed him duly elected; which is
all that Socrates says, and which if any eminent Orthodox Bishops had
testified, it would equally have served the Bishop of Alexandria's Cause. To
conclude, Baronius owns Paulinus, to have been a credulous Man, and very
unskilful in Ecclesiastical History Baron. Tom. V. An. 395. p. 15.
; yet thinking he had not spoken enough, when he relates, That a Church was
adorned with Pictures; he stretches this into, Adorned with Sacred Images Id.
An. 394. page 612.
. From all which Instances we may infer, That the Cardinal would not stick at
misquoting and misrepresenting his Authors, when it might serve the Roman
Interest.

. 3. Of this kind also we may reckon his crasty suppressing such Authorities,
in whole or in part, as seem to cross the Opinions and Practices of their
Church. His leaving out a passage in Optatus, wherein that Father makes the
being in Communion with the Seven Churches of Asia a Note of a true Catholic,
was noted before Vid. supra. 2. and Baron. An. 321.. 5.
. And we may give many such like Instances: Sozemen relates an Imperial Law,
wherein those are declared Heretics, who do not hold the Faith, which Damasus
Bishop of Rome and Peter of Alexandria then held Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 4. p. 415.
; but the fraudulent Annalist leaves out Peter of Alexandria, and mentions only
Damasus as the sole standard of Catholic Faith Faren. An. 378. page 339.
. When S. Hierom says, His Adversaries condemned him with Damasus and Peter:
Baronius bids us observe, with what reverence the Pope's Enemies treated him;
for though they accused S. Hierom of Heresy, yet against Damasus they durst
not open their Mouth Baron. An. 378. page 347.
; whereas S. Hierom protected himself by the Authority of the Bishop of
Alexandria, as well as by that of the Pope. Again, after a crafty Device to
hide the evident Testimony which Gregory Nyssen gives, against going in
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, He slightly mentions an Epistle of S. Hierom, which
excellently confutes that then growing Superstition; telling us, That the Court
of Heaven is as open from Britain as from Jerusalem. Which remarkable Sentence,
and all the other learned Arguments of that Epistle he omits by design Hieron.
Ep. 13. Tom 1. p. 120. Baron. An. 386. p. 454, 455.
; though if it had countenanced this Superstition, we should have had it cited
at large. In like manner afterward, when he had another fair occasion to cite
this same Epistle, which does so effectually condemn Pilgrimages, he will not
quote one word out of it, but barely mentions it, and runs out into the
Enquiry, what time it was writ Baron. An. 394. p. 613.
. I have given many more Instances of these fraudulent Concealments in my
Discourse of Councils, and therefore shall add no more here, but only this,
That whoever reads Baronius's Annals, hears no more generally than the Evidence
of one side, and that too, enlarged, if it be never so slight, and commended,
if it be never so spurious; but whatever makes against the Roman Church is
depreciated and perverted, or else clapped under Hatches, and kept out of sight:
Of which we have an Instance in Eusebius, who because he will not justify
their Forgeries about Constantine's Baptism and Donation, (though he be the
best of all the Ecclesiastical Historians) is never cited, but with Reproaches
and Calumnies Anna'. 324.. 143, 144, and 152. An. 325.. 192, and 193. Et An.
336.. 7, 8. Item An. 340.. 40, etc.
; and whatever he says against them, is either concealed, or the force of it
taken off, by reviling him as an Arian.

. 4. Another Artifice of our Annalist is, first to suppose things which make
for the honor of his Church, without any manner of proof, and then to take his
own Suppositions for grounds of Argument. Thus he supposes, that Constantine
gave S. Peter thanks for his Victory, without any evidence from History Baron.
An. 312.. 58.
; yea, against his own peculiar Notion, That Constantine was then a Pagan, and
durst not do any act to make him seem a Christian Id. ibid.. 62.
. Again, To color their Worship of Images, He barely supposes, that the Pagan
Senate dedicated a Golden Image of Christ to Constantine Baron. An. 312.. 68,
69.
: He argues only from Conjectures, to prove the Munisicence of that Emperor to
Rome Baron. An. 324.. 72.
; whereas, if so eminent a Prince had given such great Gifts to the most famous
City in the World, doubtless some Author would have mentioned it, and not have
left the Cardinal to prove this by random Guesses. Again, He supposos without
any proof, that Constantine knew the Supreme Power over all Christians, was in
the Church of Rome Eod. An.. 117.
; He produces nothing but mere Conjectures, that Osius was the Pope's Legate;
yet he boldly draws rare Inferences from this Eod. An.. 127.
. He does but guess and take it for granted, that the Nicene Council was called
by the Advice of Pope Sylvester Eod. An.. ult.
; yet this is a Foundation for the Supremacy, and i know not what. Thus, when
he has no Author to prove, that Athanasius venerated the Martyrs, he makes it
out with Who can doubt it? -- and it is fit to believe he did so Baron. An.
342.. 42.
. So he tells us, He had said before, that Damasus favored Gregory Nazianzen
in his being elected to be Bishop of Constantinople Baron. An. 380. page 362.
. He supposes this indeed a little before Ibid. p. 359.
: But all Ancient Authors say, and he himself affirms, That Peter (Bishop of
Alexandria) did institute him into that Bishopric Idem p. 355.
. He only supposes Siricius desired Theodosius to banish the Manichees from
Rome; but the Rescript is not directed to him, but to Albinus the Prefect; and
(except the fabulous Pontifical) there is no Evidence that Siricius was
concerned in this matter Baron. An. 389. p. 513.
. Theodoret says, The Emperor chose Telemachus into the number of Martyrs;
but Baronius supposes, This was done not only by the Emperor's Care, but by
the Ecclesiastical Authority of the Pope Baron. An. 395. 621.
. To conclude, He affirms by guess, That S. Nicetus came out of Dacia into
Italy, to Visit the Apostles Tombs, and to consult the Apostolical Seat Baron.
An. 397. page 28, and 29.
; but no Author makes this out. Now, how can any Reader trust an Historian, who
in relating things done many Ages ago, takes the liberty to invent and suppose
whatever will serve a present Turn?

. 5. Add to this that he scruples not to contradict himself, and to tell
manifest: Untruths to carry on the Interest of Rome, which we shall prove by
these Examples: He affirms Coelicianus (Bishop of Carthage) relied upon one
defense, The Communion of the Apostolic See; but immediately he tells us, That
he was supported by Constantine' s favor Baron. An. 313.. 18, 19.
. He cites S. Augustine, saying, Constantine (when Coelician's Cause was
referred to him) was a Christian Emperor; yea, he cites a Letter of
Constantine, writ in a most Christian style; and yet he feigns, that
Coelicianus delayed his appearing before this Emperor, because he thought it
unfit that a Bishop should be judged by a Layman, not yet Baptized Baron. An.
316.. 59, and 62. Collat. cum. 60.
. And again, Eight years after this he represents Constantine as a mere Pagan,
who had never heard of Peter or Paul, and took them for some Heathen Deities
Baron. An. 324.. 39.
; whereas he says, He was a Catechumen, and out of the Gospel had imbibed the
Christian Meekness eight years before Id. An. 316.. 65.
. He also affirms, That in the Year 324 there was as yet none of the Senators
believed the Christian Faith Baron. An. 324.. 76.
. And yet he says, Two year before this, that one or both the Consuls were
Christians Id. An. 322.. 1.
; yea, in the year 312. He reckons up many Senators, who had given up their
Names to Christ Id. An. 312.. 75. and 76.
. Thus he contradicts himself by following those Lying Acts of Syl vester, in
order to support the false Story of Constantine's being Baptized at Rome. Soon
after, out of a Fabulous Author he talks very big of the low Reverence which
Constantine paid to the Bishops at the Nicene Council Baron. An. 325.. 16.
; whereas all the Authentic Historians say, The Bishops rose up when he entered
in, and paid him a great respect Idem ibid.. 52.
. And when he has told many incredible Legends about the Nails of the Cross,
and-seems to grant that diverse false Nails have been adored for the true, he
excuses his abused Catholics for their mistaken Worship of false Relics,
saying, That their Faith excuses their Fault Baron. An. 326.. 51, -- and 54.
; so that Lies may be innocently told and believed (it seems) at Rome. Again he
affirms, there were Monks at Rome in the year 328, and proves this by what S.
Augustine saw there at least fifty years after Baron. An. 328. 20, and 21.
; yea, in the year 340 he says, Athanasius first brought the Institution of
Monks to Rome Id. An. 340.. 8.
, which is a manifest contradiction.

To proceed, I wonder with what Face he could commend Athanasius for speaking
charitably of the Heretic Arius, after he was dead, when he reviles Eusebius
after his death Baron. An. 336.. 44. Collat. cum An. 340.. 38.
; And never mentions any of the Protestant Doctors deceased, but with the
bitterest Malice, and in the most spightful Language he can invent: If Charity
were a Virtue in Athanasius, then Malice must be a Vice in him. He largely
relates many Appeals to the Emperor in the case of Athanasius, and yet when at
last the Bishop of Rome was chosen Arbitrator in this Case, and this but once,
He cries out, Behold, Reader, the ancient Custom! etc. Whereas since the
Emperors were Christians, it was the Custom to appeal first to him, as his
History abundantly proves Baron. An. 340.. 2.
. He very largely commends the Acts of Martyrs, but by following them falls
into many Absurdities; as where he tells us, That the Pagan Temple of Daphne at
Antioch was burnt two days after the Martyrdom of Artemius Baron. An. 362. page
37.
: Yet a little after he brings in this Artemius arguing with Julian, about the
burning of this Temple Ibid. p. 44.
. So he tells us, The Body of S. John Baptist was burnt to Ashes, except some
Bones which were carried into Egypt to Athanasius: And yet a little after S.
Hierom affirms, his Bones remained at Sebaste, and wrought Miracles there
Baron. An. 362. page 56.
. As little Truth is there in his accusing Maximus the Emperor for presuming
to judge of Bishops Causes Baron. An. 385. page 441.
; whereas Maximus his Letter to Siricius (which Baronius records Id. An. 387.
page 474.
declares, He would call the Bishops to a Council in what City they pleased,
and refer it to them (who were best skilled) to determine these matters. Again,
in order to justify those feigned Relics of Protasius and Gervasius showed
now at Rome, he affirms, That S. Ambrose gave part of them to several Bishops,
and some of them were brought to Rome: Whereas S. Ambrose himself (who knew
best what was done) assures us, He buried the Rodies whole, putting every Joint
in his own order Baron. An. 387. page 468. Collat. cum Ambrose Ep. 85.
. And to name no more, He brags, that Idols were pulled down no where with more
zeal, than at Rome Baron. An. 389, and 390. page 526.
. Yet in the same Page he tells us, There was then newly dedicated an Alter
there for sacrificing to the Heathen Gods: So that we see, designed Falsehoods
are not scrupled by him in things which seem to make for the honor of Rome, or
her Opinions.

. 6. We may also observe, that for the same ends He makes innumerable false
Inferences on purpose to pervert the Truth; thus from S. Augustine's calling
Melchiades, A Father of Christian People, (as every Bishop is) Baronius
concludes, that S. Augustine was for the Popes Supremacy Baron. An. 313.. 29.
: So from Bishops judging in Causes where the People referred their Differences
to them, he frequently infers, A right in Bishops, to judge in Temporal Matters
Baron. An. 319.. 30. item An. 326.. 100 etc. item An. 398. page 61. and 62.
: In like manner from Theodoret's, mentioning a Canon of the Church in general,
and (as his discourse shows) referring to the Canon, which forbids any Bishop
to judge a Cause till both parties were present, Baronius gathers, that the
Pope was supreme over the Bishop of Alexandria, and that by the Canons of Nice
Baron. An. 325.. 128.
. Again, That the Pope was not beholding to the Council of Nice for his
Supremacy, which he had from Christ, he proves by Pope Nicholas his Testimony,
who had the impudence in his own Cause and for his own Ends, to tell this Story
Five hundred years after Id. ib.. 130.
: So he condemns the Arians, for ejecting Bishops without staying for the
Bishop of Rome's Sentence, which he proves was unjust by an Epistle of Pope
Julius, which says, The Arians should first have writ to all Bishops, that so
what was right might be determined by all Baron. An. 336.. 34.
; where Julius arrogates nothing to himself alone, as Baronius falsely pretends.
And to make this single Privilege of Rome the more credible, he does
frequently apply what the Ancients say of all the Bishops of the West, to the
Pope: Thus what S. Basil says of all the Western Churches, he applies only to
Rome Baron. An. 371. page 239.
: And when he recites two Epistles of S. Basil, whose Title is to the Western
Bishops, and the whole discourse in it directed to many Bishops, he feigns the
Name of the Pope is left out or lost, and concludes these Letters were
peculiarly directed to him, and this only to support the Roman Supremacy Baron.
An. 371. page 238, and An. 372. page 269, 270, 271, etc.
; and therefore he repeats over and over this matter, and affirms, it was an
Embassy sent to the Pope Ibid. 273, 274.
. Thus also when S. Ambrose says, The Western Bishops' by their Judgment
approved of his Ordination: He infers that S. Ambrose implies, It was confirmed
by a public Decree of the Apostolical See Baron. An. 375. page 320.
. And whereas Basil speaking of those Western Bishops in his time, who (he
says) kept the Faith entirely; Baronius infers from hence, That their
Successors, and especially the Bishops of Rome, have never erred since Baron.
An. 372. page 276. and An. 373. page 310.
. Like to which is his inferring the usage of Praying to Saints from a pure
Rhetorical flourish of Nazianzen's, in one of his Orations Baron. An. 372. page
285.
. And thus when S. Hierom uses all his Oratory to set off Virginity, because
that seems to make for the Roman Celibacy, he takes him to be in good earnest,
and will have all his Reflections upon Marriage to be solid Arguments Baron. An.
382. page 402.
, though S. Hierom himself calls them Trifles Baron. An. 390 page 540.
. But when he tells a sober Truth about the Ignorance of the Roman Clergy, then
the Cardinal tells us, He speaks by way of Hyperbole Idem An. 385. page 435.
. From which Instances it does appear, that our Annalist did not, like an
Historian, endeavor to declare Truth, but only to serve an Interest and a
Party.

. 7. Lastly, His Partiality notoriously appears wherever the Church of Rome is
any way concerned; for when any thing of this kind comes in his way, he puts
off the Character of an Historian and turns Disputant, laboring to confute the
most ancient and authentic Authors, if they seem to say any thing against that
Church. Thus we may observe what tedious digressions he makes about the Primacy
of Rome in his discourse on the Nicene Council, for which he twice makes
Apologies Baron. An. 325.. 136, and 140.
. Again, he runs out into a long and very impertinent dispute about the Worship
of Images, in an Age when no good Author mentions them as used in the Church
Baron. An. 362. page 18.
. In like manner, He makes a long excursion to disprove an Authentic Story of
Epiphanius, tearing a Veil with a Picture wrought in it, because such things
were not fit to be in Churches Baron. An. 392. p. 568.
; and he scarce ever meets with any of the Roman Corruptions, mentioned in the
most fabulous Authors, but he leaves the History, and enlarges into Remarks
upon those Passages. But if the Writer be never so eminent, that touches any of
these Sores, his business always is, to baf^le the Evidence; of which there is
scarce one year in his Annals, wherein there are not some Examples. On the
other side, He takes every slight occasion to make the most spiteful Reflections
on all that he counts Enemies to the Roman Church: Thus he applies the Bishop
of Alexandria's description of the Arians to the Reformed Churches, though it
agree much better with these of his own Religion Baron. An. 318.. 80.
. Again, He reviles us, because we do not honor the Modern idle lewd Monks of
their Communion, as much as the Ancients did those holy and devout Monks, which
were in the Primitive Times, though it be plain to all the World, these are
like them in nothing but the Name Baron. An. 340.. 10. item An. 363. p. 132.
. The like Outcry he makes upon Protestants, for undeceiving some of those
silly Nuns, who have been decoyed into unlawful Vows, merely for Interest and
Secular Ends; and affirms the persuading these to Marry, is worse than the
Arian's ravishing and murdering them at Alexandria Baron. An. 326.. 29.
. Thus also he compares the Reformed Divines to the Eunomians, who taught,
Their Faith alone would save them, though their Lives were never so wicked
Baron. An. 360.. 38.
; forgetting that their Priest's convert (as they call it) Murderers at the
Gallows, by teaching them this very Principle. And, to name no more Examples,
when S. Basil inveighs against those who despised the Ancient Customs of the
Primitive Church, He spitefully applies this to the Reformed Baron. An. 363.
page 131.
. Whereas in very Truth, they of Rome have left off more Ancient Rites, and
brought in more new ones, than any sort of Christians in the World. By these
and many more Instances which might be given, even out of this one Century, it
is evident, that the whole design of his History is to make all the Doctrins
and Practices of Rome seem to be Primitive and right, and that he cares not how
unlawful the Means be which he uses, to gain this belief in his Reader.

. Yet to conclude, we will observe, That after all his evil-Methods there are
many things which he could neither avoid relating, nor yet excuse, which
condemn the Modern Roman Church. I wonder how he could Commend Constantine for
abolishing the Stews, and the prostituting of Christian Women there; and not
observe, That the Pope now tolerates these Abominations in Rome it self Baren
An. 314.. 74.
. Again, how does it agree with the INFALLIBILITY of the Pope, to say, That one
Holy Spirit governs the Catholic Church, so as to make the Bishops of all Ages
and Places agree in the same Opinion Id. Ib.. 76.
? If this be so, what need one Bishop alone be made Infallible? And if it be
(as he says) a Doctrine taught by the Apostles, and consequently true, That the
Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father; then the Pope, who condemns this as an
Heresy of the Greeks, is not Infallible Baron. An. 325.. 70.
. If Constantine had known of this Infallibility lodged at Rome, he would have
sent thither for exact Copies of the Holy Scriptures, and not to Eusebius in
Palestina Baron. An. 330.. 23.
. If Damasus had this Infallible Spirit, how came he (after he was Pope) to
need to be instructed in the meaning of Scripture by S. Hierom Baron. An. 379.
page 353.
? Or, if his Successor Siricius had been Infallible, how could the Origenists
(who held such palpable Heresies, that a Woman discovered them to be in an
Error) impose upon his Simplicity; and get Letters Testimonial from this sole
Judge of Heresy Baron. An. 397. page 32.
? How came the Council of Alexandria to send their Decrees to Epiphanius, S.
Hierom and S. Chrysostom, and not first send them to Anastasius, who was
Infallible? And indeed Baronius cannot prove they were sent to him at all, but
by saying, It is fit to believe, they were sent Baron. An. 399. p. 85. cum 88.
. Moreover, many things in this Century related by these Annals, look not
favorably upon the SUPREMACY. Constantine calls Eusebius's Election to the Sea
of Antioch, An advancement to the Bishopric of the Universal Church Baron. An.
324.. 152.
, which looks as if he knew nothing of the Pope's Pretenses: That Marcellus of
Ancyra, even when he was accused before Pope Julius, should call him his
Fellow-Minister, would have been very Sawey, if he had known Julius to be the
Supreme Bishop of the World Baron. An. 341.. 51.
. And if this Supremacy had been owned in former Ages, how came the Eastern
Bishops to be so angry at their being desired to come to Rome Baron. An. 341..
56, and 57.
; yea, how came they to Excommunicate the Pope, for communicating with one whom
they had judged a Criminal Id. An. 347.. 64.
? It is not concerning the Pope, but Athanasius, that Nazianzen says, He did
again prescribe Laws to the whole World Baron. An. 362. page 66.
: It seems the Pope was not the Supreme Caller of Synods, when S. Hierom
(speaking of a Council which he thought was not Authentic) Asks, What Emperor
ordered it to be Convened Eod. An. page 80.
. We cannot find in any genuine Antiquity in this Age, so great an Encomium of
Rome, as Nazianzen the Elder gives of Caesarea, viz. That from the beginning it
was, and now is accounted the Mother of almost all Churches, on which all the
Christian World casts its Eye, like a Circle drawn from a Center Baron. An.
369. page 194.
. A man would guess the Pope's Authority reached no further than the
Suburbicarian Regions, because Ursicinus (Damasus his Competitor) was forbid by
the Emperor from entering into Rome, or the Suburbicarian Regions Baron. An.
371. page 235.
. S. Basil was very unmannerly, if not unjust (had this Supremacy been then
claimed) to send his first Embassy unto Athanasius, and tell him, that He had
the Care of all the Church; Baron. An. cod. p. 236, 237, etc.
; yea afterward, when he did send into the West, he directs his Epistle to the
Italian and Gallican Bishops, without mentioning the Pope in particular: And
truly Damasus (if he were Supreme) took little care of his Office, since upon
so pressing Occasions he would neither Answer S. Basil, nor S. Hierom for a
long time. And S. Hierom was somewhat bold when he reproves the Ambition of
Rome, and said, He would Follow no Chief but Christ Bar. An. 372. page 281, 282.
. S. Ambrose also seems not to give that deference to the Mother of all
Churches that he ought, since he often Dined and made Feasts on the Saturday,
which was a Fast at Rome Baron. An. 375. page 321.
; and had the Pope then been Supreme, why did Ambrose make a Bishop at Sirmium,
in Iliyria, so far from his own City of Milan Idem An. 380. page 362.
? The same S. Ambrose also speaks of Supreme Bishops in Gallia Baron. An. 392
p. 558.
. It is strange that Siricius, the Supreme Pastor should let the Pagans set up
an Altar to the Goddess of Victory in the Roman Capitol, and that S. Ambrose
should be the only Complainant in this Case Id. cod. An. page 560.
. Finally, if the Pope then had any Jurisdiction over the Eastern Churches, why
was not he consulted about Ordaining S. Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople?
and how came the Patriarch of Alexandria to be sent to, and to Ordain him
Baron. An. 397. page 14.
? These Instances show, the Supremacy of Rome was unknown in that Age: And so
was the INVOCATION of SAINTS and ADORING of RELICS also, as one might suspect
by these Passages, That the Holy Men of those Ages, in their Dangers and
Necessities are said only to have prayed to God, not to the Blessed Virgin, or
to Saints and Angels for help: So did Alexander Bishop of Constantinople
against Arius Baron. An. 336.. 47.
; so did Parthenius against the Pagans An. 337.. 41.
; so did Constantius the Emperor, for Recovery of his Health An 338.. 11.
; so also did those Persian Martyrs An. 343.. 16.
. Thus Euphrates, an Eminent Bishop, implores only the help of Christ against
an illusion of the Devil An. 348.. 9.
. The Christians who translated the Bones of Babylas the Martyr, did not Pray
to him, but Praised God An. 362. page 40.
; and Macedonius, an holy Monk, is observed only to call upon God Night and Day
An. 388. page 477.
. Arcadius the Emperor in an Earthquade prayed to the Lord, the only preserver
of the Humble An. 396. page 21.
. Porphyrius, Bishop of Gaza, and his People, called only upon Christ, not upon
any Saints An. 398. page 71.
: So that all these used the Protestant way of Worship. And the Romanists must
be very unsafe in their Worship of Saints, since Baronius confesses, one of
their Catalogues of Saints puts in the Names of two Heretics, as good Catholic
Saints Baron. An. 340.. 41. and An. 341.. 11.
. So also as to the Adoration of Relics, the Faithful in Persia did not keep
the Body of their Martyr to Worship, but buried it in a Tomb An. 343.. 16.
. So S. Anthony the Primitive Hermit, fearing and disliking this Superstition,
ordered his Body to be put into a private and unknown Grave, according to the
Custom of the Catholic Church Baron. An. 358.. 23.
; and therefore Metaphrastes his sole Evidence will not pass, for the Legend of
translating the Bodies of S. Andrew and S. Luke to Constantinople Ibid.. 25.
. It Is true, this Superstition was then creeping in, and some Cheaters did
begin to sell the Bones of False Martyrs (a Trade used at Rome for many Ages);
but Theodosius his Law severely punished this Crime Baron. An. 386. page 455.
: Which ridiculous Imposture, Julian the witty Apostate had justly exposed some
years before, as being contrary to Scripture and to the Christian Law Id. An.
362. page 92. and An. 361. p. 36.
.

To proceed, Had the Altars been then used to be adorned with IMAGES, as they
are now at Rome, the Faithful would not have been so surprised at bringing in
an Image, and placing it on the Altar, as Optatus says they were Baron. An.
348.. 33.
; and Baronius can find no Precedent for carrying Images in Procession to
procure Rain, but the Pagan Superstition Baron. An. 362. page 60.
. In S. Ambroses time the Virgins Apartment in the Church was not adorned with
Pictures or Images, but (after the Protestant way) with Sentences of Holy
Scripture Baron. An. 377. page 327.
. Theodosius should have excepted the Images of the Saints, when he forbad the
honoring any Images void of Sense, with lighting Tapers, offering Incense and
Garlands to them Baron. An. 392. page 562.
: So that doubtless this is an INNOVATION in their Church, and so are many
other of their Rites. The Pope's Bull, to choose a Stranger to be Bishop of a
Church, whereof he never had been a Member, was unknown when Pope Julius
condemned this Practice Baron. An. 341.. 17.
. The Custom of putting the Wafer in the Communicant's Mouth (as Baronius
confesses) was unknown in this Century, when (Protestant like) they took it
into their hands Baron. An. 361. p. 2.
. In S. Augustine's time the People at Rome Fasted on Wednesdays which use they
have now left off Baron. An. 388. page 495.
. When the Rites of Burial used at Christian Funerals are described by
Nazianzen (on occasion of the Funeral of Caesarius) there is no mention of any
Prayers for his Soul; for that Superstition was not then allowed Baron. An.
368. page 179.
. The carrying a Cross before them in Procession, cannot be made out in this
Age, but by the spurious Act of Martyrs cited by Metaphrastes. Baron. An. 398.
p. 71.
. But lest I tire the Reader, I will conclude with one or two Instances more,
to show the difference between Modern Rome and this Age: Their Monks now are
not like those of that time, but resemble the Messalian Heretics, who pretended
to Pray continually, and never used any labor, and claimed all men's Alms as
due only to them; who said, that Marriages might be dissolved, seducing
Children from their Parents, and boasting they were pure from Sin; yea, wearing
Sackcloth, that all may see it Baron. An. 361.. 35, ad. 39.
. Theodosius made a Law to banish Monks from Cities, and oblige them to retire
into Desert places Baron. An. 390. page 537.
: But the Modern Monks are all for Noble Seats in the best freqnented Cities;
so that these and those are vastly different. Finally, He makes the Persecuting
Spirit of Macedonius, and the Patience of Athanasius, a mark to distinguish
Truth from Heresy: Now, if we apply this Mark; as none are greater Persecutors
than the Romanists, so we must conclude none are further from the Truth Baron.
An. 360.. 27, and 28.
.

And now by these few Instances, within the compass of one Century, the Reader
may judge what Truth there can be in that Religion, that needs so many Frauds
to hide its Faults; and what trust can be given to that Historian, who to serve
an ill Cause, makes no scruple to use all these kinds of Deceit. This may warn
all that design to peruse these Annals, not to rely upon any of his Authorities
or Arguments without examining, and also not to take every thing for Primitive
and Ancient, which he pretends to be so. This may suffice for this Volume, and
(if we proceed) we shall make the like Remarks on the following Tomes; to show,
that their Religion is made up of Falsehoods, and cannot be defended without
Lying and Forgery, which is the great support of their Evil Cause.

FINIS.
Glory be to the GOD of Truth.
Imprimatur

26 March, 1695. C. Alston, R. P. D. HEN. Episc. Land. a Sacris.

THE CHURCH HISTORY Cleared from the Roman forgeries And Corruptions found in
the COUNCILS and BAR ONIUS: FROM The Year 400, till the end of the Fifth
General Council, An. Dom. 553.

Being the Third and Fourth Parts of the Roman Forgeries.

By THOMAS COMBER, D. D. Dean of DURHAM.

For we have not followed cunningly devised Fables, 2 Pet. I. 16.

LONDON.

Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Robert Clavell at the Peacock at the West End
of S. Paul's, 1695.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in GOD, JOHN, By Divine Providence Lord Archbishop
of YORK, Primate of ENGLAND, AND METROPOLITAN.
May it please your Grace,
WHen I formerly had the Honor of Your Acquaintance, though at a distance, I
reckoned it none of my least Felicities: But since that happy Providence that
delivered these Nations, brought Your Grace nearer, to Illustrate these
Northern Regions with Your excellent Doctrine, and warm them with Your pious
Example; I could not better express my extraordinary Satisfaction and my Duty
both, than by presenting these Papers to Your Grace, who have suffered so much
from the Romish Party, and done so much to prevent their once growing and
dangerous Errors.

These Collections were all made, when this Church was threatened to have their
Corruptions imposed on us; and the First Part was ready for the Press while
that Cloud hung over our Heads. This Second Part has been hindered by diverse
necessary Avocations, but now comes to appear under Your Grace's auspicious
Patronage; and if it be so happy also to gain Your Approbation, that will
recommend it to all that know Your Grace's solid Judgment and Undisguised
Integrity. Frauds and Forgeries are naturally Your Aversation, and therefore
the discovery of so great a heap of them, may I hope be acceptable to Your
Grace; not on your own Account, to whom probably here is nothing New; but
because this Essay may assist young Divines and such as begin to read
Church History, at a cheap and easy rate to distinguish Truth from Falsehood in
matters of great importance. I shall add no more, since to give your Grace your
just Character, is as needless as it would be difficult for me, and would not
be pleasing to your Grace; only I shall most heartily pray, That the Church may
be long happy in Your Conduct, and that he may be reckoned among Your Grace's
Friends, who is,

My Lord, Your Grace's most faithful Servant, and Your True Honourer, THO:
COMBER.

THE PREFACE.
ANTIQUITY seems so Naturally to challenge Veneration from all succeeding
Times, that it gives a Value to many things which have nothing else to
recommend them: But the Records of former Ages, especially those relating to
the Faith and Practice of the Church, while it was in its purity and splendour,
are by all sober Men accounted truly Sacred. Yet no Writings have suffered more
by fraudulent Hands than these: For most of them being for many Ages in the
custody of those, who had a new Authority to set up, and were to contrive new
Doctrines to furnish and support it with Wealth and Power, their Interest
obliged them to corrupt all genuine Ecclesiastical History, and to invent
innumerable spurious Pieces, under great and ancient Names, thereby to impose
upon the ignorant Ages, and make them imagine, their later Devices were of
Apostolical, or at least Primitive Original: And this is done with so much
Artifice and Cunning, that a careless Reader of the Ecclestastical Story (as
they represent it) is in danger of being persuaded, That the Modern Roman
Church is in all things conformable to the Primitive, from which it differs as
much as Darkness does from Light: To prevent which fatal Mistake, I think no
Time can be better spent, no Pains more usefully employed, than in correcting
the History of the Ancient Church, and discovering the various Falsifications
thereof.

Wherefore I have now pursued and enlarged my Design of remarking the Roman
Frauds and Forgeries in their Editions of the Councils, and in Baronius, by
rectifying the History of the Church, and all Passages relating to it, as I go
along; having proceeded as far as the Middle of the Sixth Century: A Period
which contains Three of the first Five General Councils, and is memorable for
variety of most important Transactions. It was in this time that the most
refined Heretics disturbed the Church, and the barbarous Nations broke into
the Roman Empire, and settled in diverse parts of it. And while the former
employed the Pens of the Learned, and the later diverted the Thoughts of the
declining Emperors, Rome had an unlucky Opportunity to serve the ends of her
aspiring Ambition, and to lay the Foundation of her future Grandeur: Which
Projects were furthered by a great decay, not only of Learning, but of Piety
and good Manners, toward the End of this time, which made way for diverse
Superstitions to creep into the Worship, and many Irregularities to grow up in
the Discipline of the Christian Church. Yet still there were many Learned and
pious Writers, who labored to defend the Faith, to check all sorts of
Usurpations, and to keep up the Primitive Purity and good Order: So that the
Editors of these Councils and Baronius have been put to all their shifts, to
feign an Agreement between the Records of this Period, and the Modern Doctrines
and Practices of their Church, foisting in many Legends and spurious Tracts,
and corrupting the Words, as well as forcing the Sense of the genuine Writings
of these Ages.

Of which Proceedings I was in hopes to have found, both an exact Account and a
just Censure in the lately published Work of the Learned Monsieur. Du Pin New
Hist. of Eccles. Writers, etc. Land. 1693.
. And it must be confessed he has owned more of these ill Practices, than any
Writer of that Church, and suffered for telling more Truth than the Roman Cause
can bear. Yet after all, either by the prejudices of his Education, or the
influence of his Superiors, and the disadvantage of his Circumstances, many
things of this kind are omitted, which are necessary for us to know: And though
I would advise Young Students of Ecclesiastical Antiquity (whose service I aim
at) to Read those Elaborate Collections; Yet I cannot assure them, they may
every where depend on them.

The best method to know the wole Truth, is to Read over the Councils
themselves, and compare them, as they go on, with Baronius's Annals, and both
with these brief Remarks; which will so unfold that Mystery of Rome's
corrupting and falsifying the Church History and Writings of these times, that
a diligent observer will hereby be enabled (without a Guide) to discover more
of these Errors, than our designed brevity would allow us to set down: And such
a Reader may not only safely peruse the Historians and Disputants of that side,
but will soon arrive at the Skill to confute all their Arguments, which are
supported by disguising of Ancient Records: And as his discovery of the Roman
Frauds, will give him a just aversation for that Church; so his seeing that our
Church rejects these Arts of deceiving, and needs no false or feigned Evidence,
must give him as true a value for it; since we appeal to all uncorrupted
Antiquity, Our Pastors can say with S. Peter, We have not followed cunningly
devised Fables 2 Peter I. 16.
. Deceit in Human Affairs, is equally Odious and Mischievous: But in Religious
Matters it is highly Impious and Intolerable; because it not only misleads Men
in matters relating to their Eternal Salvation: But (as a Learned Prince used
to say,) it makes God himself an Instrument of the Crime, and a Party to the
holy Cheat Dum homines decipunt, Deum ipsum interponunt tanquam sceleris
mediatorem: Rex Alfons. apud Phil. Camerar. hor. subs. Tom. III. page 127.
: To this Horrid Degree of Guilt, may the design of imposing false and gainful
Doctrines drive partial Men. But the Mischief is prevented as soon as it is
discovered; wherefore I hope these Papers, which so plainly expose this sort of
Falsifications, may set the History of these Times in a clearer Light; and not
only help to undeceive some well meaning and misled Romanists, but to Establish
the Inquisitive and Ingenious Members of this rightly Reformed Church, for
whose Safety and Prosperity the Author daily Prays, and to whose Service he
Dedicates all his Labors.

THE CONTENTS.
PART III. CENT. V.
Chap. I OF the Time before the Council of Ephesus, Page 1 Chap. II. Of the
Time from the Council of Ephesus, till the Council of Chalcedon, p. 47 Chap.
III. Of the Council of Chalcedon, being the Fourth General Council, p. 84 An
Appendix concerning Baronius's Annals, p. 122 Chap IV. Roman Errors and
Forgeries in the Councils, from the end of the Fourth Council, till An. Dom.
500. p. 157 An Appendix concerning Baronius his Annals, p. 189
PART IV. CENT. VI.
Chap. I. Errors and Forgeries in the Councils, from the Year 500, to the End
of the Fifth General Council, An Dom. 553. p. 218 An Epitome of Dr.
Crakenthorp's Treatise of the Fifth General Council at Constantinople, Anno
553. p. 279
ERRATA.
Page 10. lin. 11. read, fourth time, p. 14. l. 4. those words Quibus verbis,
etc. were to be in the Margen at (*), p. 15. l. 24. r. noting in the, p. 21. l.
18. r. prove themselves, p. 26. l. 26. 1. to assert, p 51. l. 21. r. from
giving, p. 62. l. 3. r. diverse proofs, p. 64. l. 35. r. him by their, p. 66. l.
29. (dele) when, p. 68. l. 16. r. yet the inventor, p. 69. Marg. at l. 33, r.
amplificatorem, p. 74. l. 5. r. That inded Leo, p. 76. l. 4. r. S. Germanus, p.
79. l. 24 r. a strange assertion, ib. l. 32. r. a packed party, p. 80. l. 31.
r. Pulcheria, p. 92. l. 21. r. forge^s the title, p. 108. l. 28. r. made to
these, p. 113. l. penul. r. Emperors patronage, p. 134. l. 11. r. Constantius
his time, p. 152. l. 16. r. the pilgrimages, p. 153. l. 17. r. Legates; of, p.
161. lin. ult. and p. 162. l. 1, r. Pontificate, p. 279 l. 19. r. Theodoret, p.
289. l. 14. r. and again by, p. 301. l. 23. r. and Marcian, ib. l. 24. r.
commend Justinian, p. 402. and 403. wrong numbered for 302, 303. p. 302. l. 13.
r. Agathias (ibid.) penult. and ult, r. Justin.

Roman Forgeries IN THE COUNCILS.
PART III. CENT. V.
CHAP. I.
Of the time before the Council of Ephesus.

. 1. THE Editors of the Councils being An. Do. 400
generally the Popes Creatures, seem not so much concerned to give us a true
Account of what was done, as to make their Readers believe, that all the
Affairs of the whole Christian World were managed solely by the Bishop of Rome,
and every thing determined by his single Authority: Thus the first Council. of
Toledo was Bin. Tom. 1. Par. 2. page 596. Lab. Tom. 2. Col. 122^.
held in Spain, under Patronus, Bishop of that City: The Title says it was held
in the time of Pope Anastasius, and notes the Name of the Consul for that year,
400. But Baronius finding an Epistle of Pope Innocent writ to a Council of
Toledo five years after this Epist. 23. P. Innoc. ap. Baron. An. 405. page 235.
(relating to the Priscillian Heretics then abounding in Spain.) purely to
make us think the Bishops of Spain could do nothing without the Pope, removes
this Council down to the Year 405. Yet afterward in his Appendix, perceiving
the trick was too gro^^, he recants that Chro^ology, and restores it to its
true Year Anno 400. Baron. Ap. pend. ad Tom. 5. page 691.
But after all, this Epistle of Pope Innocent is by some suspected to be
forged; and Sirmondus confesses, that all the Old Books cite this Epistle as
written to a Council at Toulouse Lab. page 1279.
; so that he and Baronius, probably altered the reading, and put in Toledo
instead of Toulouse, because this was the more Famous Council; and they had a
mind it should be thought that all eminent Councils expected the Popes Letters
before they durst act: Whereas this Council of Toledo, makes it plain, that
they censured the Priscillianists, and absolved such as recanted purely by
their own Authority. And when they thought fit to acquaint other Churches
abroad with what they had done, they send an Embassy, not only to the Pope,
but to Simplicianus, Bishop of Milan, whose Judgment and Authority they value
as equal with the Popes Bin. page 602. and not. page 606. Lab. col. 1231. not.
col. 1240.
. And here we must observe, that Baranius and the Annotator (seeing it was a
reflection upon the Popes to have a Bishop of Milan ranked equal with the Pope)
affirm (without any Proof) that St. Ambrose and his Successor Simplicianus were
only the Pope, Legates, and that these Spanish Bishops would communicate with
none but such as the Apostolical S^^ did communicate with Bin. notes.
. Whereas they have the principal regard to the Sea of Milan, and in the
definitive Sentence name only St. Ambrose ut supra: ita Lab. Baron.
, though some Forger has there manifestly put in these words, add also what
Siricius advised: And in the Council of Turin, which Baronius cites, St.
Ambrose is named before the Pope; yea it is manifest by diverse African Councils
About this time.
, that they gave equal respect at least to the Judgment and Authority of the
Bishop of Milan, as to those of Rome Baron. An. 405. and appen. ad Tom. 3. page
693.
. So that it is ridiculous and absurd to fancy that St. Ambrose and his
Successors (who were greater Men than the Popes for Learning and Reputation)
were the Legates of Rome; and this has been invented merely to aggrandize that
See. And for that same reason they have stusted into the Body of this Council a
Rule of Faith against the Priscillianists, transmitted from some Bishop of
Spain with the Precept of Pope Leo, who was not Pope till forty years after
this Council Bin. page 599. Lab. col. 1227.
. Yea, Binius in the very Title of this Council, would have it confirmed by
another Pope that lived diverse Centuries after, of which Labbe was so ashamed,
that he has struck that whole Sentence out of his Edition Vid. Titul. Council.
ap. Bin. and Lab.
. As to the Canons of this Council I shall only remark: That the first of them
lays a very gentle punishment upon Deacons and Priests who lived with their
Wives, before a late Interdict, which is no more but the prohibiting them to
ascend to any higher Order Council. Tol. 1. can. 1. Bin. p. 597. Lab. col. 1223.
. And no wonder they touched this point so gently, for this prohibiting Wives
to the Clergy was never heard of in Spain till Siricius (who died about three
years before) advised it in his Epistle to Himerius, and therefore Innocent in
his third Epistle said, Siricius was the Author of this form of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, that is, of the Clergies Celibacy: and adds, that those who had not
received his Decree were worthy of pardon Innoc. cp. 3. Bin. page 612. Lab.
col. 1254.
: And by the many and repeated Canons made in Spain afterward in this Matter,
it appears, the inferior Clergy would not follow the Popes advice. The
fourteenth Canon Council. Tol. can. 14. Bin. p. 598. Lab. col. 1225.
shows that the Primitive way of receiving the Communion, was by the peoples
taking it into their hands, as they do now in our Church: And the Notes
confess, that the Roman Custom of taking it into their mouths out of the
Priests hand is an innovation Not. Bin. page 598. Lab. col. 1239.
, brought in after the corrupt Doctrine of Transubstantiation had begot many
superstitious Conceits about this Holy Sacrament, the altering of the Doctrine
occasioning this change in the way of receiving: Whereas the Protestant
Churches which retain the Primitive Doctrine, keep also the Primitive Rite of
Communicating. To this Council are tacked diverse Decrees which belong to some
Council of Toledo or other; but the Collectors, Burchard, Ivo, etc. not knowing
to which, have cited them under this General Title, out of the Council of
Toledo, and so the Editors place them all here Bin. page 602. Lab. col. 1231.
. But most of them do belong to later times, and the name of Theodorus,
Archbishop of Canterbury, in one of these Fragments shows it was made 300
years after this time Bin. page 604. Lab. col. 1236. An. Dom. 401.
.

We have in the next place two African Councils said to be under Anastasius,
though indeed they were under the Bishop of Carthage: The former of these,
decrees an Embassy shall be sent both to Anastasius, Bishop of Rome, and
Venerius, Bishop of Milan, for a supply of Clergymen, of whom at that time
they had great scarcity in Africa Bin. page 606. Lab. col. 1241.
. The other African Council determines they will receive such Donatists as
recanted their Errors, into the same Orders of Clergy which they had, before
they were reconciled to the Church, provided the Bishop of Rome, Milan and
other Bishops of Italy (to whom they sent a second Embassy) consented to it:
Now here, though all the Italian Bishops were applied to, and he of Milan by
name, as well as the Bishops of Rome; and though it was not their Authority,
but their Advice and Brotherly Consent, which the African Bishops expected; yet
Baronius and Binius tell us, it is certain that Anastasius did give them
license to receive these Donatists in this manner, because St. Augustine said
they did receive them Bin. page 607. Lab. col. 1242. Baron. An. 401. page 130.
. Whereas St. Augustine never mentions any license from the Pope, and his leave
or consent was no more desired than the leave of other eminent Bishops, only
the Annalist and his followers were to make this look as an indulgence granted
from Rome alone.

. 2. Pope Innocent succeeded Anastasius, who had the An. Dom. 402.
good fortune to be convinced (by St. Augustine, and other Bishops more learned
than himself) that Pelagius and Celestius were Heretics, and so to join with
the Orthodox in condemning them, for which he is highly commended by St.
Augustine, St. Hierom, and by Prosper, who were glad they had the Bishop of so
powerful and great a City of their side; and so was poor St. Chrysostom also,
whose Cause he espoused when Theophilus of Alexandria and the Empress oppressed
him; and by that means Innocent also got a good Character from St. Chrysostom
and his Friends in the East: But some think it was rather his good fortune than
his judgment, which made him take the right side: The Pontifical fills up his
Life, as usually, with frivolous matters Bin. page 607. Lab. col. 1242.
. But two things very remarkable are omitted there, the one is a passage in
Zosimus, viz. That when Alaricus first besieged Rome, and the Pagans there,
said the City would never be happy till the Gentile Rites were restored, The
Prefect communicates this to Pope Innocent, who valuing the safety of the City
before his own Opinion, privately gave them leave to do what they desired
Zosim. hist. lib. 5. page 816.
. The other is, That when Rome was taken afterward by Alarious, Pope Innocent
was gone out of the City to Ravenna, and did not return till all was quiet; and
therefore I cannot with Baronius think that St. Hierom compares Pope Innocent
to Jeremiah the Prophet Baron. An. 410. page 301.
; for Jeremiah staid among God's People and preached to them, but Innocent was
gone out of Rome long before it was seized by the Goths. Further we may
observe, that whereas St. Hierom advised a Noble Roman Virgin to beware of the
Pelagian Heretics, and to hold the Faith of Holy Innocent Hieron. ad Them. ep.
8. page 75.
: Baronius is so transported with this, that he quotes it twice in one year,
and thus enlarges on it, That St. Hierom knew the Faith was kept more pure and
certainly in the Seat of Peter, than by Augustine or any other Bishop, so that
the Waters of Salvation were to be taken more pure out of the Fountain than out
of any Rivers Baron. An. 413. page 354, and 358.
; which absurd Gloss is easily confuted by considering, that this Lady was a
Member of the Roman Church, and so ought to hold the Faith of her own Bishop,
especially since he was at that time Orthodox; and this was all St. Hierom
referred to: For he does not at all suppose the Roman See was infallible, nor
did he make any Comparison between Augustine and Innocent, since he well knew
that in point of Learning and Orthodox Judgment Augustine was far above this
Pope, who indeed derived all the skill he had as to the condemning Pelagius
from the African Fountains, and especially from St. Augustine: Besides, nothing
is more common than for some Eminent Bishops to be named as the Standard of
Catholic Communion, not from any Privilege of their See, but because at that
time they were Orthodox: So the Bishops of Constantinople, Alexandria and
Antioch are named in a Rescript of Arcadius the Emperor, with this Character,
that such as did not hold Communion with them should be cast out of the Church
Baron. An. 404. page 202.
. And thus Athanasius, Ambrose, Cyril and others, eminent for being Orthodox,
have been made the Touchstones of Men's Faith, such passing for true Believers
only, who held the same Faith with them.

For this Pope there are diverse Epistles published, upon which and the partial
Notes upon them we will make some brief remarks.

The first Epistle to Decentius, Bishop of Eugubium, was writ the last year of
Innocent Anno 416. Bin. marg. page 609. Lab. marg. col. 1248.
but is placed first, because it talks big of St. Peter, and of the duty of
other Churches to conform to the Roman usages: But there are some passages in
it which make it questionable whether this Pope writ it; or, if he did, show
his ignorance and gross mistakes; for the Author affirms, That no Apostle but
Peter did Institute Churches, Ordain Priests and Preach in Italy, France,
Spain, Africa, Sicily and the adjacent Islands Innoc. ep. 1. Bin. page 608.
Lab. col. 1248.
. Whereas the Scripture testifies that St. Paul did institute the Church at
Rome and preached in Italy; and most of the Ecclesiastical Writers affirm that
St. James preached in Spain. 2ly. He enjoins the Saturday Fast Bin. page 609.
Lab. col. 1246.
which was a peculiar Custom of the Roman Church not observed in the East, nor
at Milan, nor almost in any other Churches of diverse Ages after; and we may
observe that among all Innocent's Reasons for it, there is not one word of the
Blessed Virgin, who was not worshipped in those days, as she is now by the
Romanists, who now pretend to observe this Saturday Fast peculiarly to the
honor of the Virgin Mary. 3ly. He allows not only Priests, but also Lay
Christians to give extreme Unction to the Sick, if the Oil be but consecrated
by a Bishop Innoc. ep. 1.. 8. Bin. ibid. Lab. col. 1238.
. In which point the Roman Church has since altered her Opinion, and I doubt
not but they will call this now, a manifest error.

The second Epistle to Victricius (as Labbe confesses) is patched up out of
the fourth Epistle of Siricius and the seventh of Pope Zachary Bin. marg. page
610, and 611. Lab. col. 1252, 1253.
. And the Centuriators note concerning all these Epistles which go under
Innocent's Name, That sometimes whole Paragraphs are taken out of the Epistles
of both former and later Popes Magdeb. Cent. 5. page 1233.
, which is a ground to suspect that most of them are not genuine: However there
has been a later hand employed to foist in a passage or two into this Epistle;
for whereas the First Writer declares that, all Causes shall be determined in
the Province where they happen, some have put in a Sentence [excepting the
reverence due to the Roman Church] into the Body of the Section; and an
exception of reserving the greater Causes for the Apostolic See, in the end of
that Section Bin. page 611. Lab. col. 1250.
, which make the whole Decree null, and contradict the Nicene Canon cited
there: And whereas the former sentence was mere nonsense in Binius, Labbe has
put two words (sieve praejudicie) into his Edition, to make this gross Addition
seem coherent, and conceal the Forgery: Again, the Author of this Epistle in
his zeal against the Clergies Marriage, falsely cites it for Scripture, That
God's Priests must marry but once Bin. ib.. 6. Lab. col. 1251.
; and it is but a poor excuse which Labbe makes, that Tertullian had cited this
as out of Leviticus, since the infallible Interpreter of Scripture should have
corrected his Error, and not have countenanced an addition to the Holy Text to
serve an ill Cause. 3ly. The Writer shows himself grossly ignorant of the
Courses of the Jewish Priests, when he says, they did not depart from the
Temple nor go to their House in the year of their Ministration Ibid. ap. Bin.
Lab. 9.
. Whereas every one knows that there was but 24 Courses of the Priests, and
that every Family ministered but one Week at a time from Sabbath to Sabbath See
Seldom of Christ's Nativity, page 58, etc.
. Yet this Author makes the same mistake again in the third Epistle, and
considently talks again of the year of their Course. 4ly. Whereas St. Paul had
declared Marriage honorable in all Men (without excepting Ministers) and the
Bed undefiled Heb. XIII. 4.
. This Impudent Epistolizer calls the use of Marriage in the Clergy a being
stained with Carnal Concupisence, and expounds that place, Those who are in the
Flesh cannot please God Romans VIII. 8.
; of such Marriages Ibid.. 9.
, making the Apostle contradict himself by this senseless and false Gloss: But
notwithstanding all these pernicious and absurd Errors, Baronius and Binius do
extremely magnify the Pope upon this occasion, as being that Original Fountain
from whence the most Famous Bishops of the World used to draw Water, knowing of
what great Strength and Authority these things were which came from the
Apostolical See Not. in cp. 2. Bin. page 612. Lab. col. 1253. Baron. An. 406.
page 249.
. But first, If these Epistles be forged (which is very probable) then all
these brags and bold inferences are vain; if they be true and were writ by
Innocent, they may justly blush, that such poor stuff should come from the
Bishop of so great a See; and however it will not follow that the Roman Bishop
was the Head of the Catholic Church, because Victricius and Exuperius writ to
him for advice. For how many more and greater Bishops writ to St. Basil, St.
Augustine; yea to Isidore of Peleusium and St. Hieroin who were only Priests?
and how far do their Answers exceed those of the Pope? Yet none will be so
ridiculous to magnify the Sea of Coesarea or Hippo, or the Monasteries of
Peleusium and Bethlehem, as if they were the very Fountains of Religion, or
these Persons the Heads of the Catholic Church: I will only add, that Orosius
is noted by Baronius himself to have consulted with St. Augustine and St.
Hierom, (about matters of Faith, and greater concernment by far than these) and
not with Innocent his pretended Original Fountain Baron. An. 414. page 363.
; so that every one doubtless did not take the Pope for the sole infallible
Oracle in those days.

The third Epistle to Exuperius is liable to all the Objections against the
former: Labbe says it is patched up out of Siricius Epistle to Himerius, the
second Epistle of Celestine, and one of Leo to Theodorus Lab. col. 1254, etc.
in marg.
; and therefore probably it is forged: Or if we grant it genuine, it looks not
very favorably upon their Modern Pretense to Infallibility; for the Pope here
says, he will answer according to the measure of his understanding; and
confesses, that by Conference he added to his Knowledge; and while he was
answering others, always learned something himself Bin. page 612. Lab. col.
1254.
. The Notes also are much mistaken in arguing from two Bishops enquiring of
Pope Innocent's sense in some matters of Discipline, That all the Catholic
Church ought to keep the Decrees of the Apostolic See Notis Bin. page 613.
Lab. col. 1257.
. For there were many hundred Bishops in those and other Provinces, who never
enquired after the Bishop of Rome's customs, nor desired his advice; and it is
very certain that diverse of these pretended Decrees were not observed, no not
in France (where these two Bishops lived) for diverse Ages after they are
pretended to be sent thither. Before I leave this Epistle I must observe, that
the last Section about the Canon of Scripture, wherein all the Apocryphal Books
are reckoned up as part of the Canon Ep. 3. Innoc.. 7. Bin. p. 613. Lab. col.
1256.
, is a gross Forgery added to it 300 years after Innocent's death; for
Cresconius never saw this part of the Epistle, nor does he mention it under
this Head, though he cite the other parts of it; so that if the whole Epistle
be not forged, yet this part of it is certainly spurious, and added to it by a
later hand, as is at large demonstrated by Bishop Cosens in his History of the
Canon of Scripture, to which I refer the Reader Cous. Schol. Hist. An. 405.
page 118.
, noting only that the Council of Trent grounded their Decree about the Canon
of Scripture, not upon genuine Antiquity, but palpable Forgeries and
Corruptions.

In the following Epistles unto the twelfth, there is nothing remarkable, but
some brags of the dignity of Rome, and many pretenses to a strict observance of
the Ancient Canons, which were no where oftener broken than in that Church: Some
think they are all forged, because they want the Consuls names Bin. page 614,
etc. Lab. col. 1260, etc.
. And the twelfth Epistle may pass in the same rank, since it is dated with
false Consuls, viz. Julius the fourths time, and Palladius Bin. page 615. Lab.
col. 1264.
; but because it seems to show that the Pope took care even of Foreign
Churches, Baronius resolves to amend it of his own head, and puts in Theodosius
and Palladius, though still the number is false Baron. An. 416. number. 30. page
393.
; for Theodosius was the seventh time Consul with Palladius, not the fourth;
and had not this Epistle made for the Popes Supremacy, the Annalist would not
have taken pains to mend it.

The thirteenth Epistle, which passes in Binius for a famous testimony of
Innocent's zeal in discovering the Pelagians Bin. page 616.
, and meriting Notes, is the same with the beginning of the second Epistle of
Foelix the fourth Bin. Tom. 2. Par. 1. p. 637.
; and Labbe says it is a forgery of the counterfeit Isidore Lab. marg. col.
1265.
. The fourteenth Epistle calls Antioch a Sister Church, and from Peter's being
first there seems to confess it was the elder Sister; and both that and the
sixteenth Epistle speak of one Memoratus, which Baronius will not allow to be
the proper name of a Bishop, because indeed there was no such Bishop in that
time; so that he expounds it of the Bishop remembered, that is, of Paulinus; but
the ill luck is, that Paulinus is neither named before, nor remembered in either
of these two Epistles Bin. ut supr. Lab. col. 1256. Baron. An. 408. page 275.
. The Notes on the sixteenth Epistle mention it as a special usage of the
Bishop of Rome, not to restore any to his Communion, unless they were corrected
and amended; but this was ever the rule of all good Bishops, and of late is
less observed at Rome than in any other Church. The eighteenth Epistle
maintains a very odd Opinion, viz. That the Ordinations celebrated by Heretical
Bishops are not so valid as the Baptism conferred by them; and the Notes Bin.
page 618. Lab. col. 1270.
own that the Persons so Ordained may truly receive (as they call it) the
Sacrament of Orders, and yet neither receive the Spirit, nor Grace, no nor a
power to exercise those Orders, which seems to me a Riddle. For I cannot
apprehend how a Man can be said truly to receive an Office, and yet neither
receive Qualifications for it, not any Right to exercise it. The twenty second
Epistle cites that place of Leviticus, That a Priest shall marry a Virgin, and
affirms it as a Precept founded on Divine Authority; and he censures the
Macedonian Bishops as guilty of a breach of God's Law, because they did not
observe this Precept, which every one knows to be a piece of the abrogated
Ceremonial Law; and the Annotator cannot with all his shufling bring the Pope
off from the Heresy of pressing the Levitical Law as obligatory to Christians
Bin. page 619. Lab. col. 1272. not. 1276.
: But there is one honest passage in this Epistle which contradicts what this
Pope had often said before of the sinfulness of Priests Marriages; for here he
says, The Bond of Matrimony, which is by Gods Commandment, cannot be called
sin: However out of this Epistle (which is a very weak one, and dated only with
one of the Consuls names) the Editors feign a Council in Macedonia Bin. page
701. Lab. 1524.
and a Message sent to the Pope for confirmation of their Acts (which does not
appear at all in the Body of the Epistle). And Baronius desires the Reader to
note, How great Majesty and Authority shined in the Apostolic See, so that it
was deemed an injury to require the Popes to repeat their former Orders Baron.
^n. 414. page 365.
. Whereas if this Epistle be not forged, it is no more but a nauseous
repetition of the same Orders which he and his Predecessors had given over and
over; and the frequent harping upon the same string, in all the Decretal
Epistles, especially as to the Marriage of the Clergy, shows how little Majesty
or Authority shined in the Popes, since all the Countries to which they sent
their Orders, so generally despised them, that every Pope for diverse Ages was
still urging this matter without that effect which they desired. The twenty
third Epistle was writ to some Synod or other, they know not whether at Toledo
or Toulouse, as we noted before Bin. page 621. Lab. col. 1277.
. And the Jesuit Sirmondus in Labbe, by elaborate conjectures, and large
additions (probably of his own inventing) had put it out more full, and adorned
it with Notes Lab. col. 1279.
, which pains the impartial Reader will think it does not deserve. The twenty
fourth Epistle is dear to the Editors and Baronius, because the Pope therein is
his own witness, that all Matters ought to be referred to his Apostolical See,
and that the Africans application to him was a due Veneration, since all
Episcopal Authority was derived from him Bin. page 621. Lab. col. 1283.
. It Is true, St. Augustine does mention a Message sent to Innocent out of
Africa; but he adds that, he writ back according to what was just and becoming
a Bishop of an Apostolical See Aug. Bonif. ep. 106.
. But as to this Epistle, besides the hectoring language in the Preface, there
is neither Style nor Arguments but what are despicable; and Erasmus did long
since justly say, In this Epistle, there is neither Language nor Sense becoming
so great a Prelate Not. Marg. in Ep. 91. inter Ep. Aug. edit. Erasm. p. 86.
; so that probably the whole may be a Fiction of some Roman Sycophant, which is
the more likely, because Labbe owns that one of the Consuls names is wrong,
that is, Junius is put for Palladius Lab. col. 1287.
: Erasmus adds, that the twenty fifth Epistle is of the same grain with the
former Not. marg. in 93 ep. inter ep. Aug. edit. Erasm. p. 88.
, the Style is no better, and the Matter of the same kind; for he brags that
whenever Matters of Faith are examined, application must be made to the
Apostollcal Fountain. And yet this Pope, as the Notes confess, held the
Eucharist ought to be given to Infants, yea that it was necessary for them Bin.
page 624. Lab. col. 1289.
, that is (I suppose) for their Salvation: Now the Council of Trent has
determined otherwise, so that the Romanists must grant, this Pope erred even in
defining things necessary to Salvation; unless they will allow the whole
Epistle forged by some later hand, who (whatever Binius say to the contrary)
has dated it with the Consuls of the year after Innocent's death, according to
the best Chronologers. The twenty sixth Epistle (as the Notes confess) was writ
to Aurelius, Augustine and three more eminent Bishops of Africa, by Pope
Innocent, to clear himself from the suspicion of being a Favourer and Protector
of the Pelagian Heresy Bin. not. page 625. Lab. col. 1292.
; and by computation also this proves the very year in which he died (according
to most accounts). Now if in those days it had been believed (as it is now at
Rome) that the Pope had been Infallible, and could not err in Matters of Faith,
no Man durst have raised this suspicion, nor would any have regarded it; and
Innocent's best way of vindication had been only to have told them he was Pope
and sat in the Holy Infallible Chair; but now his laboring to clear himself
by an Epistle, shows it was possible he might err. As to the Epistle it self,
Erasmus says, Innocent answers after his fashion, being fierce rather than
learned, and more ready to condemn than instruct Not. Erasm. in ep. 96. inter
ep. August. page 90.
; and whosoever reads it will find that to be a true Character of this Epistle:
To these is subjoined a Letter of St. Chrysostom's to Innocent, in Latin only
in Binius Bin. p. 625.
, but in both Greek and Latin in Labbe Lab. col. 1291.
. The Phrase of which is so polite, the Matter so pious and solid, that Gold
does not excel Lead, more than this genuine piece of the Golden-mouthed Father
does all the former Epistles of the Pope, who (if he writ those Decretals) was
far more below St. Chrysostom in Learning than he pretended to be above him in
Dignity: I confess the Editors would persuade us to think this Epistle was writ
only to Innocent, and to him it is superscribed in Savil's Greek Edition, thus,
To innocent Bishop of Rome Chrysostom. Tom. 7. page 154. edit. Sar.
; but the Roman Parasites have added to this Title, To my most reverend and
pious Lord; but this has been lately invented, for [Domino meo] is not in the
Title in Baronius Baron. An. 402. page 192.
. And the Epistle it self seems plainly to have been written to many; for
toward the end, he says, Therefore my most venerable Lords, since you see
these things are thus, use your utmost study and diligence to repress this
injustice that is broke into the Church Bin. page 626. col. 2. Lab. col. 1300.
; and the Phrase does every where suppose it was writ to diverse Western
Bishops; and Baronius in the end of the Epistle has these words, We have writ
this also to Venerius Bishop of Milan, and to Chromatius Bishop of Aquileia
Baron. An. 404. page 195.
; Quibus verbis Romans Episcopi primatum erigit, iisdem Venerij and Chromatij
primatum erexisset Lannoy ep. 3. p. 15.
: so that since St. Chrysostom writ to all the eminent Bishops of Italy as well
as to the Pope, it is unjustly done of Baronius, to say, That Chrysostom fled
to his only refuge, viz. to the Roman Church, which he knew to be above all
other Churches, and to have power to correct the ill-deeds of others Id. ibid.
page 192.
. There is one thing more remarkable in this Epistle, St. Chrysostom tells the
Western Bishops, that being oppressed by Theophilus and his party, he appealed
(not to the Pope, but) to a Synod; yea, Innocent himself says, There was great
need to have a Synod called for this cause of St. Chrysostoms Innoc. ep. 29.
Bin. page 627. Lab. col. 1304.
. So that neither did St. Chrysostom appeal to the Roman Church alone, nor
durst Innocent take upon him to judge in this matter. As for those two Epistles
of Innocent's, one to Chrysostom, and another to the Clergy of Constantinople
(which are certainly genuine, as being preserved in Sozomen Sozom. lib. 8. cap.
26. page 471, etc.
and not derived from the Roman Mint); These two Epistles (I say) are in an
humble Style, and so well written Bin. page 627. Lab. col. 1301.
that they make all the former Decretals which come from Rome, justly to be
suspected as forged and spurious. The second Epistle of Chrysostom's which
follows these two, seems also to have been written to other Bishops as well as
Innocent, for it runs generally in the plural number; but they who would have
us believe the Pope alone did all the business of the Church, have falsified
one place in it, where St. Chrysostom says, ye have showed your selves loving
Fathers toward us: There the Latin is in Binius in the singular, Paternam ergo
nos benevolentiam declarasti Bin. page 627. col. 20. F.
. But Labbe thought fit to mend this corruption, and reads it in the plural,
declarastis, ye have declared Lab. col. 1305.
. But the grossest Forgery of all in this cause of St. Chrysostom are the
Letters that are pretended to pars between Innocent and the Emperor Arcadius,
wherein first Innocent excommunicates Arcadius, and Eudoxia the Empress, for
their injustice to St. Chrysostom Innoc. ep. 30. Bin. page 628. Lab. col. 1308.
. And then the Emperor writes first one submissive Letter Bim. ib. Lab. col.
1309.
to desire him to absolve them, to which the Pope consents Lab. solus ibid.
; yet after all this, Arcadius does again write another Letter to excuse
himself and tells the Pope, Eudoxia was very sick upon the grief for her fault
Lab. col. 1313. Baron. An. 407. page 259.
: And all these Letters are said to be writ after St. Chrysostom was dead. But
that which discovers the cheat is, that all the ancient Historians do with one
consent agree that Eudoxia the Empress was dead three years before St.
Chrysostom, which is attosted by Socrates, Sozomen and Marcellinus Socrat. lib.
6. cap. 19, 20, 21. Sozom. lib. 8. cap. 27, 28. Marcell. Chron. page 13.
; and the same is affirmed by learned Modern Authors Vid. Ap. Coci censuram.
page 113.
. The first who affirmed the contrary was Georgius Alexandrinus, a fabulus
Writer, who lived above 300 years after this time, and he was followed by
Nicephorus, Glycer and Gonnadius Baron. An. 404. page 220.
, which are all the Authorities Baronius can produce for these Forged Epistles;
only he countenances them, true or false, because this is an instance of a Pope
who excommunicated an Emperor, and serves them for a good proof that the Roman
Bishop is above the greatest Princes: But Labbe spoils the Argument by noting
the Margen, that Eudoxia died before St. Chrysostom Lab. marg. col. 1308.
, and so these Letters are notorious Forgeries. Before I leave this matter I
must observe that Baronius his great design was to represent Pope Innocent as
the chief, yea and almost sole Instrument in vindicating the injuries done to
St. Chrysostom, and therefore he tells us, That Innocent would not communicate
with the Bishops of the East, unless they would put his name into the Tables;
and he cites Theodores to prove this; but Theodoret's very words are, That the
western Bishops would not communicate with them, but on that condition Baron.
An. 407. page 258.
. So when the Adversaries of St. Chrysostom (hearing that complaints of their
proceedings were made among others to the Pope) sent some to give an account of
what they had done, Baronius (without any proof) dreams of a sentence passed by
Innocent to null what they had done Idem. An. 404. page 207.
; whereas it appears the same year, that Pope Innocent writ very frientlly to
Theophilus the chief Agent in Chrysostom's condemnation, and held communion
with him long after that unjust Fact Ibid. page 196.
; so that there is no reason to brag of this Pope, as being the Judge and
Patron of that glorious Confessor Baron. An. 406. page 144.
. who alas, died in his exile, and (excepting good wishes) had no benefit by
the Popes kindness: Yea, he was so far from being Judge, that he referred this
Cause of St. Chrysostom's to the Judgment of a Synod Baron. An. 404. page 196.
, as Baronius himself afterward declares: So Theophilus of Alexandria also
never did submit the Cause to Innocent as Baronius pretends Id. ibid. page 192.
, nor did he take him for the supreme Judge in it; but after all, retained his
obstinacy to his death: So that if we do allow Pope Innocent to be right in his
Judgment, yet he either had little power or small courage to serve this great
and good Man; and what he did for him was in conjunction with other Bishops,
not by his single Authority. Innocent's 31st. Epistle is directed to Theophilus
(St. Chrysostom's mortal Enemy) the Patriach of Alexandria, wherein the Pope
calls him Brother, and says he held Communion both with him and with
Chrysostom also, and wishes him to refer the Cause to a Synod, and there let it
be tried according to the Nicene Canons Bin. page 628. Lab. col. 1311.
. Now Baronius from hence notes, that the Communion of the Roman Church was
highly valued, and that all were to hold Communion with those who were in
Communion with Rome, and therefore they were to stick to the Communion of
Chrysostom Baron. An. 404. p. 196. ut supr.
: But the very words of the Epistle confute this Gloss; for such as followed
the Popes example at that time, were to communicate both with Chrysostom and
Theophilus And I must observe that Innocent's advising Theophilus to come to a
Synod and let this Cause be tried there according to the Nicene Canons; this (I
say) shows, That the Pope did not then pretend to find any thing in the Nicene
Canons, for referring Causes by appeal to Rome; but his two next Successors (as
shall be showed presently) forged such Canons soon after, and pretended they
were made at Nice. After this follows a rescript of Honorius, pretended to be
writ to his Brother Arcadius Bin. page 628. Lab. col. 1311.
; wherein that Emperor says, Chrysostom's was a cause concerning the Bishops,
which ought to have been determined in a General Council, and when either Party
had sent Legates to the Bishop of Rome and those of Italy, a final Sentence was
to be expected from the Authority of them all: But the Editors have forged a
Title to this Letter, wherein they say, Episcopal Causes are to be tried by a
Council of Bishops, and to be examined and determined by the Popes Authority:
Where we see the forged Title expressly contradicts the Letter it self; for that
refers these Causes to a Council in the East with the consent of all the
Bishops of Italy as well as the Pope; but this Title is designed to persuade
us, that the Popes Authority was finally to determine all matters of this kind.
The 32th 33th and 34th Epistles of Innocent have nothing in them worth noting,
and if they be genuine, their mean Style and many Incongruities are no credit
to the Author Bin. page 629. Lab. col. 1315.
.

After these Epistles Labbe publishes certain Canons sent from Rome to the
Gallican Church, by some Pope or other; and because by Sirmondus his guess, it
was Innocent, they are placed here Lab. col. 1316, ad 1322.
; there is nothing remarkable in them, but the zeal of the Collector of these
Canons to persuade the French to follow the peculiar Customs of Rome.

. 3. The Councils which the Editors place next, and with the Title of Councils
under Innocent, were called indeed in his time, but neither by his Authority,
nor so much as by his Advice: The first Council of Milevis, An. Dom. 402.
said to be under Innocent, was (as the Notes confess) held under the Primacy
of Xantippus Bin. page 630. Lab. col. 1323.
, and was held so soon after Anastasius his death, that probably these African
Fathers had not yet heard of Innocent's Election, nor do the Acts of it mention
any Pope: The Council An. Dom. 403.
at the Oak, wherein Chrysostom was deposed, was called by, and held under
Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, wherein they proceeded to deprive an Eminent
Patriarch without the knowledge or consent of the Pope; and had not the
Articles been false and the Sentence unjust, it had never been revoked barely
for wanting Innocent's approbation Bin. page 631.
. Labbe prints the Acts of this Synod which Binius had omitted Lab. col. 1334.
. About this time were frequent Synods held in Africa; the Years and Order of
which being uncertain, the Editors have placed the Acts of them altogether Bin.
page 744. Lab. col. 1104.
; and here we have only some Notes with the bare Titles: On which we will make
some few remarks: First, they are all here said to be held under Innocent, but
the Acts themselves entitle them to be held in such a year of the Emperor.
Secondly, The Notes on the First African Council tell us of Legates sent to the
Pope for obtaining some indulgence to the Donatists; which Legates being
returned, they related in this Council, what they had obtained from Anastasius
Bin. page 631. col. 2. Lab. col. 1332.
. Now this would make any one, who does not consult the Acts themselves
(printed on purpose in Pages far off) to think, the Pope was solely concerned
in this matter, which is an invention of Baronius Baron. An. 403. page 181. and
An. 405. page 234.
. But if we look back into the former Council, we shall find these African
Legates were sent in general to the parts beyond the Seas, and to Venerius
Bishop of Milan as well as to Anastasius Bishop of Rome Bin. page 745. col. 1.
Lab. col. 1081, etc.
. And Baronius himself in the year when these Legates were first sent, says,
they were to go first to Rome, and also to other transmarine Bishops Baron. An.
401. page 129.
; and again, Letters being sent to Anastasius and other Bishops of Italy Ibid.
page 130.
. Now the African Fathers applying to all these Bishops as well as to the Pope,
declares they did not look on him as sufficient alone to determine their
Matters: Besides, they did not send to these Western Bishops to obtain
indulgence (as the Notes out of Baronius falsely pretend); For they had decreed
before to indulge them, only desired the Western Bishops for the more credit,
to give their Suffrages to this Fact; for so it would appear not to be only
their single Opinion. The Second African Council was not under An. Dom. 404.
Innocent, as the Title pretends Bin. page 631. Lab. col. 1332.
, but under Aurelius, as may be seen by the Acts; and after the message from
the Italian Bishops, added to their own Authority, would not work on the
obstinacy of the Donatists, they decree to send Legates to the Emperor Honorius
to desire him to suppress them, ordering these Legates to carry Letters of
Communion to the Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops of those parts, and to
receive other Letters of Communion from them in Italy to testify they An. Dom.
407.
were Catholics: But a little after the Notes, turn this into receiving
Letters of Communion only from the Pope Council. Afric. 4. Bin. page 632. col. 2.
Lab. col. 1233.
, and infer from thence, that none were Catholics but such as were in
Communion with the Bishop of Rome: Whereas they should have added, and with
other Bishops of those parts; and then it had appeared, that this was no
peculiar privilege of any one See, but related to all Sees which then were
filled with Catholic Bishops. I shall note only, that in these Notes the
Emperor is styled The Lord of the General Council Bin. and Lab. ibid.
, which Title the Roman Parasites of late have robbed him of, and given it to
the Popes.

The eighth Council of Africa petitions the Emperor An. Dom. 410.
Honorius to revoke that Edict, whereby he had granted liberty of Conscience to
the Donatists; and the Notes out of Baronius make it so meritorious a thing to
revoke this scandalous and mischievous Indulgence, that this made Honorius so
blessed as to have Rome quitted by Alaricus three days after he had taken it
Bin. page 633. Lab. col. 1335.
; but our English Romanists, when an Indulgence served their ends, counted it
meritorious in that Prince who granted the Sects such an Indulgence here, for
we must note that Things are good or evil just as they serve their interest, or
disserve it.

The Synod of Ptolemais in Egypt Bin: and Lab. ibid.
, whereby Andronicus, An. Dom. 411.
a Tyrannical Officer, was excommunicated; is strangely magnified by Baronius,
saying, that Synesius Bishop of Ptolemais, knew that when he was made a Bishop,
he was elected by God to give Laws to Princes: And a little after he tells us,
He deposed Andronicus from his Tribunal; adding, that this shows how great the
Power of Bishops was, even to the deposing of evil Governors Baron. An. 311.
page 328, 329.
. But after all, there is no more of this true, but only that Synesius gives
notice to his neighbor Churches by circular Letters that he had excommunicated
Andronicus, who seems to have been a Military Officer in a little Egyptian
Town, and was guilty of most horrid Cruelties and notorious Crimes Synes. ep.
57, 58.
: But what is this to Kings and Princes? And the words which he cites out of
Synesius 89th Epistle, which falsely translates, we have put him down from his
Tribunal, are these, (...), etc. We have here taken him off from the Seat of
Mourners; that is, Synesius tells Theophilus his Patriarch and Superior, that
though he had justly put Andronicus among the Penitents, yet now upon his
sorrow and repentance, they had there absolved him and taken him out of that
sad station where the Penitents were wont to stand; and if Theophilus approved
of this mercy showed Andronicus, he should hope God might yet forgive him Vid.
Causab. pref. ad exerc. in Baron. and lege ep. 89. Synes. ap. Baron. ibid. page
329.
. Now was not the Cardinal hard put to it for an instance of a Bishops deposing
a King, when he is forced to falsify his Author, and use the words which
express a restoration to the Communion of the Church, to prove a deposing from
a Throne? It seems he could not or would not distinguish a Captain or petty
Magistrate from a King; nor a Stool of Repentance from a Princes Throne: This
it is to serve a Cause.

About this time was held that famous Conference at Carthage between the
Catholics and the Donatists. Seven Bishops of each side being chosen to
dispute before Marcellinus a Count sent by the Emperor to hear this Cause Bin.
a page 634, ad 698. Lab. a col. 1336, ad 1506.
. Now Baronius tells us that this Marcellinus was not called simply a Judge,
but had the Title of Cognitor, because it was not allowed to a Layman to act
as a Judge in Ecclesiastical Matters Baron. An. 411. page 318.
. But Cognitor is often used by the best Authors for a Judge, and cognoscere
Causam, is, to hear a Cause; Dies Cognitionis, is, the day of Trial: And which
is more, the Emperors Edict calls him by the title of Judex; Our will is, you
shall sit in that Disputation in the principal place, as Judge Inter Gesta Bin.
page 647. Lab. col. 1346.
; and Baronius in the very page before cites St. Augustine speaking of
Marcellinus by this Character, ipse Judex Baron. ut supr. page 317, and page
322.
. And as he moderated in the Disputation, so in the Conclusion he pronounces
the Sentence, and the Emperor confirms it Bin. page 698. and Lab. col. 1506.
; which if the Pope had done in Person, or by his Legate, to be sure that had
been ground enough to prove him the Universal and Infallible Judge in all
Causes. This is certain, Honorius did judge in this Cause by his Legate
Marcellinus, and Baronius (who use to quarrel at other Emperors for meddling in
these Cases) tells us God rewarded him for the pains he took about settling the
True Religion Baron. An. 411. page 322.
. But as to the Pope he was not concerned in this Famous Dispute; and which is
very remarkable, though the Main Dispute be about the Catholic Church, and the
Orthodox allege the Churches beyond the Seas as being in Communion with them,
and so prove them Catholics; yet they do not once name the Roman Church apart,
as if communicating with that Church or its Bishop were any special evidence of
their being Catholics: Indeed they name Innocent once, but give him no other
title but Bishop of Rome: Whereas if these African Fathers had believed the
Pope to be the Supreme Head of the Catholic Church, and that all of his
Communion, and only such were Catholics, this Dispute had been soon ended, and
they had nothing to prove to the Donatists, but their Communion with Pope
Innocent. And I remember Baronius argues that Caecilianus, Bishop of Carthage,
was a Catholic, because he had Communicatory Letters from the Church of Rome;
but the place he cites to prove it out of St. Augustine is this, When he (that
is, Caecilianus) saw himself in Communion with the Roman Church, (in which the
eminence of an Apostolical See always flourished) and with other Countries from
whence the Gospel came to Africa, etc. Aug. ep. 162. ap. Baron. An. 412. page
336.
. By which it is plain, that it was Communion with other Churches as well as
Rome which proved Caecilianus a Catholic: And I know not where Baronius found
another passage, which he affirms was proved in this Conference, viz. That the
first Head of the Church was demonstrated by the succession of the Roman
Bishops to be in Peter's Chair Baron. An. 411. page 320.
: For there is not one word to this purpose in that Conference which is printed
by the Editors here: So that till better Authority be produced, this must stand
for a devisable of the Annalists.

Nothing after this occurs which is remarkable, till An. Dom. 415.
the Council at Lidda or Diospolis in Palestina, wherein Pelagius imposed upon
fourteen Bishops a pretended recantation of his Heretical Opinions, and was by
them absolved Bin. page 701. Lab. col. 15^9.
. Binius his Title of this Synod is, that it was under Innocent: But Labbe
(fearing this might imply the Popes consent to a Heretics absolution) has
struck that out. However we have Baronius his word for it, that no Letters were
written to the Pope from this Synod Baron. An. 416. page 388.
, only some Laymen brought him the Acts of it. And he, Good Man (not so
cunning at finding out Heretics as the African Bishops) confesses he could
neither approve nor blame the Judgment of these Bishops of Palestina Vid.
Innoc. ep. 26. and Bin. not. p. 702. Lab. col. 1532.
. And Pelagius himself, though he could not finally deceive the Roman Church,
yet he hoped he might gain the Pope to his party, and did attempt it; yea it is
very probable he had succeeded, if St. Augustine and other African Fathers had
not instructed the Pope, and made him understand the danger of this Heresy:
And (we have noted before) that Innocent's carriage in this matter rendered him
suspected to be a favourer of Pelagius Baron. An. 416. page 388.
; upon which the Africans (not trusting to his Infallibility) writ very plainly
to him: And after they had condemned Pelagius and Celestius in a Council of
thirty seven Bishops at Carthage, they writ another brisk Synodical Epistle to
the Pope, telling him, that they intimated to him what they had done, that the
Authority of the Apostolical Seat might be added to their Decree, because his
Eminent Place gave more weight to his Doctrine; and if he thought Pelagius was
justly absolved, yet his Errors and Impieties ought to be Anathematized by the
Authority of the Apostolical See Council. Carthag. Bin. page 702, etc. Lab. col.
1533.
. Now the reason of this Letter, was not so much for the confirmation of their
Acts (as the Notes pretend) upon any single Privilege believed to be in the
Pope, as their Supreme Head; because they call him by the Title of their
Brother, both in the Title and the Letter; but because the Pelagians had
reported he was their Friend, and a favourer of their Opinions; which Report
did very much mischief because of the Eminence of his See, and therefore it
concerned both the Pope for his own vindication, and them also, that he should
wipe off this accusation: And it appears both by St. Augustine and Prosper,
that at last Innocent did condemn this Heresy; but this Synodical Epistle from
Carthage, dated An. 416. shows that he had not condemned it before the last
year of his life; for he died (according to Baronius) in July An. 417. So hard
a thing was it for the African Fathers to get a pretended Infallible Judge to
understand and censure a notorious Heresy. I might now leave this Head, but
that I must first observe the confidence of Baronius, who from one word in a
verse of Prosper's, will needs have Celestius a Disciple of Pelagius, to have
been first condemned at Rome, after the ancient manner, that a new Heresy
should be first Examined and Condemned by the first Seat Baron. An. 412. page
340.
. But when he should make this out, he owns that Pelagius and Celestius indeed
were first condemned in Africa, but he tells us their Heresies were condemned
long before at Rome in the person of Jovinian: But if it were true that
Jovinian had held all the Heresies of Pelagius (which is most false) then we
must attribute no great sagacity to Innocent as to condemning Heresies, because
it is plain he did not know these were the same Heresies that Jovinian had held,
nor could he be brought to censure them, till above four year after.

The Second Council of Milevis consisted of sixty Bishops, An. Dom. 416.
the Title is, under Pope Innocent Bin. page 704. Lab. col. 1537.
. But Baronius had told us before, that the same Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage,
presided in the former Council of Milevis, and in this also Baron: An. 402.
page 164.
; so that neither of them were under any Pope: The 22d Canon of this Council
says, that he who thinks to appeal to a Tribunal beyond the Sea, shall not be
received into Communion by any in Africa Bin. page 705. Lab. col. 1543.
: Which is a clear prohibition of appeals to Rome; and therefore Gratian either
found or made this notorious addition to it, unless they appeal to the Sea of
Rome Not. Bin. page 710. Lab. col. 1554.
, which is so gross a Forgery that Binius rejects it, and out of Bellarmin
expounds this passage only, of prohibiting the inferior Clergy, Priests and
Deacons, etc. to appeal beyond the Seas, i. e. to Rome; but he supposes that
Bishops in Africa still had liberty of appealing thither according to the 17th
Canon of Sardica: But to confute this false Gloss, let it be noted, That these
African Fathers profess in a following Council, that they had never heard of
any such Canon, or of this Sardican Synod, and so it is not likely they should
be guided by it: Again, about ten years before upon a complaint to Innocent of
some Bishops, who being censured in Africa, ran to Rome with Complaints, this
very Pope had written, that Bishops should not lightly go to the Parts beyond
the Seas: And the Council in Africa confirmed that passage of the Popes Letter
Bin. page 752. Lab. col. 1112.
. And since this would not restrain some Bishops here in this second Milevitan
Council, they make a Decree, That Bishops Causes should be determined by
Bishops, either such as the Primate (of Africa) should appoint, or such as the
Parties chose by his consent Bin. page 705. Lab. col. 1542.
: And then they add this 22d Canon to confine all appeals of the inferior
Clergy also to an African Synod, or to their own Primate; and then add this
Clause recited before, that those who appeal beyond the Seas, shall not be
received to Communion by any in Africa: which certainly is the penalty relating
to both Canons; because in their Letter a few years after written to Pope
Celestine, they declare it is contrary to the Nicene Canons for the Pope to
receive any into Communion by Appeal, who have been censured in their own
Province, especially Bishops, adding, That his Holiness should (as became him)
also forbid the wicked refuges of Priests and the lower Clergy, etc. That is,
not only the Appeals of Bishops, but of Priests also Epist. ad Celest. ap Bin.
page 757. Lab. col. 1675.
, which makes it as clear as the Sun, that these Fathers at Milevis absolutely
forbad all Appeals to Rome. And they had great reason so to do, not only
because it was their right to judge finally all Causes in their own Province:
But because some Popes about this time had encouraged Heretics and notorious
wicked Men, both Priests and Bishops who had fled from the just Censures of
their own Church, and found a Sanctuary and Shelter at Rome: But of this more
hereafter. This second Council of Milevis writ also to Pope Innocent about the
Pelagian Heresy, to quicken him in providing some Remedies to prevent the
spreading of that Infection, supposing the eminency of his place would add much
weight to his Censures, if he would heartily appear against these Doctrines
Bin. page 706. Lab. col. 1546.
. At the same time Aurelius and St. Augustine with three other eminent Bishops
there, writ a private Letter to their Lord and Brother (as they call him) Pope
Innocent, on the same subject Bin. page 707. Lab. col. 1546.
; in which they deal very plainly with him, and give the reason why they writ
so many Letters to him against this Heresy, because they had heard that in
Rome (where the Heretic lived long) there were many who favored him on diverse
grounds; some, because they say that you have been persuaded such things were
true; but more because they do not think he holds those Opinions. And doubtless
it was this Report which rouzed up the Pope at last to condemn the Pelagians,
as may appear by our Notes upon his 26th Epistle, which is in Answer to this
Epistle of the five Bishops: But that Answer, as also the Answers to the two
Councils Letters were not till January An. 417. as Baronius and Binius
themselves compute Bin. page 703. in not. ad Council. Carthag. Lab. col. 1536.
, which was but six Months before Innocent's death; so long did this Pope
remain under the suspicion of being a favourer of Pelagianism.

. 4. Zosimus succeeded Innocent in his Chair, and in An. Dom. 417.
his partial affection for the Pelagians; his life as it is writ in the
Pontifical, has nothing in it that is remarkable Bin. page 710. Lab. col. 1554.
, for his time was very short, but one Year, two Months and eleven Days
according to the Pontifical, or One Year, four Months and seven Days as Binius
in his Notes; though Labbe correct both him and Baronius, and says it was nine
Months and nine Days above a year that he sat; and he follows Prosper (who then
lived) in this Account, and therefore it is the most certain. As to his Acts,
Baronius prepares his Reader for his entrance, by telling us out of the
Pontifical and Gennadius, That Innocent made a Decree for the Universal Church
against the Pelagians; and Zosimus afterward promulged it Baron. An. 417. page
396.
. But we shall see presently that he was very slow in publishing any Censures
against these Heretics: For though both Baronius and Binius would color over
the matter, yet Labbe very honestly confesses, that Pope Zosimus was deceived
by the Craft of Celestius, and he proves it out of St. Augustine Lab. not. col.
1560.
; and Marius Mercator a Writer of that very time (whose admonition is printed
in Labbe) owns that Zosimus was imposed on by this Heretic, till the African
Fathers had better informed him in these matters Lab. col. 1513. scil. in Marij
Merc. commonitorio. Vide item not. Sirmond. in Ap. Lab. col. 1815.
; so that the Church was rarely well provided of an Infallible Head in the mean
time, who was only zealous to affect his Primacy, but had not sense enough to
judge of Heresy till he was informed of it from better Divines.

This Pope is said to have writ thirteen Epistles; The first by the want of a
good Style and the barrenness of the Matter, may probably enough be genuine
Bin. page 711. Lab. col. 1556.
, having nothing worthy of note in it, except some impertinent brags of the
Authority of his See. The second Epistle is a declaration of some of the Roman
Clergy excommunicated, who had fled to Ravenna to complain of the Pope (a).
Baronius and the Notes merely (r) Bin. ibid. Lab. col. 1557.
guess these to be favorers of Pelagius; but it seems more probable that they
were Catholics who disliked the Popes proceedings while he favored Celestius,
which it is certain he did, till the year 418. was well advanced (in which this
Epistle is dated,) for he writ his fourth Epistle for those Heretics, the 11th
of the Kalends of October Bin. page 714. Lab. col. 1560.
, doubtless in the year after his third Epistle, which is dated An. 417. As to
that third Epistle, Zosimus declares, that upon a solemn and judicial
examination of Celestius (the Scholar of Pelagius) he found him clear of the
Heresies with which he was charged in Africa, and cites his Accusers to come to
Rome within two Months, or he should be entirely restored to Communion Bin.
page 712. Lab. col. 1558.
. At the same rate he talks in the fourth Epistle, pleading the Cause of both
Pelagius and Celestius, declaring them innocent, and representing Heroes and
Lazarus (two holy Bishops of France) as ill Men and false Accusers; railing at
Timasius and Jacobus, who had been converted from this Heresy by St. Augustine,
as mere Calumniators, boasting all along that the Cause was by appeal referred
to him, and magnifying the Authority of his Apostolical Seat Bin. page 713.
Lab. col. 1561.
. With this Epistle also he sent into Africa Pelagius his Confession of Faith,
which Zosimus took to be very Orthodox, and doubted not but the African Fathers
would think his Faith to be unblameable; whereas in that whole Confession,
there is not one clear acknowledgment of the absolute necessity of God's Grace,
or of the necessity of Infant Baptism to wash away Original Sin, which were the
Main Errors that Pelagius was charged with Bin. page 714. Lab. col. 1563.
: So that we see a Pope, an Infallible Judge, either out of Ignorance or evil
Principles, deceived both in Matters of Faith and of Fact, mistaking Heresy
for Truth, condemning the Innocent and Orthodox, and absolving the most
notorious Heretics. Now let us enquire how Baronius and Binius bring him off:
They say first, that Zosimus could not, if he would reject this Confession of
Faith, because they said, if they had erred, they desired Zosimus to correct
whatever he thought to be wrong Notis ad ep. 3.
: And that they were ready in all things of Faith to believe as the Pope
believed Not. ad cp. 4. Baron. An. 417. page 405, 406, etc.
. Now this is no manner of Excuse, but rather an Aggravation, that after so
fair an offer the Pope did not rectify their Errors; this shows either that he
did not understand the Question, or that he was as much a Heretic as they,
especially since he not only passed over their Errors, but commends them and
pleads their Cause: Yea, Baronius himself says, this Confession contained a
manifest Error, and bad things in it far from the Catholic Faith Baron. An.
418. page 410.
; yet still the Pope could not or would not see these Errors in matters of
Faith; so that here was a manifest failure in their pretended Infallibility, at
a time when there was great need of it, to condemn a dangerous Heresy, which
the Pope was so unacquainted with, that in his Third Epistle he calls these
Disputes Ensuaring Questions, and Foolish Contentions, which rather destroyed
than edified: I further add, that in Pelagius his Confession of Faith, which he
pretended to be the Faith of the Roman Church; the Holy Ghost is said only to
proceed from the Father, the Filioque is not added; and though the Popes of
later times have condemned that omission as Heresy in the Greeks, Zosimus here
passes by that also, and takes all for sound Doctrine.

Secondly, As to matter of Fact, Orosius and the African Fathers, believed
Heroes and Lazarus to be holy Bishops, and Orthodox Men; and Prosper (who might
know them personally) testifies as much of Heroes Not. Bin. ad cp. 3.
: But Baronius and Binius say Celestius had belied them to Zosimus, and so
excuse the Pope from blame: But if Celestius did raise these Scandals, Zosimus
made them his own by believing and publishing them; and he who took upon him so
much Authority as to judge a Cause, should not have espoused one of the Parties
so far, as to take all they said of their Adversaries to be true: Yet thus this
Pope dealt with Timasius and Jacobus also. Like to this was his Judgment about
Patroclus Bishop of Arles, and the Privileges of that See; For (as Prosper
informs us) Heroes, an holy Man, Scholar of St. Martin, though free from all
Crimes, was expelled out of his Bishopric by the People, and Patroclus put in
his place ibid. An. 422. page 475.
, whom Baronius calls an Usurper Baron. An. 412. page 345.
: And when afterward he was slain, he says, it was God's just judgment upon
him to avenge his wickedness, who had invaded a worthy Man's See, and also
disturbed the rights of his Neighbor Bishops Id. An. 426. page 500.
. But Zosimus in his fifth Epistle, makes him the Primate of all those parts of
France, on pretense that Trophimus was sent from Rome, and was the first Bishop
there, and that it was his ancient right; and allows none to come from thence
to Rome without Letters dimissory from this Patroclus Bin. page 715. Lab. col.
1567.
. And in the 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th Epistles, he still advances this ill Man,
condemning Proculus Bishop of Marseilles, and all others who opposed Patroclus
in his most unjust usurpations and encroachments: Yet Binius in his Notes
confesses, that both his next Successors, Boniface and Celestine did judge
otherwise Notis ad ep. 5.
; that is, they took away this Primacy from Patroclus, and censured him for his
evil doings, giving the Privileges to Hilary Bishop of Narbon, to whom of
right they belonged Bonif. ep. 3. page 721.
: So that here is Pope against Pope, and Decretal against Decretal; so odly do
Causes go at Rome: But by Zosimus his 11th and 12th Epistles it does appear,
that the French Bishops despised the Popes Decrees, and that Proculus went on
in exercising his Primacy for all his being prohibited Bin. page 717. Lab. col.
1573.
, which looks not favorably on the Roman Supremacy. As ill fortune had Pope
Zosimus (who was always on the wrong side) in admitting the Appeal of Apiarius,
an African Priest, who was excommunicated by Urban his own Bishop for most
horrid Crimes, which he afterward confessed in an open Council (as we shall
shortly show;) yet Zosimus thinking it for the honor of his See to have
Appeals made to it from Foreign Parts, admits this wicked Wretch to Communion,
commands the African Synod to receive him, and threatens Urban with an
excommunication if he did not retract his Sentence: But the African Fathers for
all this went on to judge Apiarius, as will be seen afterward; for Zosimus
died before this Cause was ended.

I have deferred the consideration of Zosimus his 10th An. Dom. 418.
Epistle to the last place, because it was the last he writ (that is now
extant) in the Cause of Celestius, and because it was writ to the Council of
Carthage now assembled: For the Pope after he had admitted Heretics and evil
Men to appeal to Rome, was resolved to justify the Fact, and sent two Bishops,
Faustinus and Potentinus, and two Priests, Philip and Asellus, his Legates into
Africa, with false Copies of the Nicene Canons to prove he ought to be appealed
to in all Causes from all Provinces; and probably by them (or some little time
before) he sent this Tenth Epistle Bin. page 717. Lab. col. 1572.
, wherein he brags, that Tradition and the Canons had given such great
Authority to the Apostolical Seat, that none might presume to question its
Decrees; with a great deal of such stuff about Christ's giving Peter the power
to bind and loose, and the Canons giving this to his Successor, who was to have
the care of all Churches; and that since he held this place, none might examine
a Cause which he had determined, etc. Yet out of respect to the Africans (he
says) he had done nothing in the Cause of Celestius, till they had deliberated
about it, and that this Cause was just in the same state as it lately was. I
relate this more at large, because this unjust and ambitious Claim was the
occasion of a famous Controversy that lasted many years after the death of
Zosimus: But as to the Letter, the impertinency of it is very obvious; for
though he assume this Authority, it is plain, that St. Cyprian of old, and the
African Fathers afterward, did not think it any presumption to confute the
Decrees of Popes, and to examine Causes which had been ill judged at Rome. And
in the Cause of Celestius, whom Zosimus would not yet be induced to condemn;
the Council of Carthage (as Prosper relates) tell the Pope, That they had
resolved to confirm Pope Innocent' s Sentence against him, till he did openly
confess the necessity of Grace Baron. An. 418. page 409.
: And they went on with the judgment against Apiarius, for all his Appeal to
Rome, and his being absolved there; so that it is impudently done of the Roman
Writers to go about to prove the Supremacy from a Popes evidence in his own
Cause; yea, from a Claim which was denied and despised at the same time that it
was made. Another note I make on this Epistle is, that it is dated but the 12th
of the Ka. of April, and Zosimus died in January following; so that it is
plain, that he had not condemned Pelagius and Celestius nine Months before he
died. And though by those passages which Labbe has published out of St.
Augustine and Prosper Lab. col. 1575.
, it be certain he did censure this Heresy at last; yet it could not be long
before his death, and therefore Zosimus was a manifest favourer of Heretics,
almost all the time he was Pope; and he may thank the African Fathers for his
Repentance; who (though they were abused and injured by him) hide as much as
may be all his ill deeds in favor of Celestius, and for the credit of Zosimus
and the Catholic Cause, only publish his latest Acts, after he was by them
convinced that Pelagianism was an Heresy: But Celestius and his party openly
exclaimed against Zosimus for a Turncoat Vid. Opt. in Voss. Hist. Pelag. lib.
1. c. 28.
.

The same year was that Council in Africa, which the Editors entitle under
Zosimus Bin. p. 718. Lab. col. 1576.
, but really was against him: For without regarding his suspending the Cause of
Celestius, they particularly condemned all the points of the Pelagian Heresy
by Anathema's, and order all Causes between Bishops to be tried in the Province
where they arise, and renew the Canon of Milevis; that the Priests and inferior
Clergy should be tried by their own Bishops; and whoever should appeal to the
parts beyond the Seas, should not be received into Communion by any in Africa
Bin. page 754. Lab. col. 1131.
: So that we see the African Church persisted in maintaining their Rights, and
condemning Appeals, as they had very good reason, considering the bold attempt
of Zosimus, to usurp a jurisdiction over them; and his erroneous judging such
Causes both of Faith and Manners as he had presumed to meddle in; which happening
in other Provinces, he broke the Canons of the ancient Councils, by pretending
to examine and decide them elsewhere; forgetting that which Gratian had
collected out of his own seventh Epistle, and gives us here for Zosimus his
Decree Bin. page 718. Lab. col. 1574.
, viz. That the Authority of the Roman See it self cannot make any new Order,
nor alter old ones against the Statutes of the Fathers: So Gratian reads it,
and so Aeneas Sylvius cites it De gest. Council. Bas. Fascic. rer. expet. Tom.
1. page 12.
; so also the Editors publish it here; but some forging hand in the seventh
Epistle has put concedere instead of condere, for fear this Sentence should
take away from the Pope the power of making New Canons contrary to the Fathers
Decrees; a Privilege, of which Rome has made more use than any Church in the
World. This Pope's time is concluded with a forged African Council at Telepte,
wherein it is pretended they only read the fourth Epistle of Siricius, and
thence the Notes and Baronius gather that the African Church showed great
respect to the Sea of Rome Bin. page 719. Lab. col. 1577.
. But first Labbe confessed before, that this Epistle of Siricius was forged
Lab. col. 1029.
: And Secondly the Story is ill timed; for the African Church had never less
reason to respect the Popes than now, when they so manifestly robbed them both
of their Rights and their Peace also: Wherefore it is not probable that a
Council should meet there at this time, only to read an Epistle which was
invented long after.

. 5. Upon the Death of Zosimus, there were two An. Dom. 419.
Popes chosen, Boniface and Eulalius, and the Pontifical fairly tells us, the
Clergy were divided for seven Months and fifteen days, and that both of them
acted as Popes. This Schism being notified to the Emperor by Symmachus, the
Prefect of the City, he cites both the Pretenders to Ravenna, and appoints
diverse Bishops to examine into the Cause; but they not being able to agree
whether had the better Title, the Emperor defers the business till the Kalends
of May, and forbids both Parties to enter into Rome, till a Council had met at
Rome to determine this Controversy. But Eulalius (who before stood fairer of
the two) impatient of this delay, contrary to the Emperors Command, on the
fifteenth of the Kalends of April goes into the City, and causes great Factions
there: Upon which 250 Bishops met by the Emperors Order, execute his Commands,
and declare Enlalius to be no Pope, setting up Boniface Vita Bonif. and not
vid. Bin. page 719, 720. Lab. col. 1580, and 1581.
. Upon which passage I shall observe, First, That the Notes make but a vacancy
of two days between Zosimus and Boniface; and Baronius says it was not vacant
above one day Baron. An. 418. page 429.
. Whereas it is plain from the Emperors Letters, dated three or four Months
after, that neither of them was reckoned to be Pope; and he writes to the
African Bishops, that he would have the Council meet by the Ides of June, that
the Papacy might be no longer void Baron. An. 419. page 435.
; so that in truth the Sea was vacant till the Emperor had judged it on
Boniface his side. Baronius does not like it should be said that the Emperor
had any right to interpose in the Election of a Pope; but Symmachus, the
Prefect of Rome, says expressly to Honorius, it is your part to give judgment
in this Matter Idem An. 418. page 430.
; and the Emperor did at first by his single Authority declare Eulalius to be
rightly chosen Ibid. An. 419. initio.
: But upon better information he revokes that Rescript, and Commands that
neither Party should have any advantage by what was past, but all should be
reserved entirely to his judgment Ibid. page 433.
: And though he employed a Synod of Bishops to examine the Matter, yet it
appears in Baronius, that the Emperors Edict was that which gave the Papacy to
Boniface Vid. ibid. page 438, 439.
: Which will appear more plainly by the first Epistle of Boniface, and Honorius
his Answer to it.

For after this Pope was in peaceable possession, fearing the like mischief
after his death, which had happened at his entrance, he writes an humble
Supplication to the Emperor to take care of this matter for the future: And the
Emperor writes back to Boniface, declaring, That if ever two should contend
about the Papacy, and be Ordained, neither of them should be Pope, but he who
by a new Election should be taken out of the Clergy by the Emperors judgment,
and the Peoples consent Epist. and Rescript. vid. ap. Bin. page 720, 721. Lab.
col. 1582, 1583.
. This writing of the Popes among the Councils, has this Title, The
Supplication of Pope Boniface: But Baronius thinking that too mean,
fraudulently leaves out the Title Baron. An. 419. page 440.
; though the Humility of the Style sufficiently shows that the Pope believed
that the Emperor was above him; and whereas Boniface there calls the Church Our
Mother, as the Margin in Binius rightly reads it Marg. Bin. p. 720. col. 2.
. Baronius will have it to be your Mother; and Labbe leaves out the Marginal
and true Reading Lab. col. 1582.
; for it seems they think it below the Pope (though not the Emperor) to be a
Son of the Church. If the second Epistle of Boniface be genuine, it shows that
when Complaints were made to Rome out of the near adjoining Provinces, the
Popes (even after they had given too much encouragement to Appeals) were wont
to refer the matters complained of, to be examined and decided by the Bishops
of those Provinces where the Fact was done Bin. page 721. Lab. col. 1584.
. But the Notes conclude from hence, that the accusation of Bishops use to be
referred to the Pope Vid. Baron. An. 419. page 460.
; which is an universal Conclusion from Premises that will not bear it. The
third Epistle of Boniface contradicts all those which were writ before by
Zosimus, in favor of Patroclus, Bishop of Arles; for Boniface forbids
Patroclus to exercise the Power granted him by the last Pope, and decrees that
Hilary, Bishop of Narbon shall be Metropolitan Bin. ut supr. Lab. col. 1584.
; and if he judged right, then Zosimus judged wrong in this Cause. For this
Pope the Editors publish six Decrees, one of which orders the differences among
Bishops to be decided by the Metropolitan; or however by the Primate of that
Country; from whose determination there was to be no Appeal Decret. Bonif. 2.
Bin. page 722. Lab. col. 1587.
. The fourth Decree is certainly spurious, because it not only forbids a Bishop
to be brought before any Judge Civil or Military for any Crime, but declares
the Magistrate who presumes to do this, shall lose his Girdle, that is, be put
out of his Office. Now doubtless it was not in the Popes power to give or take
away Civil or Military Offices: So that this has been invented merely by those
who affected the Popes being supreme over Kings and Emperors, and would have
the Clergy exempt from all Secular Jurisdiction. As to the Pelagian
Controversy, he writ nothing about it himself; but we are told by Prosper,
that Boniface desired St. Augustine to answer the Books of the Pelagians Prosp.
adv. Collat. c. 41.
, and he showed his Wisdom in putting the Cause into a better hand than his own.

We must now return to the business of the Legates sent into Africa by Pope
Zosimus, a little before his death, who appeared in the sixth Council at
Carthage, not till the time of this Pope Boniface, in order to justify the
Roman Churches Right to receive Appeals from all Churches. The Title indeed
falsely says this Council was held about the manner of prosecuting Appeals Bin.
page 722. col. 2. Lab. col. 1589.
; but it is plain that the African Fathers questioned the right of appealing,
and had condemned before, all Appeals to any Church beyond the Seas. In this
Council the Popes Legates produce a Canon, which they say was made at Nice,
importing, That if a Bishop were condemned in his own Country, and appealed to
Rome, the Pope might write to the neighboring Bishops to enquire again into
the matter, and decide it; but if all this did not satisfy the Complainant,
the Pope might either send his Legates, with his Authority to judge it there
with the Bishops, or leave it finally to those of that Country as he pleased
Extat Graeco Lat. ap. Bin. p. 727. Lat. extat ap. Lab. col. 1590.
. Now this Canon was no sooner read, but Alypius, one of the African Bishops,
declared he could not find any such Canon in the Greek Copies of the Nicene
Council, and desired Aurelius, who presided in the Council (though the Popes
Legates were there) to send to the three other most famous Patriarchal Churches
of Constantinople, Alexandria and Antioch, to search their Copies of the Nicene
Council; and that the Pope might be desired to send some thither also at the
same time; which motion was so fair, and so certain a way to find out the
truth, that the Legates yielded to it, as they did also to have another Canon
examined, whether it were in the Nicene Council or no, about the Appeals of the
lower Clergy: After which they resolve to annex a genuine Transcript of the
Nicene Creed and Canons, to the Acts of their Synod, which concluded with a
Letter to Boniface; which the Editors had no mind to publish in this place, but
give it us elsewhere Bin. page 755. Lab. col. 1670.
. The Sum of it is, they tell their honorable Brother, that hearing he was in
Zosimus place, they had writ to him about Apiarius, who had now confessed his
Faults before them, and begged pardon, and was removed from officiating in his
old Church, but allowed to keep his Degree. Then for the two Canons pretended
to be made at Nice, they say, they had inserted them in their Acts till the
true Copies of the Nicene Council came; but if they were not found there, they
would not be compelled to endure such things as they had no mind to mention,
nor to suffer such intolerable burdens; but they hoped while he was Pope, they
should not be used with such Insolence or Pride, but that they should be dealt
with by brotherly Charity; adding, that they had sent a Copy of their Acts by
two of his Legates, who might make them known to his Holiness. This is the
true, though brief account of this Famous Council, wherein the Roman Church was
discovered to aim at Superiority, and a usurped Jurisdiction, and to practice
it to the prejudice of the Faith, and the Rights of other Churches. Moreover,
it was here discovered, that Rome, to cover this injustice and irregularity,
had corrupted the Canons of the most famous of all Geneneral Councils, and
cited such Canons out of it, as never were made there. And now to wipe off this
scandal, Binius and Baronius stickle vehemently, and try all their Art to get
St. Peter's Ship off from these Rocks. The former publishes long Notes Bin.
page 729. Lab. col. 1599.
; the latter falls from writing History to dispute Baren. An. 419, page 447, ad
456.
: But all in vain; for Binius after he has falsely told us, that it was the
Ancient Custom for Bishops and Priests to appeal to Rome, and for the Africans
to desire their Sentences to be confirmed by the Pope; Confesses, that the
Popes Legates cited the Canons of Sardica under the name of those of Nice, and
that they were not to be found in the Originals of the Council of Nice, kept in
the other Patriarchal Sees: But then he pretends the African Bishops did not
(as we do) charge Zosimus with fraud and forgery. I answer, that how modestly
soever they might speak of this Fact, it really was a notorius Imposture, and
it was sufficient that they proved it to be so, and writ plainly to both
Boniface and Celestine (as the Letters yet extant show) that they would never
endure that usurped Power any more, which the Popes by virtue of these feigned
Canons had exercised: And if rejecting Appeals to Rome be making a Schism, it is
certain the Africans did not suffer them so long as the face of a Church
remained there; so that probably that Epistle of Boniface the second, writ to
Eulalius near an hundred years after, may be true, and had not been censured by
Baronius and Binius, but only because it supposes a Church might have Martyrs
in it and be a true Church, though it utterly disowned all subordination to
Rome: And I am sure they justify many Epistles that are less probable, if they
make for the interest of the Pope. Against this, Baronius and the Notes Object,
that there was an Appeal made by an African Bishop of Fussala, who for
notorious Crimes was put out of his See by St. Augustine and others; and it
seems Boniface and Celestine both allowed this Appeal, and heard his Cause; and
this, these Flatterers of Rome think happened at this time by the Providence of
God Bin. and Lab. not. ut supr. Baron. An. 419. p. 451.
. But let it be considered, that for so notorious a Criminal as this Bishop to
appeal at this time, is neither any credit to the Pope, nor any proof that
there were no African Canons at this time to prohibit it; for it is likely
enough, that an ill Man, who had no means to shelter himself from the Justice
of his own Country, but by appealing to those Popes, who at that time pretended
a Right to receive such Complaints, would use that means of Appeal, even though
it were condemned in Africa. So that his appealing does not prove it was
lawful, nor that it was not forbid there: Besides, though St. Augustine writ
modestly, yet he intimates no more, but that some such Sentences as he had
passed on this Bishop of Fussala, had been passed or approved by the Popes;
which only prove in Fact, that some African Bishops had before this time
appealed, but he does not say it was right; yea, we see the Councils, in which
he was present, condemning it as an usurpation and great injustice, ex malis
moribus bonae Leges. The thing had been practiced till the Popes fostering
Heretics, and lewd convicted Criminals opened the Eyes of the African Church,
and made them prohibit them, and claim their ancient Rights. Again, upon St.
Augustine's Letter it appears, the Pope did not proceed to restore this Bishop;
and it seems when former Popes had taken upon them to restore ejected Bishops,
they were forced to do it by strong hand, even by sending Clerks with Soldiers
to execute the Sentence, which shows their Authority was not submitted to in
Africa: And the Bishops in their Letter to Celestin^, boldly charge him never
to send any such again; for if they should submit to such proceedings, they
should be guilty of bringing Secular Violence into the Church of God. The Notes
go on to charge us Protestants for ignorantly and treacherously insulting over
Zosimus, as one that attempted to steal a Power to receive Appeals from Africa.
Whereas the African Bishops themselves prove the Fact: And in the second Part I
have produced a very ancient Scholion Romans Forg. (...). 2. An. 34^. page 111.
, which expressly censures these Popes for Imposture as well as Usurpation; and
I now add, that Zonaras above 400 year before the Reformation says in his
Notes upon the Sardican Council, That the Bishops of Old Rome, from this Canon,
boasted a right to Appeals from Bishops in all Causes, and falsely said it was
made in the first Council of Nice; which being propounded in the Council of
Carthage, was found not to be true, as the Preface to that Council shows. So
that neither was this Canon made at Nice, nor does it decree that Appeals shall
be made to him from all Bishops, but only from those who were subject to him,
which at that time were almost all those of the West, that is, Macedon,
Thessaly, Illiricum, Greece, Peloponesus and Epirus, which afterward were
subjected to the Church of Constantinople; so that Appeals from thence were to
be made to that Patriarch for the future Zon. Schol. 5 Can. Council. Sardic.
Bever. Tom. 1. page 489.
. Wherefore we are not the first, who charged the Popes with Usurpation and
Imposture both in this Case: But the flattering Notes go on and tell us, that
if the Controversy had been about the Right of Appeals, and not about the
manner of appealing, the Popes Legates would have cited the 4th and 5th Canons
of Sardica, which treat of the Right of Appeals, and not the 7th which treats
only of the manner of prosecuting them: Now this is an open Falsehood; for the
first Canon the Legates cite is in the best Edition of the Sardican Canons, the
fifth, and is about the Right of Bishops to appeal Bin. Tom. 1. page 426.
Bever. Tom. 1. page 488.
. And the second they cite is the 14th Canon, and it is about the Appeals of
Priests and Deacons Bin. page 429. Bever page 501.
; so that neither of the Canons cited is about the manner of prosecuting
Appeals; and the latter which the Notes call the 7th Canon of Sardica does not
mention Rome.

They proceed to tell us there were 217 Bishops first and last subscribed to
this Council, being a great Provincial Council, which shows how unanimous the
Africans were in condemning the Popes Usurpation: As to the Popes Legates, the
Notes grant they did not preside there; and truly it was not fit they should,
when their own Cause was to be examined, and Rome was the criminal Church here
to be tried. Again, The Note (k) impudently calls the fifth Canon of Sardica by
the name of the seventh Canon, and pretends the Africans did not like the
latter way of prosecuting Appeals; That is, by the Popes sending Legates into
Africa to hear these Causes, but allowed him to delegate them upon an Appeal to
rehear the Appellant: Whereas the Council does expressly reject the whole Canon
as a Forgery, and forbid all Appeals to the parts beyond the Seas, so that this
is only defending one Lie by another, and cleansing a Blot with blotted fingers.

The next Note (l) gravely tells us, that the words Sardican Council, were
falsely put into the Text of this Council, because the Legates professed these
Canons were made at Nice, and because the African Fathers say they knew of no
Sardican Council, which had allowed of the Popes sending Legates, etc. Not. in
Council. 6. Carthag. Bin. page 730. Col. 2 F. Lab. col. 1602.
Now all this pains might have been spared; for these words (Sardican Council)
are only in a corrupt Latin Edition, but the Greek and Latin Copy which is the
best, has no such words at all. But we may note here very justly, That these
Popes were strangely insolent to cite two Canons of a poor obscure Council,
never heard of in Africa, no not by the learned S. Austin (as the Notes
confess,) and daringly fix these Canons upon the most famous general Council
that ever was, especially since the Nicene Council does expressly charge Council.
Nicen. can. 5. vid. Bin. page 725.
, That every Bishops sentence shall stand good in his own Province; so that he
who is Excommunicated by some shall not be received by others. Now the
pretended Canon allows the Pope to receive any person Excommunicated by the
Bishops of his own Province: So that it expressly contradicts the Canons of the
Nicene Council; and yet the Popes confidently said it was made there: Had the
African Fathers believed them and submitted, no doubt these two Canons, and
perhaps all the rest of that petty Synod had been imposed upon the World for
genuin Canons of the Nicene Council, by the Roman Church, whose Emissaries have
forged no less than 60 new Canons, and published them under the name of that
famous Council. Before I leave this subject, I must note, that Baronius and
Binius who here confess these two Canons were made at Sardica, do in the Notes
on the Nicene Council, impudently cite them, to prove there were more than
twenty Canons made at Nice, of which number they say were the Canons about
Appeals, produced in the sixth Council of Carthage Bin. notis ad Council. Nicen.
supr. page 296.
. Baronius has one trick more, For he says the Council of Sardica was a
General Council, as well as that at Nice, and of as great Authority, and so it
was all one, which Council the Popes cited Baron. An. 419. page 448. and 454.
. I have disproved this before, and only note here, that if the African Fathers
had believed this, doubtless they would not have put themselves to so great
cost and trouble, to send to three foreign and remote Churches to search out
the Truth: I must add, that the Bishops assembled at Carthage, thought the
Nicene Canons so considerable, that they annex a Copy of them to their Acts,
wherein this is remarkable, That the sixth Canon is cited without that forged
Preface, which the Roman Writers of late would make a part of the Canon it
self, viz. The Roman Church has always had the Primacy. No such words appear
in this African Copy Bin. page 725. Lab. col. 1595.
; wherefore we may conclude, they have been invented since by some of the Popes
Creatures.

. 6. Celestine succeeded Boniface, yet so as the Notes An. Dom. 423.
confess the Faction of Eulalius would not communicate with him: However, he
seems to have been very Orthodox as to the Pelagian Controversy, though
Laurentius Valla truly censures him for one of no great Learning; the Style of
his Epistles showing he was no accurate Latinist; and in his own Epistle to
Nestorius, yet extant in the Ephesine Council, he confesses he understood no
Greek Council. Ephesians. Epist. Celest. ad Nest. Bin. page 135. Lab. col. 353.
: So that whatever he did against Pelagius or Nestorius, was done at the
request and by the direction of Men more learned than himself: However it was
well, that this Pope was so willing to assist S. Cyril against Nestorius, and
Prosper, with others, against the Pelagians; for his See being eminent, his
appearing on the Orthodox side gave great countenance to their Cause, and
promoted the Condemnation of those Heretics, which the Notes and Baronius so
extremely magnify Vita Celest. Bin. page 732. Lab. col. 1610.
as if he was the first who condemned them; and that it was solely his
Authority which suppressed them, the falsehood of which we shall show presently.
The Pontifical says, He ordered the Psalms to be sung by way of Antiphon by
all, before the Sacrifice: But if he first brought in this kind of singing them
at Rome, we are sure they had been sung so long before, both in the East and at
Milan; and it seems it is no disparagement for the holy Roman See to follow
other Churches.

The first Epistle of Celestine, has a great many Sections added to it in
Binius, which are a Collection made by Prosper, or some Eminent Writer against
the Pelagians Bin. page 733. Lab. col. 1611.
. But Labbe prints the Epistle by it self, and then prints the Collections
apart: However it is thought Celestine approved them, and so they are cited by
diverse Ancients under his name Vossij Hist. Pel. cap. 30. page 82.
: But if we compare the Matter or the Style of those Additions with the former
part, which is Celestine's genuin work, it will easily be discovered, that the
Popes Authority was far more considerable than his Learning: And if any Man
wonder why this Collector is so careful, to set down the Decrees of the Roman
Church against this Heresy Bin. ibid.. 3. Lab. col. 1614.
, the reason is plainly expressed, viz. That some secret Favorers of Pelagius,
(considering the kindness he and his followers had found at Rome) professed
they would stand by the Decrees of that Church.

His second Epistle has nothing memorable in it, but that the Pope thinks the
affairs of the Province of Narbon, to be things far remote Bin. page 735. Lab.
col. 1619.
; which shows they had not then usually intermedled with the concerns of all
the Churches in the World. A little after he says, we of the Clergy ought to
be distinguished from the Laity, by our Doctrine, not by our Garments; by our
Conversation, not by our Habit; by our purity of Mind, not our Dress: Which
looks as if he would abrogate wholly the distinct Habits of the Clergy, and
persuade them and the Laity to go alike: Which gross notion the Notes labor to
cover as well as they can, by pretending he for bids only new Fashions of Habit
to the Clergy: But if it were so, this would reflect upon the various Habits of
every several Order of Monks. And yet if we look well upon the Text, he
positively dislikes all Habits which may distinguish the Clergy from the Laity,
which now adays Protestants account a Fanatical Opinion.

Most of the following Epistles are printed in the Council of Ephesus, and
shall there be considered: It suffices to observe here, That the 9th Epistle to
the Emperor Theodosius Bin. page 737 Lab. col. 1623.
owns that Arcadius and Projectus were to represent his Person in the Council
of Ephesus, which the Emperor had Commanded to be held: Therefore Cyril did not
represent Pope Celestine; and not the Pope, but the Emperor called that Council.

The 10th Epistle affirms, that the care which Kings take in the matters of
Religion is not ineffectual Bin. ibid. Lab. col. 1624.
; which shows, that Baronius had no reason to be so severe upon all those
Princes who meddled with Religious Affairs. Out of the 12th Epistle to
Theodosius we may note, that Atticus late Bishop of Constantinople is said to
be of most reverend Memory, and a most courageous defender of the Catholic
Faith Bin. page 739. Lab. col. 1629.
: And in Celestine's Epistle to Nestorius, Atticus of blessed memory, a Teacher
of the Catholic Faith Bin. Council. Ephesians. page 134.
. But this very Bishop had a long contest with the Bishops of Rome, and was
Excommunicated by Pope Innocent Baron. An. 406. page 244.
; and he on the otherside valued this so little, that he Excommunicated those
who were in Communion with Rome; and calls Paulinus and Evagrius and their
adherents (among which was the Pope) by no gentler a name than that of
Schismatics Baron. An. 412. page 348.
. So that how Orthodox so-ever he might be in any other things, it is plain, he
did not believe the Roman Church Infallible, nor think it was necessary to be
in Communion with it: And though he erred (as they now believe at Rome) in so
main a Point; yet while he was at open Enmity with the Pope, Baronius tells us
he wrought a Miracle Baron. An. 408. page 272.
; so that a Man would think, Miracles are no proof of the true Church: Another
passage in this Epistle is Memorable, viz. That Celestine says, Nestorius was
Excommunicated by the general sentence of the Bishops: Which the Reader must
remember, when the flattering Notes any where say, the Sentence against this
Heretic was solely the Act of Celestine. And indeed Baronius having recited
his 11th, 12th, 13th and 14th Epistles, boasts of him, as if God had raised him
up to stand in the gap against those Heretics which then infested the Church,
and gives him all the Glory of the Victory over them Baron. An. 432. page 616.
. Whereas, if Prosper and Cyril had writ no better against Pelagius and
Nestorius than Celestine, it is to be feared that these Heresies had not been
censured in that Age. Yet in the main he was a good Pope, and had the fortune
to take the right side in these Controversies, and therefore is highly
commended by diverse of the Orthodox; and he is very free in returning the
Complements: For in his last Epistle he calls Cyril an Apostolical Man Bin.
page 741. Lab. col. 1633.
; and Maximtanus of Constantinople he styles his Colleague. And this may
suffice for this Popes Epistles.

We are entertained next with another Collection of African Councils, held, as
they say, under Pope Boniface and Celestine Bin. page 744. Lab. col. 1641.
; but the Titles mention no Pope at all; nor were they called by any Pope, but
by the Bishop of Carthage, who presided in them, even when the Popes Legates
were present: We have taken notice of most of these before, and therefore shall
pass them over very briefly. In one of them they resolve to send a Legate to
their holy Brethren and fellow Bishops, Anastasius of Rome, and Vencrius of
Milan, putting them so equally into the Scale, that the Pope is only first
named Bin. page 745. Lab. col. 1643.
. A little after Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage says, That he by God's
appointment sustained the care of all the Churches: The Margin tells us he
means in Africa Bin. page 747. Lab. col. 1647.
; but I must note, that if a Pope had said so in this Age, though he could mean
no more than the Churches of the Suburbicarian Regions, these Gentlemen would
have stretched that to all the World. Another Council in the twelfth Consulship
of Honorius, and the eighth of Theodosius, had a Canon in some ancient Copy,
wherein these Fathers. Anathematize them that hold any middle place between
Heaven and Hell, to which unbaptized Infants go; and they expressly declare,
that whoever is deprived of the Right Hand, must fall into the Left; and that
no Catholic doubts but he is with the Devil who is not a Coheir with Christ
Bin. page 753. Lab. col. 1664.
. Now this looks so foul upon Limbus Infantum and Purgatory, the later
Inventions of Rome, that their Parasites have left this Canon out in other
Copies of this Council Vid. Bin. page 786.
: And here it is printed in a different Character, as if it were no genuine
piece of the Council, only because it condemns the modern Opinion of the Roman
Church; but the impartial Reader will conclude, that the Ancient Copy of this
Canon was elder than either Purgatory or Limbus Infantum.

Here also the Editors print at large the two famous Epistles of the African
Bishops, to two Popes successively, Boniface and Celestine, wherein they do
utterly condemn Appeals to Rome, and discover the forgery of those pretended
Nicene Canons, by which their Legates attempted to justify them. I have given
an account of the former of these Letters in the Life of Boniface. And I shall
add here, that the latter Epistle to their honorable Brother Celestine (writ
some years after) shows the Africans continued still in the same mind Bin. page
757. Lab. col. 1674.
; for therein they acquaint him that they had called a Council; and though
Apiarius alleged the Privilege of the Roman Church which had received him
unlawfully to Communion, they examined his Cause, and at last he confessed his
notorious Crimes: Wherefore they earnestly desire the Pope not so easily to
receive Complaints from thence, nor admit those to his Communion whom they had
excommunicated; for they show that the Nicene Council forbids this, both as to
Bishops, Presbyters and Laymen, without any derogation to the privilege of
the African Church, committing all the Clergy to their own Metropolitan, and
wisely ordering every business to be determined in that Province where it
arose, knowing that the Spirit of God would not be wanting to any Country,
where a Council of Bishops should meet; so that none need fear to be injured,
since they might appeal to a greater Council of their own Province, or to a
Universal Synod: Whereas if Judgment were to be given beyond the Seas, many
Witnesses must be wanting, and many other things must hinder the finding out of
truth. They add, -- That they could not find any Council which allowed his
Holiness to send any Legates to hear Causes; and for those Canons which
Faustinus had produced, as made at Nice, they could find no such Canons in the
Authentic Copies of that Council. Finally, They bid him not send any of his
Clerks to execute his Sentence, to which if they should submit, they should
seem to bring the vanity of Secular Arrogance into God's Church. This is the
Sum of this excellent Letter, which disowns and condemns all Appeals, and
renounces the Popes jurisdiction over Africa, with a modest intimation, that
his claim was grounded upon a notorious Forgery, and therefore he is required
to pretend to it no longer, for that they will not submit to such an
Usurpation. Yet such is the Impudence of the Roman Editors, that in a Marginal
Note upon this Epistle Bin. page 757. col. 2. Lab. col. 1675.
, they say these African Bishops desire the Pope, to appoint another way of
prosecuting Appeals: Which is a gross contradicting the Text it self, wherein
all manner of Appeals, and all ways of prosecuting them are utterly condemned;
but this was too harsh, and therefore the Truth was to be daubed over with this
plausible Fiction.

After this Binius presents us with another Edition of these African Canons and
Epistles, in Latin and Greek Bin. page 758.
. And Labbe newly publishes the Epistle of one Leporius, who had been converted
from Heresy, and reconciled to the Church by the African Bishops Lab. col.
1678.
, by which we may learn, that a Heretic need not go to Rome to recant, as the
Notes formerly affirmed. There is nothing further observable before the Council
of Ephesus, except two Councils, one at Rome, wherein the Pope is said to make
Cyril his Legate in the Cause of Nestorius; the other at Alexandria, in which
Cyril is pretended to Act by this delegated power Bin. page 794. etc. Lab. col.
1688.
. But this will be more properly considered in the History of that General
Council, where these Epistles are printed at large.

CHAP. II.
Of the time from the Council of Ephesus till the Council of Chalcedon.

. 1. IN this Year was held the Third General Council at Ephesus, upon the
account of Nestorius, An. Dom. 431.
who about three years before had been made Bishop of Constantinople, and was
at first believed to be both Pious and Orthodox; but he had not sat long in
that See, before he began to publish certain Doctrines about our Savior, which
gave great offense; for he taught that Jesus Christ was two Persons, one as the
Son of God, another as the Son of Man; and therefore he denied the Blessed.
Virgin to be the Mother of God, holding that the Person which was born of her,
was no more than a Mere Man: Which Opinions, not only made a Faction at
Constantinople, but caused Divisions among the Egyptian Monks; whereupon St.
Cyril first writ a Confutation of them to those Monks, and then with great
modesty admonished Nestorius of these Errors, by diverse Letters; but he
despised his Admonition, justified the Doctrines, and persecuted those who
would not own them, being supported by his Interest in the Imperial Court. Upon
this, Cyril called in Pope Celestine to his assistance, sending him an account
of what he had writ to Nestorius: On the other side, Nestorius also writ to
Celestrine, and sent his Sermons in which these Doctrines were contained, for
him to peruse. The Pope by the advice of such Western Bishops as he could then
get together, takes the part of Cyril, and offered him to join with him in
condemning Nestorius, if he did not recant: But the Authority of these two
Patriarchs of Rome and Alexandria, not sufficing to condemn a Patriarch of
Constantinople, it was thought fit to desire the Emperor to call a General
Council at Ephesus, where Nestorius might appear, and his Opinions be examined;
and the Emperor at length did agree to this Request. Now that which we are to
observe concerning this General Council, shall be under these Heads. First, To
enquire by whom it was called and convened. Secondly, Who presided in it.
Thirdly, What is memorable in the Acts of it. Fourthly, Who confirmed the
Decrees there made.

As to the first, the Historical Preface, before this Council, labors to
persuade us, That Celestine commanded the Council to be called Bin. Tom. 1.
par. 2. page 2. Lab. Tom. 3. col. 4.
; and the Notes after it say, it was appointed by the Authority of Gelestine,
and gathered together by the counsel, aid and assistance of Theodosius the
Emperor Bin. page 477. Lab. col. 1241.
. The Cardinal goes further, and says Theodosius called it by the Authority of
Celestine Baron. An. 530. page 547, etc.
; but when this is to be proved, both the Notes and Baronius are content to
make out, that this Council was not called without the Popes consent; which may
be proved concerning every Orthodox Bishop that was there; and so gives no
peculiar advantage to the Bishop of Rome. But as to the Convening it by his
Authority, nothing can be more false: For by the Emperors first Letter to
Cyril, it appears that some then thought to order Matters of Religion by Power,
rather than by consulting in common Bin. page 162, 163. Lab. col. 433.
; in which words he reflects upon Pope Celestine and Cyril, who thought, by the
Authority of their Private Synods at Rome and Alexandria, to have condemned
Nestorius, who was a Patriarch as well as they; and therefore the Emperor
rightly considered, that he could not be tried but by a General Council: So
that it seems Celestine, at first, had no mind such a Council should be called,
nor Cyril neither; but when they saw their Authority was insufficient, then
Cyril put the Monks of Constantinople upon petitioning the Emperor to command a
General Council to meet very speedily (as their words are) Bin. page 162. Lab.
col. 429.
; and the same Cyril put Juvenalis, Bishop of Jerusalem, upon writing to the
Emperor for the same purpose Bin. page 147, etc. Lab. col. 388.
. Now why should not these Applications have been made to the Pope, if the
Council were to be called by his Authority? Besides, if Celestine had called
it, his Letter of Summons would appear; but though none ever saw that, the
Emperors Edict is yet extant, wherein he fixes the day and place for the
Council to meet, enjoins Cyril, with the Bishops of his Province, to be there
at that time, and tells him he had writ to all other Metropolitans (probably to
Celestine among the rest) to attend the Synod, and not to meddle with this
Matter, till the meeting of this General Assembly, from which whoever absented
himself, should not be excused Bin. page 164. Lab. col. 436.
. Which is as full a proof that the Emperor called it by his Authority, as is
possible to be made; and we need add nothing to it but this, that the Synod it
self every where declares it was called (...), by the Emperors Decree Bin. page
168, 210. Lab. col. 445-560.
, (...), by his Will Bin. page 171. Lab. col. 452.
, and Summoned by his Letter Bin. page 211, 212, 214. Lab. col. 562, 564, 567.
; yea, the Pope himself says, I have obeyed your Pleasure as far as I was
able, and I do appear in the Council which you have commanded, by those I have
sent in my stead Bin. page 236. Lab. col. 620.
. And when these Legates came to Ephesus, they say, we are come to the Synod
which has been appointed by the most Christian and Gracious Emperors Bin. page
238. Lab. col. 626.
. So that it is a strange impudence of Baronius and Binius, in despite of so
clear evidence, to pretend this Council was convened only by the Advice and
Ministry of Theodosius, but by the Authority of Pope Celestine.

Secondly, The like prevarication they use about the President of this General
Council, for Bellarmine had made it a Maxim, That in General Councils it was
the Popes privilege to preside by himself or his Legates, and to moderate all
as Supreme Judge Bellar. de^ Council. lib. 1. cap. 19.
: Wherefore the Preface to the Council says, Cyril was to preside by the
command of Celestine, and the Authority of the Apostolic See Pref. Bin. page
2. Lab. col. 5.
; and the Notes say, The Pope presided there by Cyril, who had the Office of
his Legate Not. Bin. page 477. col. 2. Lab. col. 1243.
: And a little after they produce all the Historians who writ after Evagrius
(An. Dom. 595.); and because he says Celestine had given Cyril his place, they
conclude thence, that he was President of the Council by virtue of that Grant:
But indeed the first place belonged to Cyril as Patriarch of Alexandria, in his
own Right, because the Bishop of Rome was absent, and he of Constantinople was
the Criminal to be tried; yet Celestine had cunningly given him that which was
his due without any gift; for in his Letter to him long before the Council was
called (when the Synod at Rome had condemned Nestorius) Celestine says, he
might take to him both the Authority of his Throne, and the Order of his Place
Council. Ephesians. par. 1. cap. 15. Bin. page 133. Lab. col. 349.
; which signifies no more, than that Cyril might vote in Celestine's Name, and
add the Credit of the First Patriarch to his own Authority, to make the
Sentence against Nestorius the more Venerable. And the beginning of the Acts
distinguish Cyril's precedence from his holding Celestine's place (if they be
rightly pointed,) (r) (...), etc. Bin. page 168. Lab. col. 446.
Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, presiding, and [having] the place of Celestine,
etc. And so Zonaras understood it, who says, Cyril of Alexandria presided, and
also had the place of Celestine; thus also Balsamon Balsam. and Zonar. in 1.
Can. Ephesians. ap. Bever. Tom. 1. page 99.
. So that it seems Cyril was President of the Council, either by choice of the
Fathers, or in his own Right, as the Chief Patriach present; and he also voted
in the place of Celestine who was absent; and probably by virtue of that
Representation also, sat above all the other Patriarchs. However this is
certain, that the Bishop of Ephesus, Memnon, who had no delegation from the
Pope, is also reckoned President of the Synod; and he, together with St. Cyril,
are often called (...), even thrice in one Epistle Bin. page 295, 296. Lab.
col. 763, etc.
. And again, (...) Bin. page 303. Lab. col. 783.
; yea, these two are called, the Head of the Council Bin. page 304. Lab. col.
786.
: And all this without any mention of their having these Titles, or this Power
from the Pope. Moreover, we may observe, that Cyril alone is sometimes called
the President of this Council Leo Pap. ep. 47. and Council. Chalced. Act. 4. and
in Act. Ephesians. cap. 60.
; and the Party of John, Bishop of Antioch, charges him with usurping this
place, which was not given him by the Canons or the Emperor's Edict; (they
valued not, it seems, the Popes Grant Act. Council. Bin. p. 274. Lab. col. 714.
; so that this Title is variously applied, and no Argument can be formed from
it for the Popes Supremacy; who also sent three other Legates to this Synod, to
represent his Person, and supply his Place, as Celestine's own Letter declares
Bin. page 236. Lab. col. 620.
: Yea, the Council it self declares, that these three Legates, Arcadius,
Projectus and Philip did supply Celestin's place Bin. p. 154, and 303. Lab.
col. 666, and 783.
. Now it is not easy to understand how Cyril should be the Popes Legate and
supply his Place, and yet at the same time three other Legates need to be sent
also to supply the same place, unless we expound this Grant of the Popes to
Cyril, to signify no more than a declaration, that he would agree to all that
Cyril voted for, which is far from making him a formal Legate, or for giving
him that Authority which he had in this Council. We conclude therefore, that
Cyril, as the first Patriarch present, and the most learned of all that opposed
Nestorius Cyril. -- Cui tune dabatur primatus de talibus agendi Liberat. Brer.
cap. 4.
, and Memnon as Bishop of Ephesus, where the Council was held, were chosen
Moderators by the Synod: Nor is it likely that the Popes making these his
Legates (if that were true, which Baronius only supposes, but does not prove)
Baron. An. 430. and An. 431.
, would have given them any Power over the Council, since Arcadius, Projectus
and Philip, who really were the Popes Legates, did not preside, nor are they
reckoned up in the first place, no not in the Subscriptions, which yet are not
certainly genuine Baron. An. 431. page 566, 568.
. And when the Council sent two of these Legates among others on an Embassy to
Constantinople, they lay their Commands on them, and threaten, if they do not
observe their Orders, they would neither confirm their Acts, nor yet receive
them into Communion Bin. page 302. Lab. col. 782.
: Which shows the Council was superior even to the Popes Legates; and that
their representing the Popes person, did not entitle them to any Power over the
Council, which is that the Roman Parasites would make out. Richerius exposes
Baronius for saying Philip had a place before the Bishops, because he was a
Cardinal Tom. 1. cap. 7.. 6. p. 287.
. The first Seat and Vote therefore belonged to Cyril, but Christ (as these
Fathers say properly) was the Head of this General Council Council. Ephesians. par. 3.
cap. 13. page 403. Bin.
, and was represented by the Holy Gospels, placed above all, on a Throne, out
of which all decisions were made, not by any Humane Authority, either of Cyril
or Celestine himself.

Thirdly, We shall next examine into the proceedings of this Council, and see
where the Editors have prevaricated therein for the interest of Rome, as also
what else therein is pertinent to our purpose. Now these are, First those
things which happened before; and, Secondly in the Council. First, Before the
Council in Cyril's Letter to Nestorius, he tells him, that Celestine and the
Bishops assembled at Rome, had advised him to enquire whether those Papers were
writ by Nestorius or no (...), etc. Council. Ephesians. par. 1. p. 119. Lab. col. 313.
and Baron. An. 430. p. 533.
. This they all falsely translate, Celestino jubente, etc. as if the Pope had a
Power to command Cyril; whereas the Original Word imports no more than an
intimation given him to make this enquiry; and that not by the Pope alone, but
by the whole Roman Synod. Again, since this Controversy began between two
Patriarchs, Cyril was so modest, that he would not by his own single Authority
Anathematize Nestorius, till he had acquainted the Bishops both of the East and
West with it; yet he declares he had power to have done this if he pleased Bin.
page 125, and 131. Lab. col. 329. and col. 344.
. Now his forbearing to do this out of Prudence and Humility, is by the Roman
Editors, in their Preface and Notes, ascribed most falsely to his want of Power
and Authority. Thirdly, In the Protestation of the Clergy of Constantinople,
they prove themselves Orthodox, because they held the same Faith with the
Church of Antioch; and that which was held by Eustathius, Bishop there, in the
time of the Nicene Council, making no mention of Rome at all Council. Ephesians par.
1. cap. 13. Bin. p. 129. Lab. col. 340.
. And though now the Faith of the Roman Church is pretended to be the sole
Infallible Rule of what is Orthodox, it was not thought so then: For Pope
Celestine himself says Nestorius is to be condemned, unless he profess the
Faith of the Roman and the Alexandrian Churches, and that which the Catholic
Church held ^b. cap. 15. Bin. p. 133. Lab. col. 349. and Baron. An. 430. p. 536.
: And the Pope repeats this in his Epistle to Nestorius Cap. 18. Bin. p. 138.
Lab. col. 361.
; and in that to John, Bishop of Antioch Cap. 20. Bin. p. 143. Lab. col. 376.
: So that the Roman Church was then only a part of the Catholic Church as that
of Alexandria was; had it then been (as now it is said to be) the same with the
Catholic Church, the Pope was guilty in three several Epistles of a notorious
Tautology; for according to the modern Style) it had been enough to have said
Nestorius must profess he held the Faith of the Roman Catholic Church. So when
Cyril had informed John of Antioch, that the Roman Synod had condemned
Nestorius, and writ to him, to the Bishop of Thessalonica, to those of Macedon,
and to him of Jerusalem to join in this Sentence, Cyril adds, that he of
Antioch must comply with this Decree, unless he would be deprived of the
Communion of the whole Western Church, and of these other Great Men Cap. 21.
Bin. p. 144. Lab. col. 380.
. This passage the Preface cites to prove that Cyril made use of the Popes
Authority as his Chief Weapon in this Cause Pref. Bin. p. 2. Lab. Pref. p. 3.
Baron. An. 430. p. 539.
; but it is plain he does not so much as mention the Pope, or the Roman Church
alone, nor does he urge the danger of losing the Communion of that Church,
singly considered, but of all the Western Churches, and diverse eminent ones in
the East; and it was the Popes agreeing with all these that made his Communion
so valuable. Fourthly, as to the Titles of these Epistles, which were writ
before the Council, we may observe, that Nestorius writes to Celestine as to
his Brother, and says he would converse with him, as one Brother use to do
with another Cap. 16. Bin. p. 133, 134. Lab. col. 349. and 351. Baron. An. 430.
p. 530.
; which shows, that as Patriarchs, they were upon equal ground. It Is true Cyril
(who was as eminent for his Modesty as his Learning) calls Celestine by the
Title of his Lord Cap. 21. Bin. p. 144. Lab. col. 377.
, from which the Romanists would draw conclusions for their Supremacy; but we
note, that in the same Epistle he calls John of Antioch also his Lord, beloved
Brother and Fellow-minister Bin. and Lab. ibid.
, which very words Cyril uses when he speaks of Celestine in his Epistle to
Juvenal, Bishop of Jerusalem, calling the Pope there, his Lord, most Religious
Brother and Fellow-minister Cap. 24 Bin. page 147. Lab. col. 388.
; yea, such was the Humility of those Primitive Bishops, that they frequently
styled their Equals and Inferiors their Lords; so Cyril calls Acacius Bishop of
Beraea Cap. 22. Bin. page 145. Lab. col. 381.
: So John, Bishop of Antioch, calls Nestorius, his Lord Ibid. cap. 25.
, and the same Title in the same Epistle he bestows upon Archelaus, Bishop of
Mindus, a small City Ibid. Bin. page 150. Lab. col. 393.
. And of this we might give many more instances, but these may suffice to
expose those vain Arguers, who from some such Titles bestowed on the Roman
Bishop, think to establish his Universal Supremacy. Fifthly, Among all these
preliminary Epistles, there are none meaner, both for Style and Sense, than
those of Pope Celestine; yet Baronius brags of that to Nestorius, as the
Principal Thing which confuted him, calling it a Divine Epistle Baron. An. 430.
page 534.
. But alas it is infinitely short of Cyril's Letters; the Phrase is very
ordinary, the Periods intricate, the Arguments such as might have been used
against any Heretic, and his Application of the Holy Texts very odd; as when
the Church of Constantinople discovered Nestorius to be a Heretic, he says,
he may use St. Paul's words, we know not what to pray for as we ought Cap. 18.
Bin. page 135. Lab. col. 356.
. However there is one remarkable Passage in it (a little after) where he
says, Those things which the Apostles have fully and plainly declared to us,
ought neither to be augmented nor diminished. Had his Successors observed this
Rule, a great part of their Trent Articles had never been established: And it
had been well if the Editors had not in that very Page left out by design, one
of Celestine's own words. For he threatens Nestorius, that if after this third
Admonition he did not amend, he should be utterly excommunicated ((...)) by his
Synod, and by a Council of all Christians. Here they leave out ((...)), and
translate it ab Universitate Collegii and conventu Christianorum Bin. page 136.
Lab. col. 357.
; as if the Pope alone had power to separate a Patriarch from the Communion of
the Universal Church; whereas even when the Western Bishops joined with him,
St. Cyril notes, that those who submitted not to their Decree, would only lose
the Communion of the Western Church Ep. ad Joh. Antioch. cap. 21. Bin. page
144. Lab. col. 380.
: And if this Sentence were confirmed in the East too, then indeed Nestorius
and his party, as Celestine intimates, would be cast out of the Universal
Church. Sixthly, In Cyril's Letter to Nestorius, there is this remarkable
Saying, That Peter and John were ((...)) of equal Dignity, as they were both
Apostles and Holy Disciples Cap. 26. Bin. page 153. Lab. col. 400.
; which shows (for all the brags of the Popes Legate in the Council, that Peter
was the Head of the Faith, and of the Apostles) Par. 2. Act. 2. Bin. page 235.
; they did not believe there was any difference as to Power and Dignity among
the Apostles, and that saying must pass for a piece of Flattery, and is not to
be regarded, because it comes from a Creature of the Popes, and one of his own
House, who by the Canons was no lawful evidence Ad testimonium non admittendos
quos ipse accusator de domo sua produxerit. Council. Carthag. 7. can. 4.
. Seventhly, In the Emperor's Commission to Candidianus, one of his great
Officers, who was to preside in the Council, we may see, the Emperor gives him
power to appoint what Causes and Questions shall be first treated of, and to
forbid any pecuniary or criminal Causes to be tried there Cap. 35. Bin. page
167. and 225. Lab. col. 443. and col. 594.
; which shows that the Emperor reserved the Power of managing and ordering the
Synod, to himself, and made a Layman his representative for that purpose.

Secondly, As to the Passages in the Council, if the Preface and the Names
before the Acts, be genuine (of which there is some doubt), we may note, that
it is there declared, the Council met by the Emperors Command, and that Cyril
is mentioned first, both in his own Right, as the chief Patriarch present, and
as he had the precedence due to Celestine, here called Archbishop of the Roman
Church (a Title given to Cyril afterward) whose Legate he is no where said to
be, but only to have his place Council. Ephesians. par. 2. Act 1. Bin. page 168. Lab.
col. 445.
; that is, to sit first as the Pope would have done had he been there.
Moreover, it is remarkable, that the Council begins without the Popes Legates,
who did not come till the three Sessions of the first Act was over. But there
is one notorious falsehood both in the Notes and in Baronius, which they devise
purely in favor of the Pope, and to make him seem to have had some Supremacy
in this Council: For they say, that in the very first Action, Peter, a Priest
of Alexandria, did read that which Pope Celestine and Cyril writ against
Nestorius Bin. not. page 481. Lab. col. 1246. Baron. An. 431. page 568.
. Whereas the Acts of the Council show the contrary, namely, that though Peter
did say he had those Epistles of Celestine and Cyril in his hands, yet the
Council ordered, that the Emperors Edict, by which they were convened, should
be read in the first place Bin. page 171. Lab. col. ^52.
, and it was read accordingly: Binius, by false translating the Acts says,
Peter offered to read these Epistles first; but Labbe honestly alters that
corrupt Version, and says only, he had them in his hands to do with them as
the Synod pleased: But we see the Synod did not allow them to be read in the
first place; and afterward when these Epistles were called for, Cyril's
Epistle to Nestorius was first read and approved by the whole Synod to be
Orthodox, not because it was agreeable to the opinion of Celestine (whom they
do not once name), but because it was conformable to the Council of Nice Bin.
page 174, 175. Lab. col. 461. etc.
: Yea the whole Council had confirmed the Faith of Cyril, and unanimously
condemned Nestorius before they called upon the Notary to read the Epistle of
Celestine Archbishop of Rome Bin. page 190, 191. Lab. col. 501.
: So that the matters contained in that Popes Epistle, could neither be the
sole nor principal Motive to the Council to condemn Nestorius. For after the
reading this Epistle, they also read other Writings of Cyril upon this Subject,
and then heard the Opinions of the Ancient Doctors, Martyrs and Orthodox
Fathers recited; as also a Collection of the Blasphemies contained in Nestorius
his Works, and the Epistle of Capreolus, Bishop of Carthage, declaring his
consent to their proceedings: After all which they both pronounce and subscribe
the solemn Sentence of deposing and excommunicating Nestorius, according to the
Canons, and agreeable to the Decree mentioned in the Letter of Celestine, but
the Sentence was passed in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, the true and
supreme President of this Assembly Bin. page 204. Lab. col. 533.
: And all this was done before Arcadius, Projectus and Philip, the Popes
Legates, came to Ephesus, and yet their absence was never objected by
Nestorius, as if that had invalidated these Acts. Further, we may observe that
an Oath was given in this Council only upon the Holy Gospels (according to the
Protestant usage) Bin. page 192. Lab. col. 504.
, not upon any relicts of the Saints, as the practice is now at Rome. In the
second Action, both Baronlus and Binius add a word to the Text, and make the
Popes Legate call the Pope when he speaks to the Synod [vestrum Caput] your
Head Bin. page 235. Baron. An. 431. page 576.
; and Baronius bids the Reader observe, that Philip the Popes Legate in open
Synod professed the Bishop of Rome was the Head of the Catholic Church, and
other Bishops, members under this Head: But first, this word [vestrum] is
forged by Baronius and Binius, the Greek having no more than [(...)] and Labbe
has been so much ashamed of this addition, that he leaves out [vestro] Lab.
col. 619.
; and the sense of the place is, that upon the Councils Acclamations by way of
approving Celestines Letter as Orthodox, Philip gives them thanks, that by
their Holy Voices, they as Holy Members had agreed to an Holy Head; he does not
say to their Holy Head, yet if he had, the whole Synod, and the three Legates
particularly in a solemn Relation to the Emperor, call Cyril the Head of the
Bishops here assembled Par. 2. Act. 5. Bin. page 250. Lab. col. 655.
; but he would be ridiculous who should thence infer That Cyril was the
perpetual Head of the whole Catholic Church; yet we may more justly prove that
from an Act of the whole Council, than Baronius does the Popes Supremacy, from
a Rhodomontado of his own Legate, who barely said this, the Council neither
approving nor disapproving Vide dictum Imp. Justiniani ap. Richer. Tom. 1. cap.
7.. 9. p. 299. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. page 162, 163.
of what he said in favor of his own Bishop. And no doubt the Orthodox
Patriarchs might any of them properly be called by this Title of an Head: For
Cyril, yea Memnon, Bishop of Ephesus, are so styled in the Councils Petition to
the Emperor, to set them at liberty, lest the Synod want an Head, and all the
Bishops of the World lie under an heavy burden of grief for want of their
Presidents Bin. page 304. Lab. col. 786.
. So that it is plain by these Titles, in those days, no more was meant, than
that the Bishops to whom they are applied had some eminent place in the Church,
and in this General Council; not that all, or any one who is called an Head,
had, or ought to have any supreme standing Jurisdiction in all times over the
whole Catholic Church. So when the Council calls Alexandria the greater Seat
Act. 4. Bin. page 243. Lab. col. 638.
, and Jerusalem is called an Apostolical Church Ib. Bin. page 244. Lab. col.
641.
, and Pope Celestine styles Cyril an Apostolical Man Par. 3. cap. 23. Bin. page
416. Lab. col. 1077.
; none of those Churches did ever draw any consequences from these passages,
that their Bishops were Supreme Judges over the whole Catholic Church; that
absurdity is peculiar to the Parasites of Rome, who make this Inference from
every Honorable Title, that is, any where, or upon any occasion, by way of
Complement, or seriously bestowed upon the Pope; but since others had the same
Titles given them upon Occasion, it is plain there is no good ground for such
Conclusions. It is further memorable, that when John, Patriarch of Antioch,
would have usurped a Jurisdiction over the Bishops of Cyprus, the Council of
Ephesus decreed, that no Bishop should have, or assume any Power over those
Provinces which had not been under him or his Predecessors before that time
Bin. page 306. Lab. col. ^01.
; which Decree plainly condemns the Bishop of Rome usurping a Jurisdiction over
this Island of Britain since the Ephesine Council, because it was not under any
of the Popes, either then, or of many years after. Finally, we may note, that
John, Patriarch of Antioch, being secretly a favourer of Nestorius, would not
join with Cyril or Celestine in condemning him, but held a separate Council
with such Bishops as were of his party, and there they Excommunicated and
Deposed Cyril and Memnon with all that joined with them. On the other side, the
lawful general Council Excommunicated John of Antioch and his accomplices; and
afterward upon his Repentance Cyril declares, he restored him to Communion
upon the terms prescribed by the true Council of Ephesus Par. 3. cap. 38. Bin.
page 447. Lab. col. 1153.
. Now if the Pope of Rome had then been known and believed to be the supreme
head of the Catholic Church, and the only infallible Judge in matters of
Faith; how could the Bishop of Antioch so much as pretend to Condemn that side
on which Celestine was, or to reject that Council wherein his Legates sat and
voted against him? Or how came the Pious Emperor Theodosius, and his Officers
so openly and so long to abet the party of John of Antioch, against that of
Celestine and Cyril? There needed but two Arguments, viz. those of the Popes
Infallibility and Supremacy, to have confounded all the pretenses of this
Schismatical Council, and they are not so much as once mentioned; Which is a
certain Evidence, that neither side knew of, or believed these Papal
Privileges, usurped in later times by that encroaching See.

Fourthly, I come to consider the confirmation of the Acts of this general
Council: And this the Preface ascribes entirely to the Pope Bin. Prof. page 5.
Lab. col. 10.
, and so do the Notes after the Council upon the word [Approved] Bin. Notis.
page 478. Lab. col. 1244.
, and so does Baronius in several places: But all this is without any just
ground; For the Preface says, he sent his Legates to confirm the Acts of the
Council in his name, and cites for this these words out of Celestine's Letter
sent to the Synod by these Legates: And what you derce^, shall be accounted,
defined and determined for the tranquillity of all Churches Praefat. Bin. page
5. Lab. col. 10.
. But no such words are in that Epistle, the Pope saying no more, but only that
he had sent these Persons to be present at their Acts, and to confirm what he
had long since decreed Editio Peltani and Contij ita legit -- Actis vestris
intererunt, quaeque a vobis sunt constituta suo calculo denuo confirmabunt.
Richer. Hist. Council. Tom. 1. cap. 7. page 294.
; To which he hoped their Holiness would assent, because they knew that which
was determined, was for the peace of all Churches Council. par. 2. Act. 2. Bin.
page 234. Lab. col. 618.
. The sense of which is, that Celestine having long before Condemned Nestorius
at Rome, he sent his Legates to the general Council to get that Sentence
confirmed, and doubted not of their assent to it, since this casting out of
Nestorius (the disturber of the Churches quiet) would tend to the Peace of the
whole Church: So that this passage proves, that the Council was to confirm the
Popes Decree, not that he was to confirm their Acts: And the Synod in their
Letter to Pope Celestine do expressly say, That they had judged his Sentence
against the Pelagians should remain firm and be valid, etc. adding that they
had sent him the Acts of the Synod and the Subscriptions, that he might know
what was done Par. 2. Act. 5. Bin. page 254. Lab. col. 666, and 667.
. But there is not one word desiring him to confirm their Decrees: But as to
the Emperors, the case is clear; For the Synod and the three Legates of the
Pope address to them, to Command that what this General Council had done
against Nestorius might be in force, being confirmed by their consent and
approbation Ibid. Bin. page 251. Lab. col 659. Baron. An. 431. page 579.
. And they Petition the Emperors to make null and void the false Synods
uncanonical proceedings against Cyril and Memnon Bin. page 304. Lab. col. 786.
. And in another Relation to the Emperors, they put both these requests
together Bin. page 295. Lab. col. 766, 767.
: And Sozomen says in express terms, that the Emperor by his suffrage
confirmed their Acts Sozom. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 9. page 419.
: Yea these Testimonies are so express, that Binius himself in his Notes at
last grants, That the Emperor dimissed the Bishops, adding this Decree, that
the Sentence of this Holy General Council against Nestorius should stand in
full force Bin. not. page 483. Lab. col. 1251. Richer. cap. 7.. 12. p. 307. The
Emperors Letter in the Pseudo-Synod says, The confirmation of the Acts should
have been obtained from him: And there Bin. his Note is, How this confirmation
is to be understood, other imperial Letters show. Bin. page 270. Lib. col. 706.
. So that nothing but the prodigious partiality of Baronius and Binius for the
Popes supremacy could put them upon inventing so groundless a Story, as that of
the Popes confirming the Decrees of this Council; which he did no otherwise
than all other eminent Orthodox Bishops, that is, by consenting to their Acts,
and applauding them afterward.

. 2. Some other scattered passages there are which we will briefly put together
here before we conclude this discourse. The Preface boasts much of the words of
Firmus Bishop of Caesarea, and cites them thus, that the Synod had followed
that which Celestine had prescribed, and being compelled by his Authority had
passed Sentence on Nestorius and his Opinion Praesat. Bin. page 2. Lab. col. 4.
; and a little after, Firmus his words are otherwise cited in the same Preface,
viz. That Celestine had prescribed a certain Rule for this business, which the
Council following, observing diligently the form of the Canons, they had
inflicted the Canonical and Apostolical Judgment Richerius shows that the
Apostolical Judgment is meant of the Synods Sentence. Tom. 1.. 9. page 297.
upon him Bin. ibid. page 4. Lab. col. 8.
; and hence they infer, that the Pope had commanded the Eastern Bishops, to
Decree over again and execute his Sentence against Nestorius Bin. ut supr. page
2. Lab. col. 4.
; Yea Baronius is so bold as to affirm. That Celestine sent his Legates, not to
subject the Cause of Nestorius to a new Examination, but only to see his
Sentence Executed; and that neither did he allow the Council any more than only
to Execute his Decree; nor did this general Council Arrogate any thing to it
self, but to Act according to his Sentence Baron. An. 431. page 559.
. According to which account, this Council of Ephesus was a mear mock Assembly,
and all these Bishops no more than Officers under the Pope, to put his Decrees
in Execution. But that this is most notoriously false appears; first, from
their false citing of the words of Firmus, who truly quoted says thus. The
Apostolical seat of Celestine formerly gave his suffrage, and set a Pattern in
this business (...), etc. Par. 2. Act. 2. Bin. page 235. Lab. col. 618.
. And a little after, which we also following -- have put in force that Form,
decreeing both a Canonical and Apostolical judgment against him: The sense of
which is this; That whereas the Pope in his Roman Synod had condemned Nestorius
unless he repented in ten days, this general Council approving of that
Sentence, had upon Nestorius his refusal to appear after diverse admonitions,
condemned him also: So that he was now not only censured by one Apostolical
See, but canonically also by all the Bishops of a general Council: And that
this is the Sense, is evident from the words of the Synod it self in the
Preface to the Sentence by them pronounced, being convinced by diverse proof,
that Nestorius holds impious Opinions, we are forced by the Canons and the
Epistle of Celestine our Fellow-Minister, even with Tears to come to this
severe Sentence against him, etc. Par. 2. Act. 1 Bin. page 204. Lab. col.
We see they name the Canons first, and before Celestine's Epistle, as laying
an obligation upon them so to proceed; and they call the Pope their
Fellow-Minister; nor was it his Authority, but his having proceeded according
to the Canons, that laid the necessity upon this great Council to follow his
Example, and imitate the Pattern he had set them. For nothing is plainer, than
that the Council did always intend to examine this Cause over again; and for
that reason they cited Nestorius, and read first the Letters of Cyril and then
of Celestine; and after a full hearing both of the Fathers Opinions, and of the
Blasphemies collected out of Nestorius his Writings, finding him finally
obstinate, they pronounce Sentence on him, not in the Popes name, but thus, Our
Lord Jesus Christ, whom he has Blasphemed, by this Holy Council Decrees, that
Nestorius shall be deprived of his Episcopal dignity, and shall be excluded out
of the Communion of Bishops Bin. Lab. ut supr.
. This certainly was an Original Decree, in the name of the General Council,
and by the Authority they derived from Christ, by which they gave force and
validity to the Sentence formerly pronounced by the Pope and his Roman Council;
which had signified nothing (against his Equal, a Patriarch of the Eastern
Church, over whom he had no jurisdiction) if it had not been thus confirmed: So
that it is a strange extravagance to talk, as if a whole general Council in
that Age were convened to no other end, but only to execute the Popes Decree
blindly, without any enquiry into the merits of the Cause. And Celestine's own
Letter (cited by Baronius to make out this Fiction) declares he believes, the
Spirit of God was present with the Council Baron. An. 431 page 559.
, of which there had been no need, if all their business had been only to
execute a Sentence passed before: There is also great prevarication used by the
Cardinal and Binius, about the case of John B. of Antioch, one of the
Patriarchs summoned to this Council: This John was Nestorius his old Friend,
for they had both been bred in the Church of Antioch; and he having (as
Baronius relates) received Letters both from Celestine and Cyril, (before the
general Council was called,) importing that Nestorius was Condemned both at
Rome and Alexandira, if he did not recant within ten days; writes to Nestorius
to persuade him for peace sake to yield, telling him what trouble was like to
befall him, after these Letters were published Baron. An. 430. page 540. cum
page 542.
: Here Baronius puts into the Text these Letters, that is, of the Pope of Rome:
As if the Pope were the sole Judge in this matter, and his Authority alone to
be feared; whereas the Epistle it self tells Nestorius, he had received many
Letters, one from Celestine, and all the rest from Cyril Vid. init. Epist. ap.
Baron. and Bin. Par. 1. Cap. 25. page 148. Lab. col. 389.
. So that this Parenthesis contradicts the Text, and was designed to deceive
the Reader. But to go on with the History, though Nestorius would not submit to
John upon this Admonition, yet he had no mind to condemn him; and therefore he
came late to Ephesus, after the Council was assembled, and when he was come
would not appear nor join with the Bishops there, but with a party of his own
held an opposite Synod, and condemned Cyril and Memnon with the rest, as
unjustly proceeding against Nestorius, and by false Suggestions to the Emperor,
he procured both Cyril and Memnon to be Imprisoned. Now among others in the
Orthodox Council, who resented these illegal Acts Juvenalis speaks, because
Cyril and Memnon being now accused, left their places and stood at the Bar.
Richer. Tom. 1.. 11. page 304. cap. 7.
, Juvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem says, That John of Antioch ought to have
appeared and purged himself, considering the Holy, Great and General Council,
and the Apostolical seat of old Rome therein represented, and that he ought to
obey and reverence the Apostolical and Holy Church of Jerusalem; by which
especially, according to Apostolical Order and Tradition, the Church of Antioch
was to be directed and judged Par. 2. Act. 4. Bin. page 244. Lab. col. 641.
; alluding no doubt to that passage Acts xv. where the Errors arising at
Antioch, were rectified and condemned in the Council at Jerusalem. But Baronius
falsely cites these words of Juvenalis, as if he had said, John ought to have
appeared at least, because of the Legates sent from Rome; especially since by
Apostolical Order and ancient Tradition, it was become a custom, that the Sea
of Antioch should always be directed and judged by that of Rome Baron. An. 4^1.
page 578.
. And Binus (in his Notes) transcribes this Sentence as Baronius had perverted,
mangled and falsified it Notis ad Council. Ephesians. Bin. page 482. Lab. col. 1249.
. Which Forgery being so easily confuted by looking back into the Acts of the
Council, and so apparently devised to support the Papal Supremacy, is enough to
show how little these Writers are to be trusted, when fictions or lying will
serve the ends of their darling Church. After this the Preface-tells us, that
though John still continued obstinate, the Synod referred the deposing of him
to the Popes pleasure Pref. ap. Bin. page 3. Lab. col. 7.
; as if they had done nothing in this matter themselves. But the Councils
Letter to Celestine says, That though they might justly proceed against him,
with all the severity he had used against Cyril; yet resolving to overcome his
rashness with moderation, they referred that to Celestine' s judgment; but in
the mean time, they had Excommunicated him and his party, and deprived them of
all Episcopal power, so that they could hurt none by their Censures Par. 2.
Act. 5. page 254. Bin. Lab. col. 666.
. Therefore the Council both Excommunicated and deprived him by their own
Authority, and only left it to the Pope, whether any greater severity should be
used against him or no: It Is true not only the Pope Par. 3. cap. 20. Bin. page
414. Lab. col. 1072.
, but the Emperor Ibid. cap. 24. Bin. page 418. Lab. col. 1081.
afterward moved, that means should be used to reconcile this Bishop and his
Party to the Catholic Church, by suspending this Sentence a while, and
procuring a meeting between Cyril and John: But still it must not be denied,
both that the Council censured him their own Authority; and that Cyril without
any leave from the Pope, did upon John's condemning Nestorius, receive him into
the Communion of the Catholic Church Par. 3. cap. 38. Bin. page 447. Lab. col.
1153.
. Yet because Sixtus the Successor of Pope Celestine, among other Bishops was
certified of this, thence the Notes and Baronius infer, that this
reconciliation also was by the Authority of the Sea of Rome: Whereas Cyril's
own Letter shows, that the Terms of admitting John, to Communion, were
prescribed by the Council and the Emperor, and that Cyril alone effected this
great work.

We may further observe, Binius in his Notes tells us, that after the
condemnation of Nestorius, the Fathers shouted forth the praise of Celestine,
who had censured him before Bin. Not. page 481. Lab. col. 1247.
. And Baronius says, the Acclamations followed the condemning of Nestorius, in
which they wonderfully praised Celestine, as the Synodal Letter to the Emperor
testifies Baron. An. 431. page 570.
. By which a Man would think, that Celestine had the only Glory of this Action.
But if we look into the first Act of the Council, there are no Acclamations
expressed there at all after the condemnation of Nestorius; and the Synodical
Letter to the Emperor, cited by Baronius, has no more, but [(...)] viz. that
they praised Celestine, which imports only their commending his Sentence;
whereas in that first Act every one of the Bishops present, makes a particular
Encomium in the praise of Cyril's Faith, as being in all things agreeing to the
Nicene Creed, which fills up at least forty pages together in Labbe's Edition
Bin. page 175. Lab. col. 461, ad col. 501.
. As for the Acclamations, they are in the second Act, and in them Cyril is
equally praised with Celestine; for the Fathers say, To Celestine, another
Paul; to Cyril, another Paul; to Celestine, keeper of the Faith; to Celestine,
agreeing with the Synod; to Celestine, the whole Synod gives thanks; one
Celestine, one Cyril, one Faith of the Synod, one Faith of the whole World Par.
2. Act. 2. Bin. page 235. Lab. col. 618.
. This was just after the reading of Celestine's Letter, brought by his Legates
to the Council; yet we see even when the occasion led them only to speak of the
Pope, the Fathers join Cyril with him, knowing that Celestine's Sentence, as
well as his Information, was owing entirely to Cyril's Learning and Zeal.

Moreover we have another touch of their sincerity about the Virgin Mary; For
Baronius calls the people of Ephesus The Virgins Clients, Subjects and
Worshippers, adding, -- That as they had once cried out, great is Diana, so now
being converted, they set out Mary the Mother of God with high and incessant
Praises, and persevered to venerate her with a more willing Service, and to
address to her by a more solemn Worship Baron. An. 431. page 570, 571.
. By which one would imagine, that in the time of this Council, and ever since,
the Blessed Virgin had been worshipped as she is now at Rome; but there is not
one word of this true, except only that she was there declared to be the Mother
of God: That Epistle of Cyril's, from whence Baronius proves this, says
nothing of either Praises or Worship given to the Blessed Virgin; he says
indeed, that when the people heard Nestorius was deposed, they began with one
voice to commend the Synod, and to glorify God, because the Enemy of the Faith
was cast down. And when he had related what Honors the People did them by
carrying Lamps and burning Incense before them, he add^, Thus our Savior
manifested his Glory and his Power of doing all things, to those who blasphemed
him Baron. ib. vid. Epist. ap. Bin. page 216. Lab. col. 574.
: So that all this story of their praising and venerating the Blessed Virgin,
is his own Fiction; as is also that other conjecture of his, that the Synodal
Epistle declares, that John the Evangelist, and Mary the Mother of God once
lived together at Ephesus Baron. ib. page 571.
: For that Synodal Epistle speaks only of two Churches there called by their
Names Bin. ut supr. and ita Lab.
. So when he and Binius say, it is believed that this Addition to the Angelical
Salutation was then made, Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us Baron. An. 431.
page 601. Bin. not. page 483. Lab. col. 1252.
; and Baronius adds, that all the Faithful use to say, and often repeat this,
and teach it their Children, even while they sucked the Breasts. But I ask, Why
does any Man believe this? Is it barely because Baronius says so? Does not he
say an hundred false things to justify the Corruptions of Rome? Or can he
produce one ancient Author, about this time, or of diverse Ages after, wherein
this Phrase, Mother of God pray for us, is used? It is certain he cannot
Cy^illi verba sunt (...) -- (...) --. etc. Homil. Cyril. in fine Bin. page 222.
Lab. page 590. Ubi cultum attribu^ it Sanctae Trinitati, Gloriam Christo, at
solum Lauds Beatae Virgini.
; and therefore this blasphemous addition is much later than the Council of
Ephesus; and the Custom of saying it and teaching it to their Children, is a
Scandalous Innovation, brought in by the Roman Church in the Superstitious
Ages, and justly rejected by us who keep close to Antiquity, in owning the
Blessed Virgin to be the Mother of God, but do not Worship her or Pray to her.
And thus much for the Council of Ephesus, whose Acts being extant at large, do
abundantly confute the Popes Supremacy, and set forth many other Usages and
Practices of Rome, to be Innovations and Corruptions.

. 3. After Celestine's death, Pope Sixtus or Xystus the An. Dom. 432.
Third succeeded, who sat about eight years, but did few Memorable things: In
his younger days he was not only a Favourer, but a Patron of the Pelagians Aug.
ad Sixth. Presb. ep. 104, and 105.
, though afterward he writ against them, and strenuously opposed them Prosp.
adv. Collat. and Chro. An. 440.
. Wherefore Baronius does not sufficiently prove those three Tracts (Of Riches,
Of Evil Teachers, and of Chastity) which go under the name of this Pope, were
not his, by saying there are diverse Pelagian Doctrines in them; since if they
were writ in his youth, Xystus was then a Pelagian himself. This Pope writ (as
is said) three Epistles, two of which are put into the Council of Ephesus,
because they show Xystus his Consent to what the Council had done, and to
Cyril's actings afterward as to John, Bishop of Antioch: In the later of these
Epistles, there is a memorable Saying, cited by Vincentius Lirinensis, Let
there be no liberty for Novelty hereafter, since it is not convenient to add
any thing unto that which is Old Bin. page 486. Lab. col. 1262. Baron. An. 432.
p. 618.
. Had his Sucessors minded this good Rule, the Roman Church had not added so
many New Doctrines and Practices to those Old Ones, which were received and
used before Xystus his time. The Pontifical relates a Sorry of one Bassus, who
accused this Pope of Adultery, and that a Synod of 56 Bishops, convened by the
Emperor's Order, cleared him, and condemned his Accuser. Now for the greater
credit of this Pope, some have forged a third Epistle, wherein he is made to
signify to them his purging himself upon Oath: But Labbe condemns the whole
Epistle as spurious, and Binius rejects it, because it is stolen in part out of
Pope Fabian his third Epistle, and because the Date is wrong Bin. page 486,
487. Lab. col. 1263. 1265
; for these Arguments will serve to condemn an Epistle, that supposes a Pope
accused and tried by his Peers, whereas, had it been for the Supremacy, Binius
would have justified it, though it had these and greater faults. Besides this
Epistle, some illiterate Monk has forged the Acts of this Council, wherein the
Pope was tried; and though there be neither Latin nor Sense in it (being as
dull as that of Sinuessa) but the Inventor designing to do Honor to the Pope,
is very gently censured both by Baronius and Binius Bin. page 489. Lab. col.
1265. Baron. An. 433. page 641.
. And to this they have tacked another such a Council of the Trial of
Polychronius, Bishop of Jerusalem, before Pope Sixtus, for attempting to
challenge the Precedence before Rome, etc. And Binius confesses not only, that
Pope Nicholas alleged this Council for good Authority, but that the Modern
Writers of their Church do so also: Whereas he owns there was no such man
Bishop of Jerusalem, and that the whole Story and Acts are a Fiction of no
credit in the World Not. Bin. page 494. Lab. col. 1283.
; by which we may learn to be cautious how we trust the Roman Writers (Ancient
or Modern) when they cite Records to support the Grandeur of the Church.

About this time Theodoret mentions a great Council at Constantinople, under
Theodosius, about settling the An. Dom. 439.
Precedence of the Eastern Patriarchats, on occasion of a Contest between the
Churches of Alexandria, Constantinople and Antioch. Baronius (and out of him
Binius) in relating this, have added to Theodoret's words, that Alexandria
claimed the Priority before all the Eastern Bishops, because he was the first
Bishop of the Catholic Church after the Pope: But the Quotation he produces
out of Theodort, Ep. 86. does not so much as mention Rome nor the Pope: So that
they have invented that part of the Story to keep up their Churches Credit.
However this Council evidently shows Baron. An. 439. page 678. Bin. page 495.
Lab. col. 1284.
, that the Roman Church had nothing to do with the East; they called great
Councils without him, and settled the Precedencies of their own Patriarchats
without taking notice of the Pope. As for Sixtus, he made no figure in the
World; and all we hear of him further is, that being warned by Leo his Deacon
(and Successor afterward) he discovered and prevented the Attempts of Julianus
of Hecla, a Pelagian Heretic, who endeavored to get into the Churches
Communion, as Prosper informs us, An. 440. in Chron. In this year was held the
Synod of Riez, in the Province of Narbon, dated by the Emperors and Consuls,
without any mention of the Pope Bin. page 495. Lab. col. 1284.
. For it was held under Hilary, Bishop of Arles, who first subscribes, and is
meant in the Canons by the name of the Metropolitan, as Marca confesses De
Marca de sac. and imper. lib. 5. cap. 31. page 93.
. And though Binius have no Notes to this purpose, I must observe, that this
Hilary of Arles, as Primate of those parts of France, calls a Provincial
Council, deposes a Bishop of Ambrun, uncanonically chosen, and makes diverse
Decrees with his fellow Bishops, who doubtless were not then so much enslaved
to the Pope, as in after times.

. 4. Leo the First succeeded Xystus, being an active, An. Dom. 440.
bold and aspiring Man, so that he concerned himself in all the affairs of
Christendom, and every where labored to advance the Roman Supremacy Permaximum
fuisse Authoritatis Papalis amplificationem. Richer. de Leon. hist. council.
univ. Tom. 1. page 336.
, for which he had a favorable conjuncture by the misfortunes which then
happened to all other great Churches. The Africans were under a cruel
persecution; the Eastern Church distracted with Heresy, and a woeful Schism;
the Orthodox Bishops in the East betrayed, and oppressed by three of the four
Patriarchs, and the fourth of the Eastern Patriarchs condemned and murdered;
the Emperor of the West very young, and he in the East a weak man: and both
governed by devout and zealous Women: All which circumstances contributed to
make Leo (who was always Orthodox and powerful) very great. The Pontifical
relates but few of his Actions, and those with many mistakes Bin. page 497.
Lab. col. 1290.
; but because all the following Councils give us so much of his Life, I shall
only make some remarks upon the Pontifical, and take the rest in the order of
time. First, It Is said there he found out two Heresies, the Eutychian and the
Nestorian: But the Nestorian Heresy was found out and condemned long before
his time; and as for Eutyches, he was found out and censured by Flavianus,
Bishop of Constantinople, before Leo took him for a Heretic; yea, he writ a
kind Letter to this Heretic Leon. ep. 6. page 95.
, and two angry Letters in his behalf to the Emperor and Flavianus Leon. ep. 7.
and 8.
, because he was excommunicated. And till he was informed by the Bishop of
Constantinople what dangerous Doctrines he held, Leo inclined to be Eutyches
friend, for which (indeed) afterward he made ample amends, in assisting toward
Eutyches condemnation. Secondly, The Pontifical variously and falsely reports
the number of Bishops in the Council of Chalcedon, and is mistaken in saying,
Pulcheria was present with Martianus there, and that they confessed their Faith
before the Council, desiring them to send to Pope Leo to expound the Faith: And
that Leo after this did write a Tract, condemning all Heresies; all which are
gross mistakes: But it is true, that he writ many Epistles, and frequently
showed his approbation of the Council of Chalcedon, and that he did prevail
with Attila, King of the Hunns, to deal gently with Rome, when it was in his
power to have destroyed it. It Is very probable also, that he added some
passages to the Roman Office, and that he ordered some to watch the Church of
St. Peter and Paul, to which, in this Age, many began to make Visits and
Oblations. But Binius his Notes add diverse incredible Stories, as that about
the Hearse-Cloth, which Bled when Leo clipped it with Scissors, which Gregory
mentions near 200 year after only as a report, which he could not cite any
Author for: And another Story or two out of Sophronius his Pratum Spirituale, a
Book stuffed with Fables, as Baronius himself confesses Baron. An. 407. n 35.
page 261.
, for having cited a false Story out of this Author, he has these words, since
he put so many lies together in this one Narration, what credit can be given to
the rest? Yet Baronius himself cites this Author for Miracles and Visions, very
often, and in one place relates two Miracles out of Sophronius, for the glory of
that Epistle which Pope Leo writ to Flavianus against Eujyches and Nestorius.
An Epistle indeed very Orthodox, and at that time very seasonable, but far from
meriting those prodigious Encomiums Baronius or the Legends give it, who
magnify it as if it equalled the Creed, and proved the Pope alone was to
define all controversies of Faith, to teach General Councils what they were to
believe, and to give Laws to all Bishops in the World Baron. An. 449. page 80,
and 81.
. But whatever excellency there is in this Epistle (which is in number the Xth,
and printed in the Council of Chalcedon Lab. Tom. 4. page 344.
, it is not to be ascribed to Pope Leo, but to the learned Prosper, who was his
Amanuensis, and wrote not only this, but many other Letters for him; so that
the Sense and Phrase is Prosper's, only they are writ in Leo's name, as
Gennadius testifies, who lived but fifty year after Leo became Pope Gennad.
catal. ap. Hieron. Tom. 1. page 402.
; and the same is affirmed by Trithemius Trithem. de script. in Prosp. col. 37.
and Marcellin. in Chron.
: And we may observe, that an Epistle of this very Prosper's against the
Pelagians (as we noted before) went under Pope Celestine's name, but far
exceeded the Style of Celestine's own Letters: I only add, that Labbe here
prints all these Epistles which bear Leo's name Lab. col. 1293.
, some of which I shall have occasion to consider afterward.

The first Council of Orange, Binius intitles under Leo; An. Dom. 441.
but Labbe, ashamed of that gross pretense, leaves these words out Bin. page
498. Lab. col. 1446.
. For it was called by, and held under Hilary, Bishop of Arles, who exercised
the Jurisdiction of a Metropolitan and Primate in those parts; and all the
Bishops of those parts owned his Primacy, and met at his Summons P. de Mar.
lib. 5. page 94.
, of which Binius takes no notice. There were made in this Synod many good
Canons for Discipline, which were observed in the Gallican Church, without any
confirmation from the Pope. At the end of this Council is published a Form of
Excommunication, and a very excellent Office for reconciling Penitents,
supposed to be made in this Council, which proves Forms had then been long in
use.

The second Council at Vasatis, or Razai in France Bin. page 501. Lab. col.
, seems to me to be wrong dated; for I observe the An. Dom. 442.
fourth Canon cites a passage out of St. Hierom, with this Title, One of the
Fathers asserts, etc. Now St. Hierom died but 20 year before the date of this
Council, and could hardly so soon have been cited by the Title of One of the
Fathers; besides, the sixth Canon cites one of the spurious Epistles of
Clement, forged after this Age. But the fifth Canon orders, him who is
aggrieved with the Sentence of his Bishop, to appeal to a Synod; which shows,
that reserving Causes to Rome was not allowed or used then.

The Editors have a Roman Council of Pope Leo's, which was no more than a
Solemn meeting of the An. Dom. 444.
Clergy and Laity, to examine the Manichean Heretics Bin. p. 502. Lab.
. But there were two remarkable things in Leo's proceeding against them, of
which the Notes say nothing; but Baronius informs us Baron. An. 443. page 14.
Tom. 6.
, First, That he discovered the Manicheans by their refusing to drink of the
Cop in the Blessed Sacrament, which this Pope counts a great impiety in this
sort of People, not foreseeing that his Successors would take the Cup away from
all the People of that Church. And this passage makes it clear, that all the
People at Rome, who were Orthodox, did receive the Cup then, or else the
Heretics not receiving it could not have discovered them. Secondly, Baronius
notes, that because these Manicheans idolatrously adored the rising Sun; Leo
forbid the Orthodox People to use that innocent and ancient Custom of bowing
toward the East, for the peril of Idolatry: Now had there been any Images
adored in his time; for the same reason he must rather have forbidden bowing
down before them.

The second Council at Rome under Leo, was in the An. Dom. 445.
Cause of Hilary Bishop of Acles, who had justly deposed a scandalous Bishop in
a Provincial Synod Lab. col. 1461.
. But he (as such ill Men had often done) flies to Rome to complain; and Leo
not considering the equity of the censure, but Hilary's having acted as a
Primate in those parts of France, contrary to the Decrees of former Popes,
espouses this evil Bishops Quarrel, being more concerned for his designed
usurpation of a supremacy, than the honor of the Church. Upon this Hilary, who
was one of the most pious and learned Men of that Age, goes on foot to Rome,
and requires the Pope to act more solito, in the accustomed manner, and not to
admit such to Communion, who had been justly condemned in their own Country
Lab. col. 1462.
; and when he saw the Pope was resolved to break the Canons, and set up his
Supremacy by right or wrong, he suddenly departs from Rome without taking any
leave of Leo, for which the Angry Pope writes to the Bishops of France,
declaring Hilary's Acts null, and depriving him of his Power, to Congregate
Synods and Depose Bishops, etc. Leon. ep. 89. ap. Lab. col. 1396.
And though he brags much of his universal Authority, etc. in that Epistle, yet
knowing how little this would signify to Hilary and the rest of the French
Bishops, he gets an Edict from the Emperor Valentinian to back his Orders,
which because there are some great words for the Popes Supremacy in it,
Baronius magnifies as worthy of perpetual Memory Lab. col. 1397. Baron. An.
445. page 31.
. And since their Champions allege this Edict as a proof of the Roman
universal Supremacy, I will observe upon it, First, That it was easy for the
Pope to cite false Canons to a young and easy Emperor, and persuade him, that
the Councils had given him this Supremacy, as his Predecessors had lately done
in Africa. Secondly, That the Pope probably drew up this Edict himself, and so
put in these Flourishes about his own Authority: Which will be more plain if we
consider, that the Emperor Leo in one of his Edicts says, Constantinople is
the Mother of the Orthodox Religion of all Christians, with much more to this
purpose Baron. An. 472. page 294. Vid. item An. 458. page 233.
; but Baronius relating this says, Thus indeed Leo speaks thus, but without
doubt it was conceived in the words, and writ in the Style of Acacius who
swelled with Pride: But Leo Bishop of Rome was as proud as Acacius, and had
more influence over Valentinian, than Acacius ever had over the Emperor Leo;
wherefore in Baronius own words, without doubt Valentinian' s Edict was drawn
up in Pope Leo' s Style, and so he is only a Witness in his own Cause. Thirdly,
The Sentence of both the Emperor and the Pope was unjust; and although Leo
wheedled the Bishops of France to reject Hilary, that Bishop still acted as
Primate, and called Synods afterward; so that this big-speaking Edict was
neither believed nor obeyed as de Marca shows P. de Marca de concord. lib. 5.
cap. 33, and 34 page 98, etc.
. For indeed Hilary was Primate by Original right, and the French Bishops stuck
to him not only for his great Sanctity, but because they feared the then
growing Encroachments and Usurpations of Rome: And finally Pope Hilary, Leo's
Successor determined this Controversy, contrary to Leo's Decree Vid. Hilar.
ep. 11. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 1. page 430.
; by which we see how odly Causes go at Rome, since some Popes were for the
Primacy of Arles and some against it: But when there was a stout Bishop there,
he kept his Post without regard to the Roman Sentence: And now I hope the
Reader will smile at Baronius his inference from this Edict of Valentinian's,
Thou see clearly from hence (says he) the Pope of Romes Authority over all
Churches Baron. An. 445. page 32.
, for he must be quicksighted indeed, who can see any more in this instance
than an unjust and ineffective Claim.

. 5. Soon after Pope Leo had an opportunity to encroach An. Dom. 447.
upon the Churches of Spain; for one Turibius a Bishop there, who is called
Leo's Notary, (and probably had been bread a Notary at Rome,) certifies the
Pope that there were many Priscillian Heretics there, who confirmed their
Errors by certain Apocryphal Writings full of Blasphemies; Leo writes back to
Turibius Leon. ep. 93. ap. Lab. col. 1410.
, advising him to get a Council of all the Bishops in Spain, and there to
Condemn the Heretics and their Apocryphal Books: This advice Baronius calls
his enjoining a general Council (more Majorum) this being the right of the Pope
of Rome. And though he confesses the Bishops did not meet where the Pope
advised, nor could they meet in one place, because they were under diverse
Kings, and those Arians; yet he desires us to observe from hence, how weighty
the Popes Authority was, even with Barbarous and Arian Kings Baron. An. 447.
page 46, 47.
. But alas any one may see, he cannot make out that ever these Kings gave leave
for any Council, and it is more probable these Bishops met privately on this
occasion; yet they have made out of this, A General Council of Spain Bin. page
503 Lab. col. 1465.
: And here they would have that rule of Faith first received from Leo and
approved, which is printed before, in the first Council of Toledo Bin. Par. 1.
page 599. ut supr.
: And Baronius says the word [Filioque] proceeding from the Father and the
Son, was first added in this Council to the Creed, by the Authority of Pope
Leo, and brags much of the Popes supremacy, even in matters of Faith on this
occasion Baron. An. 447. page 47, and 48.
. But first these words were put in by these Councils, to check and discover
Priscillian Heretics, not by any express order of the Pope; and indeed Leo had
been an ill Man, if he had imposed an Article of Faith upon the Churches of
Spain, which (as Baronius confesses,) was not received expressly at Rome till
many Ages after. Secondly, These Spanish Bishops did not add these words to the
ancient Creed, but put them in by way of Explication, into an Occasional
Confession of their own Composing. Thirdly, Baronius himself notes, that the
Spaniards and French afterward added it to their usual Creeds, and at last
Rome took this Addition from them: And in the same place he commends the
Northern Nations for adding these words, and those of Rome for rejecting them a
long time; so that contradictory Actions may be (it seems) equally commended,
by those who can blow Hot and Cold with the same Breath.

About this time was held a great Council at Verulam in Britain, by St.
Garmanus a French Bishop, called over by the Orthodox Britains to assist them,
in confuting and condemning the Pelagian Heresy, as Math. of Westminster
computes Lab. col. 1464. Spelm. Council Tom. 1. page 47.
. Baronius indeed pretends this happened diverse years before, only because
Prosper (or some who have since corrupted his Chronicle) affirms, that Pope
Celestine sent St. Germanus hither Baron. An. 429.
. But most Historians agree, the French Bishops from a Council of their own,
sent over this assistance to the British Church the first time, without any
order from Celestine; and this Council of Verulam Usherij Brit. Eccles. Antiqu.
page 174.
was held long after Celestine's death, at St. Germans second coming hither: So
that in this Island, the Roman Church was not considered in those days; and one
Sister Church desired help of another to repress Heresies, without any recourse
to Rome.

. 6. In a Synod held at Constantinople under Flavianus, An. Dom. 448.
. Eutyches a Monk was formally accused of Heresy, for affirming that Christ had
but one Nature after his Incarnation, and that it was as much Nestorianism to
hold two Natures as two Persons; Upon which he was three several times cited
before the Council, and had sufficient time given, but refusing to come till
the time was expired, and (though he did come at last) obstinately defending
his Heresy, he was unanimously condemned, and by Flavianus and the whole Synod
Excommunicated and Degraded, which was a judicial proceeding agreeable to the
ancient Canons. Binius and Baronius in relating this Bin. page 504. Lab. col.
1467. Baron. An. 448. page 55.
, make some remarks which must be considered: For first, when Eutyches says,
He would subscribe the Nicene and Ephesine Councils, so far as they were
agreeable to Scripture; They note this was (more Haereticorum) according to the
manner of Heretics: But I would ask First, Whether it be not true, that the
Decrees of Councils in matters of Faith, are no further obligatory than they
are proved by Scripture? Secondly, Whether the most Orthodox Fathers
Athanasius, Cyril, etc. did not always appeal to Scripture in the first place?
And the greatest Councils ever confirm their determinations first by Scripture?
Thirdly, Whether any of the Adversaries of Eutyches in that Age did censure
him, for appealing first to Scripture? Baronius himself cites Flavianus his
Letter, wherein he first alleges Scripture, and then the Expositions of the
Fathers Baron. An. 449. page 76.
. And Pope Leo says Eutyches erred, by not having recourse to the Prophets,
Apostles and Evangelists, but to himself Ep. x. Leon. M. ad Flav. inter ep.
Leon. page 304.
; so that it was no fault in Eutyches to prefer Scripture before the Fathers
expositions; nor to appeal to it; but to expound it wrongfully was his Crime,
and that is (more Haereticorum.) Secondly, When Eutyches petitioned Theodosius
in this case, for a safe conduct to the Synod, Binius adds to his Authors
words, that this was also after the manner of Heretics: Whereas it appears,
that diverse of the Orthodox have applied themselves to the Emperors to assist
and support them, and none oftener than Pope Leo himself; so that a thing done
as frequently by the Orthodox as Heretics, can be no sign or mark of Heresy.
Thirdly, Binius pretends, that Eutyches appealed from this Synod to Pope Leo:
Now this is confuted by the very Acts of the Synod, related in the Council of
Chalcedon, and recited by Baronius, where it is said, Eutyches appealed to the
Council of the Roman Bishop, and of the Bishops of Alexandria, Jerusalem and
Thessalonica Baron. An. 449. page 75.
; yet they make as if this had been an Appeal only to the Pope. Fourthly,
Binius notes, the Appeal was not admitted: I reply, Pope Leo did so far receive
Eutyches Letter, that he writ three Epistles on his behalf, before he was
informed of the true State of the Case, and quarrelled with Flavianus for
condemning a convicted Heretic, before he had consulted him Leon. Ep. 6, 7,
and 8.
. But in truth there was no Appeal at all: Flavianus did write indeed to Leo,
(and probably to all other Patriarchs) after the Canonical Judgment was over,
to acquaint them with his proceedings; that so they might not break the Canons,
by admitting an Heretic in one Church, who was Excommunicated in another: But
the Style of Flavianus his Letter shows, that he need not ask Leo's leave to
censure an Heretical Priest of his own Diocese, nor does he desire the Pope to
confirm his Sentence, but only to make it known Epist. Flavian. ad Leon. inter
Epist. Leon. page 298.
: So that Baronius falsely infers the Popes power to judge of Heresy, and
confirm all Sentences against them, from this Letter of Flavianus: And he as
falsely makes the like inference from Eutyches writing to Leo, as if he knew of
what weight the Popes judgment was, for which Councils in doubtful Cases use to
stay, and to which all the Catholic Church would certainly incline Baron. An.
448. page 63.
. For Eutyches writ to other Bishops of Italy as well as the Pope, (as Baronius
in that Page confesses) and considered Leo no otherwise than as one Eminent
Bishop: And this Synod of Constantinople stayed not for the Popes Judgment, nor
did those Bishops who despised the Decree of this Synod, value Pope Leo's
Judgment after he had declared for Flavianus: So little truth is there in the
Annalists pompous observations, which only show, that all his aim is from every
passage, to extort some kind of color for his dear Supremacy.

In the same year were two Synods, one at Tire, the other at Berithus, in the
cause of one Ibas a Syrian Bishop, wherein the Patriarch of Antioch and
Constantinople were concerned; but the Pope is not once mentioned in the whole
proceedings Bin. page 505. Lab. col. 1468, etc. Baron. An. 448. page 64. An.
Dom. 449.
; But of the Cause it self, we shall hear more afterward.

Theodosius the Emperor being deceived by Eutyches and Chrysapius, one of his
great Courtiers, an Eunuch, espouses the Quarrel of that Heretic, and labors
to have the Sentence which Flavianus passed against him in the late Synod,
revoked; and Pope Leo was drawn into the same snare by the Letters of Eutyches
and Theodosius, till Flavianus had better informed him: For Leo writ both to
the Emperor and Flavianus on Eutyches behalf at first: And whereas Baronius
ought to blush for the Popes mistake, he recites these two Letters, and talks
big of his being owned for the lawful and chief Judge in Ecclesiastil
Controversies; yea the supreme Judge of the Universal Church, etc. Baron. An.
449. page 72, 73.
But though (as an ingenuous Romanist observes,) Leo in all his Epistles boasts
of the power of his Apostolical Seat, as much as he can, and more than by the
Canons he ought to do Richer. Histor. Council. Cien. cap. 8.. 2. page 335.
; yet neither of these Epistles say any such thing, as Baronius infers from
them. And that Letter of Flavianus, which delivered this infallible Judge from
his mistake, declares that Eutyches had received a just and Canonical
Condemnation, to which the Pope ought to consent, and to join in it: By which
we see a Sentence against an Heretic was just, before the Pope knew of it, and
that he and all Orthodox Bishops, ought by their subsequent consents to ratify
what any one Bishop had Canonically done: And since Eutyches was already
rightly censured, Flavianus requires Leo (and no doubt other Eminent Bishops)
to publish their consent to it, thereby to prevent the design of Eutyches,
which was to get a general Council called, to judge his Cause over again: Now
this serves Baronius to brag, that Flavianus knew there was no need of a
general Council, for that which the Popes Letters had defined Vid. Richer.
ibid. page 336.
A strange affection! For when Pope Leo, not first (as Baronius says falsely)
but last of all the Orthodox Bishops did stand up for Flavianus, and write to
confirm his Censure upon Eutyches, that very Cause was tried over again in the
Pseudo-general Council of Ephesus, and the true Ecumenical Council of
Chalcedon: Yea, Theodosius while the matter lay before the Pope, not staying
for his Sentence, calls a second Council at Constantinople, wherein a pacted
party of Heretics Friends revoked the Judgment passed on him by Flavianus Bin.
page 505. Lab. col. 1470. Baron. An. 449. page 74.
. And yet fearing this was not sufficient, Eutiches moved by Dioscorus,
Patriarch of Alexandria, to have a general Council called at Ephesus, which
might have sufficient Authority, not only to restore Eutyches, but to Condemn
Flavianus, though Leo should take his part.

. 7. This was the true occasion of calling this Second The 2d Pseudo-Synod of
Ephesus.
Council of Ephesus, which as to the manner of calling, the Persons present,
etc. was a General Council. But from the violent and unjust proceedings
thereof, is commonly styled The Pseudo-Synod, or the Thievish Council of
Ephesus The Acts of this Council are recited at large in the Council of
Chalcedon; wherefore the Editors refer us thither, only entertaining us here
with Binius his Notes, on which we will make some remarks Bin. page 506. Lab.
col. 1471.
. First, The Notes say, the Emperor called this General Council, usurping the
Popes Authority against right and the custom of the Church. Now here he first
owns that the Emperor called it: As to the pretended usurpation and breach of
Custom, it is certain the Pope never yet had called one General Council, as we
have particularly shown in three General Councils before, and they own it here;
so that undoubtedly the Emperor only followed the Custom of the Church, and
used that Right which his Ancestors had. Besides, let Binius or Baronius
produce one syllable in all Leo's Epistles, where that Pope (so jealous of his
Rights) did once complain of any injury done him by the Emperor in calling this
Synod: His Legate owns in this very Council, that the Pope had received such a
Letter of Summons as the rest of the Patriarchs did receive Richer. Hist.
Council. Genesis Tom. 1. c. 8.. 4. p. 340.
; and he obeyed this Summons, and sent his Legates thither, excusing his own
absence, without any reflection upon the Emperors having no Right to Summon
him: Yea, had he known it was his Right to call a General Council, why did he
write so many Letters to Theodosuis and to Pulcherius, humbly beseeching the
Emperor to call a General Council in Italy Richer. ib. p. 350.
? Nothing can be clearer, than that this pretense of Usurpation is a most
notorious Falsehood. Secondly, The Notes blame the Emperor for making Dioscorus
President of this Council; and Baronius calls this arrogating and usurping a
Right never attempted before, and he thinks God justly deprived Theodosius of
his Life the year after, for his wronging the Pope herein Baron. An. 449. page
78.
. But we have showed, Osius was the Emperors Legate, and by him made President
of the Council at Nice, and Cyril was by the Emperor made President in that of
Ephesus: As for this Council, the Pope was not like to be there in Person.
Flavianus, who should have had the second place, was a Party, whose Sentence
was to be enquired into; Domnus, of Antioch, was not altogether unsuspected;
but Eutyches friends had commended Dioscorus, of Alexandria, and Juvenalis, of
Jerusalem, to the Emperor as impartial and fit to Judge; and their Characters
made them (as the Case was supposed to stand) to have right to that Vid.
Richer. Tom. 1. c. 8.. 5. p. 246, etc.
. It Is true the Popes Legates did murmur at this, as Liberatus says Liberat.
brev. c. 12.
, and the Legates at Chalcedon called this a usurpation in Dioscorus; but
neither this Council nor that did insist upon that matter. Thirdly, The Notes
pretend Theodosius therefore summoned Leo to this Council, because he knew the
Council would be null without the Popes Authority. But the Letter of Summons
declares he called it by his own Authority, and he writ no other Summons to Leo
than he did to the Bishops of Alexandria and Jerusalem; so that it may as well
be said, Theodosius knew their Authority was as necessary as the Popes; but the
truth is, the consent of the great Patriarchs was so far necessary, that they
were to be duly summoned, and if possible, to be present; but they had no
Authority single, as to the calling or disannulling of any Council. Wherefore,
Fourthly, Though it be rejected, yet not because the Pope did not call it, or
preside in it (as his Notes pretend) but because of the unjust and violent
proceedings used in it; against which, not only the Popes Legates, but diverse
other Bishops did protest, and oppose them, even to the suffering of Banishment
and Deprivation. And here I must note a manifest contradiction in Baronius, who
in one page says, All the Bishops consented to the restitution of Eutyches,
and the deposing of Flavianus, the Legates of the Apostolic See only opposing
Dioscorus to his face: Yet in the next page he reckons up some Bishops by name,
who suffered for opposing Dioscorus; and adds out of Leo's Epistle to
Pulcheria, that many were deprived and banished for this opposition, and others
put in their places Baron. An. 449. page 95. cum page 96.
. Lastly, I only add, that the Emperor, being deceived by Eutyches, confirmed
the Decrees of this Pseudo-Synod, as his Ancestors were wont to do Baron. ib.
page 104.
; and for this reason the Acts of it were valid till they were disannulled by
the General Council of Chalcedon; and though the Pope disliked and complained
of this Council, he had no Authority to null all its Acts till another General
Council was called: Wherefore that Third Roman Council, wherein Leo and the
Bishops of Italy reprobated the Acts of this Pseudo-Synod of Ephesus Bin. page
507. Lab. col. 1475.
, was not sufficient to repeal the Council it self, but only to show that those
western Bishops would not receive it. For if the Popes Council alone had made
it null, what need had their been of a General Council to do that over again?
Yea, the Pope and this Roman Synod writ to the Emperor, earnestly entreating
him, that all things might remain in the same state they were before any
proceedings, till a General Council could meet Vid. Baron. An. 449. page 109.
; which shows that they did not believe their single Authority was sufficient
to annul all that was done The Emperor was desired to disanul this Synod, by
the Pope, etc. Council. Chalced. Act. 10. Bin. p. 294, etc.
. After this Roman Council, it seems Dioscorus, in his Private Council at
Alexandria, excommunicated Pope Leo, and Baronius makes this a greater Crime
than his confirming the Heresy of Eutyches, and he (with the Notes) observe it
as a wonder, that whereas Ninety Bishops signed the Heresy of Eutyches, only
Ten could be found to subscribe the Excommunication of the Pope Bin. in
predict. Council. 3. Romans p. 508. Lab. ut supr. Baron. An. 448. page 113.
; but the wonder ceases, if we consider that Eutyches was restored in a General
Council, or that which was called so, wherein there met an hundred twenty eight
Bishops, or their Deputies; but the Pope was excommunicated in a Private Synod
at Alexandria. I shall not enlarge upon the cruel usage of Flavianus in this
Pseudo-Synod of Ephesus, who died soon after of the blows and wounds given him
there, nor remark how Baronius would make him a Martyr for the Popes Supremacy
Baron. An. 449. page 97.
, whereas he was a Martyr for the Orthodox Faith, corrupted by Eutyches: Nor
shall I detain the Reader with any of his odd observations upon the flight of
Hilary, one of the Popes Legates, from this Council.

Anatolius, being by Dioscorus advanced to the Sea of An. Dom. 450.
Constantinople, in the room of Flavianus, Leo had great reason to fear he was
infected with the Heresy of Eutyches, and therefore he very carefully sent
three Legates to Constantinople, to inform him whether Anatolius were Orthodox,
and to desire a General Council might be called by the Emperor, and in Italy,
if he pleased, as his Letter imports Baron. An. 450. page 115.
; in the mean time (if we may trust the Acts of one of these Legates coming out
of the Vatican) Anatolius calls a Council at Constantinople, and in the
presence of the Popes Legates owns himself Orthodox, receives Pope Leo's Letter
to Flavianus, and condemns Eutyches and Nestorius; and this the Editors publish
with the Title of a Council at Constantinople Bin. page 508. Lab. col. 1475.
. Now though their own Author of the Vatican expressly says, that Anatolius
called this Council; yet both Baronius, and the Notes in the same page daringly
affirm, that the Popes Legates commanded all the neighboring Bishops to meet
in this Council Bin. and Lab. ut supr. Baron. An. 450. page 120.
: Which is as false, as that these Legates were sent to restore the lapsed
Oriental Church; and that both Theodosius and Anatolius, and all the Eastern
Bishops, in all these Transactions, owned the Pope to be the Supreme Head of
the Church. These things are only to be found in Baronius his Inferences, but
no Author or Record of these proceedings hint any such thing. The Legates chief
business was to petition the Emperor for a General Council; and it was usual
when any new Patriarch was advanced, that he should write an account of his
Faith to all the other Patriarchs; and Anatolius having been justly suspected,
was obliged to do it something more solemnly, for Leo's satisfaction.

CHAP. III.
Of the Council of Chalcedon, being the Fourth General Council.

BEING to discourse of the Fourth General An. Dom. 451.. 1.
Council at Chalcedon, we must observe, that besides the partial Preface before
it Bin. Tom. 2. par. 1. p. 2. Lab. Tom. 4. p. 1.
, and the fallacious Notes after it Bin. ib. page 409. Lab. col. 979.
, published by the Editors, the Acts of it are divided into three parts. The
first containing the Epistles, and other Writings precedent to the Council. The
second containing the several Acts of it. The third containing the Epistles,
and other Transcripts relating to that Council afterward. Of the first part I
shall treat very briefly, having spoken of diverse things, there collected, in
the former Chapter; only noting now some of the Frauds and Errors in these
preliminary Epistles. And first, I need not enlarge upon those false Stories in
the Preface to this Council, (which I confuted before, Anno 448, and Anno 449.)
That Eutyches appealed from Flavian' s Council at Constantinople, to the Pope;
That the Pope immediately became an Enemy to that Heretic; That it was the
highest Crime in Eutyches to appeal from the Pope to the Emperor Bin. Pref.
page 3. Lab. col. 3, and 4.
. Nor will it be necessary to insist upon the Prefacers owning that Theodosius
called the Pseudo-Synod of Ephesus, at Dioscorus his request; and though Pope
Leo did labor to hinder it, yet he durst not but send his Legates to it, who
indeed did generously refuse to join in the condemnation of Flavianus: But
whereas the Prefacer pretends Flavianus appealed to the Apostolic See Bin.
Pref. page 3. Lab. ib. col. 5.
(as if the Pope were alone fit to receive Appeals), I must note, First, That
de Marca confesses All the rest of the Patriarchs were his open Enemies, and
therefore he was compelled to apply to the Western Church for help De Marca de
concord. l. 7. c. 7. p 324.
, and yet he did not Appeal to the Pope alone; and Leo told Placidia, that
Flavianus Appealed not only to the Apostolic Throne, but to all the Bishops of
those parts Council. Chalced. par. 1. Bin. p. 24. Lab. col. 54.
; and Leo says the same thing in his own Epistles, that the Appeal was to all
the Churches of those parts Ibid. Bin. page 19. Lab. col. 42.
; and therefore all the Western Bishops joined with Leo in desiring a Council
might be held in Italy: Which was when they were met in Council at Rome, and
had (no doubt) declared their dislike of Dioscorus's proceedings; but it
sufficiently confutes the Prefacers boast of Leo and his Councils rescinding
the Acts of this Ephesine Pseudo-Synod, as if that had been sufficient to null
all that was done there; because if the Pope, in that Council of Rome, had
sufficient Authority to have abrogated the Acts of Ephesus, there was no need
for them to desire a greater Council to re-examine this matter, or for Leo (as
the Preface owns) to engage the Western Emperor, his Mother and his Empress to
write to Theodosius, to suffer the Transactions at Ephesus to be heard over
again Bin. page 4. Lab. col. 6.
. But Theodosius having called that Synod by his own Authority, and being
persuaded by Eutyches his Party, that the proceedings in it were regular, would
not be prevailed on by any importunities to grant this request; but he dying
soon after, and Marcian (by marrying Pulcheria, Sister and Heir to Theodosius)
coming to be Emperor, consented to call a General Council, but not (as the Pope
desired) in Italy, but in the East, where the Controversy began, and where by
the Ancient Canons it was to be decided. Which suffices to discover all those
falsehoods that are in that part of the Preface, which concerns the things
before this General Council.

In the Preleminary Epistles and Edicts which constitute the first part of the
Council of Chalcedon, we may observe many of the Titles of the Epistles are
corrupted by Roman Parasites. So in the first Epistle of Flavianus Vid. Lab.
number. 4. col. 15. marg. ita number. 6. Bin. p. 8. Lab. col. 18.
the true reading is, to Leo Archbishop of the elder Rome; but they have made
it Pope, etc. In Flavians second Epistle to Leo, the Latin Copies leave out of
the Title, and Fellow minister Bin. and Lab. number. 6.
: So again [Pope] is put into the Latin Copy instead of Archbishop in a Letter
of Leo's to the Monks at Constantinople Bin page 12. Lab. col. 23. number. 9.
. And in Leo's Epistle to Theodosius, in the Latin (for Leo, Bishop) there is
put in these absurd words, Leo, Pope of the Catholic Church of the City of
Rome Bin. page 12. Lab. col. 26. number. 10.
. And in his Epistle to the second Synod at Ephesus, the Latin leaves out these
Material Expressions, to his beloved Brethren in the Lord greeting Bin. page
15. Lab. col. 31. number. 13.
. To conclude, the Greek Title owns that Leo and his Roman Synod petitioned for
a Council in Italy; the Latin leaves this out, though the body of the Letter do
expressly declare that request Bin. page 18. Lab. col. 37, 38. number. 19.
Now these are plain Instances how little Credit is to be given to the Latin
Copies of this Council, and especially to these Titles, which the Popes
Flatterers have frequently corrupted, and altered them from the modest Style
used in those days. And hence we may gather how frivolously Baronius argues
from the Titles of Pope Leo's Epistles, wherein he styles himself Bishop of the
Roman and of the Universal Church Baron. An. 451. page 159. Leon. ep. 54. in
Council. Chalced. par. 3. Bin. p. 355. number. 6.
; that the Popes then did use the style of Universal Bishop; though St. Gregory
expressly denies that ever any of his Predecessors used that profane, new and
proud Title; but the Annalist makes bold to give Gregory the Lie, merely on the
credit of these corrupted and fictitious Titles, prefixed by forging Parasites;
for Leo's usual Inscription was, Leo, the Bishop of Rome, to, etc. so that
where we see Bishop or Pope of the Catholic Church of Rome, etc. Leon. ep. 12,
and 13. Council. Chal. par. 1. Bin. p. 12, and 14.
, there it is certain the Flatterers have been at work. But as to more material
observations; when Flavianus had condemned Eutyches, he does not desire the
Pope to confirm the Sentence, which being regularly passed on him by his own
Bishop in Council, no man could relax (as Leo himself grants Leo ep. ad
Pulcher. Bin. p. 13. Lab. col. 27. number. 11.
): But his Letter to Leo requires him to publish it to all the Bishops under
his jurisdiction Flav. ep. ad Leon. number. 6. Bin. p. 9. Lab. col. 19.
. In Leo's Epistle to Julian, one of his Legates, the Latin Copy puts in
[nobis,] and makes Leo say there is one Doctrine and Teaching of the Holy
Ghost, in us and in you; but the Greek reads -- in the whole Catholic Church
Ep. Leon. ad Jul. number. 8. Bin. p. 10. Lab. col. 19.
. Again, it is commonly pretended that Pope Leo was utterly against the
Emperors calling the second Council at Ephesus; and that one reason which made
all its proceedings null, was because it was called without his consent: But it
appears by diverse of this Popes Letters here published, that he owned it a
pious Resolution of the Emperor to call this Council Ep. Le. ad Theod. n. 10.
Bin p. 10. Lab. col. 2^. ita in ep. ad Pulcher. number. 11. ep. ad Synod. Ephesians.
number. 13.
, and in observance of his Commands, he sent his Legates to it: So that he
never pleaded his Authority in bar to the Emperors Right, even when in his
Judgment he thought there was no need of it Ep. Leon. ibid. number. 16. and 17.
Bin. p. 17. Lab. col. 37.
. And he declares that he sent these Legates, not to preside there, but to
agree with them by common consent on such things as might be pleasing to God,
as his Letter to this Synod shows, Number. 13.

It appears by Petrus Chrysologus, Bishop of Ravenna's Letter to Eutyches, that
he appealed to him as well as to the Pope; for he excuses himself as unfit to
judge a Cause that had been tried in a far Country, especially upon hearing
only one Party Ep. Petr. Raven. ad Eutyeh. number. 15. Bin. p. 17. Lab. col. 35.
: A Rule, which if the Popes had duly observed, they would not have received so
many unjust Appeals. It Is true, he refers him to Pope Leo's Epistle to
Flavianus, lately writ on this subject; but Binius in his Notes falsely puts in,
that he warns him to rely on it as an Oracle of the Holy Ghost Not. in Council.
Bin. p. 415. Lab. col. 992.
; for he only says, there was now an Orthodox Pope in St. Peter's Chair, who
had taught the Faith aright in this Epistle, which had been sent by Leo, a
little before, to this and other Bishops of the West, for their approbation.
But that of Leo himself in his Epistle to Theodosius, shows he was no honester
than he should be, and deserved not so good a Character as the Bishop of
Ravenna gives him; for he impudently cites one of the Sardican Canons, under
the forged Title of the Nicene Canon made by all the Bishops in the World Ep.
Leon. ad Theod. number. 19, 20. Bin. page 19, 20. Lab. col. 42, and 46.
; the Margin would excuse this, by pretending that other Fathers cite these
Sardican Canons under the Title of Nicene Canons; but we know no ancient
Fathers did so, except Zosimus and Boniface his Predecessors, who, to their
lasting infamy, were convicted of this notorious Fraud in the Council of
Carthage; and therefore it was an odd piece of assurance in Leo, so soon after,
to make use of the same detected Cheat. In another Epistle of his against
Eutyches, he says, In the mystical distribution of the spiritual Food, that is
given and received, by which those who partake of the virtue of the Heavenly
Food, are changed into his Flesh, who was made our Flesh Ep. Leon. ad Constable.
number. 23. Bin. p. 22. Lab. col. 48.
, which is point blank against their modern Opinion of Transubstantiation,
making the Bread to be Spiritual and Heavenly Food, and the change to be not in
the Elements, but in the Receivers. After this we have diverse Epistles of the
Western Emperor Valentinian; of his Mother and Empress, to Theodosius and
Pulcheria, writ at the request of Pope Leo, to desire that Emperor to revoke
the Judgment passed in the Pseudo-Synod of Ephesus, which further proves the
Pope had no Authority in himself to null those Acts; for he would not have
begged with Tears that which was in his own Power. But the great use the
Romanists make of these Letters, is on account of some high Expressions in them
about the Popes having a Power over all Bishops Ep. Valent. number. 25. Bin. p.
23. Lab. col. 51.
, and a Principality among them Number. 28. Bin. p. 25. Lab. col. 58.
. But there is some doubt whether these Epistles are genuine, the Story of
their being at Rome the night after St. Peter's day, not agreeing to the time
when these pretended Epistles must be writ: But if they be not forged, Rome
will gain nothing by these phrases, which Leo put into their Mouths; for he
certainly endited these Letters for them, as we may know by this Evidence, that
the Emperors Mother, Galla Placidia (who understood no more of the Canons than
the Pope told her) cites the Canon of Sardica, for a Canon of Nice Ep. Gal.
Placid. number. 26. Bin. p. 24. Lab. col. 54.
, as Leo had done before; and therefore ex ungue Leonem; we may easily know the
Penman of these Epistles: Now when he bears witness only to himself, his
testimony is suspicious, and of no weight at all; and Theodosius valued these
brags so little, that he calls Leo only by the name of Patriarch in his answer,
and affirms the Nicene Canons were not broken, and therefore he utterly
rejected the request Ep. Theod. number. 29, 30, 31. Bin. p. 25. Lab. col. 58, etc.
. Yet Leo was forced to be content, and to receive Anatolius chosen Bishop of
Constantinople, in this Synod of Ephesus into his Communion, only desiring him
to give an Account of his being Orthodox in the Faith, that he might publish it
to other Bishops Ep. Leon. ad Theod. Number. 32. Bin. page 32. Lab. col. 61.
; Soon after which Theodosius died.

Marcianus succeeding, and having no other Title to the Empire than his being
married to Pulcheria, he remitted much of the Majesty of Style in his Letters
to Leo and other Bishops, used by Theodosius and other Emperors Richer. Hist
Council. genesis l. 1 c. 8.. 11. page 363.
. But even when he complements the Pope in the highest strain, he will not
yield the Council should be called in Italy as the Pope desired, but resolves
to have it in the East, in some City which he himself should choose Epist.
Marcian. ad Leon. Number. 34. Bin. page 28. Lab. col. 63.
: Where we may see a notorious Forgery in Baronius and Binius, for whereas the
Emperor says, where it shall seem good to us, Baronius turns nobis, into
vobis, and Binius in his Notes follows him Baron. An. 450. page 119. Bin. not.
page 409. Lab. col. 980.
; as if the Emperor had left it to the Pope, to choose what City he pleased for
the Council to meet; Nay further, Binius who reads it nobis in the Epistle, yet
in a Note before that Letter, he says it was where the Peope pleased; and has
the Confidence to say in his Notes at the end of the Council, that the Emperor
writ to the Pope to appoint the place, time and manner of calling this General
Synod: Than which nothing can be more false; for the Pope would have had it in
the West if he might have chosen, but the Emperor Summoned the Bishops first to
come to Nice, as his Letters yet extant show Epist. Marcian. Number 36, and 37.
Bin. page 29, etc. Lab. col. 66, etc.
; and thither the Popes first Letter to the Synod ought to be directed; and I
wish that ignorant hand which altered the Title, and put in Chalcedon instead
of Nice, has not put in those words in it, of saving the honor of St. Peter,
and of his Legates being sent to preside in the Council Epist Leon. ad Synod
number. 40. Bin. page 31.
, which passages might look favorably on the supremacy if they be genuine;
only they are no more but Leo's own Evidence in his own Cause: After this the
Council being assembled at Nice, they with the Popes Legates desired the
Emperors presence among them, upon which he removed the Council to the City of
Chalcedon, and thither he afterward came to them Epist. Marcian. Number. 41. Bin.
page 32. Lab. col. 74.
. On which I shall only note, that Baronious and Binius have turned this
Petition of the Council and Legates, into a Declaration of the Legates alone;
for they pretend that the Emperor writ to the Council, That it seemed good to
the Popes Legates that he should be present Baron. An. 451. page 132. Bin. not.
page 409. Lab. col. 980.
; Which is a false representation of the matter, as the Emperors Letter shows.

. 2. We proceed now to the Council it self assembled at Chalcedon, and will
first consider these generals, viz. 1st. Who called it. 2ly. Who presided in
it, and in what Order they sat. 3ly. Who confirmed the Acts of it: And
secondly make some brief remarks on the particular Acts of this Council.

First, As to the Authority by which it was convened; Though the Preface had
owned that Marcian called this Council Praef. Bin. page 4 Lab. p. 6.
, yet the Notes affirm, it was appointed by the Authority of Leo, and by the
advice, assistance and help of Marcian congregated: And again, it is clear this
General Council was convened by the Exhortation and Counsel of the Emperor, but
by the Command and Authority of the Pope Not. Bin. page 409. Lab. col. 980.
: And this they pretend to prove by the Epistle of the Bishops of Maesia, writ
some years after the Council, which they cite thus, Many holy Bishops meeting
in the City of Chalcedon, by the Command of Leo (who is truly an head of
Bishops;) but the Epistle adds -- and of the venerable Bishop and Patriarch
Anatolius a Council was held, which was confirmed under two Emperors Council.
Chalced. par. 3. Number. 32. Bin. page 381. Lab. col. 912.
. But these fraudulent Editors leave out these last words, which show that
these Bishops were as much called by the Authority of Anatolius as of Leo, and
also that the Emperors confirmed the Acts of this general Council, which two
things Binius would conceal from his Reader: Now this accidental expression of
six Bishops long after, implying no more but only that Leo and Anatolius sent
out the Emperors Summons to all Bishops, (the other three Patriarchs being not
then of unsuspected fame,) is all they have to prove this egregious falsehood of
this Councils being called by the Popes sole Authority, except an Epistle of
Gelasius, another Pope pleading his own Cause: Whereas there are clear and
express proofs almost innumerable, that it was appointed and convened or called
by the Emperors Authority: For Leo was summoned himself by the Emperor, and in
obedience to that Summons excuses his own absence, and sends his Legates to the
Council Epist. Leon. Number. 40. Bin. p. 31. Lab. col. 70.
. And the Emperors general Letter, strictly requiring all Bishops to be there
is extant Epist. Marcian. Number. 36. Bin. page 29. Lab. col. 66.
, a Copy of which probably was delivered to the Pope: And in the beginning of
every Act it is expressly said, The Synod met ((...) -- (...), etc.) by the
command, or divine Authority of the Emperors Council. Chalced. Act. 1. Bin. page
34. Lab. col. 78, etc.
; and it is so often repeated, that this Council was called by the precept or
command of the Emperor, as makes it needless and impossible to cite all the
places: Liberatus the Deacon who writ some years after (when the Popes had
encroached something further) says, at the Popes request the Emperor commanded
this Council to be assembled Liberat. Brev. cap. 13. Bin. Tom 2. par. 2. page
185.
; which makes it a strange boldness in Baronius to affirm, that the Emperor
requested the Pope that a Council might be called Baron. An. 451. page 126.
, which not only this Historian but the Emperors Letter in the next page
contradicts: Yea Leo himself in his 61st Epistle, which the Notes cite with
great applause owns, the Council was gathered by the precept of the most
Christian Princes, etc. Not. Bin. p. 410. Lab. col. 982.
and the Pope in diverse of his Epistles, owns the Authority of calling general
Councils to be in the Emperor; yea the Legates own in the very Council it self,
that the Council was summoned by the Emperors Authority: So that for any of the
Popes flatterers to pretend the contrary, is to wink against the clearest light.

Secondly, As to the Presidents of this Council, the Historical Preface is very
positive, that the Apostolical Legates presided Praef. Bin. page 4. Lab. col. 6.
; and the Notes prove it was a general Council, because the Pope presided by
his Legates Not in Council. Bin. page 410. Lab. col. 981.
. But if that were essential to a General Council, there was none before this
of Chalcedon: Here indeed three of the five Legates named by the Pope,
Paschafinus, Lucentius and Boniface, were allowed to sit uppermost on one side
of the Bishops, but Basilius and Julianus, the other two, who also were named
Legates by the Pope, were not owned by the Council under that Character, and
therefore had no precedence given them Not. Bin. page 411. Lab. col. 984.
. And if this be all they mean by the Legates presiding, that they in right of
the Pope had the first place among the Bishops, we will not contend with them;
but if they suppose any Power or Authority these Legates had over the Council
by this precedence, we must deny that. Baronius brags that all things were
determined by the Popes Authority Baron. An. 450. page 120.
And the Notes before cited, speak as if they had done all things in this
Council Not. in Council. Bin. page 410. Lab. col. 981.
; yea, the Latin version of the Council forgets the Title of Presidents,
thrice, and claps it to the names of these Legates Act. 3. Bin. page 174. Lab.
col. 380. ibid. in subscrip. Act. 3. Bin. page 208. Lab. col. 448. Et subscrip.
Act. 4. Bin. page 259. Lab. col. 580.
, which Title is not in the Greek: But if we examine into the matter, these
three Legates who were allowed by the Council, had nothing more than the honor
of sitting uppermost upon the left hand, and sometimes speaking and subscribing
first: But in the twelfth Act concerning the Church of Ephesus, over which the
Patriarch of Constantinople claimed some Jurisdiction, Anatolius speaks before
the Popes Legate, and by his direction the matter was determined Act. 12. Bin.
page 305. Lab. col. 771.
. And though both Baronius and the Notes boast, That the Legates pronounced the
sentence on Dioscorus in the Popes name, as Presidents of the Council Baron.
An. 451. page 145. Not. in Council. Bin. page 410. Lab. col. 981.
; Yet if we consult the place we shall find, that they twice asked the Synods
Opinion of Dioscorus his Case, and the whole Synod declared he was to be
condemned; yet the Legates durst not pronounce the Sentence, till they asked if
the Synod commanded them to give the Ecclesiastical Sentence, and upon the
Order of the Synod they first pronounced it, and every Bishop single, declared
Dioscorus was deposed and excommunicated Act. 3. Bin. page 192, etc. Lab. col.
421, etc.
: So that there was nothing of Authority in the Legates, but only their
speaking first, and declaring that which the whole Council had agreed upon. And
because Anatolius commonly spoke in the second place, therefore he is joined
with Leo, and both of them together are called the Princes of this Council Act.
4. Bin. page 243. Lab. col. 540.
. So in one of the Epistles, after the Council, Leo and Anatolius are said to
have regularly presided herein Council. Chalced. par. 3. number. 42. Bin. page 389.
Lab. col. 933.
: By which Titles are meant only that they had the principal Places in this
General Council: But the true President of this great Synod, was the Emperor,
who, when he was present, sat above all the Bishops in the midst, and his
Legates, the Lay-Judges, in his absence, sat there; and these Representatives
of the Emperor indeed had not only the most honorable place of all, but some
Authority over the Synod it self: For they propounded or allowed all matters to
be debated; of them all Bishops, even the Popes Legates Act. 4. Bin. page 236.
Lab. col. 518. item Act. 16. Bin. page 334. Lab. col. 793.
, desired leave to speak; they summed up the Debates, and generally gave the
decisive Sentence, and upon that followed the Acclamations; so that these
Judges performed all that the Modern Popes Legates in late Councils have taken
upon them, since their Supremacy has been in its greatest Exaltation. If they
object, that neither they nor the Emperor were allowed to be present when
Dioscorus was condemned according to the Canons Baron. An. 451. page 143. Not.
Bin. page 412. Lab. col. 986.
. I Answer, the Judges in a former Session, after a full hearing of the Cause,
had determined (if the Emperor consented) that Dioscorus should have the same
punishment which he had inflicted on Flavianus, and that he and his Accomplices
should by the Council be deposed from Episcopal Dignity, according to the
Canons; to which Decree the whole Synod consented Act. 1. Bin. page 152. Lab.
col 310.
: So that there was no more to be done in the third Session, but only for the
Bishops canonically to execute this Sentence upon Dioscorus; and there was no
occasion for the Emperor, or the Lay-Judges to be present, only his
confirmation of this Sentence was so necessary, that they writ both to Marcian
and Pulcheria to desire their confimation thereof Act. 3. in fine, Bin. page
215. Lab. col. 463.
: So that the chief Authority was in the Emperor and his Representatives, the
Bishops advising, and they finally determining and confirming what was agreed
upon, so that they were properly the Presidents here.

Thirdly, As to the Confirmation of all these Acts, the Notes affirm, That all
which was decreed here concerning the Faith against Eutyches, was confirmed and
approved by Leo's Authority, as the Fathers had desired of him in their
Synodical Epistle; but they pretend he annulled and made void the 28th Canon
Not in Council. Bin. page 410. col. 2. Lab. col. 982. ita Baron. An. 451. page
159.
: And this they pretend to prove, not by the Synodical Epistle it self, for
that speaks only of the Emperors confirmation, and never desires the Pope to
ratify the matters of Faith, but says, he and they by his Legates had agreed
on these points, only they wish for his consent to the 28th Canon about the
Primacy of Constantinople, which his Legates had opposed Ep. Synod. ad Leon.
Council. Chal. par. 3. number. 2. Bin. page 351. Lab. col. 836.
. And indeed they supposed they had his consent in all things which the Legates
agreed to; and so those passages cited by the Notes out of Leo's Epistle, do
not prove that he confirmed the Decrees of Faith, otherwise than by giving his
common suffrage to them by his Legates, and agreeing with them afterward Vid.
Leon. ep. 61. cit. in not. verb. [approbatum.]
: And thus all other Bishops, who were absent, and had Legates there, confirmed
them as well as the Pope; as for his dissent from that Canon, and their brags
that he had made it void, we shall show afterward, that it remained in force
for all the Popes opposition. But it may be observed how notoriously the Latin
Version corrupts the Text to insinuate this Papal confirmation; for in the
Speech they made to the Emperor, in the end of the Council, the Latin has
these words, Concilii hujus a vobis Congregati Praedicationem, Petri sedis
Authoritate roborantes, implying that the Popes Authority was to confirm the
determinations of the Council: But the Greek has a quite different sense, viz.
that the determinations of the Pope (that is, Leo's Epistle to Flavianus) were
confirmed by that Holy Council which the Emperor had gathered Council. Chal.
par. 3. number. 1. Bin. page 347. Lab. col. 828.
: And not only that Speech, but many other evidences do show clearly, that the
Emperor confirmed the Decree of this Council. For First, In the end of diverse
Acts, the Judges, as the Emperors Legates, do confirm what was agreed upon Act.
4. Bin. page 248. Lab. col. 552.
, and sometimes promise to acquaint the Emperor for his confirmation Act. 5.
Bin. page 254. Lab. col. 568.
: Yea, the Emperor in his Speech made to the Synod, says he came to the Synod
to confirm the Faith, and not to show his Power, as Baronius and the Latin
Version reads it Baron. An. 451. page 141. vid. Act. 6. Bin. page 258. Lab.
col. 577.
; but the Greek more truly reads, I came to the Synod to confirm what was
agreed on, etc. which shows sufficiently, that the Emperor was to confirm all
the Acts: Yea, in that very Session wherein the Faith was subscribed by the
Bishops, the Emperor expressly confirms it, and makes a penal Sanction against
all that shall contradict or oppose it Act. 6. Bin. page 269. Lab. col. 608.
(...). etc. ib.
, upon which the Fathers cried out thou have confirmed the Orthodox Faith Ibid.
vid.
: And a little while after the Council was ended, the same Emperor put out two
Edicts, wherein he does fully confirm the Decrees of this Holy Council, adding
in the later, penalties to all that would not receive it Par. 3. Council. number.
3, and 4. Bin. page 352, etc. Lab. col. 840, etc.
. Wherefore we can make no doubt that the main confirmation of the Acts of this
Council was from the Emperor.

. 3. In the next place we will consider the several Sessions and Acts which
were in number sixteen. In the first Action, Baronius, by mistake, affirms,
that the Emperor was present Baron. An. 451. page 141.
; but the Acts show that he was only present by his Legates, the Lay-Judges,
who representing the Emperor the true President of this August Assembly, sat
in a more honorable place than the Popes Legates, and here and always are
named before them Act. 1. Bin. page 34. Lab. col. 88.
. But the Champions of the Supremacy boast extremely of the great words of the
Popes Legates concerning the Sea of Rome; who say in this first Action, on the
mention of Rome, which is the Head of all Churches Ibid. Bin. p. 41. Lab. col.
94.
; and the Greek seems to refer it to Pope Leo. To which may be added, that the
same Legates in the third Action, though they do not call the Pope Head of the
Universal Church, as Bellarmine falsely cites their words Bellarm. de Council.
lib. 2. cap. 11. page 85.
; yet they magnify St. Peter as the Rock and groundwork of the Catholic
Church, and the Foundation of true Faith Act. 3. Bin. page 192. Lab. col. 425.
: And in some other places they call the Pope Universal Bishop, etc. To which I
answer, The Council no where gives the Bishop of Rome any of these extravagant
Titles, and did so little regard these empty brags of the Legates, that in the
first Act, the Judges do reject the very first request which Leo's Legates made
to the Council; and when they petitioned in Leo's name, that Dioscorus might
stand at the Bar, the Judges bid him sit down Act. 1. Bin. page 41. Lab. col.
94.
: And if we consider how zealous this ambitious Pope was for the Dignity of his
See, and that his Legates had been taught their Lesson at Rome, we may justly
argue from the Councils silence, and the lower Style of Archbishop which they
give him, that these big Thrasonical Titles were not believed nor approved by
them; for many things are reported in the Councils, as said by particular
persons, which were not the Act of the whole Council; for which reason
Bellarmine egregiously prevaricates, when he makes this whole General Council
to call Peter the Rock and Groundwork of the Catholic Church Bellarm. de Romans
Pontif. lib. 1. cap. 10. page 540.
; For it was only the Popes Domestics called him so; and had the Council
foreseen the consequence, they would expressly have opposed, that which they
only silently passed by as frivolous. In the next place we may observe, that it
is said in this Council, that the Emperor confirmed the Acts of the second
Council at Ephesus Act. 1. Bin. page 48. Lab. col. 111.
, therefore it was usual then for the Emperor so to do, since this is alleged
to prove that a lawful Council. Again, when the Acts of this second Council at
Ephesus were read at Chalcedon, the Greek plainly says, the Emperor by his
Letters exhorted the Pope to be present there, but the Latin Version corrupts
the Text, and puts in supplicarunt Ibid. Bin. page 52. Lab. col. 122. (...).
, as if the Emperor had humbly supplicated the Pope to be there; whereas one of
his Legates, a few lines before, owned, that the Pope had the same Form of
Summons sent him, that was sent to the other great Bishops. Moreover, in
Eutyches Petition read in that Council, Cyril is called the President of the
third General Council at Ephesus Ibid. Bin. page 57. Lab. col. 135.
, without any mention of the Pope: And we may further observe, that the
Heretic Eutyches, in the Acts of the Council of Constantinople which condemned
him, is called Pope Eutyches, that being a name formerly given to all Eminent
Clergymen, especially in the East Ibid. Bin. p. 90. Lab. col. 222.
. I shall make no more remarks upon this first Session, which was spent in
reading over and reviewing the Council of Constantinople, wherein Eutyches was
condemned, and the Pseudo-Synod of Ephesus wherein Dioscorus absolved him,
because I have treated of both before: It is sufficient to observe upon this
full hearing, the Council of Chalcedon condemned both Eutyches and Dioscorus,
and the Lay-Judges summed up the Act; but there seems to be a Roman addition in
the end of this first Act, where it is thrust in without choerence and sense,
that Leo writ an Epistle to Flavianus; which, though it be true In fin. Act. 1.
Bin. page 153. Lab. col. 310.
, comes in very impertinently here; but the Forger thought when the Writings of
the Orthodox Fathers were mentioned, that of Leo ought by all means to be
mentioned right or wrong.

In the second Action there is nothing considerable, but the reading of this
very Epistle of Leo to Flavianus (after the Nicene and Constantinopolitan
Creed) being written expressly about the Eutychian Heresy, the main Cause to be
then decided Act. 2. Bin page 151. Lab. col. 344.
; which was therefore received there as other Orthodox Writings were, with
general Acclamations; but the Notes, citing these Acclamations, quote them
imperfectly no further than these words, Peter speaks by Leo Not. in Council.
Bin. p. 412. Lab. col. 986. Collat. cum Act. 2. Bin. p. 169. Lab. col. 368.
: But the Council goes on, and says, The Apostles and Cyril taught thus, by
which we may see it was the consonancy of Leo's Doctrine, to the writings of
the Apostles, and of St. Cyril, not the infallibility of his See which procured
his Epistle this general applause. Wherefore the Prefacer need not have
mentioned these Acclamations, as if they were only given to Leo's Epistle, or
had been made upon some single excellency peculiar to the Bishop of that See
Pref. Bin. p. 4. Lab. col. 7.
; for both the Creeds, and two of Cyril's Epistles had been honored with such
like Acclamations a little before.

The third Action contains the canonical deposition of Dioscorus, after the
Bishops had heard all the complaints against him, cited him thrice, and could
not prevail with him to appear. Now there being nothing to be done at this
Session, but to proceed according to the Canons, of which the Bishops were the
proper Executors; they only met, without Lay Judges, which (says Binius) is
the most evident note of a General Council Not. in Council. Bin. page 412. Lab.
col. 986.
, but in truth it is no note of any such matter; for if that were not a General
Council, wherein some of the Lasty were present, then there never was any
General Council till this time, and this single Act would then be the sole
Regular Act of this General Council; to such absurd consequences does these
men's blind zeal lead them. The next thing to be noted is, a corruption in the
Titles of the Petitions, which some of the Egyptian Clergy offered to the
Council against Dioscorus; for the Greek has no more but this, The Petition of
Theodorus, the Deacon, exhibited against Dioscorus; but the Latin Version
thrusts in Pope Leo's name thus, exhibited to Pope Leo and the Council of
Chalcedon Act. 3. Bin. p. 181. Lab. col. 396.
, and the same corruption is in the Titles of the following Petitions of
Ischyrion, Athanasius and Sophronius. If it be objected, that the
Superscriptions of all these Petitions, both in Greek and Latin are, To the
most Holy, etc. -- Universal Patriarch of Great Rome, Leo, and to the Holy
General Council, etc. Baron. An. 451. page 144.
: I reply, these Superscriptions seem to be forged also: For first, Eusebius
his Petition before, mentions not Leo, and these Petitions are addressed only
to the Council, there being not the least sentence in them peculiar to Leo, or
supposing him to see or read them; so that these Superscriptions to an absent
Bishop are nonsense, and in all probability added by some Roman Transcribers,
as may be guessed by the great swelling Titles, with which the Pope is loaded.
Again, in the Summons sent to Dioscorus the third time, it is declared, that
the Emperor had commanded the Bishops to hear this Cause; the Greek word is
[(...)], but the Latin softens it into [permisit] Act. 3. ib. Bin. p. 189. Lab.
col. 417.
. However, whether the Emperor commanded or permitted the Bishops to hear this
Cause, it is plain, that even in this Session, consisting only of Clergy, the
Bishops had the Emperors leave, and proceeded by his permission. As to the
Sentence it self; the Preface Pres. Bin. p. 4. Lab. col. 7.
, the Notes Not. in Council. Bin. p. 413. Lab. col. 987.
and Baronius Baron. An. 451. p. 145.
pretend it was pronounced in Leo's name, and boast much of the Legates
pronouncing it. But if we consult the place, we shall find that since no
Lay-Judges were there, the Popes Legates were (as these Judges did in other
Sessions) to collect the Votes, and then to sum them up, and publish them; and
therefore, after the enquiry was ended, they ask what the Synod thought fit to
be done; which they do over and over again, and till the Council expressly
commanded them, they did not pronounce the Sentence Act. 3. Bin. p. 191, 192.
Lab. col. 421, etc.
. It Is true, these Legates had learned their Lessons so well at Rome, that they
contrive it. in words very pompous, The most Holy and Blessed Archbishop of
the Elder and Greater Rome, Leo, by us, and by this present Synod, with the
most Blessed and Honorable Apostle, Peter, who is the Rock and Groundwork of
the Catholic Church, and he that is the Foundation (...), omissam in edit.
Bin. and Lab. ever. edit. restituit Richer. Hist. Council. Genesis Tom. 1. p. 395.
of the Orthodox Faith, (that is, Jesus Christ) has deprived him of his
Episcopal Dignity, and degraded him from all Ministration; therefore let this
most Holy General Council decree concerning the said Dioscorus what is
agreeable to the Canons Act. 3. Bin. p. 192. Lab. col. 425.
. But these Rhetorical Flourishes, coming only from the Popes Domestics, give
him no right to them; it is more material what Cardinal Cusanus observes, that
the Legates, as sitting first in this Council, first pronounce Sentence by the
Synods command, and then all she rest in order; and the force of the Sentence
depends upon the agreeing Votes of all: And we see, that though the Pope had
before canonically deposed Dioscorus, yet his Sentence was re-examined in a
General Council Cusan. lib. de Concord. Cath. lib. 2. c. 8.
. This is certain, that Anatolius, of Constantinople, and all the rest, though
in modester words, did singly condemn Dioscorus, and he was deposed and
degraded by the Authority of the General Council, and the free Votes of the
several Bishops, who, as Pope Leo himself speaks, had confirmed his Sentence
with an assent, which made the Cause incapable of being tried any more Leo ep.
63. ad Theod.
. And the Sentence which was published about his deposition Act. 3. Bin. p.
214. Lab. col. 460.
, as well as the Letter writ to Alexandria Bin. ib. Lab. col. 461.
expressly declare, that he was deposed and degraded by the Holy General Council
(c): And the very same is affirmed in the Synodical Epistles, writ to Martian
and Pulcheria, to desire them to confirm the Councils Sentence Ib. Bin. p. 215.
Lab. col. 463.
. So that in vain do the Modern Romanists brag of the deposition of Dioscorus
by the Popes Supreme Authority; for it was the opinion indeed of the Pope,
before the Council met, that he ought to be deposed; but it was the Authority
of the Council, ratified by the Emperor, which actually deposed him.

In the fourth Act, the Epistle of Pope Leo to Flavianus (wherein the Heresy
of Eutyches was confuted and condemned) was subscribed by all the Bishops, who
severally declared they received it, because it was agreeable to the Faith
declared in the three former General Councils of Nice, Constantinople and
Ephesus; and some of them add, because it was agreeable to the Scripture, and
to the Expositions of the Orthodox Fathers Act. 4. Bin. p. 218. Lab. col. 471,
etc.
. Now had these Fathers believed the Pope to be Infallible in matters of Faith,
they must have received this Epistle only upon the Credit of the Pope; whereas
they now examine and judge of it by the Rules prescribed in former Councils, and
receive it, not because the Enditer of it was Infallible, but because he had
kept close to former determinations in General Councils. And since the business
of this Council was to discover and condemn the Heresy of Eutyches, against
which new Sect no eminent Bishop but Leo had written, therefore this Epistle
was made a Test, and all were obliged to subscribe it, not (as the Romanists
brag) because the Sea of Rome was to fix the Rule of Faith; but because this
was the only Writing then extant of this kind; and we may as well prove that
St. Cyril was the Supreme Bishop of the World, and the sole Arbiter of Faith,
because his Epistles were subscribed in the General Council of Ephesus, as a
Test to find out and condemn the Nestorians, as infer the Roman Supremacy or
Infallibility from the Bishops subscribing Leo's Epistle at Chalcedon. We may
further note in this Action, that how confidently-soever modern Editors place
the Councils of Constantinople and Ephesus, under Damasus and Celestine; the
Popes Legates here plainly say the Council of Constantinople was held under the
Emperor Theodosius Act. 4. Bin. page 217. Lab. col. 471.
; and other Bishops affirm, that Cyril was the President and Head of the
Council at Ephesus Ib. Bin. p. 218, and 221. Lab. col. 474, and 482.
: Again, it is to be noted, that though Juvenalis of Jerusalem, and four other
Bishops who had joined with Dioscorus in the Synod at Ephesus, to condemn
Flavianus, repented and had subscribed Leo' s Epistle, and so declared
themselves to be Orthodox; yet the Council could not restore them to their
Places, till the Emperor, by his Judges, gave them leave to determine their
Case Ibid Bin. page 232. Lab. col. 507.
. It is also memorable, that the Egyptian Bishops, after their own Patriarch
Dioscorus was deposed, refused to sign the Epistle of Leo, till they had a new
Bishop of Alexandria, under whose jurisdiction the Nicene Canons had put them;
and though the Popes Legates and many others urged they should subscribe
immediately, yet these Bishops were excused by the Council, and their Plea
allowed Ibid. Bin. p. 233. Lab. col. 510, etc.
; which shows, that those who were under the Patriarch of Alexandria, owed no
subjection at all to Rome; nor did they or the Council of Chalcedon think the
Pope was really (what his Legates flatteringly call him) the Universal
Archbishop of Patriarch, for then they could not have allowed this Plea.
Moreover, it is observable in this Act, that Photius, Bishop of Tire, affirms,
both Anatolius and Leo were the Presidents of this Council Ib. Bin. p. 243.
Lab. col. 540.
: Also this Bishop in his Petition to the Emperors, styles them Lords of the
Earth and Sea, and of all Men, Nations and Kindreds Ib. p. 244. Lab. col. 541.
; which shows that Titles are not to be strictly understood, or to be made any
ground for Argument, since Complements were used then as well as now; and
therefore the Romanists should not attempt to prove a right from every
flourishing Title bestowed on the Pope by those who speak of him. In the Cause
between this Photius of Tire, and Eustathius of Berytus, there is a passage,
how one of these Bishops claimed a right to some Churches by the Imperial
Edicts, and the other by the Canons; and he who claimed a right by the Canons,
got the better: Yea, the Council declared, that Edicts ought not to prevail
against the Canons Act. 4. Bin p. 245. Lab. col. 544.
. From whence Baronius infers, that Princes ought to learn from hence to make
their Laws submit to the Ecclesiastical Canons Baron. An. 451. p. 149.
. But it must be noted, this was not intended to be a Rule in all Cases, only
as to the old Rights of Bishops Jurisdictions; and it was a Rule made now, only
upon this occasion; and which is most remarkable, the Judges tell the Council,
it was the Emperor's pleasure, this Cause should be tried, nor by the Edicts,
but by the Canons; for which the Bishops gave that pious Emperor thanks: And
therefore it is a great fallacy to argue from hence, that Ecclesiastical Canons
are above the Laws of Princes in their own nature; only in this Case the Good
Emperor, to oblige the Bishops, suffered the Canons to prevail. To conclude,
this Session ended with a confirmation of all things done by the Lay-Judges,
who declare they should remain firm Act. 4. Bin. p. 248. Lab. col 552.
, and so the Session ended.

In the Fifth Action, wherein the Matters of Faith were to be declared, the
Emperors Legates were present, and prevented a Schism which was like to happen
among the Bishops, some of which would not consent to the Councils definition;
but the Lay-Judges from the Emperor advised the Dissenters to go with Anatolius
and the Popes Legates, and to confer among themselves so as they might agree,
otherwise they threatened that the Emperor resolved to call a Council in the
West, to which they must go to determine the difference Act. v. Bin. page 250.
Lab. col. 560.
: From whence we may note, that they knew of no single Person who could finally
decide questions of Faith; and though it was to be determined at Rome, a
general Council must do it there: However, this Method proved effectual, and so
they published their Faith unanimously, annexing it to the Creeds of Nice and
Constantinople Ib. Bin. page 251. Lab. col. 561.
. We shall only note further, that in the Acclamations made in this Session it
is said, That the Councils definition had confirmed Leo' s Epistle, and the
Faith of Leo is commended because he believed as Cyril believed: And after all,
the Bishops agreement was not sufficient to ratify this definition of Faith,
till it was showed to the Emperor Ib. Bin. page 254. Lab. col. 568.
as the last words import.

The Sixth Action was adorned with the presence of the Emperor Marcianus, who
made a Speech to the Fathers, (which Baronius by mistake says was in the first
Session Baron. An. 450, page 141.
;) telling them he was come to confirm the Faith they had agreed on, (as
Constantine did) not to show his power Act. vi. Bin. page 258. Lab. col. 577.
. Which is a clear and undeniable proof, that the confirmation of their Decrees
depended on the Emperor, in whose presence the definition of Faith was read and
subscribed by every one of the Bishops; and he declared his Approbation
thereof, and in the open Synod appoints penalties for them who should, after
this, call these Points into question Ib. Bin. page 269, etc. Lab. col. 608.
. And then he gives them some Rules, to be formed into Canons, because they
related to Ecclesiastical Affairs; after which having been highly Applauded by
the Bishops, he was petitioned to dimiss them, but told them they must not
depart for some few days, and so took his leave of them. Which shows that the
Emperor who convened them, had also the sole power to dissolve this general
Council: I shall add what Richerius observes upon that definition of Faith made
in this Session, that it contains many of the very words and expressions of the
Athanasian Creed; and though he doubt whether Athanasius did compose that Form
which bears his name; yet he says, It is now become the Creed of the Catholic
Church, and there is not a Tittle in it which is not agreeable to the Credit,
Holiness and Learning of Athanasius Richer. Hist. Council. genesis Tom. 1. page 407.
. He notes also the policy of the Popes Legates, who contrary to all ancient
usage, and to the Primitive simplicity of the former Councils, do most
impertinently put this Epithete to the Popes name, Bishop of the Universal
Church of the City of Rome Act. 6. Bin. page 259. Lab. col. 580.
. But when I consider the absurdity of the expression, and the frequent
corruptions in these Acts, why might not that bold hand who added to the
Legates name, President of the Council; in this very place (and in this Session
where the Emperor being present certainly presided) add this huffing Title to
the Pope's name? And if so, it is a corruption and can be no ground for an
Argument: However, it is a great prejudice to all these Titles, that when any
others of the Council speak of the Pope, they call him only Bishop or
Archbishop, and none but his own Legates load him with those vain Titles.

The Seventh Action contains only the Ratification of a private Agreement, made
between Maximus Bishop of Antioch, and Juvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem,
concerning the extent of their Jurisdictions Act. 7. Bin. page 271. Lab. col.
612.
.

The Eighth Action was the case of Theodoret, who having formerly favored
Nestorius, yet being afterward convinced of his Error, was received into
Communion by Pope Leo, who had judged his cause and acquitted him before the
Council met: But for all that, the case was heard over again, and he called an
Heretic, and had been expelled the Council, if he had not cleared himself over
again by subscribing Leo's Epistle, and Anathematizing Nestorius and Eutyches,
upon which he was restored to Communion and to his Bishopric Act. 8. Bin. page
273. Lab. col. 617.
: By which it is as clear as the Sun, that the Council was above the Pope, and
had Authority to Judge over again the Causes he had determined; and also that
barely being in Communion with the Pope, could not clear any Man from Heresy,
nor give him a right to the Communion of the Catholic Church. And if the
Epistles of Theodoret to Leo be genuin, (whereof there is good cause to doubt)
and this cause were referred to the Pope by Appeal; (as the Romanists brag)
This makes the matter worse, and shows that the last Appeal is not to the Pope,
and that he cannot finally decide any cause, which shall not be liable to be
tried again in a general Council, yea though it be, as this was, a Cause of
Faith; which utterly ruins the Infallibility.

The Ninth and Tenth Actions, concern Ibas Bishop of Edessa, who had been a
Nestorian, and was deposed by Dioscorus in the Pseudo Synod of Ephesus, in
which are these observables: First, The Emperor commanded a Layman and some
Neighboring Bishops to hear this Cause, first at Tire, and then at Berytus
Act. 9 and 10. Bin. page 277. and page 280. Lab. col. 628. and 637.
; so that even Provincial Councils did not meet without the Emperors Authority,
and the Popes universal supremacy was not known then. For in the Council of
Berytus, Antioch is called an Apostolical Throne Act. 10. Bin. page 283. Lab.
col. 644.
, and the Council after they had restored him to his Bishopric, referred the
cause between him and Nonnus, (who had been thrust into his place) to Maximus
Bishop of Antioch, as the proper Judge of that matter. No more is here to be
noted, but only that the Popes Legates and the whole Council desire, that the
Emperor would revoke and utterly annul the Ephesine false Synod Ib. Bin. page
294. Lab. col. 673.
. For though the Pope had done this, yet they knew that was insufficient, since
none but the Emperor had right effectually to confirm, or null a Council which
pretended to be Ecumenical. To this Action Baronius and Binius tack another,
concerning an allowance to be made to maintain Domnus late Bishop of Antioch,
who had been deposed Bin. page 298. Lab. col. 681. Baron. An. 451. page 155.
: But they own this is not in the Greek, nor was there any such thing in the
Acts of the Council in Justinian's time, who expressly affirms Domnus was dead
before, which is certainly true Vid. Cratenthorp. vigil. dormit. chap. 35.. 9.
; Wherefore the Cardinal owns they found this in an old Latin Copy, in the
Vatican, the very Mint of Forgeries; and this Action ought to be rejected as a
mear Fiction.

The Eleventh and Twelfth Actions were spent in examing the cause of Bassianus
and Stephanus, both pretending to be Bishops of Ephesus, wherein we may
observe: That Bassianus pleads, he was duly elected by the suffrage of the
Nobility, People and Clergy of that City and the Emperor confirmed the Election
Act. 11. Bin page 300. Lab. col. 688.
; for the Pope had not then usurped the nomination or confirmation of remote
Bishops. Again, whereas Baronius brags, that the Pope deposed Bassianus from
the Bishopric of Ephesus, and cites the words of Stephen his Antagonist thus,
it is now four years since the Roman Bishop deposed Bassianus -- arguing from
thence, That it was the ancient usage for the Pope to depose Metropolitans
Baron. An. 447. page 49.
; He does notoriously prevaricate, for Stephen's words are, since the Roman
Bishop deposed him, and the Bishop of Alexandria condemned him: And a little
before the same Stephen says more fully, That Bassianus was expelled by the
holy Fathers, Leo and Flavianus and the Bishops of Alexandria and Antioch Act.
11. Bin. page 301. Lab. col. 689.
. By which the Reader may see there is no credit to be given to Baronius
Quotations, who always resolves by false Citations of Authors, to ascribe that
to the Pope alone, which was done by him in conjunction with other Bishops: And
it appears, that the principal right over Ephesus was in the Patriarch of
Constantinople, whence it was pleaded by the Friends of Bassianus, that Proclus
of Constontinople who had the right, received him to Communion: And Stephen
urges, that Flavianus of Constanstinople expelled him afterward Ibid. Bin.
page 302. Lab. col. 692.
. And therefore it is remarkable, that in the twefth Action where the Sentence
was to be pronounced, Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople declares his Judgment
before the Popes Legates, and is always named before them in all that Session,
where a Cause was to be decided concerning a Church, which was specially under
his jurisdiction Act. 12. Bin. page 305, 306. Lab. col. 771. etc.
; by which it appears, the principal Person in the deposing of Bassianus, was
the Patriarch of Constantinople, who probably desired the other great
Patriarchs concurrence for the better credit of his Sentence: Moreover it is to
be noted, that though Pope Leo favored the cause of Stephen, and writ an
Epistle in his behalf mentioned in the Council; The Popes favor did him no
service, for his Cause was tried over again, and he deposed by this general
Council as well as Bassianus; and this by the consent of the Popes Legates, who
notwithstanding their big words, did not believe it unlawful for a general
Council to contradict a determination of the Popes.

The Thirteenth and Fourteenth Actions concern only the Causes of private
Bishops, who had complained to the Emperor (not to the Pope) of injury done
them; and the Emperor appointed them to be finally determined by the Council,
and so the Bishop of Nichomedias's Jurisdiction was cleared, and the Bishop of
Nice ordered to be content only with the honor of a Metropolitan Act. 13. Bin.
page 307. Lab. col. 708.
. And in the fourteenth Action Athanasius was settled in the Bishopric of
Perrhaea; and Sabinianus, who claimed it, ordered to keep the honor of a
Bishop, and to be maintained out of the Profits of that Church, as the
Patriarch of Antiooh should direct Act. 14. Bin. p. 311. Lab. col. 717.
. Nothing is remarkable in them, but only that the Lay Judges pronounce the
Decree, and not the Popes Legates, and then the Synod consent.

The Fifteenth Action contains the Canons of this General Council for
Ecclesiastical Discipline, three of which were recommended to the Fathers by
the Emperor to be formed into Canons Supr. Act. 6.
: So that in obedience to the Emperor, they were obliged to make some
Ecclesiastical Rules: And one of these is the fourth Canon, which decrees, that
all Monks every where shall be subject to the Bishop of that Diocese wherein
their Monastery is built Act. 15. Bin. page 326. Lab. col. 757.
; which being a genuine Canon of a General Council, not objected against by the
Popes Legates, it is somewhat strange that the Modern Popes have no regard to
it, but daily and openly break it, in defiance of the Primitive Discipline, by
exempting all Monasteries from due subjection to their own Bishop Vid. Bever.
not. in Can. Chalced. 4. Tom. 2. p. 111.
; and this merely out of policy to make the Monks entirely depend upon the
Pope, and serve his interests. The ninth Canon ordains, that the Causes between
Clergymen shall be tried before their own Bishop, and not in Secular Courts;
and if a Bishop have a complaint against his Metropolitan, he shall go to the
Primate of the Diocese, or appeal to the Sea of Constantinople: Which Canon
Pope Nicholus resolved to force into his interest, and so ridiculously
expounds, the Primate of the Diocese, is meant the Bishop of Rome, who is
Primate of all Dioceses Nicol. 1. ep. 8. ad Mich. Imp.
: Turrian as boldly expounds it, the Primate of the universal Diocese: And
Binius in his Notes will have the word to signify the Prince of the Christian
Diocese Bin. not. p. 418. Lab. col. 996.
. But all these feigned additions and forced glosses will not help them,
because the Canon gives leave to the Party injured to complain, either to the
Bishop of Constantinople, or to the Pope, at his own choice, which sets that
Patriarch upon equal ground with him of Rome. But the Original Word signifies
an Order of Bishops below a Patriarch, but above a Metropolitan; and the Canon
expressly limits Appeals either to be made by these, (...), Primates, who had
Jurisdiction over the Province, or to the Patriarch of Constantinople; which
shows that this Council never thought of any Right that Rome then had to
receive Appeals from all parts of the World. And if any question why the Pope
is not here named, at least, for the Western Churches Appeals, as well as the
Patriarch of Constantinople for the Eastern; I take the true reason to be, the
absence of the Popes Legates from this Session, consisting only of Oriental
Bishops; for which reason they modestly refused to decree any thing concerning
Discipline in the West, leaving affairs there to proceed according to parity of
Reason. We may add, that the Latin Version of the sixteenth Canon has put in
the word [confitentes] into the Body of the Canon, which is not in the Original
Bin. page 328.
, but Labbe leaves out this corruption.

But that which has occasioned the greatest Controversy, is the twenty eighth
Canon, wherein this Council confirms the Decrees of the Fathers, and the second
Council of Constantinoples Canon about the Privileges of that See. For as the
Fathers had given the Sea of Rome its privileges, because it was the Imperial
City, for the same reason the second General Council gave like honor to the Sea of Constantinople; and would have it also even in Ecclesiastical Affairs,
to be advanced to the second place: And they order that the Bishop of
Constantinople should ordain and have a Jurisdiction over all the Metropolitans
of the Dioceses of Pontus, Asia and Thrace Act. 15. Bin. page 330. Lab. col.
769.
. The Modern Romanists do all they can to suppress or baffle this Canon. The
Editors put a Note before it, that it is not in their Greek Manuscripts; but
that is no wonder, since it has been long the design of their Church to
conceal this Canon; but that such a Canon was really made at Chalcedon, is
apparent, not only from the sixteenth Action, where it was read at large, and
allowed by the whole Council, and confirmed by the Lay-Judges, notwithstanding
the opposition of the Popes Legates; But it is also found in all the Greek
Collectors, cited in Photius his Nomo-Canon (writ above 900 year ago) and is
also extant in that old Latin Interpreter, who put out the Canons before
Dionisius exiguus (that is, soon after the year 500) Bever. Pand. Tom. 2.
annot. page 124.
: So that there is no doubt but this Canon was really made at Chalcedon. Yet
Gratian would not cite it under the name of a Canon of Chalcedon, but quotes it
out of the sixth General Council, wherein there are almost the same words; but
his old Editions (which were in use while the Roman Primacy was setting up) had
grossly corrupted the main words of it, and instead of the affirmative etiam in
rebus Ecclesiasticis non secus, ac illam extolli, -- etc. it was in him non
tamen in rebus Ecclesiasticis magnificetur, ut illa Vid. Gratian. Decret. par.
1. did. 22. c. 6. in not.
, which quite alters the sense, and makes it seem as if the Council had not
spoken of any Ecclesiastical Privileges; whereas they speak of no other but
such. Now this was so apparent a falsification, that the later Copies of
Gratian have mended it, and made it nec non Edit. in Octav. Francof. 1585.
: But this was not till that Church had seen Constantinople under the Turkish
Yoke, and in no capacity to vye with her.

In the Sixteenth Action the Popes Legates complain to the Judges, before all
the Council, That this Canon was made after their departure, and irregularly;
and desire it may be read: They were answered by the Archdeacon of
Constantinople, that it was customary in General Councils to treat of
Discipline after matters of Faith; that they told the Popes Legates this, and
desired their concurrence as to what should be done for the Church of
Constantinople; but they refused, saying they had other Orders; upon this they
acquainted the Judges, and they commanded the Council to proceed; and so they
did, nothing being done fraudulently, but all publicly and canonically; upon
this the Canon aforesaid was read Act. 16. Bin. page 333. Lab. col. 792.
. Then the Legates Objections were heard and answered; First to his
insinuation, that it was fraudulently obtained: The Bishops all declared, and
especially those of Pontus and Asia, newly subjected to Constantinople, that
they consented and subscribed to this Canon, without any circumvention or
force, voluntarily and freely. Secondly, whereas the Legates pretended it was
contrary to the Nicene Canons; and cite the sixth Canon of Nice falsely, putting
this forged Title (That the Church of Rome always had the Primacy) into the
body of the Canon: The Council first discovers the fallacy by reading a true
and authentic Record of that Canon, without that corrupt Addition, (though
still Baronius Baron. An. 451. p. 157. c.
and Binius Bin. Annot. page 418. col. 2. B. Lab. col. 997.
blush not to argue from this feigned Addition); and then was read the Canon of
the second Council at Constantinople, (for in that Age the Popes Cause was to
be judged by the Canons) to both which this Canon of Chalcedon was thought so
agreeable, that the Bishops principally concerned, declared again, they had
freely subscribed it as agreeable both to the Canons and Custom. And Eusebius,
Bishop of Dorylaeum, declares he read that Canon of Constantinople, here
confirmed, to the Pope at Rome, and he owned it: Where by the way, Baronius
egregiously prevaricates in expounding hanc regulam (that is, this Canon of the
second General Council) of Eusebius his rule or confession of Faith Baron. An.
451. page 126. Bin. page 342. Lab. col. 816.
, quite contrary to the plain sense of the Bishop here. To proceed, whereas the
Legates objected Thirdly, That the Bishops of Constantinople had not formerly
used the Rights now conserred on them; the contrary is manifest, both as to
precedence, since all the Acts of this Council show; that Anatolius sat and
spoke in the second place next to the Popes Legates; and they had said in the
first Act, that his due was the second place Act. 1. Bin. page 50. Lab. col.
115.
. And as to Jurisdiction, the very Bishops of these Provinces do in these Acts,
declare the Patriarchs of Constantinople had used it in their Countries and
Dioceses for many years: Upon which the Judges pronounce the Sentence, and give
the second place to Constantinople, with the Patriarchal Jurisdiction over
those Provinces named in the Canon, to which the whole Council consents, except
the Popes Legate, who entered his Protestation against it; but still the Bishops
stood firm to the Canon, and the Judges declare it valid, with which this
General Council is concluded. Baronius thinks the final Acclamations are
wanting Baron. An. 451. page 158.
; if they be so, we may easily guess who rased them out; even that Church which
then, and since has opposed this Canon, and would conceal that General Consent
by which it passed. But the last words are plain enough, where the Judges say,
The whole Synod has confirmed it Act. 16. Bin. page 344. Lab. col. 820.
, even though the Legates did dissent. I shall conclude this History of Fact,
when I have noted two Corruptions in favor of the Roman Church, which are
evident in this last Act. First, The Latin Version affirms the Judges said,
Rome truly, by the Canons had all the Primacy, omnem Primatum; but the Greek
is, (...), the Primacy before all others Ib. Bin. page 343. Lab. col. 817.
, which is not a Supremacy over all other Bishops, but the first place among
them. Again, the Legates in the Latin Copy say, The Apostolical See ought not
to be humbled in our presence; but the Greek is quite different, that is, the
Apostolical Throne commanded that all things should be done in our presence Id.
ibid.
: But he who made the alteration was one who dreamed that this Canon was to
humble Rome, whereas it takes not away the first place from the Pope, only
gives the second equal Privileges within its own bounds to Constantinople.

. 4. We shall now proceed to the third part concerning what was done after the
Council, and there will show that this Canon was valid, notwithstanding the
dissent of the Popes Legates, and Leo's furious endeavors to annull it.

The first thing, after the Councils speech to the Emperor, in the old
Collectors of Councils, was the Imperial Edicts, by which the Decrees were
confirmed; but these late Editors have removed these into the third place Bin.
par. 3. number. 3, and 4. page 352, etc. Lab. page 840.
: And first set down a pretended Letter from the Council to the Pope, which is
done only to impose upon unwary Readers, and make them think it was not the
Emperor, but the Pope who had the power of confirming the Acts. But as to the
Epistle it self, it was dated in the end of March, four Months after the
Council was separated; and (if it be not a Forgery, as some vehemently suspect,
on the account of a foolish and improbable story in it of Euphemia's dead body
confirming the true Faith by a Miracle) it was writ not by the General Council,
but by Anatolius, after he had heard of the Popes dislike of the twenty eighth
Canon; and therefore he does not desire his consent to any other thing, but
only labors to gain his assent to this Cannon Par. 3. number. 2. Bin. page 350.
Lab. col. 833.
. So that Baronius falsely argues from hence, it was the custom to send the
Decrees of General Councils to Rome, to be confirmed by the Popes Authority
Baron. An. 451. page 159.
: For this Letter was not writ by a General Council, nor does it desire a
confirmation of any thing but one Canon, which stood firm notwithstanding the
Pope always disallowed it: I only note that where the original is (...), that
is, taking his wonted care, the Latin reads consuete gubernando: As if the Pope
had by custom governed all Churches as far as Constantinople Ibid. Bin. page
351. Lab. col. 837.
. I observe also, that Binius leaves out the date of this Epistle to the Pope,
which is later in time than either of the Imperial Edicts; hoping by that means
the cheat of placing it before those Edicts would be undiscovered, and that
easy People might judge it a formal Letter writ while the Council was sitting,
to Petition the Pope to confirm all they had done. I shall not insist upon any
more particulars, but smile at Baronius, who for a few Complements, that the
writer of this Letter gives the Pope, draws a serious Argument for the
Supremacy, and would have all Bishops, even in a General Council, to be Sons to
their Holy Father the Pope Baron. An. 451. page 159.
. To proceed, the Edicts of the Emperor are dated, one in February, and the
other in March, and they do effectually confirm the Acts of the Council, and
ordain penalties on such as oppose the definitions of the Synod Par. 3. number. 3
and 4. Bin. page 352. Lab. col. 840.
. After this follow three Letters of Pope Leo, dated all of one day, directed
to Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, and to the Emperor and Empress Marcianus
and Pulcheria Ibid. number. 5, 6, 7. Bin. page 354, etc. Lab. col. 844.
, in all which he shows his consent to the other things done at Chalcedon; but
argues and exclaims against the 28th Canon, saying in his Letter to Pulcheria,
that by the Authority of Peter he utterly makes it void. But all this spoils
the Cause; for notwithstanding all his huffing, this Canon did remain in Force;
for Liberatus, who writ in the next Century, says, The Judges and all the
Bishops did not value the Legates protestation; and though the Apostolical See
still oppose it, this which was confirmed by the Synod, by the Emperors,
Patronage remains even till now Liberat. Brev. cap. 13. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2.
page 186.
; and Almain of later times affirms, the Constitution of the Council prevailed
over the protestations of Leo against it: For the Canons of general Councils do
prevail over the opposite Decrees of Popes Almain. de Eccles. Author. cap. 7.
. And the History of following times does clearly show, that the Bishop of
Constantinople was ever after this reckoned the second Patriarch, and took his
place accordingly in succeeding Councils, and retained the jurisdiction over
those Provinces which this Canon gives him: Wherefore it is very weak in
Baronius, from some bold passages in Leo's Letters to draw this consequence,
that it is clearly in the sole power of the Pope to make void, what 630 Bishops
in Council, the Emperor and Senate had agreed on and confirmed Baron. An. 452.
page 166.
. For the contrary is clear as the Sun, that the Legates contradiction there,
and the Popes ranting afterward, for all his pretended Authority of St. Peter,
did not signify any thing toward a real annulling this Canon; and the more he
strove to do it, the more he showed his Pride to be above his Power: And indeed
General Councils were needless, precarious and insignificant, if any one Bishop
were not to be concluded by the major vote, or had a negative voice there. But
because the Pope argues as well as condemns, let us hear his reasons against
this Canon: First, He every where urges, it is contrary to the Nicene Canon:
But this is false; he and his Legates indeed pretend this, but the Nicene Canon
was read over in open Council, and all of them unanimously agreed, it did no
way contradict it: The Council of Nice declared those Patriarchates, which
Custom had then settled, and (since after that time Constantinople came to be
the Imperial City,) the second General Council, and this at Chalcedon had as
good right to declare Constantinople a Patriarchate, as the first at Nice had
to declare others; and since Precedence was purely of Ecclesiastical
Institution, and given (as this Canon says,) on consideration of the honors
of the Cities, when the Emperors had made this City equal to old Rome, as to
the Civil State, the Council might allot it a suitable precedence in the
Church, which was a perfecting of the Nicene Canon, and a proceeding upon the
same reason; but no contradiction to it. Secondly, Leo argues, that this was a
prejudice to the two Sees of Alexandria and Antioch, which were elder
Patriarchates, and so ought to preceed Constantinople: I reply, Maximus Bishop
of Antioch did not think this Canon any injury to him, for he is the second who
subscribed it, and all-along in the several Sessions Anatolius sat and spoke
before him: And though Leo stood nicely upon his points in these matters, we do
not find other Bishops were of that temper; they freely submitted to the Bishop
of the imperial City, especially since he only had a place before them, but no
Authority over any other Patriarch: So that Leo need not make any objections
for them, who are not found to complain, or to have thought themselves injured.
I shall not insist upon Leo's insinuation, that this Canon was procured
fraudulently, and that Anatolius his Pride made him seek it, and strive to
impose upon the Council: For every body sees the whole Council clears him of
this; and it is plain, Leo was far prouder than Anatolius; he scorned a Second,
and feared in time he might prove an Equal: But Anatolius only got that place
confirmed to him in this Council, which he and his predecessors had hold long
before: I might add here the elaborate Arguments of Baranius and Binius; but
fearing I have been already too tedious, I shall refer the Reader to Richerius
(who discovers all their Fallacies Richer. Hist. Council. genesis Tom. 1. cap. 8..
44.
;) and make some observations on the rest of these Letters after the Council.
In an Epistle of the Emperors to the Monks of Alexandria, who disliked the
Council of Chalcedon, he recommends its definitions, as agreeing to the Faith
of Athanasius, Theophilus and Cyril, former Bishops of Alexandria Par. 3. number.
8. Bin. page 356 Lab. col. 849.
, which it seems was more considerable to them, than the Faith of Leo, in whom
that Age knew of no Infallibility. Again, it is a good Rule in an Epistle of
Leo's, That none should seek his own advancement by the diminution of another
Ibid. number. 76. Bin. page 369. Lab. col. 882.
, which had he and his Successors observed they would not have degraded all the
other Patriarchs to set themselves up as supreme over them all. There may be
some suspicion, whether that Epistle of Leo to Maximus Bishop of Antioch be
genuin; however there is a very improbable story in it, viz. That Juvenalis of
Jerusalem had sought to get the jurisdiction of all Palestina in the famous
General Council of Ephesus, and that Cyril had writ to Leo to join with him in
opposing that design; whereas that Council of Ephesus was held nine years
before Leo was Pope Ibid. number. 17. Bin. page 370. Lab. col. 884.
; and therefore Leo could not be applied to, as to any thing agitated in that
Council: After this follows a multitude of Epistles, in answer to the
complaints of the Egyptian Bishops, who adhered to this Council of Chalcedon,
and the Emperor Leo's Order to all Bishops, to give the Sense of every
Provincial Church, concerning this General Council which some heretical Monks
had questioned: For this Emperor prudently avoided the charge and trouble of
another General Council, appointing the Metropolitans to call their own Bishops
together at home, and to send him their Opinion of this Council of Chalcedon;
which was universally owned by all in their several Letters, to have been an
Orthodox Council, sufficiently approved and confirmed: Now had the Pope then
been infallible, or thought to be so, it had been sufficient to write to him
alone, and he could have told the Emperor the Sense of the Catholic Church;
but he was only writ to as other Bishops were, to declare his own Opinion: So
that in this proceeding there are no marks of his Supremacy; for the other
Bishops confirm the Faith decreed in this Council as well as the Pope, nor did
his ratifying it make it needless for the Emperor to require the sentiments of
others.

. 5. We have no more to add to this, but only to make a few brief Remarks upon
such passages in Binius's Notes upon this Council, as have not yet come under
our consideration. The Miracle of Euphemia the Martyrs taking the Orthodox
Confession of Faith into her Hand (so long after her Death and Burial) and
casting away that which was Heretical, is only hinted at in that suspicious
Epistle from the Council Par. 3. number. 2. Bin. page 351 Lab. col. 836.
: But the Notes and Baronius cite, for the formal story, no Author elder than
Metaphrastes, who lived above 450 years after; and if we consider how he and
the later Writers, who mention it, vary and contradict one another in the time
and manner of this pretended Miracle Vid. Bin. not. P. 410. Lab. col. 983.
, we shall easily discern the whole Story to be a Fiction. A little after the
Notes say, that they highly injure this Holy Council, who say the Epistle of
Ibas, which is Heretical, and contains the praises of Heretics, and the
condemnation of the Orthodox, was received and approved by the Fathers at
Chalcedon; for those who say so join with the Nestorians Bin. not. p. 411. col.
1. Lab. col. 984.
. But alas it proves very unluckily, that it was Pope Vigilius who said this,
and who was condemned for an Heretic for this and other things of like nature,
by the fifth General Council Crakenthrop. Vigil. Dormit. chap. 10. p. 107.
; and Binius knew this well enough, but because it was a Friend, he conceals
his Name. Again, he tells us of one Julianus, Bishop of Coos, that he was the
Popes Legate Not. Bin. p. 411. col. 2. Lab. ut supr.
, and so he is called indeed in the Subscriptions sometimes; but let it be
noted, that the Pope does not name this Julianus in his Letter to the Council
among his Legates Par. 1. number. 40. Bin. p. 31. Lab. col. 70.
; but Paschasinus, Lucentius and Boniface with one Basilius are there said to
be his Legates: And yet this Basilius never appeared in the Council, which
makes a very Learned Man conjecture, that the Fathers at Chalcedon rejected two
of those whom the Pope had nominated for Legates, viz. this Basilius and
Julianus, the former not being admitted into the Council, and the later having
no other place than what his own See gave him; so that Baronius his observation
concerning this Julianus his speaking Latin, as the dignity of the Roman See
required, will not prove him properly a Legate, or if it do Baron. An. 451. p.
143.
, then the Council placed the Popes Legates as they pleased. Moreover, the
Notes call the excommunicating of the Pope by Dioscorus, scelus inauditum, an
unheard-of-wickedness; and a little after they say, That Dioscorus was the
first that ever was known to excommunicate the Pope, or had committed this
unheard-of-wickedness Bin. not. p. 412. col. 1. C. and col. 2. D.
. But why all this? Does the Council say such a Fact was never attempted nor
heard of before? No, that is their addition, for we have heard of Asian and
African Bishops, who took themselves to have as much Power to excommunicate
Victor and Stephen, Bishops of Rome, as they had to Excommunicate them. And we
have heard of Liberius and Foelix, whose Communion was renounced by the
Orthodox; and therefore Dioscorus's fault was his excommunicating an Orthodox
Patriarch in a packed, private, heretical Synod, not because this Patriarch was
Bishop of Rome; for had Leo deserved this Sentence by holding Heresy, no doubt
a greater Council would afterward have ratified it, and joined with Dioscorus.
In the account which the Notes give of the third Session, we are told that
Dioscorus was accused for wasting the Goods left to the Poor, and Pious Uses,
by a Noble Lady deceased, so that no Incense could be offered for her Soul. And
Binius and Baronius hence infer that they used then to pray for the Dead Bin.
not. p. 412. col. 2. E. Lab. col. 986. Baron. An. 451. p. 144.
. But if we look into the Council, this will appear an invention of their own;
for there is no mention of praying for that Ladies Soul, or offering in co^^e
for it to God; but only that Dioscorus by spending (...) Gifts riotously, had
(as much as in him lay) hindered the offering a sweet Savor to God out of her
oblation Act. 3. Bin. p. 183. Lab. col. 401.
. Now whether this sweet Savor be meant literally of Incense, then used in
Christian Churches, or allegorically of Alms, (so called Philip. iv. 18.) yet
still there is not the least intimation that either of these were offered for
the Lady or her Soul, or any Prayers made for her after her Decease. Yet this
false Inference is nauseously repeated again afterward Bin. not. p. 417. col.
1. D. Lab. col. 994.
: In which last place Binius says, Dioscorus his with holding the Wheat which
the Emperor gave to the Churches of Lybia, so that the terrible and unbloody
Sacrifice could not be offered there, is a clear Testimony for the Mass Bin.
and Lab. ibid.
. Whereas it is only an evidence, that the Eucharist was made of Wheat, and
that they received a large Morsel (as we Protestants do) of the Holy Bread; and
when it is called an unbloody Sacrifice, I think that to be a Testimony, they
did not believe the natural and true Blood of Christ was there by
Transubstantiation. It is also very false to say, That after the Cause of
Sabinianus, Act. 14. the Council was ended, the Assembly dissolved, when the
Legates and Judges went out, and that the Eastern Bishops staid behind
clandestinly Bin. not. p. 415. col. 1. Lab. col. 991.
; In which Words there are more falsehoods than Lines. For if the Council was
ended, how came the whole Council to meet again without a new Summons, the very
next day? Again, the Legates went out indeed, but it was after the Judges, not
before them, as the Notes insinuate; and the Judges went out because the Causes
were all heard, and only the Canons to be treated of; but before they went they
ordered the Bishops to make some Canons: So that to say the Council was ended,
and the Synod dissolved because none but the Bishops staid, is ridiculous, and
contradicts his Note upon the third Session, where he makes it a most clear
evidence of a General Council, when the Bishops meet without Lay Judges: If he
say the Popes Legates did not stay; I reply, they were desired to stay, and
their peevish absence could not hinder the Councils proceedings, no more than
Dioscorus his absenting; and the Acts were next day approved as good, though
done without them; and there it was also proved, that the Council did not act
clandestinly; yea, it is very absurd to say the going out of three Men from 627
who staid behind, could make the Synod which remained, to be a Clandestine
Assembly: So that we may wonder at the boldness of these Editors, who in spite
to the 28th Canon upon false grounds condemn those Actions which were examined,
justified and approved by this whole General Council. We have in the next place
an old Inscription, pretended to have been made in a Chapel built by Hilary,
the Legate of Pope Leo, after his wondrous escape from the Pseudo-Synod of
Ephesus, in these words, To his Deliverer St. John the Evangelist, Hilary, the
Bishop and Servant of Christ Bin. not. p. 415. col. 2. Lab. col. 992. Baron.
An. 449. p. 96.
: Which Inscription gives Baronius and the Notes occasion to affirm, that he
had prayed and made Vows to St. John for his Deliverance. But I see no reason
to believe this Inscription to be so ancient as the time of this Hilary (Leo's
Successor An. 461.). For in his Letter extant in the Council, he relates the
Story of his flight, but-mentions no Saint at all, only says, he trusted in
the grace of Christ Par. 1. number. 24. Bin. p. 23. Lab. col. 52.
. And this Style which is so like the Pagan Vows to their little Deities, was
above the Infant Superstition of that Age; so that besides the improbability of
an Inscription continuing legible for near twelve hundred years; none who knows
the time of Hilary can believe the invocation of Saints was so far advanced,
for a Man to forget God and Jesus Christ the only Deliverers of their Servants,
and publicly, yea blasphemously to ascribe his deliverance to a Creature, Romans
i. 25. Wherefore we conclude this Inscription was writ by some later Hand in
times of gross Idolatry and Ignorance; and that this which they call an
Egregious Monument of Antiquity, and an Argument for Invocation of Saints, is
nothing else but an Egregious Imposture, and an Argument to prove the Fraud of
those who set up false Doctrines by feigned Antiquity. It Is true in the 11th
Action, when Stephen, whom Flavian had condemned in his lifetime, was deposed
by the Council after his death, some of the Bishops cried out, Flavian lives
after his death, the Martyr has prayed for us Act. 11. Bin. p. 304. Lab. col.
697.
; but this is far short of the aforesaid Inscription, for they neither vow nor
pray to the Martyr; only since his Sentence was agreed to be just after his
death, they Rhetorically say this seemed as if Flavianus had prayed for them
Vide ap. D. Crakenth. in Spalat. c. 59. p. 383.
: Yet this (if it be genuine) is the greatest step toward Invocation of Saints
that I have seen in any Writing of this Age; though it be no more than a
Flourish, proceeding from an excess of Admiration of Flavianus, so lately
martyred by Dioscorus, the Mortal Enemy of this Council, Concerning which
Dioscorus (for likeness of the Subject) I observe the Notes say, the Egyptians
gave him (oh horrible) Divine Honors, and Religious Worship after his Death
Bin. not. p. 419. col. 1. Lab. col. 998.
; which means no more, as Baronius (the Author of the Story) says, but that
they worshipped him as a Saint, and gave him such Religious Worship as they
give to Saints Baron. An. 452. p. 168.
. Now the wary Romanists will not say these are Divine Honors, much less were
they such Honors, as were paid to any Saints in this Age, or some that
followed: But when Modern Writers speak of Ancient Times, they often speak in
Modern Phrases; and so Binius took it to be the same thing to honor Dioscorus
as a Saint, and to give him Religious Worship, because they at Rome now give
Religious Worship to those they Canonize.

And this may suffice for this famous Council, wherein Leo (being all along
Orthodox, while the Patriarchs of most other great Sees had been either faulty
or suspected) had the greatest advantage imaginable to carry on his great
Design of setting up for the Supremacy; and though by this accident, which he
and his Legates improved, higher Titles are given him, than to any of his
Predecessors or Successors for some Ages in any Council; yet if the Forgeries
and Corruptions be abated, and the Fallacious Notes well understood, there is
no ground from any thing here said or done, to think the Fathers at Chalcedon
took this Pope for the sole, supreme and visible Head of the Catholic Church.

An Appendix concerning Baronius's Annals.
. 1. THIS Century proving so full of various observations as to swell beyond
our expectations, we must here divert awhile, to view the Errors in Barvnius,
lest the deferring these Observations to the last, should make the Reader
forget the Series of affairs already past, by laying these matters too far from
the History of that time to which these Notes belong; and for brevity sake, as
well as for the clearer seeing into this Authors Fallacies, we will follow our
former Method.

And first we will observe, that when he would set up any Doctrines, or
justify any Practices of the Modern Corrupt Roman Church, he generally cites
spurious Authors, or such as writ so long after this time, that their Testimony
is justly suspected, since no Authors of this Age do mention any such thing.

The Miracle of Julia, a Manichean Heretic Woman, struck dead by Porphyrius,
Bishop of Gaza, when he could not convert her by Arguments, is taken out of a
Latin Copy ascribed to one Mark, a Deacon of Gaza, very improbably; but the
stress of the Evidence lies upon the Credit of Metaphrastes, Lipoman and Surius
the Collectors of Legends, who trade in few others but spurious Authors Baron.
An. 403. page 179.
. It were to be wished we had some better evidence of St. Ambrose's appearing
after his death, and promising Victory over the Goths, than a Woman's Testimony:
For both Orosius and St. Augustine, who write of that Victory, ascribe it wholly
to the Power of God, and mention no Saint concerned therein. And Baronius cites
both these, as well as the credulous Paulinus, who for advancing the credit of
St. Ambrose, records an Old-Wives Tale, not supported by any credible evidence
Baron. An. 406. p. 238. I wish he had remembered here his own words, Non enim
indigent Sancti nostris illustrari mendaciis, Ibid. p. 262.
. The ridiculous story of St. Paul's appearing to St. Chrysostom, who is
pretended to have had the Picture of St. Paul in his Study, and to have
discoursed with the senseless Image, is not proved by any Author near that Age,
but by Leo the Philosopher and Emperor, who lived 500 year after, and writ a
very Fabulous History of St. Chrysostom's Life; and by a spurious Tract of
Damascens, who lived 450 year after Chrysostom's Death Baron. An. 407. p. 256.
. Yet upon these false Legends the Annalist triumphs over those who oppose
Image Worship. Like to this, is that fabulous Story of Theophilus, Bishop of
Alexandria, not being able to die in peace till the Image of St. Chysostom was
brought to him, and he had adored it Baron. An. 412. p. 345.
; which he has no other Authority for, than the aforesaid spurious Book
ascribed to a late Author Damascen; for the Writers of this Age mention no such
thing: And there can be no doubt but the Relation is false, because St. Cyril,
Theophilus his Nephew and Successor continued for some time to have as ill an
opinion of St. Chrysostom, as his Uncle had to his last breath, as his Letter
to Atticus (in Baronius) Id. ibid. p. 348.
shows: And therefore there is a Story invented of a Vision appearing to St.
Cyril, by which he was terrified into a good opinion of St. Chrysostom: But
though the Quarrel he had at first to his memory be real, this Apparition is
feigned, and proved by no elder nor better Authors Id. ibid. p. 351.
than Nicetus and Nicephorus. Another Forgery of St. Cyril's removing the
Relicts of St. Mark, and other Saints into a Church, newly built in place of an
Idol-temple, and thereby clearing it from Evil Spirits, has no better
Authority than certain Legends read in that woeful Council of Nice, which set up
Image Worship 300 year after this Age Baron. An. 414. p. 365.
. The Revelation of the Relics of St. Stephen, pretended to be writ by Lucian,
is transcribed by the Annalist, but it contains many improbable lies, and
frivolous impertinencies, such as Gamaliel (the Master of St. Paul) being a
Priest, and that St. Stephen's body was exposed to Wild Beasts by the command
of Wicked Princes, and that the way to engage St. Stephen, Gamaliel and the
rest to interceed for them, was to build a Chapel over their Relics, with
many more absurd passages: So that indeed it is fitter to be derided, or left
to the Moths and Batts, than to stand in a Church History (y). He cites for
this one of St. Augustin's Sermons (z) Baron. An. 415. page 367.
de diversis; but it is supposititious, and therefore can be no evidence for
this Fable Sermon. 51. vid. Rivet. censur. lib. 4. cap. 16.
: And it is a mighty prejudice to the whole Relation, that St. Hierom, who
lived at Bethlehem at this very time, does not confirm it, no not in his fierce
discourse against the mistaken Opinion of Vigilantius, who (as he thought)
denied even common respect to be showed to the Bones of Martyrs: And it is like
Sozomen did not like the story, because he ends his History with a promise to
give an Account of the invention of these Relics of St. Stephen, but he omits
it Sozom. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 17.
; Though he writes out another Legend there of the finding the Body of Zechary
the Prophet, of which he brings no other proof, but that he had been told this
Story Baron. An. 415. page 382.
. But it is very unlikely, that the Jews should have no regard to the Bodies of
their own Prophets, nor know of any virtue in them, and yet after so many
hundred years, the Christians should find such power in their supposed Dust;
And it is one of the greatest Blots upon the latter end of this Century, that
their Superstition made them too credulous and apt to be imposed on with Fables
of this kind, in which there is scarce any verisimilitude, or shadow of
probability: Which led the following Ages into greater Errors, and had worse
effects than were foreseen by those easy and well-meaning writers, who hastily
took up these false reports: Which Note I am obliged to insert here, to caution
the Reader against diverse relations of Miracles in Baronius about this time,
for some of which he cites Authors, who are in other things credible enough
Vid. Baron. An. 416. page 390 and alib. passim.
. To proceed, it is no great credit for the Pope, that he and the Western
Bishops mistook the time of Easter a whole Month, and were reproved by a
miraculous appearance of Water in the Font on the right day of Easter, if the
story be true An. 417. page 406.
: However to confirm this relation, Baronius has put together a great many
such like Miracles, but writ by later Authors, (Cassiodorus An. 514. Gregory
Turonensis An. 590. Sophronius An. 630.) when all Men doted on these reports:
But it is a little hard, that he should charge the Reformed Christians with
being mad, for not believing these suspicious relations, and accuse them with
deriding the consecration of baptismal Water Baron. An. 417 page 407.
; which is a known practice in all regular Protestant Churches. A little after
he would prove the antiquity of the Mass by a spurious Sermon, faslly ascribed
to St. Augustine, viz. de temp. Ser. 251. Baron. An. 418. page 418. vid. Rivet.
censur. lib. 4. c. 16.
: And he transcribes a suspicious Epistle full of improbable Stories for nine
pages together, about the Miracles wrought by St. Stevens Relics, which
Epistle he would prove by another Tract equally fabulous, which some say, was
writ by Evodius an African Bishop; others think it was only dedicated to him,
in which are Domnus and Domna (after the Gallican Fashion in later Ages) for
Dominus and Domina: But the judicious Reader who compares these Legends with
other writings of this learned Age, will easily discern both these Tracts to be
Forgeries of the modern superstitious Times Baron. An. 418. page 419. ad 428.
collat. com Baron. An. 416. page 390. and Coci censur. page 205.
: So that perhaps one Miracle-monger made them both. And Baronius had justified
neither of them, if he had remembered what himself says of a spurious Tract of
the Acts of St. Hierom, viz. That the candor of Ecclesiastical truth, and the
modesty of Christian sincerity, abhors always that which is feigned, rejects
and accurses all that is spurious; The true Faith always bitterly hating and
severely punishing every lie with the Author of it Baron. An. 420. page 473.
: But his practice is every where contrary to this profession. And soon after
he cites the Lives of the Fathers, under Theodoret's name, to prove the
efficacy of St. John Baptist's prayers, as to the Conversion of the
Marcionites, whereas the Epistle of Theodoret there cited, ascribes it to the
divine aid Baron. An. 424. page 487.
. And this fabulous Book of the Lives of the Fathers is despicable for its
gross absurdities, and can be none of Theodorets, because it contains many
Miracles, that Simeon Stylites wrought after his death; and Baronius himself
owns, That Theodoret dyed seven year before this Simeon Baron. An. 453. and An.
460. vid. Ceci censuram. page 207.
: Yet this is the Man who is so severe an Enemy to all feigned Tracts, who
again, cites the Rules for conjugal Chastity as prescribed by St. Augustine, but
finds them only in a forged Sermon, (de Temp. page 244. falsely ascribed to that
modest Father Baron. An. 428. page 508.
; Wherein there is so much Obscenity, as cannot be supposed to proceed out of
St. Augustin's mouth in public, and such as is hardly fit for Christian Ears:
besides many things that would be hissed at in any sober Auditory Vid. Coci
censur. page 198.
. Again, he cites Sophronius his Pratum spirituale, as a Book of good credit,
and relating an Apparition of the Blessed Virgin as it truly happened Baron.
An. 429. page 524.
: Whereas both Possevine and Baronius himself confess this Book to be full of
Fables, and of no credit Vid Coci censur. page 228.
; and the Author of it lived above 200 year after, in a credulous and ignorant,
as well as a superstitious Age, whose name was not Sophronius, but Joannes
Moschus: Upon whose credit he would not have relied so much, had he observed a
rule of his own, That he who writes the History of his own time is of greater
Authority, than he who writes after many Ages Baron. An. 431. page 604.
; Which Rule he breaks in the very next Page, by justifying a Legend writ by
Gregory, the Author of the Dialogues, long after the year 600, and cited by
Eulogius of Corduba, An. 847. concerning Paulinus of Nola, who died An. 431. as
a Writer of Paulinus own Age testifies there Baron. ibid. page 605.
: Whereas if this Fable were true, (as those late Writers relate it) Paulinus
must be alive 45 years after; so that he credits later Writers in contradiction
to those of the same Age. We have often seen modern Authors describing the holy
Men of this and former Ages, with Images, Crucifixes, etc. but Constantius, who
about this time writ the life of St. Germanus, mentions no Images or Crucifix
among that which he left at his death, but only a Box of Relics, the sole
point wherein Superstion was advanced as yet Baron. An. 435. p. 652, 654.
. And whereas late Writers of the Saints Lives speak of Addresses to the
Blessed Virgin, to deceased Saints, etc. this old Author mentions only Prayers
to God; for those other kind of Prayers were not used in this Age. A little
after he tells more Fables about the translation of the Relics of St. Stephen
to Constantinople out of late and unfaithful Authors, such as Cedrenus,
Nicephorus, Nicetus, etc. but he himself observes, that they do not agree as to
the time, nor the quantity of the Relics translated Baron. An. 439. p. 667.
: And this disagreement should have made him suspect the whole for an
Imposture. And if the Reader consider what incredible Stories are told of the
Miracles wrought by the Relics of this one Martyr, in Sardinia, Africa, Spain,
Palestine and Constantinople, etc. he must believe they cut his Body into as
many pieces as there were Stones thrown at him, and will wonder how the Body
could become whole again, and be entirely translated out of Palestine in the
year 439. What Theodoret relates of one African Virgin Captive, may be believed
to be true, and that Relation has no Miracle in it: But when Ado, of Vienna,
writ the Acts of another Virgin, called Julia, captivated at the same time, he
has stuffed the Story with Miracles Baron. An. 440. Tom. 6. p. 6.
; and the only reason of this difference is, that this later Author writ his
Martyrology, Anno 850, that is, above 400 year after, when Legends grew to be
more in Fashion. The Annalist takes great pains to prove certain Homilies
(which some ascribe to Eusebius Emissenus, others to Faustus Rhegiensis, others
to Caesarius of Arles) to be the work of Eucherius, Bishop of Lions; but as the
Author is uncertain, the matter of them is justly to be condemned, being full
of Superstitions, and some that came not in till the corrupter and later Ages
Baron. An. 441. p. 8.
. However, Baronius was obliged to get these Homilies ascribed to some Writer
of good repute, since many of the evil Practices and Errors of their Church
Vid. Coci censur p. 117, 118. Rivet. Crit. Sacr. lib. 4. c. 20.
, which cannot be justified by known and genuine Authors, are defended by such
obscure Tracts as this. Again, we have a very absurd Story of St. Cyril's
convincing a Monk that Melchisedech was not the Son of God, by a Revelation
made to the Monk himself, who had fallen into that Error Baron. An. 444. p. 19.
: But that Fable of Cyril's being a Monk upon Mount Carmel, is so gross, that
he rejects it with this Note, That a vehement desire to seem of Ancient
Extraction, makes Men sometimes to dote Id. ibid. p. 21.
; which Remark is most true of almost all the Monastic Orders of the Roman
Church; for Aventinus, an excellent Historian, of their own Communion, affirms,
he had discovered the Monks were wont to delight the Minds of the vile Populace
with feigned Tales, invented for gain, to make the Original of their Temples
more Noble and August Aventin. Annal. lib. 3. p. 225.
. He brings in a ridiculous Story of an Image of the Blessed Virgin, found in a
Cypress Tree, and of a Church built in the place by one Cyrus, Bishop of
Smirna; but the credit of this relies only upon Nicephorus, a modern and
fabulous Author. And at the same place he brings in a Fiction of an Image of
our Savior, wounded by a Jew, but he knows not when this matter happened; he
thinks not till after the second Nicene Council; but why then does he mention
it in this Age? No doubt to abuse his Reader into a belief that Images were
then in use. But the Story it self is all over Legend, and not more Authentic
for being recorded in their public Monuments, and read in some Churches in the
corrupt Ages Baron. An. 446. p. 39.
, in which there are the grossest Romances imaginable. A little after he taxes
Nicephorus for unfaithfulness and great mistakes in his Relations; yet
immediately he cites him as good evidence for Relics belonging to the Blessed
Virgin Baron. An. 450. p. 117.
. In the next year we have two ridiculous Stories, the one of St. Stephens
praying to St. Peter and St. Paul to spare his Chapel, when Mets was sacked
and burned by the Hunns Id. An 451. p. 134.
; the other of a Drunken Man, shut up all Night in St. Peter's Church at Rome,
and heard St. Peter and St. Paul talking together: But telling their Discourse
next morning, he was struck blind Id. ibid. p. 137.
. Upon which last Miracle, Baronius gathers, that blind Men may see great
benefits are received by the intercession of Saints. But I should rather think,
he was blind indeed that could not discern these to be mere Fables; and truly
the only Author he cites for them is Gregory Turonensis, who lived 150 year
after, and is full of these Fictions, contradicting even Salvian, who lived in
that Country at this very time. But it is observable, that the Writers of the
Lives of St. Lupus and Anianus (cited in this very place) do mention these Holy
Men as praying only to God in these Calamities Id. ibid. p. 135, 136, 137.
: For the direct invocation of Saints was not used, no not when those Lives
were written. Again, after the Council of Chalcedon had been confirmed by the
most Legal and Authentic ways, it is very ridiculous in this great Annalist to
cite so many frivolous Stories out of Legends, how some Ignorant and
Enthusiastical Monks confirmed it, or were convinced by Miracles, that it was a
Genuine and Orthodox Council Baron. ibid. p. 160, 161, etc.
: For he cites no better Author than Surius for these Fables, yet relates them
with great confidence; but this Cause needs no such evidence.

. 2. Secondly, We will note some passages in genuine Authors, which he has
corrupted to serve a turn: He that reads Baronius his Note in the year 402.
that it was an Ancient Custom to paint the Saints in the Churches, and that
they use to worship them, with kindling Lamps before them Baron. An. 402. p.
163.
, would imagine this Superstition was ancient in the beginning of the Fifth
Century; whereas the Author he cites for this is Venantius Fortunatus, who
lived till the year 600. that is, 200 year after, and though he speak of a
Picture drawn on a Wall, and a Lamp beside it, does not mention that as any
worship to the Picture, that is Baronius's own addition. Again, when he cites a
Law of Theodosius prohibiting the Jews to burn any Cross in contempt of
Christianity, he adds, that they burnt the Cross together with our Savior
crucified on it Baron. An. 408. p. 272.
; but that is his own invention; the custom of making a Cross alone being
indeed very ancient, but the adding the Figure of our Savior to it, which they
call properly a Crucifix, is but a late device, and seems not at all to be
referred to in that Law. To proceed, he makes Synesius a notorious dissembler,
when he declares he had most solemnly protested to Theophilus, who was to
consecrate him Bishop of Prolemais, that he would not accept that Order, unless
he might live with his Wife as before time Synes. epist. 105. Baron. An. 410.
p. 309, 310, 311.
. Now whoever reads that Letter may see that Synesius professes he tells truth
in this relation; yea, he solemnly calls God and Men to witness, that it is
true; he observes Truth is one of God's Attributes, and most pleasing to him:
Yet Baronius will have him to use the Art of Lying, in all these protestations,
because forsooth he cannot think Theophilus would ordain a Bishop, who should
live with, and have Children by his Wife; that is, he measures the Primitive
Church (in which there were diverse Bishops married) by their Modern Corrupt
Roman Standard. And this sincere Father must be made to mock God, and deceive
Men, and exposed as a Notorious Liar and Dissembler, rather than there should
seem to be any difference between the Primitive Church and theirs in the point
of the Clergies Marriage. Again, he observes out of St. Augustine Aug. ep. 163.
Tom. 2. fol. 153. and Tom. 7. contr. Cresc. l. 3. f. 57.
, that he accounted the Council of Sardica heretical, because Julius, Bishop of
Rome, was condemned there; and he infers, that whatever was said or done
against the Pope was of evil Fame among the Ancients Baron. An. 412. p. 336.
: But if St. Augustine had not been misrepresented, there had been no room for
this fallacious Note. St. Augustine blames this Council (in the second place
cited) as heretical for condemning Athanasius, and does not mention Pope Julius
there at all; and in the former place he names Athanasius first, and Julius
only in the second place; and he blames them not for condemning him as Bishop
of Rome, but because he was Orthodox, as Athanasius was. Wherefore Baronius
leaves out the main part of St. Augustin's Argument, only to bring in a false
and flattering Inference for the Popes Supremacy. And I have observed before,
he falsely gathers, that the Roman Church was the sole Standard of Catholic
Communion in Cecilian's time, from a place where St. Augustine says, Cecilian
of Carthage, was a Catholic, because he was in Communion with the Roman
Church, and other Lands from whence the Gospel came into Africa Aug. ep. 162.
fol. 150. Baron. An. 412. p. 336.
; that is, he was in Communion with the Eastern as well as the Western Church.
But Baronius is so dazzled with Rome, that where that is found in any Sentence,
he can see nothing else: And therefore when he cites this very place again a
little after, he would prove that Carthage owned a right in the Roman Church to
receive Appeals, and this, contrary to the express Protestation of that African
Council, wherein St. Augustine was present; and the place it self does not
mention any Appeals, and speaks of Communion with other Churches as well as
Rome Baron. An. 419. p. 450.
; and so would equally prove a right in other Bishops as well as the Pope, to
receive Appeals from Africa, if that had been spoken of there. Further, from
Socrates his relation of a Bishop of Gyzicum, named by Sisinnius, Patriarch of
Constantinople, but not received, by reason of their mistaking a late Law made
to confirm the Privileges of that See of Constantinople, and this in the time
of a mild and quiet Bishop; he infers, that this Patriarch challenged no right,
no not in Hollospont, by the Canon of any General Council Baron. An. 426. p.
494.
. Now his naming a Bishop for this City, shows he challenged a right, which was
well known to be his due, both by the Canon of the second General Council, and
by this late Law; but a peaceable Man's receding from his right, after he has
made his claim, rather than provoke a Factious City, is no proof there was no
right, as Baronius does pretend. I observe also, that the Latin Version of an
Epistle to the Council of Ephesus, has these words, cujus Reliquias praesentes
veneramini: Which is to abuse the Reader into an apprehension, that the Relics
of St. John were worshipped in that Age Baron. An. 531. p. 560.
: But the Greek word is, (...) Bin. Tom. 1. par. 2. p. 234.
, which imports no more than that they were honored, which is far less than
that which Rome now gives even to feigned Relics of uncertain Saints. A like
Falsehood about the People of Ephesus worshipping the Blessed Virgin, I noted
before Vid. supr. p. 37.
. Again, he manifestly perverts a Phrase of Theodosius, the Eastern Emperor, in
his Epistle to Acacius, where he advises the Nestorians to show themselves
approved-Bishops of the Roman Religion Baron. An. 43^. p. 620.
; which Baronius pretends, respects the Western Church of Old Rome in Italy;
but the Emperor plainly refers to his own Empire in the East, which was then
generally Orthodox, and against Nestorius: Constantinople is often called Rome,
without any other addition; and Romania, or the Roman Empire, is in many
Authors of these Ages, put only for the Eastern part of it. It is also very
odd, that he should cite Basil's Epistles to prove that the Roman Church was
wont to send Legates to regulate Affairs in the Eastern Churches Baron. Tom. 6.
An. 450. p. 116.
: Whereas St. Basil in many Epistles grievously complains of the Pride of the
West, and of their despising the Calamities of the East, not so much as giving
them that Brotherly Aid, which they might expect, when they were in great
distress; but there is not one syllable of any jurisdiction which the Pope then
did so much as pretend to over those Eastern Churches. Leo was the first who
ventured to make any steps toward this Usurpation, an hundred years after St.
Basil's time. To this device we may add his silent passing by all that makes
against the Roman Church; but being large in his Notes upon any thing which
seems to make for it, How many words does he every where use when one is
described to be Orthodox, for communicating with an Orthodox Pope? but when
those are declared to be Orthodox who communicated with the Patriarchs of
Constantinople, Alexandria and Antioch (at that time differing from the Pope)
Baron. Tom. 5. An. 404. p. p. 202.
, we have not one observation of the honor of those Sees. Thus though he cite
innumerable heretical and illiterate Writings, merely to confirm some
incredible Miracle or superstitious Practice, without any Censure passed on
them; yet when he comes to mention the Imperfect work on St. Matthew, ascribed
to St. Chrysostom (which many Roman Writers highly commend, as writ by a
Catholic, Ancient and Learned Author) Vid. Rivet. Critic. Sacr. l. 4. c. 1. p.
351.
, he falls into a fit of railing against it, as Heretical, and what not,
because in that Book we are told, The Scripture is the only rule by which true
Christians may judge of the right Faith Baron. An. 407. p. 255.
: Which Sentence, though it condemn the new Romish way, yet it is agreeable to
the Primitive and most Orthodox Fathers, who very often say the same thing. An.
401. p. 137.
And Baronius relates a little before, that a certain Bishop who wrought
Miracles, and converted many Pagans, charged his new Converts to apply
themselves diligently to read the Holy Scriptures. Moreover he brings in a
Quotation out of St. Augustine, with a long Preface, because he designs to
misapply it to justify the Roman Supremacy: But the place it self plainly
supposes the Western to be but one part of the Catholic Church; only he thinks
the Authority of Latin Fathers alone, and of Innocent, a Successor of the
Apostles, Chief of this Western Church, might suffice his Adversary (who was
one of the Latin Church). And as to Innocent's Opinion he might be sure it
would agree with what the African Councils had declared, and the Roman Church
constantly held with other Churches Baron. An. 419. p. 444. ex Aug. contra
Julian. l. 1. c. 4.
: Where we see Innocent is only set out as the first in Order of Dignity in the
Western Church, and his Opinion supposed to be right, not because of the
Infallibility of his See, or any Supreme Power in him to judge in matters of
Faith, but because he agreed with the African and other Churches; and now de
Facto took the Orthodox Side: Wherefore when Zosimus, and other succeeding
Popes favored these Pelagians, the Dignity of his See did not secure them from
the Censures of the African Fathers, as we showed before.

. 3. We pass thirdly to his rare faculty of supposing things without any proof,
and sometimes making inferences from his own inventions, for the advantage of
Rome: So when a few persecuted Eastern Bishops of Chrysostom's party fled to
the Roman Church to avoid the Storm, their own Patriarchs being all combined
against them, Baronius says, they fled to it as to their Mother, being
admonished by the examples of their Predecessors: And he goes on to insinuate a
very false thing, viz. That all the Bishops who were persecuted by the Arrians
in Constantin' s time, in the East, fled to Rome Baron. An. 404. p. 207.
. Whereas only some few came both then and now, and dire necessity had left
them no choice, nor other refuge. Thus he resolves Ruffinus shall be a Pelagian
Heretic; and out of a Council whose Acts are not extant, and the relation of
it only says, Celestius was condemned there; he will have Ruffinus condemned
in that Council upon mere conjecture, and can no other ways prove him a
Heretic, but by one Witness, even this Heretic Celestius, who being in a
strait, cited Ruffinus's words, but probably very falsely Baron. An. 412. p.
339, 340.
; so that one Heretic shall be sufficient evidence against a man that Baronius
hates; but many Orthodox Witnesses will not persuade him that Innocent favored
the Pelagians almost to the end of his Life. It is an odd conjecture that St.
Hierom would not translate any of Theophilus his Paschal Epistles, after once
he differed with Pope Innocent about restoring St. Chrysostom's name into the
Dypticks Baron. ibid. p. 346.
: For except another guess of his own, without any manner of evidence Idem An.
404. p. 223.
, there is no appearance that ever St. Hierom was concerned for St.
Chrysostom's sufferings; and it is certain he was kind with his Mortal Enemy
Theophilus in the year of Christ 404, when he got him to be banished; and it
would be very strange that St. Hierom should refuse to translate any more of
Theophilus's Epistles, on the account of a quarrel between him and Pope
Innocent about restoring Chrysostom's name into the Dypticks, since the last
Paschal Epistle translated by Hierom, was writ Anno 404; and Baronius says,
Theophilus writ every year one till Anno 412, but Chrysostom died not till Anno
407; and Innocent himself did not quarrel with Theophilus till long after the
year 404: So that the Cardinal contradicts himself, merely to support an idle
conjecture, viz. That all Eminent Fathers loved and hated only those who were
loved and hated by the Pope: And into what Absurdities and Contradictions this
Fancy has led him, may be seen by comparing those two places aforecited
together; and we may note, that though it be certain Theophilus died
unreconciled to Chrysostom's memory, or to Innocent, yet Baronius shows he was
commended as a most approved Bishop Baron. An. 412. p. 346.
, for so it seems a man might be, though he had a difference with the Bishop of
Rome. Again, it is a bare supposition, that the Privileges of the Patriarch of
Constantinople asserted in the Province of Illiricum, by a Law of Theodosius,
was founded upon the false suggestions of Atticus Baron. An. 421. p. 475.
: For the very Law it self forbids innovations, and requires the ancient Canons
and Customs, thus far observed, should be in force, on which Theodosius plainly
grounds the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Constantinople in this Province: So
that he refers to the Canon of the Second General Council of Constantinople,
and the usage ever since; and how could this proceed from any false suggestions
of Atticus?

To proceed, Prosper relating Germanus his going into Britain, as some think,
mistakes the time at least seventeen years Vid. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. p. 48.
, and says nothing of St. Lupus his Companion in that Journey; howbeit, because
Prosper says the Pope sent St. Germanus, Baronius will have him to be
authentic, contrary to all other Authors Baron. An. 429. p. 520.
, who affirm St. Germanus and Lupus were sent by a Gallican Council, to whom a
Petition from the British Bishops was sent: However he affirms it for a
certainty soon after Ibid. p. 523.
, that St. Germanus was the Popes Legate into Britain, which he had but half
proved before. And one Author, who speaks favorably of the Popes Authority,
shall be believed against many of equal Credit who speak otherwise: I grant
Prosper is a credible Writer; only he is apt, for the credit of the Cause,
always to bring in the Popes as Enemies to the Pelagians, sometimes without
reason; and Constantine, Bid with others who write of this journey into
Britain, and ascribe this mission to a French Council, deserve more credit in
that particular than he. A little after, upon Cyril's mentioning Nestorius's
writing to the Roman Bishop, in hopes to draw him to his Opinion: Baronius
supposes of his own Head, that it was an ancient use in Controversies of Faith
to write to the Bishop of Rome, and that the part he chose was generally
favored; so that if Nestorius could persuade him, the whole Catholic Church
would follow his Judgment Baron. An. 430. p. 532.
; which is all Chimaera, for Pope Victor, Stephen and Liberius of old, Vigilius
and Honorius afterward, found opposition enough (for all the dignity of their
place) when they seemed to other Bishops to take the wrong side. From a
fabulous Writer called Probus Vid. Ush. Antiq. Brit. c. 17. p. 426.
who has given us a Legend of St. Patrick's Life; he not only confidently
affirms that Pope Celestine sent this Patrick to convert the Irish, but infers
from thence, That it was clear to all men, the Gospel was to be received from
the Apostolical See for the conversion of the Pagans Baron. An. 431. p. 605.
. Whereas it is not clear that St. Patrick was sent from Rome; but it is clear,
that other Heathen Countries have received the Gospel by the care of other
Patriarchs and Eminent Bishops; so that his Ground is but conjecture, and the
Superstructure wholly vain. It Is true indeed, that Pope Leo, to show his
Authority, desired three Bishops of Sicily to appear in his annual Roman
Council once a year, and was the first Pope who put this Yoke upon them; but
how this new encroachment shows the ancient observance of holding Councils of
Bishops twice a year, is very hard to conjecture Baron. An. Tom. 6. An. 447. p.
49.
: only when a Pope alters the Fathers Customs, the Annalist will suppose he
observes and confirms them: And he could see no usurpation in this Popes
calling the Sicilian Bishops yearly to Rome, against the ancient Usage. But
when Dioscorus of Alexandria would have encroached upon the Bishops of Syria,
he blames him severely Baron. An. 448. page 54.
. We shall not mention the Authority of the Writings of Athanasius, Cyril and
other Eminent Bishops of other Sees, in Controversies of Faith: But it is very
imposing for Baronius to suppose, The Pope presided as the Master over the
whole Christian World, and out of his high Throne taught all men the Catholic
Faith Baron. An. 449. page 86.
; and all this only, because Leo had the good Fortune (by his Secretary
Prosper's help) to write one Orthodox Epistle against Eutyches in a lucky time,
when a Council was to be called to condemn that Heresy: As to the Author of it
Eutyches, it was always a Rule in the Church to receive even the Inventors of
Heresies, if they would renounce their Errors: So that for Leo to say (in his
Letter to the Council of Chalcedon) he thought they might deal so with
Eutyches, is no manner of ground for Baronius to suppose, that this was a
special Favor indulged to that General Council by the Pope, contrary to
Ecclesiastical Laws and Customs Baron. ibid. page 88.
. For it is well known, that a General Council in that Age gave Laws to the
Pope, but did not receive any from him; and whatever Leo's Opinion might be,
the Council were sole Judges of the terms on which Eutyches was to be restored;
and had he Recanted they would have received him into Communion by their own
Authority, since Arius, Nestorius and Pelagius had that Favor offered them by
former Councils, and Eutyches would have found the like Kindness here, if the
Pope had said nothing at all of the matter: Wherefore the Annalist has crowded
many Falsehoods into a few Lines only, to persuade his weak Readers, That the
Pope was above a General Council. And to make him seem above all the other
Patriarchs, he supposes from a Letter of Theodosius the Emperor, which he never
saw, and which is not extant, That the Emperor writ to Rome about the
Succession of Anatolius at Constantinople, knowing it to be the Head of all
Churches Baron. An. 450. page 115.
. This is a groundless Conjecture, because he does not so much as know in what
style Theodosius writ; and it was an Ancient Custom, for to give Notice to all
the absent Patriarchs, when any New one was elected, and the Patriarch Elect
(even he of Rome) was obliged to satisfy the rest by Letters, that he held the
Orthodox Faith. Certain it is that Theodosius valued not Leo much; because he
confirmed the Condemnation of Flavionus, though he knew that Pope and his
Legates were of his side; and it is plain by the best Historians that he died
in this Opinion: Nor can Baronius prove, that Theodosius repented of that
mistaken Judgment otherwise, than by Nioephorus (an Author of no credit when
single,) or that he Obeyed the Pope before his death Baron. An. 450. page 117.
; for this last he can cite no Author at all, and it is not only a Conjecture
of his own, but a very false one. For the last Letter that ever Theodosius writ
to Valentinian, not many Months before his death Baron. An. 449 page 111.
, shows how little he esteemed Leo's Request for a new General Council, and how
close he stuck to Dioscorus, Leo's Enemy; and therefore he could not write
after this to Leo, as Head of the Church. His Successor indeed, Marcianus, had
some reason to Caress the Pope, and therefore he writes more respectfully to
him than other Emperors had used to do Richer. hist. Council. genesis Tom. 1. cap.
8. page 363.
: Yet even in that first Letter of his he must be very sagacious, who can
discorn what Baronius again supposes, That Marcian turned his Eyes to the Chief
visible Head of the Church, resolving to do all things by his command, or (as
he phrases it) to be at his beck: For even in this highest strain of Complement
Marcian says no more, but that since Leo had a principal Bishopric among the
true Believers, he desires him to pray for him, that he might resolve to call a
Council with Leo' s consent, to take away all Error and settle a general Peace
Baron. An. 450. page 118.
. Which implies the power of calling Councils was in the Emperor, and the Popes
part was only to consent as one of the Chief Bishops, who was there to meet and
consult: And if Marcian had known or believed Leo to be the sole Supreme Judge
of all Controversies, he would not have been at the trouble of Calling a
General Council, but referred all to him.

. 4. The rest of my Observations on Baronius shall be put in Order of Time for
the better assistance of the Reader, and not under those several Heads which
does too much separate and confound things.

When S. Hierom, after three years laboring with Pope Anastasius, had at last
got him and the Roman Church to condemn Ruffinus, he then at that time
prudently appeals to the Roman Churches Faith for Trial, Whether he or Ruffinus
were the better Catholic: But Baronius, when he has cited some words of S.
Hierom against Ruffinus to this purpose, grossly prevaricates when he infers;
You see it was an undoubted Maxim, customary in the Mouths of all the Ancients,
and a necessary consequence, That if one were said to follow the Roman Faith,
he must needs be a Catholic Baron. An. 402. page 156.
. For if we hear one Father when he had the Pope on his side in a particular
Controversy say this, This is not all the Ancients: And many of them describe
themselves, as being of the Faith of Athanasius, Cyril, Flavianus, etc. or
holding the Faith of the Churches of Alexandria, Antioch, Constantinople, etc.
to prove themselves Catholic; and if S. Hierom did instance now in Rome, the
consequence depended on the Orthodoxness of the present Pope, not on the
Infallibility of his See. And Pope Gelasius afterward confesses, That the
Roman Church in this Point was guided entirely by S. Hierom, She thought as he
thought Baron An. 402 page 159.
. So that to make a General conclusion from such a special Case, is very
unreasonable; and S. Hierom himself a little after is cited, declaring the
Consent of many Churches is of greater Authority, than that of the Roman alone
Id. ibid. page 160.
. It had been well if their Roman Church had considered the peril of Idolatry,
when they went about to establish the use or Images, as Baronius tells us
Theodosius did, when he made a Law to prohibit any Adoration to be given to his
own Statues, because such worship as exceeds the dignity of Human Nature, is to
be reserved to the Divine Majesty. In the same place he relates how S.
Chrysostom reproved the People for their folly at the dedication of the
Empresses Statue; because it is easy in those matters to run into the sin of
Idolatry Baron. An. 404. page 187.
. Which Observations of his own stand on Record in these Annals, to condemn
that Church which orders Veneration, and all other expressions of Reverence to
be made to all sorts of Images of the Saints. Again, he exposes his dear Church
in observing, That the Ancients preserved both the consecrated Elements of the
Sacrament in the Church. But no sooner had he condemned us for not following
this ancient Usage, but he mentions as great an Innovation in their own Church,
for he owns they have forbid the preserving any thing but the species of Bread
Baron. An. 404. page 194.
. Now I would ask, Who differ most from Antiquity, they who totally take away
one part of the Sacrament from the People, and keep only the Bread to be
worshipped: Or we who give both Bread and Wine to the People as they did, and
provide both, newly Consecrated, for the Sick, when there is occasion, but
reserve neither for Worship? Which was the usage of the first and purest times.
And why may not we forbid the needless reserving of the Sacrament in either
kind, as well as they may prohibit it in one kind? But so insatiable is his
desire to extol the Roman Church, that though he cite all he can find of this
sort good and bad, he wishes (in one place) he could find some things, which
are not to be found, that he might let his style run out on so luscious a
Subject Id. ibid. page 206.
. We note also, that how much soever the Romanists here in the Reign of King
James the Second were for Toleration, because it was their Interest, Baronius
highly commends the severe Penal Laws made by Arcadius and Honorius against
such as differed from the established way of Worship and profession of Faith
Baron. An. 405. page 231. Vid. item An. 423. page 480.
; for Baronius is always a bitter Enemy to Toleration, and stiffly opposes the
taking away any Penal Laws. Moreover it is observable, that though his Office
be to write an History and relate Matter of Fact: When he comes to S. Hierom's
Book against Vigilantius, he puts on the Character of a Disputant, and makes
large digressions to the Heretics, (as he calls the Reformed) to justify such
a Veneration of Relics, and such a kind of worship of Saints, as Rome uses at
this day; which kind of Veneration and Worship S. Hierom would have condemned
as well as Vigilantius Baron. An. 406. page 247, 248, etc. ad page 251.
, had it been practiced in that Age. He notes that upon the difference between
Theophilus and the Pope about S. Chrysostom, a Council of Carthage writ to
Innocent, That the Churches of Rome and Alexandria should keep that Peace
mutually which the Lord enjoined Baron. An. 407. page 253.
. Which shows, those African Fathers did not think one of these Churches
superior in Authority to the other; for if so, they had no need to write to
Innocent, but only to Theophilus, to submit to the Supreme Bishop: For that was
the only way to settle a Peace, if Innocent's Supremacy had been then allowed.
And it is a vain and false Conjecture, that if Theophilus had writ any Paschal
Epistles after his difference with Innocent, no Catholic would have received
them Baron. ibid.
. For diverse Eminent and Orthodox Bishops writ to Theophilus, and received
Letters from him after this; yea, Synesius himself writes to him, to determine
a Question by the Authority of his Apostolical Succession Id. page 262.
, and he lived and died with the repute of a Catholic, though (as I have
showed) he never did yield to Pope Innocent in the case of S. Chrysostom. Alike
groundless is his Conjecture, That Arcadius labored to wipe out the stains he
had contracted in persecuting S. Chrysostom, by translating the Relics of the
Prophet Samuel, and by going into a Martyrs Temple and there praying (not to
the Martyr, observe that, but) to God Baron. ibid. page 261.
. For if we set aside the two forged Epistles recorded by Baronius, page 259.
there is no good Evidence that Arcadius, at the time when the aforesaid Acts
were done, was convinced he had done any fault in the affair of S. Chrysostom;
wherefore he could have no design to purge himself from a Fault he did not own
at that time. In the next year he spoils one Argument to prove theirs the true
Church, viz. by Miracles, since he owns Atticus, Bishop of Constantinople, did
work a Miracle even before he held Communion with the Roman Church Baron. An.
408. page 272.
. So that if Miracles prove a true Church, then a Church that separates from
the Roman Communion may be a true Church. Of which also we have another
Instance soon after, where the Church of Antioch was in a difference with Rome
for many years, (Theodoret says, 85 years,) yet all that while she was owned
by the best Catholics for a true Church Baron ibid. page 273.
. Nor do I see how that can be true which Baronius affirms, That the cause of
restoring the Eastern Bishops to Communion in Chrysostom' s case, was only
decided by Pope Innocent, since Alexander of Antioch did transact this affair
in the East, and 24 Western Bishops subscribed with Innocent in the West, to
testify their consent to this Agreement of Alexanders Baron ibid. page 274.
; yea, Thodoret ascribes this, not to the Pope alone, but to all the Bishops of
the West Ibid p. 275.
. But the Annalist will have all things done by the Pope alone, right or wrong.
Poor Socrates is branded for a Novatian Heretic, because he says, It was not
the usage of the Catholic Church to persecute Baron. An. 410. page 307.
. Yet the Emperor Marcian Council Chalced. Bin. Tom 2. par. 1. page 361.
, and Pope Gregory Greg. Mag. cp. ad Epise. Constantinop.
, who were both I hope very good Catholics, say the same thing; and therefore
we may discern Baronius his Spirit, in being so bitter against all who censure
Persecuting. In the same Year we may see, that the Bishops under Theophilus
Jurisdiction (for all his quarrel at that time with the Pope) did reserve the
greater Cases to his decision Baron. An. 410. page 312.
; and yet were very good Catholics all the while. When a Bishop pleads for
Mercy to such as have principally offended the Church, those Intercessions with
Pious Magistrates ought to have the force of Commands; But to make a general
Inference from hence, That Bishops ought to command things agreeable to the
Christian Law to Magistrates Baron. An. 412. page 334 and 335.
, is to stretch the Instance too far. But there is another obvious Note from S.
Augustine's petitioning and urging Marcellinus to spare the Heretics, and not
execute the severity of the Temporal Laws upon them, which Baronius would not
observe, viz. That the Primitive Bishops used their power and interest to get
Heretics spared by Secular Magistrates, whereas the Inquisitors use their
power now to oblige the Lay-Magistrates to kill and destroy them. Further it is
observable, that he takes upon him to interpret Gods Judgments in favor of his
own Party; and thus he expounds the Goths invading France, to be a punishment
for the Heresies there broke out Baron. ibid. page 345.
, which Salvian more piously makes to be a Scourge for their Immoralities. But
I note, that it was but two year before that Alaricus wasted Italy, and took
Rome it self; yet Baronius could not discern any Heresies there, but his
general Maxim is, That God is wont to bring destruction on those Countries
where Heresies arise. Now one might observe Leo's attempts to usurp a Supremacy
over all other Bishops, and the many pious Frauds used and beginning now to be
countenanced at Rome, about false Relics and feigned Miracles, were as
probable occasions of the Divine Judgments in Italy, as those he assigns in
France. To proceed, I cannot apprehend how Atticus could have so little Wit in
his Anger against Rome, as to call Paulinus and Evagrius (successively Bishops
of Antioch) Schismatics, merely for Communicating with the Roman Church, and
this in a Letter to so great a Patriarch as S. Cyril Baron. ibid. page 348.
, if he had known it to be then generally acknowledged (as Baronius often
pretends,) that to be in Communion with Rome was a certain sign of a Catholic;
and to differ with it, a sure note of a Schismatic. But S. Cyril's Reproving
Atticus for restoring Chrysostom's Name into the Dyptics (which was the known
desire of Pope Innocent) shows Baron. ibid. page 350.
, how little the rest of the Patriarchs valued the Judgment or the Authority of
the Popes, when they supposed them to be mistaken in the Case: For none could
or durst have so severely Censured the Opinion of a Person taken to be a
Supreme and Infallible Judge. Again, I wonder how Baronius could Record without
some reflection S. Augustin's speaking of Orosius his Journey from Spain into
Africa, only out of Zeal to understand the Scriptures, and his sending him to
Palestine to S. Hierom on that Errand Baron. An. 414. page 363.
. For according to the Cardinals Notion, he should have been more zealous for
Catholic Tradition, than for Scripture, and Rome was the only place both to
learn that in perfection, and by that to interpret the Scriptures unerringly;
and this was nearer to Spain than either Hippo or Bethlehem. But while he owns,
that the Salvation of some, after they had been purged by the Internal Fire,
was one of the Errors of Origin, and counted an Error both by Orosius and
Augustine Baron. ibid. page 364.
, it seems to look ill upon Purgatory, which their modern Church has made a
Catholic Truth; but the Primitive censured it as a false Doctrine. The Reader
also may note, that when he is commending Theodosius for his Piery, he
magnifies him for fasting upon Wednesdays and Fridays Baron. An. 415. page 381.
, (the days now appointed for Abstinence by the Protestant Church of England):
So that a man may be a pious Catholic and not keep the Fasting-days appointed
by the Roman Church, viz. Fridays and Saturdays. Moreover he contradicts
himself when he says, According to the ancient usage of speaking, by the
Apostolical Seat, is always to be understood the Roman Church Baron. An. 416
page 388.
: Whereas he has often owned the other Patriarchs Sees had the Title of
Apostolical Thrones and Seats; and a little after cites Sidonius calling Lupus
Bishop of Troys, a Bishop of Bishops, who had sat a long time in an Apostolical
Seat Baron. An. 426. page 499.
, he cites Possidius in the Life of S. Augustine, to prove the Pelagians were
first condemned at Rome, and then at Carthage Baron. An. 418. page 414, 415.
. But if the Reader consult that Author, he will find that S. Augustine writ
against them, and that they went near to draw in first Innocent and then
Zosimus to their party, till the Councils of Holy African Bishops had with much
labor persuaded first the one of these Popes, and then the other, that this
was an abominable Heresy and contrary to the Catholic Faith Possid. vit. D.
Aug. cap. 17.
: All which the Cardinal leaves out, and from half the story makes a false
Marginal Note, viz. That these Heretics were first condemned at Rome, and then
at Carthage: Which is every way false; for if it be meant of Innocent's time,
it is certain that the African Councils under the Primate of Carthage; yea,
that of Milevis had solemnly condemned Pelagianism before this Pope would
openly condemn them, he being under suspicion of favoring that Heresy to the
last year of his Life Vid. Innoc. Epist. 26. Bin. not. page 625.
; and this Council of Carthage did condemn these Heretics while Zosimus did
defend them; so that Africa, not Rome, first discovered and censured this
Heresy. He also falsely cites the Preface of S. Augustine's Books to Pope
Boniface, against the Pelagians, telling us he affirms, That the Pope being
most eminent in the highest top of the Pastoral Watchtower, did watch over
all; and from hence infers, That though S. Augustine and others sometimes call
the Pope Brother, and Colleague, yet still they own his supreme Pastoral Power
Baron. An. 419. page 442.
. But all that S. Augustine there says is this, Communisque sit omnibus nobis
qui fungimur Episcopatus officio (quamvis ipse in eo praeemineas celsiore
fastigio) specula pastoralis: The Pastoral watching is common to all of us who
are Bishops, though you have the advantage of a higher station Aug. Tom. 7.
contr. 2 Epist. Pelag. fol. 186.
. Which words only intimate the Dignity of the Roman See, as to Order; but
plainly declare Bishops to have equal Obligations to guard the Church. And
whereas a little after, from S. Augustine's modest Complement of sending these
Books to Boniface, to examine and correct, he would infinuate something of
Supremacy in Judging: This is no more than the same Father used to do to all
other Bishops to whom he dedicated his Books; so he desires Claudius, a private
Bishop to read and judge of his Books against Julian, dedicated to him Aug.
ibid. contr. Jul. praef. fol. 202.
. This therefore ascribes no Infallibility to Rome; and if S. Augustine himself
had not judged better of Pelagianism than any Pope of these times, it would not
have been condemned there to this day. After all these Instances of sincerity,
we cannot wonder that he falls upon the Reformed as Innovators, for refusing to
stand to a General Council, and so worse than the Pelagians who desired one
Baron. An. 419. page 442. E.
. But this calumny will soon be dispelled, if we call to mind the breach of
Faith used to such as had trusted Rome, in the Council of Constance; the Tricks
used by the Popes before the Council of Trent for many years together, to avoid
a General Council, when the Reformed earnestly desired one; and the great
partiality of that packt Assembly at Trent, who met not to examine or amend
Abuses, but to establish them, and had resolved to condemn the Protestants
before they heard them. It is something odd, that Baronius should quote
Gelasius his Censure of the Legends and Acts of Martyrs, That some of them were
writ by Idiots, and some by Heretics; wherefore the Roman Church then used not
to read them in public Baron. An. 419. page 456.
. For this condemns him for filling so many Pages of his Annals with this
Fabulous stuff, and discovers an alteration in the Roman Church, which of old
was wiser and honester than to read those feigned Legends, that in after Ages
took up a great part of their public Service. We may further observe, That
Leporius, an Arch-heretick recants in Africa, and applies himself to the
Gallican Bishops only, without any notice taken of Rome or Pope Boniface Baron.
An. 420. page 465.
; which confutes what the Annalist often affirms, That all great Heretics were
obliged to recant at Rome. He publishes a Rescript of Theodosius, and bids us
observe, that it contains the principal Feasts received by the Christians: Now
these are Sundays, Christmas and Epiphany, Easter and Pentecost, with the
Memory of the Apostles Passions, which is a Protestant Catalogue; and there is
not one Feast of our Blessed Lady, Holy Cross, Corpus Christi, etc. which are
now so famous at Rome in all this number assigned by Theodosius Baron. An. 425.
page 489.
; which shows they are Innovations, and the effects of modern Superstition. He
relates it as the Custom of S. Augustine and other Bishops, as well as of Pope
Celestine, to salute Presbyters by the name of Sons, and Bishops by the name of
Brothers Baron. An. 426. page 498.
, which looks not favorably on the Pope's Universal Superiority above all
Bishops whatsoever. When Pope Gregory grossly mistakes Sozomen's History for
Theodoret's, Baronius had better have owned it; for none ever thought Popes
infallible in their Quotations; but the Cardinal resolves right or wrong to
vindicate Gregory Baron. An. 427. page 507.
, who rejects Sozomen's History for that passage which is in Theodoret, but is
not in Sozomen; so rashly do Popes judge sometimes: The Passage is about
commending Theodorus of Mopsvestia as an Orthodox Father to the time of his
death, which Theodoret does affirm; but Sozomen only mentions this Theodorus
Sozom. hist. lib. 8. cap. 2.
his Conversion by S. Chrysostom, but says no more of him; and Baronius is
forced to feign this Passage was in that Part of Sozomen which was long since
lost, and which probably S. Gregory himself never saw; however Baronius knows
nothing what was there written, and therefore it is very boldly done to suppose
a thing for a certain Truth, which he could never know any thing of, only to
save the Credit of a Pope who had little or no skill in Greek Authors. Again,
it is apparently partial in him, where he produces some ancient Testimonies of
the French, being wont to break their words, to restrain this in modern Times
only to that part of them which is Reformed, while he boasts of his Catholics
as the justest Men in the World Baron. An. 428. page 512.
. To confute which, the Perjury and Treachery of the Leaguers in our Fathers
time, and the many Promises and Engagements broken to the late Hugonots in our
days, are abundantly sufficient. He takes it for a proof, that the Eastern
Bishops use to refer Causes of the greatest moment to the Pope, because one
Daniel a French Bishop fled out of his own Country for his Crimes, (probably
into the East) was complained of to the Pope, being Uncanonically Ordained;
which Complaint the Pope transmits to the Bishops of the Province of Narbon, as
the proper Judges in that matter Id. ibid.
; so that this Cause was not referred to him at all, only he was desired to
acquaint those with it who ought to determine that Point. Moreover, he makes it
a certain Evidence that Socrates was an Heretic, because he complains of
Nestorius, for urging the Emperor to persecute Heretics (as soon as ever he
was Ordained Bishop of Constantinople) Id. An. 428. page 513.
. But this Kingdom has found Romanists (when it was their Interest) to censure
Men as Heretics for the contrary, viz. for only insisting upon the execution
of some gentle Penal Laws upon such as differed from the established Religion.
He commends S. Cyril for his Modesty, in not mentioning the Fault of Theodosius
his abetting Nestorius; yet he upon bare Surmizes speaks very opprobriously of
Theodosius upon this account, and reflects upon all Kings and Sovereigns as
inclined to follow his Example Baron. An. 429 page 527. Vide iterum An. 430.
page 550.
. Now if the silence of these things proves Cyril's Modesty, who must needs
know whether Theodosius were guilty of this or no; Does it not prove somebodies
Immodesty to rail by mere Conjectures at Theodosius and all Princes? To
proceed, It is a very false consequence from Cyril's calling in Celestine to
his assistance against Nestorius, and that Popes condemning the Heretic in his
private Council at Rome, That it was the Ancient custom from the beginning, for
S. Peter's Chair alone to determine controversies of Faith, and condemn
Heresies with their Authors as they arise Baron. An. 430. page 533.
. For Cyril had first condemned this Heretic and his Opinions, and the Pope
only came in as his Second; yet after all it was necessary that a General
Council should condemn him, which had been needless if the Pope alone, or in
conjunction with another Patriarch had been sufficient. Again, he cites two
Authors only for Celestine's sending a Pall and a Mitre to S. Cyril, and these
Writers lived 8 or 900 year after this time, and he rejects some part of their
account as fabulous; yet from this Evidence he would prove, That Cyril was
Celestine' s Legate in the Council of Ephesus Id. ibid. page 538.
: But he must have better proof than this to make us believe so incredible a
thing. We may further note, that where Possidius is so particular in the
circumstances of S. Augustine's death, he mentions nothing of any Image of the
Blessed Virgin or the Saints; no Crucifix placed before him, but only the
Penitential Psalms were writ out and fastened on the Wall, which he read over as
he lay on his Deathbed. Nor does he mention any Office said for his Soul after
he was dead, but only an Office for commending his Body to the Grave Possid.
vit. Aug. verse. fin. and Baron. An. 430. page 554.
, which shows these were devised in later and more Superstitious Times.
Baronius indeed supposes the word Sacrificium, to signify the Mass here; but
it seems to signify no more than the usual Office at putting the Body into the
Grave, in hopes of a joyful Resurrection. But though nothing be more evident,
even in these Annals, to a Judicious Reader, than the many Innovations in
Doctrine and Worship, made by the modern Roman Church, contrary to the Decrees
of Councils, the Judgment and Practice of the Ancient Fathers; the Annalist a
little after (upon Capreolus Bishop of Carthage his affirming that to be the
true Faith which is delivered by the Fathers) flies out into foul Language
against the Reformed Churches for Innovations and reviving Heresies condemned
by the Fathers Baron. An. 431. page 564.
. Whereas we freely refer it to those Ancients to judge between us, Whether
they or we come nearer to the Doctrine and Usages of pure Antiquity, and can
from substantial Evidence prove them to be the Innovators. I will only note,
That in this Epistle of Capreolus, this Bishop calls the Emperor, His Lord, and
his Son Baron. An. 431. page 563.
: Upon which Baronius makes no Remark, because he would have it thought that no
Bishop, but only the Pope did ever call the Emperor, Son. For he alone is to be
the Father of all Princes and all Bishops also. A little after he interprets
that woeful destruction of the Emperor's Army in Africa, to be a Divine Judgment
upon him for countenancing the Heretical party at Ephesus Baron. ibid. page 591.
. Though not many Pages from hence he lays all the blame of this Connivance
upon the Treachery of the Emperor's Domestics Id. ibid. page 597.
, and he may find as great Defeats happening often when the Emperors did take the
Catholic part. So true is that of Solomon, No man knows either love or
hatred by all that is before him. All things come alike to all, etc. Ecclesix.
1, 2. It Is remarkable what Baronius says of a very dubious Rescript of
Valentinian, cited for the Authority of the Se^ of Ravenna by the Friends of
that Bishopric, The love of our Country is an imperious thing; yea, a Tyrant,
which compels an Historian to defend those things, which if they were said of
another place, he would utterly explode Baron. An. 432. p. 631, etc.
; which with the rest there said, is so applicable to the Cardinal (as to
Rome), that the only wonder is, he did not see how severe a Censure he (as
David once did upon Nathan's Parable) here passes upon himself. Again, he
forgets that the Miracle out of Prosper concerning a Maid, who could not
swallow a piece of the Sacramental Bread dipped in Wine (being possessed), but
was cured by drinking of the Cup Baron. An. 434. page 646, 647.
, manifestly shows the Innovation of the Roman Church, in that it declares they
used then to dip the Bread in Wine, and thought it lawful to give the Cup to
the Laity; whereas now they only give the people a dry Wafer. It was certainly
a great oversight in the Armenian Bishops (according to him who makes the Pope
the sole Judge of Heresy) to send to Proclus of Constantinople, to know
whether the Writings of Theodorus of Mopsvestia were Orthodox or no? Yet
Liberatus (an ancient Author) affirms they did this secundum morem, according
to Custom Baron. An. 435. page 649.
. So that neither Liberatus nor the Armenians knew of any Custom to go only to
Rome, out of the East, to enquire concerning the true Faith; had they known
this, no doubt they would have sent a little further. Moreover, he highly
extols the Piety of Florentius the Praetorian Prefect, who finding the Tax
paid by the Curtezans of Constantinople to the Exchequer, hindered their
expulsion from that City, gave Lands of his own to compensate the Public
damage, that he might get those Infamous Women banished Baron. An. 439. page
677.
; forgetting all the while the Impiety of the Pope and Cardinals, who now
tolerate them for a little scandalous Pension paid to their Treasury at Rome.
He also says, It is a Pelagian Principle and Heresy, to hold, That no Rich
man can be saved, unless he give all his Estate to the Poor Id. An. 440. page
682.
. Yet he knew many hundred Monasteries which have been and are endowed with
great Estates, upon a Principle nothing different from this, which is preached
frequently to rich Men and Women dying in their Churches Communion, by cunning
and covetous Priests and Jesuits. It is manifest partiality also in him, to
affirm it was a Judgment of God to deliver Carthage to the Vandals, because
there was Pagan Idolatry practiced in that City Baron. Tom VI. An. 440. page 5.
. But the same kind of Idolatry was continued in Rome notwithstanding all
endeavors to root it out, till the Goths took it; but the Annalist does not
expound that Calamity after the same manner Vid. Baron. An. 410.
. Thus he exclaims against the Cruelty of Gensericus the Vandal for persecuting
the Orthodox Bishops upon the bare naming of Pharaoh, Nehuchadnezzar or
Holofernes in their Sermons, pretending it was meant of him Baron. An. 442.
page 12.
. Whereas had he lived to this Age, he might have seen a King entitled, The
most Christian, instigated by the Jesuits to persecute the Reformed Pastors for
the same pretended Fault. It is remarkable that Theodoret, when he writes to a
Bishop of Alexandria proves himself Orthodox, because his Faith was the same
with the former Bishops of that See, viz. Alexander, Athanasius, Achillas,
Theophilus and Cyril; as also with S. Basil and Gregory, the Lights of the
World Baron. An. 444. page 23.
. The Pope is not named, so that doubtless he was not the sole Standard of
Catholic Communion then; if he had, the name of one Pope had been more to
Theodoret's purpose than all these. Again, That Pope Leo writes as imperiously
to Dioscorus of Alexandria, as he use to do to others, is very true, but it no
where appears that Dioscorus observed his Orders: Much less will it follow from
hence, That Leo was the Master set over all Churches Baron. An. 444. page 25.
; such assuming of Empire over our Equals, may indeed show our Ambition, but it
will not prove our Right. It is obvious to all that read Baronius, how he
strains all things that are said of S. Peter, to apply them to the Roman
Church; but the Reader may note; how silently he passes it by, when our Gildas
calls the British Bishops Sees here in this Island, the Seats of Peter Baron.
An. 446. page 36.
. But this may satisfy all impartial Men, that the Ancients accounted other
Bishops the Successors of S. Peter, as well as the Pope, though now he alone
usurps that and many other Privileges, of Old enjoyed in common by others, as
well as by the Bishop of Rome. Again, he spoils the Old famous Story of the
Conversion of Spain by S. James, wherein the Spaniards so much pride
themselves, out of a zealous partiality for Rome, which inclines him to affirm,
That Spain first received the Gospel from the Roman Church Baron. An. 447. page
42.
: Which Notion may in time lessen the Pilgrimaes to S. James of Compostella,
and calls in question the Devotion of those many Thousands, who have believed
his Body to be there, and worship his Relics in that place with great
assurance. Soon after, upon occasion of Turibius, complaining of the Apocryphal
Books used by the Priscillian Heretics in Spain, the Cardinal shows the
necessity of suppressing all Books that are against the Catholic Doctrine, and
urges the Bishop of Spain to suppress a Book writ by one John de Roa, about the
Rights of Princes, containing Doctrins (as he says) which he could not learn
from the Jesuits, Friars or Clergy of Spain Id. ibid. page 44.
. Now how many Books (as Apocryphal as those of the old Heretics, and as
extravagant for the Rights of the Pope, as any that ever were writ on any
Subject in the World) does Baronius cite, approve and admire? But one Book that
speaks for the Prince, and the Civil Rights of Men, must by no means be
endured. It Is observable also, That when Theodoret was suspected of Heresy, he
appeals to a Council in which the Bishops and Magistrates may meet, and the
Judges may determine what is consonant to the Apostolical Doctrine Baron. An.
448. page 53.
. Now if it had been known and believed then, that the Popes Communion was
enough to make a man a Catholic, and he had been the sole Judge, why did not
Theodoret in one word appeal to the Pope, and say he was in Communion with Leo
Bishop of Rome? He approves Theodoret's Censure of Dioscorus, for invading the
Rights of other Dioceses, contrary to the Canons of Nice and Constantinople,
and he blames Dioscorus for his Pride and Ambition; but though the Pope labor
to invade all Dioceses, and make all the Bishops in the World his Vassals,
contrary to Law, Equity, and Primitive Usage, this is no Crime in a Friend Id.
ibid. page 54.
. Baronius is miserably put to it about the Epistle of Ibas, judged (by two
Councils) to be Heretical; yet approved by the Infallible Chair. This makes him
contradict himself strangly; for here he says, This was really Ibas his
Epistle, as the Tenth Action at Chalcedon teaches, and himself confessed; and
the Opinion of the Apostolic Legates of Maximus of Antioch and others confirm
it, and Ibas was proved a Catholic by it Baron. An. 448. page 67.
. But Baronius had before cited the Tenth Action at Chalcedon to prove, That
this Epistle in that Council was found not to be Ibas Epistle, and so the
Epistle was condemned, and he absolved Id. An. 432. page 626.
. And in the former place, as well as elsewhere Id. Tom. 7. An. 553. Vid.
Crakenthorp. Vigil. dormitans, cap. 10. p. 110.
, he affirms the Epistle contained Blasphemy and Heresy; yet Pope Vigilius
approved it; and the Cardinal says, Ibas was by this Epistle found to be a
Catholic. He that can make these Contradictions friends, or reconcile them to
the Infallibility, -- erit mihi magnus Apollo. He commends Pope Leo for
reproving Theodosius the Emperor gently and mildly, when he was going to
establish Heresy by a Pseudo-Synod In cujus manu est ut prohibeat, jubet agi,
si non probibet admitti. Salvian.
. Whereas Old Eli's Example may show (if the Emperor was his Inferior in this
matter, and the Pope his Ghostly Father) that his Reproof ought to have been
sharper; yea, he should have expressly prohibited the convening of this Council
(if his Authority was necessary to their Meeting) and have not so meanly
truckled as to send his Legates to a Synod, which he judged needless, yea,
dangerous Baron. An. 449 page 80.
. And if we consider Leo's high Spirit, this Submission shows, he had no right
to call a General Council, nor power to hinder the Emperor from appointing one.
Again, When the Pope (by Prosper's help) had writ a very seasonable and
Orthodox Epistle against Eutyches, the French Bishops were careful to have it
exactly Transcribed; but it follows not from hence, That they would not vary
one syllable from his Decrees Id. ibid. page 82.
. For this respect was showed, not to the Authority of the Sea, but to the
excellency of the Epistle, as appears in that the Gallican Bishops (as has
been showed) rejected other Decrees both of this Pope and his Predecessors,
when they disliked them. And Baronius owns a little after, that these Bishops
rejoiced that this Epistle contained their own sense as to the Faith, and were
glad that the Pope held the same Opinion, that they had always held from the
Tradition of their Ancestors Id. ibid. page 86.
. So that this is no Proof, as he would have it, That the Pope was a Master
presiding over all the Christian World. For they judged of his Teaching, and
approved it, because it agreed with their Churches ancient Tradition. On no
better grounds he gathers, there was One only lawful Judge, One Governor of
Holy things always in the Church, viz. the Pope; From Theodoret's Epistle to
Leo Baron. An. 449. page 99, 101.
: For first, these Epistles are justly suspected, as being not heard of till
they came to light first out of the Vatican: And, secondly, they are
demonstrated to be spurious by diverse Learned Men, and especially this to Leo,
is showed to contain manifest Contradictions Rivet. Crit. saer. lib. 4. c. 21.
Vid Crakenth. Vigil. dorm. page 444.
. Thirdly, If this Epistle were genuine, it must be considered that all the
Patriarchs, except the Roman, were at that time either corrupted or oppressed,
and in that juncture Theodoret could appeal to none of them but Leo, and so
might well give him good words, who alone was likely and able to assist him. As
for that Testimony wherein they much glory, That Rome had the Supremacy over
all Churches, (as their Translation speaks) because it was always free from
Heresy, and no Heretic had sat there Id. Baron. ib. p. 102.
, it supposes a long experience of the Church of Romes Integrity before this
Privilege was bestowed; and if the Supremacy was given her for this Reason,
she ought to lose it again whenever any Heretical Pope shall get the Chair; nor
does Theodoret at all suppose this impossible for the future. Moreover he
brags, that Leo restored Theodoret and others, deposed by this Pseudo-
Ephesine-Synod, and infers, That it was the Popes privilege alone to restore
Bishops deposed by a Council Id. ibid. page 103.
. But the Misfortune is, Theodoret was called an Heretic after the Pope had
privately acquitted him, and his Cause was to be tried over again at Chalcedon;
and till that Council restored him he remained suspended for all this pretended
Privilege of the Pope. And before we leave him we may note, that he used all
his Interest to persuade the Emperor to call a lawful and impartial General
Council, as appears by all his Epistles to his several Friends Baron. An. 450.
page 122, 123, 124.
; which shows he knew it was in the Emperor's power alone to call one; not in
the Pope's, to whom he would have written, (being in favor with him) if he had
had Authority in this Affair. He reckons Attila's leaving to harrass the
Eastern Empire, to be a Divine Reward for Marcian's settling the true Religion
there; but presently tells us, That this Scourge of God, and other sad
Judgments fell upon Italy and the Western Empire; from whence he supposes the
Reformation of all Eastern Heresies came, and where he believes no Heresy
could ever take place Baron. An. 450. page 125.
. So miserably do Men expose themselves, when they pretend to give Reasons for
all God's Dispensations. In the next year happened the Famous Council of
Chalcedon, wherein diverse of Baronius's Frauds have been already detected; so
that I am only to add, That Leo was politic in pretending to give Anatolius a
power to receive Recanting Bishops, who had fallen into Eutyches Heresy, and
cunningly reserves the greater Cases to his own See Baron. An. 451. p. 128, and
130.
. But it is plain, Anatolius of Constantinople had as much power in the
Provinces subject to him, as the Pope had in Italy, and the greater Cases were,
according to ancient Usage, reserved to the next General Council, where both
the Bishop of Rome and Constantinoples Acts were to be re-examined, and none of
these Erring Bishops were restored but by that Council. And finally, he makes
it a great Crime in Dioscorus to pretend to Lord it over Egypt, and to say, He
had as much Authority there as the Emperor Id. ibid. page 144.
. Yet the following Popes did and said as much in relation to Italy; but
Baronius cannot see any harm in that, though Socrates did, who says, That both
the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria had exceeded the bounds of Priestly-power,
and fallen to a secular way of Ruling Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 11.
. And this may suffice for this Part of the Period we have undertaken.

CHAP. IV.
Roman Errors and Forgeries in the Councils, from the end of the Fourth
Council, till An. Dom. 500.

. 1. THE Synod of Alexandria is falsely styled in An. Dom. 453.
the Title, under Leo: For their own Text confesses, it was assembled by the
Authority of Proterius Bishop of Alexandria Bin. Tom. 2. part. 1. p. 419. Lab.
Tom. 4. Col. 1007.
.

The Second Council of Arles, which Binius had antedated 70 year, and put out
with this false Title, under Siricius, is by Labbe Lab. col. 1010.
placed here according to Sirmondus his direction.

The Council of Anjou, in Binius, is said to be held under Leo; who is not once
named in it: Wherefore Labbe leaves out that false Inscription, and only says,
it was held in the 13th year of Pope Leo Bin. p. 420. Lab. col. 1020.
.

The 4th Canon of this Council is corrupted by Binius and Baronius. For where
the Text reads, If any be [coelibes] unmarried, they put into the Margen as a
better reading, if any be [debiles] weak: Which is to make the Reader believe,
that all the Clergy then were unmarried; whereas this Canon supposes many of
them had Wives. And the 11th Canon allows a married Man to be chosen Priest or
Deacon, (the Popes Decrees not yet prevailing in France:) So that Labbe
honestly strikes out [debiles] and keeps only the true reading (d). We (u) Bin.
ut supr. Lab. col. 1021, etc.
note also, that in the end of this 4th Canon, such Clerks as meddle in
surrendering Cities are excommunicated. A Sentence which if it were now
executed, would put many Priests and Jesuits out of the Communion of the
Church, for their treachery to the Emperor and the King of Spain, many of whose
Cities they have betrayed to the French.

The Notes falsely cite the first Canon, and so does Baronius Bin. page 420.
Lab. Col. 1022. Bar. An. 453. n.
saying, it orders, That the Clergy shall not against their Bishops Sentence
seek to secular Tribunals; and pretending this was in opposition to an Edict of
Valentinian, published the year before, which restrained the Bishops
Jurisdiction to matters of Religion, unless the parties chose them. Now the
true words of the Canon are, The Clergy shall not appeal from the Bishops
Sentence, nor seek to Secular Tribunals, without consulting the Bishop. And
Valentinian's Law was of no force in France, nor probably had these Bishops
ever heard there was such a Law; so that it is not likely they ever thought of
opposing it. Finally, We observe that Baronius without any Authority falsely
affirms, that this Council was sent to Rome Baron. An. 453. n.
only to insinuate, that it was to be confirmed there. Whereas till
Fronto-Ducaeus found the Manuscript in France, they at Rome seem to have known
nothing of it.

The Council of Vannes placed by Binius here, by Sirmondus Authority is removed
to An. 465. in Labbe Bin. page 421. Lab. Col. 1054.
. Nothing in it is remarkable, but that the Assembly desires (not the Pope,
but) the absent Bishops of their own Province to confirm the Canons thereof.

The Council of 73 Bishops at Constantinople, was An. Dom. 459.
called by, and held under Gennadius Patriarch of that City, and so is falsely
titled under Leo; whose Legates do not subscribe it, and so probably were not
present at it Bin. page 425. Lab. Col. 1025.
. Baronius indeed says they were, but proves it only by conjecture, because
Leo in an Epistle speaks of his Legates, being come back to Rome the year after
Baron. An. 459. n.
. But the wonder is, how Baronius and Binius (who confess all the Acts are
lost, except one Canon about Simony) came to know, that Eutyches was condemned,
and the Council of Chalcedon confirmed in this Council. However, if it was
confirmed, no doubt the Greek Bishops would confirm the Canons of it, with the
rest, to which the Popes Legates could not consent: But since we hear of no
difference, it is like these Legates were not present.

. 2. Pope Hilary (who succeeded Leo) might justly An. Dom. 461.
be suspected of Heresy, because he confirms no more than three General
Councils, omitting that of Constantinople which condemned Macedonius. But since
there is no evidence of this Universal Epistle confirming the other three
Councils, but only the fabulous Pontifical, we may acquit him, and perhaps even
in the very Pontifical, this Council may have been erased after the
controversy of the Primacy was started Vita Hilar. Bin. page 424. Lab. Col.
1029.
. However, this being owned all along by the Catholic Church for a General
Council, it can suffer nothing by the Popes not confirming it; he alone would
deserve censure for not subscribing to it.

The Spanish Bishops who write to this Pope, by their Countries being wasted by
Euaricus the Goth Baron. An. 464. n.
were destitute of Power, and desire Hilary to declare the Canons in some
particular Cases, hoping the persons concerned (who despised them in their low
estate,) might have more respect for a great Patriarch Bin. page 425, and 426.
Lab. Col. 1034, and 1035.
. So that it is very Sophistical in the Annalist and Binius, to draw
consequences from hence, for the Popes being the Supreme Judge, and having
power to dispense with all Canons. The Pope himself in his Answer pretends no
such thing Hilar. ep 2. Bin. page 426. Lab. Col. 1035.
. He only declares the Canons, but dispenses with none: Yet if he had such a
power, doubtless he ought to have used it in Irenaeus his Case.

But the third Epistle of Hilary, writ about the same affair, seems to
discover, that all these Epistles (which talk so big of the Popes Supremacy)
are counterfeit: For the Forger, weary of inventing new Phrases, steals the
beginning verbatim out of those Epistles, that are falsely ascribed to Zepherine
and Fabian, and were not extant until long after Pope Hilary's death Hilar ep.
3. Bin. page 427. Lab. Col. 1038.
. And Labbe's Marginal Note on Binius Annotations shows, he smelt out the
Cheat, if he durst have spoken freely.

The Notes on the 4th Epistle own, that the Popes may be cajoled by false
Stories, and deceived in Matter of Fact; and this so far as to condemn holier
Bishops than themselves, as Leo and this Hilary did, in the cases of Hilary of
Arles, and Mammertus of Vienne Hilar. Ep. 4. Bin. page 427. Lab. col. 1039.
. And it is not easy to understand, how he who mistakes Matter of Fact, can
infallibly apply the Law to a Fact wherein he is mistaken.

The 5th Epistle was writ three year before those that precede it, and the
Humility of the Style makes me think it the only genuine Letter (as yet set
down) of this Pope; for he writes to the Bishop of Arles (not as a Son, but) as
a Brother, and takes it well that he advised him to keep close to the Ancient
Canons.

The 9th Epistle shows, that Mammertus his Piety was no protection to him,
against the injuries of the Roman Court Hilar. Ep. 9. Bin. page 429. Lab. col.
1043.
. But Binius does penance for this in his Notes on the 11th Epistle Not. in Ep.
11. Bin. p. 431. Lab. col. 1047.
; though all his devices will neither excuse his Popes Morals in persecuting so
great a Saint, nor vindicate his Judgment who was so grossly mistaken.

There is but one Roman Council under this Pope, called (as is pretended) to
confirm his false Judgment about the Spanish Bishops; for they absolve the
guilty Sylvanus, and condemn Irenaeus who was innocent: And though this Popes
being commonly in the wrong makes it probable, he might get such a Council
together, yet the very Acts smell strong of Forgery, as well as the former
Epistles in these cases Council. Romans Bin. page 431. Lab. col. 1061.
: For besides their Style, Maximus Bishop of Turin is mentioned not only as
present at it, but speaking in it, who died (as Gennadius Gennad. Catal. ap.
Hieron. Tom. 1. page 466. and opera Maxim. Turin. page 1.
a Writer of that Age and Country affirms,) in the Reign of Honorius and the
younger Theodosius, that is, above 40 year before this Council: So that
Baronius is very bold out of a suspected Council, to correct a Writer who lived
so near this time, against the Authority of diverse printed Copies Baron. An.
465. n.
. And Binius is more audacious to cover this with an evident falsification of
Gennadius, as if he said, Maximus lived under those Emperors, but continued
Bishop till this time Not. Bin. ut supra.
. And now let Baronius boast of the Acclamations of this Synod, (common in
other Councils) as a singular honor done to Hilary; for after all it is plain,
he liked not the Canons of it so well as to give them a place in his Annals
Baron. An. 465. n.
, which here he fills up with other manifest impertinencies.

. 3. The next Pope was Simplicius, whose appointing An. Dom. 467.
Weekly Confessors at Rome, is far from proving (what the Notes infer) that
their Sacramental Confession was instituted by Christ Not. in vit. Simp. Bin.
page 434. Lab. col. 1067.
. Nor is it for the credit of this Pope that three parts of seven in Rome it
self were Arrians in his time Ibid. Bin. page 435. Lab. col. 1068.
. But the Pontifical gives the reason of it, and expressly charges him with
dissimulation Vit. Simplic. Bin. page 434. Lab. col. 1066.
, Which seems a just censure; for though the Arrians and Photinians sadly
infested the Western Church Baron. An. 475. n.
: And though the Princes of that time were generally heretical Id. An. 476. n.
6. p. 318.
; yet poor Simplicius did nothing, and till he had been eight years Pope,
Baronius cannot pick up one Memoir concerning him, except a few Brags of an
interested Successor of his, concerning his resisting the Eastern Emperors,
which are both false and incredible: Yea, the Annals show that all the great
Affairs of this time were managed by S. Epiphanius Bishop of Pavy, who far
outshined Simplicius Baron. An. 471. n. etc,
. Wherefore I wonder that Du Pin should say, He was very full of business all
the time of his Popedom Du Pin. Eccles. Hist. Vol. 4. p. 159.
; since for more than half that time there is no true account of his doing any
thing: And when he did begin to write, Baronius owns, He did no good by any of
his Letters Baron. An. 483. n. 19. page 374.
; yet a little before, having a bad Memory, he had ridiculously boasted, That
Simplicius in the midst of the Arrian fury governed the Sea, with the same
Authority and freedom that his Predecessors had done, bearing the Causes of all
the World, depriving and restoring Bishops, correcting Emperors, opposing
barbarous Kings, and sitting as Arbiter and Judge in all things over the East
and West, as (he says) he has proved in the several years of his Pontifical
Idem An. 483. n. 8. p. 371.
. Let the Reader search, and try if he can find this proved. On the contrary
this Pope flattered all Parties, and truckled to the Heretical Usurper Basilius
(as I shall show presently) nor durst he attempt to do Justice to a persecuted
Orthodox Bishop of Alexandria, because (as an old faithful Historian tells us
Brev. Histor. Eutych. Lab. col. 1081.
,) Zeno the Emperor had forbidden him.

It is so common for the Roman Forgers to invent sham Epistles, in which the
Pope is feigned to make Eminent Bishops his Legates in all parts of the World,
that, no doubt, this Popes first Epistle to Zeno Bishop of Sevil (which has no
date) is spurious Simply. Ep. 1. Bin. page 435. Lab. Col. 1068.
. And therefore it is of no force, that the Notes infer from such a Forgery,
That the care of the whole Church was committed to the Pope by God.

The 4th Epistle tells the Emperor, to whom it was writ, That none doubted of
his Orthodox mind, and that be did as certainly imitate Marcian and Leo in
their Faith, as he did succeed them in their Empire. Now this Letter (as
Baronius and the Editors say) was writ to Zeno Idem Ep. 4. Bin. page 436. Lab.
Col. 1071.
; and they own it to be at least prudent dissimulation, for the Notes on the
Life of Simplicius affirm, Zeno was an Eutychian Heretic. But indeed it was
inexcusable Flattery, or as the Pontifical calls it, downright Dissembling: And
the Crime is worse, because upon a strict enquiry this Epistle appears to be
writ to that Heretical Usurper Basiliscus. Labbe's Margen from an old
Manuscript reads it to Basiliscus; and Zeno really was deposed a whole year
before this Epistle was writ; for Timotheus Aelurus his coming to
Constantinople (mentioned here by Simplicius) was in the time of Basiliscus
after Zeno's deposition, as an Authentic Author relates Theodor. Lect.
collect. l 1. page 183.
; and the true date of Simplicius his Epistle shows it was writ in Basiliscus
his time, and so does also the Chronicle of Marcellinus, a Book writ near that
time: But for all this, Baronius quarrels with Marcellinus, contradicts
Theodorus Lector, alters the date of the Epistle, and keeps Zeno on the Throne
a year longer before his deposing, than ancient Writers do allow; and all this
to conceal his holy Fathers wicked flattering of an Heretic, and Usurper
Baron. An. 476. n. 16. and n. 23. page 320, 321.
. But I hope the Reader will believe old and disinteressed Historians, before
the partial Annalist.

The 5th Epistle writ at the same time to Acacius Patriarch of Constantinople,
shows that it was solely in the Emperors power to call a General Council
Simplic. Ep. 5. Bin. page 437. Lab. col. 1073.
. Since Timothy of Alexandria applied to the Emperor for such a Council, and
Simplicius with Acacius joined in addresses to the Emperor against it.

In the Notes on the 8th Epistle, where Euagrius only mentioned a bare report
of the Martyr Theclas appearing to Zeno; They out of Baronius add, that she
prayed and interceded for Zeno Not. in 8 Epist. Simplic. Bin. page 439. Lab.
Col. 1079.
: Which invention is to countenance the Martyrs praying for us; The date of
this Epistle being in October 477, and (as the Notes say) writ to Zeno after he
was restored, and had sent to Simplicius an Orthodox confession of Faith; This
date I say shows that the 4th Epistle (before spoken of) must have been written
to Basiliscus; for that is dated in January 476, at which time Zeno was
deposed, and Basiliscus after he had reigned two years, as Euagrius writes Cum
jam biennio regnaverat. Euag. ap. Baron. An. 477. N. Not Ten Months, as du Pin
mistakes. page 160.
, was ejected by Zeno about July 477, long before which time, Simplicius had
writ that flattering Letter to the Usurper.

The Forgers have corrupted the Title and Conclusion of Acacius his Epistle to
Simplicius Bin. p. 439. Lab. col. 1080.
. For Simplicius in a genuine Epistle calls Acacius, his beloved Brother,
Epistle 18: But here by turning Patriarchae into Patri, they make Acacius style
Simplicius, Most blessed Lord and Holy Father, Archbishop, etc. Which
corruption (owned by Labbe) shows how little credit is to be given to the
Pompous Titles of these Epistles which are frequently feigned by the modern
Roman Parasites.

Upon the 14th Epistle they note in the Margen, The Pope dispenses with the
Nicene Canon for peace sake, and in favor of the Emperor Simpl. Ep. 14. Bin.
page 441. Lab col. 1086. (male 1034.)
. This relates to the hasty election and ordination of Stephen Patriarch of
Antioch, which the Emperor and Acacius were forced to dispatch somewhat
uncanonically for fear of a Sedition in that City, and on that account they
desired the Pope however to own him as an Orthodox Patriarch, since they had
resolved this single Example should be no precedent for the future. The Pope
like a true Signior Placebo, assents to all tamely, and allows of their
resolution, which was not (as the Notes on the 15th Epistle falsely say,) any
Condition that Simplicius prescribed to the Emperor, but a Rule that Zeno had
made for himself, before the Pope knew of the Ordination of Stephen.

The 16th Epistle declares, that Simplicius had taken Calendion the new Bishop
of Antioch into his Communion, and call him his Brother and Fellow-Bishop
Simplic. Ep. 16. Bin. p 442. Lab. col. 1036.
. The Notes calls this, the Popes confirming Calendion in the Sea of Antioch:
Whereas it was no more than his owning him for an Orthodox Brother; yea,
Calendion was thus far confirmed by Acacius, for (at his request) Acacius had
declared himself of his Communion, before he writ to the Pope. These Notes also
falsely say, Acacius was made the Popes Legate, which is a groundless Fiction of
Baronius Baron. An. 482. n. 13. p. 357.
. For if Acacius had acted in ordaining and deposing the Eastern Patriarchs,
only as the Popes Legate, there had been no Quarrel between him and Rome. And
how improbable is it, that he who contended for the Supremacy of the whole
Eastern Church with the Pope, and who is taxed by Baronius, to be one that
thirsted after nothing so much as the Primacy Baron. cod. An. n. 3. p. 355.
, that he, (I say) should accept of a Legantine power from Rome? Yea,
Simplicius his 17th Epistle does not say any such thing, but speaks of their
Obligation to mutual Love, and of the Patriarchal Office committed to him, as a
Talent God had entrusted him with: But not a syllable of his Subjection to the
Pope, or of any Office derived from him.

. 4. The Council of Tours, Binius places here under An. Dom. 482.
Simplicius, Labbe 21 years sooner under Pope Hilary; but the truth is, that it
was held An. 461. but under no Pope at all: For they desire no other but their
absent Brethren, (Bishops of that Province) to confirm their Canons Council.
Turon. Bin. page 443. Lab. col. 1049.
by their consent. The Notes on this Council mention the Fasts and Vigils,
which Perpetuus the 6th Bishop of Tours instituted for his Church, Recorded by
an old Historian of that place Gregor. Turon. lib. 10. cap. 31. p. 513.
. And it is very plain they differ extremely from those used at Rome; which
shows how unreasonable it is in the Modern Roman Church, to impose their Fasts,
Feasts and other Rites upon all Churches in the World.

The Council of Arles, in the cause of Faustus assembled to examine Points of
Faith, does not so much as mention the Pope, so that surely they did not take
him for an infallible Judge Ap. Bin. habetur Anno 524. Lab. col. 1041.
. Labbe's Notes boast, that one De Champs has confuted Bishop Usher's censure
of the Epistles of Faustus and Lucidus, and of this Council which approved
them: But before the Reader credit this, let him hear that most learned
Primate, who modestly excuses the Council, but strongly proves, that Faustus
was a Semi-pelagian Heretic Usher. Antiq. Britan. c. 13. page 229.
: And if he did not feign the consent of this and another Council to his
Doctrins, this will be one instance, that Councils may Err in matters of Faith.

. 5. Foelix the Third, who followed Simplicius, was An. Dom. 483.
much bolder, and openly reproved the Emperor and Acacius, for that which he
called a Fault: But the Notes falsify when they say, That in the beginning of
his Pontificat, he rejected, proscribed and cursed the most wicked Zeno's
(Henoticon) Edict for Union, anathematizing all that subscribed it Not. in vit.
Fall. Bin. p. 445. Lab. col. 1047.
. For Euagrius recites this Edict, and neither says Foelix condemned it, nor
condemns it himself; and Foelix former Letters treat both Zeno and Acacius with
all respect, nor do they curse either of them on the account of this Edict:
Theodorus Lector indeed says, That when all the Patriarchs besides agreed to
Zeno's Edict for Union, Foelix of Rome [(...)] joined not with him Theodor.
Lect. collect. l. 2 page 190.
. Which only implies, his not communicating with the Emperor in that point: But
Binius has improved this into proscribing, cursing and anathematizing the
Edict.

The First Epistle of Foelix to Acacius often calls him Brother, which shows as
if then he did not reject his Communion Foelix Ep. 1. Bin. page 446. Lab. col
1049.
; and neither this nor the second to Zeno, do at all mention the Emperors Edict
for Union, but quarrels only about matters of Jurisdiction, being not so much
concerned for any Heretical Opinions, as for keeping up his claim to a
pretended Supremacy: However some suspect both these Epistles as being without
date, and because that to Acacius seems to contradict Liberatus Liberat. Brev.
cap. 15. ap. Baron. An. 483. n. 1. p. 370.
: But I think they may be allowed for genuine.

The Second Epistle to Zeno is writ with modesty, yet wants not good advice.
The Pope owning it his Duty to write to the Emperor, upon his coming into the Sea of Rome; and he rather entreats, than either commands or threatens Foelic.
Ep. 2. Bin. page 448. Lab. col. 1053.
: But it is certain, if this Epistle be genuine, it is not perfect, wanting
that account of the African Persecution, which Euagrius says was mentioned in
this Epistle.

It is said, Foelix writ three Letters to Petrus Cnapheus the Heretical Bishop
of Antioch, of which only two are extant, and it is well if both be not
Forgeries [incepi sententiare contrate,] is a Phrase that smells of the later
Ages, when the Flatterers of Rome coined great variety of this kind of Epistles
to make the World think, that an Heretical Patriarch could be deposed by none
but the Pope Ep. 4. Foelix, Bin. page 452. Lab. col. 1067.
. But this very Letter owns, that Acacius and his Council had also deposed this
Peter of Antioch, as well as the Pope and his: And Baronius says, Acacius did
it first Baron. An. 483. n. 54. p. 382.
: But the Cardinal thought it worth his while to corrupt this suspicious
Epistle, wherein Foelix says, He was condemned by me, and those who together
with me do govern the Apostolical Throne: Which Phrase plainly shows, that the
Pope did not Rule alone as a Monarch at Rome, but the Italian Bishops had a
share in that Power: To avoid which Truth Baronius and they that follow him
falsify it, and read -- condemned by me, and by them, who being constituted
under me, govern Episcopal Seats Baron. An. 483. n. 68. page 385.
. The true reading implies the Bishops are coordinate with the Pope, but the
Corruption is to make us believe, they are only his creatures, substitutes and
delegates.

The Fifth Epistle to Zeno speaks honorably of Acacius, as an Orthodox
Archbishop, commending him for opposing Petrus Cnapheus Foelic. Ep. 5. Bin.
page 452. Lab. col. 1070.
: It is noted by a learned Man, that (excepting fabulous Inscriptions,) the
name [Archbishop] is here first found among the Latins: But I rather observe,
that Foelix here reads that famous Text for the Supremacy, Math. xvi. in this
manner -- and upon this Confession will I build my Church: So it is read often
in Gelasiui Epistles Gelas. Ep. 1. Bin. 466. Lab. 1158. and Ep. 4. Bin. 471.
Lab. 1171.
, -- on the Confession of Peter will I build my Church: Which shows it is not a
casual expression, but a Testimony that at Rome it self, in that Age, it was
not believed this Promise belonged so much to St. Peter's Person as to his
Faith, nor to his Successors any longer than they held that Confession. Of the
6th Epistle we shall speak when we come to Foelix his second Roman Council.

The Corrupters Fingers have been busy with the Title of the 7th Epistle,
which (as Labbe notes out of Justellus) was writ only to the Bishops of Sicily;
but they who are to support an Universal Supremacy have changed it thus, To all
Bishops Foelic. Ep. 7. Bin. page 454. Lab. col. 1075.
: And the date is falsified also, being pretended to be writ by a Roman Council
held in March, An. Dom. 487. yet it is dated in the year after, March 488. But
if they will have it genuine, let them observe, that the Pope here says,
(speaking of a Point of Faith,) He knows not but in this case, the Spirit of
God may have informed them of something that had escaped his Knowledge,
promising to hear them, if they can find anything omitted by him Ibid. Ep. 7.
Bin. page 455. Lab. col. 1077.
. Let them read this, and reconcile it with Infallibility if they can.

The Decree of Foelix about the subjection of Kings to Bishops, is neither
agreeable to the Age, nor to the Style of this Popes other Writings to the
Emperor Bin. page 455. Lab. Ep. 9. col. 1083.
; so that we cannot credit it, though Labbe has put it into an Epistle to
Zeno, because this Epistle speaks of the deposition of Acacius as a thing past,
August 1st 484: But the Margen of the next Epistle says, Acacius was deposed
July 28, 488 Foelic. Ep. 10. ap. Lab. col. 1085.
. And it is probable, that both the Sentence and the Synod are spurious, coined
out of a hint in the Pontifical, viz. That Foelix did condemn Acacius in a
Synod: Which was ground enough for the Parasites to frame a Council. But how
little credit is to be given to the Pontifical in this Popes History, Baronius
declares, when he notes that Author is not to be trusted in his Report, That
Misenus and Vitalis were sent to Constantinople, three years after this Synod
at Rome Vit. Foelic. 3. Bin. page 445. Lab. col. 1046.
. And it seems neither Euphemius Bishop of Constantinople, nor Pope Gelasius
knew of this Roman Synod: For when Euphemius asked, In what Synod his
Predecessor Acacius was condemned? Gelasius mentions no Roman Synod Gelas. ep.
10. and Baron. An. 484. n. 21. page 395.
; but says, there was no need of any particular Council, since he was
condemned by the general Sentence of the Council of Chalcedon, and upon that
ground the Roman Church rejected Acacius his Communion.

There are (in Labbe) diverse other Epistles ascribed to Foelix; one to Zeno
Foelic. ep. 12. Lab. col. 1086.
, said to be writ some time after the death of Acacius, wherein the Pope extols
that Emperor for his care of Religion, and the reverence of Divine Worship;
which shows that Foelix did not so stiffly renounce Zeno's Communion, nor damn
his Edict for Union so severely as Binius pretends. The rest of these Epistles
I pass, though most of them be suspicious.

. 6. The first Roman Council under Foelix, may An. Dom. 483.
be true as far as concerns the Condemnation of Peter Mongus, the Heretical
Bishop of Alexandria Council. Romans 1. Bin. page 455. Lab. col. 1095.
, though there is nothing to prove it, but the two first suspected Epistles of
Foelix. However, if there were such a Synod, it shows how little regard was had
to the Pope and his Council in those days, since John, whose side Rome took,
did never get admittance to the Sea of Alexandria; and Peter Mongus kept that
Chair for all the Popes Sentence: And if the other, Peter Cnapheus, the
Heretical Bishop of Antioch was condemned here, it is certain, he was condemned
before by Acacius at Constantinople: But that Evidence of Acacius his being
Orthodox, has not discouraged the Parasites from forging a pretended Citation,
in the name of this Roman Synod, to call Acacius to Rome, there to answer the
Matters charged against him: But it is so improbable, Foelix should attempt this
against one, who thought himself his equal, if not superior, that nowadays
the Romanists allow not these Processes, but count them spurious.

There is a second Roman Council placed in this At. Dom. 484.
year, wherein Acacius and the two Peter's of Alexandria and Antioch are all
said to be condemned Council. 2. Romans Bin. page 462. Lab. col. 1123.
. But let it be noted, that whereas the 6th Epistle of Foelix says, he had
deposed Acacius in a Synod in August, 484 Foelic. Ep. 6. Bin. page 454. Lab.
col. 1075.
, and at that time Baronius places his deposition Baron. An. 484 n. 30. page
397.
; Yet here we have a Synodical Letter, condemning him over again, dated above a
year after, viz. October. 485, which Date Baronius and Binius fraudulently leave
out Bin. page 463.
: But Labbe sets it down in the Margen, and so discovers the cheat Lab. col.
1127.
. Upon the whole matter, this Condemnation of Acacius was done they know not
when; and it is probable all these Letters and Synods were invented after the
Controversy for precedence between Rome and Constantinople grew high, merely
to put weight into the Roman Scale. But one corruption of this suspicious
Synodical Epistle I cannot pass, being a passage evidently put in by a later
Forger: For whereas this Letter makes the Italian Bishops call the Pope their
Prince and Head (by way of limitation,) who ought to preside in the Synods of
Italy: -- And tell those to whom they writ -- that therefore they had by Tutus
sent the Sentence underneath, which pleased the Synod at St. Peter's, and which
holy Foelix their Head, Pope and Archbishop had decreed: Some later Hand has
broken the Sense, and absurdly thrust into the midst of this Sentence these
incoherent words -- Who is the Head of all; the Lord saying to St. Peter the
Apostle, Thou art Peter, etc. Math. xvi. Which words the 318 Fathers at Nice
following, gave the Authority and Confirmation of matters to the holy Church of
Rome, both which, even to our Age, all Successions by the grace of Christ have
kept, -- and then comes in -- Therefore (as we have said,) we have by Tutus
sent, etc. Ep. Synod. Bin. page 463. Lab. col. 1126.
. It Is plain they are forced to put in these words (as we have said) to tie
these latter words to the former: And whoever considers the incoherence, the
impertinence, the sham story of the Fathers at Nice, and the many Ages
supposed, from that Council of Nice to this time, (which was but barely 160
years) will conclude this Passage is a Corruption upon a Corruption, to support
the Supremacy, while such stuff passed for Authentic proof to an ignorant Age.

The Third Roman Council under Foelix, (as we noted An Dom. 488.
on his 7th Epistle) lies under the same suspicion, being dated with the
Consuls of the year 488, yet is said to be read in Council the year before, An.
487; and from an Epistle to one Neighboring Country, is now made a Letter to
all Bishops.

. 7. Gelasius succeeded Foelix in the Roman See, a An. Dom. 492.
man of more wit and learning than most of his Predecessors, for which cause it
is thought he was called Scholasticus before St. Gregory's time, and that it
was he that corrected and set out the Roman Offices. The Pontifical relates,
that the Manichees being discovered at Rome in his time, he made a Decree, That
those who would not receive the Sacrament in both kinds, should receive it in
neither, and declares it to be a grand Sacrilege for any to divide the holy
Mysteries Vit. Gelas. Bin. page 464. Lab. col. 1154.
. Now these Heretics refusing the Cup, were to be discovered by the Priests
taking care that all the People received the Cup as well as the Bread: But this
happens to condemn the modern use at Rome, (of denying the Cup to the People)
as a grand Sacrilege; wherefore all Hands and Wits are at work to ward off
this fatal Blow. Binius in his Margen feigns, That Gelasius ordered the
Sacrament to be received in both kinds for a time: But if it had not been the
Custom at Rome to receive in both kinds before, the Manichees had never been
discovered: It is very plain Gelasius confirms the old Custom, and thinks it in
all times a Sacrilege to receive but one half: Wherefore Labbe has left out
this pitiful Note. The Editors of Gratian cover this blot, by Forging this
false Title to the Decree, The Priest ought not to receive the Body of Christ
without the Blood Gratian. decr. 3 par. de consec. did. 2. cap. 12. p. 710.
. But Gelasius speaks principally, if not only of the People, and this Sense
supposes most of the Roman Clergy to be Manichean Heretics. Therefore Baronius
rejects this Excuse as frivolous Baron. An. 496 n. 21. page 510.
, but takes as bad a method to salve up this business; for he manifestly
perverts the sense of the Decree, -- pretending the Manichees superstition made
it Sacrilege only in them to reject the Cup; but it is none in the Catholic
People not to receive it, nor in the Church to forbid it: But this is mere
Shophistry, for it was certainly the Custom even at Rome in Gelasius his time,
and many Ages after, for all the Orthodox People to receive in both kinds; and
he calls it Sacrilege in any of the People, who did not receive the Cup as
well as the Bread: For he says in general, This dividing the Mystery, can
never happen without a grand Sacrilege. Now it is certain, that when either an
Heretical or Catholic Man or Woman receives but in one kind, it does happen
that the Mystery is divided; and therefore in Pope Gelasius Opinion, the
present Church of Rome is guilty of a grand Sacrilege, in taking the Cup from
the People: And it seems, the Editors thought Baronius had not sufficiently
satisfied this Objection, and therefore they cunningly leave it out of this
Popes Decrees Bin. page 493 Lab. col. 1258.
, in both Editions.

With like craft, they omit the Tract of Gelasius against Eutyches, and only
give a touch at it in the Notes Not. in vit. Gelas. Bin. page 465. Lab. col.
1156.
; and there also care is taken (out of Baronius,) if any shall elsewhere meet
with this piece, to keep them from discerning, that Pope Gelasius condemns
Transubstantiation; and expressly says, That the substance of Bread and Wine
remains, after the Consecration: The words they cannot deny; but first,
Baronius and Binius argue it was not writ by this Pope, but by Gelasius
Cyzicenus, (an Author as Orthodox and more ancient than Pope Gelasius; but
their Arguments are not so cogent, as to outweigh the proofs that this Pope
writ the Tract. Labbe in his Margen says, that many learned men think it his.
Gennadius Contemporary with the Roman Gelasius, and the Pontifical say, he writ
a Tract against Eutyches: Fulgentius cites it as this Gelasius his Work
Fulgent. da Ferrand. Diac. cap. 18.
: Pope John the Second, also ascribes it to his Predecessor: Yea, the
Bibliotheca Patrum allowed by the Expurgators, put it out under Pope Gelasius
his name Bibl. Patr. Edit. Paris. Tom. 4. p. 522.
. And at last, Baronius himself is not against supposing it was his. But then
Secondly, He manifestly perverts the Sense of the words before-cited, being
(after long shuffling) forced to this absurdity, that -- by the substance, he
means, the accidents of Bread and Wine remain Baron. An. 496. n. 1. page 506,
and n. 14. page 508.
; Which makes this learned Pope so ignorant, as to mistake the first rudiments
of Logic, and might almost show he was an Heretic, if his Comparison in that
sense be applied to the two Natures of Christ, for illustrating of which he
brings it in: For thus it would follow, that Gelasius held, nothing but the
accidents of Christ's. Body or Human Nature, remained after the Hypostatical
Union: Doubtless, Contarenus his Brother Cardinal, was wiser and honester in
making no reply at the Colloquy of Ratasbon 1541, to this clear Testimony: And
it is great weakness in Baronius, to brag what wonders he has done, by heaping
up a parcel of falsehoods and impertinence. Before we dismiss this, let it be
noted, that the Annalist and Binius not only allow, but dispute for 500 forged
Tracts and Epistles, which support modern Popery; but they devise innumerable
things, to baffle and disgrace the most genuine Writings that condemn their
Innovations: Which is Baronius his meaning, when he gives this reason of his
large digression about this Tract, -- because out of it the Innovators take
their Weapons: But they who reject the old Writings of their own Doctors, do
more justly deserve that Title.

As to this Popes extraction, Volatteran and Panvinius say, -- his Father
Valerius was a Bishop: Which is now left out of the Pontifical, and not
mentioned in Baronius or the Notes Not. in vit. Gelas. Bin. page 465. Lab. col.
1156. Baron. An. 492. n. 6. p. 460.
: But the omission signifies little, there being so many instances of married
Bishops that had Children; Yea, of Popes that were Sons, or Grandchildren of
Bishops or former Popes: As to the time of this Pope's ingress, Baronius places
it An. 492, and upon the credit of the dates of a few Papal Epistles, (which
are always suspicious and often forged,) he rejects the Authority of
Marcellinus, who lived at this time, and died An. 534 Baron. An. 452 n. 6. p.
461.
; in whose Chronicle Gelasius is said to be made Pope An. 494; that is, two
year later than Baronius places it.

. 8. If Marcellinus be in the right, we may justly doubt of those three
Epistles, [the 1st, 2d and 9th,] which Baronius cites as writ before the year
494: The 1st has no date, and though the time of writing it be made an
Evidence against Marcellinus his Account; yet he brings no proof it was writ
An. 492, but this, Nothing hinders us from allowing these things between
Euphemius and Gelasius, to be done this year Baron. An. 492. n. 27. page 465.
. I reply, the Testimony of a good Author of that Age, who affirms Gelasius was
not Pope till two years after, hinders us from believing it was writ then: But
I will not however condemn the Epistle, which is modest enough, calling
Euphemius Bishop of Constantinople, -- his Brother and Fellow, advanced to a
Precedence by the favor of Christ Gelas. ep. 1. Bin page 466. Lab. col 1157.
: And when he was pressed to declare, by what Council Acacius was condemned, he
cites no Roman Council, nor pretended Sentence of his Predecessor Foelix: But
says, he was condemned by the Council of Chalcedon; but this he does not make
out.

The Second Epistle also wants a date, and is by guess placed in this year by
Baronius, with this false remark, That the Popes by Custom used to prescribe a
Form of Belief to all the Faithful Baron. An. 492. n. 30. page 466.
: Whereas the Letter it self declares the Custom was, -- For every new Pope to
declare his Faith to the Neighboring Bishops, that they might know he was
Orthodox Gelas. ep. 2. Bin. page 468. Lab. col. 1163.
. Now there is a vast difference, between prescribing a Form of Belief to
others, and laboring to get from them a Testimony of our believing aright.

The 4th Epistles true Title is, The Monitory of Gelasius: But in Binius these
words, [Of the most blessed Pope] are added Gelas. ep. 4. Bin page 470. Lab.
col. 1168.
, which Labbe rightly omits: In the Monitory it self observe, First, That
Gelasius denies his Predecessor or he had condemned the Emperor Anastasius.
Secondly, He says, the Church has no power to absolve any after their death.
Thirdly, He claims no power to make any new Canons, but only to execute the
old. Which other Bishops may do. Fourthly, He cannot prove Appeals to Rome by
any Canons, but those of Sardica, which were rejected by many, and slights the
Canons of Chalcedon, received every where but at Rome. Fifthly, He very falsely
pretends, Acacius was only the Executer of the Roman Churches Sentence, by
whose sole Authority some Eastern Bishops were condemned. But we know, Acacius
had condemned them long before any Sentence was given at Rome Baron. An. 483.
n. 54. page 382.
, and scorned to act under the Pope. Sixthly, Where Gelasius in his own Cause
vainly brags, That the Canons have given the Judgment over all to the
Apostolical Seat: Binius and Labbe mend it in their Marginal Note, and say, The
Canons and Christ gave it this power Ep 4. in marg. versus sinem.
; neither of which is true.

In the 5th Epistle, Gelasius owns a Private Bishop for his Brother, and
declares, that he himself cannot alter the Canons. The Margen again here says,
The Canons cannot be altered Gelas. ep. 5. Bin page 472. Lab. col. 1172.
, -- they should have said -- no not by the Pope: But here they say too little,
as before they said too much; which puts me in mind of Juvenal's Note,

Quisquam hominum est quem tu contentum videris uno
Flagitio -- You never knew a single Sin
Content Men, when their Hands are in.


The Date of this Epistle must be false, being An. 490, that is, two years
before (as they reckon) Gelasius was Pope. Labbe would mend it, by antedating
the entrance of Gelasius, forgetting that he had printed an Epistle of Foelix
to Thalassius, dated that year Lab. col. 1092.
; his Invention therefore was better than his Memory.

The 6th Epistle shows, that notwithstanding the Popes fair pretenses to an
Universal Jurisdiction, his neighbor Bishops in Dalmatia did not own it; but
looked on him as a busie-body, for meddling in their affairs Gelas. ep. 6. Bin.
page 472. Lab. col. 1173.
, and suspected the Snake of Usurpation lay under the florid Leaves of his
seeming care of all the Churches.

The 7th Epistle is briefly and imperfectly set down by Baronius Baron. An.
493. n. 36. page 478.
, because he would conceal from his Reader, that Gelasius makes Purgatory and
Limbus Infantum a Pelagian Opinion; Let them (says he Gelas. ep. 7. Bin. page
474. Lab. col. 1178.
) take away that third place, which they have made [recipiendis parvulis] for
receiving little Children. And since we read of no more, but the right hand and
left, let them not make them stay on the left hand for want of Baptism, but
permit them by the Baptism of Regeneration to pass to the right. -- Which
illustrious Testimony the Editors would obscure by reading, [decipiendis
parvulis] for deceiving Children: But if that were the true Reading, it shows,
this Pope thought none but Children and Fools would believe a Third place
invented by the Pelagians; since Scripture speaks but of two, viz. Heaven and
Hell.

It is a trifling Note on this Epistle, That Gelasius admonished some Bishops
of Italy against Pelagianism, not fearing two Princes, one of which was an
Eutychian, the other an Arrian Heretic Not. in Ep. 7, Bin. page 476. Lab. col.
1181.
. For what cared these Princes for the Popes Letters, against the Heresies of
others, so long as he let them alone, and never admonished them of their own
Heresies?

The 8th Epistle was writ to one of these Heretical Princes, viz. to
Anastasius; and the Pope is scandalously silent about his Heresy, nor does he
once reprove his Errors in the Faith; but only labors, even by false pretenses
to justify his Supremacy, which gave too just a ground for that Emperor and
his Eastern Bishops, to tax this Pope of secular Pride, a fault very visible in
all his Writings on this Subject. Further we may note, that this Epistle was of
old inscribed thus, Bishop Gelasius to the most glorious Emperor Anastasius
Gelas. Ep. 8. Bin. and Lab. ut supra.
; but the Editors have left out the Emperor's Epithet, for fear he should look
bigger than the Pope: Also, where the Pope prays that no Contagion may stain
his See, and hopes it never will Ibid. Bin. page 476. Lab col. 1183.
; which plainly supposes, it was possible Rome might Err; otherwise he had
mocked God, in praying against that which could not happen; and assurance had
left no place for hope, if the Popes were absolutely Infallible: Yet here the
Marginal Note is, The Apostolical See cannot Err: Which may caution the Reader,
not to trust their Margent nor Index, for there is often more in the
Inscription, than can be found in the Box.

The 9th Epistle being dated An. 494. was odly cited by Baronius, to prove that
Gelasius was made Pope in An. 492. Baron. An. 492. 11. 6. p 461.
: It seems to be a Collection of diverse Canons put together, no Body knows by
what Pope. And one thing is very strange, that whereas the Preface owns, the
Clergy were almost starved in many of the Churches of Italy Gelas. cp 9. Bin.
page 478. Lab. col. 1188.
; Yet the Epistle impertinently takes great care, that the Rents be divided
into four parts, as if all things had then been as plentiful as ever: And
whereas these Rules are sent to the Bishops of Lucania, near Naples, the Pope's
forbidding them to dedicate Churches without his License, is by the Marginal
Note made a General Rule for all Countries; but falsely, since the Bishops of
the East, of Afric, Gaul, etc. did never ask the Popes License in that Age, to
consecrate Churches.

The 13th Epistle is a bold attempt toward an Universal Supremacy Gelas. ep.
13. Bin. page 483. Lab. col.
: For Gelasius finding the Bishop of Constantinople at his Heels, and come up
almost to a level with him, uses his utmost effort to make a few Rascian
Bishops believe he was set over the whole Church: But he shows more Art and
Learning, than Truth or Honesty in this Argument, asserting these downright
Falsehoods. First, That the Canons order all the World to Appeal to Rome, and
suffer none to Appeal from thence: But Bellarmin (knowing these Canons where
those despicable ones of Sardica, and that even those did not intend to oblige
the whole World,) in citing this passage, changes Canones appellari voluerint,
into appellandum est Bellarm. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 17. page 98.
: So that he chooses to leave it indefinite, that all must appeal to Rome,
rather than undertake to tell us (with Gelasius,) how that See came by this
Right. Secondly, That the Roman Church by its single Authority absolved
Athanasius, Chrysostom and Flavian, and condemned Dioscorus, (as this little
Pope brags); which is as true as it is, that the Roman Church alone decreed the
Council of Chalcedon should be received, she alone pardoned the Bishops that
lapsed in the Ephesine latrociny, and by her Authority cast out the obstinate:
Which this Epistle audaciously asserts, though there are more untruths than
lines in the whole passage: And if liberty be not denied us, we appeal to all
the Authentic Historians of those Ages, who utterly confute these vain brags.
Yet Bellarmin adds to this extravagant pretense of Romes alone decreeing the
Council of Chalcedon, (these words) by her single Authority Bell. de Council.
lib. 1. c. 13. page 24.
: But Launoy blushes for him, and says, what Gelasius here says is not
strictly true, and that he needs a very benign Interpreter Lannoy lib. 5 ep. 4.
page 518.
; that is, one who will not call a Spade a Spade: But let this Pope's
assertions be never so false, they serve to advance the ends of the Roman
Supremacy; and therefore you shall find no more of this long Epistle in the
Annals, but only this hectoring passage Baren. An. 495. n. 2, 3. page 500.
Though he unluckily confesses immediately after, that Gelasius did no manner
of good with all this Ibid. n. 5.
. And no wonder, since that Age, as well as this, knew his pretenses were
unjust, his reasoning fallacious, and his instances false. Thirdly, He asserts,
that Pope Leo vacated the Canons of Chalcedon: It Is true, he did it as far as
lay in him, who measured Right only by Interest: But we have showed they
remained in full force, in all other parts of the Church, notwithstanding his
dissent openly declared. Fourthly, He affirms, that the care of all the
Churches about Constantinople was given to Acacius by the Apostolic See: Which
is, (as has been proved) a notorious Falsehood; of which this Epistle is so
full, that one would suspect it was the Offspring of a much later Age. It Is
certain, the Title is very unusual, Gelasius Bishop of the City of Rome, etc.
And the date is false, the Consul named is Victor, whose year was 70 year
before: Baronius and the Editors of their own head mend it, and read [Viator;]
and Labbe tells us in the Margin, that some things are wanting (in this
Epistle,) and some are read otherways in Justellus Manuscript Lab. marg. Col.
1200.
: And again he observes, that instead of these words, Apostolicae sedi
frequenter datum est, -- it is now read, Apostolica seeds frequenter ut dictum
est, etc. which makes a great alteration in the Sense: The former implying only
a delegated power, the later an original power of absolving all persons: So
that if the whole be not a Forgery, yet it is now corrupted in many places, by
the bold Champions of the Supremacy, to whom nothing was Sacred; Yea, we are
told it comes out of the Vatican Mint, restored and mended, (we know what that
means,) as far as was fit by Baronius Baron. An. 495. n. 1. p. 500.
. So that the Impartial Reader may judge what credit is to be given to this
Epistle (out of which they often prove their Supremacy) written by a bigoted
Pope (who scrupled not at any thing to advance his See) if it be genuine, and
transcribed by such as are convicted of repeated Corruptions.

Labbe gives us two other imperfect Epistles of Gelasius, about his renouncing
Communion with those who kept Acacius his Name in their Dypticks, as most of
the Eastern Bishops then did Gelas. ep. 14 and 15. Lab. col. 1212.
. But in these the Pope humbly says, It is not for my Humility to pass
Sentence concerning a difference reaching through the World, my part being to
take care of my own Salvation Ib. Lab. col. 1214.
. Which is so different from the style of his former Epistles, that if these be
genuine those are suspicious.

But since all these Epistles of Simplicius, Foelix and Gelasius, make so soul
a matter of Acacius his Case, let me once for all here give his Character, and
state that business. That he was Orthodox in all points is manifest by his
Epistle against Peter of Antioch Lab. col. 1107.
: And by his forcing Basiliscus to revoke his Edict against the Council of
Chalcedon Euagr. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 7.
. And while the Pope flattered that Heretical Usurper, Acacius made all the
Bishops who had subscribed it, recant Id. ib. cap. 9.
. He also ejected Peter of Antioch for Heresy, before the Pope knew of it, and
excommunicated Peter of Alexandria, yea, deposed him when he maintained his
Heresy Liberati B^ev. cap. 16, 17.
: And would not admit him to Communion again till he had professed the Catholic
Faith, and by name expressly received the Council of Chalcedon Epist. Petr. Al.
apud Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 17.
. It Is true, this Bishop proved himself a Dissembler by Apostatizing afterward;
but that was not the Popes Quarrel at Acacius, the Roman Bishops were jealous
of the Bishop of Constantinoples growing power, who flourished under the
Eastern Emperors, while their Church was obscured under a Barbarous King: And
Acacius by the Emperors consent (without consulting the Pope Liberati. Brev. ut
supr.
, put in and put out the Eastern Bishops as he thought fit, pretending this
power was given him by the Councils of Constantinople and Chalcedon: This
galled the Popes, and therefore in the pretended Sentence of Foelix, he is
charged as one that usurped others Provinces contrary to the Nicene Canons.
This checked the universal Supremacy that Rome had then been for some time
aiming at, so that they could have forgiven any Heresy rather than this
attempt: Which appears by this, That though Pelagianism had spread it self all
over the Western Church, and Eutyches Heresy prevailed in the East, yea, a
great part of Rome it self was Arrian, we find few or no Popes Letters against
these Violators of the Faith, as if they (with Tiberius) left Christ to revenge
his own injuries Deorum injuriae Diis curae. Dict. Tiber. Aug.
. But all their outcry is against Acacius, whom they would never forgive living
nor dead, for touching their Jurisdiction, that was dearer to them than all the
Articles of their Creed. But while they hated him, the whole Eastern Church
took his part, and he continued to exercise his Office (in spite of all the
Popes Sentences) until his death, leaving behind him so good a Character, that
Suidas says, If ever any man were truly venerable it was Acacius Suidas in
(Acacio.)
. Yea, it was a long time before the Greeks could be persuaded either by the
promises or threatenings of Rome to put his Name out of the Dypticks, though the
union of the East and West depended at last upon that single Point: They
objected, that he subscribed the Edict for Union made by Zeno. I reply, so did
three Patriarchs more, and that Edict contained no Heresy, nor did it condemn
the Council of Chalcedon. They urge also, that he rejected John Talaia an
Orthodox Bishop of Alexandria: But that was because he believed him perjured,
and consequently unduly elected. To conclude, Acacius was a good Man, and those
who will consider the matter impartially, will think the Popes deserve no
commendation for their stiffness and violence in this Contest.

After the Epistles follow some Tracts of Gelasius; The first of which is about
Excommunication: Wherein there is one passage that afflicts Baronius; For the
Pope says, Christ has separated the Kings Office and the Bishops; So that
Bishops must not challenge Royal Dignity nor meddle in secular Affairs, nor may
Kings administer Holy things Tract. 1. G^l. Bin. page 489. Lab. col. 1232.
. But the Cardinal will have the Roman Bishop to have at least Regal Power, and
Kings to be subject to Ecclesiastics, who he thinks may meddle in Temporal
Affairs, though Kings must not in Sacred matters; citing for this an Epistle of
Gelasius Baron. An. 496. n. 25. page 511.
. But I should rather think the Epistle forged if it did contradict this Tract,
though Baronius wrests the words he cites, and omits a passage that immediately
follows them, viz. The Ecclesiastical Rulers obey your Laws Gelas. ep. 8. Bin.
page 476. Lab. col. 1182.
; which shows Bishops were then subject to Princes.

And the next Tract [against the profane Pagan Festivals] shows that the Pope
had no shadow of Regal power at Rome in those days; For Gelasius only declares
them unlawful, and says he will deliver his own Soul in persuading the
Christians to forbear them: But it was the Senates part to forbid them and take
them away, and his Predecessors were to Petition the Emperor (as he owns) to
abolish such impieties Tract. 2. Gel. Bin. page 492. Lab. col. 1239.
. So that Baronius his huffing Preface to this argument against these Paganish
Feasts is very ridiculous. You may see (says he) how he exalts himself against
the Emperor; and though the City was under a Gothic King, he prescribes Laws to
Rome without asking leave of an Impious Prince Baron. An. 496. n. 27. page 512.
. He has good Eyes (I am sure) who in this Sermon or Discourse can see either
any exercise of Authority or Law prescribed, only indeed it is a pious and
rational exhortation.

. 9. A Roman Council under Gelasius is placed next, An. Dom. 494.
said to consist of 70 Bishops, convened to settle the Canon of Scripture, and
to distinguish genuine from spurious Authors Council. 1. Romans Bin. page 500.
Lab. col. 1260.
. But the whole seems a mere Forgery: For, first, the Publishers are not agreed
upon what Pope to Father it: Diverse Manuscripts in Labbe, ascribe it to
Hormisda (who sat 20. Years after this Lab. ibid. etc in Hormisd. col. 1557.
. Another very old Book calls it, A Declaration of Holy Scripture, etc. with
Gelasius his Annotations Lab. marg. col. 1260.
. The Decree in Gratian and in Justellus his Manuscript wants all the Books of
the Old and New Testament Gratian. Decret. par. 1. did. 15. c. 3. page 20,
etc. Et Lab. col. 1261.
. Wherein also, all the stuff about the Primacy, and the order of Patriarchs is
omitted: Yea, the Notes in Gratian own, that formerly it went no further than
to -- item gesta Sanctorum Martyrum -- So that the beginning and end (that is,
four parts in six) are Forged by their own Confession; Yea, the whole, as
Binius grants, is so confused, that in many places it is impossible to read it;
yet (they say) they have ventured to mend it as well as they can. But after all
their correcting, or (rather) corrupting it, the Copies do not agree: Some want
the Book of Judith and the 2d of Macchabees: Some have only one Book of Kings,
and one of Chronicles: Some reckon but two Books of Solomon, some three, and
others five: Some ascribe Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus to the Son of Syrach See
Lab. col. 1260. in marg. Cosen's Hist. of the Canon, page 123.
. And after all, as to the Canon it agrees neither with the Council of
Laodicea, nor with that of Carthage, nor indeed with it self, whatever Binius
vainly brags Bin. in not. page 502. Lab. col. 1266.
. And is not this a rare Foundation for the Trent Fathers to build their
mistaken Decree upon? As to the rest of it, That passage [ -- that the Roman is
preferred before all other Churches, not by any Synodal Decrees, but by the
Voice of Christ, etc. -- ] is not only a modern addition (as appears by Gratian
and Justellus Manuscript, which omit it) but it contradicts the 4th Epistle of
Gelasius, which says, The supreme power over all is not given to any by the
Canons, but to the Apostolical Church Gelas. ep. 4. Bin. page 471. Lab. col.
1170.
. The order also of the Patriarchal Sees (added since the time of Gratian) is
drawn up contrary to the Canons of Constantinople and Chalcedon: The account of
Councils make the Emperors Constantine and Theodosius Presidents of the two
first General Councils, Marcian and Anatolius of the 4th, without naming Leo,
and only mentions Celestine's consent to the third Council: So that this piece
was coined before the Pope pretended all Councils void wherein he or his
Legates did not preside. And that passage, That the Acts of the Martyrs are not
read in the Roman Church, because many of them are writ by anonymous, mistaken,
weak and Heretical Authors Bin. p. 501. Lab. col. 1263.
, was writ before that Church had stuffed all her Offices so full of lying
Legends, and ridiculous Romances about the Saints, the reading of which (before
the Reformation) took up a third part of the Priests time upon Festival days:
But upon the whole I dare aver, it is not Gelasius his work, but most of it
forged by Isidore Mercator 300 Year after the time of this pretended Council:
Wherefore it ought not to be cited as evidence on their side.

There is a 2d Roman Council under Gelasius to absolve Misenus, one of the
Popes Legates, who had betrayed his Master, and now repented: But admit the
matter of Fact be true, yet the bad style, and barbarous phrase of these Acts
are strong suspicions of their being Forged.

. 10. Anastasius the 2d succeeded Gelasius, according An. Dom 496.
to Marcellinus Chronicle (an Author of that time) or in the year 498. But
Nauclerus places his Election (out of some other Author) An. 492 Naucler.
Chron. Genesis 17. page 694.
. Baronius and the Editors without Authority correct both these, and place his
entrance An. 496 Not. in Vit. Anas. Bin. page 505. Lab. col. 1276.
. The matter is not great, and serves only to show us the obscurity of the
Popes in that Age, whose Times are so differently related in History, that we
may be sure they were not made (as now at Rome) an Era to reckon Councils and
all other Church matters by: The Author of the Pontifical (who writ after the
quarrel about Acacius was over) says hard things of this Pope; viz. 1st, That
his Clergy rejected him, because without any Council he communicated with
Photinus a Deacon of Thessalonica, a Man of Acacius party: And 2ly, because he
would privately have restored Acacius: For which also (he says) by the Divine
Judgment he was struck with death Vit. Anas. ut supra.
. Now all this was allowed for truth by their own Writers before Baronius
Rolewine. sascic. Temp. fo. 53. Naucler. Chron. Genesis 17. p. 694. Platin. vit.
An. Volatteranu:, etc.
. And both Ivo and Gratian received it for Authentic History, and placed it in
their collections Ivo Carnot. par. 14. cap. 40. Gratian decret. par. 1. did.
19. c. 9.
. But since the partial Cardinal writ, (not to discover truth, but to disprove
all that seemed to reflect on) the Roman See, Gratian is corrected in later
Editions with a Note which contradicts the Text; and the Editors Notes out of
Baronius (which extol the Pontifical to the Skies when it reports the greatest
falsehoods for the honor of Rome) here say that Book is erroneous and faulty;
yea, they charge them all to be Heretics that spread these reports, largely
disputing that all this is false: But in vain; For 1st, as to his allowing the
name of Acacius to be restored in the Dypticks (which is the meaning of voluit
revocare Acacium in the Pontifical); This is certainly true: For the Emperor
Justin expressly affirms this Pope did communicate with Acacius his party, as
the Notes own, and they cannot disprove it but by falsifying an Epistle of Pope
Symmachus, and reading ego for nego (as shall be showed presently). Nor is it
any wonder that one Pope should approve what his Predecessors had condemned;
and if this be true, Anastasius judged better than former Popes, whose Eyes
were dazeled so by Ambition, that they could not see the Truth. 2ly, As to his
communicating with Photinus without a Council, the Notes finally do not deny
it; and it seems Foelix the Senator doubted not (if Anastasius had lived) to
have engaged him to subscribe Zeno's Edict for Union; so that he was likely
enough to be moderate toward Acacius his party: Only I do not think he would
(as the Notes pretend) venture upon his single Authority to absolve Photinus,
if he had been condemned by a Council, because in that Age the Popes did not
exercise any such power. 3dly, As to his being struck with death by voiding his
Bowels, it might be true; nor can I think (as the Notes suggest) that all the
Authors above cited are mistaken, and put the Pope for the Emperor, who died by
Thunder, because the Deaths were very different: And though Binius say it was
about the same time Not. in vit. Anas. Bin page 506. Lab. col. 1278.
; that is very false; for the Pope died An. 598, in the Emperor's Seventh Year:
But the Emperor lived near twenty year longer, and died not till An. 517. So
that those Historians must be very dull who could not distinguish two such
different things happening to two Persons at so great a distance of time and
place, but took it for the same story: Yet after all it may be this Pope died a
natural death, and that this slander of his dying by Gods Judgment might be the
invention of the next Age, after the Popes had got Acacius to be declared a
Schismatic; for then the Writers were to blacken all his Friends by such
Fables as these. And now that turn is served, Baronius would wipe off the stain
again, merely because Anastasius was a Bishop of Rome: How probable this guess
is, I leave the Reader to judge.

There is but one Epistle of this Pope, writ to the Emperor (his Namesake)
Anastasius, wherein it is plain, he thinks the Quarrel about Acacius now
deceased, no just ground for the two Churches to separate from each other
Epist. Anast. Bin. page 506. Lab. col. 1279.
: Yet for the scandal he had given, his Opinion was, that his Name alone ought
to be left out of the Dypticks; but withal he approves of the Baptism and
Orders he had given, and justifies this by good proofs of Scripture Ibid. Bin.
507. Lab. col. 1280.
. Gratian holds this last Decree to be illegal and uncanonical, because it
contradicts the determinations of some of his Predecessors Gratian. decret.
par. 1. did. 19. cap. 7, and 8.
. But impartial Readers will see, that his Opinion is better confirmed by
Reason and Scripture, than the contrary ever was by any Pope that held it: Nor
ought the Notes to say, Anastasius decreed this by a dispensation grounded on
his Apostolical Authority For it is an Orthodox Truth, That the Crimes of the
dispensers of Sacraments and Holy Orders, especially if it be only Schism, do
not invalidate them, to such as in their integrity receive them: So that unless
a Pope need a dispensation to tell Truth, here is no occasion for any
dispensing Power.

This Epistle is followed by a Memorial given by the Legates of Alexandria to
the Popes Legates then at Constantinople, for an Union between the two Churches
Memor. Bin. page 508. Lab. col. 1283.
, which they speak of as equal Sister Churches, and give no hint of any
subjection due from them to Rome, (which they think) had unfortunately mistaken
them, as guilty of Heresy: Nor does Anastasius in the former Letter to the
Emperor pretend to any power that he had over Alexandria, but desires the
Emperor by his Wisdom and Authority to reduce them to the Catholic Faith,
calling him the Vicar appointed by God to preside in the Earth: Which the
modern Roman Writers think too great a complement to a Lay Prince.

Upon the death of Anastasius, the Roman Clergy were An. Dom. 498.
divided and chose two Popes, Laurentius and Symmachus: But after a warm and
long contest, both parties agreed to refer it to an Heretical Gothish King,
viz. Theodoric, to declare an Infallibly Orthodox Head of the Church Vit.
Symmac. Bin. page 509. Lab. col. 1286.
. Who modestly referred it to a Synod of Bishops, and they at last confirmed
the Election of Symmachus. The Notes call this a Schism of the universal Church
Not. Bin. page 510. Lab. col. 1288.
. But it was no more than a Schism of that particular Church of Rome, and had
no influence, that we hear of, upon the whole Catholic Church: Only a Legend
cited out of the fabulous Dialogues (which disparage the Name of Gregory the
Great) tells us, that Paschasius, a learned and holy Roman Deacon, was seen
after his death in an odd Purgatory of hot Water, condemned thither (as
Symmachus Friends told the story) for taking part with Laurentius Not. ib. Bin.
Lab. col. 1289.
: But it seems when this Fable was made, praying to Saints was not in fashion;
for Paschasius desires the Bishop that saw him to pray to the Lord to release
him. The Notes also here cite a very idle story of an Image which bled when it
was shot; but Damascen is his Author, who lived 250 year after this, and whose
stories about Images are generally ridiculous and incredible. But it is more
material to observe, that this Pope Symmachus was charged with notorious
Crimes, and the Papal power was then so low, that the Roman Clergy petitioned
an Arrian King to send Visiters to try the Pope, who submitted to this
Judicature authorized (say the Notes) by this excellent Prince: And the Bishops
(as they observe) not only acquitted the Pope, but were so wise as to conceal
the fault of which he was accused Not. Bin. page 511. Lab. col. 1290.
. But if that were so great a piece of Wisdom, Ennodius, who then writ an
Apology for him, and Baronius and Binius, who now would vindicate him, show no
great discretion in confessing he was accused of Adultery Ennod. ap. Bin. page
528. and Lab. col. 1342. Baron. An. 502. n. 32.
: For which, (if it were true,) he deserved a worse Purgatory than his
Antagonist Paschasius.

The Epistles published in Symmachus's name are Eleven. The two first of which
were formerly directed to Caesarius, but now they alter the Title, and inscribe
them to Eonius: It seems the Forger was no good Chronologer; and the Style is
so barbarous, the Sense so obscure, and the Matter so jejune, that it would be
a Scandal to any Pope to have writ them Symmach. Epist. 1, and 2. Bin. page
511. Lab col. 1291.
. And if Symmachus writ these, the 5th and 8th may be discerned by their Style,
to have been endited for him by a more able hand Ep. 5. Bin. page 512. Lab.
col. 1295.
, that is, by Ennodius, who Binius supposes did write the 8th Epistle Ep. 8.
Bin. page 515. Lab. col. 1300.
. However, this Pope is very free in blaming his Predecessor for decreeing
contrary to the ancient Custom Sym. Ep. 1. ut supra.
: But he scruples not to break many Canons at once, by ordering that the Popes
for the future shall name their Successors Concii. 1. Romans Bin. page 519.
. In the 7th Epistle of Symmachus, the Editors and Baronius have manifestly
corrupted the Text, reading is it a quidem ego, for ista quidem nego Sym. Ep. 7.
Bin. page 514. Lab. col. 1298. Baron. An. 503. n. 17.
: But the Sense shows the Forgery; for the Emperor had charged the Pope for
excommunicating him, in the case of Acacius; Symmachus replies, I deny these
things; we have not Excommunicated you, O Emperor, but Acacius: leave him, and
you are quit of his Excommunication; if you do not thrust your self into his
Excommunication you are not Excommunicated by us; if you do, you are
Excommunicated by your self, not by us: So that whether you stick to him or
leave him, however you are not Excommunicated by us. We see the Pope over and
over declares, they had not by any particular Sentence Excommunicated the
Emperor at Rome; it was only Acacius in particular, and his Followers in
general, who were sentenced there; in which Sentence if the Emperor wilfully
involved himself, they (who had done nothing against him) could not justly be
blamed, as if they had Excommunicated him: Now to bring in this Sentence with
ista quidem Ego -- is to make the Pope contradict himself, and confess he had
Excommunicated the Emperor, which he utterly denies, and therefore ista quidem
Nego -- must be the true Reading, and that bold Forgery of turning it into
[Ego,] was made on purpose to set up an early Precedent for the Pope's having
Excommunicated Emperors. Finally, The Margen of the same Epistle (to carry on
the same holy Cheat) observes, That the Pope's Dignity is greater than the
Emperors: But this is not in the Text, where Symmachus thus expresses himself,
I will not say, it is a greater, but an equal power: So that when the Pope had
stretched a little, they go much further, and dare tell greater Untruths than he.

And here we shall conclude this Century, because the first Synod said to be
held under this Pope, ought to be dated after the year 500, and belongs to the
next Age: To which we shall proceed (with Gods assistance) hereafter, when we
have first (in our usual method) noted some remarkable Errors in Baronius, that
are within this Period, but have not fallen in our way, as we treated of the
Councils of this time.

An Appendix concerning Baronius his Annals.
THE Cardinal has given a just, but severe censure of his own History, where
he says, It is dangerous to enquire after Truth among later Writers, who are
often found to write that which false rumors, vain imagination, private
affection and sometimes Flattery suggested to their Minds, to the great
prejudice of Historical Truth Baron. An. 1077.
. Yet he borrows very many of his Relations concerning the Saints, and ancient
Practices, from Modern Authors, or from spurious Tracts, of which this Period
affords us these Instances.

. 1. They will have Porcarius the Abbot to have been a Martyr, and celebrate
his Martyrdom Aug. 12th, and yet the History is taken out of a spurious Tract,
and he owns the Matter of Fact to be false Baron. An. 453. n. 47. page 191, 192.
. His report of a Golden Savior (so they name an Image) decked with precious
Jewels, made by the Emperor Valentinian, at the request of Pope Sixtus, has no
better Authority than the Epistle of Pope Adrian to Charlemain, which is
stuffed with Fables: No Writer of this Age takes notice of it, nor were such
Images then used: So that it need be no wonder, that the Vandals did not
plunder this rich Statue, because in the time of their Sacking Rome it was not
there Baron. An. 455 n. 3. page 203.
. But if some worshiper of Images about Adrian's time, to gain repute to this
Golden Statue, ascribed a greater Antiquity to it, than he ought (as was usual
in such cases,) Baronius does ill to represent it as a Wonder, that an Image
was not stolen before it was made.

The respect that Childeric, a Pagan King of France, paid to St. Genovefa, and
the Miracles that occasioned it, depends on the Credit of Surius, and the Acts
of that Virgin; so that the Matter of fact is very suspicious Baron. An. 456.
n. 7. page 212.
; and the large reflection upon it is as frivolous, in representing a Heathen
King as more pious than those (whom he calls) Heretics, for venerating and
worshipping the Saints; for his Story proves nothing of his worshipping a Saint
departed; and if any living Saints could now be found in their Church, I dare
say, the very Heretics would give them great respect.

That Apparition of the Blessed Virgin to Leo before he was Emperor, which the
Annalist describes so prolixly, has no other nor better Author than
Nicephorus, who lived long after this Age, and is by this very Historian often
censured for a fabulous Writer Baron. An. 457. n. 4. page 218.
. Again, to justify an improbable Story of Caesarius while he was but a young
Bishop, imperiously commanding a greater and much elder Bishop than himself,
(Eucherius Bishop of Lions) to work a Miracle, taken out of a corrupted piece
of Caesarius his Life; He rejects the Chronology of Gennadius, and talks of
supposing two Bishops of Lions, named both of them Eucherius Baron. An. 463. n.
6. 258.
, though no ancient Author mention any such thing.

The Relation of an Angels visibly waiting on St. Marcellus, when he and his
Monks went to Petition the Emperor against the making an Arrian, Caesar; is
cunningly contrived: For the Author notes, that of all the company, only some
few witnesses fore ordained of God, who had clearer Eyes than the rest, saw
this Angel Baron. An. 469. n. 4. 5. page 283.
. And Zonaras (a more credible Writer than the Deviser of these Acts,) who
mentions the Story, never heard of this Apparition at all Zonar. Annal. Tom. 3.
. However, if these few sharpsighted Gentlemen designed to impose upon the rest
of the Monks, the Plot was well laid, that none but they should discern the
Angel.

The Miracle of the Beam of Light, appearing at the Election of St. Remigius,
the Apostle of the French, is very suspicious, because Sidonius who knew and
admired him, and lived at the same time, is silent; and the report is fetched
from a Successor of his, who writ (or is pretended to have writ) this above 300
year after Baron. An. 471. n. 36. page 293.
.

Though Surius be one of his most common Authors for all his Legends, yet he
confesses great defects, and many things which need correction, are found in
his Collection Baron. An. 473. n. 4. p. 299.
; and he in the same Page taxes Nicephorus to be Erroneous Ibid. n. 10. p. 301.
, yet has no better Authors than he and Metaphrastes, for the invention of the
most Holy Garment of the Blessed Virgin, which yet no doubt the ignorant People
of the Roman Communion do mightily adore Id. An. 474. n. 4. page 301.
: Such another Evidence, is the Pratum Spirituale of Jo. Moschus (falsely
ascribed to Sophronius;) yet out of this, he Records a very Scandalous Story;
that the Blessed Virgin declared to a devout Votaress of hers, whom Zeno had
abused by violence; That she could not take vengeance on him for his Lust,
because this Emperor gave much Alms Baron. ^^d. An. n. 10. p. 303.
; which teaches Rich Men how to continue as filthy as they please, and be
secured against the Divine Vengeance, if any be so weak as to credit it.

It shows great partiality for any Story about the Relics of the Saints, in
that Baronius rejects all the circumstances mentioned by Theodorus Lector about
the Relics of St. Eustatius, and yet will have us believe the solemn removal
of them to Antioch; whereas we have reason to respect the Story it self to be
false, when the sole Author was grossly mistaken, both in the time and effects
of translating the Relics Baron. An 482. n. 4 and 5. page 355.
. But the business of the Annalist was, to defend and allow every thing that
seemed to make the veneration of Relics ancient.

Nothing is more evident in this Age, than that the Emperors or the Gothish
Kings; yea, the Praefacts of Rome made Rules for the Election of the Popes, and
either confirmed or annulled them: But whereas there is a Decree about
Elections at Rome, made in the vacancy of the Sea, by the Roman Clergy and
Basilius the Prefect, which seems to be very genuine Baron. An. 483. n. 10,
etc. page 371.
; Baronius rejects it, by the bare Authority of a Synod that has been forged,
(as shall be showed) on purpose to persuade the World, that Princes had nothing
to do in the Election of Popes.

The Story of the Apparition of St. Michael at Mount Garganus, is cited only
out of a late Author, viz. Sigebert, who lived above 600 year after this time:
And therefore the Cardinal ought not to have been so nice, in mending a gross
mistake in the Relation, (which shows the ignorance of the Inventor of this
Fable, (but rather to have rejected the whole Fiction so absurdly related, and
so ill attested (o). Baron. An. 493. n. 43. page 480.


With like industry Baronius defends two most ridiculous Fables about Images,
which Jo. Damascen cites out of Theodoret's Ecclesiastical History, and yet the
Facts happened (as is pretended in the Reign of Anastasius,) who was not
Emperor till 30 year after Theodoret's death Baron. An. 494 n. 59. page 494.
. Now rather than lose such Evidence for the Veneration of Images, the Annalist
falls to guessing, who was the true Author of these Fables; and first he thinks
it was Theodorus Lector; but he writ in Anastasius his time, who ordered this
Picture to be made, so that he could not speak of this, as an old Piece spoiled
with moisture: Wherefore at last he finds another Theodoret, besides the famous
Bishop of Cyrus, but knows neither where nor when he lived: So that such an
obscure Writer is not a sufficient Witness to make great improbabilities
credible; yet he takes this for a mighty and clear Miracle, wrought by God at
Constantinople in the East, on purpose to confute the Arrian Princes then
Reigning in Africa, Italy and Gaul Id. ibid. n. 66, etc. page 396.
; Who in all probability never heard of this Story, and would much sooner have
believed it, if it had been done in their own Country.

It is very improbable, that later Authors should know so exactly all the
little Acts, Sayings and Miracles of St. Benedict, and yet differ almost 30
year about the year of his Birth; nor are they agreed about his Age and Death.
This minds me of a Comical Authors remark upon such as pretend to Pray and
Preach Extempore by an Hourglass -- As if the Spirit could teach them what to
say; but not how much -- It is (doubtless) a strong suspicion that most of the
Relations were invented after the time of this Saint, (little noted in his own
days) was forgotten. Yet I see not how the time of writing the Dialogues
(called) Gregory's, should prove Marianus, Scotus, Sigebert and Trithemius
mistaken, in saying Benedict was born in the year 507: Because if Gregory the
second (which is very probable,) were the Author of those fabulous Dialogues,
he was made Pope An. 714. (in an Age of Legends,) and so Benedict dying, An.
603, might have four Abbots his Successors, before this heap of Fables was put
together, which are very unworthy of Gregory the 1st Pope Baron. An. 494. n.
70. page 497.
. It is worth noting, that this Benedict despised Learning and Study, and ran
away from School Id. ib n. 73.
; an ill Omen, that his followers the Monks should help to ruin all polite
literature, and bring in that ignorance which covered all Christendom for many
Ages: For what other could be expected from such a Founder, that was knowingly
ignorant, and wisely unlearned (as this Gregory speaks?) But it was not only
his Case; for St. Francis, another Founder of Monkery, bids his Followers -- if
they cannot Read, never to learn any Letters, but above all to take heed they
may be inspired with the Spirit Regula S. Fran cap. 8. page 28.
: Yea, he makes reading much, and getting Books, to be one of his bad signs
Idem ibid. page 91.
. These illiterate Patrons were fit to lead on an Army of Ignoramus Friars, to
extinguish the Light of Learning, that their false Doctrins and cheating
Practices might pass undiscovered in the darkness they had made.

Further, we may observe, that the Cardinal severely Taxes Trithemius, and
other Monkish Writers, for falsely feigning that many Eminent Men, who preceded
Benedict in time, were Monks of his Order, out of a blind Zeal to set up its
glory Baron. ibid. n. 78. page 498.
. But he considers not, that the same blind Zeal has put these Authors, (out
of whom he brings innumerable Stories,) upon saying very false things for the
glory of their Order, which probably never were done upon the face of the
Earth. So that he should have better Authority than these partial Monks, for
the Miracles of their own Saints.

Theodorus Lector heaped up many scattered Reports without care, and is not of
the best credit, especially in case of Relics; but his single Testimony is
enough, to make Baronius believe, That God takes care of a dead Saints Bones,
in an Earthquake, which probably might swallow up many living Saints Baron. An.
499. n. 13. page 531.
, who often suffer in such Common Calamities.

Those Miracles of St. Remigius, which are impiously equalled to them that the
Apostles wrought Baron. An. 499. n. 27, 28, 29. page 534, 535.
, have no better evidence than two Authors, (Aimonius and Hincmarus,) who writ
about 400 year after: For that Epistle of Hormisda, wherein that Pope makes
Remigius his Legate, is (like the rest of that kind,) a manifest Forgery: For
he mentions Clovis, the modern name of Ludovicus, as if he were the King of
France, and newly Baptized; whereas Clovis died at least four year before
Hormisda was Pope, and was Baptized near twenty year before this Letter is
pretended to be writ. From which Examples, (though but few) it appears Baronius
his evidence for Miracles, and other things that tend to support the
Superstitions of Rome, are generally forged, or suspicious Authors.

. 2. But when he cites genuine Writers in such Points, he often corrupts their
Sense, and sometimes their Words: For instance, Baronius pretends, that an
entire Edict of Marcian's is imperfect, merely because he cannot find in it any
particular expressions, to take away the Primacy of the Sea of Constantinople
Baron. Ar. 454. n. 12, etc 13. page 197.
. Whereas this Edict clearly confirms the Canon of Chalcedon, which had given
the second place to Constantinople, by this very Emperor Marcian's consent: And
it is something odd, that our Annalist by mere fancy, should assert even with
confidence, than an Emperor of the East should revoke by an Edict, and a Bishop
of Constantinople renounce a Privilege granted by that same Emperor, and in a
General Council, to that Church, a few years before.

Again, He insinuates that St. Severine allowed the Worship of Saints departed,
now used in the Roman Church Baron. An. 454. n. 29. page 202.
: But the Authors he cites, Euagrius and Eugippius, though they writ many years
after St. Severine's death,) have not one word of any deliverance by the
praying to Saints: But one of them says, they were freed from the Famine by the
Providence of God: And the other affirms, they praised God for hearing St.
Severine' s Prayers in this Calamity: So that Severine prayed only to God, and
the People of that Age praised him alone: And how can this excite the Posterity
of that Nation at this day to pray to St. Severine so long after his decease?

What Victor says of those, who suffered death by the Arrian Persecution in
Africa, That the Romans would count them Martyrs Baron. An. 456. n. 23. page
215.
, must be meant either of the Roman Captives in Africa, or of the Roman Church
in Italy, who looked on these Sufferers as their Brethren, and of the same
Faith, and so reckoned them Martyrs: But to stretch this Phrase, to signify,
that then the words [Roman] and [Catholick] were of the same import, is very
unreasonable, and what Victor never dreamed of.

It Is very suspicious, that Ecdicius did not get his wonderful Victory over the
Goths by praying to St. Martin, because that History is related by two Authors,
one very Authentic, that is, Sidonius, who might have been, and probably was
an Eyewitness, who does not once name St. Martin: The other Gregory of Tours,
that lived near 150 years after, and he mentions it indeed, as done by the
invocation of the Saint of his Church Baron. An. 466. n. 10, 11, 12. page 271,
272.
. But Baronius in the next year taxes him with writing things that could not be
credited I Would. An. 467. p. 11. page 275.
. Wherefore, he should rather have drawn his conclusion from the living and
certain Historian, if Truth had been the business of these Annals.

The Emperor Leo's Edict, is solely designed for the keeping holy the
Lords-days, which are the Festivals, properly dedicated to the Majesty of the
Most High. But the Annalist expounds this of all Feast-days Baron. An. 469 n.
6, 7. page 284.
, to give more color to the scandalous usage of their Church, where more
reverence is given to a little Saints-day, than to the Sunday, which from the
Creation, or however, from the Apostles times, was most religiously kept to the
Honor of God himself, as the principal time of his most solemn Worship.

Baronius also wrongs Zeno the Emperor, in saying, that his Edict for Union did
Anathematize the Council of Chalcedon Baron. An. 482. n 30. page 361.
: For the words of the Edict show the contrary, since Zeno only Anathematizes
them, who believed not according to the Nicene Creed, whether in the Council of
Chalcedon, or in any other Council; and the Cardinal himself in the next page,
only charges Zeno, with tacitly abrogating the Council of Chalcedon Id ib. n.
35.
; and Liberatus affirms, the Emperor was angry with John Talaia, for not
relishing the Council of Chalcedon Ibid. n. 36.
: Yea, the Zealots against this General Council, at Alexandria, renounced the
Communion of Peter; because by subscribing this Edict of Union, he had refused
openly to Anathematize the Council of Chalcedon Id. ib. n. 43. page 364.
; all which shows, that this Edict did not condemn that Council.

Liberatus says no more, but that the Papers were taken away, lest they should
be delivered to the Catholics, to whom they were written: But Baronius out of
this affirms, That the Pope writ to the Clergy, the Monks and Orthodox Laity
Baron. An. 483. n. 49. page 381.
, (as if he had seen the Titles of the several Letters,) and cites Liberatus
for his Evidence.

In like manner he brings in the words of Liberatus, after a Fictitious Letter
of a Roman Synod: And cites him thus, These Letters being given to Acacius, he
would not receive them, etc. Baron. An. 484. n. 34. page 397.
. By which one would imagine, that Liberatus had attested this feigned
Synodical Letter; but this Author speaks only of that Epistle of Foelix, which
Baronius had cited three pages before Id. ib. page 394. n. 17.
, and knew nothing of any Synodical Epistle.

Thus he cites part of an Oration made at the dedication of a Church, which had
been an Idols Temple, but now was consecrated to the memory of Christ, and of
St. Peter and St. Paul; and though there be not one Syllable in the words cited
of any worship of Saints, yet Baronius concludes, that this is enough to
intimate, that the worship of the Saints did always flourish, not only among
the Bishops of this new dedicated Church, but among all Catholics Baron. An.
489. n. 15. page 440.
: But he must be very willing to believe a false Doctrine, that will receive it
from a bold Conclusion, that has no Premises.

Again, To give credit to a Relation of St. Michael's appearing and being
worshipped at Rome in this Age, he cites a Poet, who says nothing of the worship
of St. Michael; and he would also insinuate, that this Drepanius lived about
this time Baron. An. 493. n. 45. page 480.
, to make this Superstition seem more ancient: Whereas it is well known, that
Drepanius Florus writ about the year 650, that is, 150 year after this Age, and
50 year after Pope Gregory Vid. Cave Tabul. Eccles. page 132. and Du Pin. Sect.
7. page 39,
, at which time many Corruptions and gross Ignorance were visible in the Church.

We may also note, That Baronius corrects Marcellinus's Chronicle, about the
ingress of Pope Anastasius, out of the Pontifical; whereas Marcellinus lived at
that time, and brought down his Chronicle to the year 534, and so is a very
credible Author Baron. An. 496. n. 55. page 518.
. But in the same page our Annalist shows, how grossly the Pontifical is
mistaken in point of time, speaking of things as done under one Pope, that were
done under another; and affirming such and such Facts done to Persons, that
were dead long before Id. ibid. n. 23.
: Yet not only here, but in many places this mistaken Author is the sole
Standard of Baronius his Chronology. And whereas Theodorus Lector, (who writ
An. 518.) expressly says, King Theodorick called a Synod at Rome Theod. Lector.
collect. l. 2. page 186.
: The Cardinal rejects his Testimony, and out of the Pontifical and some
spurious Acts, affirms, that Pope Symmachus called this Synod Baron. An. 499.
n. 1. p. 592.
: For those are the best Authors that speak of their side.

. 3. With like artifice our Author conceals some part of the Truth, which might
prejudice his Cause: As for instance, he notes as a peculiar piece of impudence
and madness in Timothy Aelurus, the Invader of the Sea of Alexandria, that he
darted forth his Anathema's against the Roman Bishops, and makes a dismal
representation of that Crime Baron. An. 457. n. 28. page 224.
: But the Epistle which relates the Story, says, he Anathematized Anatolius
Archbishop of Constantinople, and Basilius of Antioch, as well as Leo Bishop
of Rome Ibid. n 25. page 223.
: So that there is no reason to conceal that in his Recapitulation, but only to
make the Pope look higher, and greater than he was in those days.

Liberatus (no doubt) was better informed what passed at Alexandria, than Leo
could he at Rome; so that his account that Timothy Aelurus was immediately sent
into Banishment by the Emperor from Alexandria, is far more credible, than that
which Baronius deduces from Pope Leo's Letters, of his coming first to
Constantinople: But the Cardinal corrects Liberatus by Conjectures, merely to
persuade the World, that the Emperor obeyed the Pope Baron. An. 460. n. 3, and
8. page 246, 247.
in Banishing that Heretic; whereas the Writers of that time say, he did it by
advice of a Synod at Constantinople.

It is also observable, that when he speaks of Epistles writ, or Messages sent
to the Bishop of Rome by any new Patriarch, he always adds, de more, according
to Custom Baron. An. 482. n. 1. page 355.
; But though it was as much according to Custom, for every new Patriarch to
write to the Bishop of Constantinople, or to him of Antioch, etc. to notify
his Election, and declare his being in the Communion of the Catholic Church
Id. ib. n. 23, 24. page 359, 360.
; Yet there Baronius leaves out thole words, according to Custom.

. 4. But there are more Instances of his obscuring the Truth by false
reasoning, and particularly by supposing things as certain, which are not
proved, and then making Inferences from thence, and offering such Conclusions
for manifest Truths. Thus upon Supposition that the Pope was then above the
Emperor, and that nothing relating to the Church could be done without the
Roman Bishop; He introduces an Edict of Marcian's, with a Letter of Pope Leo's,
and with this Phrase, The Emperor Marcian obeyed Pope Leo Baron. An. 454 n. 4,
5, 6.
. Whereas that Letter of Leo has no relation to the Edict, and is an humble
Petition to the Emperor to get his Letter to Flavian well translated into
Greek, and sent to Alexandria, to clear him from an imputation of Heresy
falsely laid to his charge: But the Edict takes no notice of Leo, or his
Epistle, or of the Roman Church, but charges the Alexandrians to follow the
Nicene Faith, as it was prosessed by their own Bishops, Athanasius, Theophilus
and Cyril Baron. An. 454. n. 7. page 196.
: And though there be a mistake in the Month, the Year is right, and it is
dated three years after Leo's Epistle to Marcian Cod. Just. lib. 1. tit. 5. l.
8. page 33.
: But the Cardinal alters the date, and would add to the Sense, only to support
his mistaken Supposition.

Anatolius, Bishop of Constantinople, might perhaps regulate some of the
Officers or Clergy of his Church, at the request of Pope Leo; but it does not
appear, that either Leo did pretend to command Anatolius, nor that Anatolius
owned he had any Authority over him: And it is certain, that for all Leo's
huffing, the Patriarchs of Constantinople did keep the place and privileges
granted by the Council of Chalcedon: So that the Cardinals Inferences grounded
on supposing, that Leo exercised jurisdiction over, and took away the
Privileges from Anatolius Baron. An. 454 n. 14, 15. page 198.
, are not only weak, but very absurd.

He supposes Acacius was the Enditer of an Edict of Leo the Emperor, touching
the Privileges of the Sea of Constantinople, and then harangues upon his
Ambition, and severely taxes his Pride Baron. An. 47 2. n. 3, and 4. page 294.
. But he brings no proof but his own conjecture, that Acaoius did procure this
Edict: Yet if he did, it only confirms the ancient Privileges of that See, and
those it was then in possession of; and if this make him appear proud as
Lucifer (as the Cardinal intimates:) How many Edicts with ten times loftier
Styles have the Popes procured or forged, to set up and support their
Supremacy? Yet we find no censures of them, nor no inferences, but in their
commendation.

It is a false supposition, that Acacius was stirred up by the Letters of Pope
Simplicius to oppose the Heretical attempts of the Usurper Basiliscus: For (as
we have proved before,) Simplicius flattered this Tyrant, at the same time when
Acacius moved by his own Zeal for the Catholic Faith, opposed him Baron. An.
476. n 46. page 326.
. But it is the Cardinals design, to make all good Deeds owe their original
only to the Popes, and to blacken all that Acacius did, because he would not
truckle to the Papal Chair: Otherwise, when Basiliscus does no more but restore
the Rights that Constantinople had before his time, (as the words of the Edict
show Id. ibid. n. 64.
; and Theodorus Lector affirms nothing, but that the Rights of that See were
restored; why should it be a Crime in Acacius to procure this Confirmation from
Basiliscus? I dare say, Baronius thinks it no fault in Boniface, to get the
Primacy of Rome established by Phocas, a Bloodier Tyrant and greater Usurper
than Basiliscus.

A little after, upon the bare Affirmation of an interested and partial Pope,
he says, Acacius governed the Eastern Provinces by a power delegated from the
Pope Baron. An. 477 n. 13. page 334.
; and upon this supposition he explains the lapsed Asian Bishops Supplication
to him, as if it was on the account of his being the Popes Legate: But nothing
can be falser; for if Acacius would have submitted to such a Delagation, the
Popes and he had never fallen out; so that nothing is more certain, than that
he ever despised such a delegated power, and exercised jurisdiction over those
Asian Bishops by an Authority granted him by Councils and Imperial rescripts,
That is, by as good right as the Pope had in Italy.

Another false supposition is, that Timothy the Orthodox Bishop of Alexandria,
sent the Petition of such as had fallen in the time of his heretical
Predecessors, to Rome to beg Pardon, and to desire they might be readmitted
into the Church; and thence he infers, That the absolution from the crime of
Heresy, was wont to be reserved to the Pope Baron. An. 478. n. 15, 16. page 342.
. A Note so false and absurd, that we must suppose those Millions of Heretics,
which on their repentance were absolved all the World over, in all Ages,
without consulting the Pope; were not rightly absolved, if this were True: But
he builds it on a Rotten Foundation; The Letter of Simplicius, (whence he
deduces it) saying no more, but that this Timothy of Alexandria had sent him a
Copy of this Petition, to show upon what terms he had readmitted them to the
Communion of the Church; and the Pope thought his proceedings were
unexceptionable: But there is not a word of their desiring a Pardon from Rome,
or of the Popes granting it; much less of that Patriarchal Church of
Alexandria's wanting power to reconcile its own Members; which was settled on it
by the Council of Nice, as amply as the Roman Churches was.

Soon after he supposes, no Election of a Patriarch of Alexandria or Antioch
was good and valid, unless it were confirmed by the Pope: Now he draws this
consequence from a Letter of Simplicius, which only says, that upon Zeno the
Emperors charging John Talaia the elect Bishop of Alexandria with Perjury, (who
had endeavored to get the Pope to own his Communion) Simplicius would not
confirm him, upon so eminent a Persons objection Baran An. 482. n. 15. page 356.
. Which confirming, signifies no more than the Popes giving him Communicatory
Letters as to an Orthodox Bishop; which was requisite for every Patriarch to
grant to any New-Elected Patriarch as well as the Pope: And that it signifies
no more is plain from hence, because though afterward this John's election was
approved at Rome; yet that confirmation did not make him Bishop of Alexandria:
So that a Papal confirmation in those days gave no Bishop a Title, and was no
more but a Testimonial of their Communicating with him at Rome, and judging him
Orthodox: And John Talaia desired such a Confirmation as this from Acacius as
well as from the Pope, as Liberatus affirms Id. ibid n 23. page 359.
; and the miscarriage of those Letters, it seems was one reason why Acacius
opposed his Election.

He reckons up a great many things (in his opinion) grievous Crimes done by
Zeno the Emperor, but that (says he) which is more odious than all the
monstrous wickednesses is, that an Emperor should establish a Decree about
matters of Faith Baron. An. 482. n. 25. page 360.
. Now this is all on supposition, that Princes are not to meddle in the settling
the True Religion: But if he look into Sacred or Ecclesiastical Story, he shall
find nothing has been more usual, than for the most Religious Princes to
confirm the true, and condemn false Religions; and therefore if this Uniting
Edict of Zeno were Orthodox (of which we do not now dispute) the making it was
no Crime as all.

The next Year, he repeats the Story of John Talaia his appealing to the Pope;
and because in this Age they have made him the Supreme Judge over the whole
Church, Baronius says he appealed to him as to the lawful Judge Baron An. 483.
n 3 page 369.
. But Liberatus, out of whom he has the Story, shows he applied to the Pope
only as an Intercessor, and persuaded him to write to Acacius in his behalf:
And indeed the Popes definitive Sentence in those days, would have done him no
good: Wherefore, he only desired he would use his interest in Acacius, to
reconcile him to the Emperor; but all in vain: Which shows that the Eastern
Church did not then believe the Pope was a lawful Judge in this Case. It is a
bold stroke, under such a Pope as Simplicius (who submitted to the Eastern
Emperors, who (in Baronius Opinion) were Schismatics, and to the Arrian Gothic
Kings in Italy, and who could purge his own City from Heresy, but connived at
the Arrians who possessed near half Rome); for the Historian to brag, that the
Popes Majesty and Authority shined as bright as under Constantine, or
Theodosius Baron An. 483. n. 7. page 370, 371.
; and as vain a boast, that their Universal Power was as great under Pagan
persecuting Emperors as at any other time: For he never has nor never can make
this out; and the History of all Ages shows that the Popes power was very
inconsiderable at first, and grew up by degrees; being larger or narrower in
old times, as it happened to be savoured or opposed by Kings and Emperors: But
it was never very great, till the Popes had ruined both Empires of the East and
West.

From this immoderate conceit of the Papal Authority in that Age, proceeds that
mistaken observation, That Pope Foelix and Gelasius rejecting the Books of
Faustus Rhegiensis, was more than all the pious and learned Writings of S.
Caesarius, S. Avitus and the famous Fulgentius, who in peculiar Tracts confuted
Faustus Baron. An. 490. n. 33. page 449.
: They must be very good blind Catholics doubtless, who reject an Opinion
rather upon the bare Authority of the Pope, than upon the solid Aurguments from
Scripture, Reason and Antiquity, urged by the most famous Orthodox Writers.

Baronius taking it for granted, that to be a Catholic and to be in Communion
with the Roman Church is one and the same thing; wonders that the Orthodox in
the East should communicate with Euphemius the Orthodox Bishop of
Constantinople, and main defender of the Council of Chalcedon, who did not
communicate with the Bishop of Rome: And hence he supposes the Eastern
Catholics were in the dark, and could not distinguish Friends from Foes Baron.
An. 492. n. 46. page 470.
. Whereas, it is the Annalists prejudices that put him into this Mist: The
Catholics of the East clearly saw their great Patriarch was truly Orthodox,
and knew no such Principle as the Cardinal dreams of: Wherefore they did not
think an Orthodox Bishop less Orthodox, because Rome rejected him for not
submitting to their Usurpations. So that this instance utterly confutes his
Supposition, and shows how unjustly he calls us and others Heretics, merely
for not submitting to the Popes Supremacy, though we hold the Articles of the
Catholic Faith in all other Points.

Of this we have a further proof in the next Year, when Elias Bishop of
Jerusalem (owned by Baronius for a good Catholic Baron. An. 512. page 610.
, while the Quarrel continued between the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople
(which that Author Taxes as a Schism upon both sides). This Elias communicated
only with Euphemius, and is highly commended for so doing; since Euphemius was
a sound Catholic, and defended the Council of Chalcedon Baron. An. 493. n. 41.
page 479.
. Baronius indeed pretends Euphemius was not yet condemned by Gelasius Id.
Ibid. n. 42. page 480.
; but his Predecessor had condemned Acacius and all that were his partakers,
and Gelasius was hotter in this Quarrel than Foelix; which Elias of Jerusalem
knew, and yet took the contrary side to the Popes, as the safer for a good
Catholic: Therefore it could not be the opinion of that Age, that holding
Communion with Rome, was necessary to denominate a man a good Catholic, or to
free him from the guilt of Schism.

To conclude these examples, Who can value all those Pompous Consequences which
he draws about the Popes Supremacy, Appeals, etc. from the vain brags of an
Ambitious Bishop of Rome Baron An. 495. n. 2. etc. page 500.
, which were despised by those to whom he sent them, and ought not to be
regarded by us, who know his partiality, and consider he speaks in his own
cause Nemo sibi and professor and testis est. Tertul. adver. Marc. l. 5. cap. 1.
? But we may note, this is the best evidence they have; and therefore they must
make as much of it as they can. Our Lord Jesus did not desire to bear witness
to himself John v. 31.
; But his pretended Vicar, (knowing the weakness of his claim) most unjustly
Decrees; That when the Privileges of the Apostolic See are in question, he
will not have any Judge of them but himself Decret. Innocent. 3. ap. Decretal.
lib. 2. Tit. 1. cap. 12.
. And if he be Party, Witness and Judge, we may guess which way the Cause will
go.

. 5. In the next place we will note some of those absurdities and
contradictions, wherein his Zeal to serve a party has entangled this learned
Historian: For Example;

The Cardinal brings in Leo opposing the advancement of Jerusalem to a
Patriarchate, and taxes Juvenalis the Bishop there, for arrogating this Primacy
to himself Baron. An. 454. n. 19. page 199.
; Forgetting that he himself had declared, that the Council of Chalcedon had
settled this Primacy upon him Idem. An. 451. n. 124. page 154. Et Bin. Notis in
Council: Chalced. Sess. 8. page 414.
. As for what he produces out of Leo, that Cyril writ to him against this, and
with earnest Prayers desired him to oppose it; either Leo feigns this Story, or
the Epistle is suspicious; since it is very unlikely that so great a Bishop as
St. Cyril, should write so humbly, as to beg a favor of Leo then but
Archdeacon of Rome Id. ibid. n. 20, and 21 page 199, and 200.
. But Leo did not like Juvenalis his advancement, and therefore Baronius must
condemn it, though granted in a general Council: And though he say here,
Juvenalis had nothing of a good Bishop in him, and sought the Primacy by evil
arts and forged writings, contrary to the Nicene Council: Yet soon after he
tells, that Simeon Stylites and the devout Euthymius, (the gratest Saints of
that Age) gave Juvenalis a good Character, and charged the Empress Eudocia, to
communicate with him Baron. An. 455. n. 19. page 207, 208.
. I confess, I cannot easily understand how any Man can more evidently blow hot
and cold, as occasion serves, than Baronius does in these different Characters
of the same Bishop.

He relates three wonderful, if not incredible Stories of St. Leo, and the
last, though justified by an ancient Picture, (which is proof enough sometimes
for a serviceable Miracle), he utterly rejects as a Fable; The reason of which
is, that the two former instances tended to the Popes credit, but this last
reflected something on his Memory: Otherwise we should have had some Author or
other to attest it, at least as good as Sophronius Baron. An. 461. n. 7. page
252.
: But this poor Fable wants a Father, and issaid to be unworthy of Christian
Ears, and to want all ancient Authority.

It is observable, that those which he calls the most faithful Acts of Daniel
Stylites (and would have this Saint pass for a Prophet) relate, that after a
great Fire was begun in the City of Constantinople, and other endeavors to
quench it proved vain; they went to Daniel to pray for them, who foretold them,
that the Fire should cease after seven days, and so it came to pass Baron. An.
465. n. 3. page 261.
: Yet Euogrius a more credible Author says, The Fire endured but four days,
and some say six Id. ib. n. 5. page 262.
: But his Faithful Acts will have it burn seven days after the Citizens came to
Daniel. We may note also, That these Legends ascribe the saving the whole City,
one to Daniel's, another to St. Mercellus his Prayers, a third brings in St.
Marcian's Prayers, as the means of preserving one Church Id. ibid. n. 8. page
263.
: And Baronius calls all these, consentientia dicta, agreeing Reports: But an
impartial Historian would have discerned the difference, and rejected them all
as Fictions Haec est enim mendaciorum natura, ut cohaerere non possint. Lact.
lib. 5.. 3.
: For Truth is one, but Fables have infinite varieties.

He makes a severe reflection upon the Emperor Leo, for making an Eutychian
Heretic his Admiral, and imputes the loss of the Fleet to that sinful choice,
and his tolerating of Heretics Baron. An. 468. n. 24. page 281.
. But unless he could prove all Tolerating Princes were conquered, and all
Heretical Generals beaten, there is no strength in the reflection: Besides, he
forgets that his Majestic Pope Simplicius tolerated the Arrians, who about
this time possessed almost half the City of Rome Idem. An. 483. n. 6. page 370.
, and yet he makes no remark of any Judgment on him.

There are many Evidences, that Baronius did not understand Greek, and one
instance of it is, that when he had named the Heretical Bishop of Antioch,
Petrus Cnapheus, (that is in Greek) Peter the Fuller, he adds of his own,
idemque Fullo nuncupatus est Baron. An. 471. n. 6. page 287.
, the same Man is called also Peter the Fuller.

That Baronius is mistaken as to Ambrosius Aurelianus Baron. An. 476. n. 2. and
477. n. 30, 31. page 338.
, who was saluted Emperor in Britain, both as to the person and time, is made
evident by our learned Country man Archbishop Usher Usher. Antiqu. Brit. cap.
13. page 240.
: To whom the Reader is referred, for a more exact account of that famous Man.

It is very impertinent in Baronius, to upbraid the Reformed Christians of
these days, with the miraculous Confession of the Orthodox in Africa, whose
Tongues being cut out by the cruel Arrians, they still spoke plainly, and owned
the true Faith Baron. An. 484. n. 94. page 411.
: For we confess the same Faith that they did, and have the same and no more
Sacraments: But though these Bishops did then say, they held the Faith that
then was held in the Roman Church, that belongs not to the present Romanists,
who have added new Articles to their Creed, new Sacraments, and set up many new
Objects for Worship: So that if those African Martyrs and Confessors were now
alive, they would no more own these than they did the Vandals.

The censure of Nicephorus, who lived in a superstitious Age, and the Fictions
devised in the second Nicene Council to support Image Worship, are no way
credible. Xenaias (if ever there were such a Man,) was not the first, who said
the Images of Christ and the Saints were not to be adored; and it seems by his
affirming, that Worship in Spirit and Truth was only acceptable to Christ
Baron. An. 485. n. 16, etc. page 426, 427.
, that he had Read the holy Scripture more considerately than those at Rome
now, who overlook the second Commandment, and many other places which expressly
condemn their Idolatry: So that for ought appears from any Author of his time
now extant, this Xenaias was an Orthodox Christian, however in this point.

Baronius has missed Binius and others, touching the Age of Faustus the
Semi-pelagian, as also the time of the two Councils in France, relating to his
Opinions Baron. An. 490. n. 17. page 445, etc.
. But these and some other Errors are learnedly and acurately corrected by the
famous Vossius in his Pelagian History, to which I refer the Reader Histor.
Pelag. lib. 1. c. 50. page 106.
, for his own satisfaction.

How often does our Annalist censure the Eastern Emperors and Patriarchs, for
tolerating Heretics? How many dreadful Judgments (in his way of interpreting
Providence) does he note, came upon them for this single Crime? Yet here we
have an Heretical Emperor tolerated all his Reign for 17 year together, and his
name allowed in the Dypticks, by many Successive Popes, for near 30 year after
his death Baron. An. 491. n. 4. page 455.
. Surely he will not own so many Infallible Guides, before Hormisda, were
ignorant of Zeno's Heresy; and if they did know it, their fault in tolerating
him, and owning his Memory is much greater: How much so ever, therefore he
would magnify his Roman Bishops care of the Catholic Faith, when Truth comes
out, the Bishops of Constantinople in this Age did more Service to the Faith,
than the Popes; and Euphemius threatened Anastasius the Emperor into professing
the right Faith while Foelix flattered him Id. Ibid. n. 7, and 8 page 456.
; which is a good reason, why the pious Eastern Bishops chose to communicate
with the Patriarchs of Constantinople rather than with the Popes, while the
Churches were divided.

It seems the Emperor Anastasius in a controversy about the Sense of the
Council of Chalcedon, falsely thought to procure Peace by imposing silence, both
on the Catholics and Heretics: And he is censured for this vain hope Baron.
An. 492. n. 43. page 469.
. But in a like case that happened afterward, Pope Vigilius also decreed (as he
says) both sides should keep silence; and this he calls a Prudent care to
preserve the Church from danger Id. An. 547. n. 41. page 361.
: So that Baronius makes that to be praiseworthy in a Pope, which is a
grievous Crime in any Body else: Such partiality is very unbecoming in any
Writer, but chiefly in an Historian.

He gives it us, as an ingenious Argument of Pope Gelasius, That the cause
between him and Acacius could not be judged at Constantinople, where the same
persons were Enemies, Witnesses and Judges Baron. An. 493. n. 20. page 475.
: But this Pope aiming at his Adversary, like an unskilful Fencer hits himself:
For this is a very strong Reason, why Acacius his Cause should not be judged by
the Pope, an Enemy, a Witness and a Judge.

When a most pious Bishop, the main support of the Catholic Cause was deposed
and banished, viz. Euphemius, the Annalist says, he deserved to be abdicated
by Gods just Judgment, for not obeying the Popes in abdicating Acacius his Name
-- and he pretends the Fathers say, there can be no Confessors or Martyrs out
of the Roman Churuh Baron. An. 495 n. 23. page 505.
. Whereas Cyril the Monk, cited by our Historian says, Euphemius was impiously
deposed from his See, and exclaims against the wicked injustice of this Fact
Id. ib. n. 24.
; which this Man's prejudice makes him call Gods just Judgment. But God does not
punish Men for that which is no fault; and it was none in Euphemius, not to
submit to the Pope's most unjust claim of a Superiority over his Church, which
had been exempted by two General Councils from all subjection, and advanced to
the second place among the Patriarchs. As for his other assertion, no Father of
credit can be produced, that did appropriate Martyrdom, or Confessorship to
those in Communion with Rome: Yea, this very Age produced a great many Bishops
and holy Monks, such as Elias, Daniel Stylites, St. Sabas, etc. who did not
communicate with the Pope, but took part (in this contest) with Euphemius, who
then were and still are (even by Baronius) called Martyrs and Consessors. Yea,
the Cardinal himself asserts, that those who were slain, or suffered any thing
in a petty contest at Rome, merely about the choice of a Pope, were Martyrs and
Confessors Idem An. 502. n. page 543.
, though no Article of Faith came into the dispute: And doubtless, he cannot
rob these Eastern Martyrs and Confessors, (who suffered by Heretics only for
the true Faith) of their deserved Titles.

In like manner he uses Paschasius, a learned and pious Roman Deacon, who never
separated from the Catholic Church; but when two ambitious Candidates,
scandalously strove for the Papal Chair, he chanced to take the less fortunate
side: And this he counts dying in Schism, and (without any Authority) takes it
for granted, that he repented of it before his death, because otherwise he
thinks it was impossible he should be saved Baron. An. 498. n. 8. page 528.
. The ground of these remarks is an idle Legend, out of the fabulous Dialogues
ascribed to St. Gregory: But the Principles (of making it Schism and a mortal
Sin to mistake in a Popes Election) are his own.

To conclude this sort of observations, it is very hard that Symmachus should
long expect Letters from Anastasius the Emperor, more majorum Baron. An. 499.
n. 11. page 530.
; when the controversy was yet scarce decided, who was Pope, he or Laurentius.
And as for the mos majorum, that would have obliged Symmachus first to write to
the Emperor, as his Predecessors use to do.

I need not make a new Head, to observe what excursions he often has to
dispute for the Roman side, which in an Historian is not allowable, since he is
to relate pure matter of Fact, and neither to commend a Friend nor reproach an
Enemy unjustly.

There are many of these digressions about Acacius, the Bishop of
Constantinople, against whom he most bitterly inveighs for a long time
together; and treats him with language so rude and scurrilous, that one would
think he was some Monster or Devil incarnate Baron. An. 478. n. 6. page 339.
. Yet at last his greatest Crime is, (in comparison of which all his other
faults were light ones,) he opposed the Pope! who attempted to usurp a
Jurisdiction over him, and to rob him and his See of the Privileges, which
General Councils had granted to Constantinople: Otherwise (as has been
showed,) he was a most Pious and Orthodox Man: And Zeno the Emperor who stood
by his own Bishop in this just Cause, cannot escape many severe lashes from
this partial Historian, who frequently goes out of his way and takes every
little occasion Id. ib. n. 7. page 340. and ^12. page 341.
to aggravate his Miscarriages, yea, to rail at him without any cause.

It is agreed by all impartial Historians, that the Emperor Valentinian the
Third, did advance Ravenna to be a Patriarchal Seat, An. Dom. 432, and that it
held this Dignity without any dependence on the Sea of Rome, till after the
middle of the 7th Century See Dr. Hammond. of Schism, chap. 6.. 12. page 355.
. And how they strugled to keep those Liberties many years after, may be seen
in a late Eminent Author Dr. Cave disc. of ant. Gov. chap. 5.. 4.
. But Baronius, who allows a thousand Forgeries for Rome, every where disputes
against this Privilege, and condemns all that the Bishops of Ravenna did
Baron. An. 432. page 631. and An. 708. n. 2, 3, 4.
: And here takes a boasting threatening Letter of the Pope's, to be very good
evidence, that all the Privileges of the Church of Ravenna flowed from Rome
Idem An. 482. n. 44. page 364.
. But besides that his Witness is a party, we may note, the Privileges were so
large, that we may be sure the Roman Church never granted them; their ambition
to be absolutely Supreme, not allowing them to endure any Equal, especially in
Italy.

Again, we have a digression about the hard usage of the Popes Legates at
Constantinople; and he not only aggravates their Sufferings beyond what either
his Authors say, or the truth will bear: But also takes occasion to tell you,
that this is the way of Heretics, to act by Violence and Terror, and to treat
the Pious with Clubs, Swords and Prisons, instead of Charity and Peace Baron.
An. 484. n. 2, 3, etc. page 391.
. Now if this be the character of Heretics, the Roman Church that always did
and still does proceed thus where it has power, may fairly pass for an
Heretical Church. And as for the ground of this unlucky observation, Zeno and
Acacius did nothing, but what all wise Governors would have done; for since
these Legates of the Popes came to justify an usurped Authority, and to
disturb the quiet of the Church at Constantinople, their Letters (which were
judged Seditious) were taken from them, and they (without any hurt to their
persons) secured, till Time and Discourse had made them sensible how ill an
errand they came upon: So that being convinced of the Justice of Acacius
proceedings, they communicated with him, and let fall the Popes business.

I have touched that frivolous excursion about the worship of Images before
Baron. An. 485. n 16, etc. page 426.
; I only note now, that if Petrus Cnapheus did oppose that idle Superstition in
its first rise, he was more Orthodox than any who promoted it, as to that
point; And it may be the later Historians, who doted upon the worship of
Images, may have given this Peter a worse name than he deserved; Lying
Characters of all Iconoclasts, being as common with them as other fabulous
Stories, which abound in the Writers of this Controversy above all others.

From two passages out of the Additions to Gennadius, writ by some unknown
hand, mentioning two Books, one of Honoratus Bishop of Marseils, approved by
Gelasius, and another of Gennadius his own, presented to that Pope, and one
Example of John Talaias Apology sent to his sole Patron the fame Gelasius; Our
Historian largely digresses, to prove that the Pope was the sole Judge of all
Writers and Writings, and talks as if he was the only Censor librorum, in that
Age Baron. An. 490. n. 43. ad 47. page 451, 452.
: Whereas I can name him diverse other Bishops of less eminent Sees, that had
twice as many Books sent to them for their approbation; yet none of their
Successors were so vain, as to challenge any Right from thence to judge of
Orthodox Books: And for the Decree of Gelasius about Apocryphal Writings, it is
a mere Imposture.

He complains of the Arrogance of the Constantinopolitan See, which insulted
over that of Rome, as a Captive, and under a barbarous Yoke: But he will scarce
allow us to pity the Roman Church, since he runs out into vain boasting, that
the Popes had the same Vigor, Authority, Power and Majesty, now, that they had
in the best times Baron. An. 493. n. 22. page 47^
. But his Account of the little regard given to this Pope Gelasius, and his
Predecessors Letters and Sentences in this Controversy, confutes his Brags,
and proves this Authority and Majesty was only in imagination.

. 6. After all these Artifices used by the Annalist for the interest of the
Roman Church, one would not think any thing should be left, that reflected
either upon the present Doctrine or Practice of Rome: Yet Truth (like the Light)
cannot be concealed with all his Artifices.

It appears that Pope Leo was but a mean Astronomer, since he could not
Calculate the true time of Easter himself, but was forced to write to others to
inform him; and when the Infallible Guide is forced to enquire of many Fallible
persons to direct him in his Decrees, it seems he is left to the same dull way,
that other Mortals use for their information Baron. An. 453. n. 34 and 40. page
189, 190.
: And at this rate, Learning must be of more use to the Head of the Church,
than Infallibility.

He commends the barbarous Suevians and Vandals, for sparing a Monastery in one
of their Cruel Invasions, and reproaches the Reformed in France, who had burnt
very many Monasteries and Churches, at which he thinks they may blush Baron.
cod. An. n. 46. p. 191.
. But doubtless, Lewis the 14th has more cause for blushing, since he
professes that Religion that gives an extraordinary reverence to Monasteries,
and yet without scruple, Burns, Demolishes and Destroys often where he Conquers.

By a Letter writ to the Emperor Leo by Anatolius, it appears that the Eastern
Emperors consulted the Bishops of Constantinople in causes of Faith Baron. An.
457. n. 34, etc. page 226.
: And ordered them to consult the Canons, and enquire into the violations of
them; yea, to give notice to the Pope of such offenses. And after all, the
Emperor was to give these Canons their due Force, by appointing the Punishment
due to such as had broken them: Which proceeding was thought very regular then;
but the present Roman Court will not allow it, though Pope Leo himself begs of
the Emperor, (not commands him, as our Historian words it,) to use this remedy
to the Church, not only to degrade Heretical Clerks, but to banish them from
the City Baron. An. 457. n. 43. page 228.
; yet now they will not have Princes to judge or punish Clerks: Nor will
Baronius allow the Emperor a Right to call a General Council without the Pope's
consent: But the Letter of Pope Leo, from whence he infers this, shows, He was
commanded by the Emperor to come to a Council, which Order the Pope reverently
received, and wished he could have obeyed it; but modestly hopes to be excused
by the Emperors approving the Reasons he offers, why there was no need of such
a Council Ibid. 45, 47. page 228, 229.
. So that the Authority was then in the Emperor, and the Pope was to obey or
excuse himself by just Reasons. And as to the confirmation, Pope Leo says, The
Council of Chalcedon was confirmed by the Authority of Marcian the Emperor, and
by his consent Baron. An. 458 n. (...). page 234.
; yea, he owns, the definitions of that Council were above him; for what was
defined there, he durst not call to a new scanning Ibid. n. 11.
: Thus things stood then, but Rome is now above this.

If it were so excellent and pious a Law, that none should force Women to be
Nuns, nor any to be veiled till she were forty years old, till which Age she
was to remain free to marry if she pleased Baron. An. 458. n. 4 and 5. page 233.
; How comes it to pass that nothing is more common now, than to carry young
Women against their Wills into Nunneries, and to make them take the Vows at
fourteen or fifteen? These practices may be gainful, but they are very wicked,
and contrary to the Laws both of Church and State, in elder and purer times.

We may observe a visible difference between the Prayers and Usages of holy Men
in this ancient Age, and those of the modern times. St. Marcian takes the holy
Gospel in his hand, and directs his Prayers only to Christ to avert a dreadful
Fire Baron. An. 465. n. 8, page 262.
: But later Legends represent their modern Saints, taking up Crucifixes,
Relics or the Host, and praying to the blessed Virgin, or to deceased Saints
in all cases of danger: So that any considering Reader may see, that the
Primitive Worship was not like to that now used in the Roman Church.

Again, if the Matter of Fact be true, that Pope Hilary forbid the Emperor
Anthemius, to allow any Conventicles of the Macedonian Heretics in Rome, for
which we have no proof, but the boasting Letter of a Bigoted Pope, viz.
Gelasius; yet (supposing this were so) the Note of the Annalist is very
Erroneous, viz. That Heresies could not be planted at Rome so easily as at
Constantinople Baron. An. 467. n. 2. page 273.
. For Pelagius and Caelestius, who were as great Heretics as Eutyches and
Aelurus, were sheltered at Rome a long time Usherii, Ant. Britan. lib. 1. cap.
8. page 115, etc.
: And the Bishops of Constantinople did more against Eutyches and his Heresy,
than the Popes against Pelagius: And since a little after, three parts of seven
in Rome were Arrians, tolerated by the Pope, methinks we should not have the
Purity of Rome extolled at this rate, as if no Weed of Heresy could grow
there. It is but five years after this that Baronius himself owns, that Ricimer
seized on St. Agathus Church in Rome, where he and the Arrians held their
public Assemblies in spite of the Popes Baron. An. 472. n. 10. page 295.
; who were not wont to oppose Princes who had great power, and only trampled on
such as were weak.

In the Relation of Cyril the Monk, which Baronius so highly commends, it is
not much for the credit of Rome, that a Catholic Bishop of Jerusalem,
Martyrius, sends a Legate to the Emperor, to assist him in suppressing the
Eutychian Heretics, and not the Pope: And that a Saint from Heaven should call
Jerusalem the Mother of Churches Baron. An. 477. n. 23, and 25. page 336.
: For this Title is now wholly appropriated to Rome. But as to the Embassy sent
to the Emperor against the Heretics, Martyrius took the right course; for Pope
Simplicius in his Letter to the same Emperor says, The Imperial Authority only
can keep the Sheepfold of our Lords slock pure -- from the contagion of Heresy
Id. An. 478. n. 11 page 341.
; which shows, the Pope's power was not considerable at that time.

It is something remarkable also, That Pope Foelix in his Letter to Zeno the
Emperor, should affirm, That Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, was the President of
those Three hundred and eighteen Fathers assembled at Nice Baron. Au. 483. n.
72. page 386.
. For now they will allow no General Council to be Authentic, wherein the
Bishop of Rome or his Legates do not preside.

The Romanists proceedings against the Reformed, at their Councils of Constance
and Trent, where some were Burnt for a Terror, and the oppressed party who held
the right Faith, were cited before their Adversaries, who took upon them to
judge in their own Cause; these proceedings (I say), were an exact Transcript
of the Arrian Methods in Asrick, when they resolved under the cover of a
Conference to suppress the Orthodox Catholics Baron. An. 484. n. 48, 49, etc.
page 401.
.

In the Story of finding St. Barnabas Relics, we may observe all the Prayers
and Hymns were directed only to God and Christ, not any to this or any other
Saint; from which we may learn, That piece of Superstition, (which now makes up
so great a part of the Roman Offices) was unknown to those Ages Baron. An. 485
n. 8, 9, 10. page 424. vide aliud exemp. Anno 495. n. 26. p. 505.
; and St. Barnabas declares, the chief Bishop of Cyprus is not subject to any
Patriarch; he does not except the Pope; so that this Apostle seems not to have
believed St. Peter's Universal Supremacy.

Baronius presents us also, with a Confession of Faith made by one Lucidus, and
approved by a Synod of Bishops, wherein he declares, that he believes Eternal
Fire, and the Flames of Hell prepared for deadly Sins: But there is not one
word of Purgatory Baron. An. 490. n. 29. page 448.
; which shows there was no such place invented, or at least believed by the
Catholics then: And the 7th Epistle of Pope Gelasius (as we noted) signifies,
that he knew of no other places in the next World, but Heaven and Hell.

To conclude, the Annalist shuts up this Century with a Melancholy Note, That
at this time there was not one Christian Catholic Prince in the World Baron.
An. 499. n. 13. page 531.
. He might also have added, that all the Eastern Patriarchs were separated from
the Communion of the Roman Church, (although three of them that were Orthodox
communicated with one another An. 496. n. 56. page 518.
: And he might have noted also, that at this juncture there was no certain
Pope; and an Heretical Prince was then Judge of the pretenses of Symmachus and
Laurentius, the Rivals for that See. But the true Faith can subsist as well
without a Pope, as without Orthodox Princes; the Church being founded on Christ
that invincible Rock, against which the Gates of Hell can never prevail.

The End of the Fifth Centry.
PART IV. CENT. VI.
CHAP. I.
Errors and Forgeries in the Councils, from the Year 500, to the End of the
Fifth Binii Council. Tom. II. Par. I. Lab. and Cossart. Tom. IV.
General Council, An. Dom. 553.

. 1. WE referred the Councils said to be held under Pope Symmachus, to the
beginning of this Century: And the first Six are pretended to be held at Rome.
The first was to prevent Men's seeking Bishoprics, especially the Papacy, while
the Sea was full Bin. p. 519. col. 1. Lab. col. 1314.
: On which we may note the Cunning of this Pope, who probably had got the Papey
by this means; yet sees fit to condemn a Fault after he had made his advantage
by it. The Fourth Canon plainly supposes that the Pope will name his Successor,
unless he die suddenly; which is expressly contrary to the ancient Canons; which
the Notes can neither totally conceal, nor fairly excuse Bin. p. 521. col. 1.
Lab. col. 1317.
. But I look upon the Acts to be entirely forged in the later Times, as the
gross barbarity of the Style shows; and it is not probable that 72 Italian
Bishops should come to Rome as so many Ciphers, only to applaud what this Pope
did ignorantly and Uncanonically decree. It Is certain there was a Synod at Rome
called by the Arrian King Theodoric, which is perhaps suppressed by the
Editors, lest it should discover the Regal Power was then above the Papal: And
this new Stuff seems to be put into the old Garment, to fill up the Rent Luke
V. 36.
. Now Baronius and Binius place this Synod before the Kal. of May An. 499. Bin.
in not. page 520. col. 2. Lab. col. 1317. Baron An. 499. n. 1. page 529. and n.
10. page 530.
, and fall foul upon Theodorus Lector, for saying, That Theodoric called this
Synod, whereas he knew nothing of this Fiction: He says indeed, That after the
Schism had lasted Three years, (which must be An. 501. since Pope Anastasius
died An. 498.) Theodoric, who then Ruled all at Rome, called a Synod of
Bishops, and settled Symmachus in the Papal Chair Theod. Lect. collect. lib. 2.
page 186.
. So that according to him, no body called this Synod of the Editors, nor was
Symmachus yet Pope; but these are devices to make the Schism seem shorter than
it was. But Theodorus is of better Credit than the Annalist, and Cassiodorus
shows, that this Schism was not fully ended until Symmachus his death, 13 or 14
years after: For he says, That in his Consulship (An. 514) he had united the
Roman Clergy and People, and restored the desired Concord to that Church
Cossiod. Chron. An. 514. inter opera. page 14. An. Dom. 500.
So that it is certain there was a Schisin at this time, and long after.

The Second Roman Council under Symmachus has no Voucher, but Anastasius, who
pretends it was called to condemn Potrus Altinensis, King Theodoric's Visitor,
as an Invader of the Roman See. But it is no way probable, this yet unsettled
Pope durst do so bold a thing, considering Theodoric, (to whose Arbitration
they had submitted this, and commended him for determining it by a Bishp) was
then at Rome in great glory, loved and admired both by the Synod and People
Bin. p. 521. col. 1. Lab. col. 1322. Baron. An. 500. n. 2. page 536.
. But the sport is, Binius and Baronius do not agree whether this were a
distinct Synod, or only one Action of another Synod called Palmaria; however,
the dispute being about so frivolous a Fiction, we shall not interpose.

It Is probable upon Theodoric's having declared Symmachus An. Dom. 501.
the true Pope, his Enemies accused him of heinous Crimes: To cover which, a
Synod is patched up, so full of Barbarisms, False Latin and Nonsense, that it
seems to have been writ by that Ignorant Hand who forged the ridiculous Council
of Sinuessa for Pope Marcellinus; and the design of both is the same, viz. to
make us think, that a Pope cannot be judged by a Council, neither for Idolatry
nor for Adultery Bin. p. 521. col. 1. Lab. col. 1323.
. Besides, the Forger mistakes the Consul's Names; and Ruffus Magnus put in as
Colleague to Faustus Avienus, instead of Pompeius, who is by two undoubted
Writers of this Age Marcellinus and Cassiodorus in Chronic.
, joined with Avienus, as the Notes and Annalist confess, who yet have the
confidence to say these Acts are genuine Bin. not. p. 523. col. 1. Lab. col.
1327. Baron. An. 501. n. 1. page 539.
. But it seems they scarce think so, for these Acts say expressly, The Council
was called by the Precept of Theodoric; and own, that they could decree nothing
without that Princes knowledge. Yet these Parasites contradict their so
commended Acts, and affirm this Synod was called by the Pope, who was the
Criminal; yea, though they immediately after print some suspicious Precepts of
Theodoric about his calling and directing this whole process Praecept. regis
Theod. Bin. page 524. col. 2. Lab. col. 1328.
. If the whole were not fictitious, I might note, That there is a manifest
Corruption in the Acts; for where the Roman Churches Grandeur is said to flow,
First from S. Peter' s Merit, then following our Lord's Command, and the
Authority of General Councils Bin. p. 525. col. 1. La. 1323. Baron. An. 502. n.
6. p. 502.
, The Period is not sense, and jussione Domini seems put in to make the
Flattery still grosser: But the Editor's Margin has a glorious Note on this
blunder, and Baronius cites it with great Triumph. Another Trick the Notes put
upon these Acts, which in the next Sentence declare, that Symmachus and his
Bishops, desired Letters from the King's Clemency for calling this Synod. Which
the Annotator turns, as if the King desired the Popes Letters, and though he
was an Arrian, durst not call it without such Letters Bin. not. page 525. col.
1. Lab. 1332.
; which Note is as false, as it is impertinent. For we see by Theodorus Lector,
That Theodoric did call the real Council: And Zonaras says, Theodoric --
calling a Council, rejected Laurentius, and confirmed the Bishopric of Rome to
Symmachus Zonar. in vit. Anastas. Tom. 3. p. 121.
. And they must be able to outface the Sun, who out of a falsely expounded
Period would prove, that the Kings of that Age called no Councils without the
Popes consent.

Symmachus his 4th Roman Synod (of which Baronius An. Dom 502.
makes the two former to be only diverse Acts) is said to be held when Avienus
Junior was Consul; but the name of his Colleague is omitted, which was Probus,
This makes it somewhat suspicious; but the business of it confirms that
Suspicion, which was to revoke two Laws made in a Roman Synod after Simplicius
his Death, wherein (according to ancient Custom) Basilius, Prefect for Odoacer
King of Italy, was present, with some Bishops and the Roman Clergy Bin. p. 525.
col. 2. Lab. 1332.
. The first Law was, That no Pope should be elected, without the consent of the
King of Italy (then Lord of Rome.) The other, That no Pope, Bishop or other
Clergyman should alienate things given to the Church. Which Laws they pretend
to annul, because they were both made by Laymen, and not subscribed by any
Pope. But first, It is certain that Lay Princes made many Laws in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, by Advice of their Clergy; and these were frequently
confirmed in Synods. Secondly, These Laws were made in a Council of the Clergy,
as appears by that Title Sanctitati vestrae, used by Basilius; and Eulalius in
this Council confesses these Laws were made, some Bishops consenting to them
Bin. p. 526. col. 2. Lab. 1336.
. Moreover, the deceased Pope had directed the making these Laws. And the
Annotator (who here objects, They were made in the Vacancy of the Sea), in
another place says, The Roman Clergy well knew, that when the Pope, the
visible Head of the Church, was taken away, it was their part, by ancient
Custom (as the nearest Members to the Head, and Administrators of Peter' s
Church) to take care of the Universal Church Bin. Tom. l. page 102. notis ad
vit. Fabian.
. Wherefore he cannot fairly deny, but the Roman Clergy had power in the
Vacancy, to confirm a Law relating to the good ordering of their own Church:
And the bloody Contest (not yet appeased) occasioned by a double election which
was lately submitted to be judged by Theodoric, makes it very improbable this
Law should be repealed now, when so fresh an instance convinced them, that
their Schisms would be endless and intolerable if Princes did not interpose.
And Symmachus must be an ill man when he got the Chair purely by Theodoric's
approbation, to kick down the step upon which he was raised, and to take away
his right to confirm, by whom his doubtful: Title was confirmed. And finally,
neither this Theodoric nor his Successors, did ever take any notice of this
Repeal, but in every vacancy did interpose. So that I take this Synod to be a
Fiction to cover over the Power that a Lay Prince here exercised in making a
Pope, or if there ever were such a Synod it was despised, and the Law was in
force after this assembly had revoked it. And thus all Baronius his Oratory
about Symmachus his courage, and exalting himself above Kings and Princes
Baron. An. 502. n. 29. page 546.
vanishes into air, and is as false as this Popes excommunicating Anastasius
the Emperor in this Synod; which is only proved by a corrupt reading of (ego)
for (nego) as I showed before.

For the other Law to forbid alienations, they pretend to repeal it merely
because it was made by Laymen (which is false); But the Clergy here
reestablish it. If the Acts were genuine, I should guess this was to put it in
the Clergies power to dispense with themselves and their Canon, whenever they
had a mind to be sacrilegious: Since while a Royal Law forbad it, a Royal
License must be first obtained, which would be hard to procure. But the power
of Theodoric and Symmachus his circumstances then, make it clear he durst not
repeal a Law of the Prince. So that it seems to be forged. Wherefore I will
make but two remarks more, First upon that Sentence in the Acts Quia non licuit
Laico statuendi in Ecclesia (praeter Papam Romanum) habere aliquam Potestatem
Bin. page 526. col. 1. Lab. 1336.
. That no Layman, but the Pope, shall have any power to decree in the Church.
Which passage supposes the Pope a Layman, and is too ridiculous to be spoken
by Laurentius Bishop of Milan. Secondly, on the Notes I remark, that it is very
strange this Synod should excommunicate Anastasius for communicating with
Heretics supposed, since the former Synod complements Theodoric a professed
Arrian (the worst of Heretics) with the Titles of most pious and most holy
Not. in Synod. 3. Bin. page 525. col. 1. Lab. 1333 Baron. An. 502. n. 21. page
545.
: If the former were as true as this latter of giving these titles is, it would
more need to be excused than this: But the truth is, the Popes were then so
low, that they were, forced to give flatering Titles both to the Emperor and
the Gothic Kings, whatever Religion they were of.

After this Council is added an Apology writ (to answer a Paper (now
suppressed) against Symmachus) by Ennodius, wherein as far as appears by the
Objections he cites, and the Answers he gives, the Accusers of this Pope were
too hard for his Apologist. The Annalist and Binius highly magnify this Tract;
yet the former confesses by the harshness of the style, and the horrid
unevenness of a false Copy, the quickest wit can scarce apprehend it Baron. An.
503. n. 13. p. 552.
. As to the matter of it, the Author huffs at a rate which shows more zeal than
judgment; and we note, First, that he clearly owns Theodoric called the Synod
that absolved Symmachus Bin. p. 528. col. 2. Lab. col. 1342.
, and therein confutes both his admirers, Baronius and Binius. Secondly,
whereas his objectors rightly urge that the Apostle commands us not to keep
company with a Brother that is a Fornicator 1 Cor. 5. 11.
as (Symmachus was said to be) Ennodius says it is the Prophet David, and not
the Apostle which gives this advice Bin. p. 541. col. 1. Lab. 1342.
. Thirdly, he ridiculously affirms that S. Peter (who was not innocent)
transmitted Innocence as an inheritance to the Popes, and wonders any should
fancy or imagine that a Pope should not be holy, who has so high a dignity,
and is praeordained (as he blasphemously speaks) to be the Foundation on which
the weight of the Church leans Bin. ibid. Lab. col. 1343.
, as if the very Chair gave grace to a prostigate Wretch. Fourthly, He
falsifies the Scripture, in saying Samuel appealed to the Lord, that men might
not exmaine him Bin. page 542. col. 2. Lab. 1346.
; Whereas the Text expressly says he appealed to the People (before the Lord
and the King) and challenged the People to prove any ill thing upon him, 1 Samuel
xii. 3. Fifthly, his Maxim, That Peter's Successors were only to be judged by
God; was not believed by the Councils of Constance and Basil Bin. page 544 col.
2. Lab. 1352.
, nor by Theodoric, nor any who had a hand in censuring or deposing any Bishops
of Rome. Lastly, if this Book, which is so Barbarous in its style, so abounding
in railing and mistakes, and so void of true reason, were approved and
applauded in the Fifth Council; We may guess at the Qualifications of those
Bishops who sat in it. As for the Editors and Baronius, it is enough that it
pleads for a Pope, for they must extol it.

The Fifth Roman Synod has all the marks of Forgery imaginable; for the
Consuls are not named; and An. Dom. 503.
the Indiction is also false (as Baronius confesses) Baron. An. 503. n. 1.
page 549.
. And he with Binius own that the Subscriptions are so monstrously falsified,
that many Bishops are named here, who were at the Council of Chalcedon 52 years
before, and belonged to the Eastern Church, who also had been long ago dead and
buried Bin. not. p. 550. col. 1. Lab. 1370. Barou. ut supra. n. 9.
. And it is highly improbable, that 216 Bishops should meet only to approve
such stuff, and to order this Book to be inserted among the Apostolical Decrees
to be obeyed by all, as they were Bin. page 547. col. 2. Lab. col. 1364.
. This phrase also smells of a late Forgery; for in the time of this pretended
Synod, the name of Apostolical Decrees was not appropriated to Papal decisions,
nor were their Decretals universally Obeyed. For we see that in Rome it self a
great party both despised and writ against Pope Symmachus his Synodical
absolution Again, here is that foolish Sentence, That the sheep must not judge
their Pastor, unless he err in Faith, nor yet accuse him but for injustice Bin.
page 548. col. 1. Lab. 1365.
, which is undoubtedly stolen out of a Decretal Epistle forged by Mercator long
after this time; and it is wrong applied too, if Symmachus were so unjust as to
rob his neighbors of their Chastity. Wherefore the very Book of Ennodius is
suspicious, and this Synod is most certainly Forged to save the credit of an
ill Pope.

The Sixth Roman Council has no date; but the Subscriptions are certainly
forged, having (like the former) the names of many Eastern Bishops who could
not be in this Synod. The Acts are a Rhapsody out of some later Councils
against Sacrilege Bin. p 550. col. 1. Lab. 1371.
, as appears by diverse barbarous phrases, and some expressions, that are the
dialect of more modern Ages, such as that of men's giving to the Church, for the
remission of their Sins, (and aeternae vitae mercatione), and for purchasing
eternalllife. The declaring also that the Sacrilegious are manifest Heretics,
is too absurd for this Age. They further say, That the Canons of Gangra were
confirmed by Apostolical Autherity: The Forger meant, by Papal Authority. But
those Bishops at Gangra scarce knew who was then Pope: And it is plain the
Compiler of this Council had respect to a Forgery of later Ages, where Osius of
Corduba's name (the pretended Legate of the Pope) is added to the Synodical
Letter from this Synod; and therefore these Acts were devised long after this
Council is pretended to have sitten. And he must be a mere stranger to the
History of this Time; who reads here that Symmachus and his Council should say,
It is not lawful for the Emperor, nor any other professing Piety, etc. For this
supposes Anastasius no Heretic, and that Popes then prescribed Laws to the
Emperor of the East Bin. page 551. col. 2. Lab. 1375.
. I conclude with a single remark upon the Notes on this forged Council, which
pretend, Theodoric obeyed this Councils Decree Bin. p. 553. col. 1. Lab. 1372.
in ordering the patrimony of the Church of Milan to be restored to Eustorgius,
who was not in this Council, nor Bishop of Milan till eight years after: And no
doubt that Order was made by Theodoric in pure regard to Equity; for it is no
way likely that he had ever heard of this Council. I conclude these Roman
Councils with one remark relating to Mons. du-Pin, who has taken things too
much upon trust, to be always trusted himself, and therefore he publishes five
of these six Councils for genuine Du Pin, Vol. 5. page ^08.
, and gives almost the Baronian Character of Symmachus. But these Notes I hope
will demonstrate he is mistaken, both in his Man and these Synods; and I only
desire the Reader to compare his Account with these short Remarks.

. 2. There were few Councils abroad in this Popes time, and he was not
concerned in them. The Council An. Dom 506.
of Agatha (now Agde) in the Province of Narbon, was called by the consent of
Alaricus an Arrian King; Caesarius Bishop of Arles was President of it, and
diverse good Canons were made in it Bin. page 554 col. 2. Lab. 1381.
; but Symmachus is not named, so that our Editors only say it was held in the
time of Symmachus. I shall make no particular remark but on the Ninth Canon,
where Caesarius (who was much devoted to promote that Celibacy of the Clergy
which now was practiced at Rome) and the Council declare that the orders of
Innocent and Siricius should be observed Bin. page 555. col. 1. Lab. 1384.
. From whence we may Note, that these Orders had not yet been generally obeyed
in France, and that a Popes Decretal was of no force there by virtue of the
Authority of his See, but became obligatory by the Gallican Churches
acceptance, and by turning it into a Canon in some Council of their own. But
that the usages of Rome did not prescribe to France is plain from the Notes on
the xii Canon, where it appears their Lent Fast was a total abstinence till
evening, none but the infirm being permitted to dine Not. in Con. xii. Bin.
page 560. col. 1. Lab. 1398.
. But the Roman Lent (unless they have altered their old rule) allows men to
dine in Lent with variety of some sorts of meat and drink, which is not so
strict by much as this Gallican custom.

The first Council of Orleance, is only said to be in An. Dom. 507.
Symmachus time Bin. page 561. col. 1. Lab. 1404.
; but the Acts show he was not consulted nor concerned in it. The Bishops were
summoned by the Precept of King Clovis, who also gave them the heads of those
things they were to treat of. And when their Canons were drawn up, they sent
them (not to Rome, but) to their King for Confirmation, with this memorable
address, if those things which we have agreed on seem right to your judgment,
we desire your assent, that so the Sentence of so many Bishops by the
approbation of so great a Prince, may be obeyed, as being of greater Authority.
And Clovis was not wanting in respect to them; for he styles them Holy Lords,
and Popes most worthy of their Apostolical Seat. By which it is manifest, that
Rome had then no Monopoly of these Titles.

I conclude that which relates to Pope Symmachus his time with one Remark, that
in the year 500 the Devout and learned African Fulgentius came on purpose to
visit Rome: But the writer of his life, who acurately describes what the holy
Man saw there, and largely sets forth his View of Theodoric, his visiting the
Tombs of the Martyrs, and saluting the Monks he met with Vita B. Fulgen. cap.
13. page 16.
, speaks not one Syllable of the Pope, whose Benediction one would think
Fulgentius should have desired: But whether the Schism yet continued, or
Symmachus his manner did not please the good Man, 'its plain he took no notice
of him.

. 3. Hormisda succeeded Symmachus, and it seems by An. Dom. 514.
the Letter of Dorotheus, that in his Election (and not before) the Schism at
Rome ceased, which began when Symmachus was chosen Ep. Dorothei ap. Baron. An.
515. 7, 8. page 642.
; which shows that Symmachus having a strong party against him all his time,
could do nothing considerable. This Pope Hormisda was either married before he
was Pope, or was very criminal; for he had a Son, i. e. Sylverius, who (as
Liberatus testifies) was Pope about twenty years after him Liberati Brev. cap.
22. Bin. par. 2 page 191.
. This was a bold and active Pope, and did labor much to reconcile the Eastern
to the Western Church, and at last (in some measure) effected it, after the
Greeks had been separated (as Binius notes) from the unity of the Church (not
Catholic, but) of Rome (he means) about 80 years Bin. not. in vit. page 557.
col. 1. Lab. 1439.
. From whence we may observe, that a Church, may be many years out of the
Communion of the Roman Church, and yet be a true Church; for none (till
Baronius) ever said the Eastern was not a true Church all the time of this
Separation. The Notes further tell us, that King Clovis of France sent Hormisda
a Golden Crown set with precious stones, for a Present, and thereby procured
this reward from God, that the Kingdom of the Franks still continues Bin. not.
page 556. Col. 2. Lab. 1418.
. Which stuff is out of Baronius Baron. An. 514. n. 14. page 632.
. But the Story is as false as the inference; for Sirmondus proves that King
Clovis died Anno 511, that is, three years before Hormisda was Pope Labbe in
marg. 1420. and Tom. V. col. 305.
: Labbe, who owns this to be an Error, would correct the mistake, and put in
Childebert's name; but he who told the Story, could certainly have told the
Kings right name Labbe 1417. and 1418. marg
; wherefore we reject the whole Relation as fabulous: And for the inference,
the Kingdom of Franks indeed like all other Kingdoms (who sent no Crowns) has
continued, but not in Clovis his Posterity, which is long since extinct. We
shall make more remarks on this Popes History in his Letters.

And many Epistles are lately found of this Popes in the Vatican, or Forged
there, which we will now consider.

The First Epistle is certainly Forged, it is directed to Remigius, but names
King Lovis or Clovis, who was dead three year before, as Labbe owns Ep. 1.
Hor^^sd. Bin. page 557. col. 2. Lab. 1420.
; for which cause Sirmondus omitted it as Spurious, and so P. de Marca counts
it De Marca De Concord. l. 5. cap 42.. 6.
. And it is almost the same with another feigned Epistle, wherein the Pope is
pretended to make a Spanish Bishop his Legate there Ep. 26. Horm. Bin. 578.
col. 2. Lab. 1468.
: But the Reader must beware of all such Epistles, being generally writ by
later Parasites of Rome, who would have it thought, that all the Eminent
Bishops in the World, acted by a Power delegated from the Pope.

The Second and Fourth Epistles are this Popes excuse, why he did not go, but
send his Legates to a Council in the East, unto which the Emperor Anastasius
had summoned him, more majorum Ep 2. and 4. Hor. Bin. page 558, etc. Lab. 1422,
etc.
: Which shows that as yet the Emperors had the power of calling Councils, and
sent their Precepts to the Pope himself.

The Fifth Epistle is also to excuse Hormisda's not going, The Title of which
is false, viz. That it was a new thing for a Pope to be called to a Council by
the Emperor Ep. 5. Hor. Bin. 561. col. 2. Lab. 1430.
. For the Letter it self only says, there is no Example of a Pope going in
person to a Council (in Foreign Parts). But as to the Summons, that was no new
thing; for Pope Celestine was called to Ephesus by Theodosius, and Leo to
Chalcedon by the Emperor Marcian. And in this Letter Hormisda highly commends
Anastasius, for Writing to him to be there in person; and says, God moved the
Emperor to write this.

The Third Epistle is a reply to Dorotheus Bishop of Thessalonica, who calls
the Pope his Fellow Minister, in the Inscription. But Binius (contrary both to
Baronius and Labbe) corrupts the Title and Text of the Epistle of Dorotheus Ep.
Doroth. Bin. page 558. Col. 2. Lab. 1422. Baron. An. 515. n. 8. page 642. Vid.
n. 11. ^bi legit (vestro)
, reading Patri -- instead of -- Papae; and twice in six lines putting
venerando capiti nostro, -- for -- vestro: Now the true reading, I have writ
this to your venerable Head, means no more, but to your self: Whereas the
corruption tends to impose upon the Reader a false conceit, viz. That the Pope
was the Father and Head of all Bishops.

The Sixth Epistle shows, that Hormisda for two years after his advancement
into the infallible Chair, took Anastasius for an Orthodox Emperor Ep. 6.
Hormisd. Bin. page 563. col. 2. Lab. 1436.
. But Baronius had exposed him as a known Heretic, and Persecutor of the
Orthodox many years before; and Binius Notes charge him with the Eutychian
Heresy Not. in Ep. Anas. Bin page 563. Col. 1. Lab. 1435.
at this very time: Which shows Hormisda was very meanly qualified for an
universal Judge, in matters of Faith. I add, that in this Epistle the Pope
declares, He will throw himself down at the Emperors Feet for the Service of
the Church. But aftertimes have seen an Emperor falling down at the Popes
Feet, and kissing his Slipper.

The Title of the Epistle of John Bishop of Nicopolis, calls the Pope (if it be
genuine) Father of Fathers, and Prince of all Bishops Ep. Johan. Nicop. Bin.
page 564. Col. 2. Lab. 1438.
. However it can only mean, That the Pope was a chief Bishop, because in the
same Title he styles him his fellow Minister, and in the Epistle says his
Predecessor Alciso, was a Prince of Bishops, who was only an Archbishop over a
few Suffragans, and there were but eight Bishops in this Synod of Epirus Baron.
An. 516. N. 47. page 663.
, of whose complying with the Pope, Baronius brags, as if all the Eastern
Church had submitted.

In the Eighth Epistle, the Pope distinguishes the Apostolical (that is, the
Roman) from the general Catholic Church; where he affirms that these Heretics
were Condemned, both by the one and the other.

After the Ninth Epistle we have a Paper called a Form of Faith, pretended to
be sent with these Letters, to be subscribed by these Bishops of Epirus; but
yet is dated the year after these Letters, and has other marks of Forgery; the
matter of it being not designed to secure the Articles of the Old Creeds, but
to enslave all Churches to believe implicitly as the Church of Rome did, which
is so grossly flattered in it, that Hormisda might well blush at it, and must
take those who would subscribe it, for his Vassals. But doubtless, this was
devised after the Supremacy and Infallibility were got much higher: And we may
observe, the Forger of it not only claps it in here, but makes Justin the
Emperor sign it, and send it to Pope Boniface, after that Emperor and Pope were
both dead, where Binius and Labbe condemn it for an Imposture Prosess. Fidei.
Bin. page 645. col. 1. Lab. 1686.
: And the deviser of it is so fond of it, that he has thrust it in most falsely
and impertinently, in four or five several places of the Councils.

After all the Noise of the Subjection of the Eastern Churches to the Roman,
all the Letters of this time, mention no more than the Agreement and Concord of
the Eastern and Western Churches: So Avitus enquires, if they were reconciled
and a Concord was made Ep. Avit. Bin. p. 568. col. 1. Lab. 1445.
. Justin the Emperor says, he labored pro Concordia, etc. Ep Justin. Bin.
page 579. col. 2. Lab. 1470.
. And Hormisda himself speaks of it as an Union, and a receiving the Bishop of
Constantinople into an Unity of Communion Indic. Hormisd. Bin. page 582. col.
2. Lab. 1476.
; Which shows the Eastern Church owed no subjection then to Rome.

The instructions to the Legates last cited, are something suspicious, and look
like the Work of a later Hand: But Binius is so taken with them, that he Prints
them again verbatini Bin. page 560. and page 568.
, whereas Labbe omits them the second time.

The Seventeenth Epistle shows, that this Pope, under pretense of admitting
inferior Bishops to his Communion, broke in upon the Ancient Rights and Customs
of Metropolitans, freeing their Suffragans from the obedience they owed to
their Superiors by the Canons Ep. 17. Hormisd. Bin page 573. Col. 2. Lab. 1456.
. And a little after, because Dorotheus opposed this usurpation, the Pope
represents him as having forsaken Christ Ep. 22. Hormisd. Bin. page 575. col.
1. Lab. 1459.
; a piece of Cant that is common with every petty Sect, in respect of all that
are not of their party. And indeed the Epistle of Anastasius, which follows
this 22d Epistle declares, that Hormisda was a stubborn and unmerciful man, and
not only slighted the Emperor and injured him; but pretended to command him;
which he says, He will not bear Ep. Anastas. Bin. ibid. Lab. 1460.
; or as Baronius out of the Pontifical has it, he told the Pope He would
Command, and not be Commanded Baron An. 517. n. 48. page 677.
, which was not spoken in fury, but like a Prince; and had all his Successors
kept the Reins so stiff, they had curbed all the Papal usurpations; yea, wholly
prevented them.

The Relation of the Syrian Monks, which we have here in Latin, is corrupted in
the Title, and abused by a silly Translator Bin. page 575. col. 2. Lab. 1461.
. The Title is with great swelling words directed to Hormisda; but the Text
speaks to a whole Synod of Bishops, and says, Rise ye up holy Fathers -- and,
The Flock comes to you true Pastors and Doctors, to whom the Salvation of all
is committed Ib. Bin. 576. and. Lab. 1462.
; yet the Title appropriates all to the Pope single, where the Translator, for
Ecumenical Patriarch (a name which is often given also to the Bishop of
Constantinople,) ignorantly, or by design has universae orbis Terrae
Patriarchae; And he calls the Western Legate Angelum vestrum, your Angel: It Is
probable also, some such Hand has put in, vos estis caput omnium: Ye (not the
Pope alone), are the Head of all; where our Editors marginal Note is, The Pope
is the Head of all. But the boldest Forgery of all is, That Binius and Labbe
make these Monks in the end of their Epistle accurse Acacius Bishop of
Constantinople, who did communicate with the Heretics, which is added by the
Editors. For in Baronius Baron. An. 517. n. 59. page 679. and page 518.
Acacius his name is not once mentioned, neither in his Edition at Antwerp,
1596. nor in that at Venice, 1601. So that we can scarce trust any thing which
comes through such Men's hands.

The Twenty fourth Epistle, which pretends to make John Bishop of Tarragon the
Popes Legate, and speaks of his coming to Italy, and having Papal Constitutions
sent him Ep. 24. Hormisd. Bin. page 57^. col. 2. Lab. 1466.
, not only confirms our Note, that all such kind of Epistles are forged, but is
certainly spurious it self. For in this year (517,) this John presided in the
Council of Gyrone in Spain, where he and his fellow Bishops made Canons, and
take no notice of the Pope, or any Legantine Power: And the Editors differ
about the date of this Epistle. And probably the next Epistle containing the
Constitutions is forged also Ep. 25. Hormisd. Bin. page 579. Lab. 1467.
, being directed to all the Bishops of Spain, who were not then under any one
King nor Primate -- And whereas this Letter speaks of peaceable times; it is
certain these Gothic Arrian Kings, were almost continually at War with France,
and with each other: However the Inventer of these Epistles is not very Modern:
For he makes Christ the Head of the Church, and Bishops to be his Vicars: And
Penitents are here forbid to be chosen Bishops, because they could not decently
absolve others, who had openly confessed their own Sins before the People.
Which shows, the Pope was not Christ's sole Vicar then: And that there was no
Auricular Confession when this was writ.

. 3. Justin being upon Anastasius his death unexpectedly An. Dom. 518.
made Emperor, gives the Pope notice of it, and requires his Prayers; This
Hormisda (if his Letter be genuine) craftily calls, offering up the first
fruits of his Empire to St. Peter Horm. Ep. 27. Bin. page 579. col. 1. Lab.
1470.
: And the Notes add, That it was the ancient use to certify the Pope of the
new elected Emperor, and to request him to confirm and consecrate him. But I
have showed it was a much more ancient Custom, for the Pope to certify the
Emperor of his Election: Only when an Emperor came to the Throne without a good
Title, (which was Justin's case,) it was such an Emperor's interest to gain the
Pope's favor. But as for either Consecration or Confirmation, there is not one
word of it; that is a device out of Baronius Brain, and the Annotator takes it
from him of trust Baron. An. 518. n. 2, 3. page 2. Tom. 7.
; and he was owned Emperor by all, long before this notice.

The Epistle of John Bishop of Constantinople, in the Title calls Hormisda, His
most Holy Brother and Fellow-Minister Ep. to Censt. Bin. page 580. col. 1. Lab.
; and in the Letter he calls him, Most dear Brother in Christ; which Phrases
Epiphanius also his Successor uses in his Epistle to the same Pope Ep. Epiph.
Bin. page 605. col. 2. Lab. 1534.
: And from John's Epistle we learn, that when Old Rome left out the names of
the Patriarchs of Constantinople, in their Dypticks: These put out the Popes
name from their Dypticks, which shows no subjection was owned or expected, and
that the Eastern Church was on even ground with the Pope in those days,
despising his Communion as much as he did theirs.

An Epistle writ to Caesarius Bishop of Arles, this year, is suspicious,
because Baronius had mentioned his Will and Testament ten year before Baron.
An. 508. n. 30. page 589.
: But if he were now alive, we must correct the Title in Binius, where he is
called, The Vicar of the Apostolic See in France: Which words are so manifest
a Forgery that Labbe left them out. But we may suspect the whole, since the
Pope never names his last Embassy before this time received from the Emperor
and Patriarch of Constantinople, when he pretends to give an Account of the
Affairs in the East to this Caesarius.

The Legates Instructions here begin as the former did, viz. When by Gods
Mercy, ye come into the Eastern parts Indic. 2. Bin. page 582. col. 1. Lab.
, etc. and the Legates in their third Suggestion, ascribe their safe Journey
only to Gods Mercy Sug. 3. Bin. page 585. col. 2. Lab. 1485.
. So that probably those words (in the first instructions) -- and the Prayers
of the Apostles, are added by a later hand, when they used so often to pray to
Saints, as to give them a share of the Glory due to God for his Mercy.

The same hand, to countenance the same practice, seems to have corrupted the
Thirty seventh Epistle, where Hormisdu tells Justinian -- He did daily and
humbly beseech the Apostle Peter, that God might give a speedy issue to his
endeavors B. Petrum Ap. -- obsecramus, Leg. -- apud B. Petrum Apostolum. --
obsecramus. Ep. 37. Hormisd. Bin. page 584. Col. 2. Lab. 1483.
: Which borders both on Blasphemy and Nonsense, but probably the true reading
was -- apud B. Petrum -- obsecramus. That the Pope prayed daily at St. Peter's
Church to God, for Justinian's speedy success.

That the Eastern and Western Church were united about this time is true; but I
am apt to believe, that those many particular circumstances, which Baronius and
these Editors have out of a sort of reports of the Popes Legates, Letters and
other Papers, lately found (it seems) in the Vatican, are of later invention.
The Epistle of John Bishop of Constantinople, wherein he is pretended to
subscribe that flattering confession of Faith, formerly said to be subscribed
by the Bishops of Epirus Libel. Johan. Bin. page 586. Col. 1. (...) Lab. 1486.
, is certainly a Forgery, that some Parasite has transcribed as often as any
Eminent person was reconciled to the Pope; and therefore, a little after (as I
noted but now) he ascribes the same Form to the Emperor Justin, three years
after he was dead: There is no proof of this John's subscribing any such Paper,
but only the relation of Dioscorus, one of the Pope's Legates, which is
certainly false, because he says, That at this time (An. 519.) John consented
to raze the names of Phravites, Euphemius, Macedonius and Timotheus out of the
Dypticks, as well as the name of Acacius, upon which Baronius Triumphs most
extremely Baron. An. 519. n. 54. page 32. Tom. 7.
: But without any cause; for if he had not craftily omitted an Epistle of
Justinian's, writ the next year id. An. 520. n. 4. page 55.
, (which is in Binius Ep. Justinian. Bin. page 610. Col. 2. Lab. 1547.
,) it would have appeared that the Eastern Church would not yield to raze out
any more names, but only that of Acacius. But Baronius has later Epistles of
Justinian which expressly say, (a year after this pretended rasing out the names
of Euphemius, etc.) that only Acacius his Name was left out of the Dypticks,
and that the scruple about the other names was not to be meddled with; for the
Eastern Bishops would never yield that point Baron. An. 520. n. 35, 36. page 62.
. And Justin the Emperor says the same to Hormisda Idem 520. n. 56. page 66.
; yea, in the year 521, we find the Emperor still requiring the Pope should
communicate with those who only left out Acacius his name, but kept in the
other Bishops names Id. An. 521. n. 6. page 72.
. All which is sufficient to prove this Story of Dioscorus to be a mere
Fiction: Yet it may be confirmed also by the Chronicle of Victor; who mentions
no Bishops name of Constantinople but Acacius, that was rejected when the
Emperor Justin reconciled the Eastern and Western Bishops Victor. Tuen. Chron.
page 7. Valor. and Just. Coss. An. 521.
: And no Writers of this or the next Age do mention this pretended submission
of John of Constantinople; Marcellinus, Cassiodorus, Euagrius and Paulus
Diaconus are wholly silent in this matter: And if we consider how the Scene is
dressed up with variety of Letters, (lately found out) we shall be tempted to
think this part of the Epistles are forged; yet we may allow what Baronius
says, that this abundance of Letters may make us that read them now, know more
of this case, than they who lived in that Age knew, if they never saw these
Letters Baron. An. 519. n. 27. and page 27.
. For it is probable neither Hormisda, nor his Legates, nor Justin, Justinian,
etc. did ever see these Epistles that now appear under their names, so that we
may very well know more than they did; but the reason is only, because we know
more than is true.

We may discover some marks of Forgery in diverse of these Papers; As that most
of them want the Consuls Names, and are not dated; That Germanus says, he was
received in Procession with Wax Candles and Crosses Baron. An. 519. n. 35. page
29.
; a Custom of a later date; for we have no Crosses in another Procession
described by a Writer of that time Id. An. 522. n. 14. page 83.
. The calling Hormisda in one of the Letters, Archbishop of the Universal
Church Ep. Anastas. Bin. page 589. col. 1. Lab. 1494.
; and the Emperors giving the Popes Legate the Title of His Angel Ib. Lab. 1516
Bin. page 598. col. 1.
; These, with many other things that might be observed, make it probable these
Papers were Invented for a Pattern to the poor Greeks, when the design of
subjecting them to the Latin Church, was on foot in later Ages.

. 4. To proceed: Whereas Justinian in one particular point desires the Opinion
of Hormisda, and complements him so far as to tell him, He will believe that to
be Orthodox, which he shall answer Ep. Justin. ap. Baron. An. 519. n. 100. page
43. Bin. p. 598 col. 2. Lab. 1517.
; Baronius prints this in great Letters, and Binius from this particular
Assertion draws a general Inference in his Margen, viz. That which is defined
by the Pope, is to be received by all for the Catholic Faith. A Consequence so
absurd, that Labbe is ashamed of it and leaves it out, as well he might, since
Justinian did not agree with the Pope in this Question, after he had received
his Answer. And the dissenting Eastern Bishops, at this time reckoned Hormisda
to be a Nestorian Sug. Germ. Bin. page 597. col. 2. Lab. 1514.
, if we can credit any of these Papers. So that doubtless Justinian never
thought a Pope Infallible.

In another Epistle ascribed to John of Constantinople, not so very truckling
as the former, that Bishop is made to say, by the help of the Intercession of
the Holy and Consubstantial Trinity, and of the glorious and true Mother of God
Relat. Joh. Constant. Bin. page 600. col. 2. Lab. 1521.
. A Phrase too absurd for any Bishop to use: For with whom should the Trinity
intercede, or what can be more ridiculous than equalling the Virgins
Intercession to the Trinity, unless it be the making the Trinity pray to it
self? Labbe boldly attempts to mend this Sentence, but without Authority; and
after all, its evidently writ by a later Hand.

If the next relation of Germanus be true, it appears, No cause of a Bishop of
the East could be tried at Rome, without the consent of the Emperor, who
expressly forbids the trying the Cause of Dorotheus at Rome, though the Pope
earnestly desired it might be judged there Sug. G^rm. Bin. page 600. col. 2.
Lab. 1522.
, as Baronius also confesses Baron. An. 519. n. 142. page 52.
.

By the relation from the Synod at Constantinople it appears, that they call
their new elected Patriarch Epiphanius, The Popes own Brother, and fellow
Minister; and count their joint endeavors, to be one Brothers helping another
Relat Synod. Constable. Bin. page 601. col. 2. Lab. 1524.
. Binius strives to blunder this by printing it, Germanum vestrum, as if it
were the proper name of the Popes Legate. But Labbe honestly restores the true
reading germanum vestrum.

The Epistle next to this bears the name of Justinianus Augustus; yet is dated
Anno 520 Epist. Justin. Bin. page 602. c. 1. Lab. 1526.
, which is a gross mistake; for he was not styled Augustus till near seven year
after, as Baronius owns Anno 527. Yea, after this Justinian is styled Vir
illustris Bin. page 606. Lab. 1536.
; and for certain was not Emperor when this Letter is said to be writ.

The Notes after Hormisda's 70th Epistle, do bitterly inveigh against Johannes
Maxentius, and the Scythian Monks, as notorious Liars, and Eutychian Heretics;
and Labbe is more severe in his Censure than Binius or Baronius Ep. 70. Horm.
Bin. page 605. col. 1. Lab. 1532. Baron. An. 519. n. 101. page 43.
. But they are all mistaken; For this Maxentius was entirely Orthodox, and
defended the Council of Chalcedon against the Eutychians, as is fully proved by
two learned and judicious Writers, Bishop Usher and Forbesius Usher. Antiq.
Britan. cap. 14. page 256. Forbes. Instruct. Theolog. lib. 3. cap 21.
. And we may be sure Baronius first invented this false accusation, (thinking
it impossible any Man but a Heretic could write against the Pope), to be
revenged on Maxentius for so bold a Fact. But in the Age before, Cochlaeus a
Papist or Catholic (as Baronius calls him) did honestly put out Maxentius his
Works, as an Orthodox Writer, though Maxentius do write against the Epistle
under Hormisda's Name, to Possessor an African Bishop; and proves whoever was
the Author of that Epistle, was a Liar and an Heretic, as were also Possessor
and Dioscorus, one of the Popes Legates; and he further justifies himself, and
the Scythian Monks, blaming the Pope for banishing them from Rome: Saying
amongst other thing, If the Bishop of Rome should prohibit us to confess
Christ, the Son, to be one of the Holy and undivided Trinity, the Church would
never yield to him, nor respect him as an Orthodox Bishop, but utterly Accurse
him as an Heretic Oper. Max. edit. Cochlaei, fol. 31.
. So that no body then believed the Pope to be Infallible; and for Hormisda,
Maxentius suspects him to be a favourer of Pelagianism. The Emperor Justin
speaking of the Church of Jerusalem, says, that all men show [tantum favorem,
the Editors read tamen, only to blunder the Period] so much favor to it, as to
the Mother of the Christian Name, that none dare separate from it Epist.
Justin. Bin page 608. col. 2. Lab. 1542.
. Had this been said of Rome, how would the Parasites have Triumphed? Yet
wanting real Encomiums, in the next Paper they steal one; and where the Eastern
Clergy speak of their own Churches which had not swerved from the Faith
delivered to them; The Editors apply this to Rome, and say in the Margen Bin.
p. 609. col. 1. Lab. 1543.
, The Roman Church never deviated from right Doctrine: But the Reader will find
there is no mention of the Roman Church in that place; only S. Peter, who
founded that of Antioch, is pointed at a little before.

Before Hormisaa's 77th Epistle there is one of Justinian, to Hormisda; wherein
he declares, that after the Controversy was settled ultra non patiemur (they
blunder it by reading nos patiemur) He will not suffer any one under that
Government to stir any more in it Ep. Justin. Bin. page 611. col. 1. Lab. 1547.
: Which is a brisk Order to the Pope, in a cause of Religion. For which reason,
and because it shows, that he and the Greeks would not yield to leave out any
Name, but that of Acacius, Baronius omits it, and only prints the answer to it
Baron. An. 520. n. 4. p. 55. Tom. vii.
: For this was writ the year after the pretended consent of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, to raze out Euthymius, and Macedonius, with other Names out of
the Dypticks.

We cannot leave this Pope without some remarks on his carriage in answer to
the Question propounded to him by Justinian, viz. Whether it were Orthodox to
say (as the Scythian Monks did) one of the Trinity was crucified for us?
Dioscorus the Popes Legate represented this Sentence to Hormisda, as Heretical,
and that to allow it would open a gap to many Heresies Baron. An. 519. n. 82,
83. page 39.
. The Pope first determined to refer the controversy to the Bishop, of
Constantinople, as appears by another relation of Dioscorus Bin. p. 599. col. 2.
; though Baronius would conceal this, by omitting the beginning of this Paper
Baron. An. 519. n. 124. page 48.
: But probably Dioscorus durst not trust this Question with the Patriarch of
Constantinople. So that Hormisda not yet declaring himself, Justinian writ to
him, that he and the Eastern Church thought this Sentence Orthodox, and
required his consent to their Faith Id. An. 520 n. 37. page 62.
, which he further shows in another Epistle complaining of the Popes delays Ep.
Justin. Bin. page 610. Col. 2.
. At last, after a long time Hormisda writes a shuffling Letter to the Emperor,
wherein Baronius says he utterly exploded this Sentence Baron. An. 521. n. 26,
27. page 77.
: Yea, Baronius owns afterward, that this Pope would have all Catholics abhor
these words; One of the Trinity suffered in the Flesh Baron. An. 533. n. 4.
page 179.
. But this very Sentence afterward appeared to be True and Orthodox, and they
who condemned it were declared Heretics. Yea, the Scythian Monks appealed from
this Pope to that most learned and orthodox Father Fulgentius, who declared
they were in the right, and that he believed as they did Vid. opera Fulg ep. ad
Monach. col. 272.
. And finally, one of the succeeding Popes joined with Justinian and the
Orthodox Christians to confirm this Sentence: So that this Pope and his Legate
were both on the Heretical side, which spoils the Infallibility.

. 5. The Councils abroad in this Popes times take An. Dom. 514.
no notice of him, yet bear the Title of being held under him: The first,
(Binius says) was at Rhemes, and he cites for this Flodoardus Cone. Rhem. Bin
page 614. col 2. Lab. 1572.
. But Labbe calls this, a Synod at an uncertain place, and gives us Binius his
Notes; but cites the words of Flodoardus; by which it appears that Rhemigius
his being made the Popes Legate, and calling this Synod there by a Legantine
power, are Fictions of Baronius and Binius, taken out of the first forged
Epistle of Hormisda, and falsely charged upon Flodoardus, who says no such
thing: And Sirmondus with P. de Marca say, Rhemigius was not the Popes Legate:
Which manifestly appears from two Epistles of his, writ ten year after this
feigned delegation Ep. Rhem. Lab. col. 1608. An. 524.
, concerning an Invasion made upon his jurisdiction, wherein he never urges any
sort of power as Legate, but pleads his original right as a Metropolitan: And
from Baronius and his Plagiary citing Flodoardus at large for this, compared
with the words of that Author in Labbe; the Reader may learn, these Writers are
never to be trusted in any Quotation relating to the Pope, till the Authors be
searched.

The Council of Tarragon was not under Hormisda, An. Dom. 516.
though it were in his time Council. Tarrac. Bin. page 615. Lab 1562.
; The Bishops there acting independently on Rome, whose Popes Decrees of
dividing the Church Revenues into four parts, they contradict, and divide it
only into three Not. Bin. page 617. Lab. 1566.
in the eighth Canon: And in the eleventh, they order concerning the Discipline
of Monks, the Gallican Canons shall above all others be observed.

Binius misplaces the Council of Pau, Anno Dom. 509. An Dom. 51^.
But Labbe sets it in this year rightly; it was called (not by the Pope, but)
by Sigismund King of Burgundy, as all Provincial and National Synods in that
age were; the famous Alcimus Avitus was President of it, and the Pope had no
hand in it; for which reason these lesser Councils are more sincere than any,
where Rome or the Pope is named, for there the Forgers are always tempted to
leave, add, or alter something.

The same year was a Council held at Gyrone in Spain, not under the Pope, but
under John of Tarragon; and though by Hormisda's forged Epistles, he be
pretended to have been the Pope's Legate See these Notes on Ep. 24. Horm.
, and that he received Constitutions from Rome, it is plain this Council
proceeds upon its own Authority Council. Gerund. Bin. page 618, etc. Lab. 1567.
An. Dom. 518.
, and makes its own Rules; which shows these Fictions are of a later date.

The Council of Constantinople is falsely titled under Hormisda; the Union was
not yet made, and Hormisda sent not his Legates till next year, so that it is
very trifling for the Editors to say, it was partly reprobated at Rome Council.
Constable. Bin. page 620. col. 1. Lab. 1586.
, because this Synod consisted only of Eastern Bishops, called by Justin the
Emperor; and their own Patriarch John of Constantinople presided, whom they
call, Most Holy and Blessed Father of Fathers, Archbishop and Ecumenical
Patriarch Bin. p. 725. Col. 2. Lab. Tom. 5. p. 162.
, and of him and Justin, only do they desire their Acts to be confirmed. And
not only they, but two Eastern Synods also at Jerusalem and Tire ratified these
Decrees, which gave them a sufficient Authority; and it is but a Roman Fiction,
that these Acts were revoked upon the reconciling of the Eastern and Westrn
Churches.

. 6. John the first succeeded Hormisda, probably by An Dom. 523.
the interest of Theodoric the Arrian Gothic King, for he commanded him to go
as his Ambassador to the Eastern Emperor Justin, to require him not to
persecute the Arrians, but restore to them their Churches which he had taken
away, Threatening he would use the Catholics of Italy severely, if this were
not granted Vit. Johan. Bin. page 621. Col. 2. Lab. 1600.
. The Pontifical softens this with a gentle phrase, Rogans misit -- as if
Theodoric entreated the Pope to go on this ungrateful Errant; but the Notes
more truly affirm, he forced him to take this Office Not. Bin. 622. Lab. 1602.
. However, the Pope durst not disobey that King, wherefore he went to
Constantinople, and did deliver this request to Justin, so as to prevall for
liberty to the Arrians in the East, as all Authors (before Baronius) affirm
Anastasius ut sup. Platina page 71. Naucler. Chron. page 702 Paul. Diaconus l.
17. page 166, and 167.
: But the Cardinal calls this a base blot of the Popes prevarication; and
therefore he with the Notes give Anastasius the lie, and forsake him in this
part of John's Story whom in all the rest they follow. For Baronius will not
allow, that a Pope should do so vile a thing, as to solicit for Liberty of
Conscience for Arrian Heretics; wherefore he pretends he encouraged Justin to
go on in punishing them: But they cannot prove this, except by a forged Epistle
writ in this Popes name, and a mistaken passage out of Gregory of Tours, who
knew not the true Story, but speaks of John's Embassy to Theodoric, instead of
Justin. One Argument only Baronius urges, which is, Why Theodoric should
imprison this Pope at his return, and keep him prisoner till he dyed in that
woeful confinement, if he had faithfully discharged his Embassy Baron. An. 525.
n. 8. page 106, and 107.
. I answer from Paulus Diaconus, That Theodoric was moved to anger, because
Justin the Catholic Emperor had received him so honorably Pet. Diacon. l. 17.
page 167.
; and also as Baronius himself says, This Gothic King suspected the Romans
were then laying Plots against him, and confederating with Justin The Emperor.
So that doubtless he thought the Pope was in this design, and so suffered him
to dye in Prison: Now all this proves, that these Gothic Kings were absolute
Lords over the Bishops of Rome; and it looks like a Judgment on the Roman See,
that whereas they had been so bitter against Acacius and other Orthodox Bishops
of Constantinople, for only conversing with supposed Heretics, one of their
own Popes was forced to plead that the worst of all Heretics, the Arrians,
might have the public exercise of their Religion allowed by Law. I take no
notice of the Miracles ascribed to this Pope, because the fabulous Gregorian
Dialogues are the only Evidence for them.

The Roman Mint has Coined two Epistles for this Pope, of which Labbe says,
many things prove that they are both forged Ep(...) Johan. Bin. page 623. col.
1. Lab. 1603.
. The first is patched up out of the fragments of many other Popes Letters; and
that passage of the Sheeps reproving their Pastor, if he Err in the Faith, is
originally stolen out of a feigned Epistle under Pope Fabian's name. Baronius
and Binius both confess a false date, viz. Olybrius and Maximus being Consuls,
who were never in office together; and if we read Id. Junij Maximo Consule,
John was not made Pope till two Months after, nor will Olybrio Consule, mend
the matter with Id. Junij, because this Pope dyed the 27th of May in that year:
However, though they cannot reconcile these Errors, the Notes and Baronius
would have this Forgery pass for genuine, to clear the Pope from serving the
Arrian interest Baron. An. 526. n. 3. page 111.
. The second Epistle is also Fictitious, being a Rhapsody out of Leo's Epistles
and some places of Scripture Ep 2. Johan Bin. page 526. col. 2. Lab. 1605.
, and dated after this Pope was dead: So that we must reject them both
together, with the Legend of his Consecrating Arrian Churches for the Orthodox,
in defiance to King Theodoric, which Baronius and Binius would have us believe.

The Council of Lerida in Spain, was not as Binius An. Dom. 524.
says, under John, but under Sergius Bishop of Tarragon who presided in it,
and in the 16 Canon, is called the Bishop of the first See; a Title common to
all Primates of old, but lately engrossed by the Pope Council. Ilerd. Bin page
625. col. 1. Lab. 1610.
. In the Fragments of this Council, there is a method of canonically purging
Clerks accused of Crimes; but it cannot belong to this Council (as Labbe owns,)
because it mentions Leo the Third and Charlemaign, who lived near 300 year
after this Synod was held Lab. in Marg col. 1615.
. In the same year was another Spanish Council at Valencia, in Pope John's
time, but he is not once named in it, and the Canons were made by the Bishops
of the Province Cincil. Valent. Bin. page 629. Lab. 1617.
: Wherefore, Binius falsely Titles it under Pope John.

The same year was held the Council of Arles, which Binius miscalls the third,
but was truly the fourth Council there. This Synod was placed wrong formerly
An. 453, when one Opilio was Consul with Vincomalus; but another Opilio was
Consul with Rusticus this year An. 524, and Caesarius his Subscription to it
shows, this is the true date of it Council. Arel. 4. Bin. page 631. col. 2. Lab.
1622, etc.
. Binius is here twice mistaken. First, In his old Title of sub Johanne.
Secondly, In printing the Epistle of Faustus in this place, as if this Council
of Arles were that which Faustus pretended confirmed his Pelagian Errors: But
Labbe says, Binius is mistaken, and it is certain he was quite out.

In Labbe, we have here a singular Example of the modesty of Fulgentius, who
was very justly chosen President of an African Synod: But perceiving a certain
Bishop took this ill, in the next Council he renounced the Seat and Dignity,
procuring that Bishop to sit before him, resolving not to defend the Primacy he
deserved (says the Author,) where it would make a breach of Charity Lab. 1628.
Baron. An. 523. n. 32. page 103.
. And oh how happy had Christendom been, if the Popes had followed this
Pattern! Who at this time had renounced the Communion of more than half the
Christian World; chiefly for not submitting to their Primacy, and in every Age
since, have Qarrelled with all that would not allow them that claim.

The Council of Carthage under Boniface Bishop there, Styles him Bishop of the
first See Lab. Col. 1629.
: It never names the Pope, and makes it very clear, that this Primate did order
all things in that Province, without any dependence on Rome.

. 7. Foelix the Fourth was named by King Theodoric, An. Dom. 526.
who being now Lord of Rome, did of right propose him to the Clergy as a
Candidate for the Papacy, void by John's death Vit. Foel. 4. Bin. p. 634 col. 2.
Lab. 1649.
. The Notes pretend this was an usurpation, and Baronius for this Rails
bitterly at Theodoric; calling it an arrogant Fact, and giving him the Title of
a cruel Barbarian, a dreadful Tyrant and impious Arrian, adding that this was
the cause of Gods destroying him Baron. An. 526. n. 22 and 25. page 116, 117.
. But for all this rage, this is no more than what all Princes then did in
their own Dominions: And these Editors a little before printed an Epistle
wherein it is said, That Epiphanius was made Bishop of Constantinople by the
Election of Justin and the Empress, with the consent of the Nobles, Priests and
People Relat. Ep. Bin. page 605. col. 2. Lab. 1537.
: And Hormisda in the 76th Epistle says he was rightly elected: Which shows,
that the Eastern Emperors did not learn this of the Gothic Kings; but these
learned of the Emperors to name the Bishops of their chief Cities Baron. ut
sup. page 116.
. And Theodoric ever exercised this Right, as the case of Symmachus showed us
before: Wherefore that Law of Ordoacer, that the Pope should be elected by the
Princes consent, remained still in force; and Symmachus his pretended Repeal of
it is either forged, or else these Kings despised all Papal Councils which
abridged them of their right.

In the Notes on this Popes Life, we have a fabulous Vision of some doting
Hermit, who fancied he saw Theodoric's Soul thrown into the Vulcanian Kettles
Not. in vitam Foelic. Bin. page 634, 635. Lab. 1650.
. This out of Gregory's Dialogues is Foundation enough for them to Triumph in
his Damnation, who resolve to find out some Vision or Dream to persuade easy
Readers, that all Princes who injured any Pope were sent to Eternal Flames:
Again, the Notes pretend, that Justinian's Ecclesiastical Laws were made by the
Bishops of Constantinople, and put out in that Emperors name: But why might not
Justinian make his own Laws about Church matters, as Constantine and all his
Successors to this time had done? No doubt he and they used in such cases to
advise with their own Bishops: But these Parasites of Rome are angry, that the
Pope is not the sole Lawmakers in Causes Ecclesiastical; now he was not so much
as consulted in these Laws, being then the Subject of another Prince: And what
they object of Justinian's speaking honorably of Zeno and Anastasius his
Predecessors (Enemies to Rome) confirms me in the Opinion, that Justinian in
composing these Laws took no advice from St. Peter's Chair.

We may justly suspect most of these Papal Epistles, (out of which the
Canonists for some Ages fetched those Rules, by which they oppressed the
Christian World,) because if a Pope neither did nor writ any thing remarkable,
the Forgers invented Business and Letters for him as they have done for Pope
John and this Foelix; whose two first Epistles Labbe declares to be spurious
Ep. 1. Foel. Bin. page 635. col. 1. Lab. 1650. Et Ep. 2. Bin. page 673. col. 1.
Lab. 1656.
, and shows the former is made up out of the Forgeries in Pope Eleutherius
name, as also out of the Epistles of Leo, and Gregory who was yet unborn; the
latter steals the beginning from an Epistle of Pope Innocent's, and the rest is
verbatim taken out of a spurious Epistle ascribed to Pope Dionysius Vid. Bin.
Tom. 1. page 158.
: And the date of this also is after Foelix his death. But Binius boldly says
they are genuine; and Baronius would persuade us, the name of Foelix was put
for Boniface, (which is an unlikely change) Baron. An. 530. n. 1. page 153.
. Now if you ask why they vindicate such Trash; I must Note, it is for the sake
of one dear Sentence, viz. That the Roman Church in one of them is twice called
the Head; A phrase which is enough to make any Coin current at Rome.

The Third Epistle was dated 15 year before Foelix was Pope Ep. 3. Foelix. Bin.
page 637. col. 2. Lab. 1657.
, till Sirmondus lately mended the Consuls name; it is said to be written to
Caesarius Bishop of Arles, who is here styled not the Son, but the Brother of
the Pope: But the matter of it is such mean stuff, that the true Author will
have no credit by it, nor is it material whether it be genuine or no: And by
the way it is somewhat odd, that these forged or trifling Epistles, should give
Du-Pin ground for putting these two Popes into his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical
Writers Du-Pin Hist. Cent. 6. page 29.
.

Labbe adds here a Form of Anathematizing the Manichaean Heresy, wherein St.
Augustin's Opinion guides the Affair Lab. col. 1658.
. The Pope is not concerned in reconciling Heretics; for the Authority of Rome
was not so considerable in those days, as these Men pretend.

It Is true, the Council of Orange owns they had An. Dom. 529.
some Capitulars sent from Rome against the Pelagians Council Araus. 2. Bin.
page 638. col. 1. Lab. 1666.
. But Labbe's Notes say, they were Sentences collected out of the Fathers,
especially St. Augustine, and agreeable to holy Scripture Lab. not. col. 1676.
. Wherefore Binius falsely brags, that this Controversy was determined by the
Popes Authority; it was determined by St. Augustin's Authority, whose Doctrine
Pope John the second says, the Roman Church then kept and followed Ep. 3.
Joan. 2. Bin. page 655. col. 1. Lab. 1751.
. Rome only furnished the Records toward it; and a Clerk of the Rolls may as
well be called the Determiner and Judge of a Suit where he produces any old
writing, as the Pope made Arbiter in this Case: And it was the Gallican Synods
Decree, which made these Definitions to be of Force in France. Sirmondus indeed
pretends, Pope Boniface confirmed this Council Lab. col. 1673.
; but acknowledges the confirmation came some time after, though the modern
Parasites had falsely placed this Papal confirmation before the Council: But if
we enquire more strictly, it will appear this second Epistle of Boniface the
Second, (which is the confirmation) is Forged; for it not only bears date the
year after the Council, but (as Sirmondus owns Not. Sirmond. Lab. col. 1689.
,) it is dated seven Months before Boniface was Pope: So that unless you will
allow him to alter Dates at his pleasure, this Pope did not confirm this Synod
at all: Only any thing must be genuine with these Men, which gives countenance
to the Papal usurpations.

The Notes upon this Council cite a Testimony out of Gennadius, that Pope
Foelix approved a Book writ by Caesarius against the Pelagians Not. ap. Bin.
page 641. col. 1. Lab. 1676.
: Which Testimony is not in my Edition of Gennadius; and if that Author have
writ any such thing, he must mean Foelix the Third, because he writ An. 492,
which is above 30 year before this Foelix was Pope. But when such learned Men
as Prosper and Caesarius writ against an Heresy, the Popes Celestine and
Foelix gladly subscribed them, not to give the Books any greater Authority, but
to prove themselves Orthodox, and in Communion with men so famous for defending
the Catholic Faith.

The Second or Third Council of Vaison, was falsely An. Dom. 529.
placed by Binius under Pope John the second, who was not Pope till two years
after Council. Vas. 3. Bin. page 641. Lab. 1679.
; But Sirmondus rightly places it in this year in Foelix his time. In the first
Canon it would have appeared plainly, that the Readers then had Wives allowed,
if the true reading had stood, which must be Lectores -- suas uxores habentes
-- recipiant. But the Forgers have altered it in Binius thus, -- sive uxores
habuerint; in Labbe thus, sine uxore, etc. But the corrupters in both Editions
have left this passage so abused, that it is neither Grammar nor Sense. The
fourth Canon is double in Binius; Labbe has made it but one; it orders That
the Popes name shall be recited in the Gallican Offices. Now to make this Canon
seem more ancient, the Parasites had hoisted up this Council 200 year, even as
high as Pope Julius, where Binius shamelesly prints it: But Sirmondus proves
there could be no such French Council at that time: And considering the Forgers
have been so busy with this Canon, I judge it very probable, that it was made
by a Council much later than this Age, only it is clapped in here very abruptly,
to support an earlier Grandeur than the Popes at the time enjoyed; I am sure it
seems unlikely, the Gallican Church should then pay this great respect to Rome.

. 8. Pope Boniface the Second succeeded Foelix, but An. Dom. 530.
not by a clear Election, for another party chose Dioscorus who had been Legate
to Horsmida Vit. Bonif. 2. Bin. page 643. col. 2. Lab. 1682.
; but he was either poisoned or died naturally, within a Month, and so Boniface
kept the Chair: His Malice however died not with his Rival: For he called a
Synod, and got him anathematized after his Death for Simony: Which crime Pope
Agapetus a little after proved to be false, and the Sentence extorted from the
Clergy by Boniface' s malicious craft; So that the Sentence was revoked, and
Dioscorus with his party absolved Vita Agapet. Bin. page 664. col. 1. Lab. 1785.
. Another Evidence of this Popes rashness was a Decree made also in this Synod,
That the Pope should name his Successor, which was not only against the Canons,
(which this Pope and his Council here had violated,) but against an express Law
of the Gothic Princes; and therefore when this fallible Pope saw his Error, a
little after he called another Synod and revoked this Decree, confessing
himself, as Anastasius says, Guilty of Treason, in making the former Order; by
which we may see, in that Age it was Treason for the Pope in Council to Repeal
a Royal Law. Wherefore I wonder that Baronius should call that the wresting a
presumtuous and usurped power out of the Goths hands Baron. An. 531. page 165.
n. 1, 2.
, which his poor Master owned to be Treason. In short this Pope is only famous
for his Errors and evil Deeds.

But to make him look great, the Forgers have invented an Epistle for him,
containing many vaunts of the Roman Churches greatness, and a pretended
submission of the Church of Carthage, after a very long separation from Rome,
even from the time of Aurelius Ep. 1. Bonif. 2. Bin. page 644. col. 1. Lab.
1683.
. Now though this came out of their own Shop, it is so gross an untruth in the
main, That Binius and all their later Writers reject it: But though I think the
Epistle certainly Spurious, and this submission forged; yet it is true, the
African Churches (even while they did own the Roman for an Orthodox Church,)
had for a long time denied that usurped jurisdiction of Appeals from thence to
Rome, to which some Popes pretended, which had made them stand at a distance
from the Sea of Rome: The Notes on this Epistle have a fallacious Argument
however, to prove the African Church could not so long remain divided from the
Roman; because if so, they could have no true Martyrs all that time, since the
Fathers agree, That Crown is only due to those who suffer in the Catholic
Church Not. in Ep. 1. Bin. page 645. Col. 1. Lab. 1686.
. I reply, this may be very true; and yet since no Father ever said that the
particular Roman Church is the Catholic Church, a Christian may dye a true
Martyr if he die in the Communion of the Catholic Church, though he hold no
Communion with the Roman Church, which was the case at this time, or lately, of
many Eastern Churches.

Another Forgery out of the same Mint treads on the heels of this, pretending
to be a Copy of the Emperor Justin, and Justinian's submission to this Pope;
wherein they are made to own the Supremacy of Rome to the highest pitch, and to
Curse all their Predecessors and Successors, who did not maintain that Churches
Privileges Exemplar prec. Bin. ibid. Lab. ibid. Baron. An. 530. n. 6. page 154.
. But the cheat is so apparent, the matter so improbable and ridiculous, and
the date so absurd, that Baronius and both the Editors reject it; So that I
shall only note, that a true Doctrine could not need so many Forgeries to
support it, and the interest they serve shows who employed these Forgers.

We have spoken before of Boniface's two Roman Councils, one of them revoking
what the other decreed: The third is only in Labbe, being a glorious Pageant,
dressed up by the suspicious hand of a late Library Keeper to the Pope. But it
amounts to no more than the introducing a poor Greek Bishop or two, to enquire
what was said in the Roman Records, and in the Popes Letters of the Authority
of that Church Council. Romans 3. Bonif. Lab. 1691.
. So that the Pope and his Council were Judges and Witnesses in their own
Cause, and therefore their Evidence is of no great Credit: And it is very
ominous, that this Synod is dated in December, that is, two Months after
Boniface's death, who is said to have been present at all its Sessions Not.
Luc. Holstein. Lab. 1723.
. To cover which evident mark of Forgery, Holstenius gives Baronius and all
other Writers the Lie, about the time of Boniface's dying, and keeps him alive
some time longer only to give color to this newfound Synod.

The Council of Toledo might be in Boniface's time, but not under him: For the
King of Spain, (whom the An. Dom. 531.
Bishops here call their Lord) called it, and it was held sub Mantano (says
Baronius) Baron. An. 531. n. 12. page 167.
, under Montanus the Metropolitan, to whom the Council says, Custom had given
that Authority Council. Tol. 2. Bin. page 646 Lab. 1734.
: Wherefore he condemns Heretics, and exercises all sorts of jurisdiction
belonging to a Primate, without taking any notice of the Pope, or of any
delegated Power from him. So that probably all those Epistles which make
Legates in Spain about this time, are forged.

. 9. John the second of that Name succeeded Boniface, An. Dom. 532.
but Anastasius and Baronius cannot agree about the Date of his Election or his
Death; and Holstenius differs from both; an Argument that this Pope made no
great Figure Vit. Joan. 2. Bin. page 650. Col. Lab. 1741.
: However, right or wrong we have diverse of his Epistles.

The first to Valerius (says Labbe) appears by many things to be spurious; it
is stolen out of the Epistles of Leo and Ithacius, and dated with wrong
Consuls Ep. Joh. 2. Bin. 651. Col. 1 Lab. 1741.
. And I must add, Scripture is shamefully perverted by the Writer of this
Epistle; For he would prove that Christ was not created as to his Deity, but
only as to his Humanity, by Ephesians. iv. 24. and Coloss. iii. 10. where St. Paul
speaks of putting on the New Man, which after God is created in Righteousness
and true Holiness, -- and is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him that
created him: Had a Pope writ this, I would have affirmed he was no Infallible
Interpreter.

The next is an Epistle of Justinian to this Pope, wherein the Emperor is
pretended to declare his Faith was conformable in all things to the Roman
Church; and made to say, he had subjected and united all the Churches of the
East to the Pope, who is the Head of all the Holy Churches -- with much more
stuff of this kind Ep. Justin. ad Joan. 2. Bin. page 651. Col. 2. Lab. 1742.
. This Letter is rejected by the learned Hottoman, and many other very great
Lawyers, who Baronius calls a company of Heretics and Petty Foggers Baron. An.
534. n. 15. page 197.
; But confutes their Arguments with false Reasoning and Forgeries, as I shall
show when I come to note his Errors: I shall now confine my self to prove the
greatest part of this Epistle to be spurious: For who can imagine Justinian (who
vindicated the Authority of his Patriarch at Constantinople as equal with Rome,
and by an Authentic Law declares, that the Church of Constantinople is the
Head of all other Churches Justin. Cod. lib. 1. tit. 2. de Sacros. Eccles. Lab.
24.] page 10.
: Yea, in the genuine part of this Epistle, calls his Patriarch the Pope's
Brother) That he, I say, should here profess he had subjected all the Eastern
Churches to Rome? And how should he (that differed from Pope Hormisda in his
decision of the Question, whether one Person of the Trinity suffered for us;
and made Pope John now yield to his Opinion, and condemn his Predecessors
notion) declare he submitted his Faith in all things to the Pope? But we need
no conjectures, for if the Reader look a little further among the Epistles of
Agapetus Inter. Ep. Agap. Bin. page 666. Col. 2. Lab. 1789.
, he will see one of the boklest Impostures that ever was; For there Justinian
himself recites verbatim, the Epistle which he had writ to Pope- John, and
whatever is more in this Letter set out among John's Epistles, than there is in
that which is owned by the Emperor, is an impudent Forgery, added by some false
Corrupter to serve the Roman Supremacy. Now by comparing these two Epistles, it
appears, the beginning and end of both are the same, and may be genuine; but in
neither part is there one word of this subjection, or the universal Supremacy:
And all that wretched Jargon comes in where it is corrupted, viz. From Ideoque
omnes Sacerdotes universi orientalis tractus, and subjicere -- till you come to
these words -- Petimus ergo vestrum paternum --: Which when the Reader has
well noted, he will admire, that those who had the cunning to corrupt a Princes
Letter, by adding twice as much to it as he writ, should be so silly to print
the true Letter, within a few Pages: But doubtless God infatuates such
Corrupters, and the Devil owes a shame to Liars.

The next Epistle from the Gothic King Athalaric, was probably writ soon after
John's Election, since it mentions the Romans coming to that Prince, to beg
leave to choose a Pope; and both Athalario and the Senate made Laws to prevent
Simony in the Election of the Pope, as well as other Bishops: And which
(Baronius says,) was more Ignominious, This Edict was Engraven on a Marble
Table, and hung up before the Court of St. Peter's for all to see it Baron. An.
533. n. 39. page 188.
. But to me it seems more Ignominious, that the Letter shows some of the late
Candidates for the Papacy had sacrilegiously sold the holy Vessels to buy
Voices Ep. Atha. Bin. page 653. Col. 2. Lab. 1478.
: These no doubt were like to make hopeful Heads of the Universal Church.
Baronius is angry at this Letter and Edict, and I suppose places it falsely
after the forged Epistle of Justinian had aggrandized this Pope; but do what he
can, the Kings reckoning him among other Patriarchs, and making Laws for Papal
Elections, and his giving him no huffing Titles, do clearly demonstrate that
Popes then were not so great as our Annalist would make them seem; and I wonder
with what face he can say, This Law was not against the Clergy but the Laymen,
When the Law it self, and the occasion of it confutes him.

The Third Epistle may be genuine, wherein he does well to say, that according
to the Decrees of his Predecessors, the Roman Church ever kept and followed the
Doctrine of St. Augustine Epist. 3. Johan. 2. Bin. page 655. Col. 2. Lab. 1752.
; and if they had never followed any other Guide, there would not have been so
many false Doctrins brought in to that Church: However, the great impertinence
of diverse Scriptures here cited shows this Pope to be no great Divine, and one
of his proofs I doubt is forged; for I cannot, in Exodus xxiv. or any other
place find these words, You shall see your life hanging on a Tree: Now to feign
such a Prophecy must be a horrid Sin, being literally adding to Gods word
Revel. xx(...) 18.
, to which a grievous Curse is due.

The Epistle from Reparatus and his African Council to this Pope, is more
likely to be true, because there is nothing of his Universal Supremacy in it:
They call him Holy Brother and Fellow-Priest, nor do they expect Laws, but
desire advice from him: Yea, they require him to exclude from his Communion
such of the African Clergy, as came from them to Rome without leave Ep. Repar.
Bin. page 656. Col. 2. Lab. 1755.
; which shows the African Church still opposed Appeals to the Pope.

The First Council under this Pope was called at Rome, wherein He decreed
according to Justinian's desire, That it might Orthodoxly be said, One of the
Trinity was crucified for us in the Flesh Council. Romans sub Joh. 2. Bin. page
657. Col. 1. Lab. 1761.
. Now this Decree puts Baronius and Binius to stretch their Wits to save the
Infallibility: For Pope Hormisda had before judicially determined the quite
contrary in a cause of Faith, viz. That it could not be Orthodoxly said so: So
that these Parasites are to prove both parts of a contradiction true; and that
two Popes who defined directly contrary to one another, were both in the right:
Now here they shufflle and palliate this matter, calling Pope John's
disannulling Hormisda's Decree, to be only a declaring his Opinion, how far
this Sentence may, and how far it may not be held Baron. An. 533. n. 26. page
185. and notis Binij.
. But before, Baronius compares this Sentence with the Heretical Addition to
the Trisagion, and tells us, the Popes Legates (in Hormisda' s time) thought it
was utterly to be rejected: And that the Eutychians were the Authors of it;
yea, he magnifies Hormisda for condemning it Baron. An. 519. n. 108. page 45.
and n. 110. ibid. and n. 104. page 44.
. Yet Pope John says, it is an Orthodox Sentence, though still diverse Monks at
Rome did not believe him nor receive it: But took Hormisda to have been in the
right, and so far questioned John's Infallibility, that as (Liberatus notos,)
They forsook his Communion Ap. Baron. An. 533. n. 3. page 179.
; and for my part I cannot see, but one of these Popes must necessarily be an
Heretic.

In this year they place a genuine Record of a conscience An. Dom. 533.
at Constantinople, between the Catholic and Severian Heretics (o). But
Binius Notes own, this Conference ((...)) Collat. Constable. Bin. page 657. Col. 2.
Lab. 1673.
was held before Justinian writ to Pope John for his Opinion; and therefore it
should have been placed before that Popes Roman Council, and is fraudulently
set after, to make it seem as if the East had followed Rome in this Decision.
To this Conference the Eastern Bishops were summoned by the Emperor and their
own chief Patriarch: And we may here observe, First, That Hypatius Bishop of
Ephesus was Prolocutor, and is compared to St. Peter the Apostle Bin. page 658.
Lab. 1764.
. Secondly, When they speak of the Opinions of the Fathers, cited by Cyril in
the Council at Ephesus against Nesterius, they reckon two Popes, Foelix and
Julius, promiscuously with the rest, giving them no precedence, no mark of
special privilege Bin. page 659. Lab. 1766.
. Thirdly, They reject diverse Epistles, that bore the names of Orthodox
Fathers, pretended to be kept among the Records at Alexandria, as forged and
corrupted by their Heretical Bishops; and say, they must be excused from
receiving their Enemies for Evidence Bin. ibid. Lab. 1767.
. Which just Rule, if the Romanists allow us in our Disputes with them, the
Controversy would soon be ended. Fourthly, Hypatius truly affirms, that the
Eastern and Western Churches were long time divided, about the manner of
expressing themselves as to the Trinity; the Orientals suspecting the
Occidentals to be Sabellians, and these imagining those of the East were
Arrians, till Athanasius at last reconciled them by understanding of both
Tongues Bin. ibid. Lab. 1768.
; which shows that neither side pretended to Infallibility: And that Learning
is the fittest qualification for a Judge of Controversies. Lastly, They say,
their Holy Mother the Catholic and Apostolic Church of God, held it was
Orthodox to say, that one of the Trinity did suffer for us in the Flesh Bin.
page 663. Lab. 1778.
. Now this could not be meant of the Roman Church, where Hormisda's contrary
Definition was still in force, nor do they name the Pope in all their
Conference: So that Binius is mistaken in his Notion, that Justinian contrived
this Conference to unite the Bishops of the East with Rome; for he took no
notice of the late Popes Sentence, but designed this Conference to settle the
Truth; and for all the pretense of Union and Subjection in Hormisda's time, the
Churches of the East and West were not united till after this; when Pope John
consented to their Desinition, and owned that not his Predecessor, but they
were in the right.

. 10. The time of Pope Agapetus entrance and An. Dom. 535.
death is not certainly known: Anastasius, and from him Du Pin, allow him not
one whole year: Baronius and Binius would have him sit longer Vit. Agapet. Bin.
page 665. Col. 1. Lab. 1785.
, but can only prove it by the dates of some Epistles which are not genuine.
It Is certain he was dead before May 536. when Mennas Council at Constantinople
met; wherefore he must enter in the year 535. The truest account of him is to
be had in Liberatus, a Writer that knew him, Who says, He was well skilled in
the Canons, and being sent by the Gothic King, Theodatus, on an Embassy to
Justinian, to divert his Army from Italy, he arrived at Constantinople, where
he honorably received the Emperors Messenger, but would not admit Anthimius to
his Presence: After this he saw the Emperor, delivered his Embassy, which was
rejected; However, (as Christ's Ambassador) neither the Princes nor the Empress
could prevail with him to communicate with the lately ordained Bishop of
Constantinople Anthimius, unless he would prove himself Orthodox, and return to
the Church which he had deserted: Upon this Anthimius resigned and went off,
yet still was under the Emperors Protection: Yet Agapetus by the favor of the
Prince consecrated Mennas Patriarch of Constantinople, and having designed
Pelagius his Deacon to remain there as his Resident, he prepared to return to
Italy, but dyed at Constantinople Liberati brev. cap. 21. 22. Bin. par. 2. page
191. Lab. 774.
. Most of that which is added to this, is feigned by Anastastus and the later
Writers; except what another contemporary Cassiodorus writes of Agapetus, that
he was so poor, that the Sacred Plate of St. Peter's Church was forced to be
Pawned for Money to defray the Charges of this Embassy Cassiodor. Ep. lib. 12.
Ep. 20.
. But Anastasius his Fictions about the Popes quarreling with Justinian about
his Faith, and the Emperors humbling himself, and adoring the Pope afterward,
have no truth at all in them. No, nor those Miracles which Binius notes, and
Baronius pretended this Pope did in his Journey Vit. Not. in Agap. Bin. page
665. Col. 2. Lab. 1787.
; for they have no other Evidence for them than those fabulous Legends,
Gregory's Dialogues and the Pratum Spirituale Baron. An. 536. n. 68. page 254.
. And no Writer of Credit, or that lived in that Age, knew of any such thing.
The forenamed Authors for the credit of the Roman Martyrology, where Agapetus
death is set down on the 12 of the Kal. of October, will have that be the right
day of his dying: But I can hardly think he dyed so long before Mennas Council,
which was in May 536. and there he is spoken of as lately deceased: I shall
only note, that Baronius blunders his own Account woefully, by citing a
Constitution of Justinian, directed to Anthimius as still Bishop of
Constantinople, dated on the Ides of August 536, (long after Agapetus death:)
And upon this he Rails at Theodora and Justinian Baron. An. 535. n. 64. page
227.
; and it is true, the Law is so dated and titled in the Novels Authent. Col.
Novel. 16. page 34.
: But there must be a fault either in the name of Anthimius, put instead of
Menna's, or in the Consuls, because the same Emperor directs another
Constitution to Menna, in the same Month and the same. Year, and some Copies
read its date, 17 Kal. of August 536. which is the 16 of July Ibid. Novel. 42.
page 77, and 78.
: Wherefore the Annalist should be cautious, how he makes Characters of
Princes, on the uncertain Credit of these Dates.

The Copy of Justinian's Letter to John the Second, before stuffed with
Forgeries and undated, is here printed without the Additions, and dated in
January says Binius, in June says Labbe, An. 533. Ep. Justin. ad Agap. Bin.
page 666. col. 2. Lab. 1788.
. And it assures us, John's confirmation before related is spurious, because
here it is offered again to be confirmed by Agapetus, the day before the Ides
of March, An. 535. And this Popes Confirmation is dated at Constantinople, four
days after the Emperors Epistle: But Anastasius faith, The Pope came not to
Constantinople till the 10 of the Kal. of May; and Justinian's Letter supposes
him then at Rome, and if so, how could the Pope receive and answer this Letter
in four days time? But if Agapetus were at Constantinople, what need the
Emperor write to him, or date his Letter from that City? So that I suspect the
Confirmation to be a Forgery, and Labbe himself notes, These things are not
coherent Labbe in Marg. 1789.
; For which we have a good reason in Lactantius, who says, Ea enim est
mendaciorum natura ut cohaerere non possunt Lact. Instit. lib. 5.. 3.
. Yet Binius is so immodest as to stretch this seigned Confirmation, to be a
solemn confirming of all Justinian's Edicts and Constitutions in matters of
Faith Bin. not. in 1 Ep. Agapet. Bin. page 666. Col. 1. Lab. 1790.
. Whereas that Emperor sent the Constitutions to the Pope and other Patriarchs
to be executed, not to be confirmed; he only advised with his Bishops about
them, but his own Authority was enough to ratify them.

To this is subjoyned that nauseous Forgery called Exemplar precum, which has
been printed by the Editors four or five times over with variety of Titles, and
here is ridiculously applied to Justinian Exempl. prec. Bin. page 666. col. 2.
Lab. 1790.
.

The matter of Agapetus Second and Third Epistle to the African Bishops and
Reparatus is not exceptionable; for the Pope calls them his most loving
Brothers, and owns it was not agreeable to the Canons to receive Clerks from
Africa without their Letter; wherefore he would forbear it, as they had
enjoined: He confesses also the Rights of a Metropolitan to be in the Bishop of
Carthage Ep. 2. and 3. Agap. Bin. page 667. Lab. 1791, etc.
. But there are some suspicions that they are not genuine, for they say they
were sent by Liberatus: Now he had been at Rome a little before, and can scarce
be supposed to be got back to Afric, and to return to Rome by the 5th of the
Ides of September: And which is worse, (as Labbe truly observes,) Liberatus
himself who writes the Story of Agapetus, speaks but of one Journey to Rome,
and says nothing of this second: And besides it is dated Post. Cons. Paulini,
which is wrong, unless they call Bellisarius his year by that name, which is
An. 535. And then Agapetus was at Constantinople: So that we may fear the
Forgers, who would have it thought all the World applied to Rome, have been at
work here. However, if the third Letter be genuine, we learn from it that
Agapetus came into the Papacy in Winter; for it seems Reparatus had writ to
Pope John; but while his Messengers were stayed by the Winter from Sailing, he
heard in Afric of Agapetus his Election. Baronius here affirms, that the Pope
now sent Decretal Letters to be published in Africa, which are not extant
Baron. An. 535. n. 42. page 222.
: But I believe there never were any such Letters; for his advice might be
accepted there perhaps, but his Decretals then had no Authority in that Church.

The Fourth Epistle to Justinian is very suspicious, being dated with no
Consuls as the rest use to be; it mentions also the Popes sending Legates on
the Ides of October, which if it were An. 534. he was not then Pope; if the
next year, Agapetus must then be at Constantinople, (or dead there the 12 of
the Kal. of that Month, if the Roman Martyrology be true:) Wherefore we need
not be startled at that incredible passage, That Justinian had elevated the
Roman See by such Titles of Charity and Bounty, as exceeded their desires and
hopes Epist. 4. Agap. Bin. page 667. Col. 1. Lab. 1793.
. For the Letter is not genuine; And I dare say, the Parasites will not urge
this, because they think it is Justice, not Charity; and Right, not human
Bounty, which gives Rome the highest Titles; and we are of Opinion, no Titles
can exceed that Churches desires, though they may its deserts.

Since Binius suspects the 5th Epistle, as dated before Agapetus was Pope, and
Labbe says, many things prove it false, and more than suspected of imposture,
as being stolen out of Hormisda's, and Leo's Letters, and naming Theodatus
Consul, who never bore that Office Ep. 5. Agap Bin. page 668. col. 2. Lab. 1795.
; We may without more ado reject it, only noting the Forger resolved right or
wrong, to make the Pope the Mawl of all Heretics.

The two Epistles to Caesarius (supposing them genuine) are very frivolous, the
6th being only to tell him that Ecclesiastical Goods must not be alienated:
Which he knew better than the Pope; and Symmachus had writ this to him above 30
Year before: And the 7th Epistle intimates that Contumeliosus a French Criminal
Bishop, whose Cause was decided by Pope John, had appealed again to Agapetus,
which shows a Papal Decree was not decisive: But either the Pope or this Letter
has had ill Luck, because it contains in the decretal part, a flat
contradiction, both forbidding, and allowing this Bishop to say Mass Ep. 6, and
7. Agap. Bin. page 669. Lab. 1798. and 1801.
; wherefore, if we do not reject them, we may throw them by, as very
inconsiderable.

Once more the Editors abuse us with their old Forgery of Exemplar Precum,
their Corrupt rule of Faith, which cannot without the highest impudence be put
upon Justinian Bin. page 670. col. 1. Lab. 1801. etc.
; and they confess here the Consuls are mistaken a whole year, yet they presume
to mend it, and obtrude it for genuine: And Baronius would have us believe
Justinian did now repeat this profession of his Faith upon the falsest and
slightest conjectures Baron. An. 536. n. 18. page 243.
that can be imagined.

. II. The Council of Constantinople about the deposition An. Dom. 536.
of Anthimius, and the Condemnation of Severus and his followers, was held, as
Binius confesses, in the general Title, after Agapetus his death; and as often as
this Council mentions him, he is called of happy Memory: Yet in the Title on
the Top, Binius says, It was held under Agapetus and Mennas; which absurdity
of a Council being held under a dead Pope, moved Labbe to say it was under
Mennas Bin. page 671. Lab. Tom. v. page 3.
. The History of this Council may be had from Du-Pin Du-Pin. Eccles. Hist.
Cent. 6. page 131.
. But the Remarks on those things in it, which either condemn the Errors, or
savor of the Forgeries of Rome, are my business. Wherefore, I will first make
some general observations on the whole: Secondly, consider the depravations in
the Acts. Thirdly, examine the falsehoods in the Notes.

First, This Council was called to re-examine and confirm the Sentence of Pope
Agapetus, and it consisted (all but five) of Eastern Bishops Council. Constable.
Bin. p. 678. col. 1. Lab. col. 19.
, to whom Justinian sent this Sentence for their Approbation. And Agapetus
himself in a Letter writ a little before his death, desires the Eastern Bishops
to signify to him, That they did approve of the judgment of the Apostolical
Seat Act. 1. Bin. page 687. Lab. 47.
; Which shows that neither the Emperor, the Pope, nor this Council did then
take the Bishop of Rome to be the sole nor highest Judge. Secondly, Mennas the
Patriarch was the President of this Council, and sat above and before those
five Bishops, which the Annalist, and Annotator say were the Legates of
Agapetus, and the Representatives of the Roman Church lb. Bin. page 672. Lab.
3. and 4.
. Thirdly, it is certain the Emperor Justinian convened this Council by his own
sole Authority; for every Action owns They met by his Pious Command, and that
his care had gathered this Holy Synod together Vid. Act. i. and alibi. Bin.
page 689, 691, 696, and 710. Item Lab. page 54, 59, 71 and 118.
. And it is as certain that he only could and did confirm it; for Mennas the
President having heard the Synods Opinion, desires the Emperor may be
acquainted with it, Because nothing ought to be done in the Church without his
Royal Consent, and Command Bin. Act. v. page 703. Lab. 61.
. And he finally did confirm their Decree by a special Edict, which made it
valid Ibid. Bin. page 761. Lab. 263.
. So that this Council utterly confutes the Popes pretended right to convene
all Councils, for which in this Age nothing but Forged evidence is produced.
Fourthly, Though Baronius Baron. An. 536. n. 32. page 246.
, and also Binius do affirm that Agapetus did both depose Anthimius, and choose
Mennas, neither of them is true if they mean the Pope did it by his own
Authority; for before the Council, Justinian (as this Synod often declares) did
assist Agapetus, and made the Holy Canons Authentic in deposing Anthimius Act.
i. Bin. page 677. Lab. 19. and alibi.
. And because he thought it was scarce yet Canonically done, he gets the
Sentence against him confirmed by this Council: As for Mennas, he was only
consecrated by the Pope, who in his own Letter says Mennas was elected by the
favor of the Emperor, and the consent of the chief Men, the Monks and all
Orthodox Christians Bin. Act. i. page 687. Lab. 47.
; yea, the Council declares the Emperor chose him by the general suffrage Ibid.
Bin. page 677. Lab. 19.
. So that these are false pretenses designed to set up a single Authority in
the Pope, unknown to that Age.

Secondly, In the Acts of this Council there are diverse instances of the hand
of a Roman depraver: The Title of the Monks Petition, as Binius Margen says,
is not in the Greek Libel Monach. Bin. page 678. Lab. 22.
; yet he has it both in Greek and Latain (d); and so has Labbe: But it must
be the addition of a Later Hand, the Greek being the Original; it is full of
great swelling Words applied to Agapetus alone; But the Text speaks to more
than one, Do not ye suffer, O ye most blessed (...), Bin. page 679. Lab. 23.
-- Which ye (O most blessed) defending, receive ye our Petition Bin. page 681.
Lab. 30.
, and generally it runs in the plural number; So that it was addressed to the
Pope with other Bishops. The like corruption we meet with also in the Letter of
the Eastern Bishops, where the Title now is only to Agapetus; but the Text
speaks to more than one; yea, where the Greek is (...) and (...), The Latin
Version of Rome. changes it into Beatissime, and Sanctissime, adding Pater Bin.
page 683, and 684. Lab. 38. etc.
. Which shows the Forgers Fingers have been here. The aforesaid Petition of the
Monks, mentions an Image of Justinian abused by the Heretics: The Greek calls
it [(...)] The Image of that Servant of God Bin. 679. Lab. 23.
, The Roman Version is imaginem Dei very: The Image of the true God: As if
these Heriticks had been Iconoclasts before that controversy was heard of. In
the Bishops Letter the Greek reads -- (...), which signifies by open force and
secret fraud: For (...) is a Warlike Engine to batter with Bin. 684. Lab. 41.
. The Translator dreams of Manichaean Errors, which are nothing to the purpose
here. In the Epistle of the Syrian Bishops to Justinian, the Greek says, The
Pope deserved to follow the Emperors pious Footsteps, and so Labbe reads it in
the Latin: But in Binius (for fear this should look mean) we have it Vestra pia
vestigia digna facienti Bin. page 707. Lab. 106.
. The Title of Hormisda's Epistle to Epiphanius is corrupted in Latin by the
addition of these words which are not in the Greek, wherein he delegates to him
the power of a Vicar of the Apostolical Seat, in receiving Penitents Act. v
Bin. page 721. Lab. 151.
: Which is confuted by the Epistle it self, which speaks of the Church of
Constantinople, not as subjected, but united to the Roman; and does not
command, but desire Epiphanius to join his care and diligence to the Popes, as
they now had one friendship, both in Faith and Communion; yea, Hormisda
promises to act by the same measures which he recommends to Epiphanius Vid.
ibid.
. Baronius has another corruption of his own, in a Letter from the Monks of
Jerusalem and Syria; for where they desire Justinian to cut off all that do
not communicate with the universal Church of God, and the Apostolical Seat Bin.
page 708. Lab. 107.
; He leaves out the universal Church, and puts in nothing but the Apostolical
Seat Baron. An. 536. n. 89. page 259.
. In the same page he cuts off Mennas Title before the Sentence be pronounced,
viz. Mennas, the most Holy and Blessed universal Arch. Bishop and Patriarch
said Id. ibid. n. 92.
: And he adds to the end of this Sentence, that it was according to what
Hormisda and Agapetus had prescribed Baron. An. 536. n. 95. page 260.
; whereas this being the Sense of the Synod, gave Authority to what the later
of these Popes had done; and the former, Hormisda, was dead before this matter
came into Question. And now I am upon the Account of this Council in Baronius,
I will also note, that in citing an Author which says Mennas obtained an
Universal Bishopric -- he adds, that is, of the Churches subject to him Id. An.
536. n. 65. page 254.
. Yet a little after he will not allow that Paraphrase when the same words are
applied to the Popes Ib. n. 106. page 263.
, which shows his unfaithfulness in adding, and his partiality in expounding,
two very ill properties in an Historian -- But to proceed with Binius and
Labbe: In the 5th Act there is a Syod at Constantinople held under John the
Bishop there Anno 518, wherein he is called Most Holy and most Blessed
Archbishop, Occumenical Patriarch, and Father of Fathers Act. 5. Bin. page
723, 725. Lab. 158, 162.
. Yet the Editors put first in the Margen, and then into the Latin Text, under
Hormisda; which words are not in the Greek, and are absurd, because the two
Churches were not yet reconciled Bin. page 743. Lab. 211.
: Which is plain, because in the Acclamations they cry, let the Names of
Euphemius and Macedonius be restored to the Church: Which were two of their
Orthodox Patriarchs and followers of Acacius, whose Names had been struck out
of the Dypticks by Heretical Princes, and stood then condemned by Hormisda: And
they cry again, Are our Synodical powers gone away to Rome? That is, must we
reject our Orthodox Patriarchs because Rome censures them? But the Latin
corrupt version reads, Synodica Romana modo valiant Bin. page 732. Lab. 182.
; which would alter the Sense, and persuade such as cannot look into the Greek,
that Rome's Decrees were valid at Constantinople; whereas, they Decree contrary
to the Pope. In the Epistle from John of Jerusalem, to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, the late Forgers have put in a Sentence to give some color to
the Worship of the Blessed Virgin, which spoils the Sense. The true reading is
--; Do ye most holy pray for the same things that we do, for it is the common
duty of Bishops [] to intercede for the peace of the Churches, and the Emperors
Victory, and long Life Ep. Johan. Hieros. Act. 5. Bin. page 734. Lab. 190.
. But into this they thrust in a line or two -- thus -- it is the common Duty
of Bishops; (And pray ye to the Holy, Glorious Virgin Mary, the Mother of God
with us) to intercede for the peace of the Churches -- which is a new Piece put
into an old Garment so foolishly, that the Rent is very visible. Finally, the
subscriptions to the fifth and last Act are corrupted: For whereas the Roman
Deacons, Theophanes and Pelagius in all other Acts are placed after the Eastern
Bishops, here they are set before them in the Latin Version Act. v. Bin. page
759. Lab. 2^5.
. And whereas the Editors tell us, that Justinian's Edict to confirm the
Decrees of this Council is depraved in the Title to Mennas Constable. Justin. Bin.
page 761. Lab. 263.
; I confess it is so; but the Roman Parasites have depraved it by cutting off
all those Titles which the Novel here cited by them gives him Authent. col
novel. Constable. 42. cod. page 77.
, viz. To Mennas the most Holy, and most Blessed, and Ecumenical Patriarch --
All which the Editors of the Council leave out.

To these Notes of the depraving these Acts we may add a few remarks on some
passages that are genuine, but oppose the late Notions of the Roman Church. The
Epistle of Agapetus was not writ to Peter alone (as the Epistle pretends) but
to him, and other Bishops; whom the Pope calls in the first Line, His beloved
Brethren; and to Mennas there he gives the Titles of Brother, and fellow Bishop
Ep. Agap. Act. 1. Bin. page 687. Lab. 47.
. The Syrian Bishops Epistle to Justinian, declares that Christ is the Head of
the Church Ib. Bin. page 706. Lab. 100.
, which Title the Pope had not yet claimed. In the Epistle from John of
Jerusalem, to the Patriarch of Constantinople (where Leo is called Archbishop
and Patriarch of Rome) we have this memorable Truth, That Christ who gave the
power of binding and loosing to Peter the chief of the Apostles, gave it in
general to the Episcopal Order Ep. Joan. Hieros. Act. v. Bin. page 734. Lab.
190.
: Which confutes that Doctrine of all Bishops receiving this power from the
Pope. The Bishop of Tyre's Epistle to the Synod at Constantinople, calls the Sea of Antioch, which Severus the Heretic had invaded, The Throne of the
Apostolical Church of Antioch Ep. Epiphan. Tyr. Act. v. Bin. page 736. Lab. 195.
, and makes one of his great crimes to be his admitting strange Clerks
Canonically deprived by their own Bishop, to officiate without the consent of
such as had sentenced them: A crime so often committed by the Popes, that these
uncanonical precedents are produced to prove he has a privilege so to do. The
Sentence of Mennas against this Severus, and his Accomplices, recites That they
had contemned the Apostolical succession in the Church of Rome, which had
condemned them, and set at naught both the Patriarchal Throne of
Constantinople, and the Synod under it; Yea, and the Apostolical Succession,
which the Lord and Savior of all had settled in those holy places: And above
all, had despised the Sentence of the Oriental Diocese decreed against them
(I). So that their greatest fault (f) Sent. Men. Bin. page 758. Lab. 255.
was not the contemning the Popes Authority, and Apostolical Succession was
settled in other Churches by Christ, as well as in that of Rome. Lastly, The
Constitution of Justinian is made on purpose to give validity to the Sentence
of the Pope and the Synod against Anthimius and the Heretics, declaring it was
the custom for all preceding Orthodox Emperors, to confirm the Decrees of
Councils; and it says in the conclusion, this Law was published, that none
might be ignorant of those things which the Bishops had agreed on, and the
Emperor had confirmed Constit. Just. post. Act. v. Bin. page 761. Lab. 263.
. So that it is a fallacious Note of the Editors Margen to say; That it was the
duty of Emperors to take care that the Decrees of the Fathers and the Pope were
executed. Which makes their Master to be no more than their Servant and under
Officer.

In the Notes on this Council are many Falsehoods, which may be discovered by
what is already observed. Only we may consider some few of them more
particularly: As first, He takes it upon Baronius his credit Baron. An. 536. n
73. page 255.
, that Agapetus left the Western Bishops his Legates, and that their Power
continued after his decease; and thence boldly, but falsely affirms, That these
Legates procured the Synod to meet, and that they condemned these Heretics by
the Authority of their deceased Master, whose Legate also he feigns Mennas was
Not. Bin. page 763. Lab. 269.
; and in express contradiction to the Council, he will have these Italian
Bishops to be Presidents with Mennas Ib. Bin. page 764. Lab. 270.
; yet immediately calls him alone the President of this Synod Ibid. 764. col 2.
Lab. 272
. Now all this is to impose upon the Reader, as if nothing could be done
without Papal Authority: But we have proved that Justinian called and confirmed
this Council, and Mennas presided solely in it: The Acts also take no notice of
these Western Bishops having any Legantine power from Agapetus; and I shall
show presently, that before this Council rose there was a new Pope chosen, who
should have renewed their Commission to make it valid, but did not: So that
they must suppose the dead and the living Pope to have supreme Authority both
at once: Who can swallow these gross Fictions? Again, Mennas and the Council
declare, That Pope followed the Canons in allowing Anthimius time to come in
and Repent, and therefore they followed him Act. 1. Bin. page 687. Lab. 47.
; but Binius Notes turn this and say, That Agapetus commanded the Synod to use
this mercy Not. Bin. page 764. Col. 2. Lab. 272.
: But it is very pleasant to hear Clodius accuse, and Binius complain of the
Modern Greeks, for forging the Title of Ecumenical Patriarch, applied to John
in his own Council of Constantinople Ib. Bin. p. 765 Lab. 274.
. But the Latins are even with them and far outdo them, (if it were so) for
they (as we have seen) have put in that Title for Agapetus into the Latin when
it was not in the Greek, and have left it out before Menuas name, though in the
Code it be given him: So that they cannot fairly complain; Yet after all, I can
prove by authentic Records of this Age, That this Title of Ecumenical
Patriarch, was given to the Patriarch of both old and new Rome; nor is this
Council of John corrupted by the modern Greeks, and Gregory is certainly
mistaken in saying it was not used before his time: But the weakest complaint
of Forgery, and the worst proof of it imaginable, is that of Baronius and
Binius, who pretend the Greeks have fraudulently put the names of Euphemius and
Macedonius Bishops of Constantinople, before Pope Leo's Bin. p. 766. Lab. 274.
Baron. Tom. 7. An. 518. n. 20. page 7.
; and the Annalist and Annotator show shameful ignorance, in thinking to prove
by the Liturgy of St. Mark, that the Pope of Rome was prayed for first in all
Churches: For though in that Office, God is desired to preserve Their most Holy
and most Blessed Pope, whom he did fore-ordain, that his Holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church should choose by their common Suffrages, and also for their
most holy Bishop Lit. D. Marc. in Bib Patr. edit. Paris. Tom. 2 page 35.
. Yet this (being the Office used in the whole Alexandrian Patriarchate,) must
be meant of the Alexandrian Patriarch, (who was called Pope ever since
Athanasius his time,) and was the Bishop of that Church where these Prayers
were made: To prove which and shame this illiterate Exposition, I shall produce
Jac. Goar, a rigid Papist, the Editor of the Greek Euchologion; who thus
speaks, The Greeks never name the supreme Bishop of all (he means him of Rome)
in public; wherefore Urban the Fourth desired of the Emperor Mich. Palaeologus
(An. Dom. 1263. that is, 700 year after this,) that in their sacred Offices,
the Popes name should be recited out of the Dypticks, with the other four
Patriarchs, as the first and chiefest sign of their union with Rome: For which
he Cites Nicetas, lib. 5. Eucholog. in not. Jac. Goar. page 144.
. Here therefore is a proof, which proves only the mistake of them that produce
it: And for the Objection, it is a known Custom for all Churches, to name their
own Patriarchs before those of other Churches; so that it is no wonder, that at
Constantinople Euphemius's name should be placed before Leo's.

As soon as the Council under Mennas was ended, the Decrees were sent to Peter
Patriarch of Jerusalem, who by the Command of the Emperor, called a Council
there to confirm them Council. Hieros. Bin. page 766. Lab. 275.
.

In this year Labbe places the Synod of Auvergne, which met, as the Preface
owns, by the precept of King Theodebert Council. Auver. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2.
page 31. Lab. col. 1803, An. Dom. 536.
; there is no Pope mentioned in it: Binius places it in the year 541. under
Vigilius, but Sirmondus proves he was mistaken.

. 12. As soon as the news of Agapetus his death came to Rome, Liberatus says,
Sylverius was made Pope by Theodatus the Gothic King Liberat. Brev. Bin. page
191. cap. 22.
. Anastasius says, it was after one Month and 28 days vacancy Vit. Sylver.
Bin. page 770. Col. 1. Lab. 287.
; Which is very probable, being a sufficient time for the intelligence to come
from Constantinople; and if we allow that Agapetus died about a Month before
Mennas Council, this entrance of Sylverius will prove to be while that Council
sat. Baronius saw this, and fearing it would ruin his invention of the Western
Bishops, there being Agapetus his Legates, he blunders the time of Sylverius's
Election; and though he reject Anastasius account, on whom (in many less
probable Reports) he often relies; Yet he will not fix any other time, and so
leaves it uncertain; only in general he and Binius say, he was elected in the
end of this year; which cannot be; because Agapetus certainly died in the
Spring, and it required no long time for the News to come from Constantinople.
As to this Sylverius, it is certain from Liberatus, he was the Son of Pope
Hormisda; and Baronius with Binius only conjecture that he was lawfully
begotten; they would prove it indeed by this Argument, That otherwise he would
have been irregular, and the Roman Clergy would not have chosen him: But they
forget that his Election was not regular; For Theodatus was in haste, and would
not stay for that, but forced the Roman Clergy to subscribe, having got money
of Sylverius, as their own Pontifical relates. Baronius calls this fear and
vile submission of the Roman Clergy, their Clemency and a worthy Example Baron.
An. 536. n. 123. page 267.
; yet confesses this Pope deserved to be kept out: However, being got into the
sanctifying Chair, he magnifies him, but very unjustly; for Procopius a
creditable Author, who was soon after at Rome with Bellisarius, tells us,
Sylverius first swore to keep the City of Rome for Vitiges the Gothic King
Procop. de bell. Goth lib. 1. page 173.
. And so soon as Bellisarius came before it, he was the principal instrument to
persuade the Romans, who had sworn with him, to deliver up that City Id. ibid.
page 181.
: Baronius would conceal this Perjury, and therefore though he cite Procopius
here, yet he says no more than that Vitiges admonished the Pope and Senate, to
keep faithful to the Goths Baron. An. 537. n. 5. page 269.
, who indeed had been extremely civil to the Roman Church; and though they were
Arrians, yet (as their Enemy Procopius tells us,) they had such a reverence for
the holy places, that they did not hurt the Churches of St. Peter or St. Paul;
yea, they gave liberty to the Catholic Priests to serve God in their own way
Procop. de bell. Goth. l. 2. page 232.
. Which confutes the false Reports of their Cruelty, in destroying the Churches
and Bodies of the Martyrs at Rome, mentioned in the Pontifical, and in Paulus
Diaconus Paul. Diac. lib. 17. p. 170.
. However Sylverius turned once more, as Procopius says, and was suspected by
Bellisarius to have designed to betray the City of Rome once more to the Goths,
for which he deposed and banished him Procop. lib. 1. page 209.
; and Marcellinus an Author of great credit, and of that time, says, Sylverius
favored Vitiges, and for that cause Bellisarius deposed him from his
Bishopric Marcelin. Com. Chronic. indic. 15. p. 15.
. I know Liberatus (a mortal Enemy to Vigilius) would have this to be a
Calumny, invented by Theodora, and carried on by Vigilius the succeeding Pope,
who had promised Bellisarius two Hundred Crowns to get Sylverius ejected, and
himself admitted Liberat. Brev. cap. 22. Bin. page 191, etc.
; and Anastasius with Paulus Diaconus follow his Account: But the two former
Authors are in this case more worthy of Credit; however this is certain,
Bellisarius did depose and banish Sylverius, and got Vigilius Elected, who
fearing his Rival should be restored, got him at last into his Hands, and
barbarously caused him to be starved to death. This is a sad Story of two
Popes, Sylverius uncanonically elected, a Simoniack and a perjured Person; and
Vigilius a favourer of Heretics, one that is said to have hired false Witness,
and to have given Money to make the Sea void, and at last a Murderer.

Which shows, how little reason there is for Baronius and the Notes, to make
such a stir which was the true Pope of these two. They will have Sylverius to
remain the rightful Pope while he lived, and so Rail freely at Vigilius as an
Heretic, and Bloody Usurper Notis in vit. Sylver., Bin. page 771. Lab. 289.
Baron. An. 537. n. 18. page 277, 278.
. But they cannot prove this by any Evidence, but only by a manifestly forged
Epistle of Sylverius. And the contrary is very certain, because the Emperor,
the Gallican Churches and all did own Vigilius for the true Pope long before
Sylverius his death, and he openly acted as such all that time. Wherefore we
must reject that Dream of Baronius, who says (without any ground,) that
Vigilius did Abdicate the Papacy for six days upon the death of his Competitor,
and got himself new chosen; and this purged him of all Crimes, and in a moment
made him a Saint and a rare Pope: He would force this Fiction out of
Anastasius, (who in like Cases he generally despises,) who only says, the Sea
was void six days, but plainly means after Sylverius was deposed; for he
reckons Vigilius his time from thence, allotting him above 17 years and 6
Months; that is, near two years more than Baronius allows.

There are but two Epistles ascribed to Sylverius, and they are the only
Evidence to prove him the true Pope after he was Deposed; yet it is certain
both are Forged. The first charges Vigilius with Simony, yea, excommunicates
and deprives him for usurping the Papacy; it is dated with the name of
Basilius, whereas Baronius and the Annotator say, there was no such Consul in
his time Ep. 1. Sylver. Bin. page 772. col. 1. Lab. 291.
. And Labbe says, it is to be rejected for the Barbarity of the Style, and
other reasons, and concludes the mistake of the Consul, shows the bold
ignorance of Mercator, the Author of this Imposture. Now observe for the
ingenuity and credit of Baronius, that this Epistle not only serves him to
clear Sylverius from Simony, and to prove him the true Pope, but he calls this
odious Forgery, The Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, and the Exercise of
that Power, which he had to Absolve or Damn Eternally all People Baron. An.
539. n. 4. page 295.
, which is no less than Blasphemy.

The Second Epistle to Amator is so gross a Fiction, that both Baronius and
Binius reject it, being contrary to the true History delivered by Liberatus,
whom the Notes call the most faithful Writer of this time Ep. 2. Sylv. Bin. ib.
Lab. 293
: Labbe agrees with them that it is spurious, and shows that Mercator stole it
out of Gregory's Epistles, wishing that the like censure which is passed on
this, were passed upon many more of these Writings. But the Letter of Amator to
Sylverius, (which Labbe says, Learned men suspect to be as false as the Popes
answer to it,) Baronius will have to be genuine; and from this slight Forgery
alone, he proves, That all the Catholic World groaned together, at the
ignominies put upon the Bishop of the Universal Church Baron. An. 539. n. 5.
page 296. An. Dom. 536.
: A rare Historian! Whose Assertions and his Evidence are both false.

Binius places the Second Council of Orleance in this year, but Labbe from
Sirmondus puts it three years sooner, An. 533. in the time of Pope John the
Second Council. Aurel. 2. Bin. page 773. col. 1. Lab. 1779.
; it was called, as the Preface says, by the Command of the King of France,
and made very good Canons, without Papal Advice or Authority. Binius his Notes
here blunder this and the following Council, and will keep King Clovis alive
three year longer than Nature allowed him, to support a Fable of this Kings
giving the Pope a Golden Crown, An. 514. Notis Bin. page 774. col. 2.
whereas he died An. 511. Vid. Sirm. notas in Council. 3. Aur. Lab. 305. An.
Dom. 358.
.

The Third Council of Orleans, Binius sets An. 540. But Labbe more truly places
it here Council. Aurel. 3. Bin. Tom. 2. page 2. Lab. 295.
. However, it takes no notice of any Pope, though Vigilius about this time is
pretended to have writ to Caesarius Bishop of Arles. This Synod made diverse
Canons for Discipline; and by the second Canon it appears, they were zealous
for the Celibate of the Clergy: But the fourth shows, that hitherto the Canons
in this case had not been obeyed; and the ninth Canon Decrees, That if any
Clerks having Wives or Concubines were ignorantly ordained, they should not be
removed.

. 13. Vigilius was made Pope immediately after Sylverius An. Dom. 537.
was deposed, and while the Goths belieged Bellisarius in Rome, which was in
this year: But the Editors from Baronius write An. 540. upon this entrance Vita
Vigil. Bin. Tom 2. par. 2 page 1. Lab. Tom. 5. page 506.
, to cover the Fable of his new Election, after the death of Sylverius: But he
must come in in the year 537: For Marcellinus places Vigilius his death An.
554. Marcellin. Chron. P. C. Basil. An. 13. page 57.
, which makes up the 17 years and odd time that Anastasius truly allots
Vigilius; whose Successor Pelagius entered, as Baronius and the Editors own, An.
555, which is but 15 whole year from that year 540, in which (they say) he
entered; and from which they falsely compute his time, who writ Letters dated An.
538, and acted in all things as the sole true Pope, from the time Sylverius was
deposed; which was according to Anastasius, after he had sat one year and five
Months Vita Sylver. ut supra.
; and he followed Writers of undoubted credit, that is, Marcellinus, who places
his deposition and Vigilius his entrance An. 537 Marcel. Chron. page 56.
; so does Genebrard Genebrard. l. 3. page 464.
, who with Platina allow Sylverius only some odd time above one year, in which
all Writers before Baronius agree. His invention therefore it was to ascribe
above 4 years to Sylverius Baron. An. 540. n. 3. page 301.
, that this false Chronology might cover his devisable, of a new Election of
Vigilius, An. 540. which we justly reject as an idle Fable, invented to save
the Honor of the Roman Chair: Yet it is well Baronius did not think Vigilius
the true Pope all this time, for by that means we have his true Character, who,
he says, was driven on with the Whirlwind of Ambition, and like Lucifer fell
from Heaven, -- that his Sacrilege cried out on every side -- he calls him a
Schismatic, a Simoniack, an Usurper, a wretched Man, an Heretic, a Wolf, a
Thief, a false Bishop, and an Antichrist Baron. An. 538. n. 18, 19, 20. p. 277,
278.
; aggravating his Crimes with all his Rhetoric, wherein he rather exceeds the
Bounds of Modesty than of Truth; for he really was extremely wicked, and beyond
the power of the sanctifying Chair it self, to make him Holy. We have so fully
described the Acts of this Pope, and all the false Stories about him in the
following History of the Fifth General Council, that we may here pass him by,
with a few brief Remarks.

First, Liberatus assures us, Vigilius did make good his promise to Theodora
the Empress, and communicated with Heretics Liberat. Brev cap. 22. Bin. page
192.
. Anastasius, a later Author of no credit denies this, and Binius is so fond of
this Popeexcusing Fiction, that he puts into the Text these words, See how
Vigilius (though he came by evil means into the Papacy,) as soon as he got into
that holy Chair established by Gods Promise, was changed into another Man,
condemning the Heresy he had promised to approve Vita Vigil. ap. Bin. and Lab.
ut supra.
. Which false and foolish Parenthesis Labbe was ashamed of, and leaves it out.

Secondly, There are very many idle Stories in Anastasius his life of this
Pope, some of which I will briefly recite, the bare relation of them being
enough to disprove them, viz. That when the People of Rome had accused Vigilius
for a Murderer, and got the Empress to send for him Prisoner to Constantinople;
the Romans as he was going off, first desired his Prayers, and then threw
Stones at him -- That though he was brought Prisoner to Justinian, yet the
Emperor met and kissed him, and the People sang that Hymn -- Behold the Lord
the King comes, etc. -- Which being applied to the Pope is Blasphemy, and so
the Editors and Baronius counted it, as did also Pope Simplicius, when the
Heretical Bishop of Alexandria entering into Constantinople, permitted his Party
to sing the words of an Hymn only due to Christ Bin. Tom. 2. par. 1. page 436.
Lab. 1071. and Baron. An. 476. page 318.
. The rest shall be observed in the History of the 5th Council, where we may
find also the Blunders, Fictions and Contradictions of the Notes exposed, and
so will mention but few of them here Notis in Vit. Vigil. Bin. page 2. Lab. 308.
, viz. That Vigilius cunningly Abdicated the Papacy after the death of
Sylverius, and got himself new-elected by the Roman Clergy, who were divinely
inspired in that act. -- That Vigilius was a Catholic, and only polluted by
communicating with Heretics, (which was a horrid Crime formerly in Acacius.)
-- That Bellisarius was denied a Triumph at Constantinople, for his ill usage
of the Pope. -- That Vigilius Anathematized the Empress Theodora, and that God
thereupon destroyed her. -- That the Roman Church is so secured by Providence,
that it is no blot to it, if we can prove this Pope Simoniacal and Heretical --
(I ask by the way, why then do they tell so many Lies to cover this?) -- That
the Eastern Bishops depended upon Vigilius his Judgment, and stayed till he
came to Constantinople, before they would subscribe the Edict against the three
Chatpers. -- That Justinian after his coming revoked this Edict. -- That the
Pope finally confirmed the 5th Council, -- And lastly, That it was Sacrilege
in the Emperor, to presume to depose or confirm a Pope. -- All which we shall
show to be notorius Falsehoods.

The first Epistle of Vigilius is writ to three notorious Heretics, wherein he
assures them he holds the same Faith with them Vigil. Ep. 1. Bin. page 3. Lab.
311.
; and is so heretical, that the Editors are ashamed of it, and print only the
beginning of it, pretending from Baronius that some Eutychian writ it in his
name Baron. An. 538. n. 15. page 277.
. But the Reader will remember, that the Annalist always condemns genuine
Writings, if they reflect on the Pope, and justifies Forgeries, if they
magnify him; of which this is another clear instance; for Liberatus who was a
little before called the most faithful Writer of his time, has this Epistle at
large, and affirms Vigilius writ it Liberat. Brev. cap. 22. Bin. page 192.
. Yea, Victor Tuennensis has recorded it as this Popes almost in the same
syllables in his Chronicle! Victor. Tuen. Chron. page 9.
, who is another Credible Writer of that Age. And both these Africans did ever
after look on Vigilius as an Heretic for this, and so he was, but secretly for
fear of Justinian.

To whom about this time Vigilius openly writ an Orthodox Letter, though
Baronius and the Editors place it Anno 540. and call it his 4th Epistle,
pretending it was writ after Baronius his invented new election, and when the
Holy Chair had set him right in Faith Ep. 4. Vigil. ad Justin. Bin. page 5.
Lab. 315.
. But my reason why I judge it writ Anno 538 soon after his entrance, is
because it was customary for a new Pope to write to the Emperor, and give an
Account of his Faith; and since Vigilius had been advanced by Justinian, it is
not at all likely he should stay almost three years before he sent an Embassy
to enquire if he were Orthodox; and this Epistle having no Date they have clapped
to it, another to Mennas, with a Date that smells of Forgery, because the
Emperors Ambassador is made to subscribe to the Popes Letter Anno 540, which is
a thing so unusual, that either Justinian highly suspected Vigilius, or this
Postscript is added by Mercator Ep. 5. Vigil. Bin. page 6. Lab. 318.
. However it being certain that Vigilius had writ privately to Anthimius,
Severus and Theodosius, that he was of the same Faith with them, and it being
also probable that he writ these open Letters to Justinian and Mennas at the
same time wherein he anathematizes those three Heretics by name, and professes
himself Orthodox, this proves him a most egregious Hypocrite and Dissembler in
points of Faith. I shall only briefly note on this fourth Epistle, that
Vigilius reckning up the names of his immediate Predecessors, names not
Sylverius among them, which seems to intimate he was then alive: And Secondly,
if Mercator did not thrust in that Sentence, That to disturb, or diminish the
Privileges of the Apostolical Seat, appeared as bad as violating the Faith: If
this (say,) be not a latter Addition, we may infer, That Vigilius was more
concerned for the power of his See, than for the Faith.

That which the Editors call the Second Epistle, was writ to one Eutherius Anno
538: And though they and Baronius say he was then no true Pope Ep. 2. Vigil.
Bin. page 3. Lab. 311.
; yet the Collectors of the Decretal Epistles did not think so, for they have
put this among the Decretals of true Popes. Du Pin has well observed, that the
latter part of this Epistle is forged by Mercator, where Vigilius is supposed
so ignorant of Greek, (after he had lived long in Greece,) as to derive Cephas,
(the name of St. Peter) from (...), an Head. And in this corrupt part is that
absurd Sentence, -- That no true Believer was ignorant, that all Churches had
their beginning from Rome: Which though a Forgery, serves the Editors to note
upon in the Margen, The Church of Rome is the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches: Of which they have no better evidence than such Trash, and so must be
content with such as they have.

The Third Epistle to Caesarius Bishop of Arles, was writ in the same year; and
proves that Vigilius was taken for the true Pope, as well by this eminent
Father Ep. 3. Vigil. Bin. page 4. Col. 2. Lab. 314.
, as by Eutherius, Anno 538.

The Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Epistles are writ to An. Dom. 544.
Auxanius Successor to Caesarius, and show Vigilius was then so much at the
Emperors devotion, that he durst not grant a Pall to a French Bishop without
the leave of Justinian Ep. 6. Vigil. Bin. page (...). col. 1. Lab. 319.
; and when he had (above a year after) got this leave, he tells Auxanius he was
obliged to pray for the Emperor and the Empress, who had given their consent
Ep. 7. Vigil. Bin. ib. Lab. 320.
. Now if Theodora were so great a Friend to Heretics as Baronius pretends,
it is plain, Vigilius then was a Favorite of hers, which makes him still
suspected to be inclined to Heresy: But there is one mistake in this Epistle,
viz. That his Predecessor had granted a Pall to Caesarius, which De Marca says
is false, and affirms this Auxainus to have been the first Legate the Pope made
in France: A hopeful High Priest to begin that Usurpation upon Metropolitans.

In this year was that Edict put out, which condemned An Dom. 546.
the three Chapters; and here the Editors call it, The Edict of the most pious
Emperor Justinian, containing a Confession of Faith, and a Confutation of the
Heresies, that are contrary to the Catholic Church of God Titul. Edict. ap.
Bin. page 8 col. 2. Lab. 323.
. But for fear Vigilius and his Party might appear Heretical for opposing this
Orthodox Edict, the Editors will not print it here, but thrust it on some
hundred Pages further Edictum vide Bin. page 151. Lab. 638.
. And put in here their false Comment before the Text, hoping by the sham
Stories in these Notes, to take off the Readers aversation to this Heretical
Pope: But since all the Errors of these Notes are confuted at large in the
History of the Fifth Council, I will only name a few of them now, viz. That
Pelagius the Popes Secretary always opposed this Edict, is false, for he
afterward subscribed it. -- He says Vigilius, Pontianus (whose Letter is here
printed) and Facundus, who writ against this Edict, were Orthodox. -- But the
Fifth Council condemns all for Heretics, who wrote for the three Chapters'
here censured; and none but Heretical Writers could take upon them to confute
an Orthodox Confession of Faith: The Decree of Vigilius for silence, with his
prudence and courage, are all Fictions, as shall be shown in due place.

Vigilius had now been near three years at Constantinople, and carried fair
with Justinian, so that doubtless An. Dom. 550.
he had signed his Edict, which condemned the persons of Theodorus, Theodoret
and Ibas, and their Heretical Writings; yet here is an Epistle of his to a
Scythian Bishop, citing his Constitution (which defends these three Chapters,)
and wishes the persons of Theodorus, etc. might not be condemned, as some
favorers of Heresy desired: Yet in the same Epistle Ep. 12. Vigil. Bin. page
10. Col. 2. Lab. 557.
he says, he had Suspended his two Deacons for defending the three Chapters,
and would shortly Excommunicate them: Now what the Notes on this Epistle say,
That both the Opposers and Defenders of the three Chapters hated Vigilius Not.
in Ep. 12. Bin. page 11. Col. 2.
* is no wonder, for he was false to all Parties, and such trimming Sycophants,
who strive to please all, get the favor of no body.

The Fifteenth Epistle to the Universal Church, Baronius An. Dom. 551.
and the Editors do not censure; but it is a mere Forgery, being falsely dated
(as they own) in the 26 of Justinian 552; they alter it to 551. Binius found
but part of it in Baronius, so prints no more: But Labbe adds a great deal
more, not saying where he had it Epist. 15. Vigil. Bin. page 11. c. 2. Lab. 327.
: As to the matter of it, the Story of this Popes sufferings at Constantinople
is false and improbable, not attested by any credible Writer of that time: And
whereas he says, he had Excommunicated and Deposed Theodorus Bishop of
Caesarea, and Suspended Mennas Patriarch of Constantinople, that must be false,
because the Popes Legates in the sixth General Council affirm, that Mennas died
the 21st year of Justinian, (four year before the Date of this Letter,) An. 547
Council. 6. genesis Bin. Tom. 2 par. 1. page 21.
. Wherefore this Epistle and the Instrument of Condemnation against Theodorus
and Mennas are Forgeries Damnatio Theo. etc. Bin. page 12. Col. 1. Lab. 334.
: And it is very unjust, for Baronius and the Annotator on the credit of such
stuff so rudely to rail at Justinian, as if he were the vilest Heretic and
greatest Monster upon Earth. There are many other things in these Notes
deserving censure Not. in Ep. 15. Bin. page 13. Lab. 337.
, viz. The affirming that Theodorus of Caesaria deposed Zoilus of Alexandria,
and put in Apollinaris; whereas Liberatus expressly says, the Emperor did this
Liberat. Brev. cap. 24.
: The Stories of Justiman's revoking his Edict, and of Theodorus and Mennas
humble submission delivered in writing to Vigilius, and of his absolving them,
are equally false and most improbable, so that scarce any thing here can be
trusted. Were this Epistle genuine I would have observed, that Pope Vigilius
here says, he knew Justinian's Handwriting Baron. An. 552. n 15. page 388.
: And that utterly confutes Baronius and Suidas, who say, he was altogether
illiterate. I would also note, That the Pope here affirms, (An. 551.) he had
been seven year out of his Country, attending for the Peace of the Church Ap.
Lab. 333.
: Now if this be true, he must leave Rome An. 544, that is, three years before
Baronius his Account; and this will also prove some of his Epistles to Auxanius
counterfeit, being dated from Rome after that time. But after all, I reckon
this false account of the Pope's Journey, to be a sign that this Epistle is a
Forgery; only those who count it genuine ought to solve these difficulties.

There is nothing more in our Editors vere remarkable, but only some few French
Councils, called by their own Kings, and the Canons in them made by their own
Bishops, without any notice of Papal Authority, and so without any Corruptions.
Wherefore we pass them, and go on to the Fifth General Council, where Vigilius
will be brought on the Stage again.

An Epitome of Dr. Crakenthorp's Lab. Tom. v. 422, 429. col. 2. 430.
Treatise of the Fifth General Council at Constantinople, Anno 553.
Chap. i. THE occasion of this Council, was the Trio Capitulu, or three
Chapters about the Writings of Theodorus of Mopsvestia, Theodoret against
Cyril, and the Epistle of Ibas to Maris, which the Nestorians pretended was all
approved by the Council of Chalcedon; whereupon some doubted of the Authority
of that Holy Council, and the several Sects (called from their having no one
Head, Acephali) rejected it: So that to appease this dangerous Schism,
Justinian set forth an Orthodox Edict Bin. Tom. ii. par. 2. page 151. Lab. Tom.
v. page 683.
to condemn those Writings: And that not satisfying all Parties, he assembled
this Fifth General Council.

Chap. ii. Pope Vigilius was then at Constantinople, and often desired by the
Bishops, and commanded by the Emperor to be present Bin. Col. 1. 47, and 49. a.
etc Col. 2. 51. (...).
: Baronius falsely says, they had no regard to him Baron. An. 553. page 399. n.
31.
; yet he afterward owns twenty Metropolitans, and three Patriarchs invited him
to come, and offered him the Presidency Id. n. 35.
, urging him with a Promise under his Hand to to be there Bin. Col. 2. 51. a.
Lab. 430.
: Vigilius first pretended to be Sick, so they adjourned the first Session, on
his saying he would satisfy them next day Bin. col. 1. 49. a.
. Then he alleged there were but few Western Bishops; but they showed there
were more with him at that time, than had been in all the four former Great
Councils Bin. col. 2. 51. a. Lab. 430.
. He pretended also, he would offer his Sense to the Emperor alone Bin. and
Lab. ibid.
; but the Emperor required him to do it to the Council Bin. col. 1. 47 b. Lab.
422.
: So that the true reason why he would not be there, was, his Affection to the
Nestorians and the three Chapters.

Chap. iii. Upon this the Council resolves to proceed without him Bin. col. 2.
52. b. Lab. 434.
; which Cusanus says, ought to be done for the safety of the Church, when the
Pope is resolved not to come Cusan de concord. Cath. l. 2. c. 1.
; and herein they follow the Example of the Council of Chalcedon, who proceeded
without the Popes Legates, when they would not stay and join with them Conc.
Chal. Act. 16. Bin. Tom. ii. page 1. 334. Lab. Tom. iv. 79. h.
. Wherefore in the third Collation this 5th Council declared the true Faith,
and in the 4th and 5th examine the Cause of Theodorus and Theodoret: On the
fifth day (says Baronius,) Pope Vigilius sent his Constitution to the Council
Baron. An. 553. n. 41, and 48.
, being made by the advice of 16 Bishops and 3 Deacons, and designed to oblige
the whole Church, the Western agreeing with him in it Ibid. n. 47, and An. 547.
n. 39.
, and delivered by Apostolical Authority Vigil. Constable. Bin. page 26. Lab. 376.
Wherein he confirms the three Chapters, declaring 1st, That Theodorus of
Mopsvestia cannot be condemned after his death Bin. 25. Lab. 366.
. 2ly, That Theodoret's name should not be taxed Bin. ib. Lab. 367.
. 3ly, That Ibas Epistle to Maris was Catholic, and both he and that Epistle
received by the Council of Chalcedon as Catholic and Orthodox Bin. 26. Lab.
369.
. But Binius cuts off the five last Columns (which are added by Baronius and
Labbe,) and which show how fully Vigilius confirmed all the three Chapters

Chap. iv. In the 6th Collation the Council having received this Constitution,
do notwithstanding go on to examine Ibas Epistle Bin. 88. Lab. 509.
: And wonder any dare presume to say, it was received by the Council of
Chalcedon Ibid.
; Which Baronius owns was levelled at Vigilius, though out of respect he be not
named Baron. An. 553. n. 212.
. And after a strict Examination, They pronounce, that the approvers of this
Epistle are Followers of Theodorus and Nestorius the Heretics; They show the
Council at Chalcedon, owns God was made Man, which this Epistle calls
Apollinarism; That Council confesses Mary to be the Mother of God, the Epistle
denies it; They commend the Council of Ephesus, and Cyril's twelve Chapters
condemning Nestorius; Ibas condemns the Council of Ephesus, defends Nestorius,
and calls Cyril an Heretic, and his 12 Chapters impious: They stuck to Cyril's
Faith and the Nicene Creed, he condemns Cyril's Faith, and commends Theodorus
his Creed: They held two Natures, but one Person in Christ; He is for two
Persons also In fine Col. 6. Bin. page 102. Lab. 544.
: Whereupon this 5th Council Decree the whole Epistle to be Heretical, and
Anathematize all as Heretics who receive it Ibid.
. And for this reason Binius leaves out of his Edition the most of that part of
Vigilius's Constitution, which concerns Ibas his Epistle: And Baronius (who
puts it in) with the Nestorians, would excuse it by saying the latter part of
this Epistle is Orthodox: But the Council condemns the whole Epistle Col. 6. in
fine.
, and all that say any part of it is right Col. 8. Bin. page 116. Lab. 579.
; and all that write for it or defend it Col. 8. Bin. page 115. Lab. 568.
. So that Pope Vigilius, Baronius, Bellarmine and all the Writers for this
Heretical Epistle, were and are accursed by the Sentence of this General
Council: And if (as Baronius pretends) the Popes Legates at Chalcedon, say,
that Ibas appeared a Catholic by this Epistle Baron. An. 553. n. 213.
; the 5th Council shows the Fathers at Chalcedon condemned it, not heeding what
two or three said Bin. page 104. Lab. 548.
. Baronius urges, (as the Nestorians did,) that Eunomius said at Chalcedon, the
latter end of Ibas Epistle was Orthodox Baron. ut supr.
; but the 5th Council says, this is a Calumny Col. 6. Bin. 91. a. Lab.
, and cite the very words of Eunomius out of the Council at Chalcedon; which
import that Ibas was innocent, after he had agreed with Cyril and renounced his
Epistle, which he had done in the Acts before Photius and Eustathius Ibid.
. The 7th Collation of this 5th Council, was only repeating and approving
former Acts Col. 7. Bin. 104. Lab. 549.
. In the 8th Collation, Baronius owns this Council condemned the three Chapters
contrary to Vigilius Decree Baron. An. 553. n. 219.
, and Anathematize all that did defend them Col. 8. Bin. 115. Lab.
, that is, Vigilius, whom Baronius often commends as a defender of them Baron.
An. 553. n. 233. An. 546. n. 40, etc.
: Yea, they declare them Heretics, by the Doctrine of the Scriptures and holy
Fathers, and of the four former Councils Coll. 8. ut supr. and Bin. 116. Lab.
179.
: All which therefore Vigilius contradicted in his Constitution. And whatever
Baronius first says to disparage this Council, it was ratified by the 6th
Council Council. 6. Act. 15.
, by the seventh, or second Nicene Council, Act. 6. yea, (and as Baronius
confesses Baron. An. 553. number. 229.
), by all succeeding General Councils; by the Popes, Pelagius, Gregory the
Great; Agatho, Leo the second, and by all succeeding Popes, who were sworn to
observe all the General Councils, and this among others Baron. An. 869. n. 68,
69.
. To which we may add the Councils of Basil and Constance, and all the
Catholic Church till Leo the 10th's Lateran Council, An. 1516, which contrary
to the Catholic Faith Academia Paris. in Appellat.
decreed no Council could condemn a Pope: Wherefore we may conclude, Vigilius
was a condemned Heretic.

Chap. v. Now let us examine Baronius his shifts, and those Binius learns from
him. First, they pretend this was not a point of Faith, but concerned only
persons Baron. An. 547. n. 30. n. 46. n. 225. n. 231. Vid. item. Bin. not. in
5. Council. page 174. Lab. 374.
: Which is most false; For the Emperor Justinian calls it a matter of Faith
Bin. Col. 1. page 47. Lab. 422.
: so does the 5th Council it self declare Col. 8. saepissime.
: Yea, Vigilius in his Constitution calls the condemning these three Chapters
Erring from the Faith; and Facundus the Apologist for them says, the opposing
them was rooting out the Catholic and Apostolic Faith Baron. An. 546. n. 47.
. On the other side Pope Pelagius says, they are contrary to the Faith, and to
receive them is to overthrow the Faith of Ephesus Pelag. 2. ep. 7.
; which Epistle Gregory the Great confirms Greg. l. 2. ep. 36.
. Bellarmine says, that is de fide, which a Council defines to be so, and
calls the opposers of it Heretics and accurseth them Bellarm. de Council. cap.
12.. 4.
. And Baronius calls the Emperors Edict for the three Chapters, Sanctio de fide
Catholica Baron. An. 546. n. 41.
, and Fidei decretum Id. An. 547. n. 50.
, So that it must be a matter of Faith: And Gregory the Great was mistaken if
he meant, that this 5th Council handled no matters of Faith, but treated of
Persons Greg. l. 3. ep. 37.
: For the contrary is manifest. But indeed Gregory means they altered no point
of Faith established at Chalcedon, as some in his time fancied; only condemning
the persons there examined; but still it was by showing they held notorious
Heresies.

Chap. vi. But to consider the three Chapters severally: The first was about
Theodorus of Mopsvestia, who (as Vigilius says Constable. Vigil. Bin. 25. Lab. 365.
,) should not be condemned after he was dead, citing Leo and Gelasius for it,
as having decreed it for a point of Faith: But on the other side St. Austin
declares, if Caecilian were guilty of the Crimes objected (100 years after his
death,) he would Anathematize him Aug. Ep. ad Bonifac. citat. in Council. col. 5.
: Pelagius urges and approves of this Doctrine of St. Austin, and says Leo
agreed with him Pelag. 2. ep. 7.
. The same is proved in the 5th Council, to have been the Opinion of St. Cyril,
of the African Council, etc. Col. 5. Bin. page 75. Lab. 479.
Thus also Domnus was condemned at Chalcedon after his death, and many of the
old Heretics Edict. Just. Bin. 164 Lab. 715.
: Honorius was condemned by name sixty years after his death Council. vi. Act.
12, 13 and 18.
. Yea, Baronius who urges this in excuse of Vigilius in one place Baron. An.
553. number. 233.
, in another declares that it is a mistake, and that the Church of Rome does
condemn Men after their death Id. ibid. number. 185.
; So as he is forced to commend and condemn the same Fact; and to excuse this
reason of Vigilius, he disputes for both sides of a Contradiction: As to our
Saviors words, of binding and loosing on Earth, Math 18. which Gelasius and
Vigilius cite, they respect the living Ministers on Earth, and not the Persons
bound or loosed: And Leo and Gelasius both speak of loosing Persons, who dyed
Excommunicate and Impenitent, which they held unlawful; but neither of them say
with Vigilius, That an Heretic, who is not discovered till after his death,
and dyed in Heresy, may not be condemned then.

Chap. vii. Vigilius pretends in the second place, that this Theodorus dyed in
the peace of the Church Constable. Bin. page 25. Lab. 366.
; which objection is taken notice of, both by Justinian Edict. Bin. 164. Lab.
715.
and the 5th Council Collat. 5. Bin. 79. Lab. 490.
, and largely disproved by showing he was condemned as an Heretic by all
Churches, for that he dyed in his impiety; and the Council say it is a Lie to
affirm the contrary: Wherefore Baronius falsely says, Vigilius knew he dyed in
the Communion of the Church Baron. An. 553. n. 49.
. For even Binius says, this cannot be believed, because Justinian's Edict
witnesses the contrary Bin. not. in 5 Council. page 174. Lab. 735.
, even that he dyed in Heresy. So that unless an Heretic be in the Communion
of the Church, Theodorus dyed not in that Communion.

Chap. viii. The Popes third reason is, that neither the Fathers, nor Councils
had condemned Theodorus, particularly not Cyril, nor Proclus, nor the Synods of
Ephesus or Chalcedon Vigil. Constable. Bin. page 25. Lab. 364.
: But the 5th Council cites the very words of Cyril and Proclus, which declare
him an Heretic and condemn him Collat. 5. Bin. 76, etc. Lab. 483, etc.
. They cite the words of Cyril to John of Antioch, in the Council of Ephesus,
which say there were two Sons Ibid.
: Also Cyril's Epistle approved at Chalcedon says, the Council of Ephesus
Anathematized not only Nestorius, but all that taught as he did Council. Ephesians.
Act. 1. c. 6. and Chalcea. Act. 5. page 96.
: And Nestorius being Theodorus his Scholar, as the Emperor shows Justin. Ep.
ad Synod. 5. Bin. 47. Lab. 421.
, the 5th Council doubts not to affirm he was condemned in the former great
Council Collat. 8. Bin. 115. Lab. 568.
; So Pelagius the second says, the Ephesine Council condemned Theodorus and
his Creed Pelag. 2. Epist. 7.
: Vigilius indeed denies it was his Creed; but Cyril says it was his, and
produced it under his name in the Council of Ephesus, and condemned it Collat.
5. Bin. page 77. Lab. 486.
: So the not mentioning his name in the Anathema, is but a fallacious proof of
his being not condemned there: But when the Nestorians began to shroud
themselves under his name, then a Synod in Armenia condemned him by name
Collat. 6. Epist. Ibas and Baron. An. 435. n. 4.
, and Proclus exhorted them so to do as Cyril affirms Collat. 5. Bin. 77. Lab.
486, etc.
, and Cyril there condemns him by name Ibid.
: So did Theodosius and Valentiniam, by their Edicts which the 5th Council
cites Collat. 5. Bin. 71. Lab. 471, 472
. The Church of Mopsvestia put his name out of the Dypticks Ibid. Bin. 81. Lab.
495.
: And Sergius Bishop of Cyrus was deposed for reckoning his name among the
Orthodox Bishops: Wherefore the 5th Council rightly declares, That the
Catholic Church had cast out Theodorus after his death, for his impious
Writings Collat. 5. Bin. 84. Lab. 503.
. But Pope Vigilius cites two forged Epistles of Cyril and Proclus, to show
that neither of them condemned Theodorus Ibid. Bin. 76. Lab. 483. and 78. and
487.
. And with the Nestorians he denies, that these Impious Writings were composed
by Theodorus Vigil. Constable. Bin. 24, 25. Lab. 364, 365.
. But the Armenian Synod, St. Cyril, Justinian and the 5th Council, all say
they were writ by Theodorus; the same is also affirmed by Pope Pelagius Pelag.
2. Ep. 7.. etsi.
: As for what Vigilius objects, that the Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon were
against condemning Theodorus after his death Vigil. Constable. ut supra.
, Liberatus fortunes to say the same Liber. Brev. cap. 10. Bin. page 182. Lab.
752, etc.
; And Baronius, who takes no notice of Vigilius, severely taxes Liberatus for
this, as a Nestorian falsehood charged on the Council of Chalcedon Baron. An.
435. n. 11 and 12.
. And Binius says, it is contrary to Cyril's Writings (received at Ephesus,)
and to the Acts at Chalcedon Notis in Liberat. Bin. page 193. Lab. 779.
. Finally, Vigilius most falsely says, the Emperor Justinian himself, as if he
quoted the Acts of Chalcedon in his Edict for the Trinity, is for clearing
Theodorus Vigil. Constable. Bin. page 25. Lab. 365.
; which is so gross a slander as can scarce be paralleld. For Justinian in that
very Edict condemns Nestorius and all that Teach with him Edict. Just. trin.
Cod. l. 1. Tit. 1. Lab. 5. page 2.
; yea, he censures Theodorus by name in a particular Epistle, writ to this 5th
Council Bin. page 160. Lab. 706.
: On these frivolous and false grounds Vigilius Decrees, none shall condemn
Theodorus Vigil. Constable. ut supr.
: But the 5th Council, without scruple justly condemns both him, and all that
held with him or defended him, that is, Pope Vigilius for one.

Chap. ix. Secondly, Vigilius held the Heretical side as to the Writings of
Theodoret, whose person after renouncing his former Heresy all agree to be
Catholic; So that this is a point of Doctrine, not concerning a person. Yet
first Vigilius pretends, Theodoret did not write these Papers against Cyril,
alleged under his name, as (he says) appeared to the Council at Chalcedon
Vigil. Constable. Bin. page 25. Lab. 367.
, which is most false; For Binius owns he writ against Cyril, and defended both
Nestorius and Theodorus Bin. Praes. Tom. i. page 2. page 3. and notis in Epist.
61. Leonis.
; and Baronius over and over confesses the same thing Baron. An. 427. n. 30.
and An. 431. n. 182.
: So does Liberatus, cap. 4. and Pope Pelagius ep. 7. and the Councils both of
Ephesus and Chalcedon Act. Council. Ephesians. cap. 2. and cap. 8. The Chalced. Act.
1. cap. 6.
: Yea, Theodoret himself in his Epistles (cited in the 5th Council, and by Pope
Pelagius) owns it Col. 5. Bin. page 72 and 85. Lab. 473 and 504.
; So that it is a wonder Vigilius durst urge so weak and false a thing: But he
objects, The Council of Chalcedon only required him to renounce Nestorius, not
to condemn his own Writings Constable. Vigil. ut supra.
: Which is a mere fallacy, for he writ for Nestorius, and against Cyrils twelve
Chapters: Now since he condemned all the Doctrins of Nestorius at Chalcedon,
and also subscribed the twelve Chapters, he did really and virtually, though
not by name, Anathematize his own Writings Vid. Council. Chalced. Act. 8.
: Yea, Pelagius says expressly, he did condemn his own Writings Pelag. Ep. 7.
ut supra.
. And though at the Council of Chalcedon this General Condemnation sufficed,
yet when the Nestorians in the time of Justinian, defended themselves by
Theodoret's Writings, it was necessary to condemn them expressly, and by name.
Thirdly, Vigilius says, Cyril on the Union with the Eastern Bishops, required
none of them to renounce their own Writings Vigil. Constable. Bin. page 26. Lab.
page 367.
: Which signifies nothing, since Cyril made them all Anathematize Nestorius,
whose Cause they had defended before he would communicate with them Cyril. Ep.
ad Dynat. in Council. Ephesians. c. 16.
. Wherefore Vigilius falsely concludes those Writings innocent, which so
vigorously defend Nestorius his Doctrine; and if he and Theodoret vindicated
these Writings, after they had condemned Nestorius, they contradict themselves,
condemn only a name, but held the Heretical Doctrins still: Which is plain also
from Vigilius his affirming, That the Council of Chalcedon would have no
Nestorian Doctrins condemned under Theodoret's name Vigil. Constable. Bin. page
Lab. 367.
. That Council did condemn all that defended Nestorius, of which these very
Writings of Theodoret were the chief: But he there recanting his Errors, they
condemned those Errors, when they declared him Orthodox. And it was Vigilius
favor for Nestorianism, which makes him so Zealous for Theodoret's Nestorian
Writings.

Chap. x. Thirdly, Vigilius held the Heretical side as to Ibas his Epistle,
affirming that the Council of Chalcedon pronounced it to be Orthodox Vigil.
Constable. Bin. page Lab. page 370.
: But the 5th Council expressly say, the Council of Chalcedon did condemn and
cast it out Lab. Council. 5. col. 6. page 515. Bin. p.
. Again, Vigilius says, the whole Council of Chalcedon agreed with Pascasinus
and Maximus, who say that Ibas by this Epistle was declared a Catholic Vigil.
Constit. ut supra.
. Whereas the 5th Council positively declare, that the discourse of these two
single persons, was not regarded at Chalcedon Council. 5. ut supra.
: And Baronius, after so many succeeding Popes and Councils had confirmed this
5th Council, most impudently relates both these untruths, viz. That the Fathers
of Chalcedon received this Epistle as Catholic, and that by it they did judge
Ibas Orthodox Baron. An. 553. p. and An. 448. p.
; yet in contradiction to himself, he in other places Baron. An. 432. p.
not only doubts, whether Ibas did write this Epistle, but affirms expressly,
it was found at Chalcedon not to be Ibas his Epistle, citing for it the
wretched Nicene Council for Images, where this and many false Stories are
found: And after all, the Cardinal forgetting himself, says elsewhere Baron.
An. 448. page 69. Et An. 553. page
; The Council of Chalcedon said it was his Epistle, and Ibas owned it to be his
own, and that it was well known to be the Epistle of Ibas, and he cites the
10th Act of the Council of Chalcedon to prove this, which he out of the very
Acts of Chalcedon had denied before: Into so many confusions and snares, does
he fall by laboring to defend this Heretical Pope.

Chap. xi. Whose frauds, with Baronius's, will further appear if we observe,
that the true General Council at Ephesus excommunicated Ibas Council. Ephesians.
cap. 7.
, and the spurious Synod excommunicated Cyril Acta Conciliab. Ephesians. ibid
: The Emperor Theodosius to heal this breach, writes to John of Antioch, Patron
of the Nestorians, to condemn Nestorius and agree with Cyril Vid. in fine Con.
Ephesin.
: And he at last with his Accomplices consented so to do, Anathematizing
Nestorius, approving the Ephesine Council, and subscribed Cyril's Confession of
Faith Vid. Epist. Cyril. ibid.
, and so were received into the Peace of the Church, and an Union was made
between them and Cyril: Now Vigilius and Baronius pretend, that Ibas in the end
of his Epistle mentions this Union of John and Cyril with joy, therefore he
was a Catholic when he writ it Vigil. Constable. Lab. page 373. Bin. page
; and was so proved at Chalcedon by this Epistle; especially by the latter end
of it Baron. An. 448. and An. 553. ut supr.
: But the 5th Council condemns the whole Epistle, and say the latter part of it
is most impious Council. 5. Col. 6. page 517. Lab.
. And they had good reason, for though Baronius pretend this Epistle was writ
upon the Eastern Bishops Union with Cyril Baron. An. 448. n. 59. page 69.
; That is most false; for that Union was, An. 432, or 433, and Rambulus was
then Bishop of Edessa. But Ibas succeeded him, and mentions in this Epistle an
Edict condemning Theodorns of Mopsvestia, dated An. 435 Epist. Jo. ad Xystum
inter Act. Council. Ephesians. Bin. T. 1. par. 2. page 421.
; yea Rambulus was still Bishop of Edessa, and upon this Edict condemned
Theodorus, so that Ibas could not write this Epistle till 2 or 3 years after
the Union, being Bishop of Edessa when he writ it Liberat. Brev. cap. 10. Bin.
page 182. Lab. 752, etc.
: Yet then in this very Epistle he affirmed, God was not incarnate, nor Mary
the Mother of God: So that the Union Ibas praises God for, must be that false
Report spread by the Nestorians of Cyril's recanting, and yielding to John of
Antioch Cyril. Ep. ad Donatum. Council. Ephesians. par. 3. Number. 38.
: So Theodoret 12 years after the Union brags, that the East and Egypt were now
agreed, that God was not crucified Council. v. Collar. 5. Bin. page 86. Lab.
col. 508.
. And Ibas explains himself in this very Epistle by saying, God had subdued the
Heart of the Egyptian to subscribe; John of Antioch says, Yea, to the very
Heresy of Nestorius, which this Author calls the Faith lb. col. 6. Bin. 88.
Lab. 511.
in the latter end of this Epistle; by which Baronius says he proved himself a
Catholic Baron. An. 448. ut sup^.
: Yet Baronius owns this Story of Cyril's recantation, was a vile calumny of
the Nestorians, who (as he pretends) forged this Epistle for Ibas, but it was
found to be none of his Idem An. 432. page 625, 626.
; which is a ridiculous contradiction: And yet these shifts he is put to in
justifying an Epistle, wholly condemned in the 5th General Council. But to
proceed, Ibas must relate to this feigned Union, because the Nestorians did at
first require that Cyril should recant his twelve Chapters Council. Ephesians. par. 3.
Epist. Cyril. ad Acacium. Bin. page 431.
, and by the proposals of Eusebius Bishop Emisa made to him Ibid. page 422.
, which were in vain; and John of Antioch was forced at last by that Bishop, to
send his Submission to Cyril's Faith: To which second message Cyril indeed
consented, and thence the Nestorians falsely said he consented to the first, and
(as they requested) condemned his twelve Chapters; which remaining Orthodox,
Ibas his Epistle must be Heretical, as it expresses a joy for Cyril's supposed
consent to Nestorianism.

Chap. xii. The next Method which Vigilius and Baronius take to prove Ibas
Orthodox, is by the Words of this Epistle, wherein he rejects Cyril's twelve
Chapters for teaching one Nature, and affirms, Two Natures and One Person Vid.
Epist. Iboe apud Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. page 88. Lab. Council. 5. Collat. 6. page
509.
. Now the Nestorians could say this craftily like Catholics, but their meaning
was, that each Nature made a distinct subsistence, united only by Cohabitation,
so that the Son of God dwelt in the Son of Mary; as may be collected from
Nestorius own words Council. 5. Collat. 6. Bin. page 103. Lab. 546.
: And from Justinian's Edict, where he says, for Person, they perfidiously
used the word Natures Edict. Just. post Council. 5. Bin. page 161. Lab. col. 709.
. But Vigilius, to clear Ibas, says, Dioscorus and the Pseudo Ephesine Synod
did condemn Flavianus for this Confession of Two Natures Vigil. Constable. in Lab.
col. 371.
. It Is replied, they were all Eutychians who denied two Natures in all Senses,
and so might condemn these words, whether Flavianus the Catholic in a right
Sense, or Iba^ the Nestorian in a wrong, used them: And whereas Vigilius urges,
that the Council of Chalcedon condemned Dioscorus and received Ibas Constable. Vig.
ibid.
; It Is plain, they condemned his whole Epistle, as the 5th Council prove at
large Council. 5. Collat. 6. Bin. 104. Lab. col. 548.
, and received him only after he had renounced the Doctrine of this Epistle:
Again, Vigilius would justify the Epistle by pleading, that Ibas owned the
true Ephesine Council, before Photius and Eustathius Constable. Vigil. ut supra.
: But it was proved before that Ibas writ this Epistle, An. 434, and was then
an Heretic; but the Acts before Photius were not till 14 years after Baron.
An. 448. page 63. Tom. 6.
; But his being a Catholic then, is no proof that his Epistle is Orthodox:
Further, Vigilius says, that Ibas mistook Cyril till he explained his
Chapters, after which he and the Eastern Bishops ran into Cyril's Commuion
Vigil. Constable. ut supr.
. And Baronius says, that he did communicate with Cyril, after he had purged
himself of the suspicion of being an Apollinarist by declaring his Chapters
Baron. An. 448. page 66.
: Yet Baronius himself owns, that Cyril explained his Chapters at Ephesus,
while he was in Prison there, An. 431 Idem An. 431. page 595.
, while the Pseudo-Synod sat; and so their Title declares Council. Ephesians. par. 3.
Bin. page 311.
. But Ibas writ this Epistle above 2 years after this Explanation, and was then
a Nestorian: Nor did the Eastern Bishops communicate with him till long after;
and Theodoret writ bitterly against him, after that they were reconciled to
Cyril Epist. Theodoret. ad Nestor. Council. 5. Col. 5. prope finem. Bin. page 86.
. And Binius owns the difference between Cyril and the Eastern Bishops, endured
full three years after the Council Bin. Praefatio ad Council. Ephesians. Tom. i.
par. 2. page 4.
; yet Ibas writ this Epistle after the Union was made, as the 5th Council
expressly declares Council. 5. Collar. 6. Bin. page 90. Lab. 514.
: From all which it is plain that Vigilius mistakes the point; for the
Explanation Ibas meant of was Cyril's absolute revoking his twelve Chapters, (a
Forgery of the Nestorians) which in the Epistle he calls his Recanting; not
this Orthodox Explanation of the twelve Chapters, as Vigilius pretends; yea, it
was proved before Photius and Eustathius that, Ibas said, He would not have
received Cyril, if he had not Anathematized his Chapters Council. Chalced Act.
x. Bin. page 289.
. Wherefore Ibas his Epistle was always Heretical, and he an Heretic until he
recanted and came over to Cyril's Faith; but Vigilius falsely affirms him to
have been Orthodox, both before he rightly understood Cyril's meaning and
afterward Vigil. Constable. Lab. Col. 371.
, and wrongfully supposes Cyril came over to Ibas, who held two Persons, but
called them two Natures; from all which it manifestly appears, 1st, That the
dispute about this Epistle was a cause of Faith. 2ly, That Ibas his Epistle was
Heretical. 3ly, That Vigilius and Baronius in this dispute take the Heretical
side.

Chap. xiii. Baronius further pretends, that neither the asserting or denying
these three Chapters, could denominate Men Heretics Baron. An. 547. page 358.
Item An. 553. page 437.
: But this was fully disproved before (see Chap. 5.) And since this was a cause
of Faith, in which the whole 5th Council held contrary to Pope Vigilius, it
will follow, that Men may contradict the Popes Decisions in Articles of Faith,
and be no Heretics: Yea, since here the Pope was on the wrong side, they who
are to believe all such Decisions must sometimes be Heretics. Secondly,
Baronius falsely affirms, that they who held contrary to the Pope herein, were
Schismatics Convict Baron. An. 547. page 358.
. It Is true, there was a Schism, as he confesses Id. An. 553. Saepissime.
: But Vigilius and his Party were the Schismatics, who separated from a
General Council, owned for such by all Catholics.

Chap. xiv. In the next place, Baronius would excuse Vigilius from Heresy,
because he professed to hold the Faith of the Council of Chalcedon, and writ
his Constitution to defend it Baron. An. 553 page 437, 438.
: So did Victor Victoris Chron. An. 2. post Consul. Basil.
, so Facundus Hermianensis Facundus ap. Baron. An. 546. page 344.
, who writ for the three Chapters, pretend: Yea, Vigilius himself in his
Constitution pretends to maintain the Faith of that great Council Vigil. Constable.
Lab. col. 375.
. But let it be considered, that the 5th General Council after a strict
examining all these pretenses, Anathematizes all that defend the three Chapters
in the name of the Council of Chalcedon Council. 5. col. 8. Bin. page 115. Lab.
col. 568.
, which Fact all Catholics who approve this 5th Council must consent to. And
nothing is more usual with all sorts of Heretics, than to profess they believe
as the Orthodox Councils and Fathers have believed; yet they were condemned for
all that pretense, (See particular instances of this, as to the Eutychians,
Monothelites, Nestorians and Modern Romanists, in the learned Author
Crakenthorps Vigil. dormit. chap. 14. page 201, etc.
: Therefore Baronius his excuse is frivolous, since Heretics professions are
as false and contradictory as their Doctrins: And Vigilius would not forsake
the three Chapters, no not when they were proved contrary to the Council of
Chalcedon, and forbids any to write or speak against them, so as he might never
be convicted or convinced.

Chap. xv. Baronius his third excuse for Vigilius is, that he confirmed the 5th
Council Baron. An. 553. page 438 and 439. Idem. An. 554. page 445.
: And Bellarmine says, he did confirm it Bell. de Council. l. 1. cap. 5.
: Binius adds, no Man doubts it: But if Vigilius case be examined, it will be
found he changed four times in this Cause of Faith. First, While he was at
Rome, upon Justinian's first putting out the Edict, he opposed it Baron. An.
546. page 343.
, and stirred up Facundus a Nestorian to write against the Emperor in rude
Language Ibid. page 344.
. Yea, Baronius in the same place Rails (g) Bin. notis in Council. 5. page 173.
at Justinian for this Edict; and Vigilius writ a threatening Letter to
Constantinople, against all that should join with the Emperor Ibid. page 347.
: So that Vigilius, Facundus and Baronius stand all Anathematized by the 5th
Council, for writing in defense of the three Chapters Council. 5. Collat. 8.
Bin. page 115.
. But Secondly, As soon as Vigilius was come to Constantinople he changed his
Mind, and in a Council of 30 Bishops condemned the three Chapters, which
Facundus upbraids him with Baron. An. 547. page 359.
; and Baronius confesses he writ a Book against them, and sent it to Mennas
Bishop of Constantinople; and that he excommunicated Rusticus and Sebastianus
(two Roman Deacons,) with other defenders of the three Chapters Baron. An. 547.
page 360.
; and in those Epistles writ about these Men, he calls this writing to Mennas,
his Constitution, his Judgment by Peter's Authority Council. 5. Collat. 7. Ep.
ad Rustic. and Sabin. and Epist. ad Valentin. ibid.
. For which the other Party called him a Deserter, a Prevaricator, etc. Baron.
ib. page 362.
; and Victor says, that the African Bishops in a Synod excommunicated him
Victoris Chronicon. An. (...) post. Consul. Bas.
; yet Baronius owns these Bishops at that time were Catholics: Nor does it
excuse this Pope, that he revoked this Constitution which condemned the three
Chapters, presently after it was published; and made another Decree, that all
should keep silence till the General Council Baron. An. 547. page 361.
. For this only shows him a Dissembler, and a neutral in a Cause of Faith: But
Thirdly, At the 5th Council Vigilius returns to his Vomit, condemns the
imperial Edict, and defends the three Chapters (as we showed before See Chap.
iii. of this History.
), and was so obstinate as to endure Banishment for this Opinion Bin. not. in
Council. 5. page 174.
, which (though none suffered for but such as the 5th Council declared
Heretics,) Baronius calls an heavy persecution Baron. An. 553. page 435.
; and indeed his suffering on this side shows he was always a Nestorian in his
Heart: But Fourthly, Binius and Baronius say, he changed again after the 5th
Council, and condemning the three Chapters was enlarged, but died in his way
home Bin. notis ad Council. 5. ut supr. page 174.
. Yea, they are confident that he did confirm the 5th Council, (and so condemn
his late Constitution Baron. An. 554. page 444, 445.
): Which last change no ancient Author mentions: And though this only could
keep him from dying in Heresy, yet this is a Fiction of Baronius, who will say
any thing to save a Popes credit; an instance of which we have in his
commending this Proteus, for a Man of Wisdom and Constancy Idem An. 547. page
362. and 361.
, and in Binius his praising Vigilius for a prudent and pious Pope, who
imitated St. Paul in changing his Mind Bin. notis ad Council. 5. page 174.. cum.
Baron. An. 553. page 438, 439.
; while Justinian, who was always Orthodox and stood firm, is by these
Parasites decried as a wicked perfidious person Baron. An. 554. page 444.
: So that Truth in others is Error, and Error in a Pope is Truth, yea, if a
Pope hold Contradiction, he is always in the Right.

Chap. xvi. But in this Account of Vigilius changes, two of them are forged by
Baronius: First, that Decree of silence is a Fable, though it be so often
mentioned in the Annals Baron. An. 547. page 361.
, and though he say Vigilius decreed this Synodically An. 551. page 382.
, and affirm that Theodorus and Mennas consented to it An. 547. ut supr.
, and that he and Justinian had promised to observe this silence An. 551. page
381.
: Whereupon he pretends Vigilius excommunicated Theodorus and suspended Mennas
An. 551. page 384.
; And stoutly opposing Justinian, who this year hung up his Edict in
contradiction to this Decree of silence Ibid. page 381.
; though he fled to St. Peter's Church, and then to Chalcedon, yet thence he
thundered out his spiritual Darts against them all, and rescinded the Emperors
Decree An. 552. page 387.
. Upon this Baronius says, the Emperor revoked his Edict, and Theodorus
repented and submitted, as did also Mennas, and so all were content (i) Ibid.
page 388, 389.
to be silent till the Council, and great Joy followed thereupon: Now this is
all Fiction: For first, if there had been such a Decree for silence, let it be
noted, Domnus was condemned at Chalcedon for an Heretic, in that he decreed
silence should be kept about Cyril's twelve Chapters Council. 5. Collat. 6. Bin.
page 103. Lab. col. 546. Edict. Justin. Lab. col. col. 718. Bin. page 165.
. And by that Rule, Vigilius would have been Heretical for his Decree: Whereas
the truth is, he never made any such Decree; for Justinian affirms, that from
his first coming to Constantinople, until the Council, he always was for
condemning the three Chapters Epist. Justin. ad Council. 5. Collat. 1. Bin. 47.
Lab. 422.
; and as the Emperors messenger affirms, to the 5th Council then assembled, he
often promised to join with them in it Council. 5. Collat. 7. Bin. 106. Lab. 549.
. Nor did Vigilius observe his own Decree, which is pretended to be made An.
547. the 21st. of Justinian Baron. An. 547. page 361.
, and to have silenced all Disputes: For in the 22d year of that Emperor, the
two Roman Deacons above named, accused Vigilius for condeming the three
Chapters by their Leuers to diverse Bishops Idem. An. 548. page 363.
. In Justinian's 23d year, Vigilius purges himself to Valentinianus from these
Slanders, by appealing to his Judgment, sent unto Mennas, to which he declares
he then adhered Council. 5. Collat. 7. Bin. 109. Lab. 551.
. In the Emperors 24th year, he writ the like Apology to Aurelianus Ibid. Bin.
109. Lab. 558.
; and as Baronius proves, the same year he published his Sentence against
Rusticus, Sabinianus, and others for defending the three Chapters Baron. An.
550. page 375 and 380.
. Now how could he by word and writing, thus sentence and punish all that
disliked his Condemnation of the three Chapters, and appeal to his Judgment in
that case, if there had been a revocation of it, and a Synodal Decree of
Taciturnity three year before? Nor did Justinian know of, or consent to any
such Decree; for Victor says, in his 22d year he writ for the Condemnation of
the three Chapters, compelling diverse Bishops to condemn them Victoris Chronic.
An. 7. post. Cons. Basilij.
. The next year the Illyrian Bishops persuaded the Emperor not to proceed so
Ibid. An. 8.
; so did Faeundus in the 24th year; but he that year called the Council at
Mopsvestia to condemn Theodorus Council. 5. Collat. 5. Bin. page 80. Lab. 492.
. In his 25th year, Victor and Liberatus declared, he dealt with the African
Primates and Bishops to condemn these Chapters; and got Zoilus Patriarch of
Alexandria deprived for refusing it Victoris Chron. ut supr. An. 10. Liberat.
Breviar. cap. 23.
, and in his 26th year (just before the Council,) he Banished several obstinate
Afrirican Bishops Idem An. II. id est, 26 An. Justin.
: So it is very ridiculous in Baronius, to speak of the Emperor's publishing
his Edict An. 25th Baron. An. 551. ut supr.
, since it was published long before; and to pretend he revoked it the next
year, since Justinian every year writ and acted in the defense of it: We add,
that neither did Theodorus and the Catholics observe this Decree of silence;
for Vigilius sentences them for writing against the defenders of these Chapters
Idem. An. 551 page 382.
. No nor yet did the Heretics value it: for they writ warmly for the three
Chapters all that time Baron. An. 548. page 364 and An. 550. initio.
: Yea, Victor notes, that the Illyrian Synod in the 23d year of Justinian, and
the African in the 24th writ for the three Chapters Victor. Chron. An. 8 and 9.
post Consul. Basilij.
. Well, but Baronius cites public Acts for this Decree, and the subsequent
agreement between Vigilius and Mennas Baron. An. 547. page 361.
: But these Acts are forged, being dated An. 25. Justin. An. 10. post consul.
Basil. Idem An. 551. page 384.
where Baronius places the suspension of Mennas, and his submission next year
after Idem. An. 552. ut supr. An. 26. Just.
: But Mennas died the 21st year of Justinian, that is, five year before, as the
Popes Legates prove in the sixth General Council Council. 6 Gen Act. 3. and Bin.
not. ibid.
, and by that show these Public Acts were forged; yea, Baronius, who here
cites these Acts to color over this Fable, there owns the Acts to be forged,
and expressly says, Mennas certainly died in the 21st year of Justinian Baron.
An. 680.
. So that we may conclude this Decree of Silence and Mennas suspension with the
rest, are a notorious Fable, invented only to save the Credit of Pope Vigilius.

Chap. xvii. And so is his confirming the fifth Council, either before or after
his supposed Exile, which Baronius and others so boldly affirm Baron. and Bin.
ut supr. cap. 15.
: For that he did not confirm it neither during its Session, nor soon after,
Baronius proves, because his Letters would then have been annexed to the
Council Id. An. 553. page 435, 436.
. And he confesses the Reason moving Pelagius, the next Pope, to confirm it,
was, That he found the Eastern Church in a Schism by Vigilius his Constitution
Id. ib. p. 439.
, which could not have been if Vigilius in his Life had revoked that
Constitution. Again, the Western Church rejected the fifth Council all the time
of Vigilius; for there could be found but two Western Bishops who would
consecrate Pelagius after he was chosen Pope, because be condemned the three
Chapters (says Victor Victor. Chron. An. 17. post consul. Basil.
,) and as Baronius adds, because they abhorred the fifth General Council Baron.
An. 556. page 452. n. 1.
; yea, a Council at Aquileia condemned the fifth Council An. 554 Beda de 6
aetat. mund. An. 4637. Sigon. de reg. Ital. An. 554.
, urging that Pope Vigilius did not agree with it; and in this Opinion they
remained till Pelagius the second (20 years after Vigilius death and more, An.
577.) instructed them that the Apostolic Seat understanding the Controversy
better after Vigilius his time, had changed its Judgment Epist 7. Pelag. 2.
inter fragm. Conc. 5. Bin. page 123. Lab. Col. 615.
, which Letter of this Pelagius is annexed to the fifth Council, and by Binius
compared to the Epistle of Leo to Flavianus Bin. Not. in 7 Epist. Pel. 2. page
257.
. Which Argument shows, that Pelagius never heard that Vigilius changed his
Judgment, or confirmed the fifth Council. As to Evagrius, who (says Baronius)
with all the Greek Writers do affirm, that Vigilius by his Letters consented to
the Council, since he did not this during the Council, nor shortly after (being
banished), we must assert he consented when he was freed from Exile Baron. An.
553. page 435 and An. 554. page 444.
: So the Cardinal: I Reply, This is very fallacious, for neither Evagrius, nor
any Greek Writer, say any more, than That Vigilius did by Letter consent to the
fifth Synod -- But Evagrius adds, -- yet would not be present in it Evag. hist.
lib. 4. cap. 37.
. By which it is clear, the Historian means nothing but that consent, which by
word and writing he had often given, as to the Synods Opinion before they met,
of which the fifth Council often complains, because he denied it, and flew off
afterward Council 5. collat. 1. Bin. 47 and 49. Lab. 422, and 425.
; and it was these precedent Writings, that both Nicephorus (s) and Photius
mean Phot. de 7 Synod. in Council. 7.
. Wherefore it is falsely done of Baronius to apply this to a subsequent Decree,
for confirming the fifth Council after it was (f) Niceph. lib. 17. cap 27.
ended. Baronius his last Argument is, That since Vigilius was banished for not
consenting to the fifth Synod, it is not likely he should be released till he
had confirmed it Baron. An. 554. page 445. n. 6.
. But first the consequence is not good, for Justinian might restore him to
gratify so great a Subject as Narses, and Narses might entreat the Emperor to
oblige the Roman Clergy, who then were Enemies to the fifth Synod. Secondly,
(which is worse) The whole story of this Banishment and Release is fabulous:
For no Author but Anastasius mentions this last Exile, who is very fabulous,
and here much mistaken; for he says, Pelagius was present at this Release, and
then set free Anastas. apud Baron. An. 554. p. 444. n. 1.
. Whereas Victor, who then was at Constantinople says, Vigilius died in Sicily
the 16th year after Basilius his Consulship Victor. Chron. An. 16. (male leg.
17.) post consul. Basil.
, and that Pelagius was not re-called from banishment till the year after
Vigilius his death, and so could not (as Anastasius says) be released with him
Vict. Chr. Anno 17. post cons. Basil.
. Besides, Anastasius speaks only of one banishment of Vigilius, for refusing
to restore Anthimius, near two years after his coming to Constantinople, in the
lifetime of Theodora Vid. Anastas. vita Vigilii.
, (who died Anno 548, according to Baronius Baron. An. 548. p. 369. n. 24.
; and this is the banishment from which Vigilius was released at the entreaty
of Narses, according to Anastasius; and so both Bellarmin and Sanders affirm
from the Pontifical Bellarm. l. 4. de Pont. Romans c. 10. Sand. de visibil.
Monar. lib. 7.
: Wherefore they and all Writers place this banishment of Vigilius diverse years
before the fifth Council, held Anno 553: So that the Exile after the fifth
Council is a mere Forgery of Baronius, who openly contradicts his Author, as if
he mistook the time Baron. An. 547. p. 357. n. 27. and An. 552. page 387. n. 8.
, only because the real time of Vigilius's Exile will not serve his design to
excuse the Pope from dying in Heresy. He rejects a Story about Vigilius, told
by Anastasius as a manifest Lie, only because neither Facundus nor Procopius
mention it Id. An. 546. p. 347. n. 54.
. By which Arguing it will appear, not only that Vigilius was not banished
after the fifth Council, but that he was not banished at all, because neither
Victor, Liberatus, Evagrius nor Procopius, who then lived (and Victor is very
particular in naming all that were exiled for this Cause) do not once mention
Vigilius his being banished, no, nor Photius, Zonaras, Cedrenus, Glicas nor
Nicephorus. And Platina, with other Western Writers take up this Fable upon the
credit of Anastasius, and Baronius improves it to serve a turn. But Baronius
asks, If it be likely Justinian would spare Vigilius Baron. An. 553. page 435.
n. 222.
? I reply, Yes; because he was a weak and inconstant man; and he having so
great a Post, Justinian chose rather to connive at him, than to harden others
by punishing him, whom he represents to the fifth Council, as one who condemned
the three Chapters; for which Reason also he is not condemned by Name in the
5th Council. Secondly, Baronius tells us of great Liberties, Gifts, etc. given
to Vigilius upon his release and sending home, which he brings as a proof of
his consent to the fifth Council Id. An. 554. page 445. n. 6. Bin. not. ad
Council. 5. p. 174.
: Whereas that Sanction granting some Privileges to Italy is dated in August,
the 28th year of Justinian; and Vigilius (according to Victor, an Eyewitness)
died not till the 31st of Justinian. So that these Liberties were promised to
Vigilius and other Romans long before the Council, while Vigilius and the
Emperor were very kind Procop. de bell. Gothic^, (...).
, viz. in the 23th of Justinian, but performed five year after; yet three years
before Vigilius death, and so his dying before his return with these
Privileges is a Fiction: But Baronius by mere guess, places it falsely in
Justinian's 29th years beginning Baron. An. 554. initio.
, only to color the Fable. His last Argument is from Liberatus saying, he died
afflicted by the Eutychians, but was not crowned Liberat. Brev. cap. 22. ap.
Baron. An. 554. page 444. n. 5.
. I reply, he despises Leberatus Testimony as to an Epistle of Vigilius Idem.
An. 538. page 277.
: But Liberatus says not, he was banished or put to death for his Opinions;
yea, he counts his condemning the three Chapters, Heresy, and does not tell us
how he suffered or died, so that he is no Witness to this Fiction, but an
Evidence against it.

Chap. xviii. Baronius's last exception is, that this was no lawful General
Council, nor had any Authority till Vigilius confirmed it Baron. An. 553. page
434. n. 224. An, 553. page 399. n. 29.
: And Binius says, his Sentence gave it the Title of a General Council Bin.
notis in Con. 5. page 173. Col. 1.
. But we have showed before, this was a lawful General Council received by the
whole Catholic Church Supr. chap. 4.
: Now they grant it was not confirmed till after it was parted, and that it was
never gathered by the Holy Ghost; so that his Act afterward cannot make a
nullity valid: The Cardinal and Binius Baron. and Bin. ut supr. (l)
both tell us, it was no General Council at first, being called though the Pope
resisted and contradicted it; yet Binius had said before, Vigilius called the
5th Council by his Pontifical Authority Bin. notis in Con. 5. initio page 171.
. Baronius also says, the Emperor called it according to the sentence of
Vigilius Baron. An. 553. page 398. n. 23, 24.
: And the Council charge Vigilius with promising in writing to meet with them
Council. 5. Collat. 2. Bin. page 51. Lab. 430.
; and his own Letter printed there, declares his consent to the assembling this
Council Ibid. Collat. 1. Epist. Vigil.
. Yet if he had opposed it, so did Damasus the second Council at
Constantinople, which was held (repugnante Damaso Baron. An. 381.
), yet is accounted a lawful General Council; and Cusanus says, if the Pope be
negligent or refractory, the Emperor may call a General Council Cusan. de
Concord. lib. 3. chapter 15.
. And though he was not personally present in this Council, yet he sent his
Constitution, which was his Decree, ex Cathedra Baron. An. 553. page 403. n. 47.
. But says Baronius, their sentence was contrary to the Popes Decree, and
therefore it cannot be a lawful General Council Id. ibid. page 434.
. Bellarmine also urges this for a Rule Bellar. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 11.
, but the matter of Fact sufficiently confutes them, since this Council which
did Decree contrary to the Popes Sentence, is and was always held lawful. So
was the second General Council good and valid, being confirmed by an imperial
Edict in July, An. 381 Baron. An. 381. number. 80. page
, though Damasus did not so much as hear of it, till after the Council of
Aquileia held in September that year Id. ibid n. 97. page
; and it seems by Pope Gregory, that the Roman Church till his time had not
received the Canons of it Greg. M. lib. 6. Epist. 31.
. Yea, the third Canon which Damasus and Leo Turrian. de 6, 7 and 8 Synodis
page 65.
both condemned, and which Binius says, the Roman Church rejects to this day
Bin. notis in Council. Constantinop. 2.
; Yet all the while it was held Authentic, and by it Anatolius held the second
place at Chalcedon, and Eutychius in the 5th Council; by it St. Chrysostom
deposed and ordained Bishops, and held a Council in Asia: So that both Canons
and Custom had settled this Rule, as is proved in the Council of Chalcedon
Council. Chal. ced. Act. 16. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 1. page 333.
. And Justinian made those Canons of this second Council to be inserted into
the Dypticks, and to be read in Churches Novel. 131 cap. 1, 2.
: So that Canons are good and valid, without the Popes Approbation, as well as
Councils, whose Decrees have their force from the Subscriptions of the major
part of Bishops there present Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 3. c. 13. Digest.
lib. 5. Lab. 19.
, though two of the Popes Legates Council. 5. Col. 6.
, or ten others did dissent Council. Chal. Act. 4.
, especially when the Emperor confirms them by his Edict, as Constantine did
those of Nice, Theodosius those of the second General Council, etc. In like
manner Justinian confirmed this 5th Council: And so it was valid without the
Popes consent; though absent Bishops, (others as well as those of Rome,) were
desired to confirm a Council after it was past, not to give any new Authority
to it, but to preserve Unity, and to show the Orthodoxy of these absent Bishops.

Chap. xx. Omitting the 19th Chapter, which treats of General Councils at
large, we proceed to Baronius lesser and remoter objections against this
Council: He begins with Justinian who called and confirmed it, whom he taxes
1st for want of learning, calling him an illiterate man who could not read a
Letter Baron. An. 528. page 139. n. 2. An 538. page 281. n. 32^ An. 546. page
344. n. 41. An. 551. page 382. n. 2. and 4.
, for which he cites Suidas, a late fabulous, yea an Heretical Author Possevin.
Apparat. verbo Suidas.
; But Platina commends Justinian for his great Learning and Wit Platin. vit.
Bonif. secundi.
. So also Trithemius who with Possevine reckon him among Ecclesiastical Writers
Trithem. lib. de Script. Eccles.
. Pope Agatho and the 6th Council cite him as one of the venerable Fathers and
Witnesses of the Truth Council. 6. Act. 4. in Epist. Agath.
: Liberatus, an Enemy of his mentions his writing a Book against the Acephali
Lib. brev. cap. 24. (...)
. Procopius speaks of his great diligence in reading the Christian Writings
Precop. l. 3. de bell. Goth.
: So that Gotofred in his Preface to the Institutes shows, this is a mere a
Calumny of Suidas; but Baronius greedily repeats it over and over, of pure
malice to this learned Emperor. His second Quarrel at him is, for presuming to
meddle in Causes of Faith, and making Laws for Priests Baron. An. 528. page
139. An. 551. page 382. An. 553. page 439. n. 237
. But did not all the Religious Kings of Judah do so? Did not Constantine, the
two Theodosij and Martin the same? And the 5th Council highly commend him for
it Council. 5. Collat. 7. in fine Bin. 111. Lab. 561.
: The Code of Theodosius, his Code and the Authenticks sufficiently prove this
was done by the best of Princes. Thirdly, He reproaches him for his
sacrilegious Fury, in persecuting Vigilius Baron. An. 551. page 382. n. 2. An.
552. page 387. n. 8. An. 553. page 435.
. Now I have proved before this beating and banishing of the Pope is a mere
Fable See Chap. 16 and 17.
; and if he was persecuted, or rather punished it was for Heresy; and
Constantine, Theodosius the elder and younger, and Martian are commended for
the same Acts against the Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians and Eutychians, and
St. Augustine justifies this proceeding Aug. lib. contr. Fulgent. Donat. c. 20.
. Fourthly, He charges him with falling into the Heresy of the Incorrupticolae
in his last days, writing an Edict for it, and madly persecuting all the
Orthodox, especially Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople for opposing it, for
which he Rails intollerably at him, saying all Authors, Greek and Latin attest
this Baron. An. 563. page 483. 484, 485. n. 1, 2, 6, 7, 8. Et An. 564. page
487. and passim.
: Finally he dooms him to Hell for this Baron. An. 565. page 497, etc. 11. 6.
. But first, Justinian did not publish such an Edict as Evagrius and
Nicephorus, his two main Witnesses attest Evagr. Hist. l. 4. c. 40. Niceph.
lib. 17. c. 30. Baron. An. 565. page 496.
; and Baronius owns as much: And Victor Bishop of Tunen, who suffered (under
Justinian) Imprisonment, and speaks hardly of him, is silent as to this Edict;
but shows he continued constant to his Edict against the three Chapters to his
very death Victor in Chron. An. 38. Justin.
, wherein he owns all the former General Councils: And it is so far from truth,
that all Writers, Greek and Latin charge him with that Heresy, that neither
Procopius, Agathus, Victor nor Liberatus do it, nor Damascen, though he treat
of this Heresy Damsacen. lib. de Haeres.
, nor Marcellinus, Bid, nor Anastasius: Suidas says, he was most Orthodox;
Aimonius and Paulus Diaconus affirm, he was for his Faith a Catholic Ai^on. de
gest. Franc. lib. 3. c. (...). Paul. Diac. de gest. Lang. l. 1. c. 25.
: And twenty other eminent Writers (cited by this Author), do all give him a
great Character; and Pope Gregory Greg. Mag. lib. 2. indic. 11. Ep. 10. and
lib. 3. Ep. 4.
with many others after his death, bestow on him the Title of Pious and of
sacred Memory. Baronius names but three Authors for this Slander: First,
Nicephorus, whom Possevine calls Heretical and Erroneous in History Possevin.
in verb. Nicephorut.
; and the Cardinal in this Relation judges him to be a Fool Baron. An. 563.
page 484. n. 8.
, and generally he is but Evagrius his Ape. His second Witness is Eustathias
Eustath. ap. Sur. 6. Aprills.
: But Surius is generally stuffed with fabulous Writers, and such is this
Eustathius falsely pretended to have writ Eutychius his Life; for neither
Photius, Trithemius, Possevine nor Sixtus Senensis mention any such Writer: And
the Story is full of Lies; for he makes Eutychius to come to Constantinople to
the 5th Council, and then to be chosen Bishop after Mennas death, who died five
years before this Council See before Chap. 16.
; And this Eutychius was chosen full four years before it: And he reckons that
Eutychius was Banished twelve years Baron. An. 564. page 493. n. 29.
, whereas two years after his Banishment he crowned Justinius Histor. Miscel.
lib. 16.
, and was actually Patriarch when Justinius was sick, and nominated Tiberius
his associate Zonar. Tom. 3. vit. Justin.
, and so could not (as this Fabler pretends,) be desired from Banishment after
Tiberius Reign began with Justin Baron. An. 578. page 567. n. 5.
; yet to make out this Lie, Anastasius his latin Version of Nicephorus adds
ten years to John Successor of Eutychius, and makes him sit twelve year and
seven Months Idem. An. 564, 493. n. 29.
, who in Nicephorus sat but two years and seven Months. It Is true, Eutychius
was Banished by Justinian, but it was for Prophesying of his Successors Baron.
An. 578. page 566. n. 2.
, and for holding the Heresy of Origin as Pope Gregory witnesses Greg. Mag.
lib. 14. Moral. chap. 29.
, against which Justinian had put out an Edict, and which was sentenced in the
5th Council Liberat. Brev. cap. 24. Baron. An. 538. page 281. n. 33. and in
Council. 5.
. And it was for opposing this Edict, not an Heretical Edict that Eutychius was
Banished: So that thirdly, Baronius has no Author for this Slander of
Justinian's being an Heretic, but Evagrius, who is owned by all to be a most
fabulous Author, (as is proved in the History here very fully by many
instances;) Now what is his credit against so many truer and better Historians?
Finally, Whereas Baronius reviles Justinian as a destroyer of the Empire and
the Church, This Author largely proves out of the best Historians, that
Justinian was a Wise, Pious and Victorious Prince, the best Emperor as to his
Laws, his Buildings, his Wars, and his Love to Religion that ever sat on the
Throne Imperial, to which the Reader is referred See Crakenthpor's Vigilius
dormit. cap. 20. page 349, etc.
.

Chap. xxi. In like manner the Cardinal reviles Theodora the Empress, as a
Wicked, Heretical, Sacrilegious, Mad Woman, struck with death by Heavens
vengeance upon Vigilius Excommunicating her Baron. An. 535. page 226. n. 59,
60. An. 536. page 268. n. 123. An. 538. page 275. n. 9. An. 548. page 369. n.
24.
. But other Authors say, she was like her Husband in her Studies and Manners
Constantin. Manas. Annal. page 87.
: Yea, the Emperor gives her an excellent Character in his very Laws Justin.
novel. 8. cap. 1.
: He also Prag. sanct. c. 1.
, and the 6th Council after her death, call her a Woman of Pious Memory Council.
6. Act. 3. and Act. 4.
. Nor ought Baronius to revile her, for thrusting Anthimius an Heretical
Monster into the Sea of Constantinople, as he does (An. 535. page 226. ut
supr.) since there he owns, that at his Election he seemed a Chatholick, and
that she favored him as Orthodox Baron. An. 535. page 227.
; yea, he carried it so as to seem such to all Ibid. page 233. n. 86.
. As to her contending with Vigilius two years about the Restitution of
Anthimius, which Baronius relates, (An 547. page 357.) it is a mere Fable, for
that Cause of Anthimius was determined long before; and Victor says, that
Vigilius and Theodora agreed after he came to Constantinople, and that she
persuaded him to condemn the three Chapters Victoris. Chronic. An. 2. post.
Cons. Bas.
, And he (who best knew) says, it was Pope Agapetus who excommunicated
Theodora, (then favoring the Acephali) Idem in Chron. in Cons. Justininani.
An. 14. ejus Regni.
: So that Vigilius is by the Scribes mistake, put for Agapetus in Gregory Greg.
Mag. lib. 2. Ep. 36.
, as appears by his speaking of the taking of Rome by the Goths immediately
after, which was the Sacking it by Vitiges after Agapetus his time, or by
Totilas, which was (not after, but) before this pretended Sentence of Vigilius
against Theodora, viz. that year Vigilius came to Constantinople Baron. An.
547. page 353 and 356.
. From all which it is manifest, that this Pope did never Excommunicate
Theodora at all, who in her latter Days was Orthodox, but hated by the
Nestorians, for joining with Justinian in condemning the three Chapters, which
also raises Baronius his spleen against her.

Chap. xxii. His next attempt is against the three Chapters, which he wishes
had been condemned to Eternal silence, buried and extinguished Baron. An. 547.
page 362. n. 48.
, adding it had been better for the Church they had never been spoken of An.
553. page 439. n. 237.
, viz. because of the Troubles ensuing: I reply, so there was about the words
(...): But this settled the true Faith, as it did also that Controversy, and
(by Providence) shows us, that a Pope may Err in matters of Faith.

Chap. xxiii. After this he Rails at the Edict, calling it a Seed plot of
dissension Baron. An. 534. page 199. n. 21.
, and saying it was contrary to the three Chapters of the Council of Chalcedon;
and (as Facundus affirms,) contrary to Justinian's own Faith, and writ by
Heretics Id. An. 546. page 336. n. 8, 9.
; and the Cardinal says it was writ by Theodorus Bishop of Caesarea Id. ibid.
; against whom he every where Rails as a Factious and Schismatical Man, yea, an
Heretic, and obstinate Origenist Baron. An. 551. page 381. 382 and alibi.
, a most wicked Wretch, and a plague to the whole Church Id. An. 564. page 488.
: But as to the Edict, it is in defense of the Council of Chalcedon, and to say
otherwise, is to condemn the 5th General Council, who often declare as much:
Yea, Baronius elsewhere in contradiction to himself says, this Edict is a
Confession of Justinian' s right Faith, a Catechism and exact declaration of
the Catholic Faith Baron. An. 534. page 199. n. 21.
. And he might as well call the Decrees of Nice, or other General Councils
Seed-plots of dissension; yea, the Gospel it self may be so calumniated Luke
xij. 49, 51.
: Nor do Liberatus, Facundus and Vigilius (as he says,) declare that Theodorus
writ this Edict Baron. An. 546. page 336. n. 8, 9.
; Liberatus only says, he suggested it to the Emperor, to condemn the three
Chapters by a Book, to be dictated by the Emperor, which he promised to do
Liberat. breviar. cap. 24.
: Facundus names not Theodorus, but says, They were willing to believe it was
writ by the Adversaries of the Truth Facundus apud Baron. An. 546. ut supr. (o)
; which was but a conjecture, and is as false as what he next speaks of it,
being contrary to the Emperors own Faith. And Vigilius words cited by Baronius
(rightly construed) show only, that when the Edict was read in the Palace,
Theodorus required the Bishops to favor it by his words Vigil. ap. Baron.
ibidem.
; however this passage is taken out of a forged Epistle of Vigilius Vid. Ep.
ap. Binium. Tom. 2. par. 2. page 12. Lab. col. 334.
, wherein Mennas is said to be excommunicated the 25th year of Justinian, who
died the 21st year of that Emperor: So that none of his Evidence do prove, that
Theodorus writ this Edict: And for his opposing Vigilius his Decree of silence,
we showed before there was no such Decree See Chap. 16.
, nor could he lead Justinian into the Heresy of the Incorrupticolae, because
the Emperor never held it See Chap. 20.
, and his only Witnesses, that Theodorus was an Origenist Heretic, are
Facundus and Liberatus: Now Facundus is an Heretic, condemned by the 5th
General Council, for writing in defense of the three Chapters, and a malicious
Enemy of Theodorus Vid. Possevin. Appar. verbo (Facundus.)
: And so was Liberatus, for which cause Bellarmine Bellarm. de Council. l. 1. c.
5.
, Baronius Baron. ap. Bin. notis in Liberat. brev. page 193.
and Possevine Possevin. apparat. verbo (Liberatus.)
advise us to read him cautiously, especially in such things as he borrowed
from the Nestorians, and what he says of the 5th Council, Professae
inimicitiae suspicionem habent mendacij Hieron. contr. Russin. Apol. 1.
. And this is certainly so, for how could he hold Origen's Heresies, who
subcribed the 5th Council wherein Origin is by name condemned Council. 5.
Collat. 8. Art. xi. Bin. 116. Lab. 575.
? And among other Bishops, no doubt he had subscribed Justinian's Edict against
Origen's Errors Ap. Baron. An. 538. page 293.
, otherwise he could not have been so familiar with the Emperor, nor so beloved
by him as Liberatus (the Author of this Calumny) reports him to have been: So
that Theodorus was always Orthodox, and his advising this Edict is no proof it
was against the Faith.

Chap. xxiv. Baronius and Binius do attempt after this to question the Acts of
the 5th Council, not indeed in any main thing concerning their not condemning,
or Vigilius not defending the three Chapters (which is our Point,) but in
lesser matters, such as may be objected against all the General Councils in the
World See instances in the Author. Vigil. dorm. page 378. c. 24.
; which therefore if the objections were true, would not take away the
Authority of this General Council, whose Acts are as well preserved as any, and
better than any of the other Councils, except Chalcedon, that went before it.

Chap. xxv. The first Corruption they charge these Acts with is, that they add
to the Acts of Chalcedon (in reciting them) these words -- which Jesus Christ
our Lord is one of the Trinity, which words some (suspected of Eutychianism,)
would have added to the Council of Chalcedon, but could not obtain it Baron.
An. 553. page 433. n. 214.
. But first, it was no Eutychian Heretic who first said Christ was one of the
Trinity. Theodorus of Mopsvestia denied it Dionys. Exig. in Praef. ad Epist.
Procl. Bib patrum. Tom. iii.
, but Proclus who was Orthodox, affirmed it, and taught it in an Epistle,
approved in the Council of Chalcedon Justin. Leg. 7. de sum. Trin. c. 4.
; and Justinian set out an Edict for it against the Nestorians, who denied it,
wherein he also Anathematizes the Eutychians Baron. An. 533. page 180, 181. n.
7, etc.
; which Edict Pope John the second confirms, and declares to be agreeable to
the Apostolic Doctrine, and to the Faith of the Roman Church Idem An. 534. page
198. number. 15.
. Wherefore those Monks, who affirmed one of the Trinity was Crucified could
not be Eutychian Heretics, as Baronius falsely says Idem. An. 519. page 43 and
44, etc.
But Baronius is a Nestorian, who denies this Truth. And those Monks did not
seek to add it to the Council of Chalcedon, only they declared (against the
Nestorians,) this was the Sense of that Council, in the time of Hormisda, (who
was Heretical in denying it,) nor does the 5th Synod recite it as the words of
the Council of Chalcedon, but as their own words Council. 5. Collat. 6. Bin.
page 102. Lab. col. 545.
, who were as Orthodox as any in the Council of Chalcedon, and he is a
Nestorian who denies it.

Chap. xxvi. Baronius objects, Secondly, That in these Acts, Ibas is said to
have denied the Epistle to Maris to be his, which he says is false Baron. An.
553. page 432. n. 211.
, and Binius calls it a Lie Bin. notis in 5. Council. page 172. Lab. 732.
; and they both give this as an instance of the Corruption of these Acts: They
may as well prove Justinian's Edict corrupted, and Pope Gregory's Epistles,
where it is said, he durst not confess it; yea, that he denied it to be his
Edictum Justin. Bin. page 161. Lab. 707. Greg. M. Epist. 53. lib. 7.
: And the 5th Council prove he did deny it, by the interlocution of six
Metropolitans at Chalcedon Council. 5. Collat. 6. Bin. page 91. Lab. 516.
. And though Baronius do say positively in one place, that the true Acts of
Chalcedon have it, that lbas confessed it to be his Epistle Baron. An. 448.
page 69. n. 77.
; yet he cites those very Acts, and the second of Nice elsewhere, saying, it
was found not to be the Epistle of Ibas, and so it was condemned and he
absolved Id. An. 432. (page 626. n. 71.
. And the truth of the matter is, that Ibas denied at Chalcedon that ever he
called Cyril an Heretic after the Union: But we have proved before, that he
writ this Epistle diverse years before that Union, and therein called Cyril
Heretic See Chap. 10.
; which is a denying the words of his own Epistle, for which he is censured in
the 5th Council.

Chap. xxvii. He alleges that these Acts say, the Council of Chalcedon
condemned the Epistle of Ibas: Which he says is untrue, and that he has
demonstrated the contrary out of the Acts of Chalcedon Baron. ut supra. (lit.
(m)
; and Binius calls this another Lie Bin. in notis ut supr. (lit. n.)
, both of them giving this as an instance that the Acts are corrupted: But if
so, the whole Council is corrupted; for they say over and over, that this
Epistle of Ibas was condemned by the definitions at Chalcedon, and that they
had demonstrated this Council. 5. Col. 8. Bin. 114. Lab. 567.
; and it was indeed their main business, to show it was contrary to that
Council, who forced him to condemn his own Epistle before they would receive
him Ibid. Col. 6. Bin. 91. Lab. 517.
: And if Binius and Baronius say this be false, they give a General Council the
Lie; and Pope Gregory also who says, without doubt this Epistle is contrary to
the definition at Chalcedon, which was exactly followed by the 5th Council
Greg. M. lib. 7. in d. 2. Ep. 54.
. And since the Council of Chalcedon forbids all Writings for Nestorius, (such
as this Epistle is,) and approve the Judgment of Photius and Eustathius, (who
condemned this Epistle as Heretical,) and would not receive Ibas, till he
Anathematized Nestorius and his Doctrines Council. Chalced. Act. 5. and Act. 10.
; It Is certain that Council as well as the fifth, did condemn Ibas his Epistle.

Chap. xxviii. Again, Baronius and Binius accuse the Council of diverse defects,
first, in omitting the Condemnation of Origin, and giving only a brief touch
upon it Baron. An. 553. page 440. n. 243. and page 439. n. 238. Bin. notis in
Conc. 5. page 172. Lab. 732.
. But this is a notorious Calumny; for the 5th Council not only mention it
transiently, in saying, they and Vigilius had condemned Origin now Council. 5.
Collat. 5. Bin. 79. Lab. 490.
, but expressly Anathematize Origin and his impious Writings lb. Collat. 8 Bin.
page 116. Lab. 575.
: And the Cardinal mistakes in saying, they first handled the cause of Origin,
and then that of the three Chapters Baron. An. 553. page 440.
: For Nicephorus says, they read the Libels against the impious Opinions of
Origin, the second Session Niceph. l. 17. c. 27. Et Evagr. lib. 4. c. 37.
: But indeed this Council did not afresh condemn Origin, but only mention his
being condemned in that Age, by most of the Bishops present in this Council,
about 15 year before (in Menna's Synod) upon an Edict of Justinian, to which
the Western Bishops had subscribed Baron. An. 538. page 280. n. 29, etc.
, which both Evagrius, Nicephorus and others mistake for this 5th Council: So
that the Cardinal and Binius are both out, in charging the omission of
Justinian's Edict, as a defect in these Acts Baron. An. 553. page 440. and Bin.
ut supr (a)
. For that Edict was not sent to this 5th Council, but to Menna's Synod; and
that Epistle which Binius has added to these Acts as Justinian's, is a late
extract out of Justinian's large Decree: Yea, Didymus and Evagrius, who they
say were condemned in this 5th Council, were not condemned there except in
general words Council. 5. Collat. 8. Bin. 116. Lab. 175. Anath. 11.
, as holding with Origin in the point of praeexistence Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 1.
. So that it is false and malicious in Baronius and Binius to charge Theodorus
of Caesarea Baron. An. 553. page 440. n. 244. Bin. notis in Council. 5. page
172. Lab. 732.
, with stealing these things out of the Acts of this Council, which were never
in them; upon an unjust surmise and slander of his being infected with Origens
Heresy.

Chap. xxix. Like to this, is their pretense that these Acts want the Emperors
Epistle Baron. ibid. Bin. and Lab. ib.
, which he and Binius add out of Cedrenus, and thence insinuate the Acts are
defective: But Justinian's only true Epistle sent to the Council is extant in
the Acts Council. 5. Coll. 1.
, of which this is an Epitome by an ignorant hand, which says Eutyches
approved the Opinions of Nestorius; and that Nestorius was the Master of
Theodorus, whereas Justinian's true Letter and the Council teach that he was
his Scholar: And are not the Cardinal and Binius rare menders of Councils, who
would supply their pretended defects with such Stuff as this?

Chap. xxx. Baronius also objects, that the Constitution of Vigilius which
evidently belongs to this Synod, is known to be taken away out of the Acts
Baron. An. 553. page 403. n. 47, etc.
. It is granted, it bears date the 14 of May, upon which the fifth Collation of
this Council was had, but was sent to the Emperor first, and by him considered,
and then offered to the Counsil the sixth Collation, May 19th as Binius owns
Bin. notis in Council. 5. page 176. Lab. 738.
. But indeed the Council never read this publicly, nor named it or Vigilius;
to prevent offenses, they confuted it indeed, and published his Letters to
Rusticus and Sebastianus, which contradict the Constitution Council. 5. Collat.
7.
; but for his Credit (as Baronius owns,) thought fit to say nothing of his
Constitution Baron. An. 553. page 434. n. 218.
: And therefore, if this Constitution were stolen out of the Acts, it was by
the Roman Church, to cover their Fathers nakedness, and conceal his Heresy.

Chap. xxxi. Lastly, He and Binius say, the Acts want the assignation of a
Patriarchal Seat to Jerusalem, and taking two Provinces out of Antioch, and two
out of Alexandria to put under it, which being by Leo opposed at Chalcedon, was
now passed contrary to the old Order established at Nice Baron. An. 553. page
440, 441. n. 245. e Gul. Tyr. de Bell sacr. l. 24. c. 12.
: Which is not true, for it had the Title of a Patriarchate long before this
Council Bellarm. de Pont. l. 1. c. 24.
, and the jurisdiction over the three Palestinas was assigned it at Chalcedon
Council. Chal. Act. 7. vel 8.
; which Binius in his Notes on that Council, and Baronius also expressly affirm
Council. Chalced. ap. Baron. An. 451. Sess. 8. page 154. n. 124.
: Yet here in their Account of the 5th Council, the Cardinal most falsely says,
Juvenalis got this Decree to pass in the absence of the Pope's Legates, (Baron.
an 553. page 441.) But if we consult the Council, The Popes Legates first spoke
in this Cause, and expressly gave their consent to it Council. Chal. Act. 7. Bin.
page 271.
: And though perhaps Pope Leo afterward might oppose this, (as Baronius says)
that only shows how little a Popes Authority was valued; since in the Council
of Mennas, John Bishop of Jerusalem held a Synod, and presided over all the
Bishops of the three Palestinas Council. sub. Men. Act. 5. Bin. page 734. Lab.
page 187.
. And Baronius recites the Title of another Council at Jerusalem, where Peter
the Patriarch presided over all the Bishops of the three Palestinas, 17 years
before this fifth Council Baron. An. 536. page 265. and ap. Bin. p 766 Lab. p.
275.
; which shows, that Jerusalem had the Title and Jurisdiction of a Patriarch by
virtue of the Canon at Chalcedon, and that Baronius and Binius are ridiculous
and impudent to urge the want of a Fiction of Gul. Tyrius (refuted by Berterius
Berterii diatr. 2. cap. 2.
) as a defect in the Acts of this General Council.

Chap. xxxii. The Cardinal objects also spurious and false Additions made to
these Acts Baron. An. 553. p. 399. n. 29. and p. 439. n. 238.
: And he instances in the Monothelites, who in the sixth Synod are proved to
have added 24 Leaves to these Acts Ibid. p. 441. n. 247.
, as also two Epistles of Vigilius to Justinian and Theodora Baron. ib.
. But though this be true Vid. Council. 6. Act. 3. and 14.
, yet those corrupt Additions were detected and razed out in the sixth Council,
and our Acts of the fifth Council have not one of those Heretical Additions,
but follow those true Copies which were extant in Gregory's time, and those by
which (70 years after his death) the false Copies were detected in the sixth
Council, so that this is mere Sophistry Baron. An. 554. p. 445. n. 8.
. As is also his Pretense, That the Laws of Theodosius, recited in the fifth
Collation against Nestorius, are different from those in the Code and in the
Ephesine Council Baron. An. 553. p. 403. n. 46.
. For there is but one Law against Nestorius in the Code Cod. Theodos. Tit. de
haeret. l. 66.
, different from these, which mention his former Condemning the Nestorians; but
these Laws were against Diodorus and Theodorus, as well as the Nestorians, at
the Armenian Monks Petition Council. 5. coll. 5.
. And note, That all Theodosius his Laws against Heretics, are not in his
Code; for that Law in the Ephesine Council against the Nestorians, was a true
Law of this Emperors Baron. An. 448, page 50. n. 2.
: And another in the Council of Chalcedon Id. An. 449. p. 103. n. 130.
, which Baronius owns for true Laws of Theodosius; yet neither of them are in
the Code; so that he may as well say those Acts are corrupted as these, because
those Laws are not there.

Chap. xxxiii. Again, Baronius says, That Epistle of Theodoret's to Nestorius
intimating his agreeing with that Heretic and rejecting Cyril after the Union,
is a spurious addition to these Acts Baron. An. 436. Tom. 5. page 658. n. 10.
; which he proves by Leontius Qui vixit An. 580. Lib. de sectis.
, who affirms some such Letters to be fictitious. But will the Cardinal allow
him to be good Evidence, where he makes but 22 Canonical Books of the Old
Testament Leont. cap. 2.
? And does he not commend Theodorus of Mopsvestia and Diodorus, and deny that
ever Theodoret agreed with Nestorius Ibid. cap. 4.
? But even Baronius owns him to have been a Nestorian Baron. An. 431. page 602,
and 598.
; so that in this case Leontius is of no Credit. But that which is yet more
strange, That the Cardinal (in contradiction to himself) repeats and owns this
very Epistle read in the fifth Council, to have been writ by Theodoret after
the Union to Nestorius, and that he favored him still Baron. An. 432. page
628. n. 80.
; yet he brags, there is no mention of Theodoret's being addicted to Nestorius
after the Peace made, and that his Epistles to Dioscorus and Leo sufficiently
wipe off that Aspersion ld. An. 436. page 658. n. 11, 12. Et An. 449. page 106.
n. 140.
. But those Epistles are suspicious, as first appearing out of a Vatican Copy.
And whereas the Union with Cyril was made An. 432. Baron. An. 432. p. 626. n.
72.
, these Epistles were writ long after that to Dioscorus, An. 444, and that to
Leo, An. 449. So that if these Epistles were genuine, they do not prove he was
Orthodox till ten or twelve year after the Union. But two things prove them
spurious: First, Theodoret boasts in them both, that he had been 26 years a
Bishop, and a Preacher at Antioch, yet none ever reproved his Doctrine; yea,
that his Sense and the Churches always agreed, having never been accused by
any, nor accused any Epistol. ad Diosc. Baron. An. 444. and ad Leon. An. 449.
and ad Nomum. An. 448.
. Which is an horrid falsehood; for had he not been reproved by Cyril, deposed
by a General Council, and subscribed the Condemnation of Cyril? Secondly, In
both these Epistles he says, he had been 26 years a Bishop, yet one was writ 5
years after the other, and by Baronius his Computation he was but 21 years a
Bishop when he writ to Dioscorus, being made Bishop Anno 423. Baron. An. 423
page 481. n. 10.
. And his History (which mentions the Translation of the Body of S. Chrysostom
Id An. 438. page 66 3. n. 6. Theodoret. hist. lib. 5. cap. 36.
, and so must be writ seven years after the Union) commends Theodorus of
Mopsvestia for Orthodox Theodoret. ibid. cap. 40.
, shows he was a Nestorian then. Baronius would wipe off this by pretending he
writ his History before the Quarrel about Nestorius Baron. An. 427. page 506,
and 507. n. 28.
; but in the same place says, He follows Sozomen (whose Book came out An.
439.) in commending Theodorus. So that after all his shifts, Theodoret was a
Favourer of Nestorius, An. 436. when he writ that Epistle read in this fifth
Council, and long after.

Chap. xxxiv. Baronius and Binius say, The Acts are corrupted, because they
affirm an Epistle to John of Antioch, (wherein the Author rejoices for Cyril's
death) was writ by Theodoret, which they affirm was writ by an Impostor Bin.
not. in Council. 5 p. 172. Lab. 732. Baron. An. 444. p. 20, etc. and An. 553. p.
402.
; because John was dead seven years before Cyril. I Reply, That is a Mistake,
for John was made Bishop An. 427. and according to Nicephorus sat 18 years,
which reaches to the year 444. in which Baronius says Cyril died. But suppose
John were dead when Theodoret writ this, Baronius of all men should not make
this a mark of Forgery, who allows Clement's Epistle writ to James Bishop of
Jerusalem, who had been dead 30 year, for genuine; and so does Binius Confer.
Baron. An. 63 and 93. and Bin. not. in Ep. Clem. and Turrian. maxim.
: And the Cardinal cites and commends an Epistle of Theodosius as authentic,
writ to S. Chrysostom 30 years after he was dead Baron. An. 438. page 663. n. 8.
. And, Secondly, the Epistle is Theodoret's; but the Inscription only (which
should be to Domnus) is mistaken; for it is as plain by his Sermon before
Domnus after Cyril's death, which we have also in the fifth Council Council. V.
Collat. 5. Bin. page 86. Lab. col. 508.
, as by this Epistle, that Theodoret was an Enemy to Cyril after his death; and
Baronins may well pardon the Error in the inscription of John's Name for
Domnus; for he allows innumerable Epistles, Edicts, etc. to be genuine
notwithstanding Errors in the Title See many Instances in the Author at large.
p. 429, etc
, and therefore for so small a mistake in the Title of an Epistle should not
ask, What credit is to be given to such Acts Baron. An. 553. p. 403. n. 46.
? His own Annals have many greater Mistakes, as the Author proves Vigil. dorm.
c. 34. p. 435.
; yet he would have us credit them. Yea, in this reckoning of John of Antioch's
dying seven years before Cyril, he mistakes the whole time almost, according to
Nicephorus, and four years by his own reckoning of John's entering, An. 427
dying 436, yet sitting 13 years; for so John did not dye till 440, that is,
four year before S. Cyril: And the Epistles of Theodoret to Dioscoras and Leo,
on which he depends for his Arithmetic, are one or both of them forged. We
conclude therefore, that the Epistle mentioned in the fifth Council was
Theodoret's, who was a Nestorian after S. Cyril's death, and he writ it to
Domnus (not to John) Bishop of Antioch.

Chap. xxxv. But he who accuses the fifth Council for Forgeries, does follow
many forged Writings himself in his discourse about it. First, The Confession
of Faith made by Mennas, Theodorus of Caesarea and others, by way of
submission, recorded in the very Constitution of Vigilius, is Forged Baron. An.
553. p 404. n. 50. Bin. Tom. II. par. 2. page 13. Lab. col. 338.
. For as to the Matter of it: How is it likely the Eastern Bishops should say,
They allowed all the Acts of the former four Councils, made by consent of the
Pope's Legates? Or ask him pardon for Injuries which they say they had never
done to him? Or how agrees this with Baronius his saying. Theodorus asked
pardon for his Scoffs and Contumelies against Vigilius Baron. An. 592. page
389. n. 20.
? or with Vigilius his form of Excommunication of Theodorus, for despising his
Authority Vigil. Epist. post. Ep. 16. Bin. page 12. Lab. page 334.
? As to the time, this Confession and Submission is said to be made after the
Decree for Taciturnity, (which was never made) viz. An. 552. See above (h)
. And we have proved Mennas was dead five year before, and that Theodorus did
always stand firm against the three Chapters See Chapter 23.
. Secondly, He cites one Eustathius out of Surius, who is proved Fabulons
before See Chapter 20.
. Thirdly, The Epistles of Theodoret, which were showed before to be forged See
Chapter 33.
And we add, That for all his brags to Dioscorus, An. 444. he writes a kind
Letter to Irenaeus a Nestorian, deposed Bishop of Tire Baron. An. 448. page 51.
^. 7, 8.
: And another to Nomus, wherein he rails at the pious Emperor Theodosius, by
whom he and other Nestorians were deposed, and his Writings forbidden Id. ibid.
page 52. n. 11. Edict. vide Leg. 66. Cod. Theod.
, while as he falsely asserts Arians and all other Heretics were tolerated.
Theodoret therefore was a Nestorian 16 year after the Union with Cyril, and
these Epistles are Forged, which say the contrary. Fourthly, He cites the
Action at Chalcedon concerning Domnus, which is a Vatican Forgery Baron. An.
451. page 155. n. 129.
: For it is not in the Greek, nor in Liberatus, Evagrius nor Nicephorus; and
that Domnus (for whom subsistence is provided in this Forged Action) was dead
before the Council of Chalcedon, as both Justinian and the fifth Council
witness Vid. Justin. Edict. Bin. page 165. and Lab. col. 718. Vid. item Council.
5. collat. 6. Bin. 103. Lab. 546.
, who (for all Baronius frivolous Objections to support this Forgery) must
needs have truer Copies of the Council of Chalcedon, than his Vatican now
affords. And indeed Domnus was deposed in the Ephesine Pseudo-Synod, all whose
Acts were declared void at Chalcedon, except that which deposed Domnus (then
deceased) and put in Maximus at Antioch Council. Chalced. Act. 10. Bin. p 295.
, Fifthly, Baronius cites Auastasius's Lives of the Popes, who is always full
of Fables, especially in Vigilius his Life, in which are more Lies than Lines
Bin. Tom. II par. 2. page 1. Lab. Tom. V. p. 306.
: For he makes his Entrance to be when Bellisarius warred against Vitiges, who,
he says, was taken by John the Bloody, and brought to Rome by Bellisarius and
Vigilius, who gave Bellisarius the Sacrament to bring Vitiges safe to Justinian
Vita Vigil. ibid.
. But John and Narses were both absent at the taking of Ravenna, where Vitiges
freely submitted to Bellisarius, who kept him there till he carried him by Sea
to Constantinople Procop. de bell. Goth. l. 2 and 3.
. So that Vitiges came not to Rome at all. Secondly, Anastasius says, The
Emperor then enquired of Bellisarius, how he had placed Vigilius in Silverius
room, and thanked him for it Vita Vigil. ut supr.
. But Silverius was deposed, and Vigilius put in three years before Procop. de
bell. Goth. l. 1.
; yea, Justinian had writ to Vigilius, and knew that Silverius was dead a year
before; and Vigilius had writ to the Emperor Baron. An. 540. p. 303. n. 11.
and 305. n. 20.
, the year before Bellisarius came with Vitiges to Constantinople Baron. An.
541. p. 312. n. 3.
; and Binius says, Justinian did not thank Bellisarius Bin. not. in vit.
Vigilii.
. Thirdly, Anastasius talks of Bellisarius being sent into Africa, and of his
killing Gontharis, and offering great Spoils in his return at Rome, to
Vigilius, etc. Vita Vigil. ut supra.
: But after this Bellisarius was not sent into Africa, but into Persia Procop.
de bell. Persic. l. 2.
, where he stayed three years, and it was Ariobindus and Artabanus who were
sent into Africa, the latter of which treacherously killed Gontharis Idem bell.
Vandal. lib. 2, and 4.
. So that Bellisarius offered no Vandal Spoils at all; or if (as Binius would
have it Bin. not. in Vit. Vigilii.
) he did, when he wan Rome from Vitiges, that was in Silverius his time; so
that is false also, Fourthly, Anastasius makes Theodora write at this time to
Vigilius, To come to Constantinople and restore Anthimus, which he refused Vita
Vigil. ut supra.
. Binius after Baronius makes this a Miraculous change Bin. not. ibid. Baron.
An. 540. p. 303.
, and says it was just upon Silverius his death, at his first step into the Sea: But if it was after Gontharis was slain, it was not till the 19th of
Justinian Baron. An. 545. page 334.
, five years or six years after Vigilius was made Pope: And the Change is as
false as The time; for Liberatus says, Vigilius did perform his Promise to the
Empress, and writ as she desired Liberati Breviar. c. 22. Bin. page 192. Lab.
775.
; but afterward it seems, he finding the Emperor resolute, did confirm the
Deposition of Anthimus Vigil. Epist. 4 and 5.
. So that Anastasius his Story of Theodora's. writing to Vigilius after
Gontharis was slain, is a Fable: And Victor (who then lived) says, Vigilius
was called to Constantinople by the Emperor, (not about Anthimus, but) to
condemn the three Chapters in his Nineteenth year Victor. Chron. an. 4. post.
Consul. Basil. Baron. An. 545.
. Fifthly, Anastasius fables, That the Romans accused Vigilius of Murder, etc.
and that Anthimus Sorbo was sent by the Empress to seize him by force; which he
did (the People abusing and cursing him as he went out of Rome), and thus he
was violently carried by Sicily to Constantinople; to which place coming on
Christmas Even, the Emperor met and kissed him with Tears, and the People
sang, The Lord comes Anastas. in vit. Vigil. ut supr.
. But Baronius gives him the Lie Baron. An. 546. p. 347. n. 54, 55.
, as does also Binius Bin. not. in vit. Vigil. p. 3. Lab. 310.
, For Vigilius voluntarily went from Rome in the 11th year of the Gothic War,
An. 546. toward Constantinople Procop. de bell. Goth. l. 3.
, and staying long in Sicily, arrived at the Court about April of the year
following. Sixthly, Anastasius tells a long Story after Vigilius came to
Constantinople, of the Contests between him and the Emperor, with his Empress,
about restoring Anthimus; which the Pope refusing, they tore him from the Altar
of S. Euphemia, cruelly used him, imprisoned and banished him Anastas. vit.
Vigil. ut supra.
. Which are all Fables; for Anthimus was deposed Ten years before Baron. An.
536. page 244.
, and his Cause forgot, the three Chapters being now the only dispute; yea,
Baronius and Binius Baron. An. 552. page 387. n 8. Bin not. in vit Vigil. ut
supr.
, who would have something of this true, make the buffeting of Vigilius and his
flight to Euphemia's Church, to happen four years after Theodorus's death; and
indeed in Pope Agapetus's time there was some such Contest about Anthimus,
which Anastasius fabulously applies to Vigilius, and Baronius with Binius do
cherish the Fiction. Seventhly, Anastasius tells us, how the Goths after this
made Totilas King, who besieged and took Rome; but spared the People, and lived
like a Father among them Anastas. in vit. Vigil. ut supr.
. But Totilas was made King four or five year before Vigilius came to
Constantinople Baron. An. 542. p. 322. n. 1.
, and took Rome while he was in Sicily Baron. An. 547. page 353. n. 12.
, and was so cruel as to kill all the Citizens they met, and intended to ruin
both City and People, had not Pelagius and Bellisarius stayed his Rage from
places and persons; however, he made a woeful desolation there Procop. de bell.
Goth. l. 3. page 372, etc.
. Eighthly, Anastasius says, Narses was sent at the same time into Italy, and
Totilas with many Goths were slain, by the help (says Baronius) of the Blessed
Virgin Anastas. vi^. Vigil. ut supr. Baron. An. 553. p. 396, and 397. n. 13 and
18.
. But first, he mistakes the time; for Narses overcame not Totilas till six
year after his first sacking Rome, in the 18th year of the Gothic War Procop.
de bell. Goth. l. 3.
; and Binius, with Baronius, foolishly ascribe it to the Year wherein Justinian
revoked his Edict, (which he never revoked at all) and this Binius says was
the 10th year of Totilas (as Benedict had predicted Bin. not. in vit. Vigil. p.
3. Lab. 310.
). But Baronius proves Benedict a false Prophet; for he (truly) places Totilas
his death in the 11th year Baron. ut supr. lit. (h).
. As to the help of the Blessed Virgin, mentioned both by Baronius and Binius
Locis supr. cit.
, Procopius says, Narses did ascribe the Victory wholly to God Procop. de bell
Goth. lib. 3.
; and Evagrius does not mention his praying to, or relying on the Virgin; but
speaks of a Report by some, of the Blessed Virgins appearing to him from God
with notice when to fight Evagr. l. 4. cap. 23.
, but does not affirm it for truth; yet the Cardinal proves invocation of Sains
by this Fable. Lastly, after this victory (Anastasius tells us) the Roman
Clergy in a body desired Narses, if Vigilius and the Clergy banished with him
were yet alive, they might be recalled Anastas. in vita Vigilij, ut supr.
; whereas Vigilius was then at Constantinople and never banished at all; yea,
the 5th Council was assembled that year in which Totilas was slain; yet hence
Baronius (on the credit of this Fabulous Author) invents a story of Vigilius
Banishment after the 5th Council.

Chap. xxxvi. Finally, Baronius overlooking the Ambition, Treachery and Heresy
of Vigilius, can find but one ill thing in his life, which is his going to
Constantinople when the Emperor required him; this he says, was always fatal
to the Catholic Church for the Pope to leave Rome Baron. An. 346. page 347. n.
55.
. Was it so when the Popes removed for 70 years to Avignion Genebr. Chron. An.
1305.
? Was it so when Agaperus 10 years before came to Constantinople? No, says
Baronius, that was lucky, God sent him, and the power of the Apostolic seat
was thereby demonstrated Baron. An. 536. page 241. n. 12, etc.
: So that the difference was in the Men, Agapetus was a steady Catholic,
Vigilius an Heretical Hypocrite: Whose life shall conclude this Treatise.

His Ambition early appeared in procuring Boniface the 2d. contrary to the
Canons to choose him for his Successor in a Synod Anastas. in vit. Bonif. 2.
Bin. page 643. An. 532.
: But the Senate and the Laws of the Empire forced Boniface by a second Synod,
to vacate this Election of Vigilius Silverij Ep. 1. and Annst. ut supr.
. Again, upon Agapetus death, he made a compact with Theodora the Empress, that
for 350 l. in Gold, and the Papcy (which she was to give,) he would restore
Anthimus, and disannul the Council of Chalcedon Liberat. in Brev. cap. 22. Bin.
page 192. Lab. 775.
; but coming to Rome he found Silverius in the Chair, upon which he tampers
with Bollisarius, and showing him the Empress' s Mandate, promises him 100 l.
in Gold to make him Pope Idem. ibid.
. Whereupon Silverius was falsely accused of a Plot to betray Rome to the Goths,
deposed and banished, and Vigilius thrust into the Seat Idem. Ibid. and vid.
Anastas. in vita Silverij
, Usurping it two years during Silverius life, and acting all that time as
lawful Pope, viz. from An. 538. to An. 540. Baron. An. 538. page 274. and An.
540. page 300.
, writing to, and receiving Epistles from Justinian, Caesarius, Etherius, etc.
Vide Epist. Vigil.
But persidiously broke his promise both to Theodora and Bellisarius, and would
neither restore Anthimus, for fear of the Romans, nor pay Bellisarius the Money
Liberat. apud Baron. An. 538. page 276.
: And cruelly uses poor Silverius banished to Patara, who in a Synod there
excommunicated Vigilius Epist. 1. Silver. ad Vigil.
. But the Emperor hearing of it, sent him back to have the Cause heard more
fully Liberat. ut supr.
, and being come into Italy, Vigilius by new promises, gets Bellisarius to put
him into his Hands, and sent him to the Island Palmaria, and starved him to
death there Id. ibid. Baron. An. 540. page 300. n. 1. and Anastas. in vit.
Silverij.
. Upon this Baronius and Binius pretend a fit of Conscience took him, and he
abdicated the Papacy, desiring to come in by a new Election, (of which he was
sure by Bellisarius power Baron. An. 540. page 301. n. 4.
). And so the Hypocrit gets in a second time, the Electors being inspired,
says Baronius Ib. page 302. n. 7.
; yet he has till this moment described him as an Ambitious Deacon, mad with
Pride, a Patron of Heretics, a Schismatic, a Simoniack, an Usurper, a
Successor of Simon Magus, and an Antichrist Vid. loca citat. ap. Authorem.
.

Such was his entrance, and his Acts were suitable, for Liberatus says, he did
write an Epistle pursuant to his promise to Theodora, and Victor affirms, that
he writ unto Theodosius of Alexandria, to Anthimus of Constantinople, and to
Severus of Antioch, (Eutychians deposed) as to Catholics Liberat. cap. 22.
Victor in Chronico ubi ipsa Epistola extat. and ap. Baron. An. 538. page 276.
n. 14.
, assuring them he believed as they did, but bids them not tell any so: But
Baronius says, this Epistle is not his: Bellarmin says it may be his, but that
it was only in show, and before he was Pope Bell. l. 4. de Pontif cap 10.
. Baronius Quarrels at the Inscription, as if he called Justinian and Theodora
his Lords and Christ's, but Victor expressly says it was writ (not to them, but)
to three Heretical Patriarchs, and that the Inscription was, To my Lords and
Brethren joined to us in the Love of Christ our Savior Vict. Chron. An. 2.
post Consul. Vigil.
; and for all Binius and his pretenses, it is not unusual for the Pope to call
Eminent Bishops, Lords; Pope Urban calls Anselm Father and Master Malmsb. l. 1.
gest. Pontif. page 127.
, and Damasus calls Prosper and other Numidian Bishops his Lords Damas. Ep. 5.
ap. Bin. Tom. 1. page 508.
. Secondly, He alleges that Liberatus falsely affirms, that Vigilius in the
Subscription of this Epistle condemned Dioscorus who was an Eutychian, which is
absurd in a Letter whereby he would prove himself of that Party: To which it is
replied, it is an Error of the Scribe, putting Dioscorus name for Nestorius, of
which Party all the rest were there named; And the Annalist allows many such
literal mistakes in Liberatus Baron. An. 538. page 275. n. 7.
. Thirdly, Baronius asks, if this were his Epistle, why he was not upbraided
with it by Theodora and others, when he refused to restore Anthimus? It Is
answered, for ought he knows this was objected to Vigilius, since none can
argue, ab Autoritate human^ negative: However, it would have been objected had
there been occasion; but the Story of the restoring Anthimus is a Fiction of
Anastasius, as he applies it to be the ground of a Quarrel, after Vigilius came
to Constantinople: As to Bellarmine's Note, that owns the Epistle, but says, it
was writ in Silverius his time before he was true Pope Bellarm. de Romans Pont.
l. 4. c. 10.
; which excuse also Baronius, Binius and Gretzer make Baron. An. 538. page 277.
n. 15. Bin. not. in Liberat. page 194. Gretzer. defens. Bell. l. 4.
: We must Note that Liberatus, an Author of that time, relates it to be writ
after Silverius death; And when Silverius was returned back to Italy,
Bellisarius again pressed Vigilius to perform his promise to the Empress, which
does evidently suppose he had not as yet performed it, An. 540. And since
Silverius died in June that year, (soon after he fell into Vigilius hands,) we
may justly think he was too busy in dispatching him and contriving his new
Election, to write this till after he was real and sole Pope; so that Naucler.
Chron. genesis 18.
Nauclerus puts after Silverius death, Theodora's demanding of him to fulfill
his promise: But they object, that at this time he condemned Anthimus and
confirmed the Council of Chalcedon, in his Epistles to Justinian and Mennas Ep.
Baron. An. 540. page 303.
, and so it is not likely he should write the contrary to these Bishops just
then. It Is answered, he was a Notorious Hypocrite (as they own,) and so might
write on Opinion openly to delude the Emperor, and another secretly to the
Heretics; and (for all Bellarmine's pretenses) this last was his heart and
mind; for why should he dissemble in secret with his Friends, with whom, as he
tells them, he had but one Soul? He might very likely dissemble with the
Emperor, for fear of being expelled out of the Seat he so much coveted; But
what hurt or good could deposed Bishops do him? Fear therefore, not an Orthodox
mind, restrained him from openly condemning the true Faith, and his Ambition to
keep his high Station made him do it privately only: Which shows the weakness
of Bellarmine's excuse, as if he did not write this ex animo: And equally
frivolous, is that pretense of his not writing it as Pope, for when he writes
of a matter of Faith and defines and declares it, he either writes as Pope then
or never, for that is his proper office: And the Nestorians might make all
these objections against his Orthodox Epistle to the Emperor.

The second Act of Vigilius was his Constitution for Nestorianism, by which he
run into the contrary Heresy to that wherein he was dipped before, which has
been sufficiently manifested in this Treatise. There remains now only his Exit
to be considered, of which Liberatus only says, How Vigilius being afflicted
by Heresy died is known to all Liberat. Brev. c. 22. ut supr.
; Bellarmine expounds him, that it was that same Heresy which he first
secretly favored, that afflicted him Bellarm. de Pont. Romans l. 4. cap. 10.
: Baronius observes, he was by Gods just Judgment miserably tossed all his
Life, hated by the Emperor and Eastern Bishops for defending the three
Chapters, and execrable to the Western for his inconstancy; and when he was
just coming into the Haven, died before he could reach home in Sicily, of the
Torment of the Stone: As he had Murdered his Predecessor a little before in an
Island, so he died in one: And here we leave him to stand or fall to his own
Master, not imitating Baronius his spite to Justinian Baron. An. 565. page 497.
n. 6.
, in determining his final Estate.

An Appendix to this History.
IN Labbe's Edition, there is subjoyned to this Council an Epistle of Vigilius
to Eutychius, and a dicourse of P. de Marca's upon it, wherein it is extolled
as a genuine writing and a sufficient confirmation of this 5th Council Lab.
col. 596.
: And though the foregoing History do abundantly confute this, yet we will not
pass it without some observations concerning this pompous piece of Forgery.

First, In the Epistle Vigilius is made to say, that he is and was of the same
Faith with Eutychius, and the rest of the Bishops at Constantinople: But if so,
why did he exclaim that the Catholic Faith was in danger to be rooted up
Baron. An. 546. page n. 47.
? Or how came he to Anathematize Theodorus? And why did he suffer so much for a
matter that was not of Faith?

Secondly, In this Epistle Vigilius Anathematizeth all that at any time
believed the three Chapters ought to be received or defended, and all that have
endeavored to hinder their being condemned Epist. Vigil. ap. Lab. col. 600.
: Now is it probable he should curse all his Friends in Africa and in the
Western Church, yea and himself so dreadfully, who had received and defended
them, and done all in his power to hinder their condemnation?

Thirdly, This illustrious Monument (as it is called) can be no confirmation of
the 5th Council, because it never names or so much as hints at that Council. So
that it can pass for no more than Vigilius his Recantation of his former
Opinions, and being writ after the Council, seems to be designed for the
Emperors private satisfaction: For the Eastern Church then did not believe a
Popes confirmation necessary, to make a General Councils Decrees valid:

Fourthly, This Epistle is dated in December, and the Council arose but in June
before, which argues the falsehood of it; for it is not likely that he should so
soon revoke his solemn constitution, and make so great a change, or if he did,
it is strange that living above two years after, he did not receive some mark
of Justinian's favor in all that time, no nor return to his See in Peace.

As to the Dissertation of de Marca, we may note Dissert. Number. i. Lab. page 601.
, that the years when, and the place where this writing was found, give just
suspicions of its being an Imposture: It was (it seems) found by a Greek, An.
1276. in the Vatican, and he pretended to Transcribe it out of a Manuscript
there writ An. 753. Now the Original of these is dated two hundred years after
the 5th Council, and all that time no body ever heard of Vigilius his
Confirmation; and if this date be genuine, it might very probably be invented
at that time, being the very time when the Eastern Church began (contrary to
the sentiments of Rome) to pull down their Images; and that was a fit season to
produce Evidence, that the Greeks ought to submit to the Latins, whose Popes as
they pretended had made all their General Councils Decrees Authentic. And the
date of the later Transcript is more suspicious still, being the critical time
when the poor Eastern Emperor Nich. Palaelogus for getting Money and Aid from
the Pope, was forced to send some corrupted Bishops, to make a seeming
Submission to, and Union with the Roman Church, and to carry on this design An.
1276. no doubt, care was taken to find out or make this Epistle and send it
into Greece: And the Vatican whence it was taken, is known to be the Mint and
Warehouse of Forgeries: So that every circumstance is suspicious. And so is
the Reason, which the learned Patron of it gives why it is so valuable, viz.
because it vindicates the credit of the Roman See, which was much lessened by
the belief, that the 5th Council was owned for a lawful and general, though
Vigilius opposed it. Now at Rome where the Popes Authority is the main if not
the sole point of Religion, there have been innumerable Writings piously
forged, to carry on this great end, and this seems to be of that sort, only it
appeared not early enough for Baronius to cite it; however as our Author notes,
he guessed there was (or foresaw there would be) such a thing; For he
positively avers, (as was showed) upon mere conjecture, that Vigilius did
confirm the 5th Council: But he and his party lay it down for a Maxim, that
nothing can be a General Council, but what is confirmed by the Pope: Therefore
Evidence or not Evidence, Binius and Baronius affirm it was so; and they are as
confident who never saw this Epistle, as de Marca is who published it; so that
to through-paced Catholics who take their words, this Epistle is a needless
discovery.

But let us see, what Authority he has to support Number. ii. Lab. col. 601.
this famous Confirmation: He says Evagrius witnesses, that Vigilius
consented in writing, but would not come to the Council Evagr. Hist. lib. 4. c.
34.
: But this consent was before the Synod met, and is therefore plainly set down
in Evagrius before the convening, with which consent in writing both Justinian
and the Council do often upbraid this inconstant Pope: Nor can Evagrius be
expounded of any subsequent consent, since he goes on after this passage to
relate the acts of the Council: Nor do any of the later Greeks who follow him
say any more, than to imply Vigilius his precedent consent: And the 6th Council
relate the calling of the 5th Council, after the agreement between Justinian
and Vigilius Council. 6. Act. 18. Tom. iii. par. 1. page 194.
; nor can their words without manifest violence be stretched to this
Confirmation, which had it then been extant in the Greek Copy, and (as de Marca
owns) wanting in the Latin Dissertat. insr. n. 21. page 612.
, that Council had found out and observed this among other Variations.

The Testimony of Pelagius which our Author thinks Number. iii. Lab. col. 603.
so clear, is no Evidence unless it be against this Epistle; for he speaks not
of Vigilius, but of the Latin Church, which came slowly to see their Error --
labored a great while -- strove a long time even to suffering -- and would not
of a sudden lose their labor, till the Truth did appear -- Ep. Pelag. 2. ap.
Lab. col. 621.
. This plainly refers to the Roman Clergy and Western Bishops, who after
Vigilius death stood out in defense of the three Chapters so stisly, that
Pelagius the 1st, Vigilius his Successor, could scarce find any to consecrate
him Vide not. in vit. Pelag. 1. Lab. col. 788.
. And at last he was forced to get Narses to use violent Methods to bring them
in to his Communion Pelag. 1. Ep. 3. Lab. col. 792. Baron. An. 566. page 453.
; now this was three year after the Council. But how could Vigilius his hasty
turn in six Months time be called a slow change, or a long striving? And if
Pelagius the second had known of Vigilius his confirming the 5th Council, he
would not have used so many shifts to ward off the force of his and the Roman
Churches dissent, which was objected; this Epistle had stopped their Mouths for
ever; and if St. Gregory had known of it, he had referred those who doubted of
the Apostolical consent, not to Pelagius his Epistle, but to this Authentic
Confirmation of Vigilius himself.

It is well, when de Marca resolves to support the Number. iv. Lab col. cad.
tottering credit of this Pope, that he has no better Evidence of Theodorus of
Caesarea's favoring Heretics, than Facundus a condemned Nestorian, and
Liberatus who writes so partially for that side; it is plain, their spite to
Theodorus was for his zeal against Nestorius, and for giving the Emperor that
wholesome and necessary advice, to condemn all those Men and their Writings
under which the Nestorians sheltered themselves; and it is showed before that
he was no favourer either of Origin See the History chap. 23.
, or the Acephali.

Yet this defender of Vigilius reflects on Justinian's Number. v. Lab. ib.
Edict, approved by a General Council, upon the single Testimony of a convicted
Heretic, who writes so bitterly against the Truth, that he is not to be
believed nor esteemed as any thing but a bigoted and provoked Adversary: Only
our Author passes by one thing, which is, that Facundus and Liberatus both Rail
at Vigilius, for desetting their Party, and look upon him after his coming to
the Emperor as one that took the Heretical side, which shows they knew nothing
of his latter change Dissertat. Insr. Number. viii. col. 604.
. As to what he says, That there was nothing of Faith controverted in this
Council, but only concerning Persons, This is fully answered before See the
Hist. chap. 5.
: And I will only note the weakness of this distinction; For what difference is
there between condemning a Man's Heretical Opinions, and condemning that Man for
holding those Opinions? Suppose the Arians should pretend, that because Arius
was condemned at Nice, the Controversy there was about a Person, not about the
Faith, Will de Marca allow that distinction? And the like may be said of
Macedonius, Eutyches and Nestorius in former Councils: Certain it is, that in
this Council the Writings or Opinions of Theodorus and his Person also are
condemned, and so are the Opinions of Theodoret and Ibas before their
Recantation, but not their Persons; and the main Question in the fifth Council,
Whether those Writings of these three there cited were Heretical? which I think
is a matter of Faith and not of Persons.

Wherefore, since the Nestorian Heretics gloried in these Writings, the
Question whether they should Number. vi. Lab. col. 604.
be condemned or no, was not (as he pretended) concerning discipline; and so
there is no room for his impertinent distinction of (...), unless Vigilius had
a Dispensation to defend Heretical Writings; and his wavering was not prudence,
but perfidiousness in such a Case.

Facundus may be a good witness that Vigilius confirmed Number. vii. Lab. ib. and
Number. viii. ib.
the three Chapters, before his coming to Constantinople, and perhaps he might
suspend Mennas after his coming to that City, (as de Marca out of Theophanes
says). But since Mennas died that very year, as is proved by the Acts of the
sixth Council at Constantinople, where they must needs know the time of their
own Patriarchs death, but in the preceding Century Council. vi. Act. 3. Bin.
Tom. 3. par. 1. page 21 and notis ibid. page 264.
, All the rest of his Story is manifest Forgery, viz. his delivering his Decree
to Mennas, An. 548. (after he was dead) and he would prove this by a mere and
gross imposture, which is Vigilius Epistle to Theodorus, where in September,
552 Vid. fragm. Epist. Vigil. Lab. col. 337.
, the Pope is made to Excommunicate Theodorus and suspend Mennas, (who had been
dead five year:) Yet in another forged Epistle set down at large in Labbe
Epist. 15. Vigil. Lab. col. 328, etc. vid. dat. Epist. col. 334.
, in February the year before, the same Pope tells the Catholic Church, he had
excommunicated and deposed Theodorus and the other six Months ago: Yet these
apparent Fictions de Marca gravely cites as good Evidence, and in truth he has
no other Testimonies but these two spurious Epistles, and the incoherent stuff
of Anastasius Biblioth. to prove that Vigilius was persecuted by Justinian at
all, or that he ever opposed him after he came to the City of Constantinople
till the Council met. De Marca grants Facundus after this called him a
Prevaricator; and we find (about that very time, wherein those sham Epistles
lay the Scene of Justinian's persecuting him, for Excommunicating Theodorus,
and the Condemners of the three Chapters,) by good Evidence under Vigilius own
Hand, that this Pope Excommunicated two Roman Deacons, for defending the three
Chapters Vid. 2. Epist. Vigilij. recit. in Council. 5 Act. 7. Lab. col. 550,
etc. Baron. An. 550.
, full three year after his coming to Justinian: So that this learned Author
should not bring such stuff in for Evidence. Yet again he quotes an Epistle of
the Roman Clergy to the Legatories, now newly published Ep. Legatariis An. 552.
Lab. col. 407.
, which is as palpable an imposture as any of the former; For therein the
Clergy of Italy tell a long Story to the French Legates upon hearsay, to
inform them what Vigilius was then doing and suffering at Constantinople, where
these Legates then were; and whereas they might so easily have informed France
of this by Letters from Rome, they desire the Legates to write this from
Constantinople to the Gallican Church. Again, these rare Clerks say, that
Dacius Bishop of Milan had been absent from his Church 15 or 16 year, till' all
the Bishops of his ordaining were dead, so that vast multitudes died for want
of Baptism, (it seems neither Laymen nor Presbyters might then Baptize:) But
if Dacius did fly from Milan when it was taken by the Goths Baron. An. 539.
page 239.
, and never visited them till now, he had been absent but 13 year at most; but
that stay is not probable, considering how good a Bishop he was.

The long History therefore of Vigilius his returning Number. ix. Lab. col. 605.
to his Vomit, and of his being persecuted by Justinian, depending on nothing
but forged relations, is to be wholly rejected; and that Letter which Eutychius
writ to Vigilius, to have the three Chapters condemned in a lawful Council,
whereunto Vigilius by Letter consented in January 554 Vid. Epistol. Council. 5.
collat. 1. Lab. col. 424.
, was not writ upon Eutychius first promotion to the Sea of Constantinople, in
which he had sat now almost six years, (being chosen immediately upon the death
of Mennas,) but was writ purely on occasion of the designed Council; and the
Patriarch professes his Faith in it, not on the account of his entrance on his
promotion, but to remove the scandal, which the Nestorians laid upon such as
condemned the three Chapters, as if they did not assent to the former Councils,
especially that of Chalcedon.

Vigilius only covered his Nestorian principles with these shifts, and his main
Argument of the paucity Number. x. Lab. ibid.
of Western Bishops, is abundantly confuted by the Councils, showing there were
more of them present then at Constantinople, than had been in any former
General Council. And the event showed, that neither his absence nor dissenting
could hinder this, which our Author wrongfully calls an imperfect meeting, from
being universally received as a General Council.

The Constitution of Vigilius is proved Heretical before Numb. xi and xii. Lab.
col. 606.
See the Histor chap. 6, etc.
, and de Marca gives a very weak reason to prove it was not read in the fifth
Council. For how could Justinian be so silly, as to suppose he could keep the
Bishops then assembled ignorant of Vigilius his aversion to condemning the
three Chapters, when he would not come at them, (and if de Marca say true)
suffered such injuries for defending them? it is plain they knew his Mind, and
do particularly confute his Constitution, only sparing his name; yea, it is
Evident, they looked on him as a sickle Man, and published nothing but his first
and soundest Judgment, and never ceased acting vigorously for all his dissent;
for the Greeks at Chalcedon had showed, they looked on a Councils Decrees as
valid, though the Pope opposed them.

After all he has no Witnesses of his Exile, but the Number. xiii. Lab. col. 607.
fabulous Anastasius; all the Greeks (he confesses) are silent as to his
sufferings, and so are all Authentic Latin Histories too. The Epistle of Peter
of Antioch was writ 500 year after, and only speaks of some difference between
Vigilius and Mennas, which must be at his first coming to Constantinople Anno
547, but that is nothing to this time after the Council.

It seems strange, that Vigilius should pass for so Numb. xiv. Lab. col. 609.
great a Politician by the art used in this Epistle; for if it were his, I
should think he never intended to confirm the fifth Council by it, because he
never names it; which silence must proceed either from his fear to anger the
Western Bishops, with whom he joined still in heart, or from his hope that the
bare recanting his Opinions, would cajole the Emperor and his Greeks; and if we
consider his Hypocrisy and often changes, both of these might make him omit
the naming the fifth Council: But being a Forgery, we need not any conjectures
about the reason of a nonentity: Yet if I were convinced Vigilius writ this
Epistle, I should believe the date was false, and that this was his first
Recantation after he came to Constantinople before this Synod met, which is the
most probable reason, why he did not name this fifth Synod, viz. because no
such had yet been.

It was not the Greeks, but the Latins who put this Epistle to the end of the
Acts of the fifth Synod, Numb. xv. ib.
for in their Vatican it was first pretended to be found; but whoever added it,
must be very weak to imagine an unlawful Synod could be confirmed by a Popes
private Opinion delivered six months after, or that any body else should
receive a Council upon his Authority, who did not own it himself. Photius lived
300 year after this Council had been owned for a General Council, and what he
says may well be explained of the Letters of his which were read in the
Council, importing that once he was of their mind. The Arabic Manuscript is so
full of mistakes, that its Authority must be inconsiderable; it says, that the
living and dead were never excommunicated before this Synod, and that the Popes
profession of Faith was writ not to Eutychius, but to the Emperor Justinian:
And all these Testimonies amount to no more, than that which the Emperor and
the Council both gave out, that Vigilius was (as indeed he had often declared)
of the Councils Opinion.

It Is certain Pelagius the first, Vigilius his immediate successor, and who was
with him at Constantinople, Numb. xvi. Lab. col. 610.
did own this for a General Council; and if Vigilius had changed his mind, (as
Pelagius had done) so as to confirm the fifth Council, he must have known of
it, and for his own vindication would have pleaded this Writing of Vigilius, to
satisfy the Western Bishops who rejected his Communion; and his silence of
Vigilius consent and confirmation, is next to demonstration, that he know of no
such thing, and that no such thing ever was: As for all the rest they owned it
for a lawful General Council, but not one of them knew of the subsequent
consent of Vigilius.

The next thing in de Marca is, the consideration of Numb. xvii. Lab. ibid.
the reasons moving Vigilius to make this Decree, the first of which is
notoriously false; For this forged Epistle says, that now the whole World and
the Church was restored to Peace Epist. Vigil. Lab. col. 597.
, and our Author thinks the Illyrican and African Bishops, were now reconciled
to the Condemners of the three Chapters: Whereas it is plain, Liberatus did not
write his Breviary till Vigilius his death, that is, two year after the date of
this feigned Epistle; and he shows how woeful a Schism and Scandal there was
then in the Church, especially in Africa Liberat. Brev. cap. 24. Bin. page 193.
Lab. col. 778.
. And Victor one of the African Bishops of that side, died in restraint, after
he had suffered much in defense of the three Chapters thirteen years after
Baron. An. 566. in fine and An. 553. page 435.
. As to the Western Bishops, how could their being restored to Peace be a
motive to Vigilius to recant An. 553. when three year after, his successor
Pelagius was struggling with them to bring them to Peace, and could not do it
then without some force Vid. Epist. 3. Pelag. 1. Lab. col. 792.
? And our Author owns, that the French, Spanish and Italian Bishops, did not
come in till Pelagius had been some time in the Chair; and Baronius says the
same Baron. An. 556. page 452. n. 1.
, so that his first reason is not so much as true: I shall only add that
Justinian acted very sincerely in this matter, and Leontius slanders him in
supposing otherwise; for his Judgment was, that the three Chapters were to be
condemned, both Opinions and Persons, the Heretical Doctrins and Heretics too,
if they had not recanted.

But perhaps Vigilius might act dispensatively in Number. xviii. Lab. col. 611.
this change, for it is likely he still kept a Nestorian Heart, only this
spoils his second reason, why Vigilius writ this Epistle, viz. Christ having
enlightened his Mind, God revealing, and he diligently enquiring was now come to
the knowledge of the Truth Epist. Vigil. Lab. col. 597.
. For if after all, Vigilius did only confirm them dispensatively, that
supposes he did not believe the points to be either necessary or true, but only
such as might be professed for peace sake; and if that were all, what an
Hypocrite must this Pope be, to talk of a change of his Mind, and coming to
know the truth by Illumination, Revela^^on and Study? In vain does he and his
Patron allege the Example of St. Augustine, St. Paul and St. Peter; for did St.
Augustine retract things, and pretend to be convinced of his Mistakes only
dispensatively, that is, secretly believing still they might be true? Did St.
Paul only believe the Gospel (...), after his Conversion; Or was St. Peter a
Jew in his Heart, after he consented to discharge the Gentiles from the
Ceremonies of the Law? Pelagius the Second's Arguments are good as to the Roman
Clergy, who sincerely opposed the truth for a time, but upon Conviction as
sincerely embraced it: But to apply these instances to such a Proteus and
Dissembler as Vigilius, is to prostitute them, rather than defend him, who
often dispensed with himself in the duties of Morality.

If Vigilius had gone to the Council he might have Number. xix and xx, Lab. 611.
learned those two Rules de Marca speaks of, in six days, without the help of
Revelation: But the feigned Epistle says nothing of such Rules; it pretends
that Vigilius now understood the Person and Writings of Theodorus, and the
Writings of Theodoret and Ibas against Cyril were Heretical, and that it was
his duty to pronounce them Heretical, and condemn them as such; yea,
Anathematize them; and is this only a point of Ecclesiastical Discipline? May
Heretics and their Opinions be either condemned or not? and is it an
indifferent thing, whether a Pope absolve and defend, or accurse and condemn in
such cases? Surely the great name of de Marca is forged and put to this weak
tract; he would not have argued at this rate.

That the Acts of this Council were early translated Number. xxi. Lab. col. 612.
into Latin for the use of the Western Church, is probable enough; but Vigilius
needed not this Translation; he had lived at Constantinople long before he was
Pope, and now six years together after he was Pope, and so must understand
Greek perfectly: But the true reason why Vigilius Epistle was not added to
these Latin Acts, was because there was no such Epistle then invented: For had
he then writ such an Epistle, or in six Months after, it would certainly have
been joined to both the Greek and Latin Copies for all Men's satisfaction who
were scandalized by his dissent, especially if that (which de Marca supposes)
had been thought true in those Ages, viz. That the Decrees of a General Council
were invalid without the Popes Confirmation: But this is an Opinion of later
Birth.

Whatever he says in defense of the sincerity of Number. xxii. Lab. ib.
the Latin Acts, I agree to; but since he borrows from Crakenthorp, not only
his Arguments, but his conjectures also, (such as altering the name of Domnus
into John, etc.) I must believe the Author of this discourse had seen
Crakenthorp's learned History of the fifth Council, yet durst not own it,
because he could not confute it.

From the same Author he borrows much of what Number. xxiii, etc. Lab. col. 613.
he says, about condemning Origen's Opinions in this Council: But since the
Council was risen, before Vigilius began to deliberate whether he should
receive their Acts or no, (yea, and their Acts as he thinks translated into
Latin also,) how could Justinian after this send to the dissolved Council, to
know their Judgment of Origin and his Followers? Therefore de Marca mistakes
the point; and the learned Crakenthorp solves this difficulty much better See
the Hist. Chap. xxviii.
, to which I refer the Reader; And only will enquire how this Author and those
Popes he cites could truly say, that no matters of Faith were handled in this
fifth Council, if Origin and his Heretical Opinions were here condemned, as he
goes about to prove? This is a manifest contradiction. The Sense of those Popes
and others must be, no Points of Faith decided at Chalcedon, were called in
Question over again here: For the Question only was, whether the Opinions in
the three Chapters were not condemned in the Council of Chalcedon: And the
fifth Council affirming this concerning the Opinions of three Persons, did not
(as some feared) decree any new, or different point of Faith from the Council
of Chalcedon.

It is a needless thing to offer conjectures about Number. xxv. Lab. col. 614.
the reason, why Vigilius in this Epistle does not mention the condemning of
Origen's Errors; for the true reason is obvious, which is, Because the Forger
of this Epistle had nothing in his Eye, but to clear this Pope from the main
thing he was charged with, viz. defending three Heretical Chapters, and that
point he makes out: I grant he had (yet only jointly with other Patriarchs, and
by following, not leading Justinian) condemned Origin before, as Liberatus
declares Liberat. Breviar. cap. 23.
: But I must note, that Liberatus his telling us that so particularly, and
saying nothing of Vigilius his Epistle to condemn the three Chapters, is a
shrewd suspicion there was no such Epistle, since Liberatus writ after Vigilius
death, and was a favourer of the three Chapters, and writ all that he thought
might disparage such as condemned them. To conclude, either the Authority of
the Pope was not so considerable in those days, as this learned Apologist
fancies, or Vigilius his carriage was such, that no body enquired what side he
was of, after his so often turnings; since he lived above two years after this
Council, and yet no mention in any genuine Writer is made where he was, or how
he carried himself to the time of his death, which is said to have happened in
Sicily, An. 555. So little a figure did the Roman Pontiff then make; and when
the Controversy was revived in the time of Pelagius the Second, and Gregory
the Great, they chose to bury Vigilius name in silence, his inconstancy to his
Principles and evil Practices having made it the interest of the Roman Church
to clap him under Hatches so long as his Character was remembered; and this
Apologist had better have followed their Policy, than to raise him (as he has
done) only to his greater shame.

Books printed for, and Sold by R. Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THE Reasons of Praying for the Peace of our Jerusalem: In a Sermon Preached
before the Queen at White Hall, on the Fast Day, being Wednesday August 29.
1694. by Thomas Comber, D. D. Dean of Durham, and Chaplain in Ordinary to their
Majesty's. Printed by Their Majesty's Special Command.

A Daily Office for the Sick; Compiled out of the Holy Scriptures, and the
Liturgy of our Church; with occasional Prayers, Meditations and Directions.

The Catechism of the Church with proofs from the New Testament, and some
additional Questions and Answers, divided into 12 Sections by Zach. ^shem, D.
D. Author of the Book lately published, Entitled a Daily Office for the Sick,
with directions, etc.

A Church Carechism with a brief and easy Explanation thereof, for the help of
the Meanest Capacities and Weakest Memories, in order to the establishing them
in the Religion of the Church of England, by T. C. Dean of D.

The Pantheon, Representing the Fabulous Histories of the Heathen Gods, and
most Illustrious Heroes; in a short, plain and familiar Method, by way of
Dialogue, for the Use of Schools. Written by Fra. Pomey, of the Society of
Jesus; Author of the French and Latin Dictionary, for the Use of the Dauphin.

Bedae Venerabills opera Quaedam Theologica, nunc primum edita, necnon
Historica, antea semel edita. Accesserunt Egberti Archiepiscopi Eboracerifis
Dialogus de Ecclesiastica Institutione and Aldbelmi Episcopi Scireburnensis
Liber de Virginitate ex Codice antiquissimo emendarus.

Disquisitio in Hypothesin Baxterianam de Foedere Gratin, Ab initio and
deinceps, semper and ubique omnibus indulto, and adhuc apud Ethnicos and
extra-evangelicos vigente ac valente ad salutem. Authore Carolo Robothamo,
Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbytero Norfolciensi, S. Th. B.

Q. Horatii Flacci Opera: Interpretatione and Notis Illustravit Ludovicus
Desprez Cardinalitius Socius ac Rhetor Emeritus, Jussu Christianissimi Regis,
in usum Serenissimi Delphini, ac Serenissimorum Principum Burgundiae, Andium,
Biturigum. Huic Editioni accessere Vita Horatii, cum Dacerii Notis ejusdem
Chronologia Horatiana, and Praefatio de Satira Romona.

L. Annaei Flori rerum Romanarum Epitome; Interpretatione and Notis Illustravit
Anna Tanaquilla Fabri Tilia, Jussu Christianissimi Regis, in usum Serenissims
Delphini.

Compendium Graecum Novi Testamenti, Continens ex 7959. Verficulis totius N.
Testamenti tantum Versiculos 1900. (non tamen integros) in quibus omnes
universi Novi Test. Voces, una cum Versione Latina, Inveniuntur: Auctore,
Johanne Lusden. Philos. Doctore, and Linguae Sanctae in Academia Ultrajectina
Professore Ordinario. Editio Quinta.

FINIS.

