A COMPANION TO THE TEMPLE AND CLOSET: Or, a Help to PUBLIC and PRIVATE
DEVOTION, In an ESSAY upon The daily OFFICES OF THE CHURCH.

I will Pray with the Spirit, and I will Pray with the Understanding also. 1
Cor. XIV. 15. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Hen. Brom at the Gun at the West
end of S. Paul's, and Robert Clavel, in Little Britain. MDCLXXII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE And most Truly Noble LORD, JOHN LORD FRESCHEVILE,
Baron of STAVELY.
My Lord,
IF the judgment of some excellent Friends had complied with my first
Resolutions, this Mite had been cast into the Treasury by an unknown hand;
which seemed to me the more pious and the safer way, the more likely to gain
acceptance with God Mat. 6.3, 4. (...) Plat. de Repub.
who sees and rewards the most secret Virtue, and the more probable to escape
the censures of men, who shoot at Rovers, when the person designed is veiled in
a happy obscurity. But they whose kindnesses and known experience had made me
incapable to resist their advice, alleged that this Essay was consonant to
public and established Order; that the trifling and malicious oppositions of
our Liturgy have born the names of their ill-imployed Authors; Ac si honesta
erubescenda sint, inhonesta glorianda. Aug.
and that I should not fail of the favor of all the pious Sons of the Church,
to excuse the failings, and vindicate the design of my undertaking. Wherefore
they said, I need not scruple to allow the prefixing of my Name to these
Papers: To which I became more inclinable, when I reflected on my grand
Obligations to your Lordship, because I Judged this a fair Opportunity to give
a public Testimony of that Duty which your peculiar Favors challenge from me,
of which I have so deep a Sense, that I would say more, if your Lordships
Modesty did not restrain my Pen. Wherefore I do here tender to your Lordship a
Discourse upon the noblest of Duties, Prayer, and the life of that Duty,
Devotion, and the best Rule of humane composure for the Exercise thereof, the
Liturgy of the Church of England, and though many would have performed this
task better, yet none could have chosen a subject more acceptable to your
Lordship, or more excellent in it self. So that I am inclined to believe it
cannot be more my delight to behold your Lordships name grace these Pages, then
it will be your satisfaction that any thing which is yours may serve to
recommend the Concerns of Piety and the Church, to which your Lordship has
ever expressed so rare a Fidelity. For it is not alone the Honors, but the
virtues of your noble Ancestors (famous upon record for their affections to
Religion) which your Lordship does inherit; which inclinations cannot but
endear any design to illustrate and vindicate those Prayers in the defense of
which your Lordships sword has been employed, and in the practice whereof your
Soul is daily poured out at the Throne of Grace. So that I do with much
cheerfulness present this little Tract as a daily servant to your Lordship and
of continual use in your converse with Heaven, supposing it may be both
pleasant as it simpathises with your wel-grounded Principles, and profitable by
adding wings to your Petitions, and casting oil on the flames of your daily
Sacrifice. And sure if it might be so fortunate to meet with that Candor and
Piety (with which your Lordship will entertain it) in all its perusers, it
would be universally succesful and generally serviceable: for nothing but
prejudice and carelessness can make it useless to any true members of this
Church, who are all obliged to the performance of these Offices: and if the
influence of these Papers might (by the Divine Mercy) quicken so many Souls in
their addresses to Heaven, it will be infinitely pleasing to the Undertaker,
and as delightful to your Lordships diffusive Charity to behold others
Devotions kindled by a Taper first put into your hands. Nor should I despair of
so happy an issue to these Labors, if I might prevail so far as to engage men
in an impartial and serious consideration of these excellent Forms; because my
own Experience has taught me how much a clear understanding contributes to the
deserved admiration, and the affectionate recital of them, for when once we
have thoroughly pondered them, and made our Souls fully acquainted with these
pertinent and comprehensive Expressions of our constant necessities, we shall
find our hearts actuated with holy inlargements, and powerfully attracted into
the prosecution Cum oratis Deum, hoc versetur in cord quod profertur in Ore.
Aug. reg. 3.
of the requests made by our Lips; and our Minds would have no other employment
in these Duties, but to annex the sense to the words, and its most vigorous
affections to that sense, which is true Devotion Jungamus verbis sensum sensui
affectum. D. Bern. Ser. 13. in Cantic.
. And if we would learn to pray with such a knowing and fervent zeal, these
thoughts would be more efficacious with God then the loudest clamours or the
most charming (as we count them) flourishes of Rhetoric Nos nisi loquentem
audire non possumus: apud Deum non loquuntur verba sed Cogitationes. Amb. de
Cari. and Abeli. c. 9.
. For to think to prevail upon the searcher of hearts, by the methods used to
work upon the frailties of men, is to disparage the God we serve. It Is the
motions of the Soul to which he attends; wherefore if we desire to pray
acceptably, we must study our Petitions before we present them; which not only
enlivens our Devotion in the act of it, but makes our Prayers become the rule
of our lives Unusquisque nostrum sic discat orare, and de orationis lege qualis
esse debeat noscere. Cypr. de Orat.
by making us blush into amendment Oration de conscientia procedit; si
conscientia erubescat, erubescit oration. Tert. ex. ad. Cast. cap. 10.
when we find our practices the contradiction, of what we have asked with so
much passion. My Lord I hope this brief account may be sufficient to obtain
your Lordships good Opinion of this attempt, and to excuse whatever can need a
Pardon: but it is possible there may be some who are as much strangers to your
Lordship as to Charity, who may censure a Manual of Prayers unsuitable to your
military Honors and Employment; who may please to remember that Cornelius
whose Name speaks him Noble, and whose office declares him to have been
Martial, did observe the Canonical Hours of Prayer [Acts 10.3, and 30.] and
though he commanded in the Roman Legions yet he was a Devout Servant of the
Lord of Hosts; especially after his Baptism, wherein he took a more Sacred
Military Oath to be true to Jesus, as well as to Caesar: and therefore
whosoever judges this Discourse incongruous, I am sure your Lordship will not
so esteem it; while it promotes your Imitation of so excellent a Pattern. I
shall add no more but to beg my Imperfections may take Sanctuary in the
integrity of my Purposes which have armed me against all Detractions, because
my Aim is the Glory of God, the increase of Piety, and the Peace of this
Church; for the obtaining whereof the Prayers as well as the Patronage of your
Lordship are most earnestly requested by,

My Lord, Your Honors most obliged and Most faithful Servant, Thomas Comber.

THE PREFACE.
THere are two principal ends of the Worship of God, The glory of him that is
Worshipped, and the benefit of the Worshipers. And these two are so inseperably
united, that St. Augustine Credendum est totum quod recte colitur Deus homini
prodesse non Deo: Aug. Civ. Dei. l. 10. cap. 5.
reduces both to one, assuring us that all the advantage accrues to us. But
whether we look on them single or conjoined, no part of Divine Worship does so
much express and advance Gods glory; nor so directly tend to Man's good as
Public Prayer; in which we make the most universal solemn acknowledgments of
our Obligations unto, and Dependence upon, the Supreme Lord of all the World;
and by which all the servants of God in all times, places, and circumstances,
do with one heart and voice, by common consent Publica est nobis and COMMUNIS
ORATION, and quando oramus, non pro uno, sed pro toto populo oramus; quia totus
populus unum sumus. Cyprian.
reveal their wants, and obtain supplies for them. So that we may call this the
Life and Soul of Religion, the Anima Mundi, that universal Soul which quickens,
unites and moves the whole Christian World. Nor is the case of a private Man
more desperate, when he breaths no more in secret Prayer, then the condition of
a Church is where Public Devotions cease. St. Hierome out of Hippolitus puts
the cessation of Liturgy Hieron. Com. in Dan.
as a principal sign of the coming of Antichrist. And nothing more clearly
shows a profane generation, Genesis 4.26. Chal. Par. Tunc profani fuerunt homines
ut non Orarent in nomine Domini. edit. Ven.
the very title of wicked men in Scripture Psalm. 14.4. and 53.4.
being that they call not upon God. It Is well if any of us can excuse our
selves; but the general neglect of daily Prayers In the Rubric before the
Morning Prayer.
by Ministers (who are both desirous and bound to perform them) does too sadly
testify they are tired out with the peoples constant absence, and all together
witnesses an Universal decay of true Piety. Perhaps the dishonor, that is
cast upon God and Religion (while there is no apparent testimonies that they
value either) will not move these disregarders, and neglecters since they live
so that a Stranger could not imagine they had any God at all. But I hope they
have yet so much Charity for themselves, that it may startle them to consider
what mischiefs are hereby brought upon themselves and others. Wherefore let
them ask the cause of all that Atheism and Profaneness, Luxury and Oppression,
Lying and Deceiving, Malice and Bitterness that is broke in upon us, to the
torment and disquiet of the whole World. Let them ask why they plague others
with their sins, and others requite them again; and it will appear that all
this is come upon us because we forget God, and Heaven, Death and Judgment,
which daily prayers would mind us of. Our Souls are fixed to the Earth, because
we lift them not up to Heaven. We have neither grace to do good, nor resist
Sin, because we never ask it; and we can have as little hopes of Glory as we
have signs of grace, because we do not prepare for it. But if these evils be
too thin and spiritual, let it be enquired, whence our National and personal
calamities proceed, Epidemical diseases, Wars and pestilences? Whence comes
the Multiplication of Heresies, the prevalency and pride of the Enemies of the
true Religion? The Jews will tell you, Jacob's Voice in the Synagogue Omni
tempore quo Jacobi vox est in synagogis, non sunt ibi manus Esau. Prove. Rab.
lib. Musar.
keeps off Esau's hands from the People. We have disrespected and slighted God
and his Worship, and he may justly put us out of his Protection (who do not
duly pay our homage to him) and go away Si Deus s. b. synagogam intrat and nemo
inventus est abiit iratus, ut Isai. 50.2. Buxtorf. syn. ex Rh.
displeased; and then we lie open to all evil when our defense is departed from
us; and they that provoke him so to do, are enemies to thems^^^^ and to the
Church and state where they live indeed the worst Neighbors Quisquis incolit
civitatem in qua extat synagoga et eam tecum non adiit is est Vicinus malus. R.
Nath. de latr.
. But notwithstanding all this; while all sober and devout Men lament this
Epidemical iniquity, and groan under the sad effects thereof, passionately
wishing a speedy remedy; the Offenders grow bold by their numbers, and hardened
by this evil custom, till they now despise a reproof, and deny this Negligence
to be a sin, because they have no mind to amend it. But these are of two kinds.

1. Those that make their business their Apology, and suppose it is
unreasonable to expect them every Day at Common Prayer, and judge it sufficient
to say they cannot come.

2. Those which have learned to despise or hate the Prayers of the Church, and
to scorn that which their Forefathers (generally better then they) did
heartily serve God by; and yet these account it their Virtue to abstain from
them, and having sufficiently undervalued these Devotions stamped by Public
Authority, they imagine they may say innocently enough, they will not come. But
if to disparage our Rule did take off our Obligation to walk by it, Scorners
then were the least of sinners. But neither the excuses of the one can cover
his Covetousness and Irreligion, nor the confidence of the other shelter his
Pride at the last and dreadful day. So that I suppose it may be a friendly
office and will be so accepted, to warn all such of the unsafe grounds, they
rely upon, to prove their innocence in forbearing Public Prayers. And this I
shall do by representing with all Moderation, 1. The reasonableness of our
being present at Daily Prayers, to those who say they cannot. 2. The Excellency
of the Liturgy to those who say they will not come. And this I am obliged to
do, to smooth the way to the Temple: for in vain do we show how men may be
devout there, if they excuse or deny Coming thither. And we must not so confine
our Charity to these within the walls, as to forget those without. We love the
one best, but we must pity the other also, and endeavor to deliver their
Souls from living in a constant Sin, which they miscal innocence. I know I
oppose a Torrent, but as long as Men have reason, I shall hope such as will
consider may be convinced; and all rendered more moderate. However this will
Confirm those that are of the True Church, and it is something with me to serve
such.

1. We shall demonstrate the reasonableness of the daily attendance on Public
Prayers; and that principally from the Universal Reason of all the World, and
the concurrent practice and consent Non etenim penitus vana est sententia multi
Quam celebrant --
of all Mankind, which agrees in this, that wheresoever they own a God true or
false they daily perform some Worship to him Michah. 4.5.
. The very Heathens beside their private requests and vows, made particular
addresses to their temples (...). Plato in Timaeo.
in all their great concerns L. Scipio nil magnum aggressus est nisi prius
ascenso Capitolio Deos ibi veneratus esset Live. l. 26.
, and yet abstained not from the daily sacrifices, nor from the frequent
festivals of their numerous Deities. In Egypt (as Porphiry relates) they
praised their Gods with hymns three or four times every day l. de abstin. 4.. 8.
The Turks are called to their houses of Prayer five times every day, and six
times upon the Frydays; and he that notoriously absents himself, is punished
with disgrace and has a fine set upon him. And if our Savior think it
reasonable we should do something more Math. 5.4.7. (...).
how dare we call it unreasonable when we are not enjoined to do so much as
they. But to go on, Who knows not that the Jews had set hours of prayers, when
all devout people (even Christ's Apostles Act. 3.1.
(went to the Temple or Synagogues to offer up public supplications? And
these hours are observed among them exactly to this very day. One instance of
their strictness in this Particular we learn from the Talmud; where it appears
that because of the distance of the Temple, and the impossibility of attendance
on the daily Sacrifice, those who could not come hired certain Devout men who
were called [viri stationis] the Men of appearance, to present themselves daily
there, and put up petitions for them Talm. tract. Massech. Tahauai and ap. L.
Cunaeum.
. But the Pharisees not only observed the usual hours of Prayer but doubled
them, and zealously kept them all. Now Jesus tells us our Righteousness must
exceed theirs if ever we hope to enter into his Kingdom Math. 5.20.
. And we could almost afford to call that an in^ollerable burden, for we call a
smaller matter by a worse Name. To pass then to the Christian Church. We have
an Express Command, to Pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. Gr. (...) sc. ut
nullo die intermittantur certa tempora Orandi. August.
that is without omitting the set times which every day return, and ought to be
Observed.

In obedience hereunto the Church in the Apostles time, met at daily prayers;
Act. 2.46.
and so did the Primitive Christians for many Ages after, injunctis precibus
frequenter decenterque interdiu noctuque insistunt. Orig. in Cells. l. 6.
who had their Liturgy, Eucharist and Hymns, even in the night when
persecution prevented them in the day. And surely their zeal and fervor is a
huge reproach to our sloth, who yet call our selves of the same Religion, and
are so far from venturing lives and estates to enjoy opportunities of
Devotions; that we will not leave our shop nor our company, nay our Idleness
half an hour, for a freer and more easy Worship, then they could enjoy.
Surely we are unlike in practice, as we are like in name and Profession. Twice
a day was not enough for them, wherefore they appointed (in the days of
Martyrdom) three set times in every day for Prayer, Nine, Twelve, and Three in
the Afternoon In orationibus celebrandis invenimus observasse horam tertiam,
sextam and nonam, sacramento scil. Trinitatis D. Cypr. de Orat. Domin. (...).
Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7^.
, and punctually observed them. Afterward in more quiet times it was wonderful
to behold, the orderly performance of Morning and Evening Prayer (...). Chrysostom.
in 1 Timoth. cap. 2.
in huge assemblies of Men and Women Cujusvis aetatis viri ac foeminae totis
animi viribus hilarique merte precando and gratias agendo Deum bonorum autorem
venerabantur Eusebius. eccles. hist. l. 10. c. 3.
, who failed not of their Constant attendance. These are the Men and times
whose principles we are reformed by, but I wish that Corrupted Church who
forced us to a separation, do not prove more conformable to the outward part of
their Practice in a due observance of Public Prayer, then we who have more
knowledge, better Prayers, and fewer excuses, and yet less Devotion. Wherefore
let us, no more complain of this Church for expecting us at daily Prayers. Let
us rather Challenge all Nations and People for fools, and declare it
unreasonable, that we should have any God at all or let him have any of our
time, though he give us all we have. Let us tell the world, we are
self-sufficient for the Conduct and Defense of our selves and our affairs, and
then we shall discover our selves what we are, and not feign our selves too
busy; for we do lay aside our business daily, for Causes less weighty, and more
inconsiderable advantages. If Vanity or Lust, Satan or his Emmissaries call,
we can find Leisure; and why not when God calls? unless we think all that time
lost which is spent upon his service, or as if we needed not his blessing. In
short if unavoidable business did hinder us and nothing else, many men might
come always, and all sometimes, and every day an hundred for one that now
comes. Wherefore it is Sloth and Covetousness, or Atheism and Irreligion keeps
us away. And if so, what signifies those pretenses of praying at home (which
ought to be done too?) verily no more then the idle Schoolboy who seeks a
Corner not to learn but play in without disturbance. So that it is to be
doubted that constant neglecters of Public prayers, use seldom and slight
devotions in private, for they may make the same Objections against them.
Therefore do but remember the reasonableness of this is to be tried at a Higher
Tribunal, and come as often as God can in reason expect to meet you there, and
I shall ask no more.

2. To the reasonableness of the Churches injunction we may add, the Excellency
of that Provision which is made for you, which ought to invite you to come, and
will be an Aggravation of your neglect. But here I must not expatiate into the
particular Encomium which every part of the Liturgy deserves. That would make
the Porch larger then the house, and may better be seen in the following
discourse: only at present we may say this of it in general. That though all
Churches in the World have and ever had forms of prayer; yet none was ever
blessed with so comprehensive, so exact, and so inoffensive a Composure; Which
is so judiciously contrived that the wisest may exercise at once their Knowledge
and Devotion; and yet so plain, that the most ignorant may pray with
Understanding: so full, that nothing is omitted that is fit to be asked in
public; and so particular, that it comprises most things which we would pray
for in private; and yet so short, as not to tire any that have true Devotion.
Its Doctrine is pure and Primitive, its Ceremonies so few and Innocent, that
most of the Christian World agree in them: its Method is exact and Natural; its
language is significant and perspicuous, most of the words and Phrases being
taken out of holy Scripture, and the rest the Expressions of the first and best
Ages: so that whoever takes exceptions at these must quarrel with the language
of the Holy Ghost, or fall out with the Church in her greatest Innocence.
Indeed the greatest part of these Prayers are primitive, or a second Edition of
the most ancient Liturgies of the Eastern and Western Churches corrected and
amended. And in the opinion of the most impartial and excellent Grotius Certum
mihi est (...) Anglicanam, item morem imponendi manus adolescentibus in
memoriam baptismi, Autoritatem Episcoporum, Presbyteria ex solis pastoribus
composita, multaque alia ejusmodi satis congruere institutis vetustioris
Ecclesiae: a quibus in Gallia and Belgio recessum negare non possumus. Grotius
Epist. ad Boet.
, (who was no member of, nor had any Obligation to this Church) The English
Liturgy comes so near that Pattern, that none of the Reformed Churches can
compare with it. And if any thing External be needful to recommend that which
is so glorious within: We may add, That the Composers were all Men of great
Piety and Learning: for they were all either Martyrs or Confessors upon the
Restitution of Popery, which as it declares their Piety, so the Judicious
Digesting of these prayers does evidence their Learning; for therein a Scholar
can discern close Logic, pleasing Rhetoric, pure Divinity, and the very
Marrow of all the Ancient Doctrine and Discipline, and yet all made so familiar
that the unlearned may safely say, Amen 1 Cor. 14.16.
. Lastly all these excellencies have obtained that universal Reputation, which
these prayers enjoy in all the World, so that they are deservedly admired by
the Eastern Churches, and had in great esteem by the most eminent Protestants
See D. Durel his defense of the Liturgy.
beyond the Seas (the most impartial Judges.) In fine this Liturgy is honored
by all, but the Romanist whose interest it opposes and some Dissenters whose
prejudices will not let them see its luster, whence it is they call that (which
Papists hate because it is Protestant) Superstitious and Popish, and though they
count it Roman condemn it without a hearing. But when we remember, the best
things in a bad world have most Enemies (as it does not lessen its worth, so)
it must not abate our esteem, that it has malicious or misguided Adversaries:
Who for all this hold the Conclusion, and obstinately resolve they will not
come.

How endless and unprofitable it is to dispute with these, the little success
of the best arguments managed by the wisest Men do too sadly testify. Wherefore
I shall decline that, and attempt to convince the Enemies, by assisting the
Friends of our Church Devotions. And by drawing that veil which the ignorance
and indevotion of some, and the passion and prejudice of others have cast over
them, represent the Liturgy in its true and native luster, which is so lovely
and ravishing, that, like the purest beauties, it needs no supplement of Art
and Dressing, but conquers by its own attractives, and wins the affections of
all but those that do not see it clearly Ignorant qui non amant.
. This will be sufficient I am sure to show that whoever desires no more then
to worship God with zeal and knowledge, spirit and truth, purity and sincerity,
may do it by these devout Forms so that I should have concluded here my
Preface (when I had given a more particular account of this Undertaking) but
that I must first examine an Objection or two, which are like a skin over the
eyes of some, and be the Picture never so full of graces, will spoil the
Prospect, if they be not removed.

Object. 1. It is said to be a Form, and therefore a hindrance to zealous
praying by the spirit.

Answ. Whoever makes this Objection, and affirms we cannot pray by the Spirit
in the words of a Form, must beware his ignorance betray him not into a
dangerous uncharitableness, and perhaps blasphemy. For the Saints of the Old
Testament Numb. 6.23 Deuteronomy. 26.3. Ezra. 9.5. Daniel. 9.1.
prayed by Forms, and so did Christ himself in the New Math. 26.44.
and he taught his Apostles a Form to pray by, and dare any say they prayed not
by the Spirit. Have not all Churches since the Apostles times to our days had
their Forms of Prayer? and did not the devoutest men of all ages Compose and
use such? Was ever Extempore Prayer heard of in Public (till of late) unless
on special occasions? And do we think No Church nor no Persons prayed by the
Spirit, till now? To come nearer still. Have not France and Geneva their Forms?
And did not learned Calvin (and the best reformed Divines) use a Form before
their Sermons? And is not an unstudied Prayer a Form to the People, who are
confined to pray in those words? And will you say these all pray without the
Spirit of God? But sure we hug the Phrase of praying by the Spirit, not
attending the Sense. For the meaning doubtless is, to be so assisted by the
Holy Ghost, that (our thoughts being composed and our Souls calmed, and our
Hearts deeply affected with our Wants, and the Divine all sufficiency) we can
pray with a strong Faith and a fervent Love: When we are so intent upon our
Requests that we duly weigh them, and pursue every petition with pressing
importunity, ardent desires, and Vigorous affections, this is the Spirit of
prayer. And thus we may better pray by the Spirit in the words of a Form, than
we can do, when our Mind is employed in inventing new expressions. For having a
Form (which custom has made familiar) we have all things set down to our
Hands which we or others want; and we are at leisure to improve the good
Motions of the Spirit; having no more to do but to join our Souls and
Affections to every Petition, and follow them up to Heaven in most passionate
and zealous wishes that God would grant them: Whereas in Extempore Prayer the
Petitions expire into Air in a moment, for neither Minister nor People knew
them before, nor can remember them afterward; the one being busy in inventing,
the others in expecting a pleasing novelty. And methinks it argues more of the
Spirit of God, when we can attend the old Prayers with zeal and love, then when
we need Variety and Novel Expressions, to skrew us up into a Devotion too much
like Artifice, and seeming rather to be moved by the pleasure of the Fancy,
then the Actings of desire. However we judge of the Effects of Gods Spirit
rather by disposing our hearts, to join in a well-composed Form, then by
filling our heads with new Prayers, or opening our Mouths, in fluent
expressions; both which we may do without the help of the Spirit, but to be
devout without it, is most impossible. To which we shall only add, that many
Sons of God, and sound Members of our Church, do daily use these prayers with
as much Spirit, and Life, serious and sincere Devotion, as any in the World can
do. And this they account a demonstration that the Spirit does assist them in
this Form. And so it may assist these mistaken Christians, if they will lay
down their groundless prejudice, and try to serve God thus as well as they can.
So would the good Spirit assist their prayers; and make up our differences,
Quis enim inimicum adhuc ducere potest eum cum quo unam ad Deum vocem emisit.
D. Basil.
giving us one mind and one Spirit, that with one Heart and one Mouth we might
glorify one God.

Object. 2. But it is further urged, that these Prayers, though good in
themselves, will grow flat and nauseous by daily use Vilia sunt nobis
quaecunque prioribus annis Vidimus and sor^ det quicquid spectavimus olim.
Calphurn. Eccl. 7.
, and consequently become an impediment to Devotion.

Answ. We come not to the house of God, for Recreation, but for a supply of our
Wants; and therefore this might be a better reason of an empty Theater, than a
thin Congregation. We come to God in Public, to petition for the releif of
our own general Necessities, and those of the whole Church, viz. for Pardon of
sin, Peace of Conscience, the succors of Divine Grace, and a Deliverance from
sin, and Satan, Death, and Hell: as also for food and raiment, health and
strength, protection and success in all our Concerns; and more generally for
the Peace of the Kingdom, the prosperity of the Church, the propagation of the
Gospel, and the success of its Ministers. Now these things are always needful,
and always the same, to be prayed for every day alike. Wherefore (unless we be
so Vain as to fancy God is delighted with Variety and Change as well as we)
what need is there to alter the Phrase every day, or what efficacy can a new
Model give to our old requests? Particular wants and single Cases must be
supplied by the Closet-Devotions, for the Pub^ique whether by Form or Extempore
can never reach all those, which are so numerous and variable. Wherefore one
Form may fit all that ought to be asked in the Church; and why then should we
desire a needless and infinite Variety and Alteration? If we do, it is out of
Curiosity not Necessity. The poor Man is most healthful whose Labor procures
him both Appetite and Digestion, who seldom changes his Dish, yet finds a
Relish in it, and a new strength from it every day: And so it is with the sober
and industrious Christian, who busying himself in serving God, gets daily a new
sense of his Wants, and consequently a fresh Stomach to these Holy Forms, which
are never flat or dull to him, that brings new affections to them every day. It
is the Epicure and luxurious, the crammed lazy Wanton, or the diseased man that
need quelques chooses, or Sauces to make his daily bread desirable. And if this
be our Temper, it is a sign of a diseased Soul, and an effect of our surfeiting
on holy things. In this we resemble those Murmurers (Numb. 11.6.) who despised
the bread of Heaven because they had it daily, and loathed Manna it self,
calling it in scorn Dry Meat. This was sufficient to sustain their bodies, and
satisfy their hunger, but they required Meat for their Soul, Psalm. 78.18. LXX.
(...).
that is, to feed their Fancies and their lusts; even as we do for whom the
Church has provided Prayers sufficient to express our needs, but not to
satiate our wanton Fancies, nor gratify the Lust of our Curiosity; and we
complain they are insipid; so perhaps they are to such, for the Manna had no
Taste to the wicked; but it suited it self to the Appetite and Taste of every
good Man, as the Jews tell us in their Traditions Wisd. 16.21. and Fagius on
Numb. 11.
. Sure I am it is true here: for if we be curious and proud or Carnal and
Profane, there is no gust in the Common Prayers, but a truly pious Man, can
every day here exercise, Repentance and Faith, Love and Desire, and so use them
as to obtain fresh hopes of Mercy, Peace of Conscience, increase of Grace, and
expectations of Glory, and whoever finds not this, the fault is not in the
Prayers but in the indisposition of his own heart.

If all this will undeceive any, and take away their prejudice so that they may
see clearly what they cannot but love if they did behold; I shall think my
pains well bestowed: if not, it appears they are resolved to believe as they
do, and I am resolved also not to imitate them so far as to cover my Arguments
with strenuous revilings Non incessimus adversarios convitiis and contumeliis,
sicut plerique faciunt rationum and argumentorum infirmitatem maledictis
obtegentes. Greg. Naz.
because it is more pleasant to me to give a true and lovely Character of my
own Devotions, then an odious, though deserved one, of Others. Only let those
that delight in making objections against Forms know, that we can easily
recriminate, and Charge extempore Prayers, with Novelty, Confusion,
Irreverence, Vainglory, which can scarce be denied, and many other
inconveniences, that will hardly be excused. But this were to perpetuate a
Quarrel; and had not been mentioned here, but to teach those to be modest in
their Censures Cum tua praevideas oculis mala lippus inunctis, Cur in amicorum
Vitiis tam cernis Acutum.
who are not free from all Exceptions; nay liable to infinitely more then can
be justly Charged upon us.

But having thus cleared the way to all indifferent and disinterested Persons,
it is time to speak briefly of the Design of the following Discourse; which is
to make it evident that our Excellent Prayers do deserve all possible love and
esteem, and contain in them a rich Treasury of all that can make our Devotion
live^y and useful. And if we be assisted by Gods spirit, and come with Desire
to pray with zeal, and sincerity, here is (without calling in any aids but that
of Heaven) Matter enough in the curious Order, clear Method, significant
Phrases, and strong Arguments to quicken our affections, and enlarge our Souls
in holy and fervent wishes, desires, and meditations, which is the Prayer of
the Inward Man, the Life and Soul of this Duty. All which is done by giving a
Natural and facile Analysis of the Method, and by making plain and practical
Observations on the parts, together with a literal Paraphrase of the whole. By
which none can imagine I should give a borrowed luster to the Prayers, which
they had not of their own: for I only prove they had it before, and I find all
in them, that I observe from them, which I hope will be so plain, that all Men
will see the inference, and be able in their own Devotions to find out much
more. Now in this Essay I shall hope to serve three sorts of Persons.

1. The Ignorant, who may be instructed hereby to pray with understanding. Not
that we suppose these Offices so obscure as to need a Comment (for nothing can
be more plainly expressed, nor is it possible to invent words more universally
understood) but many that understand the sense of the words, have not Art
enough to discern the Order, Method, and Connection, of the Prayers, nor skill to
find out the Arguments that press every request; or the places of Scripture
which furnish these Devotions with significant Phrases, nor judgment to
Describe what disposition of Soul does suit the several parts of them. And they
that consider that the greatest number are such, will think it seasonable to
help such with a plain and easy Explication. But, to pass these, there are many
(in other things) knowing Persons, who rather for want of Consideration then
judgment, never took notice of the natural dependences of these prayers, nor
the true and full import of the expressions, nor of the Graces to be exercised
in the several Parts, because they only attended the words, but took no care to
expatiate into holy meditations. And if the former need a Master these want a
Monitor, lest they offend in a worse kind Non tibi deputatur ad culpam quod
invitus ignoras; sed quod negligis quaerere quod ignoras. Aug. de lib. arbitr.
lib. 3. c. 19.
: For Negligence is worse then simple Ignorance. But I hope though all that is
here be obvious, yet something will be found which either was not known or not
observed before, and those things also such, as may elevate the affections, and
make the Prayers more pleasing and more profitable.

2. The devout servants of God and obedient Sons of the Church, whose Care it
is to pray daily in Public, and whose desire and endeavor is to do it well.
Might I be a Nethinim to hew wood and prepare fuel for the altars of their
Hearts I should rejoice, and it has been my Care to suggest not always the
most Critical but the most practical sense which most directly tended to help
Devotion for these Men's sake; who no doubt have in their own hearts made many
of these Observations before, and I hope they will like them no worse, for I
shall like them better in hopes the same Spirit directed me and them. But I
hope that what I have done will (besides its present assistance) suggest a way
to all devout Souls, for making Pathetical, and pious inlargements, more and
better then are to be found here; that so our daily Offices may be full of life
and pleasure, and every day court us with new delights. And I must affirm, I
have rather opened the top then searched the bottom of this rich Mine. But
su^e I am we had need to quicken our Devotion all we can, not only for our own
good, but that our flames might thaw the hearts and lighten the eyes of the
rest of the Congregation; which scarce ever mind either Words or ^ense, but are
either sleepy or tired, to the dishonor of God, the discomfort of the Minister
Pauci mecum sunt in oratione, and hi ipsi vertiginosi, hiantes, assidue se
convertentes and observantes, quando Psalmorum cantor versus finiet; quando ab
Ecclesia, velut a carcere ab orationis necessitate liberabuntur. Basil. conc.
11. de servit.
and the ruin of their own Souls. How happy should we be, if by my endeavors
and your Examples, we might awaken such into a Sense of their Duty; that these
excellent Prayers might every where be said with an excellent spirit, for the
benefit of particulars, and the good of the whole Church.

3. The mistaken dissenters who hereby may be convinced (and perhaps persuaded)
Facilius vinci possunt quam persuaderi. Hyeron.
that we can pray by this Form, with as much zeal and more knowledge, with as
much Spirit and more Truth, then by any other kind of Prayer. And then it must
appear, that this Venerable Liturgy has been falsely represented by such, who
would not have it seen truly, lest it should be loved really Credunt de nobis
quae non probantur, nolunt inquiri ne probentur non esse Tert. Ante nos
incipiunt homines odisse quam nosse, ne cognitos aut imitari possint aut
damnare non possint Cyp. de idol. Van.
. But if they are so much their own Masters, as to read the Prayers seriously,
and view this little book with as much Charity as it was written with, I shall
hope either for their company at Prayers, or at least to escape their censures
for going thither. For unless they be foolishly obstinate they either must love
them, or cannot hate them. If they would love them, and pray with us we shall
be friends, and if only the second be obtained we shall be quiet, and even that
is desirable. These are the designs which began and encouraged this
undertaking: and that they are the sincere purposes of the Author, his own
Conscience does testify; and he hopes even those who approve not the Means
must confess the end is good. But that he should be so happy to obtain it in
all, is rather to be desired then expected, and if it be succesful in any of
these kinds he will not repent his pains. If in none, he is not the first that
has failed in accomplishing good Intentions. And however he will have
satisfaction in the Peace of a good Conscience 2 Cor. 1.12.
and may say with that noble Roman si sequuta fuerit quae debuit fortuna, nos
omnes gaudebimus, sin minus ego tamen gaudebo: Brutus ap. Ciceronem.
, If the success answer his sincerity, it will be a cause of universal Joy; if
not, he can rejoice in his cordial intentions to do good. For the Censures of
furious zealots, or the scoffings of profane Ishmaels, he does not value them,
being only unwilling to offend authority, or true Piety. Wherefore he does
humbly submit these Prayers to the Judicious Correction of the Reverend Fathers
of the Church, desiring nothing may be said which dissents from the Doctrine
and Discipline now established, for if it do, it is without the Authors
knowledge, and against his Judgment. And finally as to all sober and devout
Christians, he wishes the same Charity may guide their eyes and fill their
hearts in their perusal, which guided his hand in the Composal of these lines:
and then he hopes for a fair interpretation, which these following Sections may
need; since they are drawn up not for the Study, but the Temple, not for
Critics but Asceticks Malo ut me reprehendant Grammatici; quam ut non
intelligant populi. D. August.
nor to make men more learned but more devout. They are intended to wait upon
you to the house of God, and entertain you there till Prayers begin, that you
may (by perusing some parts hereof) be fitly disposed for them; which is almost
one half of the Duty Dimidium facti qui been coepit habet.
. But the Preface is grown too long, and must not be enlarged by Apologies: but
concluded with this hearty wish: May the God of Peace give us all meek Hearts,
quiet Spirits, and devout Affections; and free us from sloth and prejudice,
that we may have full Churches, frequent prayers, and fervent Charity; and that
uniting in our Prayers here, we may all join in his Praises hereafter, for
Jesus sake, Amen.

SECTION, I. OF THE PREPARATION TO Public PRAYER.
. 1. PRAYER is an Elevation of the Soul to contemplate the beauties of the
Divi^e Nature, that by beholding such transcendent perfections, it may learn to
love, desire to please, and delight to imitate so great and exact a pattern;
and consequently, is a duty of the highest concernment: for it is an Honor and
a Benefit to us, and yet it is accepted by God as our homage, and the
testimony, of our observance. It is a high favor to be admitted to have
familiar converse Job. 15.4. (...) Vulg. and Ang preces, pr^p. sign. Colloquium
familiare: Drusius. (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 7.
with the King of Kings, and a huge advantage to have so frequent admission to
the Fountain of all goodness. But then it is difficult as well as fair, and
requires so much attention and serenity, zeal and vigor, humility and faith,
love and admiration, that it cannot either be well done or kindly accepted
without some preceding Preparation; for these Souls of ours are so drenched in
Matter, and so generally taken up with the consideration of outward things,
partly by the condition of our Nature, but principally by the frequency of our
conversing with the Cares and Pleasures of the lower World, that we find our
Minds exceedingly pressed down with the weight of them, when we would lift them
up to God; but as those Fowls whose wings are not proportionable to the weight
of their bodies, do usually run some paces before they can rise from the earth
to begin their flight; so the Church teaches us first to prepare our hearts
before we begin to pray. The Jews are taught when they enter their Synagogues
to stand silently a while in the posture of Prayer, before their Devotion is
begun Buxtorf. Synag. Judaic. c. 5.
; and one of their Masters told his Scholars this was the Way to obtain
Eternal life Quum vultis orare cogitate prius coram quo stetis: Dict. R. Eleaz.
Talmud. tract. Mosi Beruch.
And the Primitive Christians had a preparatory preface Sacerdos ante Orationem
Praefatione praemissa parat fratrum mentes: Cyprian. de Orat. dominic.
to their Public Prayers, as long ago as the time of the famous Cyprian. In
imitation whereof we are appointed to exercise our Souls in the meditation of
these Sentences of Scripture, with the Exhortation subjoyned, that we may
thereby become more fit to pray. The Israelites in the oblation of their
First Fruits had a form of Gods own appointment, Deuteronomy. 26.5. wherein they- were
minded of their former Poverty: and that Illustrious Heathen Temple had this
Inscription in letters of gold (...), that the Worshippers by a true
consideration of themselves might approach with all humility to their supposed
Deities. And surely it is more requisite for us who worship the True God, to
reflect upon the vast Disproportion between our selves and him, which is as
great as between finite and infinite, mortal and immortal, holy and impure, and
so we may be convinced of the necessity of being most lowly and reverent before
him. The frailties of our bodies and the infirmities of our Nature, the defects
of our Faculties, and the misery that cleaves both to Soul and Body does
command us to be humble in the presence of God. But that which will lay us
lowest of all in o^r own thoughts is the remembrance of our Sins, which do
principally (if not alone) alienate us from God; for he that pityeth our
Miseries does hate our Sins, and he that caused the Leper to be banished out of
the City, admitted the Lame Man to the beautiful gate of the Temple. Wherefore
our Spiritual Guides present us with these in the first place, both to allay
our Pride, and to engage our Care to remove them by Repentance, before we begin
to pray, because else we know our prayers cannot be heard Psalm 66.18. Joh.
9.31. Is. 59.16.
, for Joshua himself cannot be heard while the Sin of Israel was not taken away
Joshua 7.10.
, and he meets with a check in his Devotion, because he presumed to pray before
he had removed the Accursed thing: Now since none of us are innocent, it
follows that none must come to petition God till they have prepared themselves
by Repentance, and he that does not this continues in sin still, and if so,
there is a Moral impossibility such a man's prayers should prevail, for they are
either a heap of contradictions, or a contexture of indignities against the God
of heaven; for such men bewail that in words which they love in their heart,
and ask forgiveness, where they are neither sensible of an offense, nor will
own the pardon as a favor, they accuse themselves for what they did willingly,
and never condemned themselves for it but will reiterate upon the first
opportunity; they petition their enemy, and ask for what they hate, and flatter
him whom they fear perhaps but do not love, and require things that they hope
he will not give, and if they ask any thing seriously, it is either
inconsiderable or with evil designs, and so becomes a provocation Quas nisi
seductis nequeas committere divis.
. Now can an All-seeing eye discern this without indignation? will not an
Almighty hand be lifted up to destroy them, who both delude themselves and mock
the King of Glory? let us beware least we experience the truth of this in our
eternal ruin? We are advised to a serious Repentance which will be the best
harbinger for all our petitions; if we see our sins, and feel their weight (it
is to be hoped) we shall draw near with low apprehensions of our selves, and
strong desires after God; an high opinion of him, and a hearty love to him,
with many fears and yet many hopes; and who can be more fit to pray; what
better foundation for those Prayers which must reach as high as Heaven, then
Humiliation and Repentance.

. 2. NOw the better to induce us thererto, we have God himself brought in
speaking to us in his own Words, the words of Holy Scripture: the Voice of God
brought our first Father to repentance Genes. 3.9.
, and it will surely have the same effect on us, for who will refuse when he
invites who can pardon or punish, save or destroy. He begins first to speak to
us in his holy Word, to whom we are about to speak in our Prayers; so that
those who expect God should hear their Prayers may hearken to his Word Prove.
1.24. Deus S.B. nos Vocat ad seipsum, si nos illius vocem audiemus tum ille
item preces nostras ei oblatas: Midr. Tehil. Psalm. 116.
; especially where the matter is so excellent and of so great concernment to
us, as in these invitations to Repentance from the Mouth of God himself. It was
therefore most prudently Ordered that we should begin with Holy Scripture, and
for the Particular sentences, I may say, they are the plainest and most
pertinent that can be found in the whole Book of God, which though it be divine
in every Part, yet our Care is well bestowed in selecting such Portions thereof
as are suitable to the Occasion: And thus the Reverend Composers of the
Liturgy, like skilful Physicians, have walked in this Garden of God which is
stored with remedies of all sorts, and have cropped the choicest and most
useful of several sorts; different in operation, but having the same effect to
bring us to Repentance. But, because of the great variety of tempers and
Constitutions, they have chosen some places for every one, and have it to the
discretion of the succeeding Physicians of Souls to choose such a Sentence every
day, as may suit best with their own and their Peoples hearts: Which was done
with great reason, both because of the various dispositions of men's minds, and
also of the different temper of the same man at several times; some are
ignorant, others negligent; some obdurate, others tender; some are confident,
others pensive, and that which will pierce the heart of the same man to day,
will not enter his skin to morrow; what will now cure the wound, another time
neither will abate the pain nor stop the bleeding: But here in this Panarion we
have Pious sentences of all sorts, and it may be worth our while to take them
in pieces, and see for what kind of Persons every one of them may be proper.

The Division of the Sentences. Of these Sentences some are Promises: to the
Doubtful, as Psalm 51.17. Ezekiel 18.27.
Commands: to the Negligent, as Joel 2.13. S. Math. 3.2.
Examples: to the Unwilling, as Psalm 51.3. Luke 15.18, 19.
Instructions: to the Ignorant about God, Dan. 9.9, 10. our selves, 1 John 1.8,
9.
Deprecations: of Punishment for the fearful Psalm. 51.9. Jerem. 10.24. Psalm.
143.2




These are here set down by the Church, but without any order, because only one
or two of them is to be taken at once, so that we shall reduce them to these
Five heads: 1. Support in the fears of Gods anger: 2. Comfort against the
doubting of his Favor. 3. Instruction to the Ignorant. 4. Encouragement to the
lazy. 5. Awakening to the Hypocritical.

. 3. IF we consider how universally all men have deserved the wrath of God, we
shall find it necessary for all men to fear before him; but if we again observe
how exceedingly this Fear dejects and discourages a tender heart, it will seem
necessary to apply a Cordial, least such be swallowed up of overmuch sorrow,
and hindered in their Devotions, to which purpose we shall Direct such from
these Three Sentences, Psalm 51.9. and 143.2. Jerem. 10.24.

First, you have holy David presented in that most excellent Penitential Psalm,
who was touched with the sense of his just deservings, and although God had
promised him Pardon, yet having resolved not to let him go unpunished 2 Samuel
12.13, 14.
; he being full of these fears does not run from God, but makes his application
to him, begging of him not to avenge himself upon him for his sins, but to
forgive them, which is Metaphorically expressed by hiding his face from them;
that is, not looking on them and considering them (as the Uncharitable man is
said to hide his eyes from the Poor) not looking so steadfastly to observe them,
nor so narrowly to examine them; for God is so Holy that if his pure eyes
behold iniquity, his Almighty hand must punish it: and whereas further, every
sin is a debt to Gods Justice, and his remembering of them is set out by noting
them in a in a Book; he prays the Book may be crossed and the debt blotted out
never more to appear against him, and if this had been impossible David would
not have asked it; nay further we learn, that if the Guilt be removed, the
Punishment will either be taken away, or sanctified and made tolerable. Learn
from him to have Noble thoughts of God, and not to fancy him inexorable,
neither do you only concern your selves for the Punishment, but chiefly to
obtain a Pardon, and though you expect some chastisement, yet fear not to be
ruined by it if God will hide his face from your sins; but Pray with him and
say ( Psalm LI. verse 9) O thou most righteous Judge of the whole world who
can not but punish all the Wickedness thou do discern [hide thy face from]
a strict and narrow observance of [my sins] in this life, lest they provoke
thee to punish me here; [And] because all thy debtours must be called to
account at the great Judgment, do thou for Jesus Christ's sake [blot out] of
thy Book of Remembrance all the Debts I have run into by [all my iniquities,]
that I may not be condemned to an Eternal prison for them hereafter.

Secondly, we have the same holy Psalm. 143.2.
Man observing God had a controversy with him, taking our Saviors advice
Math. 5.25.
, and resolving not to stand upon his own defense, but to go in and submit and
make his peace, not staying till a judgment was dispatched to summon him, or
Witnesses produced to convince him, but rather resolved to supplicate his Judge
Job 9.15.
, and (as Benhadad's Servants to Ahab) to make application to his infinite
Mercy; for there is no need of prosecuting where the Party does let fall his
Cause and plead Guilty; David thought this the safest course, and we may well
do so too 1 Pet. 4.18.
. The best in the World, if examined strictly, will be found faulty in some
particular, and therefore there is no ground for us to Contend who are the
vilest and worst of all; if God resolve to punish, there is Cause enough to be
pleaded against the most holiest Person in the world; therefore if we fear God
will chastise us, we must not pretend we are innocent, and therefore hope to be
spared, but rather confess our evil-deservings without a judgment to force us,
and let our hope of sparing be founded on his Mercy, not our Purity; we are
sinners, but we may be spared for all that, for if all Sinners must suffer, the
whole World must be condemned Romans 3.19.
. Sure God spares many, and though many that are spared are better then we, yet
none altogether innocent, none but must be judged with favor and mercy, and if
he please to judge us so we may escape also; however it is the best way, if we
fear Gods Anger, to pray the Suit may be stopped (for we do own our sins, and the
Lion spares the prostrate, and that God may deliver us, we may Pray with him.

Psalm 143.2.] Lord, thou chargest me with many sins, and intendest to punish
me for them, and I come not to assert my self clear, but before thou summonest
(knowing my guilt) I pray thee [enter not into judgment] neither reckon
strictly in justice [with thy Servant] who confess I have deserved Punishment,
but hope thou will spare me who rely only on thy Mercy which is my best plea,
[for in thy sight] who see so exactly, and hate sin so perfectly, by
defending their Innocence [shall no Man] not the holiest Person [living] in
this dangerous World, be acquitted or [be justified] without a favorable
allowance, which I beseech thee also show to me.

Thirdly, We are to consider that the very Corrections of God are mixed with so
much Mercy, and allayed by a supply of inward Comforts, and made tolerable by
his gracious purposes in sending them, that we ought not altogether to decline
them; for if we feel no smart for our sin we may more easily run into it again
(...), Origin. (...). 3.
, and consequently go on in it and pull upon our selves Eternal misery: And the
poor humbled Soul who sees the punishment of sin to be, a being forsaken of
God, deprived of grace and glory, delivered up to be a slave to the vilest
lusts here, and a Companion of the vilest Persons, and horridest Devils
hereafter; will account a temporal Chastisement (which delivers him from that)
a benefit and a favor, and with Saint Augustine Domine, hic Ure, seca, liga ut
pareas in aeternu^.
will pray to be scorcht and scarrified, lanced and bound here, that they may
be spared hereafter: and this may perhaps teach you instead of fearing and
flying Afflictions, to desire (as the Prophet Jeremy Chap. 10.24,) to have some
gentle correction with Gods smallest rod 2 Samuel 7.14. Heb. (...) Virga hominum
infirmiorum.
with which he strikes his own Children, for he is so merciful, that we ought
not to be afraid to fall into his gracious hands, only to pray as the Prophet
does, he will deal gently with us, especially if we apprehend some Affliction
likely to fall upon us, then we must not absolutely desire God to lay by his
Rod, but to use it with judgment Cum judicio:] modice Junius. Heb. in modo.
that is, gently with consideration to our weakness, or in a sober way in
judgment LXX. (...). V. and Vatab. in judicio.
not as a furious angry person falls on a man, who values not how nor where he
striks, nor cares if he take away our life, but that it may please God in his
Discipline to proceed as a sober and compassionate Judge, that we may be
amended, and survive the strokes, and be warned by the pain against future
rebellions, not so as that we should faint under his hand: And if either we
need, or desire, or are likely to be chastised, we must not run from God: but
our best course is on trust of Gods compassion to deliver up our selves quietly
to suffer, and with Jeremy not to desire a total sparing, but a mitigation.
Jerem. 10.24.
Since thy justice obliges thee to punish sinners, and I have deserved so
justly to suffer, and am so apt to go on in sin till I smart for it; I do
beseech thee [Correct me] here with temporal afflictions [O Lord] that thou
may spare me hereafter, but let not this correction be proportionable to my
deserts nor thy displeasure; but let it be inflicted moderately [with judgment]
and consideration of my infirmities, punish me [not in thy anger] as thou do
thy enemies [least thou bring me to nothing] so that I fall under thy hand and
survive not to be amended by it.

A Meditation Preparatory to Prayer in the fears of Gods Anger.
OH my soul, what fearful tremblings are these have seized on thee, so that the
thoughts of God that have been and ought to be thy greatest comfort, are now
become thy terror and amazement! Whence is this miserable alteration, that
thou can behold nothing but Judgment in the Father of Mercies, and Anger in
the Fountain of Love? What has provoked him that delights to spare to be
resolved to punish? Surely my sins are very many, for it is not a few can
incense him, and they have more then ordinary aggravations: for he is not so
highly displeased at small offenses, and certainly I have often committed them,
and long continued in them, for he begins not to frown upon the first
misdemeanor: Alas, the case is too apparent! My sins are both very many and
exceeding great, frequently repeated and of long continuance. I have despised
Mercy, and now I am likely to feel Judgment. Miserable wretch that I am, I have
tired out the patience of a long-suffering Father, and run from the embraces of
a loving Savior, rejected the offers of a most indulgent holy Spirit, so that
now I fear I have stopped up the fountain of his Mercy Isai. 59.2.
and unsealed the treasures of his vengeance Deuteronomy. 33.34.
. And I ought rather to wonder how God could spare me so long, then why he
should strike me now, since many have been cut off for fewer and lesser sins: I
see I have most justly deserved to suffer the worst of evils, and therefore
should esteem it an incomparable favor to be only corrected with a temporal
affliction, if I might be so excused: But it is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God Hebr. 10.31.
, who I fear will begin by these and increase them, till I be ruined by them,
and drop into a sad eternity. Therefore, O Lord, my flesh trembles for fear of
thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments Psalm 119.120.
. I know no way to escape them. To deny my sins were impudence, to excuse them
will be apparent hypocrisy. To be concealed is impossible, to be found
intolerable, I am miserably confounded. But was never any in this case before,
that I might receive some advise and comfort for them? Yes surely, The Church
has here presented me with a King and a Prophet, both dear to God, whose fears
were greater, though their sins were less, and their danger not so great as
mine; yet these in the midst of their fears considered their sins as the only
cause of these evils, and accordingly, they freely confessed them, bitterly
lamented, and exceedingly humbled themselves for them; not striving so much to
avoid the Punishment, as to obtain the pardon of their sins, knowing that the
guilt once removed, thou would either totally spare them, or gently chastise
them for their good. Wherefore they rendered themselves up into thy hands,
rather aggravating then extenuating their offenses, and yet humbly begging
their correction might be in mercy, and they found the benefit of it. Go to
then my soul, and do thou likewise; thou have first occasioned Gods wrath by
thy breaches of his laws, oh do not increase it by dishonouring his Name with
excessive fears! thou have forsaken him by sin, run not farther by despair; for
the faster thou runnest from his Mercy, the sooner thou will meet with his
Justice. Delay no longer, but go in before he send for thee, deliver up thy
self before death or any sore judgment arrest thee; accuse thy self before thou
be indicted, and confess thy sins freely before the witnesses be called out
against thee; pass sentence on thy self e're the Judge condemn thee. I cannot
expect wholly to escape, but it will be a great favor if I meet a sickness
instead of death; losses in my estate, instead of loosing both my God and my
Soul for ever. It is not fit to desire my heavenly Father altogether to lay
aside his Rod, but only to use it gently that I may by this smart be warned
against those future sins that bring me to utter and final ruin; Oh Lord,
rather chastise me then disinherit me, me, and those stripes shall be welcome
which come in exchange for eternal torments. Thou who wilt change thy Sword
into a Rod, wilt be so compassionate in thy inflictions, that I shall only
feel what my distempered soul needs to recover, and my flesh and spirit can
bear not what my sins deserve, and thy Justice might exact: Wherefore I will no
longer hide my sins, but by a humble and hearty confession declare that I hate
them more then I fear to fall into thy merciful hands, and do hope hereafter I
shall fear to offend, and then I shall be freed from these sad expectations of
thy heavy wrath, which wisdom God grant me for Jesus sake. Amen.

. 4. NOt much unlike this, is the case of the poor doubting soul, who is
discouraged from Confession by mis-giving thoughts, that God is become utterly
irreconcilable, and hence they conclude it needless to repent, because they
believe the recovery of his favor to be impossible, and truly so it is if we
think it so to be; because while we look upon it to be impossible we can never
seek after it Postquam enim adempta spes est lassus c^ra consertus stupet.
Arnobius.
, but (if we observe) it is the design of Satan to make us to think so, that we
might never obtain it nor attempt it: Wherefore to rescue these poor souls from
so dangerous a delusion, and to prepare them to ask a pardon in Faith, the
Church has selected three portions of Scripture more: The first, Psalm 51.17.
To show they are fitly disposed to ask by their contrition: The second, Daniel
9.9.
To demonstrate God is inclined to give notwithstanding their unworthiness. The
third, Luke 15.18, 19.
To prove by a pertinent example they are likely to be received, if they will
venture to come.

1. [Psalm. 51.17.] Let this dejected soul view holy David, after the
Commission of his great sin; who being earnestly desirous (as you are) to be
taken again into favor by God, verse. 12. was surveying his flocks and all his
substance Micah 6.6, 7.
to find some acceptable present to offer to God, resolving that nothing was
too much nor too precious to procure a thing so excellent. But while he looks
abroad he remembers, he has something at home, a trembling broken heart which
panted in his breast, and therefore here expressed by a word Heb. (...) Fluctus
ad scopulu^ allisos: ita signif. Psalm. 94.5.
signifying waves dashed against a Rock: this broken spirit and contrite heart
was the most acceptable offering in the world. Gods justice in condemning, his
power in detaining, and his severity in executing the sentence of his wrath
upon his Enemies was in his thoughts as a mighty Rock, against which these
thoughts had beat so long, that his heart was almost dashed to pieces with
fear, and yet he knows its sighs and groans are pleasanter to God then the
melody of the Chantings of the sons of Asaph. its pantings and breathings are
perfumes sweeter then the cloud of Incense; its free Confessions and exposing
it self to shame, make it an acceptable Heave Offering; its tears are a
precious Drink Offering, and its flaming desires do make it more excellent then
whole Burnt-offerings, and all the Sacrifices of the Temple. The sorrows of our
hearts are far more prevalent then the fattest oxen of our stalls, or the
fairest calves of our lips, neither of which without contrition are respected
by God Matthew. 15.9.
. The prayers and tears of sorrowful Hanna can fetch a greater and spedier
blessing from heaven then the costly oblations of El^anah 1 Samuel 1.13.
. David is resolved to offer this, for this he is sure God will not despise.
Which word [not despise] is to meet with the fears of the contrite sinner, who
because he knows his own heart so filthy, deceitful, and vile a thing, cannot
believe but God will reject it, as he did the lame and the blind, the sick and
maimed sacrifice under the Law. This is that you fear, but he assures you he
will not despise it: but there is more intended Minus dicitur and sub eo majus
intelligitur: ut Johan. 6.37. and alibi.
, even that he, will accept it kindly, as when Christ says, he will not cast
them off who come to him; he means, he will lovingly entertain them: so here,
it is certain God will not only not despise it, but will look upon it as the
best and greatest gift, though it be from the hand of a Publican Luke 18.
, wherefore be not disheartened, for your fears show you have this broken heart,
offer that, and be assured God will embrace it lovingly, treat it tenderly, and
keep it safely.

Psalm 51.17.] I have nothing in this world so dear to me, but I would give it
freely to purchase Gods favor; but though men be thus appeased, yet he must
have something he likes better, and truly [the Sacrifices] most likely to be
accepted [of God] who needs no outward things, [are a broken spirit] which
trembles at his Anger, and hates it self for its sins, and is almost dashed to
pieces betwixt fear and sorrow. Whoever therefore brings such [a broken and a
contrite heart] let him think it never so vile, yet [O God thou] whose favor
such alone desire [wilt not despise] nor reject but accept and embrace both it,
and those that bring it.

2. If they shall further argue against themselves, that they deny not Gods
gracious nature, but that they fear their iniquities have turned his love into
hatred, his mercy into fury, and his kindness into indignation. Behold in the
next place, a free discovery of what God is to sinners Dan. 9.9.
: for the Jews were then in captivity, but had so grievously offended, that
Daniel who much desired their restoration, scarce knew how to plead for them;
till at last he finds an Argument in Gods gracious Nature; viz. That mercies
and forgiveness (that is many, nay infinite mercies and forgiveness for
numberless sins) were Gods peculiar possession, a principal part of his Name
Exodus 34.6.
the chiefest of his Attributes, and inseparably annexed to his Essence, and
therefore the sins of his creatures cannot make any change in God: Mercy in the
creatures is by communication from him, but he is the original and fountain,
which is never dry: therefore Daniel confesses they are sinners, but denies,
that therefore it is impossible to hope for pardon for their evil doings; could
not rifle his treasures, nor rob him of his Attributes, nor alter his Nature.
That continues the same still, and therefore there is mercy to be had. He
confesses them guilty of all sorts of sins; that is, sins of commission, and
that even to an absolute rebelling, and forsaking of God, and apostasy from him
LXX. (...): ita Vulg. and Vat.
by Idolatry; and then also Omission, and neglect of walking in Gods law,
though they were taught and instructed in it; therefore they deserved no mercy:
But God is the fountain of mercies still, and therefore there is yet hope:
Other Translations generally read, not [though] but [because] we have sinned,
which is but a further illustration of the same sense; viz. We may see and be
convinced that Mercy is Gods peculiar possession, because we have done such
vile things; and yet he has spared us, that we might by our humiliation give
him occasion to forgive us; and this his pity in sparing, shows his intention
of restoring us, and therefore should quicken us to address to him who has it
solely in his own power: Daniel will not go to the King of Babylon, not to the
best nor greatest on the earth: No, Mercy is Gods, and so we have the better
hope to obtain it.

Dan. 9.9.] Why should we (because we have formerly sinned) remain hopeless of
ever being received, since we know that [To the Lord] Jehovah, who is
peculiarly [our God] as inseparably annexed to his Essence, and as his own
proper possession [belongs mercies] infinite [and forgivenesses] more then our
sins can need: and since they are his, we hope we shall have them though we are
unworthy; for [though we have] sinned by breaking his laws, and [rebelled
against him] by forsaking his Covenant [neither have we] done what he commanded
us, nor [obeyed the voice of the Lord our God] who charged us by his servants
[to walk in his laws] and tread in that plain and pleasant path [which he set
before us] though all this be true, we are sorry for it, but will not despair,
because God can yet restore us.

3. To enforce both the former, and encourage these humble souls whose desires
are too big for their faith, here is a lively example of one Luke 15.18, 19.
whose condition was as miserable, his faults as great, and his reception as
unlikely as theirs can be. And yet he comes and speeds, that you may take
example hereby, and do likewise. The example is that of the prodigal son, who
had voluntarily forsaken his Fathers house, and carried away his full portion,
which he wasted lavishly, and consumed in all manner of riot and excess, never
thinking of nor regarding his father all the time of his madness, till extreme
want had restored him to the use of his Reason ver. 17. (...) ad seipsum
rediens.
, and put him into his wits again, and then he blames himself for lying still,
either in his sin which is (lapsus animae) the fall of the soul, resolving to
arise by repentance, or else you may understand his lying along, or sitting on
the ground, to be a posture of sorrow Isa. 3.26.
: But he sees he may sit disconsolate for ever, and be no nearer to his fathers
house; wherefore he resolves to take courage and arise, and not sit always
bemoaning himself with a vain and ineffective grief, but repenting himself to
return home: His father had not called him, nor had he any assurance he should
be received; only he knew if he sat still he must starve, and if he were
repulsed, he could suffer no more. He comes not to make any apology, but to
bring in accusation against himself, he hoped indeed that his offense could not
unty the bands of that dear Relation, and therefore calls him Father, but
confesses he had forfeited the title of Son, and not only broken the law of
Nature, but of heaven, that is of the God of heaven Coelum pro Deo ponitur
quoniam est ejus habitaculum. Elias. Tisb. Psalm. 73.9.
, who expressly requires this Obedience: He could have wished a return to his
Fathers Table, but that were Presumption to expect, only he hopes he will not
see him starve, and if he be set with the meanest servants, that will be
prevented. But the Father is readier to hear then the Son to desire, and what
his unworthiness made him ashamed to ask, his Fathers Bounty made him willing
to bestow: and he that scarce hoped to be admitted a servant, is once more
owned as a dear son: This he found, and so shall they that follow his example.

Luke 15.18, 19.] Why do I sit still in my sin, vainly bemoaning my folly while
I am like to starve, surely I will take courage, and [I will arise] by
repentance, and with prayer and supplication make haste [and go] by faith [to
my Father] who can relieve me, and perhaps may have pity on me. For to move his
bowels toward me, as soon as I see him, I will fall down [and will say unto
him, Father] who did beget me that am now so wretched. I here confess that [I
have sinned] by my ungodly courses [against Heaven] and the God that dwells
there [and before thee] being so ungrateful for all thy love, that I justly
deserve to be disowned and left in my misery, for I have forfeited my relation,
[and am no more worthy to be called thy Son] yet I hope thou will not let me
perish, who feedest thy meanest servants.

A Meditation preparatory to Prayer, when we doubt of the favor of God to us.
HE that has a considerable request to make to an earthly King, must approach
without a present in his hand; but my request is to the King of Kings, to whose
laws I have been disobedient, false to his Government, refractory to his
summons, and ungrateful for his former favors: But what can I offer to him
that needs nothing? what can I give to him whose both my self and all I have
are? his favor indeed is so sweet, so desirable, and so universal a
comprehension of all happiness that I could freely give all I have or can do,
or may procure for the purchase of it: but the whole world is a vanity to him,
neither can such trifles blind his eyes or bind his hands, buy his mercy to the
unworthy, or pervert his justice from the sinner: I could methinks expose my
body to the sharpest torments, my soul to the heaviest sorrows, and my life to
the cruelest Tyrant, if I were sure of his everlasting mercy afterward, and
would account my self happy in the purchase, but it cost more to redeem a soul,
I can give nothing but it is his already, and I can suffer nothing but what I
have deserved; what then! oh where shall I have a peace offering which may not
be despised? I am told nothing is more acceptable then a broken heart, it is
strange! can an heart polluted with the guilt and enslaved to the Power of sin,
stupid to apprehend, slow to desire, and impatient to wait for and unable to
perform any good; but witty to invent and vigorous to prosecute, unsatiable to
desire, and unwearied to pursue all evil, and now more vile then ever, by
reflecting upon its own vileness shaken with fears torn in pieces with sorrow,
and even a terror to it self, miserable and poor, blind and naked, can this
heart be a fit sacrifice for so glorious and all-seeing, so holy and pure a
God, can he like that which I abhor, how can it be? but let me recall that
hasty word; for he has said it, who best knows what will please himself, and
if he value it, it is worthy, for the true worth of every thing is to be judged
by his estimation of it: Who knows but such a broken heart may be a greater
evidence of his power and mercy, a fitter instrument of his praise and glory, a
plainer table to describe his grace and draw his image on then any other? Such
a heart I have, and if this serve I am happy, I will give it freely to thee, oh
Lord! who despisest not the meanest gift if there be sincerity in the giver. It
was broken before with fear but it is now dissolved with love, I am ashamed it
is no better, but thy mercy is the greater in accepting it, and it will become
better by being thine: oh how am I filled with admiration of the freeness and
fullness of thy mercies in comparison of which the greatest humane compassion
seems cruelty, and I dare proclaim to all, that in thee are all the mercies of
the world united, and thou art mercy it self in the highest degree, if my
disobedience and negligence, contempt and ingratitude could have separated thee
from thy mercy, I had now met thee in fury taking vengeance without pity, for
I have seemed to live as if I had designed to Dare thee to turn away thy self
from me, and to try thy utmost patience, the least part of which baseness would
have turned my best friends in the world against me; but behold the mercy of my
God continues still! oh let me have the shame of an ungrateful sinner! and thy
name have the glory of thy inexpressible pity, even to those who are almost
ashamed to ask pardon, and let me to whom thou have showed such compassion,
have the honor to be an instance of thy goodness to all the world; but have I
such a father, why then do I lie still with this load of guilt upon my soul,
and this heavy burden of sorrow upon my spirit, what do I get by these vain
complaints, but waste my time and double my misery by sad reflections; I can
neither have help from my self nor any creature, but from my Father alone, to
whom mercies are as proper as misery is to me, and if I through fear or sorrow
sit still here and starve, I have not so much pity for my self as he would have
for me if he saw me thus grieved for abusing his mercies; wherefore I will
arise and go though I think I shall scarce have the face to ask more I have
spent the last so ill, and I shall be ashamed to tell him how base I have been:
but as I was not ashamed when I did evil, so I must have shame when I suffer
the desert of it, I will go bathed in tears, blushing for shame, accusing my
self and only relying on the bowels of a Father, will beg only so much mercy as
will banish despair and quiet my mind and give me some little hope, and revive
my languishing faith, and if I may have this I will be content, though I be not
entertained with assurance and certain expectations, for the least favorable
look is more then I have deserved: yet I see the tender Father upon the first
sight of the returning prodigal whom he had never sent for, but was driven home
by his own miseries, yet he runs to meet him, takes the words out of his mouth,
and receives him with all the demonstrations of love and the caresses of a deer
affection: and is my God less merciful who has invited me so often, and
promised me so largely; I have done ill to stay so long; but I will go now high
in my desires, low in my expectations sorrowing for my offense, and begging his
mercy, and I hope though I carry no merits of my own to his justice, yet I
carry misery enough to make his bowels of compassion yearn upon me and then I
cannot perish. Amen.

Thus we see the Church has showed her care of these poor contrite ones in
selecting the most and choicest of these sentences for them, who are the best
though the least part of the people, and though such are vile in their own eyes
Psalm. 15.4. Old Transl. Chal. Par. Viles prae oculis suis.
yet they are dear to God, and highly valued by all good people and tenderly
indulged by the Church, who wishes there were more of this blessed temper.

. 5. THe next sort of men, who come to pray are involved in gross ignorance and
such are inappre^ensive of their guilt and unacquainted with their danger, who
know not what to ask, nor of whom, nor why; but these be instructed before they
pray, or otherwise they will neither confess aright, nor amend at all, only out
of custom they may come and offer the sacrifice of fools, but neither knowing
God nor themselves, they always err either in thinking they have no sin, or
else in supposing those which they have, may be pardoned by a mere outward show
of Repentance. But the Church has a remedy for each disease.

1 John 1.8, 9.] First for those who do not see their sins, and therefore
cannot be cured till they know themselves sick; such need this spiritual
eye salve Revel. 3.18.
. For they account it a reproach to be reputed sinners, because they do not
discern they are such: if any exhort them to repent, they say they have no sin,
as Laodicea did: and thus they answer the Summons of God, the Exhortations and
Advices of his Ministers, and the censures of their Reprovers: In the primitive
times some Heretics were so impudent, as to say positively they had no sin
Epiphanius in haeres. Valent. l. 1. tom. 2. and Marco^. l. 1. tom. 3. (...)
Clem. Alex. Strom. 3.
; so did the followers of Valent. Marcus and Basilides, with some others, who
denied that any wickedness was a sin in them, and some in our days come too
near them; but such are so gross that all abhor them; yet many who hate such,
and will not say so with their mouths yet through ignorance or pride, say so in
their heart (...) Psalm 30.6. Isai. 47.10. Adrian. Isagoge.
, which is the language God understands, and therefore in Scripture to think
and to say are the same: But the Apostle declares that if we, Christians,
Disciples of Christ, even the best of us should either say, or think so, it is
a great error, and both false and dangerous to him that believes it Eccles.
7.20. (...) Procopius. Quisquis se inculpatum dixerit aut superbus est aut
stultus. Cypr. de opere and eleemosyn. Romans 3.20.
. The Scripture undeceives us, if we do not wilfully shut our eyes, that we may
sleep in security, while we seem innocent to our selves: which is so far from
making us really innocent, that hereby we remain guilty for ever Sine peccato
autem qui se vivere existimat, non id agit ut peccatum non habeat: sed ut
veniam non arripiat. August. de Civ: Dei. l. 14. c. 19.
, because we never seek a pardon; we think, it may be, it is in Gods Court as
in Man's, where confession is a cause of condemnation: but if we think it so in
Gods, we deceive our selves; for before him, not he that confesses, but he that
denies is condemned: and this the Apostle here further shows, that if we
confess our faults, we shall have two of Gods Attributes of our side: First,
His Truth will then oblige him to forgive us because he has promised it Prove.
28.13.
, and if I relying on that promise, do come in and accuse my self, Gods truth
will engage him to perform, that now it is promised, which none could have
expected, if there had not been a promise for it. Secondly, His Justice or
Righteousness will also plead for us; because justice being satisfied by
Christ's death, desires no further vengeance on the penitent sinner, but grants
a pardon as the just desert of Christ's merits; though the Hebrew notion of
Justice and Righteousness do seem more proper here, for with them it is put for
Charity and Mercy Matthew. 6.1. allibri (...) Hieron. Dan. 4.24. and Prove. 10.2.
solent ministri nostri quod pauperibus datur (...) nuncupare, R. Jud. lib.
(...) vide Matthew: 1.19. (...), h. e. (...), Chrysostom.
; and so it may here signify the goodness and kindness of God, which is the
foundation of our hopes, when we do confess, and through his mercy we do not
only obtain forgiveness of the guilt, but are also cleansed from the filth of
our sins also: from all which it appears that he is a fool, who out of laziness
or shame, or fear, does dissemble or deny his sins, and so not only is
deceived, but is undone for ever by it, when as by an humble and hearty
acknowledgment of the truth, Gods Truth and Mercy would have been our
Advocates, and his Pardon and Peace might be procured for us.

1 John 1.8, 9.] The Scripture declares we all have sinned, and every man that
knows his own heart will confess it. But be we the best of men, [if we say] out
of pride or ignorance, or do but think in our hearts [that we have no sin] to
confess to God, or repent of, thinking to be excused the sooner before God,
because we do not or will not condemn our own ways [we deceive] not God, who
sees all things, but [our selves] and loose our pardon by standing on our
innocence, because we speak safely in the face of the Almighty [and the truth
is not in us.]

They therefore that conceal their wickedness, God will open it to them, and
condemn them for it, [But if we] having observed our selves guilty, deal
ingeniously, and [confess our sins] with hatred, shame and sorrow. He has
promised to give us a pardon, and we may trust his Word, for [he is faithful.]
And Christ has suffered the vengeance due to such, he is righteous [and just]
and will not exact the punishment of us, but be ready [to forgive us] the
punishment due to [our sins, and to cleanse us from] the stains of [all
iniquities] we had committed.

2. If the ignorant man do discern any of his sins, yet he is apt to think
there is no difficulty to obtain a pardon, if he but acknowledge them, and cry
God mercy for them. But the Church lays before them Ezekiel. 18.27. wherein they
may see, that their souls shall not be delivered from death, the just reward of
sin, when they confess, but when they turn from their sins: For to repent
implies a disapproving of what we have done, so as to do it no more; a change
of the mind and actions also (...) est ut qui errorem suum pristinum intelligit
-- ab insania se reciperet -- and id maxim caveret, ne in eosdem laqueos
iterum inducatur, Lact. inst. l. 6. Munster Heb. (...) Matthew. 3.2. h. e. facite
vitae conversionem.
, no longer continuing to do that which we grieve that ever we had done, and
this is here plainly showed to be the condition on which our sins may be
forgiven, viz. if first we cease to do evil Isa. 1.16, 17.
: secondly learn to do well; and surely he that confesses himself in a wrong
way and grieves for it, will both leave the path he is in, and labor to find
out the right: so must the wicked man, or otherwise he does in vain expect a
pardon from God, who will not forgive one fault to him that intends to commit
more, lest his Mercy become the support of iniq^ity, his Holiness the
entertainer of what he hates, and his Goodness the encouragement to the breach
of his Laws. And if this seem difficult, that you must forsake all evil, and do
the contrary good before you can be accepted; you must consider the benefit of
it is the saving your souls alive, this will preserve you from a twofold death
(the least of which is worse then bodily death) a dying in sin, and a dying for
sin: for while you go on to practice these sins, you are really dead Impii
etiamsi videantur vivere, miseriores tamen sunt omnibus mortuis, carnem suam
sicut tumulum circumferentes, cui infaelicem infoderunt animam -- quae intra
humum volvitur, and terrenae avaritiae, cupiditatibus caeterisque vitiis
includitur, ut gratiae coelestis auram spirare non possunt. Ambros. de Cain and
Ab. Ephesians. 2.1. 1 Timothy 5.6.
, though you have a name to live, because you (so long) have no sense of any
good nor motion toward it, nor any union ^ith God, whose departure from the
soul of the sinner, is as real a death to the soul, as it is to the body to
have the soul separated from it. But by forsaking your sins, God will be moved
to return and revive you, and so you shall not dye eternally, whereas the
wicked man that lives in his sins, first God forsakes his soul, and then his
soul forsakes his body, Revel. 3.1.
and so begins his eternal misery Cum anima a Deo deserta deseri^ Corpus. Aug.
, where his soul lives only to feel torments, but never more to enjoy any good:
To prevent which, you must turn out of that evil way that leads to both these
deaths, and your souls shall live in glory; for though Gods justice oblige him
to punish you, for the old score, yet our Lord Jesus has by his death
purchased a Covenant of Repentance for us, wherein God ingageth to receive us,
and he promises to satisfy the former Debt, if we repent and amend Ezekiel.
18.27.
: Though I might easily revenge my self on the sinner for all his old
transgressions, yet through my Son Christ Jesus I do here promise [when the
wicked man] who is walking in the ways of death, not only confesses his
fault, but also [turneth away] from those paths, and being really grieved for
what is past, abstaineth [from his wickedness] and never more practices those
sins [that he hath] formerly with so much delight [committed,] if this wicked
man amend his life, [and does that which is lawful] and allowed by my word, so
that his ways be good [and right] in my eyes, I will forgive the punishment,
and remove the power of his sins, so that while impenitent sinners are dead in
sin here, and die eternally for it hereafter [he shall save his soul alive] and
I will give him life everlasting.

A Meditation preparatory to Prayer, for the instruction of such as are
mistaken.
IS it possible I should be all this while deluded so grossly to imagine my eyes
open, and my way direct, and to suppose I have hitherto dwelt in light, when
indeed, my eyes are shut, and my feet are wrong, and my mind overspread with
the mist of Error, and the Egyptian Darkness of a stupid Ignorance. Thy Word
(O Lord) is a light to my feet, not only to show me which is the right way,
but to let me know when I am in the wrong, which I never suspected till I met
with the faithful conduct of thy sacred Oracles; How have I given up my soul to
false g^ides, who, that I might not enquire after the right way, would never
acquaint me I was wandering from it; had I followed them still, I had stumbled
on the threshold of hell, while I expected to arrive at the gates of heaven.
Blessed be thy Name, I now see I have been straying from thee the fountain of
all true happiness, and have been in vain seeking content where it is not to be
found, and this disappointment drives me to seek it where it is. Had I not been
a stranger to my own heart, I had not been so far out of the right way: But I
have supposed my self clear, only because I never considered wherein I was
guilty, and have flattered my self with the pleasing thoughts of my own
innocence, so that I have been as secure, as if I really had been so: I have
relied on my own vain imaginations, being glad to spare my self the labor of a
farther inquiry, and most foolishly I have accounted this a Peace, which was no
other but want of a sense of my real danger. I find my chief design has been
to seem good, and persuade my self I was so, that I might be more quiet in the
ways of evil, and might neither be accused by my own Conscience, nor allarumed
by thy dreadful threatenings, since I supposed they did not belong to me. But
alas, how miserable would the event of this self deceit have been; for thou, oh
my God, did see, and would have condemned me for all my blasphemous and
repining thoughts against thee; my malicious, envious, disdainful and
treacherous thoughts against my neighbor: thou heardest all those false and
slanderous vain and filthy words I uttered with my mouth: those deceitful and
unjust, cruel and uncharitable works which I committed with my hands thou
saw: yea, all that formality and hypocrisy, ambition and pride, lust and
covetousness that lay in the secret corners of my heart, were apparent in thy
sight; and what did it avail me not to see them? thy vengeance would have come
as certainly, and more terribly, because it was not expected. It is most
strange I should never see this vast heap before; but sure I have wilfully shut
my eyes, lest I should discern, that I was loath to believe and unwilling to
amend: and thus my Iniquities continue still. But now I see them by thy mercy,
and I believe I have offended thee as much by hypocrisy in concealing them, as
by my disobedience in committing them. Therefore now I will ingenuously confess
them, because the graciousness of thy Nature, and the truth of thy Promises,
and the satisfaction of the Lord Jesus, are sufficient to procure a pardon for
those who dare so far trust to thy Mercy, as to become their own accusers: and
while I thus discover my sore to the Physician of souls, though it be
dishonorable and troublesome, it is the only way to have it cured and
cleansed; had not Jesus dyed for me upon my confession, thy Justice would have
proceeded to punish, but now by thy promise to him, it will oblige thee to
forgive me and deliver me: Yet since my God has so graciously convinced me of
the evil and danger of those courses I have taken, I will not rest in a bare
confession I am in the wrong; but by his grace will return from it, and utterly
forsake all these my follies. His Mercy perhaps is great enough to forgive thee
upon thy humble acknowledgment, but that he knows thy sins are as inconsistant
with thy happiness (oh my soul!) as they are with his laws; and therefore he
that desires thy felicity, will not forgive the old score, unless thou cease to
run further in debt, for while thou go on in sin, thou art in the way to
eternal death, and art really dead to all true sense of divine comfort, thou
art buried alive in lusts and pleasures, and thy flesh intombs thy wretched
soul, and the grave-cloaths of vile affections bind thee hand and foot from
moving toward God; nor have thou power to breathe in the pure air of heavenly
meditations, and can thou like to stay in this filthy place still, when thou
did not see thy misery, no wonder if thou calledst this Dungeon and Vault a
Palace. But now thou must abhor it when Jesus calls, Lazarus come forth! Do
thou not find the more thou followest these, the less thou love thy God, and
seldomer think of him, and movest slowlier toward him, and have meaner
apprehensions of him: Return then from these evil paths, for now thou know
the dead are there. Do not only seek a pardon, but desire a Communion with
him, who is thy strength and life, thy joy and happiness, and he will be joyful
for thy recovery, that he will forget all former unworthy dealings, and will
only study how to make thee happy hereafter: There is nothing can hinder thee,
unless thou love thy sins too well to forsake them, and carest so little for
him, that thou had rather dye without him, then with him live holily here,
and happily hereafter, which God forbid.

. VI. ANother sort of men there are, who know it to be their Duty to Repent,
and yet do from day to day neglect it, and have more need to be excited then
instructed, in order whereunto here is provision made of a cogent example, and
a strict command, which may put them upon the practice of this necessary grace:
First, such who are great sinners, and yet seldom reflect upon their own
condition, cannot sure but blush to behold one who had been no customary
offender, but being once surprised in a deplorable instance, never gives over
thinking upon it with shame and sorrow Psalm 51.3.
, while they that are more guilty never concern themselves: The rest of David's
life was a converse with God, and a strict observance of his will, and if the
Jewish conceit of good deeds, being weighed over against the evil might be
allowed; or if after the manner of the Persians Vita anterior simul cum delicto
in aestimationem venit, and qua major pars vitae atque ingenii ste^i^ ea
judicand^m de homine. Asin. Pollio de Persis.
, his former life had been considered with his present transgression, surely he
might have been excused. But he never attempts to hide this one sin in a crowd
of holy actions, nor goes about to extenuate it, because it was the first, or
but one, or not great in comparison of others, but confesses it to be very
heinous, continually laying it open not only before God but before himself,
that he might recollect with grief and sorrow, the guilt and filth whereof, the
baseness of the act and the danger of the event, and fully discover the
vileness and horridness thereof, and it seems he was not without dreadful
apprehensions of Gods anger, for we fix our eye on what we fear, and cannot get
that out of our minds which does affright us, oh how does this reproach that
negligence which we show who are guilty of so many and so great wickednesses,
and have no holy actions to set over against them, and yet we either cast them
behind our backs and grow careless and merry and forget our danger or if we do
sometimes look over them we do it slightly and are glad of any occasion to
divert us: It Is certain God sees them, and will one day make them all pass
before us, Psalm. 50.21. (...), tanquam aris armatorum disponam.
nay muster them up against us, unless by looking on them now we learn to abhor
them, and repent of them, and so God of his mercy do for ever hide his eyes
from them, Psalm. 51.3.
let others be unconcerned when they offend thee, and go about to excuse
themselves, I must and will publish my baseness in offending my heavenly
Father, Lord [I acknowledge] with a sad heart [my transgression] of thy most
holy law by this wilful act of wickedness, for which I know I have so justly
deserved thy wrath, that my eye and mind are fixed on what I have done [and my
sin] haunts me continually, giving my conscience no rest because it [is ever
before me] and I cannot but view the hainousness of it till thou have pardoned
it.

Secondly, If the shame of such an example make no impression, let them hear
that strict and positive command, Matthew. 3.3.
which being a summons from God to all the world to repent was proclaimed first
by the harbinger S. John in the wilderness to those who had so much devotion as
to come to him thither, and after it was published by the Lord Jesus himself in
Towns and Cities to all those he met with, this was his first Sermon Matthew.
4.17. (...), Hierocles.
and is the first lesson to be learned in Christ's School; not by some
particulars but by all that will be his Disciples, he speaks to all, and to
every particular man repent ye: for he knows this duty necessary for every one,
so that till this be done, you have done nothing in Christianity: and if any
say he will not; he despises his authority; if he plead he need not he
impeacheth his Wisdom, and if he allege he cannot yet, it seems he dare live
in a wilful neglect of his commands: Tertullian thinks we ought not to enquire
what need or what good there is of repentance, Neque enim quia bonum est
auscultare debemus, sed quia Deus praeceperit, and ad exhibitionem obsequii
prior est authoritas imperantis quam utilitas servi^^is: Lib. de poenitent.
because his commands by whose favor we hope for eternal happiness, are to
have weight with us without any appendant reason, but here we have a reason of
the precept added, to show us he injoyns not this so much to show his
authority, as because it is necessary for us, and our interest requires it,
viz. Because the kingdom of heaven or of God (which is all one, ant. page 14.)
is at hand, That is either the kingdom of grace as it is sometimes taken in
Scripture, Matthew. 13.24. and alibi.
or the kingdom of glory as it signifies elsewhere 1 Corinthians. 6.9. and 2
Thessal. 1.5.
both which do press this duty when this was spoken by our Savior he meant it
in the first sense, viz. that the time being now approaching wherein the
Messiah and our Savior of the world was to set up a spiritual kingdom in the
hearts of men, it was necessary for all that desired to become his subjects to
renounce those lusts to which they had been enslaved, and to prepare his way by
repentance or else they must remain slaves still: and this reason urges us now
as strongly as ever, because our Lord Jesus does every day now by his Word and
Ambassadors proclaim liberty to us, and offers to become our King, but in most
of our hearts sin has usurped his throne, and therefore we must first exclude
that, and if we repent not it seems we love the slavery of Satan better then
the liberty of the Sons of God, and do declare we will not have Christ to reign
over us, and though he may for a while connive at this affront, yet remember
there is another kingdom of heaven at hand even the kingdom of glory, wherein
all that shall then have rejected Christ for their King shall be utterly
destroyed Luke 19.27.
and condemned to unspeakable and endless torments. And this ought to fill such
lazy persons with fear, because for any thing they know the end of all is near
at hand, however it is secret that you might not delay, and will be sudden when
it does come, and if it surprise us we can never repent more; and if this world
should last 10000 years more it is nothing to us for this kingdom of heaven
begins with us when we leave this world, and therefore who knows how near the
kingdom of heaven may be.

Matthew. 3.3.] I see you have committed many sins, and do still go on in them,
and so are neither fit for that grace which is offered you here, nor to appear
in that judgment which must pass upon you hereafter: Wherefore I charge you all
[repent ye] of all your wickednesses, and confess them seriously, and forsake
them speedi^y, [for the kingdome] of Jesus Christ the eternal Son of the God
[of heaven] is now to be set up in the hearts of all true penitents, and for
others, their death is not (...) off and the kingdom of glory [is at hand] and
wi^^ surprise them in their trif^ing intentions to their utter ruin.

A Meditation preparatory to Prayer for the quickening of such as neglect
repentance.
IT had been well for my soul if all this while my safety had been equal to my
confidence, for none ever thought themselves more secure, though there was no
other ground for it but only because I was resolved not to take the pains to
behold my danger: I have multiplied my transgressions and lived in sins
unamended yea unrepented of, and therefore have had the drawn sword of the
divine vengeance hanging over my guilty head by the slender thread of my
uncertain life which every thing can snap asunder, and I have seemed wilfully
to shut my eyes, choosing rather to feel it and the eternal smart of it, then to
behold this dreadful sight which would long since have terrified me into
amendment and snatched me from under the approaching ruin; what prodigious
folly has seized on me? what stupid laziness has benumbed me? are the pains
of escaping greater then the pains of suffering, or will the blow be lighter
because I resolve neither to see it, nor avoid it; awake my soul, awake, while
there is a possibility to prevent thy ruin, thy sins are so numerous and so
heinous, that thou can be ignorant of them; the threatenings of Gods wrath are
so plain and so positive, that thou may see they aim at thee, thy conscience
cries so loud, that thou can not but hear it, and Gods holy spirit pleads so
powerfully, that thou must take as much pains to exclude these friends, as
would serve to turn out thy enemies; Surely God gave me not wit and
understanding to invent a plausible cover for the eyes of my conscience, or to
contrive bulworks of excuses to entrench my sins in safety, and yet I unhappy
wretch have been ingenious in nothing so much as in plotting the ruin of my
soul, and designing to perish undisturbed. Behold and blush where holy David
lies covered with shame, drowned in tears, and overwhelmed with sorrow, not
able through sear and terror to take his eye of that one offense, whilst thou a
far greater sinner art careless and unconcerned. He sets his before his own
face and God throws them behind his back, but I who cast them behind me and
strive to bury them in oblivion, and inconsideration shall have them set before
my face when the sight of them cannot conduce to the obtaining of my pardon;
but the aggravating my eternal misery: the sight of them indeed is most
unpleasant, the object odious and ungrateful, but the benefit will abundantly
recompense the trouble, and if I behold them now so as to repent of them I
shall see them no more for ever. I will imitate therefore this holy man, and
ever view the guilt and the danger of them, that I may humbly confess them, and
obtain a pardon for them: my wretched heart has taken pleasure in committing
them, and it shall have vexation in reflecting on them, for I will not take my
eyes off from them till the horrid aspect of my grievous iniquities have
humbled my soul for them and turned my heart against them. The blessed Jesus
that sees the hearts and knows the necessities of all, has given a universal
command of repentance to all men; which yet methinks seems peculiarly directed
to me who have neglected this necessary duty hitherto. Thou oh Lord see my
danger and pittieth my approaching ruin, I bow my head and heart, and neither
dare nor can disobey so gracious and loving advice, so useful and necessary a
warning. Thy bare word had been sufficient to command obedience from those who
expect salvation by thee, but thou art pleased farther to convince me, I do
believe dear Jesus the benefit is great if I shall turn now while thy grace is
so freely offered to all people, I know the danger is dreadful if I defer any
longer, since it is certain thy Kingdom shall come, but uncertain how soon,
either death shall arrest me, or judgment surprise me in such delays, I have
cause to bless thee that neither of these have happened yet, since I have so
justly provoked thee by excluding so gracious a King out of my heart, rather
then I would be at the trouble of preparing for thee: yet Lord thou call
still, and now I am making what haste I can, oh remember not how long I have
stayed, but consider how little time I have left, and by the help of thy grace
make my work short and easy, proportionable to my time and strength; I confess
I knew before, but I never considered till now and now I dare not stay: but
through thy help now I come, oh do not cast me off for thy mercies sake. Amen.

. VII. Lastly, If any by daily use of these offices begin to grow careless, and
to rest in the outward ceremony and customary observance of this Confession,
with a bended knee a pensive look, and an humble voice; we do here present them
with the summons which God sent to his people, Joel 2.13.
who in their distresses were ready enough at all the external rites of
mourning, covering the head or sprinkling it with ashes, wearing of sackcloath,
or tearing their usual garments, sighing and sitting on the ground like Jobs
friends Job. 2.12. Externa omnia luctus signa quae pessimis facile exprimi
possunt, Cod.
yet all this in Gods sight is esteemed but hypocrisy without that which these
signs were to represent, viz. a rent heart and broken spirit, of which ( sect.
4. page 12.) David speaks. The renting of the Mantle was an emblem of a heart
torn with sorrow, and was one of the highest expressions of a mighty sorrow,
and therefore it was ordered by the Jewish Doctors never to be used but upon
the death of a Father, Master, Prince or Judge, or in a common calamity, of
fire or sword, or upon the commission of the most heinous crimes, blasphemy,
burning the Law or the Sanctuary Drusius in Job 2.12.
and yet this is not sufficient, and if it be not accompanied with a true
repentance it will be but like the punishment of the Persian Nobles, whose
Cloaks of silk were torn, their ornaments rufled, and hair disordered by the
executioner but their bodies untouched. It would be acceptable to God to omit
the ceremony, and perform the thing signified, and a true penitent shall not be
rejected in an untorn garment; because that is the principal, this the
accessory, rent therefore your hearts and not, i. e. rather then your garments,
be principally careful about this Matthew. 12.7. ex Hos. 6.6. LXX (...), Drusius.
for if I must have but one I would refuse that wholly and choose a broken
heart; though God does not wholly reject the ceremony and [not your garments]
may signify not only your garments Genesis 32.28.
for it is approved Ezra. 9.3.
when it is accompanied with true repentance: but do not deceive your selves to
think to please God by a sorrow that goes no nearer to you then the borders of
your garment, it must pierce the flesh, nay the heart before you will leave of
your sin, and find the evil of your ways so far as to amend them Nemo enim se
adsuefacit ad vitandum and ex animo evellendum id quod ei non est molestum,
Plut.
and turn to God: and the more to quicken their sense of their sin and to
encourage their speedy return the Prophet repeats all those attributes of mercy
which God is described by, Exodus 34.6.
leaving out all that was terrible, least any should pretend discouragement
from those terrors and stay away. Methinks a greater sorrow then a ceremony can
express, becomes us who have offended a God gracious, that is so apt and ready
to do us good, merciful, viz. so full of compassion and pity when we are in
misery. A God slow to anger, not easily provoked, nor forward to punish when
never so just cause, of great kindness even to those who have offended, willing
to be reconciled and inclinable to forgive; and one that repents of the evil
which we deserve, and he once resolved to bring upon us Quumque abolent
d^cretum durum poenitentia, praecatio, eleemosyna, mutatio and opera bona, D.
in Jonah.
not out of any change in himself, but upon our change, for God always
resolved to punish the obstinate and spare the penitent, wherefore when the
obstinate does repent, no former decree can oblige God to punish him, nay he is
glad of this opportunity to lay by his anger; who can think he has
ingratefully sinned against such a God, and not have his heart rent with
sorrow, and who can behold such a Father, and not run to him with shame for his
disobedience, and longing desires, nay firm persuasions to be accepted.

Joel 2.13.] When you come to God to seek for pardon and reconciliation, be not
altogether taken up in the outward part, but [Rent your heart] with a serious
apprehension of your own vileness, and a hearty sorrow for your ingratitude,
and a mighty fear of his just displeasure, and then you may be accepted, though
you be only careful to rent your hard heart, [and not] so exact in the outward
sign of renting [your Garments] Provided you be so grieved for your sins as to
forsake them [and turn to the Lord] who calls himself [your God] whom you ought
not to have forsaken, and yet there is good hopes you may be received by him
again if you be sincere [for he is gracious] and ready to do good to those that
need it, [and merciful] to pity all that are in misery, and to forgive all
offenses; he is [slow to anger] most unwilling to punish, and waiting long
because he is desirous to be reconciled [and of great kindness] Nay, even when
he has resolved to punish, he is more desirous to spare [and repents him of
the evil] he purposed to inflict, when we repent of the evil which we have done.

A Meditation Preparatory to Prayer, for such as are apt to rest in the outward
part.
OH my soul, thou art surely seized with a strange distemper, which resists the
efficacy of the choicest remedies! and the plaster which cures others does not
avail me. I confess my offenses every day upon my bended knees, and yet my
faith is weak, my hopes of pardon wavering, my sense of Gods love very small;
so that I am almost tempted to live like those, who are unconcerned whether
they sin or no, because I find no benefit by all my humiliations; and this
temptation had prevailed if I had not seen that (since others receive advantage
from these means) the fault is in me and not in them, nor in the God I serve;
he cannot deny his promises, falsify his Word, nor reject those when they
come, who came upon his courteous Invitation: Oh where is this accursed thing,
that restrains Gods mercy, and blasts my endeavors, and puts me upon injurious
thoughts against heaven, and atheistical resolutions of totally neglecting
these holy things. The matter is good for God commands it, the benefit is
great, for many have found it. But is it done in a right manner? the failing
may be there; Yet I have been careful to kneel reverently, look sadly, sigh
grievously, and tell the Almighty the story of my sinful life with addresses
becoming a Penitent: Alas, this comes far short of what God requires, even a
broken spirit and a contrite heart; and I have been so concerned to seem
sorrowful, that I have not endeavored really to be so. Oh my God, thou that
searchest the heart, thou have seen my heart untouched in the midst of these
pretenses; I have not been smitten with a sense of the odiousness of my sins to
thee, nor their danger to me, and therefore I have not fully renounced them,
nor yet absolutely returned to thee and thy ways, and therefore thou have not
blessed my Confessions, which have rather been looked on by me as an indulgence
to go on (since my former offenses were so easily pardoned) then an engagement
to forsake my iniquities: But now I know my vileness in making so slight
addresses for so great a favor, and my solly to cheat my self of so
considerable a blessing, and my sloth to slip so many fair opportunities: by my
deceitful behavior before thee, O Lord, I have deceived my self, and I am
hugely ashamed that having offended so dear a Father, I have been no more
really concerned, and having so gracious a God to turn to, I am yet so far
distant from thee, by pretending to turn to thee. If I want pardon or peace,
the blame must lie upon my own negligence, for thou art apt to give, and ready
to forgive long before thou punishest sinners, but soon entreated to receive
Penitents, and do most joyfully lay aside thy resolutions of judgment, when
we perform our purposes of amendment: Oh my soul, will not this real goodness
of thy God shame thy hypocrisy, will it not pierce thy heart to see whom thou
have offended, and thaw thy hopes to behold whom thou art turning to. His
holiness is mixed with long suffering, his justice with mercy, his decrees
allayed with limitations; and is it fit to approach him, without love or fear,
hopes or desires, gratitude or admiration; or is the forgiveness so mean a
favor, that it deserves no more hearty applications; sure enough my hypocrisy
has hindered my pardon, wherefore I begin to detest it, and hereafter I will
look more to the dispositions of my heart, then the posture of my body; I will
set him before me whose love I have abused, and whose patience I have tired,
who is so gracious to spare me, and so willing to be reconciled to me a most
ungrateful wretch; that so when I come to him I may have my eyes filled with
tears, my cheeks with blushes, and my heart with sorrow: I will remember who I
am that go, that I may be humble, what I go for, that I may be earnest, and who
I go to, that I may be full of faith and hope, so shall my addresses not be in
vain, but all these gracious attributes shall be made good to me. Amen.

Having thus applied these Portions of holy writ to your own souls, we must
desire you will observe, that to these Sentences of Gods Word, is annexed by
the Church a pertinent exhortation, least any should not sufficiently
undrestand these places, or not carefully practice what they know to be
required by them: The Words of Scripture are first laid down, to show we impose
not this Duty of Confession upon you, but that God requires it: and then the
Minister proceeds to this pious inference from them, that so what God commands
may be rightly understood, and particularly applied, and duly practiced by all
people, and no man may plead ignorance or forgetfulness, to excuse him from
this necessary Duty, to which we are directed in the following Words.

SECT. II. Of the Exhortation after the Sentences.
The Analysis or Division of the Exhortation.
The parts of this Exhortation are three 1. A loving Compellation [Dearly
beloved brethren] the Scripture, etc.
2. A Profitable instruction in which is showed 1. That we must confess
Affirmatively [to acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness]
Negatively [and that we should not dissemble nor cloak them]
The Reason Because we are [before the face of Almighty God our heavenly Father]

2. How we must confess 1. With a sense of sin but confess them with an humble,
lowly,
2. A sorrow for it Penitent
3. Resolutions against it and obedient heart

3. Why we must confess For pardon to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of
the same by his infinite goodness and mercy

4. When we must confess 1. in general, always Although we ought at all times
humbly to acknowledge our sins before God, [Yet ought we most chiefly so to

2. In particular, in public where we meet Do when we assemble and meet
together 1. [To render thanks for the great benefits we have received at his
hands 2 [To set forth his most worthy praise 3. [To hear his most holy Word 4.
[To ask those things which are requisite and necessary as well for the body as
the * soul.



3 An earnest supplication in which there is 1. The person exhorting *Wherefore
I pray and beseech you
2. The parties exhorted as many as are here present
3. The thing requested to accompany me [to the throne of the heavenly grace
4. The manner of doing this Internally [with a] pure heart
Externally and humble voice saying after me




A Practical Discourse on the Exhortation.
. 1. Dearly beloved Brethren] The Minister begins with this affectionate and
courteous salutation, after the example of S. Paul, S. Peter, and S. John, who
frequently begin their Exhortations (in their Epistles) in this language; the
better to engage their attention; for which cause it is used here, not as an
idle complement, but a significant indication from whence this Admonition
proceeds, viz. from love: For he that loves the souls of his people, and hears
what God expects from them, and sees the danger of their neglect cannot in pity
suffer them to go on and perish, without warning or instruction; and the people
may see he has no ends of his own, but is engaged by his love to become their
Mo^itor, as they are his deerly beloved Brethren: Wherefore the Admonitions of
Ministers should ever be accepted as the effects of their true affection to us,
though it proves (too often) otherwise, for flatterers and dissemblers that
will extenuate or connive at our faults, are usually listed among our friends.
But those who discover our danger and reprove our vices, and advise us to
amend, these we hate as Ahab did Micaiah: for men are so foolish or unworthy,
as not to distinguish between the reproaches of an Enemy, and the reproofs of a
Friend; because when we have done evil there is some disgrace in either, but
the management and design are directly contrary Probra tam amicus quam inimicus
objicit (...). Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 1. c. 9.
, and if any reproof proceed from kindness, surely it must be this which comes
from him that is your spiritual Father, yet salutes you as Brethren, and
reckons himself under the same obligation, and touches your offenses with so
much tenderness, only his Master has charged, that he shall reprove you, and
not hate you in heart Levit. 19.17.
, for the neglect of this duty would argue he hated you, and cared not to see
you perish.

. 2. The Scripture moves us in sundry places] We may easily foresee if the
Minister did only by his own authority command us to repent, his words would
prevail but little upon many, and some might deny their guilt, others despise
the summons, and others might think to avoid by recrimination: Wherefore the
Minister comes armed with the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, that as the
Prophets of the old Testament came with Verbum Jehovae, the Word of the Lord,
so might also the Priests of the New, and though the Person may be
contemptible, yet it is the voice of God which you hear from him, and whoever
be the proclaimer, where the word of a King is, there is power Eccles. 8.4.
: who dare disobey when the King of heaven commands. He that knows the hearts
of all, and commands all men every where to repent, not only in the places now
read. But in sundry other places Isai. 1.16, 17. Chap. 55.7. Lament. 3.40, 41.
Acts 2.38. Chap. 17.30.
even throughout the whole Scripture, and miserable will their case be who
refuse so many, so plain, and so earnest calls from such a God: We Ministers
are exhorted as well as you, and we intend to join with you, and if we request
you to join with us, it is in obedience to the Commission we have from the King
of heaven, and he that refuses, refuses not Man but God, and that Word of God
which now moves you so frequently to repent, will be produced against you to
condemn you, if you obey it not.

3. To acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness] We need not
here be curious in the difference between these words, though acknowledging
seems to signify the granting something laid to our charge, as David did when
Nathan came to him: I have sinned 2 Samuel 12.13.
says he, upon the first charge: and to confess may import a voluntary act
when no man accuses us, which indeed is the more acceptable and ingenuous; but
it were well if we would but acknowledge our offenses; For God in his Word, by
his Ministers, and by our own Consciences does indict us as guilty, and he that
soonest owns the truth thereof, shall easily find mercy. But it may perhaps be
more material to take notice of the Epithete joined to our sins [manifold]
which is borrowed from Amos 5.12. and may denote the variety of our
transgressions, like Joseph's coat of many colors, for we are clothed with the
redness of Anger, the paleness of Malice, the yellow of Covetousness, the
blackness of Despair, or the green of Presumption; in these changeable garments
are our souls attired, when we put off the white garments of our Innocence. Or
else (as the learned Translator of the Liturgy) (...), Multiplicia, those
iniquities which are so cunningly twisted and weaved together, by that accursed
policy which Satan teaches men: to begin with many small thrids of lesser
sins, and by uniting these and twining them together, to proceed till they draw
iniquity with cords of vanity, and at last sin as it were with a Cart-rope
Isaiah 5.18. Peccatum trahit peccatum. Dict. R.R
; we perhaps imagine it a piece of commendable craft Job 5.13. Heb. (...) filum
retortum, unde signif. multis nexibus implicitum consilium LXX. (...) Drus.
, to be able thus to contrive our wickedness: But alas, if Gods Mercy do not
unravel it, it will at last be strong enough to draw us into eternal flames.
But we are warned, that as we have used much study and pains to twist our sins
together, that one may strengthen the other, so we do now by an humble and
hearty confession untwine and separate them again, that we be not bound in the
bands of death.

. 4. And that we should not dissemble nor cloak them, before the face of
Almighty God our heavenly Father] It is the language of Satan's school, that we
must cover one sin by committing another, which the Scripture pronounces a woe
against 1 John 1.8, 9. Isaiah 30.1.
, and shows the folly and danger of it, because it doubles the guilt Negatio
iniquitatis duplex iniquitas.
and hinders the pardon; [ See Chap. 1. Sect. 5. p. 18.] and therefore Gods
Word teaches us, that if we have sinned, we must neither dissemble them with
excuses, as Saul 1 Samuel 15.
: and Ananias with his wife Acts 5.
: nor cloak them with a flat denial, as Gehazi 2 Kings 5.
, least we be judged as they were. But this is the manner of Hypocrites, 1. To
extenuate them with dissembling apologies and fair pretenses, it was the first
time, I was surprised, the effects of it were not very evil, others have done
worse, etc. whereas the good man aggravates his sins with all those
circumstances that make them heinous, and S. Paul calls himself the chief of
sinners: The worst men will deny they have sinned, and reckon themselves among
the Righteous, as the Pharisee did Luke 18.11.
while Ezra Ezr. 9.6. loquitur de Culpis (...), ne nimium arreganter se
caeteris eximere videatur. Grotius in loc.
and Daniel put themselves in amongst sinners; and that is by much the safer
way: for he that feigns himself better then he is, or denies himself to be sick
before the Physician, keeps his disease, and looses an opportunity to regain
his perfect health; But remember thou art in Gods house, nay just before his
face, and do thou think with a lie or an excuse to deceive him: No, no, this
is too thin a veil, and to short a cover for thy numerous transgressions, and
will avail no more, then for a Thief to deny he stole that which is found about
him before the Bench, if thou could deny so impudently, or dissemble so
cunningly, as to deceive all the world, yet do not hope to impose upon him that
is Almighty to find thee out, and has a heavenly all-seeing eye to discern
thee, and he would show the kindness of a Father in thy pardon, if thou show
the ingenuity of a Son in confessing; wherefore do not deceive thy self, nor
slight this warning, for be sure one time or other your sin will find you out,
Numb. 32.23.

. 5. But confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent and obedient heart:] The
Word of God is not only a Monitor to remember us of our duty, b^^ a guide to
direct us in the performance of it, it interposeth its authority to command us
to repent, and then affords its directions to show how we may repent, and
it is impossible the right disposition of a true penitent heart can be more
exactly described (in so few words) then the Church has here done it, and they
that would know how they must be affected when they confess, so that they may
be sure to find pardon, cannot learn in fewer and more significant expressions:
1. An humble and lowly heart, viz. to behold our vileness by sin, till we have
a mean opinion of our selves, and can be content that God or Men should
dis-esteem us, since we have deserved it, such a heart the Prodigal had when he
thought a servants place too good for him Luke 15.19.
such the Publican Chap. 18.13.
when he durst neither look up nor come near, and he that wants it, and thinks
well of himself after his sin, cannot confess heartily, nor desire pardon
devoutly, nor for sake what he thinks has done him no harm. Wherefore let us
labor to have this right knowledge of our selves, and of our sins, and that we
may be ashamed of both, let us consider, we have showed so much folly and
rashness, disingenuity and ingratitude, obstinacy and perverseness, by breaking
such holy laws, of so great a God, and so gracious a Father, for so small a
price, and are thereby so miserable, that we shall for ever be disgraced if we
repent not. Sin is a more just cause of shame then any thing in the world, for
it shows a man to be a base and abominable person, nay it makes him degenerate
into a beast Psalm. 73.22. (...). Arr. in Epict. lib. 1. cap. 3.
which if we seriously think upon, it will beget in us a dis-esteem of our
selves, and a true opinion of our own unworthiness, which is an excellent
disposition for the begging or receiving of pardon. 2. A Penitent heart, viz. a
sad and sorrowful spirit, which is most becoming one that sees his actions to
have been base, vain, and d^ngerous, and therefore must ever accompany us in
confession of our sins: Now if we are of ingenuous tempers the Gospel will
produce this, viz. The beholding the wounds of Jesus which we have made, the
long suffering we have abused, the grace we have rejected, and the comforts and
benefits we have lost and forfeited: But if we are more obdurate the Law must
effect it, viz. the sight of Gods justice, and the consideration of the curse
we have deserved, and the danger we are in of endless torments for those poor
perishing pleasures; these things duly weighed will help us to draw water
before the Lord 1 Samuel 7.6. Chapter Par. Hauserunt aquas e puteo cordis sui and
abunde lachrymati sunt coram domino resipiscentes.
as the Israelites did, from the pits of our hearts, and pour them out by the
channels of our eyes: and this sorrow for what is past will both make our
confession acceptable, and help us to the third requisite. 3. An obedient
heart, that is a taking up such a dislike against sin as to resolve
steadfastly, if we can get those pardoned we have committed, that we will never
more do that which has caused so much shame and sorrow to us: and till we have
brought our hearts to this, all our confession and sorrow are not repentance,
but only a purpose to repent (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 2.
. Nor will all the rest prevail, either to a removal of the guilt, or dominion
of sin. Therefore let us learn how to confess; Humility will make our
confession sincere, Sorrow will make it earnest, and Holy purposes will make it
prevalent.

. 6. To the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by his infinite
Goodness and Mercy] There is nothing more pleasant to us then the contemplation
of Gods infinite goodness and mercy; but we are therein apt to forget his
justice, and to think the one will exclude the other, because we measure God by
our selves, in whose narrow hearts these two dispositions are not at once
contained: and hence when we hear of infinite mercy, we are apt to presume of
pardon upon any terms: But the Church from Gods Word assures you, that a sinner
cannot be forgiven, no not by this infinite mercy, unless he bring an humble,
penitent, and obedient heart; and that you are to esteem it infinite goodness,
that you may be forgiven upon these terms: For you must know that Justice
(without a Mediator) does not admit a sinner to second thoughts, nor accept of
any Repentance at all, and therefore it is an high act of Grace, that so holy a
God, so justly offended and highly provoked, will be reconciled upon any terms;
and let us not neglect our endeavors to get our hearts thus disposed, for we
had need be so prepared, or else Mercy it self will reject us: Some may here
perhaps scruple at the expression [to the end] and Question whether in our
confession we ought not rather to aim at Gods glory then our own forgiveness.
Such must know they quarrel with the language of holy Writ Acts 2.38. Chap.
3.19.
, where men are exhorted to repent that they may be forgiven, and further they
do not understand what Gods glory is, if they separate it from his doing good
to his creatures, and representing his excellencies to them; wherefore, to aim
at Gods glory and our own forgiveness is all one; for by confessing we own his
power to forgive, we show our trust in his goodness, and hope in his mercy, and
desire that the Almighty, by accepting and doing us good, may demonstrate
himself to be what we believe him to be, viz. a God gracious and merciful, etc.
that we and all the world may admire him for it, and praise him for evermore.

. 7. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins before
God.] This concession of the Churches declares that the Public Prayer ought
not to excuse any from Private Devotions. These we account the Principal, but
the other we recommend as very useful and necessary; so that we neither
encourage the lazy who neglect the private, nor allow the Precise who
undervalue the Public one ought to be done so as not to leave the other
undone. We find our Savior and his Apostles after the manner of the devout
Jews were wont to go to the Temple and Synagogues at the hours of Prayer, and
yet both he and they did seek retirements for more private Devotions. And the
Scripture teaches us to Pray at all times, in all places and with all sorts of
prayer Ephesians. 6.18. 1 Timoth. 2.8. Psalm 111.1.
that none might be excused from either, nor can one be alleged to exclude the
other for they are mutual helps to one another: for he that has been most
careful in private Confession, will be the fittest for, and most advantaged by
the other, yet he that is so prepared must not think the coming to Gods house
superfluous, because we cannot do this too often, nor too openly since many of
our sins are manifest and require a public declaration: And by this open
Confession we shall be freer from the suspicion of hypocrisy in our Closet; We
must remember we stand in need of Gods help every moment, and therefore we have
reason to beg it often, and we can never beg it in humility unless we confess
those sins that make us unworthy of it, and since we sin daily a daily
Confession is highly requisite, and that not only in those general terms which
we use with our Brethren, but in the particular and secret remembrances of
those offenses which no eyes but Gods ever see, nor will they be sufficiently
bewailed where the soul does not so particularly search out its private evils,
the heinousness, occasions, and remedies of them. Yet still we must know that
when we come into Gods house we have many weighty duties to do none of which
can be performed without a true repentance, which is therefore chiefly
necessary then: and if you have repented before, yet here you must repeat it
because of the present occasion.

. 8. Yet ought we most chiefly so to do when we assemble and meet together, to
render thanks for, etc.] These four duties, are so many arguments to prove
Confession especially necessary in the solemn Assembly, because they are all
then and there to be performed, and yet without penitence none of them will
please God: and we learn here by the way the several parts of Public Worship,
which is not much varied from those of the Jews who served God in the Temple by
Hymns, Praises and hearing the Law, only their Sacrifices are now turned into
the offering up of Praise which their own Rabbis had taught should last for
ever Omnes oblationes cessabunt in seculo futuro sed oblatio gratiarum nunquam
cessabit. Kimn. Psalm 104.
. The Heathens had the same ends also; only their Temples were not the places
where they learned Wisdom as ours are, but they came thither to glorify God
for his excellencies, to praise him for his gifts, and to call for his help,
(...), Porph. (...), lib. 2.
but this account of Public Worship exactly agrees with the account St.
Augustine gives of the Christian Church in his time, for there the Law of God
was taught, his Miracles commemorated, his Gifts praised, and his Blessings
were prayed for. Very Dei aut praecepta insinuantur, aut miracula narrantur aut
dona laudantur aut beneficia postulantur, Aug. Civ. Dei lib. 2. cap. 28.
And who do any of these well that has not confessed his offenses, and
repented of them; but this will be more plain by beholding the particulars. 1.
We are to give God thanks for his benefits, but unless we see our sins we may
think we need not a Savior, or are not much the better for spiritual mercies,
and that we deserve those that are temporal; how can he praise God for his son
who will not come to him? for his grace that will not use it? or for the hopes
of glory that never seeks after it? 2. We should glorify his Name by
publishing his excellency in Hymns and Anthems of jubilation, how can the
impenitent sinner commend that Power which he fears not, or that holiness which
he loves not, or that Mercy that he seeks not after, or that Love which he has
no experience of; the praises of such are next to mocking the Almighty, because
their hearts cannot go along with their mouths in the glory they seem to
ascribe to him. 3. We should hear his most holy Word to make us wiser and
better: But if our hearts be not prepared by true penitence we shall be
neither, for sin unrepented of stops the ears, and hardens the heart, fills the
mind with presumption and security, banisheth the holy Spirit by filthiness and
vain thoughts, and puts men rather upon hating and despising the good Word of
God, then embracing it and submitting to it. What part of it can profit such a
man? Its Exhortations they ^eed not; its comforts they need not; its
threatenings they fear not; its promises they value not; they hate its
instructions, and despise it reproofs: So that the Messenger of God may say in
his Masters language Hos. 6.4.
, What shall I do unto thee? 4. We should pray for what is needful for our
bodies and souls. But what Prince will accept a Petition from the hands of a
Rebel that disowns not his treason? much less will the King of Heaven: his very
Prayer is abominable Prove. 15.8.
, for if he asks for his body, he asks that which he intends to spend on his
lusts, and so seems to desire God to become the Providore Romans 13. ult. (...)
Gr.
for them; but he will not minister fuel to your flame, unless he intend to
consume you: If he lengthen your life, continue your health, or increase your
wealth, you will turn the edge of these against the God who bestowed them on
you, and grow more confident to despise him to your own ruin; so that if he
have any Mercy for you, he will not hear you: But as to the soul, it may be
questioned whether he that lives in sin believes he has such a jewel, when he
prises it no higher then a lust, and exposes it on the Dunghill of sin. B^t if
he do believe it he is so careless of it, that he will either ask nothing, or
however nothing heartily, because he apprehends not hi^ danger, nor sees not
his wants, and cares not whether they be supplied or no: But despises wisdom
and grace, peace and pardon, and what good then will the repetition of the
Words do to such a person: In fine, it is most evident, that though repentance
be at all times necessary, yet it is then indispensably so, when we go about
these holy Duties, or we shall not only loose the benefit of them, but mere a
curse instead of a blessing, and therefore as you love your souls, and hope to
please God in these Duties, despise not this necessary Exhortation.

. 9. Wherefore I pray and beseech you as many as are here present] The Priest
saluted you courteously at first, and now again most lovingly entreats you,
knowing that men must be courted to their own good: and herein S. Paul leads
the way 1 Cor. 4.18. 2 Cor. 2.8.
, who uses the same words, especially 2 Cor. 5.20.
when he tells them that God does entreat and beseech them by us: and so we may
say to you, that we pray and beseech you in Christ's stead, wherefore despise
not the lowliness of the address, but admire the condescension of him that
makes it, who can destroy, and yet entreats as if himself and not you were to
receive the favor: it is he that speaks by the Minister, who you are about to
pray unto in the Collects, and to beseech in the Letany, and remember that he
prays and beseeches you to repent, so that if you desire your prayers should
reach heaven, let his requests sent by his Messengers reach your hearts, and
move you all to repentance, for you all intend to pray. Men are very apt to
show their folly 2 Cor. 10.12. Luke 18.11.
in comparing themselves with one another, and many think they have not so much
need as others to repent; but it is the Law of God, and not our Brothers
practice, that must be our Rule, because we are all sinners; what glory was it
to Tamar to be more righteous then Judah Genesis 38.26.
, or to the Jews to be holier then the Chaldeans Habak. 1.13. minus improbi:
illis quidem justiores, rever^ nequissimi. Drus.
, when both were wicked? We shall never rightly judge of our ways, if we
measure them by a crooked stick. But suppose we be better then others, that
cannot make Confession needless, though no man could charge us, no nor our own
Consciences, yet is it not safe to plead Not guilty 1 Cor. 4.4. Job 9.15.
before that God who examines so narrowly, and sees so exactly, and remembers
so perfectly; that the best had need to crave for Mercy: This Confession is so
general, so universally true of all, and so particularly applicable to every
man's case, that we invite all to it, so that the Pharisee may not think himself
too good, nor the Publican doubt himself too bad to make it before God. The
Church does not allow of those dangerous Persuasions which have puffed some up
with arrogance and presumption, as if their sins were already absolutely
forgiven, and their pardon actually sealed; for if so, what need they be
obliged to a daily Repentance, or to ask for what they have already, but alas,
it is only in their own opinion, for the very pride that such false
imaginations produce, were enough to reverse the grant, if God had once
consented to absolve them: On the other side, we do advise the greatest sinners
to repent, rejecting those discouraging Doctrines of men's eternal reprobation,
which some think not reversible by any endeavors, we do not know of any living
man, that may not be pardoned In isto adhuc mundo manenti poenitentia nulla
sera est, patet ad indulgentiam Dei aditus. Cypr. ad Demetr.
; wherefore we pray and beseech these dejected persons not to be discouraged
because they have stayed so long, but to hasten because they have no more time
left, for he only is in danger of being for ever cast off, who hearing these
summons does not obey them: Let no man then go about to excuse himself, for it
is the duty of every man present in Gods House.

. 10. To accompany me] The Jews were never allowed under the Law to enter into
the Temple, but the Priest alone went in every day Exodus 30.7. Luke 1.10. Heb.
9.6, 7.
into the outer part of it to burn Incense, and to the Mercyseat or Inner and
most Holy place, none might come but the High Priest once a year, but the
people always remained in the outward Court and prayed there, for which
purpose were those stone Tables there made which the Talmud speaks of Tract.
(...) cap. 6.
. The King indeed was admitted into the Inner Court where the Priests did
sacrifice 2 Kings 11.11. 1 Kings 8.22. 1 Chronicles. 6.10.
, but when a Prince would have gone nearer, Azariah is commended for resisting
him; because the Priests alone were to come so near Levit. 10.3. Fag. (...)
propinqui dei.
. But now we have more freedom, for every Christian is one of Gods household
Ephesians. 2.19.
, and though the order of Priesthood is not taken away, yet the privilege of
the people is enlarged, so that Philoes brag is always true of us (...):
Philo. 1 Pet. 2.6.
, for every man is a Priest to offer up his own prayers and praises, and that
not without; for we are led in by the hand to the very Throne of Grace Ephesians.
2.18. Gr. (...)
by Christ or the Priest, who is his representative, and have liberty to speak
Heb. 4.16. (...) see Acts 26.1.
freely for our selves before the King of Heaven and Earth: Which you ought to
esteem as an high act of favor, and most thankfully to embrace it, since you
are now no longer to stand without and send in your Petition by the hands of a
servant, but are admitted, nay requested to come in your selves, in the company
of Gods Messenger, who has the same errant for himself, and therefore is
likely to be the more concerned, and importunate; He, even the Minister, is
that Ambassador whom God sent to bring you out of your evil ways Acts 26.18.
2 Cor. 5.18, 19.
, and it will be acceptable to God to see him return with you in his hand, and
it will be a comfort to him when he can say, Behold me, and the children thou
have given me; he will be your guide, and he sets you a good example, for he
goes himself, and no doubt both you and he will be kindly welcomed by his great
Master, and all the blessed Angels of Heaven. Wherefore let not your Minister
go alone, but be you always present, and join in the Confession; or otherwise
if he go without you, he cannot but complain of you Isai. 53.1. Heb. 13.17.
(...)
, and must sigh when his Lord enq ires for you, which will be more your loss
then his, because he has done his duty in inviting; and although he loose the
comfort of your company, yet you loose the benefit of his, and the pardon
annexed, because you neglect so precious an opportunity, and seem to send a
daily denial by the hands of Gods special Messenger.

. 11. With a pure heart and humble voice, to the throne of the heavenly Grace,
saying after me] The various Rites of washings and cleansings, which all
Nations used before they approached to their Templ^s, were only to mind them of
purity of heart, which the Heathens knew to be necessary for all that drew near
to God (...) Plato in Alcib. (...). 2 Timothy 2.22.
; wherefore in their sacrifices the unclean were commanded out by the voice of
a Crier. Much more ought Christians to come with a pure heart; which inward
purity we account the principal requisite of the prayer; but withal we require
that the tongue shall be used as the interpreter of the desires of the soul,
and therefore it is added that we pray with an humble voice. This was
Pythagoras precept of old (...).
to pray with an audible voice, and though the Jewish Doctors allow private
prayers when the lips only move 1 Samuel 1.13. and Grotius in loc.
, yet in public Worship, God himself commanded Open and vocal Confessions, and
particularly when the Sin-offering was presented, the party was to lay his hand
on the head of it, and say, Lord I am guilty of death, I have deserved to be
stoned for such a sin, to be strangled for such and such transgression, to be
burnt for these and these crimes See Munster on Numb. 5.7.
. And to come nearer, we find public Confession in the Christian Church Acts
19.18. Ordinatur ut suis quisque verbis refipiscien^iam profiteretur. Basil.
Ep. 3.
, and injunctions for every man to speak up in his acknowledgments, that so our
repentance may be as visible as our sins, and that God may be glorified Homo es
and vis rogari and putas Deum tibi non roganti ignoscere, Ambr. de poen. l. 2.
by a solemn and humble request, which even a man would expect from his
inferior, that had offended him, much more may God require it: in other Prayers
it will suffice to seal them with Amen, and set our name at the bottom; but
this must be all in our own words, and under our own hand, to justify God, and
take shame to our selves, and to encourage our brethren. The Scripture requires
in some cases we should confess our sins to men, but what can we think of those
that will not confess them to God, no not in these general terms which may be
said by the best of men too truly; surely these men are either Pharisaical, and
suppose they have no sins worth confessing; or hypocritical, and would not be
taken for sinners; or they are carnal and senseless, neither feeling their
load, nor fearing their danger; When the Prince comes by a Prison, all the
Prisoners fall on their knees, and every man begs a pardon, but if one or two
stand mute, or stay away, we should judge that they were confident of their
innocence, or obstinate in their wickedness, and fearless of the punishment;
such a censure may too justly be pas^ed upon those who either come not to
Confession, or do not speak those Words in that humble but audible voice the
Church requires, and God expects, for he will loose his glory in pardoning
thee, if thou have not first publicly made thy Recantation, and confessed thy
guilt with thy own mouth.

The Paraphrase of the Exhortation.
DEarly beloved Brethren] Your souls are really dear to me, and out of my true
affection to you, and desire of your eternal welfare, proceeds this courteous
Admonition, which you must not despise, because I am one of you Brethren, for I
speak not from my self, but from the mouth of God, who in [the Scripture moves
us in sundry places] (as well as in those I have now read) that having
seriously examined our hearts, and considered our thoughts, words and works, we
do declare the truth of what we find, and then [to acknowledge and confess] how
many several ways how frequently, and how sadly we have in all disobeyed his
will and broken his laws, by [our manifold sins and wickedness] which are so
cunningly and closely twisted by us, who have drawn iniquity with cords of
vanity, and with those cords bound our souls to everlasting misery: Wherefore
the Word of God commands us to discover them [and that we should not dissemble]
the heinousness of our transgressions, by inventing plausible excuses, or
contriving feigned pretenses to extenuate them [nor cloak them] by impudent
denials of what we are justly charged with; for it is the manner of hypocrites
so to do; but it is dangerous to excuse or deny our sins [before the face of
Almighty God] who knows our guilt, and can easily destroy us, both soul and
body, and will do it the sooner upon this hypocrisy and presumption, though he
be [our heavenly Father] and would forgive us if we confessed them like
ingenuous c^ildren; Oh let us not therefore any longer excuse or hide our sins
[but confess them] as he commands us, and in such manner as he directs us,
not slightly, but [with an humble, lowly] heart, in a due sense of our
vileness, in our frequent, and high, and heinous provocations of so gracious a
God by our rashness and folly, treachery and ingratitude, and this we must
acknowledge with a [penitent] heart, full of ^nfeigned sorrow, for the comfort
of his love, assistance of his grace, and hopes of his glory, that we have
either lost or forfeited, for the empty pleasures of sin; ^^d ^ave got nothing
in exchange; but the terrors of our Conscience, the dec^y of our hopes, and
the increase of our fears of the Divine vengeance, which we have deserved both
here and hereafter; of all which mi^chiefs we must be convinced our iniquities
are the cause, that we may hate them perfectly, and confess them also with an
utter detestation of them, and with a holy [and obedient heart] resolve, if we
be now admitted to Gods favor, that we will henceforth forsake them, and
carefully observe all his blessed will; And truly, this sense of sin, and
sorrow for it, resolutions against it, and purpo^es of Obedience, are necessary
in the confessing of our Offenses [to the end that we may obtain] that which we
seek for, even the [forgiveness of the same] because no pardon can be without
it, though he never account with us in his justice, but deal with us never so
favorably [of his infinite goodness and mercy] without which the^e had been no
conditions at all offered us, and though he be infinite in Mercy, yet ^e cannot
^dmit us on any terms but such as are consiste^t with his truth and holiness.
[And although we] who are born in sin, and do every day more or less commit
iniquity, in reason [ought at all times] even every day and in all places
[humbly to acknowled^e] even in our private closets, and sec^etly to bewail
[our sins before God] who sees the Commission, and hears the confession of them
in the most secret place, [yet ought we] though we daily perform this duty in
private, not to think that excuses us from confessing in Gods house, for it is
our duty [most chiefly so to do when we assemble and meet together] there,
where we have so many duties of so great concernment to perform, none of which
can be done so as we shall be profited by them, or God pleased with them,
unless we first do truly repent, for we come hither: 1. [to render thanks for
the great benefits we have received at his hands] for our bodies, as life and
health, food and raiment, peace and plenty, and for our souls, as redemption,
instruction, sanctification, and hopes of glorification; but the impenitent
sinner abuses the mercies of this life, and despises those that would bring
us to a better life, and therefore cannot sincerely give thanks for either, nor
without repentance can we be fit. 2. [to set forth his most worthy praise]
because all the glorious titles such give unto God can be nothing but customary
complement or flattery; for did they believe what they speak of him, they could
not live in their sins, his power would terrify them, his goodness shame them,
his grace would invite them, and his mercy encourage them to turn to him, and
till then your hymns may justly seem derision, and will not profit you no more
then your coming in your sins -- 3. [to hear his most holy Word] which calls
upon you in the first place to repent, and if you begin not there, it is likely
you will be deaf to its exhortations, slight its reproofs, refuse its commands,
despise its threatenings, and dis-believe or disregard its promises, and so all
will be lost upon you: But till you hear Gods voice, you cannot expect he
should hear yours when you come to this house of prayer. 4. [to ask those
things which are requisite and necessary] either toward our well-being or
being, even all that is convenient or of absolute necessity [as well for the
body as the soul] for if you do beg temporal mercies earnestly he knows you
will be strengthened in your sins by them, and for those which concern the
soul, if the obstinate sinner could desire them, God would not give them, nor
is such an one capable to receive them. [Wherefore] since we are come into the
House of God to worship and serve him, and all we can do will be esteemed but a
mocking of God without repentance, [I pray and beseech you] who am the
Ambassador of the King of Heaven, to whom you intend to pray for all good
things, and of him to beseech deliverance from all evil; I in his Name do
request all you [as many as are here present] high and low, rich and poor,
young and old, whether you are the best of the Congregation, or the worst of
sinners [to accompany me] in presenting an humble Confession to Almighty God,
who by Christ Jesus has given you leave to come into his presence, and
commanded me to bring you with me, and will most mercifully accept, and
lovingly embrace us both. Oh then come along with me, and let us confess our
sins [with a pure heart] not harboring any hypocrisy in our souls [and humble
voice] to express the sorrow of our minds, and since you have deserved shame,
do you in your own words accuse your selves and justify God, and fear not that
your own testimony shall be used to help to condemn you, for you are not going
to a humane tribunal, but [to the throne of the heavenly Grace] where he sits
who did invite you, and does wait for you, and will forgive you, do not fear
it. And though he be in Heaven, yet trouble not your selves how to bespeak him
for if you be willing to go with me, I will be your Mouth; only I request you
will in your own words consent to, and seal every sentence by [saying after me]
this most hearty Confession following.

SECTION III. Of the daily Confession.
The Analysis or Division of the Confession.
THis pious Confession is so methodically composed, that it naturally falls
into these four Parts. 1. The Introduction, 2. The Confession properly so
called, 3. A Deprecation of evil, 4. A Petition for good.

1. The Introduction in which is showed 1. To whom it is made to our Almighty
and most merciful Father] who is Able to pu^ish Willing to forgive: Likely to
receive us.

2. By whom it is made, by us [we]

2. The Confession it self, 1. in general, that we have sinned have erred and
strayed from thy ways
how we have sinned [like lost sheep]
2. in particular 1. of the cause, original sin We have followed too much the
Devices and Desires of our own heart
2. of the effect, Actual sin in general Disobedience We have offended against
thy holy Laws,
in sins of Omission we have left undon those things which we ought to have done
in sins of Commission And we have done those things which we ought not to have
done*,


3. in a conclusion from both * And there is no health in us:

3. The Deprecation of the Evil 1. What we would be delivered from, and 2. The
Reasons annexed to every one 1. The guilt of sin But thou, O Lord, have mercy
upon us
with the Reason, because we are miserable offenders
2. The puni^hment of it spare thou them, O God,
with the Reason, because such that confess their faults;
3. The power of it Restore thou
with the Reason, because we are of them that are penitent,

3. An Argument to enforce the Deprecation 1. From the Promises in general
According to thy Promises
2. The manner of giving Declared
3. The Persons to whom unto mankind
4. The Person by whom they were given in Christ Jesus our Lord,


4. The Petition for good, in which there is 1. Of whom we desire it And grant
O most merciful Father
2. Through whom we desire it for his sake,
3. What we desire of God 1. in general amendment that we may hereafter live
2. Piety to God a godly
3. Charity to others righteous
4. Temperance to our selves and a sober life,

4. Why we desire it, or to what end To the glory of thy holy Name] Amen.



A Practical Discourse on the General Confession.
. 1. Almighty and most merciful Father] The Church has been curious and exact
to select such Titles for God in the beginning of every Prayer, as are most
proper to the Petitions to which they are prefixed, and most likely to produce
affections suitable to those requests in him that uses them: which as it is
every where apparent to a considering person, so it may appear particularly in
the fitness of these two compellations, to the subsequent Confession, being the
Attributes of his infinite Power and Mercy. The first is an acknowledgment of
the greatness of him whom we have offended, and is the same with that which God
styles himself by to Abraham Genesis 17.1. Heb. (...) LXX. (...) and Job 22.15
(...). Aqu. (...) Theo. (...) h. e. (...). Speusippus. Ipsa suis con^enta
opibus nil indigo nostri. Lucrer. de nature.
: And it denotes his being all-sufficient in himself for his own happiness (as
the Philosopher defined him) as also his being able to supply all our wants.
And further, it notifies his absolute Dominion over all the world, and his
infinite power to do whatsoever he pleases: So that the consideration of this
attribute, shows us that we have sinned against a God whom we cannot hurt by
our sins, but by them we damage our selves, both in stopping the current of his
blessings by which we are sustained and refreshed, and by provoking him to
stretch out his mighty Arm to destroy us: the shutting his hand of bounty would
make us perish for want, b^t the weight of his Arm of power will crush us to
pieces. And we must meditate on this so long till our hearts are pierced with a
religious fear and holy dread of the anger of this Almighty God; only this fear
must not drive us from him, but draw us more speedily to him, and be as the
Needle Si nullus est timor non est qua charitas intret, sicut setam introducere
filum videmus, sed nisi exit seta non succedit linum, sic timor occupat mentem
prior verum non ibi manet quia ideo intravit ut introduceret charitatem.
Augustine. in 1. ep. Johan. 4o.
which enters not to stay, but to make way for the thread of a uniting love,
for the heart will be the faster bound to the most merciful Father, when it is
first made sensible, it has offended a dreadful Almighty God, who yet retains
the bowels as well as name of a Father, and is the most merciful of all
Fathers; for what natural Parent would not have cast out and disinherited his
once dearest Child, for the one half of what thou have done against thy
Heavenly Father; who yet upon our true repentance stands ready to embrace us
with as much love as if we had never done amiss; if fear will move our hearts,
here is represented his terrible power; if love will work upon us, here is
discovered unspeakable goodness; and what heart can resist both. His
Almightiness is first, but if the terror thereof seal up thy lips, let the
hope of his fatherly pity and compassion open them again. Learn humility and
true contrition from the first, and Faith and Hope from the latter, which are
excellent mixtures in a penitent heart, and the best dispositions in the World
for a hearty and prevailing confession.

. 2. We have erred and strayed from thy wayes] Gods laws are frequently in holy
Scripture compared to a way that leads to everlasting life, and thither we are
going, when we are walking in them. But our sins and iniquities are errings and
strayings out of this path: In our lesser, sudden and unobserved sins we step
aside, and make our way crooked Heb. (...) sig. peccatum and curvum: Eccles.
7.13. Psalm. 38.16. Job 33.27. and Matthew. 17.17 (...).
by vain thoughts, rash and idle words, light and foolish carriage; these
happen so frequently, that if we walk right a while, we are soon out again, so
that at best we go on but in contorted spiral lines, which is far from the
straitness and evenness of our rule, yet because these are done out of
ignorance, they are called Errors; which though we may think them small in
their kind, yet they are formidable in their numbers and next to infinite: but
besides these lesser wanderings we stray further and stay longer when we fall
into greater transgressions and evil habits, these are absolute forsaking of
Gods folds, and a plain passing over those bounds which God has set us as
Solomon did to Shimei 1 Kings 2.36. ubi (...) sign. trans^re limits, ut and
Jos. 4.1. at Deuteronomy. 17, 2. etc. signif. peccare.
, and by so doing we forfeit our lives as he did his, if Gods mercy did not
spare us. And thus Malice and Envy, Lust and Drunkenness, Pride and Cruelty,
Covetousness and Oppression (especially when by frequent repetitions they are
become customary) may be called straying from his ways. It Is very like, many
in favor to their own cause will count their errors no sins, and call their
strayings errors and infirmities: But the least are committed so often, that
they are not to be despised; and the greater are so heinous they cannot be hid,
and we should consider, that be the sin what it will, if we repent not we
remain in our wandering, and so an error may become a going astray; To have
stepped aside, may seem excusable by humane frailty Humanum est errare
Belluinum vero perseverare in errore. Cicer.
, he must be more then man that does not so sometimes, but he that sees his
error and goes on, it is worse then beast and wholly inexcusable. It Is certain
there is none of us but we have erred by less and strayed by greater sins, but
if we hasten our repentance, our strayings will be forgiven and esteemed as
errors, otherwise, the lesser evils if we cherish them and neglect repentance
may well increase, and be reputed as the utter deserting of Gods ways.

. 3. Like lost sheep] The Church chooses the language of the holy Ghost to
express our departure from God by: For God and his Son Jes^s are compared to
the Shepherds, and we to the Sheep of their Pasture Psalm 23.1. and 100.3, 4.
John 10.1, 2, etc.
; by our sins we become lost Sheep Matthew. 15.24.
, and by the Mercy of Jesus we are reduced Luke 15.4.
, and since we have all sinned, there is no man can deny but he is one of these
lost Sheep Isaiah 53.6.
, and David himself puts it into his Confession Psalm 119.176.
, and so may the best of men do: We frequently forsake the s^fe fold, the pure
streams, and the green pasture which God has provided for us, and wander into
a dry and barren wilderness, where we want all true comforts, and are expo^ed
to a thousand evils: Now how fitly these errings and strayings of ours are
resembled by a lost Sheep, may appear in three particulars: 1. No creature is
more apt to stray, and by its heedlesness would never keep right, were it not
continually under the Shepherds eye: So we, while we greedily feed on worldly
contents, we daily go forward, not observing whether we are right or wrong, nor
minding whither we go, so that we easily fall into offenses, and are seldom
long in Gods ways. Again, 2. Nothing is more open to dangers when it does
stray then this shiftless Creature, which has many enemies and no defense
against them; the Dog is too swift, the Wolf too strong, and the Fox too
cunning for it, so that it becomes a prey to all: Even so poor silly man, when
he has left his Shepherd, is entangled in the thorns of worldly cares,
ensnared by Satan, oppressed by wicked men, and pursued by his own Conscience,
and has not subtilty enough to contend with the Devil, nor strength to defend
himself against his instruments, nor nimbleness to fly from his accuser.
Lastly, the straying Sheep is most unlikely ever to return; for supposing it
should miss the ravenous enemies, it is so stupid and inobservant that it would
stray for ever, unless the Shepherd find it and restore it. And just thus (God
knows) it is with us, who wander up and down, forgetting whence we are fallen,
and ignorant how to return again, changing the kinds of our sins sometimes, but
never likely to find the right path, till the good Shepherd of our souls (who
comes to seek that which was lost; cause us to hear his voice behind us Isai.
30.21. John 10.4.
, and we turn and follow him: Thus by this one significant Metaphor, we own God
for our true Shepherd, and our selves to be his Sheep; poor helpless Creatures,
apt to stray, and in our wanderings likely to perish by many enemies and great
dangers, and unlikely and unable ever to return, unless he please to forgive
our sin, forget our folly, and pity our misery, and come to seek and save us,
that feel our selves near lost already, we have not minded our Shepherds voice,
nor heeded his steps, who (as the custom of Shepherds in those Eastern
countries was) John 10.4. Psalm 77.20.
did himself walk before us, we have refused to follow him in the right way,
but have run on after one another bad Example, and sometimes chosen the
treacherous directions of the Wolf or Fox, before those of our dear Shepherd,
to whom we now cry with shame and sorrow to rescue and restore us.

. 4. We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own hearts]
Confession ought to be a giving glory to God Joshua 7.19. Jerem. 13.6.
and therefore we must beware it prove not a dishonouring of him by
transferring the guilt of our sin upon him directly or indirectly: for though
our treacherous hearts love the sin too well, yet they would fain lay the blame
and shame upon some other. Adam will tacitly charge God himself Genes. 3.12.
Natura hominu^ proclivi^ in vitia vid^ri vult non modo cum venia sed etiam cum
ratione peccare. Lact. Inst. lib. 4.
rather then want an Apology to excuse his crimes; and they imitate his
example, who confess their original corruption not to aggravate but extenuate
their actual transgressions, thinking they are the more excusable because they
were naturally inclined to it; Let such know it is not alone the inclinations
of Nature, but the complying with them, and following of them, and the neglect
of Gods restraining grace that leads us into evil, and no blame can be imposed
on him that has left the Canaanites to try us, since he provides and offers
sufficient help and defense against them, nor can any excuse be made for us who
love them, and strengthen them, and daily make Covenants with them: it is our
misery, that our Nature is so evil disposed; but it is our fault Nemo de vitiis
naturalibus: sed de voluntariis poenas luit. Aug. Civ. Dei. l. 12. c. 13.
when we reject Gods directions and neglect his assistance, and take these
false principles and vitiated appetites for our guides: Wherefore we here
confess that (not the having, but) the following these evil devices and desires
is the cause of all our sins Hosea 13.6.
. That which Divines call Original sin, is by the Jews Genes. 6.5. Heb. (...)
figmentum malum. Vatab.
styled the Evil device, and is here most significantly styled The devices and
desires of our hearts, which takes in that universal Corruption which has
overspread the soul, and consists in the decay of the Divine Image which man
was created in; viz. The quickness and comprehensiveness of the intellectual
powers to discern what was truly good, and the readiness of the will to choose,
and of the affections to make after that which was so discerned: This was our
state; but now the Understanding is dull, and shallow, confused with wrong
notions and busied in devising evil Prove. 19.21. Prove. 3.29. Heb. (...) glebas
vertit.
(which the Scripture compares to plowing and turning up the clods) to search
with labor and industry for fine dresses, plausible excuses, and speedy
accomplishments: And then we begin to fall in love with evil, and greedily to
desire it, so that our Understanding is enslaved to our Appetites, and must
pronounce for it. And when we have devised how to call evil good, we are
hurried on to desire it with the blindness and violence Hi motus -- si ratione
destituuntur in praeceps rapiuntur and rapiunt. Macrob. Some. Scip. l. 2. c. 16.
of unguided affections that end in ruin. Thus we devise how to present riches
and plenty, ease and pleasure, honor and esteem, satisfaction and revenge to
our selves in so pleasing a garb, that they may pass for excellent things, and
then we long for them, and still devise ways to obtain or recover them, and
then pursue them with expense of our times and estates, with continual care,
mighty pains and restless endeavors, because we suppose we cannot be happy
without them: Although it is most sure we can never have fast hold of them; the
child may as soon catch the Rainbow, as we these flying shadows which have no
worth, but only in our imagination; But it will be well if when we have
wearied our selves with an endless and vain chase, we be so wise as to sit down
panting and breathing out sighs, and making sad reflections on what we have
done: if we can consider, we may easily discern that our devices have failed,
our desires been unsatisfied, our expectations frustrated, and our pains
unrewarded; and therefore we have good cause to confess we have followed them
too much already, and to resolve to be abused no more, because they lead us
into all sin, and yet yield nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit, for all
our venture and pains.

. 5. W^ have offended against thy holy Laws] Our gracious God has given his
law to supply all our defects, and it is a lamp Psalm. 119.105.
to lighten the darkness of our minds; a Counselor ibid. ver. 24.
to direct the weakness of our judgment, a Guide Psalm 32.8.
to conduct our unsteady actions, that we might not miss our way to true
happiness: But we will be our own directors, and call that good which God calls
evil, so that we neglect what he commands, and desire what he forbids. We
forsake our rule, and come into a wrong way by our false devices, and we run
fast by our greedy and evil appetites, and so are all our actual sins
committed, as is here taught out of S. John 1 John 3.4. James 1.17.
and this is the exact Pedigree of sin which S. James teaches to be conceived
in the devices of the mind, nourished by the desires of the heart, and produced
by following both these; so it was in the first of Gods laws, which was broken
by our first Parents Oculus vidit cor concupiscit and instrumenta operis
pergunt ad agendum. Fagius.
; and so it is ever since, these evil principles endeavor first a connivance,
then a consent, and lastly exercise a tyrannical authority and necessity to
evil, where they have gotten the power: But we may observe in this general
sentence, four aggravations of all Actual sins. 1. They are done against a law
enacted in Heaven, and proclaimed over the whole Earth, and particularly among
us, by diverse special Messengers; so that we cannot pretend ignorance. 2. Not
only against one or two, but many laws, and if we search narrowly, it will
appear we have broken all, the law of Nature, the Decalogue of Moses, the
Precepts of Christ, and the injunctions of the Apostles, and it is a bad sign
when so many Obstacles cannot stop us, and does increase our guilt when all
these laws will not restrain us. 3. These sins are not against the laws of any
mortal Prince, but against the commands of the King of Kings, the God of
Heaven, whose Dominion over us is so absolute, his Wisdom so infinite to
enact, and his Power so great to reward or punish, that David, though he was
accountable to no humane tribunal Psalm 51.4. Hieron. Epist. ad Rustic. Ambros.
in loc. Isidore Peleus. Epist. ita Explicant.
thought it aggravation enough to have offended so great a God; this shows us
the evil of the least sin, for the lesser it be, the greater is the baseness to
offend against so glorious a King as he is Nec tam considerat quid jussum est
quam illum qui jusserit, nec quantitatem imperii, sed imperantis cogitat
dignitatem. Hieron. ep. 14. ad Celant.
, where the temptation is so slight, the gain so small, and the resistance so
easy. 4. These our offenses are against most holy laws, which none of us can
plead against, that they are either unjust or unfit, impossible or
unreasonable, because our Consciences testify for them, and our sober reason
approves of them, even when our affections entice us to disobey them: And if
before our Confession we enlarge these particulars by a serious Meditation, it
will help us to acknowledge more sorrowfully, and sue more earnestly, and
resolve more firmly against them.

. 6. We have left undone those things which we ought to have done, and we have
done those things which we ought not to have done.] The perfect rule which God
has given us, does prescribe us what we ought to do (and those prescriptions
are called the Affirmative Precepts) and also forbids us those things which we
ought not to do, which are the Negative Precepts The Jewish Rab. number 613
precepts in all (so many as there are letters in the Decalogue) of which the
Affirmative are 248 (so many as the joints in a man's body) and the Negative 365
(so many as there are days in one year).
. Now the breach of an Affirmative Precept or leaving a duty undone, is called
a Sin of Omission: the breach of a Negative, or doing what ought not to be
done, is a sin of Commission, which two sorts take in all the sins that can be
committed against the Divine law, and is used here because it is large enough
to take in all the crimes of the worst, and yet it is too suitable to the
actions of the best which (if they consider) will not deny they have often
offended in both kinds: It would be tedious to insert a particular Catalogue,
and is better done elsewhere Whole duty of man in the end.
, and it is more proper for the closet then the Church. Yet since there is much
deceit in generals, and we may be private between God and our own souls even in
the Congregation. I shall advise that before our Confession we call to mind
some sins of both sorts; viz. sins of Omission, as neglecting or ill performing
of the duties of Prayer, Hearing, receiving the Sacraments; as also of matters
Moral, the omission of Alms, Obedience to our Superiors, Charity to our
Brethrens souls, together with our deficiency in the Evangelical Graces of
Faith, Repentance, Humility and Patience. And also that we consider of our sins
of Commission, such as Atheism, Apostasy, Blasphemy, Perjury, Rebellion, Anger
and Malice, Lust with its supporters Gluttony and Drunkenness: Oppression and
Cheating, Lying and Slandering, Envy and Covetousness, which are against the
Moral Law, together with those against the Gospel and its constitutions: And by
so doing, we shall avoid the hypocrisy of obscuring our particular sins under
a slight and general Confession, which can hardly be said with an humble,
lowly, penitent and obedient heart, unless we know the particulars and have
examined their number, and pondered the heinousness of them: I may add, that of
these two sorts the least is enough to condemn us, and yet there are degrees of
guilt, and those of Commission are of a deeper die; it is worse to do evil, then
to neglect that which is good, because in the first there is real mischief and
yet it is easier to avoid a sin, then perform a duty, and that cannot be
repared as this may. Therefore sins of Omission are punished by witholding of
blessings, those of Commission, by inflicting curses Excisionem animae 23
Vicibus minatus est in Negativis, and solum tres in Affirmativis, viz. non
observanti Circumcisionem: Genesis 17.14. Pascham, Exodus 12.15. Sabbachum, Exodus
31.14. Fagius ex ab Ezr.

Transgressio praecep^i affirm. poenitentia deletur, negativi poenitentia
tantum suspenditur in Diem Expiationis R. R.


. He that neglects to hear Gods Word, shall become an ignorant secure sinner,
and in a while be hardened: but the Liar shall besides have Discovery, Shame,
Poverty and Scorn. Which I do not remark, as if Sins of Omission needed little,
but because the direct breaches need much Repentance; yet least any should use
it to excuse their leaving their Duty undone, or doing it ill, let them know,
that many times to omit what we ought to do, is to do what we ought not. He
that gives not alms, is always covetous, often cruel, and sometimes a murderer
Qui suecurrere perituro potest, and non succurrit occidit.
, he that repents not hates God, and loves sin, he is obstinate and
presumptuous in that neglect: And further, he that wilfully omits a duty, or
carelessly passes it over, shall shortly fall into a sin, because he uses not
the means which God has appointed to secure us; whereupon the Church appoints
Sins of Omission (though in their nature lesser) to be first confessed, because
by these we forsake God, and lie open to temptation, and fall into all actual
and positive wickednesses. Let us not then neglect religious duties Curre ad
praeceptum leve f^rte ( scil. ejus omissio) tradet te in manum majoris. R.
Nathan de Patr.
, least we shortly have greater offenses to confess; And on the other side,
think not you can put on the strict Observance of Duty, as a cloak for your
wicked life, for if you live in sin, it is not religious offices can expiate
your guilt; and although you are constant in your public and private
Devotions, yet do not scruple to make this Confession; for if men consider the
dead^ess of their affections, the unfixedness of their thoughts, the hardness
of their hearts, and the sad mixtures of hypocrisy and pride that cleave to us
in all holy offices, they will see they have left undone the best, and most
acceptable, and most Evangelical part of every duty, and all truly good men do
acknowledge God might justly reckon their ill-performances for total omissions:
in fine, we see this part of the Confession is needful for all, and may be
useful to us all.

. 7. And there is no health in us] The sicknesses and diseases of the body, are
by the holy Ghost used to represent the sinful distempers of the soul;
infectious sins are likened to the plague, filthy and odious iniquities to
leprosy, such as disquiet the Conscience to pains and wounds: Heresy is the
Gangrene 2 Timothy 2.17.
, Envy the Consumption Prove. 14.30.
, Pride the Tympany Ep. Jude 16.
of the mind, etc. Now the poor Penitent having surveyed himself within and
without, presents himself before the great Physician of souls, and
acknowledges his want of health, he finds the whole head sick with evil
devices Isai. 1.5, 6.
, and the heart faint with pursuing evil desires, and the whole body (from
inward corrupt Principles) overspread with Egyptian ulcers; so that if Jesus
ask him to what part he shall apply his plaster, he will answer, Not to my
feet only, but to my hands and my head; nothing but a Panarion can cure him;
the Head is heavy with Ignorance, and dizzy with confused thoughts; the Eyes
bloodless with Wantonness, distorred with Envy, and inflamed with covetous
desires, [(...), 1 John 2.16.] the ears are deaf to Gods Word, but itch after
vanity and novelties; the Tongue blistered with lies and slanders, kindled at
the flames of hell James 3.6.
, steaming forth filthy and blasphemous Evaporations; the Heart is cloven with
hypocrisy, decayed in the heat of Zeal and Charity; the Hands are feeble and
soon weary of well-doing; the Stomach is overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and nauseates all sober reproof; the Knees are stiff with laziness
and irreverence in Gods worship; the Feet often lame and always trembling in
the ways of holiness; This is the sad account of our infirmities and diseases,
some of which are almost contrary to others, yet all agreeing in this to hasten
our death, if we hasten not to him who alone has remedies for us. And when we
are before him, we must not deny any of them for their multitude, nor conceal
any for their loathsomness, for this shame, will make our cure impossible
Plerosque tamen hoc opus ut publicationem sui, aut suffugere, aut de dic in
diem differ, pudoris magis memores quam salutis, vel^t illi qui in
vericundioribus corporis partibus contracta vexatione conscientiam medentium
vitant, and ita cum erubescentia sua pereunt, Tertul. de poen. cap. 6.
, and is not to be given way to, unless we love our honor better then our
eternal safety: if any of these plagues should not yet be broke out upon you,
and you should thence conclude your soundness, I shall desire that you would
first examine your selves by these symptoms, which if you find you may suspect
either you are not in health, or will not long continue so; 1 Decay of the
Appetite, when the soul does not hunger and thirst after Righteousness, and
desire the sincere Milk of the Word Matthew. 5.6. 1 Pet. 2.1.
, for a healthy soul cannot be long without them, and in the want of them is no
more satisfied with worldly delights, then your craving bowels are with
pleasant Music: such need no arts to invite them to this heavenly food, for no
business can wholly divert them, nor can any difficulty discourage them, but to
be indifferent whether we have it or no, is a bad sign, and to nauseate it a
worse. 2. An ill digestion, when the Word does not inlighten you, nor
Sacraments engage you, nor Prayer spiritualize you, nor Reproof amend you, when
Mercies do do not quicken your love, but increase your security, when
Afflictions do not bring you to Repentance, but fill you with discontent; when
these Divine things are putrified, and Venom and Corruption extracted from
them, it is time to take heed, for a disease is not far off, which may be also
gathered from 3. A general listlesness and disability in the members of our
body and faculties of our souls, for the discharge of their several parts in
Gods service, we may then fear a spiritual lethargy, although perhaps the
tongue be active still Prove. 26.14. and Chap. 13.14.
, and is exercised in speaking of Religion, and commending the ways of God:
nay, and many seemingly passionate wishes be added, that we may always walk in
them; yet if the hands hang down, and the knees and legs be feeble, if the work
be still undone, this soul is in no Athletick Constitution. Nor yet that
wherein there is 4. A superfluity of humors, if the Choler of Passion, the
Phlegm of Sloth, the Melancholy of Despair, or the Sanguine of Levity and
Volu^tuousness too much abound, you are in the borders of a disease, and had
need consider if you are not too hot with Partiality and violent Zeal, nor too
cold with Atheistical indifferency, too moist with discouraging grief^, nor too
dry with unfruitful vanity: But it is to be feared, a little Examination will
discover some, if not most of these Symptoms in us all, and were there but
half as much to portend a mortal sickness to our body, we should not stay for
an adviser, but run to, or presently send for the Physician -- Venienti
occurrite morbo -- sero medicina paracur Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
; let me but desire us much care here; where the distemper is in the nobler
part, and the danger Death Eternal, your better half is dying, and if you love
your selves, make haste to Jesus for speedy help. Flatter not your selves,
because its signs are not yet so evident, or its present force so formidable,
for by being despised it will gain strength and take root, and perhaps despise
a cure at last. Aristides dyed of the bite of a little Weazle, which he
neglected till it became incurable, and then cried out in a desperate Rage [ O
me miserum, etc.] Miserable wretch that I am! if it had been a Lion I had
sought a Remedy. Happy are they that dress their green wounds, and purge out
their noxious humors betimes, so shall they not langui^h under a tedious
sickness, nor be tormented with the pains of an irresistible Gangrene.

Some do suppose the Penitent after the full View of his many and grievous
sins, is here looking round about to find whether there be any way to escape,
or means of deliverance; but being disappointed, he humbly acknowledges there
is no health, that is, no Psalm. 146.3. -- in quibus non est salus: Vulg. Qui
servandi facultatem non habent: Vatab. Salus and (...), [ap. LXX.] Ps. 132.9.
and alibi ambigue usurpantur pro sanitate and salute, unde Psalm. 119.155. in
Vet. Trans. Health in Nov. Tran. Salvation is far, etc. and per Metonym. salus
pro mediis ad salutem necessariis, unde Psalm. 42. ult. Vet. Transl. Help of my
countenance Nov. Tra. Health of, etc. h. e. Ab his malis nos servare non
habemus potentiam, adjuvandi med^ndi, liberandi, facultatem.
salvation, or means of help, or power to procure health or deliverance among
the Sons of Men. We can destroy our selves, but in God is our hope ( Hos.
13.9.) In vain do we hope for salvation from great or small ( Jerem. 3.23.) For
no man can deliver himself nor his brother, ( Psalm. 49.7.) Salvation alone
belongs to the Lord ( Psalm. 3.8.) So that being compassed with so much guilt,
and finding no help on Earth, it becomes the Soul in this fear, with Jehosophat
(2 Chronicles. 20.12.) to fly to heaven and say, I have no might, O God, against
this great Multitude of transgressions that is set in array against me, neither
know I what to do, but my eyes are upon thee, my only refuge, and last hope,
and unless I find health and help in thee, I must inevitably Perish. But Lord
do not cast me off, but have mercy, etc. But although this sense be very
genuine, we may take the freedom for the enlarging our thoughts, and assisting
our Devotions to pursue the Metaphor, and explain it in that manner as a
general inference, etc.

. 8. But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us miserable sinners] When we have thus
discovered our deplorable condition, we must not run away from God, by the
entertainment of despairing thoughts, both because it is impossible to escape
him Non est quo fugias a Deo irato, nisi ad Deum placatum. August. in Psalm. 7.
, and by attempting to fly from God, we run into the evils we fear, and hasten
from him that alone can help us to what we desire and need. Let us come
therefore, but not with the Pharisees [ I thank thee Luke 18.11.
] but with the Publicans [Lord be merciful] as the Church from his Example has
taught us: And when we are before him, let us not ask any favors till we have
begged a removal of the evils which are upon us; viz. The guilt, the
punishment, and the dominion of sin, which are here so contrived into three
Petitions, that every one is joined with a Motive to enforce it, so that our
Misery pleads for Mercy, our free Confession cries for a removal of the
Punishment, and our hearty Reformation begs deliverance from all our contracted
Indispositions. The first thing in our view is our present Misery, which is so
plain we cannot over look it, and so great we cannot but feel it, and we are
taught to beseech our God to look upon it, for Misery is the proper object of
Mercy Misericordia est alienae miseriae quaedam in nostro cord compassio, qua
utique si possumus subvenire compellimur. August. Civ. Dei. l. 9. c. 5.
. That benign Attribute is ever looking upon the Creatures present sufferings,
without reflecting on the deserts of the sufferer, and is moved with the sight
of a distressed Person, whatever be the cause of his calamity. Therefore when
nothing else in God can give any comfort to a poor sinking sinner [that knows
he is not more miserable then he has made himself by his wickedness] then he
can lay hold of this: The Publican that dares not look up to heaven, can yet
say Miserere! and as Mercy is the sinners chiefest comfort, so it is that
Attribute that moves God to forgive and pardon Romans 11.32. Hebr. 8.12. Psalm
51.1, 2.
, so that to beg for mercy and desire forgiveness are all one, as in that
eminent Penitential Psalm, David begins with Have mercy on me! and immediately
explains it by the removing his offenses: in like manner here we pray for
pardon in our Have mercy on us, because Mercy is the Almoner to distribute this
principal act of Divine bounty, and grants out all pardons. It is not from any
desert in us, but a mere compassion of our distress, and a pure act of Free
grace that disposes God to take away sin Isai. 43.25.
: We have no friend in the Court of Heaven to obtain it, but Mercy, and no
Argument to plead for it but Misery; if we come with We have prayed, fasted,
waited Isai. 58.3.
, we seem to apply our selves to Gods Justice: But he that from a heart
secretly groaning under the apprehensions of its distress, cries out for Mercy
because he is Miserable, he shall pierce Mercies ears, and cause her to open
her compassionate eyes to see, and stretch out her gracious hand to help, and
if she be thy Advocate, she will cause the bowels of the Almighty to yearn upon
thee Jerem. 31.20. Heb. (...) vide 1 Reg. 3.26. prop. viscera matris, vel
i^volnera quibus foetus in utero continetur: at saepe pro misericordid Dei.
with the same affection that the tender Mother did when she heard the cries of
her poor sprawling infant under the merciless sword of the bloody executioner:
But then you must be sure first to view your sin and danger fully, that you may
be fully convinced of your Misery and cry in a pungent sense thereof most
earnestly, Lord have Mercy, for otherwise this will be a feigned cry, and an
intolerable abuse of this sweet Attribute; what can provoke God more, then for
a man to call Mercy forth (which is ready enough to come) and then through
impenitence or laziness, or not discerning our need of it, to send it back
empty; alas such are more miserable, because they see not their misery Nihil
est miserius misero non miserante seipsum.
, and they are never like to be delivered from that misery, because by these
feigned calls they have so often mocked God, and affronted this their only
friend, that if at last they call in earnest, when Death is before their eyes,
Mercy then will not come.

. XI. Spare thou them, O God, that confess their faults] The elder brother that
knew the fidelity and constancy of his service expects a large reward; but the
poor Prodigal that was conscious of his offenses, will esteem it a high favor
to escape a severe Chastisement, and utter exclusion from his Fathers house and
presence; they that are not sensible of their guilt fear not punishment, and
esteem a deliverance scarce worth the asking: But he that considers the
multitude of his own offenses, and Gods abhorrency of them, and remembers the
terrors of his threatenings, and strictness of his justice, the fierceness of
his anger, when he begins, and the impossibility of avoiding that stroke, which
no place can hide him from Josh. 8.20. Non erat [(...)] in eis, Manus ad
pugnandum vel pedes ad fugiendum. RR. LXX Vulg. and Masius. Nen erat iis locus
(ut Deuteronomy. 2.37) C. P. J. and nostr. Verse. Non erant in eis vires, ita Drus.
no hands resist, no feet fly from, nor no strength endure. To this poor soul
Gods pity is desirable, and it is accounted a great mercy he has not yet felt
the weight of Gods wrath, such an one begs earnestly he never may feel it, or
however not sink eternally under it, he can pray as heartily before the stroke,
come as othe^s when the smart extorts it from them. When the Israelites heard
the cry of Egypt, and saw the slaughter of so many first born Exodus 12.13.
Fagius in locum.
, they then thought it a mercy not to be slain, worthy the celebrating with a
Passover. The true penitent esteems his life a favor, and all on this side
Hell Mercy, and the condemned Malefactor will be as thankful for a Reprieve, as
another for a great Pension and high Preferment: The poor sinners request is no
greater then to be spared, and his Argument is not because he is not guilty, or
deserves no stripes, that would accelerate the stroke, to abate such daring
confidence, and convince such horrible falsehood: He knows nothing is to
begotten from God by standing on his Innocence, but the way is to acknowledge
our Guilt; for one great end of Gods temporal judgments on sinners, is to force
them to do him justice, by racks and tortures to extort a Confession from them
that have the cunning to conceal, or the impudence to deny their wickedness.
Thus God opened the mouths of Joseph's brethren Genes. 42.21. and 44.16.
of Adonibezek Judge. 1.6.
, and Manasseth 2 Chronicles. 32.12.
to display their former and almost forgotten cruelties, and made Phaaroh
himself cry Peccavi Exodus 9.27. Satis est; h. e. satis jam lucratus est Deus
poenis suis cum jam culpam nostram agnoscimus, Fagius in loc.
, and then he hoped God would cease to Punish, when he had obtained his end,
and brought him to Confession. But the wi^est way is, not to stay till some
judgment summon us, but of our own accord ingenuously to confess our sins:
Racks and Strapadoes are for obstinate Rogues, and no merciful humane Prince
would use them to one that with tears pleaded guilty, and begged a Pardon,
Matthew 26.65. Habes confitentem reum.
much less will the Father of Mercies: What need is there of any f^rther
witness, the humble sinner accuses himself, cleers Gods justice, and casts
himself wholly on his mercy, and doubtless he shall be spared, especially
because it is to be hoped, that he that has seen his danger, and so spedily
and fully confessed his fault, designs never more to prove disobedient, if he
may now be spared, and since the chief end of punishment is to prevent the sin
Nemo prudens punit quia peccatur sed ne peccatur. Senec.
, doubtless God will not be hard to be entreated to spare him that is in the
way to amendment, and whose own prudent fears have done that which otherwise a
sharp judgment must have wrought: Let us be so wise as to go in upon the first
apprehensions of Gods displeasures, and take sanctuary in his pity, and we
shall not be punished temporally, unless with designs of mercy, however not
eternally.

. 10. Restore thou them that are penitent] Though we are apt to account those
beggars, saucy and troublesome, who from one request granted, are encouraged to
make a second and more considerable. Yet God (whose rule is (Habenti dabitur)
to him that has shall be given) is well pleased with it, nor will he interpret
it impudence, if after we have prayed for a removal of the guilt, and a
deliverance from the punishment of our sin, we put up a further and greater
request, even to be restored: For it is not a single mischief which sin does
us, besides the stain and the wrath, it does alienate the mind of God from us,
and therefore after David had prayed against the forementioned evils, he also
desires to be restored Psalm 51.12. 2 Samuel 14.
. It will not suffice Absalom to be called home from banishment, unless he may
see his Fathers face: So if a truly pious man were sure never to smart for sin
by any positive evil, the bare privation of the Divine love would be
intolerable, and its suspension a grievous burden; and he that truly calls God
Father, will not be satisfied without a restoring to his favor which sin had
deprived him of: The word is also used for the rebuilding a ruined and
depopulated City Dan. 9.25, etc.
, which is the sad emblem of a soul laid wast by sin, which defaceth its
beauty, dismantles its strengths and brings down its highest and noblest
faculties, evenning them with the ground, fitting them for converse with low
and base things, making of a defenced City a heap. Which when we consider, how
can we but weep over our own souls, as Nehemiah over the ruins of Jerusalem,
never ceasing to pray that by the Holy Spirit it may be restored and
re-edifyed, and retrieved into its former beauty and strength; either of these
Metaphors afford useful Meditations: but it is most probable this Petition
refers to that clause of the Confession [there is no health in us] and
signifies our desires to be restored to health, according to Gods promise
Jerem. 30.17.
. It is not enough that we dye not by sin, but we desire we may not lie
languishing under the remains of so sad a disease, but may have a perfect cure.
Some distempers do so universally corrupt the humors, that the abatement is no
recovery, for they make way for a worse, unless the body be well cleansed after
them (...) (i. e. in anima post peccatum) (...) Arrian. in Epic. lib. 2. c. 18.
: So do most sins blind the mind, harden the heart [ Heb. 3.13.] weaken the
faith, undermine the hope, embase the affections, quench the actings of Gods
Spirit, and give the tempter advantage against us; so that a bare Pardon will
not fit us either to serve or enjoy God, till the remaining ignorance,
security, distrust, worldly mindedness, and deadness be purged out, and we be
fully restored: But nothing will move God to do this, unless you be sincerely
penitent; that is, add to your sorrow and confession real purposes of
amendment, he may pity the miserable, and may spare him that acknowledges his
offense; but he will restore none but him that reforms, for he that sees the
heart knows that to seek only pity or deliverance, proceeds only from self-love
at best, and sometimes from love to sin, as the crazy Epicure desires health,
that he may renew the prosecutions of his Lust. But he that seriously desires
to be restored, hates sin for it self, and not for its evil company, and he
that does so is truly penitent, but they that only desire a freedom from
misery and punishment, and are not grieved for these remains, will soon fall
again into sin, and God who knows that; may justly deny them that peace which
they will use so ill: By this also it appears that those men do in vain
complain of those dregs of their old corruptions, which have not truly
repented, for God leaves these Canaanites on purpose to vex these half
repenters, to hinder them in religious duties Numb. 33.35. Saepe includent vos
and introitum and exitum negabunt vobis. Jos. 23.13. Caute and tecte primo vos
irretire conentur, deinde palam urgebunt vos donec occaecuti estis. Masius.
, and when they grow weary of resisting them, then they become snares in their
way, secretly to entrap them, and by degrees scourges in their sides, violence
to drive them, and lastly thorns in their eyes, that by putting out the light
of conscience it self, they may sin without fear: Oh! Do not therefore cease
repenting as soon as you can believe or hope a Pardon, but let that hope
encourage you to repent more, and to cast out all the relics of the old
leaven, watch and pray till you be restored to the same cleerness of judgment,
earnestness of holy desire, freedom of will, power over your affections,
composedness of soul, and tenderness of conscience which you had before you
fell, for not till then are you out of the danger of your disease.

. 11. According to thy Promises declared unto mankind in Christ Jesus, our Lord]
It might well be deemed an high Presumption in us that are offenders against
God, to ask so many favors of him (...) but that he has prevented this
censure by interposing his Promise that he will do what we desire; which
Promise is a sure foundation to build our hopes upon, because by it we have a
title to that, which before we could not expect, for God being truth it self,
is obliged to make his Word good, and by his promise gives his Creature a kind
of right to the thing promised Gr. (...) promissio: (...). Eustath. Il. b.
, and if he be not bound to us, yet he is by his own Justice and Veracity Deus
non nobis fit simpliciter debtor, sed sibi ipsi. T. Aquin.
, which yet does not abridge his freedom, who could discern before, all that
could fall out, and yet freely obliged himself; so that his Promise is no more
then a Declaration of what he can do, and sees fit to be done, if it had never
been promised. Wherefore we cannot please him better then to urge him with, his
promises, because then we only desire what he judges fit to be granted; nor
must we measure the Almighty by the scant measures of a man Numb. 23.19. Homo
ex 4 causis solet promissa negare, vel quando fallaciter quid promisit, vel
quando promissi poenitet, vel quando offenditur ab eo cui fit promissio, vel
quando nequit persolvere, haec omnia a Deo absunt: ex Fag.
, who loves not to be charged with what he does not intend, or is not able to
perform, but there is no unforeseen accident can occur to alter the
determination of an All-seeing and Immutable God, his servants have always
pleased him, and obtained their suit 2 Chronicles. 6.16. Chap. 20.9.
when they have pleaded a Promise in a particular temporal concern: Much more
shall we in these which are of so great weight, and so often repeated in the
Book of God, and so fully agreeable to his eternal purposes and constant
desires. These Promises are indeed conditional, but we ask them not absolutely,
but upon the condition on which they are made, viz. as hoping by Gods grace
that we are penitent, or else our request could not be according to his
Promises. But in these words are three grounds of our hopes. 1. Because the
Promises are declared, he has not only purposes of Mercy in the secrets of
his unsearchable breast, but he has made Promises, and communicated and
published them by Word and Writing, from time to time, before Heaven and Earth,
Angels and Devils, and all Men that are, or were, or ever shall be, now if they
should not have been certainly performed, they would not have been divulged
before so many Witnesses, but since they are declared to all, they are a
summons to all, and shall be fulfilled to all that do go in to God, bringing
his gracious Proclamation in their hands. 2. They are made to mankind, for the
Apostate Angels were permitted (as they fell so) to lie to Eternity, though in
their Naturals they far excelled us, but Jesus graciously snatched hold Heb.
2.16. Gr. (...) Dr. Ham.
of us, and made a Covenant with us, so that though we are offenders, we are
salvable though despicable, yet we are such as the Promises are directed to: We
dare not with some pretend to any infallible revelation of our peculiar
interest in them, nor do we plead any particular engagements made to our
persons by Name, yet since made to all, we are thankful we are not particularly
excepted, and do hope we shall have a share, for we believe Mercy on purpose
contrived the Promises so large, that no repentant sinner might want
encouragement, and we apply them modestly to our selves, not because we are
better then others, but because we have as much need as any; and even when we
see our selves the chief of sinners, we may take comfort in the universality of
the Promise, because we are of mankind; but those who fancy they can read their
own names in them, are like that vain person who offered his Prince a great sum
of money, to be permitted to salute him familiarly every day, that men might
suppose him a Confident of the Kings: for the better sort of humble Christians
are thankful for lesser favors, which are also commonly more real though less
plausible. 3. We hope in these Promises, because they are made in Christ Jesus,
for he first clearly revealed them to us 2 Timothy 1.10.
, and procured them of God, and sealed them as a Mediator between both, and
therefore they are made in him 2 Timothy 1.1.
. And because they are made in him, 1. We believe they shall be faithfully
performed, they are Yea and Amen 2 Cor. 1.20.
; that is, really intended: Christ is the first Genesis 3.15.
and great promise, and God having given him already, has both evidenced his
love to us, and manifested his reality in promising, and his resolution of
performing all the rest in due time Romans 8.32.
. And further, it is surer comfort that they are made in him, then if they had
been made immediately to us, for so when ever we had broke any Condition, we
had lost our title to what was promised In pactis si vel tantillum ex dictis
pars altera transgrederetur rupta sunt foedera. Thucyd.
, but our Venture is deposited in a safer bottom, even in him that fulfilled
all that God required: Surely none can question those Promises which were made
freely by the God of Truth, and are confirmed by the performance of the
greatest first, and depend on the perfect Obedience of Christ Jesus, whose
complete Righteousness shall justify the claim of every true Penitent,
notwithstanding his own many failings. 2. We believe because made in him they
shall be dispensed to us with much mercy, not like those made upon Mount Sin^i,
which could only benefit him that had at all times, and in all instances
obeyed, for what comfort were that to him that owns himself a sinner: but these
are from mount Sion, and to be fulfilled by our gracious Redeemer, whose Merits
are the ground of our Hope and Faith, for it is not by reason of our deserts
that we expect such favors, but we remember he that made them, looked on Jesus
and through him with Mercy on us, and we hope for his sake to receive our
Portion: This Clause is the exercise of our Faith, in pleading the promise
through Christ, and could not have been omitted, for Faith must ever regulate
our Repentance, as well as Repentance must strengthen our Faith (...). Clem.
Alex.
, and these two must not be separated. The desires of a Pardon without this,
are but like the Petitions men offer to merciless Tyrants, rather to declare
their grief, then out of expectations of help. To see sin, and not to see the
promise, terrifies the Conscience, and turns into the amazed flight of
trembling Cain, or the final despair of wretched Judas, and produces nothing
but hideous groans such as are rebounded from the hollow caverns and infernal
prisons of damned spirits. Wherefore I advise all that would repent, not to
dwell so long in the dark Meditations of their own vileness, as to be unable to
endure the splendour of Gods Grace and Mercy; for though a serious apprehension
of sin will make that bitter, yet nothing can make God sweet, but that Faith
which represents him willing to receive all those that humbly come to him.

. 12. And grant, O most merciful Father, for his sake] To be delivered from all
the evil and mischievous consequences of sin has been thus far the subject of
our Petition, which we now enlarge by the praying for somewhat which is really
good, so that here again for our encouragement, we call to mind that our God is
a most merciful Father in Christ Jesus, on whom the penitent is taught to look,
and because he intercedes for us, we ask it for his sake, through whom God is
merciful, and we have a promise we shall prevail John 14.13.
: If we asked these things for the sake of any Saint or Angel, we could have
small hopes of success, for they are obliged to God for themselves, they depend
upon him, and by him are what they are, and the Saints have received all they
have for Christ's sake, so that if they could hear us (which is unlikely Isai
63.16. Job 14.22. Codurcus. ibid.
, they would detest any derogation to the honor of that Name to which they are
so much indebted. But our Church both here, and in every Prayer we make,
enjoins us (as Christ also does John 16. ver. 23, 26.
to ask all things in the Name, and for the alone sake of Jesus, thereby to
confront that folly and impiety of many Mediators so stiffly defended by the
Roman Church, not so much because they believe it, as because they gain by
this Diana of the vulgar Acts 19.25.
. It Is certain, we must not come in our own names, for the very Heathens
thought it unreasonable to approach their Gods without a Mediator Jani nomen
eunctis precibus praeponere soletis, viam enim vobis pandere Decrum ad
audientiam creditis. Arnob. in genesis l. 3.
. And hence the Platonists feigned their numerous Demons Jamblicus de Myster.
Philo de plant.
, who conveyed the Notices of humane affairs (especially prayers) to the
superior Deities: This multiplying Mediators in the Heathens may be a
pardonable mistake, but it is inexcusable in those that know; it was never
allowed by the Jews to use the intercession of any Creature Munster in Matthew.
4.10.
, and that Daniel prayed then for the Lords sake Dan. 9.17.
, and that there is but one Mediator 1 Timothy 2.5.
, and Jesus 1 John 2.1, 2.
is he: nor is there one example (as themselves confess) of any in Scripture
that prayed by the mediation of Saints or Angels. The Jews were taught indeed
in imitation of Daniel to use the name of Adonai Adonai est clavis qua patef^t
aditus ad Jehovam in sua essentia quasi latentem: est Thesaurus quo ea quae in
(...): condita sunt nobis impartiuntur, est Oeconomus qui omnia dispensat, etc.
Port. lucis.
in their prayers, which they called the Key to Jehovah, the storehouse to
contain, and steward to dispense all blessings which we affirm of Christ, but
that people are scandalized at the many Mediators of the Romanist, and so would
the primitive Christians be also, who all declare against it, as might be
largely proved; but that of Gregory Neocaes. may suffice Qui recte Deum invocat
per Filium invocat. in (...).
, No man rightly calls upon God the Father but by the Son. I might add more for
the confutation of this Error, if it were not better and more seasonably done
by others already, so that we may leave this when we have observed the
impudence of those ignorant and malicious persons, who charge the Liturgy as
savouring of Popery, when every little Collect does disown and declare against
one foundation Article of their Faith, nay by consequence against all that are
superstructed, viz. Merits, Pilgrimages, Shrines, Images, Indulgences, Penances
of satisfaction, etc. because we adhere only to the merits of Christ Jesus,
acknowledging our own unworthiness, but believing that he, as our Redeemer,
will procure our pardon, and as our Advocate will purchase grace to help us to
walk in the ways of God.

. 13. That we may hereafter] The very method of this exact Confession directs
us in our Repentance to look three ways successively; 1. Inwards, 2. Upwards,
3. Onwards; for humiliation, pardon, and amendment, which order we must not
break, nor disjoyn the connection; for he that first looks up to God before he
has seen his sin, will but mock the Almighty, he that first looks forward will
but deceive himself, and not be able to proceed: Again he that looks inwards
and not upwards will despair, he that looks upwards and not inwards will
presume, and if he do both see his sin, and seck for Mercy, but looks not
onwards to amend, he does but dissemble, and of all the rest we must be careful
of the future, because the discovery of sin, and the o^fer of forgiveness are
only to engage to a reformation hereafter. Which consideration respects two
sorts of persons who are apt to neglect this principal part of true Repentance:
1. The dejected penitent who is so taken up with the sight, and oppressed with
the sense of his sins, that he cannot look forward, and spends all that
precious time which is allowed for amendment, in sadly poring on what is done,
so that he finds no leisure to consider what should be done: The Church
bespeaks these (as once God to Joshua) Chap. 7.10.
Arise, why lie thou here on thy face Job 7.20.
, your sorrow cannot undo what is done, having seen your own ways, now turn
into Gods Psalm 119.59.
, set your sins before you to keep you humble Psalm 51.3.
, but not to weaken your hands from doing Gods will Lament. 3.40.
. When your sorrow has made you hate sin, and long for peace with God, it has
proceeded far enough, and to continue this Corroding Plaster, is to protract
and hinder the Cure: experience tells us that many good men suffer for want of
this advice, for fearing they should grieve too little, they study to increase
their sorrow by ever beholding the dark side of the Cloud which fills their
hearts with benumming fears, their heads with unworthy jealousies, and all
their duties with distrust and unbelief; whereas if they would set themselves
to work and oyling their wheels with love and hope leave their desires of
Pardon to Jesus to sue out, they might find more convincing proofs of the
Divine Mercy in his assistance of their endeavors, then ever they shall gain
by fruitless sighs and tears, sad wishes and empty speculations. 2. The
dissembling hypocrite who also looks not forward, but not because he fears he
cannot (as the former) but because he resolves he will not amend his life; only
finding his Conscience terrified and uneasy, he would say or promise any thing
to be quit of the present smart; but this proceeds rather from a weariness of
suffering for evil, then a hatred against doing wickedly: and such men's cries
for mercy, are only to stop the mouth of their accuser, without any resolutions
of becoming better if they procure their quiet; nay perhaps they do it in hopes
to sin hereafter with less opposition. But the Miserable wretches deceive and
tire themselves in an endless Circle of sinning and Repenting, striving for a
little false peace, that they may do that which will renew their trouble, and
then they repent again (as they call it) though indeed they never repent,
because they never amend, (...) Clem. Alex. Strom. 2o.
and in this are worse then the most blind and obdurate sinners, because they
see they have done amiss and yet will do it again; Oh let such consider this
[hereafter] and know till they both desire and endeavor a change in their
Manners they cannot be forgiven!

. XIV. Live a Godly, righteous, and a sober life,] The Jews call that place
Mich. 6.8. the law in three words, Justice, Mercy and Humility, and St. Paul
has given us both Law and Gospel in as few Titus 2.12. (...).
, in the Epistle to Titus, from whence this Petition is taken; for the
principal end of Christ's coming, of the preaching of the Gospel, and of the
Communications of Gods grace (he there shows to be that we might live, 1.
Godlily, in observance of all Duties of Piety to God; 2. Righteously, in
discharging all offices of Justice and Charity to others: 3. Soberly, in
performing what relates to our own bodies and souls: and this is the whole Will
of God. And surely he that confesses he has offended in all, and desires
forgiveness of all, must needs pray for the amendment of all that has been
amiss, or his Repentance cannot be sincere. The true Penitent takes not out
such Duties as comply with his Interest, and omits the rest, nor craves
allowance in those sins that agree with his constitution and design, and
forbears the rest, but forsakes all iniquity as displeasing to God, and as that
which Jesus smarted for, and which will deprive him of grace and glory: Those
therefore that would excuse their injustice and uncharitableness to others, or
their own voluptuousness by a strict Devotion have never truly repented, nor
those who wish there were no more required then outward justice, that they
might take liberty in other matters. God allows none of these commutations; nor
the Church who orders us to pray for Religion, and justice, and sobriety all
together, some of them perhaps may please us better; but they all alike and
only together please God, if we seek our own ease we may choose what we like
best: but if we truly love God, we must embrace all, for they all depend on one
another, and he that breaks or leaves one link loose, weakens as well as
shortens the whole chain. But let us view the Particulars: 1. A Godly life
which may challenge the first place, in regard the observations of piety are
the foundation of justice and sobriety, and the neglect opens the door to all
manner of wickedness Heu primae scelerum causae mortalibus aegri^ Naturam
nescire Dei -- Sil. Ital. Sublata pietate tollitur justitia. Cicero.
how should he that is a rebel to his Prince be just to his fellow subjects.
The first is the fear of God or the godly life, and it is the giving God his
due inwardly and outwardly. 1. Inwardly, in that complete precept of loving him
before all, above all, and more then all things, in giving him the chiefest
place in our thoughts, will, understanding and desires, so that we admire
nothing more then his wisdom, fear nothing more then his threatenings, and
design nothing more then his glory. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Matthew. 22.37. toto cord, ut
omnes cogitationes; tota anima, ut omnem vitam; tota mente, ut omnem
intellectum in Deum conferas. Aug. de dec. Christ.
This is that, loving God with our whole heart, when we confide in his Truth,
hope in his Mercy, rest on his Omnipotence, and wait for his Bounty: And if thy
heart be thus disposed it will discover it in outward significations: viz.
endeavors to know him, speaking honorably of him, in a readiness to praise
him, pray to him, and worship him in all opportunities public and private.
This is the sum of the first Table of the Law; wherein we are commanded to love
and own, honor and fear God exclusively to all others: to worship him in
purity, to reverence his name, and all that bears the impresses of it, and to
observe religiously those solemn times dedicated to his service, which is
called walking with God Genesis 5.22. C. P. ambulavit in timore coram domino.
and worthy of him 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. (...).
and such a godly life is suitable to those confessions we make of his Wisdom,
Power and Mercy, and does express we are really grieved for walking in contrary
Paths. 2. A Righteous life, which is more then a Negative can express, and is
by some falsely confined to the doing no evil to our neighbors, Justitia in eo
sita est ut abstineatur alienis neque noceatur non nocenti: ita Porphyr. Quod
tibi fieri non vis alterine feceris.
The Heathens said, do not to others what you would not have done to you. But
Christ changes it into the positive, Matthew. 7.12. ideo mihi placent Christiani
quod quae sibi fieri velint ipsi aliis faciunt. Severus Imperat.
and the Christians did that to others which they would have wished done to
themselves, besides the avoiding all wrongs and injuries; and therefore the sum
of this is: We pray that we may never do that to our neighbor which we would
be loath to suffer, as hurting his body, impairing his estate by force or fraud,
disparaging his name, at the first or second hand; and further, (...). Andron.
Rhod. in Arist. l. 5. c. 1.
whatever we would wish should be done unto us if we were abused or oppressed,
sick or sorrowful, in danger or necessity, that we may do the same to them that
are in such circumstances; and as we expect loving relatives, chaste
yoak-fellows, obedient children, faithful friends and loving neighbors, that
we may be such in all these Relations: in a Word, that we may benefit all and
hurt none Vir bonus prodest quibus potest nocet autem nemini. Cicero.
but be a common good to all we converse with: and this will be most pleasing
to that God who is the common father of all, and the Judge of all the world. 3.
A Sober life, which contains all that prudent care a man ought to take of his
own body and soul, in observance to him that Created, Redeemed, and Preserves
both; for though in common speech sobriety be opposed to drunkenness, the word
[(...)] is of larger signification, importing a prudent moderation of our
natural desires of meat or drink, ease or pleasure, that the mind be not by
them hindered in the pursuing of what is truly good, so that not every man who
is no drunkard is a sober person, for neither the gluttonous Epicure nor
lascivious Wanton do live sober lives. The full sense of this request is, that
we may be temperate and abstemious, modest and chaste, full of mortification
and self-denial, that we may use meat and drink to serve our natural needs, and
fit us for Gods service, not to pamper us for the devils saddle, not to
indispose our mind, weaken our body or shorten our lives, that we may use none
but lawful pleasures, and those so moderately, that they may not make our
spirits vain, engage our affections, engross our thoughts, nor be esteemed as
our chiefest good 1 Cor. 7.29. Vti non frui. Aug.
and if God grant us this command over our appetites, we shall never neglect
our watch, nor give our enemies advantage, nor shall we at any time be unapt
for our duties to God or man. This is a brief account of this most
comprehensive Petition, which sure^^ shall put up heartily, when we have seen
our ingratitude to God, our injustice to our neighbor, and our carelessness of
our selves; together with the vengeance we deserve for all this. Now, if ever,
it will appear high time to leave those evil and dangerous ways, and to return
into these pleasant and safe paths for our everlasting good: And that we may
heartily ask this, we must first get a firm resolution to set about these
duties, least we mock God; and secondly we must see our own insufficiency,
least we deceive our selves, by thinking we need not the assistance of Divine
grace. If we purpose firmly we do our endeavor, but if we beg the assistance
of Gods spirit, we declare our humility and are like to stand fast in those
resolutions, and this we may assure our selves, that it is his desire as well
as ours that we should live such lives, and he has long waited to hear this
Petition from you; so that when you ask it heartily he will he sure to grant
it, and rejoice over you in that he is likely to reap the fruit of all that
Jesus has done for you in our conversion and salvation.

. XV. To the Glory of thy holy Name] This Conclusion may either have respect to
all the Petitions before, or it may particularly be applied to the last: In the
first sense it is a declaration that (though we shall be happy in having all
these prayers heard yet) we are not so devoted to our own advantage, as to aim
no higher, but we believe it will tend to his glory as well as our good.
Nothing by us can be added to make his perfections more glorious in themselves;
but by such incomparable testimonies of grace and mercy, they will be more
clearly manifested to us and all men; for we consider that his delivering us
from death to life, retrieving us from fears of hell to hopes of heaven, and
changing us from sin to grace, and doing all this for rebellious wretches that
he could easily destroy; this will be a manifesto of his glory to all the
world, for all that see will admire 1 Timothy 1.16. Gr. (...). Gloria ejus est
scintilla lucis divinae cedens in utilitatem populi ejus. R. Jehud. C. Cosri.
and be encouraged themselves to repent and turn to this most merciful God, and
we our selves shall ever remember with joy and delight; that we have found in
him a most free propensity to pity the miserable, unspeakable kindness to help
the unworthy, and omnipotent power to rescue the perishing from the jaws of
Eternal ruin: and with these holy thoughts, the flames of gratitude will ever
be preserved upon the altar of our hearts, and from thence daily will ascend a
cloud of hearty praises and gratulations. Or secondly, it may be annexed to the
last Petition, viz. That we may not only do good but do it well, having an eye
to his Romans 14.5, 6.
glory, not at our own estimation, or to obtain the praise of men. That we may
live godlily, righteously, and soberly, not to our own credit but his glory,
and when we have done all, may in gratitude cast all at his feet, to let all
the world see, by whose long-suffering we are spared, by whose mercy we are
forgiven, and by whose grace we are reformed; and that our holy lives hereafter
may show, that we are so in love with God and his ways, that we esteem it our
chiefest happiness to be like him, and walk in them all our days.

. XVI. Amen.] There is in the Liturgy as well as holy Scripture a two fold
Amen, the one affirmative in the end of the Creed, the other optative in the
end of Collects, and particularly of this Confession; so that here it is an
Adverb of wishing Futur. Niph. (...) per Aphaeres. (...) unde LXX (...). vide
Fuller. Miscel. l. 1. c. 2.
and serious desire that God would grant all our petitions. Thus the Jews used
it at the end of their hymns 1 Chronicles. 12.36.
and prayers Psalm. 106. ult. Ea voce testati sunt omnes se probare ea quae
recitantur. Grotius.
and in that 106 Psalm the people are particularly charged when they had heard
that Psalm read to say Amen after it. And the Rabbis Quicunque finitis
singulis precatumculis dicit Amen in h^c seculo, dicet etiam Amen in seculo
future. R. Jehud. Tanch. alius ille facit ut redemptio nostra accelleretur.
enjoined the saying it after every little prayer as a thing pleasing to God,
and profitable to men: Comparing it to the setting our Name to an Epistle writ
in another hand which then becomes ours when we sign it Buxt. Synag. Jud. cap.
7.
. The same Doctors in their Talmud reprove three sorts of Amen. 1. Pupillum,
when like children men speak it to that they understand not. 2. Amen
surreptitium, when by carelessness they say it before the prayer be done. 3.
Amen fertile, when by sleepiness and yawning they cut it in two parts: by all
which it appears they would have it pronounced zealously and reverently by all
the people. From the Jews our Lord took it, and by placing it at the end of his
own prayer Matthew. 6.13.
declared he would have us Christians to subjoyn it to all ours; and
accordingly it appears the Apostles ordered it, for the most ignorant (who
could only join with others that prayed for him) was at the end to say Amen 1
Cor. 14.16. Gr. (...).
. Which we may rather believe they ordained in the Church, because we find the
Masters of Israel appointed those who could not pray for themselves nor read,
to go to the Synagogue Buxt. Syn. Jud. cap. 5.
and hear what others then prayed, and by saying Amen heartily to their
prayers, they made them (as they taught) become their own. From the practice of
the Apostles, it is sufficiently proved to have descended into the constant use
of the Church in all ages Nos simul Amen dicimus. Irenaeus.

Si pro ipsius Salvatoris pacto in consensit duorum quodcunque petierint fiet:
Quid igitur futurum ubi ex tot tantantisque populis in unum congregatis, una
vox respondeatur acclamantium Amen. Athan. Ad similitudinem caelestis tenitrui
Amen populus reboat. Hieron.


, so that all know, the people in the Primitive times, used in the conclusion
of all public prayers to answer with an Amen, loud as a clap of thunder; and
I wish our times (which pretend to so much zeal) had never laid aside this holy
custom, which besides the prescription of Antiquity, has the records of
Scripture to produce for its Observation: I wish I might be a happy instrument
to restore it. Let us I beseech you reassume this most useful conclusion, and
all speak it heartily, and a^dibly to testify both to God and Men, that we
have all one Lord, one Faith, one Hope, and one Mouth: And as we pronounce it,
let us reflect on all the sentences of the foregoing prayer, (especially such
as vain thoughts hindered us from attending) and sum up all our desires in one
devout Amen. Lord let all and every one of these things be granted to us: if
you forbear to say Amen out of dislike to the Prayers, do but study them and I
am confident you will be reconciled to them; if you omit Amen out of
negligence, pray consider how you can expect God should accept that Prayer
which you never owned nor consented to, we might as well be absent if we join
not with the Minister. And therefore that God may say Amen to all our prayers,
he grant us grace devoutly to say it to our own. Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Confession.
O Most glorious and dreadful Lord God; who art [Almighty] in thy power, and of
absolute Authority, able to destroy us and yet ready to spare us, and thereby
have showed thy self a gracious [and most merciful Father] slow to anger and
ready to receive us, thy pity encourages us to make this humble Confession
with shame and sorrow before thee, that [we] thy poor Creatures [have erred]
and daily gone aside out of thy right paths, by mistakes frequent, sudden and
unobserved sins [and strayed] many times by voluntary, deliberate and habitual
transgressions; whereby we have stayed longer and wandered further [from thy
ways] of pleasantness and paths of peace, where we might have been so safe and
happy: And hereby we are [like lost sheep] without our good Shepherd, exposed
to many secret, subtle, and powerful enemies; being helpless and shiftless,
unable of our selves to resist them, or fly from them, and unlikely ever to
return to thee unless thou come to seek and save us. O Lord we now find to our
sorrow that [we have followed] false g^ices with obstinacy, heedlesness and
delight, and have been given [too much] to rely upon [the devices] and false
principles of our corrupted understandings (which mistake the greatest evil for
the chiefest good) and so we have been led headlong after our mistaken choice
by the blind affections [and desires of our own hearts] which being set upon
evil^ have made us restless and impatient till we have done what we wickedly
devised, and obtained what we greedily desired. And thus by forsaking thy
conduct and pursuing all that a mistaken judgment could devise or a wicked
heart desire [we have] daily in thought, word, and deed, most grievously
[offended against thy holy laws] which we could not be ignorant of, nor are we
able to give any Reason why we should disclaim thy Sovereignty, or despise the
direction of a Rule so excellent, so just and good, that we cannot except
against it. Who shall plead for us who have been fully instructed in our duty,
and yet [we have] through laziness, forgetfulness, or worldly-mindedness, very
often [left undone those things] which our Duty to God, our Love to our
Neighbors, and the care of our own Bodies and Souls required Here reflect upon
what you read,. 6. and 14. calling to mind what you have omitted of your duty
to God, your selves or others.
; all [which] our own Consciences tells us [we ought to have done] in the most
sincere and cordial manner, yet we have either omitted them, or performed them
with so much indifference and formality, hypocrisy and distractions, that they
might almost as well have been left undone: And by this Omission and slight
observance of our duty, thou have been provoked to give us up to the deceits of
Satan, so that [we have] besides these sins of Omission frequently [done those
things] which have tended to thy dishonor, our neighbors hurt, and to the
prejudice of our own bodies and souls Here remember your s^ns of Commission (as
has been said) and call to mind your breaches of the 2d, third, sixth,
seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth Commandments.
the least of [which we ought not to have done] to have gained the whole world.
O thou Physician of Souls, our heads are full of evil devices, our hearts of
base desires, our lives are overspread with the loathsome sores of actual
transgressions, thou alone can help us, and being likely to perish, we
confess we are full of diseases [and there is no health in us] nothing but sad
symptoms of death and damnation. We have indeed wilfully brought our selves
into this estate, [but thou O Lord] who see our distress [have mercy upon us]
and let thy bowels yearn upon so wretched a spectacle, forgive that horrid
guilt that does amaze us, for though we deserve no pity, yet thou know we
are most [miserable sinners] like to be eternally condemned by thy Justice if
thou do not pardon us, and certain to perish under thy vengeance whenever
thou beginnest to punish us; but for thy pity and compassion sake [spare thou
them O God that] (knowing they have deserved thy wrath, and fearing before it
comes) do of their own accord [confess their faults] in hopes to find mercy and
a deliverance (if it please thee) from temporal judgments, however from
eternal. Although O Lord our God when thou have removed thy Judgments, unless
thou also take away that security and presumption, impenitence and unbelief,
(the sad remains of our sins) we shall want thy favor still, which is our only
happiness; therefore we further pray [Restore thou] that health and comfort,
that former joy and peace, freedom and strength we had before we did offend:
For we now groan under that deadness which seized on us upon the withdrawings
of thy holy spirit, and do see and lament those sins which did occasion it, we
^ow relent and are of the number of [them that are penitent] and resolve if
thou will cleanse us from the dregs of these corruptions, never to do the like
again. We confess we have no merit to deserve these things, and so no ground in
our selves to expect them, but we hope thou will grant us all these requests
for Pardon, Pe^ce, and Restoration, because they are oh thou God of truth
[according to thy Promises] which thou made so freely out of thy everlasting
love, and resolvest so fully to perform that that thou have openly [declared]
and proclaimed these thy gracious intentions [unto mankind] on purpose that
such poor sinners as we (who are not excepted) might not despair, but come in
upon thy general summons, and lay hold on those comfortable promises which are
made [in Christ Jesus our Lord] who Purchased this favor for us by his death,
and now lives to dispense his benefits to those he dyed for, in whom thou art
reconciled to us; so that we not only hope for a Pardon, but mindful of his
intercession, we beseech thee to give us thy holy Spirit [and grant O most
merciful Father] unto us who deserve nothing on our own account to be so
powerfully assisted by thy grace [for his sake] who is now pleading in heaven
for us [that we] who have earnest desires, and unfeigned purposes to amend,
though we cannot satisfy for the time past [may hereafter] give all diligence
to fulfill the end of Christ's coming, and answer the design of thy forgiving
us, that we may [live a godly] and religious life in observance of all our
duties to thee; that we may love and fear thee, honor and adore thee, believe
in thee, and rely upon thee, long for thee, and delight in thee above all the
world, daily seeking to know thee, praying for thy help, praising thee for thy
Mercies, and waiting in hopes of the eternal enjoyment of thee; that by serving
thee we may be enabled also to lead a [Righteous] life in all justice, honesty
and charity to our Neighbors, hurting no man in thought word or deed, but
ready to relieve and help all to our power, doing ever unto others what we
would have done to our selves. And lastly grant that by thy Divine aid we may
live a Temperate, Chaste, [and a sober life] Mortifying our lusts, moderating
our desires, restraining our appetites, so that we may avoid all carnal
delights that would cloud our reason, engross our thoughts, pollute our bodies
and souls, or unfit us for thy service. Which if thou shall please to do for
us, thy mercy in forgiving our grievous sins, thy pity in delivering us from
apparent mine, and thy grace in strengthening us to live a reformed life, will
not only be our advantage, but turn [to the glory of thy holy name] which shall
be praised by us and all the world for these incomparable testimonies of thy
unspeakable Loving Kindness now and evermore. And in token of our earnest
desire of all these Petitions, we unfeignedly sign them by heartily saying
[Amen] Lord grant it may be so.

SECTION IV. Of the Absolution.
. 1. Of Absolution in General.
SIN does abridge the Soul of its free converse with God, and by the terror of
it binds the soul down with fear, and by it the wicked are reserved in chains
to the judgment of the great day, wherefore it is compared to a bond Acts 8.23.
Graec. (...).
and the sinner is said to be holden in its cords Prove. 5.22.
but since Christ came to loose those bonds Isai. 66.1.
they are now prisoners of hope Zach. 9.12.
, because Jesus has the keys of death and Hell, and he can loose whom he
please, by forgiving, that is absolving and unloosing those bonds. But because
he is now invisible and employed in heaven to intercede for us; before his
departure he appointed his Apostles to supply his place, giving them Commission
Math. 16.19. Chap. 18.18. John 20.22, 23.
by a visible and external application of this power, to support the spirits of
all true Penitents till himself should come to ratify this Absolution: upon
which ground the Bishops and Priests of the whole Christian Church have ever
used to absolve all that truly Repented, and at this day it is retained in our
Church, and is a part of the daily office: which being so useful and necessary
and founded on holy Scripture, needs not any arguments to defend it, but that
the ignorance and prejudice of some makes them take offense at it, and
principally because it has been so much abused by the Papal Church: so that it
may perhaps help the Devotion of many, if we discover the true meaning of
Absolution, and the mistakes of our adversaries on both sides, as well those
who make it nothing, as those who urge it as instar omnium, those who would rob
us of it, as those who would ensnare us by it. 1. The true judgment of the
Church of England concerning Absolution, may best be gathered from the Liturgy;
in which are three forms of Absolving set down. The first declaratory here,
which is a solemn promulgation of pardon by a Commissionated person, repeated
every day when the whole Congregation confess their sins, wherein they are
assured of forgiveness if they Repent and believe, and this is fitted for a
mixed Company of good and bad men, where many hypocrites feign Repentance; but
this Absolution gives no encouragement to such: Only it assures all that there
is a Pardon, and shows on what terms it may be had, so that to those who truly
do repent it is present remission, to those that do not it is a Monitor that
they may repent, it comforts the Godly, and allows not the wicked to presume,
no nor yet to despair; and this being pronounced to all the people, every one
is to take his Portion. The second form is Petitionary in the Communion
Service, where the Minister lays down the Promise, and on that ground, by
virtue of his office, begs of God to make that promise good, and this is more
then the Prayer of another Person, because God having sent the Minister to
assure men of Pardon upon their Faith and Repentance, when he sees such lively
signs of both (as most show at the Lords Table) he may with Authority and
Confidence, Request Almighty God to forgive them, who in all likelihood are
come up to his own terms, as a Captain, when a besieged Town has yielded upon
the Articles sent by the General, may confidently require him to seal them.
Wherefore that holy Matron came to St. Basil and desired from him remission of
her sins, and when he answered, God alone could do that, she answered, I know
that, and therefore I desire the prayers of you his officer be presented to him
for me: and we read in Gods word of this petitionary absolution Acts 8.24.
James 5.15.
which is something more then the former, because at the holy Sacrament the
sight of sin is clearer, and the sense quicker, and men's fear greater, so that
then they need more comfort then to be told there is a Pardon, and they are
then fit to receive more, because there they show more signs of Repentance. The
third is Judiciary in the office for the sick, and therein the Priest having
declared there is a Pardon, and prayed for the sick Person, does by Gods
authority, and as his substitute Quantum in se est Sacramentum reconciliationis
homini impendit.
declare him [whom he believes truly penitent] loosed from the guilt of his
sins by Christ's merit. But this so high and solemn office is not by our Church
prescribed to be performed, but only to a weak or dying man, nor to him but
upon his hearty confession, and being full of fear and sorrow, and when he
shall desire to hear his Pardon from the Priests mouth before he go to Gods
tribunal: in such case out of pity to this dejected soul, and to fortify him
against the agonies of death, upon evidences of true Repentance, this
Absolution may be given; if the Priest be decieved Deus non semper sequitur
judicium Ecclesiae quae per surreptionem and ignorantiam interdu^ judicat. Pet.
Lom. Sent. l. 4.
the man is no worse, and if not, he is the better, by having the comfort of
his Pardon antedated in his need. Now by all this it appears that our Church
neither refuses to give Absolution, after the solemnest manner in some cases,
as some among our selves have fancied, nor yet applies that form to every
Confession, as the Romanists generally do, who never use the two first sorts of
Absolution. To this brief account we shall add these Considerations. 1. As for
those who think the Priest ought not to Absolve any persons, I think them
grossly mistaken: for if so then, why did Christ repeat this Commission so
often, are all those lines wholly insignificant; so you take them to be, who
fancy this was a Personal privilege dying with the Apostles; but the primitive
Church did not so understand them, for it is easy to prove that Absolutions
were used frequently in the three first Centuries, and therefore why may not we
use it now, since penitent sinners need comfort now as well as any did then,
and why should the remedy cease while the disease remains. Whence we conclude
Christ gave the power of these Keys to all the Apostles, and their Successors:
and St. Peter absolved the penitent Jews Acts 2.38.
St. Paul the submissive Corinthians 2 Cor. 2.10. (...).
; and St. John applies it to all Ministers 1 John 5.16.
and why should any be offended at our exercise of it upon a weighty occasion:
if it be objected [ Luke 5.18.] that God alone can forgive; we grant it that
none but God can absolve in his own right; but it is certain that this power may
be communicated to an Angel Exodus 23.20, 21.
or to Men, for the Apostles were men though holy men yet they had it; God
reconciles, but to us (says St. Paul 2 Cor. 5.18.
is committed the Administration of it, he the Lord, we the Stewards of these
Mysteries, nor does this invade Gods prerogative any more, then it would impair
the Kings privilege (of Pardoning condemned malefactors) if one of his
Attendants shall by Royal appointment deliver the pardon sealed to him that
must have the benefit of it: it is therefore no absurdity to say, God pardons
Deus quoque peccata dimi^^it per eos quibus dimittendi tribuit potestatem.
Ambr. in Luc.
when the Minister absolveth according to the Evangelical conditions of Pardon,
and if any be not forgiven upon it by God it is not for want of right in the
Priest, but for want of penitence in the Party, and no doubt in such case if
the Minister judges to the best of his skill, he does his duty; though where
Faith and Repentance is wanting God himself will not forgive, nay where men
grow worse he revokes his own purposes of Mercy, as well as the Ministers
sentence: but we may suppose he will the sooner forgive, when his
commissionated servant has piously and prudently proceeded so far. But
secondly, We do lament to behold this sacred privilege abused by the Roman
Church to serve the ends of Pride, Avarice, and Carnal policy: but first we
dissallow that arrogance of fixing this power to St. Peter's Chair or those
authorized by it: because we know all the Apostles had as much right to absolve
as St. Peter John 20.22, 23.
and from them it descended (say we) to Gods Ministers, not only to (him that
calls himself) Christ's Vicar. Secondly, We detest that accursed Simony which
they use, to sell Pardons, prostituting the top jewel of the Priestly Miter for
filthy lucre; and not only so, but by this means they cherish vice, fill the
world with Atheism and profaneness Crescit enim ibi multitudo peccantium cum
redimendi peccati spes datur, and facile itur ad culpas ubi venalis est
agnoscentiae gratia. Arnob. l. 7.
, disgrace Religion, and ruin many souls who rely upon these broken feeds, I
mean bo^ght pardons. Thirdly, We disclaim that Machivilian Policy, which they
use to advance the Priests in estimation with the Common people; and to give
them opportunity to pry into the secrets of Princes, for under pretense of
exercising a spiritual office they aim at temporal things, and to these ends
they enjoin Auricular Confession, place the Priest in Gods Throne Sacerdos est
judex condemnare vel salvare Bellarm. poen. l. 3. c. 2. Attritio virtute
clavium fit contritio. Cor. Glos. ad Did. 1. de Poen. Negatur remissio iis
quibus noluerunt sacerd^tes remittere. Bellarm. supr.
, as the Audian heretics of Old, and Donatus disciples Optat. Mil. in Parmen.
l. 5.
did: contrary to the Ancient Church of Christ Homines autem in remissionem
peccatorum ministerium suum exhibent non jus alicujus potestaris exercent.
Ambros. de Spir. S. l. 3. c. 19.
nay to their own Opinions Vid. Biol. in 4 Did. 14. Quaes. 2.
and practices -- secundum quod potestas mihi tradita s^ extendit -- and
quantum debeo and possum] in vet. form. Indulg. P. Martin.
in former times, and therefore we may, and must declare our abhorrency of
these evil uses of Absolution, though in that sober, moderate and useful manner
we do perform it, we do not vary from the prime intention of Christ's
commission, and the Practice of Antiquity: Absolution was instituted by Jesus,
and if it have been corrupted by men, we will cast away the Corruptions, not
the Ordinance it self.

. 2. The Analysis or Division of the Absolution.
The Absolution contains these three things, * 1. The Commission, in which is
showed, 1. From whom That God who is 1. Able Almighty God
2. Willing as] the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ and] who would not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live;



2: To whom, Ministers And has given Power and Commandment to his Ministers,
3. For whom, his people To declare and pronounce to his People being Penitent,
4. About what, The Absolution and Remission of their sin.

* 2. The execution of it, by declaring 1. Who gives He viz. Almighty God

2. What is given, viz. Deliverance from the guilt and punishment Pardons and
Absolveth

3. To whom 1. How many all them
2. How qualified 1 that truly Repent, and
2 Unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel:



3. The Application or a direction to Prayer, showing 1. For what we must Pray
Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us 1.] true Repentance 2.] and his holy
Spirit,

2. Why we must Pray, viz. for 1. Present acceptance that those things may
please him which we do at this present, and
2. Future assistance that the rest of our lives hereafter may be pure and
holy, so
3. Endless happiness that at the last we may come to his eternal joy,

3. How we must Pray for them through Jesus Christ our Lord: Amen.




A Practical Discourse on the Absolution.
. 3. ALmighty God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ] There is nothing in the
world more desirable then the peace of a good Conscience, especially to those
who have felt the smart of it when it is disquieted by sin: The Pardon of sin
which removes those terrors, is most welcome news to such, and the Messengers
most acceptable Romans 10.15.
; but he that has been truly humbled, will make a stop either out of Doubting
or Admiration Luke 1.34. Gr. (...) non dubitantis sed admirantis. Grot.
when a Nathan is sent from God to tell him of Pardon 2 Samuel 12.13.
he would wish it might be according to that sweet word: only the greatness of
his desires awaken some little jealousies least the message be too good to be
true; and therefore no wonder if they ask us by what Authority we do this
Matthew. 21.23.
; we answer we are but Deputed servants Heb. 5.4.
in all we do, much more in this transcendent part of our office 2 Cor. 5.8.
, we therefore show our Commission from Almighty God, whose Power none can
Question, it being a Part of his Name Exodus 34.7.
to be the Pardoner of Iniquity, Transg^ession, and Sin of all sorts in
thought, word, and deed. His Laws indeed forbid sin, and his Word decrees
punishment for it, but this does not tie his hands, nor take away his
Privilege Deus cum legem peneret non ademit sibi omnem potestatem: sad habet
ignoscendi licentiam. Lactant.
to forgive, by which he indeed shows himself Almighty Imperatori licet
sententiam revocare reumque mortis absolv^re, and ipsi ignoscere, quia non est
subjectus legibus, qui habet potestatem leges far. August.
[(...)] supreme Lord of all the World, above us and his own Laws, so that he
can dispense with them: he that bound can loose without appeal or control
Revel. 3.7.
we come from him who is the offended Party, and the Judge, who if he please to
forgive can do it so fully, that neither Men nor Devils can call you to a
further account Romans 8.33.
. Now if this term of Almighty prove dreadful as representing an Almighty
justice who remits not without blood [ Heb. 9.22.] Then the poor soul will ask
with Isaac Genesis 22.7, 8.
, where is the Lamb? I answer God has provided; and in the next words, behold
the Lamb of God, Jesus Christ, for your comfort this Almighty is the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him the Father of Mercies, and God of all
comforts 2 Cor. 1.3.
, in that being satisfied with that all-sufficient sacrifice, he can be just
and yet forgive us 1 John 1.9.
, he that sends us, can do it by his supremacy easily, may do it by his
Covenant in Christ Jesus justly, will do it through his love to us in him
certainly. And now (methinks) the Pious man should be transported with ecstasies
of Reverence and Love: Reverence to this Mighty God, Love to this merciful
Father. Behold that glorious God whose Anger thou have provoked, and whose
Commissions for thy final ruin were issuing out to be executed by the
destroying Angel, he is now the Father of Jesus, and for his sake, and at his
entreaty has sealed thy Pardon, and Cancelled that Warrant signed for thy
Execution Ezekiel. 18.4.
, and sent thee a full and free Absolution by the hands of a Messenger of
Peace; What posture is lowly enough to receive it? what love great enough to
return for it? Oh blessed Change! Now thou see what Jesus has done for thee;
look not so much at the hand that brings it, as the Power that sent it, and the
Merits that Purchased it; so shall thy Faith be firm, thy comfort sweet, and
thy peace durable; so that nothing but wilful renewed affronts against him that
sent it, can alter thy Pardon, abate thy joy, or disturb thy happy peace.

. 4. Who desires not the death of a sinner] These are the very words of God
himself [ Ezekiel. 18.23.] and for better confirmation they are again repeated [
Chap. 33. verse. 11.] and are strengthened by an Oath, which he is pleased to
take by his life, that is himself Heb. 6.13.
. Not that he needs such bonds Number. 23.19. (...). Philo. Deus loquitur nobiscum
lingua filiorum hominum. R. R.
to keep him to his promise, but for the confirmation of our Faith, and as a
condescension to our infirmity. Indeed all Gods words are most true, but not
many have an Oath annexed as this has, which he (that will not have us swear
but upon weighty Occasions) would not have added, but because the belief of
this is the Foundation of all Religion, since no man can begin to seek to God
till he believe he delights in Mercy Heb. 11.6.
and is willing to receive those that turn to him; wherefore let us not doubt
so great and necessary a truth confirmed with his Oath O beatos nos quorum
causa Deus jurat! O miserrimos si nec Deo juranti credimus. Tert. de poenit.
, who assures us he wills not the death of a sinner LXX. (...), Vatab. number
desidero aut volo.
with his Will, nor desires it as we do those things we have pleasure in, but
is even forced to it against his inclination. Which gracious nature of God is
here set before the sinners eyes, to discover what probability there is for his
granting out such a Commission, because he that desires not the death of such,
will not withold Mercy, nay he will by the offer of a Pardon prevent it, for
this phrase means, he desires the life, even the everlasting life of all
penitents Negatio mali in S. S. notat accumulationem boni. Job. 3.18. Job.
11.26. vide 1 Timothy 2.4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9.
, and if the assurance of Remission will support them, and give them
encouragement to seek for happiness, they shall not want it. For to do good is
the Nature of God, he does this willingly and readily, without the
consideration of merit or expectation of reward, but Punishments are Extorted
from him Lam. 3.33. Vatab. ex cord: non est proprium Dei affligere and
castigare homines sed alienum.
by men's wickedness, and when he inflicts them, he expostulates with himself
like an indulgent Father about to correct a disobedient child Hos. 11.8. Ezekiel.
33.11.
. So that it is no incredible thing that he should send a Pardon; it is the
device of Satan to picture the Almighty so dreadful, that he may be a terror
to his Supplicants, to make men fear, and hate and fly from him, rather then
serve or love him. But God is love, and especially kind to Men (...) Plato. 1
John 4.8.
who have no reason to dishonor God by dismal apprehensions of him: Remember I
beseech you, the Price paid for you, the Covenant made with you, the Promises
given to you; call to mind how justly, frequently and easily he might have cut
you off, if he had not designed to be Reconciled, and think of the earnestness
of his invitations, continuance of his patience, the arts of his providence,
and all other means used to preserve you; and then blush at your selves for
having ever had hard thoughts of God, or doubting he would not Absolve you:
Whoever has so conceived of God is as bad as an Atheist, for he takes away
Gods Being, and this his goodness, as if like the Scythian Deities Melius esset
nullos credere Deos, quam esse putare, sed sanguine caesorum hominum laetatos
existimare. Plutar. de Superstit. Scyth. and Gallorum.
, he rejoiced in humane Sacrifices, and we our selves had rather be reported
dead then traduced living; but though this unbelief do attempt to dishonor God,
the mischief lights upon it self: for God is glorious still in Mercy, and he
that does not believe it, is void of love, and hope, weak in Faith, full of
fears, and dismal expectations Et faciunt animos humiles formidine divum,
Depressosque premunt ad terram -- Luc.
, and when he that is persuaded of Gods mercy, can rejoice in hearing this
Absolution, the other quarrels with the Messenger, or suspects the Master, and
tortures himself with endless scruples.

. 5. But rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live] We must be
cautious while we endeavor to prevent despair, that we encourage not
presumption, and least any should think when they hear of Gods kindness to
sinners, that he will allow them their sins Romans 6.1.
this is added, to show that he so desires our happiness as the end, that he
desires our holiness as the only way thither, he would have us live, viz. in
Eternal glory, but his desires cannot be accomplished, if we continue in our
wickedness, because then God is obliged in justice to destroy us; therefore he
labors to turn us from those evil ways which end in death, and to bring us
into the safe paths of holiness, which are the beginning of Heaven upon earth,
for the felicity of Heaven is but an addition to, and the perfection of that
begun holiness; in vain therefore does any trust to this Mercy of God who lives
wickedly still: for what Father would spare his offending Child; or what Prince
pardon his rebellious Subject, but upon condition they will not renew the same
Crimes; it is possible indeed to deceive men into Remission, when the offenders
mean not to reform; Caesar was stabbed by Brutus a reconciled enemy, whom he had
adopted for his son; Cicero was beheaded by Popilius whom he had saved from
public justice. But the All-seeing God knows your purposes, and can tell what
you will do hereafter; so that you deceive your selves in hoping for
forgiveness while you remain impenitent; but you cannot deceive him to make him
grant to it; he will not make his mercy the support of your iniquity; and it
would undo (...). Orig. (...). l. 3.
sinners if he should too easily forgive; such mercy before true repentance,
would make sin cheap, and encourage men to do wickedly. Wherefore he sends his
Ambassadors to proclaim his gracious intentions of saving you, least any should
grow desperate with Cain Genesis 4.13.
, and as the hardened traitor, resolve to dye in their rebellion; but these
Ministers of God are first to turn Acts 3. ult.
men from their iniquities, and if they prevail in that, they have a Pardon
ready sealed, and can assure them of life everlasting; and that God who
punishes unwillingly will freely forgive, he must either condemn or save you;
it is most evident he had rather give you life, and will rejoice if you accept
it, and if you miss it, it is because you had rather sin and dye, not because
he had rather you should so perish.

. 6. And has given Power and Commandment to his Ministers] Whoever has a
just right, and absolute Authority, may either exercise it in Person or Depute
others, by communicating to them their Power subordinately, and then these
substitutes have a Ministerial right so far as their Commission extends; a
Temporal Prince can do thus, and choose which of his Subjects he pleases to
act thus in his Name, and by his Authority. Much more may the God of Heaven do
so, and we are taught whom he did choose Matthew. 28. ult.
the Apostles and their successors, who are his Ambassadors 2 Cor. 5.20.
his Ministers and Stewards of divine Mysteries 1 Cor. 4.1.
, nay the Presidents of Souls Heb. 13.17. Gr. (...) 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Gr. (...).
and Levit. 10.
, and the familiar friends of God Ver. 13. (...) propinqui Dei. Fagius in locum.
and the Scripture calls them Angels Jud. 2.1. C. P. ascendit Propheta in
legatione a coram domino.
, because they have the same employment which the Ancients ascribed to Angels
(...). Philo. de Plant. Noe. (...) -- divinorum sunt patefactores -- Traducunt
divina ad nos and nostra vicissim ad divina perducunt Jamblith. de Mysteriis.
, to con^ey Messages between God and Men; to present our Prayers to him, and
bring back to us the news of his Love, and especially to bring this Pardon to
the Penitent, and to proclaim it even to the Impenitent. Wherefore let those
that despise the Priest, or invade his office, or allow no difference between a
Pardon pronounced by him, and an ordinary Person; let them take heed of
contemning those whom God so highly honors, and beware they entrench not upon
the supreme Power of the Sender, in disallowing the subordinate Power of those
that are sent. A Condemned man may be told of a Pardon intended to him, but he
will then believe and humbly rejoice in it, when his Princes herald approaches
with it in his hand: Oh that we would show as much reverence and joy upon the
news of a greater Absolution; that learned Professor may be our pattern Dr.
Reynolds.
, who though he in some things dissented, yet in this of Absolution, he was so
clear, that he desired it on his death bed, and kissed the hands of his Brother
Professor Dr. Holland.
, who at his earnest request had absolved him. But besides their power, as the
Ambassadors of Christ, they have a special charge and command to restore them
that fall Galat. 6.1.
, to comfort the feeble-minded 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
, and under the Allegory of Shepherds Ezekiel. 34.4, etc.
are severely threatened, if by their neglect, the deseased, broken, and
scattered ones of the flock shall perish; and certainly if sinners grow
desperate out of ignorance that they may be forgiven, it will be heavily
charged upon these Shepherds who should have proclaimed this as we do in our
Church every day, to bring such to a hearty Repentance. A power we have
always, but when there is any truly humbled soul, then we have an express
Command to loose them of their bonds.

. 7. To declare and pronounce to his People being Penitent the Absolution and
Remission of their sins] As the Priests of the Law were to pronounce a blessing
upon the offerers Number. 6.24, etc.
so those of the Gospel are to dispense the blessing of Absolution unto the
Penitent, this we declare in this daily form according to the Power which God
has given us, and upon great need and especial occasion, are ready more
solemnly to pronounce it to those that are prepared for it, according to the
particular charge we have received; and in both Cases we can assure those that
truly Repent, that the guilt of their sin shall be absolved, and the Punishment
remitted: But God himself will not forgive any but those that are Penitent, and
therefore his servants cannot, whose power in this is limited and regulated by
his Will. We indeed cannot see the hearts of men, nor infallibly determine of
the sincerity of their repentance; but yet we see external signs of it,
prostration, confession, and in some sighs and tears; wherefore Charity
obliges us to judge favorably 1 Cor. 13.7. Justius est occulta de manifestis
praejudicare, quam manifestis de occultis praedamnare. Tert. Apol.
in dubious Cases, and it is better to commit an error on the right hand of
Mercy, then a horrid crime by cruelty (...). Antiph.
, and good men Credulitas error est magis quam culpa, and quidem in optimi
cujusque mentem facillime irrepit: Cicero.
especially Ministers, out of tenderness should hope the best. The Rabbis say
in the cause of blood, if one have the Casting voice, he must ever take the
merciful side, and give his suffrage for sparing, Fagius; and the same reason
holds here, especially because in a mixed Congregation, many are truly penitent,
and some of them much dejected, and these must not starve for fear others
surfeit, least we destroy the Righteous with the wicked: wherefore we hold out a
daily Pardon to such, but we sufficiently exclude the ungodly, because we
declare it only belongs to the Penitent. But yet though the Minister is to
judge charitably, the people are to examine impartially, because though the
Servant cannot, yet the Master can distinguish between the Penitent and
Impenitent. And though the Minister shall have a reward for his Charity, the
obstinate sinner shall not have the benefit thereof. Let it therefore be your
care to examine your hearts and repent truly, that so you may not only have a
Pardon from Man, but from Almighty God also: do you, as the Jews are taught by
their Masters to do Buxt. Syn. c. 18.
, who are bid to spend the whole Month before the day of Expiation; in
examining their lives and repenting of their sins, especially when the Trumpet
sounds to give warning four days before, and then we can assure you (as they do
them) that on the great day you shall be certainly absolved; he that truly
repents, and then comes humbly to receive this Absolution, shall have God
sealing it to him, and that day shall be his day of Expiation.

. 8. He pardons and absolveth] The unjust Steward for flattery and advantage,
does in his own name by private Compacts, diminish and remit his Masters debts,
without his consent Luke 16.5, 6.
, and those Priests are false Stewards to the God of Heaven, who in the same
manner acquit sinners. But whatever t^^ Priests of the Roman Church may get by
such fraud^i^^ dealings, sure I am God keeps so exact a debt-book, that he will
loose nothing, but the credulous debtor shall suffer by his rash belief, when
he is called over to a new reckoning; but because fidelity is the most
necessary qualification in a Steward 1 Cor. 4.2.
: We do not pretend to do this in our own Names; but being to Publish a Pardon,
we do it in Nomine Domini (not We, but He Pardons) for it is Gods sole
Privilege to forgive sins, and the Scribes and Pharisees called it Blasphemy
for any to pretend to this power Luke 5.21.
. And the Fathers of the Christian Church prove Christ to be God Ergo qui
remittit Deus est quia nemo remittit nisi Deus. Hilar. in Math. Can. 8.
because he forgave sin, which none but God can do (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 15.
, and his son Jesus who is also very God, and purchased this Mercy of
Absolution with his own blood Ille solus peccata dimittit qui pro peccatis
mortuus est. Ambr. Veniam peccatis quae in ipsum commissa sunt, solus potest
ille largiri qui peccata nostra portavit. Cypr.
; wherefore we give to God the things which are Gods, and plainly declare, he
is the Author, we the dispensers only of this favor, and the Witnesses and
Messengers to bring certain news thereof En fili certificate remissa tibi esse
peccata: hujus me testem habebis, Vade in Pace. Fer. in Matthew. 9.
. And this is more comfort to the Penitent, the Supreme Judge, he from whose
Sentence is no Appeal, Pardons thee: fear not the state of Agag whom Saul had
pardoned, but God had not; wherefore Samuel hewed him to pieces in the midst of
his vain hopes, that the bitterness of death was past. He Pardons that has
no equal to examine or approve, much less superior to disanul his actings: Our
absolution is profitable when the Persons are meet to receive it Tunc enim vera
est absolutio Praesidentis, cum aeterni arbitrium sequitur judicis. Greg. hom.
26.
; but the stamp of God will make it current in Heaven it self. The Priests
Pardon is not complete at present, till it be ratified at the last day: But he
Pardons at this present, while we are holding out this Absolution, he that
knows who among you are true believers and really Penitent, is at this instant
sealing your Pardon in Heaven, which makes ours to be valid; we then are but
the Messengers and interpreters; but it is our great Master that Absolveth,
because what we do is Pronounced in his name, dispensed by his Authority,
offered on his Condition, and confirmed by his Approbation.

. 9. All them that truly repent and unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel] These
two acts, Repentance and Faith, are by Christ Mark. 1.15.
and his Apostles Act. 20.21.
made the Conditions of all the Gospel promises; and without them no Absolution
can be had: those that have these no man can condemn, but without these no man
can acquit, it was therefore a great arrogance in those Ecclesiastics in St.
Hieroms time, who imagined they could save or destroy at pleasure -- ut vel
damnent innocents vel solvere se noxios arbitrantur Hierom. Com in. Matthew. l.
3. Nec Angelus nec Archangelus potest: nec Dominus ipse, si peccaverimus, in
poenitentiam deferentibus non relaxat Ambros. Epist. 28. ad Theodos.
and it is as great a vanity in any to believe a Servant acting contrary to his
Masters known Will, because it will be insignificant; wherefore if any by
hypocrisy shall think to surprise an Absolution; Or if he that dispenses an
act by prejudice or corruption, you must know it is he must ratify the Pardon
who can see whether these qualifications are in him that receives it or no, and
though we hold out this Act of a Grace to all, yet our Master pardons none but
such as do repent truly and believe unfeignedly, and how many soever do so, if
they have been the worst of sinners, they shall every one be forgiven; Let us
then take care to come: 1. With an h^mble, lowly, penitent and obedient heart,
sorrowing and being ashamed, fearing exceedingly, confessing humbly, and
resolving heartily against all sin, let us beware that a hard heart, and a
customary confession, and hypocritical pretenses do not ruin our hopes, and
blast our desires for he only Pardons the real Penitent. 2. Let us bring with
us an unfeigned Faith in his Gospel, trusting in the assurances of his
Promises, and persuading our selves of the necessity and excellence of his
laws, and confirming our souls in the expectations of his rewards, and this
Faith unfeigned 1 Timothy 1.5. 2 Timothy 1 5.
will open the door of Mercy; but for that bold challenge which some make to
the promises, and the benefits of the Gospel, while they are void of hatred to
sin or love to God, it is only feigned to stifle the accusations of Conscience,
and ward off the threats of the Law, and to give the man liberty to sin, and
God will never accept such to remission, but discover these men had no other
ground for their confidence, but only because they had persuaded themselves of
a falsehood: Remember you come to him (that searches the heart) for a Pardon,
and strive that your Repentance may be true, and Faith cordial and sound, as
you hope for mercy from him; and learn by this order first to repent of your
former evil ways, before you entertain too particular confidences of Gods love
and your interest in Jesus; but if you have truly repented, the more firmly you
believe, the greater will be Gods glory, and the sweeter your comfort, and the
speedier will your Absolution be confirmed. Though your iniquities are heinous
and innumerable, if upon the sight you have had of them, you do condemn your
self, with real purposes of amendment, and notwithstanding your unworthiness,
if you can trust to the Merits of Jesus, and believe all the gracious Promises
of the Gospel shall be fulfilled to you: I doubt not to assure this your
Repentance and Faith, shall pass the test of God himself, and your desires
shall be satisfied in his mercy.

. 10. Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true Repentance and his holy
Spirit] The whole duty of a Minister consists in instruction, and exhortation
Acts 2.40. Gr. (...).
the first to convince the understanding, the second to engage the affections;
both which parts of his Office the Priest does here exercise, for hitherto he
has testified there is Remission to be obtained, and now he exhorts to seek
for it; for in this Section we are directed how to obtain, in the following we
are encouraged by the Benefits to be had thereby; now this present exhortation
is a conclusion inferred from all the former parts of this Absolution, which
are in this word [wherefore] urged as so many motives to quicken our addresses,
viz. 1. Since God who is full of power and mercy would not the death of us
sinners, but desires we may live; therefore we may cheerfully come to him for
help, who will be as well pleased with the opportunity of giving, as we with
the mercy of receiving, 2. He has Commissionated Ministers, to be the Heralds
of his willingness to forgive, wherefore let us in answer to this gracious
Proclamation, go in and submit to him, who though he be the offended Party,
first sent to us to be reconciled. 3. He has assured us he will Absolve none
without true Repentance, wherefore let us beg of him, who requires this
Condition, to give what he requires Domine da quod jubes, and jube quod vis: D.
Augustine.
upon all these considerations let us beseech, etc. if we now make not our
applications, it will be a despising his love, slighting his Message, and
sending back his servants empty: oh let us earnestly pray for true Penitence,
we are encouraged by his gracious nature, engaged by his courteous offer of a
treaty, urged by necessity, as being not like to be forgiven without it:
further we must ask these favors of him from whom comes every good and perfect
gift James 1.17.
, for if we consider what we ask, we shall easily discern they must not be
sought any where else: Repentance, is a change of the notions of the mind, the
choices of the will, the actings of the affections and passions, enduring new
joys and sorrows, hopes and fears, desires and aversations: so that it is a
kind of new Creation Ephesians. 4.24. (...).
and he alone that brought life out of death, and light out of darkness, can
bring us from the death of sin, and darkness of iniquity, to the life and light
of holiness, and Piety Nulla sine Deo meus bona: Seneca.
: we can fall down by our own weight, but we cannot rise out of this narrow Pit
without help, nay we sink lower, for our hearts are as backward to repent as
forward to sin, and by frequent commissions we love sin more, and are more loath
to part with it; yesterday we mistook by accident, to day we desire to be again
in such circumstances, to morrow we shall run into them -- viresque acquirit
eundo.
, so that we must not trust in our own hearts Prove. 28.1.
but seek repentance from God, and his holy Spirit: which being both so
necessary for us, and of so incomparable advantage to us, let us humbly beg
this on our knees, beseeching God to grant them to us, which word grant Acts
11.18.
denotes a free act of grace from a Prince to his Subject, though few offending
Subjects can have a Pardon granted out upon their Repentance, yet God deals so
with us, and has not only promised to forgive us when we do repent John 6.37.
, but to give us grace that we may repent Acts 5.31.
, and if we have his gracious assistance, no doubt we shall repent truly, and
not fall into Ahabs hypocrisy, Isreal's treachery, Psalm. 78.34.
nor Judas his despair* Oh let us pray for his holy spirit of grace which will
open our eyes to see our sirs, and soften our hearts to mourn for them, and
strengthen our purposes to amend them; and this will be a true Repentance,
which contains in it an unfeigned Faith, (which is here understood though not
expressed) for Faith and true Repentance are so inseparably joined, that in
Scripture Repentance is put for them both, in many places Matthew. 4.17. compared
with Mark. 1.15.
because he that is truly humbled and really purposed to amend, does ever trust
in Gods mercy; or else it may be understood when we pray for his holy Spirit,
we mean, to produce in us all graces, especially Faith, which is that gracious
fruit of the Spirit of Adoption Gal. 4.16.
for by it we call God Father, and as such rely on him. It Is certain, if we can
prevail with God for his holy Spirit, it will bring both Faith and all Graces
with it, and will assist us to do good, when Repentance has taken us off from
our evil courses, this will keep out those lusts which Repentance began to
exclude; but observe Repentance goes first, for you must not expect this holy
Dove will abide in impure places Pietas inducit Spiritum Sanctum. R. R.

-- ad Candida tecta columbae.


, when the unclean Spirit expects his house to be swept and garnished Matthew.
12.44.
: we may then hope to have our Prayers for Gods holy Spirit heard, when
Repentance has prepared his lodgings in our hearts.

. 11. That those things may please him which we do at this present] Having thus
taught you who to pray to, and what to pray for, it remains that we show the
great advantages of having your Prayers heard, that so you may not put up so
weighty a request without such hearty desires and zealous affections as are
suitable to it: for this one Petition granted will procure you: 1. Present
acceptance, 2. Future assistance, 3. Endless happiness; true Repentance and
Gods holy Spirit will assure all this to you, but if you pray not so devoutly
and earnestly as to obtain them; your Absolution must be cancelled, your
services rejected, your souls continue polluted here, and be condemned to
endless misery hereafter, so that we hope your own Interest will quicken you
most passionately to beg for these: to which purpose consider them severally.
1. If your Confession, Prayers, and Endeavors be such as can prevail with God
to give you a true Repentance, and his holy Spirit, then all the duties now
performed shall be acceptable, particularly and in the first place, that which
we Ministers are doing, viz. pronouncing the Absolution; this shall be
confirmed by God, and he will assent to it, so that your Pardon shall be
enrolled in Heaven, and then all other duties that we and you do, shall be
pleasing to God and beneficial to you; our mutual and common Prayers shall be
answered, our praises accepted, our hearing shall be converting and
salutiferous, our Communicating an infallible conveyance, and irrevocable seal
of Grace and peace. But without Repentance all our prayers and praises and all
we do See of this at large before in Sect. 2.
shall be rejected as a mocking of God; without his holy spirit; also all our
observances are harsh and unpleasing, flat and dull in Gods account, it is this
good Spirit that makes our hearts and tongues agree, this inlightens our minds
to see our wants, quickens our memory to remember them, touches our hearts
with a sense of them, confirms our Faith that God can supply us, and enlarges
our affections to beg the relief of them. In a word, this Spirit of God helps
us to ask, inclines him to give, and fits us to receive all we pray for; so
that God is not pleased when we worship him without it Gal. 4.6. John 4.24.
Romans 8.26.
, and denies nothing when we have it: so that our Savior accounts (...) Luc.
11.13. Is. (...). Matthew. 7.11.
it the same to pray for the holy spirit, and all good things which spring from
it. And now who would not earnestly beseech for such a true Repentance as might
invite this Holy Spirit into their hearts, which will be the seal of their
Pardon, and make all they do wellpleasing to God; to please him is the
Christians highest aim; it was David's prayer Psalm. 19.14.
and the greatest blessing the Priest could wish Numb. 6.24, 25, 26. Psalm.
20.3, 4.
that Almighty God might accept them. Poor Socrates after many a tedious step
in a virtuous but afflicted state An diis placent quae feci nescio, hoc autem
solum scio me sedulo haec egisse ut placerent.
, could not tell whether he had given content to his Deities or no: but whoever
of you have the grace of Repentance and the holy spirit, are not in those
uncertainties: but have Enochs Testimony Heb. 11.5. that you do please God.

. 12. And that the rest of our lives hereafter may be pure and holy] this is
the second benefit and motive earnestly to pray for these things, for so you
shall not only be welcomed at present with a gracious smile, but all your lives
long be reputed as the friends of God, and by his help shall be preserved as
pure as a true Repentance has made you, and as holy as those are who are under
the Guard of the Spirit of holiness: Pray therefore with all your soul for a
true Repentance, or else as soon as your soul is washed it will return to its
impure wallowings, and all your labor is in vain hitherto 2 Pet. 2.22. laterem
lavare.
for a feigned repentance, will send Absalom away for a while: but upon the
next Enterview, will hurry us with more passion into his embraces; whereas the
deep wounds of the true penitent make sin hateful to him while he lives, and he
that gets on a white garment with so much difficulty, will not easily sully it
but carefully preserve it pure as his tears have made it. And upon the same
ground be very pressing for the holy spirit. Which if you can obtain, you shall
not only be preserved from the spots of sin, but shall shine with the luster of
a holy life; for our goodness is apt to vanish Hos. 6.4.
we are wavering and soon weary, unless we have that establishing spirit Psalm.
51.14.
David prays for, and then all duties will be easy, and we shall be strong,
for love and the sense of his assistance will carry us cheerfully through them
all, so as to be our pleasure, not burden; and when we are arrived to this,
nothing can bribe us to forsake them: Oh happy soul that is thus begun to be
restored to that purity and holiness which are part of Gods Image Ephesians. 4.24.
, and parcels of the Divine Perfections; blessed is he that is so far advanced,
that God is not like to forsake him, because he has made him holy, pure, and a
fit temple for the inhabitation of his spirit, nor is he likely ever to forsake
that God, whose mercy has saved him, whose grace does refresh him, whose ways
please him, and his glorious bounty which faith discovers, does still allure
him to press forward to nearer unions and unseparable connexions; no state
under the Sun is to be longed and wished for like this, which a true
Repentance, and Gods holy Spirit brings us to.

. 13. So that at the last we may come to his eternal joy through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.] There is nothing more desirable then the sweet peace of a good
Conscience, but only that which is the end and perfection thereof, and that is
that happiness which is infinite and endless, which the Scripture calls an
eternal and everlasting joy Isai. 35.10. Chap. 61.7. and 51.11.
which neither men nor devils can lessen or interrupt, much less put a period
to it: And if God give us true Repentance, it will preserve us from the sins
which forfeit this, and if he add his holy spirit, it will safely lead us into
those paths of righteousness which lead thither, where we can desire no more,
because we have all that is desirable. There are no cares to disturb, no fears
to allay nor sorrows to abate those ravishments of delight for ever: there is
joy which far surpasses the half-sad and mixed pleasures which this world
has, being nothing else but pure joy, which pleases by its own excellence,
and by having no fears nor possibility of defailance in degree or continuance;
we taste something of it in the charming calm of a strong faith, and a quiet
conscience, with undeceived expectations of Gods love; but this is but the
land-skip of our heavenly Canaan, which Jesus has purchased for us and God the
Father will grant unto us, and the most holy Spirit will be our guide thither
Psalm. 51.14. LXX. (...).
, the whole glorious Trinity is concerned for us, and will cooperate with us,
to put us into possession of them, and then rejoice over us to all eternity.
The Father who forgave us, the Son who dyed for us, and the Blessed Spirit who
wrought effectually in us, will Communicate this their joy with us and to us
for ever. And lastly, to show that you thankfully follow these Directions of
the Ministers, and have in your own heart and thoughts most devoutly petitioned
God for a true Repentance, and his holy Spirit (by means whereof all these
incomparable benefits may redound to you) in testimony I say hereof, you sum up
all in a Petitionary Amen, desiring it may be so, and assenting also to the
truth of all this: It is most true, and therefore oh so be it unto you. Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Absolution.
BE it known to every one of you that has confessed his sins with an humble,
lowly, Penitent and obedient heart, that [Almighty God] Supreme King of Heaven
and Earth, whose Royal Prerogative it is fully to acquit or finally to condemn,
being [the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ] who assumed our nature and suffered
for our sins, this great God (by his Merits) is of an angry Judge become a
tender Father, and has solemnly sworn he is one [who desires not] neither
takes pleasure in [the death] or damnation [of a sinner] though never so
justly deserving it [but rather] chooses to have opportunity to show mercy, and
therefore he uses all possible means [that he may turn from his wickedness]
which will bring the sinner into condemnation, that by leaving these paths of
death, he might be forgiven [and live] in holiness and comfort here, and in
everlasting glory hereafter. [And] to confirm this his good will, and keep
penitent sinners from despair, he [hath given] and in holy Scripture
communicated [Power] by virtue of his Supreme Authority [and Commandment] for
the exercise of this power, for when poor sinners need comfort he has given
special charge [to his Ministers] lawfully chosen by himself (and those he
appoints) to be his Ambassadors, [to declare] at all times his willingness to
pardon all [and pronounce] Absolution more particularly and plainly (to those
that by returning and obedience do own him even) [to his People being Penitent]
for all their offenses, as you now from your hearts seem to be: Know ye
therefore that we are Authorized in Gods name to bring to such the message of
[the Absolution] from the guilt [and Remission] of the punishment [of their
sins.] And by virtue of the power, and in obedience to the Command given to us
by God, we do now proclaim, that not we, but [He Pardoneth] that can do it by
his own right [and Absoldeth] both from guilt and Punishment [all them] be they
never so many, and their sins never so great, that are qualified for a Pardon,
by those conditions which are by him required, even them [that truly Repent]
and heartily grieve for all their evil ways, longing to be delivered from them,
and seriously purposing to amend them; these shall never be condemned, if they
will trust in his mercy [and Unfeignedly believe] and are firmly persuaded of
the excellency of the precepts, and the truth of the Promises of [his holy
Gospel] and if they particularly accept this message of his Love therein
manifested [wherefore] since God is so able and willing to pardon, and has
sent us his Ministers to offer a Pardon if you repent and believe, oh let us
not loose the benefit of so gracious an offer, but [let us] all, since all are
sinners, go together to the Throne of grace upon this courteous summons, and
[beseech him] earnestly, who sent it to us of his favor and bounty [to grant
us true Repentance] such as he can work in us, and such as he will accept, so
as to forgive us thereupon, and having thereby cleansed us from bypast sins,
let us most heartily beg the help of his grace [and his holy Spirit,] to
purify our hearts, strengthen our Faith, and bless our endeavors of
reformation, so constantly that we may have all our desires accomplished; which
petition if God shall grant the blessed event will be [that those things] even
all the duties which you shall now perform, and the Absolution now pronounced,
which is the office of the Minister [may please him] so as that he hear your
Prayers, and seal your Pardon, and bless all [which we do at this present] when
he has cleansed us from iniquity and quickened us by his spirit, the fruit
shall be present acceptance [and that the rest of our lives hereafter] which
formerly have been so sinful [may be pure] from wickedness, sanctified and
righteous [and holy] full of all well-pleasing, and that we may persevere all
our days in this happy course [so that at the last] when Death puts an end to
the tedious sorrows, and short contents of this mortal life [we may come to his
eternal joy] that is unconceivable and endless, without mixture or diminution,
and which is so much above our deserts that we could not hope ever to obtain it
but [through Jesus Christ our Lord] who by his Death purchased this Pardon, by
his intercession prevails for grace, and at his Ascension took possession of
this eternal joy for all that are truly Absolved; to which we all say [Amen.]
Lord be it so unto us. Amen.

SECTION V. Of the Lords Prayer.
Of the Lords Prayer in General.
. 1. WHat has hitherto been performed by the Church, was rather a preparation
to Prayer then Prayer it self. For this Confession and Absolution answers to
the Heathen Washings, and those the Jews used before they approached their
altars: So that we may say the first place is by us assigned to the first and
chiefest of all Prayers, which should have stood in the front of all; but only
till we had repented of our disobedience, we ought not to call God Father, and
till we have his Pardon, we cannot with comfort call him so. He that has been
in Rebellion, must have his offense forgiven before he presume to petition for
acts of grace, so we being praedisposed by Confession and Absolution, begin
with this Prayer. And sure this deserves to be first, since it was made by
Jesus, and endited by his divine spirit, to be a guide to, and a part of our
daily Devotions Luc. 11.1. (...) Math. 6.9. (...). vid. LXX. Numb. 6.23. (...)
Debet benedictio ista proferri lingua sancta, cum nomine Dei proprio. Fagius in
loc.
to be used as often as we need our daily bread, saying these words or praying in
this manner, which is all one, for that form of blessing ( Number. 6.23.) the Jews
are prescribed to use in that manner, who yet keep both words (and language) in
the Pronunciation; this Prayer Christ had delivered in his first Sermon Matthew.
6. but it seems his Disciples did not then understand it for a form See modo
Diatrib. on Matthew. 6.9.
so that the next year they requested him for a Form, such as the Doctors among
them were wont to give their Scholars, as a Badge of their Relation to such a
Master; and then Luke 11.1. our Lord prescribed this set Form, which for words
and phrases he took Tam long abfuit Dominus Ecclesiae ab omni affectatione non
necessariae novitatis. Grotius.
out of the Jewish forms with little variation Vid. Capelli not. in. Crit. Sacr.
to show how far he was from all affectation of novelty in Devotion: and
certainly we may discern in it a lively resemblance of its Author, who was the
highest and lowest, the greatest and least, God and Man: The Comprehensiveness
of it is the admiration of the wisest Quantum substringitur verbis, tantum
diffunditur sensibus. Tert.
the plainess suiting still the meanest capacity, for it is so clear that all
may understand it, so short that any may learn it, so full as to take in all
our wants, and so exact as to show us what we should be Vnusquisque nostrum sic
discat orare, and de orationis lege qualis esse debeat noscere. Cypr. de Orat.
as well as what we should ask, and is the Epitome Breviarium Evangelii.
Tertul. de Orat.
of the Gospel. Herein we glorify God in desiring his honor may be made
manifest, and are mindful of our selves in praying for all Graces, Reverence
and Fear, Sanctification and Purity, Submission and Obedience active and
passive, Faith and Love, Diligence and Zeal, Constancy and Perseverance; and
for our Bodies we beg, Food and Raiment, Health and Strength, Riches and
Friends, a good Name and a long Life, so far as they are good for us: We look
back to our sins past and humbly crave Remission, we look forward, first to our
duty engaging our selves in purposes of holy Charity, and then to our danger,
earnestly entreating his preventing grace and pity, may preserve us from sin
and punishment, the snares of men and devils: finally we look upwards in an
humble acknowledgment of his goodness and greatness, and just deservings of all
honor and glory from us and all the World. In this one Form as we represent
all our own wants, so we exercise all graces Quot simul expunguntur officia?
Dei honor in patre, fidei testimonium in nomine, oblatio obsequii in voluntate,
commemoratio spei in regno, petitio vitae in pane, exomologesis debito^um in
deprecatione, sollicitudo tentationum in postulatiene tutelae. Tertul. de Orat.
here is our belief of his goodness, our persuasion of his love, our desire
after his holiness, our subjection to his Authority, and hope of his Kingdom;
our willingness to suffer; and readiness to do his will; here we declare our
dependence on his Providence; and contentedness with his dispensations, our
Penitence for former sins, and resolutions of amendment; our sense of our own
frailty, and our trust in his mercy and grace, and all this ending with acts of
Faith and Love, joy and praise, Devotion and Adoration: So that this Divine
Form is fitted for all times, and all places; and all persons. The ignorant
must use it because he may understand it, the knowi^g that they may understand
it better, the sinner that he may be holy, the holy man least he become a
sinner, the rich prays thus for the sanctification of his gifts, the poor for
the supply of his wants, in private it extends to particular needs, in public
it unites us all into one soul, and makes us equally desire Non singulis
privatam precem mandavit, sed Oratione communi and concordi prece pro omnibus
jussit orare. Cypr. Epist. 8.
others good with our own, being indicted in a public style, so that though it
be useful every where, yet it is especially fitted for the Assemblies of the
Church, where all Antiquity used it as the Salt of all other offices Sat omnium
divinorum o^^ctorum^
and we in Imitation of them: for our Church prescribes it after the Absolution
for acceptance, after the word of God read, and the recital of the Creed, for
assistance in holiness, and confirmation in Faith, in the Letany for
deliverance from evil, in the Communion Service to dispose us for a penitent
hearing of the Laws of God, never too often, nor never superfluously (as you
may observe afterward) for how can we too often join his most perfect Prayer
to ours that are so imperfect, since by him both we and our prayers are alone
made acceptable. Those that presented Petitions to the Roman Emperors, drew
them up by the direction of some judicious Lawer: but we have this Sacred Form
from the wonderful Counselor, who came out of the Bosom of God, and knew his
treasures as well as our wants, he best could inform us what was fit for us to
ask, and what most likely for him to grant; he was to go to Heaven to be our
Advocate there, and he has taught us this, that there may be a Harmony between
our requests and his. What zeal and height of devout affections are sufficient
to offer up this Prayer with, drawn up by the great Master of Requests, and
orderer of all intercourse between God and Man? how sure is this of acceptance
Animata suo privilegio ascendit coelum, commendans patri, quae filius docuit.
Tertull.
which is stamped with his Image, signed with his hand, and sent in his name,
his Power will make it prevalent, and Gods love to his dear Son most acceptable
Dum prece and Oratione quam filius docuit, ad patrem loquitur facilius
audiamur. Cypr.
for what can pierce the ears sooner, or melt the heart of a tender Father more
readily, then the voice of his only and Beloved Son, use it therefore
Reverently and heartily and doubt not to be heard.

The Division of the Lords Prayer.
The Lords Prayer has three Parts, 1. The Preface, or Compellation 2. The six
Petitions, which concern Expressing, 1. Charity to Men Our
2. Faith in God Father
3. Fear of God which art in Heaven,

Either Gods Glory, by 1. The Reverence of his Attributes hallowed be thy Name,
2. The Exercise of his Authority thy Kingdom come,
3. The fulfilling of his Will, thy Will be done in earth as it is in Heaven,

Or our own good, in 1. Temporal supplies give us this day our daily bread,
2. Remission of sins past and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them
that trespass against us,
3. Deliverance for the future, from Sin and lead us not into temptation
Punishment but deliver us from evil,


Being an acknowledgement of God 1. As Supreme for thine is the Kingdom,
2. As Omnipotent the Power,
3. As Gracious and the Glory,
4. As Eternal for ever and ever, Amen.


3. The Conclusion or Doxology


A Practical Discourse on the Lords Prayer.
. 2. OUr Father which art in Heaven] This was the usual Preface to the Jewish
Forms of Prayer who styled God their Father which was in heaven Pater noster
qui es in coelis fac nobis gra iam. Sed. Tephil. Lusitan. Deus noster qui in
coelo unicus es: in lib. Musar.
. But since they owned not God the Son, they could not justly call God Father,
and being in bondage to the Law Galat. 4.6. Servis and ^ancillis non permissum
Abba vel Imma^ Dominis suis dicere. in Gem.
they were Servants rather then Sons, and such (by their own rule) might not
call their Masters by the name of Father. This Appellation suiteth us better
who are by Jesus adopted to be the Sons of God, and by his Spirit who obtained
that privilege, we are taught to cry Abba Father Gal. 4.6.
, he that is the eternal Son of God himself, who has alone right to this Name,
has put the words in our mouths: and what fitter words to begin our Prayers
then these two which include the principal requisites of Prayer, Faith and
Charity, no man can call God his Father but by Faith, and he must be in Charity
that can add Our Father, which cannot be said devoutly but by him that is free
from wrath to man, or doubting 2 Timothy 2.8.
: It Is certain God is our Father, for he has created us after his own Image,
and begotten us again by the washing of Regeneration, he feeds and cloths us,
preserves and provides for us; he teaches us what is right, and corrects us
when we do amiss, and Finally he has done like a Father in providing an
eternal inheritance for us 2 Cor. 12.14.
even such as men make for their Children 2 Samuel 7.19. G. P. Talis enim est
provisio humana.
. He has ever expressed a Fatherly love to us, and care of us, and tenderness
toward us; and this Jesus obliges us to acknowledge Isai. 63.16.
that while we call him Father we may be grateful to him, and have the
affections of Children upon us when we come to him in our needs, trusting in
his mercy, persuaded of his All Sufficiency, rejoicing in hope, and filled with
love and joy and comfortable expectations, because we are going to our Father:
and least if we were uncharitable to our Brethren, that unlikeness to God
should confute our calling him Father Matthew. 5.45. Psalm. 145.9.
who is loving to every man, we must by adding [Our] show a universal charity
to all the world, not arrogantly confining this privilege to our selves, and
out of pride or passion excluding others from it; but we must comprehend all
men within it as our brethren, sons of the same Father, making a Common Prayer
to the Common Father of all mankind; not looking sordidly to our selves alone,
but as members of the same Mistical body 1 Cor. 12.25.
having a feeling of each others wants, and desiring the Preservation of the
whole, rather then our private satisfactions; we must therefore when we begin
this Prayer lay aside all malice and envy, and with loving hearts, joined
hands, and united voices, address our selves, as so many deer Brothers and
Sisters, to Our Father, so shall we cause the Angels to Sing Ecce quam bonum
Psalm. 133.1.
how pleasant a thing it is: and no Music will be more pleasing in the ears of
our heavenly Father. But many Children have gone to their earthly Parents in
their needs, and found no relief, where they had no means to help, and could no
otherwise know the love of their deer Fathers, then by a sigh or a tear. Oh my
poor Child, I cannot help thee; whereas we need not fear such Returns, for our
Father reigns in Heaven, the Center of all happiness; so that he can do what he
pleases Psalm. 115.3.
, for Omnipotence and All Sufficiency are annexed inseparably to that Royal
Throne. Our Lord Jesus presents us with the seat of his glory, to mind us to
acknowledge his Dominion and Power, and to adore his Infiniteness and
Immensity; for he whom we pray to has all things under him, to be ordered by
his will, and all Creatures, even millions of blessed Angels, to execute his
Commands, and this should heighten our minds to ask things more excellent then
the perishing vanities of this world; this remembrance that he is in Heaven
should strengthen our Faith in his Power and Mercy, for what can we his
Children want on Earth, who have a Father in Heaven that can do all things, and
who is so full of goodness that he is not moved by all his glory to despise us,
but whatever advantages he has, his love makes them all ours, and he is in
Heaven now, but he intends to bring us thither to him, yet while we are upon
Earth we must approach with lowly addresses, and all reverence; because we come
before him who is in Heaven, adored by the blessed Angels with prostrations,
and veiled faces.

. 3. Hallowed be thy Name] The glory of God which is the principal end of our
Creation, ought to be the first in our desires, and we are doubly obliged to
desire the honor of his name, both because he deserves it upon the account of
his glorious Perfections, so that all the Earth is bound to adore the Name of
him that dwells in Heaven, and also because he is our Father Nullum probrum
intollerabilius ignominia parentum: Quis non commotus est -- etc. Grot. ex
Eurip. -- (...).
; and if we so much desire the honor of our Natural Fathers, that no good
Child can endure to hear them reproached, how much more should we long after
our Heavenly Fathers glory, and pray that none might abuse his sacred Name,
which if we be his true Sons will be unsufferable to us; how can we but desire
it may be treated by us and all men at all times, with that reverence and
Religious respect that befits so great a Majesty, who is separated from this
lower World as far as Heaven is above the Earth, and therefore his Name is to
be esteemed as no common thing, but separated and set apart, which is the
meaning Levit. 20.24. Deuteronomy. 26.28.19. Sanctificatio est seperatio per modum
excellentiae. Rab. D. Kimhi in Isai. 56.2.
of hallowing of it, the regarding it as a thing truly excellent, and so it is
in it self so holy that it cannot be profaned by Men nor Devils, so as to loose
any part of its essential purity, any more then the Suns illustrious beams are
polluted with the evaporations of a filthy dunghill; the blasphemies of hell it
self cannot prejudice Gods name, any more then the barkings of Dogs and howling
of evening Wolves do to the splendour of the Moons shining: and for this cause
it were needless to pray that Gods name might either be or remain holy: but
only, that being holy in it self, it may by us and all men be looked on as
infinitely above us, and used with reverence, and an awful regard. Now this
Name of his is himself and all that is his, it is himself as he can be known
Romans 1.19. Gr. (...).
by us, for it is his Attributes, and all that his name is called upon, all
that represents him to us, or relates to him, his Works, his Worship, his
Sabbaths, his Vicegerents and Officers in Church and State, and all that is
given to him or his; and since we cannot behold Gods Essence which is
incomprehensible, our Reverence to him will appear by our respect to his Name,
which is all we have of him with us here on Earth. Then his name is hallowed by
us, and all people, when we love his Goodness, trust in his Mercy, believe his
Promises, fear his Threatenings, acknowledge his Wisdom, and adore his Power,
and live answerable to his Attributes. When we praise him for his works, speak
well of all he does, and worship him with Humility and Faith, true affections
and hearty desires: when we keep his Sabbaths, obey Kings (his substitutes)
respect Ministers (his messengers) love his people, and inviolably preserve all
consecrated things; and finally, when we demean our selves toward God and all
that is his as may suit so great a Majesty, and so gracious a Father: and
further, we must be careful, that since we are called by the name of Christ,
that we do not profane that holy name 2 Timothy 2.19.
by wicked lives, but be moved to strive to show our Reverence and admiration
of so holy a Name Sanctificetur nomen tuum per opera nostra -- quocunque
tempore facimus quod bonum and rectum est Sanctificamus nomen ejus magnum.
Drus. ex lib. Musar. in Matthew. 6. (...). Cyril. Alex.
by becoming holy, and seperating from all sin, as his name is separated from
all pollution; it becomes us who are honored with his name in whatever we do
or speak or think, to be careful that (by defiling and abusing our selves) we
cast not dishonor on him that has condescended to such a relation. Oh let us
beware we do nothing wilfully to occasion Religion to be slandered by the
enemies thereof, for otherwise our lives will be a contradiction to our Prayers.

: 4. Thy Kingdom come] It is the Observation of every good man, that although
God is and ever shall be a glorious King Psalm. 10.16. and Psalm. 29.10. in
deluvium Deus sedit, h. e. Perditis omnibus creaturis, tamen regnum ejus manet.
R.R.
whatever become of this lower world; yet the devils hate him, and wicked men
rebel against him, and their own corruptions will not fully submit to him, and
all this while the great King of Kings seems to connive at all, seldom
exercising his power to subdue, or his justice to punish and destroy his
enemies, so that the whole world abounds with Impiety and Confusion: and then
what wonder if the Children of God, who know their Fathers Power and goodness,
do earnestly desire he may more visibly reign amongst men, for his glory, and
their own good in particular, and the benefit of all the World, for his
Kingdom is Regimen Paternum, and consequently our interest Illi deputamus quod
ab illo expectamus. Tertul.
and our happiness and therefore our Prayer; for when our Heavenly Father does
thus exercise his Authority, then his faithful servants shall be secured from
their enemies, supplied in all their needs and satisfied in all their desires.
Now the Kingdom of God or Heaven Vide Supra Chapter p. 1.. 6.
signifies either his Kingdom of Grace or that of Glory. His Kingdom of Grace
we pray may come in a double sense: 1. By an outward profession, viz. That the
Gospel may be embraced in all the world, even there where now they are slaves
to the Devil and their own lusts, who are servants to the Prince of darkness
Ephesians. 2.2.
doing his work, observing his Laws, and paying him Tribute by Sacrifices as
their Liege Lord, we pray that these poor Souls may be Converted, believe, and
be Baptized, renouncing their old Master, and professing themselves Subjects of
Jesus and of the great King of all the World. 2. We pray his Kingdom of grace
may come by a real subjection, where his Soveraignity is owned; because without
this an outward possession is but like the mockery of the cruel Jews, who
saluted him (hail King) and then smote him on the face, and so does every
professed Christian that lives wickedly. Wherefore we pray; That his Kingdom
may be within us as well as among us Luke 17.21.
and whereas now his Laws are broken, his Messengers despised, his People
abused, and his Enemies cherished; that by the power of his grace in all our
hearts, our unruly passions may be tamed, our rebellious lusts mortified, and
our naughty desires extinguished; till we all own his Authority, fear his
displeasure, and obey his Edicts as we ought to do; and if any be so obstinate
as still to refuse him for their King Luke 19.14.
we pray that our Lord Jesus would exercise his royal power in punishing all
such that others may see and fear Psalm. 58. ult.
, and every good man desires for himself this righteous Prince Psalm. 45.6.
may subdue every opposing thought in his heart 2 Cor. 10.5.
and may have the absolute command over all the members of his body and
faculties of his soul; and then he hopes his corruption will be restrained, his
graces quickened, and all his inward man in much better order, he knows if
Christ rule in his heart he shall have more freedom, comfort and peace, then
ever he had before. Oh it were happy for the Christian world and every truly
Christian soul, if Our Fathers Kingdom were set up in all our hearts, since we
all own it with our mouths; Lord let thy Kingdom of grace thus come. Secondly,
the Children of God pray for his kingdom of glory, viz. for that visible and
glorious manifestation of the Kingdom of Jesus, when he shall come to dispense
his glorious rewards and final Pardon to his faithful servants, and admit them
to be sharers in his joy, and partners in his Kingdom, and to pronounce the
fearful doom upon his obstinate and miserable enemies, to make them suffer the
just deserts of their wilful opposition and desperate Rebellion, in
unexpressible and eternal torments. In which acts the glory of his kingdom,
the mightiness of his power, the truth of his word, the infiniteness of his
love to his own, and the exactness of his justice to his enemies, shall be so
clearly demonstrated to all the world that his faithful ones shall be rapt with
joy and wonder, and glorify him for it to all eternity. Here alas they serve,
there they shall reign, here they are despised and afflicted, vexed with their
own corruptions, grieved for the sins of others, poor and disconsolate, full of
cares and fears, which when Christ's Kingdom comes, shall not only be done
away, but exchanged for endless glory, and boundless felicity. And who can
blame them who are weary with slavery Optamus maturius regnare non diutius
servire: Tert. de Or. Regnum Dei -- Volum Christianorum, confusio nationum,
exultatio Angelorum, idem. ibid.
to wish for liberty, and long for that happy day which is the end of all their
evils, and the beginning of that incomparable joy that never shall have end.
Let ungodly persons fear and tremble at this dreadful day to them; let their
tongue falter when they wish for it, and their own confusion, the holy ones of
God can join with their brethren under the Altar, in saying, Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly; the sooner he comes, the sooner shall their souls be delivered
and their desires satisfied in seeing and enjoying their Lord and deer
Redeemer. It Is true, when a good man considers how dreadful vengeance will then
seize on sinners, out of pity to them that pity not themselves; they pray
that these desperate sinners may first submit to his Kingdom of grace, and are
well pleased with the deferring of that day 2 Pet. 3.9. Pro mora finis. Tert.
ibid.
and can pray with the Primitive Christians for the putting that time further
off, though it be to their own loss, because so God will be more glorified, and
Heavens Quire fuller, and the Music sweeter, the more are brought home;
therefore they pray, that though the Kingdom of Glory be their happiness, yet
the Kingdom of Grace may first come into the hearts of all that will receive
it.

. 5. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven] As Gods Kingdom does
always abide, so his will is ever done, and so it may seem superfluous to
request it may be done, because it is the Rule by which all Creatures act, and
they all do bring about Psalm. 115.3. Romans 9.19.
his Will, when they interd it, and when they do not, and God himself always
does his own Will Deo non posse nolle est, and posse ville. Tertull. in Prax.
which is the limit of his infinite power, for he can do and does what he will,
and thus we had sufficiently asked it before in (thy Kingdom come) because
this is the property (...). Herodot.
of a King to do what he pleases. But as Gods Kingdom is scarce visible upon
Earth, so neither is the accomplishment of his Will, for those that renounce
his Authority become Lords Psalm. 12.4.
to themselves, and do their own Will, even where it displeases God, and
though his Will be at last done upon them in their final ruin, yet this is not
so properly his Will, not (voluntas beneplaciti) his pleasure, no more then the
malefactor does his Princes will when he suffers death by his Laws for a
capital crime; because he that made that Punishment did appoint it to terrify
from the Crime, and it was not his intention any should suffer by it, so it is
the Will of God that all men should live holily here 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
and happily hereafter 1 Timothy 2.4. Vt salvi simus in coelis and in terris, quia
summa est voluntatis ejus, salus eorum quos adoptavit. Tertull. ut supr.
, and if any will be wicked, it is also his will they shall suffer for it, but
then his will is not properly done on them that suffer, but only on supposition
they were obstinate sinners, which he would not have them to be: Wherefore we
pray that his first and principal Will may be done in the Conversion and
Salvation of all men. And having lately viewed the upper part of his Kingdom,
where they are ever happy by a full and free obedience to his Heavenly Will, we
long and wish, and desire that this lower part of his Kingdom (where so many
are yet totally in Rebellion, and others frequently revolting when they do
profess subjection) even that this World were modelled by that heavenly pattern
(...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 40.
, as exactly as is consistent with the frailty and mutability of such a state;
for it is easy to discern, that all the miseries in this world spring from our
disobedience to the Laws, and our acting contrary to the Will of God, so that
if the corrupt affections of the better sort were subdued, and the evil actions
of the more impious did cease, and all did guide their actions by the will of
God, we might be very happy even in this world, and should begin our Heaven
upon Earth, so that we also pray that since it is Gods will for all to live
holily Quid autem Deus vult quam incedere nos secundum suam disciplinam. Tert.
that this will of his may be accomplished; and because our Heavenly Father
has innumerable blessed Spirits there to perform his will, and they do it
cheerfully and readily, fully and constantly; we see how much our endeavors
come short of them, and how little reason we have to be puffed up for our
imperfect duties, which are begun with reluctance, deferred by sloth, or
interrupted by vanity, carried on heavily, shaken with fears, and sometimes
broken off by sin; and this prospect does humble us while we behold them flying
on the wings of love and zeal, and our selves creeping by fears and
uncertainties, and it ought to trouble us that we can do the Will of so great
and good a Master in no better manner: and then we shall strive and pray that
we may know Gods will as fully, and desire to do it as fervently, and be
enabled to accomplish it as pleasantly and as constantly as the glorious Hosts
of Heaven do, both the lights in the lower Orbs which exactly observe the laws
of their Creation -- sicut coelestia semper inconcussa suo volvuntur sidera
motu.
and those glorious Angels, and blessed Spirits which in the regions of bliss,
do delight continually (...). Clem. Constit. l. 2. cap. 56.
to serve him. Oh what affections are vigorous enough to pray for the same
obedience and unity, consent and uniformity among Gods Children, as is there
above, where every one moves in his own place, without disturbance, thwarting,
or opposition, making perfect Harmony, and keeping exact peace, and this is
Gods will. But the word [be done] seems to others to have a passive
signification, viz. That whatever happens to us or any by the will of God,
whether good or evil, it may not be displeasing to us; and this further shows
why we prayed his Kingdom might come, that so he may administer all things as
he pleases, for we are not jealous as the Subjects of earthly Princes
sometimes are, least our God should make his will an arbitrary law, because his
Holiness and Mercy, Truth and Justice, are his will, we are most sure whatever
is his will is best for us, be it Judgment or Mercy, plenty or want, health or
sickness, life or death; it is the best for us whether we apprehend it or no,
and we ought to wish it may be done, because we know he wills no evil to us --
eo nobis been optamus, quod nihil mali sit in Dei voluntate. Tert.
, and if something we think ill descends from him, we may say as Melito did to
the Emperor about the Persecutions Si quidem te jubente hoc faciunt bonum
credamus, quicquid justo imperatore jubente committitur. Eusebius. l. 4. Histor.
Eccl. c. 25. -- in hoc dicto ad sufferentiam nos ipsos admonemus. Tert.
. If thou command them they are good, because enjoined by a just Authority,
surely though it may seem hard at present, it is judged fittest for us by him
that knows our temper and need, so did the Author of this prayer learn
submission Matthew. 26.42.
and illustrated this petition by his example, and so St. Paul Acts 21.14.
(...). Pythag.
, and to murmr against Gods choice was forbidden by a Heathen, and is so
impious and foolish, that it is a wishing God out of his Throne, and the reins
out of his hands, that we might sit there, and rule all things by our own will;
as if we wished our former petition unsaid. Sure we must not only cease to be
Christians, but sober men, before we can fancy our selves wiser to contrive,
and fitter to dispense all things then God himself is. Socrates his prayer was
for what was convenient, not what he might desire (...): and ap. Juvenal.
Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus, quid Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile
nostris.
that is plainly, that Gods will might be done: And if we were our own Carvers
we should through rashness and folly, passion and prejudice, ever choose the
worst; and having such experience of our mistakes, Jesus teaches us to desire
God to order us as he pleases; and if we can live this petition, believeing the
pleasure of God to be always best, we shall have comfort in all Conditions,
and shall glorify God by such noble opinions of his Wisdom and Power, of his
love and mercy, more then by whole burnt-offerings and Rivers of Oil: for he
that can thus fully acquiesce in Gods disposals of all things, must needs
believe him to be Supreme and Almighty, and of infinite goodness and mercy: And
for this we have the Angels for our Examples; who keep those stations, and do
those offices God appoints them, and not what they choose for themselves: and
so are all those glorified Saints above, from whom we may learn that the Will
of God is to make us eternally happy at last: and why should we not give him
leave to accommodate us by the way as he pleases, and in such manner as may
bring us safest to our blessed brethren now in Glory?

. 6. Give us this day our daily bread] Having thus sought the glory of God in
the first place, we now proceed to beg a supply for our bodily necessities: but
our Savior has commanded us Matthew. 6.31.
to seek that first, and has placed it first -- post coelestia, i. e. post Dei
nomen, voluntatem, regnum, terrenis quoque necessitatibus petitioni locum
facit. Tert.
in his Form of prayer, because that which is for Gods glory is also for the
good of our nobler part -- pars haec pretium corpore majus habet.
the soul, and that we might learn that the grace of God is more necessary and
beneficial, then our bodily food, and accordingly we ought to pray for it in
the morning before we eat our daily bread: yet when we have prayed for
spiritual things, we that are flesh and not spirit are forced to beg temporal
things also. We have declared that we do in all things submit to his blessed
will, only we crave that which we cannot subsist without; we desire to do his
will and observe his pleasure as exactly as the blessed Angels in heaven; but
as he does not expect Conversationis quidem diligentiam eandem a vobis
efflagito, non tamen impossibilitatem requiro. Chrysostom. in Matthew. homil. 20.
we should live like them without food; so we may desire him to remember the
difference of our Natures, and give us our daily bread, which is so necessary
for us in this frail estate, that we cannot do his will without it: and if this
Petition had been wanting, this Prayer had been deficient; nor is there any
need for the ancient Doctors Vid. Hieron. in Matthew. l. 1. and Tit. cap. 2. and
Cassian collar. 9. ut and Tert. and Cypr. etc.
to allegorize this Phrase, as if we asked Christ the bread of life, and the
communication of him in the Sacrament for the food of our souls; for though I
can admit this may be understood by way of allusion (...) -- (...). Athanasius.
, yet I cannot allow it as the principal sense, nor is it below us to ask what
God knows we cannot be without. By Bread then we understand all manner of food,
meat or drink Ita panis signif. Number. 15.9. Prove. 23.6. Ezekiel. 4.16. etc.
which is necessary for the preservation of life, and also 1 Timothy 6.8.
whatever is required to support our frail nature (which the Roman Laws
comprehended under one word Victus) viz. Food and Raiment, and shelter; for the
shortness of this form does by one word (Bread) express the supply of all our
outward wants as of life and health, safety and success in our honest callings,
Riches and Friends, as far as we need them, and as God shall see to be fit for
us to receive, and will bestow on us. The things we here pray for are temporal;
but if we say this Petition aright we exercise many graces; for by desiring him
to give, we own his Providence, and acknowledge him the Fountain of all good
things, and that our labors are ineffectual without his blessing; we confess
his wisdom, in leaving it him to give, how much he that knows our needs shall
be pleased to dispense. We declare that we are persuaded of his All Sufficiency
and bounty, and therefore we desire not to have our portion all at once in our
own hands (...). Philo.
, least we should be too lavish of it; but that he may be the storehouse of
all good things, and that we may every day resort to him, of whose love and
liberality we do not doubt, and who we know will be as able to relieve us to
morrow as to day. We disclaim all unreasonable cares and fears what shall
become of us hereafter Matthew. 6.33, 34.
, because our Heavenly Father, that has all things at his disposal, will daily
take care of us; and as the Israelites went every day to gather Manna Exodus
16.4.
that no day might pass without a memento of Gods providence; so are we willing
to come to him day by day, to keep our hearts free from unreasonable cares,
which hinder us in seeking better things, and to make us daily mindful of our
constant dependence upon him. Here we express the moderation of our desires,
not seeking riches or honors Panem peti mandat quod solum fidelibus
necessarium est, caetera nationes requirunt. Tertull.
, jewels or ornaments, banquets or voluptuous satisfactions, but only so much
as is convenient Prove. 30.6. (...).
for the condition we are in Judge. 8.20.
, and necessary to strengthen us to do the will of God; because if we have not
Food and Raiment, the body cannot minister to the soul in duties of Religion
(...). Procop. Goth. 4.
; so much therefore we crave but not more, which would not help (...). Paraph.
(...). l. 1.. 46.
but hinder, not strengthen but weaken us to all good: we ask not these out of
any love to them, but merely out of a sense of our need: Nay it is evident our
chiefest care is about spiritual things; for we ask them first and
indefinitely, as much as we can get, even to serve us to eternity; but (having
no abiding place here) we desire no more of those but necessaries in our
journey, providing only from hand to mouth (being as the Greeks phrase it
(...)) accounting it a foolish thing to load our selves with much provision in
our Inn, where we know not whether we shall stay one night: we only ask from
day to day, that we may always show our readiness to depart whenever God shall
call us, for overmuch plenty might make us unwilling to dye. Herein we
vindicate our selves also from sloth and injustice; because we pray for our own
bread; that is, that which we shall get by his blessing on our honest labor;
for every good man will (not like an idle drone prey upon others labors but)
earn and eat his own bread 2 These. 3.12.
, and had rather want it then tear it from others by violence, oppression,
sacrilege, or rebellion, or rather then he would, by fraud or flattery, lying
or cheating, deceive his neighbor of what is justly his. If any here object,
many rich men have goods laid up for many years and need not ask their daily
bread; I answer. The Rich need Gods blessing to prosper and preserve what they
have, as the poor do to give them what they have not: nor can their meat
nourish them Matthew. 41.4.
, their garments warm them, or their palaces defend them, without his
blessing: what one has more then another is here confessed to be the gift of
God, and Christ teaches the rich humility, by showing them whence their
abundance came, and by whom it is continued; and least they should despise the
poor, they learn that if God withdraw his blessing, they will soon become both
alike; wherefore he that has, as well as he that has not, must every day on
his knees beg a piece of bread, or a power to use it, and a blessing upon it.
And thus we have begun to pray for our selves; and Jesus teaches us to begin
at the lowest step, and first to ask relief for our bodies; assuring us that
our Heavenly Father cannot hear his Children cry for bread and not supply them;
and when he has done so, we may from his kindness in lesser things, be
encouraged to ask for our Souls, which he is more concerned for; but it would
seem presumption for us to ask the greatest first, who do not deserve the
least. Genes. 32.10.

. 7. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us] The Particle [and] connects this to the former Petition, and declares we
are continuing those requests which concern our selves; and we have need to
look further then our earthly needs; least if we obtain a supply for them, from
his bounty, Consequens erat ut observata Dei liberalitate, and clementiam ejus
precaremur; quid enim alimenta proderunt, si illi reputamur revera quasi taurus
ad victimam? Tertull.
and do not procure a Pardon from his mercy, our food should fat us for the
slaughter. If we rightly apprehend the danger of our souls, all the enjoyments
of this life can yield no more pleasure to us, then the curious fare presented
to that Persian Captive (designed to be sacrificed) when he remembered the knife
and the Altar. The fears of Gods eternal vengeance will imbitter all our
abundance; and therefore we add a prayer for forgiveness, without which we
cannot relish our daily bread; nor do we think our food so necessary, as the
remission of our offenses, the want of that could but bring us to a temporal
death; but without this we shall loose everlasting life, and dye in eternal
misery: and the necessity is also as universal, for as no man can live without
bread, so no man can live comfortably here or happily hereafter without mercy;
for all men have sinned Romans 3.23. S^i^bat Dominus se solum sine delicto esse.
Tert.
, and those sins cannot be done away without mercy; which every man that lives
by bread must pray for, even the best of men; and as often as they pray for
that, even every day they must also ask Pardon of Almighty God, because no day
is wholly inoffensive; and our Lord Jesus would here set our sinfulness daily
before our eyes, to make us constantly sensible that we are unworthy of the
meat we eat, and all outward blessings which we receive; and to make us
continually humble and penitent. He knew before that even the best of men had
sin, and prescribes this petition as daily useful to all his Disciples; and
those who out of ignorance or pride think they have no sin, do exclude
themselves out of the number of his Scholars, who have all learned to pray for
Absolution. But to be more particular, let us observe how many Duties are
exercised in these few words, even all that becomes the address of a true
Penitent; Confession and self-accusation, Contrition for and Aggravation of the
s^ns, deprecation of the punishment, with acknowledgement of the justice
thereof; Faith in a Redeemer, and hope in his Merits: First we herein daily
confess our sin, our very asking pardon is an acknowledgment we are guilty, and
we appropriate them to our selves Exomologesis est petitio veniae, qui petit
veniam delictum confitetur. Tert. de Orat.
; for though Jesus did suffer the Punishment, we acted the Crimes; which we
here being mindful of his bitter Passion, do own with sorrow, calling them Our
Trespasses; and in that word we signify the vast number of our transgressions;
this plural indefinite word declares them very many, which we have committed
against God and our neighbor; not against one, but all his laws, not once, but
many times: And further we confess they are as heinous as numerous, viz.
trespasses and injuries, done to God himself by us his poor Creatures 1 Samuel
2.25.
, in his own person, or in his subjects, our neighbors of whose Rights he is
the Protector, and the avenger of their wrongs; we have broke down the hedge of
Gods laws, and by our disobedience disowned his supremacy, and denied that duty
which we owed to him, whereupon sins are called debts Matthew. 6.12. (...) the
same Luke 11.4. (...). confer Luke 13.2. cum ver. 4. (...). Chrysostom. de poen.
2. Debitum in Scripturis delicti figura est, quod perinde judicio debeatur, nec
evadat justitiam exactionis nisi donetur exactio. Tertul. ut supr.
, because God being our supreme Lord, Creator and preserver, we are bound to
obey all his pleasure, and to do his commands; specially having voluntarily
promised this in our Baptism; wherefore if we pay not God this due and vowed
obedience, we are debtors to him, and must discharge and satisfy by suffering
the Penalty Si non reddit faciendo justitiam, reddit patiendo miseriam. August.
, unless we can find a surety to undertake for us. Oh what can set out the
heighnousness of sin more lively! it is a wrong and injury done by us poor
miserable wretches, against the Laws and Authority, and the Rights of that God
who made us, and whose Covenant-servants we are; and to this we must add that
we are liable to his just and severe threatenings; and may be (if God please)
summoned to his Bar, endited for this Debt, nay Condemned for it to eternal
Torments for the satisfaction: But only that his Mercy and Wisdom has found a
gracious Redeemer who has taken these Trespasses upon himself; and made a
fuller satisfaction for them, then we could have done by eternal sufferings.
And it must be supposed we believe the satisfaction of Christ's death, and by it
hope for a Remission; or else what encouragement have we to ask pardon, and
confess a debt when we are insolvent, and that to a just and true God that must
have satisfaction; this were to ask impossibilities, to desire God to be
unjust. But our Lord Jesus who paid our scores, has sent us to his Father
with these words in our mouths, and he calls them truly Our Trespasses; to show
his love in redeeming us, and Gods mercy in forgiving us, not to make us fear
them as unpardonable: for when we remember our Redeemer we have lively hopes in
the midst of our humble acknowledgments: because he that paid our Debt, makes
the same request in heaven for us. That God would clear us and charge our
iniquities upon him. But because we are so apt to remember our needs and forget
our duty; to pray for good things to our selves, and neglect the doing them to
others, our master has annexed one of the greatest duties of the Gospel so
close to this necessary and desirable request, that we cannot ask forgiveness
of God, but we must promise the same to our neighbors, that so Christ may make
peace in Earth as well as Heaven; we must declare not only to lay as de our
groundless prejudices against our brethren, b^t to q it all pretenses of
malice or revenge, even to those who have not paid us the returns of love and
duty where they were obliged to it, and to our enemies that have wronged and
harmed us by thought word or deeds. Not that our Pardon from God depends
absolutely on this, or is merited by it: but because it is most reasonable,
that we who request forgiveness of our offenses against God, should forgive the
lesser debts Veniam det facile cui venia est opus. Ecclus. 28.3. Matthew. 18.24.
cum 28. 10000 Tal. h. e. nostrae monet. 1870500 lb 100 Denar. h. c. 3. lb 2.
sol. 6. den. vide Waser. de Number. ap. Critic.
of our brethren to u^; which are fewer in number, smaller in value, committed
against a meaner person, and commonly upon some provocation on our part. He
that does so strictly exact his due in these petty injuries, deserves to be
strictly accounted with himself, and may blush to ask of so great a God, to
abate of his rigor, when he a mortal creature will not do it to his Equal:
how can such a malicious person be sensible of the kindness which God shows
in forgiving him, when he is a stranger to those compassions: such a man's
person must be hateful to our Heavenly Father, because he is so unlike him
Matthew. 5.45. (...) al. lib. (...): Grot. (...). Libanius Sophist.
; and his request odious because it is unreasonable and impudent. Wherefore
take heed least by your malice and uncharitableness you involve your selves
into the wrath of God for your own greater injuries and offenses.

. 8. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil] Temptation does
not in its prime sense in Scripture signify a solicitation to evil, but any
kind of trial 2 Cor. 13.5. Heb. 11.29. and is expressed both by (...) and
(...). Duae sunt tentationes, una quae decipit, altera quae probat; secundum
eam quae decipit, Deus neminem Tentat. Aug. Tract. 43.
in order to the discovery of what we are; whether it be done by a Friend, as
when God tempted Abraham, Genesis 22.1. (or glorified him as some read) with a
design to manifest the strength of his Faith; or by an enemy as when Satan
desired to sift St. Peter James 1.13.
, not to purify him, but to manifest that mixture of chaff he could find in
him; and because evil objects show what we are, and declare us to be evil if we
comply with them; therefore the setting evil things before us, to draw us into
sin, are also called Temptation; but God never tempts thus, he may try us by
Afflictions, and put us in the fire as Gold 1 Pet. 1.6, 7.
to separate us from our dross, nay he will do it Zechar. 13.9.
, and it is a sign of his love Heb. 12.6.
, and ought to be a cause of our joy James 1.2.
, and David begs it as a favor Psalm. 139.23.
. Nor do any but cheats and hypocrites fly this trial, or fear to be inquired
into. Gods Children are willing their Father should try them and tempt them
here, with intentions of mercy, rather then to pass the severe Trial before the
last Tribunal: and as to these trials and temptations, Christ would rather
teach us to pray to be supported under and carried through them, then never to
be lead into them; which if Gods grace be with us, may be for our advantage and
honor, and his glory. Wherefore by Temptation here we are rather to understand
the being enticed to commit sin, or however a trying whether we will sin, and
thus it well follows the former Petition Vt non de remittendis tantum sed etiam
de avertendis in totum delictis supplicaremus. Tert. de Or. Illud ut praeterita
e^pientur, hoc ut futura vitentur. Oros. de liber. arb.
, for having considered the heinous nature and dangerous consequents of former
sins, and prayed for the forgiveness of them; if we spoke that out of a real
fear of those dreadful miseries, we cannot but desire we may never more fall
into such desperate circumstances; and to quicken this request, let us
consider. Our enemies are many and mighty, vigilant and politic, that we are
naturally easy and willing to be deceived, rash in our choices, heedless of
danger, neither considering before nor examining afterward, and so shall
certainly fall every moment it God in mercy do not help us: and if we be
humble, and fear, and heartily call for aid against sin (...). Arrian. l. 4. c.
12.
, although we should fall some times, we declare our hatred of it, and if we be
not totally free, yet we manifest a desire to be free from all; and for this we
rely not on our own strength, but as Jesus has taught us humbly beg strength
from Heaven every day against it. But some may wonder why we desire God would
not lead us, etc. sure he that hates sin so perfectly, and so lately forgave
us, will not tempt us to commit more James 1.13.
; it is most true, Satan is the Tempter Matthew. 4.3.
(and so his name Satan in Hebrew signifies) he being miserable by sin
Solatium perditionis suae perdendis hominibus operatur -- Lact. de orig. er.
, desires to make men partners with him in sin and misery, by working on those
lusts Jam. 1.14.
which do draw us into sin. But the Devil himself is under the Command of the
Almighty, who sets him bounds that he cannot pass, and gives permission to him
to tempt us Job. 1.12. Chal. P. Exiit Sathanas cum licentiae a coram Domino.
, so that he could have no power against us except it were given him from on
high John 19.11.
, and he obtains leave from God sometimes to try us, and so Christ was led
Matthew. 4.1.
by the spirit of God as a Champion to combat Satan: in such case our frailty
might make us pray and fear that we might not fall by such a trial. But other
times God in his displeasure for one sin, suffers us to fall into another; not
by enticing us, but by witholding that grace which should restrain our evil
desires, and loosing Satan's chain, and leaving us encompassed with
opportunities and engaging circumstances, which we are likely to fall by, and
this the Scripture phraseth, Entering into temptation Matthew. 26, 44. Ne me
inducas in manum peccati nec in manum transgressionis. Seder Tephil. Lusitan.
, and the Jews in their Forms being led into the hand of temptation or sin. And
let us remember how often by one sin, and desires after more, we provoke God to
expose us to such circumstances as will infallibly bring us into some grievous
transgression; but our comfort is, that God is our guide and he will direct us,
and lead us in the right way; he foresees the enticing baits, and evil objects,
and wicked company, which are in ambush for us; and if we rely on his mercy,
and follow his guidance he will conduct us so as to miss them all, or give us
strength to overcome them, though we have neither wisdom to discover nor
strength of our own to avoid the danger: wherefore we pray him to lead us, who
can restrain the powers of darkness, and desire we may not provoke him to lead
us into evil circumstances and dangerous occasions, nor let loose our infernal
foes, nor leave us to our selves, which is the prime intent of this Petition,
in its first Branch. As to the last clause of deliverance from Evil, Tertullian
and many others take it to be a fuller explication of the former Et respondet
clausula interpretans quid sit ne inducas -- hoc est enim, sed d^vehe nos a
malo. de Orat.
, and by Evil understand the evil of sin: as if we were not unwilling to be
tempted by afflictions or solicitations if it be our Fathers pleasure;
provided he would by his grace prevent us from sinning and falling into
iniquity by them: temptations and trials if they occasion not our sin, may
humble us, and quicken our prayers, mortify our lusts, and exercise all our
graces; and therefore we only desire whether God, or Satan (by his permission)
try us, we may be innocent: Or with the Ancients we may take the word [(...)]
for the Evil one, that is the Devil, who is so called in Scripture 1 John 3.12.
Ephesians. 6.16. Matthew. 5.3. Castal. a Diabol^. ibi. Tert. a maligno. (...).
Chrysostom.
, and thus we shall avoid a Repetition, (which cannot be supposed in this
compendious form) and the sense will be, that God would not deliver us up to
sin, least our enemy the Devil, taking advantage thereby, seize our hearts when
God has abandoned them, and we become his slaves, and forfeit to destruction.
Or lastly we may by Evil understand the effect of sin, viz. the evil of
Punishment, that we may not be drawn into any wickedness, nor into that which
certainly follows it, sickness, losses, crosses, death temporal and eternal,
which are the wages of sin, and of which the Devil is the Executioner; so that
the two last senses may very well stand together, viz. That God would not put
us out of his protection, nor deliver us up into Satan's power, either as a
Tempter first to entice to sin, nor as a Tormenter afterward to execute and
inflict upon us what those sins deserve in this world, or the world to come.
The sum is, that Sin is a dreadful thing, and gives Satan power over us and
possession of us, and makes us liable to be hurried on to more wickedness by
banishing Gods holy Spirit, and by taking off his favor, it opens a way for
all the miseries and mischiefs of this world and the next to fall upon us; upon
the serious consideration whereof we not only crave the remission of past sins,
but earnestly beg that we may never more fall into transgression, and then we
doubt not but to be safe from all Evil.

. 9. For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever and
ever, Amen.] Some have imagined this Conclusion was added by the Greek Church
to this Prayer, not spoken by Christ, because all the old Latin Copies want it
wholly; and all the Greek in St. Luke, and some in St. Matthew, nor is it
expounded by the Latin Fathers; others plead it is agreeable to the Jewish
forms, and generally found in the Original of one Evangelist, and in the
Syriack and Arabic, both ancient Translations, and is expounded by St.
Chrysostom and Theophilact: But our Church has chosen a middle way, and has
annexed it here in the first repetition of the Lords Prayer, and in some other
offices in other places has omitted it, not as if it were not of Divine
Authority, but therein following St. Luke as here St. Matthew. And it is very
unlikely those holy Fathers should presume to add their own inventions to this
Venerable Form of Christ's own Composure: It is more probable, that our Lord
delivering this Prayer twice, did add the Doxology at the first time which is
recorded in St. Matthew, and leave it out the second, which is set down in St.
Luke; and hence the Latin Copies [which were very confused and full of error]
might leave it out in both, least the Evangelist should seem to differ in so
considerable a matter: But however it was, it is most for our profit to wave
these inquiries, and labor truly to understand it. It is known, the Jews
concluded all their Prayers with a Doxology or form of praise, and ( Drusius
says) in these very words In Matthew. 6.13. Quia tuum est regnum, and in secula
seculorum regnabis gloriose.
, and our Lord Jesus delighted in imitating their customs, though here the
reason is weighty; for a Prayer is scarce complete without praises Philip. 4.6.
with thanksgiving.
; it being sordid to ask all from God, and return nothing to him, Prayers may
seem more necessary, but Praises are as much our Duty, and more lovely;
Petitions fit the Earth, but the glorifying God is the imitation of the
Celestial Quire, who sing a song much like this conclusion of the Lords Prayer
Rev. 5.12, 13. Chap. 11.15. -- nos Angelorum -- Candidati jam hinc coelestem
illam vocem in Deum, and o^^cium futurae claritatis ediscimus. Tertul. de Orat.
, and we do well to learn it here, against we come to use it there. We began
these Devotions with his glory, and now we end with it, that this may be the
beginning and end of all our actions Romans 11.36. Horat. Od. l. 3. od. 6. Hinc
omne princi^ium, huc refer exitum.
: we now give that to him our selves, which we prayed might be offered him from
others. For the sense of these words, they may be an acknowledgment of his
infinite perfections, who is not praised by flattery, but by a bare confession
of the truth, what he really is and has, in, by and from himself; and we fall
short of what he is and deserves in our most exact acknowledgments, for his
Kingdom is everlasting and universal, his power infinite and unlimited, his
glory transcendent and incomprehensible, we may repeat them, but can neither
fully comprehend them nor express them but by silence and admiration; only we
confess our own subjection, weakness and misery, and ascribe all these to him;
Kings must lay down their Crowns, Mighty men their Strength, and the Honorable
men of the Earth their glory at his footstool. These words considered in
themselves thus, are an Act of Praise, but being connected to the prayer by the
particle [for] they are a proper Conclusion to this Divine Prayer, and seem to
contain a reason of every Petition; for we are obliged to pray that his
Kingdom may come, because he is the right and lawful King of Heaven and Earth;
and to desire his will may be done, because he has the just Power and
Supremacy over all to command what he pleases; and to wish his name may be
hallowed, because he is glorious in himself, and deserves all possible praises
from all the World: so likewise in the three last Petitions, of him we ask for
a Temporal supply, because he is the King of all Creatures, and all provisions
are his: of him we beg a Pardon, for he only has full Power and just Authority
to dispense it; and of him lastly we request deliverance from Sin and
Damnation, because he may have the same glory from us as he now has and ever
shall have from the blessed Saints, whom he has brought to his heavenly
Kingdom; or if this seem too nice, and we reflect upon the whole prayer
together, here we are struck with reverence in remembrance of that great King
we have spoken to; we declare why we make our address to him, and what ground
we have to hope for acceptance with him. His is the Kingdom, therefore we his
poor subjects do petition him; and it is his Prerogative to help, and by his
Supremacy he may do it. His is the Power, therefore we his weak impotent
Creatures look up to him and rely upon him, who is able to do all we desire,
and being Almighty can perform it. His is the Glory, and therefore we vile
sinners that can do nothing without him, though we deserve nothing from him,
yet we present our necessities before him, that by his free grace he may have
that glory from us, which he has from all others that he has formerly
relieved: Leave thy prayers then with much comfort in his hands, who is thy
Heavenly Father, and may do abundantly for thee by his Right, and can do it by
his Power, and will do it for his Glory, both this day, to morrow and for ever;
come when thou will, he is and has Kingdom, Power and Glory, from everlasting
to everlasting, this is no mortal King, nor fading Power, nor transient glory;
but all endures longer then thy wants, even for ever and ever. Oh how hearty an
Amen may thou say to this Prayer, since as thou have great reason to desire
all these things should be granted, thou have as good ground to believe they
shall. Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Lords Prayer after the Absolution.
MOst merciful Lord God, who have owned us for thy Children by Creating us,
preserving and providing for us, and after our manifold disobedience have by
this gracious promise of Pardon, again encouraged us to call thee [Our Father]
thy mercy in receiving us exceeds the Compassions of Earthly Parents; and thy
infinite goodness and power do evidence thy glory, and teach us humbly to adore
thee [which art in Heaven] and therefore thou can do what thou please in
all the world. But we are so transported with thy admirable pity toward us
and all poor sinners, that forgetting our own wants, we heartily desire thy
glory, even that by us and all men [hallowed] sanctified, reverenced, and for
ever feared may [be thy Name] from which we have had our help, and thy
Attributes in which we have our comfort; let us ever express a fervent love and
dutiful regard to thee, and all belonging to thee. Oh Lord we lately were (as
many yet are) in rebellion against thee, but since we have sound thee so
merciful a Prince, Oh let [thy Kingdom come] into all our hearts, to rule us
by thy grace, and to fit us against it shall come in glory, for the Crowning of
thy servants, and the Condemnation of thy Enemies, whose misery thou delightest
not in, but deferrest thy coming, because it is thy will we should live in
holiness here and happiness hereafter. Dear Father let this [thy will be done]
by our obedience to thy Word, and submission to thy Providence, for then shall
all the world be happy, when thy good will and pleasure is done by us and on us
thy poor Creatures [in earth] as readily and fully, as constantly and
cheerfully [as it is in heaven] by the blessed Saints and Angels, whose food it
is to execute thy Commands: But Lord thou know the frailty of our nature,
and the misery of our Condition, which needs continual support and supplies,
and forces us to beseech thee who have all blessings at thy disposal to [give
us this day] which for any thing we know may be our last, and therefore we look
no further nor ask no more then [out daily bread] even so much food and
raiment, health and wealth, prosperity and success, as thou see is necessary
and convenient for us in this state of life and condition in which thou have
placed us, that we may be able to serve thee, not encouraged to forget thee, or
enticed to increase the number of our sins, which are so many already, that we
must daily acknowledge and bewail them; and remembering the vengeance due unto
us for them, we earnestly beseech thee to pardon [and forgive us our
trespasses] against thy righteous laws and just authority for Jesus sake, who
has made satisfaction for them: gracious Lord by his Merits forgive us [as we]
by the help of thy grace, the injunction of thy Gospel, and the example of thy
mercy [forgive them that trespass against us] in fewer and lesser matters: we
tremble at the remembrance of all those amazing miseries which our former sins
made us liable to. Oh let that mercy which moved thee to Pardon us prevail with
thee to become our guide, and though we deserve to be deserted by thee, yet
that we may never fall again into those dreadful circumstances [lead us not]
into any dangerous occasions or opportunities of sin, but though many snares be
laid for us, guide us so by thy Providence that we may seldom fall [into
temptation] and never fall by it; least Satan who desires our eternal ruin,
again get power over us and advantage against us, let us not be a prey to his
malice [but deliver us from evil] which he inticeth us to as a Tempter, and
will punish us for as a Tormentor, that we may not deliver our selves over to
him by sin, nor thou give us up to his wrath to execute thy sentence upon us
for it. These mercies we need, and though we are unworthy, yet we Petition thee
for them, thou may help us [for thine is the Kingdome] thou can do it, for
thine is [the Power] thou will do it for us as thou have freely and frequently
relieved poor penitent sinners; for which Men and Angels do acknowledge thine
is the Praise [and the Glory] and we shall by thy mercy to us be obliged to
join in this just acknowledgment, which shall be made to thee in Heaven and
Earth [for ever and ever] world without end [Amen] be it so.

SECTION VI. Of the Responses.
First of them in General.
. 1. AFter this devout address to God in that incomparable Prayer which Jesus
taught, are added some short and pithy Sentences, in which the People are to
bear a part; according to the manner of the Primitive Christians (...).
Constit. Ap. l. 2. c. 5.
, who used this so constantly, that Eusebius Eusebius. Hist. Eccl l. 2. c. 17.
brings it as an Argument to prove the Essenes were Christians, because they
sung by turns, answering one another. They did so indeed among the Jews, but
those duties were performed by the Priests and Levites only: But Christians
have a greater Privilege, and every man is so far a Priest 1 Pet. 2.9. Revel.
1.6.
, as to have leave to join in this spiritual sacrifice, and it is for the
benefit as well as honor of the people: For

First, This shows their full Consent and Unity in all that is Prayed for;
which Christ teaches us to be necessary that our Prayers may be heard Matthew.
18.19. Gr. (...).
. Nor is their silence sufficient to express such a consent as is here
required; for they must not only be willing these things may be prayed for, but
they must desire God should look on it as every ones particular request; and
accordingly Minister and people must with one mouth, as well as one mind Romans
15.6.
, praise God.

Secondly, This quickens their Devotion by a grateful variety, making those
holy offices pleasant, which our corrupt nature is so apt to think tedious; and
by a different manner of address making the time seem short Breve videbitur
tempus quod tantis operum varietatibus occupatur. Hieron. Epist. ad. Laet.
, and the Devotions new; so that we may be as fresh as in the beginning of our
Prayers.

Thirdly, This engages their Attention, which is apt to stray, especially in
Sacred things, and most of all if the people bear no part: But when they have
also their share of Duty, they must expect before it comes, that they may be
ready; when it is come that they may be right; they must observe, and after
take heed to prepare against the next Answer they are to give. How Pious
therefore and Prudent is this O^der of the Church thus to intermix the Peoples
duty, that they may be always exercised in it or preparing for it, and never
have leisure to entertain those vain thoughts, which will set upon us,
especially in the house of God Nihil agendo male agere d^scimus. Senec.
, if we have nothing to do? And assuredly the general neglect of this Duty of
answering in their course has introduced so much laziness, sleeping,
irreverence, inadvertency and weariness into the house of God. Our Pious
Ancestors may make our Devotion blush, when we see them all the time of Prayer
in procinctu, with their knees bended, their hands lifted up, their eyes fixed
on the Minister, and their hearts and mouths ready to say Amen, and answer
where ever it was required: And if ever this Devotion be restored in the Church
(which all good men passionately with) it must be by learning the people
zealously and conscientiously to join in these pious Ejaculations allotted to
them, which that they may do, I shall now explain them to every ones capacity.

. 2. O Lord open thou our lips: And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.]
This sentence with many of those that follow, are Endited by the Spirit of God,
taken out of that excellent repository of Devotion, the Psalms of David, from
whence the Jews took the greatest part of their Liturgy, and the Primitive
Christians collected their Prayers See Dr. Hammonds Preface to his Annotat.
, and composed their Hymns out of it, because it contains variety of prayers
and praises, exactly fitted for all persons in all circumstances, as pertinent
as if they had been made for the present occasion; and so we shall find this to
be which we now consider. The words are to be found in Psalm. LI. ver. 15. and
were anciently transcribed into the Christian Liturgies, for they are ordered
to be three times repeated in that ancient one attributed to St. James (not to
mention them of later date:) And nothing can be more pertinent when Minister
and people apply themselves to praise God; for speech is the gift of God Prove.
16.1. Exodus 4.11.
, and that in which man excells all other Creatures, and was given us to this
end, that we might glorify him, whence the tongue is called our glory Psalm.
16.9. gloria mea LXX. (...). Vid. Psalm. 36.12. and 108.1.
, because it is the instrument of his praise. But we here do not only
acknowledge our speech was given us to this end, but desiring now to make a
right use of it, we beg his help, and confess from him we have the faculty, and
the exercise of that faculty in every Act, especially in holy things; wherein
unless he open our lips, we cannot set forth his praise. This is the sense of
the words considered absolutely and alone. But the Observation whence they are
taken (o^t of the most famous Penitential Psalm) and where they are set (soon
after the Confession) will afford us another profitable exposition. David uses
them after the Confession of his grievous sin, and earnest supplication for
Pardon, and we use them in the Close of the Penitential part, before we begin
our solemn praises and petitions, intimating, that till we have some hopes of
our Pardon, we cannot proceed any further, and so we briefly, but zealously
press that great suit for mercy; because sin and the guilt of it does stop our
mouths, and shut our lips that we become tongue-tyed Matthew. 22.11. Gr. (...).
, speechless, and mute (as Judah the most eloquent of all his brethren) Genesis
44.16. Quid scribam vobis a t quomodo scribam, aut quid omnino non scribam hoc
tempore nescio. Tacit. Annal.
not knowing what to answer, being full of inward confusion. And sin has this
effect not only on evil men, but as much if not more on the best; whose
ingenuity produces a shame, that will stop their mouths as much as the wicked
man's terrors, of which the famous Origin is an instance, who having been
compelled to sacrifice once Epiphan. Panar. l. 2. Tom. 1. haeres. 64.
, was long after struck dumb with reading the 16 verse of the 50th Psalm, But
unto the ungodly says God what have thou to do, etc. and broke off with tears
not able to proceed further: which least it should happen to us, and a guilty
conscience should spoil the music of our Praises, or seal up our lips in
Prayer, we here do beseech him by speaking peace to our souls, to give us such
hope of his forgiving mercy, that whereas our fear, shame and grief, makes us
stand mute as so many guilty persons before him, we may have ((...)) a freedom
of speech in his presence, when by the comforts of his Spirit, the terrors of
offending slaves, are changed into the liberty of reconciled sons: which mercy
if he grant, you do all engage to use it to his glory, and resolve it shall
kindle the flames of gratitude and love in all your hearts, and your mouths
shall bear witness to it; as you are praising him for other things, you will
think of this pardoning mercy, and redouble your Eucharistical gratulations;
and no doubt this Petition shall be heard, for you desire it not only for your
own benefit, but to fit you to set forth his praise. We have cause when we go
about to glorify God, to cry out we are of unclean lips Isai. 6.5.
; but if God send hopes of remission, when the Seraphim touches our lips, and
takes away our iniquity, then we shall be fit for all holy duties, and with
that Prophet readily say, Here I am, Lord send me.

. 3. O God make speed to save us, O Lord make haste to help us] These words are
frequently repeated in the Book of Psalms; and are not much varied from that
form of Exclamation Psalm. 118.25. Heb. (...) Obsecro Jehovah serva nunc. Jun.
and Trem.
which the Jews contracted into Hosanna, which signifies Save now Lord we
beseech thee; but the old Latin Liturgies Deus in adjutorium meum intend.
Psalm. 70.1. vid. Graec. V. D. D. Duport. -- (...). ut LXX.
do assure us it is taken out of the 70th Psalm, though it be found also Psalm.
40. ver. 13. and there you may behold David surveying his sins more numerous
then his hairs, more weighty then his heart could bear, terrified with which
sad spectacle, he breaks out into this passionate ejaculation; and it may well
befit our mouths who so lately have been Confessing our offenses; and it
contains all that any penitent sinner, about to put up his Petitions, need sue
for by way of Preparation; viz. Deliverance and safety from evil, and help in
that which is good. We suppose our selves like a besieged City, our sins behind
threaten us, and our corruptions have blocked us up before, and fear is on
every side, yet still the way to heaven is open, and we send these Prayers
upwards to the place where the King of Heaven resides, for a speedy rescue to
be granted to his distressed subjects 1 Samuel 11.4. 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
: when we look back and see our innumerable iniquities, we cry out, O God make
speed, etc. when we look forward to all those duties which we are to do, and
the great opposition we are sure to meet with; we say, Oh Lord make have, etc.
Our guilt will make speed to pursue us, and Satan to destroy us, and evil
thoughts to hinder our Devotions, wherefore we must beg that our gracious God
will also make have to save and help us, just now when we are in danger and
need, and it will double Bis dat qui ci^o dat. Senec.
the kindness; we need not fear he will call these speedy cries impatience or
presumption, but prudent fear of our imminent danger, and a right apprehension
of our urgent necessities; and for our comfort let us remember, they that are
the most liberal are the most speedy Proprium est liben^er facientis ci^^
facere. Sen.
in doing good; he that we make request to has charged us See Prove. 3.8.
never to put off a necessitous person till the morrow if we have it in our
power, as he ever has it in his, to help us, wherefore be assured he will save
and help thee this day; and by the speed of his help give thee cause in the
next place to sing, Glory be to the Father, etc.

. 4. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: as it was
in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.] Although
the words of this excellent Hymn are not in Scripture, yet it is a Paraphrase
on the Song of the Seraphims Isai. 6.3. Vnde hymnum. (...) originem duxisse
fertur in Eccl. Graec.
, and is expressly grounded on Gods word 1 John 5.7.
, not only as it is an act of Adoration to Almighty God; but as it is a
particular address to each person of the blessed Trinity; who being equal in
their Godhead, are equally to be worshipped, which if it were needful might be
fully proved; but it is sufficiently done already. This truth indeed by the
malice of the Devil, and the envy of ambitious and wicked men, has met with
more opposition, then all other Christian Doctrines; the Arrians, Sabellians,
Eunomians, Apollinarists, Macedonians, and almost all Heretics denied either
the Divinity of one, or Equality of all the Persons; but the Church got this
advantage Multa quippe ad fidem Catholicam pertinentia, dum haereticorum
callida inquietudine agitantur, ut adversus eos defendi possint, and
considerantur diligentius, and intelliguntur clarius, and instantius
praedicantur. Aug. de Civ. Dei. Lib. 16. cap. 2.
by it, that this fundamental article, was more narrowly examined, clearly
explained, and fully proved then otherwise it had been; and among other good
effects of these bad causes was the composure of this Eucharistical Hymn (as
some think) or rather the enjoining it in daily use (which I rather believe)
for there are many footsteps of it before Arrius time, or any of those Councels
which condemned him, and though before the danger of this heresy, every one of
the Fathers had a form of Doxology of his own, yet with little variety of words
they all expressed the same thing, viz. to ascribe all honor and glory to the
three Persons of the glorious Trinity. Nay these very words are set down by
Clemens of Alexandria (...). Clem. Alexandr. Paedag.
as the Christians form of praising God [above 100 years before the Council of
Nice, An. 190.] besides it appears it was used in the service of the Church
before, or somewhat very like it Gloria Deo Patri, honor item and adoratio, cum
filio collega una cum Sancto vivificatore Spiritu. Athanasius.
, because the Arrians did alter the ancient form into, Glory be to the Father
by the Son, and in the holy Ghost; for which they are sharply reprehended by
the Orthodox Fathers: who afterward annexed it to their public Devotions, in
this Form in which we now have it: All which does not only prove the Antiquity
of it, but teach us that it may serve for two purposes; first as a form of
Praising God, and glorifying every Person of the Trinity, which was the first
design of those that invented it. Secondly as a shorter Creed and declaration
of our Faith in the Trinity in Unity, which was the use it was fitted to
afterward: I wish we might have no occasion to make use of it in the second
sense as a Test for Heretics (though the Disciples of Socinus and Fanatic
Enthusiasts do even still deride or deny this mystery) but if there were no
such it might still serve its principal end, to be a Form of ascribing all
Praise and Glory to the Supreme Being, and an Act of Adoration to each Person,
which we are obliged particularly to pay, because every one of the Persons in
the Trinity has done peculiar benefits for us; so that it is our Duty to
Praise the Father for our Creation, the Son for our Redemption, the Holy Ghost
for our Sanctification. The Father has sent us into the world and preserves
and provides for us in it. The Son has lived with us and died for us, and
being returned to his Glory is still mindful of us. The Holy Ghost does come to
us, and stay with us as a guard and a guide, a comforter and an advocate;
clearing our minds, cleansing our hearts, quickening our affections, and
enforcing our prayers: and shall we not then be highly ungrateful, if we pay
not a particular tribute to every Person in special as well as to all in
general: Remember the Angels sung praise to the undivided and ever-blessed
Trinity, in the morning of the Creation the beginning of all time Job. 38.7.
, and they and all the world do it now, and both men and Angels shall continue
this Jubilee to eternity. As long as goodness endures Omnes tam orationes quam
oblationes cessabunt in seculo futuro: sed oblatio gratiarum nunquam cessabit.
R.D.K. Psalm. 100.4.
, gratitude and praise cannot cease. This was and is and ever shall be done in
all ages and generations Psalm. 145.4.
. The Patriarchs and Prophets did it in the beginning of the Church; the
Apostles and Martyrs in the first planting of the Gospel. All these though
removed to heaven continue to sing praises to the Trinune God there, as we and
all Pious Christians do here; and there will never want tongues in Heaven nor
Earth to sing this gratulatory Hymn for all generations. Observe further the
Comprehensiveness of these few words: which extend to all things as well as to
all times and persons; and present at once to our view all the Mercies of God
past, present, and to come, and are an acknowledgment that all the good that
ever was or shall be done, or is now enjoyed in heaven or earth, has proceeded
from this all-sufficient and ever-flowing fountain, to whom this tribute of
praise is and was and ever will be due. Behold then, oh pious soul, a glorious
Quire of Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Saints and Martyrs in Heaven,
with all holy Men and Women in all the world, at once with united voices and
joyful hearts to sing this triumphant Song, let this inspire thee with holy
raptures and ecstasies of Devotion, to bear a part here on earth, and when thou
art taken hence, thy place shall be supplied by the succeeding generations, and
thou shall be advanced to a state as endless as his mercy, where thou shall
praise him to eternity. What better form can we have to glorify God by then
this, which is a declaration of our faith, a discharge of our homage, in which
we acknowledge his former mercies, and confess his present favors to us and
all the world, and glorify him for both; we hope in him for those that are to
come, expecting all from him, and resolving upon those returns of Eucharist
which we will for ever make to him. How can this be done too often, or repeated
too frequently? surely his mercies are more frequent then our praises can be.
Those that censure this as a vain repetition, would ill have digested the
hundred blessings Deuteronomy. 10.12. R. R. legunt pro (...): pro quid, leg. centum:
unde: unusquisque benetur centum benedictiones quotidie reddere.
which the Jews are bid to say every day; and might be offended at David's seven
times a day Psalm. 119.64.
and St. Paul's charge to rejoice always 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. Philip. 4.4.
; but as God never thinks it too often to relieve us, let us never think his
praises too many, tedious, or impertinent, but in Psalms Letanies and every
thing, let us give thanks; and when Gloria Patri is not in our mouths, let it
be in our heart, that we may never forget his benefits.

To this we shall only add the particular reason why the Church has placed it
in the close of the penitential part of daily Prayer: and that is in imitation
of holy David, who commonly when he has made his Confession, and declared his
distress, Psalm. 6.9. and 130.7.
and begged pardon and deliverance, turns his petitions into Praises, because
of his lively hope of acceptance; so we being full of hopes that our gracious
Father will forgive us, for his Sons sake by the Ministry of his spirit. We I
say, do now give glory to the Father who grants this Absolution; to the Son
who purchased and obtained it, and to the Holy Ghost who seals and dispenses
it to us; and we also call to mind those innumerable instances of the like
infinite mercies to poor sinners which have been, and ever shall be to the
worlds end; and what heart can conceive or tongue express that exstasy of
ravishing pleasures, which we shall feel at the last day, when we and all true
Penitents that ever were or shall be, shall all join in singing songs of praise
to our deer Redeemer, whom we shall love much because much is forgiven us; we
can foresee those Anthems which shall then be sounded on the battlements of
Heaven by millions of glorious souls rescued from destruction, and we by Faith
have such a sense hereof, that we begin now that Song that we shall sing for
evermore.

. 5. Praise ye the Lord: the Lords name be praised.] The first part of this, or
the Versicle is no other then the English of Hallelujah, which of old was
accounted so sacred, that the Church used it in its native language Amen and
Hallelujah (Quod nec Latino nec Barbaro licet in suam linguam transfer)
Ebraeo cunctas Gentes vocabulo decantare. August. in Pascen. ep. 178.
, and so does St. John in the Revelation keep the word Revelat. 19. ver. 1, 3,
4, and 6.
Hallelujah; but our Church has made it more intelligible to her Children by
teaching it to them in their own language; for in our tongue it is exactly
rendered Hesych. (...) ((...) est contractio Jehovae) Theodoret, in Psalm. 111.
and 113.
Praise ye the Lord. Now this Hallelujah was the name of a Hymn in frequent use
Tobit. 13.18.
among the Jews, who used al^o after the Passover to sing six Psalms from Psalm
113 to Psalm 118 which hymn Matthew. 26.30.
they called the great Hallelujah, because in those Psalms this word is often
repeated; and perhaps to distinguish it from some lesser Hallelujah of daily
use in the Temple service: from the Jews St. John learned it, and the Christian
Church from both; for it was ever annexed to, and frequently repeated in all
their Liturgies, which was so well known that when Olympius the heathen
Philosopher heard a Hallelujah sung early in the morning before any man came
into the Temple of Serapis in Egypt, he fled from the place, gathering by this
prognostic, that the Heathen Temple should become a Christian Church Sozom.
Histor. Trip. l. 9. c. 29.
. It was constantly sung in all Christian Assemblies, though with some variety,
at Rome most solemnly at Easter, in other places Sozom. Hist. Trip. l. 9. c. 39.
all the 50 days after till Whit-sunday, which were days of greatest joy
among them. But every where it was used on the Lords day Vt autem Hallelujah
per illos solos dies quinquaginta in Ecclesia cantetur, non usquequaque
observatur nam and in aliis diebus vary cantatur alibi, ipsis autem Dominicis
diebus ubique. August. ep. 120. vid. id. Psalm. 106. item Ambros. Apol. pro Dav.
and Paul. Diaconus l. 15.
. And thus we imitate the Forms used by Pious and Primitive Antiquity: and if
any ask why it is placed here; I answer first as a return to the Gloria Patri,
in which having worshipped the Trinity, we here adore the Unity, worshipping and
praising Three Persons and One God. Secondly, It may look further back to the
Absolution; for Hallelujah is an (...) a triumphant song for victory over our
enemies, it was first made on that occasion says a Jewish Doctor ^entum and
tres Psalmos dixit David, and non dixit Schira conticum nonec vidisset ruinam
improborum. R.D.K. in Ps. 104.
, and St. John Revel. 19.1, 3, 4, 6.
applies it to that song which the Saints sung for the overthrow of their
enemies, so does old Tobit also, with reverence to Isreal's restoration: and as
Moses, Exodus 15. began his song of Victory, so the Minister does here; and all
the people echo again in the same strain Exodus 15. ver. 1. cum 20. and 21.
, when we behold our sins that ruled us with rigor, and pursued us with guilt
lie dead before our eyes, then it is proper to sing a Hallelujah. Thirdly, It
may look forward to the Reading of the Psalms, and serve as a preface thereto
Hallelujah is the title to many Psalms, see Dr. Ham. on Psalm. 106.1. and Psalm.
111.1.
; because Praise is the subject matter of most of them, and the Jews call it
the Book of Praises, and being about to praise God with Psalms, we do mutually
encourage one another with this most excellent Hallelujah inter omnes cantiones
maxim excellit. id R.D. Kimhi.
Canticle, which some think is the song of Angels in heaven, with whom we hope
at last to bear a part.

SECTION VII. Of the Psalms.
. 1. Of the XCV Psalm, and the Division of it:
THe Holy Spirit being the Enditer, and David the Penman of this sacred Hymn,
the matter of it is unquestionable Heb. 3.7. chapter 4.7.
, and the placing it here to be used in the daily service, does further confirm
(what we may every where observe) the prudent and pious care of the Church in
her choice of this part of Scripture, which is as fit a preparatory to all the
succeeding offices, as is to be found in all the holy word of God. It contains
both directions and exhortations to Praises Prayers and hearing Gods word,
which (as was showed before) Vid. Sect. II.. 8.
, are the duties of our Church Assemblies; and its very composure shows it was
designed for the public service; Grotius thinks for the Feast of Tabernacles
Calv. in Psalm. 95.
, Calvin and others for the Sabbath day in Heb. 3.7.
: but St. Paul in Heb. 3.15.
, whose authority we follow, thinks it fit for every day; and by his
application of it, we have sufficient ground to adopt it into the Christian
worship; having also the Testimony of the Jewish writers, that it belongs to
the times of the Messiah. And it is too evident, the sluggishness of our hearts
to all holy duties, makes those powerful exhortations necessary to awaken us,
those strong arguments to convince us, and those dreadful threatenings and
examples to warn us; which are contained in this Psalm, as will appear by the
following Scheme.

The Analysis of the XCV Psalm.
The XCV Psalm is an Exhortation, 1. To Praise God, and shows 1. The manner
how, ver. I, II. Externally by singing and showing our selves glad
Internally by hearty rejoicing thanksgiving,

2. The reasons why, ver. III, IV. and V. 1. His Essential greatness ver. III.
2. His Superiority above all, ver. III. 3. His Dominion over all, v. IV. 4. His
Creation of all, ver. V.

2. To Pray to him, and shows also 1. The manner how, ver. VI. Internally, by
worshipping ver. VI. Externally by falling down and kneeling
ver. VI.
2. The Reasons why, ver. VII. 1. It is his due, as our Lord God, ver. VII. 2.
It is our Duty and Interest as his sheep
ver. VII.

3. To hear and obey his word, containing 1. A courteous invitation, ver. VIII.
first part expressing 1. The time when we must do it to day first part ver.
VIII. 2. The manner how we should do it, freely, if we will first part ver.
VIII.
2. A necessary caution, declaring part ver. VIII, IX, X, XI. 1. Of what we
must beware, hardness of heart, the 2d part v. VIII. 2. Why we must beware by
example 1. Of the sin of the Jews ver. IX. 2. Of their punishment 1. Gods
displeasure ver. X. 2, Their own ruin ver. XI.






. 2. Ver. I, and II. O come let us sing, etc] It has ever been and still is
the custom for Soldiers when they were about to join in battle 1 Samuel 17.20.
Gr. (...) vid. Grot. in Josh. 6.5.
, to encourage one onother with a general shout; to which we may compare this
joyful Acclamation of the Church Militant; we being now about to besiege heaven
with our Prayers, and to assail the gates of hell by holy resolution, every Man
shows his Own forwardnes^ and reproves his Neighbors backwardness, with [O
come let us, etc.] which word signifies that zealous speed we are to make, that
we may set upon these holy offices; and this we are commanded to do by the
Apostle, whenever we use to meet in the house of God Heb. 10.25.
, especially in Psalms and Spiritual Hymns Ephesians 5.19. Coloss. 3.15.
, then we must admonish and encourage one another, as the Minister and People
do most pathetically in this Psalm, stirring up each others hearts in these two
first verses to praise God; the same thing after the Poetic manner being
expressed in diverse words, from which it appears this Psalm was sitted for the
two sides of the Quire, and so we still use it. The Priest beginning the
Exhortation (O come let us sing, etc.) and the people answering (Let u^ come,
etc.) thereby approving the advice and returning the courteous invitation, and
both minister and people do mutually p^ess the duty, and express their joint
resolutions to glorify God. In private it may suffice that our heart and
spirit rejoice in God Luke 1.46, 47.
: but we are now in public and therefore as God has bestowed his favors 1
Cor. 6.^0.
on both soul and body, we must both in heart and voice glorify him by both.
We must sing his Praises and there^y show even to men who cannot see the heart,
th ^ we are glad and joy^^l in remembering his goodness. We m^st (...) stand
mute, but our tongues must affect our hearts, and the hearts of all about us:
that every man's light may shine clearly, and our neighbors torch may be
kindled at our fire, till the several sparks of gratitude that lie hid in
single hearts be blown up and united into one flame, bright as the blaze of the
Altar; and till we be all turned into holy joy and love, which will be the
effect of the zealous performing the outward part. But we must also be sure to
let our heart make a Unison with our tongue Ephesians. 5.19, etc. Romans 15.6.
, or else the grunting of swine is not more harsh and unpleasant to our ears,
then the best harmony of their voices in Gods, who only dwell on the sounds and
never observe the sense, nor excite devout affections: as a caution against
such formality, there are four good considerations proposed in these two
Verses. First, The Person to whom these Praises are addressed [unto the Lord]
who sees our hearts, and cannot (as men) be deceived with Verbal complements.
Secondly, The reason why we praise him, because he is [the strength of our
Salvation] a Rock of Defense See Dr. Hammond Annot. on Psalm. 89. ver. 26. [l]
Sir. potentissimus meus liberator, and LXX. (...), etc.
to us, and a mighty Champion for us, and powerful rescuer of us, on whose
power and mercy relies the strength of all our hopes for this world and the
next. Thirdly, The place where we praise him, we are [before his presence] in
those Assemblies where he peculiarly manifests himself. The Jews were before
the Ark, but St. Paul teaches us that we come into the Holiest of all, for we
Christians are admitted into the Presence Chamber, and if we mock him, we do it
to his very face. Fourthly, The manner in which he expects to be praised, even
that we be [glad in him] and rejoice in the Lord, not with the mirth of a
Theater, loose and voluptuous, but with the joys of Cherubins, and all those
celestial Orders, whose joy is kindled from the pure beams of the Divine love.
These things as seriously thought on as they are frequently repeated, would
spiritualize our joy, and help us both in heart and voice to glorify the
fountain of all good.

. 3. Ver. III, IV, and V. For the Lord is a great God, etc.] It Is impossible we
should do any action cheerfully till we are informed of the reason why it must
be done; and when the understanding is convinced fully, the Will chooses
freely, and then all the faculties of the Soul, and members of the Body, lend
their help readily to put it in execution. For which cause these three Verses
contain the Reasons and Motives to that duty of praising God in heart and
voice, to which the former Verses exhort us: For as the Subjects of great
Princes do celebrate their masters praises with Panegyricks, and with loud
hyperbole's set forth the greatness of their Power, multitude of their Vassals,
largeness of their Dominions, and the excellency of their atcheivements: so we
being before the King of Kings and our particular benefactor, are more firmly
obliged to glorify him, and can more justly commend him upon all these
accounts, then the Favorites of the greatest Monarch upon Earth, who are
forced to magnify small matters, and add many, to fill up their Lords
character; but we need only relate the truth, even that our God is infinite and
immense in himself, absolute and supreme in his Authority, universal and
unlimited in his Dominions, glorious and admirable in his Works; all which will
quicken our Praises, if we consider them severally as they are laid down in
order in these Verses.

1. The Lord is a great God] Let us view his Essential greatness and Immensity,
which places him without the bounds of our apprehension; but he is so much the
more to be esteemed Hoc est quod Deum aestimari facit dum aestimari non capit.
Tert. Apol. Nec videri, potes; visu clarior; nec comprehendi, tactu purior, nec
aestimari sensu major est, and id^o sic eum digne aestimamus dum inestimabilem
diximus. Cyprian.
, because he cannot be comprehended: our senses cannot represent him nor can
those thoughts (that can measure out heaven and earth) contain him, who is not
so properly said to be in the world, as the world in him; for he is every where
(...). Philo.
, but is confined no where, and though to pursue this contemplation would amaze
our understandings, rather then help our Devotion, yet it will teach us
humility, and to supply with admiration what we cannot conceive clearly nor
explicate fully; and it will engage us to extol him as much as is possible,
that our praises may hear some proportion with his greatness. Yet let us
believe that whatever we say or think of him here, is so far short of what he
really is, that when we are admitted to the Beatifick Vision, we shall confess
with that Queen that the one half was never told us 1 Kings 10.6, 7, 8.
.

2. And a great King above all Gods] Let us take notice of his Supremacy over
all, not only Men but Gods; for though there be no other God but he alone, yet
there are many to whom that name is given 1 Cor. 8.5.
. Idolaters give it to deceased Heroes and Devils, of which Eusebius out of
Hesiod reckons 30000, and St. Augustine advances the sum to 300000, every one
of which was honored with magnificent Temples, sumptuous Altars, costly and
pompous Rites and Sacrifices, curious Images, and rich Statues; they were
attended with millions of Priests, maintained at the public charge, enriched
with large Donatives, advanced to the highest dignities: and all this done by
Kings and Emperors, Senators and Philosophers. The Greatest, Richest, and
Wisest in the World, in honor of a Creature, nay a Devil, which are but the
slaves to our great and glorious God; and if such honors are paid them, what
does he that is both their and our Master deserve from us? Oh ye Christians,
when ye go about to praise the true God, behold the smoking Altars and
bleeding Sacrifices, the triumphant processions, and solemn addresses which are
paid so freely by the slaves of Gods Vassals, and be ashamed of your rude and
cheap worshipings; attend the pleasing harmony of rarest voices and sweetest
instruments, which wait upon the hymns of those that tremble at the name of
your Lord, and blush to offer up either flat or feigned gratulations: as you
have the greatest God, so he deserves the noblest adorations. Again, Angels are
called Gods Psalm. 8.6. and Psalm. 97.7. compared with Heb. 1.6.
, and it may be applied to them; they are so glorious that those holy men to
whom they have appeared could scarce refrain from giving them Divine Adoration:
they are truly admirable for the brightness of their presence, the swiftness of
their motion, clearness of their knowledge, and greatness of their power: Yet
these are but the officers of his Courts and Executors of his Will, who pay him
their duty with loud praises, veiled faces, and submiss prostrations. Now if
the Attendants be bright as the Sun, quick as Lightning, and powerful as
Thunder, what is he that is their Lord? what Songs of Eucharist does he
deserve? Lastly, the Governors of this World, are also called by the name of
Gods, but they are his Creatures, and they have no power but from him Exodus
21.6. Psalm. 82.1. and 1^8.1.
, no honor but as they administer his Rights and represent his Person; and can
you see their large ^etinues, and solemn observances, or hear the strained
praises which their flattering Parasites cast upon them, who are your Lords
servants and Tributaries; and will you give less to the King of Kings, the Lord
of Men and Devils, Angels and the highest of the Rulers of this earth?

3. In his hand are all the corners of the earth; and the strength of the hills
is his also.] Let us take a prospect of the Vastness and Immensity of his
Empire, which has no other limits then those of the Universe; for both Sea and
Land are in his hand, that is in his power, and under his command, and at his
disposal, so are the most hidden and secret corners Abstrusissima terrae. Vatab.
of the earth, into which man's eye cannot search, and also the inaccessible
tops of the loftiest mountains Lassitudines Monti^m. Heb.
, to climb which would tire the strongest, and are seldom reckoned among the
Dominions of earthly Kings, being either fortified by Robbers and so
impregnable, or deserted by the husbandman and so unserviceable: Yet the
darkest Caverns and highest rocks and mountains, which own no other Lord, even
they are his, his eyes discern the one and his power can reach the other. His
dominion reaches to the corners or uttermost parts of the Earth (as some here
read) LXX. (...) Vulg. fines. Psalm. 139.7.
so far as no Princes Armies could penetrate, nor perhaps people inhabit; yet
these parts of the World are his, and those vast mountains (whose
Immoveableness is the emblem of his unshaken and eternal principality) are as
so many natural bulwarks for the defense of his Kingdom; which takes in the
inhabitants of Heaven, the armies of the Abyss, and is large as the World,
strong as the most inassailable mountains. This King of Kings and Lord of the
Universe may challenge the most hearty and humble praises from his servants;
which we might further from their Allegorical Exposition of these words, who
apply them to the several conditions of men Psalm. 72.3. and 148.9.
; for although he be so great, the meanest and poorest are not below his
notice, and though he condescend so far, yet the very richest and greatest
(terrible as the hills of the Robbers) are not above his power; but he rules
and orders all, so that nothing happens to Kings or slaves but by his
permission, and therefore he may expect Glory from all sorts of men.

4. The Sea is his, and he made it, and his hands prepared the dry Land.] Let
us consider the greatness of his works, and we shall see the Arch of Heaven,
the Pillars of the Earth, and the Fountains of the great deep, were contrived
by his wisdom, and finished by his power; so that without boasting he may say
of this goodly Fabric, as the vain Assyrian did of his Royal City Dan. 4.30.
, and none can contradict him. The words Sea and Land are the two constituent
parts and put for the whole, and these are his by right of Creation, which sure
is the justest Title. But therefore is the making of the Sea, and adorning the
dry land here mentioned, because there is a special mark of his Wisdom and
Providence in making that separation (observed by the very Heathens). See
Grotius de Verit. Relig. Christianae lib. 1. cap. 7.
For he has bound that unfixed Element in a girdle of sand which it cannot
break; and not only restrained it from overflowing us, but made it serve our
necessities, and lend its help for the intercourse and mutual supplies of the
most distant Nations. And by these two words of Sea and Land, we mus^
understand all the furniture of both, which yield us such variety of
provisions; all these are Gods Creatures, but by him freely assigned to our
use; desiring no other Tribute from us, but to pay those Praises to our
bountiful Lord and noble Benefactor, which none of the dumb creatures can do;
and if he have also given us tongues, we shall be most ungrateful, if we
glorify him not with them. Thus we have lead you in these Meditations to
discover the glories of Gods Kingdom, as Philo tells of his Prophet, who upon
a sight of the whole, was asked (before the Creation of Man) if there wanted
any thing to complete so brave a work; he answered, there needed nothing but
one to explain that goodly Work, and glorify the maker of it. And then (says
Philo) was man created and brought into this stately Theater to do those
offices: pity is it you have eyes to see, ears to hear, mouths to taste, and
souls to judge and apprehend, if you have not hearts and tongues to sing the
Encomiums of this Great King, who has made all things so wonderfully and given
them to you so freely. You are pirates and robbers if you seize the provisions
of Sea or Land, and do not heartily give thanks to the Lord of them. Let the
serio^s apprehension of all this tune your hearts and voices to sing praises in
the highest, to so great a God, so high a Lord, of so vast perfections, and
endless Dominions; of so infinite power, and such noble bounty, that we ow our
selves and all we have to him.

. 4. Ver. VI, and VII. O come let us worship; etc.] The people of the East
exceeded all others in their expressions of reverence to their Kings; and in
Persia (...). Artaban.
it was established by law, that they should adore their Prince as the Visible
Image of God; so that (as Curtius notes) Darius received divine honor from his
subjects. But we are now before the King of Kings whose Empire is universal,
and his Dominions boundless, and therefore we may well advise one another to
use the most lowly gestures that may express our holy fear of, and awful
regard to so great a Majesty. Prostration of the body (the greatest sign of
honor among those Nations) is now out of use; but kneeling is still used in
all addresses to mortal Princes, and that is now among us an expression of the
greatest civil respect from inferiors; wherefore let us not repine if we be
commanded to kneel before our great God, the Lord of Heaven and Earth; since it
was a custom used by the Jews, and Christ himself recommended it by Scripture
Genuflexio in oratione, tam ex divina quam humana traditione provenit. Calvin.
Inst. l. 4.
, and great examples of its early observance in the Christian Church Vid.
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 5. An. Christi 170. Genua flectimus orantes. Origin. in Numb.
, and the unanimous consent of all pious men. But he that shall behold the
abominable irreverence and saucy behavior now used in our Devotions, will
think it no more then needs for us severely to reprove the people for it: as
the Ancient Fathers (who had not so much cause) use to do Diacono clamante
flectamus genua, maximam partem populi velut columnas erectas stare conspicio,
quod Christianis dum in Ecclesia oratur nec licet nec expedi^. Caesarius.
Arelat. Hom. 30. vid. item Hieron. in Ephesians. cap. 5.
, and both by our words and examples daily to say to them, O come let us kneel,
etc. not to Idols or Images the works of your hands (as Heathens and some that
are called Christians do) b^t to the Lord your Maker, who made both your Soul
and Body, and expects reverence from both; especially in public where you are
by outward reverence to give testimony of your inward fear of his holy name;
and as Christ says he that has ears; so I say he that has knees to kneel let
him kneel to him that is the glorious Maker of the whole Body the whole Man,
nay of the whole World. But we may observe that though all these words are used
to express outward reverence, yet [Worship] is a general word and signifies all
parts of Gods service, and especially prayer John 4.24. Acts 8.27.
, so that to Worship may here signify to Pray, and as before we encouraged one
another to praise God; so now having represented the Omnipotency and
All Sufficiency of God, we invite one another to pray to this great God and
mighty King, who made all Creatures, and disposes of all things, and can
relieve us whatever our wants be; we need not fear to ask what he cannot do, or
to be sent back for want of power to help (as great Kings sometimes do with
their Petitioners 2 Kings 6.27.
.) Have we such a God, and shall we be slow to worship him, or careless and
unmannerly when we make our applications to him? no sure if we love our selves,
we shall make haste to come, and be reverent when we are before him. If we want
any thing, and do not pray to him for it, he may justly suppose we question his
Power or Sufficiency, and and take it very ill, but if we pray to him with
humility, he never accounts it boldness, but accepts it as an acknowledgment
that we believe his Authority and Supremacy, and declare our dependence upon
him, who is our maker and therefore will be our preserver: for no man makes a
curious piece and then suffers it to decay by minding it no further, much less
will God despise the work of his own hands, when he can so easily preserve us.
This is the first motive to our putting up Petitions to this great God, because
he is our Maker; but on this ground all the Heathen world is as much obliged,
and has as good cause of hopes as we, because he has created them as well as
Christians. But in the seventh verse we are taught, an especial obligation lies
upon us (besides what concerns all mankind) because he is Our God and we are
his people; the Jews were once so, but now they are rejected for unbelief, and
we adopted into his family Ephesians. 2.19. Gr. (...).
, and admitted nearer to God then ever they were; so that he may justly expect
we should worship him and pray to him, for every Nation does that to their God,
though a feigned Deity Micah. 4.5.
. But he is the Lord whom we adore, and therefore able; he is our God and
consequently willing to grant our Requests: There is a mutual Covenant between
him and us, he will defend us with an especial providence, and we must serve
him with an extraordinary Devotion. Oh, blessed are we who have this Almighty
and most glorious Lord and Ruler of all the World for our God! Why do we look
disconsolate, or complain of our wants to them that either will not pity us or
cannot help us? go ye to the Lord, and complain to your God, for his is all
that power and glory you heard of before. We did not choose him but he chose us
to be his Flock Psalm. 23.1. John 15.16.
, he feeds us and folds us, we eat in his pasture, and are defended by his
hand, for our being under his hand Genesis 39.8. John 13.15. and Deuteronomy. 38.3. Number.
33.1.
denotes his care of us, and undertaking to lead us and keep us, and whereas we
are called his sheep or flock, that is his subjects; for a shepherd is put for
a King Zach. 11.6. (...). see both offices joined in two words Psalm. 78.72, 73.
in Scripture, and sheep for Subjects, his Pasture shows he feeds us, his hand
expresses his ruling of us; wherefore if we want any good let us remember our
God feeds all, much more his own sheep, let us pray to him and our King will
furnish us: Or if we fear any evil, let us call to mind his hand is over us,
his particular providence is engaged for us, he watches over us night and day.
Let us but trust in him and pray to him, for the continuance of what we have,
and the supply of what we want, and we need fear no evil, no cunning Fox nor
ravenous Wolf shall ever be able to pluck us out of his hand.

. 5. Ver. VIII. To day if ye will hear his voice, etc.] This first sentence in
the Hebrew is annexed to the former Verse, as the Condition on which God will
accept us as his sheep, and answer our prayers (by continuing the supplies of
his bounty to us and the defense of his providence over us) if we will every
day hearken to his voice; for his own sheep always do so John 10.4. and so
must we follow him who is our shepherd and goes before us by his example John
10.3. see Dr. Hammonds Annotations.
, and calls us after by the voice of his Word, otherwise we reject him from
being a shepherd over us, and so he may justly cast us off. But the Greek
Interpreters begin (as we do in imitation of them) a new sentence here, and are
warranted so to do by the change of the Person, which (is often used in holy
Writ, but) has a peculiar Emphasis here: hitherto we have been speaking to one
another to stir up our hearts to praise God and to pray to him. Now the Holy
Ghost himself Heb. 3.7.
to show that all our Devotions will be in vain unless we resolve to obey Prove.
1. ver. 24. comp. with ver. 28.
Gods word, is brought in warning us to hear the voice of God, as we expect he
should hear our petitions: Wherefore it is expressed with Majestic Authority
[if ye will] you may if you will, I will enable you to do it, and it is best
for you so to do, and I advise you to it; or as others [if ye will] implies a
wish; Oh that ye would hearken and obey: Ita (...). si, per O utinam: Exodus
32.32. and(...). Luc. 19.42. and Cap. 22.42.
for it is not unfrequent for God to wish we would do that which he knows to be
for our good; not but that he could make us do it by his omnipotency, yet he
does not deal with us as with irrational creatures by force but entreaty Deuteronomy.
4.29. and Chap. 32.29. Deus non eo modo quo per causas naturales agit movet
hominu^ voluntates sed alliciendo. Maimon.
: because he abhors such constrained observance; therefore he sends his word
and his servants every day, and gives us sufficient grace every day, and we may
hear and do his Will every day, if our own wilful obstinacy hinder not; and if
it do, he is grieved for us because we will dye Matthew. 23.37.
. Methinks it should melt our hearts to hear our gracious God so passionately
wish, and so earnestly call for our conversion, and to consider how he has
long in vain waited for it, adding one day to another even to this very day
(...). Clem. Alex. Protreptic. Hodie istud permanebit usque ad finem seculi.
R.R.
; yet we put him off, when for ought we know this may be our last day, and then
everlasting night begins with us, and though others have their [hodie] still,
we must never more hear this word this sweet [to day] if we would give all the
world for it. Oh foolish people how carelessly do you let this irrecoverable
treasure, this present day pass away, and never consider the loss till it be
too late! The Devil and your wicked hearts, say to day you are too busy, too
much taken up in other concerns, and to morrow you will hear his voice, and do
his will. But the Holy Ghost says, if ye will hear, it must be to day: for
this day is yours, but to morrow is his whom you provoke, by casting away to
day: and how care you promise what is another? or how can you expect God
should give you more time when you so despise this you have? it is likely you
may never see another day, because the more you have the more you mock God, and
the further you put him off. Gods word read or preached will sound in your ears
however this one day more, to try if yet you will so hear it as to observe it
(which is the only right hearing) Genes. 42.22.
if not, though your day of grace has lasted long it shall quickly have an
end; the Jews had their To day, but they would not hear, and now they have it
no more, let us beware by their sad example. But least we should be ignorant of
the cause of these dangerous delays, the good Spirit teaches us it is by
hardness of heart; and least any should pretend their hearts were by natural
corruption become most obdurate, we are here charged that we do not harden
them, to intimate it is wilful obstinacy not natural disability Quibus verbis
indicatur non ex alio font manare nostrum adversus Deum rebellionem, quam ex
volunta^ia improbitate, dum illius gratiae aditum obstruimus. Calvin. in Heb.
3.8.
: for God would take away the stony heart from all who are in Covenant with
him, if they did not wilfully resist the Holy Ghost Exodus 36.26. Acts 7.51.
, and like the deaf adder stop their ears; and if we consult St. Paul we shall
find two causes of hardness of heart. First unbelief, Heb. 3.12. of the
threatenings pronounced against sin, as if they should never be inflicted, and
of the promises made to assist us in, and reward us for a holy life, as if they
should never be performed: by which men go on stupidly in sin, and fear no
evil, and slight all the ways of holiness, which they think are tedious and
unprofitable; though the Divine truth affirm the contrary as long as men
believe it not, all our calls are in vain. A second cause of hardening us is
the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13. which promises present pleasures and
profits, with all sensual satisfactions, and if men believe Satan in this
which is so false, and doubt of or deny all that the God of truth affirms, what
thunder can awaken them? they will answer to all the calls of God and his
Spirit that they will not leave their fatness Judges 9.9.11.
and sweetness, since they see no harm in those ways and find carnal content;
but do not expect any pleasure in or reward for the other, if they could do
them. Why then do you make excuses or complain you are not softened and
bettered by the word of God, when you come to his house Quid ergo miramini vos
quae in scholam affertis, ea domum refer: number ut decreta vel abjecturi, vel
correcturi, vel commutaturi adveniti^? Arrian. in Epict. l. 2. c. 21.
resolved not to forsake any of your evil courses, since you trust the Devil,
and believe not him that speaks from heaven? But be advised and take heed,
behold a sad example of those hard hearted Jews who dealt thus with God at
Massah and Meribah (which words signify provocation and temptation) they
lusted for water, and because they were not presently supplied, they blasphemed
God, and questioned his providence, and doubted of his promises, and were so
hardened by their lust, that they feared not his dreadful indignation, which
therefore fell upon them. This day is made by God a day of mercy; but if you be
resolved to hearken to your lusts, if they call but for water, and will not
hear the calls of God, if you doubt his promises and despise his threatenings as
they did, you will turn this day of grace into a day of provocation and
temptation, and perhaps of destruction and desolation, as you do deserve.

. 6. Ver. IX, X, and XI. When your Fathers tempted me, etc.] It was the boast
of the Jews that they followed the steps of their forefathers, and so they
did, but not of the best of them; not of Abraham who no sooner heard Gods voice
but he was obedient to it John 8.39. Genesis 17.23.
, but they followed the steps of those obstinate and provoking wretches which
God delivered out of Egypt, conducted them in the wilderness, and sustained
them there with bread from heaven; yet they did frequently and continually
discover their disobedience and unbelief, by inventing strange ways to try and
prove the patience and fidelity of God, growing rude and insolent in every
denial, discontent and clamorous if they had not every day a new miracle, and
although he had done so much to testify his affection to them and care of
them; yet upon every slight occasion they conclude, that they had neither his
favor toward them, nor his presence among them. God indeed was so merciful
that he suffered these their evil manners forty years Acts 13.18.
, but not without loathing and abhorrency and high indignation Ver. 10. (...).
Aqu. and Sym. cum taedio pertuli. Vatabl. fas^idio habui. Jun. and Tremel.
; and though he did not presently destroy them, yet he gave sufficient
testimony that he was displeased at these their dealings. They asked every
thing of God they wanted, and were impatient of denial; but yet they would deny
God that called them to repentance every day, and thus they mistook him and
formed wrong notions of him, falsely imagining to be heard without obedience,
or else wretchedly concluding, God was not able or not willing to make good his
promises. But they must be strangers to his Power, truth and mercy that think
so. And yet as they erred in their minds, so God made them err and wander in
that desolate wilderness, and he grew so highly incensed at last at their
obstinacy and unbelief, that he unalterably proposed (which is expressed by
taking an Oath) they should none of them come into that Land of Caanan, nor
enjoy that rest, since they sometimes despised it and preferred Egypt before
it, and otherwhiles doubted whether they ever could obtain it; so that
notwithstanding all their privileges and all that God had done for them, these
vile returns provoked him that loved them once so deerly, to destroy them in
the wilderness, and make good that promise to their children, which the Fathers
had made themselves unworthy of. This is the sum of this sad example, and of
what happened to those Jews for our learning 1 Cor. 10.11. Omne quod evenit
patribus signum fuit filiis. Moses Gerund. in Genesis 12.
, and as David set it before the men of his time, and St. Paul those of his, so
does our Church daily set it before you for a warning, that you may not do as
they did, least you also perish as they did. You are delivered by Christ from
the bondage of Sin and Satan, you are the chosen people of God, pilgrims in
the wilderness of this world, and travellors to the heavenly Caanan; and here
is set before you some that of old did miscarry that you may shun those paths
that lead them to ruin; and that you may hearken to Gods calls, and believe
his Promises, and despise Egypt, and be content with his providence, and then
you shall arrive at your desired rest. Otherwise do not encourage your selves,
because God spares you; and think you may deny him to day as you did yesterday;
for he may suffer these abuses from you many years, and be highly provoked
against you in his own breast, though his anger break not out in your
destruction presently; and you had best take heed you trifle not, and mistake
till God vow your deprivation; for then you are irrecoverably lost. These
Israelites were going to a temporal Caanan, and so dyed only temporally (for
ought we know) and lost the pleasures of that pleasant land. But we are invited
to a heavenly rest, and if we provoke God as they did, our loss is ten thousand
times greater, and we must dye eternally. Acquaint your selves therefore with
Gods ways, and do not delight in such destroying mistakes as you are pleased
to hug in your bosoms. He is merciful to those that obey him, and will perform
all the expectations of his faithful servants; but those that presume he should
do so to them, and yet continue to stop their ears, though he spare them long,
yet he will cut them off at last; which being so certain, and having so plain
an example this day propounded to you, I hope you will this day hearken to the
invitations that you hear, out of Gods word; and resolve now to begin a new
course of life, and if this have so good an effect, you will have great cause
to bless God for sparing you so long, and warning you so seriously, and giving
this one effectual call more, and then you may well conclude this Divine Hymn
with, Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the beginning, etc. Amen.

The Paraphrase of the XCV Psalm.
VERSE I. [O come] with all speed, and [let us] who are here met together in
the house of God, with loud and cheerful voices [sing unto the Lord] and having
our affections raised by the remembrance of his mercy [let us] not only
outwardly and vocally, but inwardly and [heartily rejoice in] him that is the
Rock of our defense, the foundation of our hope, and [the strength] by which we
shall be brought to the fruition [of our salvation.]

Ver. II. He is present every where, but especially here where we assemble to
worship him, therefore [let us come] into his house, where we are immediately
[before his presence] (who sees our thoughts) having our hearts filled [with
thanksgiving] and gratitude for all his favors: And the more to set forth his
love, and quicken our brethren, let us openly rejoice [and show our selves
glad in him] not with any vain songs, but [with Psalms] which are indicted by
his Spirit, and appointed by the Church, as Forms of our daily Praises.

Ver. III. And we have great reason to glorify him with heart and voice [for
the Lord] Jehovah is not like any other that is falsely worshipped, for he [is a
great God] infinite and incomprehensible in his Essence, supreme and absolute
in his Dominion [and a great King] who commands over Angels of Heaven, Devils
of Hell, and the greatest earthly Monarchs, being far [above all] that are
supposed or called [Gods] and therefore deserves a nobler worship, then
Heathens give to their feigned Deities and guardian Angels, or flattering
Courtiers to their Royal Masters.

Ver. IV. He is not limited in his Power and Providence to one City, or
confined to a single Province, but [in his hands] and Power, under his Rule and
Government [are all the] remotest and most secret [corners of the earth] no
place is too far for him to reach, too deep for him to discover, or too high
and strong for him to subdue; for the height [and the strength of the hills]
which are inaccessible to men, these [are his also] and serve for the bulwarks
of his Kingdom.

Ver. V. He is Lord of all the world, and commands over that unruly Abyss of
Waters [the Sea] which he binds in fetters of sand, that it should not harm us,
but serve our needs for he has given us power over it, because it [is his] by
an unquestionable Title, for he created [and he made it] and therefore ought to
give laws to it, and to dispose of it, and all the earth, because he took away
the covering of Waters from the ground [and his hands] made Herbs and Fruits,
Birds and Beasts, and so furnished and [prepared the dry land] to be a
habitation for the Sons of Men.

Ver. VI. [O come] then since we have so gracious and All-sufficient a God [let
us] not only praise him for what we have, but also pray unto him and [worship]
him in spirit and truth, petitioning him for the relief of all our necessities,
with all possible zeal and sincerity in our hea^ts and with all lowliness and
reverence in our postures; let us bow [and fall down] on our faces [and kneel]
to so glorious a King, behaving our selves decently and humbly [before the
Lord] who is able to do all things, and being [our maker] will not suffer us
the work of his own hands to perish.

Ver. VII. But besides his Creating of us (upon which ground others have hope
to be heard as well as we,) our peculiar interest in him may encourage us to
pray to him [for he is the Lord] whom we believe in, and who calls himself
[our God] and although he made all men, yet he has especially made himself
known to us [and we are the people] whom he feeds with his Word and Sacraments,
and whom he has chosen to be the flock [of his pasture] that he himself may
watch over us day and night, to secure us from sin and Satan, because we are
his especial subjects [and the sheep] that shall ever be preserved by the care
of his eye, and the power [of his hand] if we come at his call and hearken to
his voice.

Ver. VIII. O ye peculiar people of God, observe how when his Word is read or
preached to you, his Ministers nay his Spirit does every day invite you to
Repentance, saying [to day] after you have lost so many, and have so few
remaining, while this is in your power it will be well for you [if ye will
hear] and obey [his voice] and that he may not call in vain, take heed you
wilfully [harden not your hearts] by delighting in the pleasures of sin, and
doubting of the promises, or slighting the threatenings of God; for the event
will be as sad [as in the provocation] of the Divine Anger by the unbelieving
Israelites at Meribah [and in the day of] their presumptuous [temptation] of
Gods patience at Massah [in the wilderness] of [Sin] after they came out of
Egypt.

Ver. IX. This example God set before the Posterity of those obstinate Jews,
saying to them (as now he does to us) remember the time [when your fathers]
whom you glory in, disobeyed my commands, and questioned my Providence, and
durst not trust my promises, but [tempted me] by requiring miracles from me to
satisfy their lusts, and by this they supposed to have [proved me] and made
trial of my power and love; although there was evidences enough of both in
their miraculo^s deliverance, wherein they found my kindness [and saw my works]
which were so wonderful, they would have convinced any but such stubborn
wretches.

Ver. X. For all this I forbore them (as I have done you who serve me as they
did) yet [fourty years long] I spared them from utter destruction, and still
they were as rebellious as at first, so that all that time [was I grieved with]
the perverseness of [this Generation] At last when nothing would amend them, I
declared my utter detestation of them [and said] of those whom I had once
chosen [it is a people] whom nothing can reclaim, a refractory crew [that do
err in] the thoughts of [their hearts] concerning me, imagining me faithless
and false, or weak and impotent, and no wonder [for they have not known] nor
never would observe [my waies] to destroy presumptuous sinners, but to give
grace and glory to holy and humble men, which put their trust in me.

Ver. XI. Wherefore I warn you all to take heed least you refuse to hear my
voice, and neglect to repent to day, for so you will provoke me to deal with
you as I did with them [unto whom I sware] and steadfastly resolved [in my
wrath] being justly incensed at their baseness [that they should] all perish in
the wilderness, and, for all their confidence, one of them should [not enter
into] the blessed land of promise, nor partake of [my rest] nor did they; for I
cut them off from the possession of Caanan for disobedience and unbelief, and I
will keep all such out of the heavenly Jerusalem; lo I have said it that you
may be warned and turn in time. Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the
Beginning, etc.

. VII. Of the daily use of the Psalms in the Morning and Evening Prayer.
THE Book of Psalms seems to be a Collection of thos^ devout hymns wherewith
holy men did praise God upon public or private occasions, and are fitted to
all Conditions of the Church in general, and of particular persons; and are
Divine forms of Prayer and Praise indicted by the Spirit of God, with such
admirable variety that we may easily Collect a Form from thence, either to
Petition for any thing we need, or to glorify the name of God for any mercy we
have received. Wherefore they are used and commended by Christians, Jews, and
Mahumetans. And although we have many differences among the several parties
that are called Christians, yet all agree to make use of these incomparable and
sacred Anthems; so that Cassander designed to compose a Liturgy out of them,
that might serve his purpose of universal accommodation, and be received by all
Christians. This joint consent and universal approbation, will make it needless
to spend much time to commend what all admire. Yet it were easy to reckon up
those excellent titles Virtutum Organum, Ambr. Theologiae compendium, Basil.
Epitome totius Scripturae, Athan. Parva Biblia, Luther.
, and honorable characters Psalmus benedictio populi est, Dei laus, plebis
laudatio, plausus omnium, sermo universorum, vox Ecclesiae, fidei canora
confessio, etc. vid. Ambros. praef. ad Psalm.
which have been given of them. They are the instrument of Virtue, the marrow
of Divinity, the storehouse of Devotion, the Epitome of all Holy Scripture.
They contain excellent Forms; to bless the people, to praise God, to rejoice in
his favor, to bewail his absence, to confess our faith, to crave pardon of our
sins, deliverance from our enemies, and all blessings for the Church of God. In
the use of them we ought to exercise all Graces; Repentance and Faith, Love to
God, and Fear of him, Charity to men, and Compassion to the miserable, with all
the rest of those Christian qualifications that our souls must be endued with:
the Composure of them declares they are fitted for men of all ages and degrees,
in all Estates and Conditions, Young and Old; Kings, Priests and People; in
Prosperity and Adversity; here they may find that which so exactly s^tes them
all, as it their condition had been foreseen, and particularly provided for;
and if any who grant this shall except that many of the Psalms are not
applicable to their condition, I shall confidently affirm, that a devout soul
in its enjoyment of the divine favor, can be humbled in using the complaints
for want of it, uttered by better men, and thereby they are moved to see what
they deserve, and to consider what many of their brethren want; so on the
contrary, a Pious man under trouble of spirit can by the spiritual rejoycings
there described, behold the goodness of God to others, and foresee his own
deliverance, receiving thereby additions to his faith, hope, and patience. He
that forgives his e^emies, and wishes well to all particular persons, may
repeat those curses delivered in this book, as predictions of the misery like
to befall the inveterate enemies of Religion, or as deprecations against sin
and Satan, and all the spiritual enemies of our souls, which are the Amalek
with whom we must have an endless war, and whose extirpation we must endeavor
and pray for. The like might be said of all the rest in all other cases; but
this may suffice to justify the Church in more frequent using these Psalms
then any other part of Gods word, because this is the quintescence of all
Scripture Historia instruit, Lex docet, Prophetia annuntiat, correptio
castigat, morabitas suadet, in lib^o Psalmorum profectus omnium est. Ambros. ut
supr.
accommodated for Worship and Devotion. And so it was esteemed by the Jews; and
therefore the greatest part of the Temple-service consisted of Forms contrived
out of the Psalms, and committed to the Masters of the Quire, who used those
Forms 1 Chronicles. 16.7. ad ver. 37. collected out of 105.96. and 106 Psalms. Ab
eo tempore ordinary post-hac Deus fuit celebratus Psalmis and sacra musica,
Osiander. See 1 Chr. 25.2.
, and praised God by them long after David's time 2 Chronicles. 29.30.
, yea at this very day their Liturgy is an extract principally out of these
Psalms Buxtorf. Synag. cap. 5. Et versus alios complures and Psal^is Davidicis
recitare solent, etc. ibid.
, which they use in their Synagogues at this present. And no man is ignorant
how constantly the Primitive Christians used them in their Assemblies 1 Cor.
14.26. Coloss. 3.16. (...). Constit. Apost. l. 2. cap. 57.
, so that Pliny describes their service by singing hymns to the honor of God,
which they used so much in public, that the very Women and Children and
meanest Mechanics Psalmorum oracula and domi canunt and in foro circumferunt,
Basil. in 1 Psalm. See Eusebius. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 1. and more fully, Hammond
preface to the Psalms.
could say them by heart, and sung them at home and abroad even about their
labors; making them at once the exercise of their piety, and the refreshment
of their minds, recreating themselves and glorifying God: and hereby they had
answers ready to oppose all Satan's temptations, and the most illiterate might
pray to God, or praise him in any circumstances, by a Form of his own Inditing.
How happy should we be if we were now as perfect in them! The best way to be so
is to frequent the Church daily where they are used, and there we shall at once
be refreshed with the music, and instructed by the frequent recital of them;
and so we shall at the same time be pleased and profited; we shall have holy
principles conveyed into our minds with pleasure O sapiens Doctoris inventum,
qui simul canere, and utilia nos discere excogitavit! Basil. ut supr.
. And for this cause I suppose the music which these sacred songs were first
set to, is still continued in the Church (as it was among the Jews and best
Christians) Ad S. Altar iterum rediens Psalmorum incipit Melos, concinentibus
secum sacra carmina omnibus Ecclesiastici Ordinis gradibus. Dionys. Areop.
Eccles. hist. c. 3. Vid. item Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 17. Eccl. histor.
. Which ought to mind us of the music of the Celestial Quire, and may calm our
souls, and gently raise our affections Grotius in 1 Samuel 10. v. 5.
, putting us into a fit posture to glorify our Father which is in heaven, and
sweetning these pious Lessons that will take the deeper root, because the heart
was first mollified and prepared to receive them; for sure he is of a rugged
temper, and has an ill composed soul, who feels not these effects of that
grave and pleasant harmony which does accompany this office: and we may fear
they are not of David's spirit, whose ears are offended, or spirit disturbed, or
devotion hindered, by vocal or instrumental music; but oh ye prudent and pious
Christians who bring no prejudices against these things, you know how often your
souls have been rapt up with ecstasies of devotion, and your minds filled with
Ideas of the Celestial glory, and your hearts enflamed with strong affections,
by these sweet strains. Wherefore do you endeavor when you are so disposed
with fervency and holy ardors to bless the name of God: And be sure you never
omit to bear a part your selves, in heart or voice or both, for so the Church
requires, and so the people of God in all ages Exodus 15. ver. 1. cum 20. (...)
Heb. canere and respondere signif. Med. Diatrib.
have sung their hymns by turns and responses (which Ignatius first ordained in
Christian Churches Socrat. Hist. trip. l. 6. c. 8.
) supposing by this means they might best stir up each others affections, and
come nearest to the heavenly pattern, where the Seraphims cry one to another,
holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts Isai. 6.3.
: and if we zealously imitate them here, we shall be the fitter to bear a part
with them in their eternal Hallelujahs. But our designed brevity will allow us
no further to press these things, because our principal aim is to help
Devotion, not satisfy curiosity, and therefore shall betake our selves to the
next Section, where we must treat of the means to use the daily Psalms to the
benefit of our souls.

. 8. There is not any part of Divine Service that might be of more general
advantage then the use of the Psalms, if due care were taken by us of three
things: 1. To be fitly disposed for them before we begin. 2. To be suitably
affected when we are about them. 3. To retain firmly those affections
afterward: Concerning each of which something must be said.

1. For preparation, It is most certain that our hearts are like an Instrument
out of tune, and if we begin the melody of the Psalms before we have skrewed up
our affections and set them to the right key, we shall make an unpleasing
discord; for which cause the foregoing offices of Repentance are prudently
appointed to be first performed: that we being thereby mollified, and wound up
into a frame of Devotion, may say, our hearts are ready to sing and give Praise
Psalm. 108.1. And certainly we shall find the devout performance of the
Penitential part will incomparably fit us to say or sing David's Psalms with
David's Spirit: for having confessed humbly and begged forgiveness earnestly,
and received the news of our Absolution thankfully, our hearts will be
replenished with contrition and lowliness; and we shall find our spirits
tender, our desires strong, our affections elevated and fixed upon those things
that are above; then the comforts and promises will cheer us: our sense of the
wants of our brethren, and our own necessities will give wings to all the
Petitions; our apprehensions of Gods goodness in Christ Jesus will beget such
entire love to him, that our very souls shall mingle with our praises; how
easy and how deep impressions will all these make upon the heart of a true
penitent! which an unrepentant man is not at all affected with. Consult but
your own Experience, which will convince you, that when by some sharp
affliction, or serious preparation (before the Sacrament or the like) your
affections have been moved to a humble and hearty repetition of the public
Confession, then your heart is much affected with David's devout prayers and
hearty thanksgivings, and you easily apply them to your own concerns without a
Monitor, and so you might be disposed every day if you did daily confess your
sins with the same affections and dispositions. But we must prepare not only to
sing with the spirit, but with understanding also 1 Cor. 14.15:
, and therefore let us use all means we can I advise those that are of ability,
capacity and leisure, to read the Psalms for the day privately in Dr. Hammonds
excellent Paraphrase before they go to Church; and for others to use the Lord
Hattons Psalms with the Prayers fitted to them in the same manner.
to know the meaning of these holy Psalms, which is not difficult to do;
especially so far to understand them as to be able to know when David exhorts
us, or praises God, or prays to him that we may join with him, in a right
manner. And indeed a diligent attention will make that sufficiently plain,
especially if we have seriously considered them in private.

2. For suitable affections in the Reading or singing of them, we must take
notice that there is something more required in these Psalms then in other
parts of Holy Writ; for other parts of Scripture are Read to us, and it
suffices that we be careful to hear them reverently and attentively, and
willing to be instructed by them, and resolved to be obedient to them. But here
we our selves do bear a part, and we are to speak them as our own words (...).
Athan. -- (...). idem.
, we must pray for what is there desired, and we must praise God for those
mercies which are here recorded, and this requires both an extraordinary
attention, and also a suitable disposition of mind to the matter of the Psalm
which we are repeating: So that it is necessary that we consider the subject of
each of these Divine Canticles, and endeavor to get our hearts into a temper
agreeing Tuum spiritum affectu Psalmi forma; si affectus sit amoris ama, si
timoris time, etc. Aug. in Psalm. 30.
thereunto, and so we shall sing these Psalms with such a spirit as they were
composed Ad fruendum hunc thesaurum necesse est eodem spiritu Psalmos dicere
quo fuerunt compositi. Cassian. Collat. 10. c. 10.
: which blessed frame, that Holy Spirit that first indicted them, can only beget
in us; and no tongue can tell what infinite delight, and ravishing pleasures,
and mighty advantages we might then find in this employment; wherefore having
desired the assistance of the Divine grace, be careful first to let your hearts
go along with the matter of every Psalm, and secondly to apply the [Gloria
Patri] at the end of every Psalm, according as the subject does require, in
which perhaps these general Directions may be helpful to you. Observe there are
four sorts of Psalms: 1. Psalms of instruction, 2. of exhortation, 3. of
supplication, 4. of thanksgiving: and though many are mixed composures,
containing all or most of these, yet all that is in any of them may be referred
to one of these heads, and the devout Christian may learn by the following
Rules to suit himself for any of them whether single or together.

1. The Psalms of Instruction are plain Explications of, and profitable
Meditations upon, some point of Religion; as about the Creation and Works of
God Psalm. 8. and the 104.
, about his Providence Psalm. 37. and 139. and 147.
, concerning Christ his Passion Psalm. 22. and 69.
, his Resurrection and Ascension Psalm. 2. and 16. and 110.
or his coming to Judgment Psalm. 50. and 97.
etc. Now in these and the like Psalms, we must make a hearty confession of our
belief in these Articles, and be thankful to him that revealed them, and be
careful to express those practical inferences that are all along drawn from
them in our lives and conversations; heartily desiring we may live by these
holy principles of truth, and in these we must exercise especially Faith and
Love, concluding them with giving Glory to the Father who has made us
partakers of a right Faith in his Son by his Spirit; and remembering that every
Person of this Glorious Trinity joins in these eminent works of Creation,
Providence, Redemption, and Sanctification; let us heartily praise God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for all that is done or designed for the sons of
men. Let thy soul say, Oh Lord I confess the truth of these things, I believe
them fully, and I admire them highly, and will ever love thee for declaring
them; I acknowledge thy Power in Creating, thy Bounty in sustaining, thy
Wisdom in ordering, and thy Mercy in relieving and preserving all the World; I
discern thy love in our Redemption, I hope in thy might for a resurrection to
life, and I trust in thy Mercy for a share in thy glory. Glory be to the
Father, etc. for all this.

2. The Psalms of Exhortation, which are serious admonitions backed with
powerful motives and convincing arguments and clear examples; by which we are
stirred either to some Acts of moral Virtue Psalm. 15. and 101.
or to some Duties of positive Religion; to fear God, or study his Law, or
observe his Will Psalm. 1. and 34. and 119.
, or else we are warned against sin by threatenings and examples Psalm. 7. and
58. and 64.
, particularly against distrust in God, by the History Psalm. 78.105, 106.
of his Providence over his own people. That we may profit by these, it is
requisite that we do weigh the promises and motives to holiness so seriously,
that we be convinced of our folly in neglecting these duties, and resolved to
set upon the sincere performance of them; and it is necessary that we consider
the evils that are appointed for and threatened to all sorts of sins, and the
sad instances and examples of sinners that have been made miserable thereby,
till we find our hearts moved with fear and penitence, and till we have taken
up purposes of speedy forsaking those dangerous courses; so that here we are to
exercise humility and Repentance, fear of God and pious resolutions, which
being finished in the Doxology is a superadded act of Praise, to the Father for
sparing us, to the Son for interceding for us, and to the Holy Ghost for
warning and convincing us, and this Glory be to the Father, etc. does declare,
you are thankful for the admonition, and resolved to take warning, and full of
hopes of the Divine assistance to help you to forsake the evil and follow the
good. In these Psalms take the same resolutions which holy David did, and
encourage your selves with the same hopes, love what he loves, desire what he
longed for, believe and expect, what he promises to himself, hate what he
hated, take warning by what he observed, and fear the same sad event, if you go
on in the same way with those sinners that are made examples to you, evermore
praising God for these gracious discoveries: and saying, Glory be etc.

3. The Psalms of Supplication, which are most ardent Petitions for all good
things for your selves, your Brethren, and the whole Church, in all
circumstances, and upon all occasions. These are private Prayers for Pardon of
sin Psalm. 25. and 51. and 143.
, for Restoration to Gods favor Psalm. 4. and 42. and 63.
, for Patience in trouble Psalm. 39. and 88.
, for deliverance from Spiritual or Temporal enemies Psalm. 55. and 59 and 71.
and 74.
, and also public Prayers for the King Psalm. 21. and 72.
, and for the Church and people of God Psalm. 68. and 79. and 80.
, and such like: Which that we may be fitly disposed for, we must have a quick
and feeling sense of our own and our bretherens wants, a firm belief of Gods
all sufficiency, a strong confidence in the intercession of Jesus Christ, and a
full persuasion of the acceptableness of these requests which are drawn up by
the Holy Ghost: And these devout prayers will give us occasion to show, our
care of our own souls, and our universal charity to all the world, our love to
Gods Church, and our entire dependence on his Power and Mercy, and may fitly be
closed with a giving Glory to the Father, who hears us, to the Son who pleads
for us in Heaven, and to the Holy Ghost who directs and assists us on Earth;
and we have cause to bless him who has heard both our and others Prayers, and
will do so to the end of the world; giving all persons in all ages past,
present and to come, great-cause of Eucharist and thanksgiving; for by this
[Gloria Patri] added to our Prayers, we declare our confidence and hope that he
will grant us our desires who is and was and ever shall be the helper of all
that flee to him for succor; and we call to mind that many are now praising
him in heaven, for hearing these very Petitions we now put up. Art thou poor or
miserable, sick or weak, despised or slandered, persecuted or oppressed? here
thou may breath out thy complaints to him that can help thee, or those that
are so. Art thou under trouble of conscience, or fear of Gods anger, worsted by
temptation, or sluggish in holy duties, or any ways spiritually indisposed?
here are most proper and pertinent forms for thy comfort and redress. Art thou
a well-wisher to all the world, a lover of Gods people, a friend to the Peace
of Kingdoms, and a faithful Subject to thy own Prince; have thou any
detestation for sinners, or desire of their Conversion, any pity for the
calamitous, and wishes for their deliverance? if thou bring a charitable heart
thou may pray for all or any of these in such prevailing words, that ere
thou have done speaking, thou may have such assurances of a gracious return,
as to sing Glory be to the Father, etc.

4. The Psalms of thanksgiving are those joyful songs of Praise and Eucharist,
and lovely descriptions of the Divine goodness to the World, but especially to
us and all his own people. Such are those wherein God is praised for all his
mercies Psalm. 103. and 136. and 145.
, for those bestowed on our bodies Psalm. 116. and 130.
health, plenty Psalm. 65. and 104.
, victories over our enemies Psalm. 18. and 144. and 149.
; as also for what he has done for our souls Psalm. 66. and 111. and 118.
, and in these Psalms are most earnest exhortations to join in praising his
holy Name, and most exact Characters of all Gods gracious dealings with us and
all mankind; wherefore that we may join in heart and voice, let us bring with
us hearts fully sensible of our baseness and unworthiness, mightily convinced
that God has often done good to us and others, and deeply affected with the
freeness, frequency, and fullness of his mercies and favors: for here we are to
exercise love and gratitude, and to imitate the Quire of heaven, who survey the
whole world, and pay the tribute of glory to him whose mercy and goodness they
see and admire in every thing, and so may we: and then our souls shall readily
comply with David's courteous invitations to bless the Lord. Oh my God I behold
what thou do for all mankind, and I feel what I have received, I confess my
unworthiness, and admire thy goodness in all things. And then the Glory be to
the Father, etc. is a recapitulation of all those foregoing causes of
glorifying every Person in the glorious Trinity, or all of them, and must be an
acknowledgment that all mercies are dispensed to us by the Father, for the Sons
sake, through the Ministry of the Holy Spirit; and upon this account all honor
and glory is and was and ever shall be due to Father Son and Holy Ghost. O my
ungrateful heart, which sees so much cause of praising God every day for his
works, and his goodness to others, and for what we have experience of, and yet
has not learned fully to love God and constantly to praise him; Come to the
sweet singer of Israel, he will excite thee by his example in every thing to
give thanks, learn of him to rejoice with them that rejoice, learn of him to
love and sing Glory be, etc. and thou shall sing new songs in the New Jerusalem
for ever. By such means as these we ought to tune our hearts for this heavenly
music, if we would have it please God and profit us; and if by the help of
Gods good spirit we have in some measure well performed this, our next care
must be that we loose not those good affections.

3. Therefore endeavor to nourish these holy flames on the altar of thy heart,
by a holy life, such as the inspired Penmen of these Psalms lead themselves
(...). Athanas.
, and such as they exhort others to, and so shall thou be every day fit to join
in this office, and be always prepared to accompany the Church with suitable
affections to all the several parts of Psalmody. Remember these Anthems are
designed not only to raise Devotion in public, but to assist holiness in
private Verba vivenda non legenda.
, and by letting thee feel the comfort of that in Gods house, which may
strengthen thee to do his will afterward, and to set us all upon our guard
against sin and Satan, who design to discompose our minds, by presenting
sensual pleasures and carnal allurements; but you that have tasted sweeter and
nobler delights, will certainly despise those vain and empty pretenders to
satisfaction; and wish no other joy then to praise God among his servants on
Earth here, and among his Saints in Heaven hereafter. And if this be your
desire, the constant use of these Psalms will make them so familiar, that you
will never want holy Meditations, ejaculations, answers to Satan's temptations,
and Mementoes of a holy life, which is the only way that leads to the happiness
you desire.

SECTION VIII. Of the Lessons.
. 1. BEfore we begin to read or hear the holy Scripture, it will be useful that
we consider, first their own excellency to engage our love to them. Secondly,
The Providence of God in the Composing and Preserving them, to excite our
Reverence. Thirdly, The Care of the Church in fitting them to our use, to
encourage our diligence. First, The Scripture must needs be excellent, because
it is the Revelation of the whole Will of God, so far as is necessary for our
Salvation. And we believe as God has taught us, and with the Primitive Church
2 Timothy 3.15. In q^ibus inven^untur illa omnia quae continent f d^m moresque
vivendi. Aug. doc. Chris. l. 2. c. 17. Sacrae and divinitus inspira^ae
Scripturae per se abunde sufficient ^d veritatis indicationem. Athan. in Idol.
Antiquam fidei Regulam. Eusebius. hist. lib. 5.
, that it is the complete Repository of all Divine truths that concern faith or
manners; and therefore we own it to be the Rule of our lives, and the
foundation of our Faith; and in all our considerable Sancta Synodus Christum
assess^rem capitis loco adjunxit: Vene^ondum enim Evangelium in^ Sancto throno
collocavit. Cy^ill. See Dr. Cosens History of the Canon.
controversies we place it in the Throne (as the Councels of Ephesus and
Aquileia did) for the moderator and determiner of such doubts and differences.
This is the guide of our Consciences, the ground of our hopes, the evidence of
our inheritance, and the Law by which we shall be judged at the last day John
5.45. Revel. 20.12.
. Wherefore it is the duty John 5.39.
and interest 2 Timothy 3.15.
of every Christian to be conversant in them, according to the command of
Jesus, and the example of all Gods servants, who studied them more then any
other writings: So that Sr. Basil and his friend used no other Book, but wholly
meditated in this for thirteen years. And if it were possible we should
exercise our selves in it day and night Josh. 1.8. Deuteronomy. 17.19. R. Ismael a
sororis filio rogatus, quodnam tempus Graecorum lectioni impenderet. Resp.
Nullum: nisi potest inveni itempus quod nec ad diem, neque ad noctem
pertinebat. e Talin. Masius in Jos. 1.
, that is always. But however we must spend so much time upon them, that we
may be always furnished with precepts to direct, promises to encourage, and
examples to quicken us to do all good; and also with Prohibitions to restrain,
threatenings to affright, and presidents to warn us from all evil ways
whatsoever. And being so constantly useful, and so able to show us all that is
necessary to be known, believed, or to be done; we should love them, and
delight to hear them, and know them, because ignorance of these Sacred Oracles
will lay us open to errors in Judgments Mark 12.24.
, and wickedness in Practice Psalm. 119.3.
, and finally prove the ruin of our Souls.

. 2. Secondly we must remember it is no ordinary regard which we must give to
these holy Pages, because God is the Author, and his Spirit the enditer of
them, and in his infinite wisdom and love he has committed his Will to
writing, that it might not be corrupted or impaired by the prejudices, the
malice or forgetfulness of men, as all Traditions generally are. For the matter
of it he could have filled it with amazing Mysteries, but consulting our good
rather then his own greatness, he condescends to our capacities Lex loqui ut
nobiscum lingua ^lio^um hominum: Lumen supernum nunquam descendit sine
indumento. Proverb. Rab. Sermo enim divinus secundum intelligentiae nostrae
naturam se temperat -- nobis enim non sibi loquitur. Hilar. in Psalm. 26.
, imitates our Phrases, complies with our notions, and has laid down all
necessary and fundamental truths so clearly, that the meanest may understand
them; and yet in more curious points, has left such difficulties as may
exercise the wits, and allay the arrogance of the most knowing men. Nor has he
in any part set down all that is directly tending to our salvation; but to
engage us diligently to read it all, has so prudently dispersed these
necessary things, that some of them are to be found every where, and all in no
one place; but every part thereof is useful, and none of it must be neglected
much less contemned Nulla ne verecundia tibi est, dicere eorum quae Deus ipse
loquitur, nullam esse cognitionis utilitatem? Chrysostom. Otiosum autem verbum
dicere in S. Scriptura ingens blasphemia est. Basil.
. For like high hills the outward barrenness is recompensed by Mines and hidden
treasures Matthew. 5.18. Non est litera in lege a qua non pendeant magni montes.
Dictum. Rab.
, and such the most difficult places yield to those that have skill and
patience to dig into them. And the Almighty has not only showed his care in
the forming, but also in the preserving of these Sacred Records; which though
they are the most ancient in the world, (of undoubted credit) and have been
hated and opposed by Satan and his instruments, the great and wise ones of the
world; yet time, power, policy nor malice, could never corrupt nor destroy
them; because God resolved to preserve them for our use upon whom the ends of
the World are come.

. 3. Thirdly, The Church has done her part, in compliance with the designs of
Gods Mercy and Providence, to deliver it safely to us, and make it useful for
us. Hereupon the Catholic and faithful Christians discovered the frauds of
Heretics, convinced the minds of unbelievers, and sealed the truth of it with
their blood. And least any should pretend ignorance (...). Clem. Alex. Strom.
10.
, the governors and lights of the Church, have carefully translated the
Original Scripture into all Languages, that every Nation might hear in their
own Tongue the wonderful works of God. [ Acts 2.11.] After which pattern our
Church has made that elaborate, exact, and faithful Translation into the
English tongue, the like to which is not in any Nation Anglicanae versionis
Authors omni laud majores fuisse, arguit accurata illa and ad invidiam
aliarum gentium elaborata versio. Sixth. Amama. praef. ad Drus.
. And now the Scripture has learned our Language that it may instruct us in
our own words; and it must be wilful negligence if we do not understand them:
To prevent which it is not left to our liberty, but we are enjoined to read or
hear it every day, both at Morning and at Evening Prayer, according to the
practice of the Jews Acts 13.17. 2 Cor. 3.15. Luke 4.7. Nehem. 8.8.
, who read the Law in their Synagogues however on the Sabbath, and on other
days they tasted no food, till they had read a Section of it either in
public or private Ita fecerunt Christiani test Clem. Alexandr.
, and every man knows how solemnly and constantly this has ever been done in
all the Assemblies of the Christian Church (...) -- and paulo post (...),
Chrysostom. ad Act. 9.19.
. For hence they confirmed their opinions in Doctrine Coimus ad literarum
divinarum commemorationem. Tertul. Apol. c. 39. (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 60.
, and learned lessons of holiness in conversation. I had rather your own
Observation should inform you then spend time to tell you, how carefully the
Church has selected the most practical and pertinent Chapters; omitting the
more difficult, or rather remitting them to private consideration where you
have more leisure. The Lessons suited to the solemn Festivals are determined
Nunc interposita est solemnitas sanctorum dierum quibus certas ex Evangelio
lectiones oportet in Ecclesi^ tractari. Aug. praef. in Johan.
, and do either explain the Mystery, relate the History, or apply the Example
unto us. In fine, the goodness of God in revealing, and his Power in preserving
these holy Books; as also the Churches courage in defending them, exactness in
Translating, and Prudence in dividing them; both show it is the great concern
of all Christians to understand them, and fit them so to our use that there is
nothing wanting to make us wise to salvation, but our diligent endeavor so to
profit by them, that this Grace of God and care of the Church be not bestowed
on us in vain: wherefore we shall desire you to observe the following
directions.

. 4. First it is necessary that we humbly and earnestly call for the assistance
of the Divine Spirit, which, as it did first indite, so it can best explain
these Oracles of Truth, and also enable us to practice them. And this may be
done by a short and pathetical ejaculation, while the Minister prepares himself
to Read, and if we are not ready at making such Forms, we may repeat Psalm
119.180. Open thou mine eyes that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law: Or,
ver. 125. I am thy servant give me understanding that I may know thy
testimonies; Or if you have time you may pray by that excellent Collect [the
second in Order] for the second Sunday of Advent: Blessed Lord God who have
caused all holy Scripture, etc. Now by these Prayers we own God the fountain of
all Wisdom, and express our desires to know and do his Will, and therefore no
doubt they will procure us wisdom and strength. Secondly labor to bring a
heart purified from the love of all sin, for a Lamb only can open the Seals of
this Book Revel. 5.2.
. The Mahumetans write on the cover of the Alcoran, Non attingat nisi Sanctus;
Let no unclean Person touch this; and since that better agrees to Gods word, we
shall do well to engrave it on our memories, and then we give the signification
of that rite of washing the hands before the taking it up, which the Christians
Chrysostom. hom. 52. in Evang. Johan.
observed of old, and the Turks at this day. We cast not our seed into untilled
grounds, and let us not cast the more precious seed of the Divine word into
unhallowed hearts Jerem. 4.3. Matthew. 13.4, 5, etc.
, least it be choked with weeds, or overrun with thorns, or parched for want
of root in us. The love of sin blinds the eyes, vitiates the palate, and
alters the object; it will make this Divine food nauseous, or turn it into the
nourishment of corrupt humors. He only profits by Gods word that brings a pure
and clean heart. He sees Gods will clearly, loves it exceedingly, closes with
it readily, because it suits his inclinations and sympathizes with his
affections, so that it brings its welcome along with it. 3. Come with holy
desires to learn your duty, and steadfast resolutions to practice it. The end of
writing the Scripture must be our aim in hearing it; that we may be wiser and
better. The Philosopher complained of some that read Plato, not to reform their
manners but to adorn their discourse Est etiam (proh Jupiter?) qui Platonem
legere posiulet, non vitae ornandae; sed linguae and orationis comendae gratia,
non ut modestior f^at sed lepidior. Taur. ap. Aul. Gell. no. At. 1.9.
: but we have juster cause to complain of those that hear Gods holy word, to
make them more talkative and not more holy. It is not Phrases but virtue which
we ought to learn there. We must like good soldiers stand with our loins girt,
our arms fixed, expecting only the watch word, and then we must obey. Let us
say Sp^ak Lord for thy s^rvant hears, and with St. Paul 1 Samuel 3.10. Acts 9.8.
Lord what would^st thou have me to do. And when he has in his word signified
his pleasure, our souls must answer Exodus 19.8.
All that the Lord has spoken that will we do. It had been a strange
presumption in David to have consulted the Oracle about his safety 1 Samuel 23.2.
and ver. 12.
, unless he had purposed to obey the Answer. And it is an equal affront to the
Divine Majesty, for us to pretend we come to ask his advice, when we have no
intentions to follow it.

. 5. Being thus prepared before by Prayer, purity, and holy resolutions, when
the Lessons are begun. Fourthly, Let us hear them with all reverence, according
to that excellent example of those devout Jews Nehem. 8.6.
, who when the Law was read to them, lifted up their hands, bowed down their
heads, and fell on their faces. And sure we should express such outward
respects as may declare we are mindful of the Author of these Proclamations,
who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords. The Scripture daily salutes us as Ehud
did the King of Moab Judge. 3.20.
, I have a message to thee from God. And if the Tyrant at that news rose from
his seat, shall not he condemn us if we receive it with less signs of regard
and reverence? But especially let us labor to fill our minds with serious
apprehensions, that it is the word will and mind of the great God Scriptura est
ipsa vox and anima Dei. D. Gregor.
, and then we shall express our outward reverence with more ease and sincerity.
Let us receive it as being truly his 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
; and it will work as effectually as if it came with the terrors of Mount
Sinah, or were delivered in Thunder from the battlements of Heaven. And the
better to affect your heart, behold the evident demonstrations that God is in
and with them. Think how many sad hearts these promises have cheared; how many
erring and wavering minds these truths have established; sow many obstinate
sinners these exhortations and threatenings have converted, and it will help to
give them their due value in your eyes. 5ly. Mark them with a most diligent
attention, as those did our saviors words Luke 19. ult.
. Let your eyes be fixed on the Minister as if you expected to receive something
Acts 3.5.
. Let your ear be open to receive the words, and your heart ponder well the
sense; and be sure you narrowly watch, and speedily drive away those evil
thoughts, which come to devour our sacrifice, and carry our souls away we know
not whither. How deservedly would that poor man want relief, who should
entertain himself with every Bird within his view, at a time of distribution,
till all were disposed of? Yet such is their folly who while they are pursuing
every idle thought which Satan starts, loose many sentences, which might open
their eyes, strengthen their hands, and comfort their hearts. And he knows not
what good he deprives himself of, that lets the least sentence slip unobserved;
for the very filings of gold are precious, and there is weight in the least
tittle of Gods word Matthew. 5.18.
. There are many places which are obscure, and by reason of close connexions or
speedy transitions, are no ways to be understood without the comparing with
what precedes or follows Qui non adveris quid supra and infra scriptum sit, is
pervertit verba Dei viventi^. Munster.
, so that breaking one link may spoil the chain. It is not possible a careless
hearer should understand them clearly, or apply them prudently, or make any
future benefit of them; but we find by half sentences and slight observation,
men s^ck in errors and evil principles, and the same word that cures one kills
another (...) Arrian. in Epict. l. 2. c. 24.
. It is this negligence and inadvertency that makes the Scripture so little
understood, so hugely perverted, so speedily forgotten, and so slowly
practiced. We have enough to employ our minds and our time, and did we give
that heed Qui audierit inveniet Deum, qui etiam studuerit intelligere cogetur
and credere. Tert.
to Scripture that we do to trifles, we might easily understand it, and should
be engaged to a firmer belief and a more conscientious practice of it.

. 6. The last part of our care is after the Lessons be ended; then sixthly
Meditate of them, and lay them up in your heart, that you may faithfully
remember what you have learned, and readily bring it forth upon occasion. We do
not only hear Gods word to stir us into a present Devotion; but to fill our
Treasures, store our Armory, and victual our Fort against we be besieged by
temptation or affliction Heb. 2.1. Hammond. Annot.
; and it is not our affections when we hear it, so much as our memory of what we
hear, that thus makes it serviceable to us. But we must especially treasure
that which is most pertinent to our own condition; and, as the Jewish Masters
love to Allegorize, we must not be like the Wine Press which keeps the husks
and lets out the pure Wine; nor like the Sponge which promiscuously sucks in
all; nor yet like the Hourglass which pours out at one side what it received
on the other: but in hearing we must be like the Fan which retains nothing but
the solid Corn. If we have but skill to choose according to our needs, there is
in Scripture plenty and variety for all estates; and if our arms be fewer, yet
if they be ready and fit, they may be more serviceable then more that are not
so well ordered. Lastly, Begin immediately to put what you hear into practice,
and then it is out of Satan's reach Is divinas Scripturas recte legit qui verba
vertit in opera. D. Bern.
. Take warning by the threatenings to fly from the evil; encouragement from the
Promises to perform the good; submit to the reproofs; observe the directions,
and pursue the rewards. If this glass have showed us our deformities, we must
immediately amend them, or we shall soon forget James 1.23, 24. Qui sacras
liceras legit nec confert ad rem, similis est seminanti erebro metenti nunquam,
parturienti saepius and partus sepelienti, otioso cantori, qui non habent
mercedem operis. Masius e Talm. in Jof. 1.
them, and so loose the labor and benefit of our hearing. What signifies a
Counselors opinion or a Physicians advice, if they be not followed? The better
the Council is the more is our shame if we look more on the glory of asking it,
then the honor and benefit of observing it. These rules carefully made use of,
will be soon found of extraordinary advantage, and may suffice in the general:
but because of the variety of Scripture, and the necessity of a particular
application, we shall add some short intimation how to profit by the several
parts hereof. For St. Paul has taught us, that all Scripture is useful 2 Timothy
3.16.
to inform and teach us in Faith -- (...). vide Ham. Annot. in loc.
and Truth; to discover and reprove our sins; to direct and urge our amendment;
to promote and improve us in the practice of holiness. Which rule if we follow,
we may be able to profit by every Chapter, and may learn that Art of making
every part of Gods word (like an exact picture) look directly upon our selves
Omnia quidem dicta Domini omnibus pos ta: sed pleraque in personas directa non
proprietatem admonitionis nolis constituerunt, sed exemplum. Tert. de
praescrip. hac.
, and comply with our circumstances, although it was spoken to others, and
perhaps of different condition.

. 7. First then, to apply the Old Testament out of which the first Lessons are
taken, we may consider that (besides the Psalms of which before) it consists of
these Parts, 1. The Law, 2. The History, 3. The Morality, 4. The Prophecies. 1.
The whole Ceremonial Law is omitted in the daily service, because they were
proper to the Jews, and had no apparent reason Heb. (...): Verba sunt quae non
habent apertam rationem -- sunt ex decreto Regis R. Sal. -- Praecepta quorum
non patefacta est ratio. R. Dav. Kim. in Psalm. 119.
of their obligation. Yet if we have time, leisure, and judgment, we may in
private improve them into most useful Meditations, by applying the types to
Christ, and those precepts which are literally obscure, to matters of practical
holiness. Of the Judicial Law also little is read in public; but so much of
it as is used, is the foundation of the antientest and best Laws which were
made by Heathens or Christians, and are rules of the exactest justice in the
world. And if we abate for the difference of our circumstances may conduct our
Consciences in many cases of intercourse with our neighbors. Of the Moral Law
no part is passed by, because there are the Rules of Eternal goodness, to which
the Consciences of all men give consent at the first hearing, and so are of
universal obligation; but they bind us in a higher manner then any Matthew. 5.14.
, wherefore we may learn hereby our Duty to God and Man, and discover all our
odious sins, and we may encourage our selves from the Promises to do good, for
they shall certainly be performed either literally in temporal, or with
advantage in a spiritual manner; understanding Soul for Body, Grace for
Prosperity, and Heaven for Caanan: In which manner also we must apply the
Threatenings to make us penitent for former, and cautious against future
offenses against so holy a Law of so great a God, which both conscience and
reason approve of. 2. The History is all read, and is a rare account of the
methods of Gods Providence in the government of the World, from the Creation to
the return of the Captivity. And we are to love and reverence it before all
other Records, for its Divine Author and undoubted credit; for the Persons it
treats of, the chosen people of God, and especially for the excellent design
which is to teach us to fear God, love holiness and avoid iniquity, by a
clearer and more easy method Longum iter per praeceptum breve and efficax per
exemplum. Sen.
then the precepts can do; because these lively Pictures of the final success
of piety, and the ruin of wickedness are more readily apprehended, more deeply
impressed, and more firmly remembered, Hoc tibi virtutum stimul^s, hoc semina
laudam, Hoc exempla dabit -- Ne simi^s ingentium exemplorum pravi imitoteres.
S. Salvian.
then either advice or naked exhortations. And therefore the examples of
prosperous virtue must condemn our folly and sloth, and raise a holy emulation
to be like those excellent persons, and lively faith and hope that we shall
have the same success and rewards. As also the base designs, constant
disappointments, and dreadful events which attend all ungodly wretches, must
affright us from treading those paths. And thus the shipwracks of evil men, and
the steps of the Saints may conduct us safely to our journeys end. Only because
the best men may have erred, we must not always do what they did, but make the
precepts Haec quando in S. Scri^turis legimus non ideo quia facta credimus,
facienda creda^us, ne violemus praecep^a dum passim sectamur exempla. Aug. in
Mend. c. 9.
the interpreters of their practice, and where they agree we are safe in our
imitation. 3. The Morality in the Books of Job and S^lomon (and some parts of
Apocriphal Authors which the Primitive Church read for instruction of manners)
these do recommend unto us all sorts of virtues, and set out the means to
obtain them, and the advantages of practicing them, and give a true
representation of the folly and danger of sin; with cautio^s against the
occasions thereof, laying down innumerable Observations, for the ordering of
our lives in all conditions and relations; but these so brief and independent,
that we must give extraordinary attention that we may learn our duty, in that
place and those circumstances in which we are. Here are Rules for Princes and
People; Masters and Servants; Parents and Children; Husbands and Wives; Young
and Old; Rich and Poor; Prosperous or Afflicted persons; and that we every one
may learn our own Lessons, we must mark those sentences which encourage to some
virtue we are deficient in, or reprove some offense we are guilty of; and not
out of idleness or malice pick out only those which we suppose fit our
neighbors, and paint out their crimes. For thus our own faults pass
uncensured, and neither we nor they have benefit by this excellent part of holy
Writ. 4ly. The Prophesies are the Predictions of ruin from the mouth of God to
all wicked men, both heathens and enemies of Gods people, and also those that
then gloried in that name (as we do now) but continued in the practice of all
iniquity. How sadly do the Prophets complain of such? what terrible Menaces,
and piercing reproofs do they give them? Yet every where intermixed with
earnest invitations to amendment, and pressing exhortations to sincere
reformation, and the practice of that hearty obedience which the Letter of the
Law expressed not, as an introduction to the Gospel and coming of Jesus, which
is here set out in all its glory. And when we behold that both those heathen
Nations and the Jews themselves, have pulled utter ruin on themselves, by
their contempt of the Promises, and verified the Threatenings by their
disobedience to these warnings; we ought to fear and grow wise by their
Calamity, and take heed to answer our profession with a holy life, and cast off
all those destructive sins, or we may be sure these Prophecies shall once more
be fulfilled in our inevitable destr^ction. And for the more Mysterious
Prophesies S. Propheta audivit and n^n intellexit; quid fa^ient hi qui signatum
librum and usque ad tempus consummationis mul^is obscuritatibus in^^lu^um
praesumptione mentis ediss^runt? Hieron. in Dan.
, we need not curiously pry into them, no^ know particularly to what Church or
Persons to fix the woes therein denounced; but rather applying them to our own
lusts, let us take courage from the assurance of victory under Christ's
Kingdom, to mortify and subdue them. That as God has sent him to us in the
Flesh, and so far made good these predictions, so we may admit him to reign in
our hearts; and then we shall experience the truth of that triumph, joy and
peace, which is promised to wait upon his Government, and also avoid all the
terrors that are denounced against the workers of iniquity.

. 8. The New Testament is read for the Second Lessons, because it is the
perfection of the Law, the substance of the types, and the fulfilling of all
the Prophecies; and because it has manifested the reward more fully, it
heightens and improves the duties Lex vetus ligat manum, lex nova ligat animum.
, for since to us much is given, much may justly be required. And if so clear a
discovery of Gods infinite love will not work upon us, we are strangely
obdurate. But we hope better things will be effected: 1. By the History of the
Gospel. 2. By the Epistles. Fifthly, Therefore that we may apply and improve
the Gospel, let us consider it as an exact account of all that Jesus did and
suffered for us. Here is a Relation of his mean and humble birth, a record of
his holy and afflicted life; a register of his Miracles, a summary of his
Sermons, and a most moving description of his painful and Meritorious death.
Let us therefore in hearing these Lessons imagine our selves of his retinue, as
if we were giving audience to his voice, or beholding his wonders of goodness
and might. Let us carry our Pride to his Nativity, our idleness to his
industrious doing good to all; our anger to his meekness; our revenge to his
gentleness and love of his enemies, that they may blush and dye, when they see
their deformity by so sweet a pattern. See and wonder, admire and love, and
strive to imitate your dear Savior in kindness and charity, mercy and pity,
diligence and piety, patience and constancy, faith and zeal; and rejoice to
have him presented to you thus, because your Captain is your Companion Tunc
enim promptius i^unt Milites, cum Dux sit Socius.
, and has done himself what he requires of you. The servant of Wenceslaus
following his Royal and devout Master barefoot in a deep snow to a house of
Prayer in a Winter night, when he began to tire, beheld his Prince, and with
shame and love recruited his tired spirits, and every look gave him a new life:
So would the sight of Jesus beget in us did we view him with that affection and
steddiness as we ought; if we have a due love for Christ, it will not only be
pleasant but profitable thus daily to hear of him. For his Sermons will convert
us, his Conversation engage us to love him more, his Example will invite and
inflame us, and his Death will above all tie our souls to him, and make our
sins as odious as the worst instruments of that black cruelty: thus we may live
like him, dye with him, and rise again to newness of life. Lastly, those sacred
Epistles are used, which do further explain the Mysteries of the Divine Love,
and the Covenant of Grace, declaring Gods designs in it, and expectations from
us, and the preparations made for us; with incomparable cautions against the
deceits of Satan, cruelty of Persecutors, and falsehoods of heretics, together
with variety of Promises, Exhortations and Directions, so closely united, and
so majestically expressed, that it requires a quick apprehension, and a solid
j^dgment to unravel all the mysteries in them; and yet they that avoid
curiosity and self-conceit, and bring humility, love, and holy resolutions,
such cannot be more effectually improved in knowledge and piety by any part of
Scripture. And this rule must be observed by all in the Offices of Religion,
when we hear Gods word that we do not pursue difficulties and unprofitable
disputes, but apply the holy Scripture to profit by it. And certainly he best
understands it who by it learns to bridle his passions, bound his desires,
conquer his appetites, to fear God, love his neighbor, and to be careful of
his own Immortal soul; and if we make this use of the words of God, we shall
have good cause to join in the next duty of giving praise to him that made
them, and assists us that we may profit by them.

SECTION IX. Of the Hymns for the Morning Prayer.
. 1. THere is not in the whole Circle of Christian Duties any more universal
then Praise. For because in every thing God shows mercy, we must in every thing
1 Thessalonians. 5.18.
give thanks. So that Hymns of Praise are ever seasonable, especially in the
house of God, where they are to be intermixed with every part of Divine
Service, to make it pleasant to us, and delightful to him we worship. We are to
bless God for our bodily food; how much more then for the food of our souls?
the providing of which for us is the greatest mercy next to that of giving the
Eternal word to us. For if God had not written his Word for us, we should not
have seen either our sin or our danger, our duty nor our assistance, our
Deliverer nor our reward, and shall we not Praise him for this shining light?
And particularly what Chapter is there but it contains a peculiar reason of our
thankfulness? whether it instruct or reprove us; invite us to duty, or affright
us from sin; whether it consist of Promises or Threatenings; Precepts or
Examples, it ought to be concluded with [We praise thee O God] viz. for
illuminating our minds, quickening our affections, renewing our memory, reviving
our hopes, awakening our sloth, or confirming our resolutions. Some benefit we
have or may have by every one; and therefore a Hymn will both refresh us with
variety, discharge a great obligation to God, and prepare us to hear the next
Lesson with fresher appetite. We have two for our choice that we may suit every
Chapter: but we shall first consider that which is most usual, the Te Deum.

The Analysis of the first Hymn, or the Te Deum.
This Hymn has three Parts, 1. An Act of Praise containing, 1. The Duty
performed by us in Praise and Homage.
2. The encouragement from others who also Praise him, 1. All People of the
Earth. 2. All the Powers of Heaven, Angels Cherubins Seraphins and Apostles.
Prophets. Martyrs.
All Saints


2. An Act of Confession declaring, 1. The Persons confessing, viz. The
Universal Church.
2. The Faith Confessed, 1. In the whole Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.
2. Particularly in the Son, being an acknowledgement of 1. The glory of his
Essence. 2. The manner of his Subsistence. 3. The humility of his Birth. 4. The
benefits of his Death. 5. The height of his Exaltation. 6. The certainty of his
Return.


3. An Act of Supplication requesting, 1. For all the faithful, 1. Present
assistance. 2. Final acceptance. Deliverance from Evil, Prosperity, Direction
and support.
3. The means to attain both, viz.
2. For our selves, expressing 1. Who we are His constant servants.
2. What we desire Strength against sin, pardon for it.
3. Why we desire this, because 1. Of Gods Mercy. 2. Of his Promises, 3 Ou^
humble Expectations.





A Practical Discourse on the Te Deum.
. 2. ALthough this Song of Praise be not of Divine Authority, yet it is said to
have been miraculously composed, and first Sung by St. Ambrose and St.
Augustine after the Baptism of that illustrious Convert; and it is placed among
the undoubted works of holy Ambrose, who in the times of general Calamity first
brought the use of Hymns into the Latin Churches (which had been used in the
East from the beginning) and made several Forms of Praise himself; and among
the rest this grand and powerful Hymn Grande carmen istud est, and quo nihil
potentius: Quid enim potentius, quam Confessio Trinitatis, quae quotidie totius
populi ore celebratur; Certatim omnes student fidem fateri; Patrem, Filium and
Spiritum S. no^unt versibus praedicare. Ambros. in Conc. de Basilicis, etc.
Tom. 5.
, which its likely he means when he speaks of that Confession of the Trinity in
Verse, which the people so much delighted in, and sung so joyfully every day.
For this has ever since been frequently used and highly esteemed in the
Church; not only for its Authors sake, but for its own, since it is so rare a
piece of choice Devotion. The principal scope whereof is to give all glory to
God, which therefore is interwoven with every part: but the nine first
versicles are wholly Eucharistical, wherein we express our own gratitude, and
cast our eyes on all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, that join with us in paying
that Duty, to heigthen our Devotion before so great a Lord. We have now heard
out of Gods sacred Word those gracious invitations and sweet comforts, those
useful directions and necessary warnings which he therein gives us, for all
which we give him thanks when we say We praise thee O God. We have also heard
many instances of his Power, and been instructed in his holy commands, which
engages us to acknowledge his Authority and pay our homage: Therefore we
promise to be his Servants, and seriously acknowledge him to be our Lord, which
is a mocking of the Divine Majesty Luke 6.46.
, unless we resolve to do what he has signified to be his Will. But why should
we not be sincere in this acknowledgment, since it is our honor to serve him,
whom the Heavens praise and the Earth worships, and all the Inhabitants of both
are subject to. The Earth (that is) the men that dwell therein, in all ages did
and in every Nation now do give him honor. For there is no time, nor Country,
which has not afforded many to confess and adore him that fills all places,
and endures from everlasting to everlasting. But if so many examples our of
all mankind will not suffice to make us praise him devoutly and acknowledge him
faithfully; let us lift up our eyes to the Heavens, which are replenished with
Creatures more noble and glorious then we; yet all these make it their
employment, and account it their delight to glorify his Name. And we lately
prayed that Gods will might be done on earth as it is in heaven: How it is done
there this excellent Hymn will show you. It opens Heaven to you, nay with the
Evangelical Prophet, carries you thither to behold their Order; Angels and
Powers, Cherubins and Seraphins, Apostles, Prophets and Martyrs. This shows you
their Employment which is one, and that you are now exercised in, even to
Prai^e the Lord every morning Genesis 32.26. Dimitte me quia ascendit columna
Aurorae and apprepinquat hora Angelorum. ad laud^ndum Deum. Targ. Hierosol.
, or rather every moment, with never ceasing voices Voce incessabili, in S.
Ambrose.
. Nay you may learn their song Isai. 6.3. Sanctus Pater, Sanctus Filius,
Sanctus Spiritus. Call. Par. Jon. I^a olim legebal. P. Galatinus.
even that mysterious Anthem to the Trinity, by which they confess every Person
and adore all. So that you may at once learn what to believe, and how to
worship God. Oh let us learn the song we must sing in Heaven, when we shall
bear a part in that Celestial Quire, where all these glorious hosts ever
magnify their great Commander; all Creatures of the Earth, all the Lights of
Heaven, and the Innumerable and invincible Legions of Angels, are listed under
this our Lord, fight for him, and ever execute his commands. Wherefore he is
called Lord God of Sabbath, that is of the Armies and Powers of Heaven and
Earth. And since every one that is under him gives him honor, the majesty of
his glory must reach as far as his troops extend, and they fill both the upper
and lower world. Join with these Angelick hosts now, and you shall be joined to
them hereafter; be not discouraged at the distance of your nature and
Condition; for there are alre^dy many of our brethren (which were o^ce as we
are) already glorious and admitted to this honor, intermixed with this
Society. Oh see the faithful and painful Apostles, see the zealous and holy
Prophets; behold the triumphant Army of devout and courageous Martyrs, how they
all rejoice and sing. The Apostles are ravi^hed with his glory whom they saw in
his weakn^ss. The Prophets are delighted with him whom they prophesied of, but
never beheld before. The Martyrs are transpo^ted with his love, and forgetting
all their torments solace themselves in his joys; and every gaping wound Quot
vulnera hiantia, tot ora laudantia Deum.
is a mouth to chant out his Praise. Oh what honor is it to serve such a Lord!
what delight to be admitted to so glorious a society! Summon up all the powers
and f^culties of your souls, and as they fill Heaven, do yo^ fill the Earth
with setting out the Majesty of his Glory.

. 3. The second part of this Hymn (in the eleven following versicles) is a
Confession of Faith. And every A^ticle thereof is a f^rther motive to praise
God, eit^er for the g^ory of his Essence or the mercy that appears in his
works. And since we see God at present only by Faith, the Profession of that
Faith is to us reputed a glorifying of him Romans 15.6.
. The Saints and Angels have a f^ll view, and what they ^o by Joy, we do by
Faith and holy desires of a nearer union. And certainly we cannot set out the
Majesty of his Glory better, then by assenting to that Revelation which his
Truth has made of himself; and by confessing him that the glorious Hosts of
Heaven adore, and the Universal Ch^^ch does and ever did acknowledge. For so we
agree in a sweet harmony with the Saints and Angels in heaven, and with all
holy men our Brethren on the earth. For the unanimous consent of the Servants
is a manifestation of the Masters honor: And it is an evidence that our Lord
is really such, and so glorious as we believe him to be, since all unite in the
profession of it. And this holds good most evid^ntly in the great mystery of
the Trinity, which the Celestial Quire owns by their Trisagium; Holy, H^ly,
Holy. And the Catholic Church has most unanimously acknowledged, most
sacredly kept, and most courageously defended, above all other Articles, so
that all those agree in this who differ in many other points. Let us then
cheerfully acknowledge the infinite Majesty of the Father, who governs all
Creatures, and declare the honor of his true and only Son, whose Glory is
great in our salvation. Let us confess the Divinity of that holy Spirit, who is
our Advocate in Heaven, and our Comforter (...). u rumque signif. Johan. 14.16.
and 1 Ep. Johan. 2. ver. 1.
upon the Earth. Above all let us be careful that the humiliation of our
merciful Redeemer, do not abate of our esteem: To prevent which the Church in
this Hymn as also in all her Creeds makes the largest and most particular
Confession of the Son of God; and we have here a full account of Divinity and
Humanity; because by the malice of Satan these have been so confounded and
mistaken by so many Heresies; and we have also a recital of those works of his
which most concern us, because it is the interest of us all to know and believe
these, which more directly tend to our salvation, then any other of the works
of God; and therefore do more strongly engage our gratitude, for we shall find
abunda^t matter of Praise, both in what Jesus is in his nature, and what he
has done for us. He is very God and therefore we give ^im that title which
alone belongs to the Lord of hosts; and St. Ambrose (the best interpreter of
this Hymn) says Psalm. 24, 7. and 10. Quis est iste Rex gloriae! Respondetur a
scientibus Dominus virtutum, ipse est Rex gloriae. Ergo Dominus virtutum est
ipse filius. Ambros. de Fide. lib. 4.
that twenty fourth Psalm, was sung by the Angels at our Saviors Resurrection;
those who came with him calling to those in Heaven to open the gates for the
King of Glory, who answered them as it is in that Psalm. And we may call him
the King of Glory; both as he is very God, and because he has purchased Glory
for us, and shall distribute it to us, and shall receive glory and praise from
us and all that are partakers of it. And his glory depends not on our praises,
but is inseparable from his nature, because he is the true and only begotten
Son of God; not Created as the Angels, nor Adopted as Men; but by Eternal
Generation, Coeternal with the Father, and Coequal. What though he was born in
time, the Son of Man? this does not take away his Being the Son of God, nor
change his nature, but express his love, and engage our affections. Dear Jesus!
whether has thy love carried thee! from Glory to misery; from the highest
Throne in Heaven to the lower parts of the Earth Ephesians. 4.9. Pudorem exordii
nostri non recusa^i^, sed contumelias naturae nostrae transcurrit. Hilar.
. How have thou pursued ^s through all the stages of our infelicity! from the
dishonours of the Womb to those of the Tomb, not abhorring the meanest place
that was pure, nor the lowest condition, that Innocence could be put into. What
cause have we to bless thee, Ideo quod homo est and Christus esse voluit, ut
homo possit esse quod Christus est.
who were pleased to become what we were, that we might be (not what we
deserved, but) as thou art! Holy Savior, we believe and rejoice in believing
that thou wast born like us, livedst with us and diedst for us: and that death
was our life, it was shameful and inglorious, sharp and tormenting; so terrible
as might startle a great confidence in a good cause. But it was not more bitter
to thee then sweet to us. We, even we Oh Lord had armed Death with a sting
sharp and venomous; for our sin had provoked the Divine wrath. And this sting
(though with the suffering 1 Cor. 15.57. Gr. (...) Devicto mortis a^uleo. Ambr.
of inexpressible dolours) thou have pulled out; and having satisfied the
Justice of God, can now triumph over death it self, and enable us with
comfort to say, O Death where is thy sting; with which thou did threaten all
the World with unavoidable destruction? Who can behold what thou have suffered,
and we have escaped and not be ravished with thy Love Oh blessed Lord Jesus!
The way to Heaven was ever open to Innocence, but we all had sinned and come
short of the glory of God. Heaven gates were shut against us, and Hells mouth
open to receive us. And in this estate our life had been worse then death, by
the dreadful expectations of deserved vengeance; and our death had certainly
delivered us up to feel what we feared. Do we live with any comfort? It Is thou
have removed our fears. Can we dye with any peace? It is thou alone have
renewed our hopes; if any men that are, or ever were, or shall be, are admitted
into this Kingdom, it is not by the merits of their own Innocence, but by
those of this thy all-saving death. We need not dispute de Facto whether any of
the Saints before Christ had actual Possession of Heavens Glory: (the Scripture
Heb. 11.40. 1 Pet. 3.19. Matthew. 27.52.
and the Fathers Clem. Alexandr. Strom. 20. Tertul. de anima cap. 55. Cypr.
Sermon. in Dom, Pass. Ambrosius Comment. in Romans 5. and passim.
especially St. Ambrose seem to deny it, and it is not easy to disprove them)
but this we are sure of de Jure, that none under the Law nor the Gospel ever
were received thither, but by Faith in this Death of Jesus; which God might
consider as done before it was accomplished; but no holiness that we are
capable of can challenge Heaven, nor no feigned Purgatory expiations can
satisfy for our sins, And whenever Abraham, Isaac, and Jaacob, entered into
their glory, it was in the right of Jesus, who by this saving death, pulled out
that fatal s^ing, and obtained admission for all believers, not only for Jews
and Saints of former ages, but for Gentiles and all the World that so owns him
as a Savior, as to give up themselves to be ruled by his holy Laws. Our
blessed Master indeed was glorious with his Father from all Eternity; he was in
Heaven before Ascendit non ubi Verbum Deus ante non fuerat: sed ubi verbum Ca^e
factum ante a non sederat. Ruffin. in Symbol.
: But not in our nature, not as our advocate, not to take possession for us;
but now he is restored to his t^rone again, ready to receive all believers into
the participation of his joys. And now his glory is our great advantage, and
i^finite comfort; so that we may receive this article with that delight with
which old Jaacob did the news of his beloved Joseph's advancement over all the
Land of Egypt; assuring our selves, that he who stooped so low to us, and
suffered so much for us, will employ his regained Power and Glory for ou^ good,
even to take us up to him, and to let us reign with him, who ever lives to make
intercession for us. We cannot see him in this glory by the eye of sense, b^t
we do discern ^im by the eye of faith; and we doubt not, b^t he shall be
revealed in all this glory, when he comes to judge the world at the las^ day.
He shall then come to examine and pass sentence upon all. But since we must
every one bear our own bu^dens. we must not concern our selves for the s^re of
others; but busy our selves to prepare our own accounts, for we are sure he
shall be our Judge: our guilt might make us fear and tremble to think of it;
yet his mercy may comfort us and quicken us to make ready. Who could we rather
wish should Judge us then he that Redeemed us? and he that now offers to give
us a Pardon sealed in his own blood? Let us now accept his tender, and we need
not tremble then, for our Judge shall be our advocate and our friend.

. 4. The last part which closes this devout and exquisite form, turns both the
Thanksgiving and Confession into Prayer, as a most natural consequence of all
the preceding considerations: for who can behold so great a God, so universally
praised in Heaven and Earth, and not believe him to be the fountain of all
goodness, and desire his f^vour? Who can contemplate the Savior of the World
in his Essential glory, in his admirable Condescension, willing humiliation,
and illustrious restitution, and not break forth into most passionate
supplications for a share in his love? Or if we go back no farther then the two
last Verses, we there saw him with St. Steven sitting in all his glory at the
Right hand of God, and shall we not request him to be mindful of us in his
glory, whom in his low estate he purchased with his life and blood? And as he
put on weakness and submitted to misery to redeem us, that he will employ his
reg^ined Power and Glory for our help and assistance. We say he is to be the
Judge of us and all the World John 5.22.27.
, and we know we cannot answer him for one of a tho^sand Job. 9.2.
. Sure then our wisest way is to make supplication to our Judge Job. 9.15.
, and to beg his favor may at that day be showed to us and all his people; for
at his sentence all the world ^^st stand or fall, those whom he justifies or
reputes innocent Numerare pr^ reputari Isai. 53.12. Sapient. 5.5. (...). Graec.
, shall be set on the right hand, and be reckoned among the number of the
Saints and sealed ones Revel. 7.4.
, and therefore let us pray to this great Shepherd, that though now the sheep
and goats are mixed, yet he will wash us with his blood and pronounce us
guiltless; that our lot may be with his Saints. Now that we may be thus
disposed of at the last day, we shall need not only his Mercy then, but his
grace now, to secure us in our passage through this world. Wherefore we pray
with holy David in the last words of the 28th Psalm, that God would use all
means to bring his people to his glory Psalm. 28. ult. Serva populum tuum, and
benedic hereditati tuo, and rege eos and extolle eos usque in aeternum. Vulg.
Lat.
; even that he would save them from all evil, and bless them with all good
things. That he would govern and direct them in their duty, and lift them up
and support them against all opposition for ever. And these are the sum of
every Christians needs and desires. What more can we wish or pray for, then to
be rescued out of trouble, and furnished with all blessings needful for our
souls and bodies? That God should feed us as a shepherd (as the Hebrew reads)
Heb. and LXX. pasce eos, hoc est, rege Vulg. Sorores enim sunt arts pascendi
and regnandi. Basil. conc 24.
or govern us as a Prince, conducting our duty by his care and Laws, that we
may not stray nor go amiss. And lastly, That he should bear us up against all
the opposition of Satan and his instruments, and advance us from our low
estate Job. 22.19. Psalm. 9.14.
, to ^et us up on that Rock where our enemies malice cannot reach us; but we
may stand safely there, till we are lifted up from thence to Glory, which we
cannot miss of if God hear but these Petitions. Therefore having prayed for all
that is needful for us as members of the Church, we now look more peculiarly to
our selves considered apart. And since we are now and every day employed thus
in praising God, we desire him to accept this as a Testimony that we are his
Servants. We declare it in David's Phrase Psalm. 145.2. Psalm. 145.2. Per singulos
dies benedicam tibi, and laudabo nomen tuum, etc. Vulg. Lat.
; only altering the Tense and Person. Lord help us for we are thy servants,
paying thee the daily tribute of Praise. Whatever thou bestowest on us will not
be forgotten, nor bu^ied in ungrateful silence. We meet in thy house every day
to magnify thee in this manner, and to set our the glory of thy Name in every
thing thou do for u. Withold not thy mercy, for we will not withold thy
Praise; and since we resolve daily to do the work of Angel^, Lord keep us pure
as they are, for praise is neither seemly nor acceptable in the mouth of a
sinner. Let not us who are thy servants in the morning be the devils slaves
before night Coepisti melius quam desinis, ultima primis Distant --
; but preserve us holy all day, that our afternoon sins may not rob us of the
benefit of this days Praises, nor indispose us against the next morning, when
our duty will return. Dear Jesus look on our frailty and strengthen us; look on
our guilt and misery and Pardon us. We cry earnestly and double our request
Jesus Master Math. 20.30, 31.
have mercy on us, have mercy on us; for our needs are great and pressing,
unless we find mercy for former sins we must be condemned by thee; and except
we obtain mercy for future assistance, we shall be overcome by Satan. Oh shut
not out our Prayer; consider not our merits but our distress, we know we
deserve nothing, but we have great hopes (such is thy transcendent goodness)
that we shall have what we desire. Those that were better then we have put
words in our mouths, who in the Psalms Psalm. 33.22. Sit misericordia tua Domine
super nos quemadmodum speravimus in te. Psalm. 31.1. In te Domine speravi non
confundar in aeternum. Vulg. Lat.
did not urge thee as if they had been worthy, but only trusted in thy mercy;
and so do we. We rely not on our selves or any Creature, but on thee alone, for
we know thou can help us; and we have a persuasion thou will. All the world
sees by our daily attendance on thee, that all our expectations are from thee.
Oh do not disappoint those hopes that are grounded on thy tender mercy, least
Satan upbraid us and the world slight us, Ezra. 8.22. Psalm. 22.7, 8.
and then which way can we look? Lord be it unto us according to our Faith.
Amen. Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Te Deum.
WE Praise thee] most heartily for all we have learned out of thy holy Word [O
God] and it shall be our care as it is our duty to observe thy Will, since [we
acknowledge thee to be the Lord] to whom we owe all Duty and Obedience. We
esteem it our happiness and honor to be accounted thy servants, who art Lord
of all the world; and [a^l the earth] with its Inhabitants joins with us, and
[doth worship thee] who a^t from Eternity, and in all ages have been
acknowledged to be [the Father everlasting.] Nor does this lower world alone
own thy Supremacy, but Praise is given [to thee] by the several Orders of [all
An^^^s] who with harmonious voices [cry aloud] in proclaiming thy glory, which
is ever set forth by all the hosts of [the Heavens] the Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities and [the Powers] that are [therein.] [To thee] O God triumphant
Hymns are sung in that Celestial Quire. For the [Cherubin] on one side [and]
the [Seraphin] on the other, with ravishing melody chart thy Praise, and in
their mysterious adorations, they [continually do cry] one to another [Holy]
Father [Holy] Son [Holy] Spirit, three Persons, but one [Lord] thou art the
most mighty [God of Savaoth] the supreme commander of all the hosts of Heaven,
of us and the innumerable myriods of blessed Spirits. Thou make us happy with
beholding, and the Sons of men with expecting thy glory, so that all the
Inhabitants of [Heaven and Earth] rejoice in thee, because all parts of the
Universe [are full of] those manifestations of thy power and goodness, which
declare [the majesty of thy glory.] Thus the Angels sing, and (for our great
comfort) many of our brethren now glorified bear a part with them [The
glorious company of the Apostles] who Preached Christ, and with unwearied
diligence and patience, admirable courage and fidelity showed he was come to
save the world, these are now in those regions of bliss, and there for ever
[praise thee.] As also all those harbingers of thy Sons coming, inspired at
sundry times, and in diverse manners, these are now met in glory and make up
[the goodly fellowship of the Prophets] whose words we read on earth, but they
now are happy in beholding him of whom they foretold, and now continually
[praise thee.] To all which blessed numbers are added those undaunted Legions
who sealed the truth of the Prophets predictions, and the Apostles preaching
with their blood, even [The noble army of Martyrs] who conquered infidelity and
cruelty, by Faith and Patience, these now are passed from torments to their
reward, and they with all other Saints and Angels, with united hearts and
voices sweetly [praise t^ee.] Oh Lord we long to be there that we might see
thee as clearly and praise thee as heartily as they do. But since we can now
know thee only by Faith, we must glorify thee by agreeing with [The holy
Church] even our faithful brethren [throughout all the world] in the
Confession of that True Faith, whereby every good Christian [doth acknowledge
thee] to be what thou have revealed thy self to be in thy holy word. We believe
in that Trinity which the Angels worship, even in thee [the Father] who by
creating and governing all the World, declaredst thy self to be [of an infinite
Majesty] And we believe in him that is equal in glory with thee; and one in
nature [thine honorable, true and only -- ] begotten [Son] who has redeemed
us, that we of slaves of Satan might be thy adopted Sons. We do believe and
acknowledge [also the Holy Ghost] to be very God (equal to and with the Father
and the Son) and is the advocate for us in Heaven, and [the Comforter] of us on
the Earth: And these Three Persons are One God. Thy gr^cious condescension, O
blessed Jesus, shall not Eclipse thy Divine Perfection, for though thou came
in our likeness to Redeem us, yet we believe [thou art] equal with the Father,
and [the King of Glory] for thou ever wast most glorious in thy self, and thou
[O Christ] art anointed of God a King and Priest for ever. From eternity thou
art God, neither had thou thy beginning when thou wast made the Son of Man,
for [thou art the everlasting Son] begotten [of the Father] before the world
began. Yet (blessed be thy name) thou did change thy Glory for Misery, and
sufferedst thy Eternity to be measured by time, for [when thou tookest upon
thee] that glorious design [to deliver man] from eternal death [thou did not
abhor] the meanest condition, but wast conceived in [t^e Virgins womb] and born
like unto us, only void of sin. How cheerfully did thou embrace a bitter and
bloody Passion, to satisfy the Divine Justice provoked by our offenses? and
[when thou hadst] by suffering the wrath due to us, [overcome the sharpness] of
that sting [of death] which our sins had armed it with, the whole world found
the benefit of thy Cross. For by those merits [thou did open] those gates of
mercy which iniquity had shut against all mankind, for hereby alone admittance
into [the kingdom of heaven] is granted [to all believers] that are, or were,
or ever shall be hereafter. And no such can be excluded, for now [thou sittest]
as a glorious conqueror [at the right hand of God] to intercede that the
faithful may have the benefit of thy purchase, to keep possession for them, and
finally to receive them to partake with thee [in the glory of the Father] which
thou now injoyest, and can dispose it to whom thou please. To our great
comfort therefore [we believe that thou] who have been our Redeemer and art our
Advocate [shalt come] with millions of Angels in great glory to try all the
world, and particularly [to be our Iudge] with full Power to condemn or acquit
us. [We therefore] knowing our guiltiness, and that we cannot account to thy
Justice, do before hand beg thy mercy, and most humbly [pray thee help thy
servants] with thy infinite merits and abundant grace; and to answer for them
[whom thou hast] so deerly bought, and [redeemed with thy most precious blood]
that we may not loose the benefit, nor thou the glory of thy gracious purchase.
Since all men must stand or fall then at thy sentence, Oh do thou acquit thy
faithful ones; and by applying thy merits [make them to be numbered with thy
Saints] that being placed on thy right hand, they may have a part with thee and
them [in Glory] unspeakable and [everlasting.] And that thou may have mercy
on them in thy Kingdom, give them here all that may fit them for it; and bring
them to it [O Lord save thy people] from all evil which might dishearten or
defile them [and bless] thy Church with all good things, which may make it
flourish as [thine inheritance] and encourage it in well-doing. Be thou a
shepherd to watch over and feed thy servants, a King to defend and [govern
them] in all thy holy ways; and when Satan and his instruments design to cast
them down, rescue [and lift them up] by thy grace, above their power and malice
that they may be safe [for ever.] Particularly be mindful of us in this
Congregation who will never forget thee, but as we daily taste of thy mercies,
so [Day by day] we acknowledge them in thy house, and [we magnify thee] for
them with these sacred hymns. Thou art an everflowing spring of comfort,
therefore we ever praise thee [and we worship thy name] both now in this world,
and will glorify it in thy Kingdom [ever, world without end.] And as by our
daily paying thee this Tribute of Praise, we declare our selves thy servants
[Vouchsafe O Lord] to remember our frailty, and by thy grace [to keep us this
day] which we have begun in thy service, holy, pure, and [without sin] that our
present sacrifice may be accepted, and our hearts fitly disposed against the
next opportunity. We have so often fallen into sin, and so sadly smarted for
our folly, that we must now most earnestly beseech thee [O Lord] to forgive and
[have mercy upon us] for all that is past: and again to [have mercy upon us]
and deliver us for the remaining part of our lives. We beg compassion of thee
in all humility [O Lord let thy mercy] come to us, and [lighten upon us] not
for our merits, nor after the proportion of our deserts, but our faith; even
[like as we] encouraged by thy promises most readily and firmly [do put our
trust in thee] and hope for it. And though we do not challenge it by desert,
yet we believe thou will not frustrate any of our expectations, for every one
of us renouncing all other helps can say [O Lord in thee] alone [have I
trusted] because I knew thy grace and bounty. Let me not now ask in vain; Oh
[let me never] be put to shame before the world or the devil; nor [be
confounded] by being sent away empty. [Amen].

The second Hymn after the First Lesson at Morning Prayer.
. 5. WE shall briefly pass over this Hymn; because it is seldom used, and
sufficiently plain: it being an invitation of all Creatures to praise God. And
though it be not in the Canon of Scripture, yet it is an excellent Paraphrase
on the 148 Psalm; and comes so near it in words and sense, that we must
reproach that, if we despise this. And we have the practice of the Primitive
Church to justify our use of it, wherein it was not sung only four times in
the year (as in the present Roman Church) but on all solemn occasions in the
assemblies of the faithful, from the beginning, as Ruffinus and St. Augustine
In omni solemnitate, in sac^is fidelium decantatur, Ruffinus l. 2. adv. Hieron.
ap. Six^. Senens. Biblioth. and Aug. Sermon. 47. temp.
assure us. And the duty which it invites us to ought to recommend it, which is
to praise God for all his works. It Is true they are so excellent, that they do
of t^emselves declare the Power and Wisdom of their great Creator Psalm. 19.1.
Bona enim ex s^ipsis v^ce ^^emittunt, neque enim Sol vel Luna interpret ege^^;
(...) ipsa lux palam testatur quod totum mundum illustrant. Philo.
. And yet since we have benefit by them, and understanding to observe, and
speech to express his glory who made them, God calls on us to lend them a
tongue to glorify him with, and by so doing we may fill our souls with
reverence and noble thoughts of the Lord of all things. Our aptness to be
forgetful of the rare contrivance, and unthankful for the usefulness of his
works, makes this Hymn often needful: but it is always proper to be used after
the History of the Creation, or the relation of those miracles wherein God
uses the Creatures as Instruments of his Justice or Mercy. And then we may in
this Form learn the order of Gods works, for the method is exact, and beginning
with the Heavens and the hosts thereof descends to the air, the Earth and Sea
reckoning up all the furniture of them; and concluding with a particular
exhortation to the Sons of Men, who are concerned in them all to give praise to
the Lord their maker, the Order will inform our understanding, the exactness
quicken our memory, and the comprehensive and devout manner of address, will
enlarge our affections, if we attend it, and desire to profit by it, and then
it will need no other recommendations.

The Analysis of the Benedictus or first Hymn after the second Lesson.
In this Hymn God is praised, 1. For the Redemption, both as to 1. The nature
of it, as it is an act 1. Of Gods Mercy, ver. 68. 2. Of his Power, ver. 69. 3.
Of his Truth, being the fulfilling of His Word, ver. 70, and 71. His Promise,
His Covenant, 72. His Oath, ver. 73.

2. The end of it, viz. 1. Our safety, ver. 74. 2. Our obedience, which must be
1. Universal in the parts Holiness toward God. Righteousness toward man.
2. Sincere, before him. 3. Constant, all our life, ver. 75.


2. For the Promulgation, considering 1. The Instrument, and that for 1. His
Office, to be a Prophet. Harbinger.
2. His Duty to Prepare, v. 76. Instruct.
3. The end, for Remission, ver. 77.
2. The cause why i^ was now to be thus made known 1. In general, Gods Mercy.
2. In particular, in regard 1. Of him that was to come, ver. 78. 2. Of the end
of his coming, ver. 79.





A Practical Discourse on the Benedictus.
. 6. THE Gospel which has now been read for the second Lesson, does not only
require our attention but command our gratitude, because it brings that good
news which is the cause of great joy to all people. The Angels sing, and all
holy men to whom it was revealed entertain the news with Hymns of Praise. And
if we be as sensible of the mercy as they were, and as thankful as we ought to
be for the benefit thereof, we shall rejoice as heartily as they did, since it
is as much our concern as theirs. And how can we better express our gladness
for all that the Gospel records of what Jesus has done for us, then in those
sacred forms indicted by the holy Spirit, with which devout Persons welcomed our
Lord into the world? And these will be most acceptable to God, and most
beneficial to us, both to help us with fit expressions, and to engage us to
sing them with the same heart and affections, which were in the first
Composers; and particularly with the Devotion of holy Zachariah the Author of
this Hymn; who after nine months silence recovering his speech, stays not to
rejoice in that personal Mercy, but immediately being filled with the Divine
Spirit, the inexpressible joy that filled his heart before, now breaks forth in
these words: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc. Wherein he in the Phrase
of Ancient times Genesis 9.26. Psalm. 41.13.
declares the wonderful goodness of God. And we ought to join with him, not
scrupling the Jewish form of expression, because if we be true Christians, and
have the circumcision of the heart, we are the Children of the Promise Romans 9.8.
the seed of Abraham and the Israel of God: And this God of our Israel has in
a more excellent manner delivered ^s from the slavery of Satan, then he did
them from the bondage of Egypt. And yet though this Spiritual Redemption be
much greater, there is such a similitude in the method and circumstances, that
it appears that was a type of this; and therefore Zac^ariah alludes to Gods
delivering the people from Egyptian misery. For as then he first visited them
Exodus 3.16. Gr. (...).
and considered their misery Genesis 21.1. Visitavit. Chal. Par. Recordatus est,
ita Sir. (and Luc. 7.16.) Arab. Respexit, ita Vulg. Ruth. 1.6.
, and then he rescued them with a mighty hand: So in our case he visited us in
all senses, he remembered our calamity, he looked on our misery, considered our
distress, and came himself to see us, and made such a visit as men and Angels
admire at. He came in our nature, clothed with our infirmities, and stayed with
us, and dwelt among us. And all this to Redeem us, not by doing miracles, but
by suffering death: not only by conquering our enraged enemies, but satisfying
an offended God; buying our lives with his dearest hearts blood. And by taking
our Punishment, when himself was innocent, he freed us both from the sin and
the wrath due to it Suscipiendo poenam sine culpa and culpam delevit and
poenam. August.
, that we might with freedom and hope serve our reconciled God. Well may we
call this a Mighty Salvation, being accomplished with as much Power as it was
undertaken with Love. Behold how many helpless Creatures, he delivers, from
cruel burdens, mighty oppressors, and dreadful expectations; nay from the just
vengeance of an angry terrible and Almighty God, from endless and unsufferable
flames as horrid as unavoidable. This was indeed a horn of Salvation Cornu
robur and Imperium vocat. Hieron. Hab. 3. Vide Dan. 7.24. and cap. 8.21. 1 Samuel
2.10. Chal. Par. pro Cornu habent Regnum. Ecclus. 49.5.
, that is a Royal, Princely, succor and rescue; such as became the Son of so
Victorious a King as David was; nay such as became the Son of God, when he
undertook to restore the Kingdom of Divid (which now literally Herod and the
Romans had usurped, but spiritually sin and guilt had overcome) yet Jesus will
retrieve it and set it up for ever, not to deliver us from Temporal but
Spiritual enemies; not from Tribute but Damnation; and shall not we rejoice at
his Coronation? It is certain there is not a more illustrious mercy then this
which was proclaimed so early to our first Father Genesis 3.15.
, and repeated so often by all the Prophets Act, 3.24. Deuteronomy. 28.7. Jerem. 23.6.
Isai. 25.8.
, men of excellent holiness, approved integrity, and unquestionable truth.
These all as if they had but one mouth unanimously agreed in the publication
hereof. This is the mercy that was so fully confirmed by Covenants and Oaths
Genesis 12.16. Heb. 6.
to Abraham and all the faithful. This was believed and hoped for by the Jews,
and expected by the very Gentiles Percrebuerat Orient toto vetus and constans
opinio, ut eo tempore Judae a profectus rerum poteretur. Tacitus Annal. Vid.
Numb. 24.17.
. This is that good news which cheared Adam after his fall, rejoiced Abraham in
his peregrination, revived Jacob on his dying bed John 8.56. Genesis 49.18.
, and supported the Patriarchs in all their troubles, although they only saw it
at a distance, and hoped and waited for the light while they themselves were in
the dark. But when Zachary beheld the morning star, and saw the day begin to
spring which had so long been wished and desired, he is ravished with holy joy;
like the Northern people after a tedious night when they perceive the Sun
approach. And shall not they that lived by the bare hope of this, and he that
was so overjoyed at the first glimpse of it, condemn us who are daily taught
that he is come, and has confirmed Gods truth, and answered all their
expectations, if we rejoice not at least as much in the performance, as they
did in the promise? Behold, how God has favored us to let us behold the
accomplishing of the desire of all Nations. See how he has glorified himself
in giving the world such a manifestation of his truth, as will stop the mouths
of his enemies, and for ever strengthen the faith of his humble servants. For
now he has made good all his words and Promises, his Covenant and
Protestations, in the first and greatest blessing of all 2 Cor. 1.20.
, and so given that as an earnest of all the rest. The night seemed long, and
the people of God themselves began to fear, and the wicked to deride their
expectation. But now we will trust in him; even though he defer, we will wait
on him; for we find he will not forget his promises nor falsify his word. Oh
let us rejoice in the God of truth, who has sent this mighty Salvation to us,
which is the instrument of our safety, and the evidence of his truth, and on
both accounts the cause of our rejoicing.

. 7. But in the midst of our Joy we must not forget our D^ty, nor so please our
selves with the delightful view of our advantage by this glorious Redemption,
as to pass by the design of God in giving it, least we think Jes^s came to set
us free from death, and let us loose to sin. He came to free us from the
slavery which we were f^llen into under Satan; but not to discharge ^s of our
duty to himself. Nay to increase the obligation; for by redeeming us from
captivity and death, he engaged us to serve him all our lives, which the laws
of Nations Redemptus ab hostibus r demptori serviat denec pre ium reddiderit.
Grot. de jur. B. P. l. 3. c. 9.. 10.
as well as common gratitude does inform us of. And if he had not resc^ed nor
yet purchased us, yet we are bound to serve God as we are his Creatures, and as
he is Supreme Lord and lawgiver to all the World. But then we co^ld not have
paid that duty witho^t fears and terrors, both beca^se of the Tyrants w om we
were enslaved to, and the Majesty we had offended against. And therefore witho
t a Redeemer, our se^vice to God either would have ^^en neglected or have been
^ccompanied with such ^^emblings and anxieties, so devoid of faith or love o^
hope, that it would have appeared necessa^y and cons^rained not voluntary or
free, and consequently it would be unacceptable to God, and unprofitable to us.
His mercy therefore is designed to remove our fears, and not to quit us of our
Obedience, but to make it more easy and pleasant by appeasing Gods wrath,
restraining Satan's power, and increasing our strength. So that now when we
apply our selves to the duties of Religion, we need not be discouraged at our
former guilt, he will cleanse us; amazed at Gods justice, he will satisfy it;
affrighted at Satan's malice, he will restrain it. We need not be disheartened
at the difficulty, he will help us; nor doubtful of the event, he will procure
acceptance and reward. He has taken off the terrors of an offending slave, and
left us no fear but that which is useful; the fear of an ingenious and a
dutif^l Child Non sicut feram timeo, patrem timeo, (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 2o.
, who out of love to his Father is afraid to offend him, or come short in his
duty to him. And this blessed Condition, to be able to serve God with Faith and
Hope, freedom and cheerfulness, is the great comfort of every truly pious soul;
and if we be such we shall reckon the convenience to do our duty, among the
chiefest of our felicities, and praise God as much for the Power to do good as
for any other blessing. Let us then (who pretend to more Gospel then any had
then) imitate this blessed man, who in praising God for the Redemption, seems
speedily to pass over all the benefits of Pardon and reconciliation, and glory
it self; and chooses above all to bless God for affording us opportunity and
freedom to serve him. As if holiness and undisturbed obedience were the most
desirable thing in the world, and the Heaven which Jesus brings. Let us behold
our duty and rejoice in that, more then in our pardon and ease, and then we
show a noble love. And let this deliverance produce its due effect in us, even
to make us use our hopes and comforts to quicken our love and our obedience.
And so this Hymn shall not only be a form of Praise, but a tutor to instruct us
what returns we ought to make; even to walk holily in our duties to God, and
righteously in our conversation with men Titus 1.11.
. Resolving that neither ease nor pretended gain, shall entice us back to our
chains; nor all Satan's menaces shall affright us from our gracious Master;
whom we must now serve not with such outward shows Coloss. 3.22.
as if we only courted human approbation; but with such sincerity as may
declare he has won our hearts, and engaged our affections while we live.
Therefore our ear must be bored, to signify we will now hear his word, obey
his will, and never leave so sweet and dear a Master. And when we have a while
found and considered the easiness of his service, the greatness and readiness
of his assistance, the infiniteness and endlesness of his rewards, we shall
have cause to glorify God for sending Jesus to bring us into this estate, and
think all our duty too little to express our obligation, and see reason to put
it into our Benedictus, that of slaves of Satan we are become Gods free men.

. 8. God has not only expressed his love, in raising up a Savior for us, but
in making him known to us. And since our obedience was designed, least
ignorance should make Apology Romans 10.14, 15.
, the divine care did order it should be proclaimed to all the world: It was
foretold at a great distance by the Prophets, to comfort the former ages: And
when it was just approaching, it was by a special Harbinger pointed out as near
at hand to awaken men's expectations, and summon them to prepare; so that it is
sure it was the great interest of all mankind, or else it had not been ushered
in by so many warnings. I doubt not but holy Zachary now felt the Etymology of
his sons Name, and the truth of the Angels Promise Luke 1.14. gaudium and
exulta^io.
: Not so much that he had a son, as in the joy he conceived that he was to be
the messenger of the Lord of hosts, the Herald and Harbinger to the most high:
And yet he rejoices not so much in the particular privilege of his son, as
the general benefit which the world might receive by his message: And therefore
he blesses God for his duty as well as his office. For when such a messenger
came to assure them of the approach of the so long expected Messiah, and much
desired Salvation; and to let the world know for what purposes the most high
did thus descend to Earth; it was to be hoped men would shake off their sloth,
and since he sent them so fair a notice, that they would not be surprised in
their carelessness, but appear in an Equipage suiting the greatness of his
Majesty, the dearness of his love, and the excellency of his design (...).
Philo de Cher.
that was to come. And this made the good man rejoice, hoping when they saw
their danger, and were showed their Redeemer, they would fly into his arms for
remission and grace; and if they did so he is glad for their advantage: However
he praises God for his mercy, since he has done his part: And we have still
the same cause of rejoicing, for that which was then done by an Agent
extraordinary, is now performed by the Ministers and Ambassadors of Christ, and
by the Gospel you have now heard, which, being ever resident among us, prepare
a lodging for Jesus in your hearts when he comes in the Spirit to offer his
grace to you: Thus he is set before you not to be gazed at but to be
entertained. And if you upon the warning prepare for him by Repentance, you
shall also have Remission; and then you may with Zachary bless God, for the
knowledge of Salvation that the Gospel gives unto you. And that the
exhortations of Ministers and summons of Gods word may not be as ineffectual to
us, as those of this great Prophet were to the Jews; consider the first cause
of all this Mercy, both of Gods sending his son to us, and giving us so many
warnings to receive him: It was the bowels of Gods tender mercies (...). Vulg.
Viscera Misericordiae: viz. (...), affectus Matris erga foetum e Visceribus
suis prodeuntem. Jerem. 31.20.
which yearned to behold us in the hands, and under the sword of the merciless
executioner, and moved him to send his son to rescue us by suffering the stroke
for us: It was not our merits but our misery, not our deserts but distress,
that prevailed with him: we were worthy to dye yet his heart relented, and he
could not see us bleed, and shall we be unmoved to behold him bleed for us, and
will we dye for all this? we were indeed in darkness and could not see our
danger, and if we had fallen into the pit then, it had been our calamity, but
now the morning appears, John teaches, Ministers Preach, and Christ himself the
Sun of Righteousness Malach. 4.2. (...) ut LXX Jerem. 23.5. Zachar. 3.9. male
Bez. germen, conser ver. 79. and Jesai. 9.2. Camer. Grotius: Christus (...)
dicitur a Patribus, Judaei horoscopum (...) vocare solent: and (...). Heb. 1.2.
Sir. vert. (...) Scaliger.
began to spring from the East then, and now if we perish it is our willfulness
and deserves no pity. Oh what has God done to show us the right way! sending
first the morning Star the Harbinger of the Suns approach (...). Philo.
, and when the Heathens were benighted in Idolatry, the Jews with evil
principles, worse practices, and sad afflictions; then did our Sun display his
Beams from on high, for he rose not from the Earth, but his rising was his
fall, his course a descent from Heaven to us, and if Zachary is so rejoiced
with the glimpses, we should much more with the Meridian glory he now shines
in. Let us not only rejoice in his light for a season, but walk by it, and if
we be in darkness it will show us our Condition, and then guide us into the
right way: this light will first Convert us and then conduct us. The Apostle
thought it was high time to awake then Romans 13.11, 12.
, and sure it is more so now, for if in the light of knowledge in the day we do
the works of darkness, that very light which we refuse to direct us as a guide,
shall discover us to our shame. But take warning and let not this light be set
up in vain; who would not most thankfully follow a friendly light offered to
him in an unknown, dark, and dangerous way: The Devil will lead you up and down
after the Ignis fatuus of Enthusiasm and your own imagination, till you sink
into destruction, but this Gospel is a true light, be thankful for it, for its
precepts are the Beams of the Sun of Righteousness, and do not only admire, but
follow it, and it will not only show you where you are, but carry you where you
should be, even to everlasting joy and peace, Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Benedictus.
PRaised and [Blessed be the Lord] of hosts, the [God of Israel] even of all
true believers [for he hath] showed us in holy Gospel, how he remembered our
misery, beheld our distress, and in pity sent his son from heaven: who has
[visited] in his Incarnation [and redeemed] by his death, us and all [his
people] throughout the world. He has relieved us, when we had no means of help
[and has raised up] the greatest deliverer that ever was, to be [a mighty
Salvation for us] even his Eternal and only Son, made man, descending (as was
promised) of the tribe of Judah to succeed [in the house] and restore the
Kingdom [of his servant David] and make it an everlasting Dominion. Hereby our
God has not only helped us, but manifested his own truth; for now he has make
good his Word, and done [as he spoke by] his Spirit in [the mouth of] all his
messengers [the holy Prophets, which have been] sent to give notice of this
great mercy at sundry times [since the world began.] It rejoices our souls to
see the fulfilling of that which they so often comforted Gods people with, by
assuring them [that we] and they [should be delivered] by an invincible
Redeemer, [from our enemies] Sin, and Satan, and nobly rescued [from the
hands] and out of the Power of those that had enslaved us and [of all that hate
us] and seek our ruin. This is the blessed time in which the God of truth was
pleased [to perform] the glorious work of our Redemption, which was [the mercy]
so much desired by, and so graciously [promised to our forefathers] now he has
vouchsafed to call to mind [and to remember] the engagements he made to them in
[his holy Covenant] and made them good before our eyes. Our gracious Lord is as
sure [to perform] his word as he was ready to promise, and we now rejoice in
the verification of [the Oath which he] unchangeably [sware to our forefather
Abraham] to assure him [that he would give us] (who are his seed by faith) his
own dear Son, for our Redeemer. And now what does the Lord our God require in
return for all his mercy and truth, but [that we being delivered] by the death
of Jesus from the wrath of God, and rescued [out of the hand of our enemies]
should never by sin put our selves in their power again, but being obliged by
our Pardon, and assisted by his grace, henceforth [might serve him] with a
lively faith, and cheerful hope, [without fear] of being hurt by Satan, or
rejected by God. So long as we walk [in holiness] toward him [and
righteousness] toward our Neighbors: and if our Religion and Charity be
sincere as done [before him] and constant so as we continue in it [all the days
of our life] we answer all his expectations, and need not doubt of acceptance
and reward. Lord thou came to make us holy as well as happy, and therefore
thou have sent this Harbinger to acquaint us with thy design. [And thou Child]
art chosen to give the world warning, and [shalt be called the Prophet of the
highest] God, thy office shall be to fit men to receive this mighty Savior
[for thou shall go] as a Herald [before the face of the Lord] by severe
reproofs, and powerful exhortations [to prepare his ways] by bringing men to
repentance. Thou art sent to show the danger of sin, and [to give knowledge of]
him that will bring [Salvation to his People] that they repenting, and fearing
the wrath to come, may forsake all iniquity, and fly to Jesus [for the
Remission of their sins,] It is high time for us who are guilty of so many
sins, to take care least by impenitence and unpreparedness, we loose the
benefit of this salvation which is provided for us [through the tender] bowels
of the [mercy of our God, whereby] he pitied our desperate danger, and after
our dismal right, has given us the light of [the day-spring] even his only Son
who [from on high] leaving his Heavenly Throne [hath visited us,] And now has
set up his Gospel among us [to give light] and discover the dangerous event of
sin [to them that sit in darkness] through ignorance, or by horrid guilt are in
the valley [and shadow of death] that so they may be instructed, converted and
live [And to guide our feet] when we are thus brought out of our evil and
dangerous paths, that we may enter [into the way] that leads to the everlasting
Kingdom [of Peace] we will observe this light, and follow this guide, and ever
praise thee for it saying, Glory be to the Father, etc.

The second Hymn after the second Lesson at Morning Prayer, Or the 100 Psalm.
. 9. THE Church has provided not only for our necessities but our delight,
giving us the choice of another Hymn, which is a Psalm of Praise as the Title
tells us, and was Composed to be sung by course in the Temple-service Dr.
Hammond Paraph. and Annot. on Psalm. 100.
at the time of the Oblation of the Peace Offering, and yet it is not so
appropriate to the Jewish service, but it may well fit the Christian worship;
being a double exhortation to public Praise, which is most due to God for the
publication of his Gospel, and besides it is addressed to all Nations, and so
is a fit return for so universal a Mercy as the Redemption is. There is no
difficulty in the Method or Phrase, and therefore we shall only note; That the
first Exhortation in the three first Verses, is both to direct and quicken us
in the duty of Divine Praise, directing us in the two first Verses concerning
the Persons by whom, the manner how, and place where, we must perform it, and
the third Verse contains the Motives, which are taken first from the Nature of
God; secondly from his Works, both in Creating us, and taking special care of
us as of the sheep of his Pasture: Wherefore the fourth Verse renews and
inforceth the Duty even to come into Gods house with hearts full of gratitude
and joy, lauds and benedictions; and the fifth Verse gives new reasons of it,
and more spiritual motives to it: first because of his Essential goodness;
secondly his Endless Mercy; thirdly his infallible truth. All which are
manifested so clearly in his holy Gospel, that the world never had such a
Testimony of them before, and therefore this Hymn directly looks upon us, who
have heard this good news, and obliges us to bless God for that infinite
Grace, and Mercy, and Truth, which he showed in giving his Son to us: for which
we must ever ascribe, Glory to the Father, etc.

SECTION X. Of the Hymns for the Evening Prayer, and first of the Magnificat.
The Analysis of the Magnificat.
This Hymn has two Parts, 1. A general Thanksgiving containing, 1. The Acts of
Praise Magnify and Rejoice.
2. The Instruments Soul and Spirit.
3. The Object of it The Lord God, etc.

2. The special reasons for it, 1. Upon her own account, considering 1. Her
present Meanness. 2. Her future Honor. 3. The Author of her happiness He that
is Mighty. He that is Holy.

2. Upon the account of others, 1. For the general disposals of his Providence
Giving to the Pious, Mercy. Humble, Exaltation. Poor, Supplies.
Procuring to the Proud, Shame. Mighty, Humillation. Rich, Want.

2. For the particular grace of the Redemption in which God showed His Mercy In
remembering of us.
His Power In sending help to us.
His Truth In keeping his word with us.






A Practical Discourse on the Magnificat.
. 1. THE Blessed Virgin (whom God chose to be the Instrument of the greatest
blessing that ever the World had) by the fruit of her lips, as well as of her
Womb, has given apparent testimony of the extraordinary presence of the Divine
Spirit with her, and in her. For this sacred Hymn breaths forth such lovely
mixtures of faith and fear, humility and love, charity and devotion, that it
appears she was full of grace, as well as highly favored. And it should be our
wish and endeavor to repeat it with the same affections and holy fervours,
with which she indicted it; Perhaps we think we have not the same occasion; It Is
true God the Word took flesh in her Womb, and that is her peculiar Privilege:
But if we receive the word of God, and the motions of the holy Spirit that
attend it, we may turn that word into Verbum Carnem facere est Verbum in Opus,
Scripturas in operas convertere. Bish. Andr. Ser. 6.
flesh, by Faith and Obedience; if we so hear as to practice Sit in singulis
Mariae anima -- Nam etsi secundum carnem una Matter est Christi, secundum fidem
tamen omnium fructus est. Ambros. in Luc.
we do conceive Christ by Faith, and he is formed in us Omnis enim anima
concipit Dei verbum si tamen immaculata and immunis a vitiis intemerato
castim^niam pudor^ custodiat. Idem.
by the overshadowing power of the Holy Ghost and a pu^e heart, and he is by
holiness brought forth; for Christ himself calls such Matthew. 12.50.
by the name of his Mother. We are to rejoice with all that do rejoice: but
especially when we are sharers in the mercy and advantage which occasions that
joy, wherefore we are most of all obliged to rejoice with the blessed Virgin,
both as she was the Mother of our Redeemer according to the flesh, and because
we may be so according to the spirit; the Lesson we now heard is out of the Old
Testament, and as there we find the Records and Examples of the Divine Mercy to
the Pious and humble, and of his Vengeance upon the Proud and arrogant, so here
we find a Form of Praise for those dispensations of Gods Providence; and since
all the deliverances of Gods people there related are founded on this mercy of
our Redemption, or flow from it, or are directed to it, this Hymn will teach us
to turn the Old Testament into Gospel, and with the holy Patriarchs Genesis 49.18.
Non expecto redemptionem Sampsonis quae est salus transitoria, sed expecto
redemptionem Messiae filii David. Targ.
ever to apply all to this great salvation, of which all other mercies were but
types: Behold then the Mother of Jesus saying to you, Oh praise the Lord with
me Psalm. 34.4.
and let us magnify his name together: let us show forth the greatness of his
power and goodness, for we cannot set out his Perfections with any advantage,
nor represent him greater then really he is (as we often magnify one another)
but then we magnify the Lord, when we declare what we apprehend him to be, and
let us advance his glory as high as is possible, for there is no danger of
exceeding; our Praises will be short, but they must be real, wherefore before
we can bear a part in this Anthem, we must get our souls affected with a sense
of his infinite Power, and our minds exalted with the belief of his excellent
mercy, so our praise shall be no complement, but our soul and spirit, shall
bear their part, and our thanksgiving may be real as his favors are: let his
wonderful love present it self to your affections, and bring out your wonder
and joy, your hopes and desires to behold the sweetness, till these passions
begin to be enamoured on it, and moved by it, and then they will carry a lovely
notion and fair Idea of it to the mind, and so effectually recommend it, that
the whole inward man shall be ravished with the beautiful prospect, and every
faculty of the soul, and part of the affections shall unite into a devout
celebration of the divine love and mercy. Behold the holiest of Women, observe
where she fixes her eye, and whether she directs her Praises; she rejoices not
in her own excellencies, nor does she magnify her self, but God her Savior;
which may check our vanity, who are so apt in a prosperous success and
unexpected exaltation, to sacrifice to our own deserts Hoc ego feci non
fortuna: dict. Timoth. ducis.
, to crown our selves, though we snatch it from the head of Heavens King; but
sure since he gives the blessing, he deserves the honor Tuum Domine est bonum,
tua itaque est gloria: Qui enim de bono tuo gloriam sibi quaerit, and non tibi,
fur est and latro, similisque diabolo, qui voluit furare gloriam tuam. August.
Soliloqu. c. 15.
, and he that paies it not, is a double thief, and steals the gift, and the
glory also; for both are his. She that was the Mother of Jesus after the flesh,
thinks it no disparagement to confess her Son to be her Savior, but rejoices
that he was so; let not us then think we are saved from temporal evils, or can
be from eternal death without him, and let us esteem it a greater honor to us,
and a surer ground of our rejoicing, that the most high God is become our
Salvation, then if we had our strength in our own hands.

. 2. There is nothing gives the dimensions of Gods love to us more truly, then
the sight and sense of our vileness, when we behold our selves so low and
despicable as indeed we are, then the glories of the Divine Majesty in stooping
to us, and looking on us in our low estate, will shine in their native luster,
when we see how worthless we are, and what favor we have obtained beyond our
expectations, as much as our deserts; then our souls will magnify the Lord in
the apprehensions of his greatness, and our spirits rejoice in the admirable
goodness of God our Savior. Thus the blessed Virgin was inspired with these
Seraphical ecstasies of joy, by looking on the mean Condition in which this
infinite mercy surprised her; she was not arrived to the honor of marriage;
and in the opinion of the daughters of Jerusalem (who esteemed it a huge
reproach and a great affliction 1 Samuel 1.11. (...) LXX. pro sterilitate, ut
Genesis 29.32.
to be without Children) her estate was disgraceful, and her fortunes were
really dishonorable, for though she sprung from the blood Royal of Judah, yet
she was then a poor obscure maid, unknown to the world, but regarded by him
that loves to lodge in the lowest hearts Isai. 57.15.
of the poor and pious, as well as in the highest heavens; she was in her
lowest estate the Lords handmaid, and devoutly served him day and night, and
her Piety sanctified her Poverty, and drew the eye of God to regard her, as he
will the meanest of us, if our obedience equal hers, and especially if our
minds be as low as our estate is; for so was this excellent Virgins, who by
lowliness here means not her humility, for it had argued Pride to have so high
a conceit of her lowliness of mind as to believe it obliged Gods favor, there
it was her meanness and poverty (...), abjectionem and humilem conditionem,
(...) vero humilitatem significare asserit Erasmus.
which she so freely confesses, and heartily praises God for regarding. No
doubt her humility was eminent in her afflicted condition, for when she was
advanced to be the Mother of the Worlds Savior, she seeks no greater honor,
then to be styled the handmaid of the Lord, ver. 38. Oh Blessed Soul! that was
ever the same, neither dejected in her affliction, nor puffed up with her
exaltation, but serves God cheerfully in the one, and praises him heartily for
the other: She beholds an infinite and lasting honor prepared for her, not
alone among the daughters of one place or Generation Genesis 30.13. Sir. pro
gloria med.
for she was to be the Mother of a Universal and Everlasting blessing, which
all former ages had desired, and all future times should rejoice in, and Both
would proclaim her happy above all Women, who should be the Instrument of this
Mercy: And yet she resigns all this glory to him that gave it her, and declares
whence she received it (...). Theophilac. in loc.
, that not her name, but his may have the glory: and sure she deserves the more
esteem because she returned the honor to God. Wherefore they are most wretched
who disrespect her whom God has chosen, and out of pretended hatred to
superstition will scarce allow her the reverence of an excellent person Aequale
est enim in utrisque his sectis d^trimentum; quum illi quidem vili pendant
Sanctam Virginem, hic vero rur^us ulera decorum glorificent. Epiph. tom. 2.
haer. 79.
, and yet no doubt she would detest those Ave's and gratulations which some
superstitious Votaries (to the dishonor of him whom she praised) bestow upon
her, because she calls her Son her Savior, and her self the handmaid of the
Lord, so that it is our duty to Reverence, but not Adore her; for she will
assure you it was Gods infinite power (for which he is deservedly called the
most Mighty (...) Heb. (...); nomen Dei ^sal. 24.8.
which wrought this miracle (...) res miras and magnas. Deuteronomy. 10. ver. 21.
Psalm. 26.2. Act^ 2.11.
of Jesus his incarnation, which was the cause of her honor: he magnified her,
and therefore she magnifies him, and teaches us to hallow his Name, for it is
holy and reverend Psalm. 111.9.
in it self, and deserves to be so esteemed for ever and ever.

. 3. Now that all may join with her in the Praises of the most holy, she
passes from the consideration of her personal Privileges, to the Universal
goodness of God in the constant dispensations of his Providence, that we may
see his Mercy was not confined to that time; nor limited to one Person: for as
she had now experienced the bounty and kindness of him that she had served, so
all Gods faithful servants that ever were, and all that ever shall be, are
assured to find the like. Wherefore when our particular mercies occasion our
joy, let us not confine our gratitude to our private concerns, but delight to
hear out of Gods word those numerous instances of the rewards of holiness, and
the blessings of true Piety in all times, that so we may have nobler sentiments
of the Divine goodness by viewing the extent and duration of it, and that we
may be the more encouraged to go on, in that course which will so certainly be
our advantage, let the Mother of Jesus and all holy men you read of in Sacred
Writ recommend the fear of God to us which they have sound so beneficial; for
if we be truly Religious, be our Condition never so despicable or deplorable,
we may be sure of help from Heaven; was not all mankind become hopeless and
helpless, when God made bare his holy Arm, and helped us by him that was the
strength of his Right hand Isai. 63.5.
dispersing our lofty spiritual enemies, who thought they had us sure their
slaves for ever: And when these enemies are thus scattered, shall we fear
Satan's broken forces, those instruments of his that would discourage us in our
obedience, by slanders and contempt, wrongs and injuries, menaces and
threatenings? No surely; we have the strength of God for us, his finger could
destroy them, his hand crush them to nothing Psalm. 118.15. Magna Dei efficacia
per digitum, maj^r per manum, maxima per brachium i^dicatur. Psalm. 77.16. Exodus
15.6. Grot.
, but he will employ the might of his arm in it, although the very breath of
his displeasure, nay the thought and imagination of his heart August. legi^
(...) in cogitatione cordis sui.
be sufficient to consume them and dissipate all their Counsels, be they never
so mighty in the worlds eye or high in their own imagination, they cannot harm
us, nor shall not discourage us from serving God. How did the Princes of the
world, the Jewish Pharisees, and Gentile Philosophers, scorn the beginnings of
the Gospel, designing to crush it by Power, or disgrace it by pretended
holiness, or confute it by subtle arguments; but contrary to all their
expectations Jesus prevailed over the oftentation of the Pharisees, the
learning of the Philosopher, and the legions of the Roman Emperors, so that by
an Omnipotent but Invisible arm in a few ages, his enemies vanished, and
Princes Crowns were laid at his feet. Read the Word of God, and observe the
methods of his Providence, and you shall find, He has ever appeared an enemy
to those Proud and lofty ones Aesopus rogatus quid Jupiter agit? Resp. (...).
Hes.
who are inthroned in their own vain-glories, and suppose they have strengrh
enough to secure their grandeur, his irresistible arm shall pull them down, and
set up those they despise in their place, whereby he gives not only an evidence
of his Power, but of his Wisdom and Justice, for disappointment and poverty is
the most smarting punishment to pride and insolence, and honor and exaltation
is so unexpected to the humble, that they will be most thankful for it, and
most careful to use it to his honor who bestows it on them. Jacob and Joseph,
Gideon and David were the youngest and least considerable in their fathers
houses, Leah was hated and Hannah (whose song of Praise 1 Samuel 2.1. Mary here
imitates) she was despised, and so was this blessed Virgin; who was so mean and
obscure that the honorable Ladies and stately Dames of Israel, who were all
ambitious to be the mothers of the Messiah, would have scorned her a place
among their handmaids, yet they are passed by, and she is designed to this
felicity, and she magnifies the Lord for it; but those that are great and full
of Earthly honors, expect these favors as their due, and cannot desire them
with the hunger and thirst of the poor and lowly, nor return their thanks with
the like Devotion, therefore these are disappointed of their hope, and sent
away empty (...). dicuntur qui ad aliquem veniunt beneficium expectantes and
non inveniunt. Luc. 20.10, 11. Job. 22.9.
and the Mercy is given to those that least expected it, and will be most
thankful for it. Let us therefore be lowly in heart, when our condition is low,
and if we have a sense of our wants, and desire his help, we shall be lovely in
his eyes, though the world trample on us, he will exalt and fill us with all
good things, even to our own admiration, and the envy of those who did despise
us: the world is full of instances of these dispensations of Providence, but
the most excellent and illustrious testimony that ever was, appeared in the
spiritual advantages which the Israel of God received in the giving the
Messiah, since we were then just ready to sink into ruin, had he not laid hold
of us Heb. 2.16.
and by his mighty arm rescued us from the Pit, we were justly abdicated by God
our Father, and disinherited, but Jesus comes to reconcile us, and in him we
are restored to favor Filius abdicatus in gratiam rediens Graecis dicitur
(...). and Pater (...). Scult. exer.
and received into grace again; and thus the Promise made to Abraham is made
good, and the Lord becomes the God of his seed for ever. Oh my soul acknowledge
the gracious dealings of thy most merciful Father, but above all praise him for
the mercies of the Gospel, for what comfort were it to be raised by the fall of
our temporal enemies to a fading honor, if a miserable Eternity did succeed,
but now by Faith in Jesus thou art not only secured in thy low estate, but
may behold an immovable Throne, an immortal Crown prepared for thee, high
as Heaven; while all the proud workers of iniquity shall fall low as hell,
never to rise again: Glory be to the Father, etc.

The Paraphrase of the Magnificat.
O Praise the Lord with me, all ye that behold his inexpressible goodness,
which has exalted my affections, and filled [My soul] with such glorious
apprehensions, that with all its powers it [doth magnifie] and set forth the
admirable greatness of [the Lord] my mind also [and my spirit] ravished with
the contemplation of his infinite goodness [doth rejoyce] with joy unspeakable
[in God] who has vouchsafed to become [my Savior.] I cannot sufficiently
express his Mercy, nor my gratitude [For he] that is the Majesty of Heaven, by
his marvelous condescension [hath regarded] and cast a gracious eye on the
poverty and [the lowliness] of my condition, who am so inconsiderable, and
never aimed higher, then to be reputed amongst the meanest of his servants, and
called by the name [of his handmaiden.] I am most despicable in the worlds
eyes, and vile in my own, yet he has conferred on me a high and lasting honor
[for behold] he has passed by the more noble, and chosen me to be the Mother
of the worlds Savior, so that [from henceforth] whenever this mercy is
mentioned to the honor of God, his favor toward me will be remembered, by the
people of [all generations] who shall bless God for it, and [shall call me
blessed] and account me happy above all women. But I will freely ackno^ledge it
was not my own merit nor strength that has advan^ed me [For he that is mighty]
in Power, and infinite in Mercy, most freely has exalted me, and [hath
magnified me] his poor unworthy handmaid; his therefore is the glory, his the
praise, [and holy] and reverend] [is his Name] which I, and all his servants
will ever love and honor: For I am not the only instance of his goodness, nor
do I confine my Praises to my particular occasion: all the world sees and knows
that his favor [And his mercy is] ever showed [on them that fear him] so that
holy and pious men are blessed by him, and shall be [throughout all
generations] while the world endures. Ye servants of the Lord, consider how in
all the course of his Providence, especially in this great Redemption [He has
showed strength] and a mighty Power, for [with his arm] he has secured and
lifted up his own, and by it [he has scattered] the forces and baffled the
designs of [the proud] who thought they only deserved to be respected by God,
and were so high and safe [in the imaginations of their hearts] At all times he
disappoints such expectations; and now as at other seasons [he has put down]
the wise, the honorable, and [the mighty from their seats] and thrones, on
which their pride had mounted them: [And has exalted] to that honor [the
humble and meek] even those whom the arrogant most despised. [He has filled]
most plenteously the souls of [the hungry] that earnestly desired the least
favors, and satisfied their longings [with good things] beyond their
expectations [and the rich] whose pride made them think themselves fittest
objects of his bounty, and yet their abundance abated their desires after it,
these [he hath] disappointed and [sent empty away] And as in all other cases,
so now [He remembring] the constant method of [his mercy] and seeing his
peoples distress [hath holpen] and again restored [his servant Israel] and all
faithful people to favor, and the hopes of glory [as he promised] to the
Saints of former ages, and particularly to [our forefathers] to [Abraham] that
he would give a Savior to Redeem, and bring deliverance to us [and to his seed
for ever.]

The second Hymn after the first Lesson, viz. the XCVIII Psalm.
. 4. SOmetimes instead of the Blessed Virgins Song, we use this Psalm to
express the same thing, even the might of Gods arm, and the affections of his
heart, both showed to his people Israel his true Church; and this is one of
David's triumphant Hymns, composed upon some miraculous victory over the enemies
of the truth; and being entitled a new Song, may be applied in the Mystery, to
the glorious Conquest made over Sin and Satan by the mighty arm of Jesus, or
in the letter, to those deliverances of the faithful mentioned in the Lessons:
and a new heart will make it every day a new song by a renewed sense of the
Divine goodness; for here the people of God encourage one another to praise him
for his works, which are so admirably contrived, ver. 1. so mightily performed,
ver. 2. so clearly manifested, ver. 3. to his own people, and all the world,
ver. 4. Wherefore the exhortation is renewed and enlarged, and all the world is
invited to join in this Hymn, ver. 5. and showed how to praise him with heart
and voice, and all sorts of Music, ver. 6. and 7. no part of the Earth must be
silent, but the Inhabitants of Seas Arab. populi fluviorum -- etc. -- populi
montium, Clament -- etc. Aspice venturo laetentur ut omnio seclo.
and floods, hills and valleys must rejoice, not only for past mercies, but for
the Kingdom of Christ (which every temporal deliverance minds us of) when he
shall come to free his servants from sin and misery, and exercise such justice
in the trial of all the World, that his Saints shall sing a new song of Victory
to him for ever in Heaven, and we on Earth in hopes of it, do at present
rejoice and say; Glory be to, etc.

The Analysis of the Nunc Dimittis.
Luke 2.29. Herein Simeon shows, 1. The greatness of his joy, which appears
1. In offering his very life. 2. In his readiness to meet death so Willingly,
Peaceably.

2. The reason of it, which was 1. His particular happiness, 1. In the
fulfilling the Promise. 2. In the beholding his Savior.
2. The Universal good because 1. Christ was visible to all. 2. Beneficial to
all, bringing light glory
to the Gentiles, Jews





A Practical Discourse on the Nunc Dimittis, The first Hymn after the second
Lesson.
. 5. THE Author of this short and comprehensive Hymn, was a man eminent, for
his exact Justice, vigorous Devotion, lively Faith, and extraordinary
inspiration; and of this, the holy Text assures: us and it is probable he was a
person considerable, very likely him whom the Jews call Simeon the first, who
lived at this time, and was the son of the most famous Rabbi Hillel Vid.
Scultet. Exerc. Evang. l. 1. c. 61. and Light-foots Harm. on this place.
who opposed the received opinion of the temporal Kingdom of the Messiah; for
it is certain our Simeon did so, or he had never thus rejoiced over a Messiah
presented by so mean Parents, in swaddling clothes at the gates of the Temple.
It was not the object that appeared to his eyes, but the illumination of the
Spirit, and the prospect of his Faith, that elevated his affections. Wherefore
we need not pretend to dismiss this holy song, by alleging it was an
extraordinary occasion; for the writings of the Apostles, which are daily read
among us, do as clearly represent him the Savior of the world to the eye of
Faith, and set him before us as evidently in the house of God, as any bodily
sight could do to him; and if our minds be enlightened, and our faith firm as
his, we have the same occasion, and ought to rehearse it with the same
devotion. The mercy is made sufficiently plain to us, it we were but as
apprehensive of the advantages it brings to us, and all men, as he was. I know
not why we should wish to live any longer, then till we have obtained hopes of
a share in it: But we have houses to build, families to propagate, and designs
to complete, and all before we are willing to dye. We desire something besides,
nay (perhaps) more then an Interest in Jesus; and therefore we dare not join in
this noble wi^h. But he was dead to the world before, and had been impatient of
a longer stay, but only for the promise to have a sight of Jesus in the flesh.
And when this long-wished for happiness was come to pass, his expectations are
answered, and all his desires filled. He values nothing here, but humbly craves
his dismission. His holy soul that came from God, can find no rest on the
waters of this world, and therefore desires to return with an Olive Branch of
peace to its dear Lord (...) C^em. Al. Strom. 4o. Mortem Stoici appellare
solent, (...) Arrian.
, where it was sure of rest and joy among the best of friends. He now desires
leave to depart from the flesh, which he had long esteemed his Prison, wherein
he was confined by his infirmities (...) Themistius ap. Stobae.
, and shut up from beholding the glories of God, which he now longs to see more
then ever, by this last experience of his Truth and Mercy; and he knew that
death would set him free, his desires and joy begin to swell too big to be
confined in the walls of flesh, and now he is even straightened till he be let
loose into the regions of glory to praise him face to face. And yet his
ecstasies transport him not beyond the measures of obedience and humility; for
he first asks his Masters leave, nor will he go till he have Commission: but he
intimates he had stripped himself of all worldly desires, and had his inner coat,
his flesh in his hands ready to lay it down, and run whenever the watch word
(...). Ar.
was given. His hopes and desires to see his Savior had alone made his life
acceptable, and the fulfilling of them makes even death most welcome to him;
because he knew that Jesus came to disarm death, and (by satisfying for sin) to
deprive it of that sting which made it terrible to all men. All the
sin offerings of the law were but weak armor to encounter death, nor could they
so fully purge or appease the Conscience, as that it should not accuse in the
fatal hour: But the perfect Sacrifice of the death of Jesus, does so fully
avert Gods wrath, that all that believe in him can triumph over death, meet it
with courage, and embrace it with peace, as the end of their fears, and the
entrance into their felicity 1 Cor. 15.55. Non est timendum quod liberat nos ab
omni timendo.
. How can he fear death that has his sins forgiven? or how can he doubt Gods
mercy that beholds his Son with faith and love? or how can he question the
truth of Gods Promises that embraces Jesus the greatest of all in his arms? He
that knows Gods power, is persuaded of his love, and convinced of his truth,
can dye in peace, and lie down with joy in the assurance of a blessed
Resurrection. And this we may do, for it was only their privilege who lived
then, to see Jesus, and whoever looked on him so as to dare to dye then, must
behold him by faith: and thus we may see Christ not only with Simeon presented
in the Temple, but with St. Steven standing at the right hand of God, not only
in his rising, but his full glory. Why then are we so fixed to this world? so
desirous to stay? so loath to depart? so sad when God calls? Oh let us look on
this our Redeemer so steadfastly, and embrace him so tenderly in our hearts,
that it may appear he is dearer to us then our very lives. Let us love him so
entirely that nothing may satisfy us without him; and trust so fully in his
merits and mercies, that we may live cheerfully and dye peaceably. Let us say
with this devout Old man; Lord I do now so clearly perceive thy purposes of
mercy, so confidently believe thy promises of forgiveness and so firmly rely on
the hopes of glory, that I resolve to be ever thy servant. I desire to stay no
longer in this world then to get assurances for a better. Earths vanities do
not make me wish to live, nor deaths terrors afraid to dye. If thou call me
this day, Lord I come. I can live with patience, or dye in peace; for I see him
that will preserve me in life or death, and gives me hopes that whether I live
or dye, I am the Lords. I was not with Simeon in the Temple to behold my
Savior with my bodily eyes; but I have had thy Salvation as clearly manifested
in this thy holy word, as if I had seen him with my eyes. Lord grant me thy
holy Spirit, that I may behold him with the same faith, and embrace him with
the same affections that he did, and then I shall cheerfully join in a Nunc
Dimittis, and being daily ready to dye, shall ever be fit to live, and thy will
shall be done in my life or death. Blessed Lord! thou have even to our days by
these holy writings sufficiently manifested thy Son before all our faces; and
it is our carelessness, ingratitude and unbelief, that hides him from our eyes,
and makes us hug these vanities, and fear to leave them. But thou have done thy
part, and I will praise thee, for sending this bright and glorious Sun, which
shined on so many millions of wretched Heathens benighted in the darkness of
Idolatry, and made them Christian. I will bless thee for honoring thy ancient
but despised people, who were more enabled by the birth of Jesus, then by all
their former Royalties and victorious Trophies; and instead of the bright
Cloud, the glory of the Tabernacle, thou have sent him to pitch his tent among
them, who was the brightness of thy own glory. I am ravished to behold so many
joyful souls blessing thee for this light which shined on them in their sins,
and the confines of eternal darkness, and converted and translated them into
thy marvelous light. And all thy holy Saints in all ages have given thee the
glory for all those illustrious beams of Love and Charity, Piety, Justice and
Devotion, which shine from their lives, and are but the reflection of the rays
of the grace of Jesus. This excellent person rejoiced not only in his own
felicity, but to behold by the Spirit of Prophecy what joy Jesus was like to
bring to me, and many thousands, of Converts and holy Men to the end of the
World. Wherefore let us be glad and rejoice with him, for our selves, and all
people, for the light that shines upon us, and the glory that is round about
us, and with all our Souls sing, Glory be to the Father, etc.

The Paraphrase of the Nunc Dimittis.
I Desire not to live in this world any longer, then I have laid hold of thy
Salvation; which since thy Word and Spirit has now discovered to me, I have
all I can wish for here; therefore [Lord now let thou] thy command go forth
that [thy servant] who has longed hitherto to enjoy thee, may [depart] quietly
out of this miserable world, and be dismissed from the prison of the flesh. I
can now leave it [in peace] being assured thou will make good all other
Promises, since in giving thy dear Son thou have done so exactly [according to
thy word.] My desires are satisfied, and my faith confirmed as much as is
possible in this world [For mine eyes] enlightened by thy holy Spirit, [have
seen] by Faith in thy blessed word, him that is my Redeemer and brings [thy
salvation] to me, and all the world. I cannot contain, nor yet express my joy
to behold this lovely Peacemaker [w ich thou hast] not only manifested in the
flesh, to the infinite delight of thy servants then; but [prepared] by the
discovery of thy holy Gospel to appear most gloriously [before the face of all
people] that ever were or shall be. This glorious Sun of Righteousness has
shined on all the Earth, his word is [a light to lighten] the dismal regions of
the unconverted heathens, and [the Gentiles] that knew not God. His doctrine
instructed them, and has converted many; and his presence and his grace is the
honor [and the glory] of all true believers, the joy and comfort [of thy
people Israel] so that we, and all the world are bound to praise thee for thy
Gospel, and thy son here on Earth; and to continue our song to all Eternity,
when thou let us depart from hence. Amen.

The last Hymn after the second Lesson, viz. the LXVII Psalm.
. 6. AFter those parts of the Epistles which are more Doctrinal, as containing
the excellent principles and precepts of the Christian Religion, we may
seasonably use this rare piece of David's devotion; which contains most
passionate wishes, for the propagation of the knowledge of these incomparable
truths throughout all the world, and zealous desires that they may be known to
all, as they are to us: whereby we declare our high esteem of them, our hearty
thankfulness for them, and our sincere desires that all men might have the
benefit, and God the glory by them, which is a seasonable return for those
instructions we have now received out of Gods holy word, and these very
Petitions are an act of Eucharist and Praise. The first Verse is the first
Request, even that God would be gracious to us, in forgiving our sins, giving
us his grace to profit, and outwardly expressing the kindness of his heart by
the smiles of his countenance. The second Verse is the end why we desire this
felicity to his Church; that the divine goodness to us may invite many Converts
in, and the increase of the Church will be our happiness, as it is our desire.
The third Verse is the second Petition that we and all may so discern the
excellency of his Laws, that he may be universally praised by Jews and
Gentiles. Verse fourth, both for the holiness of his Commands, and the
righteous administrations of his Providence: And to show how earnestly we
desire Gods glory, and how constantly it ought to be paid; the same Petition is
repeated ver. 5. And to encourage all to it, the blessed effects of this
universal praise are added, ver. 6. and 7. For when we are thankful, God will
multiply his blessings, the Church shall be replenished with grace, and
fruitful in good works, and more will so be drawn to embrace this Sacred
Religion. Did we thus earnestly beg his grace to prosper his Word to us, and
heartily Praise him for it our selves, and fervently wish the enlargement of
Christ's Kingdom, God the Father, and Jesus Christ even our own God, and God the
Holy Ghost would assuredly bless us. To which holy and undivided Trinity, be
ascribed all Honor, Glory and Praise, by us and all the World now and for
ever. Amen.

SECTION XI.
The Analysis of the Apostles Creed.
In this Creed are two parts, showing what we believe, 1: Concerning God. 1. In
general, that there is A God One God
I believe in God
2. In special, as to the Persons of the Trinity 1. Person the Father His
Nature the Father Almighty
Works Creation Providence maker of Heaven and Earth


2. Person the Son 1. His Name and Offices Prophet Priest and King
and in Jesus Christ

2. His Natures, both the Divine and his only Son our Lord,
Humane in his Conception and Birth who was conceived by the holy ghost, born
of the Virgin Mary,

3. His works 1. Redemption by 1. His Passion suffered under Pontius Pilate was
crucified dead and buried, he descended into hell,
2. Resurrection the third day he rose again from the dead,
3. Ascension and Interces^ he ascended into heaven, and sits at the right
hand of God the Father Almighty.

2. Final Judgment from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead,


3. Person whose Name expresses His Nature a Holy Spirit His Office to
sanctify us I believe in the Holy Ghost,


2. Concerning our selves, 1. Our Condition as to 1. Union the holy Catholic
Church,
2. Communion the communion of Saints,

2. Our Privileges 1. As to the Soul the forgiveness of sins,
2. As to the Body the resurrection of the body, and
3. As to both the life everlasting. Amen.





A Discourse of the Creed.
. 1. THE Holy Scriptures being a perfect Revelation of all Divine Truth, ought
to be undoubtedly received by every Christian. And no man is necessarily
obliged to believe any thing in order to his salvation that is not contained
therein (...) Damasc. de Orthod. Fid. l. 1. c. 1.
, or necessarily deduced thence. So that the whole Word of God may be called
our Creed, because it is the rule of our Faith. And yet because the truths
therein revealed are dispersed and variously presented according to the several
occasions of their manifestation (and since they are liable to be misunderstood
by ignorance and carelessness, or misrepresented to us by malice and interest,
it seems almost necessary that the fundamental Articles of our Faith should be
collected thence, and reduced to one comprehensive sum, which may be learned
early, remembered easily, and retained unanimously and constantly by all
Christians. On which grounds there was in the Apostles times a form of sound
words 2 Timothy 1.13. (...). Epist. Jud. ver. 14. (...). 2 Timothy 1.14. (...)
Philip. 3.16. (...)
of that Faith which was delivered to the Saints, and which they are charged to
keep with all fidelity, that they might all be of the same mind and walk by the
same rule. And if the consent of Antiquity be of any Authority, this form of
the Apostles Creed was that which they all agreed upon Discessuri ab invicem
norman prius futurae praedicationis in commune constituunt. Ruffinus in Symbol.

Omnes Orthodoxi Patres affirmant Symbolum ab ipsis Apostolis conditum. Sixth.
Senens. Bib.


before their parting, to be a standing rule and measure for the Christian
faith. So that it has ever since been of great authority in the Church, and
though the cavils of some heretics, made it fit to explain some Articles more
largely, and gave occasion to the composing of new Creeds at Nice and
Constantinople, etc. yet these were never intended to abate the Authority of
this, which of all others has been received most generally. And those were
accounted Orthodox and Catholic Hanc legem sequentes Christianorum
Catholicorum nomen jubemus amplecti, reliquos vero dementes -- haeretici
dogmatis infamiam sustinent. Theodos. and Great. Imp.
who did embrace it, and all others branded with the infamous names of
Heretics and Deceivers. But whoever desires a fuller account hereof, or a
large explication of all the Doctrines herein contained, must be referred to
those Excellent Persons who have so well performed that task, it being our
design now only to consider it as it is here made use of in our daily
Devotions: and so what is to be said will come under some of these heads, 1.
The place it obtains in our Liturgy, 2. The time when, 3. The reasons why, and
4. The manner how it is to be repeated.

. 2. This ancient Confession of our Faith is most judicially set by the Church
after the ending of the Lessons out of holy Scripture. For the Creed receives
both its Being and Authority from thence, since it is collected from the Word
of God, and proved by it, and what can be more seasonable then for us, after
the reading of Holy Writ, to declare our persuasion of all that is contained
therein: especially of the Articles treated of in the now read Portion. By
repeating our Creed here we do set to our seals John 3.33. (...).
to confirm the Truth of God and all revealed by him, and do gratefully
acknowledge and declare those salutary mysteries we have learned from these
Divine Oracles. And we may further consider, that as the Creed follows the
Lessons out of which it sprang, so it precedes the Prayers, which are grounded
on it. And the public profession of our Faith before we pray, is the
vindication and the foundation of the Petitions we make; for therefore we ask
these things, and in this manner, because we believe in an Invisible God who is
an Omnipotent Creator, a most merciful Redeemer, and a most gracious Comforter.
Hence we pray to the Father in the Name of the Son, by the assistance of the
holy Spirit, in fellowship with the Saints, for the forgiveness of sins, and a
joyful resurrection. And all this we are directed and encouraged unto by the
belief of this Creed, which, by exercising that most necessary companion of our
Prayers, viz. Faith, is an excellent preparative to our addresses. Which
secondly may partly account for the time and frequency of its repetition, which
ought to be as often as we solemniy read or pray, and so not to be omitted at
any time in public Assemblies; where the Ancients observed the use of it (and
we may receive great benefit by a devout imitation of them) in arming our souls
hereby against all doubting or evil thoughts, which disturb us most in our
attendance upon the service of our heavenly Master Cum horremus aliquid animo
recurrendum est ad Symbolum. Quando enim sine militiae sacramento miles in
tentorio, bellator in praelio. Ambr.
. So that as the Germans excluded him from their sacrifices that came without
his shield; so should he be from our Church-devotions, that holds not up this
shield of Faith, by which he may overcome all the fiery darts of the Devil.
And, as if it could never be repeated too often, we find holy Ambrose Symbolum
quoque specialiter debemus tanquam nostri cordis signaculum, antelucanis horis
quotidie recensere. ad Virg. l. 3.
commending it to his Virgins, as the first exercise of their morning piety,
and St. Augustine prescribing it to his Catechumens, to be used both Night and
Morning, not as a Prayer (as some ignorant Persons mistake it) but as a
foundation to build their Prayers on, Accipite filii regulam fidei quod
Symbolum dicitur and -- in cord scribite and quotidie dicite apud vos,
antequam dormiatis, anteq^am precedatis, symbolo vestro, vos munite. de Symb.
ad Catech. l. 1.
a Memento to whom they were made, and a ground of their hope that they should
be accepted, and for the same reasons we now place it in our Morning and
Evening Prayer.

. 3. But the fitness and necessity of its daily repetition will more fully
appear, and we shall be better instructed in our duty therein by a more
particular account of the reasons thereof, the principal of which are, 1. To
fix it in our memories and record it there, that it may never go out of our
minds, being daily revived by a fresh recital, for this being the sum of those
principles which we are to square our lives by; the Test to discern the
temptations of Satan, and the false doctrines of heretics by: Nulla enim
unquam extitit haeresis quae non hoc Symbolo potuit damnari. Coelestin. ad Nest.
we can no more be without it then the Architect without his Rule and the
Goldsmith without his touchstone. And least it should be neglected or forgotten
by private persons; if we attend on the Service of the Church, we shall neither
be ignorant nor unmindful of this heavenly touchstone, by which we may
constantly discover all that is contrary to the truth of our principles or the
holiness of our profession. 2. To express our constant fidelity to God; this
being like the Soldiers word or symbol, by keeping which, we own that great
General, whose Soldiers and Servants we avowed our selves at Baptism, and took
upon us this Faith as the badge and cognizance of our relation to God and
dependence on him. So that whenever we are to fight for him, or to approach him
Dei igitur cultus quoniam coelestit militia est, devotionem maximam fidemque
desiderat. Lact. lib. 5. c. 20. Non ego perfidum dixi sacramentum Ibimus,
ibimus --
, we must show this badge, and repeat the Articles of our Allegiance, to
declare we are still for the Lord of hosts, and do hold fast the profession of
our faith without wavering. Nor is there a more effectual argument to move God
to hear our Prayers, and obtain the intercession of Jesus, then with heart and
voice to make this Confession of him before men Romans 10. ver. 9, 10. and S.
Matthew. 10. ver. 32.
, and solemnly to own our selves his servants; Psalm. 116. ver. 16. and Psalm.
119.125.
for then we have assured promises of protection and defense. Let us then think
how reverently should we stand up to renew our faithful engagements to the King
of Heaven and Earth? and how sincerely should we profess our fidelity to the
searcher of all hearts, whose we desire so much to be accounted? and now that
we are in our Petitions to beseech him to show himself to be our God, let us
most seriously and devoutly protest our selves to be his servants. 3. To
manifest our unity among our selves, and agreement with the whole Church; that
as we have one Lord so we may have one Faith Ephesians. 4.5. Romans 15.6.
, and as Children of the same Father, servants of the same household, and
Soldiers under the same Prince, may with one mind and one mouth glorify this
One God. For we must agree in heart as well as meet in person, if we would have
our prayers Matthew. 18.19.
be accepted. It were to be wished there were no dissent in the smallest
matters among the servants of the same God; but if any such be; that they may
not dissolve our Union, nor divide our Worship, we are all to rejoice that we
agree in the main, and to repeat this Creed together with a hearty charity,
that we may all declare our selves satisfied in these necessary things, and may
pray together without the least sparks of wrath. Let us therefore remember,
these Prayers are put up only by and for the true members of the Church; and
this Creed is the Criterion to discern between the faithful and the false
Tessera and signaculum quo inter fideles perfidosque sece^nitur. Maxim. Taurin.
. So that by the hearty reciting thereof, thou ownest the same Faith which
glorified Saints did once profess, and all holy Christians throughout the world
do now believe; and do hereby declare thy self a true member of Christ's holy
Church, Fides quam Sancti Apostoli praedicaverunt, concilia firmaverunt, and
Fatres consignaverunt. Theodorus Ep. Romans
and so have a right to its privileges, and a share in its Devotions.

. 4. The last and chiefest enquiry is concerning the manner how it is to be
repeated; of which we had need be careful least our frequent use of so
excellent a part of these offices, do take off our attention from these noble
and necessary ends. There are many requisite and becoming affections, which our
thoughts should now be actuated with, concerning the certainty and the
usefulness of these truths, the happiness of those that know them, and the
misery of such as are ignorant of them. But especially we must be careful in
this part of our service, 1. To be most heartily thankful to our gracious God,
that has made these divine truths so manifest to us. Shall the heathen Plato
praise God that he was born in Greece and educated at Athens? and the Jews
bless him every day that made them sons of Abraham, and sanctified them with
his precepts? and shall not we much more magnify his favor toward us who by
the advantages of our Birth and Education, are so early instructed in these
saving truths that are so necessary, we cannot be happy without them, so
evident that we are scarce ever tempted to doubt of them, and yet withal so
mysterious that all the wisdom in the world could never (without the help of
Revelation) have discovered them to us? many Kings and Princes, Prophets and
Masters of the greatest reason, have lived and dyed in ignorance of these
principles, which by Gods mercy you understand as clearly and believe as fully
as any thing that sense or experience teaches you. Forget not therefore daily
to pay the tribute of Praise to thy heavenly Master who has made thee o^e of
his own School, and prevented thy going blindfold to destruction. 2. Be sure to
give your positive and particular assent to all and every article thereof,
receiving them all as undoubted Oracles from the mouth of the God of truth, who
neither will nor can deceive. Our souls may safely rely upon them, and require
no other demonstration (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 50.
but only whether it be certain that God did reveal them. He that knows him and
his eternal veracity will enquire no further; and he that would believe firmly
had need enquire so far, and with the Bereans search the Scripture Acts 17.11.
Non temere sed ratione nitimur ad fidem. Orig. in Cells. l. 3.
, and examine if these be confirmed there; and then we may on good grounds
annex our Credo (I believe) to every single Article, when we have found it
agreeing with the Word of God. And though [I believe] be only once set down in
the beginning of the first Article, yet it must be understood and supplied by
us in the front of every Article afterward; as it was wont to be in the
ancient form of Baptism (and may be seen in the Creed for that office in our
Liturgy) the Priest asking at every Article Credis, Do thou believe? and he
answering Credo, I believe. Meditate that God himself does so bespeak you: I
have given you my holy word, and taught you all saving truth, do you believe
there is one God? and let every ones heart echo again, I do believe it. Do you
believe he made Heaven and Earth? I do believe it, etc. Nor must any man think
it sufficient for the Minister to say the Creed for him, it is not then thy
Faith, but his own. Nor does he confess it that does not in heart or voice or
both go along with every sentence, and seal it with a most hearty assent. There
are many truths which do not concern us whether they be true or false, and in
such cases a general persuasion that they may be true will suffice. But these
principles of our Faith, are the ground of our Prayers, the rule of our lives,
and must be received with the same evidence that the Mathematicians postulata
are, on which his following demonstrations depend; so that without the
admission of these he can do nothing. Remember you must conduct the affairs of
your life by this profession; you must venture your souls at your death on
these principles; nay if need be you must seal these Truths with your blood:
therefore do not slightly repeat them but let them sink into your heart; and be
so assured of them, that no pleasure or profit may entice you to walk contrary
to it or deny it; nor no threats or pains affright you from confessing it, and
rejoice in this daily opportunity to express the constancy of your faith, and
every day protest your belief as solemnly as if you were to dye for it. 3. Our
mind can never want employment for all the faculties and powers thereof,
because in the repetition, we are to make a particular application of every
Article, that it may produce those effects and serve those ends for which it
was revealed. And it is absurd if not impious to think that God did discover
these sacred truths only to enlarge our speculations, or experience our
credulity. All that is true is equally so, and the reason why these truths are
more necessary to be believed then others, is, not because they are more
certain, but more u^eful to assist our devotions, and direct our conversation,
then any other propositions that Gods word does contain; where they are not
barely taught, but ever applied, either as encouragements to the worship of
God, or arguments to a holy life. Nor are they intended so much to make us
wiser as to persuade us to become better (...). Clem. Alex. Paedag.
. And if they have not this effect upon us, our Faith excels not the Confession
of the Devils Matthew. 8.29. James 2.19.
, who did acknowledge Jesus the Son of God, and yet opposed the purposes of
that mystery, and so had no benefit by their acknowledgment. This light is set
up to direct us, and it is expected that we should work and walk by it. And
that will appear, when our Devotions suit these principles, and our practices
are the genuine products of our profession. For therefore Heaven did reveal
this Creed, and therefore the Church inserts it here. And that we may learn to
use it to these purposes, let us more particularly consider, 1. How we may
apply it to assist our Prayers. In order whereunto we must observe that our
Faith is the basis on which our Petitions are built; the sole engagement to us
to make them, and the principal motive to God to hear them; who has so often
required that we should pray with Faith, and without the least wavering or
distrust Matthew. 21.22. 1 Timothy 2.8. Heb. 11.6. James 1.6. Graec. (...): agitatur
scil. dubitans, at non progreditur: vide item Jac. 5.15. Graec. (...); etc.
. If we come to God we must believe that he is, and that he will reward those
that wait upon him, (without which persuasion the Gentiles themselves did never
Veneramini Dees and colitis; non credentes illos esse? and propitias aures
vestris supplicationibus accommodare? Arnob. adv. gentes. lib. 2.
worship their false Gods) nor can we pray to the true with either courage,
zeal or comfort, till we have possessed our souls with right opinions of him.
And this we may do, by a reciting our Creed before our Prayers, which is an
impenetrable armor against all those discouragements and fears which Satan is
apt to assail us with. Let us not pray like those that know not God; but
imitate the holy servants of God in Scripture, who always begin their
supplications with a brief Confession of their Faith in Gods Power 1 Kings
8.23. Nehem. 9.6. 1 Chronicles. 29.11.12. Daniel. 9.4.
and Providence, his Mercy and his Covenant, as we do ours with the declaration
of our Faith. Oh what holy fervours does it put our souls into, to contemplate
the Power of an Almighty Father, the love of a most merciful Redeemer, and the
grace of the holy Spirit our sanctifier! Does it not teach us reverence and
fear, sincerity and longing desires, hope and cheerful expectations thus to set
God before us in our Creed, in the beauty of his Attributes, and the glory of
his works? When we have professed our belief in the Father Almighty that made
Heaven and Earth, how readily shall we run to him for the supply of our
temporal necessities? When we have protested our assurance that the eternal Son
of God was made man, born among us, lived with us, and dyed for us, and arose
again and returned to his glory to prepare a place for us, and plead our cause,
can we then forbear to cry for pardon and peace, for conversion and salvation?
or shall we doubt to be accepted. Again, have we owned our belief of that holy
Spirit which is the Author and finisher of all grace? and are we not then fitly
disposed and strongly moved to petition for his aid, that we may continue true
members of Christ's body, and enjoy a Communion with the Saints, remission of
our sins, restoration of our body, and an eternal life of glory? If we did not
premise our Faith to our Prayers, it might be suspected we spoke to him we knew
not, and asked what was unfit to be desired or impossible to be obtained. But
now all these stumbling blocks are removed, and our Creed is made an excellent
preparatory to the following Collects; every Petition of which are directed by,
grounded on, and enforced from some of these Articles, which, if we thus apply
them, will show us, how fitly we may desire these things, and what reason we
have to hope they shall be granted. And secondly we must learn to apply these
Articles of our Faith to the right ordering of our lives, not repeating them as
empty notions and airy speculations, but as the principles and rules of
practice. For why should the Christians belief alone be supposed sufficient,
without some Acts deduced from it. The Merchant believes there are Jewels and
rarities in other lands Estne operis in vita negotiosum aliquod quod non fide
praecunte suscipiunt actores? Arnob. l. 2.

Nihil est quod in vita geri possit, si non credulitas praecesserit. Ruffin. in
Symbol.


, and he puts to Sea, and attempts the purchase. The Countryman sows, the
Scholar studies, and the Soldier fights according to the principles of
advantage they believe will come upon those endeavors. And does the Religious
man only believe and sit still? Are not our principles surer, our hopes
clearer, and our probabilities fairer, and our gains like to be infinitely
more? Why then do we say these principles over as it were some Lesson that was
never to be put in practice? Let us turn our Creed into Syllogisms, and we
shall see what consequences necessarily flow from it. And let us so firmly
believe it that our Conversation may be the natural conclusion from those
premises; for there is no man whose natural Logic will not enable him to argue
thus. He that believes God to be Almighty, and that he made him and all the
world, must love and fear this God and trust in him in all his needs: But I
believe in God the Father Almighty, etc. Therefore I must love and fear and
trust in him at all times. Or thus, Whoever deserves and fears Gods wrath,
cannot truly believe Jesus came to save him from it, but he must speedily apply
himself to him, and thankfully embrace this salvation: But I who deserve and
fear Gods wrath do believe this, etc. Therefore I must speedily apply my self
to him, and thankfully embrace this salvation from him. And thus without
strictly confining our selves to the rules of Art, the most ignorant may with a
little consideration find the natural result of every Article, and what effect
it will produce in any man that heartily does embrace it. And oh that all the
world were as willing to live according to their professions, as they are able
to apprehend the force of these arguings! We should not see our practices so
frequently opposite to (nay destructive of) those principles we pretend to
believe. Let us ask our selves what manner of persons we ought to be, who do so
solemnly protest our belief that all these things are true. In temporal things,
what we believe dangerous and unprofitable we avoid; what we are persuaded is
pleasant and advantageous we pursue; and if our assent be as firm, why should
we not do so in spirituals? Where the grounds are surer, the inferences
clearer, and the gain and reward infinitely greater: it is too much to be feared
we follow not our Creed far enough, nor consider what the belief of those
Articles would produce in us if cordially embraced. Wherefore for the sake of
such as could not, or would not thus use the Articles of their Faith; we have
added to the Paraphrase the following Application.

The Paraphrase and Application of the Creed.
Art. 1. I Believe] most firmly [in] one infinite and eternal [God] who is a
most powerful, wise, gracious and pure spirit. Distinguished into three
Persons, the first of which is [the Father Almighty] who is the maker of me,
and all the Creatures [of heaven and earth] the preserver and Governor of all
the world.

Wherefore I am obliged and resolved to own him for my God and Almighty Father,
by loving, fearing, serving and obeying him: and to acknowledge him the Creator
of all, by admiring his works, rightly using his Creatures, and relying on his
Providence for whatever I want in this world, which is at his disposal.

And I am encouraged to call upon this my mighty God and merciful Father for my
self and all the world, for a competent measure of food and raiment, health and
wealth, peace and plenty, and not to doubt but that he who can do what he
please will take care of the work of his own hands.

Art. 2. And] I do most firmly believe in the second Person of the glorious
Trinity, even [in Jesus Christ] our anointed Savior, who is very God, equal to
the Father, being [his only Son] by eternal generation, and is now become [our
Lord] by the merciful redemption of our souls from death and hell.

Wherefore I am obliged and resolved most thankfully to commit my salvation to
the management of my glorious and gracious Redeemer, and as anointed by God to
be a Prophet, Priest, and King, to observe his teaching, rely on his
atonement, and submit to his Authority, and to walk answerable to the price
that is paid for me.

And I am encouraged to pray in his name with faith and comfort for deliverance
from my spiritual enemies, and the salvation of my soul, for a safe Pasport to
Gods Heavenly Kingdom, since his only Son is my Redeemer.

Art. 3. I do also most firmly believe it was this very son of God [who] became
man, and yet [was conceived] free from sin [by] the overshadowing power of [the
Holy Ghost] and that assuming our Nature and uniting it to his own Divine
Nature, was [born of the] blessed [Virgin Mary] so that he was both God and
Man: two Natures in one Person.

Wherefore I am obliged and resolved to be most thankful for that miraculous
condescension, and to learn to submit to the meanest condition, to do good; and
to be careful not to defile my Nature which Jesus has united to the Divinity.

And I am encouraged to pray that I may be sustained under the necessities of
my frail estate, which Jesus was acquainted with, and purged from the
corruptions which he was freed from, and that being regenerate like him by the
power of the Holy Ghost, I may be partaker of his Nature as he was of mine.

Art. 4. I do also most firmly believe that the holy Jesus being to satisfy
the Divine Justice for our offenses [suffered] the wrath which we had deserved,
and [under Pontius Pilate] the Roman Governor though most innocent in himself,
he [was crucified] till with cruel torments both of body and soul he had
offered up his life a sacrifice for sin. He was really [dead and buried] and
took possession of the regions of darkness, for [he descended into hell] and
remained under the power of death for a time.

Wherefore I am obliged and resolved to lament for; and crucify my sins, the
cause of his bitter Passion; to beware least by continuing in them, I bring my
self under the same curse, and loose the benefits of this all-saving death; and
also to learn from him to suffer patiently, and dye cheerfully when God
pleases.

And I am hereby encouraged to pray that I may not suffer what Christ has
endured for me; that this sacrifice may be accepted as a satisfaction for all
my transgressions, and that the remembrance of it, and the grace obtained by it
may mortify and kill in me that which has crucified him.

Art. 5. I do also most firmly believe that when he had paid the full price for
the sins of the world, death could no longer hold him, so that [the third day]
after his suffering, by an infinite power [he arose again] assuring us that
justice was satisfied, and our enemies conquered, since he was delivered [from
the dead] among whom our iniquities and Gods anger had laid him.

Wherefore I am obliged and resolved in my lowest estate to trust in his power
for my safety; to rely on his All-sufficient merits for my Pardon, and to
endeavor to rise from the death of sin, to walk in newness of life.

And I am encouraged to pray to my Victorious Redeemer to rescue me from the
snares of Satan whom he has conquered; to obtain my justification in Heaven,
and to complete my sanctification on Earth, that I may serve him in new
obedience, and never lie as dead in sin more.

Art. 6. I do also most firmly believe, that the work of our Redemption being
finished on Earth [he ascended] as a glorious Conqueror with great triumph
[into Heaven] from whence he came: [and sitteth] there in great glory now,
interceding for us and pleading his merits [on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty] that we may be admitted thither for his sake.

Wherefore I am obliged and resolved to lift up my heart to him, and trust in
him in all my troubles; to hope for the acceptance of my services, to ascend
thither now in my thoughts, affections and desires, that I may hereafter ascend
in Person and have the full prospect and fruition of his glory.

And I am encouraged to call upon my glorified Mediator, that he will preserve
me in peace on Earth, fill my soul with longings after Heaven, and procure my
acceptance there. And that his power over Men and all Angels, and his interest
at the Throne of God may be employed to bring me to himself.

Art. 7. I do also most firmly believe, that though Jesus be now in heaven, yet
at the end of the world [from thence he shall come] again most gloriously
attended with millions of Angels, to try and [to judge] all the world according
to their deeds, both [the quick] which shall then be found alive [and the dead]
though departed never so long before.

Wherefore I am obliged and resolved, daily to expect and diligently to prepare
for his coming to Judgment, by frequently examining and severely judging my
self before, by careful avoiding that which would then condemn me, and by
leaving all evil actions of others to receive their sentence at his Tribunal.

And I am encouraged to make my supplication to my Judge who also is my
Savior, that he will forgive me and all my enemies, and to beseech him to
prepare us for this day by his Grace, and to acquit us in it by his infinite
merits, and then none can condemn us for ever.

Art. 8. Furthermore [I believe] most firmly [in] the third Person of the
glorious Trinity [the Holy Ghost] the sanctifying spirit, who is very God, and
by his assistance and blessing on the means of grace, does instruct, convert,
strengthen and comfort all pious and pure souls.

Wherefore I am obliged and resolved, to honor the holy Word of God, to attend
on all his Ordinances, to follow the good motions of this blessed Spirit, and
in a lively hope and expectation of the assistance thereof, to resist all evil
and apply my self to all that is good.

And I am encouraged to pray by the help of this good Spirit, for a blessing on
the Word and Sacraments and all Religious duties, that I may by them become
still more wise and holy, till I am sanctified throughout in Spirit and Soul
and Body.

Art. 9. I do also most firmly believe that God is, and ever was, acknowledged
by; and has, and ever will, defend the Universal society of Believers in all
ages and places called [the holy Catholic Church] who are all united unto
Christ their head by grace, and to one another by love, as appears by [the
Communion of Saints] in all offices of Piety and Charity among themselves.

Wherefore I am obliged and resolved to live in unity peace and charity as a
useful member of this Church, to adhere to the Faith professed by it, to join
in the Ordinances Administered in it, and to do good to all that belong unto it.

And I am encouraged to pray with my brethren for the increase, safety and
peace of this Church, for the flourishing of Religion, the prosperity of the
Princes, s^ccess of the Ministers, and unity of the members thereof, that by
our Concord and good works we may all appear living members of Christ.

Art. 10. I do also most firmly believe that I and all true Christians upon our
unfeigned Faith and hearty Repentance shall obtain [the forgiveness of] and a
Pardon for all our [sins] through the merits and intercession of Christ Jesus.

Wherefore I am obliged and resolved, never to forsake Christ's Church, to which
this privilege does belong; diligently to repent of all my Transgressions, and
cheerfully to serve my God without fear, neither doubting the truth of his
Promise, nor the sufficiency of my Redeemers merits.

And I am encouraged daily to make an humble Confession of my si^s, with
earnest supplications for Absolution, and hearty Petitions that I may repent so
truly, that I may abhor and forsake all iniquity here, and be fully acquitted
from it at the last and great day.

Art. 11. I do also most firmly believe that not only our souls remain after
death, but our whole man shall be restored to life again by [the resurrection
of the body] howsoever corrupted or dispersed, and its reuniting to the soul,
at the voice and by the power of the Son of God.

Wherefore I am obliged and resolved to keep this body in temperance, soberness
and chastity while I live, to resign it cheerfully when I dye, to be steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, since I know my labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord.

And I am encouraged to pray through the first begotten from the dead, for the
sanctification of my vile body, and a part in the first Resurrection, that over
me the second death may have no power, and that I may be delivered in the
greatest miseries of this life, and supported under the very Agonies of Death.

Art. 12. [And] finally, I do most firmly believe, that the wicked shall remain
in endless torments, while Gods faithful servants shall enjoy his presence and
the society of Saints and Angels in [the life] whose joys are unspeakable, and
its glories [everlasting] which Faith I seal with a most hearty [Amen.]

Wherefore I am obliged and resolved to suffer patiently whatever happens in
this transitory life; to spend the moments thereof well; to despise the short
and empty pleasures of sin, and to esteem nothing too good to loose, too
difficult to resist, or too tedious to perform for the obtaining this happiness.

And lastly I am encouraged to pray to the purchaser of this Glory, to comfort
me in all the troubles of this life with the hopes, and to carry me through all
my duties here by the desires thereof; and finally to bring me to the fruition
of this bliss, the fulfilling of all these hopes and desires hereafter, Amen.

SECTION XII. Of the Versicles and their Responsals, before and after the Lords
Prayer.
. 1. THe Lord be with you: Answ. And with thy Spirit.] If we have sincerely
repeated our Creed together; we have professed our Faith in God, and declared
our unity and agreement with one another: and then we have cause to hope our
Prayers will prevail, since they were ushered in by Faith and Charity, the best
preparatives to that duty. We have all owned that we have one Lord and one
Faith; and now we are preparing as brethren and fellow soldiers to unite our
requests, and to send them to the throne of God. But first in token of our
mutual Charity the Church appoints (instead of the ancients kiss of peace) a
hearty salutation to pass between the Minister and People, he beginning in the
phrase of B^az to his Reapers, The Lord be with you Ruth. 2.4. Psalm. 129.8.
, which was after drawn into common use, as a form of salutation to all: and
used by St. Paul in his Epistles 2 Thessalonians. 3.16.
to which the people are to return a good wish for their Minister, in a form
taken from the same Apostle 2 Timothy 4.22. Galat. 6.18.
desiring the Lord may be with his spirit: Which is no invention of our own,
but mentioned in an Ancient Counsel Placuit ut Episcopi and ^resbyteri uno modo
salutent populum, dicentes Dominus vobiscum -- and ut respondeatur a populo Et
cum Spiritu tuo: s^cut and ab ipsis Apostolis traditum omnis retinet Oriens.
Council. Brace. primum Can. 21.
and there affirmed to have been instituted by the Apostles, and (as it there
appears) retained in the Liturgies especially of the Greek Church: but sure it
never had a fitter place then in our excellent service, where it succeeds the
Creed as the Symbol and bond of peace. St. John forbids us to salute (or to
desire God to be with) any that cleave not to this right Faith 2 Ep. 5. J^hn
ver. 10.11.
. But when the Minister has heard every one profess his Faith in the same
words with himself, how cheerfully and without scruple may he salute them as
brethren? and they requite his affection with a like return. It Is too sadly
true, that little differences in Religion make wide separations and the most
incurable animosities. Why then should not our exact agreement be as forcible
an uniter of all our hearts, since the profession of the same Faith has ever
been reputed the firmest bond of Charity (...). Philo.
. Wherefore when these endeering offices have warmed our hearts with mutual
love, these expressions will not barely signify the affections between the
Minister and his people, but may be used as the exercise of their Charity by
way of P^ayer for one another. Let the spirit^al man meditate how often Satan
is among the sons of God; how many of his flock which now are preparing to join
with him, are oppressed with hard hearts, or disturbed with vain thoughts; and
then let him earnestly pray the Lord may be with them, that his Prayers be not
in v^in for them. Let the people also remember how comfortable and advantageous
it will be to them, that he who is their mouth to God may have a pure heart,
and a fervent spirit; and with these thoughts let them most hear ily require
their Pastors prayer by desiring the Lord to be with his spirit, that both may
by acknowledging t^eir insufficiency and declaring their Charity, obtain a
blessing of God for each other, and find the benefit of these short Petitions,
in every part of the suceeding Off^ces.

. 2. Let us pray] We can do nothing in Religion without the Divine presence and
Assistance; and therefore the Minister and People must mutually beg that for
each other, and then they must join in their Petitions. In the beginning of
which is placed this short and ancient Exhortation. So often repeated in all
the old Liturgies (...) alibi Dominum oremus: postulemu^. vid. Liturg. S.
Jacobi S. Basilii, etc.
; whereby the Priest gives the signal of battle or the watch word to all the
assembly that they may set on their enemies with courage, and besiege even
Heaven it self with a holy importunity. And as the Crier of old in the Heathen
Sacrifices proclaimed his HOC AGITE, and warned all to attend what they were
about; so does the Minister charge you against all wandering thoughts, which are
never more frequent nor pernicious then in holy duties; desiring you not to
rest sati^fied in his Petitions for you, but to let your heart go along with
him; that they may be accepted as your Prayers though pronounced with his lips.
He injoyns all to pray; and that with him, and for one another: for it is a
great work we have to do, and we must now take off our thoughts from all other
things, and wholly mind this.

. 3. Lord have mercy upon us: Christ have etc. Lord have etc.] The best
beginning for our requests is a Petition for Mercy, whereby we acknowledge our
unworthiness, declare our misery, and confess we cannot expect our Prayers
should be heard, unless it may please God first to have mercy upon us. Like
those poor Lepers Luke 17.11, 12. eminus tanquam immundi [Levit. 13.45.]
clamant. Jesu, Domine miserere nostri.
, we discerning Jesus afar off, cry out unclean, and beseech him to have mercy
on us, for we are defiled dust and ashes, and how shall we dare to draw near to
him or open our mouths before him till he be pleased to pity and cleanse us?
As to this particular Form it is originally taken out of David's Psalms Psalm.
6.2. and Psalm. 51.1. and Psalm. 123.3.
, where it is sometimes repeated twice together, to which the Church has added
(Christ have mercy upon us) that it might be a short Litany, and a supplication
for mercy to every Person in the Trinity Imploramus misericordiam Domini per
Kyrie eleeson, Chri^e, etc. Kyrie, etc. ita ut tres articulos aliquo modo
divinae majestatis and trinitatis in Ecclesia celebre^us. Amalar. Fort. de
Eccl. off.
, because we have offended every Person, and are to pray to every Person, and
need the help of every Person: calling both the Father and Holy Ghost by the
same title of Lord, as being partakers of only one and the same Divine Nature;
and the Son by another title who also did partake of our humane Nature: as
Durand. Rational. l. 4. c. 12. does observe. And as Tho. Aquinas adds being
under a three sold misery of ignorance, guilt and punishment, we thrice implo^e
mercy. And because we need that, when ever we pray Quia ante omnem Orationem
sacerdotum, necesse est misericordiam Domini implorare. Durand. Rat. ut supr.
, it was used both in the Eastern and Western Churches, and become customary in
the time of Theodosius the younger; so that it was decreed by a Council Et quia
-- dulcis and nimis salubris consuetudo int^omissa est ut Kyrie eleeson
frequentius cum grandi compunctione dicatur, Placuit etiam nobis ut in omnibus
Eccles^is nostris ista consu^tudo Sancta, and ad Matutinum and ad Missas and ad
Vesperam Deo propitiante intromittatur. Council. Vasens. can. 5.
that it should be said in the Morning and Evening Prayer, and in the Communion
Off^ce with great Contrition and Devotion. By which it appears that though
these words were so sacred that the Heathens used them in their Prayers (...)
Arrian. in Epict. l. 2. c. 7.
, yet they learned them either from David or the Christian Church, where the
use hereof was so familiar, that we read that Antioch was delivered from an
Earthquake by the Peoples going barefoot in procession, and saying this short
Litany Lord have mercy on us Paul. Diacon. lib. 16.
. No doubt if with humility and fervency we repeat it. Our souls may be
delivered from sin, and our following supplications might be more acceptable:
for it signifies Lord be gracious Deus sis propitius. Ita Verse. Jun. and Trem.
unto us, or show compassion and favor toward us, in receiving and answering
the Prayers we are about to make, especially the Lords Prayer, wherein we must
not presume to call God Father, until we have entreated for grace and mercy.

But concerning the repetition of the LORDS PRAYER, in this place our designed
brevity allows us only here to say, that being the best of all Prayers, it
cannot be used too often; and having the best of all Authors for its Composer
(even him for whose sake all our requests are heard) it may seem to consecrate
the Petitions annexed to it, since they are formed by this Pattern, and contain
nothing but what is agreeable to this form, which has upon it the Royal stamp
of Divine Authority. Nor should the frequency of its returns abate our devotion
in the use, since Jesus did thrice pray in the same words. Only as before it
was applied for the Confirmation of our Pardon, so now it must respect the
following Petitions, to which we may so heartily unite it, that they may be
more acceptable for its sake, and we may make amends for any Petition thereof,
which was not so zealously put up by reason of intervening distractions when it
was said before; by asking that with a doubled earnestness now, which then we
forgot or slig^tly passed over.

. 4. Psalm. 85.7. O Lord show thy mercy upon us; Answ. And grant us thy
salvation.] From the recital of that sacred Form of Prayer which Jesus left us,
we pass to the interlocutory Petitions; by this grateful variety, taking off
the tediousness, and adding to the pleasure of the duty; as also quickening the
attention and uniting the hearts of the performers. And herein the Minister
begins, as the commissionated Ambassador of Heaven; yet the people follow and
bear a part, as a badge of their honor and an engagement to their
watchfulness, charity and devotion; while both contribute heat to each others
affections, and vigor to these short and sweet ejaculations; taken for the
most part out of the great storehouse of Divine Offices, the Psalms of David,
and being an Epitome of the ensuing Collects for Grace and Peace, for Kings,
Priests and People, that they may be replenished with all sorts of blessings.
The words of which sentences are so significant and comprehensive that it will
be hard to make a better Collection, and yet so plain and obvious that we
discourse of them rather for the help of Devotion, then any necessity of
explication. This first Versicle is a general Petition for Mercy and Salvation,
and seems to be the sum of all the weekly Collects: for one or both of these
are commonly the subject of them; we prayed for Mercy in the [Lord have mercy,
etc.] and now we beg some visible token thereof, viz. some such wonderful
deliverance Psalm. 36.17. Psalm. 64. penult.
that all the world may see and say it is his salvation. We need mercy to
pardon, pity and help us in the way, and we desire salvation at the end; even
that eternal salvation which is his by inheritance, possession, and purchase,
and can only be ours in his right and by his mercy, so that it is fit we call
it his salvation, and first crave mercy Quia non aliunde inducitur Deus ut
salvator, nisi quia misericors est. Calv. in loc.
before we presume to ask it, because we cannot otherways merit or obtain it,
but by his mercy.

. 5. Psalm. 20. ult. O Lord save the King^ Answ. And mercifully hear us when we
call upon thee.] This twentieth Psalm whence this is taken may be entitled, a
Prayer for the King, for after many Petitions for his prosperity, it concludes
with this summary ejaculation, even in these very words Psalm. 20. ult. LXX.
(...) -- etc. Ita Vulg. Lat. and Vatabl. vide Hammond Annot. Psalm. 20. [d]
, as the Greek Interpreters, and their followers do on good grounds read them.
And for the Phrase it self it is the same with that so usual acclamation God
save the King 1 Samuel 10.24. Chal. Par. Sit faelix Rex, 1 Kings 1.25.39. 2 Kings
11.12. alibi: Vivat Rex: vel Vivat in aeternum.
, wherein we do in one wo^d wish the King prosperity and peace, long life and
health, victory and everlasting felicity. And this we do not as many Parasites
only at the Coronation, when every one adores the rising Sun: but we repeat it
most loyally and devoutly every day, earnestly desiring his welfare and safety,
and because in his peace we shall have peace, we humbly beg this request may
always find acceptance, and that we may be heard and our dear and dread
Sovereign blessed every day: withal pre-ingaging (as it were) the Almighty
against a time of more especial need, viz. that when by reason of wars or
tumults we come in the behalf of our Prince to beg a particular blessing for
Him and his Armies, that we may then prevail, so that the Praying as well as
fighting legiors may be esteemed the defense and guard of his Person and his
Rights.

. 6. Psalm. 132.9. Endue thy Ministers with right ousness: Answ. And make thy
chosen people joyful] This Prayer for the holy Tribe indicted by David seems to
have been a part of the Jewish Liturgy; for it was solemnly used by Solomon at
the d^dication of the Temple; Let thy Priests be clothed 2 Chronicles. 6.46. Exodus
28.2. and 36.
[saith he] with Righteousness, alluding no doubt to the holy Garments
appointed for their ministration, which did signify that extraordinary and
peculiar sanctity which was required in those who approached so near to God.
The sense of which Petition our Church has significantly given in the word
[endue] [lightly changed from the Latin indue] which refers to the
qualifications of the mind, as the word [Cloth] to the covering of the body. So
that here we pray that they may have souls pure as their linen Ephod, and
lives spotless and holy, as the garments they are clothed with; not content to
have their outward man arrayed with the sign, but endeavoring to have their
inward man endued and adorned with the purity signified thereby. And this
Petition we make to him who has promised to deck his Priests with health Psalm.
132.16. Isai. 61.10.
, and to cloth them with the garment of salvation and the robe of
righteousness, that his Saints may re-rejoyce and sing. For the holy lives and
good success of pious and painful Ministers, is an extraordinary and a huge
delight to Gods people, who therefore do here use it as an argument to enforce
their request for the Ministers. For we (say they) are not of the number of
those who glory in the crimes of the Ministers of God, or rejoice in their
calamities: because, O Lord we love thee and them, wherefore if thou will
please to give them health and safety, righteousness and peace, we shall thrive
under their care, and joyfully follow their good examples, the benefit and the
pleasure will be ours, and the glory shall be thine for this and all thy
mercies.

. 7. Psalm. 28.9. O Lord save thy people: Answ. And bless thine inheritance.]
The kindness of the Congregation to the Minister expressed in the last
Responsal, is here most lovingly and thankfully returned and required by him
who now prays for them, as heartily as they for him before; which cannot but
endeer the Priest and people one to another, since they daily do thus mutually
interchange offices of love. Wherefore let both join in this comprehensive
request, that God would save and deliver his people from all evil, and bless
and furnish them with all good things, since they are his peculiar inheritance
and so may expect a special defense and relief from their own God. [But of this
before in the TE DEVM.]

. 8. 1 Chronicles. 22.9. Give peace in our time O Lord: Answ. Because there is none
other that fights for us but only thou O God.] It pleased God to make
particular Promises to Solomon, Hezekiah, and Josiah 1 Chronicles. 22.9. Isai. 39.8.
2 Kings 22.20.
, that he would give peace in their days. Wherefore we make bold to ask it for
our times from the God of peace our only defense Exodus 14.14. Deuteronomy. 1.30.
against our enemies. They who trust in their bow and rely on their sword care
not to ask for Peace, because they hope either to awe their foes into
quietness, or to make advantage by War, as being sufficiently guarded and
prepared. But we (even the Church of God) know Armies and Navies are useless
not only against God, but without him, and only successful by his blessing. So
that though we have both, yet we account the Divine Providence our greatest
security. How well this Petition suited the Primitive Christians every one may
discern, who considers they judged it unlawful (while the Emperors were
Heathen) to fight in their own defense Luke 22.38. ita Explic. ab Origin. in
Cells. l. 5. Ambros. de Off. Basil. and August. vid. Arnobius l. 1. p 6.
. And when Prayers and tears were their only weapons they might most justly
Ezra. 8.22.
be earnest with God for their defense, who did so wholly depend on his
Protection, that his glory seemed concerned in their safety. Yet it is not
improper for us now, though (blessed be God) we have Christian Princes and
their forces to defend us: for we wish there may be no occasion to use arms; or
if there be Bellum gerere malis videtur foelicitas, bonis necessitas. Augustine.
we declare we rely not alone on these Preparations, unless he please to bless
them we know they are unserviceable. Wherefore if it please him we desire
peace, and that he will keep off invasions and Rebellions for our time, and so
will the following generations for their days, that it may appear we wish to
live in peace, and do trust alone in the Lord of hosts.

. 9. Psalm. 51.10, 11. O God make clean our hearts within us: Answ. And take not
thy holy spirit from us.] Though Peace be accounted the chief of all blessings,
yet without grace it may do us more harm then good. Wherefore we conclude with
an carnest supplication for Grace to fit us for, and help us in, the following
devotions. We are now to offer up our incense and therefore do beseech the
Author and lover of purity in holy David's words, to cleanse the Altars of our
hearts, that neither the guilt of former offenses may unhallow or defile them,
nor any remaining evil thoughts may disturb the holy cloud; but that it may
ascend and he a sweet savor before the Throne of God. And because it is the
Holy Spirit alone which can effect this, we pray that our hearts may be so pure
as to invite this holy Dove to come unto us, and remain with us, that it may
both make and keep us undefiled both in the remaining part of our Prayers and
of our lives. If we look back on those portions of the Office which we have
performed, I hope we shall have cause thankfully to acknowledge that the Divine
Spirit has been with us, and excited the flames of our devotion, the comfort
of which aid makes us earnest for its continuance. And certainly we could never
have sent up these very sacred ejaculations with such fervent spirits, united
hearts, and harmonious voices, if the same spirit of zeal and love had not
inspired us. Therefore let the sweetness of this experience encourage us to beg
that the Holy Ghost may stay among us, so that we may as affectionately join in
those Prayers where the Minister is the only speaker, as we have done in these
wherein we have had the honor and advantage of bearing our Parts, and making
our Responsals.

The Paraphrase of the Versicles and Responsals before and after the Lords
Prayer.
Minister. MY dear brethren, in the right Faith I do most affectionately
salute you; desiring [The Lord] and his grace may [be with you] to prosper you
in that you now are doing.

Answer. And] we thankfully return the kindness, desiring likewise the Lord may
be [with thy spirit] to compose and excite it while thou speak to God for us.

Minister. Let not your thoughts wander but now [Let us pray] to God with
fervency and devotion.

O [Lord] God the Father pity, pardon, and [have mercy upon us] who are
unworthy to call upon thee.

O [Christ] the son of God pity, pardon, and [have mercy upon us] whose only
hope is in thy Mediation and Redemption.

O [Lord] God the Holy Ghost pity, pardon, and [have mercy upon us] and assist
us in these our supplications.

Our Father which art, etc. Priest. Consider our sin and misery with compassion
[O Lord] and now [shew] some token of [thy mercy upon us] to our comfort.

Answ. [And grant us] now and ever such wonderful deliverances from all evil,
that we may surely obtain [thy salvation.]

Priest. [O Lord] thou Governor of all the world, be pleased to bless,
preserve, and [save the King] thine own Anointed.

Answ. [And mercifully hear us] whose peace is linked together with his
prosperity [when we call upon thee] for him, especially on extraordinary
occasions.

Priest. O Lord do thou [Endue] the hearts and minds of [thy Ministers with]
the purity and holiness signified by their garments, that so their lives may be
full of [righteousness.]

Answ. [And] thereby thou shall [make] us and all [thy chosen people] out of
our love to them, and spiritual benefit by them exceeding [joyful] in such
exemplary and faithf^l Pastors.

Priest. Be graciously pleased [O Lord] continually to deliver and [save thy
people] out of all their troubles.

Answ. [And] of thy infinite bounty and goodness to [bless thine inheritance]
which thou have redeemed with thy precious blood.

Priest. Mercifully [Give peace] to all the world, and especially to thy
Church, that we may quietly serve thee [in our time, O Lord] thou God of Peace.

Answ. We pray to thee for Peace [because there is no other] can keep us from
war or save us in it: for we trust not in any one [that fights for us] since
none can secure us [but only thou O God] of hosts.

Priest. And since we are now to proceed in our supplications unto thee [O God]
by thy grace [make clean] and purify [our hearts] from sin, that no evil
thoughts may remain [within us] in our approaches unto thee.

Answ. As thou have begun to assist and cleanse us, so be pleased to continue
thy help [and take not] the sweet and necessary aid of [thy holy spirit] away
[from us] but let it rest upon us in the remaining part of our devotions, and
for ever.

SECTION XIII. Of the Collects for the Week and Festival days.
. 1. IT cannot be expected we should here give a particular account of all the
Collects for Sundaies and other Festival days, which are so numerous they
cannot be contained in the narrow limits of this Essay; and so plain that they
need not any curious explication: especially when the Pious soul by exercising
it self in other parts of these offices after our proposed method, is become
expert in enlarging into devout meditations, it will then easily do the same in
these Collects without a Monitor. And yet the Epistle and Gospel annexed to
them are generally an excellent Commentary upon them; and some judge they take
their name from their being Collected out of those portions of holy Writ. But
if we regard the use of the Word in the Scripture and the Fathers Dies
collectae: Vulg. Lat. Levit. 23.36. collectionem: Vulg. Heb. 10.25. and apud
Patres, collectam celebrare, saepissime. Inde prec^tiones illae a populi
collectione c^llectae appell^ri coeperunt. Alcuinus.
, they may rather seem to be denominated from the Collection and gathering
together of the People into Religious Assemblies, among whom (so collected)
these Prayers were to be used. For which cause though they be short Existimant
orationem brevem c^llectam appellari q^od sacerdos -- omnium petitiones
compendiosa brevitate colligit. Walafridu^ Strabo. vid. Durand. rational. l. 4.
c. 15.
yet all that any need ask for, is comprehended in them, and collected into a
small Epitome. Therefore let the whole Congregation join most unanimously in
them, and apply them to their own and their bretherens known necessities. And
observe that they are all directed to the Father, through the Son, who lives
and loves us Generaliter ad Patrem dirigitur, and terminatur in Nomine filii
-- and paulo post -- O Pater exandi per filium tuum qui hoc vult, and potest;
vult quia vivit, and potest quia Regnat. Durand. Rat. l. 4. c. 15.
, and so will hear us, and who reigns in Heaven and therefore can help us.
The beginning is commonly the ground on which we are induced to ask, and after
the Petition made, it is commonly backed with some motive taken from the glory
of God or our benefit, which we believe will be the effect of our being heard.
But if any desire a more distinct information of the subject of every Collect,
they may learn by the following table; wherein they are so ranged, that besides
the direction in the public we may by frequent use thereof, be always armed
with a compendious and ejaculatory Prayer of the Churches composure, pertinent
to all occasions; which may be of excellent use to those who desire to be
always on their guard against the enemy of their souls.

An Analytical Table of all the Weekly and Festival Collects.
. 2. In them we pray either first for our selves, or secondly for others; In
the first sort we pray for our selves, 1. For both body and soul, Sundaies and
Festivals. 2. and 5. of Lent.
2. For the body and things temporal, 1. Safety by the Providence of God,
Sundaies and Festivals. 2, 3, 4, and 20. after Trin.
Guarding of Angels, Sundaies and Festivals. St. Michael.

2. Deliverance from Enemies, Judgments, Sundaies and Festivals. 3. Lent.
Sexagessima, Septuag. 4. Lent.

3. Support in Adversity, Sundaies and Festivals. 3, 4. Epiphany.
4. Both Preservation from evil and supply of good. Sundaies and Festivals. 8.
15. Trinity.


3. For the soul and things spiritual, 1. Manifold gifts from God, Sundaies and
Festivals. St. Barnabas.
2. Especial favors of God, 1. Pardon of sin, Sundaies and Festivals. 12.21
and 24. Trinity.
2. Benefit of Christ's death Sundaies and Festivals. Annuntiation.
3. Acceptance for his sake Sundaies and Festivals. Purification. 2. Epiphany.

3. Abundant Grace as to 1. The Author of it 1. To comfort us, Sundaies and
Festivals. Sund. after Ascens.
2. To inlighten us, Sundaies and Festivals. Whitsunday.
3. To direct us, Sundaies and Festivals. 19. Trinity.

2. The means in 1. Hearing. Sundaies and Festivals. St. Bartholomew. St. Luke.
2. Reading, Sundaies and Festivals. 2. Advent.
3. Falling, Sundaies and Festivals. 1. Lent.
4. Prayer. Sundaies and Festivals. 10. and 23. Trinity.

3. The end to 1. Convert us from sin, Sundaies and Festivals. 1. Advent. 1.
Easter. St. Andrew. St. James. St. Matthew.
2. Rescue us in temptations, Sundaies and Festivals. 4. Advent. 4. Epiphany.
18. Trinity.
3. Enable us to do good, Sundaies and Festivals. 5. Easter. 1. and 9. Trinity.
11. 13. Trinity. 17. 25. Trinity.
4. Bring us to glory, Sundaies and Festivals. Epiphany. 6. after Epiphany.

4. The kinds of it, for 1. Regeneration Sundaies and Festivals. Nativity of
Christ.
2. Charity, Sundaies and Festivals. Quinquagessima.
3. Mortification, Sundaies and Festivals. Circumcision. Easter Even.
4. Contrition, Sundaies and Festivals. Ash Wednesday.
5. Sincerity. Sundaies and Festivals. 3. Easter.
6. Love of God and his laws, Sundaies and Festivals. 4. Easter. 6. and 14.
Trinity.
7. Heavenly affections, Sundaies and Festivals. Ascension-day.
8. Faith both Right Sundaies and Festivals. Trinity Sunday.
Steadfast, Sundaies and Festivals. 7. Trinity. St. Thomas. St. Mark.

9. Imitation of Christ Sundaies and Festivals. 6. Lent. 2. Easter.
The Saints Sundaies and Festivals. St. Steven. St. Paul. St. Philip and Jacob
St. John Baptist. Holy Innocents. All Saints day.





In the second sort we Pray for others, 1. Such as are out of the Church, as
Jews, Sundaies and Festivals. Good Friday.
Turks, Sundaies and Festivals. Good Friday.
Infidels, Sundaies and Festivals. Good Friday.
Heretics, Sundaies and Festivals. Good Friday.

2. Such as are in the Church, 1. The whole body, that it may be kept in 1.
Truth, Sundaies and Festivals. St. John. Good Friday. 5. Epiphany.
2. Unity, Sundaies and Festivals. St. Simon and Jude.
3. Peace. Sundaies and Festivals. 5. Trinity. 16. Trinity. 22. Trinity.

2. The Ministers that they may be Fit Sundaies and Festivals. St. Matthias.
Diligent Sundaies and Festivals. St. Peter.
Successful Sundaies and Festivals. 3. Advent.






SECTION XIV. Of the two Collects peculiar to the Morning Prayer.
The Analysis of the second Collect for Peace.
In this Collect are five parts, 1. The Person to whom we make this request, 1.
His Nature, [O God] who art
2. His Attributes, the Aut^or of peace and lover of concord,

2. The reasons why we make it, taken from 1. Our happiness in knowing him, in
knowledge of whom stands our eternal life;
2. Our privilege in serving him, whose service is perfect freedom,

3 The request it self, specifying 1. The thing desired defend
2. The Persons by whom, us thy humble servants,
3. The time when, in all assaults of our enemies,

4. The ends for which we make it, 1. The securing our Faith, that we surely
trusting in thy defense,
2. The removing our fears, may not fear the Power of any Adversaries,

5 The means by which we hope to prevail, through the might of Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.



A Practical Discourse on the Collect for Peace.
. 1. O God who art the author of peace and lover of concord] Peace has always
been reputed the chiefest of earthly blessings; both because of its own
excell^ncies and because it is the Parent and the Nurse of all other comforts.
So that in the sacred dialect Number. 6.26. and in salutationibus: Pax est? Genesis
29.6. comprehendit (...). Drusius.

Si non pax, nihil. Adag Hebr. ap. Fagium.


peace is used to signify all good things, ^lenty and prosperity, health and
joy, and the undisturbed fruition of all these. It is the felicity indeed of
Earth, ^here all is nothing without it, and the Type of Heaven, where all is
comprehended in it; wherefore the Christians according to Gods command Heb.
12.14. Jerem. 29.7. Psalm. 122.6. -- orbem quietum. Tertul. Apolog. Pro arcendis
hostibus -- and vel auferendis vel temperandis adversis, ut and pro gentium
pace and salute. Cypi. Epist. ad Demetr.
did ever follow it in their lives, and ^eg it in their Prayers; both as to the
Heathens under whom they lived, and the Church of God. And in obedience to the
Divine Command, and imitation of such examples, we also make it a part of our
daily Office to pray for Peace. And sure none can approach the throne of grace
to ask this blessing with greater encouragements then we have. For (as the
Church intimates) our God is the author of Peace Is^i. 45.7. Matthew. 5.9.
, and owns the peacemakers for his Children. And instead of that dreadful
title the Lord of hosts is in the New Testament Romans 15.33. Chap. 16.20.
Philip. 4.9.
ever styled the God of Peace; because he loves it, and procures it Psalm. 46.9.
, and commands us to make it and seek it with all men. So that this Petition
can never be rejected which is no more then, Lord give us that which is
agreeable to thy nature, pleasant in thy sight, and which we by thy command
continually do follow after. And as he delights to preserve his servants in
Peace from all enemies without, so also to behold them live in unity and
concord within among themselves. Hence he also commends and commands this Psalm.
68.6. and 133.1, 2. Romans 15.5, 6. Acts 2.44.
, and did so firmly bind the souls of the first believers in the bands of amity
and concord that all the powers of darkness could not dissolve those holy
combinations. Wherefore set these Attributes of God before you when you are to
beg for Peace, and let them encourage you to ask cheerfully, and teach you (as
you desire to please him) to endeavor after Peace and Concord in your lives,
that your actions may not contradict your Prayers, wherein you own your selves
sons of the God of peace.

. 2. In knowledge of whom stands our eternal life, whose service is perfect
freedom] It will further encourage our request, if we here make humble
acknowledgments of, and pleasing reflections upon our happiness in having
relation to such a God, the perfect knowledge of whom is the felicity of the
Saints of Heaven, John 17.3.
and his worship and service the safety of his holy ones on earth. It is the
most ravishing of all the delights of Eternity, for blessed spirits to take a
full prospect of the immense treasures of the unexpressible love of the God of
Peace; and to behold how he rejoices over the endearing Concord and inseparable
mities of his chosen ones in his everlasting peace. And that little discovery
which he has m^de to us in this imperfect state of his power and providence,
his care and love, his delight in our concord and procuring our peace, even
this is the greatest help to bring ^s to those endless joys. For when we behold
the miseries of the world, the rage of wicked men, and the malice of Satan; we
might in despair (...) escape them, comply with them for our present safety,
and so lose our eternal happiness. But only that we know him who is able to
secure us and delights in our peace; and therefore we fly to him; call upon
him, and encourage our selves in him in the greatest appearance of danger, and
thereby are kept through Faith unto salvation, and brought at last to that
eternal life, which we should scarce dare to hope for, but by our knowledge and
experience of his power and mercy. This is the reason why we now entreat him
for peace, whom we know to be the Author of Peace, even that we may improve our
knowledge of him, to be a means to bring us to that never ceasing peace in his
heavenly Kingdom; and to show us from whom we must seek protection all the way.
And further we declare that we neither are nor desire to be masters of our
selves. For our liberty consists not in being subject to no superior; but in
that we are the servants John 8.32.36. 1 Cor. 7.22. Dion. Drus. (...). Orat. 14.
of so almighty and gracious a master, who preserves us a thousand times safer
then if we were left to our selves. We are now directly engaged in his service,
and therefore under his immediate prote^^ion; so that now we have a perfect
freedom even from the very fears of any harm from the worst of our enemies. We
that trembled like slaves, and bowed our necks to sinful complyances in every
appearance of danger, do now pray most cheerfully for peace, and are as free
men brought out of those dismal expectations with a high hand Exodus 14.8. Dan.
3.17. Heb. 2.15.
, because we know our God whom we serve is able to deliver us, who before we
knew and worshipped him were ever through fear of death subject unto bondage.
Nay our will is now become free, because we choose what pleases God, so that
his will and our choice agrees, and so nothing can hinder us (...). Arrian. in
Epictet.
. We have resolved nobly to be no longer slaves to evil, but ever to do good;
trusting in the defense of Gods Providence, and the help of his grace: and
since we know and serve one greater then the world or the Prince of darkness
either, their threats nor flatteries cannot command or enslave us. So long as
we believe in him our souls are free.

. 3. Defend us thy humble servants in all assaults of our enemies] When we
consider our selves environed on every side with enemies and dangers, that we
are neither likely to escape nor able to overcome by our own strength; and also
behold our God who is the Author of peace and lover of concord, the joy of his
saints, and the deliverer of his servants; we shall earnestly call upon him to
defend us, and that very Petition is an acknowledgment of our own
insufficiency, to defend our selves, the sense whereof will exceedingly quicken
this request. But if we expect Protection from God, we must profess our selves
his humble servants, not in complement or flattery, but as little States when
in distress they Petition for succor from their potent Neighbors, must
acknowledge (with Ahaz) 2 Kings 17.9. Brevis formula deditionis: before ap.
Romanos, Populum, urbem, agros delubra, divina, humanaque omnia in vestrum
di^ionem dedimus. Grotius. in loc.
they will be their homagers and servants, if they will deliver them; so must
we sincerely protest our selves Gods servants, and in this form surrender up
our selves into his protection. And if we be real therein, we shall be owned as
the confederates of Heaven; and from thence shall have legions of Angels sent
in to our aid, whenever we desire or need them. But woe be to those hypocrites
who fly to God in a storm, and call themselves his servants feignedly for
present safety; but when the violence is over forsake him again. This folly and
baseness will cause him to cast out them and their prayers also. But let us
remember we have many enemies who sometimes oppose us from without, and other
times do divide us among our selves; that we may most heartily own our selves
the servants of the God of Peace; by loving and following peace with all men,
and living in concord with one another Extrances adv^niemes si s^pimu; juncti
repellemus, quoniam etian si singuli laedimur universi periclitemur. Hermocr.
ap. Thucyd. ^iabolus semper vos muni^os inveniat and arma^es c^^cordia, q^o^iam
pax vestra bellum. si illi. Tertul. ad Martyr.
. The world, the devil and wicked men (who are principally meant here) will
assault ^s. But whether the foes of goodness assail us with the flattery or
reproaches of the tongue, the violence and cruelty of the hand, the scorn and
contempt of the feet, we have a help at hand, who discerns the most secret
plots, and buffles the most politic designs, and invalidates the most
formidable preparations. And if we beg his assistance he will either deliver us
from them, or save us in them, and support us under them, that they shall not
harm us. Wherefore (if we observe) the Church reaches us not to pray that we
may not be assaulted, (for that is not to be expected) if we consider the
pride, opposition and malice of evil men to all good, and the inveterate enmity
of S^than who sets them all on work, we may as well hope to wash the Ethiopian
white, or tame a Tiger, or to behold the Lion eat grass, as that these should
give us no disturbance Si quis vitiorum omnium ini^icus rectum iter vitae
insistere co^pit, prinum propter morum differentiam edium habet; qui^enim
potest probare contraria? Petron. Arb.
. God did never promise this, nay he bids us to expect no other Isai. 59.13.
John 16.33. Eccl^s. 2.1.
, and f^rewarns us of it that we may before-armed for it; so that we right
displease God if we asked contrary to his revealed will, that we might never be
opposed. Wherefore let it suffice us that we be supported under them, and
receive no prej^dice from them as to our eternal interest. If God make us like
the miraculous bush unburnt in the midst of these flames, it will be all one as
if we had not been thrown into that fire. Only thus the malice of the wicked is
discovered, disappointed and disgraced, our patience is proved and made
apparent, and the Divine Power and Mercy is more manifested, and his name more
glorified, then if we had never been assaulted. In this we wholly submit to
him, whether he will keep the spirits of evil men from rising against us, or
(as he did in the instances of Laban, Esau, and Saul) turn their rage into
amicable compliances, and fruitless attempts.

. 4. That we surely trusting in thy defense, may not fear the power of any
adversaries, throug the might of Jesus Christ o^r Lord.] We aim higher in this
request then a bare safety from the violence and craft of our enemies. Desiring
such frequent and constant experimen^s of his care and providence, that we may
never tremble at any danger while we surely rely on his defense; but that we
may be freed from our own fears, which make us as miserable and dejected as the
evils themselves Plura sunt quae nos terrent quam quae premunt, and saepius
opinione quam re laboramus, timore -- aut augemus dolorem aut fingimus aut
praecipimus. Seneca.
; and ruin our hope, banish our joy, dissipate our counsels, and strip us of
all powers of resistance. So that either we become our own executioners, or lie
open to the designs of our enemies, who commonly enter at the breach our own
fears have made. But the only remedy for such terrors is a firm trust on the
Divine Protection, and till that faith fail, Pavor mihi omnem sapientiam ex
animo expectorat. Ennius.
we are most safe; be our foes never so numerous or potent, their Menaces and
preparations never so great; till they can conquer heaven they cannot terrify
us, who cannot perish while God is for us. Let us then pray for daily
assurances of his providence and love, and those will still add vigor to our
Faith, till we become undaunted and invincible through the might of Jesus. We
acknowledge it were the highest folly to be thus confident, if we relied on our
own strength, but if we do not fear our adversaries, it is because our Redeemer
is mighty, who as a Prince has Power with God, and will obtain help from him
for us, by the power of his undeniable intercession, and as a glorious
Conqueror commands the Earth and Hell it self. So that his might will secure us
here; and this is our strong Tower in which we believe our selves so safe, that
upon the confidence thereof we pray for protection and defense, and that we may
neither fear nor feel harm from any of our opposers; and desire this may be
granted and decreed in heaven by the mighty interest of our Mediator there, and
accomplished on earth by the invincible strength of the same Jesus here. Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Collects for Peace.
O God who] by thy constant power and providence [art the author of] safety,
and the cause of our [peace] from without, the procurer of amity [and lover of
concord] within thy Church and among thy people: Thou art the only true God [in
knowledge of whom stands out] chief happiness in [eternal life] and our best
means of coming safe thither: for thou art the best of all Masters [whose
service] is safe and pleasant, because it [is perfect freedom] from the slavery
of Satan and the fear of his instruments. Therefore mighty Lord be pleased to
[defend us] who fly to thy protection, and surrender up our selves to thee,
vowing we are and ever will be [thy humble servants] Oh keep us safe in soul
and body, if not from, yet however [in all assaults] which are made upon us by
the power malice or cunning [of our enemies] let their attempts be so
constantly frustrated [that we] under the shadow of thy wings may courageously
proceed in our holy course, and [surely trusting in thy defence] while we are
faithful to thy service, that we [may not] so much as [fear the power] or
policy [of any adversaries] since we have so good grounds to hope thou will now
and always hear us through the interest, and help us [through the might of
Jesus Christ] thy dear son [our Lord] and only Savior [Amen.]

The Analysis of the third Collect for Grace.
In this Collect are four parts, 1. A confession of the Attributes of God, 1.
Love, O Lord our heavenly Father,
2. Power, Almig^ty and
3. Eternity, everlasti^g God,

2. An acknowledgment of his Providence, Who have safely brought us to the
beginning of this day,
3. A Petition for ^is grace, 1. To preserve us from evil, 1. In general defend
us in the same with thy mighty power,
2. In particular, from 1. Spiritual, and grant that this day we fall into no
sin,
2. Temporal, neither run into any kind of danger,


2. To help us in doing good, that we may be 1 Directed by him, but that all
our doings may be ordered by thy governance,
2. Accepted of him, to do alw^ies that which is righteous in thy sight,


4. The means to obtain it through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.



A Practical Discourse on the Collect for Grace.
. 5. O Lord our heavenly Father, almighty and everlasting God] Peace without
Grace is the nurse of vice, the sauce of dangerous pleasures: It occasions our
forgetfulness of God that gave it, and becomes an undisturbed opportunity to
prosecute, and enjoy those lusts which it is apt to breed. So that we must not
pray for Peace alone, but joined with righteousness and Grace; for these God
has united in Scripture Psalm. 85.10. 2 Cor. 1, 2.
, and we must not separate them in our devotions. For which cause this Collect
for Grace follows that for Peace. Grace alone can make Peace true, beneficial
and lasting; and sin is the great boutefen and the greatest enemy to Peace in
the world. So that by receiving this Collect devoutly, we still improve our
former request, and if we can obtain such grace as to make us just and
charitable, meek and patient toward one another, this world will be the Type
of everlasting Peace. We shall neither disquiet our selves nor others, while
our doings are directed by the wisdom, and agreeable to the will of the God of
peace. Since therefore Grace is so necessary for us, we must learn where to
seek it; and its very name will lead Gratia est gratis data, non meritis
operantis, sed miseratione donantis. August. Epist. 120.
us to the free and inexhaustible fountain, whence it ever flows; even to God
who gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth no man. The very Heathens
confessed it the gift of God (...). Plat. Mem. Nulla sine Deo men's bona. Seneca.
, who will rejoice to hear such a request from an humble soul that is sensible
of its own weakness, and desirous of his strength. He will be more ready to
grant then you can be to ask Luke 11.13. (...). Maxim. Tyrius in dissert.
. Consider but the Attributes the Church has prefixed to this Prayer. Is not
the Lord your heavenly Father? and shall not he pity and love you, and delight
to do you good? Is he not Almighty, and therefore able to relieve you? and
Everlasting, the same yesterday today and for ever. Being All-sufficient, and
never to be drawn dry, though we come day by day unto him. We have no reason to
doubt either his sufficiency, his might or his mercy, and therefore no cause to
fear but this Petition shall prevail. We are on Earth, but we have a Father in
Heaven, we are weak, but our Lord is Allmighty; our time is measured by days
and nights, and we grow older every day, and must at length have our end; but
we have a God that changes not, but is the same from everlasting to
everlasting. Let this cheer our hearts Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27.
and give wings to our Petitions, and strength to our faith. Let us fly to him
and rest upon him, for we can never come to him for grace, but we are sure to
find him furnished with it, and both able and ready to bestow it upon us.

. 6. Who have safely brought us to the beginning of this day] The Mercies of
God are new every morning, and so ought our Praises to be Lament. 3.23. Psalm.
92.1, 2. Occurrere ergo ad solis Ortum, ut te Oriens invenint jam paratum.
Ambr. in Psalm. 119.
offered still with a fresh Devotion: to which purpose being now come to the
shore, it will be a pleasant and profitable prospect to look back on the great
deep, the darkness of the night which we have passed; and now to remember that
though we were folded in the arms of sleep the brother of death, and were
insensible of danger, and incapable of resistance; yet we have gone safe
through those dismal shades, which are the image of hell, the emblem of death,
the opportunity of mischief, and the most uncomfortable part of our lives. And
though the Heathens supposed the Dominion of the Night to belong to the
Infernal Powers, yet we have found it is under the government of our heavenly
Father, by whose gracious providence, we have been kept therein from the malice
of Satan, and the designs of evil men, safe in soul and body. Yea he has made
it a refreshment of our weariness, an allay of our care, and a renewing of our
strength, so that perhaps we scarce apprehended the terrors nor tediousness of
it. And are we not unworthy to live another day, if all this will not fill our
hearts and mouths with Eucharist and thankful acknowledgments to him that never
slumbers nor sleeps? who has so safely brought us to the morning light, and
given us an earnest of our resurrection? And this sincere gratitude will be not
only the discharge of a duty to God, but an occasion of benefit to our selves.
For he that heartily praises God every morning for the renewed mercies it
brings with it, may more cheerfully ask, and more reasonably expect, the
continuance of the same Providence in the day following. So that this sentence
will not only be an act of Praise, but an excellent motive to the next
Pe^ition, and will give us cause to hope, that he who has begun this good work
will perfect it, and that he who brought us safely to the beginning, will
preserve us graciously to the end of this day.

. 7. Defend us in the same by thy mighty Power, and grant that this day we fall
into n^ si^, neithe^ run into any kind of danger] Our n cessities do not end
with the Night, nor vanish with the darkness; But we need a mighty power to
keep us in the day also. For our whole lives are an absolute dependence o^ his
^efence, without which we had not escaped the terrors of the last night, nor
can we but by it be secured against the dangers of this day. The light perhaps
may make us more confident, but we are often less safe: for in the day time we
have Company to disturb us, business to ensnare us, occasions and opportunities
to entice us; we have more temptations, and greater variety of accidents and
occurrences, and yet commonly we are but slenderly guarded against all the
mischiefs which we are exposed unto; but we had need buckle on our armor, and
beware that haste or negligence do not thrust us into the battle naked, before
we have put on those pieces of defense by Prayer, which God has provided for
us. If we view the way in which we are to walk, we may discern so many pits
dug, and traps set for us, that we who are by nature blind, and by custom
careless, are never likely to e^cape them, unless we be guided by an all-seeing
eye, and guarded by an almighty power. Say therefore every morning most
passionately, Lord we shall either fall into the pits of temptation which
Satan has cunningly covered over, or run into the traps of danger which are
secretly laid for us on every side; so that if thy presence go not along with
us, carry us not any further Exodus 33.15.
. Let us not dare to rush into the midst of temptations, till we have earnestly
begged wisdom to discover, courage to resist, and strength to overcome all the
sins by which we may be allured; remembering that sin does displease our God,
destroy our Hopes, disquiet our Consciences, and lay us open to all mischiefs,
even the least of sins has these malignant qualities in it, besides that it
makes way for a greater. We must expect to be tempted, in privacy and in
company, in our business and recreations, our meat and drink, nay our charity
and devotions. But we must every morning pray that we may not in lesser or
greater instances consent to these evil motions, that we may not fall into any
sin by compliance, nor lie in and under it by impenitence; And we may be
assured Gods grace is sufficient thus to defend us. Only let us beware we do
not abuse this necessary Petition, by seeking for Companions in, and occasions
of sin before night; for if we be not watchful to avoid evil, as well as
earnest in calling for the Divine aid, we do but mock the Deity whose help we
call for, and our actions show our Petitions were but feigned. But oh! with
what a serene mind, and an active hope, shall they perform their evening
sacrifice, and lay themselves down to rest, whose Conscience testifies they
have as studiously avoided all wilful sin throughout the whole day, as they did
seriously pray against it in the morning. And that we may do so, let us place
sin before danger, both in our Prayers and in our Opinions: because that only
harms the body, but this hurts the soul. Let the Order of this sentence teach
us that sin is the greatest evil in the world: and if it cannot be avoided but
we must fall into one of these, we must choose danger rather then sin: for if
by avoiding of iniquity we are cast upon the suffering any evil, or loosing any
good; we must account such reproach our honor, such poverty our riches, and
such loss our truest gain, and we shall be eternally rewarded for it. This may
be our case sometimes, but commonly the flying of sin does not involve us in
danger, but secure us from it; and wickedness is the highway to mischief.
Drunkenness and lust, pride and malice, injustice and deceit, do naturally lead
those who follow them into many perils, and as well these as all other sins do
cause God to take away his protecting hand from us, and then we are not many
steps from ruin, although his justice should not inflict any positive evils
for these offenses. And therefore if we would be safe we must be holy. We are
apt to be more sensible and fearful of sickness then sin, of the danger to our
outward rather then inward man: but since they are productive of one another,
we must pray against both. And if we fear diseases or want, reproach or wrong,
violence or death, let those very fears quicken our petitions against sin,
which is the gate that lets them all in upon us. We may fall into calamities by
the immediate hand of Providence, but when by acts of wickedness we bring them
upon our selves, we are said to Run into danger, and this we chiefly pray
against here, that we may not by our own folly and iniquity become accessory to
our own misery; for such afflictions will not be so likely to be sanctified, so
easy to be born, nor so possible to be removed. If we lead holy lives, though
the condition of our nature make us liable to more dangers then can easily be
recounted, we shall either escape them or receive no considerable prejudice by
them. And therefore a good man beholds his body liable to wounds, maims and
diseases; his mind to the impairing of any or all its faculties; his estate to
losses, wrongs and injuries; his whole life exposed to all the misery that can
come upon him, by the unkindness or loss of friends, the malice of enemies, or
the more public disturbances to Church or State; but all these do only teach
him to walk more humbly with God, and pray every day more heartily to him to
deliver him from them; and to be more thankful if by the divine mercy he do
escape them.

. 8. But that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do always
that which is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.] If
by all that has been said, and our own sad experience, we are become so wise
as to see we are insufficient for our own conduct; I hope we shall in this
Petition most humbly commit our ways to the Lord, that he may direct our
paths, and that he may (as David speaks Prove. 3.6. ^sal. 37.5. and 23. Ideo
Deus secundet ac been fortunet om^^^ eventus in cursu vitae nostrae, nempe quia
nihil tentamus quod non ei placeat. Calv. in loc.
Psalm. 37.) order all our goings and make them acceptable to himself, and then
they shall be prosperous. If his good Spirit be our guide Psalm. 51.12. (...)
, we shall seldom fall into danger, never into sin. Oh let us earnestly
beseech him that his grace may direct our hearts, and his Providence order our
lives, that we may be blessed in our going out and coming in, in our studies
and labors, commerce and society, eating and recreations, in our prayers and
praises; that in all our actions natural, civil, and religious, we may design
his glory and be successful. The proud man thinks his doings good enough, if
they are pleasing in his own sight Prove. 16.2. and 21.2. and Prove. 14.12.
Quicquid volun^ homines se been velle putant.
though evil w^ies do frequently appear so to us, and thus we may deceive our
selves into an unexpected ruin, by absolving our selves even when God condemns
us. The Hypocrite believes his ac^ions excellent if the world commend them; if
the complying and fashionable outsides of Religion present him righteous in
the eyes of men, he sup^^^^ (...) ways prudently ordered: But we must remem^^^
^e are not judges of our own, nor of one another works; but must all stand
before the judgment seat of God, wherefore it is his approbation that we
desire. It is not the opinion of the malefactor, nor the vote of his
fellow prisoners, but the sentence of the Judge that must save or condemn.
Having therefore such a Tribunal to appear before, let us beg large measures of
his grace to lead us; for he will approve of no ways, but what his Spirit
directs us into, and that had need be excellent that appears so to an
all-seeing eye. Our lives must not be guided by the loose rules of Custom, if
we expect they should be accounted righteous in his sight: But they must be
ordered by the exact rule of his holy word; and then though all the world
condemn us we shall be prosperous here, and finally acquitted hereafter.
Perhaps we judge it impossible our ways should ever appear righteous in his
sight, but we are mistaken; for if we take him for our guide, he will not be
strict to mark unavoidable defects. And it is not our performances but the
effects of his own grace that he approves of. Nor yet does he count them
righteous for any merit that is in the works or the persons doing them, but
through the merits and obedience of the Holy Jesus, in whose name we therefore
make this Prayer, not expecting our supplications can be heard, or our actions
justified for their own worth, but through Jesus Christ our Lord: desiring he
will please by his intercession and merits so to recommend our Persons and
Devotions, that we may be sanctified by his grace, justified by his mercy, and
finally may be for ever glorified with him and for his sake. Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Collect for Grace.
O Lord] We thy poor finite Creatures upon this Earth, do daily remember with
much comfort that thou art [our heavenly Father] and have pity on us, and
being an [Almighty and everlasting God] art all-sufficient and always able to
help us. The remembrance of the dangers of the last night, does engage us most
heartily to praise thee [who have safely] kept our souls and bodies therein,
and [brought us] entire in both [to the beginning of this day,] And this thy
Providence does encourage us to beseech thee gracious^y to [defend us] from all
kinds of evil which this days occasions may expose us to; and to keep us [in
the same by thy mighty power] which alone can make us safe. Consider our
frailty O Lord [and grant, that this day] we may discover and overcome all the
temptations of the world, the flesh, and the devil; so, that [we fall into no
sin] let us not by any iniquity great or small displease thee, hurt our souls,
[nor run] by our own folly [into any kind of danger] and that we may avoid all
the mischiefs with which we are environed, we pray that we may not be left to
our selves [but that all our doings] and undertakings in spiritual or temporal
concerns [may be] this day and ever guided by thy Spirit, and [^rdered by thy]
wise and faithful [governance] for while we follow thy direction, thy grace
will enable us [to do alwaies] that which is most profitable to us, and best
pleasing to thee, even [that which is] (though imperfect in it self) accounted
[righteous in thy sight] O most merciful Judge [through Jesus Christ] his
merits and intercession; for whose sake accept and hear us, for he is [our
Lord] and only Savior [Amen.]

SECTION XV. Of the two Collects peculiar to the Evening Prayer.
WE have chosen this place to insert these parts of the Evening Service,
because all the following Collects are the same in both parts of the day, and
the Hymns with these two Prayers being all the difference, it is not necessary
in our method to separate the Offices, and this way every thing comes in its
proper place, only omitting what is peculiar to the other part of the day.

The Analysis of the second Collect for Peace in the Evening Prayer.
In this Collect are three Parts, 1. The Person of whom we ask, who is, 1. The
beginner of all good, O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels,
2. The perfecter of it, and all just works do proceed,

2. The thing asked for, described by 1. Its Name, give unto thy servants that
peace
2. Its Quality, which the world cannot give,

3. The Arguments to prevail for it, taken from 1. The benefit of the
Petitioners as a means of our 1. Holiness, that both our hearts may be set to
obey thy commandments
2. Safety, and also that by thee we being defended from the fear of our
enemies,
3. Comfort, may pass our time in rest and quietness,

2. The interest of the Mediator, through the merits of Jesus Christ our
Savior, Amen.




A Practical Discourse on this Collect for Peace.
. 1. O God from whom all holy desires all good counsels and all just works do
proceed] This Collect has the same title, and seems to have the same subject
with that in the morning Office. And indeed Peace is so desirable a blessing
that we cannot pray for it too often, especially if it be for different kinds
of Peace, as it is in the present case if we well observe it. In the Morning we
pray for external, in the evening for internal peace. In the beginning of the
day being to dispatch various affairs and converse with the world, we desire to
be preserved from the injuries, affronts, and designs of evil men: In the close
thereof we request that tranquillity of mind that springs from the testimony of
a good Conscience, that when our hearts lie as easy as our heads, our sleep
may be sweet and quiet. The first kind of Peace sometimes the best of men
cannot obtain, for the wicked will do wickedly; but even then this inward peace
will support us, and make a calm within when the waves beat most furiously from
without. So that this is the most necessary and most advantageous. Wherefore we
are taught to ask this (which is called the Peace of God) from the God of
peace, who is here described to us as the author and finisher of all holiness
and righteousness, the surest and only foundations for a true and lasting
peace. From which we may learn that there is an inseparable union between
righteousness and true peace Fac justitiam and habebis pacem; tu forte unam
habere vis, alteram non vis -- at osculantur hae amant hae: si amicam pacis non
amaveris, non amabit te pax. Aug. Psalm. 85.10.
, and that we cannot have that unless it spring from holy desires, good
counsels, and just works. If the grace of God work these in us, it is not all
the slanders Conscia men's recti famae mendadacia ridet. Ovid. Bona via gaudium
semper habet. Isidor. Soliloqu.
, the scorn, nor injustice of the world, can hinder the serene reflections and
inward Peace of a good conscience. He that does not deserve reproach can nobly
despise it: and he that has not provoked his neighbor to wrong him by any
evil doing, can easily bear the greatest of injuries. Whereas if all the world
be quiet and none disturb the wicked man, he makes himself restless Si in mundo
non est quod timeant, pacem habere putantur; sed pax ista cum conscientia
semper litigat, rixatur intrinsecus, and cum hostem non habet, secum decertat.
Cassiodor. in Psalm.
because there is an enemy within that upbraids him more loudly, and wounds him
more deeply then he can do the holy man. Whoever therefore enquires for true
peace, let them here behold him in and from whom are all the causes of it, with
love and admiration. And let them acknowledge to his glory and their own
comfort, that he is the Author and finisher of every good work James 1.17.
Philip. 2.13. (...). Hierocles.
. He excites our affections to desire it; engages our will to choose it, and
strengthens our hands to perform it. There are no holy thoughts in our minds
2 Cor. 3.5.
, nor good purposes in our hearts Prove. 16.1.
, nor any righteous actions in our lives Isai. 26.12.
, but it is in and by and through him. To him then let us make our
supplications that he will fill our hearts with the motions of his holy spirit,
the first seeds of all virtue; and by the continuing influence of the same
grace make these holy thoughts spring up into prudent and religious resolutions
and determinations; and by favorable circumstances and addition of strength
ripen them into pious and just works. And the fruit hereof will be peace, and
we may cheerfully hope and pray, that he that planted the root, and sowed the
seed, will give us the pleasure of the fruit, and comfort of the harvest, which
is the sweetest and most enduring peace. And let us beware, since we confess
this to be the fruit of righteousness, that when we seem most earnest in our
prayers for this peace, we do not wilfully deprive our selves of it, and hinder
our own wishes, by stifling holy thoughts, and breaking pious resolutions, and
neglecting good works. For he that cuts the root, and lops off the branches,
must not expect ever to eat of this fruit; and if he complains, deserves to be
silenced as the Author of his own misery.

. 2. Give unto thy Servants that Peace which the world cannot give] To ask a
thing inconsiderable of a mighty prince may seem a disparagement, because he
can as easily bestow a province on a faithful Servant, as another can give a
small gratuity. So when we that are the Servants of the most high make our
Petitions, it must be for such things as are not in our power, nor in the power
of any other to bestow. Our requests must be proportionable to his infinite
bounty rather then our deserts. We must ask something which may become his
Majesty to give, that our Lord may be glorified by the very expectations of his
Servants. We now desire peace, but it is such a Peace as no other hand can
dispense: a Peace, that is not given as the world gives, in a feigned
Complement or an empty wish at best John 14.27. Homines plerumque frigidae
tantum Ceremoniae causa pacem in ore habent; vel si pacem alicui serio
precantur, non tamen came reipsa dare possunt. Calv. in loc.
but in sincerity and with effect; a peace, differing from the worlds Peace, in
its nature, causes and Qualities, in all which it far excels it. This Peace is
grounded on the evidence of Faith in that reconciliation which the merits of
Jesus have procured Romans 5.1, 2.
between the Divine Majesty and our sinful souls; from the persuasion whereof
arises such clear hopes of pardon, such a lively sense of Gods love with such
abundant satisfaction therein; and such fixed expectations of eternal glory
thereby, that no ravishments are comparable to the pleasures of it. And then it
is further comfirmed by the testimony of a good 2 Cor. 1.12.
conscience, declaring we have endeavored to walk answerable to this infinite
love, by a strict observance of all the will of God: which occasions such a
pleasing calm in our souls, and creates so brisk a delight in every review,
that no tongue can tell the joy of such souls, but only theirs that feel it.
This is the Peace which is so sweet and so unmixed, so charming and powerful,
that no sinful pleasures can entice, nor no earthly calamities force a holy man
from the embraces of it. The Peace of the world, if it spring from the
friendship and love of men, has innumerable allays. For this is sometimes no
more but gilded flattery, and a cover for more unexpected and dangerous
assaults. But if true, it can neither support you under, nor secure you against
the anger of God, and must dye when the first of you two lovers descends to the
grave. If it arise from plenty, it will make your delights wormwood to remember
how quickly you may be stripped of them; what excellent things you have given for
them, and how speedily you must be taken from them, however your peace and
plenty must expire together. Give us then O Lord that Peace which is grounded
on thy truth, and the merits of Jesus: upon a sense of thy love and an
experience of thy grace; for this can never deceive nor fail us, because it
ends in everlasting Peace. And let us not seek this in the Freindships of the
wicked nor the storehouses of pleasure; but in Jesus and an holy life, in
heavenly desires, pious resolutions and religious Conversation. In which the
grace of God will help us, for we are his servants and make our applications to
him for it; and since we seek not as the world seeks, no doubt we shall find a
Peace so sweet and ravishing, as that nothing which the men of this World know
can be compared to it.

. 3. That hoth our hearts may be set to obey thy Commandements] It is the
Epicure that desires Peace that he may wallow in sinful pleasures; But our
first and principal end in this Petition is, that we may have no interruption
to our holiness; because our chief desire is to lead a good life De pace
temporis, per pacem pectoris, transeamus ad pacem aeternitatis. Durand. lib. 4.
cap. 39.
. And how pleasant will this sound in the ears of him who is the fountain of
all holy desires, good counsels, and just works; when we wish peace it self
only as a means to righteousness! I have observed before, that peace first
springs from a holy life, and now must add that it increases that holiness to
which it owes its Original by a reciprocal gratitude. The fear of Gods
irrevocable displeasure, and the accusations of conscience may discourage, and
persuade us we cannot safely undertake, nor hope to finish a course of piety.
And then for want of this peace our good desires seldom come so far as
religious resolutions, seldomer to be righteous actions. But this Peace will be
as a guard Phil. 4.7. Graec. (...) praesidio erit cordibus vestris. See Romans
15.13.
to exclude these fears, to keep us firm in our allegiance to God, and to make
us abound in hope, and constancy to the end. For in this we taste the sweetness
of Religion, the winning and yet solid delights it does afford. And then it
will (in our thoughts) sure be so far esteemed above all other things, that
nothing can be able to separate us from the love of God Qui in malis fuerit and
conversus est ad bonum, dum gaudet de bonis quae invenit and recordatur malorum
quae evasit, difficulter redit ad malum: Opus imperfect. in Matthew. ap.
Chrysostom. hom. 2. cap. 2.
. Thus his favor becomes our joy, his Spirit our comforter, his grace our help
and his glory our reward. And would any reject these privileges and cast away
these advantages for honor, pleasures, profit or friends? Break his league
with heaven to make such friendships? Can any man that ever tasted the living
waters of the divine grace, long for the corrupt and standing pool of any
sublunary contents? If we desire our hearts should be so fixed, let us beg an
experience of this Peace. Nothing draws us more powerfully, ties more closely,
nor keeps us constant more surely then this. For thus we shall learn to love
holiness it self, and to welcome all good motions, and diligently to improve
them till they bring forth their desired fruit.

. 4. And also that by thee we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may
pass our time in rest and quietness, through the merits of Jesus Christ our
Savior, Amen. The sum of our happiness on earth is to lead quiet and peaceable
lives in all godliness and honesty; And if we can obtain the Peace of God we
may be happy in both these. And since our heavenly Master not only delights in
the holiness, but has pleasure in the prosperity of his servants; we use it as
an argument to move him to grant us this Peace, by representing that it will
complete our felicity: for it will fix our hearts in the obedience of his laws,
and will make our ^ives most comfortable. He must be highly base that will
injure and offend an innocent and blameless man, a friend of Heaven, who
deserves and gains the affections of most men Qui infra diligitur idem and
supra diligitur. R. Mos. Aeg.

Sat fautores semper habet qui recte facit. Seneca.


. Yet if such an one be injured, he is sure of the aid of an Almighty defender,
and his own heart being filled with the Peace of God, he enjoyes tranquillity
in his own breast, and is not to be constrained by violence from without, not
cannot be terrified by any fears within. For since his care is to please God,
he daily experiences that heavens eye is over him, and is more and more
confirmed that his foundation is sure. And thus be it night or day he can pass
it over with all inward quietness, so that nothing in this world can make such
an one miserable. Let us be earnest then with the author of all holiness, to
give us that Peace which may be the nurse and guard of our piety, the support
and comfort of our lives, that our days may be safe and our nights pleasant,
and every moment engage us to new acts of Praise. And let us beg this Peace for
the merits sake of Jesus, who has purchased a Covenant of Peace with his
precious blood; remembering we deserve by our sins to live in perpetual
disturbance; but for his sake we may hope for Peace, and desire it as the
readiest way to temporal, yea and to eternal happiness. Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Collect for Peace in the Evening Prayer.
O God] the giver of every good and perfect gift [from whom] and by whose grace
[all holy desires] first spring up in our hearts, and [all good Counsels] and
holy resolutions grow, till they bring forth the fruit of righteous actions
[and all just works] both holiness and the truest Peace which flows from it [do
proceed] from thee. Wherefore gracious Lord [give unto] us that acknowledge our
selves [thy servants] such firm persuasions of our reconciliation to thee, and
such comfortable testimonies of our obedience to thy will, that we may ever
enjoy [that Peace which] is so sweet and sure, that [the world] with all its
Friendship and Plenty [cannot give] any Peace worthy to be compared with it.
Grant us so to taste this delicious fruit of a holy life [that both our]
wavering and inconstant [hearts] by the experience of this Peace [may be set]
firmly, and resolved steadfastly [to obey thy commandements] to the increase of
our Piety [and also that by thee] and thy gracious Providence [we being
defended] from the Power and malice, and preserved in safety [from the fear of
our enemies] may never be hurt, terrified or disturbed; but [may pass our time]
which thou shall afford us on this earth [in rest] from our foes [and
quietness] in our own minds. Grant us O Lord therefore this Peace for the sake,
as it was obtained [through the merits of] thy Son [Iesus Christ our Savior.
Amen.

The Analysis of the third Collect for Aid against all Perils.
This Collect has only two Parts, 1. The Petitions for 1. Mystically
Knowledge, Lighten our darkness we beseech thee O Lord,

Literally Comfort,

2. Safety intimating 1. The means by which we must be delivered, and by thy
great mercy defend us
2. The evils from which, from all perils and dangers
3. The time in which, of this night,


2. The motive urged to obtain them, for the love of thy only Son our Savior
Jesus Christ. Amen.



A Practical Discourse on the third Collect at Evening Prayer.
. 5. LIghten our darkness we beseech thee O Lord] The declining of the day does
now mind us of the approaching darkness which will shortly wrap us in the
shadows of the night. And what Petition more seasonable then with holy David to
beseech God to enlighten our darkness Psalm. 18.28. Vul. Deus meus illumina
tenebras meas.
. For the night is sad and terrible, in it we can see nothing with our bodily
eyes to entertain or to cheer us; and we seem exposed to all the mischie^s
Versuta frans and callida amat tenebris obtegi. Prud. and Ovid. Metam. 2. --
Conscia culpae, Conspectum lucemque fugit tenebrisque pudorem Celat -- John
3.20. Job. 24.17.
of Satan and those instruments of his who fly the light, and hope to cover
their sin with this sable Mantle; our dangers are many, and our fears are
sometimes more, especially if our eyes be closed by unbelief as well as
darkness. If we behold not the Divine Providence watching over us, and the
Angels encamping round about us, the very apprehension of the perils of a
dismal night may damp our joy, and startle our courage, and makes us cry out
with the Prophets servant 2 Kings 6.15, 16, 17.
What shall we do? But let us entreat the Lord to fulfill his promise Psalm.
112.4. (...) Eccl. 5.17. Psalm. 97.11. etc. Adrian. Isagoge.
that light may arise in our darkness, that is (in Scripture phrase) comfort in
our sadness. That our hearts may by faith and cheerful thoughts, by the
assurance of his providence, and the operations of his Grace, be joyful and
pleasant; and that the shine of his countenance may make our nights bright as
the day illuminated by the Meridian Sun. For the inward comforts of Gods
Spirit, and a sense of his care and favor, when the Soul is in fear or
sadness, do cheer and refresh more then a sudden light does the wandering
Travellour who is misled in a gloomy night. These make our dwellings a Goshen,
while the wicked have thoughts black and dismal; and Egypt is veiled in a
horrid shade, and terrified with the dark side of the Cloud, while the people
of God are led all the night thorough with a light of fire, so that the
darkness and light to them are equally safe and comfortable. Or if we desire to
spiritualize the Petition more, we may take occasion from the approaching
night, to enlarg our meditations upon our spiritual ignorance and blindness by
nature, by which our Souls are veiled and in the dark: so that we often wander
out of the way. We stumble in the day, and are in danger to run into the shadow
of death, till the day spring from on high visit us, and give us that true
knowledge which is usually set out under the name of light Luke 2.32. Hebr. 6.4.
illuminati, i. e. edocti.
. Wherefore let us humbly beseech our gracious Lord to let the Sun of
righteousness arise upon us, for whoever follows him does not wander nor walk
in darkness John 8.12.
and that we may take heed to Gods holy word as to a light shining in a dark
place 2 Pet. 1.19.
, and a sure guide to true blessedness. And then our knowledge shall increase,
and we shall keep the right path till we arrive to that eternal light which
shall never be extinguished. When our hearts are clouded with grief, shadowed
with ignorance, and benumbed with dreadful ^p^rehensions, we are taught to lift
up our thoughts to the Father of lights, and the God of all comfort who dwells
in that light to which no mortal eye can approach whose Countenance is clear as
the sun and bright as lightning. And if we can by our beseechings obtain his
favor to shine upon us, no doubt it will turn our night into day, our sorrows
into the joys of the Morning. While we are in the darksome cell of this lower
world, we think of our glorified brethren who dwell in a perpetual brightness
and everlasting light, and we long to be with them when it may please God. But
in the mean time we hope he will support and recreate us with some glimpses of
those beams which they have the constant and full fruition of.

. 6. And by thy great mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this
night] Comfort and safety are those two things which make a happy night. And of
whom should we ask these but of God the Lord who is a light and defense Psalm.
84.11.
. The hopes of his love makes it comfortable: But least we should be deceived
in that comfort, his mercy and power must keep us safe, which here we earnestly
desire. We may easily perceive we are most miserable without his Providence
especially in the night season; for then Satan prepares most violently to
assault us supposing it is his hour and the power of darkness. And alas how
easily may we then be enticed with pleasure, transported with malice and
revenge, or disturbed with evil fancies and imaginations! When the Soul is
heavy, the Senses dull, the stomach laden, the flesh strong and the reason
weak Stomachus aeger, men's somnolenta, animus occupatus -- tunc omne nefas
suadere contendunt, quando nullus arbiter culpae, nullus criminis conscius,
nullus potest esse erro is testis. Ambros. in 8. par. 119. Psalm.
; when the Curtain is drawn and we think no eyes see us, neither judge witness
nor accuser can espy us, how open are our Souls then to all Dangerous
temptations? And yet our temporal concerns are not more safe: for how soon may
we be seized by diseases or sudden death, or made miserable by theives and
Robbers, burnings or inundations? Are not our lives and limbs, estate and
friends liable to loss and mischief both suddenly and unavoidably? Go we then
with all speed to our merciful Father and let us represent our condition to
him; the consideration whereof will humble us and make our request; more
zealous; and mollify him and make him more ready to grant them. By his great
mercy he will be moved to compassion to see us chained by night and sleep
helpless and exposed to all mischiefs of soul and body, and will send his grace
to defend our souls, and his Angels to guard our bodies that none of these
perils shall hurt us. And then our morning Praises must own it as an Act of
great pity. How dare you suffer your eyes to sleep, in the midst of such
armies of Perils before you have besought him that never slumbers nor slee^s to
save you from them? But if any be so confident, it is not courage but desperate
stupidity and inconsideration that makes him so daring. The good man begs for
Protection for this night, and so again for the next, and every time with a new
Devotion, having warmed his heart first with apprehensions of his own dangers,
and insufficiency to escape them.

. 7. For the love of thine only Son our Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.] Although
with the Disciples we may be somewhat afraid when we enter into the cloud, yet
we must beware the darkness do not shut up the eye of our Faith, by which we
may behold him in whom God is well pleased, when our bodily eyes are closed.
And if we discern him by Faith, that very sight will make our darkness to be
light. For we may run to him and approach the Throne of Grace with him in our
Arms. The Molossian King was by law obliged to grant any Petition offered by
one that brought his Son with him. And the King of heaven cannot deny us when
we most truly and humbly disclaim our own merits, and beg his Protection for
the love he bears to the holy Jesus, who was the delight of his Soul from all
eternity, and yet ^e became one with us in his incarnation, and made us one
with him in our regeneration; and we are the members of his body and the price
of his blood: so that the Father loves us in and for him, that have nothing
attractive or lovely in our selves. Again we entreat him to save us by all the
love which Jesus bears unto us, to whom we are near as his own flesh, deerer
then his own life, more esteemed then fallen Angels or a thousand worlds. For
his delight is with the Sons of men Prove. 8.31.
. Wherefore we beseech our heavenly Father by that which will moove his bowels
toward us, by his own everlasting love to us, and his affection to his only
Son, and by the inexpressible love of that his Son to us, to give us a night
comfortable and safe. We are in darkness, but our head is in a never ceasing
light; and he that gave him to redeem us from eternal darkness, will not suffer
us to perish in spiritual darkness, nor leave us exposed to the mischiefs of
one night that will so soon be over passed. If our affections be as fervent as
this argument is fo^ceable, it is sure this Petition will not be denied.

The Paraphrase of the third Collect for Aid against all Perils.
LEt the assurance of thy Providence, the comforts of thy grace, and the beams
of thy favor [Lighten our darkness] and remove the discomfort of the
approaching night: [we beseech thee] to make in sweet and safe to us [O Lord]
thou Father of lights: [and by thy great mercy] behold and pity the various
miseries and mischiefs that we thy poor helpless Creatures are exposed unto:
That thou may preserve and [defend us] in our souls and bodies, estate and
friends [from all perils and dangers] which might befall us in any part [of
this night] grant this dear Father (not for our merits, but) [for the love]
thou bear to the person [of the only Son] and to us for his sake, since he
is [our Saviour] even [Jesus Christ our Lord] and our Redeemer. Amen.

SECTION XVI. Of the Collects for the King and the Royal Family.
The Analysis of the Prayer for the Kings Majesty.
This Prayer has two general Parts, 1. The Confession of the King of Heaven,
acknowledging, 1. His great goodness, O Lord our heavenly Father,
2. His Supreme Authority, high and mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the
only ruler of Princes,
3. His Universal Providence, who do from thy throne behold all the dwellers
upon earth,

2. The Petitions for his Vicegerent on Earth, requesting 1. A special
Providence over him, most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold
our most gracious Sovereign Lord King CHARLES,
2. All kinds of blessings ^or him, 1. Spiritual, 1. Grace and so replenish him
with the grace of thy holy spirit, that he may always incline to thy will, and
walk in thy way,
2. Gifts endue him plenteously with heavenly gifts,

2. Temporal 1. Prosperity, grant him in health and wealth long to live,
2. Victory, strengthen him that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies,

3. Eternal, with the general motive and finally after this life he may attain
everlasting joy and felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.





A Practical Discourse on the Prayer for the Kings Majesty.
. 1. O Lord our heavenly Father] The Almighty and Eternal God is (without
dispute) the King of Heaven and Earth, and supreme governor of all the world.
But since his throne is in Heaven, he is pleased to constitute Princes his
Deputies on the Earth, which he has given to the Children of men Psalm. 115.16.
. Wherefore since by him Kings reign Prove. 8.15. Nos judicium Dei suscipimus in
Imperatoribus, qui gentibus illos praefecit; id in eis seimus esse quod Deus
voluit, ideoque and salvum volumus esse quod Deus voluit. Tertul. Apol. c. 32.
, we submit to his appointment of them, and revere his Majesty in them, and to
him we make our supplications for them, who has power to defend them, as well
as authority to create them. And he must needs have a peculiar regard toward
them, and love to them, because they are anointed by him to administer his
rights among us. This has encouraged all Nations to pray for their Governors
so universally as if it had been an agreement among all mankind. To omit the
Heathen sacrifices and Prayers for the Cities and Emperors, we shall find two
Psalms Psalm. 20. and Psalm. 72.
which were used by the Jews as Forms of Prayer for the King, and both by Gods
command and the desire of the Princes of the Gentiles (who then were rulers
over that people) supplications were made to God in their behalf Ezra. 6.10.
Jerem. 29.7.
by those Jews, who were under their protection. But to come nearer, we
Christians are most expressly commanded by God and his holy Apostle 1 Timothy 2.1,
2. In obsequio quotidiano -- and pro regibus and pro his qui in sublimitate
positi sunt orandum est. Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 2. Pro potestatibus seculi. Tertul.
Apol. Obsecramus Deum pro tranquillitate mundi, pro Regibus. Cyril. catech. 5.
Pro fidelissimis and Deo dilectis Imperatoribus. Liturg. Chris. Memento Domine
piissimi and fidelissimi Imperatoris Basil. in Liturg.
, to Pray for Kings and all in authority: So that it was ever a part of the
Churches Public Devotions, to intercede for the Emperors and Princes even
while they were enemies to the Faith, as all Antiquity does evince. Much more
when the Powers of the world became Christian; for then they named them in
their offices with titles expressing the dearest affection and most honorable
respect. And surely since we meet in Public to pray especially for Public
mercies, there is not any temporal blessing that is of so universal concern, as
that we should have righteous and religious Kings, guided by wise councels, and
living in prosperity and Peace. For this (as the Apostle himself observes)
Illorum namque salus est nostra tranquilitas. Theophil. in 1 Timothy 2.

Ostendit in nostrum lucrum cadere ipsorum incolumitatem. Oecum. in loc.


is every man's advantage. The government of a Heathen or a Tyrant is better
then Anarchy, Change or Confusion. And if the Preservation of such were
advantageous to Christianity, how much more then are we obliged to call upon
our heavenly Father for the welfare of Christian Kings, who are Fathers of
their Country and nursing Fathers to the Church Numb. 11.12. Isai. 49.23.
; who execute justice, and defend Religion, and do good to all quiet and
peaceable men. Therefore we here call God our heavenly Father to signify, it
will be a great demonstration of his love to us and Care of us, if he please to
preserve our Prince whom he has set over us.

. 2. High and mighty King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the only Ruler of Princes]
We ought to beware that while we give Caesar his due, we rob not God of his.
The splendor of Royal Majesty might be apt to dazzle us, and make us imagine it
had no superior nor needed no supporter. To prevent which the Church has
selected out of holy Writ, those glorious Attributes of God which declare him
to be higher then the Kings of the Earth Psalm. 89.27.
. We see every head uncovered before mortal Princes and every knee bending to
them, which shows they are high in dignity: but Eccles. 5.8.
there is one higher then they, who has greater reverence paid him by Angels
then these by their most dutiful subjects. If Earthly Kings be judged mighty in
Power because of their guards and revenues, their forts and armies; then who
can estimate his power and might, against whom such preparations are nothing,
since he speaks in thunder, and can arm all the hosts of heaven, nay the
meanest creatures upon earth to destroy the highest and mightiest of the sons
of men. Yet if Kings and their people do confess with holy David that he is the
most high and to be feared Psalm. 47.2.
, his might shall be the support of their dignity, and their power, which is
assuredly the wisest course, for they can never be higher then when they submit
to the most high, nor stronger then when they trust in the Almighty. He who is
not only above them as being higher in dignity and greater in power, but
supreme over them, a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords Dan. 2.47. 1 Timothy 6.15.
, who has not only some petty Princes of a few Provinces his homagers (which
is all the greatest Empires in the world can boast of) but all mortal Princes
are his Vicegerents, since he has and ever had the absolute dispos^l of all
the Kingdoms upon Earth, setting up one and pulling down another as it pleases
him. It may be accounted di honor to a Prince to crave aid of his equal: but
let not the greatest Monarch blush to bend his knee to the supreme Majesty of
Heaven, whose Vassals and Homagers are all the Governors of this lower world,
who wear their Crowns by his donation, and must resign them at his command. How
can Kings or Subjects want relief that humbly and earnestly sue to this blessed
only Potentate, the King of Kings? If we that are by the supreme disposer of
all things, placed under Authority, want any thing in or for our Governors, let
us apply our selves to him who is the only Ruler of Princes, and has the
hearts of Kings in his hands Prove. 21.1.
, he can persuade, convince, and turn them, when they will not take advice from
their inferiors. And he only is the judge of their actions, since they are his
servants and substitutes, to their own master they must stand or fall, and are
only accountable at his tribunal (...). Xiphilin. Vide Psalm. 51.4. Neque enim
ullis ad poenam vocantur legibus tuti imperii potestate, homini ergo non
peccavit cui non tenebatur obnoxious. Ambros. de loc.

Nulla creatura judicat regem sed solus Deus: ss. b. Pirk. Aboth.


. And therefore we have so much the more need to pray for them to their great
Lord, that he would direct them to do well and to execute justice, and guide
them who are to rule us; that this their mighty power may be our safety and our
peace, for if it should be otherwise (which God forbid) we neither will nor can
oppose them, having no other arms against our Prince but prayers and tears
Lachrimae meae arma mea sunt -- aliter nec debeo nec possum resistere. Ambros.
Orat. in Auxent. l. 5.
. But why should we doubt, since we Pray to him that can overruled the greatest
Kings, and will not suffer this unless it be as a just punishment to our
iniquities? Finally let all this create in every soul most honorable opinions
of this great God, and fill every heart with reverence that is before him, when
we see our dread Sovereign and all the mighty Monarchs of the Christian world,
doing obeisance to his footstool, and laying down their Crowns at his feet,
acknowledging they received their dominions from him, and hold them by his
favor; and declaring they trust not in the multitude of their people, strength
of their Cities, nor prudence of their Counsels: but though they have Armies
and Navies terrible and numerous, and Revenues unaccountable, they come to the
Throne of our God to Petition for his help. And all their faithful subjects
attend on them and join with them; who then would not fear before him, and
trust in him? express all possible lowliness in his presence, and give him all
imaginable glory, who lives and reigns over all from the beginning, and
shall do so for ever and ever.

. 3. Who do from thy throne behold all the dwellers upon earth] It is an
infallible maxim that the less is always blessed of the greater Heb. 7.7.
. Wherefore being to beg a blessing from the King of Heaven for the Rulers of
this World, we must first acknowledge they are inferior to him, in the extent
of their dominion, as well as in the quality of their dignity, power, and
authority. There is a Providence in Scripture attributed to Governors Acts
24.3. (...). Graec.
, who as they sit on their thrones above all their subjects, so that height is
the emblem of the advantage they have to behold, and a Monitor of the duty
lying on them to take care of all that are under their charge. But the most
vigilant Princes with all their faithful Ministers (who are as so many eyes and
ears to them) find it difficult enough to oversee, and provide for the
inhabitants of one Kingdom. Whereas the King of Kings has the Heaven for his
throne (...) Orpheus. Isai. 66.1. Psalm. 97.9.
and the Earth for his footstool; and as he sits higher so he sees further the^
they. From his throne he beholds all the world, the meanest are not below his
cognizance, nor the greatest above his reach. He sees and rules all, which gave
ground to that Egyptian Hieroglyphick which represented God by an eye in a
scepter the emblems of Providence and Authority. And in the sacred pages the
same thing is expressed by the Phrase of Beholding from his Throne Psalm. 33.14.
Isai. 63.14.
. For the Divine Majesty is no idle spectator, but improves the height of his
seat and the universal prospect he has from thence, to the good of all
mankind. His eye denotes his care, for he sees the necessities Psalm. 34.15.
Genesis 22.14. Deus videbit al. providebit.
, and considers the wants and desires of all men, and of every particular, and
orders his supplies accordingly. So that his Providence and Dominion is over
all the earth, and no Monarch need account it a dishonor to bow before this
mighty Lord and his glorious throne.

. 4. Most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold our most gracious
Sovereign Lord King CHARLES] Since all mankind is under the eye and care of
God, no doubt he has an especial regard to Kings and Princes, on whose safety
the welfare of all the rest (next under his own providence) does depend Nihil
est illi principi Deo acceptius quam concilia coetusque hominum, quae Civitates
appellantur, earumque rectores and servatores hinc profecti huc revertuntur.
Cicer. some. Scip.
. He chiefly delights in men as they are united into Societies by charity and
laws; and for the preservation of these unions, his principal care is for those
he has set over them who are the bond of the rest. We may therefore cheerfully
pray for an especial and more particular providence over our gracious King,
because God does usually grant this, and because he needs it more then ordinary
persons do. His duty is more difficult, his abundance exposes him to more
temptations, and his height to more dangers, then any of his people; and yet
his preservation is far more necessary and of universal concernment 2 Samuel
18.3. (...). Plutar. vit. Pelopid. Cum tot ab hac anima populorum vita salusque
Pendeat -- Lucan
for he is worth ten thousand of us, and we had need pray heartily to God to
save him who does defend us all. He stands in need of more wisdom to direct
him, more power to protect him, more care to preserve him then other men, and
therefore we pray that the King of heaven will show a particular favor to him.
A pious and religious King does as earnestly seek and as much value a
favorable look from the Majesty of heaven, as any of his Courtiers do a smile
from his countenance. Psalm. 84.9. Psalm. 21.6. Psalm. 4. ver. 7, 8.
Lord (says holy David) look upon the face of thine anointed, and thou will
make me glad with the joy of thy Countenance, yea more joyful then the worlding
is in the increase of his admired wealth. And methinks it should fill our Souls
with awful and noble thoughts of our glorious Lord God to see Kings in the
light of whose countenance is life, and whose favor is a dew upon the grass
Prove. 19.6. Chap. 16.15.
, courting so humbly and needing so mightily the favor of the Majesty of
heaven. Let us join our most hearty requests that what our deer Sovereign wants
and wishes he may have; if he were a Saul or a Nero we should sin in ceasing to
pray for him 1 Samuel 12.23.
: But no affections nor passions are too fervent, no opportunities too often to
call upon God for our gracious King, who is our lawful and natural Liege Lord,
a just possesser of his Crown, a worshiper of God, a defender of the faith, a
maker of good laws, and an executor of the same; who secures our rights,
protects us from public enemies and Private frauds, and endeavors to choose
fit and faithful governors both for Church and State. For such an one we must
pray not only out of obedience to God and the Churches order but out of our
private love and particular affection, as St. Ambrose Meque non solum officio
publico debitas pendere preces sed etiam amore privato. Amb. ep. ad Gr.
did for the Emperor Gratian. To quicken us whereunto we may do well to call
to mind the miseries of the Church of God under persecuting heathens of old,
later furious Romanists, and the particular calamities of this Church under the
late usurpers, and then we shall discern what praise we owe to God and what
love to our gracious King, whose name ought to be so deer to us, that in our
daily office we should wish it written in heaven and registered in the book of
life, as well as in the leaves of the Churches devotions.

. 5. And so replenish him with the Grace of thy holy Spirit that he may always
incline to thy will and walk in thy way] Grace is so constant a companion and
so certain an effect of the Divine favor that the Greek expresses both by one
word. So that if we can prevail with God to look favorably on our Sovereign we
may be assured he will give bountifully to him. And since the first and
choicest of his largesses is the Grace of his holy Spirit we first beg, that he
may have a constant and bountiful supply of that, of which he needs a double
portion. For the temptations of a Prince are many to pride and luxury, to
carelessness and vanity; his faithful friends very few, who either will or dare
inform or advise him without partiality and self interest; his Concerns are
weighty, since the welfare of Church and State depend upon them; his example
prevalent and usually made the encouragement of virtue, or the excuse of vice.
All which declares the danger of Governors to be very great to fall into evil
ways, and their preservation from them to be the greatest blessing, wherefore
all faithful subjects and good men cease not to pray that he who rules us may
be governed by the will and walk in the ways of God, and then judgment shall
be executed, religion maintained, the Nation shall remain in peace and the
Church in prosperity; the Kingdom established, the King and people exceeding
happy in each other. Evil men (for their own designs) may advise their Prince
to attend nothing but the pursuing his own inclinations, and to walk in the
ways of his own heart; but the Church knows it is his happiness honor, and
interest, to will according to the will of God, and act according to his law,
and therefore orders us to pray for such abundant measures of Grace as may
incline his heart and guide his life into all the Paths of true holiness, that
his eminent dignity may make his virtue exemplary and conspicuo^s, and that may
refle^t again a luster upon his honor to make him still more glorious. And to
encourage this Petition we may remember it is desired in heaven as well as on
earth, by him that can give, as well as by us that ask: for God himself enjoins
the Prince to have always beside him a Copy of his law Deuteronomy. 17.18. Josh. 1.8.
, to read on it, meditate in it, ask council of it Psalm. 119.124. Heb. viri
consilii mei sunt.
, and walk according to it, that he might prosper all his days. And from
thence came that ceremony (still in use) of delivering the word of God to the
King 2 Kings 11.12.
at his Coronation, the substance whereof is fully expressed in this excellent
sentence, which will most heartily be put up, by all that desire the glory of
God, the benefit of the Prince, and the welfare of this Nation.

. 6. Endue him plenteously with heavenly gifts] In the first ages of the world
there were usually many visible effects of the descent of the holy spirit Numb.
11.17. Judges 13.25. 1 Samuel 10.10. and Chap. 16.13.
, upon such as were chosen to govern the people of God, to beget in those under
them a reverent opinion of these Persons whom all the world has ever accounted
sacred. And there are still some footsteps of these miraculous gifts in the
power of healing which God has bestowed upon the lawful heir of this Crown, as
a testimony that our King is the Lords anointed. To which we beseech our
heavenly father to add the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of
counsel and might, which are so necessary that in our prayers as well as
Solomon's choice 1 Kings 3.9, 10, 11. ubi Grotius ex Men. (...).
they have the precedence of all outward blessings. For these gifts will enable
him to determine intricate cases, to manage weighty affairs, to countermine
subtle devices, to disentangle cunningly proposed counsels, in which general
usefulness, and the advisers self-interest are commonly closely twisted.
Wherefore we pray that he may have so quick an apprehension; so sound a
judgment and so courageous a mind that (like many of his Royal progenitors) he
may with a spirit almost prophetical unriddle the dark Intrigues of Policy, and
with an Heroic resolution break through the most rugged difficulties: that he
may neither fear his Enemies, nor too much encourage any of his seeming
friends, that he may neither be lifted up in prosperity nor dejected by
adversity, and may tread the narrow path between justice and clemency, severity
and indulgence: and we are to hope that he who has advanced our Sovereign to
this dignity will be mindful of the necessities of his own anointed, and fit
him for the place he has called him to; so that all his people may reverence
and love him and be happy under the Government of so wise and religious a
Prince.

. 7. Grant him in health and wealth long to live] Though Solomon chose wisdom
and grace, yet God added beyond his promise riches and honor, long life and
health as an accessory to the former 1 Kings 3.11. Matthew 6.33.
. Wherefore according to our Saviors rule we pray for those in the first
place; and now we hope our all sufficient Lord who has endless treasures of
all sorts will not deny us these temporal blessings, which are requisite to his
external felicity. And we have the primitive Christians Nos enim pro salute
Imperatoris Deum invocamus aeternum: and paulo post -- Oramus pro omnibus
Imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam imperium securum, etc. -- and quaecunque
hominis and Caesaris vota sunt. Tert. Apol. cap. 30. Sacrificamus pro salute
Imperatoris (sed Deo nostro and ipsius, sed quomodo praecepit Deus) pura prece.
Idem ad Scapuli cap. 2.
for our example in this as well as in other things; who though they did offer
no incense to fase Gods for the health and safety of the Emperor, as the
Gentiles did, yet did daily and earnestly sacrifice to the true God with
fervent prayers beseeching him to give their Princes health, and wealth, long
life and peace, and whatsoever Caesar or any man could wish for or desire; as
we learn out of Tertullian and all the ancient Liturgies. But we must take
these words in their full latitude and so they will comprehend all outward
blessings, so health signifies not only the good temperament of the body, but
(as the Latin salus) safety from all dangers Isaiah. 58.8.
. And wealth intimates not only riches but all manner of plenty and prosperity
Job. 21.13. 1 Corinthians. 10.24.
. And a long life is to be interpreted of a life of comfort and happiness; Non
vivere sed valere est vita. Prove. Rab. ita. 1 Kings 1.31. Dan. 2.4.
for the life of the miserable is almost a continual dying. And now let us put
all these together, and the sum will be that we earnestly pray that his
Majesty's life may be long, and his years many and prosperous; that he may be
freed from sickness and want, that so his Reign may abound with all blessings.
Which we ought earnestly to desire for our own sakes because it is our concern
the Supreme power should be always vigorous and safe, prosperous and abounding
in all plenty, that he may be a terror to his enemies, and a defense to his
loving and loyal subjects. In his safety we are safe, his health and wealth
enables him to secure us in that which is ours; since his strength, and his
time, his treasures and his power are employed and expended for the common
good. And because changes are always dangerous sometimes destructive to a
Nation, we pray that our King may be long preserved in his gracious Reign over
us. And no doubt his majesty shall fare the better for the fervent prayers of
the Church, which he has so well deserved by being the Restorer and Defender
of its ancient doctrine and discipline.

. 8. Strengthen him that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies]
Guiccardine the famous historian tells us that the constant opposition of the
Popes to the Emperors, had occasioned it to pass for a Proverb (proprium est
Ecclesiae edisse Caesares) that it was natural to the Church to hate the
Emperor. Which how justly it is said of the Roman Church the world knows. But
it is sure nothing is more contrary to the principles and practice of this our
Church, who may rejoice and glory in her fervent love of her gracious King, her
devout prayers for him, and her constant loyalty to him and his Royal
Progenitors. So that I hope it may be more justly said that it is natural to
the true Sons of the Church of England to love the King. Whoever loves the
peace of the Church does heartily pray for the flourishing of the Crown;
because they live and grow together: and he that is a friend to one, cannot be
a foe to the other. His friends are our friends, and his enemies our enemies.
For whoever attempts to smite the Shepherd Si quis ovem jugulat gregem
imminuit, at qui pastorem tolat omnes dissipat. Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 2.
seeks to destroy the flock, and he is a mortal foe to the whole nation In reos
majestatis and publicos hosts omnis homo miles est. Tertul.
. I know nothing so common with rebels and usurpers as to pretend love to those
they would stir up against their lawful Prince; but it appears to be ambition
and covetousness, in the later end; and such persons design to rise by the fall
of many thousands. Or it Religion should be the ground of the quarrel, besides
our late sad experience, Reason will tell us, that War, and faction, injustice
and cruelty, can never lodge in those breasts where that pure and peaceable
quality does dwell. If it be a foreign Prince that opposes our King, he is a
Robber and unjust to invade his neighbors rights: if he be a Subject who
rises against his Sovereign he has renounced Christianity with his
allegiance, and is to be esteemed a troubler of our Israel Nisi falior
Vsurpator bellum infert, Imperator jus suum tuetur. Ambr.
. Therefore whosoever they be that are enemies to the King, or whatsoever the
pretense be, we wish they may never prosper in that black impiety of unjust
invasion or unchristian rebellion. And how exactly our fidelity and our
devotions in this, agree with the rites and manners of the first and best
Christians may appear to any discerning person Pro p^^ssimo and a Deo
conservando Imp. nostro, o^ nique palatio and exercitat ejus -- pr^ quo pugnare
Dominum Deum nostrum dignetur and subjicere sub pedibus ejus omnem hostem and
hellatorem. Liturg. S. Basil. ita fere Lit. Chrysostom. Exercitus fortes, senatum
fidelem, populum probum, orbem quietum. Tertul. Apol. c. 30. -- ut subjectas
habeant gentes -- ut amota perturbatione seditionis succedat laetitia. Ambr. in
1 Timothy 2.
. We know the Emperors when Heathens and afterward obtained many and great
Victories by the Christians prayers; for which cause one of the Legions Eusebius.
Eccles. hist. l. 5. c. 5.
was surnamed the thundering Legion: and let us pray in hope our prayers shall
not be less effectual for a Prince of the right Faith, that so the enemies of
his soul, and of his life, the enemies of his Crown and dignity, may either be
converted or discovered, defeated and deservedly punished: and then we may live
in love and peace, and give the glory of our safety to him who strengthens the
hands and hearts of all faithful subjects, and gives the Victory to his
Anointed.

. 9. And finally after this life, that he may attain everlasting joy and
felicity through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.] Having now wished our Prince all
the happiness which this world is capable of, we must remember he is mortal,
and though never so dear to us he must be taken from us. His health must end in
sickness, his wealth in a Sepulcher; his life and his glories here must have an
end. For he that conquers all other enemies, must add to the number of deaths
trophies, and fall under the hand of the last enemy. Wherefore we do most
heartily pray that an earthly and transient prosperity may not be all his
portion; but that he may so please God in the Administration of this temporal
Authority, that when all these things cease, he may be admitted to that never
ceasing felicity of Heaven, to reign in a glorious eternity, crowned with that
Crown of life which fades not away; which does so infinitely transcend all
that an earthly Diadem can afford, that the greatest Monarchs have renounced th
ir Crowns and Scepters, and all the pleasures and magnificence of their Courts,
and sought after it in the retirements of a poor obscurity, accounting it a
blessed exch^nge to part with Earth for Heaven, Temporals for Eternals. There
is now nothing further in this world we can desire, and therefore we pray that
our dear Sovereign may never be so deceived with the glories of this golden
Crown, as to forget, much less neglect, or despise to seek for that glorious
Crown, which is richer, sweeter and safer a thousand times: but that he may be
happy both in this world and the next through Jesus Christ, who is the blessed
and only potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords; by his merits alone
those whose swords can cut them a passage to an earthly throne must be admitted
to reign in glory; and he must intercede for those, to whom the world make
their Petitions: they who by their interest and power can have or do any thing
here, must be there accepted through Jesus Christ as well as the meanest of
their Subjects. Wherefore in his name we ask, and by his mediation we hope to
obtain, that our beloved Prince may be prosperous and holy, wise and
courageous; that he may have a healthful body, a pious Soul, a quiet mind,
faithful counselors, loyal Subjects, conquering armies, a long life abounding
with riches and honor, and at the end of these transient glories, a never
ceasing joy in the Kingdom of heaven: and let every good Subject and good
Christian, whoever loves the Church, and respects his Country, say Amen. Let us
pray thus, and live thus, to the honor of God, the establishment of Religion,
and the welfare of both King and people, Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Prayer for the Kings Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly Father] who art most [high] in dignity [and mighty] in
power: To whom should we pray for our earthly Governors but to thee the
Supreme [King of Kings] and the absolute [Lord of Lords] from whom they derive
their authority, and to whom alone they are accountable, since thou art [the
only Ruler] of the hearts and examiner of the actions [of Princes] we
acknowledge thee the King of all the world [who do from] the highest heaven
[thy throne] by ^hy all-sufficient providence take care of, and with thy
all-seeing eye [behold all the dwellers upon earth] especially thine anointed
ones, on whose safety the welfare of the rest depends. In all loyal affection
to our King we [most heartily] entreat thee, and in all lowly regard to thy
glorious Majesty [we beseech thee] by thy particular providence to defend, and
[with thy] especial love and [favour to behold] thy servant, and [our most
gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles] that in his safety and happiness we may
have peace and comfort [and so replenish him with] all holy and virtuous
qualities by filling his heart with [the grace of thy holy Spirit] to make him
a most religious Prince [that he may] in his counsels and intentions [alwaies
incline to] choose that which is agreeable to [thy will] and in his actions and
undertakings ever follow the rule of thy word [and walk in thy way] And that he
may be fitted for the due Administration of so great a charg [endue him
plenteously with] the spirit of wisdom and courage and such an extraordinary
measure of all [heavenly Gifts] as may declare him thy anointed: And that he
may be every way blessed [grant him in health] and safety, plenty [and wealth
long to live] and prosperously to reign over us; direct, prosper and
[strengthen him] and his armies [that he may vanquish and overcome] the
policies and forces of [all his] and our [enemies] who attempt to disturb our
peace. [And finally] since the greatest of men, the best of Kings, and the
longest of worldly joys are finite, grant to our dear Sovereign that [after
this life] finished in virtue and honor [he may attain] a Crown of glory in
the Kingdom of [everlasting joy and felicity] which was purchased by the
merits and must be obtained [through] the mediation of [Iesus Christ our Lord]
to all which we most heartily say [Amen] be it so.

The Analysis of the Prayer for the Royal Family.
This Prayer has three Parts, 1. The Person to whom we Pray, described by His
Power, Almighty God,
His Goodness, the fountain of all goodness,

2. The Persons for whom we Pray, we humbly beseech thee to bless, our gracious
Queen Catherine, James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family,
3. The blessings desired for them, 1. Spiritual gifts and grace, Endue them
with thy holy Spirit, enrich them with thy heavenly grace,
2. Temporal prosperity, prosper them with all happiness,
3. Eternal glory, and bring them to thine everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.




A Practical Discourse on the Prayer for the Royal Family.
. 10. ALmighty God the fountain of all goodness we humbly beseech thee to bless
our gracious Queen Catherine, James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family]
There is as near an alliance between this and the former Prayer, as between the
persons for whom they are made: so that there will be little to be added,
except where this has something peculiar. And first it deserves our notice
that God is called here the fountain of all goodness which is the explication
of those Scripture Phrases the wellspring of life and living waters Psalm.
36.9. Jer. 2.13.
: and is an acknowledgment that the God we pray unto is absolute and
independent having all goodness in and from himself, and also inexhaustible,
for though he bestows his blessings liberally and constantly upon all
creatures, yet he suffers no diminution nor decay. Wherefore though we have now
been petitioning for a King who needs extraordinary assistances, and large
measures of all kinds of blessings, yet we know this Ocean cannot be drawn dry,
but can supply the Branches as well as the root and make all that stock grow
and flourish together. The Queen and heir to the Crown are the fountains from
which we hope blessings shall be derived upon after Generations. But here we
behold there is a higher fountain, which must first replenish them with all
that goodness which they convey to us. The ancient Church in their prayers did
desire the welfare of the Palace and the imperial family Domum tutam. Pertul.
Pro omni palatio. Liturg. S. Basil. Pontifices, eorumque exemplo caeteri
sacerdotes, cum pro incolumitate principis vota sus^iperent, Neronem quoque and
Drusum iisdem diis commendavere. Tacit. Annal. l. 4. Vt pro Domino Imperatore
cum sua prole orationes and oblationes augeantur. Council. Rhemense. can. 40.
Ezra. 6.10.
as well as the safety of the Emperor. And the practice of the heathens, as
well as the Canons of the Christians do make it appear fit and rational. But if
reasons do outweigh examples we may add that we are many ways obliged to pray
for the Queen and the Royal family. 1. In regard to the glory of God, whose
honor is advanced by holy example of persons so illustrious, whose dignity
when it is adorned with piety and goodness may bring virtue into repute, and
engage many to imitate them. 2. In duty to the Kings majesty, whose comfort
will be increased both in the holiness and prosperity of persons so nearly
related to him, and so dearly beloved by him. 3. Thirdly in affection to our
Country who in this and future generations will have cause to bless God for
these prayers if they become prevalent; because these are the hopes of
succeeding times, and our children may be happy in the religious education of
such as are to be the pillars of Justice and Patrons of the Church hereafter.
David had not been so curious in Solomon's education, but that he knew it was
not the Princes personal concern alone, but interest of the whole Nation and of
all Gods people. The Persian Kings desired the Prayers of the Jews for their
sons [Ezra 6.10.] and chose four of their most wise and virtuous Nobility to
whom the education of the Prince was committed who (as Clem. Alexandrinus tells
us) were called the Royal tutors, and we hope the care of those concerned shall
be joi^ed to the Churches prayers, and then this Petition shall be prevalent.

. 11. Endue them with thy holy Spirit, enrich them with thy heavenly grace:
Prosper them with all happiness, and bring them to thine everlasting Kingdom
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.] These particulars are a comprehension of
the same blessings in other words which before we desired for the King, even
spiritual temporal and eternal felicity. The persons we pray for are Royally
descended, nobly educated, replenished with all honorable endowments, with
great riches and vast possessions; yet although they need none of the wealth or
honors of this world, we may wish them greater and better things, viz. that
their virtue may be parallel to their descent, and their graces equal Nemo in
nostrum gloriam vixit, nec quod ante nos fuit nostrum est, animus facit
nobilem. Sen. Ep. 44.
nay excel all other endowments: that they may be rich in good works so as to
gain the love of God and of all good men: these in the first place; to which we
desire it may please God to superadd all outward happiness, that the Queen may
be fruitful, the Prince healthful and the whole family numerous and fortunate,
united in the bonds of an indissoluble love; and that there may never want a
man of them to sit upon the throne for ever. Let not Traitorous Projectors be
more zealous to cut off these hopes, then we are to pray to God to discover and
disappoint them: let us beg that we may not provoke him to punish us in the
decay of that Royal house, the establishment whereof we should wish more then
that of our own families; because the welfare of so many are dependent on it,
and the consequences of change, dismal and uncertain. Therefore we will
heartily pray they may have all the happiness they can wish in this world, and
so enjoy it, that they may not loose the glorious Crown of Eternity in the
world to come, for which no temporal greatness or pleasures can make them a
satisfaction. Amen.

The Paraphrase of the Prayer for the Royal Family.
O [Almighty] and all-sufficient Lord [God the fountain] of life, and
inexhaustible spring [of all goodness] As we have begged thy blessing for thine
anointed, so also [we humbly beseech thee] in order to his comfort, and our
benefit and the good of future times, continually [to bless our gracious Queen
Catherine] and the illustrious Prince [James Duke of York] that the succession
may be secured by the preservation and encreas of them [and all] the branches
of [the Royal family] And that they may please thee and become blessings to us
[endue them with] the best of all endowments [thy holy Spirit] to direct them
in all virtue and [enrich them with] the most durable of all riches [thy
heavenly grace] to make them exemplary and rich in good works, keep them from
all traitorous designs and [prosper them with all] kind of [happiness] which
this world can afford, to encourage them in well-doing; and because this
happiness must end, give them at the conclusion thereof a blessed exchange [and
bring them to thine everlasting Kingdome] of joy and peace there to reign with
thee for ever [through] the merits and intercession of [Jesus Christ our Lord]
and only Savior. Amen.

SECTION XVII. Of the two last Prayers.
The Analysis of the Prayer for the Clergy and People.
This Prayer has three Parts, 1. The Preface, in which God is acknowledged in
1. His Excellent Attributes, Almighty and everlasting God,
2. His Wonderful Works, who alone workest great marvels,

2. The Petitions, expressing 1. For whom we pray, Clergy, send down upon our
Bishops and Curates,
People, and all Congregations committed to their charge,

2. For what we pray, 1. Grace to fit them for duty, the healthful spirit of
thy grace,
2. A Blessing on their endeavors, and that they may truly please thee, pour
upon them the continual dew of thy blessing.


3. The Argument to enforce them, Grant this O Lord for the honor of our
advocate and mediator Jesus Christ. Amen.



A Practical Discourse on the Prayer for the Clergy and People.
. 1. ALmighty and everlasting God, who alone workest great marvels] As we have
made our supplications before for our Temporal Governors, that we under them
may have all those outward blessings which will make our lives comfortable
here; so we now continue to pray for our Spiritual Guides, that with them we
may receive all those Graces and inward blessings which will make our souls
happy hereafter. And as we are members of the Church as well as the State, we
must pray for those things which are requisite to the preservation and felicity
of both jointly and severally, since they mutually support each other. And as
the union of men into Polities and civil Societies, is designed for the
securing our Bodies and Estates, and the obtaining of external prosperity; so
the union of Christians, by one Spirit into one Faith, and to one another by
the bonds of love, is intended by God for the edification of our souls, and the
securing our eternal inheritance. Wherefore let us remember our Mystical as
well as Political union, our souls as well as our bodies, and most devoutly
imitate the best examples, in calling John 17.20. Deuteronomy. 33.11.
upon God for his Church and People; and especially for the Ministers thereof,
as the Scripture injoyns us Psalm. 132.9. Ephesians. 6.18, 19.
, and as the Apostle St. Paul so often particularly entreats those he writes
unto Coloss. 4.3. 1 Thessalonians. 5.25.
to do. And for this we have in all ages many testimonies of holy men, who both
in their public and private worship did ever beg for the peace and welfare of
the Church, more then any of their private concerns. With which noble spirit if
our breasts be possessed, this excellent Form is here daily presented to us, to
be offered to God with fervent affections, which is so contrived that the very
method and phrase if duly considered may furnish us with many affecting
meditations to improve our devotion in the use of it. The Introduction sets God
before us in those admirable Attributes and wonderful Works, which declare him
every way fit to be called upon for his Church, and mind us what he has done
for it. It is he that first gathered his Church out of obstinate Jews and
ignorant Heathens by his Almighty Power; and who has by the same Omnipotence
either preserved it from, or supported it against, the malice of Satan, the
rage of Persecutors, the subtility of Heretics, and the blind zeal of factious
Dividers: so that it continues to this very day, and shall do to the end of the
world, because our Redeemer ever lives to intercede for us, and has promised
to be with us Matthew. 16.18. chap. 28. ver. ult. Heb. 7.25. Graec. (...) Omnis
Ecclesia quae fit propter Deum firma permanebit. Dic. Rab.
for ever. Our God is everlasting, and the duration of the Church relies on the
indeficiency of the Divine Nature, which ever lives and ever loves it, and is
as powerful and sufficient to support and supply it now, as ever in former
ages. History can describe, and our Fathers can tell us what mavelous works
he has done for the benefit thereof; how many miracles he wrought for the
confirmation of his truth, to the conviction of its enemies, and the
strengthening of the members thereof. In the first times he did wonderfully
inspire the Apostles with the Holy Ghost and power to work miracles, by which
Acts 2.4. Chap. 9.17. Chap. 19.6. 2 Timothy 1.6. 1 Timothy 1.18. (...): hoc est,
(...). Chrysostom. (...). Oecum. in loc.
their successors were distinguished for some time, till the world did believe.
And afterward, though the operation were not so visible (because it was not so
necessary) (...). Chrysostom. l. 4. de Sacerdotio. Necessaria fuerunt antequam
crederet mundus, ad hoc ut crederet. Aug. Civ. De. 22.
, yet the assistance is as sure; for that is as requisite now as ever, and the
effect of these mediate gifts, and the blessing upon our endeavors is as
advantageous and more suitable to the present condition of the Church. For the
greatest of all wonders (which some prefer to the Creation of Light out of the
Darkness) is not yet ceased, viz. the conversion of sinners, by that which the
profane world account the foolishness of Preaching, and then who dares deny,
but God works great marvels still, though not in so magnificent a way. Oh
therefore let us call upon this Almighty and everlasting God, that he will
marvellously assist his Ministers, and wonderfully bless his People under them;
that it may appear that he who of old was visibly present with his Church by
Miracles, may be now perceived to be still among us by extraordinary
assistances and admirable success bestowed on his servants.

. 2. Send down upon our Bishops and Curates, and all Congregations committed to
their charge, the healthful spirit of thy grace] This Prayer being made for the
whole Church, does here exactly enumerate the several parts of which it does
consist, Bishops, Ministers and Saints Philip. 1.1. (...): Illi sunt Ecclesia
plebs Sacerdoti adunata and pastori suo grex adhaerens: S. Cypr. Epist. 69.
: In St. Paul's phrase, all which do make a Church. And in the ancient Liturgies
all these degrees are particularly mentioned Pro Archiepiscopo nostro N.
honorifico sacerdotio in Christi Ministerio, and omni Clero and populo Dominum
postulemus. Liturg. S. Basil.
and prayed for; though the same thing be asked for them all, the salutary
spirit of the divine grace, of which every one of them stands in need, and the
consideration of their several places and offices will be the best guide and
help to our affectionate putting up this Petition. First the Bishops, who as
they have the highest dignity in the Church so they have the greatest Charge,
being to oversee both the People and the Ministers. So that by being advanced
above all, they become servants unto all Ne te efferas, officium tibi non
potestas injungitur, body incipiendum tibi servire omnibus. Grotius in Matthew.
20. Asserit Judaeos Captivos ita loqui ad Ethnarcam suum. vid. Matthew. 20.27.
and 1 Cor. 9.19. Apud nos qui in perant serviunt iis quibus videntur imperare.
Aug. Civ. De. l. 19. c. 14.
and on them as on the Apostles 1 Cor. 11.28. Graec. (...).
lies the care of all the Churches. They are to endeavor to preserve the
Church in peace and prosperity, by electing fit persons into the Ministry, and
ordering the externals of divine worship with decency, and to edification by
preventing haeresies and Schisms among the Clergy; and by enquiring into and
censuring all public crimes both in Clergy and People and by consulting upon
occasion about the most important affairs of Church and State; which is a
burden for the shoulders of an Angel. And if we consider how necessary and
beneficial this office is to us Ecclesiae salus in summi sacerdo^i^: i. e.
Episcopi dig^itate consistit; cui si non exors quaedam, and ab omnibus detur
potestas, tot e^^ ^i^^tur schismata q^ot sacerd^tes. Hier. advers. Lucifer.
and how impossible to be duly performed without extraordinary measures of the
Spirit of Grace, we shall no doubt earnestly beg it for all of this Sacred
order, especially for him whom we live under, whom though we do not here (as
the ancients did) mention by name, yet we daily remember with a particular
affection. Secondly Curates, by which we are not to understand stipendiary
persons but all the inferior Clergy to whom the Bishops do commit the [curam
animarum] cure or charge of Souls: which name, however abused by vulgar
acceptance, minds us of the original of those we now call Ministers. For at
first the sole charge of every City and the adjacent parts lay upon the Bishop,
till by the increase of the faithful it became necessary for him to take unto
himself certain [Curatores] Deputies, to whom he committed the office of
instructing, reserving to himself the rights of Government and Superiority (as
is excellently proved by some of our own Authors; and these (acting as the
seventy with and under Moses, and) taking part of the Burden on them are
therefore properly called here by the name of Curates. And let all that have
undertaken this weighty charge, most devoutly pray for themselves and all their
Brethren, and all the faithful people of God join with us in so doing. For our
office is to chatechise and instruct the ignorant, to exhort and encourage the
good, to rebuke and convince sinners, to confirm the doubting, to win the
gainsaying, to comfort the sad, visit the sick, to preach to our
congregations, to pray with and for them, to administer the holy Sacraments,
and in a word, to take care of the Souls of the living and bury the bodies of
the dead. Wherefore the Prayers of Christ's flock had need be fervent for them,
since this cannot be done without the aid of the Spirit of grace: especially
because Ministers must be able to teach their Auditors, by the innocence of
their lives Non statim boni sacerdotis est aut tantummodo, innocenter agere,
aut tantummodo scienter praedicare; cum and innocens, tantum sibi proficit nisi
d^ctus sit, and doctus sine doctrinae sit Authoritate nisi innocens sit. Hilar.
Pict. de Trin. l. 8.
as well as by the vastness of their learning; and had need be free of the
crimes with which they charge others, least their reproofs become their own
reproach, rather then their neighbors amendment. Lastly the people who are to
hear and learn from these spiritual guides, must be prayed for; that they may
be open to instruction, easy to advice, gentle upon reproofs, willing to learn
and receive Gods word, diligent to practice it, and full of all benign
dispositions, and replenished with Justice, Charity and Devotion. Remember
(holy brethren) how seriously God and his Spirit has charged you with his
people, and how strictly he will require them from you, so that if through your
default any perish 1 Kings 20.39. Ezekiel. 33.9.
, you are accountable to God for them. Consider how ineffectual both your
prayers and instructions Magisteria fornisecus adjutoria quaedam sunt;
Cathedram in coelo habet qui eorda docet. Aug. in Epist. Johan. Tract. 4.
will be, unless the Spirit of grace bless them; and then pray heartily for
your Congregation, and let them who are to suck these breasts pray for a
healthful nurse; a pious, painful, zealous and knowing Pastor: nay let us all
Ministers and People desire with and for one another, that spirit of saving
grace that may make the whole body of the Church healthful, and every member
strong, active, and useful in its place Titus 2. ver. 11. Vatab. Gratia
salutaris, etc. See Psalm. 132 ver. 16.
. That the Governors may be prudent, the Ministers faithful and the People
diligent, and all of them ready and vigorous for the duties of Religion and
every good work.

. 3. And that they may truly please thee pour upon them the continual dew of
thy blessing] As the Grace of God is requisite to fit all the members of
Christ's Church for their several offices and duties; so his blessing is
necessary to make their labors prosperous. Man is called by Philo the
celestial plant, having his root reverst (...). lib. de insid. pejor.
and seeming to grow from heaven. And herein the comparison holds, that as
plants require the influence of heaven to quicken them, and the dew thereof to
moisten them; so those which are set in the Church (the garden of God) require
the salutary spirit of grace to make them live, and the irrigations of the
divine blessing to make them spring and bring forth fruit. It is not from our
pains nor your diligence alone that success must come, not from him that plants
nor him that waters, but from God that gives the Increase 1 Corinthians. 3.5, 6.
. Whole buckets of water poured on by the hand of man, will not so much refresh
the Plant, as the gentler showers and dew from above; wherefore the dew is used
to express, plenty and abundant increase Genesis 27.28. Deuteronomy. 33.18. and 28.
Hoseah. 14.5.
, particularly in knowledge Deuteronomy. 32.1. Aegyptii eruditionem indicantes coelum
pingunt rorem fundens. Caussin. Hieroglyph. Horax. 35.
, of which the dew falling from the Clouds was the Hierogliphick among the
Egyptians. Let us then most passionately gasp for this prolifick dew, that we
may not only please God by our constant and ready attendances upon Prayers and
other offices, but truly and thoroughly please him by our fruitfulness under
these means; let it appear by our humility and charity, our justice and
innocence, by the success of the Ministers, and the improvement of every
Congregation, that we do not receive the Grace of God in vain. For he is ready
to give his blessing, if we be fit to receive it, he will not only sprinkle but
pour it on us; because we need large measures, and that not only at some
seldom seasons but continually at both the morning and evening Sacrifice,
least affliction or temptation should wither us. Oh! what Soul does not long to
be thus watered, since nothing can fructify without it, nor can any thing dye
or be barren that does enjoy it? Let us humbly pray that the good orders of our
Bishops, the prayers and Exhortations of our Ministers, and the constant
attendancies of our People, may be thus watered from above, that we may bring
forth an hundredfold and send forth a pleasant favor of good works Et eum a
siecitate continua immaduerit imbre, tunc emittit illum suum habitum, divinum,
ex sole conceptum, cui cemparari suavitas nulla potest. Plin. lib. 17. c. 5.
Genes. 27.27.
like the fields of Palestina when watered from the celestial springs. And so
should every member of Christ's Church live and grow and flourish, then which
nothing is more desirable.

. 4. Grant this O Lord for the honor of our Advocate and Mediator, Jesus
Christ, Amen] We must not allow either the Clergy or People to ask these
Petitions with any designs to advance their own glory, or to become famous for
their gifts or graces. For the end must be the manifestation of the glories of
our Advocate and Mediator, who at his Triumphant Ascension, gave divine gifts
Ephesians. 4.8.
unto men, and accounts those who are endued with them as so many rays of his
glory 2 Cor. 8.23. Sunt Christi gloria, quia nihil habent nisi dono Christi.
Calvin.
. It is Jesus who obtains by his pleading at the Throne of grace both the
spirit and the blessing for us, and it is he that bestows both upon the Church
for which he once gave his body, and on which he ever sets his love. Let him
have the Honor of all the holy and religious performances of his Church, and
let us earnestly desire that by the flourishing of this his body all the world
may see the prevalency of his intercession with God, the sincerity of his love
to his servants, his continual care of them and bounty to them; which will
surely cause all people to advance and magnify his holy name. Nothing is more
the Honor of Jesus now in heaven then that his Church be ruled with pious and
wise Governors, his Ordinances administered by zealous and holy Ministers, and
all places abounding with religious, loyal and charitable People. And what
argument will sooner open the ears and pierce the heart of the Father of
mercies, whose great design is to glorify his dear and only Son? This declares
that our Petitions herein comply with his eternal purposes. We see the
dishonor of some distempered members seems to reflect upon the head; and we
are grieved for it, desiring sincerely the holy Jesus may have (as he deserves)
all glory by the holiness and prosperity of his Church, and we hope that Heaven
will say [Amen] hereto.

The Paraphrase of the Prayer for the Clergy and People.
O Lord who art [Almighty] in power [and everlasting] in duration, who have
promised to be ever with thy Church, we acknowledge thee the [God who alone
workest] wonders in the calling, and have ever showed [great marvels] for the
preservation thereof in all Ages; wherefore we beseech thee to [send down] from
above suitable gifts and graces upon all estates of men in the Catholic
Church: particularly [upon our Bishops] to direct them in the governing, upon
our Ministers [and Curates] to assist them in the feeding of thy flock; [and]
also upon [all Congregations] of Christian men and women, whose souls thou have
[committed to their charge] and that the account may be given up to the
Ministers comfort and the profit of thy Church, let them all be inspired with
[the healthful] and saving [Spirit of thy grace] to fit them for, and assist
them in, all religious duties: [And that they] all in their several places [may
truly please thee] by a right use of this grace, do thou plentifully [pour upon
them] in all holy offices the effectual and [the continual dew of thy blessing]
that thy Messengers pains may be successful, and thy peoples lives fruitful in
all good works: [Grant this] which we ask of thee [O Lord] not to advance our
own fame but [for the honor of] him that is [our Advocate] to obtain them of
thee, our Redeemer [and Mediator] to dispense them to ^s; for the holiness and
happiness of thy Church is the glory, of thy dear Son [Iesus Christ] therefore
do thou with us, and to us, say [Amen.]

The Analysis of the Prayer of St. Chrysostom.
In this Prayer are two Parts, 1. The ground of our asking, considering 1. The
Experience of his Grace, Almighty God, who have given us grace at this time
with one accord to make our common supplications unto thee,
2. The Truth of his Promise, and do promise that when two or three are
gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests,

2. The Petition or thing asked, Hearing our Prayers, as to 1. The Matter,
fulfill now O Lord the desires and petitions of thy servants,
2. The Manner, as may be most expedient for them,
3. The principal Requests 1. To know God granting us in this world knowledge
of thy truth
2. To enjoy him, and in the world to come life everlasting, Amen.






A Practical Discourse on the Prayer of St. Chrysostom.
. 5. ALmighty God who have given us grace at this time with one accord, to make
our common supplications unto thee] This excellent conclusion of our prayers
that bears the name of its renowned Author, was well known to the Greek Church;
for it is still found extant in the Lyturgies both of St. Chrysostom and St.
Basil. And yet its own worth might sufficiently recommend it, if it wanted the
reputation of those honorable Names. For it is founded on our own experience,
and the certainty of his Promise who is infallible; carried on with such
submission to the Divine Will, and designed so to our chiefest advantages, that
nothing can be more judiciously contrived, or more pertinently applied to this
close of our Devotion. Where it seems to review and re-enforce all our former
Petitions, to revive our hopes of acceptance and encourage our zeal in them,
yet so as to represent our necessities in the most humble and lowly manner,
with submission to his Wisdom, who best knows what is most expedient for us.
We may now reflect on those many necessary and useful Prayers which we have
offered up to God with an unanimous consent and a hearty Devotion; and it is
fit we should pay our grateful acknowledgments for that Grace which has
assisted us therein. For there are no clearer evidences of the presence of the
Divine Spirit in our Prayers then the sincere agreement and harmonious accord
of our souls in the joint oblation of them Acts 1.14. Chap. 4.24. Gr. (...).
and the fervent affections that every one in particular has added to them. It
is his Grace that has bound our arrows together by the bonds of love, and has
directed them to pierce the Clouds by a vigorous and steady zeal. And we have
the surer ground to believe he has assisted us, and the greater cause to
praise him for it, in regard these are no other then our Common Prayers and
ordinary Supplications, which have no novelties or varieties to court our
Fancies, but yet have been made new to us by a fresh supply of his heavenly
grace, which has kindled our accustomed sacrifice with new flames. And if we
well consider, the effects of Gods grace are rather to be judged by the heart
then the tongue, by renewed affections rather then change of expressions. And
to be sure nothing but a new sense of our old wants, can give life to these
Petitions. Wherefore as we daily receive new succors, let us daily make new
acknowledgments; that as we have the comfort of our union and zeal, so he who
bestows them may have the glory. And yet this is not all the use we must make
of the experience which we have had of his enabling us to pray; for it must
strengthen our faith, and quicken our hope that we shall be heard. For he that
helps us to ask, thereby assures us he intends to give Matthew. 25.25. Psalm.
10.17.
. He prepares the heart and then his ear attends thereunto. The first step
toward the obtaining of a blessing, is the giving us a heart devoutly to ask
for it Signum futurae impetrationis est, quando Spiritus S. movet ad petendam
cum fiducia and quasi securitate impetrandi. Cassian. coll. 9.
. Which desire he would not create if he did not intend to fulfill it. Therefore
we may lay this as a foundation on which we may cheerfully request his gracious
acceptance of those Prayers which he has quickened us to by a new Devotion.

. 6. And do promise that when two or three are gathered together in thy name
thou will grant their requests] But that we may not doubt of the prevalency of
our Petitions, nor go away from the Throne of Grace with a sad heart, we have
not only our ground of hope from the operations of the Spirit (which are
secret, and not always so discernable) but from an infallible promise made by
him who is Truth it self, and in whom all the Promises of God are Yea and Amen.
Which assures us that the united requests of his People, who meet and pray in
his name can never miscarry. For Jesus is so highly delighted in the unions and
unanimous societies of the faithful, that if but two of them Math. 18.19, 20.
Vbi duo consident sermonem habentes ^e lege, Schechinah est inter ipsos. R.R.
ap. Drus.

Non multi^udini sed unitati plurimum tribuendum. Cypr. de unit. Eccles.


agree on earth to ask any thing it shall be given them, and wheresoever two or
three are gathered together in his Name he is Non dicit ero, non enim tardat
cui Cunctatur, sed jam sum ( i. e. illic inveniar) praesens gratia and favore
singulari. Luc. Brugens.
in the midst of them. Nay he is there before they come, ready to receive their
supplications; and whoever meet in his house of Prayer, shall find he is
present amongst them Psalm. 46.6. Deus in medio illorum esse dicitur quibus
exhibet gratiosae suae praesentiae testimonia. Ravan. These. Bib. vid. Deuteronomy.
7.21. Josh. 3.10.
by the communications of his grace and his answering their Prayers. For the
granting our requests (as you may here observe) is the Paraphrase of Jesus his
being with us; and the best testimony of his being among us is the granting our
desires. And this way we wish our blessed Lord may manifest himself to us, who
are gathered together in his name, Acts 4.7. compared with Matthew. 21.23. 1 Samuel
17.45. Psalm. 20.8.
that is in obedience to his Command and Authority, in hope and trust in his
power and Aid, to pay our homage to him, to declare our Faith in him, and to
own our dependence upon him. Wherefore his own Promise does oblige him to hear
us. Sometimes the Congregation is very numerous, and he that will hear so few
will (as an Ancient notes) much rather receive those requests to which so many
have unanimously and devoutly said AMEN. But if there be but few (as to the
shame of this Nation is too often seen) the wickedness of the neglecters ought
not to reproach the Pi^ty of those that are present; nor is it safe for men to
despise them for their parcity, since Jesus disdains not the smallest Number.
The Jewish Masters indeed teach that ten is the least number Quando december
homines intrant domum Synogogae, Divinitas est cum illis: Dicunt enim in Talm.
December faciunt coetum. Ita Rab. Salom. in Numb. 14.27.
to make an Assembly fit for the Divine Presence. But our gracious Lord
descends lower, even unto two or three, that none might be discouraged by the
negligence of their Brethren. And now be we never so few, if we be unanimous
and devout, what comfort will this promise leave upon our spirits in the close
of our Prayers, which ascend to Heaven with privilege and authority! When they
are backed with his promise they cannot fail. Who would not lay aside all
occasions and run every day to meet with Jesus who is sure to be found in the
Temple? And who would not love these Devotions in which so many thousands do
agree? And who (that believes the truth of Jesus) can doubt of a gracious
return to them? If you find but few of your brethren at Church, you shall find
him whom your soul seeks there; and by his grace and his answers, you shall
find he has been with you and left a blessing behind him.

. 7. Fulfill now O Lord the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be
most expedient for them] Having so good grounds to believe he has been present
with us, both from the experience of his assistance, and the certainty of his
promise, we are taught now to speak to the holy Jesus as it were face to face,
to apply our selves to him as if he stood before us; beseeching him who enabled
us to put up these requests, and has been among us and heard them all along,
to make good his promise, and, as he was nigh unto us when we called on him,
that he will fulfill the desires of us that fear him. Psalm. 145.18.19.
Desires and Petitions are empty things, the hunger and thirst of the soul, and
when the Divine bounty satisfies these desires he is said to fill us: for food
is not more pleasing to a hungry body, then the desire accomplished Prove. 13.19.
is to a longing soul. Therefore we beseech him who hears the Petitions of our
mouths, and also discerns the meditations of our hearts, that he will fulfill
all our wishes as holy David prays, Psalm. 19.14. And as he often in that Book
Psalm. 20. ver. 4, 5. Psalm. 21. ver. 2.
makes desires and Petitions the two parts of his Prayers, so do we, taking the
Petitions for the words of these holy Forms, even that which we have asked with
our lips in express terms: and by the desires, we mean those inlargements of
our souls into secret thoughts and affectionate wishes, which were too big to
be delivered at our mouths, but were begotten in our hearts by the spirit of
God: and perhaps by occasion of some meditations suggested in these Pages.
Which desires are the wings to our Petitions, the life of our sacrifice, and
the particular application of these general requests to the state of our own
souls; which he that kneels next to us cannot discern, but our Lord Jesus both
sees and will fulfill these as well as those Petitions, which were the ground of
such devout inlargements. He will grant both if it be expedient for us; but
because we are so unable to judge what is for our real advantage, we must not
too peremptorily require that he should give us all we wish or pray for. We may
ask for evil things, or for good things which may be evil for us Nam pro
jucundis aptissima quaeque dabunt Dij -- caeca magnaque cupidine ducti,
Conjugium petimus, partumque uxoris; at illis Notum qui pueri qualisque futura
sit uxor. Juven. Exorari in perniciem rogantium, saeva benignitas.
; or we may desire them unseasonably, immoderately or to evil purposes, and
then it were cruelty to hear us, and it is the greatest kindness to deny us.
Let us therefore learn from the example of Christ himself, to submit our will
to the will of God (...).
, and learn from a Heathen to give God leave to choose for us; who being
infinite in wisdom and goodness knows what is fittest for us, and when and
where, in what manner and what measures to bestow it. So that if we leave it to
him, we shall have all mercies with infinite advantages, when we are fittest
for them, and they will do us most good. Whereupon we must resolve though our
petitions and desires be earnest, yet they shall not be arrogant nor
presumptuous, but shall learn humbly to submit unto, and patiently to wait upon
our Heavenly Fathers order and appointment.

. 8. Granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to come
life everlasting, Amen.] To know God here by Faith, and to behold him hereafter
and enjoy him is the sum of our true happiness. And therefore we need not
positively pray for any thing else, but may be so far indifferent as to all
other things to leave it to our gracious Master to give or deny us those things
according as he sees most expedient; provided these two be secured, to know God
here, and to enjoy him hereafter. These we must crave however, and desire all
other blessings may be subordinate to these, and so given to us that neither of
these be hindered or impaired. Or we may consider that since Jesus has promised
to hear all these our prayers, we beseech him to confirm his word in granting
them, that we may have a further experimental knowledge of the truth of his
promises. In this world me need his daily help, and do every day most humbly
desire it, and if he please to answer us according to his promise, it will give
us such constant and fresh testimonies of his being our true and never failing
friend that we shall still trust more strongly in him, and come more cheerfully
to him, till at last nothing can separate us from his love. And thus we being
daily bound by new experiences of his favor, shall become faithful to the
death, and then we cannot fail of the Crown of life. And we may enforce all our
foregoing Petitions by representing to the holy Jesus the great advantages we
shall have by his daily fulfilling our desires and Petitions: for besides the
things we ask for, hereby we shall acquire such confirmation to our Faith, and
such evidences of his truth, as will secure us in his love while we live in
this world, and bring us to fullness of glory and felicity in the world to come;
therefore dear Jesus hear us and answer us to our endless comfort, Amen. Be it
so.

The Paraphrase of the Prayer of St. Chrysostom.
WE acknowledge thy goodness O [Almighty God who] remembering our inability to
serve thee [hast given us] that sweet and efficacious assistance of thy [grace
at this time] which has enabled us [with one accord] and a fervent devotion
[to make our] Addresses to thee with new affections: even in the presenting
these our daily and [common supplications unto thee] we confess thou have
helped us to ask, and therefore hope thou intendest to give, and the rather
because thou have assured us [and do promise that when two or three] even the
smallest number of the faithful in obedience to thy command [are gathered
together] to offer up their united prayers to the Father [in thy name] they
shall find thee present in the midst of them for [thou wilt grant their
requests] Wherefore since we have called upon thee by thine aid and are
assembled in thy name [fulfill now O Lord] unto us this gracious promise and
mercifully accept [the desires] and meditations, which have been sent from the
hearts, the prayers [and Petitions] uttered from the mouths [of thy Servants]
supplying their wants with the best things, and at the fittest times [as may
be] judged by thy infinite wisdom [most expedient for them] But however thou
dealest in all other things, let the interest of our souls be secured both here
and hereafter by thy [granting us in this world] daily experiments and further
[knowledg of thy truth] in the fulfilling of thy promises and the granting of
our prayers; that so we may never forsake thee here [and in the world to come]
our happiness shall be completed by thy bringing us then to [life everlasting]
through Jesus Christ our Lord [Amen.]

The Blessing taken out of 2 Corinthians. 13. ver. ult.
. 9. THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore, Amen.] In all Religious
Assemblies it has been the custom to dismiss the people with a Blessing,
which was wont to be pronounced by the principal Person present Heb. 7.7.
, sometimes by the King 2 Samuel 6.18. 1 Kings 8.55.
, but most commonly by the Priests Numb. 6.23, 24, ver. etc.
, whose office was to bless in the Name of the Lord. And therefore under the
Law, there was a particular form of Benediction, which the Jews to this day
observe so religiously, that they believe it ought to be repeated in the Holy
Tongue Fagius in Numb. 6. Buxtorf Synag. c. 14. See Nehem. 8.6.
, and to be received by the People with all reverence, bowing their heads and
prostrating their bodies: so that no man may presume to look upon the Priests
hands when they are stretched out to give it, because they say then the glory
of God rests upon them. And in the Christian Church also they ever concluded
with a blessing ('it is likely the same we now use, being endited by the Holy
Spirit, and used by St. Paul in the close of his Epistle to the Corinthians)
concerning which it was ordered that the Assembly should bow their heads (...).
Clem. Constit. Ante benedictionem sacerdotis, egredi populus non presunat.
Council. Agath. can. 31.
when it was pronounced and decreed by a Council that none might depart out of
the Church till it was given. But to give a greater strength to these Orders
let us consider the excellency of this Divine Blessing, and sure its own
perfections will oblige us to stay for it, and engage us to receive it with all
devotion and reverence. The legal Benediction was no more but a wish for
temporal felicity: but this contains the whole order of our salvation, and
brings in the glorious Trinity with the several gifts of each Person to make us
completely happy. The Father indeed is first in order, but we begin with the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, the benefits purchased by his Passion;
because that is the first mover in our acceptance, and obtains both the love of
God the Father, and the Communication of the Holy Ghost. What can the pious
soul ask or desire which is not comprehended in this Blessing? here is the
grace of the Son to pardon our sin, the love of the Father to supply our wants,
the fellowship of the Blessed Spirit to strengthen our weakness. The first to
redeem us, the second to justify us, the third to sanctify us: and all these
not only at this present, but to be confirmed to us, and remain with us, even
when we are gone from the holy place, in life and death and for ever. Nor are
these only desired, but they are pronounced over us by the Ambassador of God,
whom he has sent to bless in his name: and this Minister of Heaven being
cheared with observing our Devotion, does from his soul wish, and Ministerially
(as far as in him lies) dispense these unspeakable blessings to us. And what he
does on Earth shall be ratified in Heaven to every truly holy man. Oh let us
bow our heads and open our hearts to receive this universal blessing as from
God himself, and depart from the holy place full of comfort and joy, that we
have such a preservative against all evil, and such a guide and encouragement
to all good, even the blessing of God to be with us and remain upon us for
ever: and to this let all the people say, Amen.

The Blessing Paraphrased.
LEt [The Grace] and all the benefits of the death [of our Lord Jesus Christ]
merit our Absolution [and the love of God] the Father seal our justification
[and the fellowship] and Communication of the Graces [of the Holy Ghost]
perfect our sanctification. And let all these at present [be with us] and rest
upon us [all evermore.] Amen.

(...) FINIS.
ERRATA.
The Reader is desired to excuse and amend the following Errata, occasioned by
the Authors great distance from the Press.
PReface page 8. read Pet. p. 8. marg. l. 12. r. infirmorum, p. 12. l. 5. r.
recover it, ib. marg. l. 3. r. confectus, p. 18. l. 2. r, not approach, p. 21.
l. 1. r. had need be, p. 22. marg. l. 13. r. accipiat, ib. l. 21. r. Magistri,
ib. l. 23. r. (...). p. 29. marg. l. 3. r. Acies, p. 32. l. 21. r. not be, p.
35. l. 14. marg. r. Quinque, p. 43. l. 3. r. Sec. 1.. 5. p. 22, p. 66. marg. l.
8. r. (...), p. 70. marg. l. 4. r. tribus, p. 72. l. 22. r. bloodshot, p. 81.
marg l. 10. r. (...). p. 90. marg. l. 13. r. (...), p. 94. l. 12. r. in your,
p. 96. l. 4. r. sectile, p. 105. marg. l. 8. r. ignoscentium, p. 114. marg. l.
1. r. r. Lev. 10.13. p. 118. l. 29. r. it, act. ib. marg. l. 11. r. nisi, p.
129 marg. l. 12. r. Med. p. 174. l. 24. r. reference, p. 184 l. 30. dele [11].
p. 199. marg. l. 14. r. e, p. 216. marg. l. 13. r (...), p. 229. l. 35 r. his
Divinity, p 259. l. 21. r. therefore it, p. 260. marg. l. 13. r. hi ve^o, p.
269. marg. l. 1. r. (...), p. 271. l. 3. r. enobled, p. 313. marg. l. 3. r.
Prus. ib. marg l. ult. r. (...), p. 315. l. 31. r. the other, p. 319. l. 15. r.
reciting. p. 320. marg. l. 18. r. occur, p. 349. marg. l. 17. r. (...).


