THE SECTOR ON A QUADRANT, OR A Treatise containing the Description and Use of
four several QUADRANTS; Two small ones and two great ones, each rendered many
ways, both general and particular.

Each of them Accomodated for Dyalling; for the Resolving of all Proportions
Instrumentally; And for the ready finding the Hour and Azimuth Universally in
the equal Limb.

Of great use to Seamen and Practitioners in the MATHEMATICS.

Written by JOHN COLLINS Accountant Philomath.

Also an Appendix touching Reflected Dyalling from a glass placed at any
Reclination.

London, Printed by J.M. for George Hurlock at Magnus Corner, Thomas
Pierrepont, at the Sun in Paul's Churchyard; William Fisher, at the Postern
near Tower Hill, Booksellers; And Henry Sutton, Mathematical Instrument-Maker,
at his House in Thred-needle street, behind the Exchange. With Paper Prints of
each Quadrant, either loose or pasted upon boards; to be sold at the respective
places aforesaid. 1659.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THou have in this Treatise, the Description and Uses of three several
Quadrants, presented to thy View and Acceptance; and here I am to give thee an
account of their Occasion and Original.

Being in conference with my loving friend M. Thomas Harvie, he told me, that
he had often drawn a Quadrant upon Paper pastboard, etc. derived by himself,
and never done by any man before, as to his knowledge, from the Stereographick
Projection, which for a particular Latitude, would give the Hour in the equal
Limb, and would also perform the Azimuth very well; and but that it was so
particular, was very desirous to have one made in Brass for his own use by an
Instrument Maker: whereto replying, that with the access of some other Lines to
be used with Compasses, it might be rendered general for finding both the Hour
and the Azimuth in the equal Limb: He thereupon intimated his desires to M.
Sutton, promising within a fortnight after their conference, to draw up full
directions for the making thereof. But M. Sutton having very good practice and
experience in drawing Projections, speedily found out the drawing of that
Projection, either in a Quadrant or a Semicircle, without the assistance of the
promised directions, and accordingly, has drawn the shape of it for all
Latitudes, and also found how the Horizontal Projection might be inverted and
contrived into a Quadrant without any confusion, by reason of a reverted tail,
and let me further add, that he has taken much pains in calculating Tables for
the accurate making of these and other Instruments, in their construction more
difficult then any that ever were before; and the said M. Sutton conceiving
that it would be an advancement to their Trade in general, besides satisfactory
to the desires of the studious in the Mathematiques, to have the uses of a good
Quadrant published, prevailed with me, in regard M. Harvey was not at leisure
(though willing his Quadrant should be made public) to write two or three
sheets of the use of it, which I intended to have given M. Sutton (who very
well understood the use as well as the making) to be published in his own name;
whereto he being unwilling, and finding that therein many of the uses of one
Quadrant, much less of more could not be comprised, at his earnest request, I
wrote what is here digested, succisive and horis Antelucanis, having little
leisure for that purpose, and all this performed before the Instruments were
cut, wherefore the description given of them, may not so nearly agree with the
Instruments, as if they had been first made, nor possibly some of the examples
about finding the hour of the night by the Stars; which examples were fitted
from Tables of present right Ascension, whereas the Quadrant is fitted to serve
the better for the future, the difference notwithstanding will be but small.
And thus hoping thou will cover my failings with the mantle of love, and kindly
accept of my endeavors, tending to the public advancement and increase of
knowledge, I still remain a Wellwiller desirous thereof.

John Collins.

depiction of a quadrant



How the Projections on both the Quadrants may be Demonstrated.
TO satisfy the inquisitive Reader herein, I shall only in this Edition quote
such Latin Authors and Propositions as will evince the truth thereof, the
performance whereof in English, is hereafter intended by my loving friend M.
Thomas Harvie, in an elaborate Treatise, concerning all the Projections, with
their Demonstration and Application, who is accomplished with singular
knowledge in that kind, as in general in the Mathematiques.

Now the Demonstration of these two Projections is as much included in the
Demonstration of the Stereographick Projection, which by Aguilonius in his 6
Book is largely insisted upon, as a peculiar question in Trigonometry, is
included in a general Case, and both the Projections on these Quadrants being
derived from the grounds of the said general Projection, are necessarily
involved in one and the same Demonstration.

Stofler in his Astrolabe supposes the eye in the South Pole Stereographically
projecting upon the Plain of the Equator those Circles between the North Pole
Horizon and Troprick of Capricorn, neglecting that part under the Horizon.

But the Projection on the Quadrant, considered as it may be derived from his
Astrolabe, supposes the eye in the same Position, and makes use of one half of
the Projection of the other part of the Circles intercepted between the Horizon
and Tropic of Capricorn, namely, of that space between the Tropic below our
Horizon, only changing the names of Cancer for Capricorn in their use, and
using the depressed Parallels to the Horizon, instead of the Parallels of
Altitude; so that the Azimuths of the Quadrant made by this inversion, are no
other then the Azimuths of Stoflers Projection continued below the Tropic of
Capricorn where he breaks them off, and the rule he prescribes to draw the
parallel of 18d of Depression for the Twylight serves to draw that, and all the
other parallels of Altitude in this Quadrant.

In like manner the Horizontal Projection supposes the eye in the Nadir
projecting upon the Plain of the Horizon.

That part of the Sphere intercepted between the two Tropicks, neglecting that
part thereof under the Horizon.

But the Projection on the other great Quadrant, considered as derived
therefrom, supposes the eye there projecting that part of the Sphere which is
there neglected with the like change of denomination; and the Parallels of
Declination are no other then the continuance of the said Parallels of the
Horizontal Projection round to the Midnight Meridian, and the Hour circles the
continuance of the said hours, only the Index of Altitudes is fitted to the
Depressed Parallels of the Horizon, in stead of the Parallels of Altitude.

Now it is evident, either from the Sphere or Analemma, that that part of
either of these Projections which falls under the Horizon, will supply the use
of that which happened above, admitting only a change of denomination; for in the
Horizontal Projection, that Parallel of Declination which was called the Winter
Tropic, being no other then the same Circle continued about, now in its use
and denomination, becomes the Summer Tropic; and the reason is, because what
ever Altitude the Sun has in any Sign upon any Hour or Azimuth reckoned from
the Noon Meridian, he has the like Depression on the like Hour and Azimuth in
the opposite Sign counted from the Midnight meridian.

The terms of Noon and Midnight Meridian are afterward used in relation to
some general Proportions: By the Hour in general is meant the Angle between the
Meridian of the Sun or Stars, and the Meridian of the place: By the Hour
counted from Noon Meridian, is meant the said Angle counted from that part of
the Meridian of the place which falls above the Elevated Pole, continued
toward the Depressed Pole: and by the Midnight Meridian, the opposite thereto
under the Elevated Pole, continued as before.

By the Azimuth counted from the Midnight Meridian, is meant an Angle at the
Zenith between the Suns Vertical or Azimuthal circle, and the Meridian of the
place, measured by the Horizon, counted from the Intersection of the Horizon
with the Meridian under the Elevated Pole; and by the Azimuth counted from the
Noon Meridian, is meant the Complement of the said Angle to a Semicircle,
counted from the opposite Intersection of the Horizon with the former Meridian
continued above the Elevated, and toward the Depressed Pole, according to
which acceptions, the general Proportions are fitted for finding it either way
in both Hemispheres, without any restriction to North or South.

A more immediate account of these Projections.
HItherto we have accommodated our Discourse, to show how these Projections are
derived from Stoflers Astrolabe, and from the Horizontal Projection, of which
neither Stofler (as to my knowledge) for I have only seen his 8 Book) nor the
learned M. Oughtred, give no peculiar Demonstration, as being particular
examples of a general case, largely (as such) insisted on; and this we have
done for the accommodation of Instrument makers, to whom this Derivation may
seem most suitable; whereas such a deduction is not at all necessary to the
Demonstration of the Projections so derived.

For in the Projection derived from the Inversion of Stofler, let the eye be
supposed to be placed in the North Pole, projecting upon the Plain of the
Equinoctial, such Circles in the Sphere, as are described in the Quadrant
between the two Tropicks, a quarter of which Projection will be the same with
that on the Quadrant, namely, one of those quarters between the South part of
the Meridian and hour of six, which will leave out all the outward part of the
Almicanters between it and the Tropic of Cancer, and in stead thereof, there
is taken in such a like part of the depressed Parallels to the Horizon between
the same Hour of six, and Tropic of Capricorn, which is the reverted tail; for
the Parallels of Depression have the same respect to the Tropic of Capricorn,
that the Parallels of Altitude have to the Tropic of Cancer, and will work the
same in effect.

In like manner, the Eye in the other Projection may be supposed in the Zenith,
Stereographically Projecting upon the Plain of the Horizon, that part only of
the space between the Tropicks, which falls without the Projection of the
Horizontal Circle, save only the reverted tail, which is the Projection of so
much of the Parallels of South Declination, as is intercepted between the prime
Vertical Circle and the Horizon, and is taken in to serve in stead of that part
of the Parallels of North Declination, which will fall without the Quadrant.

In any of these Positions of the Eye, all Circles passing through the same,
will be projected in right lines by 91 Prop. 6 Book of Aguilonius, such are the
Azimuths on the Horizontal Quadrant, and the Hours on the other Quadrant,
represented by the thread lying over any Ark in the Limb, so also in this latter
Quadrant is the Parallel of Altitude equal to the Latitude of the place, a
right line.

All Circles parallel to the Horizon and Equinoctial, will be projected in
concentrick Circles by 94 Prop. 6. Aguilonius, such are the Parallels of
Altitude in the Horizontal Quadrant, and the Parallels of Declination in the
other Quadrants, represented by the Bead, when it is rectified to the Index of
Altitudes in the one, and to the Ecliptic in the other, carried in a circular
trace from one side of the Quadrant to the other.

All other Circles in the Sphere, whatsoever and howsoever situated, being
projected according to the supposed position of the Plain and Eye, will be
represented by Excentrick Circles. by 96 Prop. 6. Aguilonius, and the hours in
the Horizontal Projection will (if they be produced) meet with the projected
Pole points, so also the Azimuths in the other Projection, which by the like
parity of Reason may be denominated The Equinoctial Projection, will (being
produced) meet with the projected points of the Zenith and Nadir; and how in
particular to project and divide any Circle however situated in the Sphere, is
abundantly shown in the 6th Book of the aforesaid Author, and amplified with
many examples, though none of them agreeing with the particular Draughts of
these Quadrants, yet if put in practice according to the proposed Situation of
the Eye, will be found to agree with the prescribed Directions for the making
of these Quadrants. See also Clavius his Book of the Astrolabe, Guido Ubaldus
his Theorick of the general Planispheres, and M. Oughtreds 2d Scheme B in his
late Trigonometry in English.

An Appendix to the Description of the Small Quadrant.
SInce the Printing of the sheet B, we have thought fit to vary a little from
the Description there given of the Small Quadrant.

The Dyalling Scale of Hours described in page 9, near the beginning, which I
say in Page 191 may be omitted, is accordingly left out, and instead of it, a
line of Versed Sines of 90d put on, the uses whereof are handled in the great
Equinoctial Quadrant.

Also there is two Scales added to the small Quadrant more then was described;
namely, the Scale of Entrance, the same that was placed upon the Horizontal
Quadrant, with a Sine of 51d 32 put through the whole Limb serving to give the
Altitude at six, which the thread will intersect, if it be laid over the
Declination in the Limb; but enough of the uses of these Scales is said in the
Horizontal Quadrant.

Lastly, Those that like it best, instead of having on the Small Quadrant one
loose fitted Scale for the Hour, and another for the Azimuth, may have the
Hour-Scale only divided into two parts, serving to give the Hour and Azimuth
for the Sun, and all the Stars in the Hemisphere, the one part for South
Declinations, the other for North Declinations, in imitation of the Diagonal
Scale.

An Advertisement.
ALL manner of Mathematical Instruments, either for Sea or Land, are exactly
made in Wood or Brass, by Henry Sutton, in Thredneedle-street, near
Christophers Church, or by William Sutton in Upper Shadwel, a little beyond the
Church.

Page Li. Errors to be thus Corrected. 8 33 apply supply 19 25 76 d 54 79 d 54
20 7 48 d 45 d 23 3 50 d 41 50 d 41 23 11 58 53 24 25 a Letter Character. the
Character plus + 28 is less if less 55 14 difference of one of differences of
55 17 of the Legs from the Legs of one of the Legs The affections in page 57
line 16, 17. wanting Braces, are expressed at large page 140, 141. also the
last affection in that page having a mistake of lesser for greater in the
middle brace is reprinted in page 138 60 14 The last term of the 4th Proportion
should be the Sine of the angle sought, and not the Cosecant. 92 29 a Leg and
its adjacent angle The Hipotenusal and its adjacent angle 30 to find the other
angle by 4 to find the side opposite there to by 8 Case Case. See page 138. 103
34 Acquimultiplex Aequimultiplex 35 therefore by therefore by 18 Prop. 7.
Euclid. 121 18 Hour 3 Altitude 41 d 31 Altitude for the hour 3 is 43 d 31 158 1
Line of Line of Sines 159 21 of 90 d at 90 d 164 ^8 any some 174 15 in the Limb
in the lesser Sines 181 25 between as also between 27 would find it would in
the other Hemisphere find it 184 21 the common as the common 189 1^ either it
may be found either 192 24 As the second including side As the Sine of the 2d
including side 207 1 great Scale great Quadrant 209 7 60 parts 60 equal parts

The Angle C in the Scheam page 52 is wrong cut, and should be 113d 22, See it
in page 156.

Page 98 a wrong Scheam printed, the true one is in page 93.

Page 102 in the under Triangle the Angle D should be 108d 37 See page 201.

The first ten lines of calculation p. 53 are somewhat misplaced, and should
stand thus.

D^ffs Logms B C 126 Legs 169 2,2278867 A C 194 101 2,0042214 Sum with double
Radius A B 270 Base 25 1,3979400 24,232208^ Sum 590 half sum 295 Logarith. 2
4698220 3 8677620 former Rectangle Residue 20,3644461 The half is the tangent
of 56 d, 41 t. 10,1822230 Which Ark doubled is 113, 22 A C B the Angle sought.

A Table showing the Contents of the Book.
AN account of the original of the Projections, and their Demonstration. In the
Preface. The Description and making of the small Quadrant: Page 1. The Use of
the perpetual Almanac. 12 The Uses of the Projection on the small Quadrant. 15
Of the Stars inscribed thereon. 24 Of the Projection drawn in a Semicircle. 33
Of the Stars and quadrant of Ascensions drawn on the backside of the quadrant.
34 The Uses of the Quadrat and Shaddows. 35 Diverse ways to measure the altitude
of a Tower or object. 36 Affections of Plain Triangles 45 Proportions for the
Cases of right angled plain Triangles 46 Proportions for the Cases of Oblique
Plain Triangles 49 Doubtful Cases manifested, and mistakes about them rectified
50 Four several Proportions for finding an angle when three sides are given,
not requiring the help of Perpendiculars 52 Affections of Sphoerical Triangles
56 Six several Proportions suited to each of the 16 Cases of right angled
Sphoerical Triangles, with all necessary caution 60 Directions for varying of
Proportions. 72 Some Cases of oblique Sphoerical Triangles resolved without the
help of Perpendiculars 76, 83 When some of the Oblique Cases will be doubtful,
and when not 80, 81 Six of those Cases demonstrated to be doubtful 86, 87
Perpendiculars needless in any of those Cases, and not used 88 Some new
Proportions applied to the Tables 88 And mistakes about Calculating the
distances of places noted 89 And Proportions esteemed improper to the
artificial Tables applied for that purpose 96 Proportions both Instrumental and
others for finding a Sphoerical angle when 3 sides are given 100, 101 Those
Instrumental Proportions how demonstrated and derived from other Proportions in
use for the Tables. 103 New Proportions for finding the Hour and Azimuth
demonstrated from the Analemma. 108. And applied to the Calculating of a Table
of Hours. 117 A Table Calculated thereby, showing the Suns altitudes on all
hours for some Declinations useful for the trial and construction of some
Instruments. 121 A Table of the Suns Altitudes for each 5d of Azimuth fitted to
the same Declinations. 122 To Calculate a Table of Azimuths to all Altitudes.
124 And a Table of Altitudes to all Azimuths. 128 And the Proportions used laid
down from the Analemma. 132 Affections of some doubtful Cases of Sphoerical
Triangles determined. 138 The ground of working Proportions on a quadrant. 144
Proportions is equal Parts resolved instrumentally. 146, 147 All Proportions in
Tangents alone resolveable by the tangent line on the quadrant, or by a tangent
of 45d. 148 Proportions in Sines and Tangents wrought on the quadrant. 151
Proportions in equal parts and tangents resolved by the quadrant. 152
Proportions in equal Parts and Sines so resolved, being useful in Navigation.
156, 157 Of a line of Sines, and how from it or the Limb to take off a Sine,
Tangent or Secant. 158 Proportions in Sines wrought on the quadrant. 161 How to
proportion out lines to any Radius from lines inscribed in the Limb. 167 To
operate Proportions in Sines and Tangents on the quadrant. 168 A general way
for finding the Hour. 173 As also of the Azimuth. 174 Particular Scales fitted
for finding the same. 177 Another general way for finding the Hour. 181 And for
finding the Suns Altitudes on all Hours. 183 Another general way for finding
the Azimuth. 183 And of distances of places by the quadrant. 188 How from a
quadrant to take off Chords* 190 The Description of the Diagonal Scale. 193,
194 The said Scale fitted for the ready finding the Hour and Azimuth for all
parts of England, Wales, Ireland, and the uses thereof. 195, 196 The
description and uses of the particular Scales in Dyalling. 197 Also the uses of
other Scales fitted for finding the Hour and Azimuth near noon. 200
Hitherto the Uses of the small Quadrant.
THe Description of the great Equinoctial Quadrant. 2 The Uses of a line of
Versed Sines from the Center. 208 And of Versed Sines in the Limb. 214 The Uses
of a fitted particular Scale, with the Scale of entrance, for finding the Hour
and Azimuth in the equal Limb. 216 As also for finding the same in the Versed
Sines of 90d in the Limb. 220, 221 And of the Diagonal Scale therewith. 222,
223 New general Proportions for finding the Hour and Azimuth. 225 Diverse
Proportions demonstrated from the Analemma. 227 Several general Proportions for
finding the Hour applied. 230 And several Proportions applied for finding the
Altitudes on all Hours. 233 General Proportions for finding the Azimuth 237 A
new single Proportion in Sines for Calculating a table of hours. 243 The Stars
how put on and the hour found by them. 244, 245 The Construction of the
Graduated Circle. 248 The line of Latitudes demonstrated. 249 Uses of the
graduated Circle and Diameter in resolving of Proportions, and in finding the
Hour and Azimuth universally. 253 Uses of other Lines within the said Circle.
261 To prick down a Horizontal Dyal in a Square or a Triangle by the Dyalling
lines on the Quadrants. 262 Proportions for upright Decliners. 265 To prick
down upright Decliners in a Square or rather right angled Parralellogram, is
likewise in a Triangle from the Substile. 268 To prick them down in a Triangle
or Paralellogram from the Meridian. 272 An Advertisement about observing of
altitudes. 275 The description and making of the Horizontal quadrant. Page 1
The perpetual Almanac in another form 12 A tide Table with the use of the
Epacts in finding the Moons age. 11 The uses of the Horizontal Projection. 18
The uses of the particular curved line and fitted Scales thereto. 20 Some
Proportions demonstrated from the Analemma. 26 A particular Scale for finding
the Hour and Azimuth fitted thereto, with its uses. 27 The uses of the Scale of
entrance, being another particular fitted Scale for finding the Hour and
Azimuth in the Limb. 32 A Chord taken off from the equal Limb and the Hour and
Azimuth found universally thereby. 34 A new general Proportion for the Azimuth
to find it in the equal Limb. 36 Another for the Converse of the fourth Axiom.
38 The Stars how inscribed, and the hour of the night found by them. 39 Some
uses of the Dyalling Lines. 44, 45 The use of the Line of Superficies. 46, 47
And of the Line of Solids. 48 And of the line of inscribed Bodies and other
Sector Lines. 49, 50 A Table of the Latitudes of the most eminent places in
England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. 52, 53 A Table of the right Ascensions
and Declinations of 54 of the most eminent fixed Stars. 53, 54 Lastly, A Table
of the Suns Declination and right Ascension for the year 1666, with a Table of
equation to make it serve sooner or longer.
An Error Page 248, Line 30 and 31 for so is L N to L F read so is L N to N F.

Of the Lines on the foreside of the QUADRANT.
ON the right edge from the Center is placed a Line of equal parts, of 5 inches
in length, divided into 100 equal parts.

On the left edge a Line of Tangents, continued to two Radii, or to 63d 26m the
Radius whereof is 2 inches.

These two Lines make a right Angle in the Center, and between them include the
Projection, which is no other then a fourth part of Stoflers particular
Astrolabe inverted.

Next above this Projection, toward the Center, is put on in the Quadrant of a
Circle, the Suns declinations.

And above that in four other Quadrants of Circles, the days of the Month,
respecting the four seasons of the year.

Underneath the Projection, toward the Limb is put on, in one half of a
Quadrant, one of the sides of the Geometrical Quadrat, and in the other half
the Line of shadows.

All which is bounded in by the equal Limb.

There stands moreover on the very edges of the Quadrant, two Dyalling Scales,
which do not proceed from the Center; that on the right edge is called the Line
of Latitudes; and that on the left edge the Scale of Hours (equal in length to
the Sines) which is no other then a double Tangent, or two Lines of Tangents to
45d each set together in the middle, and so might, if there were need, be
continued, ad infinitum.

The Construction and making of such of these Lines as are not commonly
described in other Treatises.
To inscribe the Line of Declinations, there will be given the Suns declination
to find his right Ascension, which is the Ark of the Limb, that by help of a
Ruler, moving on the Center of the Quadrant, and laid over the same, will
in-scribe the Declination proposed.

The Canon to find the Suns right Ascension from the nearest Equinoctial point,
correspondent to the Declination proposed, is
As the Radius To the Cotangent of the Suns greatest Declination: So the
Tangent of the Declination given: To the Sine of the Suns right Ascension.
The four Quadrants for the days of the month are likewise to be graduated
from the Limb, by help of a Table of the Suns right Ascensions, made for each
day in the year.

The Geometrical Quadrat is inscribed in half the Quadrant of a Circle, by
finding in the Table of natural Tangents, what Arches answer to every equal
Division of the Radius, and so to be graduated from the Limb; so 300 sought in
the Tangents gives the Ark of 16d 42m of the Limb against which 3 of the
Quadrat is to be graduated.

The Line of shaddows is no other then the continuance of the Quadrat beyond
the Radius, and so the making after the same manner; thus having the length of
the shadow assigned, annex the Ciphers of the Radius thereto, and seek in he
natural Tangents, what Ark corresponds thereto; thus the shadow being assigned
thrice as long as the Gnomon, I seek 3000 in the natural Tangents, the Ark
answering thereto, is 71d 34 which being counted from the left edge of the
Quadrant, toward the right in the Limb, the Line of shadows may from thence be
graduated; the Complement of this Ark is the Suns Altitude, answering to that
length of the right shadow, being 18d 26.

The Canon to make the Line of Latitudes, will be
As the Radius to the Chord of 90d so the Tangents of each respective degree of
the Line of Latitudes. To the Tangents of ohter Arks:
The natural Sines of which Arks are the numbers that from a Diagonal Scale of
equal parts shall graduate the Divisions of the Line of Latitudes to any Radius.

To draw the Projection.
Those Lines that cross each other, are Arches of Circles, whose Centers fall
in two straight Lines.

Of the Paralels of Altitude.
All those Arks whose Aspect denotes them to be drawn from the right edge of
the Quadrant toward the left, are called Paralels of Altitude, and their
Centers fall in the right edge of the Quadrant, continued both beyond the
Center and Limb so far as is needful.

To find the Intersections of the Paralels of Altitude, with the Meridian, that
is, Points therein limiting the Semi-diameters of the Paralells.
Assume any Point in the right edge of the Quadrant, (which is called the
Meridian Line) near the Limb to be the Tropic of Cancer; the distance of this
Point from the Center of the Quadrant, must represent the Tangent of 56d 46
which is half the Suns greatest Declination more then the Radius; the distance
of the Equator from the Center, shall be equal to the Radius of this Tangent.
For the finding the Intersections of the other Paralells of Altitude, it will
be best to make a Line of Semi-tangents to the same Radius, that is to number
each degree of this Tangent with the double Ark, and so every half degree will
become a whole one: Out of this Line of Semi-tangents prick off from the Center
of the Quadrant 66d 29 the Complement of the Suns greatest Declination, which
will find the Intersection of the Tropic of Capricorn with the Meridian.

Now to fit the Projection to any particular Latitude: Out of the said Line of
Semi-tangents from the Center of the Quadrant, prick off the Latitude of the
place, and it will find a point in the Meridian Line, where the Horizon, or
Parallel of 00d of Altitude will intersect the Meridian; this Point is called
the Horizontal Point, and serves for finding the Centers of all the Paralells.

To the Latitude of the place add each degree of Altitude successively till you
have included the greatest Meridian Altitude; these compound Arks are such as
being pricked from the Center of the Quadrant out of the Line of Semi-tangents
will find points in the Meridian Line, limiting the Semi-diameters of the
paralells of Altitude.

Above the Horizon, and between the Circle that bounds the Projection falls a
portion thereof called the Reverted Tail, which otherwise would if it had not
been there reverted, have excurred the limits of a Quadrant.

To find the Intersections for those Paralells of Altitude, substract
successively each degree out of the Latitude of the place, and the remaining
Arks prick from the Center out of the Line of Semi-tangents: The use of this
Tail being to find the hour and Azimuth before or after 6 in the Summer time
only, it need be continued no further above the Horizon then the Ark of the
Suns greatest Altitude at 6, which at London is 18d 12.

To find the Centers of the Paralells of Altitude.
These are to be discovered by help of a Line of natural Tangents, not numbered
with the double Arks, whose Radius must be equal to the distance of the Equator
from the Center of the Quadrant, or which is all one to 90d of the Line of
Semi-tangents: Out of this Line of Tangents prick off beyond the Center of the
Quadrant the Complement of the Latitude, the distance between the Point thereby
found, and the Horizontal Point is the Semi-diameter wherewith the Horizon is
to be drawn.

To find the Centers of the rest of the Paralells.
To the Complement of the Latitude add each degree of Altitude successively
till you have included the greatest Meridian Altitudes; The Tangents of these
Arks prick beyond the Center, the distance from the Points so discovered to the
Horizontal Point, are the Semi-diameters of the Paralells of Altitude; the
extreamities of which Semi-diameters being limited in the Meridian Line; these
extents thence prict, finds their Centers.

Some of these Compound Arks will exceed 90 degrees, as generally where any
Meridian Altitude is greater then the Latitude. In this case substract those
Arkes from 180d and prick the Tangents of the remaining Arks from the Center of
the Quadrant on the Meridian Line continued beyond the Limb, and then as
before the distances between those Points and the Horizontal Point, are the
Semi-diameters of those Paralells, whose Extremities are limited in the
Meridian Line.

To find the Centers of the Paralells of the reverted Tail.
From the Complement of the Latitude substract each degree of Altitude in
order, till you have included the greatest Altitude of 6 the Tangent of the
remaining Arks prick from the Center of the Quadrant, and you will find such
Points the distances between which and the Horizontal Point are the
Semi-diameters of those Paralells.

To find the Centers and Semi-diameters of the Azimuths.
All those Portions of Arks which issue from the top of the Projection toward
the Limb are called Azimuths, the Centers of them all fall upon that Parallel
of Altitude which is equal to the Latitude of the place whereto the Projection
is fitted, which will always be a straight Tangent Line.

Out of the former Line of Tangents, whose Radius is equal to the distance of
the Equator from the Center of the Quadrant, prick down the Latitude of the
place on the Meridian Line, and thereto perpendicularly erect the Line for
finding the Centers of the Azimuths, which must be continued through and beyond
the Projection.

Out of the said Line of Tangents and beyond the Center prick down the Tangent
of half the Complement of the Latitude at London 19d 14m and it will discover a
Point which is called the Zenith Point, because in it all the Azimuths do meet;
The distance between this Point and the Point where the Center Line of the
Azimuths intersects the Meridian make the Radius of a Tangent, out of which
Tangent prick down each degree successively, both within and beyond the
Projection on the Line of Centers, and you have the Centers for all the
Azimuths; where note, that the Centers of all Azimuths which exceed 90d will
fall within the Projection, and of all others without, the distances of these
respective Points from the Zenith Point, are the Semi-diameters of the
Azimuths, with which extents let them be respectively drawn.

To draw the Summer and Winter Ecliptic and to divide them.
The Summer Ecliptic is drawn from the Point of the Equator in the left edge
of the Quadrant to the Tropic of Cancer, and the Winter thence to the Tropic
of Capricorn out of a Line of Tangents to the Radius equal to the distance of
the Equator, from the Center prick down the Tangent of 23d 31 the Suns greatest
declination from the Center of the Quadrant on the Meridian Line toward the
Limb, and you shall discover the Center of the Summer Ecliptic with the same
extent, being the Semi-diameter thereof, set one foot down at the Tropic of
Capricorn, and the other will fall beyond the Center of the Quadrant on the
right edge, and discovers the Center for drawing the Winter Ecliptic; to
divide them use this Canon.

As the Radius to Tangent of the Suns distance from the nearest Equinoctial
Point: So the Cosine of the Suns greatest Declination: To the Tangent of the
Suns right Ascension,
which must be counted in the Limb, and from it the Suns true place graduated
on both the Eclipticks.

To draw the two Horizons, and to divide them.
One of the Horizons is the Parallel of 00d of Altitude, which being intersected
by the Azimuth Circles, is thereby divided into the degrees of the Suns
Amplitude; this is the upper Horizon, and the drawing hereof was showed already.

The other Horizon is but this inverted, and the Divisions transferred from
that, the Center of it is found by pricking the Tangent of the Complement of
the Latitude on the Meridian Line from the Center of the Quadrant, the distance
of the Equator being Radius.

But it may be also done from the Limb by the Proportion following.

As Radius, to Tangent of the Latitude; So the Tangent of the Suns greatest
Declination, to the sine of the greatest Ascensional difference
(which converted into Time, gives the time of the Suns rising or setting
before or after 6) by which Ark of the Limb the Horizon is limited; Then to
divide it say As the Radius, to the Tangent of the assigned Amplitude: So is
the Sine of the Latitude: To the Tangent of the Ascensional difference agreeing
thereto,
which counted in the Limb, from it the Amplitudes may be divided on both the
Horizons; and note, if these Amplitudes be not coincident with those the
Azimuths have designed, then are the said Azimuths drawn false.

To inscribe the Stars on the Projection.
Such only, and no other as fall between the two Tropicks, may be there put on.

Set one foot of the Compasses in the Center of the Quadrant, and extend the
other to that place of either of the Eclipticks, as corresponds to the given
declination of the Star, and therewith sweep an occult Ark: I say then that a
Thread from the Center of the Quadrant laid over the Limb to the Stars right
Ascension where it intersects, the former occult Ark is the place where the
proposed Star must be graduated.

Of the Almanac.
There is also graved in a Rectangular Square, or Oblong, a perpetual Almanac,
which may stand either on the foreside or back of the Quadrant, as room shall
best permit.

On the Backside of the Quadrant there is,
1. On the right edge a Line of Signs issuing from the Center, the Radius
whereof is in length 5 inches. 2. On the left edge a Line of Chords issuing
from the Center. 3. On the edges of the Quadrant there are also two Scales for
the more ready finding the Hour and Azimuths in one Latitude; the Hour Scale is
no other then 62d of a Line of Sines, whose Radius is made equal to half the
Secant of the Latitude being fitted for London) to the common Radius of the
Sines; the pricked Line of Declination annexed to it, and also continued beyond
the other end of it, to the Suns greatest Declination is also a portion of a
Line of Sines, the Radius whereof is equal to the Sine of the Latitude taken
out of the other part of the Scale, or which is all one the Sine of the Suns
greatest declination is made equal to the Sine of the greatest Altitude at the
hour of 6 taken out of the other part of the Scale, which at London is 18d 12m
4. The Azimuth Scale is also 62d of a Line of Sines, whose Radius is made equal
to half the Tangent of the Latitude to the common Radius of the Sines, the Line
of the Declination annexed to it, and continued beyond it: To the Suns greatest
Declination is also a portion of a Line of Sines of such a length whereof the
Sine of the Latitude is equal to the Radius of the Sines of the other part of
this fitted Scale; or which is all one, the length of the Suns greatest
Declination is made equal to the Suns greatest Vertical Altitude, which in this
Latitude is 30d 39 of the other Sine or Line of Altitudes.
The Limb is numbered both with degrees and time, from the right edge toward
the left.

Between the Limb and the Center are put on in Circles, the Scales following.

1, A Line of Versed Sines to 180 degrees.

2. A Line of Secants to 60d the graduations whereof begin against 30d of the
Limb, to apply which Vacancy, and for other good uses, there is put on a Line
of 90 Sines, ending where the former graduations begin; this is called the
lesser Sines.

3. A Line of Tangents graduated to 63d 26

4. A Line of Versed Sines to 60d through the whole Limb, called the Versed
Sines quadrupled, because the Radius hereof is quadruple to the Radius of the
former Versed Sines.

5. A Line of double Tangents, or Scale of hours, being the same Dyalling Scale
as was described on the foreside.

6. A Tangent of 45d or three hours through the whole Limb for Dyalling, which
may also be numbered by the Ark doubled to serve for a Projection Tangent, alias
a Semi-tangent.

7. In another Quadrant of a Circle may be inscribed a portion of a Versed Sine
to eight times the Radius increased, of that of 180d called the Occupled Versed
Sine, and at the end of this from the other edge, another portion of a Versed
Sine to 12 times the Radius increased may be put on.

8. Lastly, above all these is the Scale of Hours or Nocturnal with Stars names
graved within it toward the Center; this is divided into 12 equal hours and
their parts, and the Stars are put on from their right Ascensions, only with
their declination figured against them.

All the Lines put on in Quadrants of Circles must be inscribed from the Limb
by help of Tables, carefully made for that purpose; an instance shall be given
how the Line of Versed Sines to 180d was inscribed, and after the same manner
that was put on, must all the rest:

Imagine a Line of Versed Sines to 180d to stand upon the left edge of a
Quadrant from the Center with the whole length thereof upon the Center sweep
the Arch of a Circle, and then suppose Lines drawn through each graduation or
degree thereof continued parralel to the right edge till they intersect the
Arch formerly swept which shall be divided in such manner as the Line of Versed
Sines on this Quadrant is done.

But to do this by Calculation, A Table of natural Versed Sines must first be
made, which for all Arks under 90d are found by substracting the Sine
Complement from the Radius, so the Sine of 20d is 34202 which subtracted from
the Radius rests 65798, which is the Versed Sine of 70d:

And for all Arks above 90d are got by adding the Sine of the Arks excess above
90d unto the Radius: thus the Versed Sine of 110d is found by adding the Sine
of 20d to the Radius, which will make 134202 for the Versed Sine of the Said
Ark.

This Table, or the like of another kind, being thus prepared, the proportion
for inscribing of it will hold. As the length of the Line supposed to be
posited on the left edge, Is to the Radius, So is any part of that length To
the Sine of an Arch,
which sought in the Tables, gives the Arch of the Limb against which the
degree of the Line proposed must be graduated.

But in regard the Versed Sine of 180d is equal to the double of the Radius;
the Table for inscribing it will be easily made by halfing the Versed Sine
proposed, and seeking that half in the Table of natural Sines, so the half of
the Versed Sine of 70d is 32899 which sought in the Table of natural Sines,
gives 19d 13 fore of the Limb against which the Versed Sine aforesaid is to be
graduated, and so the half of the Versed Sine of 110d is 67101 which answers to
42d 9 of the sines or Limb.

So likewise the Table for putting on the lesser Sines was made by halfeing the
natural Sines, and then seeking what Arks corresponded thereto in the natural
Sines aforesaid; those that think these Lines to many may very well want the
Versed Sines so often repeated; And they that will admit of a Radius of 6 or 7
inches, may have the Line of Lines Superficies and Solids, put on in the Limb
on the foreside, and the Segments Quadrature, Equated Bodies, Mettalls, and
inscribed Bodies, or other Lines at pleasure put on upon the backside, as has
been already done upon some Quadrants.

Now to the Use.

The Uses of the PROJECTION.
Of the Almanac.
BEfore the Projection can be used, the day of the Month, the Suns place or
Declination must be known; but these are commonly given by the knowledge
thereof: Now this Almanac will as much help to the obtaining hereof, as any
other common Almanac.

It consists of a Rectangular Oblong, or long Square divided into 7 Colums in
the breadth to represent 7 days of the week, accounting the Lords day first;
and length ways into 9 Columns, the two uppermost represent the months of the
year, accounting March the first, the five middlemost the respective days of
each Month, and the two undermost some certain leap years, posited in such
Columns, as that thereby may be known by Inspection, what day of the Week the
first of March happened upon in the said Leap years; the contrivance hereof
owns its original from my Worthy Friend Mr. Michael Darie, for the due placing
of the Months over the Columns of days, take the following Rule in his own
words.

First having March assigned to lead the round,
The rest o'th Months are easily after found;
If that you take the complement in days
To 35 of a placed Month always,
And count it from its place with due Progression
It shows you where the next Month takes possession.
Thus placing the Month of March first, then if I would place April, or the
second Month, March having 31 days, the Complement thereof to 35 is 4 then
counting four Columns from the place of March, it falls upon the 5 Column,
where the figure 2 is placed for the 2d Month, then April being placed; if I
would place May I take 30, the number of days in April, from 35 there rests 5,
and counting 5 Columns from the place of April where it ends, which is in the
3d Column, the figure 3 is placed for the 3d Month or Month of May. The next
thing to be known is on what day of the Week the first day of March falls
upon, which is continually to be remembered in using the Almanac.

This for some Leap years to come, may be known by counting in what Column the
said Leap year is graved, thus in Anno 1660, the first of March falls upon a
Thursday, because 60 is graved in the 5 Column, that being the fifth day of the
Week: But for a general Rule take it in these words.

To the number two add the year of our Lord, and a fourth part thereof,
neglecting the odd remainder, when there is any; the Amount divide by 7 the
remainder, when the Division is finished, shows the number of Direction, or day
of the week, on which the first day of March falls, accounting the Lords day
the first; but if nothing remain, it falls on a Saturday.

2 Example for the year 1657 The even fourth thereof 414 2073 (296 quotient. 7)
1 remaining.

By this Rule there will be found to remain one for the year of our Lord 1657
whence it follows that the first day of March fell on the first day of the
Week, alias, the Lords day in that year; so in Anno 1658, there remains 2 for
Monday: in 1659, rests 3 for Tuesday; in 1660 rests 5 for Thursday; so that
hence it may be observed, that every 4 years the first of March proceeds 5
days: Upon which supposition the former Rule is built; say then

As 4 to 5, or as 1 to 1 so is the year of the Lord propounded, to the number
of days, the first of March has proceeded in all that Tract, caused by the odd
day in each year, and the Access of the days for the Leap years; this number
divided by 7, the remainder shows the fractionate part of a Week above whole
ones, which the said day has proceeded, which will not agree with the day of
the Week the first of March falls upon, according to common tradition, unless
the number two be added thereto, which argues that the first of March, as we
now account the days of the week fell upon Monday, or the second day of the
week in the year of our Lords Nativity: This is only for Illustration of the
former Rule, being to show that the adding of the even fourth part of the year
of our Lord thereto, works the proportion of 4 to 5.

The Use of this Almanac is to know for ever on what day of the Week any day
of the Month falls upon.
Remembering on what day of the Week the first day of March fell upon in the
year propounded (which does then begin in the use of this Almanac, and not
sooner or later, as upon New Years day, or Quarter day) all the figures
representing the days of the Month do also represent the same day of the week
in the respective Months under which they stand; and the converse, the Month
being assigned, all the figures that stand as days under it, inform you what
days of the said Month the Week day shall be the same, as it was upon the first
day of March, and then by a due Progression it will be easy to find upon what
day of the Month any day of the week falls, as well as by a common Almanac,
without the trouble of always one, and sometimes two Dominical Letters quite
shunned in this Almanac, by beginning the year the first of March, and so the
odd day for Leap year is introduced between the end of the old, and the
beginning of the new-year.

Example.
In Anno 1657. looking for the figure 10 in the Column for Months, for the
Month of December; under it I find 6, 13, 20, 27, now the first of March being
the Lords day, I conclude also that these respective days in December, were
likewise on the Lords day; and from hence collect, that Christmas day, which is
always the 25 of that Month, happened on a Friday.

Uses of the Projection.
THis Projection is no other then a fourth part of Stoflers particular
Astrolabe, fitted for the Latitude of London inverted, that is, the Summer
Tropic and Altitudes, etc. turned downwards toward the Limb, whereas in his
Astrolabe they were placed upwards, toward the Center; thus the Quadrant
thereof made, is rendered most useful and accurate when there is most occasion
for it; before the projection can be used, the Bead must be rectified, and
because the Thread and Bead may stretch, there may be two Beads, the one set to
some Circle concentrick to the Limb, to keep the other at a certainty in
stretching, and the other to be rectified for use.

To rectify the Bead.
LAy the Thread over the day of the Month in its proper Circle, and if the
season wherein the Quadrant is to be used, be in the Winter half year, set the
Bead by removing it to the Winter Ecliptic; but in Summer let it be set to the
lower or Summer Ecliptic, and then it is fitted for use,

One Caution in rectifying the Bead is to be given; and that is in Summer time
if it be required to find the hour and Azimuth of the Sun by the Projection,
before the hour of 6 in the morning, or after it in the evening, or which is
all one, when the Sun has less Altitude then he has at 6 of the clock; then
must the Bead be rectified to the Winter Ecliptic, and the Parralels above the
Horizon in the Reverted Tail, are those which will come in use.

To find what Altitude the Sun shall have at 6 of the clock in the Summer half
year.
This will be easily performed by bringing the Bead that is rectified to the
Summer Ecliptic to the left edge of the Quadrant, and-there among the Paralels
of Altitude it shows what Altitude the Sun shall have at 6 of the clock: It
also among the Azimuths shows what Azimuth the Sun shall have at the hour of 6.
Example, So when the Sun has 17 degrees of North Declination, as about the 27
of April, his Altitude at the hour of 6 will be found to be 13d 14m and his
Azimuth from the Meridian 79d 14m whence I may conclude if his observed
Altitude be less upon the same day, and the Hour and Azimuth sought, the Bead
must be set to the Winter Ecliptic, and the Operation performed in the
reverted Tail.

Here it may be noted also that the exactest way of rectifying the Bead, will
be either from a Table of the Suns Declination, laying the Thread over the same
in the graduated Circle, or from his true place, laying it over the same in the
proper Ecliptic, or from his right Ascension counted in the Limb.

Or Lastly from his Meridian Altitude on the right edge of the Quadrant, for
these do mutually give each other the Bead, being rectified to the respective
Ecliptic as before. for Example.

To find the Suns Declination.
The Thread laid over the day of the Month, intersects it upon that Circle
whereon it is graduated, which in the Summer half year is to be accounted on
this side the Equinoctial, North, and in the Winter-half year, South; so laying
the Thread over the 27th. day of April, it intersects the Circle of Declination
at 17 degrees, and so much was the Suns Declination.

To find the Suns true place.
The Thread lying as before, shows it on the respective Ecliptic, So the
Thread lying over the 17 of April, will cut the Summer Ecliptic, in 17d 7m of
Taurus; or in 12d 53m of Leo, which agrees to the 26 day of July, or
thereabouts, the Thread intersecting both these days at once; and the opposite
points of the Ecliptic hereto, are 17d ^m in Scorpio, about the 20 of October;
and 12d 53m of Aquarius, about the 22d of January, all showed at once by the
Threads position.

To find the Suns right Ascension.
Lay the Thread over the day of the Month as before, and it intersects it in
the equal Limb; whence taking it in degrees and minutes of the Equator, whilst
the Sun is departing from the Equator toward the Tropicks, it must be counted
as the graduations of the Limb, from the left edge toward the right; but when
the Sun is returning from the right edge toward the left; the right Ascension
thus found, must be estimated according to the season of the year.

From June 11 to Sept. 13 It must have 90 degrees added to it. Sep. 13 to Dec.
11 It must have 180 degrees added to it. Dec. 11 to Mar. 10 It must have 270
degrees added to it.


But in finding the Hour of the night by the Quadrant, we need no more then 12
hours of Ascension, for either Sun or Star, and the Limb is accordingly numbered
from the left edge toward the right, from 1 to 6 in a smaller figure, and
thence back again to 12, and the other figures are the Complements of these to
12. so that when the Sun is departing from the Equator toward the Tropicks;
his right Ascension is always less then 6 hours, and the Complement of it more;
but when he is returning from the Tropicks toward the Equator, it is always
more then 6 hours, and the Complement of it less; the odd minutes are to be
taken from the Limb, where each degree being divided into 4 parts, each part
signifies a Minute of time, and to know whether the Sun does depart from, or
return toward the Equator, is very visible, by the progress and regress of the
days of the month, as they are denominated on the Quadrant.

Example.
So the Thread laid over 17d of Declination, which will be about the 27 April
The Suns right Ascension will be 44d 37m In time 2h 58 26 July The Suns right
Ascension will be 135 23 In time 9 2 20 October The Suns right Ascension will
be 224 37 In time 2 58 22 January The Suns right Ascension will be 315 23 In
time 9 2


But here the latter 12 hours are omitted.

Such Propositions as require the use of the Bead, are,

To find the Suns Amplitude, or Coast of rising and setting from the true East
or West.
Bring the Bead, being rectified to either of the Eclipticks, it matters not
which, to either of the Horizons, and the Thread will intersect the Amplitude
sought, upon both alike: Example; The Suns Declination being 17 North, or
South, the Suns Amplitude, will be found to be 28^ 2m.

The Amplitude before found for the Summer half year, is to be accounted from
East or West Northwards; and in the Winter half year from thence Southwards.

To find the time of the Suns rising or setting.
The Thread lying in the same Position, as in the former Proposition,
intersects the Ascensional difference in the Limb, which may there be counted
either in degrees or Time.

Example.
So the Bead lying upon the Horizon, being rectified to 17^ of Declination, the
Thread intersects the Limb at 22d 38m, which is 1h 30m of time, and so it shows
the time of Suns rising in Summer, or setting in Winter, to be at half an hour
past 4; and his rising in Winter, and setting in Summer, to be at half an hour
past 7.

To find the length of the Day or Night.
The time of the Suns rising and setting are one of them; the Complement of the
other to 12 hours; so that one of them being known, the other will be found by
Substraction; the time of Suns setting is equal to half the length of the day;
and this doubled gives the whole length of the day; in reference to the Suns
abode above the Horizon, the time of setting converted into degrees, is also
called the Semi-diurnal Ark; the time of Sun rising (so converted is called the
Semi-nocturnal Ark) doubled gives the whole length of the Night; so upon the
27th day of April, the Sun having 17d of Declination, the length of the day is
15 hours, and the length of the night 9 hours.

To find the Suns Altitude on all Hours; or at any time proposed.
In Summer time, if the hour proposed be before 6 in the morning, or after it
in the evening* lay the Thread to the hour in the Limb, the Bead being first
rectified to the Winter Ecliptic, and amongst the Paralels of Altitude above
the upper Horizon, it shows the Altitude sought.

Example.
So the Sun having 16d of declination Northwards, as about the 24th of April,
laying the Thread over the Declination, I set the Bead to the Winter Ecliptic,
and if it were required to find what Altitude the Sun shall have at 36 minutes
past 6 in the afternoon, lay the Thread over the same in the Limb, and the Bead
among the Parralels of Altitude will fall upon 7d,

At all other times the Operation is alike; the Bead being rectified to that
Ecliptic that is proper to the season of the year: Lay the Thread over the
proposed hour in the Limb, and the Bead amongst the Parralels of Altitude,
shows the Altitude sought.

Example.
So if it were required the same day to find what Altitude the Sun should have
at 19m past 2 in the afternoon; Lay the Thread in the Limb over the time given,
and the Bead among the Parralels of Altitude will fall upon 45d for the
Altitude sought.

To find the Suns Altitude on all Azimuths.
IN the Summer half year, if the Azimuth propounded be more Northward then the
Azimuth of the Sun shall have at the hour of 6; The Bead must be rectified to
the Winter Ecliptic, and brought to the Azimuth proposed above the upper
Horizon, and there among the Parralels of Altitude, it shows the Altitude
sought.

So about the 24th of April, when the Suns Declination is 16d his Azimuth at 6
of the clock will be found to be 76d 54m from the South; Then if it were
required to find the Suns Altitude upon an Azimuth more remote, as upon 107d
from the South, laying the Thread over the Declination, I set the Bead to the
Winter Ecliptic, and afterward carrying it to the Azimuth proposed among the
Parralels of Altitude above the upper Horizon, it falls upon 7d for the Suns
Altitude sought.

In all other Cases bring the Bead rectified to the Ecliptic proper to the
season of the year, to the Azimuth proposed; and among the Parralels of
Altitude it shows the Altitude sought; So far the same day, I set the Bead to
the Summer Ecliptic, and if it were required to know what Altitude the Sun
shall have when his Azimuth is 50d 48 from the Meridian carry the Bead to the
said Azimuth, and among the Parralels of Altitude it will fall upon 45d for the
Altitude sought.

The Hour of the night Proposed to find the Suns Depression under the Horizon.
IMagine the Sun to have as much Declination on the other side the Equinoctial,
as he has on the side proposed; and this Case will be co-incident with the
former of finding the Suns Altitude for any time proposed; the reason whereof
is because the Sun is always so much below the Horizon at any hour of the
night, as his opposite Point in the Ecliptic is above the Horizon at the like
hour of the Day.

Such Propositions as depend upon the knowledge of the Suns Altititude, are to
find the Hour of the Day, and the Azimuth (or true Coast) of the Sun.
THe Suns Altitude is taken by holding the Quadrant steady, and letting the Sun
Beams to pass through both the Sights at once, and the Thread hanging at
liberty shows it in the equal Limb, if this be thought unsteady, the Quadrant
may rest upon some Concave Dish or Pot, into which the Plummet may have room to
play; but for great Quadrants there are commonly Pedistalls made.

The Altitude supposed to find the Hour of the Day, and the Azimuth of the Sun
in Winter.
Rectify the Bead to the Winter Ecliptic, and carry it along amongst the
Parralels of Altitude till it cut or intersect that Parralel of Altitude on
which the Sun was observed, and the Thread in the Limb shows the hour of the
Day, and the Bead amongst the Azimuths shows the Azimuth of the Sun.

Example.
So about the 18 of October, when the Suns Declination is 13d 20 South if his
observed Altitude were 18d the true time of the day would be found to be either
36 minutes after 9 or 24 minutes past 2 and his Azimuth would be 37 degrees
from the South.

To find the Hour of the Day, and the Azimuth of the Sun at any time in the
Summer half year.
IT was before intimated, That if the question were put when the Sun has less
Altitude then he has at the hour of 6 of the clock, that then the Operation
must be performed among those Parralels above the upper Horizon, in the
reverted Tail, the Bead being rectified to the Winter Ecliptic; and that it
might be known what Altitude the Sun shall have at 6 of the clock, by bringing
the Bead rectified to the Summer Ecliptic, to the left edge of the Quadrant.

So admitting the Sun to have 16d of North Declination, which will be about the
24 April, I might find his Altitude at 6 of the Clock by bringing the Bead
rectified to the Summer Ecliptic to the left edge of the Quadrant; to be 12d
28m whence I conclude, if his Altitude be less, the Bead must be rectified to
the Winter Ecliptic, and be brought to those Parralels above the upper
Horizon; and it may be noted, that the Suns Altitude at 6 is always less then
his declination.

Example.
Admit the 24th of April aforesaid the Suns observed Altitude were 7d laying
the Thread over the Suns Declination, or the day of the month; I rectify the
Bead to the Winter Ecliptic, and bring it to the said Parralel of Altitude
above the upper Horizon; and the Thread intersects the Limb at 9d 3m showing
the hour of the day to be 24 minutes past 5 in the morning, or 36 past 6 in the
evening, and the Bead amongst the Azimuths shows the Azimuth or Coast of the
Sun to be 107d from the South.

Another Example.
But admitting the Sun to have more Altitude then he has at the hour of 6, the
Operation notwithstanding differs not from the former, but only in rectifying
the Bead, which must be set to the Summer Ecliptic, and then carried to the
Parralel of the Suns observed Altitude, and the Thread will intersect the Limb
at the true time of the day, and the Bead amongst the Azimuths shows the true
Coast of the Sun.

So upon the 24th of April aforesaid, the Suns observed Altitude being 45d, I
bring the Bead rectified to the Summer Ecliptic, to the said Parralel of
Altitude, and the Thread intersects the Limb at 55d 15m showing the hour to be
either 41m past 9 in the morning, or 19m past 2 in the ofternoon; to be known
which by the increasing or decreasing of the Altitude, and the Bead amongst the
Azimuths shows the Azimuth or true Coast of the Sun to be 50d 40^ from the
South:

Another Example.

Admit when the Sun has 19d 13m of North Declination which will be about the
6th of May, his observed Altitude were 56d the Bead being set to the Summer
Ecliptic, and brought to that Parralel of Altitude amongst the Azimuths shows
the Suns true Coast to be 23d from the South, Eastwards in the forenoon, and
Westwards in the afternoon, and the Thread in the Limb shows the true time of
the day to be either 7 past 11 in the forenoon, or 5^m past 12.

The Depression of the Sun supposed to find the true time of the night with us,
or the hour of the day to our Antipodes; As also the true Coast of the Sun upon
that Depression.
THis Proposition may be of use to know when the Twilight begins or ends, which
is always held to be when the Sun has 18d of Depression under the Horizon, to
perform this, Imagine as much Declination on the contrary side the Equinoctial,
as the Declination given, and find the time of the Day, as if the Suns Altitude
were 18d

So when the Suns Declination is 16d North, as about the 24th of April, laying
the Thread over it I rectify the Bead to the Winter Ecliptic, and bringing it
to the Parralel of 18d the Thread in the Limb show the Twilight to begin at 54m
past 1 in the morning, and ends at 6 past 10 at night, and the Azimuth of the
Sun to be 28d 58 which in this Case is to be accounted from the North.

But if the Suns greatest Depression at night be less then 18d as that it may
be in any Latitude where the Meridian Altitude at any time in Winter or the
opposite Sign is less then 18d there is no dark night which in our Latitude of
London will be from the 12th of May to the 11th of July.

Of the Stars graduated on the PROJECTION.
SUch Stars as are between the two Tropicks only, are there inscribed, and such
have many things common in their Motion with the Sun when he has the like
Declination, as the same Amplitude, Semidiurnal, Arc, Meridian, Altitude,
Ascentional difference, etc.

These Stars have Letters set to them to direct to the Circle of Ascensions on
the back of the Quadrant, where the quantity of their right Ascension, is
expressed from one of the Equinoctial points; those that have more Ascension
then 12 hours from the point of Aries, are known by the Character plus + set to
them; many more Stars might be there inserted, but if they have more then 23d
31 of Declination, the Propositions to be wrought concerning them are to be
performed with Compasses, by the general Lines on the Quadrant.

To find the true time of the Day or Night when any Star comes to the
Meridian.
In the performing of this Proposition we must make use of the Suns whole right
Ascension in time, which how that might be known has been already treated of,
as also of the Stars whole right Ascension, which may be had from the Circle of
Ascensions on the back of the Quadrant if 12 hours be added to the right
Ascension of a Star taken thence that has a Letter Character affixed to it.

Substract the Suns whole right Ascension from the Stars whole right Ascension,
increased by 24 hours when Substraction cannot be made without it, the
remainder is less then 12 shows the time of the afternoon or night when the
Star will be upon the Meridian; but if there remain more then 12, reject 12 out
of it and the residue shows the time of the next morning when that Star will be
upon the Meridian.

Example.
The 23d of December the Suns whole right Ascension is 18 hours 53 which
subtracted from 4 ho: 16 the right Ascension of the Bulls eye increased by 24
there remains 9h 23 for the time of that Stars coming to the Meridian, and
being subtracted from 6 ho: 30 the right Ascension of the great Dog, there
rests 11 ho: 37 for the time of that Stars coming to the Meridian at night.

This Proposition is of good use to Seamen, who have occasion to observe the
Latitude by the Meridian Altitude of a Star, that they may know when will be a
fit time for observation.

In finding the time of the Night by the Stars, we use but 12 ho: of right
Ascension, nor no more in finding the time of their rising or setting, so that
when it is found whether it be morning or evening is left to judgment, and may
be known by comparing it with the former Proposition, if there be need so to do.

To find the Declination of any of these Stars.
This is engraven or annexed to the Stars names, yet it may be found on the
Projection, by rectifying a Bead to the proposed Star, and bringing the Thread
and Bead to that Ecliptic it will intersect; and in the same Position the
Thread will intersect the said Stars declination in the Quadrant of
Declinations; if the Bead meet with the Summer Ecliptic the Declination is
North, if with the Winter South.

To find the Amplitude and Ascensional difference of any of the Stars on the
Projection.
BRing the Bead rectified to the Star to either of the Horizons, the Thread
being kept in its due Extent, and where it intersects the same it shows that
Stars Amplitude which varies not, and is Northward if the Star have North
declination, otherwise Southwards, the Thread likewise intersecting the Limb,
shows the Stars Ascensional difference.

Example.
So the Bead being rectified to the Bulls eye, and brought to the lower
Horizon, shows the Amplitude of that Star to be 25d 54 Northwards because the
Star has North Declination; And the Thread lies over 20 49 of the Limb which
is this Stars Ascensional difference, which in Time is 1 ho 23m The Thread in
the Limb lies over 4 ho 37m from midnight for the Stars hour of rising, and
over 7 ho 23m from the Meridian for the Stars hour of setting always in this
Latitude which with the Amplitude varies not, except with a very small
allowance in many years.

To find a Stars Diurnal Ark, or the Time of its continuance above the Horizon.
When the Star has North Declination add the Ascensional difference of the
Star before found in Time to 6 hours, the Sum is half the time. South
Declination Subtract. the Ascensional difference of the Star before found in
Time from 6 hours, the Residue is half the time.


Of that Stars continuance above the Horizon, which doubled, shows the whole
time, the Complement whereof to 24 ho is the time of that Stars durance under
the Horizon.

Example.
So the Ascensional difference of the Bulls eye being in time 1 ho: 23 added to
6 hours, and the Sum doubled makes 14 hours 46m for the Stars Diurnal Ark or
abode above the Horizon, the residue whereof from 24 is 9 ho: 14m for the time
of its durance under the Horizon.

To find the true time of the Day or night, when the Star rises or sets.
THe Stars hour of rising or setting found as before, being no other but the
Ascensional difference of the Star added to, or subtracted from 6 hours; which
the Thread shows in the Limb the Bead being rectified to a Star, and brought
to that Horizon it will intersect; is not the true time of the night; but by
help thereof that may be come by; this we have denominated to be the Stars
hour, and is no other but the Stars horary distance from the Meridian it was
last upon;

If a Star have North Declination the Stars hour of rising must be reckoned to
be before 6 and the time of its setting after 6 South Declination the Stars
hour of rising must be reckoned to be after 6 and the time of its setting
before 6


Now the time of the Stars rising or setting found by this and the former
Propositions must be turned into common time by this Rule. To the Complement of
the Suns Ascension add the Stars Ascension, and the Stars hour from the
Meridian it was last upon, the Amount if less then 12 shows the the time of
Stars rising or setting accordingly; but if it be more then 12 reject 12 as often
as may be, and the remaind-sheweth it.

So upon the 23d of December for the time of the Bulls eye rising.

h m The Complement of the Suns Ascension found by the foreside of the Quadrant
is -- 5 7 And the said Stars Ascension on the backside is -- 4 16 The Stars
hour of rising is -- 4 37 14 hours.

From which 12 rejected rests 2 hours for the time of that Stars rising, which
I conclude to be at 2 in the afternoon, because that Star was found to come to
the Meridian at 23m past 9 at night, the like Operation must be used to get the
time of that Stars setting, which will be found to be at 4 ho 46m past in the
morning.

h m Complement Ascension -- 5 7 Stars Ascension -- 4 16 Stars hour of setting
-- 7 23 16 h. 46

To find what Altitude and Azimuth a Star that has North Declination shall
have when it is 6 hours of Time from the Meridian.
Rectify the Bead to the Star, and bring the Bead and Thread to the left edge
of the Quadrant, and there among the Parralels of Altitude and Azimuths it
shows what Altitude and Azimuth the Star shall have.

Example.
So the Bead being set to the Bulls eye, and brought to the left edge of the
Quadrant it will be found to have 12 17 Altitude, and 80d 3 Azimuth from the
South, when it is 6 hours of time from the Meridian, which Proposition is
afterward used to know to which Ecliptic in some Cases to rectify the Bead
as has likewise been intimated before.

The Azimuth of a Star proposed, To find what time of the Night the Star shall
be upon that Azimuth, and what Altitude it shall then have.
SUpposing the Azimuth proposed to be nearer the South Meridian then that
Azimuth the Star shall have when it is 6 hours from the Meridian: Bring the Bead
rectified to the Star, to the proposed Azimuth, and among the Parralels of
Altitude it shows that Stars Altitude, and the Thread in the Limb shows that
Stars hour to be turned into common time to attain the true time sought.

Example.
If the question were What Altitude the Bulls eye shall have when his Azimuth
is 62d 48 from South, this being less Azimuth then he has at 6 hours from the
Meridian, the rectified Bead being brought to the Azimuth shows among the
Parralels the Altitude to be 39d and the Stars hour shown by the Thread in the
Limb is either 8 ho: 56 or 3 ho: 4 from the Meridian; then if upon the 23 of
December you would know at what time the Star shall have this Altitude on this
Azimuth, Change the Stars hour into common time by the former Rule.

December. 23 Complement of Ascension 5h 7 5h 7 Stars Ascension -- 4 16 4 16
Stars hour -- 8 56 3 4 18 19 12 27

And you will find it to be at 19 past 6 in the evening, or at 27m past
midnight.

For Stars of South Declination being they have no Altitude above the Horizon
at 6 ho: distance from the Meridian, the operation will be the same, void of
Caution.

But for Stars of North Declination when the proposed Azimuth is more remote
from the South Meridian then the Azimuth of that Star 6 ho from the Meridian,
another Bead must be rectified to the Winter Ecliptic, and carried to the
Azimuth proposed above the upper Horizon, where amongst the Parralels it shows
the Altitude sought; and the Thread in the Limb shows the Stars hour to be
converted into common time.

Example.
The Azimuth of the Bulls eye being 107d 53 from South, which is more then the
Azimuth of 6 hours, the other Bead set to the Winter Ecliptic, and carried to
that Azimuth in the Tail, shows the Altitude to be 6d and the Stars hour to be
5 ho: 18 Or 6 ho: 42 which converted into common time, as upon the 23d of
December, will be either 41m past 2 in the afternoon, or 5m past 4 in the
morning following.

h ' h ' December 23 Complement Suns Ascension 5 7 5 7 Stars Ascension -- 4 16
4 16 Stars hour -- 5 18 6 42 Rejecting 12 the Total is -- 2 41 Or 4 5

The Hour of the night proposed to find what Altitude and Azimuth any of the
Stars on the Projection that are above the Horizon shall have at that time.
FIrst turn common time into the Stars hour, the Rule to do it is, To the
Complement of the Stars Ascension add the Suns Ascension, and the time of the
night proposed, the Aggregate if less then 12 is the Stars hour; if more reject
12 as often as may be, and the remainder is the Stars hour sought. So the 23 of
December, at 8 a Clock 59 minutes past at night what shall be the Horarie
distance of the great Dog from the Meridian

Complement of great Dogs h ' Ascension -- 5 30 Suns Ascension -- 6 53 Time of
the night -- 8 59 The Sum is, 12 rejected -- 9 22

Then for Stars of South Declination, rectify the Bead to the Star proposed,
and lay the Thread over the Stars hour in the Limb, and the Bead amongst the
Parralels and Azimuths, shows the Altitude and Azimuth of the Star sought.
Example. So the Bead being rectified to the great Dog, and the Thread laid
over 9 ho 22 in the Limb, the Bead will show the Altitude of that Star at that
time of the night to be 14d and its Azimuth 39d from the South.

The Operation is the same for Stars of North Declination when the Stars hour
found as before is not more remote from the South Meridian then 6 hours on
either side.

But if it be more then 6 ho distance from the Meridian as before 6 after its
rising, or after it before its setting, then as before suggested, one Bead must
be rectified to the Star, and brought to the Summer Ecliptic, where the Thread
being duly extended, another must be set to the Winter Ecliptic, and
afterward the Thread laid over the Stars hour in the Limb, this latter Bead
will show the Stars Azimuth and Parralel of Altitude in the reverted Tail above
the upper Horizon.

Example.
So upon the 23 of December, I would know what Azimuth and Altitude the Bulls
eye shall have at 4 a Clock 5 minutes past the morning following.

Time proposed 4h 5 Complement of Bulls eye Ascension -- 7 44 Suns Asce^sion 23
of December -- 6 53 12 rejected rests -- 6h 42

Proceed then and lay the Thread over 42 past 6 and the Bead among the other
Paralels in the Tail shows the Stars Altitude to be 6d and its Azimuth from
the Meridian 107d 53 These two Propositions have a good tendency in them to
discover such Stars as are upon the Projection if you know them not, but
supposing them known the Proposition of chiefest use is

By having the Altitude of a Star given to find out the true Time of the night,
and the Azimuth of that Star.
If the Stars observed Altitude be less then its Altitude at 6 ho: distance
from the Meridian; Bring the Bead, rectified to the Star, to the Summer
Ecliptic and set another Bead to the Winter Ecliptic, Then carry it to the
Parralell of Altitude above the upper Horizon in the Reverted tail and there
it will show the Azimuth of that Star; and the thread in the Limb shows the
hour.

Example.
So if the observed Altitude of the Bulls eye were 6d its Azimuth would be
found to be 107d 53 from the South, and its hour 42 past 6 from the Meridian
the true time would be found to be 5 minutes past 4 in the morning the 24 of
December.

ho: Complement of Ascension the 23 of December -- 5 7 Stars hour -- 6 42 Stars
Ascension -- 4 16 4 5

But for Stars that have South declination or north, when their Altitude is
more then their Altitude being 6 hours from the Meridian, this trouble of
rectifying two Beads is shunned; in this Case only bring the Bead that is
rectified to the Star to the Parralel of Altitude, and there among the Azimuths
it will show the Stars Azimuth, and the Thread in the Limb intersects the Stars
hour sought.

Example.
December 11th Bulls eye Altitude 39^ Azimuth from the South 62d 48

Hours from the Meridian -- 8h 56 Complement of Ascension -- 6 00 Ascension of
Bulls eye -- 4 16 The true time of the night was 12 past 7 of the Clock 7 12

Another Example.
The great Dogs observed Altitude being 14d his Azimuth from the South would
be 39d.

h m And the Stars hour from the Meridian -- 9 22 Stars Ascension -- 6 30 If
this Observation were upon the 31 of December, the Complement of the Suns
Ascension would be -- 4 30 8 22

And the true time of the night 22 minutes past eight of the Clock.

For varieties sake there is also added to the Book a Draught of the Projection
for the Latitude of the Barbados; in the use whereof the Reader may observe
that every day when the Sun comes to the Meridian between the Zenith and the
Elevated Pole, he will upon diverse Azimuths in the forenoon (as also in the
afternoon) have two several Altitudes, and so be twice before noon, and twice





afternoon, at several times of the day, upon one and the same Azimuth, viz.
only upon such as lie between the Suns Coast of rising and setting, and his
remotest Azimuth from the Meridian, which causes the going forward and
backward of the shadow; but of this more hereafter, when I come to treat of
Calculating the Suns Altitude on all Azimuths; It may also be observed that the
Sun for the most part in those Latitudes has no Vertical Altitude or
Depression, and so comes not to the East or West.

Moreover there is added a Draught of this Projection for the Latitude of
Greenland, in the use whereof it may be observed that the Sun, a good part of
the Summer half year comes not to the Horizon, and so neither rises nor sets.

And that no convenient Way that this Projection can be made should be omitted,
there is also one drawn in a Semicircle for our own Latitude, which in the use
will be more facile then a Quadrant, there being no trouble before or after six
in the Summer time, with rectifying another Bead to perform the Operation in
the reverted Tail, neither does the Drawing hereof occupy near the Breadth, as
in a Quadrant, and so besides the ease in the use is more exact in the
performance; there being no other Rule required for rectifying the Bead, but to
lay the Thread over the day of the Month, and to set the Bead to that Ecliptic
the Thread intersects.

A Semicircle is an Instrument commonly used in Surveigh, and then it requires
a large Center-hole; however this Projection may be drawn on a Semicircle for
Surveigh, but when used at home there must a moveable round Bit of brass be
contrived to stop up that great Center-hole, in which must be a small
Center-hole for a Thread and Plummet to be fastened, as for a Quadrant and some
have been so fitted.

The Reader will meet with variety of Lines and furniture in this Book to be
put in the Limb, or on other parts of the Semicircle, as he best likes. The
Projection for the Barbados and Greenland, are drawn by the same Rules
delivered in the Description of the Quadrant, and so also is the Summer part of
this Semicircle, and the Winter part by the same Rules that were given for
drawing the Reverted Tail.

Of the Quadrant of Ascensions.
The turning of the Stars hour into the Suns hour and the the converse may be
also done by Compasses upon the Quadrant of Ascensions on the back side.

To turn the Stars Hour into common time, called the Suns hour.
THe Arithmetical Rule formerly given is nothing but an abridgment of the Rule
delivered by Mr. Gunter, and others, and the work to be done by Compasses,
differs somewhat from it, though it produce the same Conclusion which is:

To get the difference between the Ascension of the Sun and the Star by
substracting the less from the greater; this remainder is to be added to the
Stars hour, when the Star is before, or has more Ascension then the Sun, but
otherwise to be subtracted from it, and the Sum or remainder is the true time
sought.

To do this with Compasses, take the distance between the Star and the Suns
Ascension, and set the Suns foot to the observed hour of the Star from the
Meridian it was last upon, letting the other foot fall the same way it stood
before, and it shows the time sought, if it does not fall off the Quadrant.

If it does, the work will be to find how much it does excur, and this may be
done by bringing it to the end beyond which it falls, letting the other foot
fall inward, the distance then between the place where it now falls, and
where it stood before, which was at the Stars hour, is equal to the said
excursion, which being taken, and measured on the other end of the Scale, shows
the time sought.

This trouble may be prevented in all Cases, by having 12 hours more repeated
after the first 12, or 6 hours more may serve turn if the whole 18 hours be
also double numbered, and Stars names being set to the Additional hours,
possibly the Suns Ascension and Star do not both fall in the same 12 hours, yet
notwithstanding the distance is to be taken in the same 12 hours between the
quantity of the Suns Ascension and the Stars, and to proceed therewith as
before, and the Compasses will never excur; in the numbering of these hours,
after 12 are numbered they are to begin again, and are numbered as before, and
not with 13, 14, etc.

And this trouble may be shunned when there is but 12 hours by assuming any
hour to be the Stars hour, with such condition that the other foot may fall
upon the Line; and the said assumed hour representing the Stars hour; count
from it the time duly in order, till you fall upon the other foot of the
Compasses, and you will obtain the true time sought.

To turn common time, or the Suns hour into the Stars hour.
THis is the Converse of the former; take the distance between the Star and the
quantity of the Suns Ascension, and set the Star foot to the Suns hour, letting
the other fall the same way it stood before, and it shows the time sought.

Of the Quadrat and Shaddows.
Both these as was showed in the Description of the Quadrant, are no other then
a Table of natural Tangents to the Arks of the Limb and may supply the use of
such a Cannon, though not with so much exactness, all the part of the Quadrate
are to be estimated less then the Radius, till you come against 45^ of the
Limb, where is set the figure of 1, and afterward amongst the shadows is to be
accounted more then the Radius, and so where the Tangent is in length 2 Radii
as against 63d 26m of the Limb. 3 Radii as against 71 34 of the Limb. 4 Radii
as against 75 58 of the Limb. 5 Radii as against 78 42 of the Limb.
are set the figures 2, 3, 4, 5, and because they are of good use to be
repeated on the other side of the Radius in the Quadrat, there they are not
figured, but have only full points set to them, falling against the like Arks
of the Limb from the right edge toward the left, as they did in the shadows
from the left edge toward the right.

To find a hight at one Observation.


LEt A B represent a Tower, whose Altitude you would take, go so far back from
it that looking through the sights of the Quadrant, the Thread may hang upon 45
degrees of the Limb, or upon 1, or the first prick of the Quadrat, and the
distance from the foot of the Tower will be equal to the height of the Tower
above the eye, which accordingly measure, and thereto add the height of the eye
above the ground, and you will have the Altitude of the Tower.

So if I should stand at D and find the Thread to hang over 45d of the Limb, I
might conclude the distance between my Station and the Tower to be equal to the
height of the Tower above my eye, and thence measuring it find to be 96 yards,
so much would be the height of the Tower above the eye.

If I remove farther in till the Thread hang upon the second point of the
Quadrat, then will the Altitude of the Tower above the level of the eye be
third point of the Quadrat, then will the Altitude of the Tower above the level
of the eye be fourth point of the Quadrat, then will the Altitude of the Tower
above the level of the eye be fifth point of the Quadrat, then will the
Altitude of the Tower above the level of the eye be
twice thrice four times as much as the distance from the Tower is to the
Station. five times as much as the distance from the Tower is to the Station.


So removing to C; I find the Thread to hang upon the second point of the
Quadrat, and measuring the distance of that Station from the Tower, I find it
to be 48 yards, whence I may conclude the Tower is twice as high above my eye,
and that would be 96 yards.

So if I should remove so much back that the Thread should hang upon 2 of the
shaddows etc. as E the distance between 3 of the shaddows etc. at F the
distance between 4 of the shaddows etc. 5 of the shaddows etc.
the Station and the foot of the Tower would be twice thrice four times five
times
as much as the height of the Tower above the eye, and consequently if I should
measure the distance between D and E where it hung upon 1 and 2 of the
Shaddows, or between E and F, where it hung upon 2 and 3 of the shaddows, etc I
should find it to be equal to the Altitude; but other ways of doing it when
inaccessible will afterward follow.

A Second way at one Station.


WIth any dimension whatsoever of a competent length, measure off from the foot
of the Object, whether Tower or Tree, just 10 or 100, etc. of the said
Dimensions, as suppose from B to K, I measure of an hundred yards; there look
through the sights of the Quadrant to the Top of the Object at A, and what
parts the Thread hangs upon in the Quadrat or Shadows, shows the Altitude of
the Object in the said measured parts, and so at the said Station at K the
Thread will hang upon 96 parts, showing the Altitude A B to be 96 yards above
the Level of the eye, and so if any other parts were measured off, they are to
be multiplied by the Tangent of the Altitude, or parts cut by the Thread,
rejecting the Ciphers of the Radius, as in the next Proposition.

A third way by a Station at Random.


TAke any Station at Random as at L, and looking through the sights observe
upon what parts of the Quadrat or Shadows the Thread falls upon, and then
measure the distance between the Station and the foot of the object, and the
Proportion will hold.

As the Radius To the Tangent of the Altitude, or to the parts cut in the
Quadrat or shadows, So is the distance between the Station and the Object To
the height of the Object above the eye.
So standing at L, the Thread hung upon 30d 58m of the Limb, as also upon 600
of the Quadrat, the Tangent of the said Ark and the measured distance L B was
160 yards, now then to work the former Proportion, multiply the distance by the
parts of the Quadrat, and from the right hand of the product cut off three
places, and you have the Altitude sought.

In this Work the Radius or Tangent of 45d is assumed to be 1000.

To measure part of an Altitude, as suppose from a window in a Tower to the top
of the Tower, may be inferred from what has been already said; first get the
top of the Tower by some of the former ways, and then the height of the window
which substract from the former Altitude and the remainder is the desired
distance between the window and the top of the Tower.

The former Proportion may also be inverted for finding of a distance by the
height, or apprehending the Tower to lie flat on the ground, and so the height
to be changed into a distance and the distance into a height, the same Rules
will serve only the height of a Tower being measured, and from the top looking
to the Object through the sights of the Quadrant, what Angle the Thread hangs
upon is to be accounted from the right edge of the Quadrant toward the left;
but in taking out the Tangent of this Ark, after I have observed it, the Thread
must be laid over the like Ark of the Quadrant from the left edge toward the
right, and from the Quadrat or Shaddows the Tangent taken out by the
Intersection of the Thread, and so to measure part of a distance must be done
by getting the distances of both places first, and then substract the lesser
from the greater.

To find the Altitude of any Perpendicular, by the length of its shadow.
THis will be like the first Proposition, with the Quadrant take the Altitude
of the Sun, if in so doing the Thread hang over the 1st pricks in the Quadrat,
the length of the Shadow is equal to the height of the Object Tree, or
Perpendicular 2d pricks in the Quadrat, the length of the Shadow is double the
height of the Object Tree, or Perpendicular 3d pricks in the Quadrat, the
length of the Shadow is triple the height of the Object Tree, or Perpendicular
4th pricks in the Quadrat, the length of the Shadow is four times the height
of the Object Tree, or Perpendicular 5th pricks in the Quadrat, the length of
the Shadow is five times the height of the Object Tree, or Perpendicular
whatever it be; But if it hang 1 in the shaddows 2 in the shaddows 3 in the
shaddows 4 in the shaddows 5 in the shaddows
the highth of the object is equal to the length of the double the length of
the triple the length of the four times the length of the five times the length
of the
Shadow which may happen where the Sun has much Altitude, as in small
Latitudes, and so the length of the Shadow being forthwith measured, the height
of the Gnomon may be easily attained.

If the Thread in observing the Altitude hang on any odd parts of the Quadrant
or Shadows, the Proportion will hold as before. As the Radius To the length of
the Shadow, So the Tangent of the Suns Altitude, or the parts cut by the Thread
To the height of the Gnomon to be wrought as in the third Proposition;
if the length of the Gnomon, and the length of its shadow were given; without
a Quadrant we might obtain the Suns Altitude, for As the length of the Gnomon
Is to the Radius So is the Length of its Shadow To the Tangent of the
Complement of the Suns Altitude.


And the height of the Sun, and the length of the Gnomon assigned; We may find
the length of the Shadow by inverting the Proportion aforesaid.

As the Radius To the length of the Gnomon So the Cotangent of the Suns
Altitude To the Length of the Shadow.
To find an innaccessible Height at two Stations.
Assume a Station any where, as at G, and there observe the Altitude of the
Object A B which admit to be 70d Now it is well observed by Mr. Phillips, that
if you remove so far back as that the Object may appear but half so high, as
suppose at I it appears to have but 35d of Altitude that then the distance
between these two Stations G and I, is equal to the length of the Hipotenu
Sall, or scaling Ladder A G; and this must needs be so, because the Acute Angle
A G B being the Complement of the Obtuse Angle at G is equal to the Sum of the
other two Acute Angles G A I and G I A, which Sum is likewise Complement of the
Obtuse Angle at G to 180, but these Angles by Supposition being equal each to
other will subtend equal Sides; Admit then I measure the distance G I, and find
it to be 102 yards and a tenth, the Proportion to get the Altitude will hold As
the Radius To the said measured distance So is the Sine of the Angle at the
nearest Station To the Altitude of the Object.


To work this with the Pen, Out of the Line of Sines take the Sine of 70d with
Compasses, and measure it on the equal parts, where admit it reach to 94 parts,

Then multiply the said number by the distance 102, 1 and the Product will be
95, 974 from which cutting off three figures to the right hand the residue
being 95, 974, is the Altitude sought fere, but should be 96 caused by omitting
some fractionate parts in the distance which we would not trouble the Reader
withal.

Another more general way by any two Stations taken at random.


ADmit the first Station to be as before at G where the observed Altitude of
the Object was 70d and from thence at pleasure I remove to H, where observing
again I find the Object to appear at 48d 29m of Altitude, and the measured
distance between G and H to be ^0 yards, a general Proportion to come by the
Altitude in this case will hold.

As the difference of the Cotangents of the Arks cut at either Station. Is to
the Distance between the two Stations, So is the Radius To the Altitude of the
Object or Tower.
To save the substracting of the two Arks from 90d to get their Complements, I
might have accounted them when they were observed from the right edge of the
Quadrant toward the left, and have found them to have been 20d and 41d 31m; to
work this Proportion lay the Thread over these two Arks in the Limb from the
left edge toward the right, and take out their Tangents out of the Quadrat and
Shadows, then substract the less from the greater, the remainder is the first
term of the Proportion, being the Divisor in the Rule of three to be wrought
by annexing the Ciphers of the Radius to the Distance; or as Multiplication in
Decimalls; and then dividing by the first term the Quotient shows the Altitude
sought, 41d 31 Tangent from the Shadows is -- 885 20d Tangent from the Quadrat
is -- 364 Difference -- 521


By which if I divide 50000 -- the distance increased by annexing the Ciphers
of the Radius thereto, the Quotient will be 96 fere the Altitude sought.

This may be performed otherwise without the Pen, as shall afterward be shown;

If the distance from the Stations either to the foot or the top of the Tower
be desired, the Proportions to Calculate them will be As the difference of the
Cotangents of the Arks cut at either Station Is to the distance between those
Stations, So is the Cotangent of the greater Arc to the lesser lesser Arc to
the greater

distance from the Station to the foot of the Tower:

And so is the Cosecant of the greater Ark to the lesser distance lesser Ark to
the greater distance
from the top of the Tower to the eye,

Or having first obtained the Height, we may shun these Secants, for As the
Sine of the Ark of the Towers observed Altitude at the first Station. Is to the
height of the Tower or Object above the eye, So is the Radius To the distance
between the Eye and the Top of the Tower;
and by the same Proportion using the Ark at the second Station, the distance
thence between the Eye and the Top of the Tower may be likewise found.

If any one desire to shun this Proportion in a difference, as perhaps wanting
natural Tables, it may be done at two Operations: The first to get the distance
from the eye to the Top of the Tower at first Station, in regard the difference
of two Arks is equal to the difference of their Complements, it will hold As
the Sine of the Ark of difference between the Angles observed at each Station
Is to the distance between the two Stations, So is the Sine of the Angle
observed at the furthest Station, To the distance between the eye and the Top
of the Object at the first Station,
which being had, it then holds, As the Radius To the said Distance, So the
Sine of the Angle observed at the first Station, To the Altitude of the Object.


The rest of the Lines on the Quadrant are either for working of Proportions,
or for Protractions, and Dyalling depending thereon; wherefore I thought fit to
reduce all the common Cases of Plain and Sphoerical Triangles to settled
Cannons, and to let them precede their Application to this or other
Instruments, which shall be endeavored; it being the chief aim of this Book to
render Calculation facil, in shunning that measure of Triangular knowledge
hitherto required, and to keep a check upon it.

Some Affections of Plain TRIANGLES.
THat any two sides are greater then the third.

That in every Triangle the greater side subtendeth the greater Angle, and the
Converse.

That the three Angles of every Triangle are equal to two right Angles, or to
180.

That any side being continued, the outward Angle is equal to the two inward
Opposite ones.

That a Plain right angled Triangle has but one right Angle, which is equal to
both the other Angles, and therefore those two Angles are necessarily the
Complements one of another.

By the Complement of an Arch is meant the residue of that Arch taken from 90d
unless it be expressed the Complement of it to 180d, to save the rehearsal of
these long Words, The Tangent of the Complement, The Secant of the Complement;
others are substituted, namely the Cotangent and the Cosecant.

An Obutse angular Triangle has but one Obtuse angle, an Acutangular Triangle
has none.

If an Angle of a Triangle be greater then the rest, it is Obtuse, if less
Acute.

The Side subtending the right Angle is called the Hipotenusal and the other
two the Sides or Legs.

1. To find a side.
Given the Hipotenusal, and one of the Acute Angles, and consequently both.

As the Radius, To the Sine of the Angle opposite to the side sought: So is the
Hipotenusal, To the side sought.
2. To find a Side.
Given the Hipotenusal and the other side.

As the Hipotenusal To the given side: So is the Radius to the Sine of the
Angle opposite to the given side.
Then take the Complement of that Angle for the other Angle.

As the Radius, to the Hipotenusal: So is the Sine of the Angle opposite, To
the side sought, To the side sought
3. To find a Side.
Given a Side, and one Acute Angle, and by consequence both As the Radius, To
Tangent of the Angle opposite to the side sought: So is the given side, To the
side sought.


Or, As the Sine of the Angle opposite to the given side Is to the given side:
So is the sine of the other Angle To the Side sought.


4. To find the Hipotenusal.
Given one of the Sides, and an Acute Angle consequently both, As the Sine of
the Angle opposite to the given side, Is to the Radius: So is the given Side,
To the Hypothenusal


Or, As the Radius, To Secant of the Angle adjacent to the given Side: So is
the given side, To the Hipotenusal.


5. To find the Hipotenusal.
Given both the Sides.

As one of the given Sides. To the other given Side: So is the Radius, To the
Tangent of the Angle opposite to the other side,
Then take the Complement of the Angle found for the other Angle.

Then, As the Sine of the Angle opposite to one of the given Legs, or Sides,
Is to the given Sides: So is the Radius, To the Hipotenusal.
6. To find an Angle.
Given the Hipotenusal, and one of the Sides.

As the Hipotenusal, Is to the given Side: So is the Radius, To the Sine of the
Angle opposite to the given side;
The Complement of the angle found, is the other Angle.

7. To find an Angle.
Given both the Sides.

As one of the given sides, To the other given Side: So is the Radius, To the
Tangent of the angle opposite to this other Side.
The Complement of the angle found is the other Angle.

Because the Sum of the Squares of the Legs of a right angled Triangle is
equal to the Square of the Hipotenusal by 47 1 Euclid. Therefore the 2d and 5th
Case may be otherwise performed.

2. Case, To find a Side or Leg.
Given the Hipotenusal, and other Leg.

To do it by Logarithmes, Add the Logarithm of the Sum of the Hipotenusa and
Leg, to the Logarithm of their difference, the half Sum is the Logarithm of
the Side sought.

Which in natural Numbers is to extract the Square root of the Product of the
Sum and difference of the two Numbers given, namely, the Hipotenusal and Leg,
which said root is equal to the side sought.

5. Case, When both the Sides are given to find the Hipotenusal.
To do it by Logarithmes, Substract the Logarithm of the lesser side from the
doubled Logarithm of the greater, and to the absolute number answering to the
remaining Logarithm add the lesser side the half sum of the Logarithmes of the
Sum thus composed, and of the lesser side, is the Logarithm of the Hypotenusa
sought.

Which work was devised, that the Proposition might be performed in
Logarithmes; The same Operation by natural numbers, would be to Divide the
Square of the greater of the Sides by the lesser, and to the Quotient to add
the lesser Side, then multiply that Sum by the lesser Side, and extract the
Square root of the Product for the Hipotenusal sought.

Cases of Oblique Plain Triangles.
1. Data To find an Angle,
TWo sides with an Angle opposite to one of them to find the Angle Opposed to
the other side.

As one of the Sides, To the Sine of its opposite Angle: So the other side; to
the Sine of the angle opposed thereto.
If the Angle given be Obtuse, the Side opposite to it will be greater then
either of the rest, and the other two Angles shall be Acute;

But if the given Angle be Acute, it will be doubtful whether the angle opposed
to the greater side be Acute or Obtuse, yet a true Sine of the 4^h Proportional.

The Sine found will give the angle opposite to the other given side, if it be
Acute, and it will always be Acute when the given angle is Obtuse, But if it be
fore known to be Obtuse, the Arch of the Sine found substract from a
Semicircle, and there will remain the Angle sought.

In this Case the quality or affection of the angle sought must be given, and
fore-known, for otherwise it is impossible to give any other then a double
answer, the Acute angle found, or its Complement to 180d, yet some in this Case
have prescribed Rules to know it, supposing the third Side given which is not,
if it were then in any Plain Triangle it would hold, That if the Square of any
Side be equal to the Sum of the Squares of the other two Sides, the angle it
subtends is a right angle, if less Acute, if greater Obtuse; but if three Sides
are given we may with as little trouble by following Proportions come by the
quantity of any angle, as by this Rule to know the affection of it.

Two Sides with an Angle opposite to one of them, to find the third Side.
In this Case as in the former, the affection of the angle opposite to the
other given side, must be fore-known, or else the answer may be double or
doubtful.



In the Triangle annexed there is given the sides A B and A C with the angle A
B C to find the angle opposite to the other given side, which may be either the
angle at C or D, and the third side, which may be either B C, or B D, the
reason hereof is because two of the given terms the Side A B, and the angle at
B remain the same in both Triangles, and the other given side may be either A C
or A D equal to it, the one falling as much without as the other does within
the Perpendicular A E.

The quality of the angle opposite to the other given side being known; by the
former Case get the quantity, and then having two angles the Complement of
their Sum to 180d is equal to the third angle, the Case will be to find the
said side, by having choice of the other sides, and their opposite angles as
follows.

2. Two Angles with a Side opposite to one of them given to find the Side
opposite to the other.
As the Sine of the angle opposed to the given Side, Is to the given Side; So
is the Sine of the angle opposite to the side sought* To the side sought.
Ricciolus in the Trigonomerical part of his late Almagestum Novum, suggests in
the resolution of this Case, that if the side opposite to the Obtuse angle be
sought, it cannot be found under three Operations; as first to get the quantity
of the Perpendicular falling from the Obtuse angle on its Opposite side, and
then the quantity of the two Segments of the side, on which it falls, and so
add them together to obtain the side sought; But this is a mistake, and if it
were true by the like reason a side opposite to an Acute angle, could not be
found without the like trouble; for in the Triangle above, As the Sine of the
angle at B Is to its Opposite side A C or A D, So is the Sine of the angle B C
A, or B D A, To its opposite Side B A,
where the Reader may perceive that the same side has opposite to it both an
Acute and an Obtuse angle, the one the Complement of the other to 180d, the
same Sine being common to both, for the Acute angle A C E is the Complement of
the Obtuse angle B C A; but the angle at C is equal to the angle at D being
subtended by equal Sides, and the Proportion of the Sines of Angles to their
opposite Sides is already demonstrated in every Book of Trigonometry.

3. Two Sides with the angle comprehended to find either of the other Angles.
Substract the angle given from 180d, and there remains the Sum of the two
other Angles, then As the Sum of the Sides given, To tangent of the half sum of
the unknown Angles: So is the difference of the said Sides, To Tangent of half
the difference of the unknown Angles.


If this half difference be added to half sum of the angles, it makes the
greater, if subtracted from it, it leaves the lesser Angle

4. Two Sides with the Angle comprehended, to find the third side.
By the former Proposition one of the Angles must be found, and then As the
Sine of the angle found, is to its Opposite side: So is the Sine of the angle
given, To the Side opposed thereto,


If two angles with a Side opposite to one of them be given, to find the side
opposite to the third Angle is no different Case from the former, because the
third angle is by consequence given, being the Complement of the two given
angles to 180d, and the like if two angles with the side between them were
given.

5. Three Sides to find an Angle.
The Side subtending the Angle sought is called the Base.

As the Rectangle or Product of the half Sum of the three sides, and of the
difference of the Base therefrom, Is to the Square of the Radius: So is the
Rectangle of the difference of the Legs, or containing Sides therefrom, to the
Square of the Tangent, to half the Angle sought.
And by changing the third term into the place of the first.

As the Rectangle of the Differences of the Legs from the half Sum of the 3
sides, Is to the Square of the Radius: So is the Rectangle of the said half
sum, and of the difference of the Base there from, To the Square of the Tangent
of an angle, which doubled is the Complement of the angle sought to 180d, Or
the Complement of this angle doubled is the angle sought.
To Operate the former Proportion by the Tables.
From the half Sum of the three Sides substract each Side severally then from
the Sum of the Logarithmes of the Square of the Radius (which in Logarithms is
the Radius doubled) and of the differences of the Sides containing the angle
sought.

Substract the Sum of the Logarithms of the half sum of the three sides, and of
the difference of the Base therefrom the half of the remainder is the Logarithm
of the Tangent of half the angle sought



Example.
In the Triangle A B C let the three sides be given to find the Obtuse angle at
C.

Differences from the half sum.

B C 126 Legs -- 101 -- 2,0043214 A C 194 Legs -- 169 -- 2,2278867 A B 270
Base -- 25 Logarithms -- -- -- 1,3979400 Sum with double Radius 24,2322081 Sum
590 half sum 295 -- 2,4698220 -- 3,8677620 3,8677620 -- -- 20,3644461 Tangent
of 56d 41 which doubled is 113d 22 the angle sought. 10,1822230 half

For the 2d Proportion for finding an Angle the Operat on varies; to the former
sum add the double Radius, and from the Aggregate substract the latter sum, the
half of the Relic is the Logarithm of the Cotangent of half the Angle sought.

Tangent of 33d 19 the Complement whereof is 56d 41 which doubled makes 113d 22
as before The Tables here made use of are Mr. Gellibrands.

It may be also found in Sines.

As the Rectangle of the Containing Sides or Legs Is to the Square of the
Radius: So the Rectangle of the differences of the said Legs from half Sum of
the three Sides, To the Square of the Sine of half the Angle sought.
Or, We may find the Square of the Cosine of half the Angle sought by this
Proportion.

As the Rectangle of the containing Sides, Is to the Square of the Radius: So
the Rectangle of the half sum of the three Sides, and of the difference of the
Base there from, To the Square of the Cosine of half the Angle sought, viz. To
the Square of the Sine of such an Ark, as being doubled is the Complement of
the Angle sought to 180d, or the Complement of the found Ark doubled is the
angle sought.
All these Proportions hold also in Spherical Triangles if instead of the bare
names of Sides you say the Sines of those Sides, and this Case may also be
resolved by a Perpendicular let-fall; but the Reader need not trouble himself
with name nor thing in no Case of Plain or Sphoerical Triangles, but when two
of the given Sides or Angles are equal.

If the Square of the Radius and the Square of the Sine of an Ark be both
divided by Radius the Quotients will be the Radius, and the half Versed Sine of
twice that Arch, and in the same Proportion that the two terms propounded, as
will afterward be showed, upon this Consideration may any of these Compound
Proportions be reduced to single Terms for Instrumental Operations, by placing
the two Terms of the first Rectangle, as two Divisors in two single Rules of
three, and the terms of the other Rectangle as middle terms.

An Example in that Proportion for finding an Angle in the Sinees: As one of
the Legs or including Sides, Is to the difference thereof from the half sum of
the three Sides: So is the Difference of the other Leg therefrom, To a fourth
Number.


Again.

As the other Leg, To that fourth Number: So is the Radius, To the half Versed
Sine of the Angle sought; And so is the Diameter or Versed Sine of 180d Or
Secant of 60d To the Versed Sine of the Angle sought.
And upon this Consideration, that the fourth Term in every direct Proportion
bears such Proportion to the first Term, as the Rectangle or Product of the
two middle Terms does to the Square of the first Term, as may be demonstrated
from 1 Prop. 6. Euclid. We may place the Radius or Diameter in the first place
of the first Proportion, and still have the half or the whole Versed Sine in
the last place as before, therefore As the Radius, To one of the given Legs:
So the other given Leg, To a fourth Number,
which will bear such Proportion to the Radius, as the Rectangle of the two
given Legs does to the Square of the Radius, then it holds, As that fourth
number, To the Radius: So the Rectangle of the difference of (...) the Legs
from the half sum of the three sides; To the Square of the Sine of half the
Angle sought,
and omitting the Raidius, it will hold; As that fourth Number, To the
differences of the Legs from the Legs from the half sum of the three Sides:
So is the difference of the other Leg therefrom, To the half Versed Sine of
the Angle sought.


And if the Diameter had been in the first place, then would the whole Versed
Sine have been in the last.

This Case when 3 Sides are given to find an Angle is commonly resolved by a
Perpendicular let-fall, it shall be only supposed and the Cannon will hold, As
the Base or greater Side, To the sum of the other Sides: So is the difference
of the other Sides, To a fourth Number,
which taken out of the Base, half the remainder is the lesser Segment, and the
said half added to this fourth Number is the greater Segment.

Again.

As the greater of the other Sides, To Radius: So is the greater Segment, To
the Cosine of the Angle adjacent thereto,
Or, As the Lesser of the other Sides, To Radius: So is the lesser Segment, To
the Cosine of its adjacent Angle:


This for either of the Angles adjacent to the Base or greatest side but for
the angle opposite to the greatest side, which may be sometimes Obtuse,
sometimes Acute; not to multiply Directions, the Reader is remitted to the
former Cannons, or to find both the Angles at the Base first, and by
consequence the third angle is also given, being the residue of the sum of the
former from a Semicircle.

In right angled Spherical Triangles.
By the affection of the Angles to know the Affection of the Hipotenusal, and
the Converse.

If one of the angles at the Hipotenusal be a right angle The Hipotenusal will
be A Quadrant. If both be of the same kind, The Hipotenusal will be lesser then
a Quadr. If of a different kind, The Hipotenusal will be greater then a Quadr.
By the Hipotenusal to find the affection of the Legs* and the Converse:
If the Hipotenusal be A Quadrant one of the Legs will be a Quadrant If the
Hipotenusal be Less then A Quadrant The Legs, and their Opposite Angles will be
less then Quadrant If the Hipotenusal be Greater, then A Quadrant One Leg will
be greater, and the other less then the Quadrant:
The Legs of a right angled Sphoerical Triangle are of the same Affection as
their Opposite Angles and the Converse:
If a Leg be a Quadrant the Angle opposite thereto will be a Quadr. If a Leg
be less then a Quadrant the Angle opposite thereto will be Acute If a Leg be
greater then a Quadrant the Angle opposite thereto will be Obtuse.
All these Affections are Demonstrated in Snellius; I shall add some more from
Clavius de Astrolabio, and the Lord Nepair.

The three Sides of every Sphoerical Triangle are less then a Whole Circle.

In an Oblique angular Triangle, If two Acute Angles be equal the Sides
opposite to them shall be lesser then Quadrants. Obtuse Angles be equal the
Sides opposite to them shall be greater then Quadrants. Reg. 10* 11, 4



If an Oblique angular Triangle, if two Acute Angles be unequal the side
opposite to the lesser shall be lesser then a Quadrant Obtuse Angles be unequal
the side opposite to the greater shall be greater then a Quadrant Reg. 12, 13.4.



An Acute angular Triangle has all its Angles Acute, and each side less then a
Quadrant.

Two sides of any Spherical Triangle are greater then the third.

If a Sphoerical Triangle be both right angled and Quadrantal, the sides
thereof are equal to their Opposite Angles.

If it has three right Angles, the three sides of it are Quadrants.

If it have two right Angles, the two sides subtending them are Quadrants and
the contrary, and if it have one right angle, and one side a Quadrant, it has
two right angles, and two Quadrental sides.

Any side of a Sphoerical Triangle being continued, if the other sides together
are equal to A Semicircle the outward angle will be equal to the inward opposite
angle on the side continued. lesser then A Semicircle the outward angle will be
lesser then the inward opposite angle on the side continued. greater then A
Semicircle the outward angle will be greater then the inward opposite angle on
the side continued.


If any Sphoerical Triangle have two Sides equal to lesser then greater then
a Semicircle, the two angles at the Base or third Side will be equal to lesser
then greater then
two right Angles.

In every right angled Spherical Triangle having no Quadrantal Side, the angle
Opposite to that Side that is less then a Quadrant is Acute, and greater then
the said Side;

But that angle which is Opposite to the Side, that is greater then a Quadrant,
is Obtuse; and less then the said Side.

In every right angled Spherical Triangle all the three angles are less then 4
right angles, that is the two Oblique angles are less then 3 right angles, or
270d.

In a right angled equicrural Triangle, if the two equal angles be Acute,
either of them will be greater then 45d, but if Obtuse less then 135d.

In every right angled Sphoerical Triangle either of the Oblique angles is
greater then the Complement of the other, but less then the difference of the
same Complement from a Semicircle.

Two angles of any Sphoerical Triangle are greater then the difference between
the third angle and a Semicircle, and therefore any side being continued, the
outward angle is less then the two inward opposite angles.

The sum of the three Angles of a Sphoerical Triangle is greater then two right
angles, but less then 6.

In Spherical Triangles, that angle which of all the rest is nearest in
quantity to a Quadrant, and the side subtending it are doubtful, Whether they
be of the same, or of a different affection, unless foreknown, or found by
Calculation;

But the other two more Oblique angles are each of them of the same kind as
their Opposite Sides, which Mr Norwood thus propounds, Two Angles of a
Spherical Triangle, shall be of the same affection as their Opposite Sides, and
to this purpose,

If any Side of a Triangle be nearer to a Quadrant then its opposite Angle, two
Angles of that Triangle (not universally any two) shall be of the same kind,
and the third greater then a Quadrant.

But if any Angle of a Triangle be nearer to a Quadrant then its opposite side,
two Sides of that Triangle (not universally any two) shall be of the same kind,
and the third less then a Quadrant.

In any Sphoerical Triangle, if one of the angles be subtracted from a
Semicircle, and the residue so found subtracted from a Whole Circle, the Ark
found by this latter Substraction, will be greater then the Sum of the other
two Angles.

In every Sphoerical Triangle the difference between the sum of two angles
howsoever taken, and a whole Circle or 4 right angles is greater then the
difference between the other Angle and a Semicircle; The demonstration of most
of these Affections are in Clavins his Comment on Theodosius, or in his Book de
Astrolabio, where showing how to project in Plano all the Cases of Sphoerical
Triangles, and so to measure the sides and Angles, he delivers these Theorems
to prevent such Fictitious Triangles as cannot exist in the Sphere.

The 16 Cases of right Angled Sphoerical Triangles, Translated from Clavius de
Astrolabio.
1. To find an Angle.
Given the Hipotenusal and side opposite to the Angle sought.

As the Sine of the Hipotenusal, To Radius: So the Sine of the given side To
the Sine of the Angle sought.
Or, As Radius, To sine of the Hipotenusal: So the Cosecant of the side, To the
Cosecant of the Angle.
As Radius, To sine of the side: So Cosecant of the Hipotenusal, To sine of the
angle.
As Cosecant of the side, To Radius: So Cosecant of the Hipotenusal, To
Cosecant of the angle.
As Cosecant Hipotenusal, To Radius: So Cosecant of the side, To Cosecant of
the angle.
As the Sine of the side to Radius: So sine of the Hipotenusal, To Cosecant of
the Angle.


The Angle found will be Acute if the Side given be less then a Quadrant,
Obtuse if greater.

2. To find an Angle.
Given the Hipotenusal and side adjacent to the Angle.

As Radius, To Cotangent Hipotenusal: So tangent of the side, To Cosine of the
angle.
As tangent Hipotenusal. To Radius, So tangent of the Side. To Cosine of the
angle.
As the Cotangent of the side, To Radius: So Cotangent Hipotenuse, To Cosine of
the angle.
As Radius, To Cotangent side: So tangent Hipotenusa, To Secant of the angle.
As Cotangent Hipotenusal: To Radius: So Cotangent side, To Secant of the
angle.
As the tangent of the side, To Radius: So tangent Hipot: To Secant of the
angle.


The Angle found will be Acute, if both the Hipotenusal and the given side be
greater, or less then a Quadrant, but Obtuse if one of them be greater, and the
other less.

3. To find an Angle.
Given the Hipotenusal, and either of the Oblique Angles

As the Radius, To Cosine Hip: So Tangent of the given angle: To the Cotang of
sought angle
As the Cotangent of the given angle: To Radius So Cosine of: the Hipot: To the
Cotang of the sought angle.
As the Cosine of the Hipot: To Radius So Cotang: of the given angle: To the
tang. of the ang: sought
As the Radius, To Secant Hip: So Cotangent of the given angle: To the tang of
the angle sought
As Secant of the Hipotenusal: To Radius So the tangent of the angle given: To
the Cotan: of the angle sought
As the tangent of the given angle: To Radius So Secant of the Hipotenusal: To
tangent of the angle sought.


The angle found will be Acute, if the Hipotenusal be less then a Quadrant, and
the given angle Acute; or if the Hipotenusal be greater then a Quadrant, and
the given angle Obtuse; And the said angle will be Obtuse, if the Hipotenusal
be less then a Quadrant, and the given angle Obtuse; Of if the Hipotenusal be
greater then a Quadrant, and the given angle Acute.

4. To find an Angle.
Given the Side opposite to the Angle sought, and the other Oblique Angle.

As the Radius: To sine of the angle given So is the cosine of the given side:
To the Cosine of the angle sought
As the Radius: To Cosecant of the given angle So Secant of the side given: To
Secant of the angle sought
As the sine of the given angle: To Radius So the Secant of the given side: To
the Secant of the angle
As the Cosine of the given side: To Radius So the Cosecant of the given angle:
To the Secant of the angle sought
As the Cosecant of the given angle: To Radius: So Cosine of the given side: To
the Cosine of the angle sought
As the Secant of the given side: To Radius So sine of the given angle: To the
Cosine of the angle sought


The angle found will be Acute, if the side given be less then a Quadrant,
Obtuse if greater.

5. To find an Angle.
Given a side adjacent to the angle sought, and the other Oblique angle, if it
be foreknown whether the angle sought be Acute or Obtuse, or whether the Base
or other side not given be greater, or lesser then a Quadrant.

As the Cosine of the given side: To Radius So Cosine of the given angle: To
the sine of the angle sought
As the Radius: To Secant of the given side So Cosine of the given angle: To
Sine of the angle sought
As the Radius: To Secant of the given angle So Cosine of the given side: To
Cosecant of sought angle
As the Cosine of the given angle: To Radius So Cosine of the given side: To
the Cosecant of the angle sought
As the Secant of the given side: To Radius So is the Secant of the given
angle: To the Cosecant of the angle sought
As the Secant of the given angle: To Radius So is the Secant of the given
side: To the Sine of the angle sought


The angle found will be Acute, if the side not given be less then a Quadrant,
Obtuse if greater.

In like manner if the Hipotenusal be less then a Quadrant, and the given angle
Acute; Or if the Hipotenusal be greater then a Quadrant, and the given angle
Obtuse, the angle found will be Acute.

But if the Hipotenusal be less then a Quadrant, and the given angle Obtuse, or
if the Hipotenusal be greater then a Quadrant, and the given angle Acute, the
angle found will be Obtuse,

6. To find an Angle.
Given both the Legs.

As Radius: To sine of the side adjacent to sought angle So Cotang of the side
opposite to the angle sought: To Cotang of the angle sought
As the sine of the side adjacent to sought angle: To Radius So the tangent of
the side opposite to the sought angle: To the tang of the angle sought:
As the Tangent of the side opposite to sought angle: To Radius So the sine of
the side adjacent to the sought angle: To Cotang of the angle sought:
As the Radius: To Cosecant of the side adjacent to sought angle So the tangent
of the side opposite thereto: To the tang of the angle sought:
As the Cosecant of the side adjacent to the angle sought To Radius So is the
Cotang of the side opposite to the angle sought: To Cotang of the sought angle:
As the Cotangent side opposite to the sought angle: To Radius So Cosecant of
the side adjacent to the angle sought: To the tang of the angle sought


The Angle found will be Acute, if the side opposite to the angle sought be
less then a Quadrant, but Obtuse if greater.

7, To find a Side or Leg.
Given the Hipotenusal and the other Leg.

As the Cosine of the given side: To Radius So Cosine of the Hipotenusal: To
Cosine of the side sought
As Radius: To Secant of the side So Cosine of the Hipotenusal: To Cosine of
the side sought
As Cosine Hipotenusal: To Radius So Cosine of the given side: To Secant of the
side sought
As Radius: To Secant of the Hipotenusal So Cosine of the given side: To Secant
of the side sought
As the Secant of the Hipotenusal: To Radius So Secant of the given side: To
Cosine of the side sought
As the Secant of the given side: To Radius So Secant of the Hipotenusal: To
the Secant of the side sought


The side sought will be less then a Quadrant, if both the Hipotenusal and
given sides be less then Quadrants, but greater then a Quadrant if either the
Hipotenusal be greater, and the given side less, Or if the Hipotenusal be less,
and the given side greater.

8. To find a Side.
Given the Hipotenusal, and an Angle opposite to the side fought.

As the Radius: To sine of the Hipotenusal So sine of the given angle: To the
sine of the side sought
As Radius: To Cosecant of the Hipotenusal So the Cosecant of the given angle:
To Cosecant of the side sought
As the sine of the Hipotenusal: To Radius So Cosecant of the given angle: To
Cosecant of the side sought
As the Cosecant of the given angle* To Radius So the sine of the Hipotenusal:
To the sine of the side sought
As the sine of the given angle: To Radius So the Cosecant of the Hipotenusal:
To the Cosecant of the side sought


The side found will be less then a Quadrant, if the Angle opposite thereto be
Acute, but greater if Obtuse.

9. To find a Side.
Given the Hipotenusal and Angle adjacent to the Side sought

As the Radius: To Cosine of the given angle So tangent of the Hipotenusal: To
the tangent of side sought
As the Cosine of the given angle: To Radius So Cotangent of the Hipotenusal:
To Cotang of the side sought
As the Cotangent of Hipotenusal: To Radius So the Cosine of the given angle:
To tangent of the side sought
As the Radius: To Secant of the angle So Cotangent of the Hipotenusal: To
Cotang of the side sought
As the Secant of the given angle: To Radius So tangent of the Hipotenusal: To
the tangent of the side sought
As the tangent of the Hipotenusal: To Radius So Secant of the given angle: To
Cotang: of the side sought


The Side sought will be less then a Quadrant, if the Hipotenusal be less then
a Quadrant, and the given angle Acute: Or if the Hipotenusal be greater then a
Quadrant, and the given angle Obtuse; But it will be greater then a Quadrant,
if the Hipotenusal be less then a Quadrant, and the given angle Obtuse: Or if
the Hipotenusal be greater then a Quadrant, and the given angle Acute.

10. To find a Side.
Given a Side, and an Angle adjacent to the sought side. Provided it be
foreknown whether the side sought be greater or less then a Quadrant, or
whether the other angle not given be Acute or Obtuse; or finally whether the
Hipotenusal be greater or less then a Quadrant.

As the Radius: To the Cotangent of the given angle So tangent of the given
side: To the Sine of the side sought
As the tangent of the given angle: To Radius So tangent of the given side: To
the sine of the side sought
As the Cotang of the given side: To Radius So the Cotang of the given angle:
To the sine of the side sought
As Radius: To Cotangent of the given side: So tangent of the given angle: To
Cosecant of the side sought
As the tangent of the given side: To Radius So tangent of the given angle: To
the Cosecant of the side sought
As the Cotangent of the given angle: To Radius So Cotang of the given side: To
the Cosecant of the side sought


The Side found will be less then a Quadrant, if the angle opposite thereto and
not given be Acute, but greater if it be Obtuse; In like manner it will be
less, if the Hipotenusal be less then a Quadrant, and the side given also less
then a Quadrant: Or if the Hipotenusal be less then a Quadrant, and the given
side greater, the side found will be greater then a Quadrant; Lastly, if both
the Hipotenusal, and the side given be greater then a Quadrant, the side found
will be less then a Quadrant, but greater if the Hipotenusal be greater then a
Quadrant, and the given side less.

11. To find a Side.
Given a Side, and an Angle opposite to the Side sought

As Radius: To sine given side So tangent given angle: To tangent of the side
sought
As the sine of the given side: To Radius So Cotangent of the given angle: To
Cotangent of the side sought
As the Cotangent of the given angle: To Radius So sine of the given side: To
the tangent of the side sought
As the tangent of the given angle: To Radius So Cosecant of the given side: To
Cotangent of the side sought
As the Radius: To Cosecant of the given side So Cotang of the given angle: To
Cotangent of the side sought
As the Cosecant of the given side: To Radius So tangent of the given angle: To
tangent of the side sought


The side found will be less then a Quadrant, if the given Angle opposite
thereto be Acute, but greater if Obtuse.

12. To find a Side.
Given both the Oblique Angles.

As the sine of the angle adjacent to side sought: Is to Radius So Cosine of
the angle opposite to side sought: To Cosine of the side sought
As the Radius: To Secant of the angle opposite to side sought So sine of the
angle adjacent to the side sought: To Secant of the side sought
As Radius: To Cosecant of the angle adjacent to side sought So Cosine of the
angle opposite to side sought: To Cosine of the side sought
As the Cosine of the angle opposite to side sought: To Radius So side of the
angle adjacent to the side sought: To Secant of the side sought
As the Secant of the angle opposite to side sought: To Radius So Cosecant of
the angle adjacent to the side sought: To Cosine of the side sought
As Cosecant of the angle adjacent to side sought: To Radius So Secant of the
angle opposite to side sought: To Secant of the side sought


The side found will be less then a Quadrant, if the given angle Opposite
thereto be Acute, but greater if Obtuse.

13. To find the Hipotenusal.
Given a side and an Angle adjacent thereto.

As the Radius: To Cosine of the given angle So Cotangent of the given side To
Cotang of the Hipotenusal
As the Cosine of the given angle: To Radius So tangent of the given side: To
tangent of the Hipotenusal
As the tangent of the given side To Radius So Cosine given angle: To Cotangent
of the Hipotenusal
As Radius: To Secant of the given angle So tangent of the given side; To the
tangent of the Hipotenusal
As the Secant of the given angle: To Radius So Cotang of given side: To the
Cotang of the Hipotenusal
As the Cotangent of given side: To Radius So Secant of the given angle: To
tangent of the Hipotenusal


The Hipotenusal found will be less then a Quadrant, if the given side be less
then a Quadrant, and the angle given adjacent thereto Acute; As also if the
given side be greater then a Quadrant, and the given angle adjacent thereto be
Obtuse.

But it will be greater then a Quadrant, if the given side be greater then a
Quadrant, and the given Angle adjacent thereto Acute; As also when the given
side is less then a Quadrant, and the given Angle Obtuse.

14. To find the Hipotenusal
Given a Side, and an angle Opposite thereto.

If it be fore-known whether the Hipotenusal be greater or less then a
Quadrant, or whether the other angle not given be Acute or Obtuse; Or lastly,
whether the other side not given, be greater or less then a Quadrant.

As the sine of the given angle: To Radius So sine of the given side: To the
sine of the Hipotenusal
As the Radius: To Cosecant of angle given So sine of the given side: To the
sine of the Hopotenusal
As Radius: To Cosecant given side So sine of the given angle: To Cosecant of
the Hipotenusal
As the sine of the given side: To Radius So sine of the given angle: To
Cosecant of the Hipotenusal
As Cosecant of given side: To Radius So Cosecant of the given angle: To sine
of the Hipotenusal
As Cosecant of the given angle: To Radius So the Cosecant of the given side:
To Cosecant of the Hipotenusal


The Hipotenusal found will be less then a Quadrant, if both the Oblique Angles
be Acute or Obtuse, or if both the sides be greater or less then Quadrants.

It will also be greater then a Quadrant, if one of the Oblique Angles be
Acute, and the other Obtuse, or if one of the sides be less and the other
greater then a Quadrant:

15. To find the Hipotenusal,
Given both the sides, distinguished by the names of first and second.

As Radius: To Cosine 1st side So Cosine 2d side: To Cosine of the Hipotenusal
As Radius: To Secant 1st side So Secant 2d side: To Secant of the Hipotenusal
As Secant 1st side: To Radius So Cosine of the 2d side: To Cosine Hipotenusal
As Secant 2d side: To Radius So Cosine 1st side: To Cosine of the Hipotenusal
As Cosine 1st side: To Radius So Secant 2d side: To Secant of the Hipotenusal
As Cosine 2d side: To Radius So Secant 1 side: To the Secant of the
Hipotenusal


The Hipotenusal found will be less then a Quadrant, if both the Sides are less
or greater; But otherwise, it will be greater, if one be less and the other
greater.

16. To find the Hipotenusal.
Given both the Oblique Angles, distinguished by the names of the first and
second.

As Radius: To Cotangent 1st angle So Cotangent 2d angle: To Cosine of the
Hipot:
As the tangent 1st angle: To Radius So Cotangent 2d angle: To Cosine of
Hipoten:
As tangent of 2d angle: To Radius So Cotangent 1st angle: To Cosine
Hipotenusal
As the Radius: To tangent 2d angle So tangent 1st angle: To Secant of the
Hipot:
As Cotangent 2d angle: To Radius: So tangent 1st angle: To Secant of the
Hipotenus;
As the Cotangent 1st angle: To Radius So Tangent 2d angle: To Secant
Hipotenus:


The Hipotenusal found will be less then a Quadrant, if both the Oblique angles
be Acute or Obtuse, but greater if one of them be Acute, and the other Obtuse.

I shall not spend time to show Examples of all these Cases, but shall only
instance in an Example or two. In the Right angled Sphoerical Triangle P S N,
let the side P N represent the Poles height, the side S P the Complement of the
Suns declination, the side S N the Suns Amplitude of rising from the North
Meridian, the Angle S P N the time of Suns rising from Midnight, and the angle
P S N the angle of the Suns Position; and in it let there be given the side P N
51d 32, and the side P S the Complement of the Suns Declination to find the
angle S P N the time of the Suns rising; then in this Case there is given the
Hipotenusal, and the side adjacent to the angle sought to find the said angle;
and this is the 2d Case, whence the Proportion taken is, As Radius, To
Cotangent of the Hipotenusal: So the Tangent of the given side, To the Cosine
of the angle sought;
and so the Proportion to find the time of Suns rising will be As the Radius,
To the tangent of the Suns declination: So the tangent of the Latitude, To the
Sine of the time of Suns rising before 6 in Summer or after it in Winter, the
Complement whereof is the time of its rising from Midnight.


Tangent 13d Suns declination -- 936336 Tangent 51d 32 the Latitude -- 1,009922
Sine 16d 53 --, 946328 the Compl: of which Ark is 73, 6, which converted into
time shows that the Sun rises in our Latitude when he has 13d of North
Declination at 52^ and a half past 4 in the morning fere.
By the same Data we may find the Side S N the Suns Amplitude of rising or
setting, and this will agree with the 7^h Case; for here is given the
Hipotenusal, and one of the Legs to find the other Leg the Proportion will be,
As the Cosine of the given side: To Radius: So the Cosine of the Hipotenusal,
To the Cosine of the side sought;
that is in this Cass, As the Cosine of the Latitude, To Radius: So is the Sine
of the Suns Declination, To the Sine of his Amplitude from the East or West.


Example, Logme.

Sine 13d Radius is -- 1,935208 Sine 38d 28 -- 979383 Sine 21d 12 -- 955825 the
Complement whereof, viz 68d 48 is the side S N sought, and this Proportion is of
good use to obtain the Variation of the Compass at Sea by the Suns Coast of
rising; More Examples need not be given, the Reader may try over all the Cases
by the Calculated Triangle annexed.


Some may say here are more Proportions then needs, especially seeing there are
no Logarithmical Tables of Secants; but Alterna amant Camenae, they have not
hitherto been published in English; the Instruments to be treated of will have
Secants; besides in some Cannons there are Tables of the Arithmetical
Complements of the Logarithmical Sines and Cosines, which augmented by Radius,
are the Logarithmical Secants of the Complements of those Arks to which they do
belong; and for Instruments, especially Quadrants, a Proportion having Tangents
or Secants many times cannot be Operated on the Quadrant without changing the
Proportion, by reason those Scales cannot be wholly brought on, being infinite;
Now the chief Grounds for varying Proportions, are built upon a few Theorems.

1. That the Rectangle or Product of a Tangent, and its Complement is equal to
the Square of the Radius, or which is all one, that the Radius is a mean
Proportional between the Tangent of an Arch, and the Tangent of its Complement,
that is, As the Tangent of an Arch, To Radius: So Radius, To tangent of that
Arks Complement,


And by Inversion.

As the Cotangent of an Arch, To Radius: So Radius, To tangent of that Arch,
that is, As the 4h term to 3d, So second to first.


2. That the Radius is a mean Proportional between the Sine of an Arch, and the
Secant of that Arks Complement.

That is, As the Sine of an Arch, To Radius: So is the Radius, To Secant of
that Arks Complement, and the Converse.


3. That the Rectangles of all Tangents and their Complements, being
respectively equal to the Square of the Radius, are Reciprocally Proportional,
That is, As the Tangent of an Arch or Angle: Is to the Tangent of another Arch
or Angle: So is the tangent of the Complement of the latter Arch: To the
tangent of the Complement of the former,


And by varying the Second Term into the place of the Third, we may compare
the Tangent of one Ark to the Cotangent of another, etc. that is, As the
tangent of an Ark or Angle: Is to the Cotangent of another Ark So is the
tangent of this latter Ark To the Cotangent of the former.


4. That the Sines of Arches, and the Secants of their Complements are
reciprocally proportional, that is, As the Sine of an Arch: To the Sine of
another Arch or Angle: So is the Cosecant of the latter Arch, To the Cosecant
of the former,


And by changing the 2 and 3 Terms, a Sine may be compared with a Secant.

Now hence to be directed to vary Proportions, observe that if 4 Terms or
Numbers are Proportional, it is not material which of the two middle Terms be
in the second or third place; for instance if it be, As 2 to 4 So is 3 to 6:


It will also hold, As 2 to 3 So 4 to 6.


Secondly, that when 4 Terms are in direct Proportion, if a question be put
concerning a fifth Term not ingredient in the Proportion, it is not material
whether the two former, or the two latter Terms be taken: As if it should be
demanded; When 2 yards of Linen cost 4sh. What shall 8 yards? Answer, 16.

It might as well be said, If 3 cost 6, What 8? Answer, 16.

Hence then in any Proportion, if the two first Terms be, As the Tangent of an
ark, To Radius, to bring the Radius into the first place, it may be said, As
the Radius, Is to the Cotangent of that Ark, because there is the same
Proportion between these two latter Terms, as between two former; Now in all
the former Theorems, the two latter Terms consist either of the parts, or of
the Complements of the parts of the two former, whence it will not be difficult
to vary any Proportion propounded.

1. From whence it will follow, that a Proportion wholly in Tangents may be
changed into their Complements without altering the Order of the Terms, and
the Converse.

If it were As Tangent 10d, To tang 20d: So tang 52d, To tan 69d 15
It would also be, As tang 80d, To tan 70d: So tan 38d, To tan 20d 45


2. That if the two latter Terms of any Proportion being Tangents are only
changed into their Complements, it infers a Transportation of the first Term
into the second place.

That is in the first Example, As Tang 20d, To Tangent 10d: So Tangent 38d, To
Tangent 20d 45.


3. That if the two former Terms of a Proportion being Tangents are changed
into their Complements, it likewise infers a changing of the third Term into
the place of the fourth.

And then if the fourth Term be sought, it will hold, As the second Term, To
the first: So is the third Term, as at first propounded to the fourth.
In the first Example, as tangent 70d to tangent 80d: So tang ^2 to tang 69d 15.


4. That a Proportion wholly in Secants may be changed into a Proportion wholly
in Sines, without altering the Order of the places, only by taking their
Complements, and the Converse.

If it were, As Secant of 80 To Secant 70d So Secant 60d To Secant 10d It would
also hold in Sines,
As the Sine 10 to Sine 20d So the Sine of 30d To Sine 80d


5. That if the two latter Terms being Secants, should be changed into Sines,
and the Converse, if they were Sines to be turned into Secants, it will be done
only by taking their Complements, but then must the second and first Terms
change places one with another.

If the Proportion were, As Sine 12d to Sine 42d So is the Secant of 36d to
Secant of 75d 26.
It would also hold, As Sine 42d to Sine 12d So Sine of 54d to the Sine of 14d
34.


6. That if the two former Terms of a Proportion in Secants, should be changed
into Sines and the Converse; this would infer a changing of the fourth Term of
that Proportion into the place of the Third: But the third Term not being that
which is sought: The Rule to do it, would be to imagine the two first Terms to
change places, and then to take their Complements.

If the Proportion were: As Secant of 39d to Secant of 75d 26 So is the Sine of
12d to the Sine of 42d.
It would also hold, As Sine 14d 34, to Sine of 52d. So is the Sine of 12d, to
the Sine of 42d.


7 Two Terms whether the former or latter in any Proportion being as a Sine to
a Tangent, may be varied.

For, As the Tangent of an Arch, To the Sine of another Arch: So is the
Cosecant of the latter Arch, To the Cotangent of the former.


And by transposing the Order of the Term. As a Sine, To a Tangent: So the
Cotangent of the latter Arch, To the Cosecant of the former.


This will be afterward used in working Proportions on the Instrument, and
there Instances shall be given of it.

8. Lastly, Observe that if 4 Terms or Numbers are Proportional, their Order
may be so transposed, that each of those Terms may be the last in Proportion;
and so of any 4 Proportional Terms, if there be given, the other that is
unknown may be found, Thus, As first to second So third to fourth.
As second to the first So the fourth to the third:
As the third to the fourth:, So the first to the second.
As the fourth, To the third So the second, To the first.


Cases of Oblique Sphoerical Triangles.
1. TWo Sides together less then a Semicircle with the Angle comprehended given
to find one of the other Angles.

At two Operations they may be both found by a Proportion demonstrated in the
late Trigonometry of the Learned Mr. Oughtred.

As the Sine of half the sum of the sides, To Cotangent of half the contained
angle: So the sine of half the difference of the sides, To the Tangent of half
the difference of the other angles.
Again, As the Cosine of half the sum of the sides, To Cotangent of half the
contained angle: So the Cosine of half the difference of the sides, To the
Tangent of half the sum of the other angles.


Add the half difference to the half sum, and you have the greater Angle; but
subtracted from it, and there remains the lesser angle.

If the sum of the two given Sides exceeds a Semicircle, the Opposite Triangle,
must be resolved instead of that propounded.

Here note that evey Sphoerical Triangle has opposite to each angular Point,
another Triangle, having the side that subtends the said Angle common to both,
and the angle opposite thereto equal, the other parts of it are the Complements
of the several parts of the former to a Semicircle.

So if in the Triangle B C D there were given the sides B C, and C D with their
contained Angle B C D to find the Angle C B D because these two sides are
greater then a Semicircle, resolve the opposite Triangle C A D, in which there
will be given C A, which may be the Complement of the Latitude 38d 28, and C D
the Complement of the Altitude 83d with the angle A C D, the Suns Azimuth from
the North 73d to find the angle C A D the hour from Noon.



C A 38d: 28 Sides, C D 83: 00 Sides, 121: 28 sum 60: 44 half sum Logarithms
Logarith. 44: 32 difference 22: 16 difference, Sine 957854 Cosine -- 996634 36:
30 half the Angle 53: 30 Complement, Tang: 1013079 Idem -- 1013079 1970933
2009713 Sine of 60d 44 half sum 994069 Cosine 968919 Tang: of 30d 24 -- 976864
tan 68d 39 1040794 Sum 99: 3 hour, in Time 36 before 6 in the morning, or as
much after it in the afternoon, difference 38d 15 Angle of position.
2, Two Angles together less then a Semicircle with the side between them,
alias, the Interjacent side, To find one of the other sides.

This is but the Converse of the former to be performed at two Operations to
get them both, and the Proportion thence applied by changing the sides into
Angles.

As the Sine of the half sum of the angles, To the Sine of half their
difference: So is the Tangent of half the interjacent side, To the Tangent of
half the difference of the other sides.
Again.

As the Cosine of the half sum of the angles, To the Tangent of half the
interjacent side: So the Cosine of half their difference, To the Tangent of the
half sum of the other sides.
If half the difference of the sides be added to half the sum of the sides, it
makes the greater side; but subtracted from it, leaves the lesser.

If the Sum of the two given Angles exceeds a Semicircle, then, as in the
former Case, resolve the Opposite Triangle.



So in the Triangle Z P if there were given the angle Z P, the Suns Azimuth
from the North 63d 54, and the hour from Z P 105^ in time 5 in the morning, or
7 in the evening, and the Complement of the Latitude Z P 38d 28, to find the
Complement of the Altitude Z 80d 31, or the Complement of the Declination P 66^
29, two Operations finds both, and neither with less.

Example.

Angle Z P -- 105d, 00d P Z -- 63: 54 difference -- 41d 6 half difference --
20: 33 Sine -- 954533 Cosine 997144 half the side Z P -- 19: 14 Tang -- 954268
Idem 954268 Sum of the (...) -- 168: 54 1908801 1951412 half sum -- 84: 27 Sine
-- 999796 Cosine 898549 Tangent -- 7: 1 909005 ta 73^ 30 1052863 73: 30 Sum --
80 31 the greater side Z Difference -- 66 29 the lesser side P
3. Two sides with an Angle opposite to one of them given, To find the Angle
opposite to the other, its Affection being fore-known.

As the Sine of the side opposite to the angle given Is to the Sine of its
Opposite angle: So is the sine of the side opposite to the angle sought, To the
sine of its opposite angle.
Here note, that the same Sine is common to an Arch, and to its Complement to
180, if the Angle sought be foreknown to be Obtuse, substract the Arch found
from 180^ and there remains the angle sought.

Example.
So in the former Triangle, if there were given the side P 66d 29 the
Complement of the Declination with its opposite angle P Z 63d 54, the Suns
Azimuth from the North, and the side Z, the Complement of the Altitude 80 31,
the Angle Z P the hour from Noon would be found to be 105.

Sine 63d 54 -- 995329 80 31 -- 999402 1994731 Sine 66d 29 -- 9906234 Sine 75d
-- 998497
The Complement of 75d is the angle sought, being 105d, and so much is the hour
from Noon.

In some Cases the Affection of the angle sought cannot be determined from what
is given;

Such Cases are,

When the given Angle is Acute, and the opposite Side less then a Quadrant, and
the adjacent or other Side greater then the opposite Side, and its Complement
to a Semicircle also greater then the opposite Side.

Also when the given Angle is Obtuse, and the opposite Side greater then a
Quadrant, and also greater then the other side, and greater then the Complement
of the said other Side to a Semicircle.

In all other Cases the Affection of the Angle sought may be determined from
what is given; in these it cannot without the help of the third side (or
something else given)

Where Cases are thus doubtful, there can be but a double answer, and both
true; wherefore find the Acute Angle and its Complement to 180d and the like
answer give in Case 4^h, 5^h, 6th, 7th and 8th following.

4, Two Angles with a Side opposite to one of them being given, To find the
Side opposite to the other, its Affection being foreknown.

As the Sine of the angle opposite to the given side, Is to the Sine of the
given Side: So is the Sine of the angle opposite to the side sought, To the
Sine of the side sought.
If the side sought be foreknown to be Obtuse, the Complement of the Ark found
to 180 will be the side sought.

Example.
So in the former Triangle, if there were given the angle at Z the Suns Azimuth
from the North 63d 54, and the Complement of the Suns Declination P 66d 29 with
the hour from Noon Z P to find the Side Z the Complement of the Suns Altitude,
it would be found to be 80d 31, and the Altitude it self 9d 29.

Sine 66d 29 -- 996234 Sine 105 that is of 75d is -- 998497 1994731 Sine 63d 54
is -- 995329 Sine 80d 31 -- 999402
In some Cases the Affection of the Side sought cannot be determined from what
is given;

Such Cases are,

When the given Angle is Acute, and the opposite Side less then a Quadrant, and
the other Angle greater then the former Angle, and its Complement to a
Semicircle also greater then the said former Angle.

Also when the given Angle is Obtuse, and the opposite Side greater then a
Quadrant, the other Angle being less then this Angle, and its Complement to a
Semicircle also less then this Angle:

What Snellius has spoke concerning these doubts, is in some Cases false, in
others impertinent, however I conceive not that Learned Author mistakes, but
the Supervisors after his death.

In all other Cases the determination is certain, as may be hereafafter showed.

5. Two sides with an Angle opposite to one of them being given, To find the
third side, the kind of the angle opposite to the other side being foreknown.

First find the Angle opposite to the other side by 3d Case, and then you have
two Sides and their opposite Angles.

To find the third side by the Inverse of either of the Proportions used in the
2d Case, the former will be, As the Sine of half the difference of the angles
given, To tangent of half the difference of the sides given: So is the sine of
half the sum of those angles, To the tangent of half the side required.


In the latter Case, if the sum of the given Angles exceed a Semicircle, the
opposite Triangle must be resolved.

Example.
If in the former Triangle there were given the side P, the Complement of the
Declination 66d 29 and angle Z P, the Azimuth from the North 63d 54 with the
side Z P, the Complement of the Latitude 38d 28, to find the side Z, the
Complement of the Suns Altitude on the Proposed Azimuth: The first Operation
will be to find the Suns angle of Position Z P 37d 32, which is always Acute
when the Sun or Stars do not come to the Meridian between the Zenith and the
elevated Pole.

The said angle being found by the former Directions, we proceed to the second
Operation.

Sides 66 29 difference 28d 1 half 14d 00 30 Tang -- 939705 Sides 38 28
difference 28d 1 half 14d 00 30 Tang -- 939705 Angles 63 54 Sum 101d 26, half
50d 43 Sine -- 988875 Angles 37 32 Sum 101d 26, half 50d 43 Sine -- 988875
1928580 26 22 difference, half 13d 11 Sine -- 935806 Tangent of 40d 15 30 --
992774 doubled is 80d 31 the side sought being the Complement of the Suns
Altitude.
6. Two sides with an angle opposite to one of them being given, To find the
angle included, or between them, the species of the opposite to the other side
being foreknown.

First find the angle Opposite to the other side by 3d Case, and then we have
two angles and their opposite sides to find the other angle, by the Inverse of
either of the Proportions used in the first Case, the former will be, As the
sine of half the difference of the sides, To the Tangent of half the
difference of the angles: So is the sine of half the sum of the sides. To the
Cotangent of half the angle required;
That is, to the Tangent of an Ark, whose Complement is half the angle inquired.

If the sum of the given sides be more then a Semicircle, in the resolution of
this latter Case resolve the Opposite Triangle.

Example.
In the former Triangle given P Comple: Declination 66d 29 Z P Comple: Latitude
-- 38 28 Angle Z P the Azimuth -- 63 54 To find the hour Z P -- 105 The first
operation will find the angle of Position as before 37 d 32
The second Operation.

half difference of the given angles 13 d 11 m Tangent -- 936966 half sum of
the side -- 52, 28, 30 Sine -- 989931 1926897 half difference of the sides 14 d
00 30 Sine -- 938393 Tangent 37 d 30 -- 988504 Comple: is 52 30 doubled makes
105 d, the Angle sought.
7. Two Angles with a side opposite to one of them being given. To find the
third Angle, the kind of the side opposite to the other Angle being foreknown.

First find the side opposite to the other Angle by 4th Case,

And then we have two angles, and their opposite sides to find the third angle;
by transposing the order of either of the Proportions used in the first Case,
the latter will be, As the Cosine of half the difference of the sides, To the
Tangent of half the sum of the angles: So the Cosine of half the sum of the
sides, To the Cotangent of half the contained angle.




Example.
In the Triangle Z P Data angle -- 37 d 32 Angle P -- 105 00 Side Z -- 80 31 To
find the angle Z -- 63 54 The first Operation will find Z P -- 38 28
The second Operation.
half sum of the angles -- 71 d 16 Tangent -- 1046963 half sum of the sides --
59 d 29 30 Sine Compl: -- 970558 2017521 half difference of the sides 21 d 1 30
Cosine -- 997007 Tangent 58d 3 -- 1020514 Compl: 31d 57 doubled is 63^ 54 the
angle sought.
8. Two angles with a side Opposite to one of them being given, To find the
Interjacent side, the kind of the side opposite to the other angle being fore
known.

First find the side opposite to the other angle by 4 Case,

And then you have two sides, and their opposite angle given to find the 3 side
by, tranposing the Order of either of the Proportions used in the 2d Case, the
latter will be, As the Cosine of half the difference of the two angles, To the
tangent of half the sum of the two sides: So the Cosine of half the sum of
the two given angles, To the Tangent of half the third side.


Example.
In the former Triangle given the Hour angle at P 105d 00 Azimuth angle at Z 63
54 Compl Altitude Side Z 80 31 To find the Compl. of the Latitude the side Z P
38 28 The first Operation will find the side P 66^ 29
Second Operation.
half the sum of the two sides 73d 30 Tangent 1052839 half the sum of the two
angles 84 27 Cosine 898549 1951388 half the difference of the two angles 20d 33
Cosine 997144 Tangent of 19d 14 -- 954244 Doubled is 38 28 the side sought
These 6 last precedent Cases may be called the Doubtful Cases, because that
three given terms are not sufficient Data to find one single answer without the
quality of a fourth, which is demonstrated by Clavius, in Theodosium, and
seeing it passes without due caution in our English Books, I shall insert it
from him:



LEt A D and A C be two equal sides including the angle D AC, and both of them
less or greater then a Quadrant.

Draw through the Points C and D, the arch of a great Circle C D, continue it,
and draw thereunto another Arch or Side from A, namely A B, neither through the
Poles of the Arch C D, nor through the Poles of the Arch A D, so that the
angles B and B A D may not be right angles, nor the angle A D B, if then each
of these sides A D A C be less then a Quadrant, the two angles C, and A D C
will be Acute; and if these Arks be greater respectively then a Quadrant, the
two angles C and A D C, will be Obtuse, whence it comes to pass that the angle
A D B is Obtuse, when the angle A D C is Acute, and the contrary: Now forasmuch
as the sides A C and A D are equal to each other, the other Data, viz. the side
A B, and the angle at Bare common to both, for in each Triangle A B D, and A B
C there is given two sides with the angle at B opposite to one of them; Now
this is not sufficient Data to find the angle opposite to the other side, which
may be either the acute angle at C, or the Obtuse angle ADB the Complement
thereof to a Semicircle: Nor to find the third side, which may be either B D,
or the whole side B C, nor the angle included, which may be either B A D, or B
A C, therefore in these 3 Cases we have required the quality of the angle
opposite to the other given side A B, and though it be not so much observed; in
the other Trigonometry, by Perpendiculars let fall, without the knowledge of
the said angle it could not be determined whether the Perpendicular would fall
with in or without the Triangle, nor whether the angle found in the first Case
be the thing sought, or its Complement to 180^, nor whether the angles or
Segments found by 1st and 2d Operation in the other Cases are to be added
together, or subtracted from each other, to obtain the side or angle sought.

So also two angles with a side opposite to one of them, are not sufficient
Data to obtain a fourth thing in the said Triangle, without the affection of
the side opposite to the other given angle.



LEt A B and A C be two unequal sides containing the angle B A C both together
equal to a Semicircle, one being greater, the other less then a Quadrant Draw
through the Points B and C, the arch of a great Circle B C, continue it, and
draw thereto from A another side AD; but not through the Poles of A C, nor
through the Poles of B C, so that the angles D and C A D may not be right
angles, nor the angle A C D a right angle; for if it were a right angle, the
angle A B C whereto it is equal, should be also a right angle, and so the two
sides A B and A C, by reason of their right angles at B and C should be equal,
and be Quadrants contrary to the Supposition; Now the angles A C D and A B C
being equal, which is thus proved: Suppose the two sides A B and B D to be
continued to a Semicircle at E, then will the said angle be equal to its
opposite angle at B, the side A C by supposition is equal to the side A E, the
Complement of the side A B to a Semicircle, but equal sides subtend equal
angles, therefore the angle at C is equal to the angle at B or at E, which
being admitted retaining the side A D and angle at D, we have another angle
opposite thereto, either C or B, which are equal and common to both Triangles,
and so if the side opposite to the given angle at D were sought, a double
answer should be given, either the side A C, or the other side A B its
Complement to 180, and the interjacent side might be C D or B D, and the third
angle the lesser angle C A D, or the greater B A D, which is not commonly
animadverted.

Two Sides with the Angle comprehended, to find the third Side.
That the former Cases might be resolved without the help of Perpendiculars,
has been long since hinted by Mr Gunter, Mr Speidel, and Mr Gellibrand, but so
obscurely that I suppose little notice was taken thereof; but this Case has
not hitherto been resolved by any man, to my knowledge, under two Operations
with a Perpendicular let fall, working by Logarithms, unless by Multiplication
and Division in the natural Numbers, which being the only Case left wherein we
are to use Perpendiculars, I shall show how to shun both, with the joint use of
the Natural and Logarithmical Tables, by a novel Proportion of my own, and
illustrate the usefulness thereof by some Examples.

Two Sides with the Angle comprehended, to find 3d Side.
As the Cube of the Radius, To the Rectangle of the Sines of the comprehending
sides: So is the Square of the Sine of half the angle contained, To half the
difference of the Versed sines of the third side, and of the Ark of difference
between the two including sides,
Which half difference doubled, and added to the Versed Sine of the difference
of the Legs or containing sides, gives the Versed Sine of the side sought.

And if you will make the third Term the Square of the Sine of half the
Complement of the contained angle to 180d, you will find the half difference of
the Versed Sines of the third side, and of the sum of the two including sides
to be doubled and subtracted from the Versed Sine of the said sum.

But to apply the former to Logarithms.
Double the Logarithmical Sine of half the angle given, and thereto add the
Logarithms of the sines of the containing Sides, and from the left hand of the
Sum, Substract 3 for the Cube of the Radius, so rests the Logarithm of half the
difference of those two Versed Sines above.

And if instead of the second Term be taken into the Proportion, the double of
the Rectangle of the Sines of the containing Sides; that is, if the Logarithm
of the Number 2 be added to the Logm of the other middle Terms, you will have
the Logarithm of the whole Difference in the last place; having found it, take
the Number that stands against it, either in the Natural Sines or Tangents, and
accordingly add it to the Natural Versed Sine of the Difference of the Legs,
and the sum is the natural Versed Sine of the side sought.

This is the Inverse of the 4h Axiom, used when 3 sides are given to find an
angle, and will be of great use to Calculate the Distances of Stars by having
their Declinations and right Ascensions, or Longitudes and Latitudes given, by
means whereof the Altitudes of two of them, or of the Sun with the difference
of time, or Azimuth, being observed at any time off the Meridian, the Latitude
may be found, as also for Calculating the distances of places in the Arch of a
great Circle, all of them Propositions of good use in Navigation; as for the
latter it has hitherto been delivered in our English Books doubtfully,
erroneously, or not sufficiently for all Cases, the Rules delivered being only
true in some Cases, and doubtful in most, not determining whether the side
sought be greater or less then a Quadrant.

The Reader may observe how necessary it is to have such Tables, as have the
natural Sines and Versed Sines, etc. standing against the Logarithmical Sines,
for this and other following Proportions discovered by my self for the easy
calculating a Table of hours and Azimuths to all Altitudes, as also a Tables of
Altitudes to all hours; but as yet there are none such made as have the Versed
Sines, but will in due time be added to Mr. Gellibrands Tables; in the interim
it may be noted, that the Residue of the Natural Sine of an Ark from Radius
called its Arithmetical Complement, is the Versed Sine of that Arks Complement;
thus the natural Sine of 40d is 6427876 subtracted from Radius, rests 3572124,
the Versed Sine of 50 d. And for Arks above 90 d we need no natural Versed
Sines, because the natural Sine of any Arks excess above 90 d added to the
Radius is equal to the Versed Sine of the said Ark, thus the Sine of 40 d
augmented by the Radius is equal to the Versed Sine of 130 d and is 16427876

Example of this Case.
In the Triangle Z P let there be given the side Z, the Complement of the
Altitude 70 d 53 and the side Z P the Complement of the Latitude 38 d 28n with
the angle Z P 145 d the Suns Azimuth from the North, to find the side P, the
Suns distance from the Elevated Pole.



Sine 38 d 28m -- 97938317 Sine 70 53 -- 99753646 Sine 72 30 Logm dobled
199588390
Natural Sine against 97280353 it doubled is 10691964
Natural V Sine of 32 d 25m the difference of the sides -- 1558280
The Versed Sine of 103 d the -- 12250244 side sought, and therefore the Sun
has 13 d of South declination.
Another Example of this Case for Calculating the Suns Altitude on all hours.
As the Cube of the Radius, To the double of the Rectangle of the Cosines, both
of the Latitude, and of the Suns declination. So is the Square of the Sine of
half the hour from noon, To the difference of the Sines of the Suns Meridian
Altitude, and of the Altitude sought.
This Canon will find two Altitudes at one Operation, and will have very
little trouble in it, the double Rectangle, that is the second term of the
Proportion, being fixed for that Declination.

Add the Logarithms of the Number two, and of the Cosines of the Declination
and Latitude together the sum may be called the fixed Logarithm.

Double the Logarithm of the Sine of half the hour from noon, and add it to the
fixed Logarithm the sum rejecting 3 toward the left hand, for the Cube of the
Radius is the Logarithm of the difference: Take the natural Sine that stands
against it, and substract it from the natural Sine of the Meridian Altitude,
both for the Winter and Summer Declination, and there remains the natural Sines
of the Altitudes sought.

If this difference cannot be subtracted from the Sine of the Meridian
Altitude, it argues the Sun has no Altitude above the Horizon in this Case
substract that from this, and there will remain the Natural Sine of the Suns
Altitude for the like hour from midnight in Summer.

Example.
Let it be required to Calculate the Suns Altitude when he has 23d 31m both of
North and South Declination for our Latitude of London at 2 and 5 a Clock in
the afternoon, or which is all one for the hours of 10 and 7 in the morning.

Sine 38d 28m Compl Latitude -- 97938317 Sine of 66 29m Compl Declination --
99623428 Logarithm of Number 2 is -- 03010300
Fixed Number -- 200572045 Logm of Sine of 15d, doubled -- 188259924
Nearest natural Sine against it, 761900 -- 88831969 61d 59m Summer Meridian
Altitude Natural Sine -- 8828110 Substract -- 761900 the difference before
found Rests -- 8066210 the natural Sine of 53d 46 the Summer Altitude for the
hours of 10 and 2 14d 57m Winter Meridian Altitude Not Sine -- 2579760
Substract the former difference -- 761900
Rests the Natural Sine of 10d 27m the -- 1817860 Winter Altitude for the hours
of two and ten.
The same day for the Altitude of 5 and 7.
Fixed number -- 200572045 Sine of 37d 30m Logm doubled -- 195688942
Natural Sine against it 4226183 -- 96260987 Winter Meridian Altitude, as
before Sine 2579760
Rests -- 1646423 the natural Sine of 9d 29m Summer Altitude for 5 in the
morning, or 7 in the evening. Natural Sine. Summer Meridian Altitude, as before
-- 8828110 The former difference -- 4226183 Rests the Natural Sine of 27d 24m
-- 4601927 The Summer Altitude for 7 in the morning, or 5 in the afternoon.
The former Case may also be performed at two Operations by help of a
Perpendicular supposed, without the help of Natural Tables.
1. If both Sides are equal, As the Radius, To the sine of the Common side: So
the Sine of half the Angle, To the Sine of half the side sought.


2. If one of the sides be a Quadrant, this by continving the other side to a
Quadran (as shall afterward be showed) will become a Case of right angled
Sphoericala Triangles, in which besides the right angle, instead of the
quadrantal side, there will be given a Leg, and its adjacent angle to find the
other angle by 4 Case of right angled Sphoerical Triangles; and so if the angle
included were 90d it would be a Case of right angled Sphoerical Triangles, in
which besides the right angle, there would be given both the Legs or Sides to
find the Hipotenusal.

3. In all other Cases one or both of the including Sides being less then
Quadrants, it will hold, As the Radius, To the Cosine of the angle included: So
the tangent of the lesser side, To the tangent of a fourth Ark,


If the angle included, be less then 90d substract the 4^h Ark from the other
side; but if it be more from the other sides Complement to 180d, The remainder
is called the Residual Ark.

Then, As the Cosine of the 4th Ark, To the Cosine of the Ark remaining:

So the Cosine of the lesser side, To the Cosine of the side sought.

The side sought may be greater then a Quadrant, and so be doubtful, but we
may determine,

That when the Legs are of the same kind, and the angle comprehended Acute,
the side sought is less then a Quadrant.

And when the Legs or containing Sides are of a different kind, and the angle
comprehended Obtuse, the side sought is greater then a Quadrant.

Or it may be determined from the affection of the Residual Ark in all Cases.
When the contained angle is acute, and the residual Ark more then 90d, or when
the said angle is Obtuse, and the residual Ark less then a Quadrant, the side
sought is greater then a Quadrant, in all other Cases less.



Example.
In the Triangle Z P, let there be given Z P, and Z with the angle at Z, to
find the side P, the Suns distance from the Elevated-Pole.

angle included 145d Logm Or, 35 Compl 55d Sine -- 99133645 Tangent of 38 28
lesser side -- 99000865 Tangent 33d, 3 -- 98134510 Compl P to 180d is 109 7 The
Ark remaining or differ: 76d 4m Cosine -- 93816434 Lesser side -- 51 32 Cosine
-- 98937452 192753886 Ark found -- 33d 3m Cosine -- 99233450 Sine 13 --
93520436
The Complement hereof 77 d should be the side fought, but because the angle
was Obtuse, and the residual Ark less then a Quadrant, the side sought is
greater, and therefore 103 d the Complement hereof is the side sought.

This Case and the Converse of it being the next Case, I have thus settled to
apply the to Logarithmical Tables only, in Case the natural ones were wanting,
being all the other Cases are thereto fitted; and as the trouble about the
Cadence of a Perpendicular is here shunned, without so much as the name of it;
so may it be done in all the rest of the Oblique Cases, which I had so fitted
up for my own use; but forbear to trouble the Reader with them, apprehending
these to be better, and that he would not willingly Calculate for a portion of
an angle, or a Segment of a Side, in order to the finding out the thing sought,
when with as little trouble he may come by it, and yet Calculate always either
for a side or an angle, one of the six principal parts of the Triangle.

Otherwise for Instruments.
As the Diameter, To the difference of the Versed Sines of the sum, and of the
difference of any two sides, including an Angle.

Or, As the Cosecant of one of the including Sides, Is to the Sine of the other
side: So is the Versed Sine of the angle included. To the difference of the
Versed Sines of the Ark of difference between the two including Sides, and of
the third side sought, Which difference added to the Versed Sine of the
difference of the Legs, makes the Versed Sine of the side sought.
And so is the Versed Sine of the contained angles Complement to 180d To the
difference of the Versed Sines of the sum of the Legs, and of the side sought,
which subtracted from the Versed Sine of the said sum, there remains the
Versed sine of the side sought,

Here note, that the same Versed Sine is common to an Ark greater then 180 d,
and to its Complement to 360 d, So the Versed Sine of 200 d is also the Versed
Sine of 160 d.

The Proportions delivered for Instruments having such Tables as before hinted,
will not be so unsuitable to the Logarithms as commonly reputed.

Example for Calculating the distance of two places in the Arch of a great
Circle, otherwise then according to the general Cannon before delivered.
As the Secant of one of the Latitudes, To the Cosine of the other, So the
Versed Sine of the difference of Longitude, To the difference of the Versed
Sines of these two Arks,
The one the Ark of distance sought, the other the Ark of difference between
both Latitudes, when in the same Hemisphere, or the sum of both Latitudes when
in different Hemispheres, which difference added to the Versed Sine of this
latter Ark, the sum is the versed Sine of the distance,

By turning the Substraction to be made of the first Term into an Addition,
the two first Terms of the Proportion will be, As the Square of the Radius, To
the Rectangle of the Cosines of both the Latitudes:


Then for the third Term being the difference of Longitude, take the natural
Versed Sine thereof, and seek that Number in the natural Tangents, and that
Logarith Tangent that stands against it take into the Proportion instead of the
Logarithm of the Versed Sine proposed.

Admit it were required to find the Distance between London and Bantam, in the
Arch of a great Circle.
Logme

Bantam Longitude 140 d Latitude 5 d 40 South Cosine 9,9978725

London Longitude 25, 50 Latitude 51, 32 North Cosine 9,7938317 -- difference
of Long 114 d 10 Not V Sine 14093923 equal to the natural Tangent of 54 d 38
nearest Logm 10,1489900

Natural Sine 8723538 against it -- 2 9940694

Not Versed Sine of 57 d 12 the sum of both Latitudes 4582918 --

Sum -- 13306456 the natural Versed Sine of 109 d 18 30 the Ark of distance
sought.

And if to the said difference, namely -- 8723538

Be added the natural Versed Sine of the difference of both Latitudes, namely
the V Sine of 45 d 52 -- 3036695 --

The sum being the natural V Sine of 100 d 8 30 is -- 11760233 the distance of
two places, having the same Latitudes, and difference of Longitude, but are
both in the same Hemisphere.

Here note, that no two places can have above 180 d difference of Longitude,
therefore in differencing the two Longitudes if the remainder be more take its
Complement to 360 d.

The Complements of these two distances, namely 70 d 41 30 and 79 d 51 30 are
the distances of two places of the same Latitudes considered as in different
Hemispheres, their difference of Longitude being 65 d 50 the Complement of the
former, and two places in a such Position compared with their former Positions
may be apprehended to be Diametrically opposite upon the Globe, as thus, Bantam
having 5d 40 South Latitude, let another place have as much North Latitude, the
difference of Longitude between them 180 d and consequently so much their
distance; now whatever be the distance between Bantam and the third place, the
Complement of it to 180 d shall be the distance between the two other places.

10. Two angles with the Interjacent side given. To find the 3d angle, the
proportion derived from the former Case by changing the angles into sides, and
holds without any such change supposed is,

As the Cube of the Radius, To the double of the Rectangle of the Sines of the
two given angles:

So is the Square of the Sine of half the given side, To the difference of the
Versed Sines of these two Arks, the one is the angle sought, the other the Ark
of difference between one of the including angles, and the Complement of the
other to a Semicircle, which difference added to the Versed Sine of this Ark
gives the Versed Sine of the angle sought.

How to work this by Tables need not be showed after the Logm of the difference
is got, if it be less then the Radius, it may be sought either in the Sines or
Tangents, and the natural Sine or Tangent that stands against it and comes
nearest taken; but when it exceeds the Radius always seek it in the Tangents,
and take the natural Tangent that stands against it, which difference so found,
is to be added to the Versed Sine of the difference of the Legs to obtain the
Versed Sine of the angle sought.

Otherwise for Tables the common way by a supposed Perpendicular
1. If both the angles are equal, As the Radius. To the Sine of the angle
given: So the Cosine of half the given Side, To the Cosine of half the angle
sought.

In all other Cases not belonging to right angled Triangles if one or both of
the given angles be Acute, it holds, As the Radius, To Cosine of the
interjacent side: So the Tangent of the lesser angle, To the Tangent of a 4^h
Ark.


If the interjacent side be more then 90d substract the 4^h Ark from the other
angle; but if less then 90d, substract the 4^h Ark from the other angles
Complement to 180d, noting the residual Ark.

Then, As the Cosine of the 4th Ark, To the Cosine of the Ark remainmaining: So
the Cosine of the lesser angle, To the Cosine of the angle sought.


When the interjacent side is less then a Quadrant, and the residual Ark more,
or when the interjacent side is greater then a Quadrant, and the residual Ark
less, the angle sought is Obtuse, in all other Cases Acute.



In the Triangle Z P let there be given The angle of Position at -- 21d 28 The
hour from noon angle at P -- 33 47 And the side P the Suns distante from the
elevated Pole -- 103 00


To find his Azimuth the angle Z P
Sine 13 d the Complement of the interjacent side -- 93520880 Tangent 21 d 28
the lesser angle -- 95946561
Tangent of 5 d 3 -- 89467441 The other angle -- 33 47
The difference being the residual ark 28 44 Cosine -- 99429335 Lesser angle --
21 28 Cosine -- 99687773 199117108 Ark first found -- 5d 3 Cosine -- 99983109
Sine 55 d -- 99133999
The Complement whereof 35 d in this Case is not the angle sought, but the
residue hereof from a Semicircle 145 d is the angle sought being Obtuse,
because the interjacent side is greater then a Quadrant, and the residual Ark
less; the residual Ark in Operation if greater then a Quadrant, take its
Complement to 180 d, because there are no Sines to Arks above a Quadrant, and
then the Complement of this Ark to 90d is the Complement of the residual Ark
the Sine whereof must be taken for the Cosine of the residual Arc.

Otherwise for Instruments.
As the Diameter, To the difference of the Versed Sines of the sum and
difference of the two including angles, Or, As the Cosecant of one of those
angles, Is to the Sine of the other, So the Versed Sine of the interjacent
side,
To the difference of the Versed Sine of an Ark left by substracting one of the
including angles from the Complement of the other to a Semicircle, and of the
angle sought, which difference added to the Versed Sine of the said Ark, gives
the Versed Sine of the angle sought,

And so is the Versed Sine of the interjacent sides Complement to 180 d, To the
difference of the Versed Sines of an Ark made by adding one of the including
angles to the Complement of the other to a Semicircle, and of the angle sought,
which subtracted from the Versed Sine of the said Ark, leaves the versed sine
of the angle sought.

11. Three Sides to find an Angle.
The two sides including the angle sought are called Legs, and the third side
the Base.

As the Rectangle or Product of the Sines of the half sum of the three sides
and of the difference of the Base therefrom. Is to the Square of the Radius: So
is the Rectangle of the sines of the differences of the Legs from the said
half sum, To the Square of the Tangent of half the angle sought.
And by changing the third Term into the place of the first, As the Rectangle
of the Sines of the differences of the Legs from the half sum of the 3 sides,
Is to the Square of the Radius: So the Rectangle of the Sines of the half sum
of the three sides, and of the difference of the Base therefrom, To the Square
of the Tangent of an Ark, whose Complement doubled is the angle sought,
or this Ark doubled is the Complement of the angle sought to 180 d, or it
might be expressed, To the Square of the Cotangent of half the angle sought.

Otherways in Sines.
As the Rectangle of the Sines of the containing Sides or Legs, Is to the
Square of the Radius; So the Rectangle of the Sines of the differences of the
Legs from the half sum of the three sides, To the Square of the Sine of half
the angle sought.
Or the Cosine may be found.
As the Rectangle of the Sines of the containing sides, Is to the Square of the
Radius: So the Rectangle of the Sines of the half sum of the 3 sides, and of
the difference of the Base therefrom, To the Square of the Cosine of half the
angle sought.
These two latter Proportions are demonstrated in the Treatises of the Lord
Napier, Mr Oughtred, Mr Norwood, and are those from whence I shall educe the
Demonstrations of the rest.

To work the third Proportion that finds the Square of the Sine of half the
angle.
To the Arithmetical Complements of the Logarithms of the sines of the
containing Sides or Legs add the Logarithmical Sines of the differences of the
said Legs from the half sum of the three Sides, the half sum of these four
Numbers will be the Logarithm of the sine of half the angle sought.

In the Triangle Z P, Data, the three Sides to find the angle a P the hour from
noon.



80 d 31 Base 66 29 Legs -- Ar comp, 0376572 38 28 Legs -- Ar comp, 2061683
Sum-185, 28 difference of the Legs half-92 44 from half sum -- 26d 15 Sine
9,6457058 54, 16 Sine 9,9094190
Sum -- 19,7989503 Sine of 52 d 30 half -- 9,8994751 doubled 105, the angle at
P sought.
The Arithmetical Complement of a Logarithm, is the residue of that Logarithm
from the next bigger Number, consisting of an Unite and Ciphers.

Otherwise for Instruments.
As the difference of the Versed Sines of the sum, and of the difference of any
two sides including an angle, Is to the Diameter,
Or, As the sine of one of the said sides, To the Secant of the Complement of
the other. So is the difference of the Versed Sines of the third side, and of
the Ark of difference between the two including sides, To the Versed Sine of
the angle sought.
And so is the difference of the Versed Sines of the third, and of the sum of
the two including sides, To the versed Sine of the sought angles Complement to
180d.


12. Three Angles to find a Side.
The work here for the Canon or Tables, will be by changing the Angles into
Sides, the general Rule for changing all the parts of a Triangle, is to draw a
new Triangle, and let the angles be wrote against their Opposite sides, and
these against those, only taking the Complements of the greatest Angle, and
greatest side opposed thereto to 180 d, this for most convenience that the
sides or angles of the new framed Triangle may not be too large, and so cause
recourse to the Opposite Triangle, otherwise the Complements of any side and
its opposite angle to 180 d* might as well have been taken.



But for this Case, seeing there are only angles to be changed into sides, take
the Complement of the greatest angle to 180 d and proceed as if there were
three sides given to find an angle.

But the Proportion in Versed Sines, etc. without any such change will be, As
the difference of the Versed Sines of the sum, and of the difference of any two
angles adjacent to the side sought. Is to the Diameter,


Or, As the Sine of one of the said angles, Is to the Cosecant of the other: So
is the difference of the Versed Sines of the third or Opposite angle, and of an
Ark left by substracting one of the including angles from the Complement of the
other to a Semicircle, To the Versed Sine of the side sought.
And so is the difference of the Versed Sines of the third angle, and of an Ark
made by adding one of the including Angles to the Complement of the other to a
Semicircle. To the Versed Sine of the sought sides Complement to 180d.


Thus having finished the Cases, it is to be intimated that the Proportions
here used in Versed Sines are variously demonstrated in diverse Writers, but in
most the latter part for finding the Complement of an angle to 180d, is quite
omitted, those that have demonstrated the former part, do it in these terms
following. As the Rectangle of the sines of the containing sides, Is to the
Square of the Radius: So is the difference of the Versed Sines of the Base, or
third Side, and of the Ark of difference between the two including sides, To
the Versed Sine of the angle sought,
which the Reader may see in Lansberg, Regiomantanus, Snellius, Pitiscus, and
the learned Clavius, who makes 15 Cases, and twice as many Scheams, to
demonstrate this part of it. I shall only show how it may be inferred from the
common Proportions in use fitted to the Tables demonstrated by the Lord Napier,
Mr Oughtred, Mr. Norwood.

We have two Proportions delivered in Rectangles and Squares the one for
finding an angle, the other to find its Complement to 180d. The two first
terms are the Proportion between the Rectangle of the Sines of the containing
sides, and the Square of the Radius; these two terms being divided by the Sine
of one of those sides, the Quotient will be the Sine of the other, if the same
Divisor divide the Square of the Radius, the Quotient will be the Secant of the
Complement of the Ark belonging to the Divisor, because, As the Sine of an Ark,
To Radius, So is the Radius, To the Secant of that Arks Complement; But if any
common Divisor divide any two Terms of a Proportion, the Dividends will be
Acquimultiplex to the Quotients; and therefore by the Quotients will bear such
Proportion each to other as the Dividends, and therefore it holds, As the
Rectangle of the Sines of the containing sides, Is to the Square of the Radius:
So is the Sine of one of those sides, To the Secant of the Complement of the
other.


Again, for the third Term, to find an angle it is proposed. So is the
Restangle of the Sines of the differences of the Legs from the half sum of the
three sides.

Or which is all one, So is the Rectangle of the Sines of the half sum, and
half difference of the Base or third side, and of the Ark of difference between
the two including sides, To the Square of the Sine of half the angle sought,


And so to find the Complement of an angle to 180 d.

So is the Rectangle of the Sines of the half sum of the three sides, and of
the difference of the third side or Base therefrom,
Or which is equivalent thereto, So is the Rectangle of the Sines of the half
sum, and half difference of the Base or third side, and of the sum of the two
including sides, To the Square of the Sine of an Ark,
which doubled is the Complement of the angle sought to 180 d, or the
Complement of that Arch to a Quadrant doubled, is the angle sought.

The former of these two expressions of the third Term of the Proportion, as
being the more facil for memory is now retained; but the latter, (formerly
used, and now rejected) agrees best with the Proportion, as applied to Versed
Sines, for the inferring whereof note, that such Proportion, As the difference
of two Versed Sines bears to another Versed Sine, the same Proportion does
the half difference of those Versed Sines, bear to half the Versed Sine of that
other Arch: But that is the same that the Rectangle of the Sines of the half
sum and half difference of any two Arks does bear to the Square of the Sine of
half that other Arch, which will be thus inferred, because if the said
Rectangle and Square be both divided by Radius, the two Quotients will be the
half difference of the versed Sines of the two Arks proposed, and half the
versed Sine of the 4^h Arch.

That the Sines of the half sum and half difference of any two Arks are mean
Proportionals between the Radius and the half difference of the Versed Sines of
those Arks is demonstrated in Mr Gellibrands Trigonometry in Octavo, that is,
As the Radius, To the Sine of half the sum of any two arks: So is the sine of
half the difference of those two arks, To half the difference of the versed
sines of those two arks,
and therefore the said Rectangle divided by Radius, the Quotient is half the
difference of the versed sines of the two Arks.

And that the Sine of any Arch is a mean Proportional between the Radius and
half the versed Sine of twice that Arch,

That is, As the Radius, Is to the sine of an Arch: So the sine of that Arch,
To half the versed sine of twice that Arch,
and therefore the Square of the sine of any Arch divided by Radius, the
Quotient is the half versed sine of twice that Arch; whence the Rule to make a
Cannon of whole Logarithmical versed sines is to take half the arch proposed,
and to the Logarithm thereof doubled, or twice wrote down, to add the Logarithm
of the number two, and from the sum to substract the Radius.

We have before inferred, that As the Rectangle of the sines of the containing
sides, Is to the Square of the Radius: So is the sine of one of those sides, To
the Secant of the Complement of the other,
and that by dividing those two Plains by one of those sides; but if we divide
the said two Plains, viz. the Rectangle of the sines of the containing sides,
and the Square of the Radius, by the Radius as a common Divisor, the latter
Quotient will be the Radius, and the former the half difference of the versed
sines of those Arks whereof the two containing sides are the half sum and the
half difference; but those Arks are found by adding the half difference to the
half sum to get the greater, and substracting it therefrom to get the lesser;
Which is no other then to get the sum and difference of the two containing
sides, it therefore holds, As the Rectangle of the sines of the containing
sides, Is to the Square of the Radius,
Or, As the sine of one of those sides, To the Secant of the Complement of the
other: So is the half difference of the versed sines of the sum and difference
of those two sides to the Radius,


And by consequence so is the whole difference to the Diameter, and this being
admitted the whole Proportion in all its parts may be inferred from Mr Daries
Book of the Uses of a Quadrant, where he demonstrates, That, As the difference
of the versed Sines of the sum and difference of any two sides including an
angle, Is to the Diameter: So is the difference of the versed sines of the
third side, and of the Ark of difference between the two including sides, To
the versed sine of the angle sought, in that Scheme it lies,


As M S, To G H: So is M P, To H C.

And I further add,

As M S, To G H: as before, So is P S, To G C. that is, retaining the two first
Terms of the Proportion, the same it holds for the third and fourth Term.

So is the difference of the versed sines of the third side, and of the sum of
the two including sides, To the versed sine of the sought angles Complement to
180d.

Now from these Proportions thus Demonstrated, are inferred those others that
give the answer in the Squares of Tangents, in order whereto observe,

That if 4 Numbers are Proportional, their Squares are also Proportional
(quamvis non in eadem rations) so that any three of those Squares being given,
the Square of the 4th will be found by direct Proportion, and the Proportion
for making a Table of Natural Tangents from the Tables of natural sines is, As
the Cosine of an Ark, To the sine of the said Ark: So is the Radius, To the
Tangent of the said Ark.


It will therefore hold by 22 Prop. of 6h Book of Euclid, As the Square of the
Cosine of an Ark, Is to the Square of its sine: So is the Square of the Radius,
To the Square of its Tangent,


Now from the two Demonstrated Proportions for the Tables, the two first Terms
are common to both, and therefore there is the like Proportion between the two
latter Terms of the first Proportion, and the two latter in the second, as
between the two latter, and the two former in each Proportion: Now because the
latter Proportion finds the Square of the Cosine, and the former the Square of
the Sine of the same Ark, it is inferred that the third term in the latter
Proportion, bears such Proportion to the third Term in the former Proportion,
as the Square of the Cosine of an Ark, does to the Square of its Sine, which is
the same that the Square of the Radius bears to the Square of the Tangent of
the said Ark, it therefore holds when three sides of a Spherical Triangle, are
given to find an angle. As the Rectangle of the Sines of the half sum of the
three sides, and of the difference of the Base therefrom, Is to the Rectangle
of the Sines of the differences of the Legs therefrom: So is the Square of the
Radius, To the Square of the Tangent of half the angle sought,
and by changing the 2d Term into the place of the first. As the Rectangle of
the sines of the differences of the Legs from the half sum of the 3 sides, Is
to the Rectangle of the sines of the half sum of the three sides, and of the
difference of the Base therefrom: So is the Square of the Radius, To the Square
of the Cotangent of half the angle sought.


These Proportions are published in order to their Application to the
Serpentine Line, which will be accomodated for the sudden operating of any of
them; the Axioms to be remembered are not many, the Reader will meet with their
Demonstration and Application in Mr Newtons Trigonometry now in the Press, and
said to be near finished: The four Proportions in plain Triangles, when three
sides are given to find an angle without the Cadence of Perpendiculars are
demonstrated in the 27 Section of the late Miscellanies of Francis van Schooten.

The Construction of diverse Instruments will require a Table of the Suns
Altitudes to the Hour and Azimuth assigned; And for the Acurate bounding in of
the Lines, it may be a Table of Hours and Azimuths to any Altitude assigned;
for the easy Calculating whereof, I am desired for the ease and benefit of the
Trade, to render this part of Calculation as facil as I can, and therefore
shall handle it the more largely.

To Calculate a Table of Hours to all Altitudes in all Latitudes.
The 1. Proportion shall be to find the Suns Altitude in Summer, or Depression
in Winter at the hour of 6. As the Radius, To the sine of the Latitude: So the
sine of the Declination, To the sine of the Altitude or Depression sought


This remains fixed for all that day the Suns Declination supposed not to vary,
and then it holds, As the Cosine of the Declination, To the Secant of the
Latitude: So in Summer is the difference in Winter the sum of the sines of the
Suns Altitude proposed, and of his Altitude or Depression at 6 To the sine of
the hour from 6 toward noon in Winter, and in Summer also, when the given
Altitude is greater then the Altitude of 6, but when it is less toward
midnight.


This Proportion also holds for Calculating the Horary distance of any Star
from the Meridian.

In like manner to Calculate the Azimuth.
As the sine of the Latitude, To sine of the Declination: So is the Radius, To
the side of the Suns Altitude or Depression in the prime Vertical, that is,
being East or West.
This remains fixed for one day.

Then, As the Cosine of the Altitude, To the Tangent of the Latitude: So in
Summer is the difference, and in Winter the sum of the sines of the Suns
Altitude proposed, and of his Vertical Altitude or Depression, To the sine of
the Azimuth toward noon Meridian in Winter and in Summer also, when the given
Altitude is greater then the Vertical Altitude or Depression, but when it is
less toward Midnight Meridian.


This Proportion is general either for Sun or Stars, when the Declination is
less then the Latitude of the place; But when it is more, say as before, As the
sine of the Latitude, To the sine of the Declination: So is the Radius, To a
fourth we may call it a Secant.


Again. As Cosine Altitude, To the Tangent of the Latitude: So in declinations
toward the Depressed Pole is the sum; but toward the Elevated Pole the
difference of this Secant, and of the sine of the Sun or Stars Altitude, To the
sine of the Azimuth from the Vertical toward the noon Meridian.


Before Application be made, the latter part of these Proportions being of my
own peculiar Invention, and of very great use both for Calculation, and
Instrumentally, it will be necessary to demonstrate the same.



For the Hour from the Analemma.
Having in the Scheme annexed drawn the Equator and Horizon, the two pricked
Lines passing through the Center, as also the Prime Vertical and Axis, the two
straight Lines passing through the same.

Let I X and L M represent two Parralells of Declination on each side the
Equator, and O X a Parralel of the Suns Altitude in Summer, and P Q of his
Depression in Winter, at the hour of 6, because these Parralells pass through
the Intersection of the Parralells of Declination with the Axis. Let R S be a
Parralel of Altitude after 6, and T V a Parralel of Altitude before it; from
the Intersections of these Parralells of Altitude with the Parralels of
Declination let fall Perpendiculars on the Parralells of the Suns Altitude or
Depression at 6, and then we shall have diverse right Lined right angled
Triangles Constituted in which we shall make use of the Proportion of the sines
of angles to their opposite sides an Axiom of common demonstration.

In the Triangle A F E, As the sine of the angle at F the Radius, To its
Opposite side A E, the sine of the Declination: So the sine of the Latitude the
angle at E to A F, the sine of the Suns Altitude at 6.

Again in the two Opposite Triangles A B C, the smaller before the greater
after 6.

As the Cosine of the Latitude the sine of the angle at A, To its Opposite side
B, C, the difference of the sines of the Suns Altitude at 6, and of his
proposed Altitude: So is the Radius sine of the angle at B, To C A, the sine of
the hour from 6 in the Parralel of Declination in the lower Triangle before, in
the upper after 6.
So in the Winter or lower Triangle A B D C.

As Cosine of the Latitude sine of the angle at A, To B C, the sum of the sines
of the Suns Depression at 6 B D, and of his given Altitude D C: So is the
Radius the sine of the angle at B, To A C, the sine of the hour from 6 toward
noon in the Parralel of Declination,
The sine of the hour thus found in a Parralel, is to be reduced by another
Analogy to the common Radius, and that will be, As the Radius of the Parralel I
A, the Cosine of the Declination, Is to the common Radius E AE: So is any other
sine in that Parralel. To the sine of the said Arch to the common Radius.


Now it rests to be proved that both these Analogies may be reduced into one,
and that will be done by bringing the Rectangle of the two middle Terms of the
first Proportion with the first Term under them as an improper Fraction to be
placed as a single Term in the second Proportion, being in value the answer
found in the Parralel, and then we have the Rule of three to Operate as it were
in whole Numbers and mixed. The Proportion will run, As the Cosine of the
Declination, To Radius: So the said Improper Fraction* To the Answer.
and so proceeding according to the Rules of Arithmetic.

The Divisor will be the Rectangle of the Cosine of the Declination, and of the
Cosine of the Latitude, one of the middle Terms would be the Square of the
Radius, and the other the former sum or difference.

Now if any two Terms of a Proportion be divided by a common Divisor, the
Dividends being Equimultiplex to the Quotients, the Quotients bear the same
mutual Proportion as the Dividends by 18^ Propos. 7 Euclid.

So in this instance if the Rectangle of the Cosines both of the Latitude and
of the Declination be divided by one of those Terms, the Quotient will be the
other, and if the Square of the Radius be divided by the Sine of an Arch, the
Quotient will be the Secant of that Arks Complement; So in the present Example,
if the former Rectangle be divided by the Cosine of the Latitude* the Quotient
is the Cosine of the Declination, if the Square of the Radius be divided by the
same Divisor, the Quotient is the Secant of the Latitude, likewise if both
those Plains were divided by the Cosine of the Declination, the Quotients would
be the Cosine of the Latitude, and the Secant of the Declination, it therefore
holds, As the Cosine of the Declination, To the Secant of the Latitude,
Or, As the Cosine of the Latitude, To the Secant of the Declination: So is the
former sum or difference of sines, To the sine of the hour from 6, which was to
be proved.


Corrollarie.

As the Radius, To the sine of an Arch in a lesser Circle or Pararlell: So is
the Secant of that Parralell, To the sine of the said Arch, to the common
Radius.
Hence may be observed a general Canon for the double or compound Rule of
three, divide the Terms into two single Rules, by placing two Terms of like
Denomination in each Rule, and the other remaining Term may in most Cases be
put among either of these two Terms of like Denomination, and then by arguing
whether like require like, or unlike, the Divisor in each single Rule, may be
discovered, and then it will hold in all Cases, As the Rectangle or Product of
the two Divisors, Is to the product of any two of the other Terms: So is the
other Term left, To the Number sought,




For the Azimuth.
Having drawn the Horizon and Axis, the two pricked Lines, the Vertical Circle Z
N, and the Equinoctial Ae Ae, the Parralels of Declination I K and L M, draw T
V a Parralel of lesser Altitude then that in the Vertical, and R S a Parralel
of greater Altitude; Draw also P Q a Parralel of Depression equal to the
Vertical Altitude, in the point C above the Center the Point A being as much
below it b,eing the point where the Parralel of Declination intersects the
Vertical Circle, and from the point C in the lesser parralel of Altitude, let
fall the perpendicular C B on the parralel of Depression P Q, by this means
there will be Constituted diverse right lined, right angled Triangles, and
through those Points where the parralel of Declination, and parralels of
Altitude intersect, are drawn Elipses pricked from the Zenith to represent the
Azimuths, and in the three several Triangles thus Constituted, the side A B
measures the quantity of the Azimuth in the parralel of Altitude, and B C in
the two upper Triangles is the difference of the sines of the Suns proposed
Altitude, and of his Altitude in the prime Vertical: But in the lower Triangle
the sum of them, it then holds by the Proportion of the sines of Angles to
their opposite sides.

In the two upper Triangles, As the Cosine of the Latitude, the sine of the
angle at A, To its opposite side B C, the difference of the sines of the Suns
Vertical, and of his proposed Altitude: So is the sine of the Latitude, that is
the sine of the angle at C, To its opposite side B A, the sine of the Azimuth
from the East and West,


And the like in the lower Triangle, only there the third Term B C, is the
sum of the sines of the Suns Vertical Depression, and of his given Altitude:

Such Proportion as as the Cosine of an Ark does bear to the sine of an Ark,
does the Radius bear to the Tangent of the said Ark, this being the Canon by
which the natural Tangents are made from the natural sines, and therefore we
may change the former Proportion, and instead thereof say, As the Radius, To
the Tangent of the Latitude: So the said sum or difference of Sines, To the
Sine of the Azimuth in the Parralel of Altitude:


The answer falling in a Parralel or lesser Circle is to be reduced to the
common Radius by another Analogy, and that is As the Cosine of the Altitude
(the Radius of the parralel) To the Radius: So any sine in the said parralel,
To the like sine in the common Radius.


Now it is to be proved that both these Proportions may be brought into one,
and that will be as before, by making an improper Fraction whose Numerator
shall be the Rectangle of the two middle Terms of the former Proportion, the
first Term, viz. the Radius being the Denominator, and placing this as the
third Term in the second Proportion, and then those that understand how to
operate the Rule of three in whole Numbers and mixed, will find their Divisor to
be the Rectangle or Product of the Cosine of the Altitude, and of the Radius,
and the Dividend the Product of the three other Terms, namely, of the Tangent
of the Latitude, the Radius, and the former sum or difference of sines, whence
it holds, As the Rectangle of the Cosine of the Altitude, and of the Radius, Is
to the Rectangle of the Tangent of the Latitude, and of the Radius: So is the
former sum or difference of sines, To the sine of the Azimuth.


The Reader may presently espy that the two former Terms of this Proportion
may be freed from the Radius by dividing them both thereby, and the Quotients
will be the Cosine of the Altitude, and the Tangent of the Latitude,

It therefore holds, As the Cosine of the Altitude, To the Tangent of the
Latitude: So in Summer is the difference, in Winter the sum of the sines of the
Suns Vertical and proposed Altitude, To the sine of the Azimuth from the
Vertical.


This is general either for Sun or Stars, when their Declination is less then
the Latitude of the place; but when it is more, the Case does but little vary.

In the Scheme annexed fitted to the Latitude of the Barbados having drawn H H
the Horizon, P P the Axis, Ae Ae the Equator, Z A the Vertical draw two
parralells of Declination F R, K A continued till they intersect the Vertical
prolonged, draw the parralel of Altitude B, and parralel thereto from the Point
A draw A E, Then does the latter part of the Proportion lie as evident as
before,

In the right angled Triangle C G F right angled at G, As the sine of the
Latitude the angle at F, To its Opposite side C G the sine of the Declination,
So the Radius the angle at G, To the Secant C Z F.


Again in Summer.

As the Cosine of the Latitude the angle at, To its opposite side D Z F, the
difference between the former Secant and the sine of the Altitude: So is the
sine of the Latitude, the angle at F, To its opposite side D, the sine of the
Azimuth from the Vertical in the Parralel of Altitude.


In Winter, As Cosine Latitude angle at A, To B E the sum of the former Secant
equal to E M, and of the sine of the Altitude M B: So is the sine of the
Latitude the angle B, To A E, equal to B D the sine of the Azimuth in a
Parallel as before, to be reduced to the common Radius.


From this Schem may be observed the reason why the Sun in those Latitudes upon
some Azimuths has two Altitudes, because the Parralel of his Declination F R
intersects, and passes through the Azimuth, namely, the pricked Ellipsis in the
two points S,.

I now proceed to the Use in Calculating a Table of Hours.
For those that have occasion to Calculate a Table of Hours to any assigned
Altitude and parralel of Declination, it will be the readiest way to write down
all the moveable Terms first, as the natural sines of the several Altitudes in
a ruled sheet of Paper, and then upon a piece of Card to write down the natural
sine of the Suns Altitude at 6 and removing to every Altitude, get the sum or
difference accordingly, which being had, seek the same in the natural sines,
and write down the Logm that stands against it, then upon the other end of the
piece of Card get the sum of the Arithmetical Complements of the Logarithmical
Cosine of the Declination, and of the Logarithmica Cosine of the Latitude, and
add this fixed Number to the Logme before wrote down; by removing the Card to
every one of them, and the sum is the Logme of the sine of the Hour from 6, if
the Logmes be well proportioned out to the differences which may be
sufficiently done by guess.

Example.
Comp Latitude 38d 28 Ar Comp -- 0,2061683 Comp Delinat 66, 29 Ar Comp --
0,0376572 fixed Number --,2438255 Let the Altitude be 36^ 42 Not Sine 5976251
Natural sine Altitude at 6 -- 3124174 difference -- 2852077 Log against 9
4550441 Sine of 30d the hour from 6 toward noon -- 9,6988696
Another Example.
N S Altitude at 6 -- 3124174 Let the Altitude be 13d 46 N S 2379684 difference
-- 744490 Logm -- 8,8715646
The former fixed Number -- 0,2438255 Sine of 7d 30 the hour from 6 toward
midnight because the Altitude is less then the Altitude of 6. 9,1153901
This method of Calculation will dispatch much faster then the common Canon,
when three sides are given to find an angle; the Azimuth may in like manner be
Calculated, but will be more troublesome not having so many fixed Terms in it,
and having got the hour, the Azimuth will be easily found; in this Case we have
two sides and an angle opposite to one of them given, to find the angle
opposite to the other, and the Proportion, will hold, As the Cosine of the
Altitude, To the sine of the hour from the Meridian: So the Cosine of the
Declination, To the sine of the Azimuth from the Meridian.


And in this Case the three sides being given, we may determine the affection
of any of the angles.

If the Sun, or Stars have declination toward the depressed Pole, the Azimuth
is always Obtuse, and the hour and angle of position-Acute.

If the Sun, etc. have declination toward the Elevated Pole, but less then the
Latitude of the place the angle of Position is always acute, the hour before 6
obtuse, the hour and Azimuth between the Altitude of 6, and the Vertical
Altitude both acute, afterward the hour acute, and the Azimuth obtuse.

But when the Sun or Stars come to the Meridian between the Zenith and the
Elevated Pole, as when their declination is greater then the Latitude of the
place, the Azimuth is always acute, the hour before 6 obtuse, afterward acute.

The angle of position from the time of rising to the remotest Azimuth from the
Meridian is acute, afterward obtuse.

Another General Proportion for the Hour.

As the Radius, To the Tangent of the Latitude: So the Tangent of the Suns
declination, To the sine of the hour of rising from six:
Again. To the Rectangle of the Cosine of the Latitude, and of the Cosine of
the declination, Is to the Square of the Radius: So is the sine of the
Altitude, To the difference of the Versed sines of the Semidiurnal Ark, and of
the hour sought.


Having got the Logarithm of this difference, take the natural number out of
the Sines or Tangents that stands against it, accordingly as the Logme is
sought, and in Winter add it to the natural sine of the hour of rising from 6,
the sum is the natural sine of the hour from 6 toward noon.

In Summer get the difference between this fourth and the sine of rising from
6, the said difference is the natural sine of the hour from 6 toward noon,
when the Number found by the Proportion is greater then the sine of rising,
toward midnight when less.

The Canon is the same without Variation as well for South declinations as for
North, and therefore we may by help thereof find two hours to the same Altitude.

Example.
Comp Lat 38d 28 Ar Comp Sine --, 2061683 Comp declin 77d Ar Comp --, 0112761
fixed number --, 2174444 Let the Altitude be 14d 38 Sine -- 9,4024889 Natural
sine against it -- 41660, 00 -- 9,6199333 Not sine of rising from 6 -- 29058,
79 Sum -- 70718, 79 N sine of 45d the hour from six in Winter. Difference --
12601, 21 Sine of 7d 14 the hour from 6 in Summer toward noon to the former
Altitude, and like declination toward Elevated Pole.
Another Example for the same Latitude and Declination.
Logme Let the Altitude be 20d 25 Sine -- 9,5426321 The former fixed Logme --
2174444 Natural sine against it -- 5754811 Sum -- 9,7600765 Natural sine of
rising -- 2905879 Sum -- 9,7600765 Sum -- 8660690 sine 60d the ho from 6 in
Wint Difference -- 2848932 sine 16d 33 the hour from 6 in Summer toward noon;
And thus may two hours be found at one operation for all Altitudes less then
the Winter Meridian Altitude, to be converted into usual Time by allowing 15d
to an hour, and 4^ to a degree.

To Calculate a Table of the Suns Altitudes on all Hours.
As the Secant of the Latitude, To the Cosine of the Declination,
Or which is all one, As the Square of the Radius: To the Rectangle of the
Cosines, both of the Latitude and of the Declination: So is the sine of the
hour from 6. To a fourth, namely, in Summer the difference of the sines of the
Suns Altitude at 6, and of the Altitude sought, in Winter the sum of the sines
of the Suns Depression at 6, and of the Altitude sought.


Having wrote down the Logarithmical sines of the hour from 6 on the Paper, at
one end of a piece of Card may be wrote down the sum of the Logarithmical
Cosines of the Latitude and Declination, and add the same to the sine of the
hour rejecting the double Radius, and take the natural sine that stands against
the sum sought in the Logarithmical sines; having this natural sine, get the
sum and difference of it, and of the natural of the Suns Altitude at 6, the sum
is the natural sine of the Altitude for Summer declinations, and the difference
for Winter Declinations when the sine of the Suns Altitude is the lesser: But
when it is the greater, the said difference is the natural sine of the Altitude
for hours beyond 6 toward midnight.

Example.
Logm Complement Latitude 38d 28 Sine -- 9,7938317 Compl Declination 66 29 Sine
-- 9,9623428 fixed Logme -- 19,7561745 Let the hour be 30d that is 2 hours
before and after six in Summer sine 9,6989700 Sum -- 9,4551445 Natural sine
against it -- 2851308 Not sine of the Altitude at 6 -- 3124174 Sum -- 5975482
Sine of 36d 42 being the two Altitudes for 4 and 8 in the morning or afternoon,
in Summer. Difference -- 272866 Sine of 1 34 being the two Altitudes for 4 and
8 in the morning or afternoon, in Summer.
Another Example.
Let the hour be 45d from six Sine -- 9,8494850 the former fixed Logme --
19,7561745 N Sine against it -- 4032791 Sum -- 9,6056595 N Sine of Altitude at
6 -- 3124174 Sum -- 9,6056595 Sum -- 7156965 Sine of 45d 42 being the two
Altitudes for the hours of 9 or 3 in Summer or Winter for Declination 23d 31
both toward the Elevated and Depressed Pole. Difference -- 908617 Sine -- 5 13
being the two Altitudes for the hours of 9 or 3 in Summer or Winter for
Declination 23d 31 both toward the Elevated and Depressed Pole.
By the former Canon was the following Table of Altitudes calculated, and that
with much celerity beyond any other way, it will not be amiss to Calculate the
Suns Altitude at 6 by the natural Tables only, however the Logarithms will
accurately discover the natural sine of at, if duly Proportioned by the
differences.

A Table of the Suns Altitudes for each Hour and quarter for the Latitude of
London.
North. South. Declination. 23d, 31 13 Equator. 13d 23 31 XII. 61d, 59 51, 28
38, 28. 25, 28 14, 57 XII.. 61, 49 51, 21 38, 22 25, 20 14, 52 * 61, 23 50, 59
38, 4 25, 8 14, 39. 60, 40 50, 24 37, 36 24, 43 14, 18 I. 59, 42 49, 36 36 56
24, 10 13, 48 XI. 58, 29 48, 35 36, 5 23, 26 13, 9 57, 4 47, 24 35, 4 22, 34
12, 23 55, 29 46, 1 33, 55 21, 33 11, 29 II. 53, 45 44, 3^ 32, 36 20, 25 10, 28
X. 51, 53 42, 51 31, 8 19, 8 9, 19 49, 54 41, 4 29, 34 17, 44 8, 3 47, 51 39,
1^ 27, 53 16, 14 6 41 III. 45, 42 37 1^ 26, 6 14, 38 5 13 IX. 43, 31 35, 9 24,
12 12, 55 3, 39 41, 16 33, 2 22, 15 11, 7 1, 59 38, 59 30, 52 20, 13 9, 15 0,
15 IIII. 36, 42 28, 37 18. 7 7, 17 VIII. 34, 23 26, 22 15, 58 5, 17 32, 4 24, 5
13, 46 3, 12 29, 43 21, 46 11, 32 1, 4 V. 27, 23 19. 27 9, 16 VII. 25, 4 17, 7
6, 58 22, 46 14, 47 4, 39 20, 28 12, 27 2, 20 VI. 18, 13 10, 9 00, 00 VI. 15,
58 7, 51 13, 46 5, 34 11, 37 3, 20 VII. 9, 30 1, 7 V. 7, 25 Declination.
Ascensionall difference. 5, 24 3, 27 13d 16d, 54 VIII. 1, 34 IIII. 23, 31 33,
12 R A

A Table of the Suns Altitudes for every 5 degrees of Azimuth from the Meridian
for the Latitude of London.
North. South. Declination. 2^d 31 13d Equator. 13^ 23d, 31 Mer Alt 61, 59 51,
28 38d 28 25d, 28 14d, 57 5 61, 55 51, 23 38, 21 25, 21 14, 49 10 61, 42 51, 7
38, 2 24, 57 14, 22 15 61, 21 50, 40 37, 30 24, 20 13, 39 20 60, 51 50, 3 36,
44 23, 27 12, 39 25 60, 11 49, 14 35, 45 22, 16 11, 19 30 59 21 48, 13 34, 32
20, 51 9, 43 35 58, 20 46, 59 33, 3 19, 7 7, 46 40 57, 7 45, 31 31, 19 17, 7 5,
31 45 55, 43 43, 50 29, 19 14, 50 2, 57 50 54, 3 41, 53 27, 3 12, 13 0, 03 55
52, 7 39, 39 24, 30 9, 21 60 49, 56 37, 9 21, 40 6, 11 65 47, 27 34, 22 18, 34
2, 46 70 44, 39 31, 18 15, 12 75 41, 34 27, 58 11, 37 80 38, 10 24, 23 7, 51 85
34, 32 20, 38 3, 59 90 30 39 16, 42 95 26, 34 12, 40 100 22, 28 8, 41 105 18,
20 4, 44 Declinat Amplitude. 110 14, 15 0, 54 13d, 21d, 12 115 10, 19 23, 31
39d, 54 120 6, 36 125 3, 7

Many Tables may want the natural Tables standing against the Logarithmicall;
therefore the method of Calculation by the Logarithmicall Tables only, is not
to be omitted, albeit we wave the common Proportions, when three Sides are
given to find an Angle.

A general Proportion derived from the book of the honorable Baron of
Marchist^n, which may be wrought on a Serpentine Line without the use of
Versed Sines, or finding the half distance between the 7th Term and the
Radius, not encumbred with Rectangles, Squares, or Differences of Sines, or
Versed Sines.

Three Sides to find an Angle; two of them or all three being less then
Quadrants.
By a supposed perpendicular, which need not to be named.

As the Tangent of half the greater of the containing sides, To the Tangent of
the half sum of the other sides: So is the Tangent of half their difference, To
the tangent of a fourth Arc.
If this Arc be greater then the half of the first assumed side; namely, then
the Arc of the first Term, in the Proportion, the (Supposed perpendicular
falls without) Angles opposite to the two other Sides are of a different
Affection, the greatest side subtending the Obtuse angle, and the lesser the
Accute.

If the Angle Opposite to the greater of the other Sides be sought* Take the
difference; if to the lesser, the Sum of the 4th Arc, and of half the
containing Side, which half is the first Term in the Proportion,

Then, As the Radius, To the Cotangent of the other Containing Side: So the
Tangent of the said Sum or difference, To the Cosine of the Angle sought.


The first Term above needs no Restraint, but when one of the Containing
Sides is greater then a quadrant:

If the 4th Arc be less then the half of the first assumed Side, the
Perpendicular falls within, in this Case, the two Angles, opposite to the two
other sides may be found, being both Acute.

Get the Sum and difference of half the first assumed Side, and of the 4^ Arc,
the Sum is the greater Segment, and the Difference or residue, the lesser
Segment; the Perpendicular always falling on the side assumed, first into the
Proportion; Then, As the Radius, To the Cotangent of the lesser of the other
Containing Sides; So is the Tangent of the lesser Segment. To the Cosine of the
Angle sought.
As the Radius, To the Cotangent of the greater of the other Containing Sides;
So is the Tangent of the greater Segment. To the Cosine of the Angle sought.


From these general Directions is derived this Canon for Calculating the
Azimuth; As the Tangent of half the Complement of the Altitude; To the Tangent
of the half sum of the Sun or Stars distance from this elevated pole, and of
the Complement of the Latitude: So is the Tangent of half their difference, To
the Tangent of a 4h Arc.


If this Ark be less then half the Complement of the Altitude, the Azimuth is
Acute; if more obtuse, in both Cases, get the difference of these two Arkes, if
there be no difference, the Azimuth is 90d from the Meridian; Then, As the
Radius, To the Tangent of the Latitude; So the Tangent of the said Arc of
difference, To the Sine of the Azimuth from the prime Vertical.


This when the Sun or Stars do not come to the Meridian between the Zenith and
the elevated pole: but when they do, Let the sum of the 4th Ark, and of half
the Complement of the Altitude, be the third Term in the latter Proportion.

This is a ready Way to Calculate a Table of Azimuths; two Terms in each
Proportion being fixed for one Declination; and the Azimuth being known, the
Hour may be found by a single Operation, As the Cosine of the Declination, Is
to the Sine of the Azimuth, from the Meridian: So is the Cosine of the
Altitude, To the Sine of the Hour, from the Meridian.


Example, for 13d of North Declination.
77d Complement of Declination the Polar distance. 38. 28 Complement of
Latitude at London. 115, 28 Sum: half sum 57d, 44 Tangent. 10,1997231. 38, 32
difference: half diff 19, 16 Tangent 9* 5434594 fixed for that declination --
19,7432225 Altitude 4d, 44 Comp. 85d 16 half 42d 38 Tang. 9,9640811 Tangent of
-- 31. 1 -- 9,7791414 difference -- 11 37 Tangent 9,3129675 Tangent of 51d 32
the Latitude -- 10,0999135 Sine of 15d, the Azimuth 9,4128810 from East or West
Northwards, because the Ark found by 1st Operation was less then half the
Complement of the Altitude.
Another Example for the Altitude 34d 22

Log^ The fixed Number -- 19,7432225 Compl. Altitude 55^ 38 half 27, 49^
Tangent 9,7223147 Tangent of -- 46, 23 -- 10,0209078 Difference -- 18, 34
Tangent 9,5261966 Tangent of the Latitude -- 10,0969135 The Sine of 25d the
Azimuth from -- 9,6261101

East to West Southwards because the first Ark was more then half the
Coaltitude.

The hours to these two Azimuths will be found by the latter Proportion to be
-- 98d, 54 50, 9
from Noon.

To Calculate the Suns Altitude on all Hours and Azimuths.
The first operation shall be to find such an Ark as may remain fixed in one
Latitude to serve to all Declinations in both Cases: So that but one Operation
more need be required.

The Proportion to find it is As the Radius to the Cotangent of the Latitude,
So is the Sine of any Hour from 6, or Azimuth from the Vertical To the Tangent
of a fourth Ark.


This 4th Arc (if the Azimuth be accounted from the Vertical, that is, from
the points of East or West toward noon Meridian) Is the Altitude that the Sun
shall have, being in the Equinoctial, upon that Azumuth, and so one of the
Quesita.

If the hour from 6 be accounted upward on the Equinoctial, this 4^h Ark is the
ark or portion of the hour Circle, between the Equinoctial and Horizon.

This Ark for Hours and Azimuths beyond 6, or the Vertical, toward the
midnight Meridian, is the Depression under the Horizon, according to the
Denominations already given it.

For the Altitudes on all Hours.
When the Sun is in the Equinoctial, As the Radius, is to the Cosine of the
Latitude: So is the Sine of the Hour from 6 To the Sine of his Altitude.


In all other Cases,

If the Hour from noon be more then 6 Substract the Equinoctial Arks that
Correspond to such parts of time as you would Calculate Altitudes for; out of
the Suns distance from the Depressed Pole, and then it will hold,

If the Hour from noon be less then 6 Substract the Equinoctial Arks that
Correspond to such parts of time as you would Calculate Altitudes for; out of
the Suns distance from the Elevated Pole, and then it will hold, As the Cosine
of the Ark found by the first common Proportion, Is to the Cosine of the Ark
remaining; So is the Sine of the Latitude, To the Sine of the Altitude sought*


For the more speedy Calculating a Table of the Suns Altitudes for this
Latitude to any Declination, there is added a Table of these Equinoctial Arks
for every hour and quarter, as also for every 5d of Azimuth; The use whereof
shall be illustrated by an Example or two, observing by the way, that the same
Ark belongs to two hours alike remote on each side from six, as also like Arks
to two Azimuths equally remote on each side the Vertical.

Hours on each side six, Azimuths on each side the Vertical. d VI 0, 00 fixed
Arks 5, 55 5d 3, 59 8, 49 10 7, 51 VII 11, 37 V 15 11, 37 14, 19 16, 55 0 15,
12 19, 22 25 18, 34 VIII 21, 40 IIII 30 21, 40 23, 49 25, 48 35 24, 30 27, 39
40 27, 3 IX 29, 19 III 45 29, 19 30, 52 32, 13 50 31, 19 33, 27 55 33, 3 X 34,
32 II 60 34, 32 35, 28 36, 17 65 35, 45 36, 57 70 36, 44 XI 37, 30 I 75 37, 30
37, 55 38, 13 80 38, 2 38, 24 85 38, 21 XII 38, 28 90 38, 28

Equinoctial Altitudes or Depressions.

Example.
Admit it were required to Calculate the Suns Altitude for 2 or 10 of the
Clock, when his declination is 23d 31 North.

Suns distance from the Elevated Pole -- 66: 29 fixed Ark for 2 or 10 is -- 34:
32 Residue -- 31: 57 Complement of the Residue 58d 3 Sine -- 9,9286571 Sine of
-- 51 32 the Latitude -- 9,8937452 19,8224023 Sine of -- 55 28 Com first ark
9,9158200 Sine of -- 53 45 the -- 9,9065823 Altitude sought -- 9,9065823
So if it were required to Calculate the Suns Altitude for the hour* of 5 in
the morning when his declination is 20d North

distance from depressed Pole -- 110d fixed Ark -- 11: 37 The Residue is 81d,
33 Or -- 98 23 Sine of 8d, 23 the Compl of the Residue -- 9,1637434 Sine of the
Latitude -- 9,8937452 19,0574886 Sine of 78d 23 the Compl fixed ark --
9,9910119 Sine of 6d 42 the Altitude sought -- 9,0664767
For the Altitudes on all Azimuths.
As the Sine of the Latitude, Is to the Cosine of the Equinoctial Altitude: So
is the Sine of the Declination, To the Sine of a fourth Ark.
Get the sum and difference of the Equinoctial Altitude, and of this fourth Ark
the sum is the Summer Altitude for Azimuths from the Vertical toward noon
Meridian.

The difference when this 4th Ark is lesser greater
then the Equinoctial Altitude is the Winter Summer
Altitude for Azimuths from the Vertical toward Noon Midnight
Meridian

Example.
Let it be required to Calculate Altitudes for the Suns Azimuth 30d from the
Meridian, that is 60d from the Vertical for Declination 23d 31 both North and
South.

This will be speedily done, add the Logme of the Sine of the Declination to
the Arithmetical Complement of the Logme of the Sine of the Latitude, this
number varies not for that declination, and to the Amount add the Logme of the
Cosine of the Equinoctial Altitude, the sum rejecting the Radius is the
Logarithmical Sine of the 4th Ark.

Sine Latitude Ar Comp -- 0,1062548 Sine declination -- 9,6009901 Sine of 55d
28 the Complement of Equinoctial Altitude -- 9,7072449 9,9158200 Sine -- 24d 49
-- 9,6230649 Equinoct Altitude -- 34 32 Sum -- 59 21 Summer Difference -- 9 43
Winter Altitude for that Azimuth.
Another Example:
The former Number -- 9,7072449 Sine 78d 23 Comp of Equinoct 9,9910119 Altitude
for 15d of Azimuth -- Sine of 29d 57 -- 9,6982568
Eq Altitude 11 37 Difference -- 18 20 Sum -- 41 34 The Summer Altitudes for
15d Azimuth each way from the Vertical to that declination.
The Suns Declination 20d North to find his Altitudes for 15d Azimuth on each
side the Vertical.
Sine of 51d 32 the Latitude Ar Com -- 0,1062548 Sine of 20d the declination --
9,5340517 Sine of 78d 23 Comp Eq Altitude -- 9,9910119 Sine of 25d 20 --
9,6313184 Sine of -- 25d 20 Eq Altitude -- 11 37 Difference -- 13 43 Sum -- 36
57 The Summer Altitudes for 15d Azimuth on each side the Vertical to that
Declination.
By the Arithmetical Complement of a Number is meant a residue which makes that
first Number equal to the other:

And so if from a number or numbers given another Number is to be subtracted,
and instead thereof a third number added, the total shall be so much increased
more then it should by the sum made of the number to be subtracted, and of
that was added:

That is to say, in this last Example instead of substracting the Sine of the
Latitude from another sum we added the residue thereof, being taken from Radius
thereto, and so increased the Total too much each time by the Radius, which is
easily rejected.

If the Sun or Stars come to the Meridian between the Zenith and the Elevated
Pole, as when their Declination is more then the Latitude of the place, the
former Rule of Calculation varies not only the sum of the Equinoctial Altitude,
alias, the fixed Ark, and of the Ark found by the second Proportion will be
more then 90^ In this Case the Complement of it to 180 d is the Altitude sought.

A double Advertisement.
The Declination toward the Elevated Pole supposed more then the Latitude of
the place.

If the Complement of the Declination be more then the Latitude of the place
also, as in this case it always is for the Sun; the Sun or such Stars shall
have two Altitudes on every Azimuth between the Coast of rising or setting, and
the remotest Azimuth from the Meridian; To find what Azimuths those shall be,
As the Cosine of the Latitude, To Radius; So is the Sine of the Declination, To
the Sine of the Amplitude,


And So is the Cosine of the Declination, To the Sine of the remotest Azimuth
from the Meridian.

Between the Azimuth of rising, and the remotest Azimuth, the angle of Position
is Acute, afterward Obtuse.

The Sun upon the remotest Azimuth, the angle of Position being a right angle,
will have but one Altitude to find it.

As the Sine of the Declination. To Radius; So is the Sine of the Latitude, To
the Sine of that Altitude.
Example.
In North Latitude 13d of Barbados.

Declination 20 d North, the Suns Amplitude or Coast of rising 69 d 23 from the
North, or 20 d 33 from the East Northwards, and his remotest Azimuth from the
North Meridian 74 d 4^. His two Altitudes upon the Azimuth of 74 d from the
Meridian 27 d 27 the lesser and 52 d 27 the greater, the fixed Ark found by the
first Operation, being -- 50 d 3 And by the second Operation the Ark found is
-- 77 30 Difference being the lesser Altitude is -- 27 27 The sum 127d 33 the
Comp to 180 d being the greater Alt is 52 27 Altitude on the remotest Azimuth
-- 41 07


Upon Azimuths nearer the Meridian then the Coast of rising or setting, it need
not be hinted that there will be but one Altitude.

The Proportion from the 5th Case of Oblique Sphoerical Triangles to find the
Suns Altitude on all Azimuths would be

As the Cosine of the Declination, To the Sine of the Azimuth from the
Meridian: So is the Cosine of the Latitude, To the Sine of the angle of
Position.

In such Cases when it will be acute or obtuse is already defined, and where
two Altitudes are required it will be both, and being accordingly so made, the
Proportion to find the Altitudes would be, As the sine of half the difference
of the Azimuth and angle of Position, To the Tangent of half the difference of
the Polar distance and Colatitude So the Sine of half the sum of the Azimuth
and angle of Position, To the Tangent of half the Complement of the Altitude.


The Azimuth being an angle always accounted from the Midnight Meridian; but
the former Proportion derived from the other Trigonometry in this Case is more
speedy.

Such Stars as have more Declination then the Complement of the Latitude never
rise nor set, if their declination be also more then the Latitude of the place,
they will have two Altitudes upon every Azimuth, except the remotest from the
Meridian, and the Calculation the same as before.

Example for the Latitude of London.
The middlemost in the great Bears Rump, declination 56d 45, The remotest
Azimuth will be 61 d 49 from the Meridian, and the Altitude thereto 69 d 26.

If that Star have 30 d of Azimuth from the Meridian,

The first ark will be 34 d 22 difference being the lesser Alt 27^ 7 The second
ark -- 61 39 difference being the lesser Alt 27^ 7 Sum -- 96 11 Comp the
greater Altitude -- 83 49
This will be very evident on a Globe for having rectified it to the Latitude
extend a Thread from the Zenith over the Azimuth in the Horizon, then turn the
Globe round, and such Stars as have a more utmost remote Azimuth from the
Meridian, and do not rise or set will pass twice under the Thread, the Azimuth
Latitude and Declination being assigned if it were required to know the time
when the Star shall be twice on the same Azimuth it may be found without
finding the Altitudes first by 6^h Case of Oblique Spherical Triangles,

As before get the angle of Position.

As the Sine of half the difference of the Complement of the Latitude, and of
the Complement of the declination. To the Sine of half their sum: So the
Tangent of half the difference of the Azimuth from the Meridian, and of the
angle of Position, To the Cotangent of half the hour from the Meridian, to be
converted into common time if it relate to Stars: In each Proportion there is
two fixed Terms.


The Illustration how these two fixed Arks are obtained, is evident from the
Analemma in the Scheme annexed.

AE E represents the Equator.

H K the Horison, P T the Axis, Z N the Prime,

Vertical S D a Parralel of North declination, another of South, declination, P
S and P A N the Arks of two hours Circles between six and noon, and P D T
another before 6. In the Triangle E L B right angled, there is given the angle
at E, the Complement of the Latitude, the side E L the hour from 6, with the
right angle at L to find the side L B the ark of the hour Circle contained
between the Equinoctial and the Horzion by 11th Case of right angled Sphoerical
Triangles, the Proportion will be, As AE E Radius, To AE H Cotangent Latitude:
So E L Sine of the hour from 6, To L B The Tangent of the said Ark.


From Z draw the Arches Z S and Z (being Ellipses) through the Points where the
Hour Circle, and Parralels of Declination intersect, and they represent the
Complements of the Altitudes sought, and let fall a Perpendicular from Z to R,
then will P R be equal to L B, because the Proportion above is the same that
would Calculate R P; Which subtracted from P S or P the Suns distance in
Summer or Winter from the Elevated Pole rests R S or R: Now in an Oblique
Spherical Triangle reduced to two right angled Triangles by the Demission of a
Perpendicular, the Cosines of the Bases are in direct Proportion to the Cosines
of the Hipotenusals a consequence derived from the general Axiom of the Lord
Napier, and therefore it holds, As the Cosine of the Ark R P, or B L, that we
call the common fixed ark, Is to the Sine of the Latitude, the Complement of Z
P: So the Cosine of the Ark remaining, that is the Complement of R S or S O, To
the Sine of the Altitude, the Complement of Z S or Z:


This for all hours under 90^ from the Meridian, but for those before or after
6 in the Summer it may be observed in the opposite Triangles E A N and E A I,
counting the hour E A each way from 6 that the Ark of the hour Circle A N equal
to A I, as much as it is above the Horizon in Winter, so much is it below the
same in Summer, and the Suns distance from the Elevated Pole then equal to his
distance from the Depressed Pole now: and the Zenith distance then equal to the
Nader distance now, as is evident in the Triangle T N D.

So that in this Case the Sun is only supposed to have Winter instead of Summer
Declination, and the Rule for Calculating his Altitude the same as for Winter
Altitudes.

In like manner for the Azimuth.
In the Schem following H Q represents the Horizon, AE F the Equator, S G a
Parralel of Summer declination, and another passing through M of Winter
declination, Z S L and Z N A two Azimuths between the Vertical and Noon
Meridian, Z K I N another between it and the Midnight Meridian, from the Points
S M I let fall the Perpendiculars S D, M O, I G representing the Declination in
the Ellipses of several hour Circles; So will L S, M L, A K, represent the
Altitudes of these 3 Azimuths respectively, according to the proper
Declination, for the finding whereof there is given in the Triangle E L B the
side E L the Azimuth from the Vertical the angle B E L, the Complement of the
Latitude and the right angle, and the Proportion by 11th Case of right angled
Sphoerical Triangle is As AE H the Radius, To H AE the Cotangent of the
Latitude: So E L the Sine of the Azimuth from the Vertical, To L B the Tangent
of the Equinoctial Altitude to that Azimuth.




Thut we see the first Proportions common to both, this Case issuing from the
2d Axiom of Pitiscus, that in many right angled Sphoerical Triangles having the
same Acute angle at the Base, the Sines of the Bases and Tangents of the
Perpendiculars are proportional.

For the second Operation to find B S.
Though the Analogy is derivable from the general Proposition of the Lord
Napier, yet here I shall take it from Ptitiscus the 1 Axiom.

That in many right angled Sphoerical Triangles, having the same acute angle at
the Base the Sines of the Perpendiculars and Hipothenusals are in direct
Proportion.

Therefore in the Triangle AE Z B, and D S B it will hold, As AE Z the Sine of
the Latitude, To Z B the Cosine of the Equinoctial Altitude, So is D S, the
Sine of the Declination, To the Sine of B S, which is equal to B M:
See 29th Prop. of 3d book Regiomontanus, I prove it thus, The opposite angles
at B are equal, and the angles at D and O are equal, and the side D S, equal to
M O, it will then be evinced by Proportion, As the Sine of the angle at B, To
its opposite side M O or D S: So is the Radius, that is the angle at O or D, To
its opposite side S B, or M B.

This equality being admitted, if unto L B we add B S, the sum is L S the
Altitude for Summer Declination, if from B L we take B M equal to B S, the
remainder M L is the Altitude for the like Declination toward the Depressed
Pole, being the Winter Altitude of that Azimuth.

But for Azimuths above 90 d from the Meridian it may be observed in the two
Opposite Triangles E A N, and E A I, counting the Azimuth E A each way from the
Vertical its Equinoctial Altitude A N in the Winter is equal to its Equinoctial
Depression A I in the Summer, and is to be found by the 1 Proportion.

The second Proportion varies not.

As the Sine of the Latitude N F equal to AE Z, Is to N I equal to Z B the
Cosine of the Equinoctial Altitude or Depression: So is the Sine of the
Declination, I G equal to D S: To Sine I K, from which taking A I, the
Equinoctial Depression rests A K, the Altitude sought.

To Calculate a Table of the Suns Altitude for all Azimuths and hours under the
Equinoctial.

This will be two Cases of a Quadrantal Sphoerical Triangle.

1. For the Altitudes on all Azimuths.
There would be given the side A B a Quadrant, the angle at B the Azimuth from
the Meridian, and the side A D the Complement of the Suns Declination.

If the side B D be continued to a Quadrant, the angle at C will be a right
angled, besides which in the Triangle A D C, there would be given A D as before
the Complement of the Suns Declination, and A C the measure of the angle at B
to find D C the Suns Altitude being the Complement of B D, and so having the
Hipotenusal, and one of the Legs of a right angled Sphoerical Triangle, by the
7th Case we may find the other Leg, the Proportion suitable to this question
would be As the Sine of the Azimuth from East or West, Is to the Radius: So is
the Sine of the Declination, To the Cosine of the Altitude sought.




2. For the Altitudes on all Hours.
There would be given the side A B a Quadrant, A D the Complement of the Suns
declination with the contained angle B A D the hour from noon, to find the side
B D the Complement of the Suns Altitude.

Here again if B D be continued to a Quadrant, the angle at C is a right angle,
the side A D remains common, the angle D A C is the Complement of the Angle B A
D, See Page 57 where it is delivered, That if a Sphoerical Triangle have one
right angle, and one side a Quadrant, it has two right angles, and two
Quadrantal sides, and therefore the angle B A C is a right angle; this is
coincident with the 8th Case of right angled Spherical Triangles, the
Proportion thereof is, As the Radius, Is to the Cosine of the Declination, So
is the Sine of the hour from six, To the Sine of the Altitude, sought.


Affections of Sphoerical Triangles.
BEcause the last Affection in page 57 is not Braced in the beginning, and a
mistake of lesser for greater, in the last Brace but one, I thought fit to
recite it at large.

Any side of a Sphoerical Triangle being continued, if the other sides together
are equal to a Semicircle, the outward angle on the side continued shall be
equal to the inward angle on the said side opposite thereto.

If the sides are less then a Semicircle, the outward angle will be greater
then the inward opposite angle;

But if the said sides are together greater then a Semicircle, the outward
angle will be less then the inward opposite angle.



In the Triangle annexed, if the sides A B and A C together are equal to a
Semicircle, then is the angle A C D equal to the angle A B C.

If less then a Semicircle then is the said angle greater then the angle at B.

But if they be greater, then is the said angle A C D less then the angle at B.

By reason of the first Affection in page 58 (which wants a Brace in the first
Line) after the words two sides) We require in the first, second, and other
Cases of Oblique angled Sphoerical Triangles, the sum of the two sides or
angles given, to be less then a Semicircle.

Before I finish the Trigonometrical part, I think it not amiss to give a
Determination of the certain Cases about Opposite sides and Angles in
Sphoerical Triangles, having before shown which are the doubtful, and the
rather because that this was never yet spoke to.

Two sides with an Angle opposite to one of them, to determine the Affection of
the Angle opposite to the other.
1. If the given angle be Acute, and the opposite side less then a Quadrant,
and the adjacent side less then the former side.

The angle it subtends is acute because subtended by a lesser side, for in all
Sphoerical Triangles the lesser side subtends the lesser angle and the Converse.

2. If the given angle be acute, and the opposite side less then a Quadrant,
and the other side greater then the former side:

This is a doubtful Case, if it be less then a Quadrant it may subtend either
an Acute or an Obtuse angle, and so it may also do if it be greater then a
Quadrant, yet we may determine,

That when the given angle is acute, and the opposite side less then a
Quadrant, but greater then the Complement of the adjacent side to a Semicircle
(which it cannot be unless the adjacent side be greater then a Quadrant) the
angle opposite thereto will be obtuse.

3. The given angle Acute, and the opposite side greater then a Quadrant, and
the other side greater.

If two sides be greater then Quadrants, if one of them subtends an Acute
angle, the other must subtend an Obtuse angle, by the 1st. Affection in page 58.

4. The given angle Acute, and the opposite side greater then a Quadrant; The
other side cannot be lesser then the former, by what was now spoken.

5. If the given angle be Obtuse, and the opposite side less then Quadrant, the
other side less subtends an Acute angle.

6. If the given angle be Obtuse, and the opposite side less then a Quadrant;
The other side greater then the former side must of necessity be also greater
then a Quadrant, otherwise two sides less then Quadrants should subtend two
Obtuse angles, contrary to the first Affection in p 58.

7. If the given angle be Obtuse, and the Opposite side greater then a
Quadrant; If the other side be greater then the former it will subtend a more
Obtuse angle.

8. If the given angle be Obtuse, and the Opposite side greater then a
Quadrant, If the other side be less then the former, whether it be lesser or
greater then a Quadrant it may either subtend an Acute or Obtuse angle.

But we may determine
That when the given angle is Obtuse, and the Opposite side greater then a
Quadrant; If the Complement of the adjacent side to a Semicircle be greater
then the said opposite side, the angle subtended by the said adjacent side is
Acute.

Two Angles with a side Opposite to one of them, to determine the Affection of
the side opposite to the other.
1. If the given angle be Acute, and the opposite side less then a Quadrant; If
the other angle be less, the side opposite thereto shall be less then a
Quadrant because it subtends a lesser angle.

2. If the given angle be Acute, and the Opposite side less then a Quadrant, If
the other angle be greater the Case is ambiguous, yet we may determine,

If the given angle be Acute, and the opposite side lesser then a Quadrant, if
the Complement of the other angle to a Semicircle be less then the Acute angle
(which it cannot be but when the latter angle is Obtuse) the side subtending it
shall be greater then a Quadrant.

3. If the given angle be Acute, and the opposite side grnater then a Quadrant,
if the other angle be lesser.

Then by 12 of 4 book of Regiomontanus, if two Acute angles be unequal, the
side opposite to the lesser of them shall be less then a Quadrant.

4. If the given angle be Acute, and the opposite side greater then a Quadrant,
If the other angle be greater,

It must of necessity be Obtuse, because otherways two Acute unequal angles,
the side opposite to the lesser of them should not be lesser then a Quadrant,
contraty the former place of Regiomontanus.

5. If the given angle be Obtuse, and the opposite side lesser then a Quadrant,
If the other angle be lesser,

It must of necessity be Acute, and the side subtending it less then a
Quadrant, otherways two sides less then Quadrants should subtend two Obtuse
angles, contrary to 1st Affection in page 58.

6. If the given angle be Obtuse, and the opposite side less then a Quadrant,
If the other angle be greater,

By 13 Prop of 4h of Regiomontanus, if a Triangle have two Obtuse unequal
angles, the side opposite to the greater of them shall be greater then a
Quadrant.

7. If the given angle be Obtuse, and the opposite side greater then a
Quadrant, If the other angle be greater or more obtuse then the former; it is
subtended by a greater side.

8. If the given angle be Obtuse, and the opposite side greater then a
Quadrant, If the other angle be less then the former, the Case is ambiguous;
yet we may determine,

That when the given angle is Obtuse, and the opposite side greater then a
Quadrant, if the other angle be less then the Complement of the said Obtuse
angle to a Semicircle, the side subtending it shall be less then a Quadrant.

The former Cases that are still, and alwais will be doubtful, may be
determined when three sides are given.
A Sphoerical Triangle having two sides less then Quadrants and one greater,
will always have one Obtuse angle opposite to that greater side, and both the
other angles Acute.

A Sphoerical Triangle having three sides less then Quadrants, can have but one
obtuse angle (and many times none) and that obtuse angle shall be subtended by
the greatest side;

But whether the greatest side subtend an Acute or Obtuse angle cannot be
known, unless given or found by Calculation, and that may be found several ways.

First by help of the Legs or Sides including the angle sought by 15^ Case of
right angled Sphoerical Triangles.

As the Radius, To the Cosine of one of those Legs; So is the Cosine of the
other Leg, To the Sine of a fourth Arch.
If the third side be greater then the Complement of the fourth Arch to 90d,
the angle included is Obtuse, if equal to it a right angle, if less an Acute
angle.

Secondly, By help of one of the Legs and the Base or Side subtending the
angle sought by 7th Case of right angled Sphoerical Triangles.

As the Cosine of the adjacent side, being one of the lesser sides, Is to the
Radius: So the Cosine of the opposite side, To the sine of a fourth Arch.
If the third side be greater then the Complement of the 4th Arch to 90d, the
angle subtended is Acute, if equal to it a right angle, if less an Obtuse angle.

All other Cases need no determination, if a Triangle have two sides given
bigger then Quadrants, make recourse to the opposite Triangle and it will agree
to these Cases.

If three angles were given to determine the Affection of the sides if they
were all Acute the three sides subtending them will be all less then Quadrants.

But observe that though a Triangle that has but one side greater then a
Quadrant, can and shall always have but one Obtuse angle, yet a Triangle that
has but one Obtuse angle may frequently have two sides greater then Quadrants.

In this and all other Cases let the angles be changed into sides, and the
former Rules will serve,

I should have added a brief Application of all the Axioms that are necessary
to be remembered, and have reduced the Oblique Cases to settled Proportions (with
the Cadence of Perpendiculars only to show how they arise) whereby they will be
rendered very facil; as also the Demonstration of the Affections, which may be
hereafter added to some other Treatise to be bound with this Book.

Of working Proportions by the Lines on the Quadrant.
BEfore I come to show how all Proportions may in some measure be performed
upon the Lines of this Quadrant, it is to be intimated in general, That the
working of a Proportion upon a single natural Line, was the useful invention of
the late learned Mathematician, Mr Samuel Foster, and published after his
decease as his; In the use of his Scale, a Book called Posthuma Fosteri, as
also by Mr Stirrup in a Treatise of Dyalling; in which Books, though it be
there prescribed, and from thence may be learned, yet I acknowledge I received
some light concerning it, from some Manuscripts lent me by Mr Foster, in his
life time to Transcribe for his and my own use touching Instrumental
Applications; Yet withal be it here intimated, that there are no ways used upon
this Quadrant for the obtaining the Hour and Azimuth with Compasses, and the
Converse of the 4th Axiom, but what are wholly my own, and altogether novel,
though not worth the owning, for Instrumental Conclusions not being so exact as
the Tables are of small esteem with the learned as in Mr Wingates Preface to
the Posthuma; besides the taking off of any Line from the Limb to any Radius;
the Explanation of the reason of Proportions so wrought, the supply of many
Defects, and the inscribing of Lines in the Limb, I have not seen any thing of
Mr Fosters, or of any other man's, tending thereto.

Of the Line of equal Parts.
THis Line issues from the Center of the Quadrant on the right edge of the
foreside, and will serve for Mensurations, Protractions and Proportional work.

The ground of working Proportions by single natural Lines, is built upon the
following grounds.

That Equiangled Plain Triangles have the sides about their equal angles
Proportional, and this work has its whole dependence on the likeness of two
equiangled Plain Right angled Triangles; as in the figure annexed, let A B
represent a Line of equal parts, Sines or natural Tangents issuing from the
Center of the Quadrant supposed at A, and let A C represent the Thread, and the
Lines B C, E D making right angles with the Line A C, or with the Thread, the
nearest distances to it from the Points B and E.

I say then that this Scheme does represent a Proportion of the greater to the
less, and the Converse of the less to the greater.



First of the greater to the less, and then it lies, As A B to B C: So A E to A
D, whence observe that the length of the second Term B C must be taken out of
the common Scale A B, and one foot of that extent entered at B the first Term,
the Thread must be laid to the other foot at C, according to the nearest
distance then the nearest distance, from the Point E to the Thread that is from
the third Term called Lateral entrance, being measured in the Scale A B, gives
the quantity of the 4^h Proportional.

Secondly of the less to the greater.
And then it lies, As B C to A B: So E D to A E, Or, As E D to A E: So B C to A
B, by which it appears that the first Term B C must be taken out of the common
Scale, and entered one foot at the second Term at B, and the Thread laid to the
other at C according to nearest distance then the third Term E D must be taken
out of the common Scale and entered between the Thread and the Scale, so that
one foot may rest upon the Line, as at E, and the other turned about may but
just touch the Thread, as at D, so is the distance from the Center to E the
quantity of the 4th Proportional; and this is called Parralel entrance, because
the extent E D is entered Parralel to the extent B C: To avoid Circumlocution,
it is here suggested, that in the following Treatise, we use these expressions
to lay the Thread to the other foot, whereby is meant to lay it so according to
nearest distance, that the said foot turned about may but just touch the
Thread, and so to enter an extent between the Thread and the Scale is to enter
it so that one foot resting upon the Scale, the other turned about may but just
touch the Thread.

Another chief ground in order to working Proportions by help of Lines in the
Limb is,
That in any Proportion wherein the Radius is not ingredient the Radius may be
introduced by working of two Proportions in each of which the Radius shall be
included, and that is done by finding two such middle terms (one whereof shall
always be the Radius) as shall make a Rectangle or Product equal to the
Rectangle or Product of the two middle Terms proposed, to find which the
Proportion will be.

As the Radius, To one of the middle Terms: So the other middle Term, To a
fourth,
I say then, that the Radius and this fourth Term making a Product or
Rectangle equal to the Product of the two middle Terms, these may be assumed
into the Proportion instead of those, and the answer or fourth Term will be
the same without Variation, and therefore holds, As the first Term of the
Proportion, To the Radius: So the fourth found as above, To the Term sought.


Or,

As the first Term of the Proportion, Is to the fourth found as above: So is
the Radius, To the Term sought; and here observe, that by changing the places
of the second and third Term, many times a Parralel entrance may be changed
into a Lateral, which is more expedite and certain then the other, having thus
laid the foundation of working any Proportion, I now come to Examples.

1. To work Proportions in equal parts alone.
If the first Term be greater then the second, take the second Term out of
the Scale, and enter one foot of that extent at the first Term, laying the
Thread to the other foot, then the nearest distance from the third Term to the
Thread gives the 4th Proportional sought, to be measured in the Scale from the
Center.

If the first Term be less then the second, still as before keep the greatest
Term on the Scale, and enter the first Term upon it, laying the Thread to the
other foot, then enter the third Term taken out of the Scale between the
Thread and the Scale and it finds the 4th Proportional.

Example.
Admit the Sun shining, I should measure the length of the Shadow of a
Perpendicular Staff and find it to be 5 yards, the length of the Staff being 4
yards, and at the same time the length of the Shadow of a Chimny, the Altitude
whereof is demanded, and find it to be 22 yards, the Proportion then to acquire
the Altititude would be, As the length of the shadow of the Staff, To the
length of the Staff: So the length of the shadow of the Chimney, To the height
thereof,
that is

As 5 to 4: So 22 5 to 18 yards the Altitude or height of the Chimney sought,
Enter 4 or the great divisions upon 5, laying the Thread to the other foot,
then the nearest distance from 22 5 to the Thread measured will be 18, and in
this latter part each greater division must be understood to be divided into
ten parts.

And so if the Sun do not shine, the Altitude might be obtained by removing
till the Top of a Staff of known height above the eye upon a level ground be
brought into the same Visual Line with the Top of the Chimney, and then it
holds, As the distance between the Eye and the Staff, To the height of the
Staff above the eye: So the distance between the Eye and the Chimney. To the
height of the Chimney above the Eye.


Some do this by a Looking Glass, others by a Bowl of Water, by going back till
they can see the top of the object therein, and then the former Proportion
serves, mutatis mutandis.

But Proportions in equal parts will be easily wrought by the Pen, the chief
use therefore of this Line will be for Protraction, Mensuration, and to divide
a Line of lesser length then the Radius of the Quadrant Proportionally into the
like parts the Scale is divided, which may be readily done, and so any
Proportional part taken off, to do it Enter the length of the Line proposed at
the end of the Scale at 10, and to the other foot lay the Thread the nearest
distances from the several parts of the graduated Scale to the Thread shall be
the like Proportional parts to the length of the Line proposed, the Proportion
thus wrought is, As the length of the graduated Scale, To any lesser length: So
the parts of the Scale, To the Proportional like parts to that other length.


Of the Line of Tangents on the left edge of the Quadrant.
THe chief Uses of this Scale will be to operate Proportions either in Tangents
alone or jointly, either with Sines or equal parts, to prick down Dyals, and to
proportion out a Tangent to any lesser Radius*

To work Proportions in Tangents alone.
1. Of the greater to the less.

Enter the second Term taken out of the Scale upon the first, laying the
Thread to the other foot, then the nearest distance from the third Term to the
Thread being taken out and measured from the Center shows the 4th Proportional.

But if the Proportion be of the less to the greater,

Enter the first Term taken out of the Scale upon the second, and lay the
Thread to the other foot, then enter the third Term taken out of the Scale
between the Thread and the Scale, and the foot of Compasses will show the 4
Proportional.

Example.
Of the greater to the less, As the Tangent of 50d, To the Tangent of 20d: So
the Tangent of 30, To the Tangent of 10d.


To work this take the Tangent of 20^ in the Compasses, and entering one foot of
that extent at 50d, lay the Thread to the other, according to the nearest
distance, then will the nearest distance from the Tangent of 30d to the Thread
being measured on the Line of Tangents from the Center be the Tangent of 10d
the fourth Proportional.

By inverting the Order of the Terms, it will be, Of the less to the greater.

As the Tangent of 20d, To the Tangent of 50d: So the Tangent of 10d, To the
Tangent of 30d, to be wrought by a Parralel entrance.

This Scale of Tangents is continued but to two Radii, or 63d 26 whereas in
many Cases the Terms given or sought may out-reach the length of the Scale, in
such Cases the Propprtion must be changed according to such Directions as are
given for varying of Proportions at the end of the 16 Cases of right angled
Sphoerical Triangles.

In two Cases all the Rules delivered for varying of Proportions will not so
vary a Proportion as that it may be wrought on this Line of Tangents.

First when the first Term is greater then 63d 26 the length of the Scale, and
the rwo middle Terms each less then 26d 34 the Complement of the Scale
wanting; In this Case if any two Terms of the Proportion be varied according
to the Rules for varying of Proportions, there will be either in the given
Terms or Answer such a Tangent as shall exceed the length of the Scale, but it
may be remedied by a double Proportion by the reason before delivered for
introducing the Radius into a Proportion wherein it is not ingredient.

As the Radius, To the Tangent of one of the middle Terms: So the Tangent of
the other middle Term, To a fourth Tangent:
Again.

As the Radius, To that fourth Tangent: So is the Cotangent of the first Term,
To the Tangent of the fourth Ark sought.
The Radius may be otherways introduced into a Proportion then here is done,
but not conducing to this present purpose, and therefore not mentioned till
there be use of it, which will be upon the backside of a great Quadrant of a
different contrivance from this, upon which this trouble with the Tangents will
be shunned.

An Example for this Case.
As the Tangent of 65d, To Tangent of 24d: So the Tangent of 20d, To what
Tangent? the Proportion will find 4d, 10.
Divided into two Proportions will be,

As Radius, To Tangent 24d: So Tangent of 20d, To a fourth, the quantity
whereof need not be measured.

Again.

As Radius, To that fourth: So the Tangent of 25d, the Complement of the first
Term, To the Tangent of 4d 26, the fourth Tangent sought.

Operation.
First enter the Tangent of 24d on the Radius or Tangent of 45d laying the
Thread to the other foot, then take the nearest distance to it from 20d, and
enter that extent at 45d, laying the Thread to the other foot, then will the
nearest distance from 25d, to the Thread if measured from the Center be the
Tangent of 5d 26 sought.

The second Case is when the first Term of the Proportion is less then the
Complement of the Scale wanting, and the two middle Terms greater then the
length of the Scale.

This arises from the former, for if the Terms given were the Complements of
those in the former Example, they would be agreeable to this Case, and so no
further direction is needful about them, for the Tangent sought would be the
Complement of that there found, namely 84d 34.

Hence it may be observed, that a Table of natural Tangents only to 45d, or a
Line of natural Tangents only to 45d may serve to operate any Proportion in
Tangents whatsoever.

To Proportion on out a Tangent to any Radius.
Enter the length of the Radius proposed upon the Tangent of 45d and to the
other foot of the Compasses lay the Thread according to the nearest distance,
then if the respective nearest distances from each degree of the Tangents to
the Thread be taken out they shall be Tangents to the assigned Radius:

Because the Tangents run but to 63d 26 whereas there may be occasion in some
declining Dyalls to use them to 75d though seldom further; to supply this
defect, they may be supposed to break off at 60 and be supplied in a Line by
themselves not issuing from the Center, or only pricks or full-points made at
each quarter of an hour, for the 5th hour, that is, from 60d to 75d, and so
these distances pricked again from the Center as here is done, either one way or
other, the Proportion will hold, As the common Radius of the Tangents, Is to
any other Assigned Radius: So is the difference of any two Tangents to the
common Radius. To their Proportional difference in that Assigned Radius,


And so having Proportioned out the first four hours, the 5th hour may be
likewise Proportioned out and pricked forward in one continued straight Line
from the end of the 4th hour.

To work Proportions in Sines and Tangents by help of the Limb and Line of
Tangents issuing from the Center.
THough this work may be better done on the backside where the Tangents lie in
the Limb, and the Sines issue from the Center, and where also there is a Secant
meet for the varying of some Proportions that may excur, yet they may be also
performed here supposing the Radius introduced into any Proportion wherein it
is not ingredient, the two middle Terms not being of the same kind as both
Tangents or both Sines.

To find the 4th Proportional if it be a Sine.
Lay the Thread to the Sine in the Limb being one of the middle Terms, and
from the Tangent being the other middle Term take the nearest distance to it,
then entering this extent upon the first Term being a Tangent lay the Thread to
the other foot, and in the equal Limb it shows the Sine sought.

So if the Example were, As the Tangent of 50d, To the Sine of 40d: So is the
Tangent of 36d, To a Sine, the 4th Proportion would be found to be the Sine of
23d, 4.


If a Tangent be sought.
Lay the Thread to the Sine in the Limb being one of the middle Terms, and
from the Tangent being the other middle Term, take the nearest distance to it,
then lay the Thread to the first Term in the Limb, and the former extent
entered between the Scale and the Thread finds the Tangent, being the 4th
Proportional sought.

If the Example were, As the Sine of 40d, To the Tangent of 50d: So is the Sine
of 23d 4 To a fourth a Tangent, it would be found to be the Tangent of 36.


These Directions presuppose the varying of the Proportion, as to the two
Tangents, when either of them will excur the length of the Scale, of which more
when I come to treat of the joint use of the Sines and Tangents on the backside.

If both the middle Terms be Sines, the 1st Operation will be wholly on the
Line of Sines on the backside, by introducing the Radius, and the second upon
the Line of Tangents on the foreside, likewise, if both the middle Terms were
Tangents, the first Operation would be on the Line of Tangents on the foreside,
and the second on the Line of Sines on the backside; but this is likewise
pretermitted for the present, for such Cases will seldom be reducible to
practice.

To work Proportions in equal Parts and Tangents.
Because the Lines to perform this work do both issue from the Center, the
Radius need not be introduced in this Case; but here it must be known whether
the first or second Term of the Proportion taken out of its proper Scale be
the longer of the two, and accordingly the work to be performed on the Scale of
the longer Term, which shall be illustrated only by a few Examples, the ground
of what can be said being already laid down.

Example. To find the Suns Altitude, the length of the Gnomon or Perpendicular
being assigned, and the length of its Shadow measured.

As the length of the Shadow. Is to the Radius: So is the length of the Gnomon,
To the Tangent of the Suns Altitude.
Example.
If the length of the Shadow were 8 foot, and the length of the Gnomon but 5
foot, because 8 of the greater divisions of the equal parts are longer then the
Tangent of 45d take the said Tangent or Radius, and enter it at 8, laying the
Thread to the other foot, then the nearest distance from 5 of the equal parts
to the Thread measured on the Tangents shows 32d for the Suns Altitude sought.

So the distance from a Tower and its Altitude being observed the Proportion,
to get the height of the Tower is, As the Radius, To the measured distance: So
the Tangent of the Altitude. To the height of the Tower.


So in the Example in Page 38, the measured distance K B was 100 yards, and the
Altitude 43d 50 to find the height of the Tower take the Tangent of 45 d, and
enter it on 10 at the end of the equal Scale, laying the Thread to the other
foot, then take the Tangent of 43 d 50, and enter it between the Scale and the
Thread, and the Compasses will rest at 96 the height of the Tower in yards,
sometimes each grand division of the equal Scale must represent but one
sometimes 10, and sometimes 100, as in Case L B, and the Altitude thereto were
given to find the height assigned.

Another Example.
As the Tangent of 60d, Is to 50: So is the Tangent of 40d, To 24 2 as before.
Take 50 equal parts, and enter it upon the Tangent of 60 d laying the Thread
to the other foot, then the nearest distance from the Tangent of 40 d to the
Thread measured on the equal parts from the Center will be 24 2 as before.

Otherwise.
Enter the Tangent of 40 d upon the Tangent of 60 d laying the Thread to the
other foot, then enter 50 equal parts down the Line of Tangents from the
Center, and the nearest distance from the termination to the Thread measured in
the equal parts will be 24 2 as before.

If both the Tangents in any Proportion be too long, they may be changed into
their Complements if one of them may and the other may not be so changed
without excursion, then the Proportion may be wrought by the Pen, taking the
Tangents out of the Quadrat and Shaddows, or it may be made two Proportions by
introducing the Radius as before showed; it will not be needful to speak more
to this, only one Example for obtaining the Altitude of a Tower at two Stations.

As the difference of the Cotangents of the Arks cut at either Stations: Is to
Radius: So the distance between those Stations: To the Altitude of the Tower.


In the Diagram for this Case the Complements of the angles observed at the two
Stations, viz. at G were 20 d, at H 41 d 31.

Take the distance on the Line of Tangents between these two Arks, and because
equal parts are sought, and the said Extent less then 50, the measured distance
changing the second Term of the Proportion into the place of the third, Enter
the said Extent upon 50 in the equal parts, laying the Thread to the other
foot, then if the Tangent of 45 d be entered between the Scale and the Thread,
the Compasses will rest upon 96 for the Altitude sought.

To work Proportions in equal Parts and Sines by help of the Limb.
TO suppose both the middle Terms to be either equal Parts or Sines, will not
be practical, yet may be performed as before hinted, without introducing the
Radius, if it be not ingredient, because both these Lines issue from the
Center, and may also be performed by the Pen by measuring the Sines one the
Line of equal parts, as was instanced in page 41.

But supposing the middle Terms of a different kind.

1. If a Sine be sought, Operate by introducing the Radius.

Lay the Thread to the Sine in the Limb being one of the middle Terms, and
from the other middle Term being equal parts, take the nearest distance to it,
one foot of this extent enter at the first Term, and the Thread laid to the
other foot cuts the Limb at the Ark sought.

If the Ark sought be above 70 d this work may better be performed with the
Line of equal parts and Sines jointly, as issuing from the Center.

2. If a Number be sought*

Lay the Thread to the Sine in the Limb being one of the middle Terms, and
from the other middle Term being equal parts take the nearest distance to it,
Then lay the Thread to the first Term in the Limb being a sine, and enter the
former extent between the Scale and the Thread, and the foot of the Compasses
will on the Line of equal parts show the fourth Proportional.

The Proportion for finding the Altitude of a Tower at one Station by the
measured distance, may also be wrought in in equal parts and Sines.

For, As the Cosine of the Ark at first Station, To the measured distance
thereof from the Tower: So is the Sine of the said Ark, To the Altitude of the
Tower.


In that former Scheme, the measured distance B H is 85, and the angle observed
at H 48 d 29

Wherefore I lay the Thread to the Sine of the said Ark in the Limb, counted
from the right edge, and from the measured distance in the equal parts take the
nearest extent to the Thread, then laying the Thread to the Cosine of the said
Ark in the Limb, and entering the former extent between the Thread and the
Scale, I shall find the foot of the Compasses to fall upon 96 the Altitude
sought.

So also in the Triangle A C B, if there were given the side A C 194, the
measured distance between two Stations on the Wall of a Town besieged, and the
observed angles at A 25 d 22, at C 113 d 22, if B were a Battery we might by
this work find the distance of it from either A or C, for having two angles
given all the three are given, it therefore holds, As the Sine of the angle ot
B 41d 16, To its opposite side A C 194, So the Sine of the angle at C 66d, 38
the Complement, To its Opposite side B A 270, the distance of the Battery from A




Such Proportions as have the Radius in them will be more easily wrought, we
shall give some few Examples in Use in Navigation.

1. To find how many Miles or Leagues in each Parralel of Latitude answer to
one degree of Longitude.
As the Radius, To the Cosine of the Latitude. So the number of Miles in a
degree in the Equinoctial, To the Number of Miles in the Parralel.
So in 51 d 32 of Latitude if 60 Miles answer to a degree in the Equinoctial 37
3 Miles shall answer to one degree in this Parralel.

This is wrought by laying the Thread to 51 d 32 in the Limb from the left edge
toward the right, then take the nearest distance to it from 60 in the equal
parts which measured from the Center will be found to reach to 37 3 as before.

The reason of this facil Operation is because the nearest distance from the
end of the Line of equal parts to the Thread is equal to the Cosine of the
Latitude, the Scale it self being equal to the Radius, and therefore needs not
be taken out of a Scale of Sines and entered upon the first Term the Radius as
in other Proportions in Sines of of the greater to the less, when wrought upon
a single Line only issuing from the Center, where the second Term must be
taken out of a Scale, and entered upon the first Term.

2. The Course and Distance given to find the difference of Latitude in Leagues
or Miles.
As the Radius, To the Cosine of the Rumb from the Meridian: So the Distance
sailed, To the difference of Latitude in like parts.
Example.
A Ship sailed S W by W, that is on a Rumb 56 d 15 from the Meridian 60 Miles,
the difference of Latitude in Miles will be found to be 33 3 the Operation
being all one with the former, Lay the Thread to the Rumb in the Limb, and from
60 take the nearest distance to it, which measured in the Scale of equal parts
will be found as before,

3. The Course and Distance given to find the Departure from the Meridian,
alias the Variation.
As the Radius, To the Sine of the Rumb from the Meridian: So the distance
Sailed, To the Departure from the Meridian.
In the former Example to find the Departure from the Meridian, Lay the Thread
to the Rumb counted from the right edge toward the left, that is to 56d 15 so
counted, and from 60 in the equal parts being the Miles Sailed, take the
nearest distance to it; this extent measured in the said Scale will be found to
be 49 9 Miles, and so if the converse of this were to be wrought, it is evident
that the Miles of Departure must be taken out of the Scale of equal parts and
entered Parralelly between the Scale and the Thread lying over the Rumb.

Many more Examples and Propositions might be illustrated, but these are
sufficient, those that would use a Quadrant for this purpose may have the Rumbs
traced out or pricked upon the Limb: Now we repair to the backside of the
Quadrant.

Of the Line of on the right Edge of the Backside.
THe Uses of this Line are manifold in Dyalling in drawing Projections in
working Proportions, etc.

1. To take of a Proportional Sine to any lesser Radius then the side of the
Quadrant, or which is all one, to divide any Line shorter in length then the
whole Line of Sines in such manner as the same is divided.

Enter the length of the Line proposed at 90 d the end of the Scale of Sines,
and to the other foot lay the Thread according to nearest Distance, or measure
the length of the Line proposed on the Line of Sines from the Center, and
observe to what Sine it is equal, then lay the Thread over the like Arch in the
Limb, and the nearest distances to it from each degree of the Line of Sines
shall be the Proportional parts sought.

And if the Thread be laid over 30 d of the Limb the nearest distances to it
will be Sines to half the Common Radius.

2. From a Line of Sines to take off a Tangent, the Proportion to do it is, As
the Cosine of an Arch, To the Radius of the Line proposed: So the Sine of the
said Arch, To the Tangent of the said Arch.


Enter the Radius of the Tangent proposed at the Cosine of the given Arch, and
to the other foot lay the Thread then from the Sine of that Arch take the
nearest distance to the Thread, this extent is the length of the Tangent
sought; thus to get the Tangent of 20 d enter the Radius proposed at the Sine
of 70 d, then take the nearest distance to the Thread from the Sine of 20 d,
this extent is the Tangent of the said Arch in reference to the limited Radius.

Otherways by the Limb.
Lay the Thread to the Sine of that Arch counted from the right edge whereto
you would take out a Tangent, and enter the Radius proposed down the Line of
Sines from the Center and take the nearest distance to the Thread then lay the
Thread to the like Arch from the left edge, and enter the extent between the
Scale and the Thread, the distance of the Foot of the Compasses from the Center
shall be the length of the Tangent required.

3. From the Sines to take off a Secant.

The Proportion to do it is, At the Cosine of the Arch proposed, To Radius of
the Line proposed So the Sine of 90d, the common Radius, To the length of the
Secant of that Arch, to the limited Radius.


By the Limb,
Lay the Thread to that Arch in the Limb counted from left edge whereto you
would take out a Secant, then enter the Limited Radius between the Scale and
the Thread and the distance of the foot of the Compasses from the Center shall
be the length of the Secant sought, and the Converse if a Secant and its Radius
be given to find the Ark thereto enter the Secant of 90 d then enter the Radius
of it between the Thread and the Sines, and the Compasses shows the Ark
thereto, if counted from 90 d toward the Center.

Otherways.
Enter the Radius of the Line you would devide into Secants at the Cosine of
that Arch whereto you would take out a Secant, and to the other foot lay the
Thread then the nearest distance to the Thread from the Sine of 90 d is the
length of the Secant sought: Thus to get the Secant of 20 d enter the Radius
limited in the Sine of 70 d then the nearest distance from 90 d to the Thread,
is the length of the Secant sought.

And here it may be noted, that if you would have the whole length of the Line
of Sines to represent the Secant sought, then the Cosine of that Arch which it
represents shall be the Radius to it; so the whole Line of Sines representing a
Secant of 70 d, the length of the Sine of 20 d shall be the Radius thereto.

It may also be observed, that no Tangent or Secant can be taken of at once
larger then the Radius of the Quadrant, nor no Radius entered longer then that
is, and that if the Radius entered be in Length
of the Sines Tangents to 63h 26 71 34 75 58 Secants to 60d ^ 70 32 75 32 may be
taken off by help of the Line of Sines.

And here it may be observed, That if the Tangent and Secant of any Arch be
added in one straight Line or otherwise in Numbers, the Amount shall be equal
to the Tangent of such Ark as shall bisect the remaining part of the Quadrant,
as is demonstrated in Pitiscus and Sn^llius.

Whence it follows, That if we have a Tangent and Secant no further then to 60
d each, yet a Tangent by the joint use of both Lines may from them be pricked
down to 75 d: Wherefore at anty time to lengthen the Tangents double the Arch
proposed, and out of the Amount reject 90 d; The Tangent and Secant of the
remainder connected in one straight Sine shall be the Tangent of the Arch
sought.

Thus to get the Tangent of 70 d the double is 140 d whence 90 d rejected rests
50 d; the Tangent and Secant of 50 d joined in one straight Line shall be the
Tangent of such an Arch as bisects the remaining part of the Quadrant, namely
of 70 d.

It may also be observed, That the Tangent of an Ark, and the Tangent of half
its Complement is equal to the Secant of that Arch as is obvious in drawing of
any Projection.

A Chord may also be taken off from the Line of Sines, but more facilly by the
Line of Chords on the left edge of the Quadrant, and is therefore pretermitted.

To work Proportions in Sines alone.
Frst, Without the help of the Limb or lesser Sines without introducing the
Radius, but upon this Line alone independently.

There will be two Cases, 1. If the first Term be greater then the second, the
entrance is lateral; Enter the second Term upon the first, laying the Thread
to the other foot.

Then from the third Term in the Scale take the nearest distance to the
Thread, and measure that Extent from the Center, and it shows the Term sought,
and so if it were,

As Sine 30d, To Sine 10d: So Sine 80d, the fourth Proportional would be found
to be 20d.

In giving Examples to illustrate the matter, I shall make use of that noted
Canon for making the Tables,

As the Semiradius, or Sine of 30d, To the Sine of any Arch: So the Cosine of
that Arch, To the Sine of that Arch doubled.

But when the first Term is less then the second,

Enter the length of the first Term upon the second, laying the Thread to the
other foot of that Extent, then enter the third Term Parralelly between the
Scale and the Thread, and it shows the fourth Proportional sought.

So if it were, As the Sine of 10d, To the Sine of 30d: So the Sine of 20d, To
a fourth, the 4th Proportional would be found to be 80 d.

Another general way will be to do it by help of the Limb, by introducing the
Radius in such Proportions wherein it is not
Lay the Thread to one of the middle Terms in the Limb, and from the other
middle Term on the Line of Sines take the nearest distance to it, then enter
one foot of that extent at the first Term on the Line of Sines, and lay the
Thread to the other foot, and in the Limb it shows the 4th Proportional sought.

Example.
If the three Proportionals were, As Sine 55 d, To Sine 70 d: So Sine 30 d, To
a fourth, the fourth Proportional would be found to be 35 d.

But if the first Term of the Proportion be either a small Ark or the answer
above 70 d, the latter part of this general direction for more certainty may be
turned into a Parralel entrance, that is to say instead of entering the Extent
taken from one of the middle Terms in the Sines to the Thread laid over the
other middle Term in the Limb, and entering it at the first Term in the Sines
finding the Answer in the Limb lay, the Thread to the first Term in the Limb,
and find the Answer in the Line of Sines by, entering the former extent
parralelly between the Scale and the Thread.

What has been spoken concerning the Limb may also be performed by the Line of
lesser Sines in the Limb by the same Directions.

So if it were, As the Sine of 5d, To Sine 30d: So the Sine of 10d To a fourth,
the 4th Proportional would be found to be the Sine of 85d, and the Operation
best performed by the joint use of the Line of Sines, and the lesser Sines by
making the latter entrance a Parralel entrance.

When the Radius is in the third place of a Proportion in Sines of a greater to
a less* the Operation is but half so much as when it is not ingredient.

Example.
As the Cosine of the Latitude, To the Sine of the Declination, So the Radius,
To the Sine of the Suns Amplitude.
If the Suns declination were 13d, to find his Amplitude in our Latitude for
London, take the Sine of 13d and enter one foot of it on the Sine of 38d 28 and
to the other foot lay the Thread, and in the Limb it shows the Amplitude sought
to be 21d 12.

By changing the places of the two middle Terms, this Example will be turned
into a Parralel entrance.
Lay the Thread to the Complement of the Latitude in the Limb, and enter the
Sine of the Declination between it and the Scale, and you will find the same
Ark in the Sines for the Amplitude sought, as was before found in the Limb.

Such Proportions of the greater to the less wherein the Radius is not
ingredient, that have two fixed or constant Terms, may be most readily
performed by the single Line of Sines without the help of the Limb.

An Example for finding the Suns Amplitude.
As the Cosine of the Latitude, To the Sine of the Suns greatest declination:
So the Sine of the Suns distance from the next Equinoctial Point, To the Sine
of the Suns Amplitude.
Because the two first Terms of this Proportion are fixed, the Amplitude
answerable to every degree of the Suns place may be found without removing the
Thread; To do it enter the Sine of the Suns greatest Declination 23d 31, at the
Sine of the Latitudes Complement, and to the other foot lay the Thread, where
keep it without alteration, then for every degree of the Suns place counted in
the Sines take the nearest distance to the Thread, and measure those extents
down the Line of Sines from the Center, and you will find the correspondent
Amplitudes.

Example.
So when the Sun enters, his Equinoctial distance being 30 d, the Amplitude
will be 18 d 41, and when he enters Equinox distance 60 d, the Amplitude will
be 33 d 42; and when he enters the greatest Amplitude will be 39d 50, his
distance from the nearest Equinoctial Point being 90 d.

But for such Proportions in which there is not two fixed Terms, the best way
to Operate them will be by the joint help of the Limb and Line of Sines.

An Example for finding the Time of the day the Suns Azimuth Declination and
Altitude being given.
By the Suns Azimuth is meant the angle thereof from the midnight part of the
Meridian, the Proportion is As the Cosine of the Declination, To the Sine of
the Azimuth: So the Cosine of the Suns Altitude. To the Sine of the hour from
the Meridian.


Example.
So when the Sun has 18 d 37 North Declination, if his Azimuth be 69 d from
the Meridian, and the Altitude 39 d, the hour will be found to be 49 d 58 from
Noon.

So if there were given the Hour, the Declination and Altitude by transposing
the Order of the former Proportion, it will hold to find the Azimuth, As the
Cosine of the Suns Altitude, To the Sine of the hour from the Meridian: So the
Cosine of the Suns Declination, To the Sine of the Azimuth from the Meridian.


Commonly in both these Cases the Latitude is also known, and the Affection is
to be determined according to Rules formerly given.

A Proportion wholly in Secants we have showed before may be changed wholly
into Sines; but the like mutual conversion of the Sines into Tangents is not
yet known, however it may be done in (...) of the 16 Cases wherein the Radius
is ingredient, for instance, let the Proportion be to find the time of Sun
rising. As Radius, To Tangent of Latitude: So the Tangent of the Declination,
To the Sine of the hour from 6.


Instead of the two first Terms it may be, As the Cosine of the Latitude, To
the Sine of the Latitude,
then instead of the Tangent of the Declination say, So is the Sine hereof to a
fourth.


Again, As the Cosine of the Declination, To that fourth: So Radius, To the
Sine of the hour from six:
This being derived from the Analemm^ by resolving a Triangle, one side whereof
is the Arch of a lesser Circle.

If a Quadrant want Tangents or Secants in the Limb, but may admit of a Sine
from the Center, the Tangent and Secant of the Latitude, etc, may be taken out
by what has been asserted, to half the common Radius, and marked on the Limb,
and the Quadrant thereby fitted to perform most of the Propositions of the
Sphoere in one Latitude, and how to supply the Defect of a Line of Versed Sines
in the Limb shall afterward be shown.

What has been spoken concerning a Line of Sines graduated on a Quadrant from
the Center, may by help of the equal Limb be performed without it.

1. A Proportional Sine may be taken off to any diminutive Radius.


By the Definition of Sines the right Sine of an Arch is a Line falling from
the end of that Arch Perpendicularly to the Radius drawn to the other end of
the said Arch;

So the Line H K falling Perpendicularly on the Radius F G shall be the Sine of
the Arch H G, and by the same Definition the Line G I falling perpendicularly
on the Radius F H shall also be the Sine of the said Arch, and whether the
Radius be bigger or lesser, this Definition is common, but the Line G I on a
Quadrant represents the nearest distance from the Radius to the Thread,
therefore a Sine may be taken off from the Limb to any Diminutive Radius, to
perform which,

Enter the length or Radius proposed down the straight Line that comes from the
Center of the Quadrant, and limits the Limb; observe where the Compasses rests,
this I call the fixed Point, because the Compasses must be set down at it, at
every taking off, then to take off the Sine of any Arch to that Radius, lay the
Thread over the Arch counted in the Limb from the said edge of the Quadrant,
and take the nearest distance to it for the length of the Sine sought: But to
take out Sines to the Radius of the graduated Limb set down one foot at the Ark
in the Limb, and take the nearest distance to the two edge Lines of the Limb,
the one shall be the Sine, the other Cosine of the said Ark.

2. A Proportion in Sines alone may be wrought by help of the Limb.
Take out one of the middle Terms by the former Prop. and entering it down the
right edge from the Center, take the nearest distance to the Thread laid over
the other middle Term in the Limb, counted from right edge, then lay the
Thread to the first Term in the Limb, and enter that extent between the right
edge Line and the Thread, the distance of the foot of the Compasses from the
Center, is the length of the Sine sought, to be measured in the Limb by entering
one foot of that Extent in it: So that the other turned about may but just
touch one of the edge or side Lines of the Limb issuing from the Center, or
enter that Extent at the concurrence of the Limb with the said Line, and lay
the Thread to the other foot according to the nearest distance, and in the
Limb it shows the Ark sought: Whence may be observed how to prick of an angle
by Sines instead of Chords.

From this and some other following Propositions I assert the Hour and Azimuth
may be found generally by the sole help of the Limb of a Quadrant without
Protraction.

How from the Lines inscribed in the Limb to take off a Sine, Tangent, Secant
and Versed Sine to any Radius, if less then half the common Radius of the
Quadrant.
IT has been asserted, that a Sine may be taken off from the Limb, and by
consequence any other Line there put on; for by being carried thither they are
converted into Sines, and put on in the same manner, for by the Definition of
Sines, if Lines were carried Parralel to the right edge of the Quadrant from
the equal degrees of the Limb to the left edge they would there constitute a
Line of Sines and the Converse.

To find the fixed Point enter the Radius proposed twice down the Line of Sines
from the Center, or which is all one, Lay the Thread over 30 d of the Limb
counted from the right edge toward the left, and enter the limited Radius
between the Thread and the Scale; so that one foot turned about may just touch
the Thread, and the other resting on the Line of Sines, shows the fixed Point,
at which if the Compasses be always set down, and the Thread laid over any Ark
in the Tangent, Secant or lesser Sines, the nearest distances from the said
Point to the Thread shall be the Sine, Tangent, Secant, of the said Ark to the
limited Radius.

But for such Lines as are put on to the common Radius, as the Tangent of 45 d,
etc. the Radius is to be entered but once down from the Center to find the fixed
Point.

Of the Line of Secants.
This Line singly considered is of small use, but junctim with other Lines of
great use for the general finding the Hour and Azimuth: Mr Foster makes use of
it in his Posthuma to graduate the Meridian Line of a Mercators Chart, which is
done by the perpetual addition of Secants, and the like may be done from this
Line lying in the Limb but a better way will be to do it from a well graduated
Meridian Line by doubling or folding the edge of the Chard thereto, and so
graduate it by the Pen.

Of the Line of Tangents.
The joint use of this Line with the Line of Sines is to work Proportions in
Sines and Tangents, in any Proportion wrought by help of Lines in the Limb
wherein the Radius is not ingredient, the Radius must be introduced according
to the general Direction.

If the two middle Terms be Sines there must be one Proportion wrought wholly
on the Line of Sines on the Backside, and another on the Line of Tangents on
the foreside; but such Cases are not usual:

But if the two middle Terms be Tangents, the first Operation must be on the
line of Tangents on the foreside, and the latter on the line of Sines on this
backside, unless the Radius be ingredient.

A general Direction to work Proportions when the middle Terms are of a
different Species.
If a Sine be sought,

Lay the Thread to the Tangent in the Limb being one of the middle Terms, and
from the Sine being another of the middle Terms take the nearest distance to
it, then lay the Thread to the other Tangent in the Limb, being the first
Term, and enter the former extent between the Scale and the Thread, and the
foot of the Compasses on the Line of Sines will show the fourth Proportional.

Example.
If the Proportion were, As the Tangent of 30 d, To the Sine of 25d So is the
Tangent of 20 d, To the Sine of 15 d 27.

Lay the Thread over the Tangent of 20 d in the Limb, and from the Sine of 25 d
take the nearest distance to it, then lay the Thread to the Tangent of 30 d,
and the former extent so entered that one foot resting on the Sines, the other
foot turned about may but just touch the Thread, and the resting foot will show
15 d 27 for the Sine sought.

2. If a Tangent be sought.

Lay the Thread to the Tangent being one of the middle Terms, and from the
other middle Term being a Sine take the nearest distance thereto, then Enter
one foot of that extent at the first Term being a Sine, and the Thread laid to
the other foot shows the fourth Proportional in the Line of Tangents in the
Limb.

Example.
So if the Proportion were, As the Sine of 25 d, To the Tangent of 30 d: So is
the Sine of 32 d, To a Tangent, the fourth Proportional would be found to be
the Tangent of 35 d 54.

If the answer fall near the end of the Scale of Tangents, the latter entrance
may be made by laying the Thread to the first Term in the Limb, and by a
Parralel entrance an Ark found on the Line of Sines, then if the Thread be laid
over the like Ark in the Limb it will intersect the Tangent sought.

These Directions presuppose the varying of the Proportion when the Tangens
excur the length of the Scale, according to the Directions in the
Trigonometrical part; but as before suggested, those Directions are
insufficient when one of the Terms or Tangents are less then the Complement of
the Scale wanting, and the other greater then the length of the Scale, for two
such Arks cannot be changed into their Complements without still incurring the
same inconvenience; in this Case only change the greater Term, which may be
done by help of the Line of Secants, for, As the Tangent of an Arch, To the
Sine of another Arch; So is the Cosecant of the latter Arch, To the Cotangent
of the former.


And by Transposing the Order of the Terms.

As a Sine, To a Tangent: So the Cotangent of the latter Arch, To the Cosecant
of the former.
Example.

If the Proportion were, As the Sine of 8d, To the Tangent of 25d So is the
Sine of 60d, To the Tangent of 71d: Here we might foreknow by the nature of the
Terms that the Tangent sought would be large or find by trial that it cannot
be wrought upon the Quadrant: We may therefore vary it thus, As the Tangent of
25d To the Sine of 8d: So the Secant of 30d, To the Tangent of 19d, the
Complement of 71d, the Arch sought.

Lay the Thread over 8d in the lesser Sines, and set down one foot of the
Compasses at the Sine of the same Arch the Thread lies over in the Limb; and
take the nearest distance to the Thread laid over the Secant of 30, then lay
the Thread to the Tangent of 25d, and enter the former extent between the
Thread and the Line of Sines, and the distance of the foot of the Compasses
from the Center measured on the Tangents on the foreside shows 19d.

But a more general Caution in this Case without the help of the Secants, would
be by altring the larger Tangent into its Complement by introducing the Radius,
and operating the Proportion on the greater Tangent of 45d.

If the Proportion were, As the Tangent of 70d, To the Sine of 60d: So the
Tangent of 25d, To the Sine of 8d 27.


By introducing the Radius at two Operations it would be easily wrought, As
Radius, To Tangent 25d, So Sine 60d, To a fourth,


Again, As the Radius, To the Tangent of 20 d: So that fourth, To the Sine
sought.

So the former Example wherein a Tangent is sought may be likewise varied.

As Radius, To Tangent 25d: So Sine 60d, To a fourth,


Again, As that fourth, To the Radius: So is the Sine of 8d, To the Cotangent
of the Arch sought,
namely to the Tangent of 19d as before.

Two Proportions with the Radius in each are as suddenly done as one without
the Radius.

Operation.
Lay the Thread over the Tangent of 25d in the greater Tangents, and from the
Sine of 60d take the nearest distance to it, enter that extent at 90, or the
end of the Line of Sines, laying the Thread to the other foot according to the
nearest distance, then enter the Sine of 8 parralelly between the Scale and the
Thread and the distance of the foot of the Compasses from the Center is the
Tangent of the Complement of the Ark sought to be measured in the greater
Tangents by setting down one foot at 90d, and the Thread laid to the other,
according the nearest-will lie over the Tangent of 19 d.

An Example with the Radius ingredient and a Sine sought, Data, Latitude, and
Declination, to find the time when the Sun shall be East or West.

As the Radius, To the Cotangent of the Latitude: So the Tangent of the
Declination, To the Sine of the hour from 6.
To be wrought by the help of the lesser Tangents.
When the Radius comes first and two Tangents in the middle, change the largest
Ark into its Complement to bring it into the first place, and the Radius into
the second; then take out the Tangent of the other middle Ark, either from the
foreside from the Scale, or out of the Limb by setting one foot at the Sine of
90 d, and taking the nearest distance to the Thread laid over the Tangent
given, then laying the Thread to the Tangent of the first Ark, enter the former
extent between the Scale and the Thread, and the foot of the Compasses will
show the Sine sought.

Otherways the two middle Terms being Tangents, as also when the first Term
and one of the middle Terms is a Tangent, change the Radius and one of those
Tangents into Sines.

For, As the Radius, To the Tangent of any Ark: So is the Cosine of the said
Ark, To the Sine thereof.
And, As the Tangent of any Ark, To Radius: So is the Sine of that Ark, To the
Cosine thereof.
And so the former Proportion changed will be, As the Sine of the Latitude, To
the Cosine of the Latitude: So the Tangent of the Declination, To the Sine of
the hour from six,
When the Sun shall be East or West.

Example.
If the Declination were 23d 30 North, in our Latititude of London 51d 32 to
find the Sine sought, Lay the Thread to the Tangent of the Declination in the
Limb, and from the Complement of the Latitude in the Sines take the nearest
distance to it, then lay the Thread to the Sine of the Latitude in the lesser
Sines and enter the former extent between the Thread and the Scale and the foot
of the Compasses shows the answer in degrees, if the Thread be laid to the
Ark found in the Limb it there shows it in Time; So in this Example the time
sought is 20d 14, or in Time 1h 17h before 6 in the morning or after it in in
the Evening.

If the Latitude and Declination were given, To find the Suns Azimuth at the
Hour of 6.
As the Radius, To Cosine of the Latitude: So the Tangent of the Suns
Declination, To the Tangent of his Azimuth from the Vertical.
In this Case a Tangent being the 4th Term sought, the Operation is very facil.

Lay the Thread to the Tangent of the Declination in the lesser Tangents, and
from the Cosine of the Latitude take the nearest distance to it, and either
measure that extent on the Tangents on the foreside, or set one foot of that
extent upon the Sine of 90d, and to the other lay the Thread and it will
intersect the Tangent sought in the Limb: So in our Latitude when the Sun has
23d 30 of declination, his Azimuth at the hour of 6 will be 15 d 9 from the
East or West.

Another Example, So if the Suns distance from the nearest Equinoctial Point
were 60 d, his right Ascension would be found to be 57 d 48.

The Proportion to perform this Proposition is, As the Radius, To the Cosine of
the Suns greatest Declination: So the Tangent of the Suns distance from the
next Equinoctial Point, To the Tangent of the Suns right Ascension,
or when the Tangents are large, As the Cosine of the Suns greatest
declination, To Radius: So the Cotangent of the Suns distance from the
Equinoctial Point. To the Cotangent of his right Ascension.


By what has been said it appears that the working Proportions by the natural
Lines is more troublesome then by the Logarithmical, however this trouble will
be shunned in the use of the great Quadrant by help of the Circle on the
backside.

I now come to show how the Hour of the Day, and the Azimuth of the Sun may be
found universally by the Lines on the Quadrant, which is the principal thing
intended.

The first Operation for the Hour will be to find what Altitude or Depression
the Sun shall have at the hour of 6.
The Proportion to find it is, As the Radius, To the Sine of the Latitude: So
the sine of the Suns Declination, To the sine of the Altitude sought.


Example.
So in Latitude 51 d 32, the Suns declination being 23 d 31, To find his
Altitude or Depression at 6, Lay the Thread to the Sine of the Latitude in the
Limb, and from the sine of the Suns Declination take the nearest distance to
it, which extent measured from the Center will be found to be 18 d 12.

This remains fixed for one Day, and therefore must be recorded, or have a mark
set to it.

Afterward the Proportion is, As the Cosine of the Declination, To the Secant
of the Latitude,
Or, As the Cosine of the Latitude, To the Secant of the Declination: So in
Summer is the difference, but in Winter the Sum of the sines of the Suns
proposed or observed Altitude, and of his Altitude or Depression at 6, To the
Sine of the hour from 6 toward Noon in Winter, as also in Summer when the
Altitude is more then the Altitude of 6, otherways toward Midnight.


To Operate this.
In Winter to the sine of the Suns Depression at 6, add the sine of the
Altitude proposed, by setting down the extent hereof outward at the end of the
former extent; in Summer take the distance between the sine of the Suns
Altitude, and the sine of his Altitude at 6, and enter either of these extents
twice down the Line of sines from the Center, then lay the Thread to the Secant
being one of the middle Terms, and take the nearest distance to it. Lastly,
enter one foot of this extent at the first Term, being a Sine, and to the
other foot lay the Thread, and in the equal Limb it shows the hour from 6,
which is accordingly numbered with hours.

But when the Hour is near Noon, the answer may be found in the Line of Sines
with more certainty by laying the Thread to the first Term in the Limb, and
entering the latter extent Parralelly between the Scale and the Thread.

Otherways.
Enter the aforesaid sum or difference of sines once down the Line of Sines
from the Center, and laying the Thread to the Secant, being one of the middle
Terms, take the nearest distance to it, then lay the Thread to the first Ark
in the lesser sines, and enter the former extent between the Thread and the
Scale, and the foot on the Compasses on the Line shows the Sine of the Hour.

Example.
If the Altitude were 45d 42, take the distance between it and the sine of 18 d
12 before found enter this extent twice down the Line of sines from the Center,
and laying the Thread over the Secant of 51 d 32 take the nearest to it, then
entering one foot of this extent at 66 d 29 in the Line of Sines the Thread
being laid to the other according to nearest distance will lie over 45 d in the
Limb showing the hour to be either 9 in the morning, or 3 in the afternoon, and
so it will be found also in the latter Operation by entering the first extent
once down the sines, and taking the distance to the Thread lying over the
Secant of the Latitude, and then laying the Thread to 66 d 29 in the (...), and
entering that extent between the Scale and the Thread.

To find the Suns Azimuth
The first Operation will be to get the Suns Altitude in the Vertical Circle,
that is, being East ar West.

As the six of the Latitude, To Radius: So is the Sine of the Declination, To
the sine of the Altitud.
So in our Latitude of London, when the Sun has 23d 31 of declination, his
Vertical Altitude in Summer will be found to be 30d 39 and so much is the
Depression when he has as much South declination.

This found either by a Parralel entrance on the Line of Sines by laying the
Thread to the sine of the Latitude in the Limb, and entering the sine of the
Declination between the Scale and the Thread, or by a Lateral entrance in the
Limb changing the Radius into the third place, and then enter the sine of the
Declination on the Sine of the Latitude, laying the Thread to the other foot,
and in the Limb it shows the Altitude sought; having found this Ark let it be
recorded or have a mark set to it, because it remains fixed for one Day,
afterward the Proportion to be wrought is, As the Cosine of the Altitude, To
the Tangent of the Latitude: So in Summer is the difference in Winter the sum
of the Sines of the Suns Altitude, and of his Vertical Altitude or Depression:
To the Sine of the Azimuth from the East or West toward noon Meridian in
Winter as also in Summer, when the given Altitude is more then the Vertical
Altitude, but if less toward the Midnight Meridian.


This Proportion may be wrought diverse ways on the Quadrant after the same
manner as the former, I shall therefore illustrate it by some Examples.

Declination 13d, Latititude 51d 32, Vertical Altitude 16d 42, Proposed
Altitude in Summer -- 41d, 53. Proposed Altitude in Winter -- 12 13


Enter the aforesaid sum or difference of Sines twice down from the Center of
the Quadrant, and take the nearest distance to the Thread being laid over the
Tangent of the Latitude, this extent set down at the Cosine of the Altitude,
and lay the Thread to the other foot and in the Limb it shows the Azimuth
sought. So in this Example the Azimuth will be found to be 40d both in Summer
and Winter from East or West toward Noon Meridian.

Otherways.
Enter the aforesaid sum or difference of sines but down from the Center, and
take the nearest distance to the Thread laid over the Tangent of the Latitude,
then lay the Thread to the Complement of the Altitude in the lesser sines, and
enter the former extent between the Scale and the Thread, and the answer will
be given in the Line of Sines, supposing the declination unchanged, if the
Altitude were 9d 21 both for the Winter and the Summer Example, the Azimuth at
London would be 9d 22 from the East or West Northwards in Summer, and 35 d
Southwards in Winter.

Hitherto we suppose the Latitude not to exceed the length of the Tangents,
whether it does or not this Proportion may be otherways wrought by changing the
two first Terms of it; Instead of the Cosine of the Altitude to the Tangent of
the Latitude, we may say, As the Cotangent of the Latitude, To the Secant of
the Altitude:

So when the Sun has 23 d 31 of North Declination in our Latitude, and his
Altitude 57 d 7, take the distance between the sine thereof and the sine of 30
d 39 the Altitude of East, and enter it once down from the Center, and take the
nearest distance to the Thread laid over the Secant of the Altitude, viz. 57 d
7, then lay the Thread to 38 d 28 in the Tangents, and enter the former extent
between the Scale and the Thread, and the Compasses on the Line of Sines will
rest at 50 d for the Azimuth from East or West Southwards, because the Altitude
was more then the Vertical Altitude.

Otherways without the Secant in all Cases by help of the greater Tangent of
45d.
Enter the aforesaid Sum or difference of the Sines once down from the Center
and lay the Thread to the Tangent or Cotangent of the Latitude in the greater
Tangents, and take the nearest distance to it.

Then for Latitudes under 45d enter the former extent at the Complement of the
Altitude in the Line of Sines, and find the answer in the Limb by laying the
Thread to the other foot, or if it be more convenient make a Parralel entrance
of it, and find the answer in the Sines as before hinted.

But for Latitudes above 45 d, first find a fourth by entering the sum or
difference of sines between the Scale and the Thread, and then it will hold, As
the first Term, To that fourth: So Radius, To the Sine of the Azimuth, and may
be either a Lateral or Parralel entrance, according as it falls out, and as the
Radius is put either in the second or third place, in all these Directions the
introducement of the Radius is supposed according to to the general
Advertisement.

The finding of the Amplitude this way presupposes the Vertical Altitude
known, and then the Proportion derived from the Analemma, not from the 16 Cases
is, As the Radius, To the Tangent of the Latitude, So the Sine of the Vertical
Altitude, To the Sine of the Amplitude:


So also to find the time of Sun rising.

As the Cosine of the Declination, To Secant of the Latitude: So the sine of
the Suns Altitude at 6, To the Sine of the hour of rising from six.
To find the Suns Azimuth at six of the clock otherways then by the 16 Cases.
As the Cosine of the Suns Altitude at 6, To Tangent of the Latitude, So is the
difference of the sines of the Suns Altitude at 6, and of his Vertical
Altitude, To the sine of the Azimuth from the Vertical.


To find the time when the Sun shall be due East or West. As Cosine of the
Declination, To Secant of the Latitude: So the difference of the Sines of the
Suns Altitude at 6, and of his Vertical Altitude, To the Sine of the hour from
6, When the Sun shall be due East or West.


These Proportions derived from the Analemma, are general both for the Sun and
Stars in all Latitudes; but when the Declination either of Sun or Stars exceed
the Latitude of the place, this Proportion for finding the Azimuth cannot be at
some times conveniently performed on a Quadrant, but must be supplied from
another Proportion, whereof more hereafter.

Of the Hour and Azimuth Scales on the Edges of the Quadrant.
These Scales are fitted for the more ready finding the Hour and Azimuth in one
Latitude, being only to facilitate the former general Way.

The Labor saved hereby is twofold, first the Suns declination is graved
against the Suns Altitude of 6 in the Hour scale, and the said Declinations
continued at the other end of the said hour Scale to give the quantity of the
Suns Depression in Winter equal to his Altitude in Summer; and secondly they
are of a fitted length as was showed in the Description of the Quadrant, and
thereby half the trouble by introducing the Radius shunned.

The Use of the Azimuth Scale.
The Altitude and Declination of the Sun given to find his Azimuth.
Take the distance between the Suns Altitude in the Scale, and his Declination
in Summer time in that Scale that stands adjoining to the side; in Winter in
that Scale that is continued the other way beyond the beginning, and laying the
Thread to the Complement of the Suns Altitude in the lesser sines, which is
double numbered, enter this extent between the Scale and the Thread parralelly,
and the foot of the Compasses shows in the Line of Sines the Azimuth
accordingly,

Declination 23 d 31, Altitude 47 d 27, the Azimuth thereto would be 25 d from
East or West in Summer, and if the Altitude were 9 d 43 in Winter the Azimuth
thereto would be 30 d either way from the Meridian.

And so when the Sun has no Altitude, lay the Thread over 90 d in the lesser
Sines and enter the extent from the beginning of the Azimuth Scale to the
Declination, and you will find the Amplitude which to this Declination will be
39 d 50.

The Uses of the Hour Scale.
To find the Hour of the Day.
TAke the distance between the Suns Altitude in the hour Scale, and his
Declination proper to the season of the year, then laying the Thread to the
Complement of the Suns Declination in the lesser sines enter the former extent
between the Scale and the Thread and the foot of the Compasses shows the sine
of the hour.

Example.
If the Declination were 13 d North, and the Altitude 37d 13 take the distance
between it in the Scale and 13 d in the pricked Line, then laying the Thread to
77 d in the lesser sine enter that extent between the Scale and the Thread, and
the resting foot will show 45 d for the hour from 6, that is either 9 in the
forenoon, or 3 in the afternoon.

The Converse of the former Proposition will be to find the Suns Altitude on
all Hours.
The Thread lying over the Complement of the Suns Declination in the lesser
sines from the sine of the hour, take the nearest distance to it, then set down
one foot of that extent in the hour Scale at the Declination, and the other
will reach to the Altitude.

Example.
At London, for these Scales are fitted thereto, I would find the Suns Altitude
at the hours of 5 and at 7 in the morning in Summer when the Sun has 23 d 31
of Declination.

Here laying the Thread to 23 d 31 the Suns declination from the end of the
lesser Sines being double numbered, from the sine of 15 d, taking the nearest
distance to it, set down one foot of this extent at 23 d 31 the declination it
reaches downwards to 9 d 30, and upwards to 27 d 23 the Suns Altitude at 5 and
7 a clock in the morning in Summer.

Another Example.
Let it be required to find the Suns Altitudes at the hours of 10 or 2 when his
declination is 23d 31 both North and South.

The Thread lying as before over the lesser sines take the nearest distance to
it from 60d in the sines, the said extent set down at 23d 31 in the pricked Line
reaches to 53 d 44 for the Summer Altitude, and being set down at 23d 31 on the
other or lower continued Line reaches to 10d 28 for the Winter Altitude.

The Hour may be also sound in the Versed sines by help of this fitted hour
Scale,
Take the distance between the Suns Altitude, admit 36d 42, and his Meridian
Altitude to that Declination 61 d 59, and enter one foot of this extent at the
sine of 66 d 29, and laying the Thread to the other foot according to nearest
distance and it will lie over the hours of 8 in the morning, or 4 in the
afternoon in the Versed sines in the Limb, and thereby also may the time of
Suns rising be found by taking the distance from 0 to the Meridian Altitude and
entering it at the Cosine of the Declination as before and the Converse will
find the Suns Altitudes on all hours by taking the distance from the Cosine of
the Declination to the Thread laid over the Versed sine of the hour from Noon,
and the said Extent will reach from the Mridian Altitude in the fitted Scale to
the Altitude sought.

To find the time of Sun rising or setting,
Lay the Thread over the Complement of the declination as before, in the lesser
sines, and enter the extent between the Altitude, which is nothing that is from
the beginning of the Hour Scale to the Declination between the Scale and the
Thread and the foot of the Compasses shows it in the Line of sines, which may
be converted into Time by help of the Limb.

If these Scales be continued further in length as also the Declinations they
will after the same manner find the Stars hour for any Star whatsoever to be
converted into common Time, as in the uses of the Projection, as also the
Azimuth of any Star that has less declination then the place has Latitude,
but of this more in the next Quadrant.

In Dyalling there will be often use of natural sines, whereas these Scales are
continued but to 62 d, if therefore it be desired to take out any sine to the
same Radius, the rest of the Scale wanting may be easily supplied, for the
difference of the sines of any two Arks equidistant from 60 d is equal to the
sine of their distance.

Thus the sine of 20 d is equal to the difference of the sines of 40 d and 80 d
Arks of like distance from 60 d on each side, and so may be added either to 40
d forward, or the other way from the end of the Scale.

In finding the Hour and Azimuth by these Scales, not in the Versed sines, the
Directions altogether prescribe a Parralel entrance, but if the Extent from the
Altitude to the Declination be entered at the Cosine of the Altitude or of the
Declination in the Line of sines according as the Case is, and the Thread laid
to the other foot, the Hour and Azimuth may be found in the lesser sines by a
Lateral entrance.

Or if the said Extent be doubled and entered as before hinted, the answer will
be found in the equal Limb.

Example to find the Suns Azimuth.
Declination 23 d 31 North. Altitude -- 41: 34
Having taken the distance between these two Terms in the Azimuth Scale and
doubled it, enter one foot in the Line of sines at 48 d 26, the Complement of
the Altitude, and laying the Thread to the other according to nearest distance
it will lie over 15 d of the equal Limb for the Suns Azimuth from the East or
West Southwards.

The Use of the Versed Sin's in the Limb.
It may be noted in the former general Proportion, I have used the word Azimuth
from Noon or Midnight Meridian, though not so proper, because they are more
universal and common to both Hemispheres, other expressions besides their
Verbosity would be full of Caution for the following Proportion in our Northern
Hemispere, without the Tropic that finds it from the South between the Tropic
of Cancer and the Equinoctial, when the Sun comes to the Meridian between the
Zenith and the Elevated Pole would find it from the North, wherefore it is fit
to be retained.

A general Proportion for finding the Hour.
As the Cosine of the Declination, To the Secant of the Latitude:
Or, As the Cosine of the Latitude, To the Secant of the Declination: So is the
difference of the Sines of the Suns Altitude proposed, and of his Meridian
Altitude, To the Versed Sine of the hour from Noon^
And So is the sum of the sines of the Suns proposed Altitude, and of his
Midnight Depression, To the Versed sine of the hour from Midnight:
And So is the sine of the Suns Meridian Altitude, To the Versed sine of the
Semidiurnal Ark:
And So is the sine of the Suns Midnight Depression, To the Versed sine of the
Seminocturnal Ark.


The Operation will be like the former, I shall therefore only illustrate it
by one Example, the Meridian Altitude is got in Winter by differencing, in
Summer by adding the Declination to the Complement of the Latitude, if the sum
exceed 90 d the Complement thereof to 180 d is the Meridian Altitude.

An Example for finding the Hour from Noon.
Declination -- 23d 31 North the 11th June. Comp. Latitude -- 38 28 London. 61
59 Meridian Altitude.

Proposed Altitude -- 36 42, take the distance between the sines of these two
Arks, and enter it once down the Line of sines from the Center, and take the
distance to the Thread laid over the Secant, then enter one foot of that extent
at the sine being the first Term, and to the other lay the Thread, and in the
Versed sines in the Limb it will lie over the Versed Sine of the hour from Noon.

In this Example, if the Thread be laid over the Secant of 51d 32 the extent
must be entered at the sine of 66d 29 23 31 the extent must be entered at the
sine of 38 28
either way the answer will fall upon 60 d of the Versed sine showing the Hour
to be either 8 in the forenoon, or 4 in the afternoon.

If the hour fall near noon, then the extent of the Compasses may be Quadrupled
and entered as before, and look for the answer in the Versed Sines Quadrupled:
Or before the distance be took to the Thread the extent of difference may be
entered four times down from the Center.

The Converse of this Proposition will be to find the Suns Altitude on all
Hours universally. As the Secant of the Latitude, To Cosine Declination,
Or, As the Secant of the Declination, To Cosine Latitude: So the Versed sine
of the hour from Noon, To the difference of the sines of the Suns Meridian
Altitude, and of his Altitude sought,
to be subtracted from the sine of the Meridian Altitude, and there will
remain the sine of the Altitude sought.

So in Latitude of London, if the Suns Declination were 13 d 00, and the hour
from noon 75 d, that is either 7 in the morning, or 5 in the afternoon.

Lay the Thread over the Versed sine of the hour from noon, namely, 75 d, and
from the sine of 77 d the Complement of the Declination, take the nearest
distance to it, then lay the Thread to the Secant of the Latitude, and enter
the former extent between the Scale and the Thread, and you will find a sine
equal to the difference sought, which sine take between the Compasses and
setting down one foot at the sine of 51 d 28 the Meridian Altitude, the other
foot turned toward the Center will fall upon the sine of 19 d 27 the Altiude
sought.

A General Proportion for the Azimuth.
Get the Remainder or Difference between these two Arks, the Suns Altitude and
the Complement of the Latitude by Substracting the less from the greater, and
then the Proportion will hold, As the Cosine of the Latitude, Is to the Secant
of the Altitude,
Or, As the Cosine of the Altitude, To the Secant of the Latitude: So is the
sum of the sines of the Suns Declination* and of the aforesaid Remainder, To
the Versed Sine of the Azimuth from the Noon Meridian in Summer only when the
Suns Altitude is less then the Complement of the Latitude.
In all other Cases, So is the difference of the said sines, To the Versed sine
of the Azimuth, as before from Noon Meridian.


Example.
The 11th of June aforesaid, the having 23 d 31 of North declination, his
Altitude was observed to be 18 d 20, which subtracted from 38 d 28 the
remainder is 20 d 8, take out the sine thereof, and set down one foot at the
sine of 23 d 31, and set the other forwards toward 90 d, then take the nearest
to the Thread laid over the Secant of the Latitude 51 d 32, enter one foot of
this Extent at the Complement of the Altitude by reckoning the Altitude it self
from 90 d toward the Center, and the Thread laid to the other foot cuts the
Line of Versed sines at 105 d the Azimuth from the South.

The same day when the Altitude was more then the Colatitude, suppose 60 d 11
the Remainder will be found to be 21 d 43, take the distance between the sine
thereof and of 23 d 31, and because the Extent is but small enter it four times
down the Line of sines from the Center, and take the nearest distance to the
Thread laid over the Secant of the Latitude, which entered at the Cosine of the
Altitude, the Thread laid to the other foot shows 25 d in the Quadrupled Versed
Sines for the Azimuth from the South.

The Proportion hence derived for the Amplitude.
As the Cosine of the Latitude, To Secant of the Declination, etc. as before.
So in Summer is the sum in Winter, the difference of the sines of the Suns
Declination, and of the Complement of the Latitude, To the Versed Sine of the
Amplitude from Noon Meridian.


The Proportion for the Azimuth will be better expressed by making the difference
to be a difference of Versed sines.

How the Versed sines in the Limb may be spared in Case a Quadrant want them.
If a Quadrant can only admit of a Line of sines from the Center, the common
Quadrant of Mr Gunters very well may, on the right edge above the Margent for
the Numbers of the Azimuths, it may be easily fitted for any or many Latitudes
by setting Marks or Pricks to the Tangent and Secant of the Latitudes in the
Limb, which may be taken out by help of the Limb, Line of Sines, or by
Protraction, and either of these general Proportions wrought upon it, or those
which follow, if it be observed that whenever the Thread lies over the Versed
sine of any Ark in the Limb, it also at the same Time lies over a Sine equal
to half that Versed sine to the common Radius: Now because the sine of 30d
doubled is equal to the Radius, let it be observed whether the sine cut by the
Thread be greater or less then 30 degrees.

When it is less let the Line of Sines represent the former half of a Line of
Versed Sines, and take the sine of the Ark the Thread lay over, and enter it
twice forward from the end of the Scale toward the Center, and you will obtain
the Versed sine of the angle sought.

When it is more take the distance between the sine of 30 d and the said sine,
and letting the Line of sines represent the latter half of a Line of Versed
sines, enter the said distance twice from the Center, and you will obtain the
Versed sine of the Arch sought, namely, the sine of an Arch, whereto 90 d must
be added.

Three sides to find an Angle, a general Proportion.
As the Sine of one of the Sides including an angle, Is to the Secant of the
Complement of the other including side: So is the difference of the Versed
Sines of the third side, and of the Ark of difference between the two including
sides, To the Versed Sine of the Angle sought.
And So is the difference of the Versed sines of the third side, and of the sum
of the two including sides, To the Versed sine of the sought angles Complement
to 180d.


To repeat the Converse when two sides and the angle comprehended are given to
find the third side were needless.

If one of the containing sides be greater then a Quadrant, instead of it in
referrence to the two first Terms of the Proportion, take the Complement
thereof to 180d for the reputed side, but in differencing or summing the two
containing sides alter it not: And further note, that the same Versed sine is
common to an Ark less then a Semicircle, and to its Complement to 360 d.

The Operation of this Proportion will be wholly like the former, so that there
needs no direction but only how to take out a difference of two Versed sines to
the common Radius, seeing this Quadrant of so small a Radius is not capable of
such a Line from the Center.

And here note that the difference of two Versed sines less then a Quadrant, is
equal to the difference of the natural sines of the Complements of those Arks.

And the difference of two Versed sines greater then a Quadrant is equal to the
difference of the natural sines of the excess of those Arks above 90 d.

And by consequence the difference of the Versed sines of two Arks the one
less, the other greater then a Quadrant is equal to the sum of the natural
sines of the lesser Arks Complement to 90d, and the greater Arks excess above
it.

And so a difference of Versed sines may be taken out of the Line of natural
sines considered as such.

Or the Line of sines may be considered sometimes to represent the former half
of a Line of Versed Sines as it is numbered with the small figures by its
Complements from the end of it to 90d at the Center, and sometimes the latter
half of it, and then the graduations of it as Sines must be considered as
numbered from 90 d to 180 d at the end of it, and so a difference to be taken
out of it by taking the distance between the two Terms, which if the two Arks
fall the one to be greater the other less then 90 d will be a sum of two sines,
as before hinted, and in this Case the sine of the greater Arks excess above 90
d to be set down outward if it may be, at the Versed sine of the lesser Ark,
or which is all one, at the sine of that Arks Complement, and the distance from
the Exterior foot of the Compasses to the Center will be equal to the
difference of the Versed sines of the Arks proposed.

To measure a difference of Versed sines to the common Radius.
In this Case also the Line of sines must sometimes represent the former,
sometimes the latter half of a Line of Versed sines, and then one foot of the
difference applied to one Ark, the other will fall in many Cases upon the Ark
sought, each Proportion variously expressed, so that possibly either one or the
other will serve in all Cases.

But if one of the feet of the Compasses falls beyond the Center of the
Quadrant: To find how much it falls beyond it, bring the said foot to the
Center, and let the other fall backward on the Line, then will the distance
between the said other foot, where it now falls, and the place where it stood
before be equal to the excess of the former foot beyond the Center, which
accordingly thence measured helps you to the Arch sought, and its Complement
both at once with due regard to the representation of the Line; this should be
well observed, for it will be of use on other Instruments.

A difference of Versed sines thus taken out to the Common Radius must be
entered but once down from the Center.

To take out a Difference of Versed sines to half the common Radius.
Count both the Arks proposed on the Versed sines in the Limb, and find what
Arks of the equal Limb answer thereto, then out of the Line of sines take the
distance between the said Arks, and you have the extent required, which being
but half so large as it should be is to be entered twice down from the Center.

To measure a difference of Versed sines to half the common Radius.
The Versed sines are largest at that end numbered with 180d, count the given
Ark from thence, and laying the Thread over the equal Limb find what Ark
answers thereto, then setting down the Compasses at the like Ark in the Line of
sines from the end of it toward the Center mind upon what Ark it falls, the
Thread laid to the like Ark in the Limb shows on the Versed sines the Ark
sought.

To save the labor of drawing a Triangle, I shall deliver the Proportion for
the Azimuth derived from the general Proportion, As the Cosine of the Latitude,
To the Secant of the Altitude,
Or, As the Cosine of the Altitude, To the Secant of the Latitude: So is the
difference of the Versed sines of the Sun or Stars distance from the Elevated
Pole, and of the Ark of difference between the Latitude and Altititude. To the
Versed sine of the Azimuth sought;
as it falls in the Sphoere that is from the Midnight Meridian. And So is the
difference of the Versed sines of the Polar distance, and of the Ark of
difference between a Semicircle and the sum of the Latitude and Altitude, To
the Versed Sine of the Azimuth from Noon Meridian.


A Canon derived from the Inverse of the general Proportion to find the
Distance of places in the Ark of a great Circle.
As the Secant of one of the Latitudes, To the Cosine of the other. So the
Versed sine of the difference of Longitude, To the difference of the Versed
sines of the Ark of distance sought, and of the Ark of difference between both
Latitudes, when in the same Hemisphere, or the Ark of the sum of both Latitudes
when in both Hemispheres, which difference added to the Versed sine of the said
Ark gives the Versed sine of the Ark of distance sought.
And So is the Versed sine of the Complement of the difference of Longtitude to
180 d. To the difference of the Versed sines of the Ark of distance sought, and
of an Ark being the sum of the Complements of both Latitudes when in one
Hemisphere; Or the sum of the lesser Latitude increased by 90d, and of the
Complement of the greater Latitude when in different Hemispheres, which
difference subtracted from the Versed sine of the said Ark, there will remain
the Versed sine of the Ark of distance sought.


This Proportion is to be wrought after the same manner as we found the Suns
Altitudes on all hours universally, and the difference to be measured in the
Line of sines as representing the former half of a Line of Versed sines,
according to the Directions given for measuring of a difference of Versed sines
to the common Radius or Radius of the Quadrant.

By altring the two first Terms of the Proportion above, we may work this
Proposition by positive entrance. As the Radius, To the Cosine of one of the
Latitudes: So the Cosine of the other Latitude, To a fourth.
Again. As the Radius, To the Versed sine, as above expressed in both parts, So
is that fourth, To the difference as above expressed.


An Example for finding the distance between London and Bantum in the Arch of a
great Circle the same that was proposed in Page 96.

Bantam Longitude 140d Latitude 5d 40 South. London Longitude 25, 50 Latitude
51 32 North. difference of Longitude 114: 10 Sum 57 12
Lay the Thread to 5d 40 in the Limb counted from left edge and from 38d 28 in
the sines the Complement of our Latitude take the nearest distance to it, then
lay the Thread to 114d 10 in the Versed sines and entering the former extent
down the Line of sines from the Center take the nearest distance to it, then
laying the Thread over 57d 12 in the Versed sine, it cuts the Limb at 13d 15
from the right edge, at the like Ark set down one foot of the former extent in
the Line of sines, and the other will reach to the Sine of 41d 42, then laying
the Thread over the like Ark in the Limb, it will intersect the Versed sines at
109d 18 the Ark of distance sought to be converted into Leagues or Miles
according to the number of Leagues or Miles that answer to a degree in each
several Country.

Thus when we have two sides with the angle comprehended to find the third
side, either to half or the whole common Radius without a Line of natural
Versed sines from the Center, or by the Proportions in page 93, or a third way,
which I pretermit to the great Quadrant; and thus the Reader may perceive this
small Quadrant to be many ways both Universal and particular, which are of
sudden performance though tedious in expression.

Three sides to find an angle.
Each of the Proportions in Rectangles and Squares before delivered for the
Tables, may as before suggested be reduced to single Terms, an instance shall
be given in that which finds the Square of the sine of half the Angle sought.

Add the three sides of the Triangle together, and from the half sum substract
each of the sides including the angle sought, then it will hold, As the sine of
one of the Comprehending sides, (rather the greater that the entrance may be
Lateral.) Is to the sine of the difference of the same side from the half sum:
So is the sine of the difference of the other comprehending side, To a fourth
sine,
Again. As the Sine of the other comprehending side, Is to that fourth sine: So
is the Radius, To half the Versed sine of the angle sought,
And So is the Diameter, To the whole Versed sine.


To work this on the Quadrant.
Upon the first Term in the Line of sines being the greatest containing side,
enter the extent of the second, and to the other foot lay the Thread, then from
the third Term in the sines take the nearest distance to it, Which extent
enter at the sine of the first Term in the second Proportion, and to the other
foot lay the Thread, and it will cut the Versed sine at the angle sought.

Having showed how all Proportions may be performed upon the Quadrant: I now
proceed to the rest of the Lines.

Of the Line of Chords on the left edge of the Backside.
I shall not at present speak any thing as to the use thereof, that is intended
to be done in a Treatise of the general Scale; the principal use of a Line of
Chords is to prick off readily the quantity of any Arch of a Circle, to do
which take the Chord of 60d, and draw a Circle with that Extent then any Arch
being to be prict off it is to be taken out of the Line of Chords, and to be
transferred into the Circle swept, this supposes the Radius not to vary.

But to do it to any Radius that is lesser take the Semidiameter of the Circle,
and enter it at the Chord of 60d laying the Thread to the other foot, and the
nearest distances to the Thread will be Chords to the Semidiameter assigned,
and the Converse will measure the Chord of any Arch by a Parralel entrance.

A Chord may be taken off though no Line of Chords be graduated.
The Bead wheresoever it be set carried from one edge of the Quadrant to the
other, the Thread being extended does describe the Quadrant of a Circle, if
therefore extending the Thread down one edge of the Quadrant you set the Bead
to the distance of the Radius (or Semidiameter of the Circle swept) from the
Center, and at it set down one foot of the Compasses, and lay the Thread kept
at a certainty in stretching over the Limb to any Arch, and then open the
Compasses to the Distance of the Bead, you shall take out the Chord of the said
Arch.

A Chord may very conveniently be taken off from any Circle swept Concentrick
to the Limb, and diverse such there are upon both sides of this Quadrant; Sweep
a Circle of the like Radius on Paper as that on the Quadrant, and then setting
one foot to the Intersection of the Concentrick Circle with the right edge, the
Thread being laid over any Arch whatsoever in the Limb, take the distance to
the Intersection of the Thread with the Concentrick Circle, and transform the
said Extent into the Circle drawn upon Paper.

Of the Versed Sines Augmented.
These are to be used with fitted Scales thereto, to stand upon a loose Ruler
for the ready and more Exact finding the Hour and Azimuth near Noon, or at
other times, and shall be treated of in the use of the Diagonal Scale.

Of the Line of Latitudes and Scale of Hours on the spare edges of the foreside.
The use of these Scales are for the ready pricking down of any Dial that has
a Center in an Equicrural Triangle from the Substile, as shall be showed in the
Use of the great Quadrant, though the Schems be fitted to small Scales.

The Scale of Hours standing on the Edge on the foreside may very well be
supplied from thence to another Radius, as shall in due Time be showed, though
it do not proceed from the Center, and therefore may be spared out of the Limb
on the Backside.

The Description of the Diagonal Scale.
THe particular Scales handled in Page 181 would find the hour and Azimuth in
the equal Limb without doubling the Extent, if laying the Thread over the
Cosine of the Declination in the lesser sines when the hour is sought; or over
the Cosine of the Altitude when the Azimuth is sought, it be minded what Ark of
the Limb the Thread intersects, and then make the entrance of one foot of the
Extent at the like Ark in the sines laying the Thread to the other foot
according to nearest distance.

But because these Scales are more convenient being twice as long, there is
accordingly a Diagonal Scale fitted to serve for our English Region, and may be
accommodated to any 5 or 6 degrees of Latitude, and placed conveniently on any
Instrument for Surveigh to give the hour and Azimuth in the Limb of the
Instrument or on the frame of the plain Table.

And here I am to intimate that either the hour or Azimuth Scale before
described on the small Quadrant, will serve to find both the Hour and Azimuth,
as conveniently as either; the foundation whereof is, that the same Proportion
demonstrated from the Analemma that finds the hour from six being applied to
other sides of the Triangle will also find the Azimuth from the East or West,
an instance whereof I give in the Use of a great Quadrant for finding the
Azimuth when the Declination of the Sun or Stars exceeds the Latitude of the
place.

By the like parity of reason the Proportion that found the Azimuth is a
general Proportion to find an angle, when the threee sides are given the Canon
will be, As the Cosine of one of the including sides, Is to the Radius: So is
the Cosine of the side Opposite to the angle sought, To a fourth a Sine or
Secant.
Again. As the second including side, Is to the Cotangent of the first
including side: So when any one of the sides is greater then a Quadrant is the
sum, but when all less the difference between the 4th abovesaid, and the Cosine
of the second Includer, To the Cosine of the angle sought.


We do suppose but one of the three sides given to be greater then a Quadrant,
if there be any such it subtends an Obtuse angle, and both the other sides
being less then Quadrants subtend Acute Angles.

When the 4th Sine is less then the Cosine of the second Includer, the Angle
sought is Obtuse, other ways Acute.

Hence the peculiar Proportion educed for the hour will be, As the Sine of the
Latitude, Is to the Radius: So is the Sine of the Altitude, To a 4th a Sine or
Secant.


Again. As the Cosine of the Declination, Is to the Tangent of the Latitude, So
in Summer is the difference, but in Winter the sum of the sines of the
Declination of the Sun or Stars, and of the 4th Sine, To the Sine of the hour
from six.


When the 4th Ark is less then the Declination the hour is Obtuse, when greater
Acute, and in Winter always Acute:

But of this Proportion I make no use it being liable in some Cases to
Excursion, and will not hold backward to find the Suns Altitudes the hour being
assigned.

This Diagonal Scale is made after the same manner as the Hour Scale described
in the small Quadrant, being but several Lines of sines the greater whereof are
made equal to the Secant of the Latitude, whereto they are fitted, the Radius
of which Secant is 5 Inches long.

The lesser Sines continued the other way, their respective Radii are made
equal to the sine of the Latitude of that greater sine whereto they are
continued.

The parralel Lines fitted to the respective Latitudes are not to be
equidistant one from another; but having determined the distance between the
two Extreme Latitudes, to which they are fitted for the the larger sine it will
hold, As the difference of the Secants of the two extreme Latitudes, It to the
distance between the Lines fitted thereto: So is the difference of the Secants
of the lesser extreme Latitude, and any other intermediate Latitude, To the
distance thereof from the lesser extreme.


And so for the lesser sine continued the other way, having placed the two
Extremes under the two former Extremes, to place the imtermediate Lines, the
Canon would be, As the difference of the sines of the two extreme Latitudes, Is
to the distance between the Lines fitted thereto: So is the difference of the
sines of the lesser extreme Latitude, and of any other intermediate Latitude,
To the distance thereof from the lesser Extreme.


Having fitted the distances of the greater sine, straight Lines drawn through
the two extreme sines shall divide the intermediate Parralels also into Lines
of sines, proper to the Latitudes to which they are fitted: Now for the lesser
sines they are continued the other way at the ends of the former Parralells,
the Line proper to each Latitude should be divided into a Line of sines, whose
Radius should be equal to the sine of the Latitude of the other sine whereto it
is fitted; and so Lines traced through each degree to the Extremes; but by
reason of the small distance of these Lines, the difference is so exceeding
small, that it may not be scrupled to draw Lines Diagonal wise from each degree
of the two outward extreme Sines, for being drawn true, they will not be
perceived to be any other then straight Lines.

Whereas these Lines by reason of the latter Proportion should not fall
absolutely to be drawn, at the ends of the former Lines whereto they are
fitted, and then they would not be so fit for the purpose, yet the difference
being as we said, so insensible that it cannot be scaled, they are
notwithstanding there placed and crossed with Diagonals drawn through each
degree of the Extremes.

The Uses of the Diagonal Scale.
1. To find the time of Sun rising or setting.
In the Parralel proper to the Latitude take out the Suns Declination out of
the lesser continued sines, and enter one foot of this extent at the Complement
of the Declination in the Line of sines, and in the equal Limb the Thread being
laid to the other foot will show the time sought.

In the Latitude of York, namely 54d, if the Sun have 20d of Declination
Northward he rises at 4 and sets at 8 Southward he rises at 8 and sets at 4


2. To find the Hour of the Day or Night for South Declination.
In the Parralel proper to the Latitude account the Declination in the lesser
continued sine, and the Altitude in the greater sine, and take their distance,
which extent apply as before to the Cosine of the Declination in the Line of
sines on the Quadrant, and laying the Thread to the other foot according to
nearest distance it shows the time sought in the equal Limb.

Thus in the Latitude of York when the Sun has 20d of South declination, his
Altitude being 5d, the hour from noon will be found 45 minutes past 8 in the
morning, or 15 minutes past 3 in the afternoon fere.

For North Declination.
The Declination must be taken out of the lesser sine in the proper Parralel,
and turned upward on the greater sine and there it shows the Altitude at six
for the Sun or any Stars in the Northern Hemispere, the distance between which
Point and the given Altitude must be entered as before at the Cosine of the
declination, laying the thread to the other foot and it shows the hour in the
Limb from six toward noon or midnight, according as the Sun or Stars Altitude
was greater or lesser then its Altitude at six.

So in the Latitude of York, when the Sun has 20d of North declination if his
Altitude be 40d, the hour will be 46 minutes past 8 in the morning, or 14
minutes past 3 in the afternoon.

4. The Converse of the former Proposition will be to find the Altitude of the
Sun at any hour of the day, or of any Star at any hour of the night.
I need not insist on this, having shown the manner of it on the small
quadrant, only for these Scales use the Limb instead of the lesser sines, for
Stars the time of the night must first be turned into the Stars hour, and then
the Work the same as for the Sun.

5. To find the Amplitude of ehe Sun or Stars.
Take out the Declination out of the greater sine in the Parralel proper to the
Latitude, and measure it on the Line of sines on the lesser Quadrant, and it
shows the Amplitude sought.

So in the Latitude of York 54d when the Sun has 20d of Declination, his
Amplitude will be 35d 35.

6. To find the Azimuth for the Sun or any Stars in the Hemisphere.
For South Declination.
Account the Altitude in the lesser sine continued in the proper Parralel, and
the Declination in the greater sine, and take their distance enter one foot of
this extent at the Cosine of the Altitude on the Quadrant, and lay the Thread
to the other according to nearest distance, and in the Limb it shows the
Azimuth from East or West Southwards.

So in the Latitude of York, when the Sun has 20d of South Declination, his
Altitude being 5d, the Azimuth will be found to be 44d 47 to the Southwards of
the East or West.

For North Declination.
Account the Altitude in the lesser sine continued, and apply it upward on the
greater sine and it finds a Point thereon, from whence take the distance to the
declination in the said greater sine in the Parralel proper to the Latitude of
the place, and enter one foot of this Extent at the Cosine of the Altitude on
the Line of sines, and the Thread being laid to the other foot according to
nearest distance, shows the Azimuth in the Limb from East or West.

So in the Latitude of York, when the Sun has 20d of North Declination, and
40d of Altitude, his Azimuth will be 23d 16 to the Southwards of the East or
West.

When the Hour or Azimuth falls near Noon, for more certainty you may lay the
Thread to the Complement of the Declination for the Hour, or the Complement of
the Altitude for the Azimuth, in the Limb, and enter the respective extents
Parralelly between the Thread and the Sines, and find the answer in the sines.

We might have fitted one Scale on the quadrant to give both the hour and
Azimuth in the Equal Limb by a Lateral entrance, and have enlarged upon many
more Propositions, which shall be handled in the great Quadrants.

Mr Sutton was willing to add a Backside to this Scale, and therefore has put
on particular Scales of his own for giving the requisites of an upright
Decliner in this Latitude, which he has often made upon Rulers for Carpenters
and other Artificers and Diallists, and whereof he was willing to afford them a
Print; whereto I have added other Scales for giving the Hour and Azimuth near
Noon.

On the Backside are drawn these Lines,
A large Dyalling Scale of 6 hours or double Tangents, with a Line of Latitudes
fitted thereto. A large Chord. A Line for the Substiles distance from the
Meridian. A Line for the Styles height. A Line for the angle of 12 and 6. A
Line for the inclination of Meridians. All these Scales relate to Dyalling.
An Azimuth Scale being two Lines of natural sines of the same Radius set
together at O, and thence numbered with Declinations, this Scale must be made of
the same sine that the hour Scale following is made of continued from O one way
to 38d 28, and the other way to 23d 31 or further at pleasure; but numbered from
the beginning which is at the end of that 38d 28 the Complement of the Latitude
with 10d 20, etc. up to 60d.

The Hour Scale is no other then a Line of sines with the declinations set
against the Meridian Altitudes in the Latitude of London, the Radius of which
sine is equal in length to the Dyalling Scale of hours.

Of the Uses of these Scales.
The Line of Hours and Latitudes is general for pricking down all Dialls with
Centers as will afterward be showed in the Use of the great Quadrant, and by
help of the Scale of Hours may the Diameter of a such a Circle be graduated as
is placed in on the back of the great Quadrant, and the Line of Latitudes will
serve as a Chord to divide the upper Quadrant, and the Hour Scale or Line of
Sines will serve as a Chord to divide a Semicircle, whose Diameter is equal to
the Scale of Hours into 90 equal parts and their Subdivisions, and hereby may
Proportions in sines and Tangents, or Tangents alone be wrought by Protraction,
and so the necessary Arks in Dyalling found generally as is done by Mr Foster
in the three last Schems of his Posthuma, this will easily be understood if the
use of the Circle on this Quadrant be well apprehended.

The particular Scales give the requisite Arks of upright Decliners in this
Latitude by inspection, for count the plains Declination in the Line of
Chords, and a Square laid over it intersects all those Arks or to be found by
applying the Declination taken out of the Chords with Compasses to every other
Line.

Example.
So if an upright Plain decline 35d from the Meridian.

The Substiles distance from the Meridian will be -- 24d 30 The Styles height
-- 30 38 The Inclinations of Meridians -- 41 49 The angle of 12 and 6 -- 54 10
These particular Scales also resolve some of the Cases of right angled
Sphoerical Triangles, relating to the Motion of the Sun or Stars thus,

Of the Line of the Styles height.
Account the Declination in the Line for the Styles height, and against it in
the Chord stands the Amplitude of the Sun or Stars from the Meridian.

Example for Amplitude.
So when the Sun has 18d of Declination, his Amplitude will be 67d 13 from the
Meridian, and 29d 47 from the Vertical.

The reason hereof is because the two first fixed Terms of the Proportion that
Calculate the Styles height are the Radius and the Cosine of the Latitude, and
the two first Terms that Calculate the Amplitude are the Cosine of the
Latitude and the Radius, and therefore must as well serve in this Case as in
that.

On this Style Line may be found the Suns Altitudes on all hours, when he is in
the Equinoctial by applying the hour from six taken from the Chords to the
other end of the Style Line.

Of the Substiler Line.
Hereby we may find the time of Sun rising and setting, take the Declination
out of the Substilar Line and measure it on the Line of Chords.

Example.
So when the Sun has 18 of North Declination, the Ascensional difference is
24d 9 in time 1 hour 36 minutes, and so much the Sun rises and sets from six.

Hereby may be also found the Equinoctial Altitudes to every Azimuth.

Of the Line for the Angle of 12 and 6.
Hereby we may find the time when the Sun will be due East or West.

Account the Complement of the Declination in this Scale, and against it in the
Chords stands the hour from six.

Example.
So when the Sun has 18d of North Declination, he will be East or West at 7 in
the morning, or 5 in the afternon.

By these Scales the requisites of an East or West Reclining or Inclining Dial
in this Latitude may be found.

1. The Substiles distance from the Meridian.
Account the Complement of the Reclination Inclination in the Chords, and
against it in the Line for 12 and 6 stands the Complement of the angle sought.

2. For the Styles height.
Apply the Reclination in the lesser sines on the Diagonal Scale in the
Parralel proper to the Latitude to the greater sine and it shows the Ark
sought.

3. For the Inclination of Meridians.
This may be also found on the Diagonal Scale when the Substiles distance is
not more then the Latitude, By Accounting the Substiles distance on the greater
sine, and applying it to the lesser.

4. For the Angle of 12 and six.
Account the Complement of the Reclination in the Chords, and against it in the
Substilar Line is the Complement of the angle sought.

So if an East or West Plain Recline or Incline 35d.

The Substiles distance from the Meridian will be -- 45d 52 The Styles height
-- 26 41 The Inclination of Meridians -- 66 27 And the angle of 12 and 6 -- 56
55
Of the Hour and Azimuth Scales.
This Scale is fitted to find the Hour from Noon in the Versed sine: augmented,
and the Proportion to be wrought by it the same as delivered in the use of the
small Quadrant. As the Cosine of the Declination, Is to the Secant of the
Latitude: So is the difference of the sines of the Suns proposed and Meridian
Altitude, To the Versed sine of the hour from Noon.


And of this one Proportion we make two by introducing the Radius. As the
Radius, is to the Secant of the Latitude: So is the former distance, To a
fourth.
By fitting the Radius of the sines equal in length to the Secant of the
Latiude; this first Proportion is removed for the said difference of sines
taken out of this fitted Scale is the 4th Proportional, the Proportion that
remains to be wrought upon the Quadrant is, As the Cosine of the Declination,
Is to the difference of the sines taken out of this fitted Scale: So is the
Radius, To the Versed sine of the hour from Noon.


By this means if in the same Proportion as we increase the length of the
fitted Scale, we also increase the versed sines lying in the Limb, we may find
the hour and Azimuth near noon with certainty if the Altitude be well given:

These Scales in their Use presuppose the Hour and Azimuth of the Sun to be
nearer the noon Meridian then 60d.

Operation to find the Hour.
Take the distance between the Altitude and the Declination proper to the
season of the year out of the Hour Scale, and enter one foot of this Extent at
the Cosine of the Declination in the Line of sines, and laying the Thread to
the other foot according to nearest distance, it shows the hour from noon in
the Versed sines Quadrupled.

Example.
When the Sun has 23d 31 of North Declination, and 60d of Altitude, the hour
from noon will be 13d 58 to be Converted into time.

When the hour is found to be less then 40d from Noon, the former extent may be
doubled and entered as before, and it shows the hour in the Versed sines
Octupled.

And when the hour is less then 30d from Noon, the former extent may be tripled
and entered as before, and after this manner it is possible to make the whole
Limb give the hour next Noon, the Versed Sine Duodecupled, lies on the other
side of the Quadrant; and in this case, an Ark must first be found in the Limb,
and the Thread laid over the said Ark, counted from the other edge, will
intersect the said Versed Sine at the Ark sought.

To find the Suns Azimuth:
TAke the distance in the Azimuth Scale, between the Altitude and the
Declination, proper to the season of the year, and entering it at the Cosine of
the Altitude, laying the Thread to the other foot, according to nearest
distance, it will show the Azimuth in the Versed Sines quadrupled; or, when the
Azimuth is near Noon, according to the former restrictions for the hour, the
extent may be doubled, or tripled, and the answer found in the Versed Sines
Octupled, or Duodecupled, as was done for the hour.

Example.
So when the Sun has 23d 31 of North Declination, his Altitude being 60d. The
Azimuth will be found to be 26d 21 from the South.

By the like-reason, when we found the Hour and Azimuth in the equal Limb by
the Diagonal Scale, if those extents had been doubled, the Hour and Azimuth
near six, or the Vertical, might have been found in a line of Sines of 30d, put
through the whole Limb, but that we thought needless.





FINIS.
THE DESCRPITION AND USES Of a Great Universal Quadrant: With a Quarter of
Stofters particular Projection upon it, Inverted.

Contrived and Written by John Collins Accomptant, and Student in the
MATHEMATIqUES.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1658.

The DESCRIPTION Of the Great Quadrant.
IT has been hinted before, that though the former contrivance may serve for a
small Quadrant, yet there might be a better for a great one.

The Description of the Fore-side.
On the right edge from the Center is placed a line of Sines.

On the left edge from the Center, a line of Versed Sines to 180d.

The Limb, the same as in the small Quadrant.

Between the Limb and the Center are placed in Circles, a Line of Versed Sines
to 180d, another through the whole Limb to 90d.

The Line of lesser Sines and Secants.

The line of Tangents.

The Quadrat and Shaddows.

Above them, the Projection, with the Declinations, Days of the month, and
Almanac.

On the left edge is placed the fitted Hour, and Azimuth Scale.

Within the Projection abutting against the Sines, is placed a little Scale,
called The Scale of Entrance, being graduated to 62d, and is no other but a
small line of Sines numbered by the Complements.

At the end of the Secant is put on the Versed Sines doubled, that is, to twice
the Radius of the Quadrant, and at the end of the Tangents tripled, to some few
degrees, to give the Hour and Azimuth near Noon more exactly.

The Description of the Backside.
On the right edge from the Center, is placed a Line of equal part being 10
inches precise, decimally subdivided.

On the outside next the edge, is placed a large Chord to 60^, equal in length
to the Radius of the Line of Sines.

On the left edge is placed a Line of Tangents issuing from the Center,
continued to 63d 26, and again continued apart from 60d, to 75d

The equal Limb.

Within it a Quadrant of Ascensions, divided into 24 equal hours and its parts,
with Stars affixed, and Letters graved, to refer to their Names.

Between it and the Center is placed a Circle, whereof there is but three
Quadrants graduated.

The Diameter of this Circle is no other then the Dyalling Scale of 6 hours, or
double Tangents divided into 90d.

Two Quadrants, or the half of this Circle beneath the Diameter, is divided
into 90 equal parts or degrees.

The upper divided Quadrant, is called the Quadrant of Latitudes.

From the extremity of the said Quadrant, and Perpendicular to the Diameter, is
graduated a Line of Proportional Sines; M Foster call it the Line Sol.

Diagonal-wise, from one extremity of the Quadrant of Latitude to the other, is
graduated a line of Sines; that end numbered with ^0d, that is next the
Diameter, being of the same Radius with the Tangents.

Opposite and parallel thereto from 45d of the Semicircle, to the other
extremity of the Diameter, is placed a Line of Sines equal to the former.

Diagonal-wise, from the beginning of the Line Sol, to the end of the Diameter,
is graduated a Line of 60 Chords.

From the beginning of the Diameter, but below it, toward 45d of the
Semicircle, is graduated the Projection Tangent, alias, a Semi-tangent, to 90d,
being of the same Radius with the Tangents.

The other Quadrant of this Circle being only a void Line, there passes
through it from the Center, a Tangent of 45d, for Dyalling, divided into 3
hours, with its quarters and minutes.

Below the Diameter is void space left, to graduate any Table at pleasure, and
a Line of Chords may be there placed.

Most of these Lines, and the Projection, have been already treated upon in the
use of the small Quadrant, those that are added, shall here be spoke to.

Of the Line of Versed Sines, on the left Edge, issuing from the Center.
THis Line, and the uses of it, were invented by the learned Mathematician, M.
Samuel Foster, of Gresham College, deceased, from whom I received the uses of
it, applied to a Sector; I shall, and have added the Proportions to be wrought
upon it, and in that, and other respects, diversifie from what I received;
wherein I shall not be tedious, because there are other ways to follow, since
found out by my self.

The chief uses of it are, to resolve the two cases of the fourth Axiom of
Spherical Trigonometry; as, when three sides are given to find an Angle, or two
sides with the Angle comprehended, to find the third side, which are the cases
that find the Hour and Azimuth generally, and the Suns Altitudes on all hours.
For the Hour, the learned Author thought meet to add a Zodiaque of the
Suns-place annexed to it, both in the use of his Sector, as also in the use of
his Scale, published since his death, entitled Posthuma Fosteri, that the Suns
place being given, which for Instrumental use might be obtained, by knowing on
what day of each month the Sun enters into any Sign, and allowing a degree
for every days motion, come by it prope verum, and being sought in the annexed
Zodiaque (which is no other then two lines of 90d. Sines, each made equal to
the Sine of 23d 31 the Suns greatest Declination) just against it stands the
Suns Declination, if accounted in the Versed Sine, from 90d each way; but this
for want of room, and because the Declination is more easily given by help of
the day of the month, I thought fit to omit, the rather, because it may also
be taken from the Table of Declinations.

But from hence I first observed, that if the two first terms of a Proportion
were fixed, if two natural Lines proper to those terms, were fitted of an equal
length, and posited together, if any third term be given, to find a fourth in
the same proportion, it would be given by inspection, as standing against the
third; but if the Lines stand asunder, or a difference be the third term,
application must be made from one Line to the other with Compasses, as in the
same Scale there is also fitted a Line of 60 parts, equal in length to the
Radius of a small Sine, serving to give the Miles in every several Latitude,
answerable to one degree of Longitude.

Three sides given to find an Angle, the Proportion, As the difference of the
Versed Sines of the Sum, and difference of any two Sides including an Angle, Is
to the Diameter, So is the difference of the Versed Sines of the third side,
And of the Ark of difference between the two including Sides, To the Versed
Sine of the Angle sought;
And so is the difference of the Versed Sines of the third side And of the sum
of the two including sides, To the Versed Sine of the sought Angles, Complement
to a Semicircle.


Corollary.
And seeing there is such proportion between the latter terms of the foregoing
Proportion, as between the former, omitting the two first terms, it also holds,
As the difference of the Versed Sines of the third side, and of the Ark of
difference between the two including sides Is to the Versed Sine of the Angle
sought, So is the difference of the Versed Sines of the third side, And of the
sum of the two including sides, To the Versed Sine of the sought Angles,
Complement to 180d.


And this is the Proportion M. Foster makes use of in his Scale, page 25 and
27. to find the Hour and Azimuth by Protraction, as also in page 68. in
Dyalling, when three sides are given to find an Angle, by constituting two
right angled equi-angled plain Triangles, the legs whereof consist of the 4
terms of this Proportion.

But in that Protraction work, the first and third terms of the Proportion are
given together, with the sum of the second and fourth terms, to find out the
said terms respectively.

The Proportion for the Hour.
As the difference of the Versed Sines of the Sum, and difference of the
Complement of the Latitude, and of the Sun or Stars distance from the Elevated
Pole, Is to the Diameter or Versed Sine of 180d, So is the difference of the
Versed Sines of the Complement of the Altitude, and of the Ark of difference
between the Complement of the Latitude, and of the Polar distance, To the
Versed Sine of the Hour from Noon.
And if the latter clause of the third term be the Sum of the Colatitude and
Polar distance, the Proportion will find the Versed Sine of the hour from
midnight,

And if the sum of any two Arks exceed a Semicircle, take its Complement to
360d, for the same Versed Sine is common to both.

When the Declination is toward the Elevated Pole, the Polar distance is the
Complement of it to 90d; and when toward the Depressed Pole, the Polar
distance is equal to the Sum of 90d, and of the Declination added together.

Example.
Let the Suns Declination be 15d 46 North, Complement, -- 74d 14 The Complement
of the Latitude, -- 38 28 Sum -- 112: 42 Difference -- 35: 46 And let the
Altitude be 20d, Complement -- 70: 00
Operation.
Take the distance between the Versed Sines of 35d 46, and of 112d 42, and
entering one foot of that extent at the end of the Versed Scale at 180d, lay the
thread to the other foot, according to nearest distance, then take the distance
between the Versed Sines of 35d 46, and 70d, and entering that extent
parallelly, between the Thread and the Scale, and the other foot will rest upon
the Versed Sine of 77d 32, the quantity of the Hour from the Meridian being
either 50 past 6 in the morning, or 10 past 5 in the afternoon.

The Reader may observe in this work, that the thread lies over a Star, by
entering the first extent; as also, that there is the same Star graduated at 35d
46 of the Versed Sine, and this no other then the Bulls eye, having 15d 46 of
North Declination, for which Star in this Latitude, there needs be no summing
or differencing of Arks, in regard the Stars declination varies not: So to find
that Stars hour at any time, having any other Altitude, only lay the thread over
that Star in the Quadrant, and take the distance between the Star in the Scale,
and the Complement of its Altitude, and enter that extent parallelly between
the Thread and the Scale, and it finds the Stars hour from the Meridian: Thus
when that Star has 39d of Altitude, its hour from the Meridian will be found
to be 45d 54, in time, 3 hours 3, which to get the true time of the night, must
be turned into the Suns hour by help of the Nocturnal on the Backside: But
admitting the Suns Declination and Altitude to have been the same with the
Stars, the true time of the day thus found, would have been 56 past 9 in the
morning, or 3 past 3 in the afternoon; and thus the Reader may have what Stars
he pleases put on of any Declination, and for any Latitude; and they may be put
on at such a distance from the Center, that the distance from it to the Star,
may be a Chord to be measured in the Limb, to give the Stars Ascensional
difference, or the like conclusion: And thus the thread being once laid, and the
former point found for one example to the Suns Declination, neither of them
varies that day; which is a ready general way for finding the time of the day
for the Sun.

To find the Semidiurnal, and Seminocturnal Arks.
SUppose the Sun to have no Altitude, and the Complement of it to be 90d, and
then work by the former precept, and you will find the Semidiurnal Ark from the
beginning of the Line, and the Seminocturnal Ark from the end of the Line,
which doubled, and turned into time, shows the length of the Day and Night, and
the difference between 90d, and either of those Arks is the Ascensional
difference, or time of rising and setting from 6.

To find the Azimuth generally.
The Proportions for this purpose have been delivered before, from which it may
be observed, that there are no two terms fixed, and therefore to every
Altitude, the containing sides of the Triangle, namely, the Complements both of
the Altitude and Latitude must be summed and differenced, when the Proposition
is to be performed on this Line solely, and the Operation will be after the
same manner, as for the hour, namely, with a Parallel entrance: and this is all
I shall say of the Authors general way; and of any other that he used, I never
heard of; those ways that follow, being of my own supply.

By help of this Line to work a Proportion in Sines alone, wherein the Radius
leads.
As the Radius Is to the Sine of any Ark, So is the Sine of any other Ark To
the Sine of a fourth Ark.
This fourth Sine, as I have said before, is demonstrated by M. Gellibrand, to
be equal to half the difference of the Versed Sines of the Sum, and difference
of the two middle terms of the Proportion.

Operation.
Let the Proportion be, As the Radius Is to the Sine of -- 40d So is the Sine
of -- 27 To a fourth Sine Sum -- 67 Difference -- 13


Take the distance between the Versed Sines of the said sum and difference, and
measure it on the Line of Sines from the Center, and it will reach to 17d, the
fourth Sine sought.

By help of this Line may the Divisions of the line Sol, or Proportional Sines,
be graduated to any Radius less then half the Radius of the Quadrant, the Canon
is, As the Versed Sine of any Ark added to a Quadrant, Is to the Radius, or
length of the Line Sol, So is the Versed Sine of that Arks Complement to 90d To
that length which pricked backward from the end of the Radius of the said Line,
shall graduate the Arch proposed.


Example.
Suppose you would graduate 20 of the Line Sol, enter the Radius of the said
Line upon the Versed Sine of 110d, laying the thread to the other foot; and from
the Versed Sine of 70d, take the nearest distance to the thread, which prick
from the end of the Line Sol, toward the beginning, and it shall graduate the
said 20d.

This Line Sol is made use of by M. Foster in his Scale for Dyalling.

The Line of Versed Sines was placed on the left edge of the foreside of the
Quadrant, for the ready taking out the difference of the Versed Sines of any
two Arks, and to measure a difference of two Versed Sines upon it, which are
the chief uses I shall make of it; whereas to Operate singly upon it, it would
be more convenient for the hand to have it lie on the right edge of the
Quadrant.

An example for finding the Azimuth generally, by help of Versed Sines in the
Limb, and of other Lines on the Quadrant.
I shall rehearse the Proportion, As the Cosine of the Latitude is to the
Secant of the Altitude,
Or, As the Cosine of the Altitude is to the Secant of the Latitude, So is the
difference of the Versed Sines of the Suns distance from the Elevated Pole, and
of the Ark of difference between the Latititude and Altitude, To the Versed
Sine of the Azimuth from the midnight meridian.


And making the latter clause of the third term the Complement of the Sum of
the Latitude and Altitude to a Semicircle, the Proportion will find the versed
Sine of the Azimuth from the noon Meridian.

Example.
Altitude, -- 51d 32 Latitude -- 34: 32 Complement 55d 2^ Difference 17: 00
distance from elevated Pole, 66: 29
Operation in the first Terms of the Proportion.
On the Line of Versed Sines, take the distance between 17d, and 66d 29, and
entering it twice down the line of Sines, from the Center, take the nearest
distance to the thread laid over the Secant of 51d 32, the given Altitude, and
entering one foot of this Extent at the Sine of 55d 28 the Complement of the
Latitude, lay the thread to the other foot, according to nearest distance, and
in the line of Versed Sines in the Limb, it will lie over 95d, for the Suns
Azimuth from the midnight meridian.

And the Suns declination supposed the same, he shall have the like Azimuth
from the North, in our Latitude of London, when his Altitude is 34d 32, for the
sides of the Triangle are the same.

Another Example.
To find it in the versed Sine of 90d Latitude -- 47d 27 Altitude -- 51: 32 Sum
-- 98: 59 Complement -- 81: 1 Polar distance -- 66: 29


Take the distance in the Line of Sines, as representing the former half of a
Line of Versed Sines, between these two Arks counted toward the Center, viz.
66d 29, and 81d 01, and enter this extent twice down the Line of Sines from the
Center, and take the nearest distance to the thread lying over the Secant of the
Latitude 47d 27, then enter one foot of this extent at 51d 32 counted from the
end of the Sines toward the Center, laying the thread to the other foot,
according to nearest distance, and in the Versed Sine of 90d, it shows the
Azimuth to be 65d from the South in this our Northern Hemispere.

Of the fitted Particular Scale, and the Line of Entrance thereto belonging.
THis Scale serves to find both the Hour and Azimuth in the Latitude of London,
to which it is fitted, in the equal Limb, by a Lateral or positive Entrance, it
consists of two Lines of Sines.

The greater is 62d of a Sine, as large as can stand upon the Quadrant, the
Radius of the lesser Sine is made equal to 51d 32 of this greater, being fitted
to the Latitude: The Scale of Entrance standing within the Projection, and
abutting on the Line of Sines, is no other but a portion of a Line of Sines,
whose Radius is made equal to 38d 28 of the greater Sine of the fitted Scale;
and this Scale of Entrance is numbered by its Complements up to 62d, as much as
is the Suns-greatest meridian Altitude in this Latitude.

The ground of this Scale is derived from the Diagonal Scale, the length
whereof bears such Proportion to the Line of Sines whereto it is fitted, as the
Secant of the particular Latitude does to the Radius, which is the same that
the Radius bears to the Cosine of the Latitude, and consequently, making the
Line of Sines to represent the fitted Scale, the Radius of that Sine whereto it
is fitted, must be equal to the Cosine of the Latitude: and so we needed no
particular Scale, but this would remove the particular Scale, or Scale of
Entrance, nearer the Center, and would not have been so ready as this fitted
Scale; however, hence I might educe a general method for finding the hour and
Azimuth in the Limb, without Tangents or Secants. The first Work would be to
proportion out a Sine to a lesser Radius, which would find the point of
Entrance, the next would be to find the Altitude, or Depression, at 6. the
third would be to enter the sum, or difference of the Sines of the Altitude, or
depression at 6 at the point of Entrance, and to lay the thread to the other
foot; but I shall demonstrate it from other grounds.

1. To find the time of Sun Rising, or Setting.
Take the Declination from the lesser Sine, and enter it at the Declination in
the Scale of Entrance, laying the thread to the other foot, according to nearest
distance, and it shows the time of Rising or setting in the equal Limb.

So when the Sun has 13d of South Declination, he rises at 8 past 7 in the
morning f^re, and sets at 52 past 4 in the afternoon.

2. To find the true time of the day.
In Summer, or Northwardly Declination, take the distance between the Altitude
in the greater Sine, and the Declination in the lesser Sine.

In Winter, take the Declination in the lesser Sine, and with your Compasses
add it to the Altitude in the greater Sine.

These extents enter at the Declination in the Scale of Entrance, and lay the
thread to the other foot, according to nearest distance, and in the equal Limb,
it will lie over the true time of the day.

In Summer, when the Declination in the fitted Scale is above the Altitude, the
hour is found from 6 toward midnight, when below it, toward Noon.

Example.
When the Sun has 13d of North Declination, his Altitude being 39d 10 will be
a quarter past 9 in the morning, or 3 quarters past 2 in the afternoon; and
when he has the same South Declination, his Altitude being 16d 14 the time of
the day will be found the same.

The Converse will find the Suns Altitudes on all hours by this fitted Scale,
which I shall handle the general way.

3. To find the Amplitude.
Take the Declination from the greater Sine, and enter it at the beginning of
the Scale of Entrance, laying the thread to the other foot, according to nearest
distance, and it shows it in the Limb.

When the Sun has 13d of Declination, his Amplitude will be 21d 12.

4. To find the Azimuth of the Sun.
In Summer* take the distance between the Altitude in the lesser Sine, and the
Declination in the greater.

In Winter, or South Declinations, take the Declination from the greater Sine,
and add it to the Altitude in the lesser Sine with your Compasses.

These Extents, enter at the Altitude in the Scale of Entrance, and lay the
thread to the other foot, according to nearest distance; and in the equal Limb,
it shows the Azimuth from the East or West.

In Summer, when the Altitude falls below the Declination, the Azimuth is found
from the East or West, Northwards; when above it, Southwards.

So when the Sun has 13d of North Declination, his Altitude being 43d 50 the
Azimuth will be found to be 45d from East or West, Southwards; and when he has
the same South Declination, his Altitude being 14d 50 he shall have the same
Azimuth.

These Scales are fitted to give the Altitude at six, and the Vertical Altitude
by Inspection.

Against the Declination in the greater lesser
Sine stands the Vertical Altitude or Depression, Altitude or Depression at six.


When the Hour or Azimuth falls near Noon, mind against what Arch of the Line
of Sines the point of Entrance falls, the thread may be laid to the like Arch in
the Limb, and the respective extents entered parallelly between the Scale and
the thread, and the answer found in the Line of Sines.

But we have a better remedy by help of the Versed Sine of 90d put through the
whole Limb.

The joint use of the Fitted Scale, with the Versed Sine of 90d in the Limb.
IN the following Propositions, I shall make no use of the lesser Sine of the
Fitted Scale.

Get the Summer and Winter Meridian Altitude, by summing and differencing the
Declination, and the Complement of the Latitude, which may be done with
Compasses in the equal Limb, by applying the Chord of the Declination both ways
from the Colatitude.

To find the Hour of the Day in Winter.
Take the distance between the Meridian Altitude, and the given Altitude, out
of the greater Sine of the fitted Scale, and as before, enter it at the
Declination in the Scale of Entrance, laying the thread to the other foot,
according to nearest distance, and in the Versed Sine of 90d it shows the hour
from Noon.

So if the Sun have 13d of South Declination, the Meridian Altitude is 25d 28,
if the given Altitude be 17d 44 the time of the day will be half an hour past 9
in the morning, or as much after 2 in the afternoon.

To find the Hour of the Day in Summer.
Take the distance between the Summer Meridian Altitude, and the proposed
Altitude, and if this extent be less then the distance of the Declination in
the Scale of Entrance from the Center, enter it at the Declination in the said
Scale, and laying the thread to the other foot, it will in the Versed Sine of
90d show the Hour from Noon.

If the Sun have 23d 31 of North Declination, his Meridian Altitude will be 61
59, if his given Altitude be 47d 51, the time of the day will be a quarter past
9 in the morning, or three quarters of an hour past 2 in the afternoon.

If the Extent be larger then the distance of the point of Entrance* to wit,
the distance of the Declination in the Scale of Entrance from the Center, the
hour must be found from midnight.

In this case, with your Compasses add the Sine of the Winter Meridian
Altitude, taken from the greater Sine of the fitted Scale, to the Sine of the
Altitude in the said Scale, and enter the said whole extent at the point of
Entrance, as before; and in the Versed Sine of 90d, the thread will show the
hour from midnight.

When the Sun has 23 31 of North Declination, if his Altitude be 5d 24, the
time of the day will be half an hour past 4 in the morning, or half an hour
past 7 in the evening, the Winter Meridian Altitude to this Declination being
14d 57. When the hour in these examples falls near Noon, the extent of the
Compasses may be doubled, or tripled, and an Ark first found in the Limb, then
if the thread be laid over the like Ark from the other edge, it will accordingly
in the Versed Sines doubled or tripled, show the time sought; and the like may
be done for the Azimuth.

To find the Azimuth of the Sun in Winter:
Get the Ark of difference between the Suns Altitude, and the Complement of the
Latitude, and in the greater Sine of the fitted Scale, take the distance
between the said Ark, and the Suns Declination, and enter one foot of this
Extent at the Altitude in the Scale of Entrance, laying the thread to the other
foot, and in the Versed Sine of 90d, it shows the Azimuth from Noon Meridian.

Example.
Colatitude, -- 38d 28 Altitude, -- 12: 13 Ark of Difference -- 26: 15
Declination -- 13: 00 The Azimuth to this example, will be 50d from the South.
In Summer, get the Ark of difference between the Altitude, and the Complement
of the Latitude, then when the Suns Altitude is the lesser of the two, take the
sum, but when the greater, the difference of the Sines of the Suns Declination,
and of the said Ark, and enter it at the Altitude on the Scale of Entrance, and
you will find the Azimuth from the noon Meridian, as before; but when either of
those extents are larger then the distance between the point of Entrance and
the Center, the Azimuth must be found from the midnight Meridian.

In this case, take the difference, that is, the distance of the Sines of the
Suns Declination, and of the Ark* being the sum of the Altitude and Colatitude,
out of the greater Sine of the fitted Scale, and enter it at the Altitude in
the Scale of Entrance, laying the thread to the other foot, and in the Versed
Sine it shows the Azimuth from the North.

Example for finding the Azimuth from the North.
Colatitude -- 38d 28 Altitude -- 14: 15 Sum -- 52: 43 Declination, -- 23: 31
The Azimuth to this example, will be found to be 70d from the North.
Of the joint use of the Diagonal Scale, with the Line of Sines on this
Quadrant.
If the respective extents that found the Hour and Azimuth in the Limb on the
small Quadrant, be doubled, and applied here to the Line of Sines issuing from
the Center, which in this case becomes the Scale of Entrance, the Hour and
Azimuth will be also found in the equal Limb of this Quadrant, for all those
respective Latitudes to which the Diagonal Scale is accommodated.

Of the Hour and Azimuth Scales on the Backside thereof.
THose Scales were fitted to the Versed Sines quadrupled on that small
Quadrant, and consequently, are fitted to the Versed Sine of 90d, and the Line
of Sines on this Quadrant, which is just double the Radius of that Quadrant.

Those Scales are peculiarly fitted for the Latitude of London, and thereby we
may always find the Hour and Azimuth in the Versed Sine of 90, without the
trouble of summing or differencing of Arks.

1. By the Hour Scale, to find the Hour of the Day.
Take the distance between the Declination, proper to the season of the year,
and the Altitude, and entering one foot of that extent at the Complement of the
Declination in the Sines, lay the thread to the other foot, according to nearest
distance, and it shows the hour from Noon.

Example.
When the Sun has 13d of North Declination, his Altitude being 47^ 24, the
Hour will be 30 past 10 in the morning, or as much past 1 in the afternoon.

In Summer, when this extent is greater then the Cosine of the Declination, and
that it will be, when the Sun has less Altitude then he has at 6.

The Declination is graduated against the Meridian Altitudes. In this case, add
the Sine of the Altitude given, to the Sine of the Meridian Altitude in Winter,
to that Declination, with your Compasses, and enter that whole extent at the
Declination counted in the Line of Sines from 90d laying the thread to the other
foot, according to nearest distance, and in the Versed Sine of 90d, it will
show the hour from midnight.

Declination, -- 23d 31 North, The hour will be found either 4 in the morning,
or 8 at night. Altitude -- 1: 34 The hour will be found either 4 in the
morning, or 8 at night.
2. By the Azimuth Scale, to find the Azimuth of the Sun.
Take the distance between the Declination proper to the season of the year,
and the Altitude, and entering one foot of this extent at the Complement of the
Altitude in the Lines of Sines issuing from the Center, to the other lay the
thread according to nearest distance, and it shows the Azimuth from the noon
Meridian in the Versed Sine of 90d.

Declination -- 23d 31 North, The Azimuth hereto will be found 65d from the
South. Altitude -- 47: 27 The Azimuth hereto will be found 65d from the South.
In Summer, when this extent is greater then the Cosine of the Altitude, and
that it will be, when the Sun has less Altitude then he has in the Vertical,
the Azimuth must be found from the midnight Meridian. In this case, because the
Azimuth Scale is not continued far enough, the sum of the Altitude and
Colatitude must be gotten, and the distance taken between the said Ark and the
Declination, counted in the hour-Scale as a Sine, and that extent entered at the
Altitude counted from 90d in the Line of Sines, and the thread laid to the other
foot, will show the Azimuth from the North in the Versed Sine of 90d in the
Limb.

Colatitude, -- 38^ 28 The Azimuth to this example will be 65d from the North.
Altitude -- 10: 19 The Azimuth to this example will be 65d from the North. Sum
-- 48: 47 The Azimuth to this example will be 65d from the North. Declination
-- 23: 31 The Azimuth to this example will be 65d from the North. North.
General Proportions.
It now remains to be showed, how the Hour, and Azimuth, etc. may be found
generally, either in the equal Limb, or in the Versed Sine of 90d, and that
without the help of Tangents or Secants, and possibly with more convenience
then with them.

In page 55. I have asserted, that the fourth term in any direct Proportion,
bears such Proportion to the first term, as the Rectangle of the two middle
terms does to the square of the first term.

And in page 105. That the Sine of any Arch bears such proportion to the Secant
of the Complement of another Ark, as the Rectangle of the Sines of both those
Arks, does to the Square of the Radius.

Whence it follows, That, As the Radius, Is to the Sine of one of the sides
including an Angle, So is the Sine of the other containing side, To a fourth
Sine.


I say then, that this fourth Sine bears such Proportion to the Radius, as the
Sine of one of those including sides, does to the secant of the Complement of
the other.

And therefore, when three sides are given to find an Angle, it will hold, As
the Radius, Is to the Sine of one of those including sides, So is the Sine of
the other including side, To a fourth sine.


Again, As that fourth Sine, Is to the difference of the Versed Sines of the
third side, and of the Ark of difference between the two including sides, So is
the Radius, To the Versed Sine of the Angle sought.
And as that fourth Sine, Is to the difference of the Versed Sines of the third
side, and of the sum of the two including sides, So is the Radius, To the
Versed Sine of the sought Angles, Complement to 180d, or a Semicircle.


Thus we are freed from a Secant in the two first terms of 3 several
Proportions that find (...) Hour and Azimuth: All which I shall further confirm
from the Analemma, and then proceed to Application, in the Scheme annexed.

Proportions in the Analemma.
UPon the Center C, draw a Circle, and let N C be the Axis of the Horizon, and
E P the Axis of the World, AE C the Equator, F and Z Y two Parallels of
Declination on each side the Equator, alike equidistant, S G the parallel of
Altitude at 6, and D E F the parallel of Depression at 6; draw a parallel of
Altitude less then the Altitude at 6 V R, and another greater M N continued;
also a parallel of Depression less then the Depression at 6 W P, and another
greater X Y, and there will be constituted diverse right lined, right angled
Triangles, relating to the motion of the Sun or Stars, in which it will hold.



As Radius is to the Cosine of the Declination, So is the Cosine of the
Latitude To a fourth.
Namely the difference of the Sines of the Meridian Altitude, and Altitude at 6
in Summer, equal to the Sum of the Sines of the Meridian Altitude and
Depression at 6 in Winter, which is equal to the sum of the Sines of the
midnight Depression and Altitude at 6 in Summer.

A: B B: A.

Again the same, As D: S E E: D S

Again the same -- G: B F B: F G.

As that fourth is to the Radius, So is the Sine of the Meridian Altitude, To
the Versed Sine of the Semidiurnal Ark
A: B I: K.

The two first terms are common to all the rest of the following Proportions.
And so is the Sine of the midnight Depression, To the Versed Sine of the
Seminocturnal Ark.
G F: B F F L to K F.

And so is the Sine of the Altitude, To the difference of the Versed Sines of
the Semidiurnal Ark and Hour sought from Noon,
A: B I M: K N.

And so is the Sine of the Depression, To the difference of the Versed Sines of
the Seminocturnal Ark, and of the hour from Midnight,
F G: F B P L: K O

And so is the difference of the Sines of the Suns Meridian, and given
Altitude, To the Versed Sine of the hour from Noon,
A: B M: N.

If the Sun have Depression, So is the sum of the Sines of the Suns Meridian
Altitude, and proposed Depression, To the Versed Sine of the hour from Noon,
A: B Q: O.

And so is the difference of the Sines of the Midnight and propose Depression,
To the Versed Sine of the hour from Midnight,
F G: F B P F: O F.

But supposing the Sun to have Altitude, retaining still the two first terms,
it holds. And so is the sum of the Sines of the Midnight Depression and given
Altitude, To the Versed Sine of the hour from Midnight.
F G: F B F R: F S.

And so is the Sine of the Altitude, or Depression at six, To the Sine of the
Ascensional difference,
A: B A I: B-K.

In Summer, if the Sun have Altitude, So is the difference of the Sines of the
Altitude at six, and of the given Altitude, To the Sine of the hour from six,
toward Noon, if the given Altitude be greater then the Altitude at six,
otherwise toward Midnight.
A: B A M: B N.

Also A: B A T: B S.

If he have Depression, So is the sum of the Sines of the Altitude at six, and
the given Depression, To the Sine of the Hour from six, toward Midnight.
A: B A Q: B O.

In Winter, if the Sun have Altitude: So is the the sum of the Sines of his
Depression at 6, and of his given Altitude, To the Sine of the hour from 6
toward Noon,
S D: S E D V: Z E.

If he have Depression. So is the difference of the Sines of his Depression at
6, and of has given Depression. To the Sine of the hour from 6 toward Noon,
when the Depression is less then the Depression at 6, otherways toward
Midnight.
S D: S E W D:Q E.

When two terms of a Proportion happen in the common Radius, and two in a
Parallel, there needs no Reduction.

In Latitudes nearer the Poles then the Polar Circles, the Semidiurnal Arks,
when the Declination is toward the Elevated Pole, will be more then the
Diameters of their Parallels; in that case, the difference, is the difference
of the Versed Sine of the Hour, and of the fourth Proportional, found by the
Proportion that finds the Semidiurnal Ark.

General Proportions for the Hour.
The Proportion selected for the Hour is, As the Radius, Is to the Cosine of
the Latitude, So is the Cosine of the Declination, To a fourth:
Namely, the difference of the Sines of the Meridian Altitude, and of the
Altitude at 6.

Again, 1.
As that fourth, Is to the Radius, So in Summer, is the difference; but in
VVinter, the sum of the Sines of the Suns Altitude or Depression at 6, To the
Sine of the Hour from 6 toward Noon or Midnight, according as the Altitude or
Depression is greater or less then the Altitude or Depression at 6.
2.
And so is the difference of the Sines of the Meridian, and proposed Altitude,
To the Versed Sine of the Hour from Noon: And so is the sum of the Sines of the
Midnight Depression, and given Altitude, To the Versed Sine of the Hour from
Midnight.
3.
And so is the Sine of the Altitude, To the difference of the Versed Sines of
the Semidiurnal Ark, and of the Hour sought.


By the first Proportion, the hour may be found generally, either in the equal
Limb, or Line of Sines.

By the second Proportion, it may be found generally, either in the Versed
Sines of 90d, or 180d.

By the third Proportion, it may be found in the Line of Versed Sines issuing
from the Center in many cases. I shall add a brief Application of all three
ways.

The first Work will be to find the point of Entrance.

Example, For the Latitude of Nottingham, 53d.

Lay the thread to the Declination, admit 20 in the Limb, counted from the left
edge, and from the Latitude in the Line of Sines, counted toward the Center
from 90d; take the nearest distance to the thread, the said extent measured from
the Center, will fall upon 34 25, and there will be the point of Entrance; let
it be recorded, or have a mark set to it.

If the Suns Declination be North, the Meridian Altitude in that Latitude, will
be 57d, the said extent will reach from the Sine thereof, to the Sine of the
Suns Altitude, or Depression at 6, to that Declination, namely, to 15d 51:
which may also be found without the Meridian Altitude, by taking the distance
from 20d in the Sines, to the thread laid over the Arch 53d, counted from the
right Edge, and by measuring that extent from the Center, the point thus found,
I call the Sine point.

Thirdly, If the respective distances between the Sine point, and the Sine of
the given Altitude, be taken and entered upon the point of Entrance, laying the
thread to the other foot, according to nearest distance, the hour may be found
all day for that Declination, when it is North in the equal Limb.

Example, For the Latitude of Nottingham, to the former Declination, being
North.
When the Sun has 11d 31 20 17
of Altitude, the Hour in each Case will be found half an hour from 6, to the
lesser Altitude beyond it, toward Midnight; to the greater, toward Noon.

And when the Altitude is 38d 19, the time of the day will be either half an
hour past 8 in the morning, or half an hour past 3 in the Afternoon.

An Example for the Latitude of Nottingham, when the Declination is as much
South.
Let the Altitude be 10d 6, In this case add the Sine thereof to the Sine of
15d 51, the whole extent will be equal to the Sine of 26d 39; Enter this Extent
upon the point of Entrance at 34d 25 laying the thread to the other foot,
according to nearest distance, and the time of the day found in the Limb, will
be either half an hour past 9 in the morning, or half an hour past 2 in the
afternoon.

An Example for working the second Proportion.
The Summer Meridian Altitude is 57d, if the given Altitude be 46d 11, take the
distance between the Sines of these two Arks, and entering this extent upon the
point of Entrance, lay the thread to the other foot, according to nearest
distance, it will in the Versed Sine of 90d, show the Hour from Noon to be 37d
30, that is, either half an hour past 10 in the morning, or half an hour past 1
in the Afternoon.

And when the Hour falls near Noon, we may double or triple the extent of the
Compasses, and find an Ark in the Limb, which if counted from the other edge,
and the thread laid over it* will give answer in the Versed Sines doubled or
tripled accordingly.

A third Example.
If the Altitude were 3d 15, in this case the distance between it and the
Meridian Altitude being greater then the distance of the point of Entrance from
the Center, the hour must be found from Midnight; add the Sine thereof to the
Sine of 17d, the Winter Meridian Altitude, the whole extent will be equal to
the Sine of 20 25; Enter the said extent upon the point of Entrance* as before,
and in the Versed Sine of 90d, the hour will be found to be either half an hour
past 4 in the Morning, or half an hour past 7 in the Evening.

Examples for working the third Proportion.
Take the Sine of 30d, and enter it upon the point of Entrance, laying the
thread to the other foot, according to nearest distance, and there keep it; then
take the nearest distance to it from the Sine of 57, the Meridian Altitude; and
the said Extent prick upon the Line of Versed Sines on the left edge, and it
will reach to 118^ 54, set a mark to it. Lastly, the nearest distance from the
Sine of each respective Altitude to the thread, being pricked from the said
mark, will reach to the Versed Sine of the hour from Noon, for North
Declinations.

So when the Sun has 24d 48 of Altitude, the Hour from 7: 17 Noon will be
found to be -- 75d 105


A Winter Example for that Declination.
The nearest distance from the Sine of 17d, the Winter Meridian Altitude, to
the thread, will reach to the Versed Sine of 61d 6, the Complement of the former
to a Semicircle, at which set a mark; then if the Altitude were -- 12d 30 14: 26
the nearest distances to the thread pricked from the latter mark, would show the
hours to these Altitudes to be 2 hours 1 hour
from Noon

This last Proportion in some cases will be inconvenient, being liable to
excursion in Latitudes more Northwardly.

Two sides with the Angle comprehended, to find the third side.

As the Radius, Is to the Sine of one of the Includers, So is the Sine of the
other Includer, To a fourth.
Again, As the Radius, Is to the Versed Sine of the Angle included, So is that
fourth, To the difference of the Versed Sines of the third side, and of the Ark
of difference between the two including sides,
And so is the Versed Sine of the Included Angles Complement to 180. To the
difference of the Versed Sines of the third side, and of the sum of the two
including sides.
Another Proportion for finding it in Sines, elsewhere delivered.

By the former Proportion, having the advantage both of lesser and greater
Versed Sines, we may find the side sought, either in the line of Sines, or in
the line of Versed Sines on the the left edge* issuing from the Center.

The Converse of the Proportion that found the Hour, will find the Suns
Altitudes on all Hours.
As the Radius, Is to the Cosine of the Latitude, So is the Cosine of the
Declination, To a fourth Sine.
Namely, The difference of the Sines of the Suns Meridian Altitude, and of his
Altitude at 6 in Summer, but the sum of the Sines of his Depression at 6, and
Winter Meridian Altitude, hereby we may obtain the point of Entrance and
Altitude, or Depression at 6, as before, and let them be recorded, then it
holds, As the Radius, Is to the Sine of the Hour from 6, So is that fourth
Sine, To the difference of the Sines of the Suns Altitude at 6, and of his
Altitude sought; But in Winter, To the sum of the Sines of his Depression at 6,
and of the Altitude sought.


Hereby we may find two Altitudes at a time.

Lay the thread to the Hour in the Limb, and from the point of Entrance, take
the nearest distance to it, the said Extent being set down at the Altitude at
6, shall reach upward to the greater Altitude, and downward, to the lesser
Altitude.

Example.
Admit the hour to be 5 and 7 in the morning, the Altitudes thereto for 20
North Declination for the Latitude of Nottingham, will be found to be 7d 17,
and 24^ 48

If the Hour be more remote from 6 then the time of Rising, we may find a
Winter Altitude to as much South Declination, and a Summer Altitude, to the
said North Declination.

Thus if the Hour be 45d from 6, that is either 9 in the morning, or 3 in the
afternoon, the nearest distance from the point of Entrance to the thread, will
reach from the Sine of 15d 51, the Altitude at 6 upwards, to the Sine of 42d
18, the Summer Altitude to that Declination: But downwards, it reaches beyond
the Center: In this case measure, that extent from the Center, and take the
distance between the inward foot of the Compasses, and the Altitude at 6* which
measured on the Sines, will be found to be 7d 17 for the Winter Altitude to
that Hour.

So if the hour were 60d from 6, that is either 10, or 2, the Summer Altitude
would be found to be 49d 42, and the Winter Altitude 12d 30.

And this may be found in the Versed Sines on the left edge, accounted as a
Sine each way from the middle, if use be made of the lesser Sines, instead of
the Limb, in finding the point of Entrance, as also, in laying it to the Sine
of each hour from 6, in which case the Compasses will always find two
Altitudes at once; for when they fall beyond the midst of the said Line, it
shows the Winter Altitudes counted from thence toward the end of the said
Versed Sines.

Having found the fourth Sine, which gives the point of Entrance as before, the
Altitudes on all hours may be found by the Versed Sines of 90d in the Limb, the
Proportion will be, As the Radius, Is to the Versed Sine of the Hour from Noon,
So is the fourth abovesaid, To the difference of the Sines of the Meridian
Altitude, and of the Altitude sought.


But for hours beyond 6, the Proportion will be, As the Radius, Is to the
Versed Sine of the Hour from Midnight, So is the fourth abovesaid, To the sum
of the Sines of the Suns Depression at Midnight (equal to his Winter Meridian
Altitude,) and of his Altitude sought,
Hereby also we may find two Altitudes at once.

Operation.
Lay the thread to the Versed Sine of the Hour from Noon, and from the point of
Entrance at 34d 25, take the nearest distance to it, the said Extent shall
reach from the Summer Meridian Altitude, accounted in the Sines to the Altitude
sought, also from the Winter Meridian Altitude, to the Altitude sought.

Example.
Latitude of Nottingham is 53d, Complement -- 37^ Suns Declination, -- 20 Sum
being the Summer Meridian Altitude -- 57d Difference being Winter Meridian
Altitude 17
If it were required to find the Altitudes for the hours of 11 and 1 The
Extents so taken out will find the Summer Altitudes to be -- 55^ 00 And the
Winter Altitudes to the same hours and Declination -- 15^ 51^ 10 and 2 The
Extents so taken out will find the Summer Altitudes to be -- 49, 42 And the
Winter Altitudes to the same hours and Declination -- 12, 30 9 and 3 The
Extents so taken out will find the Summer Altitudes to be -- 42, 18 And the
Winter Altitudes to the same hours and Declination -- 7, 17 8 and 4 The Extents
so taken out will find the Summer Altitudes to be -- 33, 47 And the Winter
Altitudes to the same hours and Declination -- 00, 32


But for hours more remote from the Meridian then 6, as admit for 5 in the
morning, or 7 at night, which is 75d from the North Meridian; lay the thread to
the said Ark in the Versed Sine of 90d, and the distance from the point of
Entrance to it, shall reach from the Sine of 57d, the Meridian Altitude, to the
Sine of 24d 48, the Summer Altitude for the Hour 75d from Noon, and if that
Extent be pricked from the Winter Meridian Altitude, it will reach beyond the
Center, in which case, enter that Extent upon the Line of Sines, and take the
distance between the point of limitation and 17d, which will (being measured)
be found to be the Sine of 7d 17, the Altitude belonging to the hour 105 from
Noon.

In like manner, the Altitudes for the hours 97d 30 from Noon that is 82d 30
from Midnight, will be 11d 31 and for the like hours from Noon 20d 17 112, 30
from Noon that is 67, 30 from Midnight, will be 3: 15 and for the like hours
from Noon 29: 19


In like manner, it might have been found in the Versed Sines issuing from the
Center, if in finding the point of Entrance, and in laying the thread to the
Versed Sine of the Hour, we make use of the lesser Sines, and of the Versed
Sine of 180d in the Limb.

For the Azimuth.
Two of the former Proportions may be conveniently applied to other sides, for
finding the Azimuth universally. As the Radius, Is to the Cosine of the
Latitude, So is the Cosine of the Altitude, To a fourth Sine.


Get the sum of the Altitude and Colatitude; or, which is all one, the sum of
the Latitude and Colatitude; and if it exceeds a Quadrant, take its Complement
to a Semicircle: This fourth Sine is equal to the difference of the Sines of
this Compound Ark, and of another Ark to be thereby found, called the latter
Ark.

Then it holds, As the fourth Sine, Is to the Radius, So in Summer is the
difference, but in Winter, the sum of the Sines of this latter Ark, and of the
given Declination, To the Sine of the Azimuth from the Vertical.


When the latter Ark is more then the Declination, the Azimuth will be found
from the Vertical toward the Noon Meridian, otherwise toward the Midnight
Meridian, and in winter, always toward the Noon Meridian.

For such Stars as come to the Meridian between the Zenith and the elevated
Pole, the fourth Ark will never exceed the Stars declination, and their Azimuth
will be always found from the Vertical toward the Meridian they come to,
above the Horizon.

Example for the Latitude of Nottingham.
Complement of the Latitude is -- 37d Altitude is 40^ -- 40 Sum -- 77
Let the Declination be 20d North.

To find the point of Entrance, take the nearest distance to the thread laid
over 50 in the Limb, counted from right edge from the Sine of 37d, the said
Extent measured from the Center, falls upon the Sine of 27d 26, and there will
be the point of Entrance; the said Extent pricked from 77^ in the Sines, will
reach to the Sine of 30 51, where the Sine point falls.

Lastly, The distance between the Sine point, and the Sine of 20d being entered
at the point of Entrance, and the thread laid to the other foot, the Azimuth
will be found in the equal Limb to be 21d 48 from the East or West Southwards,
because the Sine point fell beyond the Declination.

Another Example for that Latitude, the Declination being 20d South Altitude.
12d 30
The point of Entrance will fall at the Sine of 36^

The Sine point may be found without summing or differencing of Arks, by taking
the nearest distance from the Sine of the Latitude, to the thread laid over the
Altitude, counted in the Limb from the right edge; which Extent being added to
the Sine of 20d the Declination, the whole Extent will be equal to the Sine of
31d, this being entered on the point of Entrance, and the thread laid to the
other foot, the Azimuth will be found to be 61d 14 from the East or West
Southwards.

A third Example for the Latitude of London, 51d 32.
Let it be required to find the Azimuth of the middlemost Star in the great
Bears tail, Declination is 56d 45, let the Altitude be 44d 58.

The nearest distance from the Sine of 38d 28 to the thread laid over the
Altitude counted from the right edge, will find the point of Entrance to be at
the Sine of -- 26d 6.

The nearest distance from the Sine of 51d 32 to the thread laid over the
Altitude, counted from the right edge, need not be known, but the distance
between that Extent, and the Sine of 56d 45, the Stars Declination being entered
on the point of Entrance, will find the Azimuth of that Star, by laying the
thread to the other foot, to be 40d from the East or West Northwards.

Thus we find it the general way, and so it will also be found by the fitted
particular Scale; for the Hour, the point of Entrance, and Sine point, vary not
till the Declination change; but for the Azimuth, they vary to every Altitude.

To find the Azimuth in the Versed Sines.
As the fourth, found by the former Proportion; namely, where the point of
Entrance happened, Is to the Radius, So is the difference of the Versed Sines of
the Polar distance, and of the Ark of Difference between the Altitude and the
Latitude, To the Versed Sine of the Azimuth from Midnight Meridian.
This finds the Angle it self in the Sphere.

And so is the difference of the Versed Sines of the Polar distance, and of the
Ark of residue of the sum of the Latitude and Altitude taken from a Semicircle.
To the Versed Sine of the Azimuth from Noon Meridian. This finds the Complement
of the Angle in the Sphere to a Semicircle.
The Proportion to find it from Midnight Meridian, the third term being
expressed in Sines, will be thus.
Get the sum of the Altitude and Colatitude, and when it exceeds a Quadrant,
take its Complement to a Semicircle, the Ark thus found, is called the Compound
Ark. Then it holds, As the fourth found before. Is to the Radius, So in Summer
Declinations, is the difference, but in Winter Declinations, the sum of the
Sines of the Suns or Stars declination, and of the compound Ark, To the Versed
Sine of the Azimuth from the Midnight Meridian of the place.


Use this Proportion always for the Sun or Stars, when they come to the
Meridian between the Zenith and elevated Pole.

And to find it from the Noon Meridian,

Get the difference between the Altitude and Colatitude, and then it holds, As
the fourth Sine found before, Is to the Radius, So is the sum of the Sines of
the said Ark of Difference, and of the Suns Declination, To the Versed Sine of
the Azimuth from the Noon Meridian, in Summer only, when the Suns Altitude is
less then the Colatitude.


In all other cases, So is the difference of the said Sines, To the Versed Sine
of the Azimuth, as before, from Noon Meridian.


If by the former Proportion it be required to find the Azimuth in the Versed
Sine of 90d, a difference of Versed Sines taken out of the Line of Versed Sines
on the left edge must be doubled, and being taken out of the Line of Sines, as
sometimes representing the former, sometimes the latter half of a Versed Sine,
needs not be doubled.

Example:
Latitude of Nottingham -- 53d Altitude of the Sun -- 4 Ark of difference -- 49
Declination 20 North, the Polar distance is -- 70
The Point of entrance will fall at the Sine of 36d 54

And the difference of the Versed Sines of 49^ and 70^, equal to the distance
between the Sines of 41^ and 20 being entered at the Point of entrance, and the
Tbread laid to the other foot will lie over 61d 30 of the Versed Sine of 90^,
and so much is the Suns Azimuth from the North.

Another Example for finding it from the South when the Altitude is more then
the Colatitude.
Altitude -- 47d Colatitude -- 37 of Nottingham. difference -- 10
The Point of entrance will fall at the sine of 24d 14 found by taking the
nearest extent from sine of 37d to the Thread lying over 43d of the Limb the
Coaltitude.

Then the distance between the sines of 10d, the Ark of difference as above,
and the sine of 20 the Suns North Declination being entered at the Point of
entrance, and the Thread laid to the other foot, will show 53d 55 in the Versed
sine of 90d for the Suns Azimuth from the South.

A third Example when the Altitude is less then the Colatitude in Summer.
Complement Latitude 37d of Nottingham. Altitude -- 34 difference -- 3
The Point of entrance will fall at the sine of 29d 55, and the sum of the
sines of 3d, and of 20d the Suns declination supposed North, is equal to the
sine of 23d 13: Which Extent entered at 29d 55, the Point of entrance, and the
Thread laid to the other foot according to nearest distance, it will intersect
the Versed sine of 90d at the Ark of 77d 57, and so much is the Suns Azimuth
from the South.

And if there were no Versed sines in the Limb, find an Ark of the equal
Limb, and enter the sine of the said Ark down the Line of sines from the other
end, and you may obtain the Versed sine of the Ark sought.

More Examples need not be insisted upon, having found the Point of entrance,
the distance between the Versed sines of the Base or side subtending the angle
sought, and of the Ark of difference between the two including sides, being
taken out of the straight Line of Versed Lines on the left edge, and entered at
the Point of entrance, laying the Thread to the other foot shows in the Versed
Sine of 180d in the Limb the angle sought; and if the said distance or Extent
be doubled, and there entered it shows the angle sought in the Versed Sine of
90d, when the Angle is less then a Quadrant, when more, the distance between
the Versed Sines of the Base and the sum of the Legs, will find the Complement
of the angle sought to a Semicircle without doubling in the Versed Sine of 180d
in the Limb, with doubling in the Versed Sine of 90d.

Lastly, Three sides, viz. all less then Quadrants, or one of them greater,
generally to find an angle in the equal Limb, the Proportion will be, As the
Radius, Is to the Cosine of one of the including sides: So is the Cosine of the
other Includer, To a fourth Sine.


Again, As the Sine of one of the Includers, To the Cosecant of the other: So
when any one of the sides is greater then a Quadrant is the sum, but when all
less, the difference of the fourth Sine, and of the Cosine of the third side,
To the Cosine of the angle sought.


If any of the three sides be greater then a Quadrant, it subtends an Obtuse
angle, the other angles being Acute; But when they are all less then Quadrants,
if the 4th Sine be less then the Cosine of the third side, the angle sought is
Acute, if equal thereto, it is a right angle, if greater an Obtuse angle.

From the Proportion that finds the Hour from six, we may educe a single
Proportion applyable to the Logarithms without natural Tables for Calculating
the Hour of the day to all Altitudes, By turning the third Term, being a
difference of Sines or Versed Sines into a Rectangle, and freeing it from
affection.

The two first Proportions to be wrought are fixed for one Declination; The
first will be to find the Suns Altitude or Depression at six.

The second will be to find half the difference of the Sines of the Suns
Meridian Altitude, and Altitude sought, etc. as before defined, the Proportion
to find it is, As the Secant of 60d, To the Cosine of the Declination: So is
the Cosine of the Latitude, To the Sine of a fourth Arch.


Lastly, To find the Hour.
Get the sum and difference of half the Suns Zenith distance at the hour of
six; and of half his Zenith distance to any other proposed Altitude or
Depression.

Then, As the Sine of the fourth Arch, Is to the Sine of the sum: So is the
Sine of the difference, To the Sine of the hour from six toward Noon or
Midnight,
according as the Altitude or Depression was greater or lesser then the
Altitude or Depression at six.

Observing that the Sine of an Arch greater then a Quadrant, is the Sine of
that Arks Complement to a Semicircle.

Of the Stars placed upon the Quadrant below the Projection.
ALL the Stars placed upon the Projection are such as fall between the Tropicks
and the Hour may be found by them with the Projection, as in the Use of the
small Quadrant: Which may also be found by the fitted particular Scale, not
only for Stars within the Tropicks, but for all others without, when their
Altitude is less then 62d, and likewise their Azimuth may be thereby found when
their Declination is not more then 62d.

For other Stars without the Tropicks, they may be put on below the Projection
any where in such an angle that the Thread laid over the Star shall show an Ark
in the Limb, at which in the Sines the Point of entrance will always fall; And
again, the same Star is to be graved at its Altitude or Depression at six in
the Sines, and then to find the Stars hour in that Latitude whereto they are
fitted, will always for Northern Stars be to take the distance in the Line of
Sines between the Star and its given Altitude, and to enter that Extent at the
Point of entrance, laying the Thread to the other foot according to nearest
distance, and it gives the Stars hour in the equal Limb from six, which may
also be found in the Sines by a Parrallel entrance, laying the Thread over the
Star.

Example.
Let the Altitude of the last in the end of the great Bears Tail be 63d, take
the distance between it and the Star which is graved at 37d 30 of the Sines,
the said Extent entered at the Sine of 23d, the Ark of the Limb the Thread
intersects when it lies over the said Star, and by laying the Thread to the
other foot you will find that Stars hour to be 46d 11 from six toward Noon
Meridian, if the Altitude increase, and in finding the true time of the night,
the Stars hour must be always reckoned from the Meridian it was last upon; in
this Example it will be 5 minutes past 9 fere.

Of the Quadrant of Ascensions on the backside,
This Quadrant is divided into 24 Hours with their quarters and subdivisions,
and serves to give the right Ascension of a Star, as in the small Quadrant to
be cast up by the Pen.

It also serves to find the true Hour of the night with Compasses.
First having found the Stars hour, take the distance on the Quadrant of
Ascensions in the same 12 hours between the Star and the Suns Ascension (given
by the foreside of the Quadrant) the said Extent shall reach from the Stars
hour to the true hour of the night, and the foot of the Compasses always fall
upon the Quadrant; Which Extent must be applied the same way it was taken, the
Suns foot to the Stars hour.

Example.
If upon the 30th of December the last in the end of the Bears Tail were found
to be 9 hours 05 past the Meridian it was last upon, the true time sought would
be 16 minutes past 3 in the morning.

Another Example for the Bulls Eye.
Admit the Altitude of that Star be 39 d, that Stars hour as we found it by the
Line of Versed Sines was 3 ho 3 from the Meridian, if the Altitude increase,
then that Stars hour from the Meridian it was last upon was 57 minutes past 8
-- 8h:57

If this Observation were upon the 23d of October, the Complement of the Suns
Ascension would be -- 9: 30 The Ascension of that Star is -- 4: 16 The true
time of the night would be forty -- 10: 43
three minutes past ten.

The distance between the Star and the Suns Ascension being applied the same
way, by setting the Sun foot at the Stars hour will show the true time sought.

When the Star is past the Meridian, having the same Altitude, the Stars hour
will be 3 past 3, and the true time sought, will be 49 past 4 in the next
morning.



The Geometrical Construction of Mr Fosters Circle.
THe Circle on the Back side of the Quadrant, whereof one quarter is only a
void Line, is derived from M. Foster's Treatise of a Quadrant, by him published
in An^o 1638. the foundation and use whereof being concealed, I shall therefore
endeavor to explain it.

Upon the Center H describe a circle, and draw the Diameter A C, passing
through the Center, and perpendicularly thereto, upon the point C, erect a Line
of Sines C I, whose Radius shall be equal to the Diameter A C, let 90d of the
Sine end at I; I say then, if from the point A, through each degree of that
Line of Sines, there be straight lines drawn, intersecting the Quadrant of the
circle C G, as a line from the point D does intersect it at B the Quadrant C G,
which the Author calls the upper Quadrant, or Quadrant of Latitudes shall be
constituted, and if C I be continued as a Secant, by the same reason the whole
Semicircle C G A may be occupied; hence it will be necessary to educe a ground
of calculation for the accurate dividing of the said Quadrant, and that will be
easy; for A C being Radius, the Sine C D does also represent the Tangent of
the Angle at A, therefore seek the natural Sine of the Ark C D in the Table of
Natural Tangents, and the Ark corresponding thereto, will give the quantity of
the Angle D A C, then because the point A falls in the circumference of the
Circle, where an Angle is but half so much as it is at the Center, by 31 Prop.
3. Euc. double the Angle found, and from a Quadrant divided into 90 equal
parts, and their subdivisions, by help of a Table so made, may the Quadrant of
Latitudes be accurately divided: but the Author made his Table in page 5.
without doubling, to be graduated from a Quadrant divided into 45 equal parts.

Again, If upon the Center C, with a pair of Compasses, each degree of the line
of Sines be transferred into the Semicircle C G A it shall divide it into 90
equal parts; the reason whereof is plain, because the Sine of an Arch is half
the chord of twice that Arch, and therefore the Sines being made to twice the
Radius of this circle, shall being transferred into it, become chords of the
like Arch, to divide a Semicircle into 90 equal parts.

Again, upon the point A, erect a line of Tangents of the same Radius with the
former Sine, which we may suppose to be infinitely continued, here we use a
portion of it A E.

If from the point C, the other extremity of the Diameter lines be drawn,
cutting the lower Semicircle (as a line drawn from E intersects it at F)
through each degree of the said Tangent, the said lower Semicircle shall be
divided into 90 equal parts; the reason is evident a line of Tangents from the
Center shall divide a Quadrant into 90 equal parts, and because an Angle in the
circumference is but half so much as it is in the Center, being transferred
thither, a whole Semicircle shall be filled with no more parts.

The chief use of this Circle, is to operate Proportions in Tangents alone, or
in Sines and Tangents jointly, built upon this foundation, that equiangled
plain Triangles have their sides Proportional.

In straight lines, it will be evident from the point D to E, draw a straight
line intersecting the Diameter at L, and then it lies as C L to C D; so is A L
to A E: it is also true in a Circle, provided it be evinced, that the points B
L F fall in a straight line.

Hereof I have a Geometrical Demonstration, which would require more Schemes,
which by reason of its length and difficulty, I thought fit at present not to
insert, possibly an easier may be found hereafter: As also, an Algebraick
Demonstration, by the Right Honorable, the Lord Brunkard, whereby after many
Algebraick inferences it is euinced, that as L K is to K B so is L N to ^ F:
whence it will follow, that the points B, L, F, are in a right line.

If a Ruler be laid from 45d of the Semicircle, to every degree of the Quadrant
of Latitudes, it will constitute upon the Diameter, the graduations of the Line
Sol, whereby Proportions in Sines might be operated without the other supply.

From the same Scheme also follows the construction of the straight line of
Latitudes, from the point G, at 90^ of the Quadrant of Latitudes, draw a
straight Line to C, and transfer each degree of the Quadrant of Latitudes with
Compasses, one foot resting upon C into the said straight line, and it shall be
constituted.

To Calculate it.
The Line of Latitudes C G bears such Proportion to C A as the Chord of 90d
does to the Diameter, which is the same that the Sine of 45d bears to the
Radius, or which is all one, that the Radius bears to the Secant of 45 d, which
Secant is equal to the Chord of 90 d; from the Diagram the nature of the Line
of Latitudes may be discovered.

Any two Lines being drawn to make a right angle, if any Ark of the Line of
Latitudes be pricked off in one of those Lines retaining a constant Hipotenusal
A C, called the Line of Hours, equal to the Diameter of that Circle from whence
the Line of Latitudes is constituted, if the said Hipotenusal from the Point
formerly pricked off, be made the Hipotenusal to the Legs of the right angle
formerly pricked off, the said Legs or sides including the right angle shall
bear such Proportion one to another, as the Radius does to the sine of the Ark
so pricked off; and this is evident from the Schem, for such Proportion as A C
bears to C D, does A B bear to B C, for the angle at A is Common to both
Triangles, and the angle at B in the circumference is a right angle, and
consequently the angle A C B will be equal to the angle A D C, and the Legs A C
to C D bears such Proportion by construction, as the Radius does to the Sine of
an Ark, and the same Proportion does A B bear to B C, in all cases retaining
one and the same Hypotenusal A C, the Proportion therefore lies evident.

As the Radius, the sine of the angle at B, To its opposite side A C, the
Secant of 45d: So is the sine of the angle at A, To its opposite side B C
sought.
Now the quantity of the angle at A was found by seeking the natural Sine of
the Ark proposed in the Table of natural Tangents; and having found what Ark
answers thereto, the Sine of the said Ark is to become the third Term in the
Proportion.

But the Cannon prescribed in the Description of the small Quadrant is more
expedite then this, which Mr Sutton had from Mr Dary long since, for whom, and
by whose directions he made a Quadrant with the Line Sol, and two Parrallel
Lines of Sines upon it, as is here added to the backside of this Quadrant.

Of the Line of Hours, alias, the Diameter or Proportional Tangent.
This Scale is no other then two Lines of natural Tangents to 45 d, each set
together at the Center, and from thence beginning and continued to each end of
the Diameter, and from one end thereof numbered with 90 d to the other end.

This Line may fitly be called a Proportional Tangent, for whersoever any Ark
is assumed in it to be a Tangent, the remaining part of the Diameter is the
Radius to the said Tangent.

So in the former Schem, if C L be the Tangent of any Ark, the Radius thereto
shall be A L.



In the Schem annexed, let A B be the Radius of a Line of Tangents equal to C
D, and also parralel thereto, and from the Point B to C draw the Line B C, and
let it be required to divide the same into a Line of Proportional Tangents: I
say, Lines drawn from the Point D to every degree of the Tangent, A B shall
divide one half of it as required from the similitude of two right angled
equiangled plain Triangles, which will have their sides Proportional, it will
therefore hold, As C F, To C D: So F B, To B E, and the Converse, As the second
Term C D, To the fourth B E: So is the first C F, To the third F B, and
therefore C F bears such Proportion to F B, as C D does to B E, which is the
same that the Radius bears to the Tangent of the Ark proposed.

If it be doubted whether the Diameter will be a double Tangent or the Line here
described such a Line, a Proportion shall be given to find by Experience or
Calculation, what Line it will be; for there is given the Radius C D, and the
Tangent B E, the two first Terms of the Proportion, with the Line C B the sum
of the third and fourth Terms, to find out the said Terms respectively; and
it will hold by compounding the Proportion, As the sum of the first and second
Term, Is to the second Term: So is the sum of the third and fourth Term, To
the fourth Term,
that is, As C D + B E, Is to B E: So is C F + F B = C B, To F B,
see 18 Prop. of 5 of Euclid, or page 18 of the English Clavis Mathematicae, of
the famous and learned Mr Oughtred.

After the same manner is the Line Sol, or Proportional Sines made, that being
also such a Line, that any Ark being assumed in it to be a Sine, the distance
from that Ark to the other end of the Diameter, shall be the Radius thereto.

A Demonstration to prove that the Line of Hours and Latitudes will jointly
prick off the hour Di^tances in the same angles as if they were Calculated and
pricked off by Chords.



Draw the two Lines A B and C B crossing one another at right angles at B, and
prick off B C the quantity of any Ark out of the line of Latitudes, and then
fit in the Scale of Hours; so that one end of it meeting with the Point C, the
other may meet with the other Leg of the right angle at A, from whence draw A E
parralel to B C; So A B being become Radius, B C is the Sine of the Arch first
pricked down from the line of Latitudes; from the Point B through any Point in
the line of Proportional Tangents, at L draw the Line B L E, and upon B with
the Radius B A draw the Arch A D, which measures the Angle A B E to the same
Radius: I say, there will then be a Proportion wrought, and the said Arch
measures the quantity of the fourth Proportional, the Proportion will be, As
the Radius, To the Sine of the Ark pricked down from the Line of Latitudes: So
is any Tangent accounted in the Scale, beginning at A, To the Tangent of the
fourth Proportional;
in the Schem it lies evident in the two opposite Triangles L C B and L A E, by
construction equiangled and consequently their sides Proportional.

Assuming A L to be the Tangent of any Ark, L C becomes the Radius, according
to the prescribed construction of that Line, it then lies evident, As L C the
Radius, To C B the Sine of any Ark, So is L A, the Tangent of any Ark, To A E,
the Tangent of the fourth Proportional.
Namely, of the Angle A B E, and therefore it pricks down the Hour Lines of a
Dyal most readily and accurately: the Proportion in pricking from the Substile
being always, As the Radius, To the Sine of the Styles height, So the Tangent
of the Angle at the Pole, To the Tangent of the Hour-line from the Substile.


Uses of the Graduated Circle.
To work Proportions in Tangents alone.
In any Proportion wherein the Radius is not ingredient, it is supposed to be
introduced by a double Operation, and the Poportion will be, As the first term,
To the second, So the Radius to a fourth.


Again, As the Radius is to that fourth, So is the third Term given, To the
fourth Proportional sought.


In illustrating the matter, I shall make use of that Theorem^ for varying of
Proportions, that the Tangents of Arches, and the Tangents of their Complements
are in reciprocal Proportions.

As Tangent 23d, to Tangent 35d, So Tangent 55d to the Tangent of 67d.

In working of this Proportion, the last term may be found to the equal
Semicircle, or on the Diameter.

1. In the Semicircle.
Extend the thread through 23d on the Diameter, and through 3^ in the
Semicircle, and where it intersects the Circle on the opposite side, there hold
one end of it, then extend the other part of it over 55 in the Diameter, and in
the Semicircle, it will intersect 67d for the term sought.

2. On the Diameter.
Extend the thread over 23d in the Semicircle, and 35d on the Diameter, and
where it intersects the void circular line on the opposite side, there hold it,
then laying the other end of it over 55 d in the Semicircle, and it will cut 67
d on the Diameter.

If the Radius had been one of the terms in the Proportion, the operation would
have been the same, if the Tangent of 45 d had been taken in stead of it.

To work Proportions in Sines and Tangents jointly.
1. If a Sine be sought, the middle terms being of a different species.

Extend the thread through the first term on the Diameter, being a Tangent, and
through the Sine, being one of the middle terms, counted in the unequal
Quadrant, and where it intersects the Opposite side of the Circle hold it, then
extend the thread over the Tangent, being the other middle term counted on the
Diameter, and it will intersect the graduated Quadrant at the Sine sought.

Example.

If the Proportion were as the Tangent of 14d to the Sine of 29d So is the
Tangent of 20d to a Sine, the fourth Proportional would be found to be the Sine
of 45d.

2. If a Tangent be sought, the middle terms being of several kinds, Extend the
thread through the Sine in the upper Quadrant, being the first term, and through
the Tangent on the Diameter, being one of the other middle terms, holding it at
the Intersection of the Circle on the opposite side, then lay the thread to the
other middle term in the upper Quadrant, and on the Diameter, it shows the
Tangent sought.

Example.
If the Suns Amplitude and Vertical Altitude were given, the Proportion from
the Analemma to find the Latitude would be, As the Sine of the Amplitude to
Radius, So is the Sine of the Vertical Altitude, To the Cotangent of the
Latitude


Let the Amplitude be -- 39d 54 And the Suns Altitude being East or West -- 30
39
Extend the thread through 39 54, the Amplitude counted in the upper Quadrant,
and through 45d on the Diameter, holding it at the intersection with the Circle
on the Opposite side, then lay the thread over 30d 39, the Vertical Altitude,
and it will intersect the Diameter at 38d 28, the Complement of the Latitude
sought.

But Proportions derived from the 16 cases of right angled Spherical Triangles,
having the Radius ingredient, will be wrought without any motion of the thread.

An Example for finding the Suns Azimuth at the Hour of 6.
As the Radius to the Cosine of the Latitude, So the Tangent of the
Declination, To the Tangent of the Azimuth, from the Vertical toward Midnight
Meridian.
Extend the thread over the Complement of the Latitude in the upper Quadrant,
and over the Declination in the Semicircle, and on the Diameter. it shows the
Azimuth sought.

So when the Sun has 15d of Declination, his Azimuth shall be 9d 28 from the
Vertical at the hour of 6 in our Latitude of London.

Another Example to find the time when the Sun will be due East or West.
Extend the thread over the Latitude in the Semicircle, and over the Declination
on the Diameter, and in the Quadrant of Latitudes it shows the Ark sought.

The Proportion wrought, is, As the Radius to the Cotangent of the Latitude, So
is the Tangent of the Declination, To the Sine of the Hour from 6.


Example.
So when the Sun has 15^ of North Declination, in our Latitude of London, the
Hour will be found 12d 18 from 6 in time 49 past 6 in the morning, or before it
in the afternoon.

Another Example to find the Time of Sun rising.
As the Cotangent of the Latitude, to Radius, So is the Tangent of the
Declination, To the Sine of the Hour from 6 before or after it.
Lay the thread to the Complement of the Latitude in the Semicircle, and over
the Declination on the Diameter, and in the Quadrant of Latitudes, it shows the
time sought in degrees, to be converted into common time, by allowing 15^ to an
hour, and 4 to a degree.

So in the Latitude of London, 51d 32 when the Sun has 15^ of Declination, the
ascensional difference or time of rising from 6, will be 19d 42, to be
converted into common time, as before.

By what has been said, it appears, that the Hour and Azimuth may be found
generally by help of this Circle and Diameter.

For the performance whereof, we must have recourse to the Proportions
delivered in page 123. whereby we may always find the two Angle adjacent to
the side on which the Perpendicular falls, which may be any side at pleasure;
for after the first Proportion wholly in Tangents is wrought, to find either of
those Angles, will be agreeable to the second case of right angled Spherical
Triangles, wherein there will be given the Hypotenusal, and one of the Legs, to
find the adjacent Angle, only it must be suggested, that when the two sides
that subtend the Angle sought, are together greater then a Semicircle, recourse
must be had to the Opposite Triangle, if both those Angles are required to be
found by this Trigonometry, otherwise one of them, and the third Angle may be
found by those directions, by letting fall the perpendicular on another side,
provided the sum of the sides subtending those Angles be not also greater then
a Semicircle; or, having first found one Angle, the rest may be found by
Proportions in Sines only.



IN the Triangle Z P, if it were required to find the angles at Z and, because
the sum of the sides P and Z P are less then a Semicircle they might be both
found by making the half of the Base Z the first Term in the Proportion, and
then because the angles Z are of a different affection, the Perpendicular would
fall without on the side Z continued toward B, as would be evinced by the
Proportiod, for the fourth Ark discovered, would be found greater then the half
of Z; hence we derived the Cannon in page 124, for finding the Azimuth; Whereby
might also be found the angle of Position at; so if it were required to find
the angles at and P, the sides Z and Z P being less then a Semicircle the
Perpendicular would fall within from Z on the side P, as would also be
discovered by the Proportion, for the fourth Ark would be found less then the
half of P.

But if it were required to find both the angles at Z and P, in this Case we
must resolve the Opposite Triangle Z B P, because the sum of the sides Z and P
are together greater then a Semicircle, and this being the most difficult Case,
we shall make our present Example. The Proportion will be, As the Tangent of
half Z P, Is to the Tangent of the half sum of Z B and P B: So is the Tangent
of half their difference, To a fourth Tangent.
That is, As Tangent 19d 14, Is to the Tangent of 86d 30,: So is the Tangent of
9d 30, To a fourth.


Operation. Extend the Thread through 19 d 14 on the Semicircle, and 9 d 30 on
the Diameter, and hold it at the Intersection on the opposite side the
Semicircle, then lay the Thread to 86 d 30 in the Semicircle, and it shows 82 d
44 on the Diameter for the fourth Ark sought.

Because this Ark is greater then the half of Z P, we may conclude that the
Perpendicular B A falls without on the side Z P continued to A. fourth Ark --
82d 44 half of Z P is -- 19 14 sum -- 101 58 is Z A difference -- 63 30 is P A


Then in the right angled Triangle B P A, right angled at, A we have P A and B
P the Hypotenusal, to, find the angle B P A, equal to the angle Z P. The
Proportion is As the Radius, Is to the Tangent of 13d, the Complement of B P:
So is the Tangent of P A 63d 30, To the Cosine of the angle at P.


Extend the Thread through 13 d on the Diameter, and through 63 d 30 in the
Semicircle counted from the other end, and in the upper Quadrant, it shows 27 d
35 for the Complement of the angle sought.

And letting this Example be to find the Hour and Azimuth in our Latitude of
London, so much is the hour from six in Winter when the Sun has 13 d of South
Declination, and 6 d of Altitude, in time 1 ho 50 minutes past six in the
morning, or as much before it in the afternoon.

To find the Azimuth.
Again, in the Triangle Z A B right angled at A, there is given the Leg or Side
Z A 101 d 58, and the Hipotenusal Z B 96 d, to find the angle B Z P; here
noting that the Cosine or Cotangent of an Ark greater then a Quadrant is the
Sine or Tangent of that Arks excess above 90 d, and the Sine or Tangent of an
Ark greater then a Quadrant, the Sine or Tangent of that Arks Complement to 180
d, it will hold, As the Radius, To the Tangent of 6d: So is the Tangent 78d 2,
To the Sine of 29 d 44,
found by extending the Thread through 78 d 2 on the Semicircle, counted from
the other end, alias, in the small figures, and in the Quadaant it will
intersect 29 d 44; now by the second Case of right angled Sphoerical Triangles,
the angle A Z B will be Acute, wherefore the angle Z B is 119 d 44 the Suns
Azimuth from the North, the Complement being 60 d 16 is the angle A Z B, and so
much is the Azimuth from the South.

To work Proportions in Sines alone.
THat this Circle might be capacitated to try any Case of Sphoerical Triangles,
there are added Lines to it, namely, the Line Sol falling perpendicularly on
the Diameter from the end of the Quadrant of Latitudes, whereto belongs the two
Parrallel Lines of Sines in the opposite Quadrants, the upermost being extended
cross the Quadrant of Latitudes.

The Proportion not having the Radius ingredient, and being of the greater to
the less.
Account the first Term in the line Sol, and the second in the upper Sine
extending the Thread through them, and where it intersects the opposite
Parrallel hold it; then lay the Thread to the third Term in the line Sol, and
it will intersect the fourth Proportional on the upper Parrallel. As the Sine
of 30d, To the sine of any Arch: So is the Cosine of that Arch, To the sine of
the double Arch and the Converse.


By trying this Canon, the use of these Lines will be suddenly attained.

Example.
As the sine of 30d, To the sine of 20d: So is the sine of 70d, To the sine of
40d.
But if it be of the less to the greater, the answer must be found on the Line
Sol.

Account the first Term on the upper Sine, and the second in the Line Sol, and
hold the Thread at the Intersection of the opposite Parrallel, then lay the
Thread to the third Term on the uper Parrallel, and on the line Sol it will
intersect the fourth Proportional if it be less then the Radius.

But Proportions having the Radius ingredient, will be wrought without any
Motion of the Thread.

As the Cosine of the Latitude, To Radius: So is the sine of the Declination,
To the sine of the Amplitude.
So in our Latitude of London, when the Declination is 20d 12 the Amplitude
will be found to be 33d 42.

Extend the Thread through 38 d 28 on the line Sol. and through the Declination
in the upper Sine, and it will intersect the opposite Parrallel Sine at 33 d
42, the Amplitude sought.

The use of the Semi-Tangent and Chords are passed by at present.

The line Sol is of use in Dyalling, as in Mr Fosters Posthuma, page 70 and 71,
where it is required to divide a Circle into 12 equal parts for the hours, and
each part into 4 subdivisions for the quarters, and into such parts may the
equal Semicircle be divided; that if it were required to divide a Circle of
like Radius into such parts, it might be readily done by this.

Of the Line of Hours on the right edge of the foreside of the Quadrant.
This is the very same Scale that is in the Diameter on the Backside, only
there it was divided into degrees, and here into time, and placed on the
outermost edge; there needs no line of Latitudes be fitted thereto, for those
Extents may be taken off as Chords from the Quadrant of Latitudes, by help of
these Scales thus placed on the outward edges of the Quadrants may the
hour lines of Dyals be pricked down without Compasses.

To Draw a Horizontal Dyal.


FIrst draw the line C E, for the Hour-line of 12, and cross it with the
Perpendicular A B, then out of a Scale or Quadrant of Latitudes set of C B and
C A, each equal to the Styles height, or Latitude of the place, then place the
Scale of 6 hours on the edge of the Quadrant, whereto the Line of Latitudes was
fitted, one extremity of it at A, and move the Quadrant about, till the other
end or extremity of it will meet with the Meridian line C E; then in regard the
said Scale of Hours stands on the very brink or outward most edge of the
Quadrant, with a Pin, Pen, or the end of a black-lead pen, make marks or points
upon the Paper or Dyal against each hour (and the like for the quarters, and
other lesser parts) of the graduated Scale, and from those marks draw lines
into the Center, and they shall be the hour lines required, without drawing any
other lines on the Plain, the Scale of Hours on the Quadrant is here
represented by the lines A E, and E B, the hour lines above the Center, are
drawn by continuing them out through the Center.

And those that have Paper prints of this line, may make them serve for this
purpose, without pricking down the hour points by Compasses, by doubling the
paper at the very edge or extremity of the Scale of Hours.

Otherwise to prick down the said Dial without the Line of Latitudes and Scale
of hours in a right angled Parallellogram.

Having drawn C E the Meridian line, and crossed it with the perpendicular C A
B, and determining C E to be the Radius of any length, take out the Sine of the
Latitude to the same Radius, and prick it from C to A and B, and setting one
foot at E, with the said Extent sweep the touch of an Arch at D and F, then
take the length of the Radius C E, and setting down one foot at B, sweep the
touch of an Ark at D, intersecting the former, also setting down the Compasses
at A, make the like Arch at F, and through the points of Intersection, draw the
straight lines A F, B D, and F E D, and they will make a right angled
Parallellogram, the sides whereof will be Tangent lines.

To draw the Hour Lines:
Make E F, or E D Radius, and proportion out the Tangents of 15d and prick them
down from E to 1 and 11 and draw lines 30 and prick them down from E to 2 and
10 and draw lines
through the points thus found, and through the points F and D, and there will
be 3 hours drawn on each side the Meridian line.

Again, make A F or B D Radius, and proportion out the Tangent of 15d, and
prick it down from A to 5, and from B to 7.

Also proportion out the Tangent of 30d, and prick it down from A to 4, and
from B to 8, and draw lines into the Center, and so the Hour Lines are
finished, and for those that fall above the 6 of clock line, they are only the
opposite hours continued, after the like manner are the halfs and quarters to
be pricked down.

Lastly, By chords prick off the Styles height equal to the Latitude of the
place, and let it be placed to its due elevation over the Meridian line.

Of Upright Decliners.
Diverse Arks for such plains are to be calculated, and may be found on the
Circle before described.

1. The Substiles distance from the Meridian.
By the Substilar line is meant, a line over which the Style or cock of the
Dyal directly hangs in its nearest distance from the Plain, by some termed
the line of deflexion, and is the Ark of the plain between the Meridian of the
Plain, and the Meridian of the place. The distance thereof from the Hour-line
of 12, is to be found by this Proportion.

As the Radius, To the Sine of the Plains Declination, So the Cotangent of the
Latitude, To the Tangent of the Substile from the Meridian.
2. For the Angle of 12 and 6.
An Ark used when the Hour Lines are pricked down from the Meridian line in a
Triangle or Parallellogram, (and not from the Substile,) without collecting
Angles at the Pole.

As the Radius, Is to the Sine of the Plains Declination, So is the Tangent of
the Latitude, To the Tangent of an Ark, the Complement whereof is the Angle of
12 and 6.
3. Inclination of Meridians.
Is an Ark of the Equinoctial, between the Meridian of the plain, and the
Meridian of the place, or it is an Angle or space of time elapsed between the
passage of the shadow of the Style from the Substilar line into the Meridian
line, by some termed the Plains difference of Longitude; and not improperly,
for it shows in what Longitude from the Meridian where the Plain is; the said
Plain would become a Horizontal Dyal, and the Styles height shows the Latitude,
this Ark is used in calculating hour distances by the Tables and in pricking
down Dyals by the Line of Latitudes, and hours from the Substile.

As the Radius, Is to the Sine of the Latitude, So the Cotangent of the Plains
Declination, To the Cotangent of the Inclination of Meridians.
Or, As the Sine of the Latitude to Radius, So is the Tangent of the Plains
Declination, To the Tangent of Inclination of Meridians.


4. The Styles height above the Substile.
As the Radius, Is to the Cosine of the Latitude, So is the Cosine of the
Plains Declination, To the Sine of the Styles height.
Or the Substiles distance being known, As the Radius, To the Sine of the
Substiles distance from the Meridian, So is the Cotangent of the Declination,
To the Tangent of the Styles height.


Or, The Inclination of Meridians being known.

As the Radius, To the Cosine of the Inclination of Meridians, So is the
Cotangent of the Latitude, To the Tangent of the Styles height.
5. Lastly, For the distances of the Hour Lines from the Substilar Line.
As the Radius, Is to the Sine of the Styles height above the Plain, So is the
Tangent of the Angle at the Pole, To the Tangent of the Hours distance from the
Substilar Line.
By the Angle at the Pole, is meant the Ark of difference between the Ark
called the Inclination of Meridians, and the distance of any hour from the
Meridian, for all hours on the same side the Substile falls, and the sum of
these two Arks for all hours on the other side the Substile.

These Proportions are sufficient for all Plains to find the like Arks, without
having any more, if the manner of referring Declining Reclining Inclining
Plains to a new Latitude, and a new Declination in which they shall stand as
upright Plains, be but well explained, for East or West Reclining Inclining
Plains, their new Latitude is the Complement of their old Latitude, and their
new Declination, is the Complement of their Reclination Inclination, which I
count always from the Zenith, and upon such a supposition, taking their new
Latitude and Declination, those that will try, shall find that these
Proportions will calculate all the Arks necessary to such Dials.

So if an Upright Plain decline 25d in our Latitude of London from the Meridian.

The Substiles distance from the Meridian is -- 18d 34 The Angle of 12 and 6 is
-- 62: 00 The Inclination of Meridians is -- 30: 47 The Styles height is -- 34:
19
To Delineate the same Dial from the Substile by the Line of Latitudes, and
Scale of hours in an Equicrutal Triangle.

To Draw an Upright Decliner.


An Upright South Plain for the Latitude of London, Declining 25d Eastwards.
TO prick down this Dial by the line of Latitudes, and Scale of Hours in an
Isoceles Triangle.

Draw C 12 the Meridian Line perpendicular to the Horizontal line of the Plain,
and with a line of Chords, make the Angle F C 12, equal to the Substiles
distance from the Meridian, and draw the line F C for the Substile; Draw the
line B A perpendicular thereto, and passing through the Center at C, and out of
the line of Latitudes on the other Quadrants, or out of the Quadrant of
Latitudes on this Quadrant, set off B C and C A each equal to the Styles
height, then fit in the Scale of 6 hours, proper to those Latitudes, so that
one Extremity meeting at A, the other may meet with the Substilar line at F.

Then get the difference between 30d 47, the inclination of Meridians, and 30d
the next hours distance lesser then the said Ark, the difference is 47 in time,
3 nearest then fitting in the Scale of hours as was prescribed.

Count upon the said Scale,

Hour. Min. 0 3 from F to 10 1 3 11 2 3 12 3 3 1 4 3 2 5 3 3 And make points at
the terminations with a pin or pen, and draw lines from those points into the
Center at C, and they shall be the true hour lines required on this side the
Substile.

Again, Fitting in the Scale of Hours from B to F, count from that end at B the
former Arks of time.

Ho Min 00, 03 from B to 4 1, 3 5 2, 3 6 3, 3 7 4, 3 8 5, 3 9 And make Points
at the Terminations, through which draw Lines into the Center, and they shall
be the hour Lines required on the other side the Substile.

The like must be done for the halfs and quarters, getting the difference
between the half hour next lesser (in this Example 22d 30) under the Ark called
the inclination of Meridians, the difference is 1d 17 in time 33 nearest to be
continually augmented an hour at a time, and so pricked off as before was done
for the whole hours.

By three facil Proportions, may be found the Styles height, the Inclination of
Meridians, and the Substiles distance from the Plains perpendicular, for all
Plains Declining, Reclining, or Inclining, which are sufficient to prick off
the Dyal after the manner here described, which must be referred to another
place.

If the Scale of hours reach above the Plain, as at B, so that B C cannot be
pricked down, then may an Angle be pricked off with Chords on the upper side the
Substile, equal to the Angle F C A, on the under side, and thereby the Scale of
hours laid in its true situation, having first found the point F on the under
side.

To prick down the former Dyal in a Rectangular blong, or long square Figure
from the Substile.

Having set off the Substilar F C, assume any distance in it, as at F to be the
Radius, and through the fame at right Angles, draw the line E F D, then having
made F C any distance Radius, take out the Sine of the Styles height to the
same Radius, and entering it at the end of the Scale of three hours, make it the
Radius of a Tangent, and proportion out Tangents to 3 and set them off from F
to 10 1 hour 3 and set them off from F to G 2 3 and set them off from F to H


Again, Take out the Tangents of the Complement of the first Ark, increasing it
each time by the augmentation of an hour, namely 57 and prick them from F to I
and from the points 1 ho. 57 and prick them from F to K and from the points 2
57 and prick them from F to E and from the points
thus found, draw lines into the Center.

Then for the other sides of the Square, make C F the Radius of the Dyalling
Tangent of 3 hours, and proportion out Tangents to the former Arks, namely, 3
and prick them from B to P Also to the latter Arks, 57 and prick them from A to
-- N 1 ho. 3 and prick them from B to O Also to the latter Arks. 1 h. 57 and
prick them from A to -- M 2 3 and prick them from B to L Also to the latter
Arks. 2 57 and prick them from A to -- D
and draw lines from these terminations into the Center, and the Hour Lines are
finished; after the same manner must the halfs and quarters be finished.

And how this trouble in Proportioning out the Tangents may be shunned without
drawing any lines on the Plain, but the hour lines, may be spoke to hereafter,
whereby this way of Dyalling, and those that follow, will be rendered more
commodious.

Lastly, the Style may be pricked off with Chords, or take B C, and setting one
foot in F, with that Extent sweep the touch of an occult Arch, and from C, draw
a line just touching the outward extremity of the said Arch, and it shall prick
off the Angle of the Styles height above the Substile.

To prick off the former Dyal in an Oblique Parallellogram, or Scalenon alias
unequal sided Triangle from the Meridian.


First, In an Oblique Parallellogram.

DRaw CE the Meridian line and with 60d of a line of Chords, draw the pricked
Arch, and therein from K, contrary to the Coast of Declination, prick off 62d,
the angle of 12 and 6, and draw the line C D for the said hour line continued
on the other side the Center, and out of a line of Sines, make C E equal to
65d the Complement of the Declination; then take out the sine of 38d 28 the
Complement of the Latitude, and enter it in the line D C, so that one foot
resting at D, the other turned about, may but just touch the Meridian line, the
point D being thus found, make C F equal to C D, and with the sides C F and C
E make the Parallellogram D G F H, namely, F H and G D equal to C E: and E G
and E H equal to D C. And where these distances (sweeping occult arches
therewith) intersect will find the points H and G limiting the Angles of the
Parallellogram.

Then making E H or C D Radius, proportion out the Tangents of 15d and prick
them down from E to 1 and 11 and 30 and prick them down from E to 2 and 10 and
draw lines into the Center through those points, and the angular points of the
Parallellogram at H and G, and there will be 6 hours drawn, besides the
Meridian line or hour line of 12. Then making D G Radius, proportion out the
Tangent of 15d, and prick it down from D upwards to 5, and downward to 7, also
proportion out the tangent of 30d and prick it from D to 8, and from F to 4,
and draw lines into the Center, and so the hour lines are finished; after the
same manner are the halfs and quarters to be proportioned out and pricked down:
and if this Work is to be done upon the Plain it self, the Parallel F H will
excur above the plain, in that case, because the Parallel distance of F H from
the Meridian, is equal to the parallel distance of D G the space G. 8. may be
set from H to 4, and so all the hour lines pricked down.

To prick down this Dyal in a Scalenon, or unequal sided triangle from the
Meridian, from E to D draw the straight line D E, and from the same point draw
another to F, and each of them (the former hour lines being first drawn) shall
thereby be divided into a line of double tangents, or scale of 6 hours, such a
one as is in the Diameter of the Circle on this quadrant, or on the right edge
of the foreside; and therefore by help of either of them lines, if it were
required to prick down the Dyal, it might be done by Proportioning them out,
take the extent D E, and prick it from one extremity of the Diameter in the
Semicircle on the quadrant, and from the point of Termination draw a line with
black Lead to the other extremity, (which will easily rub out again either with
bread or leather parings) and take the nearest distance from 15 of the Diameter
to the said line, and the said extents 30 of the Diameter to the said line, and
the said extents 45 of the Diameter to the said line, and the said extents
shall reach from, E to 11 and from D to 7 shall reach from, E to 10 and from D
to 8 shall reach from, E to 9 and from D to 9
and the like must be done for the line E F, entering that in the Semicirle as
before; or without drawing lines on the quadrant, if a hole be drilled at one
end of the Diameter, and a thread fitted into it, lay the thread over the point
in the Diameter, and take the nearest distances thereto.

Lastly, from a line of Chords, prick off the substilar line, and the styles
height as we before found it.

This way of Dyalling in a Parallellogram, was first invented by John Ferrereus
a Spaniard, long since, and afterward largely handled by Clavius, who
demonstrates it, and shows how to fit it into all plains whatsoever, albeit
they decline, recline, or incline, without referring them to a new Latitude;
the Triangular way is also built upon the same Demonstration, and is already
published by Mr Foster in his Posthuma, for it is no other then Dyalling in a
Parallellogram, if the Meridian line C E be continued upwards, and C E set off
upwards, and lines drawn from the point, so found to D and E, shall constitute
a Parallellogram.

An Advertisement about observing of Altitudes.
IMagine a line drawn from the beginning of the line Sol, to the end of the
Diameter, and therein suppose a pair of sights placed with a thread and bullet
hanging from the beginning of the said line, as from a Center; I say the line
wherein the sights are placed, makes a right angle with the line of sines on
the other side of Sol, and so may represent a quadrant, the equal Limb whereof
is either represented by the 90d of the equal Semicirle, or by the 90d of the
Diameter and thereby an Altitude may be taken. Now to make an Isoceles
equicrural, or equal legged triangle made of three straight Rulers, the longest
whereof will be the Base or Hipotenusal line; thus to serve for a quadrant to
take Altitudes withal, will be much cheaper, and more certain in Wood, then the
great Arched wooden framed quadrants. Moreover, the said Diameter line supplies
all the uses of the Limb, from it may be taken off Sines, Tangents, or
Secants, as was done from the Limb; and therein the Hour and Azimuth, found
generally by help of the line of Sines on the left edge, as is largely showed
in the uses of this quadrant, besides its uses in Dyalling, only when such an
Instrument is made apart, it will be more convenient to have the line of Sines
to be set on the right edge, and the Diameter numbered also by its Complements;
this Diameter or double Tangent, or Hipotenusal line being first divided on,
all the other lines may from it, by the same Tables that serve to graduate them
from the equal Limb be likewise inscribed: and here let me put a period to the
uses of this quadrant.

Gloria Deo.


The Description of an Universal small Pocket Quadrant.
THis quadrant has only one face.

On the right edge from the Center is placed a line of sines divided into
degrees and half degrees up to 60 d. afterward into whole degrees to 80 d.

On the left edge issues a line of 10 equal parts, from the Center being
precise 4 inches long, each part being divided into 10 subdivisions and each
subdivision into halfs.

These two lines make a right angle at the Center, and between them include a
Projection of the Sphere for the Latitude of London.

Above the Projection are put on in quadrants of Circles a line of Declinations
4 quadrants for the days of the month, above them the names of 5 Stars with
their right Ascensions graved against them, and a general Almanac.

Beneath the Projection are put on in quadrants of Circles a particular sine
and secant, so called, because it is particular to the Latitude of London.

Below that the quadrat, and shadows.

Below that a line of Tangents to 45 d.

Last of all the equal Limb.

On the left edge is placed the Dialling scale of hours 4 Inches long,
outwardmost on the right edge a line of Latitudes fitted thereto.

Within the line of sines close abutting thereto is placed a small scale called
the scale of entrance beginning against 52 d. 35 min. of the sines numbered to
60 d.

The line of sines that issues from the Center should for a particular use
have been continued longer to wit to a secant of 28 d. because this could not
be admitted, the said secant is placed outward at the end of the scale of
entrance toward the Limb, and as much of the sine as was needful placed at
its due distance, at the other end of the scale of entrance.

Of the uses of the said quadrant.
THe Almanac has been largely spoke to in page 12, and 13, also again in the
uses of the Horizontal quadrant page 11, 12.

The quadrat and shadows from page 35 to 44.

The line of Latitudes and scale of hours page 250. Again, from page to 262 to
274, also the line of sines, equal parts, and Tangents, in other parts of the
Book.

The use of the Projection.
THis projection is only fitted for finding the hour in the limb, and not the
Azimuth, all the Circular lines on it are parallels of Altitude or Depression
except the Ecliptic and Horizon, the Ecliptic, is known by the Characters of
the signs, and the Horizon lies beneath it, being numbered with 10, 20, 30, 40.

The parallels of Altitude are the Winter parallels of Stofler's Astrolable,
and are numbered from the Horizon upwards toward the Center, the parallels of
Depression which supply the use of Stoflers Summer Altitudes are numbered
downwards from the top of the Projection toward the limb.

To find the time of Sun rising, and his Amplitude.
LAy the thread over the day of the month, and set the Bead to the Ecliptic,
then carry the thread and Bead to the Horizon, and the thread in the limb,
shows the time of rising, and the Bead on the Horizon the quantity of the
Amplitude.

Example.
So on the second of August the Suns Declination being 15 d* his Amplitude will
be 24 d. 35 min. and the time of rising 41 past 4 in the morning.

To find the Hour of the Day.
HAving taken the Suns Altitude and rectified the Bead as before showed, if the
Sun have South Declination bring the Bead to that parallel of Altitude on which
the Suns height was observed, amongst those parallels that are numbered upward
toward the Center, and the thread in the limb shows the time of the day.

Eample.
So when the Sun has 15 d. of South Declination, as about 28th of January, if
his Altitude be 15 degrees. the time of the day will be 39 m. past 2 in the
afternoon, or 21 m. past 9 in the morning.

But in the Summer half year bring the Bead to lie on those parallels that are
numbered downwards to the limb, and the thread shows therein the time of the
day sought.

Example.
If on the second of August his Declination being 15 d. his Altitude were 40 d.
the true time of the day would be 8 m. past 9 in the morning, or 52 m. past 2
in the afternoon.

If the Bead will not meet with the Altitude given amongst those parallels that
run donwnwards toward the right edge, then it must be brought to those
parallels that lie below the Horizon downward toward the left edge, and the
thread in the Limb shows the time of the day before six in the morning or
after it in the evening in Summer.

Example.
When the Sun has 15 d. of North Declination as on the second of August if his
Altitude be 5 d. the time of the Day will be 44 m. before 6 in the morning, or
after it in the evening.

Of the general lines on this quadrant.
THe line of sines on the right edge is general for finding either the hour or
the Azimuth in the equal limb, or in the said line of sines, as I have largely
showed in page 231 for finding the hour, also for finding the Suns Altitudes on
all hours, as in page 234, for finding the Azimuth from page 237 to page 2.9.

Though this quadrant has neither secants nor versed sines as the rest have,
yet both may be easily supplied, let it be required to work this Proportion.

As the Cosine of the declination, Is to the secant of the Latitude, So is the
difference of the sines of the Suns Meridian and given Altitude, To the versed
sine of the hour from noon,
before or after six the hour may be found from midnight by the proportions in
page 230.

Let the Radius of the sines be assumed to represent the secant of the
Latitude, the Radius to that secant will be the cosine of the Latitude, then
lay the thread to the complement of the Declination in the limb counted from
right edge, and take the nearest distance to it. I say that extent shall be the
cosine of the Declination to the Radius of the Secant enter this at 90 d. of
the line of sines laying the thread to the other foot according to nearest
distance, then in the sines take the distance between the Meridian Altitude and
the given Altitude, and enter that extent so upon the sines that one foot
resting thereon, the other turned about may just touch the thread the distance
between the resting foot and the Center is equal to the versed sine of the ark
sought and being measured from the end of the line of sines toward the Center
shows the ark sought.

Example.
When the Suns Declination is 15 d. North if his Altitude were 35 d. 21 m. the
time of the day would be found 45 d. from noon, that is 9 in the morning or 3
in the afternoon.

Of finding the Azimuth generally.
THough this may be found either by the sines alone in the equal limb as
before mentioned, or by versed sines as was instanced for the hour, see also
page 239, 240, 241, yet where the Sun has vertical Altitude or Depression, as
in places without the Tropicks toward either of the Poles, it may be found
most easily in the equal limb by the joint help of sines and tangents by the
proportions in page 175.

First, find the vertical Altitude as is showed in page 174. Then for Latitudes
under 45 d.

Enter in Summer Declinations the difference, but in Winter Declinations the
sum, of the sines of the vertical Altitude, and of the proposed Altitude once
done the line of sines from the Center, and laying the thread over the Tangent
of the Latitude take the nearest distance to it, then enter that Extent at the
complement of the Altitude in the Sines, and lay the thread to the other foot,
and in the limb it shows the Azimuth from the East or West.

Example. For the Latitude of Rome to wit 42 d. If the Sun have 15 d. of North
Declination his vertical Altitude is 22 d. 45 m. If his given Altitude ^e 40 d.
the Azimuth of the Sun will be 17 d. 33 m. to the Southward of the West. If his
declination were as much South and his proposed Altitude 18 d. his Azimuth
would be 41 d. 10 m. to the Southwards of the East or West. For Latitudes above
45.

If we assume the Rad. of the quadrant to be the tangent of the Latit. the Rad.
to that Tang. shall be the co-tangent of the Latit. wherefore lay the thread to
the complement of the Latitude in the line of Tangents in the limb, and from
the complement of the Altitude in the Sines take the nearest distance to it, I
say that extent shall be cosine of the Altitude to the lesser Radius which
measure from the Center, and it finds the Point of entrance whereon enter the
former Sum or difference of sines as before directed, and you will find the
Azimuth in the equal limb.

Or if you would find the answer in the sines, enter the first extent at 90 d.
laying the thread to the other foot, then enter the Sum or difference of the
Sines of the vertical and given Altitude, so between the scale and the thread,
that one foot turned about may but just touch the thread, the other resting on
the sines, and you will find the sine of the Azimuth sought.

Example. For the Latitude of Edinburg 55 d. 56 m. If the Sun have 15 d. of
Declination, his vertical Altitude or depression is 18 d. 14 m. the Declination
being North, if his proposed Altitude were 35 d. the Azimuth of the Sun would
be 28 d. to the South-wards of the East or West.

But if the Declination were as much South, and the Altitude 10 d. the Azimuth
thereto would be 46 d. 58 m. to the South-wards of the East or West.

The first Operation also works a Proportion to wit. As the Radius Is to the
cotangent of the Latitude. So is the cosine of the Altitude, To a fourth sine.


I say this 4th sine bears such Proportion to the Radius as the cosine of the
Altitude does to the tangent of the Latitude, for the 4th term of every direct
Proportion bears such Proportion to the first terms thereof, as the Rectangle
of the two middle terms does to the square of the first term.

But as the rectangle of the co-tangent of the Latitude and of the cosine of
the Altitude is to the square of the Radius, So is the cosine of the Altitude
is to the tangent of the Latitude, or which is all one, So is the co-tangent of
the Latitude, To the secant of the Altitude, as may be found by a common
division of the rectangle, and square of the Radius by either of the terms of
the said rectangle, by help of which notion I first found out the particular
scales upon this quadrant.

All Proportions in sines and Tangents may be resolved by the sine of 90 d. and
the Tangent of 45 d. on this quadrant if what has been now wrote, and the
varying of Proportions be understood, as in page 72 to 74 it is delivered.

Because the Projection is not fitted for finding the Azimuth there are added
two particular scales to this quadrant, namely, the particular sine in the
limb, and the scale of entrance abutting on the sines fitted for the Latitude
of London.

Lay the thread to the day of the month, and it shows the Suns Declination in
the scales proper thereto.

Then count the Declination in the Limb laying the thread thereto, and in the
particular sine, it shows the Suns Altitude or Depression being East or West.

To find the Suns Azimuth.
FOr North Declinations take the distance between the sines of the vertical
Altitude and given Altitude, but for South Declinations add with your compass
the sine of the given Altitude to the sine of the vertical Altitude, enter the
extent thus found, at the Altitude in the scale of entrance laying the thread
to the other foot according to nearest distance, and in the equal limb it
shows the Azimuth sought from the East or West, or it may be found in the
sines by laying the thread to that arch in the limb that the Altitude in the
scale of entrance stands against in the sines, and entering the former extent
paralelly between the thread and the sines.

Example. So when the Sun has 13 d. of Declination his vertical Altitude or
Depression is 16 d. 42 m. If the Declination were North and his Altitude 8 d.
41 m. his Azimuth would be 10 d. to the North-wards of the East or West. But if
it were South and his Altitude 12 d. 13 m. the Azimuth would be 40d to the
South-wards of the East or West.

By the same particular scales the hour may be also found.

To find the time of Sun rising or setting.
TAke the sine of the Declination, and enter it at the Declination in the Scale
of entrance and it shows the time sought in the equal lim^e from six.

Example. When the has 10 d. of Declination the Ascensional difference is 49
m. which added to, or subtracted from six shows the time of rising and
setting.

To find the hour of the day for South Declination.
IN taking the Altitude, mind what Ark in the particular Sine the thread cut,
add the Sine of that Ark to the Sine of the Declination, and enter that extent
at the Declination in the Scale of entrance laying the thread to the other foot
according to nearest distance, and in the equal limb it shows the hour from
six. So if the Declination were 13 d. South and the Suns Altitude 14 d. 38 m.
the thread in the particular Sine would cut 18 d. 49 m. and true time of the
day would be 9 in the morning or 3 in the morning.

To find the time of the day for North Declination.
HAving observed what Ark the thread in taking the Altitude hung over in the
Particular Sine take the distance between the Sine of the said Arc, and the
Sine of the Declination and entering that extent at the Declination in the Scale
of entrance the thread in the limb shows the hour from six.

Example. If the Suns Declination were 23 d. 31 m. North, and his Altitude 39
d. the Arch in the particular Sine would be 53 d. 32 m. and the time of the day
would be about 3 quarters past 3 in the afternoon, or a quarter past 8 in the
morning.

When the Altitude is more then the Latitude the thread will hang over a Secant
in the particular Scale, this happens not till the Sun have more then 13 d. of
North Declination, in this case take the distance between the Secant before the
beginning of the Scale of entrance, and the Sine of the Declination at the end
of the same and enter it as before.

Example. The Suns declination being 23 d. 31 m. North if his Altitude were 55
d. 29 m. the thread in the particular Scale would hang over the Secant of 18 d.
11 m. and the true time of the day would be a quarter past 10 in the morning,
or 3 quarters past 1 in the afternoon. The Proportions here used are expressed
in Page 193.

The Stars hour is to be found by the projection by rectifying the Bead to the
Sar and then proceed as in finding the Suns hour, afterward the ^ue time of
the night is to be found as in page 32.

ERRATA.
In the Treatise of the Horizontal quadrant, page 43 line 6 for the 3 January
read the 30th. In the Reflex Dialling page 5, add to the last line these
words, As Kircher shows in his Ars Anaclastica.

FINIS.
THE DESCRIPTION AND USES OF A GENERAL QUADRANT, WITH THE HORIZONTAL
PROJECTION, UPON IT INVERTED.

Written and Published By JOHN COLLINS Accountant, and Student in the
Mathematics.



LONDON, Printed Anno M. DC. LVIII.

The Description OF THE HORIZONTAL QUADRANT.
THis Denomination is attributed to it because it is derived from the
Horizontal projection inverted.

Of the Fore-side.
On the right edge is a Line of natural Sines. On the left edge a Line of
Versed-Sines. Both these Lines issue from the Center where they concur and
make a right Angle, and between them and the Circular Lines in the Limb is the
Projection included, which consists of diverse portions and Arkes of Circles.

Of the Parallels of Declination.
THese are portions of Circles that cross the quadrant obliquely from the left
edge, toward the right.

To describe them.
OBserve that the left edge of the quadrant is called the Meriridian Line, and
that every Degree or Parallel of the Suns Declination if continued about would
cross the Meridian in two opposite points, the one below the Center toward
the Limb, and the other above, and beyond the Center of the quadrant, the
distance between these two points is the Diameter of the said Parallel, and the
Semidiameters would be the Center points.

It will be necessary in the first place, to limit the outwardmost Parallel of
Declination, which may be done in the Meridian Line at any point assumed.

The distance of this assumed point from the Center in any Latitude, must
represent the Tangent of a compound Arc, made by adding half the greatest
Meridian Altitude to 45 Degrees. which for London must be the Tangent of 76 Degr.

And to the Radius of this Tangent must the following work be fitted.

In like manner, the Semidiameters of all other Parallels that fall below the
Center, are limited by pricking down the Tangents of Arkes, framed by adding
half the Meridian Altitude suitable to each Declination continually to 45 Degr.

Now to limit the Semidiameters above or beyond the Center only prick off the
respective Tangents of half the Suns midnight Depression from the Center the
other way, retaining the former Radius, by this means there will be found two
respective points limiting the Diameters of each Parallel, which had, the
Centers will be easily found falling in the middle of each Diameter.

But to do this Arithmetically, first, find the Arc compounded of half the
Suns meridian Altitude, and 45 Degr. as before, and to the Tangent thereof,
add the Tangent of half the Suns midnight depression, observing that the
Suns midnight depression in Winter-Summer, is equal to his Meridian Altitude
in Summer-Winter, his declination being alike in quantity, though in different
Hemispheres, the half sum of these two Tangents are the respective
Semidiameters sought, and being pricked in the meridian line either way from the
former points limiting the Diameters, will find the Centers.

Or without limiting those Points for the Diameters: first, get the Difference
between the Tangents of those Arkes that limit them on either side, and the
half sum abovesaid, the said difference pricked from the Center of the
quadrant in the meridian line finds the respective Centers of those Parallels,
the said half sums being the respective Semidiameters wherewith they are to
be described.

Of the Line or Index of Altitudes.
THis is no other then a single pricked line standing next the Meridian line, or
left edge of the quadrant, to which the Bead must be continually rectified,
when either the hour or Azimuth is found by help of the projection.

To graduate it.
Add half the Altitudes respectively whereto the Index is to be fitted to 45
Degr. and prick down the Tangents of these compound arkes from the Center.

Example.
To graduate the Index for 40 Degr. of Altitude, the half thereof is 20, which
added to 45 Degr. makes 65 Degr. which taken from a Tangent to the former
Radius, and pricked from the Center, gives the point where the Index is to be
graduated with 40 Degrees.

Hence it is evident that where the divisions of the Index begin marked (0) the
distance of that point from the Center is equal to the common Radius of the
Tangents. Because this quadrant (as all natural projections) has a reverted
tail, the graduations of the Index are continued above the Hozontal point (0)
toward the Center to 30 Degr. 40 as much as is the Suns greatest Vertical
Altitude in this Latitude, and the graduations of the Index are set off from
the Center by pricking down the Tangents of the arkes of difference between
half the proposed Altitude, and 45 Degrees. thus to graduate 20 degrees. of the Index
the half thereof is 10 Degrees, which taken from 45 Degrees, the residue is 35
Degrees, the Tangent thereof pricked from the Center gives the point where the
Index is to be graduated with 20 Degrees.

Of the hour Circles.
THese are known by the numbers set to them by crossing the Parallels of
Declination, and by issuing from the upper part of the quadrant toward the
Limb.

To describe them.
LEt it be noted that they all meet in a point in the Meridian Line below the
Center of the quadrant: the distance whereof from the Center is equal to the
Tangent of half the Complement of the Latitude taken out of the common Radius,
which at London will be the Tangent of 19 Degrees. 14.

The former point which may be called the Pole-point, limits their
Semidiameters, to find the Centers prick off the Tangent of the Latitude and
through the termination raise a line Perpendicular to the Meridian line, the
distance from the Pole-point being equal to the Secant of the Latitude, must be
made Radius. And the Tangents of 15 Degrees, 30 Degrees etc. pricked off on the
former raised line, gives the respective Centers of the hour Circles, the
distances whereof from the Pole point are the Semidiameters wherewith those
hour Circles are to be drawn.

Of the reverted Tail.
THis needs no Rule to describe it, being made by the continuing of the
parallels of Declination to the right edge of the quadrant and the hour
Circles up to the Winter Tropic or parallel of Declination nearest the Center,
however the quantity of it may be known by setting one foot of a pair of
Compasses in the Center of the quadrant, and the other extend to 00 Degrees of
Altitude in the Index; an Arch with that extent swept over the quadrant as much
as it cuts off will be the Reverted Tail, and so much would be the Radius.

Of a Quadrant made, of this Projection not inverted.
BY what has been said it will be evident to the judicious that this inversion
is no other then the continance of the extents of one quarter of the Horizontal
projection.

Which otherwise could not with convenience be brought upon a quadrant.

Hence it may be observed that.

Having assigned the Radius, a quadrant made of the Horizontal Projection
without inversion, to know how big a Radius it will require when inverted the
proportion will hold.
AS the Radius, is to the distance of the intersection of the Aequinoctial
point with the Horizon from the Center equal to the Radius of the said
Projection when not inverted, in any common measure.

So is the Tangent of an Arc compounded of 45 Degrees, and of half the Suns
greatest Meridian Altitude.

To the distance between the Center and the out-ward Tropic next the Limb in
the said known measure when inverted, whence it follows that between the
Tropicks this projection cannot be inverted, but the reverted tail will be but
small, and may be drawn with convenience without inversion.

Of the Curved Line and Scales belonging to it.
BEyond the middle of the Projection stands a Curved or bending Line, numbered
from the O or cipher both ways, one way to 60 Degrees, but divided to 62
Degrees, the other way to 20 Degr. but divided to 23 Degrees. 30.

The Invention of this Line ownes Mr. Dary for the Author thereof, the Use of
it being to find the hour or Azimuth in that particular latitude whereto it is
fitted by the extension of a thread over it, and the lines belonging to it.

The lines belonging to it are two, the one a Line of Altitudes, and
Declinations standing on the left edge of the quadrant, being no other but a
line of Sines continued both ways, from the beginning one way to 62 Degrees,
the other way to 23. Degrees 30.

The other line thereto belonging is 130 Degrees. of a line of Versed Sines, which
stands next without the Projection being parallel to the left edge of the
quadrant.

To dravv the Curve.
DRaw two lines of Versed Sines, it matters not whether of the same Radius or
no, nor how posited; provided they be parallel, let each of them be numbered as
a Sine both ways, from the middle at (0) and so each of them will contain two
lines of Sines, to the right end of the uppermost set C, to the left end D, and
to the right end of the undermost set A, and to the left end B.

First, Note that there is a certain point in the Curve where the Graduations
will begin both upwards and downwards, this is called the Aequinoctial point;
to find it, lay a ruler from A to the Complement of the Latitude counted from
(0) in the upper Scale toward D, and draw a line from A to it, then count it
the other way toward C, viz. 38 Degrees 28. for the Co-latitude of London, and
lay a ruler over it, and the point B, and where it intersects the line before
drawn, is the Aequinoctial point to be graduated.

Then to graduate the Division on each side of it, requires only the making in
effect of a Table of Meridian altitudes to every degree of Declination (which
because the Curve will also serve for the Azimuth in which case the graduations
of the Curve, which in finding the hour were accounted Declinations must be
accounted Altitudes) must be continued to 62 Degrees for this Latitude, and
further also if it be intended that the Curve shall find a Stars hour that
has more declination.

To make this Table.
GEt the Sum and difference of the Complement of the latitude and of the
Degrees intended to be graduated, and if the sum exceed 90 Degrees, take its
complement to 180 degrees instead of it: being thus prepared the Curve will be
readily made.

To graduate the under part of the Curve.
Account the sum in the upper line from O toward D, and from the point A in
the under line draw a line to it.

Account the difference in the upper lfne when the degree proposed to be
graduated is less then the complement of the Latitude from O toward C: but
when it is more toward D, and from the point B lay a Ruler over it, and where
the Ruler intersects, the line formerly drawn is the point where the degree
proposed is to be graduated.

Example.
Let it be required to find the point where 60 degrees. of the Curve is to be
graduated.

Arc proposed 60 degrees. Co-latitude 38: 28 98: 28 Sum 81: 32 Difference 21 32

Count 81 degrees. 32 in the upper line from O toward D, and from the point A draw
a line to it.

Count the difference 21 degrees 32 from O toward D, because the co-latitude
is less then the arc proposed, and lay a Ruler over it, and the point B, and
where it intersects the former line is the point where 60 degrees. of the Curve is
to be graduated on the lower side.

Another Example.
Let it be proposed to graduate the same way, The arc of 30 degr. 30 degr.
Co-latitude 38: 28 Sum 68: 28 Difference 8: 28

Count 68 degrees. 28 from O toward D, and from the point A draw a line to it.
Again in the said upper line, count 8 degrees. 28 upwards from O toward C, and
from the point B lay a ruler over it, and where it intersects the line last
drawn is the point where 30 d. of the curve is to be graduated. To graduate the
upper part of the curve requires no other directions, the same arkes serve, if
the account be but made the other way, and in accounting the sum the ruler
laid over B. in the lower line instead of A, and in counting the difference
over A, instead of B, neither is there any Scheme given hereof, the
Practitioner need only let the upper line be the line of altitudes on the left
edge of the quadrant continued out to 90 degrees. at each end, and to that end next
the Center set C, and to the other end D. So likewise let that end of the
Versed Scale next the right edge of the quadrant be continued to 180 degrees.
whereto set A, and at the other end B, and then if these directions be
observed, and the same distance and position of the lines retained, it will not
be difficult to constitute a Curve in all respects agreeing with that on the
fore-side of the quadrant.



Of the hour and Azimuth Scale on the right edge of the Quadrant.
THis Scale stands outwardmost on the right edge of the quadrant, and consists
of two lines, the one a line of 90 sines made equal to the cosine of the
Latitude, namely, to the sine of 38 degrees. 28, and continued the other way to 40
degrees. like a Versed sine.

The annexed line being the other part of this Scale, is a line of natural
Tangents beginning where the former sine began, the Tangent of 38 degrees. 28 being
made equal to the sine of 90 degrees. this Tangent is continued each way with the
sine; toward the Limb of the quadrant it should have been continued to 62
degrees. but that could not be without excursion, wherefore it is broken off at 40
degrees, and the residue of it graduated below, and next under the Versed sine
belonging to the Curve that runs cross the quadrant being continued but to
half the former Radius.

Of the Almanac.
NExt below the former line stands the Almanac in a regular ob-long with
months names graved on each side of it.

Below the Almanac stands the quadrat^, and shadows in two Arkes of circles
terminating against 45 degrees. of the Limb, below them a line of 90 sines in a
Circle equal to 51 degrees. 32 of the Limb broken off below the straight line, and
the rest continued above it.

Below these are put on in Circles a line of Tangents to 60 degrees.

Also a line of Secants to 60 degrees. with a line of lesser sines ending against
30 degrees. of the Limb (counted from the right edge) where the graduations of the
Secant begins.

Last of all the equal Limb.

Pricked with the pricks of the quadrat.

Abutting upon the line of sines, and within the Projection stands a portion of
a small sine numbered with its Complements beginning against 38 degrees. 28 of the
line of sines, this Scale is called the Scale of entrance. Upon the Projection
are placed diverse Stars, how they are inscribed shall be afterward shown.

The description of the Backside.
Put on in quarters or Quadrants of Circles.
1 THe equal Limb divided into degrees, as also into hours and halves, and
the quarters pricked to serve for a Nocturnal. 2 A line of Equal parts. 3 A line
of Superficies or Squares. 4 A line of Solids or Cubes. 5 A Tangent of 45
degrees double divided to serve for a Dyalling Tangent, and a Semitangent for
projections. 6 The line Sol, alias a line of Proportional Sines. 7 A Tangent of
51 degrees 32 through the whole Limb. 8 A line of Declinations for the Sun to
23 degrees. 31. Four quadrants with the days of the Month. 9 10 11 12
13 The Suns true place, with the Charecters of the 12 Seignes. 14 The line of
Segments, with a Chord before they begin. 15 The line of Metals and Equated
bodies. 16 The line of Quadrature. 17 The line of Inscribed bodies. 18 A line
of 12 hours of Ascension with Stars names, Declinations, and Ascensional
differences.
Above all these a Table to know the Epact, and what day of the Week, the
first day of March, happened upon, by Inspection continued to the year 1700.

All these between the Limb and the Center.
ON the right edge a line of equal parts from the Center decimally sub-divided,
being a line of 10 inches; also a Dyalling Tangent or Scale of 6 hours, the
whole length of the quadrant not issuing from the Center.

On the left edge a Tangent of 63 degrees. 26 from the Center.

Also a Scale of Latitudes fitted to the former Scale of hours not issuing
from the Center, and below it a small Chord.

The Uses of the Quadrant.
Lord's Day 1657 63 68 74 85 91 96 anno 25 1 26 3 4 11 6 epact Monday 58 69 75
80 86 97 anno 6 7 14 9 15 17 epact Tuesday 59 64 70 81 87 92 98 anno 17 12 18
20 26 22 28 epact Wenesday 65 71 76 82 93 99 anno 23 29 25 1 3 9 epact Thursday
60 66 77 83 88 94 anno 28 4 6 12 7 14 epact Friday 61 67 72 78 89 95 700 anno 9
15 11 17 18 25 20 epact Saturday 62 73 79 84 90 701 anno 20 22 28 23 29 1 epact

Days the same as the first of March.
March 1 8 15 22 29 November August 2 9 16 23 30 August May 3 10 17 24 31
Jnuary October 4 11 18 25 0 October April 5 12 19 26 00 July Septem. 6 13 20 27
00 December June 7 14 21 28 00 February

Perpetual Almanac.

Of the Uses of the Projection.
BEfore this Projection can be used, the Suns declination is required, and by
consequence the day of the month for the ready finding thereof there is
repeated the same table that stands on the Backside of this quadrant in each
ruled space, the uppermost figure signifies the year of the Lord, and the
column it is placed in shows upon what day of the Week the first day of
March happened upon in that year, and the undermost figure in the said ruled
space shows what was the Epact for that year and this continued to the year
1701 inclusive.

Example.
Looking for the year 1660 I find the figure 60 standing in Thursday Column,
whence I may conclude that the first day of March that year will be Thursday,
and under it stands 28 for the Epact that year.

Of the Almanac.
HAving as before found what day of the Week the first day of March happened
upon, repair to the Month you are in, and those figures that stand against it
shows you what days of the said month the Week day shall be, the same as it
was the first day of March.

Example For the year 1660, having found that the first day of March happened
upon a Thursday, look into the column against June, and February, you will
find that the 7th, 14th, 21th and 28th days of those Months were Thursdayes,
whence it might be concluded if need were that the quarter day or 24th day of
June that year happens on the Lords day.

Of the Epact.
THe Epact is a number carried on in account from year to year toward a new
change, and is 11 days, and some odd time besides, caused by reason of the
Moons motion, which changes 12 times in a year Solar, and runs also this 11
days more toward a new change, the use of it serves to find the Moons age,
and thereby the time of high Water.

To know the Moons age.
Add to the day of the Month the Epact, and so many days more, as are months
from March to the month you are in, including both months, the sum (if
less then 30) is the Moons age, if more, subtract 30; and the residue in the
Moons age (prope verum.)

Example.
The Epact for the year 1658 is 6, and let it be required to know the Moons age
the 28 of July, being the fifth month from March both inclusive

6 28 5 The sum of these three numbers is 39
Whence rejecting 30, the remainder is 9 for the Moons age sought.

The former Rule serves when the Month has 31 days, but if the Month has
but 30 Days or less, take away but 29 and the residue is her ages

To find the time of the Moons coming to South.
MUltiply the Moons age by 4, and divide by 5, the quotient shows it, every
Unit that remains is in value twelve minutes of time, and because when the
Moon is at the full, or 15 days, old she comes to South at the hour of 12 at
midnight, for ease in multiplication and Division when her age exceedes 15
days reject 15 from it.

Example,
So when the Moon is 8 days old, she comes to South at 24 minutes past six of
the clock, which being known, her rising or setting may be rudely guessed at
to be six hours more or less before her being South, and her setting as much
after, but in regard of the varying of her declination no general certain rule
for the memory can be given.

Here it may be noted that the first 15 days of the Moons age she comes to
the Meridian after the Sun, being to the Eastward of him, and the later 15
days, she comes to the Meridian before the Sun, being to the Westward of him.

To find the time of high Water.
TO the time of the Moons coming to South, add the time of high water on the
change day, proper to the place to which the question is suited, the sum
shows the time of high waters

For Example, There is added in a Table of the time of high Water at London,
which any one may cast up by memory according to these Rules, it is to be
noted, that Spring Tides, high winds, and the Moon in her quarters causes some
variation from the time here expressed.

Moons age Moon South Tide London Days. Ho. mi. Ho. Mi 0 15 12 -- 3 00 1 16
12: 48 3: 48 2 17 1: 36 4: 36 3 18 2: 24 5: 24 4 19 3: 12 6: 12 5 20 4 7 00 6
21 4: 48 7: 48 7 22 5: 36 8: 36 8 23 6: 24 9: 24 9 24 7: 12 10: 12 10 25 8: 00
11: 00 11 26 8: 48 11: 48 12 27 9: 36 12: 36 13 28 10: 24 1: 24 14 29 11: 12 2:
12

This Rule may in some measure satisfy and serve for vulgar use for such as
have occasion to go by water, and but that there was spare room to grave on
the Epacts nothing at all should have been said thereof.

A Table showing the hours and Minutes to be added to the time of the Moons
coming to South for the places following being the time of high Water on the
change day.
H. m. Quinborough, Southampton, Portsmouth, Isle of Wight, Beachie, the Spits,
Kentish Knock, half tide at Dunkirke. 00: 00 Rochester, Maulden, Aberdeen,
Redban, West end of the Nowre, Black tail. 00: 45 Gravesend, Downs, Rumney,
Silly half tide, Blackness, Ramkins, Semhead. 1: 30 Dundee, St. Andrews,
Lixborne, St. Lucas, Bell Isle; Holy Isle. 2: 15 London, Tinmouth, Hartlepoole,
Whitby, Amsterdam, Gascoigne, Britain, Galizia. 3: 00 Barwick, Flamborough
head, Bridlington bay, Ostend, Flushing, Bourdeaux, Fountnesse. 3: 45
Scarborough quarter tide, Lawrenas, Mountsbay, Severne, King sale, Corke-haven,
Baltamoor, Dungarvan, Calice, Creek, Bloy seven Isles. 4: 30 Falmouth, Foy,
Humber, Moonles, New Castle, Dartmouth, Torbay, Caldy Garnesey, St. Mallows,
Abrowrath, Lizard. 5: 15 Plymouth, Weymouth, Hull, Lin, Lundy, Antwerpe, Holmes
of Bristol, St. David's head, Concalo, Saint Malo. 6: 00 Bristol, foulnes at the
Start. 6: 45 Milford, Bridg-water, Exwater, Lands end, Waterford, Cape clear,
Abermorick Texel. 7: 20 Portland, Peterperpont, Harflew, Hague, St. Magnus
Sound, Dublin, Lambay, Mackuels Castle. 8: 15 Poole, S. Helen, Man Isle,
Catnes, Orkney, Fair Isles, Dunbar, Kildien, Basse Islands, the Casquers,
Deep at half tide. 9: Needles, Oxford, Laysto, South and North Fore-lands. 9:
45 Yarmouth, Dover, Harwich, in the frith Bullen, Saint John de luce, Calice
road. 10: 30 Rye, Winchelsea, Gorend, Rivers mouth of Thames, Fair Isle
Rhodes. 11: 15

To find the Epact for ever.
IN Order hereto, first, find out the Prime Number divide the year of the Lord
by 19 the residue after the Division is finished being augmented by an Unit is
the Prime sought, and if nothing remain the Prime is an Unit.

To find the Epact.
MUltiply the Prime by 11, the product is the Epact sought if less then 30,
but if it be more, the residue of the Product divided by 30 is the Epact
sought, there note that the Prime changes the first of January, and the Epact
the first of March.

Otherwise.
Having once obtained the Epact add 11 so it the Sum if less then 30 is the
Epact for the next year if more reject 30, and the residue is the Epact sought.

Caution.
When the Epact is found to be 29 for any year, the next year following it
will be 11 and not 10, as the Rule would suggest.

A Table of the Epacts belonging to the respective Primes.
Pr. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Ep. 11 22 3 14 25 6 17 28
9 20 1 12 23 4 15 26 7 18 29

The Prime number called the Golden Number, is the number of 19 years in which
space the Moon makes all variety of her changes, as if she change on a certain
day of the month on a certain year she shall not change the same day of the
month again till 19 years after: and then it does not happen upon the same
hour of the day, yet the difference does not cause one days variation in 300
years, as is observed by Mr. Philips.

The Uses of the Quadrant.
WIthout rectifying the Bead nothing can be performed by this Projection,
except finding the Suns Meridian Altitude being shown upon the Index, by the
intersection of the Parallel of declination therewith.

Also the time when the Sun will be due East or West.
TRace the Parallel of Declination to the right edge of the Projection, and the
hour it there intersects (in most cases to be duly estimated) shows the time
sought, thus when the Sun has 21 degrees. of North declination, we shall find that
he will be due East or West, about three quarters of an hour past 4 in the
afternoon, or a quarter past 7 in the morning. The declination is to be found
on the Backside of the quadrant by laying the thread over the day of the
month.

To rectify the Bead.
LAy the thread upon the graduated Index, and set the Bead to the observed or
given Altitude, and when the Altitude is nothing or when the Sun is in the
Horizon set the Bead to the Cipher on the graduated Index, which afterward
being carried without stretching to the parallel of Declination the thread in
the Limb shows the Amplitude or Azimuth, and the Bead amongst the hours
shows the true time of the day.

Example.
Upon the 24th of April the Suns declination will be found to 16 degrees. North.

Now to find his Amplitude and the time of his rising, laying the thread over
the graduated Index, set the Bead to the beginning of the graduations of the
Index, and bring it without stretching to the parallel of declination above
being 16 d* and the thread in the limb will lie over 26 degrees. 18 for the Suns
Amplitude or Coast of rising to the Northward of the East, and the Bead amongst
the hours shows 24 minutes past 4 for the time of Sun rising.

Which doubled gives the length of the night 8 hours 49 min.

In like manner the time of setting doubled gives the length of the day.

The same to find the hour and Azimuth let the given Altitude be 45 degrees.
HAving rectified the Bead to the said Altitude on the Index and brought it to
the intersect, the parallel of declination the thread lies over 50 degrees 48.

For the Suns Azimuth from the South.

And the Bead among the hours shows the time of the day to be 41 minutes past
9 in the morning, or 19 minutes past two in the afternoon.

Another Example wherein the operation will be upon the Reverted tail.
Let the altitude be 3 degrees. 30 And the declination 16 degrees. North as before.
TO know when to rectify the Bead to the upper or nether Altitude will be no
matter of difficulty, for if the Bead being set to the nether Altitude will
not meet with the parallel of declination, then set it to the upper Altitude,
and it will meet with Winter parallel of like declination, which in this case
supplies the turn.

So in this Example, the Bead being set to the upper Altitude of 3 degrees. 30 and
carried to the Winter parallel of declination.

The thread in the Limb will fall upon 68 degrees. 28 for the Suns Azimuth from
the North, and the Bead among the hours shows the time of the day to be
either 5 in the morning or 7 at night.

Another Example.
Admit the Sun have 20 degr. of North Declination (as about the 9th of May) and
his observed altitude were 56 degrees. 20 having rectified the Bead thereto, and
brought it to intersect the parallel of 20 degrees. among the hours it shows the
time of the day to be 11 in the morning or 1 in the afternoon, and the Azimuth
of the Sun to be 26 degrees. from the South

The Uses of the Projection.
TO find the Suns Altitude on all hours or Azimuths will be but the converse
of what is already said, therefore one Example shall serve.

When the Sun has 45 degrees. of Azimuth from the South.

And his Declination 13 degrees. Northwards.

Lay the thread over 45 degrees. in the Limb, and where the thread intersects the
Parallel of Declination thereto remove the Bead which carried to the Index
without stretching, shows 43 degrees. 50 for the Altitude sought.

Likewise to the same Declination if it were required to find the Suns Altitude
for the hours of 2 or 10.

Lay the thread over the intersection of the hour proposed with the parallel
of Declination, and thereto set the bead which carried to the Index shows the
Altitude sought namely 44 degrees. 31.

The same Altitude also belongs to that Azimuth the thread in the former
Position lay over in the Limb.

This Projection is of worst performance early in the morning or late in the
evening, about which time Mr. Daries Curve is of best performance whereto we
now address our selves.

Of the curved line and Scales thereto fitted.
This as we have said before was the ingenious invention of M. Michael Dary
derived from the proportionalty of two like equiangled plain Triangles
accommodated to the latitude of London, for the ready working of these two
Proportions.

1. For the Hour.
As the Cosine of the Latitude, is to the secant of the Declination, So is the
difference between the sine of the Suns proposed and Meridian Altitude. To the
versed sine of the hour from noone,
and the converse, and so is the sine of the Suns Meridian Altitude, to the
versed sine of the semidiurnal Arc.


2. For the Azimuth.
The Curve is fitted to find it from the South and not from the North, and the
Proportion wrought upon it will be.

As the cosine of the Latitude, is to the Secant of the Altitude. So is the
difference of the versed sines of the Suns (or Stars) distance from the
elevated Pole, and of the sum of the Complements both of the Latitude and
Altitude, to the versed sine of the Azimuth from the noon Meridian.


Which will not hold backward to find the Altitude on all Azimuths, because the
altitude is a term involved, both in the second and third terms of the former
proportion.

If the third term of the former Proportion had not been a difference of
Sines, or Versed sines, the Curved line would have been a straight-line, and
the third term always counted from one point, which though in the use it may
seem to be so here, yet in effect the third term for the hour is always
counted from the Meridian altitude.

Here observe that the thread lying over 12 or the end of the Versed Scale, and
over the Suns meridian altitude in the line of altitudes, it will also upon the
curve show the Suns declination, which by construction is so framed that if the
distance from that point to the meridian altitude, be made the cosine of
Latitude, the distance of the said point from the end of the versed Scale
numbered with 12 shall be the secant of the declination to the same Radius,
being both in one straight-line by the former constitution of the thread, and
instead of the thread you may imagine a line drawn over the quadrant, then by
placing the thread as hereafter directed it will with this line and the fitted
scales constitute two equiangled plain triangles, upon which basis the whole
work is built.

In the three first Proportions following relating to time, the Altitude must
always be counted upwards from O in the line of Altitude, and the Declination
in the Curve upwards in Summer, downwards in Winter.

1 To find the time of the Suns rising and setting by the Curve.
WE have before intimated that the suns Declination is to be found on the back
of the quadrant, having found it, lay one part of the thread over 0 degrees. in the
Line of Altitude, and extending it, lay the other part of it over the Suns
Declination counted from O in the Curve, and the thread upon the Versed scale
shows the time of Suns rising and setting, which being as much from six
toward noon in Winter as toward midnight in Summer, the quantity of
Declination supposed alike both ways on each side the Equinoctial, the thread
may be laid either way from O in the Curve to the Declination.

Example.
When the Sun has 20 degrees. of Declination, the thread being laid over 20 degrees.
in the Curve and O in the Altitude on the left edge shows that the Sun rises
sets 1 hour 49 before after six in the Summer and rises sets as much
after before six in the Winter.

2 The Altitude and Declination of the Sun being given to find the hour of the
day.
COunt the Altitude from O in the Scale of Altitudes toward the Center, and
thereto lay the thread, then count the Declination from O in the Curve, if
North upwards toward the Center, if South downwards toward the Limb.

And lay the thread extended over it, and in the Versed Scale it shows the
time of the day sought.

Example.
The Altitude being 24 d. 46 and the Declination 20 d. North counting that
upwards in the Scale of Altitudes, and this upward in the curve, and extending
the through thread, it will intersect the Versed Scale at 7 and 5, showing the
hour to be either 7 in the morning, or 5 in the afternoon.

Another Example for finding when twliight begins.
Let the Suns Declination be 13 degrees. North, the Depression supposed 18 degr.
under the Horizon.

In stead of the case propounded, suppose the Sun to have 13 degrees. of South
Declination, and Altitude 18 degrees. above the Horizon accordingly extending the
thread through 18 in the Altitudes counted upward from O in the line of
Altitudes and through 13 degrees. counted downward in the Curve from O, and upon
the Versed Scale, the thread will show that the Twilight begins at 28 minutes
past 2 in the morning, and at 32 min. past 9 at night.

3 The Converse of the last Proposition is to find the Suns altitudes on all
hours.
EXtend the thread over the hour proposed in the versed Scale and also over
the Declination in the Curve counted upward if North, downward if South.

And in the Scale of Altitudes it shows the Altitude sought.

Example.
If the Sun have 13 degrees. of North Declination his Altitude for the hour of 7
in the morning, or 5 in the afternoon will be found to be 19 degrees. 27.

In the following Propositions the altitude must always be counted from O in
the Curve downwards, and the Declination in the line of altitudes, if North
downward, if South upwards.

4 To find the Suns Amplitude or coast of rising and setting.
Example.

If the Sun had 20 degrees. of Declination the thread being laid to O in the Curve,
and to 20 in the line of altitudes or Declinations, either upwards or downwards
the thread will lie 33 degrees. 21 from 90 in the Versed Scale, for the quantity of
the Suns Coast of rising or setting from the true East or West in Winter
Southward, in Summer Norhward.

5 The Suns altitude and Declination being proposed to find his Azimuth.
COunt the altitude from O in the Curve downward, and the declination in the
Winter upon the line of Declinations from O upwards, in Summer downwards, and
the thread extended shows the Azimuth sought, on the Versed Scale.

Example.
So when the Sun has 18 degrees. 37 of North Declination, as as about 19 July, if
his altitude were 39 degrees. the Suns Azimuth would be found to be 69 degrees. from
the South.

6 The Converse of the former Proposition will be to find the Suns Altitude on
all Azimuths.
THe Instrument will perform this Proposition though the Porportion for finding
the Azimuth cannot be inverted.

Lay the thread to the azimuth in the Versed Scale, and to the Declination in
the Scale on the left edge, and upon the Curve it will intersect the altitude
sought.

Example.
If the Sun had 16 degrees. 13 of South Declination, as about the 27th of October,
if his Azimuth were 39 degrees. from the South the altitude agreeable thereto would
be found to be 14 degrees.

These Uses being understood* if the hour and altitude or the azimuth and
altitude were given to find the Declination, the manner of performance cannot
lurk.

Of the Hour and Azimuth Scale on the right Edge of the Quadrant.
THis Scale being added by my self, and derived from Proportions in the
Analemma, I shall first lay them down, and then apply them.



In the former Scheme draw F C V the Horizon, Z C the Axis of the Horizon, C P
the axis of the Sphere G C continued to N the Equator, O L a parallel of
North, and E I a parallel of South Declination, W X a parallel of winter
altitude, S L a parallel of altitude less then the Complement of the latitude,
N Z P a parallel of greater altitude, and from the points E and B. let fall the
perpendiculars E F and B H, and from the points B G and N let fall the
perpendiculars B G, G M, and N O which will be the sines of the Suns
declination, by this means there will be diverse right lined right angled
plain Triangles constituted from whence are educed, the Proportions following
to calculate the Suns hour or Azimuth.

Note, first, that T V is the Versed sine of the Semidiurnal arc in Summer,
and E I in Winter, and Y V the sine of the hour of rising before six in
Summer, equal to the distance of I from the Axis continued in Winter, which may
be found in the Triangle C Y V, but the Proportion is. As the Cotangent of the
latitude, To Radius. So the Tangent of the Suns Declination, To the sine of his
ascentional difference, being the time of his rising from six,
thus we may attain the Semidiurnal arc.

Then for the hour in the Triangle B H I it holds. As the Cosine of the
latitude, to the sine of the altitude. So is the Secant of the Declination. To
the difference of the Versed sines of the Semidiurnals arc, and of the hour
sought.


In the Triangle B H I it leys. As the Cosine of the Latitude the sine of the
angle at I. To its opposite side B H the sine of the altitude. So is the Radius
or the angle at H. To B I h difference of the Versed sine of the Semidiurnal
arc, and of the hour sought,
in the parallel of declination and by consequence, so is the secant of the
Declination, to the said difference in the Common Radius as we have else where
noted, if this difference be subtracted from the Versed sine of the semidiurnal
arc there will remain E B the versed sine of the hour from noon, the like
holds, if perpendiculars be let fall from any other parallel of Declination,
from the same Scheme it also follows. As the Cosine of the Latitude, Is to the
secant of the Declination. So is the sine of the Meridian Altitude. To the
versed sine of the semidiurnal arc.
Here observe the like Proportion between the two latter terms, as between the
two former which may be of use on a Sector.

If the Scheme be considered not as fitted to a peculiar question for finding
the hour, but as having three sides to find an angle, it will be found upon
such a consideration in relation to the change of sides, that the Proportion
for the Azimuth following is no other then the same Proportion applied, to
other sides of the Triangle, and so we need have no other trouble to come by a
Proportion for the Azimuth, but it also follows from the same Scheme.

In the Triangles C D A and C K G, and C Z N the first operation will be to
find A D, and G K, and N ^ in all which the Proportion will hold. As the Radius
to the Tangent of the Latitude.
Or as the Cotangent of the Latitude to Radius. So is the Tangent of the
Altitude, to the said respective quantities,
which when the Altitude is less then the Complement of the Latitude, are the
sins of the Suns Azimuth from the Vertical belonging to the proposed Altitudes
when the Sun is in the Equinoctial, or has no declination.

The next proportion will be.
As the Cosine of the Latitude, Is to the Secant of the Altitude. So is the
Sine of the declination. To the difference sought being a 4 Proportional.
Hereby we may find A B in the Winter Triangle A G B which added to A D, the
sum is the sine of the Azimuth from the Vertical consequently W B, is the
Versed sine of the Azimuth, from the noon Meridian.

Also we find G L in the Summer triangle L M G, when the Altitude is less then
the Complement of the Latitude, which added to S G the sum S L is the Versed
sine of the Azimuth from the South.

Likewise we may find N R in the Triangle R O N, and by subtracting it from N
Z, there will remain R Z, and consequently Q R the versed sine of the Azimuth
from the Meridian in Summer when the Altitude is greater then the Co-latitude.

And for Stars that come to the Meridian between the Zenith, and the Elevated
Pole, we may find N c, in the Triangle N c d where it holds, as the sine of the
Angle at N, the complement of the Latitude, to its opposite sides c d, the
pricked line, the sine of the Declination: so is the Radius to N c, the parallel
of altitude the Azimuth sought.

The latter Proportion lies so evident, it need not be spoken to, if what was
said before for the hour be regarded, and the former Proportion lies. As the
Cosine of the Latitude, the sine of the Angle at A. To its Opposite side D C,
the sine of the altitude. So is the sine of the Latitude, the angle at C. To
its opposite side A D in the parallel of altitude.


And in stead of the Cosine, and sine of the Latitude.

We may take the Radius, and the Tangent of the Latitude.

Another Analogy will be required to reduce it to the common Radius.
As the Cosine of the Altitude to Radius. So the fourth before found in a
parallel. To the like quantity to the Common Radius.
These Analogies or Proportions being reduced into one, by multiplying the
terms of each Proportion, and then freed from needless affection will produce
the Proportion at first delivered.

The Uses of the said Scale.
WE have before noted, that if two terms of a Proportion be fixed, and
natural lines thereto fitted of an equal length, that if any third term be
sought in the former line, the fourth term will be found in the other line by
inspection, as standing against the third.

So here, in this Scale which consists of two lines, the one an annexed
Tangent, the other a line of Sines continued both Ways, the Radius of the
Sines being first fittted, the Tangent annexed must be of such a Radius, as
that 38 degrees. 28, of it may be equal in length to the Radius of the Sine to
which it is adjoined, and then looking for the Declination in the Tangent just
against it stands the time of rising, from six or ascentional difference, or
the Semidiurnal arc, if the same be accounted from the other end as a Versed
Sine.

So if the Suns Altitude be given, and accounted in the Tangent, just against
it stands the Suns Azimuth, when he is in the Equinoctial upon the like
altitude, and thus the point N will be found in the Tangent at the altitude,
when it is more then the Colatitude.

1 An Example for finding the time of the Sun rising.
If the Declination be 13 degrees. look for it in the annexed Tangent, and just
against it in the hour Scale stands 16 degrees. 53 the ascentional difference in
time 1 hour 7 min. showing that the Sun rises so much before, and sets so
much after 6 in Summer, and in Winter rises so much after, and sets before
6, for this arc may be found on either side of six where the declination
begins each way.

2 To find the time of the day.
To perform this Proposition we divide the other Proportion into two, by
introducing the Radius in the Middle. As the Radius is to the Secant of the
Declination. So is the sine of the altitude to a fourth.


Again. As the Cosine of the Latitude to Radius. So the fourth before found. To
the difference of the Versed Sines of the Semidiurnal arc, and of the hour
sought.


The former of these Proportions must be wrought upon the quadrant, the latter
is removed by fitting the Radius of the Sines that gives the answer, equal in
length to the Cosine of the latitude.

Wherefore to find the time of the day, lay the thread to the Secant of the
declination in the limb, and from the sine of the altitude take the nearest
distance to it, and because the Secant is made, but to half the Common Radius,
set down one foot of this extent at the Declination in the annexed Tangent,
and enter the said extent twice forward, and it will show the time of the Day.

Example.
Let the Declination be supposed 23 degrees. 31 North, and the Altitude 38 degrees. 59
the nearest distance from the Sine thereof, to the thread laid over the Secant
of 3^ degrees. 31 will reach being turned twice over from 3^ d. 31 in the annexed
Tangent nearest the Center to 33 degrees. 45 in the Sines, alias to 56 d. 15
counted as a Versed Sine showing the time of the day to be a quarter past 8 in
the morning, or three quarters past three in the afternoon.

3 To find the Suns Altitude on all hours.
Take the distance between the hour and the Declination in the fitted Scale,
and enter it down, the line of Sines from the Center, then laying the thread
over the Cosine of the Declination in the Limb, the nearest distance to it
shall be the sine of the Altitude sought.

Example.
Thus whee the Sun has 13 degrees. of South Declination, count it in that part of
the annexed Tangent nearest the Limb, if then it were required to find the
Suns Altit. for the hours of 10 or 2 by the former Prescriptions the Altitude
would be found 10 d. 25

4 To find the Suns Amplitude.
Take the Sine of the Declination from the line of the Sines, and apply it to
the fitted Scale where the annexed Tangent begins, and either way it will reach
to the Sine of the Amplitude.

Example.
So when the Sun has 15 degrees: of Declination his Amplitude will be found to be
24 degrees. 35.

5 To find the Azimuth or true Coast of the Sun.
Here we likewise introduce the Radius in the latter Proportion.

1 In Winter lay the thread to the Secant of the Altitude in the Limb, and
from the sine of the Declination, take the nearest distance to it, the said
extent enter twice forward from the Altitude in the annexed Tangent, and it
will reach to the Versed Sine of the Azimuth from the South.

Example.
So when the Sun has 15 degrees. of South Declination, if his Altitude be 15 degrees.
the nearest distance from the sine thereof to the thread laid over the Secant
of 15 degrees, shall reach in the fitted Scale from the annexed Tangent of 15
degrees. being twice repeated forward to the Versed sine of 39 degrees. 50 for the Suns
Azimuth from the South.

2 In Summer when the Altitude is less then 40 degrees. enter the former extent
from the sine of the Declination to the thread laid over the Secant of the
Altitude twice backward from the Altitude in the annexed Tangent, and it will
reach to the Versed sine of the Azimuth from the South.

Example.
So if the Sun have 15 degrees. of North Declination, and his Altitude be 30 degrees.
the prescribed extent doubled shall reach from the annexed Tangent of 30 degrees.
to the Versed sine of 75 degrees. 44 for the Suns Azimuth from the South.

3 In Summer when the Altitude is more then 40 degrees. and less then 60 degrees.
apply the extent from the sine of the Declination to the thread, laid over the
Secant of the Altitude once to the Discontinued Tangent placed a Cross the
quadrant from the Altitude backwards minding how far it reaches, just against
the like arc in the annexed Tangent stands the Versed sine of the Azimuth from
the South.

4 When the Altitude is more then 60 degrees. this fitted Scale is of worst
performance, however the defect of the Secant might be supplied by Varying the
Proportion.

6 To find the Suns Altitude on all Azimuths.
JUst against the Azimuth proposed stands the Suns altitude in the Equator
suitable thereto, which was the first Arc found by Calculation when we treated
of this subject, and the second arc is to be found by a Proportion in sines
wrought upon the quadrant.

This quadrant is also particularly fitted for giving the hour, and Azimuth in
the equal limb.

The sine of 90 degrees. made equal to the sine if 51 degrees. 32 gives the altitude of
the Sun or Stars at six, for if the thread be laid over the Declination counted
in the said sine, it shows the Altitude sought in the limb, so when the Sun
has 13 degrees. of Declination his Altitude or Depression at 6 is 10 degrees. 9.

It also gives the Vertical Altitude if the Declination be counted in the
limb, seek what arc it cuts in that particular sine, when the Sun has 13
degrees. of Declination, his Vertical Altitude or Depression is 16 degrees. 42.

To find the hour of the Day.
HAving found the Altitude of the Sun or Stars at six, take the distance
between the sine thereof in the line Sines, and the Altitude given, and entering
one foot of that extent at the Declination in the Scale of entrance laying the
thread to the other foot according to nearest distance, it will show the hour
from six in the limb.

Example.
When the Sun has 13 degrees. of Declination his Altitude, or Depression at six
will be 10 degrees. 9 if the Declination be North, and the Altitude of the Sun be
24 degrees. 5 the time of the day will be half an hour past 7 in the morning, or
as much past 4 in the afternoon.

In winter when the Sun has South Declination as also for such Stars as have
South Declination, the sine of their Altitude must be added to the sine of
their Depression at six, and that whole extent entered as before.

When the Sun has the same South Declination, if his Altitude be 11 degrees. 7 the
time of the day will be half an hour past 8 in the morning, or 30 min. past 3
in the afternoon.

To find the Azimuth of the Sun or Stars.
LAy the thread over their Altitude in the particular sine fitted to the
Latitude, and in the equal Limb it shows a fourth Arc.

When the Declination is North, take the distance in the line of Sines between
that fourth Arc and the Declination, and enter one foot of that extent at the
Altitude in the Scale of entrance, laying the thread to the other foot, and in
the equal Limb it shows the Azimuth from the East or West.

Example.
When the Altitude is 44 degrees. 39 the Arch found in the equal Limb will be 33
degrees. 20 then if the Declination be 23 degrees 31 North, the distance in the line of
sines between it and the said Arc being entered at 44 degrees. 39 in the Scale of
entrance the thread being laid to the other foot will show the Azimuth to be 20
degrees. from the East or West.

But if the Declination be South, add with your Compasses the sine thereof to
the sine of the fourth Arc, and enter that whole extent as before, and the
thread will show the Azimuth in the equal limb.

Example. When the Altitude is 12d. 13 the fourth Arch will be found to be 9
degrees 32 minutes, then admit the Declination to be 13 degrees South, whereto
adding the Sine of the fourth Arc, the whole will be equal to the sine of 22
degrees. 41 minutes, and this whole extent being entered at 12 degrees. 13 in the Scale
of entrance lay the thread to the other foot according to nearest distance, and
it will intersect the equal. Limb at 40 degrees. and so much is the Suns Azimuth
from the East or West.

Because the Scale of entrance could not be continued by reason of the
Projection, the residue of it is put on an little Line near the Amanack the
use whereof is to lay the thread to the Altitude in it when the Azimuth is
sought, and in the Limb it shows at what Arc of the Sines the point of
entrance will happen which may likewise be found by pricking down the
Co-altitude on the line of Sines out of the fitted hour Scale on the right
edge.

How to find the hour and Azimuth generally in the equal limb either with or
without Tangents or Secants has been also showed, and how that those two
points for any Latitude might be there pricked and might be taken off, either
from the Limb, or from a line of Sines, or best of all by Tables, for half
the natural Tangent of the Latitude of London, is equal to the sine of (...) 39
degrees. And half the Secant thereof equal to the sine of (...) 53d. 30 Against
which Arkes of the Limb the Tangent and Secant of the Latitude are graduated,
but of this enough has been said in the Description of the small quadrant.

Of the Quadrat and Shadows.
THe use thereof is the same as in the small quadrant only if the thread hang
over any degree of the Limb less then 45d. to take out the Tangent thereof out
of the quadrat count the Arch from the right edge of the quadrant toward the
left, and lay the thread over it, the pricks are repeated in the Limb to save
this trouble for those eminent parts.

Of the equal Limb.
WE have before showed that a Sine, Tangent and Secant may be taken off from
it, and that having a Sine or Secant with the Radius thereof the correspondent
Arc thereto might be found, and that a Chord might be taken off from
Concentrick Circles or by help of a Bead, but if both be wanting enter the
Semidiameter or Radius whereto you would take out a Chord twice down the right
edge from the Center, and laying the thread over half the and laying the
thread over half the Arch proposed, take the nearest distance to it, and thus
may a chord be taken out to any number of degrees less then a Semicircle.

It has been asserted also that the hour and Azimuth might be found generally
without Protraction by the sole help of the Limb with Compasses and a thread.

Example for finding the hour.
THe first work will be to find the point of entrance take out the Cosine of
the Latitude by taking the nearest distance to the thread laid over the said
Arc from the concurrence of the Limb with the right edge, and enter it down
the right edge line and take the nearest distance to the thread laid over the
complement of the Declination counted from the right edge, this extent entered
down the right edge finds the point of entrance, let it be noted with a mark.
Next to find the sine point take out the sine of the Declin. and enter it dowh
the right edge, and from the point of termination, take the nearest distance to
the thread laid over the ark of the Latit. counted from the right edge, this
extent enter from the Center and it finds the sine point, let it be noted with
a mark.

Thirdly, take out the sine of the Altitude and in Winter add it in lenght to
the sine point, in Summer enter it from the Center and take the distance
between it and the sine point which extent entered upon the point of entrance,
if the thread be laid to the other foot shows the the hour from 6 in the
equal limb before or after it, as the Sine of the Altitude fell short or beyond
the sine point.

Example. In the latitude of 39 d. the Sun having 23d. 31 of North Declination,
and Altitude 51 degrees. 32 the hour will be found to be 33 degrees. 45 from six
toward noon.

Note the point of entrance and sine point Vary not, till the Declination Vary.

After the same manner may the Azimuth be found in the limb, by proportions
delivered in the other great quadrant. Also both or any angle when three sides
are given may be found by the last general Proportion in the small quadrant
which finds the half Versed sine of the Arc fought, which would be too
tedious to insist upon and are more proper to be Protracted with a line of
Chords.

To find the Azimuth universally.
THe Proportion used on the small quadrant for finding it in the equal limb
(wherein the first Operation for the Vertical Altitude was fixed for one day,)
by reason of its Excursions will not serve on a quadrant, for the Sun or Stars
when they come to the Meridian between the Zenith and the elevated Pole, but
the Proportion there used for finding the hour applied to other sides will
serve for the Azimuth Universally, and that is As the Radius, Is to the sine of
the Latitude, So is the sine of the Altitude, To a fourth sine.


Again. As the Cosine of the Altitude, Is the Secant of the Latitude.
Or, As the Cosine of the Latitude, Is the Secant of the Altitude. So In
Declinations toward the Elevated Pole is the difference, but toward the
Depressed Pole the sum of the fourth sine, and of the sine sine of the
Declination. To the sine of the Azimuth from the Vertical.


In Declinations toward the Depressed Pole, the Azimuth is always obtuse,
toward the elevated Pole if the Declination be more then the fourth Arch it is
acute, if less obtuse.

Example for the Latitude of the Barbados 13 degrees.
Altitude 27 degrees. 27.

Declination 20 degrees. North.

Lay the thread to 27 degrees. 27 in the Limb, and from the sine of 13 degrees. tahe
nearest distance to it which enter on the line of Sines from the Center, and
take the distance between the limited point, and the sine of 20 degrees. the
Declination, this latter extent enter twice down the line of the Sines from
the Center, and take the nearest distance to the thread laid over the Secant of
27 degrees. 27 this extent enter at the sine of 77 degrees. the Complement of the
Latitude, and laying the thread to the other foot it will lie over 16 degrees. in
the equal Limb, the Suns Azimuth to the Northwards of the East or West.

Otherways.
Another Example for the same Latitude and Declination, the Altitude being 52
degrees. 27 lay the thread to it in the Limb, and take the nearest distance to it
from the sine of 13 degrees. as before, and enter it down the line of sines from
the Center, and from the point of the limitation take the distance to the sine
of 20 degrees. the Suns Declination, this latter extent enter once down the line
of sines from the Center, and take the nearest distance to the Thread laid over
the Secant of the Altitude 52 degrees. 27 then lay the thread to 77 degrees. the
Complement of the Latitude in the lesser sines, and enter the former extent
between the Scale and the thread, and the foot of the Compasses shows 16 degrees.
as before, for the Suns Azimuth to the Northward of the Vertical, that the Sun
may have the same Azimuth, upon two several Altitudes has been spoken to
before, and how to do this without Secants has been shown.

Two sides with the Angle comprehended to find the third side.
Diverse ways have been showed for doing of this before, I shall add one more
requiring no Versed sines nor Tangents.

1 If both the sides be lesser then quadrants, and the Angle at liberty.

Or,

2 If one of the sides be greater then a quadrant, and the Angle included
acute, it will hold.

As the Radius, To the Cosine of one of the including sines. So is the Cosine
of the other, To a fourth sine.


Again. As the Cosecant of one of the including Sides ^ is the Sine of the
other, So is the Cosine of the angle included, To a seventh Sine.


The difference between the fourth and the seventh Sine, is the Cosine of the
Side sought.

1 In the first case if the angle given be obtuse, and the seventh Sine greater
then the fourth Sine, the Side sought is greater then a quadrant in other cases
less.

If in the second case the seventh Sine be less then the fourth, the side
sought is greater then a quadrant in other cases less.

In this second case when one of the includers is greater then a quadrant, and
the angle obtuse resolve the opposite Triangle by the former Rules, or the
sum of the fourth and seventh Sine shall be the Cosine of the side sought in
this case greater then a quadrant. We have before noted that the Cosine of an
Arc greater then a quadrant is the Sine of that Arkes excess above 90 degrees.
this no other then the converse of the Proportion for the hour demonstrated
from the Analemma, in the Triangle O Z P.



Let there be given the Sides O P 113 degrees. 31 the side Z P 38 degrees. 28 and the
angle comprehended Z P O 75 to find the Side O Z.

Operation.
Lay the thread to 51 degrees. 32 in the Limb, and from 13 degrees. 31 in the Sines
take the nearest distance to it which measured from the Center will reach to
the sine of 18 degrees. 12 minutes the fourth Sine.

Again, laying the thread to 23 degrees. 31 in the Limb, from the Sine of 15 degrees.
take the nearest distance to it, then lay the thread to the Secant of 51 degrees.
32 and enter the said extent between the Scale and the thread, the distance
between the resting foot, and the Sine of 18 degrees. 12 minutes before found
measured from the Center is equal to the Sine of 9 degrees. 32 being the Cosine of
the side sought which in this instance because the seventh Sine is less then
the fourth sine is greater then a quadrant, and consequently must have 90 degrees.
added thereto, therefore the side O Z is 99 degrees. 28 minutes if the question had
been put in this Latitude what depression the Sun should have had under the
Horizon at the hours of 5 or 7 in the Winter Tropic it would have been found
9 degrees. 28 and this is such a Triangle as has but one obtuse Angle yet two
sides greater then quadrants, and how to shun a Secant, and a parallel
entrance has been showed els-where.

Of the Stars on the Projection, and in other places of the fore-side of the
quadrant.
SUch only are placed on the Projection as fall between the Tropicks being put
an according to their true Declinations, and in that respect might have stood
any where in the parallel of Declination, but in regard we shall also find the
time of the night by them with Compasses, they are also put on in a certain
Angle from the right edge of the quadrant, to find the quantity of the Angle
for Stars of Northerly declination, get the difference of the Sines of the
Stars Altitude six hours from the Meridian, and of its Meridian Altitude, and
find to the Sine of what Arch the said difference is equal, against that Arch
in the Limb, let the Star be graduated in its proper declination, but for
Stars of Southwardly Declination, get the sum of the Sines of their
Depression at six and of their Meridian Altitude, and find what Arc in the
Sines corresponds thereto as before.

We have put on no Stars of Southwardly Declination that will fall beyond the
Winter Tropic, but some of Northerly Declination falling without the Summer
Tropic, are put on that are placed without the Projection toward the Limb.

All these Stars must be graduated against the line of Sines at their
respective Altitudes or Depressions at the Stars hour of Six from the
Meridian, and must have the same letter set to them in both places, as also
upon the quadrant of 12 hours of Ascension on the Backside where they are put
on according to their true Ascension with their Declinations and Ascensional
differences graved against them with the former Letter, and such of them as
have more then 12 hours of right Ascension have the Character plus affixed,
denoting that if there be 12 hours of Ascension added to that Ascension they
stand against, the sum is their whole true right Ascension.

To find the quantity of a Stars hour from the Meridian by the Projection.
SEt the Bead upon the Index of Altitude to the Stars observed Altitude, and
bring it to the parallel of Declination the Star is graved in, so will it show
among the hour lines, that Stars hour from the Meridian, and the thread in
the Limb will show the Stars Azimuth.

Example.
Admit the Altitude of Arcturus be 52 degrees. the hour of that Star from
midnight, if the Altitude increase will be 7 past 10 fere, and the Azimuth of
that Star will be 47 degrees. 43 to the Eastwards of the South.

The hour and Azimuth of any Star within the Tropicks, may be also found by
the fitted Scale on the right edge of the quadrant, or by the Curve, after the
same manner as for the Sun, using the Stars Declination as was done for the
Suns, or in the equal limb as we showed for the Sun, which may well serve for
most of the Stars in the Hemisphere.

Otherwise with Compasses according to the late suggested placing of them.

To find the hour of any Star from the Meridian that has North Declination.
TAke the distance between the Star point in the line of Sines, and its
observed Altitude, and laying the thread over the Star where it is graved on or
below the Projection, enter the former extent paralelly between the thread and
the Scale, and it shows the Stars hour from six in the sines toward noone,
if the Altitude fell beyond the Star point, otherwise toward midnight.

Example.
For the Goat Star let its Altitude be 40 degrees. and past the Meridian, the hour
of that Star will be 44 from six, for the Compasses fall upon the sine of 11
degrees. 4 the hour is toward noon Meridian, because the Altitude is greater then
34 degrees. the point where the Star is graved, the thread lying over the Star
intersects, the Limb at 25 degrees. 47 if the distance between the Star, and its
Altitude be entered at the sine of that Arc, and the thread laid to the other
foot, the hour will be found in the equal Limb the same as before.

For Stars of Southwardly Declination.
BEcause the Star point cannot fall the other way beyond the Center of the
quadrant, therefore the distance between the Star point, and the Center must be
increasing by adding the sine of the Stars Altitude thereto, which will fall
more outward toward the Limb, and then that whole extent is to be entered as
before.

Example.
The Virgins Spike has 9 degrees 19 of South Declination the Depression of that
Star at six will be found by help of the particular sine to be 7 degrees. 17 and at
that Arc in the sines the Star is graved, if the Altitude of that Star were 20
degrees. the sine thereof added to the Star will be equal to the sine of 29 degrees. 6
this whole extent entered at the sine of 37 degrees. 52 the Arc of the Limb
against which the Star is graved, and the thread laid to the other foot, the
hour of that Star if the Altitude increase will be 19 past 9.

To find the true time of the right.
THis must be done by turning the Stars hour into the Suns hour or common
time, either by the Pen as has been showed before, which may be also
conveniently performed by the back of this quadrant, for the thread lying over
the day of the month shows the Complement of the Suns Ascension in the Limb.

Or with Compasses on the said quadrant of Ascensions.
THe thread lying over the day of the month, take the distance between it and
the Star on the said quadrant, the said extent being applied, the same way as
it was taken the Suns foot to the Stars hour shall reach from the Stars hour
to the true hour of the night, and if one of the feet of the Compasses fall
off the quadrant, a double remedy is els-where prescribed.

Example.
If on the 12th of January the hour of the Goat Star was 16 past 5 from the
Meridian, the true time sought would be 49 past 1 in the morning.

Example.
If upon the third of January, the hour of the Virgins Spike, were observed to
be 19 past 9, the true time sought would be 45 past 2 in the morning.

To find the time of a Stars rising and setting.
THe Ascentional difference is graved against the Star, the Virgins Spike has
48 of Ascentional difference, that is to say, that Stars hour of rising is at
48 past 6, and setting at 12 past 5, And the true time of that Stars rising
upon the third of January, will be at 22 past 10 at night, and of its setting
at 47 past 8 in the morning, found by the former directions.

Of the rest of the lines on the back of this quadrant.
THey are either such as relate to the motion of the Sun or Stars, or to
Dialling, or such as are derived from Mr Gunters Sector.

The Tangent of 51 degrees. 32 put through the whole Limb is peculiarly fitted to
the Latitude of London, and will serve to find the time when the Sun will be
East or West, as also for any of the Stars that have less Declination then the
place has Latitude.

Lay the thread to the Declination counted in the said Tangent, and in the
Limb it shows the hour from 6 if reckoned from the right edge.

Example.
When the Sun has 15 degrees. of North Declination the time of his being East or
West will be 12 degrees. 17 in time about 49 before or after six, fere.

The Suns place is given in the Ecliptic line by laying the thread over the
day of the month in the quadrant of Ascensions, of which see page 16 and 17 of
the small quadrant.

Of the lines relating to Dialling.
SUch are the Line of Latitudes, and Scale of hours, of which before, and the
line Sol in the Limb, of which I shall say nothing at present, it is only
placed there in readiness to take off any Arc from it, according to the
accustomed manner of taking off lines from the Limb to any assigned Radius.

The requisite Arkes of an upright Decliner will be given by the particular
lines on the Quadrant for the Latitude without the trouble of Proportional
work.
1 The substiles distance from the Meridian.
ACcount the Plains declination as a sine in the fitted hour Scale on the
right edge of the fore-side, and just against it in the annexed Tangent, stands
the substiles distance from the meridian.

If an upright Plain decline 30 degrees. the substiles distance will be 21 degrees. 41
minutes.

2 The Styles height.
Count the Complement of the Plains Declination in the said fitted hour scale
as a sine and apply it with Compasses to the line of sines issuing from the
Center, for the former Plain the styles height will be found 32 degrees. 37.

3 The Inclination of Meridians.
Account the stilts height in the annexed tangent of the fitted hour Scale, and
just against it in the sine stands the Complement of the Inclination of
meridians which for the former plain will be found to be 36 degrees. 25

4 The Angle of 12 and 6.
Account the Plains Declination in the Limb on the Backside from the right
edge, and lay the thread over it, and in the particular Tangent it shows the
Angle between the Horizon and six 32 degrees. 9 in this Example the Complement
whereof is the Angle of 12 and 6, namely 57 degrees. 51 min.

Also the requisite Arkes of a direct East or West, reclining or inclining Dial
may be found after the same manner for this Latit.
1 The substiles distance.
ACcount the Plains Reinclination in the Limb on the Backside from the left
edge, and in there lay the thread, and in the particular Tangent it shows the
Arc sought.

So if an East or West plain recline or incline 60 degrees. the substiles distance
will be found to be 32 degrees. 12.

2 The styles height.
Account the Reinclination in the particular Sine on the foreside and in the
Limb it shows the styles height, which for the former Example will be found
to be 42 degrees. 41.

3 The inclination of Meridians.
The Proportion is, As the Sine of the Latitude, to Radius.

So is the sine of the substiles distance.

To the sine of the inclination of Meridians, when the substiles distance is
less then the Latitude of the place it may be found in the particular sine on
the foreside, by the intersection of the thread, and for this Example will be
42 degrees. 53.

4 The Angle of 12 and 6.
Account the Complement of the Reinclination in the peculiar hour Scale as a
sine, and just against it in the annexed Tangent stands the Complement of the
Angle sought, in this Example the Angle of 12 and 6 is 68 degrees. 20.

In other Latitudes the Operations must be performed by Proportional work with
the Compasses.

Of the Lines derived from Mr. Gunters Sector.
Such are the Lines of superficies Solids, etc.

Of the Line of Superficies or Squares.
THe chief uses of this Line jointly with the Line of Lines in the Limb, is
when a square number is given to find the Root thereof, or a Root given to find
the square number thereto, these Lines placed on a quadrant will perform this
some what better then a Sector, because it is given by the Intersection of the
thread without Compasses, the properties of the quadrant casting these lines
large where on a Sector they would be narrow.

To find the square Root of a number.
The Root being given to find the Square Number of that Root.
IN extracting the square Root pricks must be set under the first third, fifth,
and seventh figure, and so forward and as many pricks as fall to be under the
square number given, so many figures shall be in the Root, and accordingly the
line of lines, and superficies must vary in the number they represent, I am
very unwilling to spend any time about these kind of Lines, as being of small
performance, and by my self and almost by all men accounted mere toys.

If a number be given in the superficies, the thread in the lines shows the
Root of it, and the contrary, if a number be given in the lines the thread laid
over it intersects the Square thereof.

The performance thereof by these lines is so deficient that I shall give no
Example of it.

When a number is given to find the square thereof, if not to large the Reader
may correct the last figure of it by multiplying it in his memory.

To three numbers given to find a fourth in a Duplicated Proportion.
That is to work a Proportion between Numbers and Squares.

Example.
If the Diameter of a Circle whose Area is 154 be 14, what shall the Diameter
of that Circle be whose Area is 616.

Example.
Lay the thread over 616 in the superficies, and from 14 in the equal parts,
take the nearest distance to it, then lay the thread to 154 in the superficies,
and enter the former extent between the thread and the Scale, and the foot of
the Compasses will rest upon 28 the diameter sought.

To find a Proportion between two or more like superficies.
ADmit there be two Circles, and I would know what Proportion their Areas bear
to each other, in this case the proper use of a Line of superficies would be to
have it on a ruler, and to measure the lengths of their like sides, for Circles
the lengths of their Diameters upon it, and then I say, the numbers found on
the superficies bear such Proportion each to other as the Areas or superficial
contents, and for small quantities may be done on the quadrant by entering down
the larger extent of the Compasses on the Line of Lines from the Center, and
mind the point of limitation, enter then the other extent on the point of
limitation, and lay the thread to the other foot, find what number it cuts in
the superficies, and the greater shall bear such Proportion to the lesser as
100, etc. the length of the whole line does to the parts cut.

The Proportion that two superficies bear each to other is the same that the
squares of their like sides, and therefore their sides may be measured either
in foot or inch measure, and then the Squares taken out as before showed.

The line of superficies serves for the reducing of Plots to any proportion.
ADmit a Plot of a piece of ground being cast up contains 364 Acres, and it
were required to draw another Plot which being cast up by the same Scale should
contain but a quarter so much, and let one side of the said Plot be 60 inches,
against 60 in the lines, the square of it will be found to be 3600, and the
fourth part hereof would be 900, which account in the superficies and you will
find the Square Root of it to be 30, and so many inches must be the like side
of the lesser Plot if being cast up by the same Scale it should contain but of
what it did before.

If the line of Superficies were on a straight ruler, then to perform such a
Proposition as this, would be to measure therewith the side of the Plot given,
minding what number it reaches to in the Superficies, the fourth part of the
said Number being reckoned on the Superficies, and thence taken shall be the
length of the side in the Proportion required.

Of the Line of Solids.
IF a number be duly estimated in the said line, and the thread laid over it,
it will in the line of lines show the cube Root of that number, and the
converse the Root being assigned, the Cube may be found, but by reason of the
sorry performance of these Lines I shall spend no time about it, if this line
be placed on a loose Ruler, and the like sides of two like Solids be measured
therewith, those Solids shall bear such Proportion in their contents each to
other as the measured lengths on the Solids.

Three Numbers being given to find the fourth in a Duplicated Proportion.
Example.
IF a Bullet of 4 inches Diameter weigh 9 pound, what shall a Bullet of 8
inches Diameter weigh? Answer 72 pounds.

In this case let the whole line of Solids represent 100, always the Solid
content whether given or sought, must be accounted in the line of Solids, and
the Sides or Diameters in the Equal parts.

Lay the thread to 9 in the line of Solids, and from 8 in the inches take the
nearest distance to it, enter one foot of that extent at 4 in the inches, and
lay the thread to the other foot: and it will lie over 72 in the Solids for the
weight of the Bullet sought.

An Example of the Converse.
If a Bullet whose Diameter is 4 Inches weigh 9 pound, another Bullet whose
weight is 40 pound, what shall be the Diameter of it.

Lay the thread to 40 in the Solids, and from 4 Inches in the lines take the
nearest distance to it.

Then lay the thread to 9 in the Solids, and enter the said extent at the equal
Scale, so that the other foot turned about may but just touch the thread, and
it it will rest at 6 Inches nearest, which is the Diameter sought.

Of the Line of inscribed Bodies.
This Line has these letters set to it.

D Signifying the Sides of a Dodecahedron S Signifying the Sides of a (...) I
Signifying the Sides of a Icosahedron C Signifying the Sides of a Cube O
Signifying the Sides of a Octohedron T Signifying the Sides of a Tetrahedron
And the Letter S Signifies the Semidiameter of a Sphere, the use whereof are
to find the Sides of the five Regular Bodies that may be inscribed in a Sphere.

Example.
A joyner being to cut the 5 Regular Bodies desires to know the lengths of the
sides of the said 5 Regular Bodies that may be inscribed in a Sphere where
Diameter is 6 inches.

Lay the thread over S* and take 3 inches out of the line of equal parts or
Inches, and enter that extent so that one foot resting on the said Scale of
inches, the other turned about may but just touch the thread, the resting point
thus found, I call the point of entrance, from the said point take the nearest
distances to the thread laid over the Letters.

Inch. Dec. parts D And measure those Extents on the Line of Inches, and you
will find them to reach to 2.13 I 3.15 C 3.45 O 4.23 T 4.86

Which are the Dimensions of the respective sides of those Bodies to which the
Letters belong.

The uses of the Lines of quadrature, Segments, Metals and Equated Bodies, I
leave to the Disquisition of the Reader, when he shall have occasion to put
them in practice, which I think will be seldom or never; and wherein the
assistance of the Pen will be more commendable.

These lines were added to this quadrant to fill up spare room, and to show
that what ever can be done on the Sector, may be performed by them on a
quadrant.

A TABLE Of the Latitude of the most eminent Places in England, Wales, Scotland
and Ireland.
d. m. Bedford 52 8 Barwick 55 54 Bristol 51 27 Buckingham 52 Cambridge 52 12
Canterbury 51 17 Carlisle 55 Chichester 50 48 Chester 53 16 Colchester 51 58
Derby 52 58 Dorchester 50 40 Durham 54 50 Exceter 50 43 Gilford 51 12
Gloucester 51 53 Hartford 51 49 Hereford 52 7 Huntington 52 19 Ipswich 52 8
Kendal 54 23 Lancaster 54 10 Leicester 52 40 Lincoln 53 14 London 51 32
Northampton 52 14 Norwich 52 42 Nottingham 53 Oxford 51 46 Reading 51 28
Salisbury 51 4 Shrewsbery 52 47 Stafford 52 52 Stamford 52 38 Truero 50 30
Warwick 52 20 Winchester 51 3 Worcester 52 14 York. 53 58 WALES d. m. Anglezey
53 28 Barmouth 52 50 Brecknock 52 1 Cardigan 52 12 Carmarthen 51 56 Carnarvan
53 16 Denbigh 53 13 Flint 53 17 Llandaffe 51 35 Monmouth 51 51 Montgomeroy 51
56 Pembrooke 51 46 Radnor 52 19 St. David 52 00 The ISLANDS. d. m Garnzey 49 30
Jersey 49 12 Lundy 51 22 Man 54 24 Portland 50 33 Wight Isle. 50 39 SCOTLAND.
d. m. Aberdean 57 32 Dunblain 56 21 Dunkel 56 48 Edinburgh 55 56 Glascow 55 52
Kintaile 57 44 Orkney Isle 60 6 St. Andrews 56 39 Skirassin 58 36 Sterling. 56
12 IRELAND. d. m. Autrim 54 38 Arglas 54 10 Armach 54 14 Caterlagh 52 41 Clare
52 34 Cork 51 53 Droghedah 53 38 Dublin 53 13 Dundalk 53 52 Galloway 53 2
Youghal 51 53 Kenny 52 27 Kildare 53 00 Kings town 53 8 Knock fergus 54 37
Kynsale 51 41 Lymerick 52 30 Queens town 52 52 Waterford 52 9 Wexford. 52 18

A Table of the right Ascensions and Declinations of some of the most principal
fixed Stars for some years to come.
R. Ascension. Declination. Magnitude H m D. m. Pole Star 00 31 87 34 N 2
Andromedas Girdle 00 50 33 50 N 2 Whales Belly 01 35 12 S 3 Rams head 1 48 21
49 N 3 Whales mouth 2 44 2 42 N 2 Medusas head 2 46 39 35 N 3 Perseus right
side 2 59 48 33 N 2 Bulls eye 4 16 15 46 N 1 Goat 4 52 45 37 N 1 Orions left
foot 4 58 8 38 S 1 Orions left shoulder 5 6 5 59 N 3 First, in Orions girdle 5
15 00 35 S 3 Second, in Orions girdle 5 19 1 27 S 3 Third, in Orions girdle 5
23 2 9 S 3 Orions right shoulder 5 36 7 18 N 2 The Wagoner 5 39 44 56 N 2
Bright foot of the Twins 6 18 16 39 N 3 Great Dog 6 30 16 13 S 1 Castor or
Apollo 7 12 32 30 N 2 The little Dog 7 22 6 6 N 2 Pollux or Hercules 7 24 28 48
N 2 Hidra's heart 9 10 7 10 S 1 Lions heart 9 50 13 39 N 1 Lions Neck 9 50 21
41 N 3 Great Bears rump 10 40 58 43 N 2 Lions back 11 30 22 4 N 2 Lions tail
11 31 16 30 N 1 The Virgins girdle 12 38 5 20 N 3 First in the great Bears
tail next the rump 12 38 57 51 N 2 Vindemiatrix 12 44 15 51 N 3 Virgins Spike
13 7 9 19 S 1 Middlemost in the Great Bears tail 13 10 56 45 N 2 Last in the
end of the Great Bears tail 13 34 51 05 N 2 Arcturus 14 00 21 03 N 1 South
Balance 14 32 14 33 S 2 Brightest in the Crown 15 24 27 43 N 3 North Balance
14 58 08 03 S 3 Serpentaries left hand 15 56 02 46 S 3 Scorpions heart 16 08 25
35 S 1 Serpentaries left knee 16 18 09 46 S 3 Serpentaries right knee 16 49 15
12 S 3 Hercules head 16 59 14 51 N 3 Serpentaries head 17 19 12 52 N 3 Dragons
head 17 48 51 36 N 3 Brightest in the Harp 18 25 38 30 N 1 Eagle or Vultures
heart 19 34 08 00 N 2 Upper horn of Capricorn 19 58 13 32 S 3 Swans tail 20 30
44 05 N 2 Left shoulder of Aquarius 21 13 07 02 S 3 Pegasus mouth 21 27 08 19 N
3 Right shoulder of Aquarius 21 48 01 58 S 3 Fomahant 22 39 31 17 S 1 Pegasus
upper Wing, or Marchab 22 48 13 21 N 2 Pegasus Lower Wing. 23 55 33 25 N 2

Mr. Sutton knowing that some of the Tables of Declination and Right Ascension
in our English Books are antiquated and removed forward, took the pains to
Calculate a new Table of Right Ascensions and Declinations to serve for the
future, in regard I was not at leisure to accomplish it; which follows.

Days. January R A. Decl. H. M. D. M. 1 19 35 21 46 2 19 39 21 36 3 19 43 21
25 4 19 47 21 14 5 19 51 21 03 6 19 56 20 52 7 20 00 20 40 8 20 04 20 27 9 20
09 20 15 10 20 13 20 01 11 20 17 19 48 12 20 22 19 34 13 20 26 19 20 14 20 30
19 05 15 20 34 18 50 16 20 38 18 35 17 20 42 18 19 18 20 46 18 03 19 20 50 17
47 20 20 54 17. 30 21 20 58 17 13 22 21 03 16 56 23 21 07 16 39 24 21 11 16 21
25 21 15 16 03 26 21 19 15 44 27 21 23 15 26 28 21 27 15 07 29 21 31 14 48 30
21 35 14 28 31 21 38 14 09 Days. February R A. Decl. H. M. D. M. 1 21 42 13 49
2 21 46 13 29 3 21 50 13 08 4 21 54 12 48 5 21 58 12 28 6 22 02 12 06 7 22 06
11 45 8 22 10 11 24 9 22 14 11 03 10 22 17 10 41 11 22 21 10 19 12 22 25 9 57
13 22 29 9 35 14 22 33 9 13 15 22 36 8 51 16 22 40 8 26 17 22 44 8 06 18 22 48
7 43 19 22 52 7 20 20 22 55 6 57 21 22 59 6 34 22 23 03 6 11 23 23 06 5 48 24
23 10 5 24 25 23 13 5 01 26 23 17 4 37 27 23 21 4 14 28 23 25 3 51 29 30 31
Days. March R. A. Decl. H. M. D. M. 1 23 28 3 27 2 23 32 3 03 3 23 36 2 39 4
23 39 2 16 5 23 43 1 52 6 23 46 1 29 7 23 50 1 05 8 23 53 0 41 9 23 57 0 18 10
0 01 North 6 11 0 05 0 30 12 0 08 0 53 13 0 12 1 17 14 0 15 1 41 15 0 19 2 04
16 0 23 2 28 17 0 26 2 51 18 0 30 3 15 19 0 33 3 38 20 0 37 4 01 21 0 41 4 24
22 0 44 4 48 23 0 48 5 11 24 0 52 5 34 25 0 55 5 57 26 0 59 6 19 27 1 03 6 42
28 1 06 7 04 29 1 10 7 27 30 1 14 7 49 31 1 17 8 11 Days. April. R. A. Decl.
H. M. D. M. 1 1 21 8 33 2 1 25 8 55 3 1 29 9 17 4 1 33 9 38 5 1 36 9 51 6 1 40
10 21 7 1 44 10 42 8 1 47 11 03 9 1 51 11 24 10 1 54 11 44 11 1 58 12 05 12 2
02 12 24 13 2 06 12 45 14 2 10 13 04 15 2 13 13 24 16 2 17 13 43 17 2 21 14 02
18 2 25 14 21 19 2 29 14 40 20 2 32 14 58 21 2 36 15 16 22 2 40 15 34 23 2 44
15 52 24 2 48 16 09 25 2 51 16 27 26 2 55 16 43 27 2 59 17 00 28 3 03 17 16 29
3 07 17 32 30 3 10 17 48 31 Days. May R. A. Decl. H. M. D. M. 1 3 14 18 03 2 3
18 18 18 3 3 22 18 33 4 3 26 18 48 5 3 30 19 02 6 3 34 19 16 7 3 38 19 29 8 3
42 19 42 9 3 46 19 55 10 3 50 20 08 11 3 54 20 20 12 3 58 20 32 13 4 02 20 44
14 4 06 20 55 15 4 10 21 05 16 4 14 21 16 17 4 18 21 26 18 4 22 21 36 19 4 26
21 45 20 4 30 21 54 21 4 34 22 02 22 4 38 22 11 23 4 42 22 19 24 4 46 22 26 25
4 50 22 33 26 4 54 22 40 27 4 58 22 46 28 5 02 22 52 29 5 06 22 57 30 5 11 23
02 31 5 15 23 07 Days. June. R. A. Decl. H. M. D. M. 1 5 19 23 11 2 5 23 23 15
3 5 27 23 19 4 5 31 23 22 5 5 36 23 24 6 5 40 23 26 7 5 44 23 28 8 5 48 23 29 9
5 52 23 30 10 5 56 23 31 11 6 00 23 31 12 6 04 23 31 13 6 08 23 30 14 6 12 23
29 15 6 17 23 28 16 6 21 23 26 17 6 25 23 24 18 6 29 23 21 19 6 33 23 18 20 6
38 23 14 21 6 42 23 11 22 6 46 23 06 23 6 50 23 01 24 6 54 22 56 25 6 58 22 51
26 7 02 22 45 27 7 06 22 39 28 7 10 22 32 29 7 14 22 25 30 7 19 22 17 31 Days.
July R. A. Decl. H. M. D. M. 1 7 23 22 09 2 7 27 22 01 3 7 31 21 52 4 7 35 21
43 5 7 39 21 34 6 7 43 21 24 7 7 47 21 14 8 7 51 21 04 9 7 55 20 53 10 7 59 20
42 11 8 03 20 30 12 8 07 20 18 13 8 11 20 06 14 8 15 19 54 15 8 19 19 41 16 8
23 19 28 17 8 27 19 14 18 8 31 19 00 19 8 35 18 46 20 8 39 18 32 21 8 43 18 17
22 8 47 18 02 23 8 51 17 46 24 8 55 17 31 25 8 58 17 15 26 9 02 16 59 27 9 06
16 42 28 9 10 16 25 29 9 14 16 08 30 9 17 15 51 31 9 21 15 33 Days. August R.
A. Decl. H. M. D. M. 1 9 25 15 16 2 9 29 14 58 3 9 33 14 39 4 9 37 14 21 5 9 40
14 02 6 9 44 13 43 7 9 48 13 24 8 9 51 13 04 9 9 55 12 45 10 9 58 12 25 11 10
02 12 05 12 10 06 11 45 13 10 10 11 25 14 10 14 11 04 15 10 17 10 43 16 10 21
10 22 17 10 25 10 01 18 10 28 9 40 19 10 32 9 18 20 10 35 8 57 21 10 39 8 35 22
10 43 8 14 23 10 46 7 52 24 10 50 7 30 25 10 53 7 07 26 10 57 6 45 27 11 01 6
22 28 11 04 6 00 29 11 08 5 37 30 11 11 5 14 31 11 15 4 51 Days. September R.
A. Decl. H. M. D. M. 1 11 19 4 28 2 11 23 4 6 3 11 26 3 42 4 11 30 3 19 5 11 33
2 56 6 11 37 2 33 7 11 41 2 10 8 11 44 1 46 9 11 48 1 23 10 11 51 0 59 11 11 55
0 3^ 12 11 59 0 12 13 12 02 South 11 14 12 06 0 35 15 12 09 0 58 16 12 13 1 22
17 12 17 1 46 18 12 20 2 09 19 12 24 2 33 20 12 27 2 56 21 12 31 3 19 22 12 35
3 43 23 12 38 4 06 24 12 42 4 30 25 12 45 4 53 26 12 49 5 16 27 12 53 5 39 28
12 57 6 02 29 13 01 6 26 30 13 04 6 49 31 Days. October R. A. Decl. H. M. D.
M. 1 13 08 7 11 2 13 12 7 34 3 13 15 7 57 4 13 19 8 19 5 13 22 8 42 6 13 26 9
04 7 13 30 9 26 8 13 34 9 48 9 13 38 10 10 10 13 41 10 31 11 13 45 10 53 12 13
49 11 14 13 13 53 11 36 14 13 57 11 57 15 14 00 12 18 16 14 04 12 38 17 14 08
12 59 18 14 12 13 19 19 14 16 13 39 20 14 20 13 59 21 14 24 14 19 22 14 28 14
38 23 14 32 14 57 24 14 36 15 16 25 14 39 15 35 26 14 43 15 5^ 27 14 47 16 1^
28 14 51 16 29 29 14 55 16 47 30 14 59 17 04 31 15 03 17 21 Days. November R.
A. Decl. H. M. D. M. 1 15 07 17 38 2 15 11 17 54 3 15 15 18 10 4 15 19 18 26 5
15 23 18 41 6 15 27 18 56 7 15 31 19 11 8 15 36 19 26 9 15 40 19 40 10 15 45 19
53 11 15 49 20 07 12 15 53 20 19 13 15 58 20 32 14 16 02 20 44 15 16 07 20 56
16 16 11 21 08 17 16 15 21 19 18 16 19 21 29 19 16 23 21 39 20 16 28 21 49 21
16 32 21 58 22 16 36 22 08 23 16 40 22 16 24 16 44 22 24 25 16 49 22 32 26 16
53 22 39 27 16 57 22 46 28 17 02 22 52 29 17 06 22 58 30 17 11 23 03 31 Days.
December. R. A. Decl. H. M. D. M. 1 17 15 23 08 2 17 20 23 13 3 17 25 23 17 4
17 29 23 20 5 17 34 23 23 6 17 38 23 26 7 17 42 23 28 8 17 47 23 29 9 17 51 23
30 10 17 56 23 31 11 18 00 23 31 12 18 05 23 31 13 18 09 23 30 14 18 14 23 29
15 18 19 23 27 16 18 24 23 25 17 18 28 23 22 18 18 33 23 19 19 18 37 23 15 20
18 41 23 11 21 18 45 23 07 22 18 49 23 02 23 18 54 22 56 24 18 58 22 50 25 19
03 22 43 26 19 07 22 36 27 19 11 22 29 28 19 16 22 21 29 19 20 22 13 30 19 25
22 04 31 19 30 21 55

A Rectifying Table for the Suns Declination.
Years Years Years 1657 1661 1665 1669 1673
1659 1663 1667 1671 1675
1660 1664 1668 1672 1676
Months min. min. min. January 3 s 2 a 5 a 4 s 3 a 7 a 5 s 4 a 9 a February 5
s 5 a 10 a 5 s 5 a 11 a 6 s 5 a 11 a March 6 s 5 a 13 s 5 a 5 s 12 a 5 a 5 s 12
a April 5 a 5 s 11 a 5 a 5 s 10 a 4 a 4 s 9 a May 4 a 4 s 8 a 3 a 3 s 6 a 2 a 2
s 4 a June 1 a 1 s 2 a 0 s 0 a 0 s 1 s 1 a 3 s July 2 s 2 a 5 s 3 s 3 a 7 s 4 s
4 a 9 s August. 5 s 5 a 10 s 5 s 5 a 11 s 6 s 5 a 12 s September 6 s 5 a 13 s 6
a 5 s 13 a 6 a 5 s 12 a October 6 a 5 s 12 a 5 a 5 s 11 a 4 a 5 s 9 a Novem. 3
a 4 s 7 a 2 a 3 s 5 a 1 a 2 s 3 a December. 0 a 1 s 1 a 1 s 0 a 1 s 2 s 1 a 3 s

The use of the Rectifying Table.
NOte that the minutes under the respective years is to be added or subtracted
to or from the Suns Declination in the former Table, as is noted with the
letter a or s: and also note that the first figure in each month stands for
the first 10 days of the month, and the second for the second 10 days, and
the third for the last 10 days, except in March or September, which in March
will be the first 9 days only, and in September the first 12 days.

Example.
I would know the Suns Declination the 15 day of May 1668. Now because this day
of the month falls in the second 10 days, I look in the Table under the year
1663, and right against May you shall find that in the second place of the
month stands 6 a, which shows me that I must add 6 minutes to the Suns
Declination in the former Table 21 degrees 5 min. that stands against the 15
day of May, and then I find that the Sun will have 21 degrees. 11 min. of North
Declination, and so for the rest, which will never differ above two minutes
from the truth, but seldom so much, and for the most part true.

Note that the former Table of the Suns Declination is fitted exactly for the
year 1666. by the Rules Mr. Wright gives in his Correction of Errors, and from
his Tables, and may indifferently serve for the years 1658, 1662. 1670, 1674,
without any sensible error, and the Table of Right Ascensions will not vary a
minute of time in many years.

FINIS.
Errors in the Horizontal Quadrant.
PAge 5 line 6 in an Italian letter should not have been distinct, nor in
another letter from the former line. page 5. line 9. for quarter, read half. p.
5. l. 13. r. of a quadrant. p. 11. l. 7. r. 63 d. 26. p. 19. l. 7. r. the same
day to. p. 23. l. 17. r. and ends at 32 past 9. p. 27. l. 7. for N R, r. N Z.
p. 28. l. 4. r. in the parallel. p. 30. l. 9, and l. 10. r. 23 d. 31. p. 38. l.
4. r. Is to the sine. p. 50. l. 5. r. whereof the Diameter.

AN APPENDIX Touching REFLECTIVE DIALLING.

By JOHN LION: Professor of this, or any other part of the Mathematics, near
Sommerset House in the Strand.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, 1658.

DIRECT DIALLING
By a Hole or Nodus.
To draw a Dial under any window that the Sun shines upon by help of a thread
fastened in any point of the direct Axis found in the Ceiling, and a hole in
any pane of glass, or a knob or Nodus upon any side of the window or
window-post.

CONSTRUCTIO.
FIrst, draw on pastboard or other material, an Horizontal Dial for the
Latitude proposed.

Then by help of the Suns Azimuth, which may be found by help of a general
Quadrant, at any time, or by knowing the true hour of the day with the help of
the said Horizontal Dial: and draw that true Meridian from the hole or Nodus
proposed, both above on the Cieling, and below on the walls and floor of the
Room; so that if a right line were extended from the said hole or Nodus by any
point in any of those lines, it would be in the meridian Circle of the World.

To find a point in the direct Axis of the world, which will ever fall to be
in the said Meridian, in which point the end of a thread is to be fastened.
FIrst, fix the end of a thread or small silk in the center of the Hole or
Nodus, and move the other end thereof up or down in the said meridian formerly
drawn on the Cieling or wall, until by applying the side of a Quadrant to that
thread, it is found to be elevated equal to the Latitude of the place; so is
that thread directly situated parallel to the Axis of the world, and the point
where the end of that thread touches the meridian either on the Cieling or
wall, is that point in the direct Axis sought for, wherein fix one end of a
thread, (which thread will be of present use in projecting of hour-points in
any place proposed, then:

To find the Hour-points either under the window, or any other convenient place
in the Room.
Place the center of the said Horizontal Dial in the Center of the Hole or
Nodus; also situate the said Dial exactly parallel to the Horizon, and the
meridian of the said Dial in the meridian of the world, which (as before) may
easily be done, if at that instant you know the true hour of the day.) Then
take the thread whose end is fixed in a point in the direct Axis, and move it
to and fro, until the said thread does interpose between your eye, and the
hour-line on the said Horizontal Dial which you intend to draw, and then
keeping your eye at that situation, make a point or mark in any place where
you please, or under the window, so that the said thread or string may
interpose between that point or mark so made, and your eye, as aforesaid; which
said point so sound will show the true time of the day at that hour all the
year long, the Sun shining thereon, so will that point, together with the said
thread, serve to show the hour, instead of an hour-line.

In like manner, the said thread fixed in the Axis may be again moved to and
fro, until the said thread does interpose between the eye and any other
hour-line desired on the said Horizontal Dial and then (as before) make another
point or mark in any place at pleasure, or under the said window, by projecting
a point from the eye, so that the said thread also interpose between that point
to be made and the eye, so will that point so found show the true time of the
day for the same hour that did the hour line on the said Horizontal Dial, which
was shadowed by the said thread.

In like manner may be proceeded (by help of that thread, and the several
hour lines on the said Horizontal Dial) to find the other hour-points which
must have the same numbers set to them as have the hour lines on the said
Horizontal Dial.

Otherwise to make a Dial from a hole in any pane of glass in a window, and to
graduate the hour lines below on the Sell, or Beam, or on the ground, that hole
is supposed to be the center of the Horizontal Dial, and being true placed, the
style thereof, if supposed continued, will run into the point in the Meridian
of the Cieling before found, where a thread is to be fixed; then let one extend
a thread fastened in the center of the Horizontal Dial parallelly to the
Horizon, over each respective hour-line, and holding it steady, let another
extend the thread fastened in the Meridian, in the Cieling along by the edges
of the former Horizontal thread, and so this latter thread will find diverse
points on the ground, through which if hour lines be drawn, and the Sun shine
through the hole in the pane of Glass before made, the spot of the Sun on the
ground shall show the time of the day.

For the points that will be thus found on the Beam or Transome, the thread
fixed in the Cieling, or instead of it a piece of tape there fixed must be
moved so up and down, that the spot of the Sun may shine upon it, and being
extended to the Transome or Beam graduated with the hour lines, as before
directed, it there shows the time of the day. Here note, that it will be
convenient to have that pane of Glass darkened through which that spot is to
shine.

In like manner may a Dial be made from a nail head, a knot in a string tied
any where a cross, or from any point driven into the bar of a window, and the
hour lines graduated upon the Transome or board underneath.

To make a Reflected Dial on the Ceiling of the Room is only the contrary of
this, by supposing the Horizontal Dial with its style to be turned downwards,
and run into the true meridian on the ground, where the thread is to be fixed,
and to be extended along by the former Horizontal thread (held over the
respective hours as before) upward, to find diverse points in the Cieling, as
shall afterward be showed.

Of Dials to stand in the Weather.
These may be also made by help of an Horizontal Dial.

DRive two nails or pins into the wall, on which the edge of a Board of
competent breadth may rest, then to hold up the other side of the Board, drive
two hooks into the wall above, whereto with cord or line the outside of the
Board may be sustained, and this Board being Horizontal, place the Horizontal
Dial its Meridian-line in the true Meridian of the world. If a Plain look
toward the South, the style of the Horizontal Dial continued by a thread from
the center will run into the Plain, which note to be the center of the new
Dial, as also that line is the new style, which must be supported with stays,
when you fix it up.

By a thread from the center laid over every hour-line on the Horizontal Dial,
cross the Horizontal line of the Plain, which note with the same hours the
Horizontal Dial has.

The hour lines on the Plain are to be drawn from the center before found
through those points, and so cut off by the Dial, or continued at pleasure.

If the Center of the Dial be assigned before you begin the work, in such Cases
you may remove the Horizontal Dial up and down, keeping it still to the true
position or hour, till you find the Axis or style run into the Center.

But if the Plain look into the East or West, then possibly the Axis of the
Horizontal Dial will not meet with the Plain: in such Cases you must fix a
board so, that it may receive the Axis, (the board being perpendicular to the
Plain) this style or Axis is to be fastened to the Plain by two Rests, the
hour lines may be drawn by the eye, or shadowed out by a Light: Bring the
thread that represents the Axis or style into any hour-point (on the Horizontal
Dial) by your eye or shadow; at the same time the thread or shadow making marks
on the Plain, shows where the hour lines are to pass.

After the same manner any hour-line is to be drawn over any irregular or
crooked Plain. Further observe, that any point in the middle, or near the end
of the style will as well show the hour of the Day, as the whole style.

Of Refracted Dials.
IF you stick up a pin or stick, or assign any point in any concave Boul or
Dish, to show the hour, and make that the center of the Horizontal Dial,
assigning the meridian-line on the edges of the Boul, point out the rest of the
hour lines also on the edges of the Boul, and taking away the Horizontal Dial,
elevate a string or thread from the end of the said pin fastened thereto over
the Meridian-line equal to the Elevation of the Pole or the Latitude of the
place; then with a candle, or if you bring the thread to shade upon any
hour-point formerly marked out on the edges of the Boul, at the same time the
shade in the Boul is the hour line.

And if the Boul be full of water, or any other liquor, you may draw the
hour lines, which will never show the true hour, unless filled with the said
Liquor again.

Reflected Dialling.
To draw a Reflected Dial on any Plain or Plains, be they never so Gibous, and
Concave, or Unequal, or any irregularity whatsoever, the Glass being fixed at
any Reclination at pleasure, (provided it may cast its Reflex upon the places
proposed.) Together with all other necessary lines or furniture thereon, viz.
the Parallels of Declination, the Azimuth lines, the Parallels of Altitude (or
proportions of shadows) the Planetary Hour Lines, and the Cuspis of those
Houses which are above the Horizon, etc.

1. If the Glass be placed Horizontal upon the Transome of a window, or other
convenient place:

How upon the Wall or Cieling whereon that Glass does reflect to draw the
Hour Lines thereon, although it be never so irregular, or in any form
whatsoever.

CONSTRUCTIO.
FIrst, draw on Pastboard or other Material an Horizontal Dial for the Latitude
proposed.

Then by help of the Azimuth, or at the time when the Sun is in the Meridian;
or by knowing the true hour of Day, whereby may be drawn several lines on the
Cieling, Floor, and Walls of the Room: so as in respect of the center of the
Glass they may be in the true Meridian-circle of the World: For if right lines
were extended from the center of the said Glass by any point, though elevated
in any of those lines so drawn, it would be directly in the Meridian Circle of
the World.

Now all Reflective Dialling is performed from that principle in Optics, which
is, That the angle of Incidence is equal to the angle of Reflection. And as any
direct Dial may be made by help of a point found in the direct Axis, so may any
Reflected Dial be also made by help of any point found in the Reflected Axis.

And in regard the reflected Axis for the most part will fall above the Horizon
of the Glass without the window, so that no point there can be fixed,
therefore a point must be found in the said Reflected Axis continued below the
Horizontal of the said Glass, until it touch the ground or floor of the Room
in some part of the Meridian formerly drawn, which point will be the point in
the reversed Axis desired, and may be found, as follows.

One end of the thread, being fixed at or in the center of the said Glass,
move the other end thereof in the meridian formerly drawn below the said
Glass, until the said reversed Axis be depressed below the Horizon, as the
direct Axis was elevated above the Horizon, which may be done by applying the
side or edge of a Quadrant to the said thread, and moving the end thereof to
and fro in the said meridian, until the thread with a plummet cut the same
degree as the Pole is above the Horizontal Glass, and then that point where
the end of the thread touches the Meridian either on the floor or wall of the
room, is the point in the reflected reversed Axis sought for.

Now if the Reversed Axis cannot be drawn from the Glass by reason of the
jetting of the window or other impediment, that point in the reverse Axis may
be found by a line parallel thereto, by fixing one end of it on the Glass, and
the other end in the meridian, so as that it may be parallel to the floor or
wall in which the reversed Axis-point will fall, and find the Axis point from
that other end of the lath: so if the same Distance be set from that point
backward in the Meridian on the floor, as is the Lath, the point will be found
in the Reversed Axis desired.

Thus having found a point in the reflected reversed Axis; it is not hard, by
help whereof and the Horizontal Dial, to draw the reflected hour lines on any
Cieling or Wall, be it never so concave or unequal.

To do which: First note, that all straight lines in any projection on any
Plain, do always represent great Circles in the Sphere, such are all the
hour lines.

Place the center of this Horizontal Dial in the center of the Glass, the
hour lines of the said Dial being horizontal, and the Meridian of the said Dial
in the Meridian of the world, which may be done by plumb lines let fall from
the meridian on the Cieling: Then fix the end of a thread or silk in the said
center of the Dial or Glass, and draw it directly over any hour-line on the
Dial which you intend to draw, and at the further side of the room, and there
let one hold or fasten that thread with a small nail.

Then in the point formerly found on the reversed Axis on the ^oor, fix another
thread there (as formerly was done in the center of the Dial) then take that
thread, and make it just touch the thread (on the hour-line of the Horizontal
Dial extended) in any point thereof, it matters not whereabouts, and mark where
the end of that thread touches the Wall or Cieling, and there make some mark
or point.

Then again move the same thread higher or lower at pleasure, till it, as
formerly touch the said same hour thread, and mark again whereabouts on the
wall or Cieling, the end of the said thread also touches. In like manner may
be found more points at pleasure, but any two will be sufficient for the
projecting or drawing any hour-line on any plain, how irregular soever. For if
you move a thread, and also your eye to and fro, until you bring the said
thread directly between your eye and the points formerly found, you may project
thereby as many points as you please at every angle of the Wall or Cieling,
whereby the reflected hour-line may be exactly drawn.

Again, in like manner remove the said thread fastened in the center of the
Horizontal Dial, (which also is the center of the Glass) on any other
hour-line desired to be drawn, and as before fasten the other end of the
thread, by a small nail, or otherwise at the further side of the room, but so
that the said thread may lie just on the hour-line proposed to be drawn on the
Horizontal Dial. Then (as before) take the thread fastened in the point on the
reflected Axis, and bring it to touch the thread of the hour-line in any part
thereof, and mark where the end of that thread touches the said Wall or
Cieling: Then again (as before) move the said thread so, as that it only touch
the said thread of the hour-line in any other part thereof, and also mark where
the end of that thread touches the said Wall or Cieling: So is there found two
points on the Wall or Cieling, being in the reflected hour-line desired, by
help of which two points the whole hour-line may be drawn; for if (as before) a
thread be so situated, that it may interpose between the eye and the said two
points found, you may make many points at pleasure, whereunto the said thread
may also interpose, which for more convenience may be made at every angle or
bending of the Wall or Cieling, be they never so many: So that if lines be
drawn from point to point, that said reflected hour-line will be also exactly
drawn.

In like manner may the other hour lines be drawn so, that the Reflex or spot
of the Sun from the said Horizontal Glass situated in the said window (as
before) shining amongst the said reflected hour lines drawn on the wall or
Cieling, will exactly show the hour of the day desired.

Now if lines be drawn round about the said Room, equal to the Horizon of the
said Glass, it will show when the Sun is in or near the Horizon.

To draw the Equator and Tropicks on any Wall or Cieling to any Horizontal
reflecting Glass.
1 To draw the Reflected Equator or Equinoctial-line on the Wall or Cieling,
which represents a great Circle.
TAke the thread fixed in the Center of the Glass, and move the end thereof to
and fro in the meridian line drawn on the Cieling, until by help of a Quadrant
the said thread be elevated equal to the complement of the Latitude, (which
will be always perpendicular to the reversed Axis) marking in the Meridian
where the end of that thread falls, then on that point and the said meridian
line on the Cieling erect a perpendicular line, which line may be continued on
any plane whatsoever, and is the reflected Equinoctial line desired.

Note that all great Circles are right lines, and are always drawn or
projected from a right line.

2. To draw the Tropicks. Note, that all Parallels of Declination are lesser
Circles, and are Conick Sections.
FIrst, make or take out of some Book a Table of the Suns Altitude for each
hour of the day, calculated for the place or Latitude proposed, when the Sun is
in either of the Tropicks. Then take the thread fixed in the center of the
Glass, and by applying one side of a quadrant to the said thread, and moving
one end of it to and fro in the hour-line proposed, elevate the said thread
answerable to the Suns height in that hour, when he is in that Tropic you
desire to draw, and mark where the end of that thread so elevated touches in
that hour-line proposed. So may you in like manner find a several point in
each hour-line for the Suns height in that Tropic, whereby a line may be drawn
on the Wall or Cieling from point to point formerly made in the said
hour lines, which the Tropic desired.

In like manner may any parallel of Declination be drawn: If there be first
calculated a Table of the Suns altitude at all hours of the day, when the Sun
has any Declination proposed, whereby may be drawn either the Parallels of the
Suns place, or the parallels of the length of the day.

To draw the parallels of Declination to any Reflected Glass most easily, by
help of a Trigon first made on past board or other material.
FIx the Trigon to the reflected roversed Axis, so that the center of the
Trigon may be in the center of the Glass, then will the Equinoctial on the
Trigon be perpendicular to the said Axis: then take the thread fixed in the
center of the Glass, and lay it along either of the Tropicks or other
parallels of Declination required, which is drawn on the said Trigon, which
thread must be continued so, that the end thereof may touch any hour-line, and
on that hour-line mark the point of touch, the thread being still laid on the
same parallel of declination on the Trigon: in the same manner find a point in
each hour-line. Lastly, draw a line by those points so found, which will be the
Tropick-line or other parallel of declination, as the thread was laid on, on
the Trigon.

To draw the Azimuth-lines on any Wall or Cieling to any Horizontal reflecting
Glass. Note that all Azimuths are great Circles.
FIrst, find a vertical point, either above to the Zenith, or below to the
Nadir of the Glass (by some called a perpendicular or plumb line) and mark in
what point it cuts the floor of the room, which point I call the reflected
vertical point, wherein the end of a thread is to be fixed: For by a point
found in the reflected Axis of the Horizon the Azimuths may be drawn, as by a
point found in the reflected Axis of the Equinoctial the hour lines may be
drawn.

Then on pastboard or other material draw the points of the Compass or other
degrees, and fix the center thereof in the center of the Glass, and the
meridian thereof in the meridian of the world, as was shown in drawing the
hour lines, being careful to place it horizontal.

Then take the thread fixed in the place of the glass, and draw it over any
Azimuth, which is desired to be drawn, and at the further side of the Room
fasten that thread with a small nail as it was in drawing the reflected
hour lines: Then take the thread whose end is fastened in the said reflect
vertical point, and bring that thread so as just to touch the said horizontal
thread, and augment it, until the end thereof touch the wall or Cieling, and
there make a mark or point. In like manner, move the said thread, whose end is
fastened in the said vertical point, higher or lower at pleasure, till as
formerly it touch the said horizontal thread, and mark again whereabouts the
end thereof touches the said Wall or Cieling: Now by help of these two points
found in the reflected Azimuth line, the whole Azimuth line may be drawn; for
if (as before in drawing the Hour Lines) a thread be so situated, that it may
interpose between the eye and the said two points, you may make many points at
pleasure, to which the said thread so situated may also interpose, which may be
made at every angle or bending of the wall or Cieling (as before) whereby the
reflected Azimuth-line desired may be drawn. In like manner may the other
reflected Azimuth lines be drawn.

Also there may be lines drawn parallel to the Horizon round about the room, by
help of the thread fixed in the center of the Glass, and a Quadrant for the
elevation thereof, which will show the Suns altitude at any appearance thereof.

Thus have I showed the drawing of a Reflected Dial from an Horizontal Glass,
with all the usual furniture thereon, though the wall or place on which it is
to be drawn be never so gibous or irregular, or in what shape soever.

Now the Glass may be exactly situated Horizontal, if you draw a reflected
parallel for the present day, and know also the true hour, and so place the
Glass, that the spot or reflex of the Sun may fall thereon on the Cieling, for
there is no way by an Instrument to do it, the Glass is so small.

Of Reclining Reflecting Glasses.
Reflected Dialling from any Reclining Glass.
I shall now show how to draw any Reflected Dial, with all the Furniture (that
possible may be) the Glass being set at any possible Reclination.

In the drawing of which there is principally to be considered, 1 The Reflected
Horizon. 2 The Reflected Meridian.


Note, the Horizon and Meridian are two great circles.

1 To draw the Reflected Horizon according to the situation of any reclining
Glass whatsoever.
FIrst, let two pieces of nealed wire be fastened on the window on each side of
the said Glass, the ends thereof being without the room in the air, at whose
ends let there be fastened a thread which may be pulled straight at pleasure, by
bending of the wire, then bend those wires upward or downward, until the thread
fastened at the end of each wire be exactly horizontal with the center of the
Glass, which may be tried by a quadrant: Then I tie a string or thread cross
the room, in such sort that I may from most part of the thread see the
reflecting glass, and therein the said horizontal thread without the room: Then
on the said thread cross the room, I tie a slipping knot to move to and fro at
pleasure, which knot I move to and fro on the said thread, until by looking in
the said Glass I find from my eye the said knot and part of the horizontal
thread without, all as it were in a right line, the one interposing the sight
of the other. Then being careful to keep the knot in that position, fasten one
end of a thread in the place of the center of the reclining reflecting glass,
and bring that thread so, as just to touch the aforesaid knot, augmenting that
thread, until the end thereof touch the wall or Cieling, and there make a mark
or point, so is there one point found on the Wall or Cieling in the Reflected
Horizon of the World. Then I begin again, and remove the position of that
thread (which went overthwart the Room) either higher or lower at pleasure,
still having regard that I may from the most part of the said thread see the
Reflecting Glass, and therein the same horizontal thread without the room.
Then, as before, I move the said knot on the said thread to and fro, until (as
before) by looking in the said Glass I find from my eye the said knot, and
part of the Horizontal thread both in one right line, the one interposing the
sight of the other; and by the said knot I bring that thread, whose end is
fastened in the center of the said glass, and keeping it just to touch the
said knot, I continue it, until the end thereof touch the Wall or Cieling, as
before, and there I make another mark or point; so is there two points found in
the said reflected Horizon on the wall or Cieling. By which said two points, if
a thread (as before) be so situated, that it may interpose between the eye and
the said two points, there may be many points made to be in the same
interposition of the thread, which (as before) may be made at every bending or
angle of the Wall or Cieling, whereby the reflected Horizon desired may be
drawn, by drawing a line from point to point round about the Room; Which will be
the true reflected Horizon according to the situation of the glass.

2 To draw the Reflected Meridian, according to the situation of any Reclining
Glass whatsoever.
FIrst, take a lath or thin piece of wood of any convenient length at pleasure,
as some one and an half, or two foot long, and at each end thereof make a hole,
the one to hang a thread and plummet, and the other is to put a small nail
therein to fasten it in some part of the window over the center of the Glass,
so that the thread and plummet may hang without the room: then by help of the
Suns Azimuth you may draw the meridian line, (as before) as if the Glass were
horizontal, and move the lath with the thread and plummet at the end of it to
and fro, until the thread and plummet be in the direct meridian of the world
with the center of the Glass. Then (as before) tie a thread cross the room,
in such sort that from or by some part of the said thread both the Reclining
glass and the thread to which the plummet is fastened may be seen at one time.
Then (as before) on the said thread, which crosses the room, I tie a slipping
knot, which I move to and fro on the said string, until by looking in the said
Glass I find from my eye the said knot and some part of the perpendicular
thread without, all as it were in one right line, the one shadowing or
interposing the sight of the other, being then very careful to keep that knot
in the same position, then take the thread (whose end whereof being fastened in
the said center of the Glass) and bringing it just to touch the said knot, I
augment that thread, until the end thereof touch the said wall or Cieling, and
the said thread also touch the knot, as before: then in that place where the
end of the said thread touches the wall or Cieling, I make a mark, which mark
or point will be directly in the reflected meridian of the world, according to
the situation of that Glass. Then again I remove that thread (overthwart the
room) on which the said knot is, either higher or lower then it formerly was at
pleasure, still having regard that from some part of the said thread within,
you may see both the Reclining Glass, and the perpendicular thread without at
one time; and (as before) move the said slipping knot on the said thread, until
by looking in the said Reclining Glass, you see the said knot and some part of
the perpendicular thread without in one right line, so as the one shadows or
hinders the sight of the other, (as before) which knot then must not be removed
from its situation, then take that thread (whose end is fastened in the Glass)
and bring it to touch that knot, the end of the said thread being continued to
touch the wall or Cieling: so is that point of touch on the Cieling another
point found in the Reflected Meridian of the world. So is there two points
found in the said Reflected Meridian, on the wall or Cieling; by which, if a
thread (as before) be so situated, that it may interpose between the eye and
the said two points, many points thereby in the said reflected Meridian may be
made at every bending or angle of the wall or Cieling, whereby the Reflected
meridian desired may be drawn, by drawing a line from point to point obliquely
in the Room, which will be the true Reflected Meridian of the world, according
to the situation of that Glass.

Now this Reflected Horizon and Meridian being first drawn, they will be of
great use in drawing the Hour Lines, together with all the furniture that
possibly can be drawn on any Dial.

To draw the Reflected Hour Lines to any Reclining Glass on any plane
whatsoever, that the Sun will be reflected on: By help of an ordinary
Horizontal Dial for that Latitude.
FIrst, extend several threads from the center of the Glass to the extremity
of the Reflected Horizon in the Room (which for more convenience and use may be
the several hour lines, and may also serve as a bed to situate the Horizontal
Dial on the Reflected Horizon) having regard to situate the center of the Dial
on the center of the Glass, and the Meridian of that Dial on the Reflected
Meridian of the World: Then to find the point in the Reflected reversed Axis
on the floor of the Room; Take a thread, one end thereof being fastened in the
center of the Glass, and move the other end thereof to and fro in the
reflected meridian under the Reflected Horizon, until by help of a Quadrant the
said thread is found to be depressed under the reflected Horizon, equal to the
latitude of the place, and where the end of the said thread intersects or meets
the Reflected Meridian either on the floor or wall, that point is the reflected
reversed Axis, as was required. In which point fasten one end of a thread,
which thread will be of great use in drawing the reflected hour lines on any
wall or Cieling whatsoever. Now if this thread, whose end is fastened in a
point on the reflected reversed Axis, be taken and brought to touch any part of
any one of the threads of the hour lines (produced to and fastened in the
reflected Horizon) the said thread being continued so, as the end thereof may
touch the wall or Cieling, and also any part of the said thread touch the
hour-line or thread proposed; that point on the wall or Cieling is in the
reflected hour-line desired to be drawn: Also the other point in the same
reflected hour-line may be found; If the said thread, whose end is fastened in
the Reflected Axis, be brought to touch some other part of the same hour-thread
proposed; so that when (as before) the end of the said thread touches the wall
or Cieling, some part of that thread may also touch the hour-line desired,
which point of touch on the wall or Cieling, is also another point in the said
reflected hour-line desired. By which two points so found (as before) the
reflected hour-line may be drawn by a thread, projecting by those points from
the eye, as it was formerly directed in drawing the reflected hour lines to an
Horizontal Glass.

To draw the Reflected Equinoctial line, and also the Tropicks on any wall or
Cieling, to any Reclining Reflecting glass.
1 To draw the reflected Equinoctial line on the Wall or Cieling.
TAke that thread, whose end is fastened in the center of the reclining glass,
and move the other end thereof to and fro in the said Reflected meridian
formerly drawn, until (by help of a quadrant) the said thread is elevated above
the reflected Horizon formerly drawn, equal to the Complement of the Latitude,
(which as before will be always perpendicular to the reversed Axis) and make a
point in the said reflected meridian, where the end of the said thread
touches; then on that point and the said reflected meridian on the Cieling,
raise a perpendicular line, which is the Reflected Equinoctial line desired.

2. To draw the reflected Tropicks, or other Parallels of Declination.
FIrst, (as before) make or take out of some Book a Table of the Suns Altitude
for each hour of the day, calculated for the place or Latitude proposed, when
the Sun is in either of the Tropicks, or other parallel of Declination: then
take that thread, whose end is fastened in the center of the Glass, move the
other end thereof to and fro in the hour-line proposed, until by applying one
side of a quadrant to the said thread you find the said thread elevated above
the reflected Horizon answerable to the Suns height in that hour proposed, when
he is in that Tropic or degree of Declination proposed. Which altitude
required will be found in the foresaid Table for that end calculated, which
said thread being of the elevation above the reflected Horizon, as the said
Table directs: then mark where the end of the thread (so elevated) touches
the Wall or Cieling in that hour-line: so is one point found in the reflected
parallel of Declination desired to be drawn. In like manner, find in the said
Table in the same parallel or degree of declination what altitude the Sun has
at the next hour, and elevate the said thread, whose end is fastened in the
center of the Glass, equal to the Suns altitude in that hour above the said
reflected Horizon, by help of the said Quadrant, and where the other end of the
said thread falls in the hour-line proposed, make another mark or point. And
so in like manner make the points (belonging to that parallel of Declination)
in the remaining hour lines, according to the several Altitudes found in the
said Table of Altitudes: Then drawing by hand a line to pass through those
several points so found, as before, which line is the reflected parallel of the
Suns declination desired. In like manner may be drawn all or any other parallel
of Declination, which may have respect to the Suns place, or the length of the
day, as shall be desired.

Or, To draw the said reflected Tropicks, or other parallels of Declination,
without any Tables calculated, only, by help of a Trigon first made on
pastboard or other material. Note that all Parallels are lesser Circles.
FIrst (as formerly is showed in drawing the parallels of Delination to a
Reflecting Horizontal Glass) fasten the Trigon on the reflected reversed Axis,
so that the center of the Trigon may be in the center of the Glass, then also
will the Equinoctial on the Trigon be perpendicular to the said reflected
reversed Axis: then take the thread fixed in the center of the said Glass,
(which is also in the center of the Trigon) and lay it upon that parallel of
Declination, drawn on the said Trigon, whose reflected parallel is required to
be drawn on the plane or Cieling: then move the Trigon, the thread lying on the
said parallel, until the end of the said thread touch any hour-line on the said
wall or Cieling, in which point of touch on that hour-line make a mark, so will
that point be in the reflected parallel of Declination desired. In like manner,
move the said Trigon, still keeping the thread on the same parallel, until the
end of that thread touch another hour-line on the said plane or Cieling, and
there also make another mark. And so in like manner find a point in each
hour-line through which that reflected parallel must pass; then drawing a line
to pass through those several points on the said plane or Cieling, which line
is the reflected parallel of the Suns Declination desired.

In like manner may be drawn any other reflected parallel of Declination
required.

To draw the reflected Azimuth-lines to any reclining Glass, on any plane
whatsoever that the Sunbeams will be reflected on. Here note that Azimuths are
great Circles.
FIrst, know that the reflected vertical point in the Axis of the Reflected
Horizon, will always be found in the reflected meridian. And look how many
degrees the reflected Horizon differs from the direct Horizon, so many must the
reflected Axis of the Horizon differ from the direct Axis of the Horizon: Hence
the reflected vertical point, whereby the reflected Azimuth-lines are drawn,
may be thus found.

Take that thread whose end is fixed in the center of the Glass, and move the
other end thereof to and fro in the reflected meridian, until by applying one
side of a quadrant thereto, you find the said thread depressed just 90 degrees,
or perpendicular under the reflected Horizon; then make a mark or point where
the other end of the said thread touches the said reflected Meridian on the
Wall, Ground, or Floor of the Room, which point so found is the reflected
vertical point desired, in which point fasten one end of a thread:

Then on pastboard or other material draw the points of the Compass or other
degrees, placing the center thereof in the center of the Glass, and the
meridian thereof in the reflected meridian of the world, which said pastboard
must be also situated in the reflected Horizon just as the Horizontal Dial was
formerly directed to be situated for drawing the reflected hour lines: And as
the threads from the center fastened in the reflected Horizon were also the
hour lines on the Horizontal Dial, whereby the reflected hour lines were
drawn. So now the threads from the center fastened in the Reflected Horizon may
be the Horizontal Azimuth lines, whereby the reflected Azimuth-lines may be
drawn: Or if that thread which fastened in the center of the glass be drawn
exactly over any Azimuth-line, the end whereof being fastened by a nail or
other means in the reflected Horizon on the other side of the Room, there may
several points be found in the wall or Cieling, through which the reflected
Azimuth line must pass, as follows:

Take that thread, one end of which is fastened in the said vertical point, and
bring it just to touch the Azimuth thread formerly fastened, and continue it
until the end thereof touch the wall or Cieling, (and also the thread it self
touch the said Azimuth it self, as before) in which point of touch on the wall
or Cieling make a mark, through which point that reflected Azimuth-line must
pass. Then move the said string fastened in the said vertical point, so that
it may just touch the said thread again, but in another place: then as before
continue that thread, until the end thereof touch the wall or Cieling again,
as before, and there make another mark, through which the said reflected
Azimuth line must also pass; In like manner may more points be found for your
further guide, in drawing that Azimuth-line. But two points being found will be
sufficient.

To draw any reflected line by any two points given over any plane whatsoever,
without projecting by the eye.
FAsten two threads in the place of the center of the said reclining Glass,
drawing the said threads straight, fastening each of the other ends in the two
reflected Azimuth-points formerly found on the wall or Cieling. Then situate a
thread cross or thwart the room, so as it may cross those other threads from
the center, near at right angles, and also just touch both of them in that
situation. By which said thread cross the room may any number of points in the
said reflected Azimuth-line to be drawn, be found at pleasure: For if the end
of another thread be also fastened in the center of the said Glass, making the
other end thereof to touch the wall or Cieling, but so that it may also just
touch the said thread, which is fastened cross the room, which point of touch
on the said wall or Cieling is another point in the said reflected Azimuth line
required to be drawn. In like manner may more points be found at every angle or
bending of the wall or Cieling for the exacter drawing the reflected Azimuth
line required, which does find points, whereby is drawn the same reflected
Azimuth line (or other lines) as was formerly done by a thread so situated,
that it may interpose between the eye and any two points assigned on the wall
or Cieling.

In like manner, if the thread fastened on the further side of the room were
removed on another Azimuth line on the said pastboard, and then fasten it again
on the further side of the room (as before) you may by help of the said thread
fastened in the said vertical point find several points on the wall or Cieling,
through which that Azimuth-line will pass; So may you either by this or the
former way draw what Azimuth lines you please, either in points of the Mariners
Compass or degrees, as you please, by drawing it first on pastboard, as before
is directed.

And note generally, that such relation the point found on the floor or ground
in the reflected reversed Axis, has to the hour lines drawn on the Horizontal
Dial, in drawing the reflected hour lines; The same has the Reflected vertical
point found on the floor or ground, to the Azimuths drawn on the pastboard in
drawing the reflected Azimuth-lines.

To draw the reflected parallels of the Suns altitude, or proportions of
shadows to any reclining Glass on any Plane whatsoever, that the Sunbeams
will be reflected on. Here note, that parallels of Altitude are lesser Circles,
therefore are not represented by a right line.
FIrst, know generally that what respect the parallels of Declination have to
the hour lines, such have the parallels of Altitude to the Azimuths.

For if one end of a thread be fastened in the place of the center of the
reclining Glass, and the other end moved to and fro in any reflected Azimuth
line, until the said thread be elevated any number of degrees proposed above
the reflected Horizon (the Elevation of which thread being found, by applying a
Quadrant thereto, and making a mark or point where the end of the said thread
touches the said reflected Azimuth drawn on the wall or Cieling, that point so
found is the point through which that Almican^er or reflected parallel of the
Suns altitude must pass.

In like manner, remove the other end of the said thread fastened in the center
of the Glass to another reflected Azimuth-line, and (as before) move it higher
or lower, until by applying the edge of a quadrant to that thread, you find
the said thread above the reflected Horizon the same number of degrees first
proposed, and at the end of the said thread in that Reflected Azimuth-line
drawn on the wall or Cieling I make another mark or point, through which the
same Reflected Almicanter or parallel of Altitude must also pass: And so in
like manner I find a point on each reflected Azimuth-line, through which the
same parallel of Altitude must pass. Then drawing by hand a line to pass
through these several points so found, as before, that line is the Reflected
parallel of the Suns Altitude proposed. In like manner may be drawn all the
other parallels of Altitude desired, which will show the Suns altitude or the
Proportion of any shadow to its altitude, at any appearance of the Suns reflex
thereon.

To draw the Jewish or old unequal hour lines to any Reclining Glass on any
plane whatsoever that the Sunbeams will be reflected on. Here note that the
Jewish hour lines are great Circles.
FIrst, (by the Rules formerly given) draw two reflected parallels of
Declination of 16 d. 55, the one being near the Summer, and the other near the
Winter-Tropick: for when the Sun has that Declination, the day is 15 hours
long in the Summer, and 9 in the winter: Then (as is formerly directed) situate
a thread just between the eye, and those three points in the said Reflected
Dial, as is expressed in the ensuing Table, so may you thereby draw all or any
of those Jewish hour lines desired, which will at any appearance of the spot by
the reflex of the Glass amongst those hour lines, show how many of the equal
hours is past since Sunrising, as was desired. Now in this Latitude of 51 degrees.
30, If the parallels of the Suns declination be drawn, both when the day is 9
and 15 hours long, that is, when it is 16 d. 55, any of those Jewish hour lines
will intersect the common hour lines, either upon the hours, half hours, or
quarters. And such a declination may be found, that it shall so do in any
Latitude desired.

Unequal Hours. 15 H. M Equ. H. 9 H. M. 0 4 30 6 7 30 1 5 45 7 8 15 2 7 00 8 9
00 3 8 15 9 9 45 4 9 30 10 10 30 5 10 45 11 11 15 6 12 00 12 12 00 Unequ. hours
15 H. M. Equ. H. 9 H. M. 7 1 15 1 0 45 8 2 30 2 1 30 9 3 45 3 2 15 10 5 00 4 3
00 11 6 15 5 3 45 12 7 30 6 4 30

To draw the Circles of Position to any reclining Glass on any plane
whatsoever, that the Sunbeams will be reflected on.
NOte that all Circles of Position are great Circles of the Sphere, and do
always intersect each other in that point of the Reflected meridian which
touches the Reflected Horizon, which may be called the common intersection;
which said Circles of Position are reckoned upon the Reflected Equinoctial both
ways from the said meridian down to the said Horizon: The Horizon Eastward
being the Cuspis of the first House, and the Horizon Westward being the Cuspis
of the seventh House; and the Reflected meridian the cuspis of the tenth House.
So that those Meridian-planes, whose Reclination is 60 degrees Westwards,
(being measured from the meridian in the Equinoctial) lies in the Cuspis of the
eighth House, and 30 degr. Westward lies in the Cuspis of the ninth house, and
30 degrees. Eastward in the Cuspis of the eleventh House, and 60 degrees. Eastward in
the Cuspis of the twelfth House: which are all the Houses above the Horizon.

Now to draw any Circle of Position, or the Cuspis of any House on any Cieling
or wall to any reclining Glass is done as follows:
First, fasten a thread, in such sort, within the Room, as that it may
interpose between the eye and the said common point of intersection on the wall
or Cieling, and also between that point where the reflected hour-line of 4
(being 60 degrees. Westward from the said Meridian) intersects the reflected
Equinoctial also on the Cieling, whereby points may be made at every bending or
angle of the wall or Cieling, to which the thread so situated may also
interpose, by which points the Reflected Cuspis of the eighth House may be
drawn. In like manner may the Cuspis of any other House above the Horizon, as
the 9 th. or 10 th. which is the Meridian (or Medium Coell) or 11 th. or 12 th.
be drawn also. For if (as before) the said thread be again so fastened within
the Room, as that it may also interpose between the eye and the said common
point of intersection, and also those points where the reflected hour-line of 2
(being 30 degrees. Westward from the said meridian) do cut the reflected
Equinoctial, whereby may be drawn the reflected Cuspis of the ninth House. Or
where the Reflected hour-line of 10 (being also 30 degrees. Eastward from the
meridian) do also cut the said reflected Equinoctial, whereby may be drawn the
Cuspis of the 11 th. House. Or where the reflected hour-line of 8 (being 60
degrees. Eastward from the meridian) do also cut the said reflected Equinoctial,
whereby may be drawn the Cuspis of the 12 th. House. The Horizon always being
the Cuspis of the first and seventh Houses, and the meridian the Cuspis of the
tenth house or Medium Coeli: wherein generally it is to be noted, That in all
planes which cut the common Intersection of the meridian and Horizon, (as does
the Horizontal, and also all meridian planes both Direct and Reclining) these
Circles of Position are all parallel to the meridian, and therefore parallel
each to other. For look what respect the hour lines in all Direct or Reclining
Polar Planes, or Direct meridian Planes have to the Axis of the World: Such
respect have the Circles of Position, in all Horizontal, or Direct meridian or
Reclining meridian Planes, to the Axis of the Prime vertical: For as the
hour lines in the first are all parallel to the Axis of the Equinoctial, in
whose Poles they meet: So the Circles of Position in the second are all
parallel to the Axis of the Prime Vertical, in whose Poles they also meet.

The reason why Glasses reflect a double Spot, is because they are polisht on
both sides, which may be remedied with a Pumex-stone. Those that desire to read
more of this Subject may see what is written by Kircher, in primitiis Gnomicae
Catoptricae, and since him by Magnan and others,

VALE.
FINIS.

