ITUR Satyricum: IN LOYAL Stanza's.
By John Collop, M. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for William Shears, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the Bible in Be^dford-street near Covent Garden, 1660.

Itur Satyricum IN Loyal Stanza's.
ATheism away, twin to Rebellion hence,
ABove fraud and force acquires, see, providence!
Charl's the Church Gold, Gods Image, see! returned
Through all the fiery trialls shines unburn'd.
Kings are Gods Christ's; Charles Christ like does appear
For Reformation in His Thirtieth Year.
The day which brought him forth, him in does bring
Gives both new life to the people and the King.
To our conversion now Rome lay no claim
Monck, Austine, Patrick nor Palladius name;
Three more then Pagan Nations now we see
Can by a Monck of ours Converted be.
Nay your three, Spain, France, Italy, are out done
Though every Monck is there a Champion.
One English Monck has here converted more,
Then all your Moncks perverted heretofore.
Spare Honest Heilin, spare thy learned pains
To vindicate St. George from addle brains.
We for our Champion now no Champion need,
St. George for England wants no Roman Creed.
This is the George, defeats the Dragons Sting;
The Church relieves the daughter of the King.
Could we with Calvin stories faith deny
What he calls fable, we would call Prophecy.
Make Bone-fires bigger, purge the infected air,
Least Treason like a Plague inhabit there.
Rebellion's Witchcraft, Witchlike may't expire,
And the Land her sin thus expiate by fire.
Nor must the Bells be wanting to the air;
Least with their Prince schisms spirits wander there.
While you your safety, and our Kings Proclaim,
Churches no more we will common places name.
Flowers strew the way, with Charles was born the spring
Twill flourish and return with him our King.
In The Winter of his absence who lay dead,
How the Gay Butterflyes in tro ps now spread?
See! how the gaudy Anticks do appear,
In masking liveries of the youthful year.
None fear to spend all, but cry Charles is come.
Charles is our all and all, to every Sum.
A Golden Age in Charles is sure foretold,
Whose sight can change even City Chains to Gold.
How they all glister, that it may appear,
Safety like heaven is never bought to dear?
At the Cits(...)ost shall now be spilt no blood,
But what is of Grape, which issuing by a flood
From every Conduit, proclaims Charles divine,
Who Savior like, turns Water into Wine.
Thousands half starved, by miracle seem fed,
Charles by his presence multiplies their bread.
The Air, Sea, Land, all summoned tribute bring,
T'acknowledge Charles an universal King.
Least these to little be, descending spears
In musical treats seem to salute his ears.
Propitious Stars in Charles his Waine prevail,
There Is no sad influence from the Dragons tail.
Glorious as Princes, if not Angels all?
Who Englands King will King of Devils call.
See! How to the Spaniard to Charles tribute pays,
While each on's back, a petty Indie lais.
Nor art thou less a tributary France,
While these thy apes present a Morris dance.
Or is it an heavenly influence? the whose train,
Thus sparkles to be Stars in Charles his Waine.
Yet see Great Charles not fit for vulgar eyes,
Like to Divinity Couched in mysteries!
Nature has seemed to place him in disguise,
Whose inside glories all outsides outvies.
Glories that ly no deeper then a skin,
Are not for Princes, their's must ly within,
God his own Character does on Princes Write,
He robbed Divinity called Gods shadow light.
All characters are libels, who'de set forth
Charles, is a Traitor to impeach his worth:
Since praises must fall short, expressions be
But the faint shaddows of Divinity.
Had not the Churches Martyr great Charles shown,
Himself by's Scripture, he had died unknown.
Now we a David read and Solomon
Without their bad, all they had good in one.
The Blood of Martyrs is the Churches seed:
It Is Charles his blood for the Church must interceed.
The heir of's virtues and his kingdoms be
The worlds reformer by a Prophecy;
No Pilsring Charles of Suevia, his glory
Did only blaze to light us to thy story.
Charles from Charles must be greatest of that name:
They Are gayer acts, but lacquey'fore his fame.
Hail Charles the second; second unto none:
The fifth falls short brought in comparison:
Greater then Charles the first sirnam'd the great;
The Pope of more then he him gave defeat:
So the most Christian King, most Catholic too
And Faiths Defender will all meet in you.
Charles by the Grace of God thou wilt truly be,
It Is merely Gods Grace has restored thee:
How do the Branches of the Royal Oak
Now flourish, and nere fear the axes strok!
Under Presbytery will these gay things truckle?
From Lords the mighty twindle to the muckle?
Sneak to the Commons, and there serve to show
For their deserts no House can be to low.
The Lords are grains to balance the royal scale:
If they prove light the Rabble must prevail.
Who in the Church will parity introduce
Shame in the State, pre-eminence out of use;
The wiser Lords who Voted Bishops down,
Casheir'd th'lesse sacred titles of their own.
Useless, and senseless, how should they not fall,
Who had renounced their part spiritual.
They their own fortunes fence about in vain,
Who lay in common sacred and profane.
May't in no Lord be treason to be wise?
Nor the beast the Rabble want a Sacrifice.
May Aged have Bristols young Lords, Bruces parts:
The Loyal Cleavelands, brave Northamptons hearts;
No Bedfords wanting be to the Council table;
Strange faults in son and father to be able.
So shall no Comets reared from fat of Earth
Presage Kings ruin, or the peoples dearth.
May the House of Commons be no Juglers box:
The steeples not men's heads have weather-cocks
With every wind of fancy to turn round.
Where all are giddy, how can truth be found?
No Cock braind sciolists factions may promote
Leave real truths on aerie names to dote.
So Sacrilege no more shall privilege be:
Nor to be slaves the peoples liberty.
May none by house of Commons understand
The place and fare of those devour the Land.
No Tax succeed a fast, first fast then prey:
Not pray and fast; fasts make the stomachs way.
A strange contrivance thus to gain a power
Three Nations sat, by fasting to devour.
Pray like the thief, a blessing on the Vocation:
Steal and give thanks for robbery of a Nation.
May Burgers mind the trade of Corporations,
And make no more a traffic of three Nations.
Nor their Elections be so numerous made
Three Lands seem slaves to Freemen of a Trade.
Since here not wisdoms are, but voices weighed:
Folly and Factions Votes must be obeyed.
May they procure good laws, then Charles supply
With that, he to his people is, a subsidy.
May aerie mysteries never unhinge their pates,
Should pry in mysteries of trade not states.
The cause, the cause, hence fears, hence Jealousies,
Who think Stars twinkle, it is their weaker eyes.
May all have noble fears, fears to do ill:
Be jealous too, least treason lurk there still.
The Prince have fears, and Jealousies to entrust
Those gratesy not reason but their lust.
Barbarous as their own Latin, or Law French,
No fee tongued Lawyer here on Laws entrench;
Faction and treason mould in forms of Law:
Prove the Lawyers anagram true, that Liars aw.
May Loyal Laws, late Common-place-Book's pains
Receive no common place as loyal gains.
For what is due on the disloyal score
May he his own works read, and write no more.
The proud Church sinned, the Vandal, Goth, and Hun
Angry heavens scourges in the Scot o'rerun
The Bishops wore Lawn Sleeves, bless us! the Nun
Does make these Lawns they are works of Babylon,
The Church is rich: how can an Achan hold
From Babylonish garments and from Gold.
But see the fruits! These with the Eagle snatch
Coals from the Altar which their own nests catch.
Lord from the Altar touch all with a coal
Which to thy service may inflame the soul:
None then shall Organs hate, all Organs be;
Made isntrumental in the serving thee.
No nose tuned Parson the Pulpit shall be labor
With noise resembling the Scotch Pipe and Tabor.
No pulpits shall vie tricks with Hocus Pocus
Truths raise shall clear them, that no Scotch mist choke us.
Scripture no more shall wracked be to profess
Her self to all impiety patroness.
To fall on times, no Priest shall leave his Text:
First divide that, and then the people next.
Cloaks for their Knavery now no pulpits need:
Arms shall give place to Gowns, while errors bleed,
The Militant Church with Charles went in exile,
But now returns enriched with Egypts spoil.
No more shall Gypsies in Rellgion be
The statutes unrepeal'd, can these go free?
The Canting Vagrants in opinions, doom
Must Gypsy like to be with pass sent home.
Send them to Italy; take them Florentine:
By Nicks discourses they should all be thine,
All Common wealths men: ours was common wealth
By knack of zeal an artificial Health.
No Presbyterian shall run out of's wits,
And introdu'ce again Phanatick fits.
By looser Prayers intitling to the sp'rite
Out of their senses three whole Kingdoms fright.
With humms, hah, whine, and a nose tuned story,
Wry neck, scru'd face, made for a Directory.
Gods name as often in vain used as in charms,
The People to be witch into all harms.
With Jacobs voice may none have Esaus hands:
None Bishops hate, because they love their lands.
Nor may long prayers the widows house devour
Or Gods house widow make, and seize her dour;
Nor by vain babbling only serve to show
A Babel of confusion thence must grow;
Out of the road of Common sense Career,
That none may say it is Common Prayer they hear.
Hate our Church forms, least they delivered be
From pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy:
From envy, hatred, want of charity,
From all sedition, and conspiracy;
From all false Doctrine, and from heresy;
Strange superstition in the Letany:
To pray for Charles, and for his victories
Over these their sins, his greatest enemies.
Restore Great Charles our Letanies, that we
May pray for those, who would not pray for thee:
Into the way then shall we God implore,
The erred and deceived to restore.
Forgive and pray forgiveness: hearts refute
Did both us slander, and thee persecute.
So we may have restored the fruits of the earth
Having of them nor of good prayers a dearth.
Then unity, peace, and concord we will beseech
God make up ours, and every Nations breach.
Pity on prisoners, and for Captives pray,
Though they were those would take our lives away:
Have mercy Lord on all men we beseech.
Prayers which exceptions use can never heaven reach.
Broke bones may thus rejoice, knit, grow more strong
In ways of peace, and truth to walk along.
FINIS.

