A DISCOURSE UPON THE FORM and MANNER OF Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating
BISHOPS, PRIESTS, and DEACONS, According to the ORDER OF THE Church of ENGLAND.

By THOMAS COMBER, D. D. Dean of Durham, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1699.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in GOD, THOMAS Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY,
Primate of all ENGLAND, And Metropolitan, etc.
May it please your Grace,
BY the divine Mercy and assistance I have now finished my illustration of our
Public Offices (which end with these Forms of Ordination,) By showing how
agreeable these (as well as the rest) are to Scripture, to pure Antiquity, and
to the design of this important Duty; I have also compared this with the
Ordinals of other Churches, Ancient and Modern, and hope all impartial Judges
will own, that ours receives great advantage by the comparison: But my
principal care has been to help the Candidates for Holy Orders, not only to
understand, but consider the whole compass of their Duty, and to persuade them
to perform it strictly and exactly: Being well assured that nothing will more
effectually conduce to the Glory of God, the Honor and Establishment of this
Church, to the growth of saving Knowledge and Piety, and the suppression of
Heresy, Schism and Vice, than a learned and devout, an exemplary and
industrious Clergy: And certainly it is great pity we should not have the best
of Men to officiate, since we are blessed with the most excellent Forms for all
Divine Administrations.

It Is not possible more care should be taken of this, than is here, as far as
Rules and Offices can go: But it is your Grace, and the College of Bishops must
give life to the Churches Orders, and to my Endeavors: Your Grace has a Right
to these Papers, because you are the chief Governor in Ordinations, under whose
Hands most of the Right Reverend the Bishops receive their Character, with
power to admit others to the inferior Orders. Wherefore from your Graces known
zeal, and exemplary care, we cannot but expect such measures shall every where
be taken in this Affair; that none shall be received into this Holy Function,
but such as are like to be a lasting Honor to it; Our Adversaries on both
Hands seem now to despair of their baffled objections against our Forms, but
fail not to enlarge on the popular Theme, of personal reflections upon some
defaulters, so that if those that are already Ordained and yet offend, were
reformed, and the unqualified kept out for the future, our Enemies ill will
would want matter to work on, and our Sion would be the Joy of the whole
Christian World. If both Clergy and People could be brought up to an adequate
conformity to our incomparable Rules, it would immediately be apparent (what
all these Discourses are intended to prove) that there is nothing material to
be reformed in our Constitution (...), Aristot. Polit. Cavendum ne si graviora
inferremus vulnera dum minoribus mederi desideramus, Ambr. de offic. l. 2. c. 2.
. And therefore the one thing necessary in our Church (whatever some would
suggest to the contrary) is to live up to our Engagements, and to let care be
had, that our Lives be answerable to our most Holy Profession, and our
Practices agreeable to our Vows; Which I am confident will be sincerely
endeavored by your Grace; and that Heaven may prosper you, and all our
Governors in so just, so pious, and so laudable a design, shall ever be the
subject of his Prayers, who desires on this, and all occasions, to approve
himself,

My Lord, Your Graces most humble and faithful Servant, THO. COMBER.
Durham October. 8th, 1699.
ERRATA.
Page 19. Marg. at. l. 31. r. R.R. expon. de. p. 22. l. 12. r. Druidten. p. 65
l. 22. dele as. p. 73. l. 10. r. a truer. p. 90. l. 23. r. The person. p. 93.
l. 17. r. their hair. p. 100. r. reverend, l. 13. and p. p. Marg. r.
praesident. p. 104. l. 1. r. desiring them. p. 117. l. 8. r. other Synods. p.
133. Marg. at l. 21. r. Doctrinae. p. 174. l. 11. r. Mission. p. 181. l. 7. r.
usage, that is, p. 227. Marg, at l. 28. add after lectitabor, Hieron. p. 231.
Title. r. consequents. p. 229. Marg. at l. 11. r. manu recenti. p. 259. after
the Title. l. 3. r. it is a. p. 280. l. 19. r. he calls. p. 282. l. 11. r.
out, and coming. p. 325. l. 25. r. this salutary. p. 330. l. 33. r. Discipline.
p. 365. l. 32. r. (as they ought) p. 443. l. 1. r. in his name. l, 4. r. in my
name. Marg. l. 5. r. mittentis.

A DISCOURSE ON THE OFFICES OF ORDINATION.
CHAP. I. Of the Preface.
. 1.
IT has been the constant use of this Church, to take care (pursuant to St.
Paul's Rule) 1 Cor. XIV. 26.
that all her Offices may be done to Edification. Which evidently appears here,
in premising this seasonable and instructing Preface, concerning the Kinds and
dignity of Holy Orders, the solemn manner of being admitted to them, and the
Qualification of such as are to enter into any of them, especially the first,
being the Gate to all the rest; which is so proper an Introduction, that we
shall (after our usual method) first set out its several parts, and then
explain the whole.

The Analysis of the Preface.
This Preface shows concerning Holy Orders and Ordination, these two
Particulars 1st. The Opinion and practice of all other regular Churches
concerning, 1. The distinction of the three Orders. It is evident to all men,
diligently reading Holy Scripture, and ancient Authors, etc.
2. The honor and respect paid to them all. Which Offices were evermore had in
such reverent estimation.
3. The solemn manner of being admitted to them. That no man might presume to
execute any of the same, except he were first called, etc.

2ly. What is required by this Church in that case; and therein, 1. A general
reason is premised. And therefore that these orders may be continued and
reverently, etc.
2ly. Particular Rules laid down, as to, 1. All three Orders in respect of the
1. Examination. No man shall be accounted, or taken to be a lawful, etc.
2. Solemn Admission. And admitted thereunto according to the Form, etc.
3. Ages of the Persons. And none shall be admitted a Deacon, except he be, etc.

2. That of a Deacon, concerning, 1. His Qualifications. And the Bishop knowing
either by himself, or, etc.
2. His Admission. May at the time appointed in the Canon, etc.





. 2.
It is evident to all men diligently reading Holy Scripture, and ancient
Authors, that from the Apostles time, etc.
Being about to prescribe the several Forms for ordaining Deacons, Priests and
Bishops, we studiously avoid the odious charge of Innovation, and therefore
appeal to Scripture and Antiquity as our Evidence, that these three Orders have
been in the Church from the Apostles time: Whereby we make a distinction,
between these three truly Sacred Orders, which were instituted by Christ and
his Apostles, and alone are retained by our Reformers, as necessary for all
Ages; and those inferior Orders of Subdeacons, Acolyths, Exorcists, Readers,
etc. invented by men in later times, and therefore laid aside in this Reformed
Church. It Is true, these were names of Offices used in some places very early;
but those who had these Titles had no solemn Ordination at first, and were
looked on rather as Candidates for, than Persons in Holy Orders: And therefore
Alphonsus a Castro Alf. a Castro adv. haeres. l. xi. tit. Ordo.
with very many other eminent Doctors of the Roman Church, cited by the learned
Chamier, allow not these lesser Orders to be Sacraments, nor truly Sacred, as
not being instituted by Christ Cham. Panstrat. l. iv. c. 22. p. 212.
. But as to these three greater Orders, our Preface modestly dates their use
from the Apostles time, for it might have been carried much higher, since it is
also evident, that in the Jewish Economy (the first Church settled by a written
Divine Law) above 3000 years ago, three Orders were appointed, the High Priest,
the Priests and the Levites, answering to our Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons,
and being the very Pattern to the Apostles in the institution of these three
Christian Orders, as diverse of the Fathers have observed Et ut sciamus
Traditiones Apostolicas sumptas de Veteri Testamento, Quod Aaron and filii ejus
atque Levitae in Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi, Presbyteri atque Diaconi
vendicent in Ecclesia. Hieron. ad Euagr. Ep. 85. T. 2. p. 511. Vide item Clem.
Epist. ad Corinth. page 92.
. I may also add that our Savior (who loved not unnecessary alteration) kept
as nigh to this Form in his own time, as the circumstances would bear; for he
sustained the place of High Priest and Bishop, (by both which names he is
called Heb. iv. 14. and 1 Pet. ii. 25.
) being the supreme Ruler of his Church, and under him the Apostles were then
only as Priests, having below them the LXX Disciples, like to the Levites and
Deacons Luc. x. 1. -- (...). Theoph. in loc.
: Out of whom, after the Apostles succeeded their Master in the Government of
the Church, many were chosen into higher Orders, and seven of them were fixed
as Deacons in Jerusalem, the Mother of all Churches Vid. Chron. Alexand. Bibl.
Patr. T. 12. p. 60. and Epiph. Panar. T. 1. haer. 20.
. After our Lord's ascension also, Scripture mentions the like number of stated
Orders; First, The Apostles who then held the place of Bishops, though they
could not be fixed to any one City: Secondly, The Evangelists who were sent to
plant or to water newly converted Churches; and these represented the
Presbyters, to which we may add the Deacons, ordained not only in Judea, but
also among the Gentile Proselytes Phil. i. 1. 1 Timothy iii. 8.
as appears from the Title of some Epistles, and the Rules given to Timothy
about them. The only Objection, as to the Scripture-Period, is about the
seemingly promiscuous use of the words Bishop and Presbyter or Elder. For which
Objection it suffices to note, 1st. That in those Churches where any of the
Apostles lived or commonly resided, as Jerusalem and Corinth, there St. James
and St. Paul for a while kept the Government in their own hands, and so long
there was no occasion for any more than two Orders under the Apostles in those
places, viz. Presbyters and Deacons. 2ly. That in those Cities where few were
converted, there was no occasion for Presbyters at first, and it seems
reasonable to think, there were no more fixed there than a Bishop and his
Deacons, which some make to be the case at Philippi, that Epistle being
directed only to the Bishops and Deacons, though others will have Bishops there
to signify Presbyters; and think Epaphroditus his Title left out in the
direction, because he carried the Epistle -- Cum Presbyteris and Diaconis,
Syriac. verse. Ita Theoph. in loc.
; and they observe St. Polycarp only mentions two Orders at Philippi,
Presbyters and Deacons (...). Ep. ad Philip. p. 18.
; but for their argument from the plural number, (Bishops.) it is sufficiently
answered by observing Philippi was a Metropolis, and had many Cities under it
in that Province, and so had many Bishops: However we do not deny, that in some
Churches, before a due settlement could be made, there might be but two Orders
besides the Apostles, who, as St. Clement says, Preaching in Countries and
Cities, ordained the First Fruits of them (proving them by the Spirit) Bishops
and Deacons of such as should believe (...). Ep. ad Corinth. p. 96.
. But Epiphanius against Aerius (the heretical Founder of the Presbyterian
party) gives a convincing reason for this, viz. because while the Preaching was
new -- all things could not be settled by the Apostles at once -- and where none
were found worthy to be Priests, they were content only with a Bishop, who
could not be without his Deacons for ministrations: but the Church was not yet
completed in its Offices, since nothing is perfect at first, but in process of
time, all that its needs required was fixed (...) -- and paulo post, (...).
Epiph. Panar. contr. Aer. lib. 3. T. 1. haer. 75.
. Whence we may infer, that in perfect Churches there were then three Orders;
and I hope our Adversaries will not offer imperfect ones for our imitation;
especially since it is clear, even in the Apostles days, that they (then being
in the place of Bishops) had power over Deacons, and gave a mission to
Presbyters Act. vi. 6. and xv. 22.
. That Evangelists could not confirm the converted Samaritans without the
Apostles Act. viii. 14, 15, 16, 17.
: That the Bishops constituted by them, were to charge the Pastors not to
preach any strange Doctrine 1 Timothy i. 3.
, and to see laborious Preachers well rewarded 1 Timothy v. 17.
, to censure offending Elders 1 Timothy v. 1.
, yea to examine and approve of Deacons 1 Timothy iii. 8.
, and to admit both these by Imposition of Hands Chap. v. 22.
; which place the Fathers generally explain of Ordination Vid. Theoph. in loc.
and Bern. de consid. lib. 4. c. 4. p. 887.
: And the like superiority Titus had in Creet Tit. i. 5. and Chap. iii. 10.
. From all which it appears there was an Order of Bishops above the Presbyters,
who must have jurisdiction over them, or else they could not reprove and
censure them (as Epiphanius notes) Epiphan. ut supra, haer. 75. contr. Aer.
; who also had then the only Power of Ordaining both the Presbyters and the
Deacons, and of confirming baptized Converts; and it is plain they had two
Orders under their Inspection and Rule, both the Preaching Presbyters, and
ministering Deacons in regular Churches, especially a little before the end of
the Apostles time. But our Preface dates the certain and general use of these
Orders from the Apostles time. So that we need not prove much more, than what
is granted by D. Blondell, the great Champion for two Orders, who confesses
that Bishops were distinguished from, and superior to Presbyters so early, that
the usage had prevailed about the year of Christ 140 Blondel. citat. a Dr.
Hammond. in Epist. praefix. Dissert. de Episc.. 23.
. Now it is agreed that St. John lived till An. Christ. 98. and if this usage
had prevailed within 42 years after, it must either have begun in the time of
the Apostles, and then must be made with their consent, or else we must suppose
so great a Change could be begun and perfected in distant places in a very
short time; which is incredible, especially if we look on the temper and state
of those poor, pious and persecuted Pastors, who succeeded the Apostles: for no
man can imagine they were busy in procuring a Dominion over their Brethren,
which neither Christ nor his Apostles had allowed them: Yet we can go higher
than Mr. Blondell yields, and as early as St. Clemens Romanus, who writ an
Epistle to the Corinthians before St. John's death, or about that time; and
though in one place of it where he speaks of the time when the Apostles first
planted Churches, he mention only two Orders, yet afterward, he takes notice,
that before the late unhapy Schism, They walked in Gods Laws, being subject to
their Governors, and giving due Honor to the Presbyters among them (...).
Clem. Ep. ad Corinth. p. 4.
. Now since we cannot reasonably suppose the Christians at Corinth, then had
any secular Governors of their own: These (...) (who are set before and
distinct from the Presbyters must be Bishops. Spiritual Governors, who in
Scripture are called by that very name Act. xv. 22. and Hebr. xiii. 7.
: And we may from this place further note; Obedience is due to them, and only
Reverence to the Presbyters. So that these two Orders were distinct from the
very time of the Apostles: And he mentions the third of Deacons also; so that
it is no wonder, if he liken the Christian Hierarchy to the three Orders among
the Jews; nor can it be doubted but these Three Orders were distinct in his
time.

S. Ignatius follows him, who was Martyred ten years after St. John's death An.
108. and his Epistles mention Bishops, Priests and Deacons (as then fixed in
all the Churches he Writ to) so very often, that we cannot cite all the places
in this brief account, but refer the Reader to Dr. Hammond's Dissertations D.
Hammond. Dissert. 2. de Episc. cap. 25. de Testim. D. Ignatij.
where they are all collected, and the places are so clear, that such as would
maintain only two Primitive Orders, are forced to question the Authority of the
Holy Martyr 's Epistles: But a learned Writer has so fully vindicated them for
genuine Vid. Vindic. Epistolar. D. Ignatij per Pearson. Edit. Cantab. 1672.
, and so plainly proved, that all other Writers of the second Century did
distinguish these Orders Ibid. cap. 13. p. 155.
, that my pains are superseded in that matter; and Ignatius remains an
undoubted Evidence for these three Orders.

So are those two genuine Epistles of Pius Bishop of Rome Anno 164. Wherein he
names two of his Subordinate Clergy, Soter and Eleutherius (both afterward his
Successors,) most worthy Presbyters: And in the fourth Epistle written to a
Bishop, he says, That the Presbyters and Deacons should honor him, not for
his Superiority, but for his being Christ's Servant (d). Epist. 3. Pij prim.
cap. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 70. and Epist. 4: ibid. p. 71.
In the same Century Anno 192 lived Clemens of Alexandria, who speaks of some
precepts in Scripture given to Presbyters, others to Bishops, and others to
Deacons (...). Clem. Al. paedag. l. 3. cap. 12.
. And expressly affirms, that there were then in the Church the Degrees of
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons (...). Id. Strom. lib. 6. p. 667.
, than which nothing can be clearer: Next to him may be placed Tertullian his
contemporary, who names all these Orders, and affirms the right of Baptizing is
in the Supreme Priest; that is, the Bishop, and then in Priests and Deacons,
but not without his License for the Honor of the Church Dandi quidem jus habet
summus sacerdos qui est Episcopus, dehinc Presbyteri and Diaconi, etc. Tert. de
Bapt. cap. 17.
. And he blames the Heretics for blundering these Sacred Orders, and
confounding them with the Laity. So that one was a Bishop to day, and another
to morrow; one a Deacon or Presbyter to day, to morrow a Reader or a Layman
Idem de praescript. haeret. cap. 41. p. 217.
. Yea, he there tells us, that Bishops were set over the Church by the
Apostles, and that the Succession was continued to his time Idem ibid. cap. 32.
p. 213.
; which is what our Preface affirms concerning Bishops, that they had been over
the Church from the Apostles time: To him in the beginning of the next Century
may be added Origin Anno 220; who says, that Bishops, Priests and Deacons are
names of distinct Administrations Origin in 19. Matthew. p. 363.
. And he names these Orders again Idem in 21. Matthew. ver. 12. p. 442.
, and when he had reckoned up the Laity, the Deacons and himself among the
Presbyters, he adds; The Bishop is he that had delivered to him, the
Ecclesiastical Rule over all of us (...). Id. in Jerem. hom. 2.
. Before the middle of this Century flourished, St. Cyprian An. 248. who every
where names these three Orders so expressly, that none can deny they were fixed
in the African Church long before his time; wherefore waving innumerable
testimonies concerning the distinction of the Orders, I will only cite two or
three about their Subordination. First he says, -- Bishops succeeded the
Apostles, and are ordained in their stead -- and that Schisms and Heresies
spring from contemning this one Bishop Praepositos qui Apostolis vicaria
ordinatione succedunt -- inde enim Schismata and Haereses obortae sunt -- dum
Episcopus contemnitur. Cypr. Ep. 69.
. And as to the Presbyters acting presumptuously against their Bishop, he
represents it as an offense against God, a forgetting the Gospel, their own
place, and the future Judgment, when without regard to their Superior, without
any precedent in former Ages, they challenge his whole Power with rudeness
Cypr. Ep. 10. p. 29.
. And he has writ one Epistle, only to show the horrid Crime of a Deacon
contemning his Bishop, and appointing the Person who did so, to be
excommunicated and deposed unless he repented Idem Ep. 65. p. 192.
. So that in his time, Deacons and Presbyters were not only distinct from, but
subject to their Bishop: About this time also Novatus, the Heretic, is
censured for not considering there could be but one Bishop in one Church, that
was orthodox, (as Rome then was) though at the same time there were forty six
Presbyters and seven Deacons under him in that City Epist. Cornelii ap. Eusebius.
l. 6. c. 35.
. To this Age we must also reckon the Canons called Apostolical, made in diverse
Synods under Heathen Emperors, and collected by Clemens Alexandrinus, (as it is
believed) but certainly a genuine remain of this Century, as is abundantly
proved by a very learned Author Codex Can. Eccles. Prim. vindicat. per. G.
Beveridge, 1678.
. Now these Canons every where make out the distinction of these Orders, and
the subjection of the two latter, to the first, viz. the Bishop: For they
decree three Bishops must ordain a Bishop, but one is sufficient for a Priest
or Deacon Apostol. Can. i, ii. Bern. Tom. 1. p. 1.
. And very many of these Canons name these Orders distinctly, as being then
settled and well known in the Christian Church in that early Age Ibid. Can. iv,
v, vi, vii, viii, and xvii, xviii, and xxv, xxvii, xxviii, xxix, and xxxiii,
xxxvi, and xlii, xliv, xlv, and li, lii, liii, and lxiii, lxviii, lxix, lxx,
and lxxxiii.
. And for the Subordination, No Presbyter or Deacon may remove without his
Bishop's leave Ib. Can. xv. p. 10.
. No Presbyter can separate from him Ib. Can. xxxi. p. 19.
. The Bishop may excommunicate or absolve Presbyters and Deacons Ib. Can.
xxxii. p. 21.
, and neither of them are to do any thing without their Bishop's consent Ib.
Can. xxxix. p. 27.
; yea Presbyters and Deacons are declared to be Officers under the Bishop Ib.
Can. xli. p. 28.
. And now we have viewed the original of these Orders, whose Foundations were
laid by God in the Old Testament, agreed to by our Savior, and instituted by
his Apostles in the New; and the next three Centuries continued the usage in
times of Persecution, when the Bishops were all Saints or Martyrs, and could
have no reason to alter an Apostolical Institution, nor any ends of Ambition or
Covetousness to tempt them to set up any Innovation. So that we conclude, thus
far there were three Sacred Orders in the Church. Our Adversaries confession of
this, makes all further proof of the number and distinction unnecessary, and we
may be assured, that what was done in those Pure and Primitive Ages was right;
so that we will only add a few Observations about the Bishops superiority over
Priests and Deacons, and so end this Section. In the Council of Alexandria, An.
339. it appeared that one Colluthus, who was but a Presbyter, had ordained
Ischyras and others to the same Degree, but that Council degraded him and the
rest, and reduced them to the degree of Laics, for want of Episcopal
Ordination Epist. Synod. ab Alexand. Binius, T. 1. p. 405.
; which probably gave occasion to the Council of Antioch, An. 341. to forbid
any but a Bishop to ordain a Presbyter or Deacon Conc. Antioch. can. 10. Bin.
Tom. 1. p. 411.
. For it had been always taken for granted, that the Bishop was of the first
Order, and so to admit the other two: Hence Optatus Milevitanus, who flourished
An. 368. says of the times before his own, that even then the Church had
Deacons fixed in the third, and Presbyters in the second Degree, besides
Bishops, who were the top and Princes of the rest Optat. Milev. lib. 1. p. 39.
. So Sidonius styles Euphronius a Priest of the second Order: before he was
made a Bishop Sidon. Apol. l. 4. ep. 25. p. 106.
; yea before him St. Hierom reckons Presbyters the second Order Hieron. in 1
ep. Tim. cap. iii.
. And the Gallican Ritual calls them -- an Order next following the Bishops --
of the second Dignity; affirming that the Apostles filled the world with this
second sort of Preachers -- and they there pray at the Ordaining a Presbyter,
that he may obtain the gift of a second merit Ordin. Pres. in Litur. Gallic.
vet. ap. Mabil. l. 3. p. 306.
. More of which testimonies may be seen in a late learned Author of our own
Vid. Dod. Dissert. Cypr. 6.. 12.
. To conclude, it was so well known that a Bishop was a superior order to a
Presbyter, that it was deemed Sacrilege by the Fourth General Council to thrust
a Bishop down from the first to the second Degree (...) Council. Chalc. Act. 4.
Bin. p. 427.
. So that however persecution and dire necessity may perhaps exeuse some late
Churches, for being forced to mix the two first Orders, and to have only
Priests and Deacons: Yet we, who have a prescription of above 1600 years for
us, even from the Apostles time, have the right of our side, and must never
depart therefrom. I have no time to enlarge upon this Subject, which has been
so fully and learnedly discussed by diverse excellent Writers, that I hope the
Controversy is at an end; wherefore I shall refer the Reader for his further
satisfaction (if it be desired) to the Authors here cited Bilson of Church
Govern. c. 2. -- And. Opusc. resp. ad Ep. Molin. -- Ham. mond. Dissert. de jure
Div. Episcop. -- Bish. Tay. Div. Instit. of Episc. -- Spalat. de R. P. Eccles.
l. 2. c. 3.
, which are abundantly sufficient.

. 3.
Which Offices were evermore had in such reverent Estimation.
The Honor and Dignity of the Priesthood is only mentioned here as a reason
why so solemn an Admission to it, and so extraordinary Qualifications in the
Candidates for it are required. Yet it deserves our particular consideration,
because we live in an Age wherein not only Religion, with all holy times,
places, and things, but with them the Persons also that are consecrated to
God's service, and have been honored in all Nations and Ages of the World; are
despised by the Separatists and Enthusiasts, as well as by the Atheistical and
Profane: So that I am obliged with St. Paul to magnify my Office Romans xi. 13.
, and show it was evermore had in reverent esteem by all wise and good men: and
to prove this I will begin with the first times.

Before the Law, the Priesthood originally was in the Firstborn, as not only
the Ancient Jews Ab. Ezr. in Genesis iv. 3.
, but also diverse Christian Fathers and others do declare See Seldom. Hist. of
Tithes p. 5. and review. p. 451.
. And these were accounted the most honorable in every family; so that they
were commonly Kings and Priests both, as appears by the Example of Melchisedec
in Sacred Story Genesis xiv. 18.
, and by the testimony of Heathen Writers Temporibus heroicis -- (...).
Aristot. Polit. l. 3. c. 14. Majorum b^ec erat consuetudo, ut Rex esset etiam
Sacerdos, Serve. ad Virg. Aen. 3. p. 276.
, as well as the evidence of Christian Authors (...). Isid. Pelcus. l. 2. ep.
47.
. So that in those eldest times the dignity of the Priesthood was reputed very
great, and only fit for the greatest Persons to exercise. And it is rationally
believed, it was this right which Esau despised and sold Genesis xxv. 34.
, for which he was rejected by God, who confirmed this honor to Jacob: However
it is certain, that before the Levites were chosen to officiate about holy
things, the firstborn were Priests, and such were those young men who were
sent by Moses to offer Sacrifices before Aaron's election Exodus xxiv. 5. -- and
misit primogenitos. Called. Par. and Verse. Arab. -- Ante erectum Tabernaculum --
li^urgia erat penes primogenitos. Beresc. Rab.
. Yea God himself declares he had taken the Levites to minister to him instead
of the firstborn Numb. iii. 12, and 45.
, who therefore must have been the Priests of the Lord till then; and some
observe Reuben regularly was to have this dignity, but was excluded by a
notorious crime; so was Simeon the next Son also; and Levi (his Partner in
destroying Shechem) had been deprived also, but only that Tribe expiated their
Fathers fault by slaying the Idolaters, Exodus xxxii. 29. and so as the eldest
Tribe duly qualified were chosen to this honor; for which Dathan and Abiram,
the Reubenites, envyed them, and joined in a Sedition against Moses on this
occasion Numb. xvi. 1.
, which shows these Offices were then very highly accounted of, and God did
intend they should remain great and honorable, both by the large and noble
Revenues settled on them, which maintained them in the state of Princes under
the Jewish Economy (a). (...). Phil. de praem. sacerd. p. 832.
And by the Authority of judging all sorts of Causes; so that even the Levites
sat on the Tribunals by Divine Command Deuteronomy. xviii. 9. 2 Chronicles. xix. 8. --
(...). Joseph. adv. Ap. l. 2.
, and bore the highest Character among that People. As for the High Priest, his
Garments, his Palace, his place in the Sanhedrin and elsewhere, do all show an
extraordinary Grandeur and Authority was vested in him; and Josephus says that
Moses who was King in Jeshurun Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 5.
, (when he published God's having elected Aaron for High Priest) declared, if
it had been left to his choice, he would have named himself, and have accounted
it a reward for all his labors for that People Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 3. c. 9.
p. 179.
. We know that Eli was both High Priest and the Supreme Judge over Israel, so
that both Offices were united in him 1 Samuel iv. 18.
: and in Joshua's time Eleazar's dignity was such, that he is generally named
before Joshua, the Prince and Chief Magistrate of Israel Numb. xxxii. 28. and
xxxiv. 17. Josh. xvii. 4. and xxi. 1.
. We see also that God was so tender of Aaron's honor, that when he and Miriam
were both in a fault, she was struck with Leprosy, and he spared Ut discamus
cavere ne Sacerdotes exesos reddamus, Drus. in Number. xii. 1, 10.
, which Example Solomon also imitated, who only deprived Abiathar the
High Priest, but put Joab (his Partner in the same Treason, to death 1 King.
ii. 26, 27.
. To this purpose also we may note, that the Priests in Scripture are called
Gods Exodus xxii. 28. RR. exempl de Sacerdotibus, and D. Paul. locum applicat
Pontifici, Act. xxiii. 5.
, and sometimes (as the Rabins tell us) Angels Jud. ii. 1. Hic erat Phineas,
Phesic. fol 2.
. For that Angel who came up from Gilgal to Bochim (they say) was Phineas the
High Priest, because Angels properly come down: and not only in Judea, but in
the adjacent Countries of Egypt and Midian, there was the same name for a
Prince and a Priest, (which often causes a difference among Interpreters; but
it is probable the persons were both (...) Deuteronomy. xvii. 9. Exodus ii. 16. Chald.
Par. Principem Midian -- ita Genesis xli. 45.
; the Priests also (as Princes then) were usually called Fathers Judge. xvii. 10.
: So that no Titles were then too great for them which might express veneration
and respect. For it seems by Josephus, that among the Jews, to have right in
ministering holy things was reckoned the highest kind of Nobility; wherefore
when he would set out his own extraction, he glories that he descended of a
Sacerdotal Family Joseph. Vita, Tom. 2. p. 661.
. All this and much more (which I might add) proves the reverent estimation of
these Orders among God's ancient People, and that by divine direction.

The same also we shall find (as if it were by universal consent) was the
Opinion and Practice of the Gentiles all over the World, to esteem and give
honor to their Priests, next to their Kings: Among the Egyptians the King was
either chosen out of the Priests, or was obliged to be of that Order before his
election, as diverse ancient Authors do relate (...). Synes. de Prove. p. 93. ita
Plat. de Repub. Plut. Is. and Osir.
; and their lesser Orders were plentifully supplied with variety of Meats and
Wines at the public Charge Herodot. Euterp. l. 2. p. 104.
. The Persian Priests were their Magi who are described by Porphyry, as the
Divine Philosophers, and Servants of their God -- a great and venerable Order
of men (...). Porph. de abst. l. 4.. 16.
, who were highly respected by, and Privy-Councellors to that great Emperor Id.
ibid.
. Yea one of the Persian Kings made it to be writ on his Monument (as one of
his greatest Titles) that he had been Master of the Magi: For (as Strabo tells
us) they by excelling others in Wisdom of old time, got themselves dominion and
honor Sacerdotes Aegyptios, Chaldaeos and Magos aliqua sapientia caeteris
excellentes, principatum, and honorem apud majores nostros comparasse, Strabo.
Geogr. l. 1. p. 18.
. The Indians likewise so revered their Brachmans, or Priests, as to exempt
them from all legal penalties and tribute, and both Prince and People applied
to them for their Prayers and Advice in all difficulties Porphyr. de abstin. l.
4.. 17. p. 168, 169.
. The Priest of Hercules at Tire, wore a Mitre and a Purple Robe, and was next
in dignity to the King, as Alex. ab Alexandro has recorded In Tyro Herculis
Sacerdos cum insula and purpura procedit, and post Regem secunda dignitate
fungitur, Alex. ab Alex. Genesis Dier. l. 2. c. 8. p. 66. a. b.
, and the same Author there has collected diverse instances of the same
veneration given to, and like ensigns of honor used by, the Priests of several
other Nations. So that Clem. of Alexandr. had reason to say, That even down to
his time among the most rational of the Barbarous Nations, the race of Priests
is kept up as a security to the Kingdom (...). Clem. Al. ap. Causab. not. in
Suet. p. 167.
. And truly in those Ages there were not many more barbarous than the Northern
People, even our Ancestors the Britains, Galls and ancient Germans, whose
Priests were called Druids or Druidren (which our Saxons write Dritchten) that
is Lords, as Lipsius gives us the Etymology Lips. Cent. 3. ad Belg. Ep. 44.
, to whom these People paid the highest honor and respect, as Diodorus Siculus
reports Quos eximio honor dignantur. Diod. Sicul. l. 5. c. 9.
. And Caesar (who knew them very well) says, there were two Orders of Nobility
only among the ancient Gauls, first the Druids, and then the Knights -- the
former being among them in great esteem, judging all public and private Causes
-- distributing also rewards and punishments, -- and over them was one chief
Druid, who had the supreme Authority, but all of them were exempted from War
and Tribute, and enjoyed an universal immunity -- magnoque ii sunt apud eos
honor -- fere de omnibus controversiis constituunt -- praeest unus qui summam
inter eos habet autoritatem, etc. Caesar. Bell. Gal. l. 6. p. 225, 226.
; which character of them is confirmed by Tacitus Tacit. de moribus, Germ c. 7.
p. 607, etc.
, Pomponius Mela Pomp. Mela l. 3. c. 2.
, and other Authors. As for Strabo, he seems to have hinted at Vossiu^ his
derivation of Druids from Dru, that is (as we write it) True Vossius de idolol.
l 1. c. 35.
, or Faithful Men; hence he says All account them the most just, so that both
public and private judgments are trusted with them, and they also determine
matters of War; and if they forbid a Battle already begun, they immediately
desist Justissimi autem omnium opinione, ideo and privata and publica judicia
eorum fidei mandantur, etc. Strab. Geogr. l. 4. p. 137.
. The same Author also affirms, that the Getae (another of these Northern
People) had a Priest who was an associate with the King in Governing, and had a
title of Divinity Id. ibid. l. 7. p. 208.
; and a later Writer mentions two other Nations of this Clime, who honored
their Chief Priest no less than their King Flaminem suum non minus quam regem
venerantur, Helmold. de Rug. and Sclav.
. So that the honors now annexed to these Sacred Orders in these Northern and
Western parts of the World See the Bishop's right to vote in Capital Causes,
chap. 4.
, did not owe their beginning to Christianity, but were annexed originally to
such as were Priests from Pagan times, as far as any memory remains, and
Christian Princes did not begin, but continue their Dignity and Authority: And
particularly their freedom from Taxes was a Privilege enjoyed not only by the
Druids, but by the Egyptian Priests Genesis xlvii. 26. Joseph. Antiq. l. 2. c. 4.
, by those of India (...). Porphyr. de abst. l. 4.. 17.
and Persia, for the custom of his own Country moved Artaxerxes to exempt the
Jewish Priests, Levites, etc. from all Toll and Tribute Ezra vii. 22. vide quae
Josephus notat de Ocho Tyranno, Joseph. ant. l. 11. c. 7.
; who were also to enjoy the like Privilege by a Special Order of Julian the
Apostate, that they might be freer to pray for his prosperity Julian. Epist.
25. p. 153.
. But of this more hereafter: I should tire my Reader and my self if I should
enlarge upon the honors and dignity of Priests among the more cultivated
Greeks and Romans, who had an incredible number of them; many belonging to
every one of their (almost innumerable) Gods, and yet none of them wanting
either maintenance or respect. So that I shall only briefly instance in some of
the principal among these. Among the Greeks it was a special honor, to make
some very great and very eminent men Priests with the Title of the Chief of
that Province, where they were created Presidents of the Sacrifices: such were
those Asiarchae in the Acts Act. xix. 31. Quidam de principibus Asiae, Vulg.
Alii vert. de primoribus Asiae.
, which we translate the Chief of Asia, That is, the Chief Priests who held the
Highest Dignity in the lesser Asia, and such were the Helladarchae in Greece,
Bithynarchae and Galatarchae in Bithynia and Galatia, as a late learned Writer
has fully made out Pride. Marmor. Oxon. p. 28. and not. ejus, p. 95.
. The Priest of Venus was also King of Cyprus (...). Scholiast. in Pindar.
Pyth. Od. 2.
, and the Honor and Revenue annexed to it was so considerable, that Cato
offered King Ptolemy (if he would yield up his Arms) to procure him chosen
Priest of the Goddess at Paphos, and then he should want neither Riches nor
Honor (...). Plutar. in vita Catoni^.
. Among the Romans there were very many Colleges of Priests, to whom the
highest respect was paid, and by whom diverse of the Principal Offices of State
also were managed: but these are so well known, that a few observations will
suffice. The greatest Men as Q. Fab. Maximus Plin. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 48.
, and the famous Cicero Cicero, Orat. 2. Phil.
were Augurs at Rome, and they had this privilege, that till they died they
could not by any Crime forfeit their place Plutar. Quaestion. Romans Prob. 99.
, and with it they might hold the Consulship, or any other Praefecture; and
therefore the Sons of the Nobility were sent to Tuscany to be fitted for this
Office Cicer. de divinat. l. 1. and Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 1.
. Numa the Second King of Rome, executed the place of Chief Flamin Live. Hist.
l. 1.
, of which there were three Orders, and the first, viz. the Flamin of Jupiter,
had singular privileges, and could deliver Criminals who kneeled to him Aulus
Gellius, l. 5. c. 15. and Rittershus. de Jure asyli, c. 2.
, and was excused from taking an Oath Aul. Gell. ibid.
, and to omit many other particulars, The Pontifex maximus bore the Title of
King of Sacred things, and was next to the King in dignity, living at home, and
going abroad in the state of a Prince; for he was reputed Supreme Arbiter both
of divine and humane Affairs Pontifex maximus -- judex atque arbiter habetur
rerum divinarum humanarumque, Ver. Flaccus Verbo Orde, p. 144.
. So that the Consuls of old sought this high Dignity: And the Emperors
afterward from Augustus his time (not daring to trust so large an Authority in
any other hand) always were solemnly admitted Highpriests, till Gratian's time
Sueton. vit. August. c. 31. p. 167. and not. Causab. ibid. item Al. ab Alex.
genesis dier. l. 2. c. 8.
, who refused it out of Conscience as a Pagan Office: By all which it is most
apparent, that all Nations (who owned any God, or had any sort of Religion)
unanimously agreed to use his Priests and immediate Servants with all possible
honor and respect.

But since the Preface speaks only of the Ministers of the Christian Church, it
is more to our purpose to enquire what esteem is due to them, and what honors
have been conferred on them; and doubtless as their Office is more excellent,
and their Administrations more sublime, than those of any other Religion; so
their dignity is not, and their esteem should not be less: Wherefore we will
enquire what light we have from Scripture, and what evidence from Antiquity in
this matter: When our Lord sent forth his newly ordained Apostles to preach, he
declares, that such as despised them, despised both him and his heavenly
Father, and that he would take all the respect and favor showed to them, as if
it were to himself Matt. x. 40, 41. Luc. x. 16.

Piissimus Dominus communem sibi cum servis suis and honorem simul and
contumeliam facit, Salv. de gub. l. 8.


; and St Paul strictly charges that none presume to despise his lately
constituted Bishops 1 Timothy iv. 12. Titus ii. 15.
, and Orders that the Presbyters who were diligent in preaching should have
double honor 1 Timothy v. 17.
; he enjoins the People over whom they are set, to esteem them very highly in
love for their work sake 1 Thessalonians. v. 12. (...).
: and when he sent Epaphroditus the Bishop of Philippi to his See, he commands
the Christians, to have a great honor for him, and such as he was Philip. ii.
29. (...).
; for there is an high Authority lodged in the Episcopal Order, who are not
only to teach, but to command 1 Timothy iv. 11.
, and rebuke with all Authority Titus ii. 15.
. And the People were not only to obey their commands, but to submit also to
their punishments Hebr. xiii. 17. (...). Theoph. in loc.
. Which clear places of Holy Writ do confer on them a power to Govern, and a
right to be Honored by their Flock: Hence the Apostles, though very humble,
did not even in their persecuted estate refuse all expressions of honor, for
Cornelius fell down at St. Peter's feet, so did the Jailer before Paul and
Silas; and the Governor of Melita honored St. Paul with many honors Acts x.
25. and xvi. 29. and xxviii. 10.
. But besides these precepts and practices the very Names and Titles given to
those in these Sacred Orders in the Scripture do imply, that the Holy Ghost
designed them to a very Honorable Employment: The name Apostle imports a
Messenger, sent with Authority to act in his Masters name; and therefore the
Emperor's Praefects are the (...) 1 Pet. ii. 14.
; and the Judges in France of old were styled Missi Dominici Capitular. reg.
Franc. Tom. 1. p. 198. and alibi.
: Yea the Chief Officer under the Jewish Patriarch was called his Apostle Cod.
Theod. tit. de Judaeis, l. 16. Tit. 8. LL. 14.
: and it is plain our Lord intended his Apostles should have Chief Authority in
his Church, because he promised them twelve Thrones and power to judge all
Christians, that is, the true Israelites Matt. xix. 28.
. Their Successors who were fixed in the Churches they had planted, are called
Bishops, which is a name importing Oversight and Rule; for Eleazar who was Son
to the High Priest, and a Chief over the Rulers of the Levites, is called a
Bishop by the Greek Interpreters, and elsewhere a Prince of the Rulers Numb.
iv. 16. (...) qui cap. iii. 32. dicitur (...).
, and in the sense of a Governor; that word is elsewhere used by them in the
Old Testament Nehem. xi. 9, 14. Isai. lx. 17.
. In the New Testament the place of an Apostle is called a Bishopric Act. i.
20.
, and our Savior is styled the Bishop of our Souls 1 Pet. ii. 25.
. At Athens this name was given to the Judges Aristid. orat. de concur. ad As.
civ.
. At Rome the High Priest was sometimes named the Bishop of the holy Virgins
(...). Plut. vit. Numae.
, which perhaps might occasion Hesychius to explain it by the word King (...).
Hesych. p. 364.
. So that every where it has been reputed a Name importing Dignity and Rule:
So does the Title of (...) (which St. Paul gives to Bishops Heb. xiii. 7.
, signify commonly chief Governors Matt. ii. 6. and Act. vii. 10.
; as does also that other of Presidents, which is applied to Bishops by very
ancient Christian Writers (...). Just. Ma^t. Apol. 2. p. 97. Dionys. Cor. ap.
Eusebius. l. 6. c. 23.
. I shall only add, that they also have the name of Angels, as some Fathers
expound that of the Apostle of Women's wearing a Covering because of the Angels
Sacerdotes and Ministros altaris intellige, Prim. in loc. ita Ambros. and Euch.
in 1 Cor. xi. 10.
; and as all of them generally interpret that of the Revelations, where the
Angels are the Bishops of the seven Churches of Asia Revel. ii. 1. Epiph. l. 1.
T. 2. Panarii, and alii passim.
; a Title sometimes given to the Jewish High Priest, as we noted before. The
name Presbyter (which some will have originally belonging to the first, but
afterward commonly given to the second Order of the Clergy) denotes also
Authority and Rule, and seems to confirm the old usage of the eldest Sons
governing all the Family (...). Diod. Sic. l. 2.
, a custom retained in Arabia till Strabo's time (...). Strab. Geog. l. 16. p.
530.
. The Ancients in Homer are put for the most Honorable, as Eustathius notes
(...). Not. Eustat. ad Hom. Iliad. 2.
. And it is not only in the Old Testament, that a Presbyter or Elder, signifies
a Ruler, and one in Authority Numb. xi. 16. and xxii. 7. Josh. xxiv. 31. and
alibi.
; But in all Languages some word of like signification is used for men in some
Office or Honorable Post, as Senators in Latin, Seigneur in French, Signore in
Italian, Sennor in Spanish, and our Saxon Ealdorman, are all Titles of Honor
Vide Seld. Syned. l. 1. c. 14. p. 335. Skinners Dictionary voce Signior, and
alibi.
; and so was Presbyter originally intended, for the Verb from which it comes
signifies to Rule (...). Hesch. p. 784.
, and it is used for a Superior: Of which the word Priest (which we commonly
use) is only a barbarous contraction, but can by no means be supposed (as some
profanely apply it in their discourse) to be any name of diminution, or
contempt. There remains only the Title of Deacon, now restrained to the lowest
of these three Orders, but it must be reckoned honorable in it self, because
it is applied to the chief Civil Magistrate, in respect to his being
subordinate to God Romans xiii. 4. Gr. (...).
, to Bishops, to the Apostles, and to Christ himself Romans xv. 8. 2 Cor. vi. 4.
Colos. iv.
; and though I would not infer from that use of the Name (as a late Author
does) that this Order was not in the Apostles time Preface to the History of
the Regalia. p. 14.
: yet I may justly note, that no dishonor can be cast upon our Deacons or
Ministers from this appellation that will not reflect upon Magistrates, and our
Lord also: To which I may add Mr. Mede's observation, that it is not said they
are Ministers of the people, but of God and of Christ See Medes Diatrib. on 1
Cor. iv. 1.
. Wherefore all the names of these Sacred Orders in Scripture are honorable,
and so are also the Offices signified by them, and this may suffice for the
inspired Books.

As to the Opinion and Practice of the Christians afterward, they could not
but value the Priesthood at an high rate, since they reckoned it so necessary
to Religion, that there could be no Church where there were no Priests Ecclesia
non est quod non habet Sacerdotes. Hier. adv. Lucif. c. 8. ita Theod. and
Valent. l. 20. in append. ad Cod. Theodos.
. And the famous Justinian has recorded it in his Laws, That the Kingdom and
the Priesthood are the greatest gifts that the Divine Goodness has given unto
men (...). Justin. praef. ad Auth. coll. 1. Tit. 6. p. 11.
: but to go back to the earliest times, Epiphanius cites ancient Authors
affirming, That St. James Bishop of Jerusalem ( after the manner of the Jewish
High Priest Exodus xxviii. 36.
wore a golden Plate as a Diadem on his Head, in token of his Royal Priestood
Epiphan. Panar. l. 1. T. 1. haer. 29. and l. 3. T. 2. haer. 78.
. The like Ornament, as Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus reports, was used by St.
John Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 23. p. 141.
. And Baronius gives instances of the same thing used by Primitive Bishops, who
could not be supposed to do it out of Pride, but to express the dignity of
their Order Baron. Annal. An. 34. p. 240.
, which in times of persecution, when it had no outward luster nor secular
support, was honored by the faithful; and those holy Bishops were revered as
the representatives of God and Christ Jesus. Yea St. Ignatius, an humble Bishop
and an eminent Martyr, requires Christians to obey their Bishop as Christ did
his Father, to observe and reverence the Presbyters as the Apostles of Christ,
and to respect the Deacons as the Ordinance of God Vid. loc. citat. a D.H. Ham.
dissert. 2. c. 25.
which is no more than our Savior and St. Paul had intimated before Luke x.
16. and 1 These. iv. 8.
. And so it was no new Doctrine of his: It were endless to give instances of
the strict observance of these Precepts by the devout Converts of that Age, so
that one or two may suffice: The blessed Martyr St. Polycarp was so highly
honored by the people of Smyrna where he was Bishop, that until the day of his
Martyrdom he had never pulled off his own shoes, every one striving who should
do that office for him Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 15. p. 97.
; and those of Antioch kissed the Hands and embraced the Feet of Meletius their
Bishop Chrysostom. de S. Melet. Antioch. T. 5. p. 539.
. The old and famous St Anthony the Hermit, who lived in the times of
Persecution, though he wrought Miracles, yet being not in Orders, he used to
bow his Head, and humbly receive the Benediction of Bishops and Priests; nor
would he pray, if but a Deacon were present, but made him go before him in the
Office Athanas. in Vit. D. Ant. Tom. 5. p. 508.
. And this Custom of bowing to beg the blessing of the Clergy, and other very
holy Men, was so usual among Christians, that the very Gentiles did it to St.
Anthonys's Scholar, St. Hilarion, as St. Hierom in his life reports Vit. S.
Hilarion. apud Hieron. Tom. 1. p. 329.
; and the usage continued for many Ages, both in the Eastern and Western
Church, to kiss the Clergies hands, and kneeling to receive their blessing Vid.
Haberti observe. in Pontifical. Graec. Obs. 7. p. 139.
. But I proceed, and shall add, that when Constantine became a Christian he was
exemplary for honoring the Clergy; for coming to the Council of Nice, and
seeing the Bishops rise to receive him, he would not sit down in that venerable
Assembly till the Fathers desired him (...). Eusebius. in Vit. l. 3. cap. 10. p.
363.
, and when the Council was ended, He feasted them all in his Palace, making
diverse of them sit at his own Table Id. ibid. c. 14. p. 364.
. In after times St. Martin was placed next to the Emperor Maximus, and his
Presbyter sat between the Emperors Uncle and Brother, at a Feast where many
Nobles were present Sulpic. Sever. vit. D. Martini. 23. p. 466.
. And it was believed a Judgment of God fell upon Valentinian the elder, for
not rising to that Bishop when he came to him Idem in Dialogo. 6. p. 537.
. I might also note, that if Bishops solicited Princes for the pardon of
Criminals, or on other occasions of Charity, they used not to deny them: And
St. Martin is said rather to command it than entreat in such cases Et si pro
aliquibus supplicandum regi fuit, imperavit potius quam rogavit. Sulpic. Sever.
vit.. 23. p. 465.
. But I shall rather observe, that before there were Christian Magistrates, the
Apostles put the power of judging all causes among beleivers into the Governors
of the Church 1 Cor. vi. 1. and 1 Timothy v. 19, 20.
, who exercised this Power during the times of Persecution -- Nam and judicatur
magno cum pondere, etc. Tertul. Apol. cap. 39.
. But when the Emperors became Christian, the Bishops were by Law made Judges
of all Spiritual Matters, and of all Causes among their own Clergy Sozom.
Histor. Eccles. l. 1. cap. 9. p. 206.
; so that there lay no appeal from them, and their Sentence was to be more
binding than that of the secular Judges as Constantine decreed. And besides,
the Laity out of the esteem they had for this Order, did so often choose them
Arbitrators, that diverse good Bishops complained of it as a very great Burden;
yet for making Peace they submitted to it, and the Laws confirmed their
decisions Posidon. de vit. August. cap. 19. vid. Cod. Just. l. 1. Tit. 14. de
Episc. and. p. 25.
. I might further observe, that Bishops were very often sent on Embassies,
especially in order to make Peace: Thus Maruthus a Bishop in Mesopotamia was
sent Ambassador to the Persian King Socrat. Hist. lib. c. 8. p. 736.
. St. Ambrose was twice sent on Embassies from the Emperor to Maximus Baron.
An. 381. and An. 387.
, and Epiphanius Bishop of Pavy was twice Ambassador between the Gothic Princes
and the Emperors, and was both times succesful in making Peace Idem Baron. Anno
471. and 474.
. I will conclude what peculiarly belongs to the first Order, by noting the
Honorable Titles given to the Bishops; and first they were generally called
Fathers Ecclesia patres ipsos appellat. Aug. in Psalm. 45. Constable. Apostol. l. 2.
c. 36.
. And the Emperors writing to them, or speaking of them give them the Title of
your Holiness Cod. Justin. l. 1. Tit. 1. l. 7. p. 3.
, most Blessed and most Religious Ib. Tit. 2. l. 16. p. 8.
, most Venerable, or most Reverend Ib. Tit. 3. l. 25. p. 13.
, most beloved of God Ib. l. 42. page 17.
, with many such like Expressions, some of which were used to the Emperors
themselves: And though the Greek Church be now in miserable Poverty and
Slavery, yet the Christians there, call even ordinary Priests, Fathers, and
kiss their Hands, lifting them up to their Foreheads when they meet them, which
among the Eastern People are marks of the highest respect Neque enim Sacerdotes
ordinarii debito fraudantur honor, quorum unusquisque -- (...) -- appellatur,
nec ab ipsorum manibus osculandis iisque fronti apponendis -- abstinetur, Smith
de hodier. stat. Eccl. Graec. p. 61.
, and this mighty reverence to the Clergy, is one great means to preserve
Religion among those poor oppressed people: To this we may add for these parts
of the World what we find in the French Capitulars, and our own Ancient Laws
relating to this Subject: In the former, the Law requires That all men by all
means shall pay all honor to their Bishops and Priests Ut omnes omnino
Episcopos and Presbyteros suos omni honor venerentur, Capit. Car. Mag. An.
802. c. 35. p. 373.
, and another ordains, That all shall be obedient to those of the lower, as
well as the higher Orders, as to the Ambassadors of the most high God, whose
Vicegerents they are in the Church Ut omnes suis Sacerdotibus tam majoris
ordinis quam inferioris, a minimo usque ad maximum, ut summo Deo cujus vice in
Ecclesia legatione funguntur, obedientes existant, Cap. An. 805. ibid. p. 437.
; and the penalty is no less than the loss of all places at, and banishment
from the Court Id. ibid. p. 440.
. And by those Laws all injuries done to the Clergy are punished with a mulct
thrice as great as for the like fault to a common Person Leg. Bavar. An. 630.
p. 99. Capit. Lud. Pii An. 822. p. 627.
; and finally all Clerks are exempt from secular Tribunals Capit. Car. Mag. 37.
p. 227. An. 789. and Cap. Lib. 8. c. 3. p. 941.
. As for our own Nation, even the inferior Clergy of old had so great a
respect here, that when any of them came to a Village, all the people received
them joyfully as God s peculiar Servants, and when they met them, they ran to
them, and bowing their Heads, earnestly begged their blessing, and diligently
listened to their directions Bedae Hist. l. 3. c. 26. p. 240. Edit. Cantab.
; and they had a Privilege to save a Criminal from death, though he were
condemned for Treason Tantum enim apud Anglos ordini tribuitur ut Sacerdoti,
vel de majestate damnato -- vita conceditur, Polyd. Verg. Hist. Hen. 7. p. 609.
. The Saxon Laws also made a Priest equal to a Thane or secular Lord, and then
they had place accordingly Leg. Aethelst. An. 928. Spelm. T. 1. p. 406.
; and by these Laws the people are bound at all times to defend and honor them
as the Servants of God Council. Aen. An. 1009. ib. p. 523. Leg. Canut. An. 1032.
p. 541.
; and the offenses which were done against any in holy Orders were esteemed so
great, as to deserve a punishment equal to those done to the Nobles Leg.
Aethelst. c. 13. p. 406.
; yea sevenfold more than if they were done against an ordinary Layman (x).
Can. Egbert. An. ^50. can. 61. p. 264.
As to their Privileges, they were in those days very many and so great, as
sufficiently show the pious esteem our Ancestors had of them; I can only
mention some few: As first, they were exempted from going to the Wars, or
serving in person, or bearing of Arms Sine expeditione, Council. Winton. An.
855. ib. p. 349. Vid. not. Baluz in 2 Tom. Capitular. p. 1132.
: As also from paying Tribute to maintain War, or otherwise Passim ap. Spelm.
T. 1. p. 198, 231, and 517.
, a Privilege granted (as we showed before, and an old Council observes)
Sacerdotes Pagani a publicis actionibus exempti quanto magis hoc Christianis
debitum. Council. 4. Aurel. Can. 13.
to Pagan Priests, and much more due to those of the Christian Church, by whose
Spiritual Arms our religious Ancestors believed Victory and Peace was obtained:
And they were also exempted from being summoned before any secular Tribunals to
be tried there Leg. Hoel. An. 940. l. 32. p. 413. Leg. Edv. Conf. l. 5. p. 620.
Tho. Walsing. An. 344. p. 155.
. And if they came as Evidence, their bare Testimony without an Oath was
esteemed sufficient Can. Egbert. Can 19. p. 260. Leg. Hoel. l. 9. p. 409.
. I might instance in many more, but these are abundant evidence that these
Orders were of reverent esteem in old Times; and though diverse of these honors
and immunities are now out of use, yet still we see the Bishops in France and
England are reckoned Peers, and the Head of the first of the Three Estates,
enjoying the highest Honors, Offices and Employments both in Church and State,
having a Principal Place in Parliaments, Privy Council, and some other Courts,
where they are ranked among the Prime Nobility, and have Titles, Privileges,
Preheminencies and Authority suitable to the Charactar which they bear, not
only here, but in most other Christian Countries: As I could particularly
prove, but that it is so well known to all that converse in modern History, or
know the present state of Europe, and of this their Native Country: For the
inferior Orders, they freely submit to the diminution of some of their ancient
Honors and Immunities, which they desire no further than may tend to the
success of their Ministry, the advantage of Religion, and the good of the
State; and perhaps there never were more learned, pious and worthy Men of these
Orders than in this Age, and these still are very much respected and esteemed
by all wise and good Men Ea enim est jucunda laus quae ab iis proficiscitur qui
ipsi in laud vixerunt. Cicero.
, who generally honor the Function for Jesus sake, who instituted it for the
good of Mankind in general, and the benefit of every man's soul: Nor are such
despised by any, but such as are debauched in their Manners, or Atheistical or
Factious in their Principles, whose commendation would be a disgrace, and their
scorn is really a great honor, showing the party contemned to be very unlike
the infamous contemner (as Synesius noted of Andronicus, and Padre Paolo of the
abuses of the Pope) Vid. Epist. Synes. Ep. 94. p. 236. item Vit. Pad. Paul.
, who usually cover their own Crimes by falsely accusing others Ut crimina in
silentium mittant sua vitam infamare conati sunt alienam. De Donat. Opt. Milev.
l. 4. p. 78.
. But as to those of the Clergy, who (as the Scripture expresses it) make
themselves vile, and the offering of the Lord contemptible 1 Samuel iii. 13. and
ii. 17.
, I do not plead for them to enjoy the honors of an Office which they execute
so ill; only it is unjust the whole Profession should suffer for the sake of a
few, as Arrianus observes of the Philosophers Arrian. in Epictet. l. 4. c. 8.
p. 407.
who have not that right, which all other ranks of men enjoy; for if a
Carpenter build, or a Musician play badly, they say these are no good Masters
in these Arts, so that they censure only the Man, but condemn not the
Profession; but if a Philosopher then did (or a Priest now do evil) men censure
all of that rank, and fall foul on the Character it self: Whereas, though in a
great Body some will do despicable things; yet in general, the Clergy are as
studious and painful, as exemplary and useful in their places, as charitable to
the Poor and as serviceable to the Public as any rank of men, and merit at
least as great honor and esteem as their Predecessors did in any age since the
Primitive: But if after all, they meet not with the like regards, I hope they
will go on to do worthy and honorable Actions, and account themselves more
happy to want the Honor they deserve, than if they enjoyed it without any
personal desert Ea studiose sequutus sum, ex quibus vera gloria nasci possit,
ipsam quidem gloriam per se nunquam putavi expetendam, Cic. Cat. Epist. 5.
, and however it fare with their Persons, their Order ever was, and always will
be had in reverent esteem, as long as God is owned and Religion professed among
us, for we must renounce and despise Heaven and these Ministers thereof both
together.

. 4.
That no Man might presume to execute any of them, except he were first called,
cried and examined, and known to have such Qualities as are requisite for the
same.
Since the Dignity is so great, and the Offices so honorable, it is fit the
entrance should be well guarded, least they should be profaned by Arbitrary or
Promiscuous intrusions: St. Paul has told us: That no Man takes this Honor to
himself, except he be called of God as was Aaron Hebr. v. 4.
. He (being the great Master of his House, the Church) must appoint his own
Officers, for none goes into a well governed Family, and says, I will be
Steward here Vide Arrian. in Epictet. l. 3. c. 22. p. 308.
; it was the Sin of Jeroboam, and the ruin of his House, to admit every one
that would to be one of his Priests 1 Kings xiii. 33, 34. Qui volebant
offerebant munus suum. Chal. Par.
. And the false Prophets are called in the Hebrew, The selfmade Prophets Ezekiel.
xiii. 2. Hebr. (...) a seipso factus propheta.
. A name very well agreeing to the Teachers of our modern Sectaries, who
without any proof of a Divine Call, or any previous Trial and Examination,
presume to execute some of these Offices, to the danger of their own and their
hearers Souls: But in our and all regular Churches, there is and ought to be a
solemn scrutiny into the qualifications of the Candidates before their
Admission. Such an enquiry was made before the admitting a Jewish Priest, and
not only Corporal Blemishes Levit. xxi. 17.
, but diverse other defects were impediments to his Consecration Outram de
Sacrif. cap. 6. p. 63, etc.
, so that while the Priesthood was tied to one Family, some were kept out as
unqualified. Yea, the Heathens were very nice in receiving Men into their
ridiculous Orders: None could be consecrated a Priest to Mithra, who had not
given proof of his Virtue, by going through diverse degrees of Punishments
(...). Suid. voce (...)
. Nonnus says, The Trials were 80, each more difficult than another Nonni
Hist. Coll. c. 5.
: And though Pythagoras was recommended by Polycrates Prince of Athens, and
Amasis King of Egypt, he could not be admitted into the Society of the
Egyptian Priests, until he had bore many hardships even to admiration Porphyr.
in vita Pythag. p. 82.
. Tertullian adds, that the Trials of Mithra were a kind of Martyrdom, and
those being past they offered their Crowns to the God, and never used such
Ornaments any more Tertul. de coron. mil. cap. 15. p. 111.
. The Priests of Venus were first kept close and instructed in the Eleusinian
rites, and called ((...)) then after a year or more they were made Supervisors
((...)), and at last ((...)) or Rulers of the holy rites: So that they had
three Orders (...). Suidas.

Eleusinia haeresis diutius consignant quam initiant -- cum epoptas ante
quinquennium non instituunt. Tertull. adv. Valent.


. We learn also from Porphyry, that the Samothaeans, an elective Order of
Indian Priests, were chosen with great care, and admitted by the chief
Magistrate Porphyr. de abstin. l. 4.. 17. p. 168.
. It Is remarkable also, that Julian directs the Pagan High Priest, to choose
for Priests those who were the best, the most Religious and most Charitable in
every City, whether they were Poor or Rich (...). Julian frag. p. 556.
. The Druids who were Priests to our Heathen Ancestors, trained up their
Disciples twenty years together in their Discipline, and then admitted them
with a solemn Oath, (the Form of which is yet extant Vettius Val. Antiochi ap.
Seld. Praef. de Diis Syris.
. And when their chief Priest died, a Successor was chosen by Merit only, and
the Common suffrage Caesar de Bell. Gall. lib. 6. p.
. And Suetonius notes, That the Emperor Claudius would admit none into the
Colleges of Priests, till they had first taken a solemn Oath In cooptandis per
Collegia sacerdotibus neminem nisi juratus nominavit. Sueton. vit. Claud. c. 22.
; which shows that all Mankind agreed to use great caution in the choosing and
initiation of the Ministers about holy things: But our previous care relies on
a better Foundation than this; for we have the command of God in Scripture, and
the Laws and Practice of the Primitive Church for it. Our Lord no doubt chose
his Apostles and lxx Disciples out of the very best of the Jews, or else he
made them so, and because he knew their Hearts, there was no need of
Testimonials or Examination: Yea, the Apostles and their immediate Successors
had the Gift of discerning Spirits 1 Cor. xii. 10. (...). Theophilac. in loc.
; that is, of knowing by Inspiration, who were fit for the Ministry: So that
they could foretell what proof they would make, and such were the Prophecies
that went before concerning Timothy 1 Timothy iii. 18. Vide Chrysostom. etc. in loc,
apud Annot. Grotij ibid.
. This also was the meaning of St. Clement's saying, The Apostles made Priests
and Deacons of such as they had proved by the Spirit (...). Clem. Ep. ad
Corinth. p. 96.
, and the same were such as St. John ordained in the lesser Asia, Men that were
marked out by the Spirit (...). Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 17. p. 67.
. But the Apostles foresaw, that this temporary miraculous Gift would cease,
after the Church was settled, whereupon having fixed Timothy Bishop at Ephesus,
and Titus in Creet, who were to have a subordinate Clergy; he gives them Rules
to direct them in examining and approving the Candidates for holy Orders 1 Timothy
iii. 1. etc. Titus i. 6. and 11.2.
, and charges them to Ordain none hastily; that is, not till they had thoroughly
tried them 1 Timothy v. 22. i. e. (...). Ita Theophil. in loc.
. And it is very observable, that no such Rules are given in any of St. Paul's
Epistles written to whole Churches, only in these two, that are directed to two
Superior Bishops: Which is a demonstration, that this Apostle intended not only
the Ordination, but the Scrutiny and Approbation of all Ecclesiastics, should
be solely in the Bishops power: Now these are Injunctions laid on these
Governors of the Church by Divine Authority, which they are bound in Conscience
to obey; and how exactly every one of them was observed by the Primitive
Bishops, shall be showed more particularly afterward: It is sufficient here
only in general to observe, that the ancient Council of Sardis Decrees. -- The
Candidates shall be examined with all exactness and care, -- and each of them
must stay no little time in the inferior, before they are admitted to the
superior Orders, -- since neither Prudence nor Piety allows that Men shall
enter into these Orders rashly, or suddenly, -- and the Blessed Apostle, the
Doctor of the Gentiles forbids the making hasty Ordinations (...). Conc. Sard.
Can. 10. Bever. T. 1. p. 496.
. And before this the first General Council of Nice declares, that a time and a
trial is necessary to all before they can be made Clergymen Council. Nicaen. 1.
Can. ^. Bev. T. 1. p. 60. and Can. 9. ibid. p. 70.
. As to our Church, we not only enquire after their inward Calling, but try and
examine their Qualifications before that (which may be counterfeited as being
secret) is allowed, and if the same care were taken to enquire into the fitness
of all that are put into secular Offices of Trust and Power, as there is into
the Candidates for sacred Orders, the Public would be much better served, for
the Ecclesiastics must bring Testimonials, and pass one if not two Scrutinies
before they can be accepted: of which more hereafter.

. 5.
And also by Public Prayer, with imposition of Hands were approved, and
admitted thereto by lawful Authority.
It would make intolerable confusion in all Professions, if every Man who
judged himself qualified for an Eminent Station, might thrust himself into it,
till he were solemnly admitted by lawful Authority: For every Man thinks well
of himself, and at this rate every conceited Soldier would be a Captain, and
every Opinionative Lawyer a Judge; wherefore there are two things here
required. 1st, That the Clergy shall be solemnly admitted by Prayer and
Imposition of Hands. 2ly, That they shall be admitted by lawful Authority,
which will give me occasion to discourse in general. First, Of their solemn
Admission. Secondly, Of Episcopal Ordination for Bishops only, with us, have
the sole lawful Authority to admit.

First, No Clergyman can enter into Orders but by a solemn Admission, which is
appointed in Conformity to the Divine directions under the Law concerning the
Garments, the Sacrifice, the Anointing and the Washing in the Tabernacle, Exodus
chap. xxix.
before Aaron or his Sons might Officiate. I might enlarge upon the solemn
Forms of admitting the various sorts of Priests among the Gentiles; but for
brevity sake I will only refer to one or two Authors, concerning the Creation
of Flamins and Vestals Rosin. Antiqu. l. 3. cap. 15. p. 215. item Brisson. de
Formul. lib. 1. p. 118.
. Nor shall I enlarge upon all the Christian Rites of Ordination in this place,
because the particulars will occur afterward; Only note in general, that
Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of Hands were always used on these occasions.
Our Lord directed his Disciples to Pray immediately, before he created them
Apostles Matt. ix. 38. and chap. x. 1.
, and both Deacons and others were ordained by Fasting, Prayer and Imposition
of Hands Acts. vi. 6. chap. xii. 2, 3. 1 Timothy iv. 14.
. Which holy Custom was kept up in all Ages of the Church with great Reason,
since it was begun by our Savior and his Apostles, and because these Orders
are of so great importance to the Church. It Is plainly the Sense of all
Mankind, that no Office of Trust, or Power should be conveyed to any sort of
Men, Civil or Military, without some solemn Creation, Admission or Investiture
to the same; wherefore this is much more necessary, with respect to such as are
Officers under the King of Heaven, and entrusted with the care of Souls: This
then being agreed on all hands, we pass to the second thing observable in this
Paragraph.

Secondly, What is the lawful Authority to admit Men into holy Orders, which we
affirm to be only Bishops; and here I shall not content my self to prove this
by the Statute Law of this Land; that no Man can be a lawful Priest, or Deacon,
unless he be ordained by a Bishop Stat. 13. Eliz. cap. 12.. 1. and Act of
Uniformity 14 Car. 2.
; but further show, this Law is grounded upon holy Scripture, and the Canons
and Practice of the Universal Church. First, Our Lord, as Supreme Ruler of his
Church, called and ordained his Apostles Matthew. x. 1, 2. chap. xxviii. 19, 20.
John xx. 21, 22, 23.
, and they ordained Deacons, Presbyters and Bishops Act. vi. 6. and xiv. 23. 2 Timothy i. 6.
; but they gave the power of admitting all others only to the Bishops, to whom
also they only gave Rules to choose Candidates by (as was observed before.) The
Canons of the Apostles are express, that two or three Bishops are necessary to
the Consecrating a Bishop, and one to the Ordaining a Priest and Deacon Can.
Apostol. 1. and 2. (...), etc. Bev. T. 1. p. 1.
. Neither of which (as Dionysius observes) can be initiated without the Bishops
Prayer Dionys. Eccles. hierar. cap. 5.
. So Firmilianus affirms, That the Presidents have the sole power of Baptizing,
Imposition of Hands and Ordination Firmilian. Ep. ad D. Cypr. numb. 75. p. 237.
; which Testimony with others, did so convince the learned Daille, the great
Patron of Presbytery, that he owns Ordination in St. Cyprian 's time was
properly the Bishops right Ordinationem -- Episcopalis juris (...) fuisse in
Cyprianci seculi Ecclesia confitemur. Daille de cult. Latin. relig. lib. 2. c.
13. p. 171.
. So that this confession of so great an Adversary, may excuse any further
proof for that Age; and if it be considered, that the Bishops down from the
Apostles to Cyprian's days were very Poor, and persecuted, as well as very
Pious, it cannot be supposed they should within that period have usurped, or
monopolized any Authority that was not left them by the Apostles; and thus this
concession amounts to a grant, that the Bishops had the sole right of Ordaining
given them by the Apostles. Afterward, that Bishops alone did Ordain is so
plain it needs no proof: And St. Hierom where he warmly attempts to equal
Presbyters and Bishops in many things, yet even there excepts the power of
Ordination as the Bishops sole right Quid facit Episcopus, excepta Ordinatione,
quod Presbyter non facit. Hier. ad Evagr. Ep.
. St. Chrysostom also makes the same exception as to Ordination (...). Chr. in
1 Timothy.. 11. T. 4. p. 287.
. And if this had not been the general belief of the Ancient Catholic Church,
Aerius would not have been reckoned an Heretic (by Epiphanius and St.
Augustine) for denying this difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter
Epiphan. haer. 75. p. 404. Augustine. de Haeres. haer. 53. Tom. vi. p. 6.
. Where Epiphanius notes, the Episcopal Order makes Fathers of the Church,
which the Order of Presbyters cannot do Epiphan. ut supra l. 3. T. 1. etc.
. To which also the Ancient Canons agree: Those of Ancyra (ten years before the
Nicene Council,) forbid both the Chorepiscopi and City Presbyters to Ordain
Synod. Ancyran. can. 13. and not. Bev. T. ^. p. 175.
. In the Council of Sardica those Clerks, that were Ordained by Musaeus and
Eutychianus who were not Bishops, were only admitted to Lay-communion Council.
Sardic. an. 347. can. 18 and 19. Bev. T. 1. p. 505.
. The like Decree also was made about the Ordinations of Maximus, a pretended
but no real Bishop, that the Persons should be reputed no Clergymen, and all
his Acts annulled (...), etc. Council. Constable. 2. can. ^. Bev. T. 1. p. 91. Soz.
lib. 1. cap. 9.
. So it was determined in a Synod at Alexandria, that Ischyras who was ordained
by one Colluthus a mere Presbyter, should be deprived of that degree to which
he had falsely pretended (...). Synod. Alexand. ap. Athanas. Apol. 2.
, for (say they) since Colluthus died but a Presbyter, his Ordinations are void
Epist. Synodal. ap. Bin. Tom. i. p. 405.
. So in the Council of Antioch, where the Chorepiscopi are forbid to Ordain.
Balsamon notes, Presbyters are not mentioned, because it was taken for granted,
they could not pretend to such a power Balsam. in 10 Can. Council. Antioch. ap.
Bev. T. 1. p. 439.
. The Council of Hispalis degraded a Priest and two Deacons for this only
Reason, That the Bishop being ill in his Eyes, suffered a Priest to say the
Prayers over them, contrary to the Ecclesiastical Custom; and they say, the
Bishop should have been deprived also had he been alive Council. Hispal. 2 Can.
5. An. 619. Bin. T. 2. par. 2. page 326.
. Whoever desires to see more instances may consult Baluzius his notes Baluzij
not. in Capitular. Reg. Franc. Tom. 2. p. 1246.
, where he gives other Examples of Clerks that were un-episcopally ordained,
who were to be re-ordained or reputed mere Laymen. It was upon this
universally owned principle, (that Bishops only could Ordain) that when the
Emperors gave Rules for the qualifications of Candidates for holy Orders, they
directed them only to the Bishops Collat. Authentic. Tit. 6. Nov. Just. 6. T.
2. p. 2, etc.
; and the General Council of Chalcedon lays the Penalties for all Un-canonical
Ordinations only upon the Bishops, because they only could be Guilty of these
Crimes Council. Chalced. can. 2. and can. 6. Bin. Tom. 2. p. 112. and 118.
. The sixth General Council upon the same ground reckons up Ordinations, as
those things which peculiarly belong to the Office of a Bishop (...). Council.
in Trul. can. 37. Bev. Tom. 1. p. 199.
: So that nothing can be clearer than the Bishops sole Right to Ordain, if we
consult the Canons, or usage of the Church in all former Ages: But some object,
this will deprive diverse Foreign Churches (where they have no Bishops) of a
lawful Ministry, because their Ministers have no Ordination but by Presbyters;
To which I shall only say, that the first Presbyter who presumed to Ordain had
no such power given him, and so could not rightly convey that which he never
received: There is no precedent in Scripture of mere Presbyters Ordaining
alone, and such Ordinations would have been declared null in the Primitive
Ages; yea for 1500 year together no such were allowed: But the fairest plea is,
That some of these Churches were forced by dire necessity to this irregularity,
by the obstinate refusal of the Popish Bishops to ordain any that were for
Reformation, so that they must either have such a Clergy as they could have, or
have none to Officiate in the Protestant way: To which I reply, That where this
necessity was real, and while it was so (as perhaps it might be in some places
at first,) it will go far to excuse them Inculpabile judicandum quicquid
necessitas intulit. Leo. Pap. ap. Joh. P. 8. ep. 199.
. But du Plessis says, They in France might have had the assistance of some
Bishops who favored the Reformation, and they would not Mornaeus de Eccles.
cap. 11.
, and some of them grew so enamoured of their new way, as to re-ordain those
who were Episcopally ordained Danaei Isag. part. 2. lib. 2. c. 22.
, which shows it was choice in some, so that this Plea cannot be urged by them;
and why might not they have got some Bishops privately ordained by the English
or Lutherans, to keep up a legal Ministry? We see this was done in the
Primitive times, where Frumentius having converted the Indians, went back to
Alexandria, and was ordained their Bishop Ruffin. Eccles. Hist. l. 10. cap. 9
and 10.
. And the newly converted Iberians sent to Constantinople for a Bishop
Theodoret. lib. 1. c. 23 and 24.
. So that the necessity was not unavoidable; wherefore, if any of them despise
Episcopal Ordination, or eject them who are so ordained, (as is done in
Scotland) they have no excuse, and I judge their Orders to be utterly null and
void Voluntas habet poenam, necessitas veniam optat. Milev. lib. 7. p. 101.
. But for those of the Foreign reformed Churches, who highly value the
Episcopal Order, wish for Bishops, but are by Persecution and Violence kept
from that Happiness See Monsieur le Moyn 's Letter in Durell's Vien. p. 126.

See also Bishop Andrew's Opusc. Posthum. p. 195.


; we pity them, and pray for them, and hope God will excuse this defect till
they can remedy it; but we are thankful to that Providence which allows us to
keep up the Primitive Orders in a due Subordination, and to have a right and
truly Canonical Ministry, in this well constituted Church, the exact Transcript
of the Primitive and the Glory of the whole Reformation.

. 6.
And therefore, to the intent that these Orders may be continued, and
reverently used and esteemed in the Church of England: No Man shall be
accounted or taken to be a lawful Bishop, Priest, etc.
In this Section our Church censures not the new way, nor condemns those that
are Foreign, but secures the old way, and takes care to oblige her own Members,
declaring that none shall be accounted a lawful Bishop, Priest or Deacon in
this Church of England, nor exercise any of these Functions here, unless
(according to the Primitive discipline) he be first called, tried and examined,
and then ordained according to this Form: Except he has elsewhere had
Episcopal, that is lawful Ordination, which last Clause seems designed to allow
of Romish converted Priests, who were ordained by Bishops, before whom we
receive without Reordination (if they renounce their Errors) because that
Church preserves the Order of Bishops, and the Substance of the Primitive Forms
in her Ordinations, though corrupted with many modern superstitious Rites, as
we shall show more particularly afterward; and in this also we follow the
Primitive Sense, for Re-ordinations are forbid, when the Orders had been once
rightly conferred Can. Apostol. 68. and Council. Carthag. Can. 52. Nemo sacros
ordines semel datos iterum renovat. Cypr. de abl. pedum. p. 350. ita etiam
Gregor. ap. Great. Did. 68. cap. 1.
, and how those of Rome who allow the Greek Ordinations, can justify rejecting
our Orders, when they can make no Objection to our Form, nor prove us Heretical
in any Article of Faith, I cannot conceive. It Is Pride and Uncharitableness,
not Arguments or Examples in Antiquity, that guides them in this most unjust
proceeding: As to these Forms of Ordination prescribed to be alone used here,
they are exactly conformable to the directions given in holy Scripture, and
more agreeable to the practice of the Primitive Church than any Offices of this
kind in the World, being neither so naked as the way of Geneva, nor so
luxuriant in Ceremonies as that of the Roman Church; for we have added to the
general Rules of Scripture all and only the Primitive Rites, agreeing with the
reformed in that which we have taken from Scripture, and with the Roman Forms
in all that Accords with genuine Antiquity: So that our Offices must be more
perfect than either of the other, which will appear in every part of the
following Discourse as to the particulars. But here I will observe in general,
That it is probable the Primitive Offices at first were very short, consisting
only of some few Prayers with Imposition of Hands; yet before the Fourth
Council of Carthage, there was used a scrutiny into the Faith and Manners of
the Candidates, and diverse Questions were put to them, and several Ceremonies
for the various Orders were brought in, which that Council reports and confirms
Council. 4. Carthag. Can. 1, 2, etc. ap. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 588.
. The Offices of the Greek Church seem very ancient in all the substantial
Parts, and therefore they are very short Eucholog. p 249, etc. p. 392, etc. p.
302, etc.
; yet even in them diverse Modern Additions are discernable: The oldest
formularies of the Western Church are very brief, as appears by the Forms for
Ordaining Bishops, Priests and Deacons, used in the ancient Church of Englan
Extant apud Theodor. poenitent. p 283, 284, etc.
. The old Roman Ordinal in the Sacramentary of St. Gregory Sacram. Greg. ap.
Tom. Pamel. Liturg. T. 2. p. 370.
by a later called, also a Roman Ordinal published by the learned Baluzius
Appendix Actor. veterum in Bulz. not. ad Capitul. Tom. 2. p. 1372.
, and (to name no more) by the ancient Gallican Forms which contain only an
exhortation to the people, three short Prayers and two larger, concluding with
four brief Collects relating chiefly to the Communion: Which are published by
Monsieur Mabillon Mabill. Liturg. Gallican. lib. 3. p. 307, etc.
. Now all these are short and void of Ceremonies, and though these were the old
methods of Ordaining in the Churches, then in Communion with Rome, and there
also; yet whoever will compare the ancient Roman Ordinals, will find the elder
to be always the shorter and more pure, and the later to have been enlarged
with many frivolous and superstitious Rites Vid. Morin. de Ordin. Latinorum
par. 2.
, which as they were added without Reason, so upon just Reasons our Church
pared them off at the Reformation, and reduced these Offices nearer to their
Primitive Patterns Ut vobis novas caeremonias excogitare, ita nobis easdem
justis de causis resecare licuit. Mason. de Min. Angl. l. 2. c. 16.. 11.
; for justification whereof I refer the Reader to a very learnned Author, who
has taken pains to compare their Offices for Ordination with ours, and those
of the Primitive Church; and proved, that we have rejected nothing but needless
and late inventions in this piece of Service: So that ours is much to be
preferred before theirs Collationem vide ap. Mas. ibid. cap. 17. p. 227, etc.
. The Lutheran Churches have Forms something more agreeable to Antiquity and
proper for this Occasion, yet they are not full enough in some substantial
Parts, and cannot compare, with our Office Formula ordinationis ad sacr.
ministerium Lipsiae usitat. Impres. Ibid. 1624.
. Much less can the old Scotch Form (said to be drawn up by Mr. John Knox)
which is very defective in the election of ordinary Ministers Scotch Psalter
cap. 2. p. 8. edit. Middleburgh 1594.
, and not much better in the Form of electing a Superintendent An. 1560 Ibid.
p. 16.
. But out of all these we shall sometimes make proper Observations concerning
their Agreement with our Offices: Concluding this general Discourse with
observing, that since no one entire form of Ordination is left on Record in
holy Scripture; every Church has power to compose a Form for its own use, to
which all the Members of it must adhere, provided there be nothing contained
therein contrary to God's word. As for ours, it is drawn up by the Rules of
Scripture, and is not only Orthodox, but so instructing, so pious and so very
proper to the occasion, that I do recommend it, First, To all that are to enter
into holy Orders, to read that Form over which belongs to the Order he is about
to receive, that he may prepare himself for it, by understanding his Duty and
considering his Vows before he make them Eccles. v. 2.
. Secondly, Because we must perform our Vows, and practice our Duty all our
lives long; it is convenient if not necessary, for every Clergyman once a year
at least, seriously to read the same Office over to keep him mindful of his
engagements: The pious Cardinal Borromaeo enjoined every Priest to keep the day
of his Ordination yearly, remembering it in his Prayers Council. Mediol. 3. Anno
1573. ap. Bin. T. 4. par. 2. p. 421.
. And our Clergy would find it very much conduce to mind them of their Duty,
and excite them to do it with zeal and diligence, if they did spend annually
the day of their admission, in Fasting, Prayer and Reading attentively these
useful and incomparable Forms.

. 7.
And none shall be admitted a Deacon except he be Twenty three years of Age,
unless he have a Faculty -- A Priest shall be full Four and twenty years old --
A Bishop shall be full Thirty years of Age.
Because the Scripture has not determined the exact time when Men shall enter
into these several Orders; every Church has fixed the Ages by the Rules of
Prudence as they saw most fit. St. Paul, it is true, forbids a Novice to be made
a Bishop, but that is to be understood, not of a person young in years, but
newly converted 1 Timothy iii. 6. (...). e D. Chrysostom. Theophil.
. But all Churches have agreed not to admit Men very young into these weighty
Offices; for God himself fixed the Ages of Thirty and Twenty-five for the
Levites entering on their Ministration Numb. viii. 24. and iv. 3.23. ubi lxx.
ubique habent (...).
, and our Savior was Thirty years old when he began to Preach Luke iii. 23.
. Which is the reason given by the Council of Neocaesarea; Why none, though
otherwise worthy, shall be admitted Priest till he be Thirty years of Age
Council. Neocaes. An. 315. Can. 11. Bev. T. 1. p. 411.
. The Council of Agde decreed the same Age for a Priest, and appointed a Deacon
should be Twenty five year Old Council. Agathen. An. 506. Can. 16, 17. Bin. T.
2. par. 1. page 555.
and these were the common ages in those eldest times. For St. Hierom
vindicates his Brother's Ordination, because he was then Thirty years Old, and
he supposes Timothy was no older when he was made a Bishop Hierom. Epist. 62.
ad Theoph. Tom. 2. p. 273.
. I know some have carried this higher, for Caesarius Bishop of Arles would not
ordain a Deacon till he were Thirty years of Age Cypr. vita Caesarij ap.
Mabillon. Lit. Gal. p. 170.
. And Justinian made a Law, that none should be a Presbyter, until he were
Thirty five year Old Authent. Coll. 9. Tit. 6. Novel. 123. c. 13.
. But the Sixth General Council of Constantinople reduced it to the old period,
and appointed Thirty for a Priest, and Twenty five for a Deacon Council. 6.
Constant. in Trul. An. 681. Can. 14. Bev. T. 1. p. 173.
. Which Ages (to name no more) were fixed in the Saxon Church above a Thousand
years ago, as appears by Egbert's Collection of the Canons then in force here
Excerpt. Egbert. Can. 91 and 95. An. 750. Spelm. Tom. 1. p. 267.
. Yet as our Preface notes in case of great and early merit, or an
extraordinary occasion, this may be dispensed with: For Pope Zachary allows
Boniface Bishop of Mentz, to ordain Priests as well as Deacons at Twenty five
years of Age, because he wanted assistants among the newly converted Germans Si
autem tales non reperiuntur and necessitas exposcit, a 25 An. and supra Levitae
and Sacerdotes Ordinentur, Zach. ep. 12. Bin. T. 3. par. 1. p. 374.
; and it was upon the extraordinary merit of Epiphanius (afterward Bishop of
Pavy) that he was ordained Deacon at Twenty years of Age Ennodius in vit.
Epiphan. Ticinens.
, and that it is likely was the cause why St. Remigius was made an Archbishop
when he was but Twenty two Vide Hincmar. in vit. Remigij.
; yea in the Greek Church one Eleutherius was not above Twenty year old, when
he was consecrated a Bishop in Illyricum Niceph. Callist. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c.
29.
. No doubt there are some persons of early parts, and extraordinary Learning
and Wisdom, though they be very young Antevenit sortem meritis, virtutibus
Annos.
; and in such cases they are to be regarded rather according to their
Discretion and Knowledge than their Ages Levit. xix. 32. Hebr. Sen. Chal. Par.
ejus qui Doctus est in lege, unde RR. dicunt Senex est qui Sapiens est.
. I could instance in diverse of those, who entered very young into the Ministry
and have proved very Eminent; but I need name no more than the most famously
learned Bishop Usher, ordained before he was Twenty one See his Life p. 561.
; and the pious and eloquent Bishop Jer. Tailor, who entered into Orders younger
than he See his fun. Sermon.
; wherefore, it is fit there should be a power of dispensing, being necessary in
some Cases and commendable in others Ubi necessitas urget excusabilis est
dispensatio, ubi utilitas provocat laudabilis. Bern. de consid. l. 3. c. 10.
. I shall only add, that the Canon Law fixes the Age of Twenty five, for
undertaking a Cure of Souls Decret. Gregor. l. 1. tit. 6. c. 7.. 3. col. 129.
, and our Statute Law allows none under Twenty four to be instituted to a
Living Stat. Eliz. 13. c. 21.. 3. and 5.
, because it is fit they should be of steady minds, who undertake so great a
Charge: If any shall object, that we in this Church admit Men something younger
than was done of old, I think two sufficient Reasons may be assigned for that
practice. First, That the methods of Learning are now more compendious than in
former Ages; so that experience shows, Men arrive at much greater degrees of
skill in Languages, and Sciences in Twenty four than formerly they could do in
Thirty years: Secondly, Our Clergy are not now obliged to Vow celibacy, and
that is a Reason given in some later Councils, why they bound them to stay to
so confirmed an Age, that they might upon trial of their inclinations better
know, whether they were able to keep such a Vow or no.

. 8.
And the Bishop knowing either by himself, or by sufficient testimony any
Person, to be a Man of virtuous conversation and without crime.
The Age being determined for all Orders, the Preface concludes with describing
the Qualifications of a Deacon, the times, place and public manner of
admitting one to that Order: And it is but Reason, since Bishops have the sole
power of Ordaining, that they should use very great caution in admitting
Candidates; wherefore, this Preface requires that they shall be well assured,
either by their own knowledge, or by the testimonial of credible Persons, that
they are Men of good Lives, and free from all noted Crimes, and herein chiefly
lies the use of Testimonials, the Bishop may easily judge of their Learning,
but it cannot be supposed he can know how most of them have lived, before their
entrance into holy Orders; and yet, if he do admit any that have been
scandalous, he will not escape blame, and ought to repent of it afterward
Curae sit tibi maxim introducere tales quos postmodum introduxisse non
poeniteat, Bern. de consid. l. 4. c. 4. p. 887.
. Wherefore our Canon wisely enjoins they shall bring sufficient testimonials
of their sober Life, from such as have known and lived near them for three
years before Can. 34. Eccles. Anglic.
, which also foreign Canons have required Nemo fiat Clericus nisi qui bonum
testimonium habet. Capit. Reg. Fran. lib. 6. c. 126.
. Now these Laws are grounded on St. Paul, who makes it necessary for a Bishop
to have a good testimony of those without, that is of Heathens 1 Timothy iii. 7.
(...). Theophil. in loc.
, and if that were requisite when most were Pagans, much more is it necessary
now that this part of the World is Christian. The Pagans might accuse
maliciously, but those of our Faith should have no ends to serve, but the glory
of God and the interest of the true Religion; so that it is justly hoped what
such Men say is very true, because they must wish the Church to which they
belong may be as well served with good Priests, and not be scandalized with bad
ones. And such as sign these Testimonials have it put into their Power to
discover evil Men, and commend only those that are worthy, wherefore since so
great a Trust is reposed in them, they ought never to sign any Testimonial
which they know to be false; yea, which they do not know to be true, least they
become guilty of bearing Falsewitness, and mislead the Bishop who cannot see
all things with his own Eyes, nor hear all with his own Ears, and so must rely
on others to direct his choice Miser est imperator apud quem vera reticentur,
qui cum ipse public ambulare non possit, necesse est ut audiat, and vel audita
vel a pluribus roborata confirmet: Capitol. vit. Gordian. p. 668.
. And let him be never so desirous to keep out wicked Pastors, an Hypocrite
commended by eminent Hands, may deceive him, and then the dishonor of God and
mischief to Souls, which are the sad consequences of such misinformation, are
to be charged only upon those who for fear, favor, or negligence signed the
false Certificate; who deserve a severe Punishment in this World, if our Law
(as the Indian) did allow it Apud Indos extremi digiti eorum, qui falsum
testimonium consignassent, decurtantur. Strab. Geogr. l. 15.
. However they shall certainly answer for it in the next World, and I heard a
most Reverend and Worthy Prelate (now with God Ar. Bp. Dolben who died April
11. 1686.
,) charge his Clergy not to impose upon him by signing Testimonials, which they
did not know to be true, as they would answer it to him at the dreadful day of
Judgment. Which being duly considered will I hope prevent that evil Custom of
giving Men's hands, out of Custom or Complement to mere Strangers, or to oblige
a Friend that we know does not deserve it: Since most of those infamous
Persons, that are in Orders generally crept in at this Door: But as to the
particulars, it is necessary that the Bishop be satisfied, First, as to his
Life, and Secondly, as to his Knowledge. The first enquiry is into their lives
Ante vita quam doctrina quaerenda est. Ambros. in Psalm. cxviii. 1. T. 1. p. 873.
, for that is over and over repeated by St. Paul, that they must be blameless 1 Timothy iii. 2. Titus i. 6, 7.
, and if they be never so learned or ingenious, and be not virtuous, their
example will do more harm than their preaching can do good; they discourage the
pious and harden sinners, dishonor our Lord Jesus, disgrace his Church, and
not only destroy their own but others souls also. So that if men be vicious and
criminal, no other qualifications ought to recommend them; they must by all
means be kept from Holy Orders: but of this more hereafter.

. 9.
And after examination and trial, finding him Learned in the Latin tongue, and
sufficiently instructed in Holy Scripture.
The next care of the Bishop is to examine and try the understandings of such
as come to offer themselves to be ordained, of which he and his Chaplains, are
competent Judges. So that if he ordain any illiterate Person, that fault must
lie upon the Ordainer only, since Virtue may, but learning cannot be
counterfeited before a learned and diligent Examiner: It Is St. Paul's
injunction (and so indispensible) that He be apt (or as the word imports, able)
to teach 1 Timothy iii. 2. (...).
; nor can any Man be fit to teach others, who has not first been well
instructed Multo tempore disce quod doceas. Hieron. ad Rustic. ep. 4. p. 47.
, first in Secular Learning, and secondly in Holy Scripture. The Apostles
wanting time and opportunity to get Learning in an ordinary way, were
miraculously inspired both with the knowledge of all Tongues, and all Divine
Truths, to show that Christ himself judged these were necessary Qualifications
for his Ministers: But as the Manna ceased when God's People came to a Land
where Corn would grow by industry, so Heaven has now withdrawn this immediate
Inspiration, and left us to acquire Knowledge by study, and other proper means:
Now therefore it is required, that a Deacon (though of the lowest Order) shall
at least be skilled in the Latin Tongue, that he may be capable of reading the
best Authors which are writ in or translated into that Language: Our Apostle we
see distinguishes the Minister from him that sits in the room of the unlearned
1 Cor. xiv. 16. ubi Theoph. (...).
, which plainly supposes him that officiates to be Learned: Under the Law, the
Leprosy in the Head, made a man unclean all over Levit. xiii. 44.
; the moral of which is, that ignorance leads to all sin, and is not (as the
Romanists say, the Mother of Devotion) but of all Error Ignorantia matter est
cunctorum errorum, Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 25. Bin. T. 2. Par. 2. p. 351.
; having, as St. Bernard says, two Daughters, Mistakes and Doubtfulness, which
are both evil, but the first is more pernicious, the latter more troublesome
Pessimae matris ignorantiae, pessimae item filiae duae sunt, falsitas and
dubietas -- perniciosior illa, ista molestior, Bern. in Cant. Ser 17. p. 607.
, and a Teacher of others must be free from both: God expected that the
Levitical Priests should preserve knowledge, because the people were to enquire
the Law at their mouth Mal. ii. 17.
: yea he rejected those then from being Priests to him, who rejected knowledge
themselves, and destroyed others for lack of it Hos. iv. 6.
: and a blind Watchman is a contradiction, in terminis, and worse than a sleepy
one Isai. lvi. 10.
, for he may awake and do his duty sometimes; but he that is blind is
originally and always incapable to be a Watchman. Now if these were rejected by
God under the Priesthood of Aaron, there is much more reason to exclude such
ignorant Wretches from the Ministry of the Gospel, for which all sorts of
knowledge are absolutely necessary: So that it is an inexcusable presumption
and profane boldness, for such as are very ignorant to offer themselves to be
Ordained Non temeritate quorundam, docere quod nescias, sed ante discere quod
docturus sis, Hieron. Ep. 26. cap. 4.
, and in such cases Bishops ought to be inflexible, and by no means to allow or
admit any such; who will be a lasting disgrace to their Ordainers, a sport to
the Profane, and a reproach to the Sacred Order, which has been so well
considered, that in conformity to this Rule of our Church, all the ancient
Canons and Laws decree, that no Bishop shall ordain such as are illiterate, and
punish severely such as do Council. Roman. sub Hilario. An. 467. Can. 3. Bin. T.
2. par. 1. p. 432. Gelasii Ep. 9. ib. 479. Council. 2. Aurel. Can. 16. An. 536.
ibid. p. 773.

Authent. Collat. 1. Tit. 6. cap. 1. page 12.

Capitular. reg. Franc. lib. 6. cap. 126. T. 1 page 944.

Council. Tribur. Can. 33. An. 895. Bin. T. 3. par. 2. page 127.


. I cannot cite the particulars they are so many, but shall refer to some of
the principal Orders in this kind, and note that our Canon requires, that he
that is to be Ordained shall be a Graduate in one of the Universities, or be
able at least to render an account of his Faith in Latin, and confirm it with
testimonies out of Holy Scripture Can. 34. Eccles. Angl.
, which is sufficient to exclude all the unlearned: And let it be considered,
that it was the gross ignorance of the Clergy in former ages, which set up and
promoted all those notorious Errors that are now professed in the Roman Church:
It is recorded, that in Germany a Priest was so ignorant as to mistake the very
form of Baptism, and turn it into false and ridiculous Latin Baptizo te nomine
Patria, and Filia, and Spiritu Sancta, An. 750. Ep. 6. Bonifac. Bin. T. 3. par.
1.. 1 page 367.
; a little after the famous Rabanus Maurus, being learned above his Brethren of
that Age, was turned out of the Abbey of Fulda for no crime, but reading too
many Books Aventin. annal. l. 4. p. 309. An. 842. Baluz. not. in Reginon. p.
525.
; about the same time it was among the Articles of Enquiry in the Visitation of
Rathbodus, Archbishop of Triers -- Whether the Priests understand the Prayers,
Prefaces and Canon of the Mass, -- and if they could read well the Epistle and
Gospel, or at least give the literal sense of it Reginon Collect. de Eccles.
Discipline. inqu. Artic. 82, 83. p. 28, 29.
; yea we find mention of a Priest, who merely by negligence after he was
Ordained, forgot to read his Office Flodoardi Hist. l. 3. c. 28.
. Nor were our Saxon Clergy of that age much better generally; for it is
ordered in an Old Council, that Bishops shall enquire if the Priests can
construe the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the Sentences of the Mass Council.
Clovesho. Can. 10. An. 747. ap. Spelm. T. 1. page 248.
: and there was good reason for that enquiry, since King Alfred says, very few
on this side Humber, and none on the South of Thames, when he began to reign,
understood the Common Prayer in Saxon, or could translate a piece of Latin
Alfredi praefat. ad versionem Boetii and Aelfric. Grammat. ap. Spelm. ibid. p.
618.
. Nor was it much mended at the Conquest when the Clergy were so illiterate,
that the rest were amazed at him who had learned his Grammar Ordinati ita
literatura carebant, ut caeteris esset stupori qui grammaticam dedicisset,
Math. Paris An 1067. page 5.
; which stupid want of good literature was owing, no doubt, to the Monks, whose
Patrons were ignorant Enthusiasts; and that Dunce they call St. Francis,
advises his Monks who could not read not to learn, but to wait for the Spirit
of the Lord Regula S. Francisci cap. 8. p. 28.
; and he reckons it an ill sign, if a Friar be given to read and get many Books
Ibid. page 91.
. Yea Isidore Clarius, about 150 years ago, declares, that in his Episcopal
Visitation he found few Secular Priests who could construe what they did read
-- and diverse of them could not read well Isidor. Clar. Orat. 26. ad Cler. and
Synod. ejus, An. 1547.
; which scandalous ignorance remains still among many of this sort of Clergymen
in France, as one of their own Communion complains Baluzii not. ad capitul. T.
2. p. 1132.
. And another who lately was at Rome gives the same Character of very many
Priests, in that so much gloried of City Mabillon in itin. Italico, p. 113.
. So that it is needful yet to put the old Question in the French Capitulars to
many of them, whether the Priests understand their Missal Capitular. Tom. 1.
lib. 1. c. 6. p. 713.
. And now what false Doctrines and corrupt Practices may not be first imposed
upon such a set of blind Guides, and by them received and taught as Gospel
Truths and Apostolical or Primitive Rites? And what reason have we to bless
God, that our Clergy are generally skilled in the Tongues, and some great
Masters of them, and other polite literature, equalling at least if not
exceeding their Predecessors in this and most other Churches, and more would be
thus qualified if their great charge and scanty Livings, did not deprive them
of good Books, and force them to strugle with Poverty, and so hinder their
improvement: Which I hope is a juster account of this Matter, and a true
character of our English Clergy, than is given by a late writer in this Church,
who makes a comparison between the modern Popish Clergy and ours, preferring
the former, and lamenting the gross Ignorance of such as are either in holy
Orders, or would be put into them; the contrary to which is manifest to all
unprejudiced persons, and the reflection needs not to be confuted.

But there is another sort of knowledge, which is a sufficient understanding of
holy Scripture: And since this is the perfect Rule both of Faith and Manners In
ijs quae aperte in S. Scripturis positae sunt inveniuntur illa omnia quae
continent fidem -- moresque vivendi, Aug. de Doctr. Christ. l. 2. cap. 9.
. None can be fit to instruct others, who is not very well instructed herein
himself: It was Timothy's recommendation to St. Paul, and the chief motive to
him to ordain him, that from a Child he had known the holy Scripture 2 Timothy
iii. 15.
; this qualified Apollos for a Preacher, and enabled him to make many Converts,
because he was mighty in the Scriptures Acts xviii. 24. and 28.
, and Titus is ordered to admit none to be Pastors, but such as had been taught
in the Faithful word, so as to be able thereby both to exhort the Orthodox, and
to convince the gainsayers Titus i. 9.
. It Is Recorded of St. Basil and his Friend Gregory Nazianzen, that they spent
13 years together in a Monastery, before they entered on any public
Ecclesiastical Function, Reading no other Books but only the holy Scripture
Ruffin. Hist. Eccles. lib. 11. cap. 9.
, which may justly be esteemed the principal ground of their extraordinary
Proficiency afterward: And hence the ancient practice of Pious Bishops, was to
examine the Candidates strictly, if they had diligently Read the holy
Scripture, and it is Recorded of Caesarius Bishop of Arles, that he would
ordain none of what Age soever, who had not first Read over in order the whole
Bible four times Ut nec in qualibet majori aetate ordinaretur nisi quatuor
vicibus in ordine libros Vet. Test. legerit ante and toties Novum. Cypr. vit.
Caesarij lib. 1. n. 32.
. St. Hierom began to complain in his time, that this was but too much
neglected, so that among the Teachers, one could hardly find Men that could
understand the Law of God Hieron. adv. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 9.
. But this was endeavored to be amended by the Canons: In the East the Bishop
before he ordained any Man, was strictly to enquire into his Life and Manners,
and especially concerning his Knowledge of the holy Scriptures Nomocan. l. 16.
ap. Coteler, Monum. Eccl. Graec. Tom. 1. p. 71.
, and Charles the great tells his Clergy, that they must not only learn the
Scripture themselves, but be able also to teach them to others Capit. Car. M.
an. 811. Tom. 1. p. 479.
. In the second Council of Nice, the Metropolitan was to examine a Bishop
elect, whether he could readily and with understanding Read the Canons and the
holy Scripture Council. Nicaen. secundum. An. 787. Can. 2. Bin. Tom. 3. p. 1. p.
701.
; the latter of which, if those Fathers had been well versed in, they would not
have decreed for Image Worship: But after that and the like unscriptural
Doctrines, and Practices were crept into the Western Church; we find by degrees
the Study of the Scripture was generally laid aside, and fabulous legends
devised by the Priests, and read to the People instead of them, so that about
the time of the Reformation, the principal Divines of the Roman Church were
utterly ignorant in Scripture; it being remarked, that Albert Prince Elector
and Bishop of Mentz, at the Diet of Ausburg took up a Bible that lay on the
Table, and asked what Book that was which spoke so much against the Church Acta
Comitiis Augustan. An. 1530.
. And another Bishop about that time reproved a Priest for expounding the
Scriptures to his People, and said he thanked God he never knew what the Old
and New Testament were, not understanding nor wishing to understand more than
his Portitory and Missal See Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 1153.
. But our reforming Princes soon cured this evil here, by injunctions, that
every Clergyman should have the new Testament both in English and Latin, with
Erasmus 's Paraphrase on it, and should diligently study the same, and the
Bishops were to enquire how they had profited therein Injunctions of King Ed.
6. An. 1547. Sparrows Collect. p. 6. and Injunct. of Q. Eliz. An. 1559.. 16.
ibid. p. 72.
. So that in a little time our Protestant Clergy became very expert in
Scripture, and thereby were able both to instruct their own Flock, and to
confute their Adversaries: For which and many other Reasons our Bishops are
still obliged to be very careful, to admit none but such as are very well read
in holy Scripture.

. 10.
May at the time appointed in the Canon, or else (upon urgent occasion) on some
other Sunday or Holy day, in the face of the Church, admit him a Deacon in such
manner and form as hereafter follows.)
The Person being thus qualified may be admitted by the Bishop, but regularly
the Ordination should be, First, At one of the times appointed by the Thirty
first Canon; that is, on the Sundays after the four Ember weeks, which were the
ancient Seasons for this Office, as I have showed before See the Compan. to the
Temple, Par. 2. Edit. Fol. p. 353.
. But however, it ought to be on some Sunday, or Holyday, as was used even from
the Primitive times (...). Council. Carth. Can. 35.
, and as the time, so the place also should be known and public, viz. in the
face of the Church: So the first Deacons were chosen, in a full Assembly of the
Disciples Acts vi. 2.
; and the Peoples presence was thought necessary, because they were to give
their Testimony 1 Timothy iii. 2. Titus i. 6.
, which is St. Cyprian's Argument for public Ordination Cyprian. Epist. 38.
Ep. 68.
, and was a Point so fully agreed in the best Ages, that if the People and
Clergy were present, it was counted a good Ordination (...). Athan. Apol. 2.
, otherwise it was censured, and thought to be at least irregular, if it was
hudled up in private Ad fastigium tantum accusatores suos latendo pervenit. Ep.
2. Celestin. Bin. T. 1. p. 736.
. And in later times it has been thought necessary to decree, that the names of
the Candidates should be published upon three several Sundays before the
Ordination, that the unworthy might be discovered and stopped Council. Adolph. Ep.
Colon. An. 1549 Bin. Tom. 4. p. 239.
, for which public Ordinations that (except upon very urgent necessity) are
only used in our Church, are a proper means: But if after all this care, to
procure an unblameable Clergy, (the like to which is used in no civil Offices,)
some unworthy Persons do creep in, and some that are Ignorant or Scandalous, or
both, get into holy Orders; no doubt it is a great Calamity to that place where
their Lot falls, yet even this is no ground for Separation; our Savior did not
forsake the Communion of the Jewish Church, though their Priests then were
extremely wicked, and he orders his Disciples both to hear and observe their
injunctions Matthew. xxiii. 2. (...). Theoph. in loc.
, because they who exclude themselves, may direct others to the Kingdom of
Heaven, and there was a Judas among the Apostles: We are to consider if this be
our case, that the Grace which makes all Administrations effectual comes from
God 1 Corinthians. iii. 6.
, who can work that which is good by evil, or incompetent instruments if he
please (...). Vid. Chrysostom. in 2 Timothy Sermon. 2.
; so that we may be profited by an evil Priest, and therefore the Greek
Canonists have determined, that we must not separate from such an one, though
he be never so bad, but believe he may contribute to our Sanctification (...).
Balsam. in 31 Can. Apost.
. His wickedness hurts only himself, but your separation may hurt you, and the
guilt of that lies at your own Door: The Poet compares such an one, to a
Whetstone that makes other things sharp, but cannot cut any thing -- Fungens
vice cotis Acutum Reddere quae ferrum valet exors ipsa secandi: Poet. Lyricus
ap. Sarisbur. ep. 170. p. 548.
. St. Augustine frequently Treats of this Subject, and says, it is more
reasonable we should tolerate the evil for the sake of those that are good,
than to forsake the good upon the account of those that are evil Aug. de verb.
Dom. Ser. 18. p. 19, 20.
; and he thinks such a separation as preposterous, as it would be for the
Traveller to go back, because the mile Stone which directs others in the way,
does not stir it self Id. Hom. 50. p. 122.
, and he brings in the Example of Noah, who did not forsake the Ark though
there were unclean Beasts therein Idem ad Vincent. Epist. 48. p. 36.
. Nazianzen compares this case to an Emperor who has two Seals, one of Gold,
another of Iron, the matter differs, but the impression and efficacy is the
same Greg. Nazianz. orat. 40.
. St. Isidore of Peleusium proves, that evil Priests do not defile the
Sacraments, nor hinder their effect Isidor. Peleus. lib. 1. Epist. 120. and
lib. 2. Epist. 37.
; and an old Council illustrates this with a proper comparison -- for (says the
Canon) the Offices are no more defiled by the Crimes of him that officiates,
than the Seed is corrupted by the Seeds-mans wickedness Quia non inficit semen
seminantis iniquitas. Synod. S. Patric. Can. 7. ap. Spelm. Tom. 1. p. 56.
. Which may abundantly satisfy those who are so unfortunate, as to live under
an evil Priest, that they must not forsake Gods Ordinances, no, nor their own
Congregation upon that account; yet because such Ministers are discouraging to
the good, and an excuse for wicked Men, a dishonor to God and a scandal to
Religion; it becomes the Bishops (as our Church directs) to use all possible
precaution to keep all Ignorant and Vicious Persons out of these holy Orders;
of the manner used in conferring whereof we now proceed to discourse.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE OFFICE For making DEACONS.
CHAP. I. Of the Form and Manner of making Deacons in general.
. 1.
THE lowest Order of the Clergy in the Apostolical and our Church is, that of a
Deacon, which deserves a great esteem, because the meanest Office in God's
House is honorable Psalm. lxxxiv. 10.
, and none ought rashly to undertake it, nor suddenly to be admitted into it,
because it is the foundation of, and first step toward the higher Orders Ubi
male posuimus Principia, sic caetera sequentur, Cicer. ad Attic. l. 10. c. 20.
; and being instituted by the inspired Apostles, it is a Sacred Order which
gives a Man power to minister about Holy Things. By Moses's Law the Levites
were to be Holy as well as the Priests; and the directions which St. Paul gives
concerning their Qualifications, are evidence sufficient, that great care ought
to be taken of their Admission. It Is true, the first occasion of making
Deacons, was to dispense the Charity of the Church among the Poor Acts vi. 2.
; but if they had not been intended for higher Ministeries, there had been no
need of requiring they should be full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom Ibid. ver. 3.
. Epiphanius affirms they were taken out of the LXX Disciples, who were
Ordained Preachers in Extraordinary by Christ Luke x. 1.
, and were now made Preachers in Ordinary, as appears by the instances of St.
Stephen Acts vi. 8.
, and St. Philip Ibid. viii. 5.
, who both did Preach after their Ordination Epiphan. advers. haer. lib. 1. T.
1. p. 22. b.
; and St. Ambrose likewise affirms this Order may Preach Quamvis non sunt
Sacerdotes, Evangelizare possunt sine Cathedra, sicut Stephanus and Philippus,
Ambros. in Ephesians. 5.
. Besides, in the earliest Monuments of Antiquity, we find Deacons constantly
attended on the Bishop in all his Sacred Ministrations, and assisted him; so
that Ignatius says, they were not only to serve Tables, but to be Ministers of
the Church of God (...), Ignat. Epist. ad Trall.
: and St. Cyprian affirms the Apostles chose them to be Ministers of their
Episcopal Office, and of God's Church Episcopatus sui, and Ecclesiae Ministros,
Cypr. ad Rogat. Ep. 9.
; but their special duty was to distribute the Bread and Cup to the People
after the Bishop had Consecrated it (as a learned Author has made out Bevereg.
Annot. ad Can. 2. Council. Ancyr. T. 2. p. 174.
: who also shows there, that they bore a part in the Liturgy with the Priest or
Bishop; and when Churches were built in the Country, Deacons alone, sometimes,
performed the whole Office there, and not only read the Prayers, but the
Gospel, and (by license) Preached or made an Homily upon it: So that their
Privileges increasing, at last they began to despise the Presbyters, of which
diverse of the Fathers complain Aug. Quaest. ex utr. Testam. mixed. qu. 101.

Hieron. ad Evagrium, Ep. 85.

Gregor. M. lib. 1. Ep. 14, 15, 16.


, and many Canons of Councils were made to reform this abuse Council. Carthag.
6. Can. 18. Council. Romans sub Gelas. c. 9, 10. Council. 1. Arelat. Can. 18. and 2
Can. 15.
; but since we shall have occasion to treat of the particulars hereafter, we
will now go on (after our usual method), first to give the Analysis of the
whole Office, and then explain the Parts in order.

The Analysis of the whole Office for making a Deacon.. 2.
This Office is made up of 1st. The preparatives before Ordination. 1st. More
remote in, 1. The Sermon, Rub. I. 2. Presenting them to the Bishop. 3. His
Appeal to the People. 4. The Litany.
2ly. More directly, by 1. The proper Collect. 2. The Epistle. 3. The Oath of
Supremacy. 4. The Questions and Answers.

2ly. The Ordination it self being 1. The Imposition of Hands. 2. The solemn
words. 3. Delivering the New Testament.
3ly. The Consequents after Ordination. 1. Reading the Gospel. 2. Receiving the
Communion. 3. The Prayers after it. 4. Some Instructions, Rubr. ult.



CHAP. II. Of the Remoter Preparatives to Ordination.
. 1.
Rubr. 1. WHen the day appointed by the Bishop is come, after Morning Prayer is
ended, there shall be a Sermon or Exhortation, declaring, etc.
This Section orders a Sermon, or Exhortation shall precede every Ordination;
which if it be celebrated in a Cathedral, and on a Sunday or Holy Day, the
Sacrament is always Provided; only two things are to be noted; first the
placing, and then the subject of these Sermons. The place of our Sermons
ordinarily are after the Nicene Creed: but on these days lest the Office should
be broken, the Preaching is fixed after the end of our Morning Prayer, strictly
so called. The Litany being removed into the Communion Service, as very proper
to this occasion; otherwise the Litany would be to be said twice in one
Morning, and so too much lengthen the Offices. And since the Ordination is to
be performed at the Altar, and always joined with a Communion, this Rubric
orders, that all the rest shall be finished in the Body of the Church, before
the Bishop and Candidates go up to the Holy Table.

2ly. As to the Subject of the Sermon, it is required that it relate to this
Occasion, for nothing is more comely Prove. xxv. 11. Hebr. (...) super rotis
suit.
, nor more profitable than a word spoken in due season: it is very fit to
instruct at this time, first the Candidates in the several parts of their Duty,
and the Nature of their Office, that they may weigh and consider well the great
Charge they are about to undertake, and be encouraged cheerfully to promise,
and sincerely to resolve they will perform it by God's help. 2ly. It is also
equally proper now to teach the Congregation what reverent esteem they ought to
have of such as are set to watch for their Souls, to offer up their Prayers to
God, and to make known God's Word and Will to them, and thus all may be edified
by such a pertinent Discourse; and truly the usefulness of such a Sermon at
this time is sufficient to justify our own and other reformed Churches in
requiring it Post habitam Concionem, incipit is qui Ordinationis ritum
administrat, Form. Eccles. Luther. Edit. Lips. 1624.
, if we had no Precedents for it in Antiquity. In the Roman Church in later
Ages we can expect nothing of this kind, because Preaching was there generally
laid aside for diverse Centuries; yet in some very old Rituals there is a brief
exhortation to such as are to be ordained, or to the people, or to both,
something like a Homily Form of Ordin. by Mr. Knox. p. 10. Print. Middleburgh,
1594.
. But probably in the Greek Church it was generally used, that one of the
Candidates (if well qualified) preached, as St. Chrysostom did at Antioch on
the day he was ordained Priest, as the Title of that Sermon, still extant
plainly shows Et convertens se Ordinator ad populum faciat Sermonem fi velit --
ante Litaniam, Vet. Ordinal. circ. An. 900. ap. Morin. de Ord. par. 2. p. 322.
, viz. The first Homily when he was promoted Presbyter: and the Discourse
appears to be made that very day (...), Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Hom. 38. p. 443.
edit. Savil.
. But he was a very extraordinary Person, and so might be chosen to give an
early experiment of his fitness to enter into this Holy Order. Otherwise and
ordinarily it seems more fit, some graver and more experienced Priest should be
appointed to do this Office, because such an one may be likely to exhort and
direct all present, with more Judgment and more Authority, than he who has
scarce yet made any trial of his abilities.

. 2.
Rubr. II. The Archdeacon, or his Deputy shall present unto the Bishop
(sitting in his Chair near to the Holy Table) such as desire to be ordained
(each of them being decently habited) saying, etc.
This Rubric directs, 1st. Who shall present the Candidates. 2ly. To whom, and
where they shall be presented. 3ly. And in what Habits. As to the first, it
has been very ancient, and as generally observed, that the Archdeacon should
present both Priests and Deacons to be ordained. So that we find an universal
consent in all the old Formularies both of the Eastern and also of the Western
Church in this matter: so it is ordered in the Euchologion (...), Euchol. p. 252
in the Syrian forms Ordin. Syror. ap. Morinum, par. 2. p. 406.
, in the old Latin Ordinals Ver. Form. Latin. ibid. p. 398.
, and in the modern Roman Pontifical Pontif. Romans p. 31.
, as well as in our Church: and there is greater reason for this now than of
old, when the Archdeacons lived with, and constantly attended on the Bishop at
the Cathedral. For now they have a considerable Jurisdiction allotted them in
each Diocese, which they ought yearly to visit, and thereby they must become
acquainted with most of the Clergy, and so can best judge of their
Testimonials: yea it is their Duty and interest to take care that none but
worthy persons be admitted, because when they come afterward to be fixed in
Country Cures, they may probably fall under their Government, and if they be
Learned and Pious, they will have the reward of this care in examining them, by
the comfort and credit that will accrue from such admissions. Having thus given
the reasons of the Archdeacons presenting, I shall say something of their
Original and Office; in great Churches, where the Bishop had many Deacons, the
eldest had the Title of Archdeacon and was a sort of Governor over all the
rest (...), Theod. Hist. l. 1. c. 26.
, and thus Athanasius is called Archdeacon to Alexander Bishop of Alexandria.
The Deacons in some places chose those, not for Age alone, but other good
qualities Diaconi eligunt de se si quem industrium noverint, and Archidiaconum
vocent, Hier. ad Evagr. ep. 85.
, afterward the Bishops chose them; and if the Senior was not fit, he might
nominate another, as an old Council decrees Council. Agath. Can. 23. An. 506.
Bin. Tom. 2. par. 1. p. 555.
, and this with their being ever in the Bishops eye, gave them so much Power at
Rome, that the Archdeacon, though no Priest, must approve of all that were to
be advanced from Deacons to Presbyters there Hieron. ad Evagr. ep. 85. ubi
supra.
; which custom of Rome was soon after imitated by all other Churches, and among
their various Duties described by Isidore Isidor. Hispal. ep. ad Leudef. Episc.
Cordub.
; this was ever one, to examine and approve of Candidates for Holy Orders; yea
the Bishops employed them in so many affairs, that they were called his Eyes
(...). Isid. Peleus. lib. 4. ep. 188. ad Lucium Archid.
, but still they were but of the Order of Deacons; so that when an Archdeacon
was to be consecrated a Bishop, he must first be ordained a Priest Sidon.
Apollinar. l. 4. ep. ult.
. After this, though they kept the old Title of Archdeacons, they were often
Presbyters; so that the Canons of Hincmarus are directed, to Guntharius and
Odelhardus, Archdeacons and Priests Capitul. Hincmari An. 874. Tom. 3. Council.
Gallican.
; and then their Power was very much enlarged; for they were appointed by the
Bishops to visit their Diocesses for them Onuphr. Panvin, in libel. de vocab.
Eccl.
, in the Roman Ordinal they are called the Bishops Vicars, and in some Churches
had a certain Form of Prayers, and some Ceremonies used at their Promotion Vid.
Morin. de Ordin. Cophtit. p. 508.
: Which though it be not Customary here, yet the great trust reposed in them,
and the mighty benefits that may accrue to the Church by their prudence,
fidelity and diligence, ought to make our Bishops always choose those, that are
most Eminent for their Learning, Industry, Gravity and good Life, to this
considerable Office, and these will very much assist them in the good
government and ordering of their Diocesses; especially after Age or Infirmities
have indisposed them for personal Oversight, as to the remoter parts under
their jurisdiction.

2ly, The Persons to whom they are presented for Ordination is the Bishop, who
(as we have showed) has the sole right to ordain, and because he represents in
this Act the person of Christ, from whom the power of giving holy Orders by his
Apostles, has been rightly transferred to them, therefore he Sits in a Chair
near to the holy Table, which Seat is called in the Greek a little Throne
(...). Euchol. p. 292. alij addunt (...). vid. p. 297.
, and of old (that too much State might not be used in the most holy place, and
the presence of the King of Kings) it was only covered with a Linen Cloth, as
we learn from the Passion of St. Cyprian Vid. Pont. in vit. D. Cyprian. p.
penult.
, who was offered at a Seat in the Praetorium, accidentally covered with Linen,
so that even then he sat as Bishops use to do: In the Roman Church it is called
by an old Saxon name, which implies it was a folding Stool or Chair, placed as
it is with us within the Rails Episcopus accedit ad Faldistorium ante altar.
Pontif. Romans p. 30.
. For Ordinations in all Churches being accompanied with the Communion, have
constantly been celebrated near the Altar, before which in the Eastern parts
the Candidates stood for some time, while some Prayers were made in a very
humble bowing Posture, expecting and waiting for the Gifts and Grace of God, as
diverse Offices do express it Qui cum tremore stat coram Patre nostro Episcopo.
Ordin. Syror. apud Morin. par. 2. p. 397.
. Which ours who are to be ordained should so far imitate, as to approach with
reverence and great humility this Sacred place and him who acts in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and is in this Office his immediate delegate.

3ly. As to the Persons presented, this Rubric takes care of their external
Decency, as the following Question and Answer does of their inward fitness:
First it is ordered, that every one of them shall be Decently habited, because
a good Figure and decent Apparel naturally gain reverence and respect, but
affected gaiety and sordid dirtiness equally cause contempt: Almighty God
himself prescribed the Garments for the High Priest, the Priests and Levites
under the Law, and they were such, as might procure Honor and Glory even to
the lowest Order Exodus xxviii. 2. Ibid. ver. 40. (...), verse. lxx.
And in all Nations in the World their Priests wore Garments differing from
other Men. Our own Canons enjoin, that Ministers shall at all times wear grave,
distinct and decent Habits Can. lxxiv. Eccles. Anglican.
, wherein our Law agrees with the Orders of other ancient Churches, which
forbid the Clergy to imitate the Laymens Fashions in any sort of Clothes, and
to use any but a very grave Habit, even when they do not officiate Nec vestibus
nec calceamentis decorem quaerant. Council. Carth. 4. Can. 45. Bin. Tom. i. par.
1. p. 549.
. In the Eastern Church it was punished with a Weeks suspension, for a Priest
to be seen (either at Home or in a Journey) in any other Garb than in that
appropriate to his Order (...). Council. 6. in Trul. can. 27. Bever. T. 1. p.
187.
. St. Hieron declaims extremely against those of his Order, who dressed
themselves rather like Bridegrooms than Clergymen Sponsos magis existimato
quam clericos. Hier, ad Eust. ep. 22. p. 184.
. So that he thought it their duty to go always in grave and plain attire, even
when they were abroad; and he informs us that the Clergy had a Habit in those
days, when they did officiate different from that they wore commonly (t).
Religio divina alterum habirum habet in us^^ communi, alterum in ministerio.
Id: in Ezekiel. 44.
The old French Law, charge Priests and Deacons not to put on Garments like
Laymen, but Cassocks like the Servants of God Capitular. An. 742. cap. 7. Tom.
i. p. 148.
. I could add more Laws to this purpose, but I choose rather to observe the
agreement of Foreign reformed Churches, as well as the ancients with us in this
Matter: The Lutheran Synod decrees, That Ministers as well by their pastoral
Habit, as by their cutting their Heir, shall be distinguished from other Orders
of Men -- Ut externo Habitu pastorali, sic etiam coma capitis, a reliquorum
hominum ordinibus sint distincti. Synod. Luth. An. 1600. edit. Lips. 1624.
; for other Churches, I refer the Reader to the laborious Collections, and
undeniable evidence in this matter, of a late learned Prebendary of this Church
Durel 's View of the Reformed Churches, 1. chap. 20. p. 21.
. So that if the Clergy oppose these Orders, and affect to be Gay and Modish,
or cast off their Priestly Garments, they act contrary to the Reason of
Mankind, the Custom and Laws of all Nations, as well as of our Church, which
enjoins them to go decently always in peculiar Habits; but when they come to be
ordained, it is expected they should all be clad in white Surplices, to
distinguish them from the rest of the people, and because that is the color,
and the very Garment, which they must put on whenever afterward they minister
in Gods House. I know some precise and ignorant people are prejudiced without
Reason, against the use of this white Vestment: But St. Hierom's Question at
the same time, proves its ancient use in the Christian Church, and reproves
their needless scruple: Can it be (says he) any offense to God, for a Bishop or
Priest to go to the Communion in a white garment Quae sunt rogo inimicitiae
contra Deum si Episcopus vel Presbyter, etc. in administratione sacrificiorum
-- candida vest processerint. Hier. adv. Pelag. l. 1. c. 9. T. 2. p. 416.
? and since it is in God's service, if it do not offend him, why should it
offend any of us? Now that it is pleasing to God, appears, because he himself
chose pure Linen Ephods for his Priests and Levites under the Law Exodus xxviii.
4. 1 Samuel chap. ii. 18.
which was so well known, that such were called those who wore a Linen Ephod 2 Samuel xxii. 18.
. From the Jews it is probable the Egyptians learned this Custom, to wear no
other Garments but only of white Linen, looking on that as the fittest
covering, for such as attended on Divine things as being most pure Quod ex lino
contextum est, purissimum est divinis rebus velamentum. Apul. in Apol. part. 1:
Vid. Hieron. in Ezech. c. 44.
. The like Garments also were worn by the Brachmans, who were the Indian
Priests as Philostratus Reports Philostrat. vit. Apollon. l. 3. c. 4. item
Saubert. de Sacrificiis cap. 8.
. From so Divine an original and spreading a practice, the ancient Christians
did use white Linen Garments in divine administrations, and that is one of the
principal parts of the Ministers attire in the Eastern Church Euchol. not. p.
111. number. 11.
, and it was so long since used there, that Nazianzene advises the Priests to
purity, because a little spot is soon seen in a white Garment (...). Greg. Naz.
in Matthew. 19.
, and a later Author says, this color is the emblem of Purity and Holiness,
and an imitation of Gods glorious clothing, who covers himself with Light as it
were with a Garment, Psalm. civ. 2. (...). Symeon. Thessal. ap. Euchol. not. ut
supra.
, to which we may add, that it was a Custom at Rome, for all that stood for any
Office to appear in a white Garment in token of their innocence, from whence we
derive the word Candidates, as very learned Authors have noted Just. Lips.
Elect. l. 1. cap. 13. and Voss. etymolog. voc. Cand.
. I can allow the observation of St. Fulgentius, that the change of the Heart
is the best preparative for Gods service, but must disallow the conclusion he
drew from thence, that therefore he would officiate in the same Clothes that he
slept (p). Vir. B. Fulg. c. 18. p. 22.
. The persecuting times he lived in, when the Orthodox worship was supressed,
may excuse that practice; but it is contrary to the African Canons, and the
general Use of all other Churches, and if I were to determine this matter I
should decree, That the Clergy ought to change their Garments, when they
Minister, for Men's sake, who naturally love decency in all things, and
especially those that are Sacred: And to change their Hearts for Gods sake, who
sees their thoughts, and is present at all our Religious Assemblies.

. 3.
The words at Presenting.] Reverend Father in God I present unto you, etc.
[Bishop] Take heed that the Persons, etc. [Arch-Deacon] I have enquired, and
also examined them, and think them so to be.
This Dialogue shows the wonderful caution used by this Church in admitting Men
to holy Orders, in appointing a proper Officer to examine both their Learning
and their Lives; and that so strictly, that unless he can with a good
Conscience publicly affirm he believes them apt and meet, to exercise their
Ministry to the honor of God and the edifying of the Church, they are not so
much as allowed to stand for Candidates, nor can they be presented to be
ordained: The matter is by Divine appointment, and so is indispensible; for St.
Paul has charged, that he shall first be proved or examined, who would use the
Office of a Deacon (...). 1 Timothy 3.10.
; and all the ancient Canons strictly require it. Yea, one Office appoints,
that diverse Priests shall testify the Persons fitness, for his Manners and his
Learning especially in sound Doctrine Officium Copthit. in Ordin. Sacerdotis,
ap. Morin. p. 507.
. The words were something altered at our Reformation, for in the old Roman
Forms, the Archdeacon said, our holy Mother the Catholic Church requires you
would Ordain, etc. Postulat S. matter Ecclesia Catholica ut hunc -- ordinetis.
Form. Latin. ord. Morin. par. 2. p. 271.
; but in regard the Archdeacon has no Commission to appear for the whole
Catholic Church, our Reformers did judge it better for him, to speak in his
own name; and since the duty of examining lay on him, he was thought fittest to
pass for them, and this he must do explicitly, by saying He thinks them to be
duly qualified: And not with that unseasonable Salvo, which the Roman Ordinal
puts into his Mouth -- as far as Human frailty suffers me to know Quantum
humana fragilitas nosse sinit scio and testificor. Vet. form. ap. Morin. ibid.
; Which the Forms of Edw. the 6th caused to be left out, least any negligence
might shelter it self under such an excuse Confer. Pontifical. Roman. p. 31.
cum Liturg. Ed. 6. apud Sparrow. page 139.
. But however, least any unworthy Person should impose upon the Archdeacon, or
his Deputies, diverse of our best and greatest Bishops have used (after all) to
examine the Candidates themselves, and though they did not lay aside the use of
their Delegate, nor of this Form, yet they resolved to be certain of their own
knowledge, that the Archdeacon did both answer truly, and judge aright See the
Life of Ar. B. Williams, Par. 2. p. 41. and Life of Ar. B. Usher. p. 90.
. As to the Phrases here made use of it is known that the Sons of the Prophets
called them by the honorable and endearing Name of Fathers 2 Kings ii. 12.
; and Kings gave them the same Title in those days also 2 King. xiii. 14.
. The Apostles called Clergymen their Sons 1 Timothy i. 1. and 2 Ep. i. 2. Titus
i. 4.
, and claimed to be Fathers to them and to all the Faithful 1 Cor. iv. 15.
, by which Name Christian Bishops, who succeeded them in their Office, were
generally called (as I showed before) Preface,. 3.
; but to distinguish them from Natural Parents, they saluted them Fathers in
God, or in Christ; and they are so Particularly in this Solemn Act to those
they Ordain, wherein they put them into a new and nearer relation to God and
Christ Jesus, and adopt them into, not only the Service, but the Family of
their Heavenly Father. I need not enlarge upon that solemn Charge the Bishop
gives the Presenter, which briefly but fully intimates, first the necessary
Qualifications for a Minister, viz. Learning and Godly Conversation. 2ly. The
principal ends for which Ministers are appointed, viz. to promote the Honor of
God, and to edify Men who are Members of his Church; of both which I shall
have frequent occasion to speak hereafter.

. 4.
The Appeal to the People.] Brethren, if there be any of you who knows any
impediment, or notable Crime in any of these Persons presented, etc.]
In pursuance of this care to keep unworthy Men from entering into Holy Orders,
by the direction of Holy Scripture, and Primitive Practice, our Church enjoins
the Bishop shall enquire of the People if they know any of the Candidates to
have been guilty of any such Crimes, as ought to exclude them from Holy Orders.
The first Deacons were appointed to be such as all the Disciples could witness
for their goodness (...) Act. vi 3.
and St. Paul makes it necessary, not only for a Bishop, but even for a Deacon
also, that he be found blameless 1 Timothy iii. 2, and 10. Tit. i. 7.
before he can exercise that Office. Now this can no other way be secured, but
by enquiring of those among whom he has lived before he came to be Ordained;
wherefore this method was always taken in all Churches, for upon this ground
Orders were given in public, as was noted before; and among the Apostolical
Canons it is decreed, That such as have been convicted of Fornication,
Adultery, or any other notorious Crime, should never be admitted into any
Ecclesiastical Order (...), Can. Apostol. 61. Bever. Tom. 1. p. 40.
; they might upon their repentance be absolved, but after such a blot, could
not be advanced to the honor of the Clergy; that Dignity being to be conferred
upon none but unblemished Persons; and the higher the Order was, the stricter
care was taken; for Tertullian acquaints us, that the Governors of Christian
Assemblies must be approved and reverent Men, acquiring this Honor, not by
Money, but by a testimony, that is whose innocence the people could attest
Praesidunt probati quique Seniores honorem istum non precio, sed testimonio
adepti, Tert. Apol. c. 39.
. St. Cyprian is very full and clear in this matter, for he observes Cyprian.
Epist. 68. ad Cler. and Pleb. Hisp. p. 201, 202.
, That God ordered the Priest of old should be set before the whole
Congregation, -- that the People being present, the Faults of evil men may be
discovered, and the Merits of the good published; -- and if any were then
charged with any Crime, such might be admitted to repentance, but were
prohibited Ordination into the Clergy, and excluded from the Sacerdotal Honor:
the same thing is also affirmed by Origin, viz. that such as have notoriously
sinned, can have no Dignity in God's Church (...), Orig. in Cells. l. 3.
; and the same Author further shows the use of a public Ordination, saying,
The presence of the People is required at the Ordaining of a Priest, that they
may all know and be satisfied, that he who is chosen is the Best, the
Learned, the Holiest and the most eminent for all Virtue Idem hom. 6. in
Levit. cap. 8.
; and when such were pitched on, the People used to cry He is Worthy, he is
Worthy; a Phrase which seems to have been originally derived from the ancient
Romans, for so Fabius in Livy recommends P. Decius to be his Colleague in the
Consulship, that he was Worthy of the People, and Worthy of his Parentage --
dignum vobis, dignum Parente suo, Live. live. 10. c. 13. p. 758.
, which Brissonius takes to be a Form Brisson. de formul. lib. 2. p. 135.
, and notes that such as were unworthy were not allowed to give in their Names
among the Candidates Quos indignos judicavit profiteri vetuit, Vell. Paterc. l.
2.
: yet if any such did stand for Offices, the Form of denying them was, for the
People to cry out Unworthy when their Names were published (...), Plutar. in
Galb.
. And that this publishing the Names of the designed Clergy was usual both
among Christians and Jews in the eldest times, we may learn from a remarkable
passage of the Emperor Alexander Severus, who lived An. Chr. 230. and
endeavored to revive this Custom (then obsolete) in Heathen Rome; For when he
would give Governors to Provinces, or make any great Officers, -- He published
their Names, and exhorted the People if they knew any Crimes they had
committed, they should prove them, or else not to accuse them on peril of
Death: For he said 'twas unreasonable, that what the Christians and Jews did in
publishing their Priests before they ordained them, should not be done in
making Rulers of the Provinces, to whose power, not only men's fortunes but
their lives also were committed Lamprid. vit. Alex. Severi, cap. 45. p. 570.
: that just Prince it seems liked the custom, but knew not the Christians had
greater reason than he, to do this, viz. Men's Souls, which are of more value
than their Lives and Estates, are committed to our Priests: but of the rite it
self, all Ages afford evidence. When Fabian was designed Bishop of Rome, An.
237. by the miraculous lighting of a Dove on his Head, The People with one Soul
and all readiness cried He is Worthy (...), Eusebius. l. 6. c. 29.
. The Author of the Apostolical Constitutions, who, (though he writ after this)
relates many ancient Customs, says, that upon the publication of a good Man
they use to cry thrice He is Worthy (...), Constit. Apostol. l. 8. c. 4.
. In the Western Church there is abundant proof of this form of Acclamation, as
may be seen in St. Ambrose Ambros. de dignit. Sacerd. c. 5. Tom. 4. p. ^82.
, and in St. Augustine, who declaring Eradius his Successor, the People cried
out diverse times He is Worthy, He is Worthy, He is Just Aug. Epist CX. edit.
Venet. 1552. T. 2. p. 107.
. So when Rusticus was chosen Bishop of Auvergne, all the People immediately
cried out, He is Worthy and Just Greg. Turon. hist. Franc. l. 2. c. 13:
: yea, in this Church of England it is recorded of Gundulphus, that his
excusing himself as Unworthy to be a Bishop, was drowned by the cry of the
People, that he was Worthy (n), Vox se indignum clamantis opprimitur, cum quo
se clamat indigniorem eo dignior acclamatur, Seldom. not. in Eadmer. p. 196.
and so he was chosen Bishop of Rochester about ten years after the Conquest:
But nothing can make this Custom clearer than the ancient Forms of Ordination,
which in the two lower Orders constantly prescribe, that the People shall
testify their consent by crying Worthy: which they thrice repeat in the Greek
Church -- (...). Euchol. in Ordin. Diac. p. 251. ita in Ordin. Presbyt. p. 294.
, and in like manner at the Consecration of a Bishop the Clergy repeated thrice
he is Worthy, he is Just, in the old Roman Form Ordin. Roman. vet. ap. Morin.
de Ord. Lat. Par. 2. p. 276.
: In other Forms of great antiquity the same acclamation is required before a
Bishop be Consecrated Morin. ibid. p. 265.
; and in the lower Orders there is generally in all the Gallican and other
Western Offices of Ordination, a form of address to the People desiring to
declare by their Voices, that such an one is Worthy to be a Priest or a Deacon
Mabil. de Lit. Gallic. l. 3. p. 103. and p. 305. Morin. ut supr. p. 263, 264.
. But it seems this was afterward turned into a Summons to the People to make
their Objections against any of the Candidates Morin. in ordin. circ. An. 700.
p. 267.
. And so has this Form continued for near 1000 years together, as may be seen
by comparing the ancient and later Offices, and those of other Churches with
that of our own Morin. de ord. Lat. Par. 2. p. 272, 281, 284, 310, etc.

Pontif. Roman. p. 31, and p. 40.

Ordin. Ed. 6. apud Sparrow. Col. p. 139.

Scotch Psalter by Jo. Knox. p. 11.


. So that in so universal an agreement of the whole Christian World, founded
upon so plain intimations of Holy Scripture, we cannot but own the usage is
right in it self, and the best expedient that can be found to exclude the
Unworthy: Yet this constant and solemn application to the People, no doubt gave
occasion to their further encroachments at elections of the Clergy, and at last
from witnesses of their Conversation they presumed in some places to claim a
right of choosing, especially their Bishops, which filled those Churches, where
it was practiced, with violent Factions and intolerable Mischiefs. However not
only Mr. Baxter, but some that pretend to our Communion, have undertaken to
defend this false, pernicious and impracticable Opinion, that the People have
right to choose their Pastors; wherefore I shall take leave to digress a
little, and briefly enquire into this matter.

. 5. Of Popular Elections.]
If the People had a right to choose, doubtless it would have been declared in
Scripture, or in pure and primitive Antiquity, or it must be grounded upon
constant and uncontrolled practice in some of the first and best Ages; but
neither of these can be proved. Before the Law, the Priestood being hereditary
and the privilege of the Firstborn, God (who only gives precedence of Birth
and long Life) not the People, chose their Priests. Under the Law the
Priesthood was fixed in one Tribe, and the Office of High Priest in one Family,
and none of them could be excluded, unless there were some defect in their
Extraction, their Bodies or their Minds, or for some high Crime, of which
ordinarily the Sanhedrin, not the People were judges Vid. Outram. de Sacrif. l.
1. c. 6. p. 63.
, and the Kings sometimes placed or displaced the High Priest 1 Kings ii. 27,
and ver. 35.
, so did Antiochus Epiphanes Joseph. Antiq. lib. 15. cap. 3.
, and the Roman Emperors: when they had successively conquered the Jews, choose
or reject the Highpriests at their Pleasure: But in all this period, for near
4000 years, there are no footsteps of either Right or Fact as to popular
Elections. After our Saviors coming, and entering on his Ministry, he chose his
Apostles and the LXX Disciples himself; and it is plain he gave his Apostles
power to choose and ordain others, and left no manner of intimation, that the
People should have any right herein. Those CXX who appointed two Candidates for
the vacant place of Judas, and left the choice, by lot, to God Act. i. 23, 26.
Solent quae sort dantur dici divinitus dari, Aug. Genesis ad lit. l. 1. c. 18.
were not all the Believers, no nor that multitude of the Disciples who chose
the seven Deacons Act. vi. 2.5.
, but the Apostolical College of Pastors which consisted of the Apostles and 70
Disciples, and about 38 more of the principal Disciples fitted for the
Ministries of the Church, as a very learned man has proved Dr. Lightfoot's
works, Tom. 1. page 744, etc. and page 778.
. The Holy Ghost chose Barnabas and Saul Act. xiii. 1, 2, 3.
. The Apostles were only guided by it in choosing Bishops for their fixed
Successors 1 Timothy i. 18. Vid. Patr. citat. a Grot. in loc.
, and had a peculiar gift of discerning Spirits, that is, of judging who were
fit for these Offices 1 Cor. xii. 10.
; and they being inspired, gave Rules only to the Bishops, Timothy and Titus,
what kind of Persons they should choose into the Ministry Vid. Theoph. Praef.
ad 1 Ep. Tim. and ad Epist. Tit.
, (as has been observed already) therefore they only then had a right to
elect. The Peoples part (allowed by St. Paul) being no more but only to declare
them blameless, as witnesses of their Conversation: and certainly so long as
the Apostles lived who had so extraordinary an inspiration (and so had most of
their immediate Successors); it had been the highest presumption for the People
to meddle any further in Elections, than to applaud their choice: So that there
is no ground in Scripture for the Peoples Right to choose their Pastor.
Wherefore if they had not this power from Christ nor his Apostles, let us next
enquire whether the Primitive Church gave them any such Right. St. Clement, who
lived with the Apostles, says they chose Bishops and Deacons out of those they
had proved by the Spirit, and that the whole Church was pleased with their
choice (...), Clem. Ep. ad Corin. p. 100.

Universa Ecclesia sibi gratum esse testante, ita vertit, P. de Marca. lib. 8.
c. 2.


, that is, they did not give their consent before, but by an after-act
testified their satisfaction, as that word elsewhere signifies Romans i. 32.
(...).

Luke xi. 48. (...).


. So that the People then could not be said to elect, nor yet in any of those
Cases where God, by immediate direction of his Spirit, or by some miraculous
indication singled out the Person which was to be Ordained, of which for some
Ages there are diverse instances (...), Eusebius. l. 3. c. 17. p. 67. idem l. 6. c.
9. p. 156. idem ibid. c. 22. p. 169.
; and till the time of compiling the Apostolical Canons, there were Bishops
promoted by divine Grace, that is, by indications from the Spirit Apostol. Can.
80. Bever. Tom. 1. p. 52.
. So also the People had no right to elect, nor hand in the choice of Bishops
in those Churches where the eldest Presbyters succeeded of course, being fit;
or if not, the Presbyters of that Church chose one out of themselves; as it
continued to be done at Alexandria from St. Mark, down to the time of
Dionysius, for near 250 years Hieron. ad Evagr. ep. 85. Tom. 2. p. 511.
: but Ecchellensis says, the usage remained there to much later times Ambros.
com. in cap. 4. ad Ephesians. T. 3. p. 504. item Ecchellens. ap. B. Stilling.
unreas. of Separat. p. 320.
. And I could give many examples (though they were irregular) where Bishops
nominated their Successors, and the People did submit to their Choice, and here
also they could not be said to elect. The main arguments for this pretended
Right, are some passages of St. Cyprian, and a few seeming reasons. But first
as to St. Cyprian, though he used to consult with the Priests, Deacons and
People in ordaining to the lower Degrees, the reason was, that he might weigh
every ones merits and manners by their common advice Solemus vos ante
consulere. etc. Cypr. ep. 33. p. 76.
. But to show this gave them no right to elect, he there speaks of one that he
ordained privately, because he knew the Person was worthy Id ibid. p. 77.
, and his next Epistle presents us with a like case Id. ep. 34. p. 80. Vid.
item ep. 35. p. 84.
. Now it is not likely this strict Father and holy Martyr, would have chosen
men into his Clergy without the People, if they had a right to elect. Besides,
where he runs highest to prove the Peoples presence necessary, it is only, that
unworthy Persons may be excluded Ne quis ad altaris Ministerium, vel ad
Sacerdotalem locum indignus obreperet, Cypr. ep. 68. p. 201.
. The election is made by the Bishops, but before the People, who know
perfectly every ones life, and have seen their Conversations Episcopus
deligatur plebe praesente, quae singulorum vitam plenissime novit, Id. ibid. p.
202.
. So that here they are only witnesses, and they have the testifying part, but
the Bishops the power of judging and approving. It Is true, the People in those
difficult persecuting times were forced sometimes to sieze on, and compel Men
to become Clerks or Bishops, which was then a prologue to Martyrdom; and the
Governors of the Church connived at, and confirmed these uncanonical Elections,
otherwise they might have wanted Clergy; but this must not be pressed for a
Precedent to our peaceable times, any more than Phedimus of Amasia his choosing
and dedicating Gregory Thaumaturgus, Bishop of Neo-caesaria, when he was
distant three days journey, can justify ordaining men at a distance; or one of
the Crowds naming Alexander, a Collier, for Bishop of Comana, ought to be
brought to justify the right of popular nominations; these were extraordinary
cases, and proved well in those instances, but must by no means be drawn into
example. The reasons also given to prove popular Elections necessary in this
period, before Christianity was settled, are not cogent. It Is said, 1st. The
Clergy were then chosen out of the Body of the People. 2ly. It was necessary
they and their Pastors should be dear to each other. 3ly. Their maintenance was
only the Peoples free will offerings. To which it is replied, that every one of
the particulars are true of the Apostles times, in which it is certain the
People did not elect. Besides, 1st. The Pastors being chosen out of the People,
only proves, that they were proper witnesses of their Conversation, but not
judges of their Learning, which yet Electors ought to be. 2ly. Nothing was more
likely to set variance between the Pastor and the Party which was overvoted in
the choice, than such popular elections, as was found by sad experience
afterward Vide Augustine. ep. 225. and D. Hieron. ep. 60, 61, 62.
; and had that happened in times of persecution, those factions had ruined
Christianity in the Cradle. 3ly. The defeated Party would have been provoked to
withdraw their Contributions from a Pastor forced on them, and so great want
must have ensued in many places; but I must remark, though the Quantity was
voluntary, yet they were better Christians in those Ages, than to think
themselves at liberty to give less than a Tenth Part, since Christ had ordained
(agreably to his Fathers provision under the Law,) that they who preached the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel 1 Cor. ix. 13, 14.
, and whoever chose them, when they were chosen, this at least was their just
due; I shall not now mention those weak Inferences from publishing their Names
to the People, as if that made them Electors: For that very Historian who says
the Emperor Severus proclaimed the Names of his intended Governors for
Provinces, also notes, that he gave, and he chose the Men for those places: So
that as yet there appears no ground for any right of the People in choosing
Pastors, no nor in the Canons of these Ages. Those called the Apostolical,
Forbid Bishops to be translated, though the multitude force them, unless the
Bishops judge it reasonable Apostol. Can. 14. Bev. T. 1. p. 8.
. They suppose a Bishop sent to a stubborn People who will not receive him
Apostol. Can. 36. ibid. p. 24.
, who therefore certainly was not chosen by them; yea diverse of these Canons
make the Bishops Judges, whether the Person be worthy or no (...). Can. 77, 79,
and 82. ibid.
. The Council of Ancyra (ten years before that of Nice) also speaks of Bishops
constituted over a Diocese that would not receive them Council. Ancyran. Can.
18. Bev. Tom. 1. p. 385.
, from whence the learned de Marca infers, That Bishops were sometimes elected
and consecrated at a distance from the vacant City, and without the Peoples
consent Petr. de Marca de Concord. l. 8. c. 5. p. 358.
. So that nothing appears of a right thus far. After Constantine had settled
Christianity, and Peace brought Plenty into the Church, the People began to
interpose in Elections, and some ill men made their interest that way; but to
assure us this was usurpation, and no right, the Councils of that Age condemned
it, and labored to prevent this growing encroachment. The first General
Council of Nice condemns the Peoples forcing Bishops to ordain new Converts, as
being contrary to Scripture and the Canons; Council. Nicaen. 1. Can. 2. Bev.
Tom. 1.
and the Council would have all in the Province consent to every Bishops
Ordination, and three at least to be present, the rest declaring their consent
by writing, however the Metropolitan must agree to it, and if any difference
arise, the suffrage of most should prevail Ibid. Can. 4. and Can. 6. p. 63, and
66.
. I know some of the Patrons of popular Elections stretch these Canons to all
the People in the Province. But besides the absurdity of so universal an
Assembly on every vacancy, all other Canons which repeat and confirm these, do
expressly expound them of all the Bishops in the Province Council. Antioch. Can.
19. Bev. T. 1. p. 448. Conc. Arelat. Can. 5. Bin. T. 1. p. 565. Council.
Carthag. Can. 13. ibid. 527.

Canones Mart. Bracar. Can. 3. Bin. T. 2. par. 2. p. 240.


. So that Balsamon affirms, whereas the people had meddled in Elections before,
these Canons restrained that use, and placed the sole right of choosing in the
Bishops Balsam. in 4 can. Council. Nicaen. Bev. ut sopr. page 63.
, and de Marca says this Council restored the ancient right of Election to the
Bishops, and to restrain the contumacy of the people, did not so much as name
their presence Petr. de Marca de Concord. lib. 8. cap. 3. page 382.
. The Council of Antioch, nulls the advancing of a Bishop though all the people
choose him, if he be not first approved by a Synod and the Metropolitan Council.
Antioch. An. 341. can. 16. Bev. Tom. 1. page 445.
, it allows not of Translations by compulsion of the people Can. 21. Ib. 450.
, and declares the Bishops in a Synod alone have power to promote a worthy
Person Can. 23. ibid.
. In the Council of Sardica, the peoples inviting Men by Letters to be their
Bishops is condemned, as proceeding from Bribery and tending to Sedition
Council. Sardic. An. 347. Can. 2. Bev. Tom. 1. page 484.
; and the Peoples desire of a Bishop cannot be satisfied, unless all the
Bishops have notice, and most agree to it Can. 6. p. 490. ibid.
. The Synod of Laodicea appoints Elections of the Clergy shall be made in
private Council. Laod. An. 465. can. 5. Bev. Tom. 1. page 455.
, and having declared the Judgment of the Metropolitan, and his Suffragans
necessary to the appointing a Bishop Can. 12. p. 458.
. They absolutely forbid the Crowds to elect Can. 13. p. 459.
. For now the Church began to be very sensible of those many mischiefs, that
were the natural and necessary consequences of the peoples usurping a part in
Ecclesiastical Elections, in which they had no right to meddle further than to
testify their knowledge, concerning the Candidates Life and Manners.
Wherefore, there were after this all along many good Laws made to stop this
growing evil, but still (in great Cities, especially) the people encroached
more and more, and fell into Factions, Mutinies and Seditions almost upon every
vacancy, which often ended in Fighting, Cruelty and Bloodshed, to the shame of
Christianity, and the scandal of the Church, of which I could give very many
deplorable instances; but they are collected to my hand by a most Learned and
now Right Reverend Author Unreasonableness of separat. by B. Stilling. p. 318.
to whom I refer the Reader, being not willing to lanch out into the Laws, or
practices of later Ages, which signify little to create a right in the people,
which Christ never gave them, nor did his Apostles, or their Successors in the
pure Ages convey it to them, but it began upon some urgent necessity in a few
Cases, in times of Persecution; it was carried on in times of Peace by Force
and Faction, and was forced to be taken away by the abominable abuses of it,
and the miserable consequences that followed on it: The only wonder is, that
Men, to gratify a Party, should suppose that Christ, or his Apostles were the
Authors of a thing so naturally tending to divide and disgrace the Church, and
so manifestly the cause of confusion and every evil work: It Is well known, the
generality of the People are so bad Judges, that if they had such a Right, the
most Votes would commonly fall on the worst Men (...). Pythag. ap. Stohaeum.
, an empty, cunning and plausible Hypocrite, would easily get more suffrages
among the Mob of a City, than the most knowing, humble and holy Men, who least
seek the honor they most deserve; and if the Election were to be made in an
assembly of the better sort of Citizens, (as was practiced in some places a
while) the matter would not be much mended, for in such Bodies of Men (as Pliny
well observes) the Opinions are numbered not weighed, and therefore in such
Assemblies, nothing is more unequal than this seeming equality; for though the
Members be unequal in Sense and Understanding, yet their right to Vote is equal
Plin. Epist. lib. 2. ep. 12. p. 109.
, and this may suffice at present to say of this Matter, for I shall afterward
have occasion to show how the Bishops regained their original Right, in naming
and choosing the inferior Clergy, and the Emperors and Princes with the Clergy
elected Bishops, and so put a period to the Mischiefs, that had arisen every
where from popular Elections: And now I return to that ancient and just
Privilege, which our Church still preserves to the People, that is a Liberty
upon good grounds to accuse any of them who come for holy Orders.

. 6.
Rubr. iii. And if any great Crime, or Impediment be objected, the Bishop shall
surcease from ordering that Person, until such time as the Party accused, shall
be found clear of that Crime.
That the people had of old a liberty to object, in order to discover to the
Bishops such as were unworthy has been showed already, and if it be prudently
managed, it is an excellent method to prevent his mistake, who has the sole
power to approve. But we find by St. Chrysostom, that in his time these
Accusations were too many, and proceeded from prejudice, rather than honest
zeal; Go, says he, and behold the public Festivals, where according to Law,
they usually elect Ecclesiastical Governors, and you shall see a Priest loaded
with as many faults as there are numbers of people to be governed; so that they
who have Power to give the honor are also divided into many parties, and the
Assembly of the Clergy scarce can agree with one another, or the Candidate
Chrysostom. de sacerd. lib. 3. Tom. 6. Edit. Sav. p. 23.
. To correct this, one of the ancient Apostolical Canons decrees, that nothing
but proving the Accusation can stop a Man from being ordained Can. Apostol. 61.
Bev. T. 1. p. 40. and Zonaras in loc.
; for as Julian the Emperor said well, if to accuse be sufficient, who can be
innocent Si accusasse sufficiat quis erit innocens, Martin. in vita coram oper.
. And further, least any out of evil will, or ill principles should be prompted
to invent false stories of the Clergy, especially the higher Order; A general
Council and other Synod did forbid Heretics, and those under censure, or
excommunicate Persons to be admitted to accuse, and the like was ordered as to
Schismatics Council. Genesis 2. ap. Constable. can. 6. Bev. T. 1. p. 93. Council.
Chalc. can 21. Apost. can. 75. Cypr. ep. 42. and 55.
, because it might justly be presumed, that such as were Enemies to the Church,
were moved by malice, or revenge to bring in false accusations: But if the
accuser be a credible Person, then the Candidate must clear himself before he
can be admitted to holy Orders. Which is so great a disgrace, loss and injury
to the Party accused, that he who charges a Man in these circumstances, had
need be very sure he can prove the Crime; so that of old it was determined, the
accuser should be bound in an Obligation to pay, or suffer an equivalent, to
the damages of the accused, if he did not make good his charge Nam inscriptio
primo semper fiat, ut talionem calumniator recipiat, Damas. Ep. 4. ad Steph.
cap. 7. ita Council. Constant. can. 6 ut supra.
, which is so very rational that it is decreed both in the Civil and Canon Law
in all other cases Leg. Honor. and Theod. LL. 10. c. de calumn. Gratian.
decret. par. 2. cause. 2. qu. 3. cap. 3.
, and there is as good grounds for it in this case as in any other, because it
takes away both a Man's Livelihood and also his good Name: But if no such
Obligation be required by our Church; yet Men should do as they would be done
by, none would have their little faults aggravated, nor suspected crimes
published and solemnly averred; and since more or less all are faulty, the
consideration of our own frailty, should make us not very forward to accuse
others, to which end some ancient Ordinals when they invite the people to
declare, pray them to be mindful of their own Condition Cum fiducia exeat and
dicat, veruntamen memor sit conditionis suae. Codex Corbei. apud Morin. p. 272.
ita Pontif. Romans p. 31. and 40.
, since they also may fall, -- or as some Books have it -- mindful of their own
Communion Communionis suae, Morin. ibid. p. 267. and 284.
, viz. that he is a Brother who is thus charged by them, whose faults if they
be not mischievous and notorious, Charity obliges those of the same Communion
to excuse and cover. Yet after all, if the people know any great crimes of
which these Candidates are guilty, it is much better to declare them now, when
by such a discovery they may keep ill Men out, than to accuse them and divulge
their faults afterward, when the accusation tends only to the dishonor of
Religion, and the hindering the success of their Ministry, and it will be
supposed to proceed rather from malice than a zeal for Gods glory, or love to
the Church, unless the complaint be made in private to their Superiors, who
have power to reform these Offenders: Finally, if any of these Candidates know
any great Enormities they have committed, though no Man accuse them; yet God
and their own Consciences know they are unworthy of so high and holy a Calling,
and will be a blemish to it whenever they are discovered. So that without a
long Repentance, and such a change of Heart and Manners as may secure them from
relapsing, I must advise these Persons, not to presume to offer themselves, for
if the Bishop do not, God (in whose place he stands) will punish this
presumption; And I know some Conscientious Persons yet alive, who were
otherways extraordinarily qualified for holy Orders, that merely by reflecting
on some of their too common juvenile extravagancies, durst not take the
Ministry upon them, but applied themselves to Callings less grateful to them.

. 7.
Rubr. iv. Then the Bishop (commending such as shall be found meet to be
ordered to the Prayers of the Congregation,) shall with the Clergy and People
present, sing or say the Litany, etc.
If there be no Objection, the Office proceeds, and first the Bishop commends
those who are found fit to the Prayers of the People; and if any Priests are
ordained (that being the more weighty Office) a space is allowed for the
Congregations private Devotions; for some of them may be Friends, or Relations
to the Candidate, or be such as are to be under their charge, and then they
will desire time to put up particular requests for them, for which this vacant
time gives them an opportunity; but even they who have no such special ties,
are obliged (as Christians and Members of that Church wherein these Men are to
officiate) to pray heartily, that its Clergy may be rightly chosen and
replenished with grace, since that is a common blessing to all good Christians
in every part of the Nation: The ancient Western Offices referring to the
peoples crying Worthy, Worthy; do immediately order them all to join in their
Prayers to God, as they have done in their testimony of these Men saying, let
your common prayer follow your common consent Commune votum Communis
prosequatur Oration, etc. Ver. Ordin. ap. Morin. p. 263. Liturg. Gallic. ap.
Mabillon. lib. 3. p. 305. Pontif. Romans p. 32.
, and as now the whole Congregation has at least by their silence consented to
their admission. So they are concerned for the general good, earnestly to pray
for them: It Is a suffrage in our Liturgy taken out of Scripture 2 Cor. vi. 41.
and Psalm. cxxxii. 8.
, to pray that God would cloth his Ministers with Righteousness, that his
Saints may sing with Joyfulness. Which supposes, that nothing more rejoices
good people than a pious and religious Clergy, with whom they can sing their
Offices with a Glad Heart, and while they praise the Lord with them, they then
can praise him for them. There is a form for all the People in the old Offices,
upon the Ordaining a Priest, which I shall Transcribe for their sakes who need
such an help: Let us (Brethren) all join in one common Prayer, that he who is
chosen for the help and furtherance of your Salvation, may by Gods merciful
gift obtain the blessing of the Priesthood; and by the prerogative of his
Virtues, obtain the gifts that are proper for it, and so may not be unfit for
that Station, (through Jesus Christ, etc. Ordin. Vet. apud Morin. p. 287. and
ap. Ma. billon. ut supra, p. 307.
. But our Church proceeds to the Litany, of which having treated before Compan.
to the Temple par. 2
, I am here only to note, That it is a most comprehensive deprecation of all
Evil, and Intercession for the whole Church and all degrees of Men therein, and
so must be very proper on this occasion, which is a public and universal
concern to all sorts of people that wish well to Religion; upon which ground
all other Churches use it at Ordinations, and as we do add a peculiar Petition
for the Persons now to be ordained: The Greek Church according to their Custom
have two or three short Litanies in this Office, and say therein, For the
Servant of God N, now to be promoted [a Deacon, a Priest, or a Bishop,] and his
Salvation -- Let us entreat the Lord (...) (N) (...). Resp. (...), Eucholog. p.
250, 293 and 303.
, but this is two short, The Latin Ordinals have this in the end of their
Litany, That thou would vouchsafe to bless these elected. Resp. We beseech
thee, etc. and then in two other Petitions, -- To Bless and Sanctify, etc. --
To Bless, Sanctify and Consecrate these elected Pontif. Roman. page 27.
. Which as a vain repetition was rejected by our Reformers in the Book of Edw.
the sixth Sparrow Collections page 141.
, but instead thereof, this excellent request is put in, [That it may please
thee to Bless these thy Servants, now to be admitted to the Order of (Deacons
or Priests) and to pour thy Grace upon them, that they may duly execute their
Office, to the edifying of thy Church, and the glory of thy Holy Name.] Which
are as full and as much to the purpose, as can be expressed in so few words, For
first, In general we beg Gods blessing on them, and then as to their Office we
intimate, 1st. What is the means, and 2ly, the manner of executing it well. To
execute the Priests Office, is a Scripture phrase and comprehends their whole
Duty, and the making full proof of their Ministry (...). Luke 1.8. (...). 2
Tom. 4.5.
, or using the Office of a Deacon or Priest well (...). 1 Timothy 3.13.
in St. Paul's way of speaking: Now this cannot be done unless they have
abundance of Grace, a double portion of the Spirit 2 Kings ii. 9.
, other Men are only to take care of their own Salvation, and ordinary measures
may serve them, for the duties of common Life: But these are to save themselves
and those that hear them 1 Timothy iv. 16.
. Besides the manner and end of their performing all their duty is, 1st. To
Edification, a common Metaphor in holy Writ, where the Church is compared to
the House of God Ephesians. ii. 19. 1 Timothy iii. 15.
. Ministers to Builders 1 Cor. iii. 10.
, every Convert they make, and every Sinner they reform, by their Prayers,
Sermons and private Admonitions, are living Stones added to this Building
Ephesians. ii. 21, 22.
; and their improvement in Wisdom and Virtue, is their Edification Ephesians. iv.
12.
. So that a Minister especially is to mind that great Rule, to do all things to
Edification 1 Cor. xiv. 26.
. He must not seek his own interest, but the benefit of his people. Nor 2ly,
aim at his own praise, but at the honor and glory of God 1 Cor. x. 31.
. It is not enough that they commend his Parts or Learning, but that they can
justly bless God for their growth in all goodness Semen accepistis, verba
reddidistis -- istae lauds vestrae folia sunt arborum, fructus quaeritur, Aug.
V.D. Ser. 5.
, and this is the sum of this proper Petition.

CHAP. III. Of the more direct Preparations to Ordination.
. 1.
THE Communion Service (by the fifth Rubric) succeeds the Litany, not only in
this but all other Churches. In the Greek Church, the Office for Ordination
comes in about the middle of the Communion Service Euchol. p. 255.
: Among the Eastern Christians, The Altar must be prepared with all things
necessary for the holy Mysteries, before they begin Ordinat. Syror. Morin. p.
384.
. And there are Prayers proper for the Mass, (as they call it) in all the
Western Offices Codex Corbeiens. Morin. page 279. and alibi passim.
, which is every where supposed to be then celebrated. And in the Penitential
of our Archbishop Theodorus, the Bishop who Ordains is to consecrate the holy
Sacrament Poenitent. Theod. Ar. Ep. Cant. cap. 3. pa. 3.
, the Reasons for which shall be given afterward; at present I will only note,
That the Candidates are to draw near to God, and therefore must be more than
ordinarily sanctified Levit. x. 3. Syriac. In ijs qui mihi propinquiores sunt
Sanctificabor. Verse. Pers. -- in propinquis meis.
, for which Reason, the confession of Sin after each Commandment, with the
Collect for Purity of Heart which precedes it, are extremely proper at this
time, for those who ought now to purify themselves by fervent Devotion and
hearty Repentance, before they enter on so solemn an admission to this Sacred
employment.

. 2. The proper Collect.
Prayer has always been used at Ordination, and Scripture as well as Reason
shows they must never be put asunder: When our Lord was about to appoint his
twelve Apostles, he directs his Disciples in the very verse before, (which we
have ill divided, and put it into another Chapter Matthew. ix. ult. cum x. 1. At
in Versione Persica and Arab. cohaerent haec verba cum initio. c. 10. Vid.
Polygl.
, to Pray to the Lord of the Harvest, to send forth Laborers into his Harvest:
So that he who knew all Men's hearts would not ordain without Prayer: So when
the Eleven were to elect a Colleague they prayed first Acts i. 24.
; and though the holy Ghost had named Barnabas and Saul; yet the Church of
Antioch fasted and prayed before their Designation Acts xiii. 2, 3.
. And Reason teaches us, that application ought to be made to God in this case,
as well, because these Persons are to be appointed his immediate Servants, as,
because he only can fit them for this great work: Wherefore all regular
Churches have set Forms on this occasion; only in the Scotch method, the
Minister who ordains is to direct his Prayer as God shall move his heart Scotch
Psalter by Mr. Knox p. 11.
. But doubtless a judicious Form like this of ours, is abundantly better upon
so solemn an occasion, and how very fit ours is I shall now show by the
following Analysis and Discourse.

The Analysis of the first Collect.
This Collect contains 1st. A Preface of the Divine Institution. 1. Of diverse
other Orders in general. Almighty God who by thy divine Provedence have
appointed, etc.
2ly, Of Deacons in particular. And did inspire thine Apostles to choose into
the order of Deacons, the first Martyr, etc.

2ly, The Petitions for the Candidates. 1. More generally for Mercy. Mercifully
behold these thy Servants now called to the like Office, etc.
2ly, Particularly for, 1. True knowledge. Replenish them so with the truth of
thy Doctrine,
2ly, Holiness of Life. And adorn them with innocence of Life.


3ly, The Motives to excite 1. Us to ask, viz. 1. Their right discharging of
their Office. That both by word and good example they may faithfully serve thee.
2. The churches benefit by it. To the glory of thy Name, and the edification
of thy Church.

2. God grant these requests. Through the merits of our Savior, Jesus Christ,
who lives, etc. Amen.



A Discourse on this Collect.. 3.
Almighty God who by thy divine Providence have appointed diverse Orders of
Ministers in thy Church, and did inspire thine Apostles to choose into the
Order of Deacons, etc.
It Is a just encouragement to our Prayers, when we know, that we desire Gods
blessing upon his own institution and not our invention. Wherefore our business
being to beg his favor upon us in this Ordination in general, and these
Deacons in particular, the Preface properly sets out, 1st, That the variety of
Orders among Ministers in his Church: And 2ly, This Order of Deacons had their
original by divine appointment. God in his Providence foresaw in every Age what
his Church would need. While Jesus himself was on Earth only two Orders were
necessary, the Apostles and LXX Disciples, and those he ordained; to these the
Deacons were added by the direction of the holy Spirit: And while the Church
was in planting, diverse extraordinary degrees of Ministers were requisite for
that difficult work; wherefore when our Lord ascended up on high, he received
of his Father and bestowed on Men, several other special Gifts to qualify some
as Prophets to interpret the Scriptures of the old Testament by the same Spirit
they were writ, others as Evangelists to write the Acts and Sermons of our
Savior, and Preach them and his Doctrine to such Nations as had not heard of
him Ephesians. iv. 8. and 11.
. But when these extraordinary occasions ceased, then these Orders (which were
only temporary) expired also: But still the Ordinary Ministers of the Church
were to continue to the end of the World, viz. The Bishops for the perfecting
of the Saints, by Confirmation; the Deacons for the works of Ministration at
the Altar, and in disposing Charity; the Presbyters for the edifying the Body
of Christ by Preaching and Admonition Ephesians. iv. 12.
. Jesus foresaw these would be things always to be done, and therefore these
Orders were ever to endure: which Original of all the various degrees, and the
suiting them to the Ages and Occasions of the Church is well expressed in the
Old Western Collect, where God's presence is desired on this ground, because he
is the distributer of Orders, and prepares things fit for each Season, Adesto
quaesumus, Domine -- honorum dator, ordinum distributor, officiorumque
dispositor, qui -- sempiterna providentia, praeparas and -- aptanda dispensas,
etc. Vid. Morin. Par. 2. p. 263. Mabillon. Lit. Gall. l. 3. p. 304. Romans Pont.
p. 25.
and then dispenses what is so prepared (e). But 2ly. Our business being now to
ordain Deacons, it is further observed, that this particular Order is also of
Divine Appointment; for as the Apostles were inspired in other Acts, so no
doubt they were guided by inspiration in the choice of a new Order; and the old
Offices say expressly in another Prayer for a Deacon, that the Holy Ghost moved
them to choose this Order -- Eorum gradu (quos Apostoli tui -- sancto Spiritu
autore elegerunt) dignus existat. Morin. p. 286. Mabil. ut supr. p. 305.
Pontif. Romans p. 39.
. And herein also we imitate the Eastern and Western Offices both, that we make
especial mention of the first Martyr St. Stephen (...). Euchol. p. 250, 251.
ita Clem. Constit. l. 8. c. 25. p. 142. and Sir. ap. Morin. p. 447. Copt. ibid.
p. 506. item Occident. ap. Morin. and Mabill. p. 286, and 305.
, the Captain and Leader of the seven Deacons, as well as of the noble Army of
Martyrs, the lasting Glory of this Order, and the most accomplished Pattern
that can be proposed to all that enter upon this Office for their imitation,
whose gifts were so great, that he was able to convince or confound all
gainsayers; yet his humility was so signal, that he submitted to the meanest
Office of taking care of the poor and needy, being equally to be admired for
the holiness of his Life, and his patience under a cruel Death, for his mighty
Charity to his Bloody Foes, and his vigorous Faith in his glorified Redeemer.
Now all this was the effect of God's Grace, which is sufficient also to make
you that are now to succeed him in the same Order, to be like him at least in
some measure in these heavenly Qualities; wherefore you ought to look at the
lovely Copy here set you, and resolve firmly you will imitate him as far as you
are able, praying heartily you may do so in the next words.

. 4.
Mercifully behold these thy Servants now called to the like Office and
Administration. Replenish them so with the truth of thy Doctrine, and adorn
them with innocence of Life.]
It Is natural for men to look kindly on the works of their own hands, but God's
are always very good, wherefore he always delights in them; where his
Providence appoints an Office, his Favor follows it of Course. That which he
directed his Apostles to do, in ordaining Deacons, we are now about, and as he
was gracious to those first elected, we hope he will be so to those who are
called to an Administration like theirs, viz. to officiate under the Governors
of the Church in Sacred Mysteries, and dispensing of Charity; so that we pray
(according to ancient forms) that God would mercifully look upon these his
Servants Super hunc famulum tuum quaesumus, Domine, placatus intend. Morin. p.
263. Mabil. p. 304. Pont. Romans 35.
. It Is true they are now approved by Man, yet we know, and their own Conscience
tells them, they have many infirmities and defects, so that they need the mercy
of that God, who sees them all, to excuse and so accept them; none are worthy
by their own merit; it is Grace alone that makes them fit; and if God did not
look on the best with favor, they could not be sufficient for these things
(...). 2 Cor. ii. 16. (...), 2 Co^. iii. 5.
. The Bishop can do the outward part, but the grace that makes them worthy
flows from the visitation of the riches of his mercy (...). Euch. p. 251.
, as the Greek Office expresses this. And now having prayed in general for
God's mercy and favor, we further beg, that when his mercy has preceded, his
grace may follow, and that, in those great effects of it, so necessary for the
Tribe of Levi, Illumination in true Doctrine, and Innocence or Perfection in
Manners; the former to replenish their Understandings with the knowledge of all
Truth, the latter to adorn their Conversation with all sorts of Virtue: these
two are Moses's Prayer for the Sacred Tribe, and the meaning of Urim and
Thummim Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 8. Perfectiones tuae and Doctrinae tuae. Verse. Samar.
, and will make our Man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished to every good
work 2 Timothy iii. 7.
. And indeed both are absolutely necessary for a Clergyman, he must (as the
first Deacons were) be replenished with wisdom Act. vi. 3. Vid. item Luke ii.
40.
. The Fountain which is to water many, had need to be very full, yea to
overflow, and then he may serve God by his words. And he must also be adorned
with Innocence of Life, that he may serve God by his good Example; and thus
both by Word and Deed he may glorify his Name, and edify the Church. Hence
the ancient Offices mention both these (...). Clement. Constit. ap. Morin. p.
24.

Ut coelesti munere ditati, and tuae majestatis gratiam possint acquirere, and
been vivendi aliis exemplum praebere. Pont. Romans p. 39.


; and pray they may labor both by their Words and Deeds to edify God's
people. And that being filled with Heavenly Gifts, they may both please
Almighty God, and profit others by their good Example: Nor may these two be
separated, for if a Minister be Innocent, but Ignorant, his Innocence only
profits himself, but he is not qualified to instruct others. And if he be
Learned, but Vicious, his Evil Example hinders the effect of his Exhortations,
and makes his Knowledge become unprofitable. Wherefore St. Hilary notes, a good
Clergyman must have both; and we pray for both together Non statim boni
Sacerdotis est tantum innocenter agere aut scienter praedicare -- innocens sibi
tantum proficit -- doctus sine doctrina sit, authoritate nisi sit innocens.
Hill. Pict. d^ Trin. l. 8.
, that his Head may be full stored with the knowledge of all Orthodox
Principles, and his Life adorned with all sorts of Virtuous Practices. Holiness
is often compared to an Ornament, and to such Robes as Men put on when they
would appear gay and graceful Isai. lxi. 10. 1 Pet. iii. 3, 4. Rev. vi. 11.
. Virtue is admired and lovely in all Men, especially in Ministers; they who
are wicked themselves, cannot but commend it in those of this Order Quinetiam
placet sua natura adeoque gratiosa est virtus, ut insitum etiam sit malis
probare meliora. Sen. de Ben. l. 4.
. Who can never be generally acceptable, reverenced and respected, whatever
Parts or other Qualifications they may have, unless their Lives be holy and
without blemish. So that this (which we pray for) must be our Candidates
principal care, to live religiously, and to abstain from all appearance, as
well as avoid all occasions of evil. Neither Wit nor Learning, Eloquence or
Education will adorn him, unless he lead a pious and holy Life.

. 5.
That both by Word and good Example they may faithfully serve Thee in this
Office, to the Glory of thy Name, and the Edification of thy Church, through
the Merits, etc.]
It Is fit so great and necessary a request should be earnestly desired by us,
and graciously granted by God, to which end we conclude with two proper
Motives, the former to excite our Devotion in Asking, the latter to incline our
Heavenly Father to hear us. Let us therefore consider, that if we can prevail
with him for a Learned and Holy Clergy, they will be enabled to serve God
faithfully; and the effects of that service shall bring abundance of glory to
God, and much profit to his People, both by their Preaching and Living.
Fidelity is the most necessary quality in, and the proper Character of a good
servant Titus ii. 10. Matthew. xxv. 21.
, especially if he be in a place of considerable trust 1 Cor. iv. 2.
. And more particularly it is required, where the things committed to their
trust are the Souls of Men, that are more valuable than Silver or Gold 1 Pet.
i. 18.
, and the Master an All-seeing God who cannot be deceived, who hears their
Words, and sees all their Actions, and has declared he will require of them all
that are lost by their neglect Ezekiel. xxxiii. 6.
. To serve such a Lord carelessly or deceitfully, will certainly bring a curse
on them Jerem. xlviii. 10.
: But to discharge this Trust faithfully cannot fail of a large reward Dan.
xii. 3. Matthew. x. 41. Luke xii. 37.
. Wherefore it is not only their duty to be his faithful Servants, but their
interest also, for our Lord has promised, that such as both do his Will
themselves, and teach others to obey it, shall be the greatest in the Kingdom
of Heaven Matthew. v. 19.
; therefore if we desire their eternal happiness hereafter, who are chosen to
minister for our Salvation here, we must earnestly pray they may faithfully
serve God in this Office. But let it be observed by the way, unless they serve
God in this Calling both by Word and Deed, it is not full and complete, and
therefore not faithful service; good Preaching is but half their duty, Good
Living is as necessary for Example as the other for Instruction; and both do
equally conduce to promote those two great ends of this holy Calling, the glory
of God, and the edifying of his People. A learned, diligent and religious
Pastor, it is to be hoped will daily glorify God himself, and not only persuade
others so to do, but by converting Sinners, informing the Ignorant, convincing
the Erroneous, and improving the Graces of those that are good: he will make
his service abound in a return of many thanksgivings to God 2 Cor. ix. 12.
; and the fruits of his labors will appear in the happy effects of his
Ministry upon the Souls of such as are committed to his Charge. So that if we
desire God should be highly glorified, and would have true Religion and Virtue
greatly flourish, nothing tends more to these desirable ends, than a Clergy
thus qualified; if we can prevail with God to give them these Gifts and Graces,
it is not they alone, but many others will reap the benefit of them. It Is like
giving food to a Nurse, who feeds not her self only but others (...). Plutar.
de Convict. Philos. cum Principe.
; and thus God in a compendious way blesses a whole Congregation at once;
wherefore this Petition ought to be asked with an hearty importunity. There is
but one thing can be pretended to damp our Devotion therein, which is the
little success that some very excellent men, both for their Preaching and
Lives, have in too many Parishes, so that this effect is not constantly the lot
of the best Ministers. Our Savior made not many Converts, and he represents
three parts in four of the good Seed as Perishing by the fault of the Soil
Matthew. xiii. 4, etc.
; and good men in all Ages have complained of this Isai. liii. 1. Romans x. 22.
: experience also shows, that though all are apt to censure and excuse
themselves who live under a bad Pastor; yet alas very few obey the
exhortations, and follow the example of a good one. However though this be very
discouraging to our Prayers, and the endeavors of worthy Clergymen, we must
not cease to pray, nor they to proceed; for some no doubt are, and will be
converted and saved by these proper and efficacious means; and though all do
not, many will glorify God for providing such Ministers; and it is worth all
their pains to bring some glory to him, and a few Souls to Heaven; to which we
may add, that Almighty God will reward the good Shepherd (as St. Chrysostom
observes) according to his labor, not after his success; for (says St. Paul)
he rewards every man according to his work (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. iii. 8.
. The People who will not be profited, lose their own reward, and deprive
themselves of a happy advantage; but they cannot take away the bounty which a
gracious Master promises to his faithful Servants Securus labor quem nullus
valet evacuare defectus. Bern. de Consid. l. 4. c. 2.
: So that we have reason enough for praying heartily for such Pastors, and they
have sufficient encouragement to persevere in their duty, because it may turn
to God's glory and the good of many; however it cannot fail of ending in the
eternal salvation of those who both by word and good example faithfully serve
our common Master in these Offices. Finally therefore to move God to hear and
grant so weighty a request, which must turn one way or other to so good an
account, we beg it through the merits of our Savior Jesus Christ who died to
purchase favor for his Church, and whose intercession grounded on those merits
of his on Earth, are certain to prevail now in Heaven, where he lives and
reigns with the Father and the Holy Ghost, and shall do so for ever and ever.
Amen.

. 6. The Epistles:]
Since the Office of a Deacon is by divine appointment, the directions for it
must be found in God's word; upon this occasion therefore it has been an
ancient, and is a rational Custom to select some of the most proper places of
Holy Writ suitable to this and the other Orders, and to read them in the
Ordination: In some Churches the Person ordained reads them, to give testimony
of his readiness and ability to perform this part of his duty Ordinat. Maron.
ap. Morin. Par. 2. p. 399.
; in others the Reader does this, and before he begin the Ordained says to him
Peace be unto you (...). Vid. Ordinat. Graec. Morin. ib. p. 223.
; thereby expressing his gratitude for these instructions out of Holy
Scripture. As to the particular places chosen for the Epistles, none is fitter
than this, which contains St. Paul's directions to Timothy about the
qualifications of a Deacon; wherefore almost all Churches order this to be the
Epistle at their Ordination Mabil. de Lit. Gallic. l. 2. p. 170. Lectionar.
Hieron. ap. Pamel. Tom. 2. p. 60. and ap. Baluz. Capitul. Franc. T. 2. p. 1247.
item in Ordinat. Maron. ap. Morin. p. 399.
, because it fully sets forth what manner of Persons they ought to be, who are
admitted into this Order. So that the Candidates should hear this with great
attention and reverence, trying themselves secretly all the while by this
Divine Touchstone, that if they have these qualities, they may proceed with
joy; if they want any of them, they may labor to supply that defect.

The Analysis of this Epistle.
This Epistle contains 1st. Directions about the Qualifications of the
Candidates. 1. Their internal qualities, Ver. viii, ix.
2. The enquiry into them, Ver. x.
3. Their external Qualifications, as to their Families, Ver. xi.xii.

2ly. An encouragement to such as are admitted to behave themselves well in
this Office, Ver. xiii.


The Paraphrase of 1 Timothy iii. 8. -- 13.. 7.
1 Timothy iii. 8. Having given thee (O Timothy) the qualifications of a Bishop,
which may also serve for a Presbyter, whose duty is almost equal to a Bishop's,
and therefore his Qualities are to be much the same (...). Theophilac.
, I now proceed to those of a Deacon, for [so likewise] in an inferior degree
(...) i. e. (...). id. ibid.
, [must the Deacons be] qualified as Bishops and Presbyters are to be See verse.
2, 3, etc.
, for theirs also is a sacred Office, and a step to the higher Orders: More
particular care must be taken, that they be sober and [grave] persons, serious
in their Behavior, and honest in their Deeds (...), i. e. honestos, been
moratos, ut sig. ver. 4. Philip. 4.8. 1 Timothy 11.2. male Vulg. pudicos (in
favorem caelibatus.)
. As to their words, they must always speak truth to all, [not double tongued]
nor given to flattery and dissimulation, which sows discord, by representing
things diversely to several persons, whereas they should be peacemakers: As to
their Actions, if they do not totally abstain from strong drink (as both Jewish
and Gentile Priests did during their Administrations Levit. x. 9. Et Grot.
ibid. vide item Porphyr. lib. 4. 6. p. 150. Julian. Caes. Epist. 49. ad
Arsacium.

(...). Theophil. ut supra.


. Yet they must be always temperate [not given to] any kind of excess by
drinking [much wine] at any time; and to avoid the suspicion of this they are
not to frequent places of public resort, unless on special business Hoc
prohibitum in Council. 3. Carthag. can. 27. Can. Apostol. 42. Conc. Laod. can.
24. Canon. Egberti 18. Spelm. p. 261. Aelfri. can. 30. capit. R. Franc. l. 5.
can. 173. canon. 75. Eccles. Anglican.
. For Drunkenness is an intolerable sin in any of the Clergy, and not only
unfits them for all the sacred Offices, but is so very Scandalous, that they
who bear this Character must avoid the very appearance and suspicion of it. And
the like care must also be taken, that these Deacons (who are trusted with the
Administration of the Churches Charity,) be free from all inclinations to
Covetousness, which naturally and almost necessarily inclines Men to defraud
Poor and Rich (...). Theophil. in Matthew. 21. p. 121.
. Wherefore it is required, that they be content with the provisions that are
made for them, and by their Charity and Justice give evidence that they are
[not greedy of filthy Lucre,] that is, That they do not use any Sacrilegious or
Scandalous way to enrich themselves, such as embezeling the Churches stock,
Usury and Gaming Can. Apostol. 42, 43, 44. Bev. T. 1. p. 29. Council. Nicaen.
can. 17. p. 78. Council. Carthag. can. 5. p. 518. Capitul. lib. 6. cap. 200.
, nor may they entangle themselves in much secular business Can. Apostol. 6.
ib. p. 4. Council. Ellib. can. 19 Carthag. 1. can. 6. and 9. Council. 3. ibid.
can. 15. Council. Chalced. can. 3. item Arelat. 2. can. 14. etc.
, because they have spiritual work sufficient to take up their whole time, and
they cannot serve two such different Masters as God and Mammon Matthew. vi. 24.
. Nor ought they to follow any mean or sordid Trade, (as the Apostles at first
were compelled to do) for better provision will be made for their subsistence,
and then such Occupations will be below the dignity of these Offices, and make
their Persons and Administrations also become contemptible.

Ver. ix. As to their internal endowments, they must be fully instructed in all
the Mysterious Doctrines of the Christian Religion, first having a clear
understanding, and firm belief of all its Articles, and then [holding the
Mystery of] this most holy [Faith] so fast, that no Terrors may affright them
into the denying it, no Heretics nor Schismatics persuade them to forsake it:
And because this Faith teaches nothing but Purity and Holiness 1 Timothy i. 19.
; Ita Orant Graeci pro Diacono. Euchol. p. 250.
So that they who make Shipwreck of a good Conscience by evil Deeds, soon lose
or change their Faith 1 Timothy i. 19.
; therefore the Deacons must lead Holy Lives, as well as believe aright, and
then they may rejoice [in] the Testimony of [a pure Conscience] which cannot
accuse them for any notorious Sin (...), Theophil. in loc.
. Neither of these qualifications can be spared, they must hold the true Faith
with a Conscience void of offense Ver. Sir. and Arab. tum Conscientia pura.
vid. Polyglot.
, and then alone are they fit for this Degree, when they are perfectly Orthodox
in their Judgments, and very unblameable in their Lives.

Ver. x. [And] because it is so pernicious to the Church to promote Men into
the Offices thereof, who are not thus qualified, [let these also] as well as
Bishops and Presbyters [first] be strictly examined and diligently tried (...),
Graec. Ambitiosa lex est, ad sacerdotium notae sanctitatis admittit, inquirit
in Mores. Sen. controv. l. 1. c. 2.
before they be ordained: And if there be any time and opportunity let them [be
proved] by living with, or near the Bishop (for some time before) that he may
find out their inclinations, and observe their conversation Mos antiquae
Ecclesiae, and inde clerici, lectores, etc. olim facti erant antequam Diaconi
officium susciperent.
, and so may admit them safely upon his own knowledge and experience: However
he must be well satisfied they are worthy, and [then] being ordained [let them
use the Office] and do all the Duties [of a Deacon being found blameless] after
they have passed so strict a Scrutiny.

Ver. xi. But I do not think Marriage, which is not only innocent but also
honorable in all Men Hebr. xiii. 4. (...), Chrysostom. in Tit. hom. 2.
, any impediment to the Office of a Deacon, any more than it is to the higher
Orders 1 Timothy iii. 2. and 4.
, for I allow them to be married Men, and therefore give Rules concerning their
Wives also, (who were of old called Deaconesses, and in Baptism and visiting
the Sick of their own Sex, did Minister, and had a solemn admission Etiam nunc
in Orient Diaconissae -- in suo sexu ministrare videntur in baptismo and
ministerio verbi, Hieron. Com. in Romans 16. Council. 4. Carthag. can. 12. and
Bever. not. in Council. Chal. can. 15. Tom. 2. p. 118.
. For as this care is taken of the Husband [even so must their Wives be grave]
serious, modest, and Matron-like in their carriage for an Example to all other
Women Animadversum queque est Pontificis uxorem singularis exempli and magni
documenti esse oportere, Al. ab Alex. genesis dier. lib. 2. cap. 8.
. As to their words they must be true and charitable, such Women of all others
must [not] be [slanderers] nor apt to raise and carry evil Reports of any,
especially not of the Poor, least they deprive them of that maintenance they
need; As to their carriage they must be [sober] at all times and very
temperate, so as to be always fit to join in Holy Offices, and that they may
not bring a scandal on their Husbands, who probably may commit some of the
Poors stock to them, wherefore they must be [faithful] in that trust; yea [in
all things] whatsoever committed to their charge, by the Deacons, or trusted to
their secrecy by those of their own Sex.

Ver. xii. Yet I would not have Deacons chosen out of such as have formerly
taken all that liberty in Marriage or Divorces, which the secular Law now
allows, of having more than one Wife at once, or marrying another after a
Divorce from the first; This is of ill fame at best, wherefore [Let the] Men
who are chosen [Deacons be the Husbands of one Wife] for Polygamy, yea Digamy
Matthew. xix. 8. Inde Digami prohibentur eligi in clerum, Can. Apostol. 17. Leo.
Magn. Ep. 87. Justin. novel. 6. c. 1. Excerpt. Egbert. Spelm. Tom. 1. p. 261.
, as well as marrying after a Divorce while the former Wife lives Mark x. 11,
12. Placuit ut secundum Evantelij and Apostoli disciplinam neque dimissus ab
uxore, neque dimissa a marito alteri conjungentur, sed ita maneant aut sibi
reconciliarentur, Council. Milev. can. 17. Bin. T. 1. p. 705. Vid. Capitul. l.
7. cap. 382. Baluz. T. 1. p. 1107.
, are forbid under the Gospel to Laymen, and would be very scandalous even in
the lowest order of the Clergy: And further, if the Person who is to be chosen
to this Office, have Children and a Family, it should be enquired what
regularity is observed there, for if they govern wisely at home in their
private capacity [ruling their Children and their own Houses well] that is a
good ground to hope, they will manage a higher trust in Gods House with great
prudence (...), Theophilac.
, and so may safely be advanced in the Church.

Ver. xiii. Nor must you, O Timothy, think I take too much care, or am too
strict in my Rules for this lowest degree, being a step to the highest, so that
you and all succeeding Bishops must narrowly watch the first door, that lets
Men into Ecclesiastical Dignities. [For they that have] given good proof for
some time of their discretion, and diligence in this lower Station, and [used
the Office of a Deacon well] do so justly deserve to be promoted to an higher
place, that they may be said to [purchase to themselves] by the merit of their
faithful service [ a good degree (...), Theophilac. Verse Aethiop. Majus
ministerium acquirunt sibi: Positivum pro comparativo, ut Luc. x. 42. (...).
Vulg. optimam partem nostri -- meliorem.
,] that is to be advanced into the order of Presbyters, for which this place
will prepare them, and at which by such laudable means they ought to aim In
Ordin. Diaco^d orant ut meliorem habeat gradum, Euchol. p. 250. Clem. Constit.
l. 8. c. 5. Pontif. Roman. p. 37.
: Yea, such Deacons as are well qualified for their Office, and have
conscientiously discharged it, acquire much honor from Men, [and great
boldness in] Preaching [the Faith which is in Christ Iesus] as St. Stephen the
first Deacon did, and so may the more learned and well instructed of this order
do upon occasion before they are made Presbyters, whose proper Office
ordinarily it is to Preach.

. 8. Of Acts vi. 2, -- 7.]
This other Portion of Scripture, which is the Sacred History of the Divine
institution of this Order, is appointed sometimes to be Read, to put the
Candidates in mind of the excellent Original and prime design of their Office,
which though it be so very proper is not prescribed in many Churches besides
ours; only I find it ordered at the making an Archdeacon among the Maronites
Vid. Ordinat. Syror. apud Morin. p. 402.
, and in the Dutch reformed Liturgy Liturgia Eccl. refor. Belgij page 267.
, but how well it suits the occasion our usual Method will show.

The Analysis of Acts vi. 2. -- 7.
This portion of Scripture describes 1st. The preliminaries to the electing of
the first Deacons, 1 The assembly Ver. ii.
2 The Reason Ibid.
3 The advice Ver. iii, iv.

2ly. Their Election and their Names, Ver. v.
3ly. Their Ordination by the Apostles. Ver. vi.
4ly. The effect of their Ministry. Ver. vii.


The Paraphrase thereof.

Act. vi. 2. WHen the multitude of Converts, who resigned their Estates to the
Managery of the Apostles for relieving the poor Believers, had brought much
trouble on the Twelve, so as to hinder their attendance on higher Ministries,
and some jealousies arose between the converted Jews and Gentile Proselytes
from a supposed partiality in distributing these Alms: [Then] about seven
Months after our Saviors ascension, [the Twelve] Apostles, being yet all
together at Jerusalem, as Supreme Governors of the Church, [called] those who
had been miraculously inspired, and were their Counsel chosen out of [the
multitude of the Disciples] to come [unto them] in a Synod Hoc erat secundum
Council. Apostol. in Hierusal. An. Christ. 34. Bin. T. 1. p. 1.
; where being assembled, Peter stood up [and said,] in the name of the rest,
[it is not] agreeable to equity, or [reason, that we] on whom the great work of
planting the Gospel lies, [should leave] off preaching [the Word of God] by
which we daily convert many Souls: And spend so much of our time to manage the
public Stock, [and serve] the Poor by furnishing their [Tables] with all
necessaries.

Ver. iii. Wherefore Brethren] Since diverse of you are qualified for this
necessary Office, [Look ye out among you] who are the principal Disciples,
[seven men] for that number is sacred, and sufficient for this Mother Church of
Jerusalem Septem Diaconos propter Sacramentum ejusdem numeri ordinaverunt. Rab.
Maur. de instir. l. 1. c. 7. Idem numerus in omnibus antiqu. Ecclesiis. Vide
Council. Neocaes. Can. 15. and de Roma. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 35. Sozom. l. 7. c. 19.
Isidor. Hispal. de Off. l. 2. c. 8. Council. Aquisgran. Can. 8.
. And be sure, (since they are to be trusted with the daily ministration of the
Churches Charity) that they be [of honest report], who by their good carriage
have gained the reputation of just and faithful Persons, and such as you can
witness their integrity Gr. (...). Verse. Arab. Quorum virtus testimonio
probetur. vid. Act. xvi. 2.
. Moreover because we intend sometimes to employ them in higher Ministries, as
Christ himself did Seventy of you Epiphan. ut supr.
, let them be of such, as have the largest measure of inspiration, being [full
of the Holy Ghost, and] also endued with the greatest share of [wisdom] and
prudence. And when you have agreed on the Persons, you must present them to us,
who have the sole power of Ordaining; that those [whom] you nominate [we may
appoint] Gr. (...). Verse. Arab. Quibus delegabimus hoc negotium. Vid. postea.
Ver. 6.

(...). ap. Isocr. Panath. pro ad Magistratum promovere.


] by a special Consecration, to be [over this business] of distributing the
Alms, and employed occasionally in more solemn and sacred Duties; which will
not only be profitable and of advantage to the whole Company of Believers.

Ver. iv. [But we] being thus freed from the burden of taking care for the
Poor, though not from overseeing that the Deacons do it well Vid. Grot. in Act.
vi. 4.
, [will give our selves continually to] those two principal parts of our Office
[Prayer] to God, which is chiefly for those within the Church; [and to the
ministry of the Word] by Preaching, principally to convert men that are out of
the Church, but withal to confirm such as are converted.

Ver. v. Which rational and prudent motion was acceptable to the Synod, [and
the saying pleased the whole mulitude] there assembled, who believed the Holy
Ghost directed the Apostles in setting up a new Order on this occasion, [and
they chose] after due consultation, these Seven, who were all qualified as the
Apostles required. First [ Steven Qui vocatur (...). in Menol. and Anthol.
Graec.
,] the chief and most eminent among them, [a Man full of Faith and] zeal, and
inspired with extraordinary gifts [of the Holy Ghost] above the rest; who all
had such degrees of these gifts and graces as fitted them for this Office,
[and] therefore they elected [ Philip Vide Act. viii. 5, and 26, cap. xxi. 8.
and Procorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicholas Vid. Apoc.
ii. 7. Ab eo orti sunt Nicolaitae. Epiphan. haer. 25. Hieron. ep. 48. At ipsum
inculpa^um asserunt. Clem. Alex. Strom. 3. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 23. Theod. haeret.
Fab. l. 3.
,] who was of Gentile Extraction, [a Proselyte] converted first to the Jewish
Religion, and formerly [of Antioch]: all which had deserved a good testimony,
and were then well known in the Apostolical College, and diverse of them
afterward proved eminent in the Church.

Ver. vi. These Seven are the Men [whom they] of the Synod elected, and [set
before the Apostles] who, as Supreme Rulers of the Church, had the sole power
of delegating a right to any that were to officiate therein. [And] since the
Office of Deacons was sacred, necessary, and to continue in the Church, they
solemnly admitted them in such manner as all others afterward were to be
admitted; therefore [when they had prayed] earnestly to God for them, [they
laid their hands upon them] as the Jews were wont to do in their solemn
Designations of any to Offices of Dignity and trust Numb. xxvii. 18.
; and from this Precedent set by the Apostles here and afterward, all
Ordinations in the Christian Church were made by Prayer and Imposition of Hands
Ordinatio Clericorum non solum ad imprecationem vocis, sed ad impositionem
impletur manus. Hieron. in Isai. 58. Tom. 4. p. 421.
. And these two have been ever since accounted so necessary, that no regular
Ordination could be without them.

Ver. vii. And God who directed the setting up this New Order, gave it a good
effect, the Apostles having more leisure to make Converts; and being sometimes
assisted by the Deacons in these higher Ministries, diverse became Christians.
[And the word of God] was preached so frequently, that the knowledge thereof
[encreased, and the number of the Disciples] by the accession of new Converts,
[multiplied in] that Church of [Ierusalem greatly], notwithstanding the malice
and menaces of the Jewish Rulers: So that abundance of the common people [and a
great company of the Priests Male Beza dubitat de hoc loco, cum omnes MSS.
Graec. ita legunt.
] themselves, not only professed, but [were obedient to the Faith] of Christ,
believing the Principles and practicing the Duties of Christianity.

. 9. Of the Oath of Supremacy.]
Though the Form of this Oath, in our Nation, be no older than the dawning of
our Reformation under King Henry 8. Sub Henrico 8. primo introductum est
juramentum primatus. Reg. Jacobi Apol. log. p. 53.
; yet the thing is as old as Scripture History: for the right of Kings which
this Oath declares, is set forth in God's Word, where David and Solomon,
Hezekiah and Jehosaphat 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 21. 1 King. ii. 27. 2 Chronicles. viii. 14,
15. and chap. xx. 21.
, as Supreme in the Ecclesiastical as well as in Civil Affairs, made Laws in
matters of Religion, and the Priests as well as the People were subject unto
them. As to the putting it into the Ordination Office, we will show, 1st. The
reasonableness thereof in general; 2ly. The particular reasons for giving it to
the Clergy; 3ly. The occasion of introducing it here.

1st. That it is reasonable in general will appear, from the consent of all
mankind, (the modern Papists excepted) that Kings are Supreme in all sorts of
Causes; the Jews thought so, (as was showed before) and so did the Gentiles, as
the great Philosopher sufficiently declares, in saying, the King is Lord of all
things that relate to the Gods (...). Arist. Pol. l. 3.
; of which opinion also was a good old Pope, who (did not foresee the unjust
claim of his Successors, but) owned, that God had given the Emperor dominion
over all, Priests as well as Soldiers Deus -- qui ei omnia tribuit, and
dominari eum non solum Militibus, sed etiam Sacerdotibus concessit. Greg. l. 2.
ep. 64.
; a Doctrine, taught long before by St. Chrysostom, who says, the Emperor was
the Supreme and Head of all things upon Earth (...) Chrysostom. Orat. de Stat. 2. p.
463.
. To which agree all those Titles that the Clergy gave Christian Princes, or
they claimed as their due. Pope Eleutherius calls Lucius, King of Britain, The
Vicar of God in his Kingdom Epist. Eleuther. ad Luc. Spelm. Tom. 1. p. 34.
. King Edgar is called The Vicar of Christ, in the Laws promulgated in his time
Leg. Hydens. ibid. p. 438.
, and he styles himself Pastor of the Pastors Charta ejus apud Seld. notis in
Eadmer. p. 146.
; and in much later times, before the Pope pretended to give the Kings of
England this Title (for defending the Roman Errors, our Princes claimed it as a
right inherent in their Crown, to be the Defenders of the Faith Fidei
defensores and sumus, and esse volumus. Brev. Ric. 2. Reg. Eliens. fol. 1384.
; and it is very remarkable, that the General Councils of Constantinople and
Chalcedon used that very same style as of right belonging to the Emperors
Theodosius and Marcian (...). Conc. Constant. Bin. Tom. 2. Par. 1. p. 89. ita
Council. Chalced. Act. 6. Bin. ibid. p. 269.
; and Leo Magnus, Bishop of Rome, calls the latter of these the Defender or
Preserver of the Faith Custos Fidei. Leo M. ep. 71. ad Anastas. p. 415.
: Agreeably to which, Pope Anastasius calls the Emperor of the same Name, God's
Vicar, appointed in his stead to preside in the Earth Epist. Anastas. Pap. ad
Imperator. Anastas. Bin. ut supr. p. 507.
. The like Titles were given by the Bishops in Councils to the Western
Emperors, for Charlemaign is styled Ruler of the true Religion -- and Governor
of God's holy Church Council. Mogunt. An. 813. in Praef. Bin. T. 3. Par. 1.. 2.
p. 196.
; his Son Lewis is also called The strenuous Ruler of the true Religion Vid.
ibid. An. 847. p. 372.
. But if any should object, these are only Complements, and do not prove that
Princes were really Supreme in all Causes. I shall observe, that they really
exercised this Supreme Authority, for the Codes and Novels of Justinian,
Theodosius, and other Emperors in the East, the Capitulars of Charles the
Great, and his Successors in the West; the Laws of our Saxon, Danish and first
Norman Kings abound with Statutes and Edicts concerning Bishops, Clergymen and
Religion; and Eadmerus owns, that all things Divine and Humane expected William
the Conquerors Order Cuncta ergo divina simul and humana ejus nutum
expectabant. Eadmer. Histor.
. I shall say nothing now of the Right of Kings and Emperors prefiding in all
great Councils of old, because I have treated of that in a peculiar Tract See
the Roman Forgeries. Vol. 1, and 2.
; and showed there also, that they confirmed both the Decrees of Faith and
Canons made there by consent of the Clergy. Nor will I enlarge this Discourse
by proving, that the right of investing and confirming Bishops in their Sees,
was anciently in Christian Kings and Princes, and owned to belong to them in
the fourth General Council of Chalcedon Vid. Acta Council. Chalced. Act. 2. Bin.
T. 2. Par. 1. p. 404.
. It Is more direct to my purpose to cite those other ancient Councils, which
speak of the Oath of Allegiance taken by the Clergy (especially those of the
Higher Order) to their several Kings and Princes at their admission to their
places, or upon the change of the Supreme Governor, and first of those in Spain
Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 74. An. 633. Council. 5. ibid. Can. 7. An. 636. and
Council. 6. ibid. Can. 18. An. 638.
: One of which Councils has these words, If any Churchman, from a Bishop to
the lowest Order of Clerks or Monks, be found with wicked intentions to have
violated the general Oaths they took for the safety of the King, their Country
and the Nation, he shall immediately be deprived of his Dignity, and be
excluded from his Place and his Honor Council. Tolet. 10. Can. 2. circ. An.
658. Bin. T. 2. p. 519.
. And there are variety of testimonies, that the French Clergy did always swear
Allegiance to their Princes: The Bishops in their Councils had declared it as a
matter of right Council. Turon. 3. Can. 1. Aquisgran. 2. Can. 2, and 12.
, and so also in their private Epistles Hincmar. opera. T. 2. ep. 4. c. 15.
: Yea there are the very Forms extant among diverse ancient Instruments, showing
what the King promised the Bishop, and he swore to the King Vide Theod.
poenitent. p. 476, 477.
. And for the practice it is recorded, that Bishops, Abbots, Archdeacons and
Canons did swear Allegiance over again, who had been in a Conspiracy against
Charles the Great Capit. Pipin. An. 973. Tom. 1. p. 540.
. And that Pope Leo the 3d took an Oath of Fidelity to the same Prince upon his
Creation Epist. Carol. M. ad Leon. ibid. T. 1. p. 271.
. Moreover when he was made Emperor, he made a Law, That every Man in his
Realms, who had sworn fealty to him as King, should swear it to him again as
Emperor, and this was to be done by the Clergy as well as the Laity Capit. Car.
M. An. 801. c. 2. Tom. 1. p. 363.
. We have also a Record containing the Privileges granted to a Bishop of Anjou,
when he took the Oath of Allegiance, as other Bishops of France use to do to
Lewis King of that Nation -- Fecimus Sacramentum fidelitatis sicut alit
Episcopi regni Franciae ipsi faciunit. Theod. poenitent. p. 476.
, together with an inspeximus to confirm it Ibid. p. 477.
. And the practice of swearing Fealty by our Bishops in this Nation is so
ancient, that its first original can scarce be found; yet so well known
withal, that it needs no particular Proof; therefore I proceed.

2ly. To give the Reasons why it should be given to the Clergy; 1st. Because
the holy Scripture declares, they are subjected to Kings and Princes as well as
Laymen. St. Chrysostom notes, that St. Paul says, Every Soul -- (though he be
a Priest -- or an Apostle) he must be subject to the higher Powers Romans xiii.
1. -- (...). Theoph. e Chrysostom. in loc.
. And St. Bernard tells a great Bishop, if Every Soul must be subject, then
yours; he that attempts to except you out of that universal Command, endeavors
to deceive you Si omnia, anima etiam vestra, quis vos excepit, etc? Bern. ad
Henr. Senon. Episc. Ep. 42.
. Now if the Clergy be subject, and the Prince supreme over them, why should
they not recognize this Supremacy, and vow that Allegiance which is consequent
thereupon, when their Superior requires it of them? 2ly. Their qualifications,
condition and interest also, as well as their numbers are generally such, that
it is of great importance to a King to be secured of their Fidelity; yea, it is
necessary to the safety of his Government; for being Teachers of the People,
they may either establish them in their Loyalty, or excite them to dangerous
Seditions and Rebellions, of which the Annals of Popish Kingdoms (whose Clergy
of old took no Oath to their Prince, but one to the Pope), afford many woeful
examples. And it is noted by Josephus, that the Pharisees, a bold and busy Sect
among the Jews, were often troublesome to their Kings, and dared to oppose them
openly; for there were 6000 of them, and they all refused to swear Allegiance
to Herod and Caesar, as the whole Nation besides had done (...). Joseph. Ant.
l. 13. c. 22.
. To which I may add the relation of Simeon of Durham, concerning Aldwin and
Turgot, two Monks of that Church (wherein I have the honor to be preferred)
who raised Sedition in Scotland against King Malcom, and pretended they could
not in Conscience swear Allegiance to him Sim. Dunelm. Chron. l. 3. c. 22.
. 3ly. The Clergy of all Christian Kingdoms are, and have been endowed with
Tithes, Lands and Houses, and invested with very great Immunities, Honors and
Privileges, chiefly by Kings and Princes, who have been the Founders or
Confirmers of most of our eminent Churches, and therefore are Patrons of the
same: So that they are bound in gratitude to give their Benefactors all
possible assurance of their Fidelity; and they would be the worst of men, if
they do not as sincerely pay it, as they universally and justly promise it:
They, as all other Subjects, are protected in their Persons, Estates and good
Names by the Laws of their Prince, and this Protection always obliges the
Persons so protected to bear Faith and Allegiance to him that protects them;
but their Provision being also chiefly from the Crown, they owe more duty to it
than many others of their Fellow Subjects.

But 3ly. There was a particular Reason for requiring this Oath from the
English Clergy of all Orders at the Reformation, because diverse of them
(especially the Regulars) had not sworn Allegiance to the King, but had taken
Oaths to their Superiors, and to the Pope, to obey them and promote their
Interest in all things, which left them at liberty, upon any Quarrel between
our King and the Bishop of Rome, or his Dependants, to take part with their
Ecclesiastical against their Civil Superiors: So that when there was an
irreconcilable difference between Rome and our King, and he had by Law cast out
the Pope's usurped Power, he was obliged for his own safety to restore the
ancient custom, and make a Law that all the Clergy should swear Allegiance to
him, as being under Christ, Supreme Head on Earth (or as we now without a
Metaphor call it, Supreme Governor Vide Stat. An. 23. Hev. 8.
). And this Oath was brought into the Ordination Office in the first Book of
King Edward the 6th Sparrow's Collect. page 145.
, and in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign the taking it was enjoined
under the severest Penalties Stat. 1 Eliz. 1. and 5. 1.
. And no doubt there was good reason, and great cause for this, for the Pope by
his Interest in the Clergy, had long oppressed this Nation and taken away much
of the King's just Prerogative, as our Nobles and Parliaments in Popish times
had often complained Vid. Gravamina Eccles. Anglicanae ap. Fascic. rerum
expetend. T. 2. p. 416.

Vid. item Histor. Tho. Walls. An. 1312. p. 74.


, and they made diverse good Laws to retrench these encroachments Stat. Provis.
25. Ed. 3. and Stat. Ric. 2. cap. 5.
, but all in vain, for the Pope proceeded in the exercise of his Tyranny, and
the Clergy receiving diverse, yea contrary commands from different Masters (the
King and the Roman Bishop) could not possibly serve them both, (as our Savior
notes) and they generally stuck to their Spiritual, and despised their Temporal
Lord Matthew. vi. 24. Nemo potest quamvis uno Domino obtemperare repugnantia
jubenti, Aug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 2. p. 2.
. So that it was absolutely necessary utterly to expel the Pope's Authority
from hence, because as one of our Kings, soon after the Conquest, publicly
declared, No Man could keep his Allegiance to him, and pay Obedience to the
Apostolic See against his Will Nequaquam fidem quam sibi debebat simul and
Apostolicae sedis obedientiam contra suam voluntatem posse servare, Gul. 2.
Anselmo. ap. Eadmer. l. 1. p. 26.
. And this seemed so necessary at first to many, who in other things were
zealous in the Romish Faith that they took it; and Gardener writ an excellent
Book in defense of this Oath, and the Supremacy therein asserted, as well as
the Allegiance there promised (o); Gardin. de vera obed. in Fascicul. rer. exp.
T. 2. p. 800.
and the Pope's prohibiting it, only produced stricter Injunctions to oblige
the taking it, and greater penalties on the refusers, especially because our
Governors observed Vid. praefat. Laur. Humph. ad Hist. Jesuitismi.
, that the Opinion of the Pope's Supremacy, put him upon Excommunicating and
Deposing our Kings, and excited his Creatures in these Realms to lay many
execrable Plots to destroy the Queen, and change the Religion and Government
also. And it is the restless endeavors of the bigoted Papist to restore the
Papal Power, that has since brought in another stricter Oath, and does make it
necessary to continue these Precautions even in our times: I shall not enter
into this Dispute, which has been already handled by so many learned Pens, but
refer the Reader to some of them, who elaborately and unanswerably confute the
Pope's, and assert the King's Supremacy Regis Jacobi Apolog. pro juram. Relig.
Christian subjection par. 2. Land. 1586.

Mason de minister. Anglic. l. 3. c. 4, 5.


, and particularly shall recommend a posthumous work of Dr. Is. Barrow upon
this Subject Dr. Barrow of the Pope's Supremacy, Lon. 1680.
, which (unfinished though it be) is abundantly sufficient to satisfy any
impartial Enquirer, and had it received the advantage of the Author's own last
hand, it would have been the most perfect Tract on any point of Controversy now
extant, so that I wish some Pen that were suitable to his, would fill up the
vacant references, and enlarge upon the pertinent hints of that Book, which
would make it next to a Demonstration of the Question he undertook to prove.

. 10. Of the Questions in general.]
That all possible care may be taken to make, or find, those who enter into
Holy Orders, Worthy. Our Church has here rightly placed these Questions; not
deferring and confining them to the consecration of a Bishop, as the Roman
Ordinal does Pontific. Roman. p. 61.
, because the greatest security to Religion is the careful guarding the first
entrance into its Ministrations Cujusque rei potissima pars principium est,
Digest. l. 1. Tit. 2. praef.
, and therefore we put these interrogatories to Deacons and Priests, for he
that would breed good Officers must choose good Soldiers, and he that is
faithful in a lesser, will be so in a greater trust Luke xvi. 10.
. It Is a calling, that Men can never forsake, and so ought not to be rashly
undertaken Luke ix. 62. Et Conc. Chalced. can. 7. Item Annot. Bev. T. 2. p. 114.
: So that though these Questions be now first proposed to the Candidates; yet
it is absolutely necessary they should have Read them over seriously before in
Private, and duly weighed them all, before they presume to answer them in the
Presence of God, and of his Holy Angels Tenetur vox tua -- in libro viventium
-- praesentibus Angelis locutus es, Ambros. de initiand. c. 2. p. 343.
, as well as of the Bishop his representative, if they answer falsely, or rashly
before so great an Assembly, and just before they are to receive the Holy
Sacrament, it is an inexcusable as well as a presumptuous Sin, and Solomon has
told us, we cannot come off by saying it was an Error Eccles. v. 2, 3, 4, 5,
etc.
, neither God nor the Angels who attend these Holy Ministries will so excuse
us. The wise Heathens advise us, not to answer any Questions suddenly (...),
Aeschin. ap. Plutar. de audit. p. 39.
. The Scripture makes it the character of a Fool, to answer a matter before he
hears (that is, understands and considers) it Prove. xviii. 13.
, and it is an evidence of a most notorious Hypocrite, to promise easily for
gaining his ends (b). (...), Theoph. in Matthew. 20.
But if either of these be the case in a matter of so high importance it is
unpardonable; For what (says a late Author) is more unworthy? What is worthy of
greater Punishment? than to profess they know that which they are Ignorant of,
to say they will do that which they do not intend, and can do that which they
cannot any ways perform Soccolovij Epithalamion Episcopi cum sua sponsa, Eccles
p. 39.
. Wherefore I must beseech all that are to take Orders, to set apart some days
before their Ordination by Fasting and Prayer, to examine themselves concerning
every Question, that they may answer truly to the Enquiries, and reply
deliberately where they are to promise, their Conscience bearing them Witness,
that they assert the very Truth, and do engage only what they intend to
perform: Otherwise it will bring a Curse upon them instead of a Blessing.

. 11. The Analysis of the Questions.
These seven Questions are an Enquiry concerning three things 1st, Their right
way of entering into Holy Orders, 1st, As to their internal Call. Qu. I. Do you
trust that you are inwardly moved, etc.
2ly, As to their external Call. Qu. II. Do you think that you are truly called
according to the will of, etc.

2ly, Their right Faith especially in all Holy Scripture. Qu. III. Do you
unfeignedly believe all the Canonical, etc.
3ly, Their resolution to do all the duties of this office in relation to 1st,
The people 1 Reading God's Word. Qu. IV. Will you diligently Read the same unto
the People, etc.
2 Assisting in Divine Offices and care of the poor. Qu. V. It appertains
unto the Office of a Deacon -- will you do this, etc.

2ly, Themselves and their families. Qu. VI. Will you apply all your diligence
to frame, etc.
3ly, To their Ecclesiastical superiors. Qu. VII. Will you reverently obey your
Ordinary and other chief Ministers, etc.




A Discourse upon the Questions.. 12.
Quest. I. Do you trust that you are inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take
upon you this Office, etc.]
That God's Providence which disposes all things according to his Pleasure,
orders what particular Profession every Man shall take on him, was a Truth
believed by the Heathen (...), Hom.
. And therefore cannot be doubted of by Christians, especially since Scripture
teaches us, that God calls Men to several States of Life, to which (for that
Reason) the name of calling is always given in the Holy Books 1 Cor. vii. 17.
20. (...), Theoph. in loc.
. But there is much more Reason to affirm this, concerning such as are to be
made Ministers in the Church which is God's House, and of which he is the Lord
and Master: Arrianus affirms, none must take on him to be a Philosopher, unless
God move him to it (...) Arr. in Epict. l. 3. c. 22. p. 308.
, for otherwise he will be as absurd, as he that should come into a well
ordered House, and say he will be Steward there. Surely then none may presume
to thrust themselves into Gods immediate Service, without his special
invitation and assent; and this is what we name the internal Call, and is the
Subject of this Enquiry: Now St. Paul has declared, That no Man takes (that
is, of right) this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron Hebr. v. 4.
. He was made a Priest, by immediate Revelation. So was St. Paul called to be
an Apostle Miraculously, and others in the first planting of the Church Romans i.
1. and 1 Corin. i. 1. Acts xiii. 2.
. But this was an extraordinary way, and so was not to endure long; Yet still
we may expect, that the same Spirit which only can give them success in their
Ministration, should move them to desire this Office, and bless all the
endeavors they use to qualify themselves for it: It Is true, this is an inward
motion, and so only known to every Man's own Conscience 1 Cor. ii. 11.
, and to God that searches the Heart Jerem. xi. 20. and xvii. 10.
; therefore in his Presence, we demand of them, if they do sincerely believe
their first Inclinations to this Holy Calling were from the Spirit of God Now
to answer falsely to such a Question, is lying not to Men but to God Acts v. 4.
. So that the Candidates ought to examine their own Hearts very strictly
concerning this Matter; For it is an easy thing to deceive our Ordainers in
this case, who are fallible Men, and cannot look into our Breasts, and unless
we take great care we may also deceive our selves: For we are generally
favorable Judges in our own Cause, Our Heart is deceitful, and we cannot
easily know it, as God has told us Jerem. xvii. 9.
. Our mind (says St. Gregory) often belyes it self to it self, feigning to
love the good Works it hates, and not to value the glory of the World which it
does love Gregor. M. Pastor. par. 1. cap. 9. fol. 3. E.
; you will say then, how shall we be directed in this matter, so as not to be
imposed on our selves, nor impose upon others in so nice an Enquiry? I reply,
you must observe the Question, and examine if you take this Calling upon you
with no other design than to serve God, by promoting his Glory and Edifying his
People? And this is Calvin's definition of the Inward Call, in his Book of
Institutes, (which being published about Ten year before the Ordinal of Ed. the
sixth, might probably be a guide to our Reformers in framing this Question.)
That it is the good Testimony of our own Heart, that we have taken this Office,
neither for Ambition, Covetousness, or any evil design, but only out of a true
fear of God, and a desire to edify the Church Areana vocatio -- est bonum
cordis nostri testimonium quod neque ambitione neque avaritia, neque ulla alia
cupiditate, sed sincero Dei timore and aedificandae Ecclesiae studio oblatum
munus recipiamus, Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 3. p 353. edit. primo An. 1535.
. Now this we may know by duly considering, whether it were the external
Honors and Revenues that are annexed to this Profession, or any other Worldly
end, that first or chiefly did incline us to the Ministry, if so we were moved
by carnal objects, and led on by our own corrupt will and affections: But if
our principal motives were Spiritual, that is, a zeal for God's Glory, and a
desire to promote the Salvation of Souls, then we were moved by the Spirit and
inwardly called by God; I grant we cannot but know, there are honors and
rewards, piously and justly annexed to this Holy Function, and as Men we cannot
but hope for a competency of them; yea, this may be a subordinate motive, but I
may say of the Priesthood as Christ of the Kingdom of Heaven, it must be sought
in the first place for it self, and the other only as additional consequences
thereof Matthew. vi. 33. Sint verba legis fundamentum via terrae adjunctum, Dict.
R. Jehud. ap. Rab. Nath. de patr.
. We must love the Duties of this Calling, Reading, Study, Praying, Preaching,
etc. more than the rewards (...), Marc. Anton. l. 4.. 31.
; yea, if Persecution should ever strip the Church of these Provisions, (as it
has often done,) we must not cast off our Holy Ministrations 1 Cor. ix. 16.
. For he cannot be a good Servant who hates his Work, and loves nothing but his
Wages Avidus ad mercedem piger ad laborem, Aug. de Sanctis. Ser. 4.
, if God move us, his Service is our first aim and our principal desire, we
shall serve him cheerfully, whether we have a greater or a lesser compensation:
It Is too mean a design for one who is to wait at God's Altar and praise him
there, with Angels, Archangels and all the Host of Heaven, to look on this only
as a Trade to get Bread, or a creditable way of living 1 Samuel ii. 36. Ne facias
legem coronam aut securim, Adag. Hebr.
; which the Rabbis call making Gods Law a Crown, or a Hatchet. Our motives
must be Nobler, Higher and more Spiritual, if they come from above. Now since
we can only know this, the Question, is and ought to be put to us. For this
inward Call thus explained, Is the first, and one of the principal
qualifications for him that is to be employed about Heavenly things; and
therefore, it is inserted not only into ours, but other reformed Offices for
Ordination where it is enquired, if they believe that God by the Church calls
them to this Ministry, and if they did not seek it for worldly Riches or Glory
Liturg. Eccles. Belg. Qu. 1. in Ordin. p. 260. The Scotch Psalter by Mr. Knox.
Form of Ordination Qu. 2. p. 18.
. There are no Footsteps of this in the Roman Office, (which no doubt is a
culpable omission) yet we are told by a late Author, that some Zealous Bishops
of that Communion in France, not long since refused to ordain such concerning
whose internal Vocation they were not satisfied Dr. Burnat's Preface to the
Regalia p. 28.
, but I believe few of their fellow Bishops followed their Example: because it
is not required by Law as it is in our Church. Our Candidates know this
Question will be asked them, wherefore let them examine their Hearts strictly,
and answer it in the sincerity of their Souls, not doubting but that Good
Spirit, who excited them to this Work, will assist and bless all their
performances.

Quest. II. Do you think that you are truly called according to the Will of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the Due Order of this Realm, etc.] So long as Miraculous
Gifts continued, the Persons endued with them in a larger measure than others,
were easily known to be called by God, and some of them (as St. Paul) were not
called of Men, nor by Men Galat. i. 1. (...). Chrysostom. in loc.
. But this was peculiar to the Apostles, or to that Age only, as St. Chrysostom
has observed: for now since Miracles and such Divine Evidences and Indications
are ceased, it is necessary that this inward Call, should be tried and approved
of by Men. Nothing is so easy to counterfeit as a Message from the Gods --
hercule audivi esse optumum mendacium, quicquid Dii dicunt id rectum est
dicere. Plaut. Mostell. Act. 3. Sc. 1. p. 528.
says the Slave in Plautus, and experience tells us nothing is more readily
believed among the vulgar, than such a Pretense managed by a bold undertaker;
so that this inward Call has been in all Ages pretended to by all the
Imposters in Religion. Among the Jews, there were false Prophets, who gave out,
that God called them, but he declared they ran before they were sent, and
Prophesied out of their own Heart, or (as the Original imports) made themselves
Prophets Jer. xxiii. 21. and Ezekiel. xiii. 3. Heb. Voc. eos (...) Sir. Verse. Qui
suam sequuntur phantasiam.
. In Christian times this set up Montanus, and many other enthusiastical
Heretics. And though Mahomet had no power of Miracles, no gift of Prophecy, no
learning nor good Life to prove his Mession, yet he boldly said, God was his
witness, that he had sent him (...). Euthym. Zigabin. Panoplia edit. per
Sylburg. p. 46.
. In the ignorant and superstitious Ages, the Roman Church gave very great
encouragement to Men and Women that were illiterate, to Preach, upon pretended
Commissions from Christ, or Visions and Dreams which they boasted of S.
Vincentius somniadit se a Christo missum ad Praedicandum. Vid. Lipom. in vit.
(mihi.) p. 263. ita Hildegardis. vid. Opera ejus in Bib. Patrum. Tom. 15. edit.
Col. 1622.
. But afterward finding the mischief of these holy Cheats, they were forced to
enquire into those false Claims Acta Cor. Cardin. Alliaco. ap. Baluz. Miscel.
T. 2. p. 284, and 294.
. And it is the weak credulity of most of our Sectaries, which exposes them to
admit bold Pretenders to the Spirit to be their Teachers, without any preceding
Trial; and hence Papists in disguise, ignorant, scandalous and heretical Men,
have got into their Conventicles, and been admired by the abused Crowd, as
Persons sent from Heaven, and full of the Holy Ghost. To prevent which Common,
but Dangerous Cheat, the Primitive Church punished those who presumed to
exercise any Ecclesiastical Office, while they were Laymen, with
Excommunication; and they forbid the inferior Clerks to officiate until they
were in one of the higher Orders Council. 6. Constant. in Trullo. Can. 58. and
Can. 64. and Balsamon ibid. Bev. T. 1. p. 225, and p. 233.
. And there were (from the first settling of Churches) every where public Forms
drawn up for examining such as desired to be Ordained, and then solemnly to
Admit them; which no doubt was agreeable to the Will of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who inspired his Apostles to give Rules to their Successors the Bishops, for
trying all that were to be promoted to Holy Orders, (as was showed before);
whence we may infer, that our Savior and his Apostles did not think any Man's
Word was to be taken as to his inward Call, till his claim had been enquired
into and approved by the Governors of his Church, and till they also gave him
an external Call; therefore to fix an Order in every Church for the solemn
trial and admission of Ministers, is according to the Will of Christ, in
general: And since the Order duly settled in this Realm is so agreeable to
Primitive Practice, and to God's Word, we may safely say, that such as are
admitted according to this Due Order, are admitted according to the Will of
Jesus Christ; the particulars I shall demonstrate in every part of these
Discourses, so that I need only remark here, That our Candidates may answer
this Question (when they have read this Tract, and understand this Office well)
more certainly, and upon better grounds, than those of any Church in the World.
For though the two Essential Parts of Ordination, Prayer, and Imposition of
Hands, are retained in both the Eastern and Western Offices (which are of
Apostolical institution,) yet there are so many Ceremonies added, some of which
are apparently Superstitious and Idolatrous, and some so dubious, that
whosoever does consider, can scarce say with a clear and well-informed
Conscience, that such as are called by the Constitution of those Churches, are
called according to the Will of Christ: Happy therefore are those who receive
Orders here, who can have no just scruples Romans xiv. 5, and 23.

Been praecipiant qui vetant quicquam agere quod dubitas aequum sit an iniquum.
Cicer. de Offic. l. 1.


, and may without any hesitation reply, that they are truly called according to
the Will of Christ, since the Order of this Realm is so in all particulars, as
has been, and shall be demonstrated to every ones satisfaction.

Quest. III. Do you unfeignedly believe all the Canonical Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament?] The reading of God's Word in public, was the Office of an
inferior Clerk, called a Reader in the middle Ages; to whom at his Admission,
the Bishop delivered a Bible, and said, Take heed you believe in your Heart,
that which you pronounce with your Lips -- quod autem Ore legitis, Cord
credatis. Pontif. Romans p. 17.
. But now since this Duty of Reading is especially incumbent on the Deacons,
it is very proper to ask them, if they believe all the Canonical Books to be the
Word of God. For an ordinary Christian, the Creed which is taken out of the
Scripture is a sufficient confession of Faith; but a Minister ought to declare
himself more comprehensively, and publicly own, That all Scripture is given by
inspiration of God 2 Timothy iii. 16.
; and whereas the Roman and Lutheran Churches only ask them if they believe the
Creed Pontif. Romans p. 53. and Formula Ordinat. Lips. 1624.
, we and some other of the Reformed Churches, more justly enquire if they
believe all that God has revealed in the Divinely Inspired Books Litur. Eccl.
Belg. qu. p. 262.

Scotch Psalter, qu. 3. p. 19.


. Now in order to answer this Question with judgment and sincerity, the
Candidate must know which are, and which are not Canonical Books. There are
some Books of Scripture of which no doubt ever was, and the Ancient Church made
a Rule or Canon, that these and no other should be received for Divinely
Inspired Books, and thence they have the Name of Canonical Artic. vi. Eccles.
Angl. Nos iis Libris fidem accommodare debemus, quos Ecclesia -- ab initio
traditos and conservatos agnoscit, and approbat. Aug. in Faust. l. 28.
. Now these are declared by Our Church exactly as they were of old Council.
Laodicen. Can. 68. Bev. T. 1. p. 481.
, as has been unanswerably proved by the learned Bishop Cosens, in his
accurate History of the Canon of Scripture, which is worth the Readers diligent
perusal. As to other Books, we do with the Ancients call them Apocryphal,
because their being writ by Inspiration does not appear; wherefore though we
read them sometimes for instruction in Morality, we do not prove our Faith by
them, nor take them into the Canon Hos Libros legit quidem Ecclesia, sed eos
inter Canonicas Scripturas non recipit -- ad aedificationem plebis, non ad
autoritatem ecclesiasticorum dogmatum confirmandam. Hieron. praef. ad Libr.
Judith. Tom. 3. p. 39.
; yea we censure it as a bold innovation, in the late Council of Trent,
contrary to all Antiquity, to declare these Apocryphal Books, to be of equal
Authority with the Canonical Books, which were always received in the Church.
It Is these therefore, and only these our Candidate is to believe, because the
Writers were inspired by the Holy Ghost, and all therein contained was revealed
by the God of Truth: From hence Ministers are to take Arguments to confirm
their Faith, and convince Gainsayers; hence they gather Rules to direct their
own and their peoples Manners, for this is a complete Repository for both Faith
and Good Life In quibus inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem moresque
vivendi. Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 17.
. These are to be believed and received in the first place, and then there is
no need to prove any thing to be True or Good, but only to show it is asserted
or commanded in Holy Scripture: Humane Sayings (as Salvian notes) need
Arguments and Witnesses, but God's Word is its own witness, because it is
necessary, that whatever is spoken by unerring verity, should be accepted as
the testimony of uncorrupted Truth Salvian. de Gub. l. 3.
. The first business of a Minister is therefore, to believe these Divine Books
himself, and then to make his People receive them as such, for otherwise he can
neither teach, exhort, or reprove with Authority, or any hopes of Success.

Quest. IV. Will you diligently read the same unto the People assembled in the
Church where you shall be appointed to serve?] The former Questions are
concerning things necessary to be known, and so the Answers to them are only
assertory. These contain diverse things necessary to be done, the Answers to
which are Promissory, and bind the Soul of the Party answering to perform that
which he so solemnly engages. First. Diligently to read the Scripture to the
People in public, for this was always a Principal Part of Divine Service; the
Jews of old constantly had the Law and the Prophets read in their Synagogues 2
Kings xxii. 8. Nehem. viii. 3. Acts xiii. 14, 15, and 27.
. And our Savior himself did this Office Luke iv. 16. Vid. Lightfoot, T. 1. p.
614.
. When the Primitive Christians met, especially on Sundays, we are assured by
the most Ancient Fathers, that the reading the Divine Writings of the Old and
New Testament, was never omitted (...). Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 98.

Coimus ad Literarum Divinarum Commemorationem. Tert. ap. c. 39.


; and a considerable part of the time spent in their Religious Assemblies, was
employed in this Exercise. It appears also, that they collected Tables of
Proper Lessons for the whole year, out of the most Practical Parts of
Scripture, which were set down in Lectionaries, some of which are still extant,
being attributed to St. Hierom, and to other ancient Authors, from whence our
Epistles and Gospels are derived Vid. Pamel. Liturg. Tom. 2. and Praef. ib.
item Baluz. Append. ad Capitul. T. 2. p. 1309.
. But whereas some had brought in other Books (not writ by the Spirit of God)
to be read in the Church, the Council of Laodicea forbad it, and charged, that
nothing should be read in the Church but only the Canonical Books of the Bible
(...). Council. Laod. Can. 59. Bev. T. 1. p. 480.
; and of old the Acts and Passions of the Martyrs were not allowed to be read
in the Church at Rome it self Decret. Gelasi. 1. An. 494. Bin. T. 2. p. 501.
. But in latter Ages that Church had brought in so many false, fabulous and
foolish Legends, as Lessons for their numerous Saints Day, that the Reading of
the Holy Scripture was almost totally excluded; wherefore our wise Reformers
rejected all such Legendary Stuff, and restored the Primitive Usage that is
commanded, that nothing should be read in the Church but the Canonical
Scripture (except some few practical parts of the Apocrypha) See the Preface to
our Common Prayer, Concerning the Service of the Church.
. Besides, since the reading the Bible in public is intended for the
edification of the People, they took care to translate it into the English
Tongue, accounting it very absurd to lock up that sense, which all men should
understand, in an unknown Tongue: The first reason of turning the Scriptures
into Latin was, that the Romans (whose Mother Tongue that was then) might
understand them; but to keep them in Latin now, when no Nation in the World
naturally speaks that Language, is to act contrary to the design of the first
Author of that Version, yea of the Holy Penmen themselves, who writ in Tongues
then commonly understood, and required their writings should be read to the
People in the Church in a Language known to them Coloss. iv. 16.
, and forbad those who had the gift of Tongues to use that gift in any
Religious Assembly without an interpreter 1 Cor. xiv. 3, 4, 5, and ver. 14, 15,
16.
. From whence it was, that as soon as any Nation of a new Speech was converted
to be Christian, the Scriptures were soon after Translated into their Language,
as I could prove by many instances Hoc affirmat de Gothis, Isidor. Chron. edit
per Grotium, p. 711. De Saxonibus Alured. ep. ap. Spelm. T. 1. p. 380. and not.
Wheeloci in Bed. Hist. l. 2. c. 18. p. 153. De Abassinis: Ludof. Hist. Aethiop.
l. 3. c. 4.
. Nor do any sort of Christians want this Privilege, but the miserable People
under the Roman Yoke. And doubtless it is inhumane Cruelty to hide this Lamp
(which God lighted up to direct their Feet, and illuminate their Paths Psalm.
cxix. 105.
) under a Bushel Luke viii. 16.
; this is to leave them in the dark Psalm. xix. 7, 8.
, to rob them of that word, which being heard with meekness, is able to save
their Souls James 1. ver. 21.
. To deprive them of that which is every way profitable for them, as St. Paul
affirms 1 Timothy iii. 16, 17.
; 1st. For Doctrine, that is, to teach and confirm that which is True. 2ly. For
Reproof, that is, to discover and confute Errors and Heresies. 3ly. For
Correction, that is, to reform the lives of evil Men. 4ly. For Instruction in
Righteousness, that is, to make the lives of good Men better. So that it is
sufficient to make men perfect, and thoroughly furnished to every good work:
Being therefore so very profitable, and universally beneficial, we strictly
charge our Ministers to read it diligently to their People; and that this
Office may be effectual unto all the purposes aforesaid, they must be
admonished to prepare their hearts to hear it, as the Will and Words of the God
of Heaven, clearing their minds from all vain and wicked thoughts Eam
reverentiam scriptis tuis debeo, ut sumere illa nisi vacuo animo irreligiosum
putem. Plin. lib. 9. ep. 35. p. 372.
, keeping silence all the while the Minister is reading (to which they were
commanded in the Primitive Church Facto tandem silentio Scripturarum sunt lecta
divina solennia. Aug. de Civ. Dei. 22. c. 8.
), and listening to these Sacred Portions of the Holy Text with great attention,
because otherwise they cannot learn by the Instructions, nor be wrought upon by
the Exhortations and Reproofs, comforted by the Promises, nor warned by the
Threatenings; and thus alas the Ministers reading and their hearing will be in
vain; but of this I have spoken more at large before See Comp. to the Temple.
Par. 1. Sect. 9. p. 89.
, and shall only add, that we ought not to value Sermons (that are merely human
composures) above the hearing Scripture read, as many weak people do, who
refuse to come to Church to hear the divinely inspired works of the Prophets
and Apostles, on such days as there are no Sermons, which argues a great
contempt of God's Word, and is a manifest neglect of a most profitable
Ordinance, instituted by Christ and his Apostles, and which might very much
promote our Salvation, if we duly attended thereto.

Quest. V. It appertains to the Office of a Deacon in the Church, where he
shall be appointed to serve, to assist the Priest in Divine Service -- Will you
do this, etc.] This comprehensive Question does briefly, but fully set out all
the other Duties peculiar to the Office of a Deacon, First, with intent to
instruct the Candidate in all parts of that weighty Charge he undertakes, and
then to require his solemn Promise that he will perform them by God's help: It
is not fit he should take a place in God's House, till he know what are the
Duties thereof, nor can he wisely, or honestly engage to do all these
particulars till he know them: Wherefore the Bishop lays them plainly before
him, that he may not afterward pretend to excuse himself by Ignorance; there is
a like Form in the Aethiopic Ordination of a Deacon Vid. Morin. de Ordinat.
Copthitar. p. 507.
, and a Rubric in the Syrian Formulary, directing the Bishop to instruct a
Priest in his Duty: Yet both are after the Orders are given Idem de Ordinat.
Maronitar. p. 410.
, but ours is placed more properly, to show him that is to enter on this
Office, that it is rather a Burden than an Honor Clericatum non honorem
intelligens, sed onus, Hieron. de Nepot. ep. 3. T. 1. p.
, and to give him opportunity distinctly to consider, the manifold Obligations
now to be laid upon him, and we will explain them severally, in hopes that such
as are concerned, will take some time before they come for Orders, seriously to
Read over the particulars, and examine themselves whether they are willing to
undertake so great a Charge, and conscientiously resolve to execute it. Now
these Duties are, First, Such as are to be done within the Church. Secondly,
Those that are to be done at large in the Parish where he is fixed.

First, We may observe in general, that as in a well ordered Army every Officer
and Common Soldier has his peculiar Post; So in an established Church, every
Priest and Deacon has his particular Cure and Charge; for not only our own
Canons, but those of the ancient Church expressly forbid the Ordaining of any
Clergy Man, without a Title to some Cathedral, or Parochial Church wherein he
is to celebrate Divine Offices (...), Conc. Chalced. can. 6. Bev. T. 1. p. 118.
vid. Syn. S. Patricij can. 3. Spelm. T. 1. p. 53. Excerp. Egb. can. 51. ibid.
p. 263. Et can. 33. Eccles. Angl.
, for experience taught Bishops, that unfixed Clerks could not be governed, nor
Diocesses ruled, after once Parish Churches were Built, far distant from their
Cathedrals, unless they had one or more certain settled Ministers there, who
should under them Rule that portion of their Flock Ecclesiae rurales, in
Council. Sardic. can. 12. Diaconi plebem regentes, Conc. Elib. can. 77. Qui per
Diocoeses Ecclesias regunt, Conc. Agath. 2. can. 22. Item Tolet. 3. can. 20.
, and be accountable for the same to God, and to their Ecclesiastical Superior
Episcopis subjecti sunt. Conc. Arel. 1. can. 12, 13. 19.
. Now the Deacons Duties in these Churches where they are appointed to serve
are six. 1st, To assist the Priest in Prayers. 2ly, In the Administration of
the Sacrament. 3ly, To Read the Scripture and Homilies. 4ly, To Catechize. 5ly,
To Baptize. 6ly, To Preach if he be Licensed thereto.

1st, A Deacon as his very name imports is to Minister to a Bishop, or a Priest
in the Celebration of Divine Offices Diaconus -- non ad Sacerdotium sed ad
ministerium ordinatur, Council. Carthag. 4. can. 4. Diaconi ministerium
presbyteri officium, Innocent. decr. 21.
, and to serve those of the higher Orders; which of old was generally
practiced, especially in the Greek Church, Where the Deacon repeats the short
Litany, and some brief Collects, and pronounces some Sentences, such as Let us
attend -- Let us hear the Holy Gospel Eucholog. Miss. Chrysostom. p. 64, 65, and 68,
69.
and the like. And in our Cathedrals they often Read the Litany, the Epistle
and the Confession at the Altar, and the Priests perform all the rest of the
Service: Before the modern invention of Lay-Parish-Clerks, there was generally
a Priest and a Deacon in every Church, the latter of which repeated the
Confession, Lords Prayer and the Creed after the Priest, and made all the
Responses as our Clerks now do: But of late Deacons are usually fixed as
Curates under some Eminent Priest, in whose absence the whole Divine Service is
left to them; and they Read all the Prayers except the Absolution, which it is
the Privilege of a Priest alone to repeat: Now since Deacons are so frequently
trusted with the performance of all the Liturgy, and other Duties in
considerable Churches in our days, therefore our Bishops ought to be very sure,
they are sufficiently qualified for so great a Charge, and should expect them
to have more Learning and Prudence, than was required in the Candidates for
this Order of old, while they were always under the Eye of a Bishop or
Presbyter, and were only to assist one of them in the lower parts of the
Offices.

2ly, The Deacons Office as to the Holy Communion remains the same that it was
in the Primitive Church, where they were never allowed to consecrate the Sacred
Elements, for none but a Bishop, or a Priest at least were permitted to do that
(...), Clem. Constable. l. 8. cap. 28. ita Council. Nicaen. 1. can. 18. Bev. T. 1.
p. 80. Council. Arelat. 1. can. 25. His non permissum (...), Epiphan. haer. 79.
, and the penalty upon a Deacon, if he presumed to Consecrate was to be deposed
Fulberti Carnotens. Epist. 36.
. His Office is, when the Sacrament is Consecrated, to assist the Priest or
Bishop in distributing the same to the Congregation, which was their part in
this Mystery, as anciently as Justin Martyr's time; who says, The Deacon makes
all that are present partakers of the Consecrated Bread and Wine (...), Just.
Mart. Apol. 2. p. 97.
, but especially they use to distribute the Cup, of which then all the people
(not the Priests alone) used to drink Solennibus adimpletis calicem Diaconus
offerre praesentibus coepit, Cypr. de laps. verse. fin.
, and it appears, that the Custom in the Roman Church also was (till of late
time) for all the People to receive the Cup, or else this could not have been
the Deacons Office there, who need not assist the Bishop, or Priest in giving
the Cup, if he alone had drunk of it: But St. Laurence the Deacon Experire
utrum idoneum ministrum elegeris, cui commisisti Dominici sanguinis
dispensationem, Laurent. ad Sixtum Papam. Ambros. de offiic. l. 1. c. 41.
says to Pope Sixtus, you have committed to me the dispensing of the Blood of
Christ. And Tho. Aquinas affirms, That in his time the Deacons performed this
Unde and Christi sanguinem dispensat de Diacono, Aquin. in 4. d. 24.
, and so do many other of the Writers of the Roman Church Rab. Maur. de instit.
cler. l. 1. c. 6. Alcuin. de Officiis, Hugo de S. Victor. l. 1. de Sacr. c. 38.
By which we see, they have been guilty of a notorious Innovation, in their
giving the Communion only in one kind: But to return; the Deacons should learn
from hence to be humble, and pay a great respect to the higher Order, who has
power to Consecrate the Body and Blood of Christ, of which he is only the
dispenser Diaconus ita se Presbyteri ut presbyter Espiscopi ministrum noverit,
Conc. 4. Carth. can. 37. Bin. T. 1. p. 589
; the Priests are their Supeperiors, and as such they must reverence their
Persons, observe their Commands, and endeavor to learn from their Discourse
and Example how to behave themselves, especially in God's House, where though
they be inferior to the Presbyters, yet they are in the execution of their
Office superior to the People; and it is no small honor to be called to
distribute the Symbols of our Savior's Body and Blood, those pledges of his
Love and Seals of our Salvation. Let our Deacon therefore purify himself,
before he presume to touch those Sacred Elements, let him deliver them
reverently, devoutly lifting up his Heart to God, and with a fervent charity,
Praying for every Soul that comes to receive at his Hands; and let the people
honor and esteem him, who in this Action is the representative of Christ, who
by his Hand gives himself verily and indeed to every Worthy Communicant.

3ly, It is his Office to read the Holy Scripture to the people as was showed
before, but it is further remarked here, that he is also to read Homilies in
the Church: Which is no new injunction, for an ancient Council Orders, that
when the Priest is infirm and cannot Preach, the Deacon shall read the Homilies
of the Fathers Council. Vasens. 2. can. 2. An. 529. Bin. T. 2. par. 1. page 641.
. In those old Archives of St. Remigius, among the necessary Books, are
reckoned 40 Homilies of St. Gregory Vid. Notas Baluz. in Tom. 2. Capitul. p.
1159.
. And Charles the Great charges his Bishops, not to suffer any to Preach new
and uncanonical things to the people of their own Heads Capitul. Car. Mag. An.
789. cap. 80. p. 240.
. To prevent which by the hand of Paul the Deacon he collected the best things
out of the Catholic Fathers Writings, and fitted then to every Festival,
enjoining them to be read in the Church, as an old Historian informs us
Sigeberti Chronic. ad An. 807.
. A little after whose time a Council at Mentz enjoins every Bishop to provide
some Homilies, containing necessary admonitions for informing the people of his
Diocese, and the Priests are to translate them into the rustic Roman or Dutch
Tongue, that all may understand what is read to them Council. Mogunt. can. 2.
An. 847. Bin. T. 3. par. 1.. 2. page 373.
. Among our Saxon Ancestors abundance of these Homilies were compiled for
public use, and a Catalogue of many of them still extant in the Saxon Tongue,
is preserved by a learned Writer See Dr. Hicks his Saxon Grammar, p. 133.
. But no Church ever had a better Collection of Homilies, than those which were
made at our Reformation, in the first year of King Edward the sixth, and
enlarged afterward. Wherein the Principal Articles of the true Faith are
explained and confirmed, and the chief Precepts of good life declared and
inculcated, out of Scripture and ancient Fathers in so exact a method, so plain
a phrase, and so persuasive and rational a way of Arguing, that the most
ignorant people may receive very great advantage by them; and such as are more
knowing, cannot but esteem them far above those crude and indigested Discourses
they sometimes hear from modern Pulpits: It Is certain, the compilers of our
Homilies were Men of great Learning and Judgment, and the ignorance of the
Clergy newly converted from Popery, with the general disuse of Preaching before
the Reformation, made these plain Discourses absolutely necessary in that Age;
and if the style and phrase (which is now grown somewhat obsolete) were adapted
to our present times, they would be of great use still in many places, where
the Clergy want Books and Maintenance to qualify themselves for Preaching; so
that I hope our Governors will take care to put this excellent matter into a
better dress, and then the use of them ought to be revived.

4ly, It is his Office to instruct the Youth in the Catechism: Of which Duty I
have treated at large before Companion to the Altar par. 3. fol. p. 210.
. So that I shall only note here, that the Catechist, was a peculiar Officer in
the African and Eastern Churches, but we being unwilling to multiply Sacred
Orders beyond the number instituted by the Apostles, chiefly fix this duty upon
the Deacons, being the lowest step toward the knowledge of God, and easier than
Preaching; though it be as necessary and profitable a Duty as that, therefore
the Canon enjoins all Ministers, Priests as well as Deacons to Catechize all
the Children, Servants and young people of their Parish every Sunday and Holy
day Can. 59. Eccles. Anglican.
. But in such Churches as can maintain both a Deacon and a Priest, there the
former is principally to look to this Duty. For this was very anciently a part
of their Office, The Deacons (says the Book ascribed to Dionysius the
Areopagite) teach those who have renounced darkness, by catechizing them into
the ways of light (...), Eccles. Hier. cap. 5.
, and while they are laying a foundation of Divine knowledge in others, they
very much improve their own understanding, in these first Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ.

5ly, Their duty is to Baptize Infants, which we may gather from St. Philip the
Deacons Baptizing the Samaritans, but the Apostles were sent to confirm them
afterward Acts viii. 12, 13, 14, 15, etc.
, from whence that ancient Canon did appoint, that a Bishop should confirm such
as had been baptized only by a Deacon Si quis Diaconus regens plebem sine
Episcopo vel presbytero aliquos baptizaverit Episcopus per benedictionem eos
perficere debet, Conc. Ellib. can. 77.
, and we see in Scripture Baptism was reckoned one of the lowest kinds of
Ministeries; so that our Savior did not Baptize, but his Disciples John iv. 2.
. St. Peter commanded others (probably some of the Deacons) to Baptize
Cornelius his Household Acts x. 48.
, and St. Paul says, he had baptized but few 1 Cor. i. 15, 16, 17.
. The Roman Pontifical reckons it among the ordinary works of a Deacon, to wait
at the Altar and Baptize Diaconum enim oportet ministrare ad altar, Baptizare,
etc. Pont. Roman. p. 31.
; but out of respect to the higher order of Priesthood, our Church seems to
allow this to be done by a Deacon only in the absence of a Priest, because
Baptism being a Sacrament should be administered by the principal Minister that
is present, though there is no doubt but a Deacon's Baptizing is as valid as
that of a Priest.

6ly, The last part of their Ministration within the Church is Preaching, for
which we have the Example of St. Stephen and Philip, two of the first Deacons,
who preached often Acts vi. 10. chap. vii. 2. chap. viii. 5 and 35.
, it is true, they were extraordinarily inspired by the Holy Ghost, and
consequently very fit for this great work, but our Deacons being generally
young Students in Divinity, who have had little time to fit themselves for
sound and profitable Preaching; therefore they are not permitted to Preach,
unless they be specially licensed from the Bishop, who ought to examine them
very strictly, and to be fully satisfied that they are very well qualified for
the Pulpit, and not (as the manner of some is) to grant Licenses promiscuously,
to all that enter into this Order: For though the pretense is, that most of
them are to serve cures alone; yet in such case, it is generally better they
should only read Homilies in this year of Deaconship, whereby they would gain
time for Study, and opportunity to prepare a stock of general Learning and
useful Notions, to enable them to Preach much better when they come to be
Priests, to whose Office the duty of Preaching in the ancient Church seems to
have been so appropriated Unde nunc neque Diaconi in populo praedicant, Ambros.
(vel Hilar. Diac.) in 4 Ephesians.
, that Vigilius Bishop of Rome censures Rusticus and Sebastianus, two of his
Deacons, who, without his order, had presumed to take on them the Authority of
Preaching, contrary both to the Custom and the Canons Epistol. Vigil. ad
Rustic. etc. Collat. 7. Council. 5.
; and Pope Leo decreed, that none but Priests should dare to Preach Praeter eos
qui Domini sacerdotes sunt, nullus sibi jus docendi and praedicandi audeat
vendicare, Leon. ep. ad Max. Antioch.
; but this must be understood of ordinary cases, for when Deacons were very
well qualified, we find they were allowed to Preach, as may be seen in the
instance of Benjamin a Deacon in Persia Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 38. page 178.
, who was Martyred for Preaching the Gospel there: I know the Church of Rome,
for some Ages past, has reckoned Preaching among the usual parts of a Deacons
Office, as may be seen in their Authors and their Ordinals Diaconos ad
praedicationis officium -- vacari congruit. Synod. Romans sub Gregor. M. Can. 1.
in ejus Oper. Fol. 274. b. ita Rab. Maur. de instit. cler. l. 1. c. 7. and
Pontif. Romans p. 31.
But I take it to be much better, to leave it in the Bishops power (as our
Church does) to single out only some of the most Learned and Prudent that he
Ordains, and give them the encouragement of a special License to Preach, which
may engage others afterward to come very well qualified for this first Degree.

7ly. The external part of the Deacons Office, is that which was the Original
Cause of the Institution of this Order, viz. To take care of the Poor. For the
bitter spite of the Jews against such as embraced the Faith of Christ, together
with that zeal for God's glory, and that generous Charity and contempt of the
World which inspired the first Converts, made them to sell their Estates (in
Judaea especially) and put it into a Common-stock, for the Apostles to
distribute among the poor Believers Acts iv. 33, 34, etc.
, which proving a heavy burden to them, and an hindrance to more Spiritual
Ministries, they chose Seven Deacons Acts vi. 2, 3, etc.
, who were to enquire into the necessities of every one, and apply a suitable
relief to them out of the Churches Treasure Viduarum and mensarum Ministri. De
Diaconis, Hier. ep. 85. ad Evagr.
. But in the Gentile Churches, where the Faithful retained a propriety in their
Estates, St. Paul had taught them 1 Cor. xvi. 1.
to lay by some part of their six days gains, and to offer it on the Sunday at
the weekly Sacrament, where that which was offered, was afterward dispensed by
the Deacons, with the Bishops advice; which we may gather from Justin Martyr
(who writ in the beginning of the next Century) and informs us, that such as
were able and willing, gave weekly -- and what was so given, was deposited with
the Bishop, who took care of Orphans, Widows and other Poor (...). Just. M.
Apol. 2. p. 99.
. And doubtless after the Apostles example, the Bishops used the Deacons in
this distribution. Tertullian notes this Oblation-money was put into a kind of
an Ark or Chest (once a Month in his time, or oftener) which was divided among
the Sick, the Aged, the Orphans, and such as suffered for God's Cause Tertul.
Apol. c. 39. p. 3^
. And of this Chest the Deacon was the Keeper Diaconum -- sacrae arcae
custodem. Paulin. de Mirac. S. Martin. l. 4.
for which reason the Persecutors demanded the Churches Treasure of St.
Laurence, who was Deacon to St. Sixtus, Bishop of Rome, as of him which did
manage the Wealth of the Church Qui dispensatione Ecclesiasticae substantiae
praeeminebat. S. Leo Sermon. de S. Laurentio.
. But still in those days the Bishop was Overseer of these Charities, and
therefore if the Deacon saw a poor Man, upon notice given to the Bishop, he was
to relieve him Clementis Constit. l. 2. c. 36.
. And St. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, commands his Clergy, that nothing be
wanting to the Confessors in Prison, nor any other that labored under Poverty
Cyprian. ad Cler. l. 5. ep. 2.
Now this was in those Devout and Charitable Ages, a very great Trust reposed
in the Deacons, because while the Fervors of the first Ages lasted, the
Oblations of the Faithful, especially in great Cities, were very large; so that
we learn from St. Chrysostom, that the Church of Antioch daily fed 3000 Widows,
and relieved Prisoners, Sick, and Strangers besides D. Chrysostom. ad pop.
Antioch. hom. 3.
. And as for the Church of Rome, in times of Persecution (in Pope Cornelius his
days) there were 1500 poor Widows, and other distressed, maintained by the
public Charity there Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 35. p. 179.
, and many more afterward; for (as a good Author Onuph. Panvin. de interpret.
voc. Eccles. verb. Diac. Card.
observes) instead of the Seven Deacons, first instituted at Rome, they were
obliged to make fourteen regionary Officers, of which each in his region or
quarter, was to look after the Widows, Orphans, and Poor, and then they were
increased to eighteen, and called at length Cardinal Deacons, but in the Roman
Ordinal, Patres Diaconiae, to so great a height did this Office arise there: In
other Churches as well as that, from St. Paul's words, of putting a Widow into
the Catalogue 1 Timothy v. 9. Graec. (...), veteres inde catalogum fecerunt in
unaquaque Ecclesia, quae postea dicitur Matricula, in qua pauperum qui
Ecclesiasticis stipendiis aluntur nomina descripta erant. Vid. Du Fresn. Gloss.
T. 2. p. 482.

Voss. de Vitiis, Sermon. l. 3. c. 24. p. 517.


, there was a List made of all the Poor People, which were kept by the
Oblations of each Church, called by the name of Matricula; and this sort of
Poor had the title of the Matricularians, which were all under the care and
inspection of the Deacons, who by the Bishops advice did give them a constant
allowance: And probably from the Jewish custom of permitting the Lame Man to
lie and beg at the Gates of their Temple, came the usage of such allowed
Beggars at the Doors of Christian Churches Acts iii. 2. In Council. Ephesin.
mentio fit pauperum Sedentium ad ostium Ecclesiae. Bin. T. 1. Par. 2. p. 294.
, being of the number which belonged to that place. Nor is this Pious Custom
ceased, for in two Cathedrals wherein I have had the honor to be preferred
(and I suppose in others) there is still such a Catalogue of Poor kept, to whom
the Oblations are distributed by the Sacrist (who formerly was a Deacon) in
Weekly or Monthly proportions, according to the Directions of their Superiors.
So that in Cathedrals, and some large Parochial Churches, where there is a
Deacon, Reader under a Priest, where the Offerings of the Altar are sufficient
to make such provision, it is at this day the Deacon's part to enquire for the
Sick, Poor and Impotent of their Parish, and intimate their Names, Habitations
and several Conditions, to their Superiors, that they may be relieved, either
out of the fund for Charity arising from the Oblations, or by the voluntary
Contribution of the abler Parishioners, to which the Minister ought frequently
to exhort them, and to be the common Father of the needy, relieving them
himself as far as his ability extends, and engaging others to do the like; for
in so doing he pays an acceptable service to Almighty God, who styles himself
the Father of the Fatherless, the Husband of the Widow, and the God of the Poor
and Needy: yea, and takes what is done for these as done to his own self Matthew.
x. 42. and xxv. 35.

Christus est -- qui in omnium suorum Pauperum universitate mendicat. Salv. de
Gub. l. 4.


. Perhaps it will be said, that this part of the Deacons Office is now
superseded, by those many good Laws that have been made for relief of the Poor
since the Reformation. To which I reply, That in some places those Laws are
badly executed, and even where they are, the provisions of Law are very scanty,
and respect only ordinary cases; but many by sudden Losses and Calamities do
fall to be necessitous, and others by Infirmities, Age and other ways become
poor. Now none so proper as the Priest or Deacon to be an Advocate for these,
none so fit to comfort them as he; and it is his duty to use his best
endeavors that suitable provision be made for them.

Now when the Bishop has so fully and plainly laid the Deacons whole duty
before them, he enquires if they will cheerfully and willingly undertake all
this? for God desires no unwilling Servant, but expects that such as
voluntarily come in, shall be admitted upon these, and no other terms.
Therefore they answer They will, God being their Helper: Which words, being
spoken in the presence of God, and his Delegate the Bishop, and before a great
Congregation, are a solemn promise, which will always bind the Souls of those
that make it; therefore they must never forget this Vow, but apply their utmost
endeavor to perform it in every point, praying daily for God's help, which
they here declare is necessary in order to the due execution of this weighty
Charge.

Quest. VI. Will you apply all your diligence to frame and fashion your own
lives, and the lives of your Families, according to the Doctrine of Christ,
etc.] After the Duties, especially relating to their Office and the Public,
the Bishop proceeds to demand security of them concerning their personal Duties
and private Conversation, requiring a promise from each of them, that they will
order their own Lives, and (as much as in them lies) the lives of their
Families, according to the Rules of the Gospel, and that so exactly, that he
and they may not only be innocent, but exemplary to other Christians; of which
we shall next treat. First, As to themselves, it is absolutely necessary that
they both live holily and set others a Pattern, for St. Peter expressly
requires, that the Pastors be examples to the flock 1 Pet. v. 3.
, and the Forms used by Protestants generally ask this Question of all
Candidates Vultisne pie and honest vivere, and aliis esse bono exemplo. Resp.
Volumus. Form. Lutheran. Lips. 1624. Vide Qu. 3. Eccles. Belg. Lit. p. 261. and
Scotch Psalter, Ordin. p. 21.
. It is the chief end of their Ministry, to make others live according to the
Gospel Rules, and therefore they must be very careful they do not break them;
the Priests and Levites in Nehemiah's time, first purified themselves and then
the people Nehem. xii. 30.
; for they that are unclean cannot cleanse others. The Fathers observe, that
Doing is set before teaching, because it is more necessary and useful Act. i.
1. (...).

Ita Matthew. v. 19. (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 10. p. 49.


. Preaching then only (says St. Cyprian) is profitable when our Deeds are
answerable to our Words Cypr. Libr. de zel. and livor.
. A Good Life without Preaching (says another) is better than Preaching
without a Good Life: For that silently profits, this makes a noise, but
confounds (...). Isid. Peleus. ep. 271.
. Hence St. Paul advises Timothy first, to take heed to himself, and then to
his Doctrine, and so he might both save his own Soul and his Hearers also 1 Timothy iv. ult.
. It was Origen's Character, and was the cause that his Preaching did so much
good, viz. His Words and his Manners did exactly agree (...). Christiani de
Origin Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 3. p. 151.
It Is an easy thing to discourse finely (a quick Wit and a voluble Tongue
qualifies a man for that) but it is difficult to live a strict and holy Life,
and therefore men value this most (z); and they also gain most by it, Homines
malunt exempla quam verba quia loqui facile est, praestare difficile. Lanct.
instit. l. 4.. 23.
for it helps them that are infirm, to see a good example, and makes that
easier to do, which another has done before them Salv. de Gubern. l. 3.
. This makes the Preachers words effectual in men's hearts, for while his Lips
teach what should be done, his Life directs them how to perform it Illa vox
libentius auditorum corda penetrat quam dicentis vita commendat, qui dum quod
oportet loquendo imperat, ostendendo adjuvat ut fiat. Greg. Pastor. l. 2. c. 3.
. And as Pliny well observes, Examples have this peculiar advantage, that they
convince men, the Person who exhorts them, approves of the Precepts he gives
Plin. Panegyr. ad Traj. p. 81.
. It was (as Lactantius remarks) a great reason why the Philosophers did so
little good by their excellent discourses of Morality, because many of them
were vicious in their Lives, they took off the weight from their Precepts by
teaching only and not doing; for who will keep Rules when those who prescribe
them, teach men to break them Qui docent tantum and non faciunt, ipsi
praeceptis suis detrahunt pondus: quis enim obtemperet cum ipsi praeceptores
docent non obtemperare. Lact. Inst. l. 3.. 16.
. And God knows an evil life will have the same effect now: if any of our
Clergy be scandalous, their Sins are much more heinous and mischievous than
those of the Laity; as their Knowledge is greater, it is expected their Works
should be better (...). Isid. Peleus. l. 2. ep. 121. p. 176.

(...). Julian. Aug. frag. p. 529.


; and they make Religion odious and contemptible, while they help evil Men to
Excuses, and teach them to make an Apology for their Crimes, from the Priests
own practice Non confundant opera tua Sermonem tuum, ne cum in Ecclesia
loqueris, tacitus quilibet respondent, Cur ergo quae dicis ipse non facis.
Hier. ep. 2. ad Nepot. p. 15.
; yea, they make it impossible for them with any modesty to reprove Sinners;
for while they censure others for that which they commit, they manifestly
condemn themselves; their Impudence is intolerable, and their Rebukes in vain
Quomodo feras alieni ultorem and proprii criminis defensorem -- se magis ipse
condemnat qui in alio damnat quod ipse committit. Ambros. ep. 76.
; to which St. Paul adds, that they which judge others and do the same things,
cannot hope to escape the judgment of God Romans ii. 3.
: For while they tell others what their Sins deserve, they instruct the
Almighty Judge of the World how they themselves are to be punished Chrysostom.
ap. Wolf. mem. Lect. T. 1. p. 117.
; he may condemn these wicked Servants out of their own Mouths Luke xix. 22.
. Their evil example is a Common Scandal to that Religion which they profess
(...). Council. Chalced. Bin. T. 2. Par. 1. p. 191.
: and as St. Gregory expresses it, they foul the Pure Waters of Eternal Life
with the dirt of their Feet; their walking in wicked Ways making their Doctrine
to be despised and abhorred Ezekiel. xxxiv. 18. Aquam pedibus perturbare, est
sanctae meditationis studia, male vivendo corrumpere. Greg. pastor. l. 1. c. 2.
. Whereas if their Preaching were more ordinary, and their Lives very holy,
they would gain more reverence Magnam tamen vitae Pontificum exhibebat
venerationem, quorum negligebat fidem. Malmsbur. de Gest. Reg. l. 1. p. 4. de
rege impio Eadbaldo.
and be capable of doing much more good: To conclude this point, we desire all
Orders of the Clergy to consider, of how great importance it is to Religion and
the Church, that their Lives be blameless and exemplary, and how extremely
mischievous to both, how offensive to God, pernicious to their People, and
destructive to their own Souls, if they be otherwise, and then I hope they will
freely make, and carefully keep this necessary promise here required of them.

Secondly, As to their Families, they are to promise for their Families not
absolutely as they do for themselves, but with this Proviso, as far as in them
lies, that they also shall live according to the Gospel Rules, and set a good
Example: Every Man is restored by Christ and his Grace to that Freedom of Will,
that he may be good if he please. But the best Man may have an unruly Family
after all his endeavors, and therefore he can only promise to do his best
endeavor to regulate them; yet he must do that with care and application,
because he is now about to be advanced to a place of Authority in God's house,
and it will be great prejudice to his admission thereto, if his own House be
out of order (...), Marc. Anton. l. 1.. 16. p. 5.
; for Chilo requires, that no Man should stand to be elected a Magistrate at
Athens, till he had learned to govern at home (...), Dict. Chilonis.
; upon which ground we see Eli was rejected by God, and the Priesthood taken
out of his Family, because he (though himself a good Man) did not severely
enough punish his wicked Sons 1 Samuel 3.13. Hebr. Et non contraxit rugas contra
eos: Corripuit Eli and punitus est quia non corripere debet, sed abjicere,
Hieron. T. 2. p. 411.
. The ancient Christian Canons also are much stricter concerning Clergy-mens
Wives, Children and Servants, than those of the Laity: The Sons of
Ecclesiastics are forbid to set out and see Pagan Plays, or to Marry with
Gentiles, Heretics, or Schismatics Council. Carthag. 3. can. 11 and 12. Bin.
T. 1. p. 575.
. Their Servants are not allowed to go out to plunder, or get prey Council.
Aurel. can. 23.
, and no Man can be admitted to be a Bishop, Priest or Deacon, (says an old
Council) till he have made all that are of his Family Orthodox Christians --
Non ordinentur, priusquam omnes qui sunt in domo eorum Christianos Catholicos
fecerint, Council. Carth. 3. can. 18. Bin. T. 1. p. 575.
; all which rely upon this Maxim, that he who has not been faithful in a
little, will not be so in much Luke xvi. 10.
; if Men be remiss in their own Houses, and do not instruct, reprove and exhort
their Wives, Children and Servants, they cannot be fit to instruct, reprove and
exhort a large Parish, but of this I discoursed before See the Paraphrase on
the Epistle, before, viz. 1 Timothy 3.11, 12.
, noting only that the Sins committed by any of a Clergy-mans House are a
scandal to Religion, but especially to him; and therefore with Synesias of old
Vide Synesij Epist. 32. p. 178. opt.
such as he cannot reform, he ought to turn out of his House, for the Houses of
Ministers should be the Schools of Virtue, little Emblems of a Church, and
patterns for all their Parishioners, of Peace and Good order, Sobriety and
Devotion: Which when I have earnestly recommended to my Brethrens care, as a
matter of great importance; it is natural to observe, that St. Paul by these
Rules, and our Church by this part of her Question, supposes Clergymen of all
Orders may have Wives and Children, and ought to be at liberty to Marry, or
live single as they judge to be most expedient: Yea, we affirm, that the Roman
Churches practice in forcing the married to renounce their Wives, and single
Persons to Vow Celibacy, before their Ordination, is contrary to Scripture and
Primitive usage; it is unreasonable in it self, a Snare to the Parties who make,
and a Scandal to that Church which requires this Vow, being an occasion of much
filthy Lust in secret, and it is to be feared of Murder too very often; imposed
merely for Politic ends, that the Church may ever be the Heir to all her
Clergy, and the public never refund what private Men have gained: Which
particular charge we thus make out. As to Scripture it is evident St. Peter had
a Wife St. Matthew. viii. 14.
, and that St. Paul asserts his right to Marry, if he had pleased 1 Cor. ix. 2.
, one of the ancients affirms, he had a Wife as well as St. Peter and others of
the Apostles (...), Ignat. ep. ad. Philadelph. p. 178.
, and another affirms, that all the Apostles had Wives except St. John and St.
Paul Ambros. in 2 Cor. xi. 2.
, Philip the Deacon and Evangelist had a Wife and Children Acts xxi. 8, 9.
. So had Aquila an Apostolical Preacher Acts xviii. 26.
, and the Rules given by St. Paul to Timothy, are a demonstration that he
allowed Bishops and Deacons to be married Men, nor is there any thing in all
Scripture that forbids them this liberty; if we proceed to Antiquity,
Polycrates his Father and Grandfather had been Bishops of Ephesus before him,
and so must be married Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23. p. 142.
. We read of a Deacon whose Wife lived with him in the same House about the
year 150 Iren. adv. haer. l. 1. cap. 9. p. 71.
. St. Polycarp mentions one Valens a married Priest Polycarp. ep. ad Philad.
, and Charemon Bishop of Nilus was a married Bishop Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. cap. 42.
, and so were diverse of the most eminent Fathers of the Primitive Church, as
Spiridion, the Gregory's, Nyssen, and Nazianzen, both Father and Son, and
Hilary Bishop of Poictiers the stout Champion of the Orthodox Faith, together
with diverse others, too many to be remembered here, especially since the Fact is
so clear, that Baronius is forced to own, there were of old not only Bishops,
but other Clergymen who had Wives and Children Baron. Annal. An 353.. 33. T.
3. p. 634. idem An. 493. n. 1. p. 470.
. But then he pretends, they had been married before they were ordained, but
vowed to abstain perpetually afterward, which false pretense is confuted by a
more authentic Writer of those Ages; who says, None of the most illustrious
Clergymen of the East, no not Bishops, were compelled by any Law to such
abstinence, for many of them during the time of their being Bishops, did beget
Children by their lawful Wives (...), Socrat. Hist. l. 5. c. 21. p. 698.
. The Councils also suppose and allow this. The Apostolical Canons say, Bishops
often left Wives and Children at their decease Can. Apostol. 40. ap. Bev. T. 1.
p. 27.
. Those at Ancyra permit Deacons to Marry after their Ordination, if they
declared their intention when they were Ordained Council. Ancyran. can. 10.
ibid. p. 383.
. The Council of Gangra pronounces an Anathema against such as said they ought
not to receive the Sacrament, if a married Priest did officiate (...), Council.
Gangr. can. 4. ib. p. 419.
, which was then the Heresy of the Eustathians, and is now the Opinion of the
Roman Church, for which they stand accursed by this ancient Council: And when
some would have had the Clergy bound to Celibacy in the great Council of Nice,
Paphnutius carried it to leave them at liberty, to Cohabit with their Wives if
they pleased (...), Socrat. Hist. l. 1. c. 11. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 23. Gelas.
Cyzicen. lib. 2. c. 32.
, and to separate from them upon pretense of greater purity had been condemned
in the first Ages Can. Apostol. 5. Bev. T. 1 p. 3.
. However Siricius and some other Roman Bishops labored hard to force single
life on that part of the World, then under their jurisdiction: But the sixth
General Council recites and condemns this, as a particular constitution of
Rome, contrary to the Primitive and Apostolical Rules, and the Honor which God
has given to Marriage; wherefore they do allow Priests and Deacons to live
with their Wives, and forbid the requiring any promise of Celibacy, or
Separation from such as are to be ordained Council. 6. Constant. in Trul. can.
13. Bev. T. 1. p. 171.
. And ever since in the Greek Church (in opposition to this Roman innovation)
each Priest is enjoined to Marry once Coteler. Eccles. Graec. monument.
Nomocan. Tom. 1. p. 69.
. Nor did the Popes decrees prevail much in the West, for Sidonius and many
French Bishops were married Vit. Sidonij ante oper. ejus p. 2.
, and the Councils of that Age call their Wives by the name of (Episcopa) the
Bishopess Council. Turon. 2. can. 14. Bin. T. 2. par. 2. p. 227.
, and so it was in Germany long after, where the Priests Wife had the title of
Presbyteress, as these words of Aventinus show; The Priests in that Age
publicly married Wives like other Christians, as is evident by the ancient
instruments of Donations, where their Wives are joined as Witnesses, and called
by the honorable name of Presbyteresses Aventin. Annal. l. 4. p. 382.
. This was altered thereby that decree of Pope Hildebrand, That Priests should
have no Wives, or if they had should dismiss them or be degraded Presbyteri
uxores non habeant, habentes aut dimittant aut deponantur. Lambert Sch. Chron.
An. 1074.
. Which he caused to be executed with such rigor, as set all this part of
Christendom into a Flame; the Germans censured it as an Act of Violence and
Tyranny Avent. Annal. lib. 5. p. 448.
. Huldrich Bishop of Ausburgh writ a sharp Epistle to prove it a wicked and
mischievous innovation Vide Epistol. Huldrici in Fascic. rer. expetend. Tom. 2.
p. 161.
. And two of our English Historians thus speak of its reception here Radulf. de
Diceto Hist. ap. 10. Script. An. Dom. 1074. item Matthew. Paris, p. 9.
. The Pope urged this without precedent, and as many thought out of a blind
prejudice, contrary to the Opinion of the Holy Fathers -- and from this very
thing so great a scandal did arise, that the Church was never Rent with a more
grievous Schism in the time of any Heresy: Nor did the English submit to it;
for about 50 years after Calixtus (one of Hildebrand's successors) sent the
Cardinal of Crema his Legate into England to press it a second time, but he was
vehemently opposed, and being himself caught with a Lewd woman the night after
the Council, he departed with disgrace, and carried not the Pope's Point, as
our Historians (to his Infamy) do report Matthew. Paris An. 1125. page 70.

Jornallens. Chron. ap. 10. Script. Col. 1105.


. And where this Order did prevail, it occasioned so much abominable
wickedness, as was the grief and shame of all good Men, and particularly St.
Bernard, who sadly complains that the Clergy who abstained from the lawful
remedy of Marriage, and on that occasion run into all filthyness, were so many,
they could not, and so impudent they would not lie hid Multi (certum est) nec
latere queant prae multitudine, nec prae impudentia quarunt -- abstinentes
remedio nuptiali^, in omne deinde stagitium effluentes, Bern. de convers. ad
Cler. p. 29.
, which was so notorious, that when the Suedes (upon their Conversion) had
declared it to be for the public good, Priests should have their own Wives,
the Popes were forced afterward to allow it in those Countries Vide Grotij
proleg. ad epit. Procopij p. 39.
, and also to admit their Sons for legitimate Vid. ibid. in Elogiis p. 139.
. So that upon the whole matter our Reformers very prudently rejected so new
and scandalous a Law, and do allow the Clergy to Marry, taking only care that
they choose good Wives, and make their Families pious and exemplary.

Quest. VII. Will you reverently obey your Ordinary, and other Chief Ministers
of the Church, etc.] There is no regular Society can subsist without a due
Subordination of the Inferiors to their Superiors; so it is in Houses and
Cities, Kingdoms and Armies, in the last of which we find in the Gospel, a
Centurion under Authority (that is, of the Tribune,) yet had Soldiers under
himself Matthew. viii. 9.
. So in the Church now it is settled, the Bishops are subjected to their
Metropolitan, and take an Oath of Canonical obedience to them Hincmar. ep. 35.
, and to Reverence them Debitum Metropolitano honorem reddere, Hieron. ad
Pammach. ep. 61.
. The like Oath Deans and Archdeacons take to the Bishops, and the inferior
Priests and Deacons are required to promise to their Ordination, Obedience, not
only to their Bishop, but to other chief Ministers who are set over them, and
have the care of them, that is Deans in Cathedrals, and Archdeacons as to the
rural Clergy, which is necessary to preserve Peace and prevent Disorder. The
Superior must give Orders, and Inferiors obey them; otherwise all things would
soon run into Confusion, and we may gather, that God is the Original of this
Subjection in all Churches of the Saints, because he is not the Author of
Confusion but of Peace 1 Cor. xiv. 33.
. It may be noted also, that the Candidates promise gladly to obey; That is,
readily and willingly without Murmuring, or too nice Disputing, unless the
thing enjoined be notoriously Evil; for to be very scrupulous proceeds from the
Pride of Inferiors, and tends to overthrow the Superiors Authority Si ubi
jubeatur quaerere singulis liceat, pereunte obsequio etiam Imperium intercidit.
Tacit. Hist. l. 1. p. 178.
. And the Law decrees in favor of the inferior, if he were commanded, and
obeyed in a dubious Case In re dubia servum nil deliquisse, qui Domino jubenti
obtemperavit. Ulp. ex Cells. L. 1. de nox. act.
, because in things only doubtful, it is safer to obey than dispute. Yet this
does not give Superiors any unlimited power to command any thing that is evil,
for they only promise to obey their Godly, admonitions -- Subdito
magistratibus, principibus, potestatibus, sed intra limits disciplinae,
Tertul. Apol.
. So that such as Govern in the Church must take heed they do not enjoin any
thing, but that which is either good in it self, or apparently tends to promote
Piety and Virtue, and is not evil: For the Oath of Canonical Obedience also,
has this limitation, that they shall be obeyed, in omnibus licitis and
honestis, In all (yet only in) Lawful and Honest things, It Is many Ages since,
some had put diverse uncertain and ensnaring Additions to this ancient and plain
Oath, whereupon a Council almost 900 years ago, took that way of Swearing quite
away; their words are, It is said, that some of our Brethren (the Bishops)
compel those they are about to Ordain, to swear they are Worthy, and will do
nothing against the Canons, and that they will be obedient to the Bishop who
Ordains them, and to the Church wherein they are Ordained, which Oath because
it is dangerous, we do all agree shall be utterly forbid Council. Cabilon. An.
813. can. 13. Bin. T. 3. par. 1.. 2. p. 193.
. But how long this good Canon prevailed is uncertain, for I find many worse
Forms of Oaths used in the Gallican Church in after Ages Vid. Theodor. poenit.
Tom. 2. p. 471. 473. item p. 483. 486, etc.
, from all the dubious and unlawful parts of which, the Reformation has
delivered us; and blessed be God our Oaths of Canonical Obedience are short and
simple, and our Superiors expect no other Obedience from us, than the Canons
require, which are all Lawful and Honest things. So that this Duty we may
safely, and in all reason ought to pay to them, especially having promised it
in the presence of God: And if we fall into any irregularities, for which these
our Governors (according to their Duty to God) reprove us, this promise obliges
us humbly to submit to such their Godly Admonitions 2 Timothy iv. 2. Titus ii. 15.
, and to amend for the future, what they blame us for: To which we have this
encouragement, that by being trained up to give due obedience to those over us,
we shall learn to Govern others (...), Solon apud Stobaeum.
, if it shall please God to advance us, afterward, to places of Dignity in the
Church; so Joshua was made fit for Ruling the people of Israel, by having first
been Moses his Servant: Now though this belong to Priests also, yet it
particularly respects the Deacons, who are not only to obey the Bishops, but
also to remember their order is below that of Presbyters Maneant Diaconi in
proprio ordine, scientes quod Episcoporum ministri sunt, Presbyteris autem
inferiores existunt, Council. Carthag. 6. e. Council. Nicaen. can 18. Vid. Bev.
T. 1. p. 80.
, and therefore they must also reverence the Priests, take their advice Ut
Diaconus ita se Presbyteri ut Episcopi ministrum noverit, Council. 4 Carthag.
can. 37.

Diaconi noverint Presbyteris omni humilitate deferendum, Council. Andeg. can.
3. Vid. Arelat. 1. can. 18. Tolet. 4. can. 38. Council. in Trul. can. 7.


and obey their directions, because they have more Age, and are of more
Experience in Ecclesiastical Matters than they: It seems of old, many Deacons
had through self-conceit been apt to behave themselves with arrogance and
disrespect toward the Presbyters, for remedy whereof the Ancient Church took
great care to determine and enjoin also their subordination and subjection to
Presbyters, and would not allow them to sit down in presence of a Priest, till
he desired them so to do Quod non oportet Diaconum coram Presbytero sedere --
nisi jussu ejus, Council. 4. Carth. can. 39. Laod. can. 20. Agath. can. 6. e
Nicaen. can. 18.
, and when any of them were presumptuous against this Superior Order, the
Fathers have severely reprimanded them Hieron. ad Euagr. Ep. 85. Auth. Quaest.
Ver. and Nov. Testam. Cyril. de ador. in Spir. lib. 13.
. To conclude, both Priests and Deacons are hereby bound conscientiously to
observe those excellent Rules of discipline, called the Canons of the Church of
England, grounded on Scripture, and the decrees of ancient Councils, and
tending to secure our Faith, direct our Worship, and regulate our Manners,
being the best Rules for discipline that are any where to be found: So that our
Candidates should diligently read them over, labor to understand them, and
resolve to practice them, as far as they are concerned: Which would be an
excellent means to restore our Church to its Pristine beauty, and repair those
breaches that Schism and Libertinism have made in our Constitutions, by the
grievous neglect of our Holy Discipline: And since the Church has so many
Enemies without, let it be the care of all who are promoted in it, to behave
themselves dutifully to their Superiors, to keep Unity and Peace among
themselves, and zealously to perform all their known duty; so shall God bless
this Church, and the Gates of Hell will never be able to prevail against it.

CHAP. IV. Of the Ordination it self.
. 1. OF the Imposition of Hands.]
Having passed all these Preliminaries with care and caution, the Bishop
proceeds to confer the Order it self, for which he has prepared his Candidate,
first by a visible Sign, viz. Laying his Hands on the Persons Head; which is
one of the most ancient Rites in the World for conferring any Blessing, Dignity
or Power. For thus it was used before the Law Genesis xlviii. 14.
, and under the Law also Numb. xxvii. 18, 23. Deuteronomy. xxxiv. 9.
. And from the constant use of the Jews, the Apostles brought it into the
Ordinations of the Christian Church, and used it so constantly Acts vi. 6. and
xiii. 3. 1 Timothy iv. 14, and ver. 22. and 2 Timothy i. 6.
, that the word even in Scripture, is put for the Act of Ordination (...). Act.
xiv. 23.
; and all Ecclesiastical Writers, Fathers, Historians and Collectors of
Councils use the Laying on of Hands, for conferring Holy Orders, as might be
proved (if it were necessary) by innumerable instances; but in a matter so very
plain we will content our selves with a few, which will suffice to show this
was an Apostolical and Primitive Rite, and an Essential Part of Ordination. The
ancient Author under the name of Dionysius, says, the Imposition of Hands
gives the Priestly Character and Power (...). Eccles. Hier. c. 5.
; and St. Basil says, by Laying on of Hands they receive the Spiritual Gift
(...). Basil. ad Amphil. Can. 1. Bev. Tom. 2. p. 48.
. A Priest is made (as another has it) by the Power of the Holy Ghost, by the
Bishops Voice and Laying on of his Right Hand -- (...). Jov. Monach. ap. Phot.
. The Ordination of the Clergy (as St. Hierom speaks) is completed by two
things, Laying on of Hands, and a Prayer of the Lips Hieron. lib. 16. in Jesai.
. The same is also affirmed by all the Schoolmen, who generally make this
Imposition of Hands necessary to the conferring of Holy Orders Durand. Ration.
fol. 21. D. Tho. 3. p. qu. 84. art. 4. Bonavent. in 4. sent. did. 24. art. 2.
qu. 1.
; and the Canon Law decrees, if it have been omitted, it must be supplied
cautiously afterward, without repeating the whole Office Greg. de decret. l. 1.
Tit. 16. de Sacram. non iterand. c. 3. p. 310.
. Remarkable is the Story of Marcianus an holy Bishop, who having ordained an
evil Man, wished his Hands had rather been thrust into an heap of Thorns than
laid on the Head of Sabbatius at his Ordination Socrat. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 20.
: and we read of some Orthodox Priests, who with indignation thrust away the
Hands of Arrian Bishops when they would have laid them on their Heads Theod.
Hist. l. 4. c. 14.
. And as to the mystical meaning of this Ceremony, I find it variously
explained; some will have it signify the taking them into God's special
protection Ita Dionys. Eccl. Hier. cap. 5. Et Simeon. Thessal. in Eucholog.
page 257.
; others, the granting them power to act, because the Hand is the instrument of
action Cyril. in Jesai. l. 5. Manum Dei, potestatem Dei dixit. Aug. Com. in
Psalm. lxxii. T. 8. -- (...). Ita Pachymer. Schol. in Dionys.
; others, the plentiful imparting to them the Gifts of the Spirit, for Gifts
are distributed by the hand D. Tho. Aquin. ubi supr.
. But the most natural signification of it seems to be the Bishops delivering
them a power to officiate in the Church, and to administer holy things; but
because he does this in God's Name, and by Authority from him, the Candidate
should lift up his Heart to Heaven, and pray for grace to fit him for this
weighty Charge. There is only to be further observed, as to this Rite, The
difference between the two Orders; for at the Ordination of a Deacon, the
Bishop alone lays his Hands on the Head of the Candidate, but when a Priest is
ordained, the Priests that are present do all lay on their hands with the
Bishop, which some would derive from Timothy's being ordained with the laying
on of the hands of the Presbytery; but the Greek Fathers and Ethiopick Version
expound that of the Bishops who joined with St. Paul in making Timothy a Bishop
1 Timothy iv. 14. (...). Chrysostom. (...) Theoph. in loc. -- Impositione Manuum
Episcoporum. Verse. Aethiop.
. And in the Greek Church none but the Bishop lays on his Hand at the
Ordination of a Priest, as well as of a Deacon Euchol. in Ordin. Diac. p. 250.
and in Ord. Presbyteri, p. 293.
. So that it is an ancient usage only of the Western Church, mentioned as early
as the 4th Council of Carthage, An. 398. where it is said, when a Priest is
Ordained, all the Presbyters that are present shall join with the Bishop in
laying on Hands: But at a Deacons Ordination, only the Bishop lays on his Hands
-- Omnes Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt manus suas juxta manum Episcopi super
caput ejus tenent. Council. 4. Carthag. Can. 3. -- Solus Episcopus qui eum
benedicit, manum super caput illius ponat. ibid. Can. 4. Bin. T. 1. p. 588.
; and from that Council it has been taken into the Rubric of the Roman
Pontifical Pontif. Roman p. 36. and postea in Ord. Presbyt. vid. Morin. de Ord.
Latin. p. 269.
, and ours as well as other Reformed Churches Liturg Belgic. page 261. Formul.
Lutheran. Lips. 1624.
; but I do not think the import of it to be any more, than to do some greater
Honor to the higher Order of Priests; and so to distinguish it from that of a
Deacon, unless it be in token of the College of Presbyters consenting to the
Bishops ordaining one into their Body, for of old they were his Council, and
the Bishop was not to ordain any without their advice Episcopus absque Concilio
Presbyterorum Clericos non ordinet. Excerp. Egbert. Can. 44. An. 750. Spelm. T.
1. p. 263.
: So that the Presbyters laying on of Hands only, and always with a Bishop,
cannot imply their having any direct power in Ordination, but only their
agreeing to the election, testified by their public joining in this Act of
their Solemn Admission. But a Priest being a very Honorable Order in the
Church of Christ, it is very fit the Bishop should advise with his Clergy of
that Degree, concerning the Qualifications of those who offer themselves for
this Sacred Order; and it may be of good use, that all the Priests present
being fully satisfied as to every particular man's endowments, may the more
heartily join with the Bishop in praying to God to give them grace suitable to
this undertaking.

2. Rubr. Humbly kneeling before him.]
This Posture of receiving Holy Orders kneeling, was so well known and so
constantly practiced in the Pure Ages of the Primitive Church, that when
Gregory Nazianzen's Father (being then but a Youth) was sent to be publicly
Catechized by Leontius, Bishop of Caesarea, in Cappadocia, he kneeled all the
time, which the whole Congregation interpreted, as an Omen he would become a
Priest afterward, because that was the Posture of a Candidate for Orders, not
of a Catechumen Greg. Naz. Orat. 19. de Patre suo Vide item Baron. Anno 325. n.
30. p. 284.
. Now a Rite so well known then, could be of little less than Apostolical
original. The Author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy mentions it, and notes
that a Deacon kneeled but upon one Knee, a Priest on both, before the Altar,
while the Bishop laid his Hand on his Head (...). Dionys. Eccl. Hier. c. 5.
, which is also enjoined in the Greek Rubric Eucholog. Graec. page 256. and
page 297.
. But we, according to the Custom of the Western Church, require Deacons as
well as Priests to kneel humbly upon both knees Pontifical. Roman. p. 32.
; and the Lutheran Form requires them to kneel before the Altar as soon as the
Questions are proposed to them Ad ordinandos procumbentes coram Altari
Creditisne Fidem, etc. Form. Luth. Lips. 1624.
. The reasons for which ancient usage are principally two: First, In respect to
the Bishop, who in this Sacred Action represents our Lord Jesus himself, and
executes a Power delegated to him from his and our Great Master, and this
Posture of Adoration is principally due to him, only it is paid to the
Ambassador for the King of Heavens sake. Secondly, We must observe, that though
the Bishop pronounces the Words, yet Christ gives the Grace and confers the
Gifts; which therefore the Candidate must receive with the profoundest
humility, and no Posture so fit as that of Prayer: for he must all the time
humbly and earnestly beg of Jesus, to confirm the Words of his Servant the
Bishop, and that he would give all those good Qualities to him, which are
requisite for a just and conscientious discharge of this Office. We put up our
Petitions to Mortal Princes upon our Knees, and whoever is advanced to Secular
Dignity, receives his Investiture from the Royal Hands kneeling; how much more
reasonable is it we should kneel to the King of Heaven, when He is about to
endue us with his Grace, and invest us with an Office in his Courts.

. 3.
The Solemn Words.] Take thou Authority to execute the Office of a Deacon in
the Church of God committed to thee, in the Name, etc.]
There are generally certain Forms used in the admissions to all Offices Civil
and Military, and so it ought to be in these that are Ecclesiastical. But
because there are no Forms prescribed in Scripture, every Church has taken the
liberty to compose its own Formularies. It would suffice (says Pope Innocent)
if the Ordainer only said, be thou a Priest or a Deacon; but now Forms are made
by the Church, they must be used Innocent. de Sacram. non iterandis.
. That of the Roman Church indeed is a very odd Form Accipe Spiritum Sanctum ad
robur, and ad resistendum Diabolo, etc. Pont. Romans p. 36.
, and belongs no more to a Deacon than to any other Christian; for they pretend
to give him the Holy Spirit to enable him to resist the Devil and his
Temptations. The Form of the Greek Church is much better, where, because of
that ancient error of those who did attribute the efficacy of Sacramentals to
the virtue of him that Ministers them (as the Ancients note 1 Cor. iii. 4. Vide
D. Chrysostom. Hom 50. in Matthew. and Aug. Tract. 6. in Jonah.
). The Bishop humbly ascribes the whole Act to God, and says, The Divine Grace
which always heals that which is weak, and fills up that which is defective,
promotes N. to be a Deacon (...) N. -- (...) chol. p. 250.
. And to the same effect they speak in the Ordaining of a Priest. As to our
Form it is owing to our Reformation, and is (as it ought to be) a clear
explication of the Ceremony of Laying on of Hands; which signifies (as was
noted) collation of Power, and delegating Authority; and therefore the Bishop
says, Take thou Authority, etc. It seems by St. Ambrose there were in his time
some mystical words used at Imposition of Hands, which were believed to convey
authority Manus vero impositiones verba sunt mystica quibus confirmatur ad hoc
opus electus, accipiens Authoritatem, Ambr. in 1 Timothy 4.
. And here the Bishop, in whom the Supreme Power is lodged, grants Authority to
the Candidate to execute the Office of a Deacon; which is his Commission and
lawful Call, giving him a right to perform all the Duties annexed to that
Order. Yet (according to the example of the Eastern Church) the Bishop declares
he does not this purely of himself, but by a Power granted him from God; and
therefore he adds In the Name of the Father, of the Son, etc. to intimate that
the Holy and ever Blessed Trinity does confer this Order on him. We are
commanded by St. Paul to do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus Coloss. iii. 17.
Quicquid agis, in nomine Dei agas. R. D. Kimch. in Psalm. 1. ver. 2.
; from whence the Christians generally begin all their Solemn Instruments with
this Form, In Nomine Domini, and sometimes the whole Trinity is expressed,
especially in Religious Ministrations, such as Absolution, Marriage and Holy
Orders, where each Person of the Trinity concurs, the Father by his Providence,
guides the Choice; the Son by his Supreme Authority over the Church, grants the
Power; the Holy Ghost by his Gifts and Graces, qualifies and fits the Person
now chosen. One of the Greek Ritualists makes this a calling the whole Trinity,
to witness this Present Act (...). Sym. Thessai. de Sacr.
; but I take the former to be the true sense, because to do a thing in the Name
of God, etc. is to do it as his Representative, and by his Authority, and so
the Person is promoted to be a Deacon, Ministerially by the Bishop, but
Originally and Principally by God himself, from whom he receives this Honor,
humbly kneeling on his Knees; and he should remember that to him he must one
day give an account, how he has performed his Duty, which cannot but strike
his Mind with reverence and holy fear, while these Solemn Words are repeated.

.
4. Rubr. Delivering the New Testament,] Take thou Authority to read the Gospel
in the Church of God, and to Preach, etc.]
This is the second significant Rite used in our Ordination, concerning which
we shall observe, That the Deacons in the Christian Church, are made after the
pattern of those Ministers among the Jews, whose Office was to keep the Book of
the Law, and upon occasion, to read it publicly in their Synagogues, in whose
stead our Savior himself did once Minister Luke vi. 20. (...), i. e. (...)
Epiphan. Minister stat and recitat de Lege. Lib. Massech. Suc.
. So that the place was honorable, though inferior to that of the Ruler of
the Synagogue. In like manner the Deacons proper Office was to read the Holy
Scripture in the Christian Assemblies, as diverse of the Ancients have
particularly noted Evangelium Christi quasi Diaconus lectitabor; (...). Clem.
constit. l. 2. c. 57.
; and Sozomen recites it as a Custom peculiar to Alexandria, that only the
Archdeacon read the Gospel there, whereas the ordinary Deacons read it
elsewhere (...), Sozom. Hist. l. 7. cap. 19.
. At Carthage where they had a peculiar order of Lectors, the Bible was
delivered (not to the Deacons) but to the Reader with these words, Take this
Book and be thou a Reader of God's word, and if thou art faithful and useful in
this Office, thou shall have a part with them, who have ministered the word of
God Council. 4. Carthag. can. 8. Bin. Tom. 1. page 588.
. But we having laid aside this Office, properly deliver it to the Deacon
wherein we are conformable to the ancient Churches: In the Syrian Formularies
it is peculiar, that the Bishop delivers to every one of the Deacons a Book of
the Epistles, and to the Priests a Book of the Gospels (g). Ordinat. Syror. ap.
Morin. p. 451. and p. 458.
The words spoken at the delivery of the Holy Book, have been varied in the
Western Church. For in one of their ancient Ordinals (supposed to be 800 years
old, and taken out of a Saxon, or English Book) The Bishop said unto the
Deacon, Take this volume of the Gospel, read and understand it, and do thou
both deliver it to others, and fulfill it in thy Works Accipe istud volumen
Evangelij, lege and intellige, and aliis trade and tu opere ad imple: Form.
ver. ap. Morin. de Ord. Lat. p. 286.
. But in the modern Roman Church, the Bishop absurdly says, Take thou power to
read the Gospel in the Church of God, [as well for the living as for the dead]
in the name of God, Amen Accipe potestatem legendi Evangelium in Ecclesia Dei
[tam pro vivis quam pro defunctis] in nomine Domini, Amen. Pontif. Romans p. 17.
. But that we may be assured, this Botch was added in the blind Ages; Morinus
Post haec verba Ecclesia Dei -- in inferiori margin Scriptura recenti and
atramento plane alio Tam pro vivis quam pro defunctiis, etc. Morin. de ord.
Latin. p. 337.
has discovered these words, (as well for the living as the dead) were put
into the Margin of an Ordinal of near 600 years old, in a modern hand and later
Ink: So that this corruption has been designed, since their false Doctrine of
Purgatory was set up, however it is impossible to reconcile the words, either to
Truth or good Sense. The Gospel may profit the living who can hear it, but the
dead cannot exercise that Sense, and so can have no benefit by another reading
thereof: The Spirit therefore calls upon living Men and says, We must hear
God's Voice to day Hebr. iii. 17.
. And the Orthodox Fathers teach us, there is no more hopes of finding any
comfort in the next World for them, who are not cleansed from their Sins in
this (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 5. T. 1. p. 26. Vid. Aug. de temp. Ser. 66.
fol. 159.
. If Men die without Faith and Repentance, neither Prayers nor Reading, can
work these Graces in them: Unless they fancy (as some Charmers of old did,)
That there is a Magical power in the words of Holy Scripture, that can operate
upon disembodied Spirits, which is a wickedness severely condemned, especially
in Clergymen by an ancient Council Council. Laod. can. 36. and Balsam. and Zon:
ibid. Bev. Tom. 1. p. 469. and Not. T. 2. p. 196.
; and is one sort of conjuration, which by abusing God's word borders upon
Blasphemy Vid. Camerar. Oper. subseciv. Tom. 3. cap. 30. page 104.
. So that this Addition makes the Roman Form more like the creation of a
Necromancer, than a Christian Deacon; and therefore our Reformers justly cast
out this late corruption, and restored the Form to its ancient Purity: Giving
our Deacon a Power and Right to Read the Scripture, which being the Word and
Will of God, and the Means of our Salvation should be Read plainly, and
deliberately with affectionate Devotion and fervent Charity to the living,
because this is their only day of Grace, and unless it work upon them now,
while it is called to day, they shall never see, or hear these Holy Books more,
till they be opened to their Condemnation at the last Judgment: As to the
Deacons duty in Reading and Preaching, also (by License from the Bishop) I have
spoken before, and shall only add this caution; That it is not safe for young
Preachers to meddle with nice Points, and high Speculations in their Sermons,
plain truths and practical matters being easier, and safer for them to Preach,
and far more profitable for their People to hear, or in the words of Seneca
Senec. de benef. l. 7. cap. 1.
. There are no things hard to be found out, but only such as afford no other
advantage to the finder, but that he has found them; whatever will make us
better and happier lies open and is near at hand.

CHAP. V. Of the Consequence after Ordination.
. 1. OF the Gospel.]
In our usual Service the Epistle and Gospel stand together, but in this Office
they are separated, and the Ordination it self intervenes, and did so of old;
for in an Ordinal writ above 800 years ago, we have this Rubric, That the
greater Orders shall be conferred before the Gospel, the lesser after the
Communion Majores gradus ante Evangelium, minores vero post Communionem dantur,
Vid. Morin. de ordin. Latin. par. 2. p. 270.
. Now the Deacon is the first of the greater Orders, and the Reason of setting
the Gospel immediately after his Ordination was, that the new ordained Person
might immediately exercise his Authority, and give proof of his fitness for
this part of his Office, in solemnly reading the Gospel, for by our Church, as
well as the Roman it is ordered, That one of them appointed by the Bishop shall
read the Gospel See our Rubric here. Aliquis de noviter ordinatis dalmatica
indutus Evangelium dicit, Pontif. Romans p. 39.
. The Portions chosen for this occasion have been diverse. One of the ancient
Gallican Forms, had Luke ix. from ver. 57, to ver. 62 Liturg. Gallican. ap.
Mabillon. l. 2. p. 170.
, which is not so proper by much as this Gospel out of St. Luke xii, from to
ver. 35. to ver. 38. appointed by our Reformers under King Edw. the sixth Vid.
Sparrow's Coll. p. 146.
; for the very name of a Deacon signifies a Servant, and here they have the
directions of their great Master Christ Jesus, how they are to prepare
themselves for his second coming, by doing their duty well in that station
which he has given them in his Household, and his promise of a reward, if they
be found in well doing.

. 2. The Analysis of the Gospel of St. Luke xii. 35 -- 38.
This Gospel contains under a Metpahor. 1st. The advice given, and the duties
to be done by Servants. 1. To be ready for business. Ver. 35. 2. To expect
their Master. Ver. 36. 3. To open the door presently. Ver. 36.
2ly. The reward promised by the Master to such as follow it. 1. In general
they are blessed. Ver. 37. 2. In particular. 1. Their Master will reward them
well. Ver. 37. 2ly. They shall be sure of it. Ver. 38.




The Paraphrase on this Gospel.

S. Luke xii. 35. YOu that are Deacons are Officers in Christ's House the
Church, and have the care and government of his people, your fellow servants
committed to you, and perhaps his being invisible, and as it were absent in
Heaven Nel assentia del signiore, si conosce il Servitore, Prove. Ital. ap. S.
Torriano. p. 78.
, may tempt you (as the Masters absence does evil Servants,) to grow insolent
or careless: But I advise you to remember, he will come to call you to an
account, and as the Servants in the East, (where long Garments were worn) could
not be fit for business, till they had tied them up with a girdle Cingulum est
indicium servitutis, quod discursus expeditos reddit, Petr. Chrysol. Ser. 24.
p. 62. (...), Theophil.
. So [Let your Loins be girded about] with the strictest Chastity and constant
Sobriety -- Baltheo castitatis Petr. Chrysol. ut supr. Lumbos praecingimus cum
carnis luxuriam per continentiam coarctamus, Greg. Mag. Hom. 13.
, and then you will be always in a posture to execute your Lord's commands; but
if you indulge your selves in Idleness, Wantonness or Excess, you must neglect
his work, and will be surprised at his coming Luke xxi. 34. -- Sopor ille
gravissimus extat Quem saturi capiunt, Lucret. l. 4.
, which will be as sudden as if it were in the night; therefore while others
Sleep let your Eyes be waking [and your Lamps burning,] so that the brightness
of your Knowledge, and the splendour of your good Example In Manibus Sanctorum
ipsa bona opera sunt lucernae -- quae ad innocentiae testimonium nocturno
portantur tempore, Petr. Chrysol. ut supr.

Lucernae ardent -- cum per bona opera proximis nostris, lucis exempla
monstramus, Greg. M. ut supr.


may not only declare your care to do your Master's will, but direct and
encourage others to follow you: You must foresee your Lord's coming, and while
the World is overspread with the darkness of Ignorance and Oblivion, you must
give notice by your words, and set them a pattern by your works, so as both you
and they may be prepared and ready for the Lord at his coming.

Ver. 36. Which may be illustrated by this Comparison, suppose some great Man
espoused to a noble Virgin, were gone to fetch home his Spouse to his own
House, in order to consummate the Marriage, and intending to return (as the
custom was of old) with his Bride late at night Matthew. xxv. 6. Behold at
midnight there was a Cry made -- Sponsa a novo marito nocte deducitur, hinc
tedae, and faces. Serve. ad Virg. Eclog. 8.
, would not all his Servants (especially the chief of them) be ready dressed; put
all in order, and wait with lighted Torches to receive him, whenever he came?
Now our Lord espoused our nature on Earth at his Incarnation -- (...),
Theophil. in loc.
, and when Heaven is near filled with glorified Saints, he will then return to
Earth with great Majesty, and carry the remainder of holy Souls up with him, to
complete his great and glorious Nuptials at the Last Day. Therefore all things
must be put in that Order that you would have him find them, [And ye your
selves] who have the Charge of others Souls as well as of your own, must be
[like unto Men] that are Servants in a place of Trust, and [that wait for their
Lord,] expecting every moment, [when he will return from the Wedding.] For they
take effectual care to put both themselves and their Fellow Servants into so
fit a Posture to receive him [that when he comes and knocks -- Venit, cum ad
judicium properat, pulsat; cum per aegritudinis molestias mortem esse vicinam
designat. Greg. Mag. ubi supra.
] at the first warning, and upon the least notice, [they may] without any
delay, fear or surprise [open] the Door [to him immediately] and be ready to
attend him and entertain him with all imaginable demonstrations of duty and
gladness.

Ver. 37. Such officious care and diligence could not but be kindly accepted,
and liberally rewarded by an Earthly Master, whereas yours is an Heavenly
Master, therefore Happy and [Blessed are those Servants, whom the Lord when he
cometh] from Heaven [shall find] to have been so industrious in his absence,
and to be [watching] for his return, they shall receive extraordinary marks of
his favor, and have a part in the Inheritance Prove. xvii. 2.
. He shall treat them not only as his Friends, but as if he were their Servant
En mutatio inaudita rerum, epulanti servit Dominus and servit accinctus,
Ministris suis ministerium facit Christus, and facit in Patris gloria jam
constitutus. Petr. Chrysol. ut supra.
. [Verily I say unto you, he shall gird himself, and make them sit down to
meat] in his Heavenly Kingdom [and will come forth] as a Bridegroom out of his
Chamber, [and serve them] as freely as ever they served him; that is, he will
feast them with liberal communications of Grace and Glory, and make them drink
of those Rivers of Pleasures that are at his Right Hand for evermore, so that
they shall be happy to all eternity.

Ver. 38. And though the coming of your Lord is uncertain, yet if you do your
duty thus, the reward is certain. [And if he shall come] at never so
unseasonable an hour, as it is supposed he will (not at Nine at Night, the
first Watch, because the most slothful are then scarce gone to sleep,) but if
it be [in the second Watch] that he come between Nine and Twelve, when all are
most soundly sleeping, [or come in the third Watch] between Twelve and Three,
before the most diligent do awake (...). Theoph. in loc.
, it is all one to such vigilant Servants as have made all ready. Let his
Heavenly Master come never so suddenly, or (to others) unseasonably [and find
him so] prepared, he cannot miss of an infinite and eternal reward of Glory.
Therefore though some may think the duty hard, to take such pains to watch so
long, and work so diligently, yet when I consider how largely it shall be
requited, I must say again [Blessed is that Servant.] Which if these newly
ordained Persons believe, it will make them steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord, forasmuch as they know their labor is not
in vain in the Lord.

. 3. Of their receiving the Communion.]
It has been observed in all Churches to celebrate this Sacrament whenever
Holy Orders are given: The Old Canons obliging the Bishop who ordains to
consecrate, and the Ordained all to receive Vide Poenitentiale Theod. Can. 3.
p. 90.
. In the Greek Church, Bishops and Priests are forbid to be ordained on
Fasting-days, because on those days they have no Communion there Vide Morin.
not. ad Ordin. Graec. Par. 2. p. 217.
. With them also the Deacons and Priests, newly ordained, first receive,
because they assist in distributing the Sacred Elements (...). Eucholog. p.
251, and p. 294. and notis, p. 301.
; and the same Custom they have in the Syrian Churches Morin. de Ord. Syror. p.
486.
. But the Greeks go farther, and enjoin their Priests to continue for seven
days together, after they are Ordained, to give and receive the Communion
(...). Eucholog. in not. p. 301.
: Yea, and in the Ancient Gallican Church, as also at Rome, the Priests
received of their Ordainer a whole Consecrated Loaf (for Wafers are an
Innovation) which after they had communicated out of at Church, they took home,
and there privately communicated for forty days together Fulbert. Carnot. Ep.
2. ad Finard. and Rubric. vet. Ordinal. Roman.
. So necessary have all Churches thought the receiving of the Holy Communion to
be, for such as enter into Holy Orders: and it is upon several accounts very
proper on that Occasion. First, As it gives them an opportunity to examine
themselves, and to repent of their Sins, for this will purify their Souls
before they enter upon a Sacred Office. 2ly. The worthy receiving this Holy
Sacrament, will stir up in them a fervent Love to their Dear Redeemer, and an
hearty Charity for those he has bought with his most Precious Blood; which two
Principles will inspire them with a great zeal for the glory of Christ, and the
good of his peoples Souls. 3ly. This Sacrament was instituted to convey to such
as are duly prepared for it, large measures of his Grace, and they need a more
than ordinary share of it, to fit them for so Spiritual an Office. 4ly. The
Lords Supper is a Federal Feast, wherein as our Lord ratifies his Covenant of
Mercy and Grace to us, so do we seal our Vows and Promises of Duty and
Obedience to him; and those newly Ordained have those Engagements yet warm upon
their Lips, which they have just now made to Jesus by his Ambassador: all which
solemn promises of Services to be done in the Office they have undertaken in
Christ's Family, they ratify and confirm by receiving this Sacrament: Which of
old was so usually joined to Oaths and Contracts, that the word Sacramentum
signifies both an Oath and this Holy Mystery. Thus Princes were wont to confirm
their Leagues with each other; and receiving the Communion at their Coronation
was as a Seal of their Oath then made to their People; and for this reason such
as are new Married are required to come to the Sacrament soon after their
Matrimony, to bind themselves more strictly to keep their Conjugal Vows, as I
have observed in a former Discourse Compan. to Temple, Par. iv. Fol. page 68.
. Wherefore all that are Ordained are enjoined, as soon as they have bound
themselves to all the Duties of their Places in the presence of Men, to go to
God's Altar, and ratify the same before him; so that if they were fraudulent
in their Promises, or shall be negligent afterward; we may say with St. Peter,
They have not lied to Men, but to God Acts v. 4.
. Therefore besides the Preparation necessary for ordinary Christians. The
Clergy on this great Occasion, must particularly prepare themselves, some days
before, by seriously reading over their intended Promises, which are to be
bound upon their Souls, by so Sacred a Tie: yet if they find themselves willing
to Engage, and resolved to Perform them, they need not be discouraged, for the
Bishop in the last Collect, prays to God to enable them to keep them all.

The Concluding Collect.. 4.
I observe in all the Ancient Western Offices, there is a Prayer in the
Post-communion, which is called The Benediction Vid. Mabillon. Lit. Gallican.
page 305. Et Morin. de Ordinat. Lat. p. 263.
; and in the Eastern Form, the Bishop is to bless every one of them after he
has ordained them Morin. de Ordinat. Syror. p. 452.
. To which this Collect of ours, and the like in other Reformed Churches do
exactly agree Liturg. Eccles. Reform. Belg. p. 263.

Scotch Psalter, Form of Ordination, p. 25.


; for they are all in precatory style. Since God alone can properly and
originally Bless, and therefore Bishops, Ministers and Parents Bless, by
praying to God for those they would have to be blessed: and how very fit this
Collect is upon that Occasion, will appear by the following Analysis and
Discourse.

The Analysis of the Concluding Collect.
In this Collect are four Parts, 1st. A Preface declaring the grounds of these
requests, 1. God's being the fountain of all goodness. Almighty God, giver of
all good things,
2. His special favor to these, Who of thy great goodness have vouchsafed to
accept, etc.

2ly. The Petitions themselves, which are, 1. For inward Graces. Make them --
to be modest, humble, etc.
2. For obedience to the Rules of the Church. To have a ready will to observe
all Spiritual Discipline;
3. For internal satisfaction of their own Conscience. That they having always
the testimony, etc.
4. For constancy and perseverance. And continuing ever stable and strong, etc.

3ly. The design of asking them that they may 1. Deserve well. May so well
behave themselves in this, etc.
2. Be promoted higher. That they may be found worthy to be called unto the
higher, etc.

4ly. The manner of presenting them, 1. By praying in Christ's Name. Through
the same thy Son our Savior,
2. by giving glory to him. To whom be glory and honor, world, etc. Amen.



A Discourse upon this Collect.

ALmighty God, giver of all good things, who of thy great goodness have
vouchsafed to accept, and take these thy Servants, etc.] The Bishop cannot but
wish well to those who are ordained by laying on of his hands, and knowing that
though he can admit them to this Office, he cannot qualify them for it; he
wisely applies himself to God, and heartily recommends them to him, introducing
his requests with two very proper considerations. First in general, That God is
Almighty, and the giver of all good things: His Power is infinite, so that he
can do all things, and his bounty is immense, so that he is as willing as he is
able: The Scripture describes him as the giver, both of all temporal Psalm.
ciii. 5. and cxlv. 16. Luke i. 53.
, and (which these persons chiefly need) of all spiritual good things Matthew.
vii. 2. Jam. i. 17.
. Wherefore when we want Water, to whom should we go but to this ever flowing
fountain. Secondly, And we have a special ground to hope for his peculiar
favor toward these Persons, because now it appears that God has taken and
accepted them, (by the Ministry of the Bishop his Vicegerent) to bear the
Office of Deacons in his Church; Our Lord Jesus promised to be with his
Apostles, and their Successors (especially in these Sacred Ministrations) unto
the end of the World Matthew. xxviii. ult.
. They were elected and examined by his Rules and admitted in his name. The
Bishop is Christ's Ambassador, so that this solemn Act is to be looked upon as
the act of his great Master. Of old there were often miraculous indications of
God's approving such as were chosen into Holy Orders, but now since miracles
are ceased, we have no other way to judge of God's accepting Men into these
Offices, but by his Providence moving them to desire the Ministry, and his
guiding the Bishops after Examination to approve and ordain them; which is the
Reason why the ancient Forms speak of all that are thus called, as of Persons
chosen of God Quem ad officium Diaconatus vocare dignatur, Mabil. lit. Gallic.
p. 304. -- Quem ad Presbyteri munus elegit, ibid. page 306.
; and the Greek Ordinals call them, such as are determined to be made Ministers
by God's unsearchable Power (...), Euchol. p. 250.
, and those whom he has vouchsafed to bring into the Office of a Deacon Orat.
2. in Ordin. Diac. ibid. p. 251.
. So that the Argument is very cogent; God is the only Master, who can qualify
the Servants that he chooses, and since he has vouchsafed to accept these into
his Service, we ought both to pray and to hope, that he will give unto them
those Gifts and Graces, which will fit them for their places, and enable them
rightly to execute their Holy Calling.

Make them, we beseech thee O Lord, to be modest, humble and constant in their
ministration, to have a ready will to observe all spiritual, etc.] As the
Preface contains proper motives, so the Petitions take in all the necessary
Qualifications for this Office. The Roman Church only prays here in general,
that God would give them his Holy Spirit -- and replenish them with all virtue
Pontif. Romans p. 39.
. The Greek Offices name the particular Graces of -- Faith, Charity and
Spiritual strength Eucholog. in Ord. Diac. p. 250.
. But our Form is larger and begs for them, First, The inward Qualities of
Modesty, Humility and Constancy: The two first always go together, for an
humble Person is as certainly modest, as a proud Man is arrogant: Now those
graces are necessary for all Christians, much more for Clergymen, and
especially for these that are but newly entered into the lowest Order; they must
beware of being lifted up with Pride, least (as St. Paul speaks) they fall into
the same Condemnation, and for the same Sin too as the Devil did 1 Timoth. iii.
6.
, whatever other Gifts, Graces or Parts they may have, Humility is that Robe,
or upper Garment which must cover and secure them all 1 Peter v. 5. Grec.
(...), Amiculum candidum exterius superinjectum ornamenti causa, and nodo
alligatum dicitur, (...), Gatat. Cinnus l. 1. c. 9.
, and it makes all other virtues lovely: And since they are yet but young, and
need to learn of their Superiors; Humility and Modesty disposes them to
receive, and invites others to give them instruction Psalm. xxv. 8.
, and are the first steps toward improvement; yea, these are the first Graces
which God gives, to make way for all the rest, for he gives Grace only to the
Humble James iv. 6.
. So that these excellent Qualities of Modesty, and Humility will recommend us
to the favor of both God and Men: Yet in the next place, because Humble and
Modest Persons, may be apt to be discouraged by too mean an Opinion of
themselves, and so become averse to great undertakings; as we see in Moses his
excusing himself so far, as to his being the deliverer of Gods people, that his
unseasonable Modesty gave offense James iv. 6.
. Exodus v. 13, 14. Bona ingenia debilitat verecundia, perversa confirmat
audacia, Plin. lib. 4. ep. 7.
Therefore, 3dly, Constancy in their Ministration is added, for these Qualities
may meet in the same mind, it being the character of M. Antoninus, that though
he was Modest, yet he was Constant -- Humble, yet not unactive Quamvis esset
constans erat etiam verecundus, Capitolin. p. 160. -- verecundus sine ignavia,
id. page 179.
. Which pattern our Deacon must imitate, he must be humble but not dejected,
lowly minded, yet vigorous and steady in his Duty, bold in reproving Sinners,
constant in praying for, and instructing his people, zealous for God's glory,
active in his care of the poor and needy: But after all ascribing the whole
praise to God for what he is and can do, doing much good, but never boasting of
any, being like the Silkworm (which one ingeniously makes the emblem of a truly
good Man) always working, yet covering it self while it works De verme Serico.
Operitur dum operatur, Novarin. elect. Sacr. l. 1. page 137.
. He knows he serves a good Master, who will one day publish and openly reward
all the services done him in secret Matthew. vi. 2,
, and therefore he seeks not human praise, even while he does deserve it O
virtus vicina Deo nil ducere laudi cum laudanda geras -- de S. Martino, Paulin.
in vit. Bib. patr. p. 583.
. He is diligent in all parts of his Office, strictly conscientious in the
performance of his Duty, but still as humble and modest, as if he were an
unprofitable Servant; thus we pray our Deacon may be internally qualified.

Secondly, We desire God to give them a ready will to observe all Godly
Discipline: As the former respects their inward Disposition, so this their
outward Conversation, which is fully directed in those excellent Canons of our
Church, that contain Rules of Holy Discipline, and diverse of them relate to the
Clergy, especially touching their Obedience to their Superiors, their uniform,
regular and devout performance of all Divine Offices; and also concerning their
sobriety and decency, both in Manners and Apparel Can. 74 and 75. Eccles.
Anglic.
; all which they have lately promised to observe, so that we pray they may
freely and willingly keep this promise in all the particulars, such as being
Loyal to the King, Obedient to the lawful commands of their Ordinary, constant
in reading Prayers and Homilies, or making profitable Sermons, keeping the
Fasts and Festivals of the Church, strictly forbearing those gaities in their
Habit and Freedoms in Conversation, as also those Games and Sports which the
Canons forbid to Clergymen, while they tolerate so much as is innocent in
these matters to the Laity; for it is expected they should be much more
Spiritual and Nice in their Actions than others, and abstain even from all
appearance of Evil; and if they obey not the Rules of the Church, they teach
others not only to disobey their part of the Canons, but to despise themselves,
and trample on all Ecclesiastical Authority: Yea, I fear the common neglect of
this Spiritual Discipline, has increased Schism, and exposed too many of our
Order not only to censure, but sometimes to scandal, and such offenses as grow
upon the stock of taking too much liberty.

That they having always the testimony of a good Conscience, and continuing
ever stable and strong in thy Son Christ.] If they be thus inwardly disposed,
and live so canonically as is above expressed, then they cannot want the
testimony of a good Conscience, and great boldness in the Faith which they have
in our Lord Jesus Christ 1 Timothy iii. 13.
; these two are necessary consequents of the former, and so are linked to them,
and asked as it were together: When they offered themselves to be ordained, a
Testimonial from others was sufficient to satisfy their Ordainer; but after
they are admitted, the Bishop prays they may have (that which was St Paul's
comfort, viz.) the Testimony of their own Consciences 2 Cor. i. 12. (...).
. That is, That their Conscience may bear witness they have conversed with all
Men, especially with their own Flock, in all sorts of Duties, with Simplicity
and godly Sincerity: Conscience is that Faculty by which the Soul sees it self,
and compares its Actions with the Laws of God silently accusing us, if we break
them, and excusing, yea commending us if we have kept them Romans ii. 15.
. So that no Man can have the Testimony of a good Conscience, but he who is in
all things willing to live honestly Hebr. xiii. 18.
. An Hypocrite may by fair shows deceive others into a good Opinion of him,
Alius fortasse alium ipse se nemo deceperit, modo introspiciat vitam seque quid
mereatur interroget, Plin. paneg. p. 65.
but no Man who has examined his Heart and Ways can ever deceive himself Hebr.
xiii. 18.
. We pray therefore, that our Deacon upon trial of his demeanor in his Office,
may not be conscious to himself of any willful Sin of Omission or Commission.
Which if he find, he will have inexpressible comfort in this Testimony of a
good Conscience; and it is a happy thing when after proving his own work he has
his joy in himself, and not in another Galat. vi. 4. Meminimus quanto majori
animo honestatis fructus in conscientia quam in fama reponatur, Plin. l. 1. ep.
8 (...), Democrit. ap. Plat. de prosect. p. 81.
. They who only desire the reputation of being good, but are not so, are in
perpetual fear of discovery and their character changes as peoples minds alter,
but he who is assured by his own Conscience of his sincere endeavors to do his
whole Duty well, has his delights from himself, and can rejoice even when the
World by mistake does censure him: It Is one of St. Paul's qualifications for a
Deacon that he have a pure Conscience 1 Timothy iii. 9.
. And to that this petition alludes, which begs of God, that his dispositions
may be so turned to Piety and Virtue, and his Life so constantly agreeable to
Spiritual Discipline, that his own Heart may not condemn him for any thing, but
give him a good Testimony: And this in the next place will make him continue
steady in his hope, and strong in his Faith, of a glorious reward from his
Master our Lord Jesus Christ; let such as have neglected Christ's Service, or
done it deceitfully, doubt and fear there is no reason for them (when their
Conscience does not clear them,) to hope that their Lord who is greater than
it, and knows all things, will acquit them: It Is only they whose heart
condemns them not, who can have confidence toward God 1 John iii. 20, 21.

Magna est vis Conscientiae in utramque partem, ut neque timeant qui nihil
commiserint, and poenam semper ante Oculos versari putent qui peccaverint.
Cicer. orat. pro Mil.


; and St. Paul has observed, None can draw near to him in full assurance of
Faith, but they whose hearts are sprinkled from an evil Conscience Heb. x. 22.
: To conclude, Others may set out with plausible pretenses and great
expectations, but none will ever continue steadfast and strong in Christ, but
they that have the testimony of a good Conscience; it is that will encourage
them to persevere in well doing, and secure them of an eternal reward, as well
as support them till they do obtain it.

May so well behave themselves in this inferior Office, that they may be found
worthy to be called unto the higher Ministries in thy Church, through the same,
etc.] He that is thus Qualified inwardly and outwardly, being supported by the
testimony of a good Conscience, and encouraged to persevere by a steadfast hope
in Christ, will certainly behave himself very well in this inferior Office,
and act becomingly and agreeably in every part of his Duty; he will be diligent
in his Study, devout in his Prayers, he will Read and Preach to Edification,
and live so as to be an Example to his People, he will instruct with plainness,
reprove with meekness, comfort with tenderness, and succor the Poor with his
own and others Charity; whatsoever things are true and honest, just and pure,
lovely and of good report, virtuous and praiseworthy Philip. iv. 8.
. All this may be expected from such a Deacon, who will be a credit to this
inferior Order, while he remains in it, and deserve (according to God's own
Method) a greater number of Talents for using the first so well Matthew. xxv. 29.

-- Qui dum priora accipit posteriora mereatur. Plin. lib. 2. ep. 24.


. To this degree he was advanced in hopes of his good behavior in it; but when
he has used this Office well, his merit will promote him to the higher
Ministrations of the Church: It is the Policy of all prudent Generals, to
observe in their Camps, who do their Duty best in the place of Common Soldiers,
and these they promote to be first their inferior Officers (as Vegetius has
observed,) and then by degrees these are advanced to greater Commands and
larger Rewards, that the other legionary Soldiers, may with all labor and zeal
strive to become capable of those high Employments -- Gradatim promoti sunt ad
Officia ea quibus magnae utilitates and Honores constitutae sunt, ut caeteri
Milites -- omni labor ac devotione contenderent ad tanta praemta p^rvenire.
Veget. de re mil. lib. 2. cap. 8.
. Which was also Julius Caesar's practice, to take the Centurions who had
behaved themselves valiantly and advance them into higher stations, as a just
reward of their Courage and Conduct Caesar. de Bell. Galic. lib. 6. page 262.
. The like care was also taken by the Emperor Justinian in bestowing Civil
Offices; for he says, We always provide to promote every one according to his
diligence and deserts, to better place and greater dignities Semper providimus
unumquemque secundum labores suos ad meliores gradus and majores dignitates
producere. L. 2. cap. de Praef. praet. Afric.
. And so it ought to be in the Church, the best Laymen should be made Deacons,
and the best Deacons, should be advanced by Degrees to be Priests and Bishops;
for none will adorn those higher Orders, but such as have behaved themselves
well in the Lower; for he that is faithful in little, will be faithful also in
much Luke xvi. 10.
. Thus we have considered these particulars as they are motives to the Bishop
and all the Congregation to make these requests with great devotion for the
newly Ordained Persons; because if they can prevail with God to give them such
Grace, they will prove a credit to their Office, a blessing and an honor to
the Church: But the Deacon himself should consider these Petitions, so as to
excite him to endeavor vigorously to be such as they pray he may be, humble
and modest in his Carriage and Temper, constant and diligent in his
Ministrations, regular and strictly Canonical in his Life; for here are all
sorts of motives laid before him to encourage his resolutions and endeavors
herein; the Spiritual Motives are, the Peace of his own Conscience, the
Confirming of his Hope and Faith in Christ, and the securing his perseverance
as well as his eternal reward; the Temporal Motives are, his being an Ornament
to the Church, an Honor to his Order while he remains of it, and his deserving
justly to be promoted in time to the highest Office in Christ's Church; and St.
Paul has taught us, if we desire the Office of a Bishop only as a greater
opportunity to do more good, it is very lawful: To rise by these means is
commendable, and it is an innocent, yea a laudable ambition, to act well in
this inferior Station, that we may be called to a higher.

Finally, These requests are of so great importance, to the Persons Ordained,
to the People among whom they are to Officiate, and to the whole Church, that
they are asked by the most powerful of all intercessions, through Jesus Christ,
etc. Yea, and it is so likely that he who has called them to this Office, will
qualify them for it, that as if these Petitions were heard already, and sure
of acceptance (if the Persons prayed for put no bar) that we give thanks before
hand, and conclude the Collect with this Doxology, To whom be glory, etc. Amen.

. 5. The Last Prayers and Rubric.]
The Office is closed with a Prayer (which is very proper for such Acts as
these, that are begun, continued and ended in God's Name) and with that
Benediction which belongs to the Communion, that is always celebrated at
Ordinations: but these are both explained before in their proper places. So
that I shall only observe the last Rubric, which admonishes the Deacons to
continue a whole year in this Order, and gives this reason for it, that they
may be perfect and expert in Ecclesiastical Administrations, before they become
Priests; which reason is so evident and convincing, that all Churches have
founded such a like Order upon it: for the Custom has every where been, to
keep the Deacons for some time in that Office, before they go higher. Hence the
Canons here Can. 32. Eccles. Angl.
and elsewhere, strictly forbid the ordaining any one both Priest and Deacon in
one day Council. Romans II. sub Sylvestr. An. 324. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 255. Council.
Trid. Sess. 23. Can. 13. ib. p. 390.
; and a great Council declares, that every Clergyman must stay the time
appointed by Law in each Order, before he be advanced higher Council. 8
Constantin. Can. 17. Bev. T. 1. p. 358.
. Yet in several Ages of the Church the time between these Orders has been
various. Of old it was much longer, for Epiphanius, Bishop of Pavia, was eight
years a Deacon, before he was made Priest In Diaconatu a vigesimo incipiens,
octo annos explevit. Ennod. vita Epiph.
; and we read of others who continued fifteen years in this Order Gregor.
Turon. l. 4. c. 6. p. 128.
. An Ancient Roman Council is said to enjoin a Deacon to stay five years, and a
Priest three before they be removed higher Council. Romans II. sub Syvestr. ut
supr. (c).
. Later Councils agree with us, and fix the time to one year Council. Trid.
Sess. 23. Can. 14. Bin. T. 4. p. 390. Council. Aquil. An. 1596. ibid. p. 580.
. But so as both they and we leave it to the Bishops prudence, who upon
reasonable causes, that is the extraordinary merit of the Person, the evident
profit of the Church, or some urgent necessity, may Ordain some Men sooner.
Though ordinarily it is much better to make them stay the year of probation in
this first Order; and sometimes it is an argument of Men's pride and too much
forwardness to offer themselves sooner. Besides, this keeps up that Apostolical
and Primitive Distinction of the three Orders, which by no means ought to be
broken or confounded; and perhaps it might not be amiss if such as are Ordained
Deacons only to read, and do inferior Offices in Cathedrals, or large
Parishes, were always kept in that Degree, not only to make the difference of
Orders more visible, and to make ours more conformable to the Primitive Church;
but to prevent that scandal, which some of these Men of ordinary Parts and mean
Education, have frequently brought on the Venerable Order of Priesthood. To
conclude, the Office of a Deacon is by no means contemptible, but very
honorable in it self; and those who are of this Order must endeavor so to
live as to raise its reputation, and then they may be very serviceable to the
Church, even in that Station, which is a good step toward an higher Degree,
whereof I am next to treat.

A DISCOURSE ON THE OFFICE For making PRIESTS, Where it differs from the former.
A Preface, concerning the Dignity of this Order.
. 1.
THE Bishops (since the Apostles deaths) being the highest Officers in the
Church of Christ, is a sufficient demonstration of the honor of the
Priesthood, that it approaches so nigh to the Episcopal Dignity, as to cause
diverse of the Holy Fathers to affirm, there is not much difference between a
Presbyter and a Bishop (...), D. Chrysostom. Hom. 11. in 1 Epist. ad Timoth.
. And St. Hierom speaking of their several Administrations, asks what a Bishop
can do, which a Priest cannot? He only excepts Ordination there Quid enim
facit, excepta Ordinatione, Episcopus, quod Presbyter non facit, Hier. ad
Euagr. Ep. 84. p. 512.
, and Confirmation in another place Orthodox. ap. Hieron. Diac. ad v. Lucif. T.
2. p. 187.
. Which are the only eminent Acts that Antiquity did (as we also do)
appropriate to the Bishops. The Schoolmen (to advance the supposed power of
their Priests in consecrating the Sacrament, which they call making the Body
and Blood of Christ) generally hold, that Bishops differ from them only in
Dignity not in Order Sunt and alia quaedam non Ordinum sed dignitatum nomina,
etc. Lomb. 4. Sent. did. 22. c. 10. fol. 186.

D. Thom. in 4 Sent. did. 24. qu. 3. ar. 2. ita Bonavent. ibid. Tostat. in
Matthew. 16. q. 74.


. By which they do not mean with Aerius in Epiphanius, that there is no
difference in degree between them (...), Panar. haer. 75.
, because they freely allow Bishops a Primacy of Dignity among Priests, and a
superiority over them, only they affirm, there is no new formal character
impressed on a Priest, when he is advanced to the Episcopal Chair; and
therefore they call it the Ordination of a Priest, but the Consecration of a
Bishop: But we have proved before, there are three distinct Orders, so that we
think the Schools distinguish two nicely, and must assert the Bishops are a
different Order, but so (as the Fathers teach) that Priests are not much below
them, but joined with them in the Sacerdotal honor Presbyteros cum Episcopo
sacerdotali honor conjunctos, Cypr. ad Luc. ep. 58.
. The Apostle St. Peter writing to those of this Order, calls himself their
Fellow-Presbyter (...), 1 Pet. v. 1.
; from whence the Bishops when they writ to Priests used to give them that very
same Title of Fellow-Presbyter and Brother, even down to the time of St.
Chrysostom, and St. Augustine Fratri and Compresbytero Sixto. Aug. Ep. 104 vid.
Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in Ep. ad Philip.
; yea, in our Ordination Office the Bishop speaking to the Priests, calls them
Brethren, and the College of Presbyters writing to St. Cyprian their Bishop
call him Brother Vid. Cypr. Epist. 26.
. Nor was their Dignity only expressed by Titles of mutual respect, but the
Priests were really the Counselors of their Bishop and Assessors with them, as
St. Ignatius speaks (...). Ignat. Epist. ad Tral.
, another calls the Assembly of Presbyters, the Senate of the Church Habemus in
Ecclesia senatum nostrum coetum Presbyterorum, Hier. in Jesai. c. 3.
; and says, they and the Bishops ought to rule the Church in common In commune
debent Ecclesiam regere, Id. com. ep. ad Tit.
. For which Reason they sat with the Bishops of old in Councils (n), and also
voted with them as is manifest by the Tiles and Subscriptions of very many
Synods; Council. Elliber. in Praefat. and passim.
yea of later times, when Priests grew very numerous, they had their
Procurators or Proxies, even in great Councils, as in that of Lions Matthew. Par.
An. 1215. page 272.
, and so they have still in our Convocations: Within the Church, they sat down
as soon as the Bishop came in, on seats placed round the Altar (...), Council.
Laod. can. 56. Bev. Tom. 1. p. 479. Et Eusebius. l. 10. c. 4.
, and though his Seat was higher in public; yet in private he was commanded to
treat them as his Colleagues Council. 4. Carthag. can. 35. Bin. T. 1. p. 589.
, and when the Bishop sat down, he was not to suffer a Priest to stand beside
him Ibid. can. 34.
, it being esteemed a great crime in any Bishop to despise them Hieron. adv.
Johan. Hierosol. cap. 2.
. For so long as the Bishop and his Presbyters lived together in Cities at or
near the Mother Church, he was obliged to consult them in all weighty affairs,
and always did so, as we find in St. Cyprian; and afterward when Christianity
was settled, and spread into the Country, so that diverse Priests were fixed in
rural cures. The Bishops still kept a College of Presbyters with them at their
Cathedrals, which doubtless was the Original of Deans and Chapters, designed to
be the standing Council of the Bishop: But as to the particulars; of old no
Bishop might ordain any Clerks unless he had the consent of his Presbyters, for
they were to offer and propose to him, such Persons as they judged fit for Holy
Orders; as may be collected from the first Council of Nice, which decreed that
the Presbyters ordained by Meletius, should lose the Privilege of proposing and
presenting the Names of such as they approved of (...), Ep. Syn. Nicaen.
Theodoret. lib. 1. c. 9.
; which supposes, if their Ordination had been good, this would have been their
right: Which is thus affirmed, and described by Theophilus Alex. This shall be
the method of Ordinations, all the College of Priests shall consent and choose,
and then the Bishop shall examine them (...), Theoph. Al. can. 6. Bev. T. 2. p.
172.
. Yea, the 4th Council of Carthage says expressly, That a Bishop without the
Counsel of his own Clergy shall not ordain any Clerk Ut Episcopus sine consilio
clericorum suorum clericos non ordinet, Conc. 4. Carth. can. 22. Bin. T. 1.
page 589:
; and in that Council which was called against St. Chrysostom. He was accused
for making Ordinations without his Clergys consent, which then was esteemed a
great irregularity: So it was secondly, for a Bishop to hear any considerable
Cause without the presence or determine it without the consent of his
Presbyters, Ut Episcopus nullius causam audiat, absque presentia clericorum
suorum, alioqui irrita erit Sententia, Council. 4. Carth. can. 23. Bin. ibid.
. Or if they did, the Sentence they gave was to be void; Yea, the cause of an
offending Bishop according to the old Canons, must be tried before a joint
Commission of Bishops, Priests and Deacons Council. 2. Carthag. can. 10. Bin.
ibid. p. 570.
. So Thirdly, a Bishop could not degrade a Presbyter without the consent of a
Synod Council. Hispal. 2. Can. 6. An. 619. Bin. T. 2. par. 2. p. 334.
, wherein it is known Presbyters were present. The Canon Law allows not a Bishop
to treat any Priest indecently, nor to suspend him without the approbation of
his Chapter -- Vel inhoneste tractare aut sine judicio capituli suspendere,
Alex. 3. in Decret. l. 5. Tit. 31. c. 1.
. And some Parish Priests then had power to suspend, or interdict their
inferior Clerks, and Lay-Parishioners, which Sentence if it were just, the
Bishop was to confirm, and could not relax it, but by the consent of the Priest
that laid it on (s). D^cretal. L. 1. T. 31. de offic. jud. ordin. 1. 3.
I know in later times many of the Privileges belonging to the second Order
have been laid aside, whether to repress the ambition of the Presbyters, who
unjustly aimed at an equality, or out of an affectation of singularity in some
of the superior Degrees, I will not determine: It is sufficient to my purpose
to show the honor of Priesthood, which in the best Ages was thought worthy to
act jointly with Bishops in most Ecclesiastical concerns, and to have the next
degree of Reverence and Authority to them; yet still so as to be inferior and
subordinate to their Bishop: And I look upon it to be equally pernicious to the
Church, for Presbyters to aspire to a parity with Bishops, or for these to
despise the others as unworthy to advise or assist them; For the former
destroys, and the latter very much impairs the good Government of the Church:
The Bishops cannot exercise that Authority which Christ and his Apostles left
them, if Presbyters be their equals, this will make (as St. Hierom speaks,) as
many Schisms as Priests: And they cannot have that useful assistance, toward
the execution of their Episcopal Function, which was designed them when they
exclude so many learned and able Men, as this next Order affords, from their
Counsels and and Administrations, wherefore the Orders must be distinct to
avoid confusion, but provided the Subordination be kept up, due respect should
be shown, to exclude Arbitrary Dominion. And this temper is prescribed by that
often quoted Council of Carthage, which decrees, That the Bishop shall sit
higher in the Assembly of Presbyters in the Church: But within the House he
shall consider them as his Colleagues Ut Episcopus in Ecclesia in confessu
Presbyterorum sublimior sedeat, intravero domum, collegam Presbyterorum se esse
cognoscat, Conc. Carth. 4. can. 35. Bin. T. 1. p. 589.
. So that antiquity required of Presbyters, to express all imaginable Reverence
in public to their Bishop, and remember his Superiority, and of Bishops to
show them in private all possible respect, and treat them with great Civility:
And I could instance in some of our greatest Bishops of this and the last Age,
who by calling some of the most learned, grave and experienced of their Clergy
to consult with in private, about their weightiest Affairs, have done
themselves great Service, and gained a great Reputation from all, as well as a
greater respect from their whole Clergy thereby: To conclude, Humility is the
Duty, the Ornament and Security of both Orders, and that Grace alone will set
all right on both sides, and bring Glory to God and benefit to the Church.

CHAP. I. Of the Epistle.
. 1.
THere is nothing to be remarked on this Office, but where it differs from that
for making Deacons, and the first material difference lies in the proper
Portions of Scripture appointed for the Epistle and Gospel at the Ordination of
a Priest, which have been various in diverse Churches. The ancient Gallican
Offices appoint for the Epistle Titus I. ver. 1. to ver. 7. Mabil. Litur. Gal.
l. 2. p. 171.
. Or (as an old Lectionary has it) to ver. 10. Lectionar. in Append. ad
Capitul. Franc. per Baluz. Tom. 2. p. 1350.
. But since that more properly belongs to the Order of Bishops, our Reformers
chose Ephesians. iv. ver. 7, to ver. 13. (which is also read in the Ordination of a
Priest by the Syrian Maronites Morin. in Ordinat. Syror. p. 408.
; and it is very proper for the occasion, because the Apostle here treats of
the diversity of Gifts and Offices in the Church, and particularly of their
Author, variety and use; which we proceed in our usual method to illustrate.

The Analysis of the Epistle, Ephesians. iv. 7, -- 13.
This Epistle concerns the variety of Ecclesiastical Gifts, showing 1st. The
universality and measure of them, Ver. 7. 2ly. The Author of them, and the time
of giving, Ver. 8, 9, 10. 3ly. The various kinds of them, and different Offices
receiving them, 1. Apostles, Ver. 11. 2. Prophets, Ver. 11. 3. Evangelists,
Ver. 11. 4. Pastors and Teachers, Ver. 11.
4ly. The end of giving them, and their duration. 1. The Churches good in
general, Ver. 12. 2. The perfecting every Christian in particular. Ver. 13.


The Paraphrase of this Epistle.. 2.
Ephesians. 4. ver. 7. Having exhorted you to unity as Members of the same Body, I
fear lest the different kinds and measures of Gifts, which you behold in the
several degrees of Ministers, may break this Union and move some to Pride,
others to envy, and so make dissension among you. Wherefore I will give you a
clear account of this diversity, which does not make you diverse Bodies, but
distinguishes one Body into several Members Non multa sunt corpora, per
varietatem gratiarum, sed membra diversa, Hieron. in loc.
. All Christians have some gifts, but the sort and degree depends on the
free will of the giver (...). Thophil. in loc.
. For [unto every one of us] especially such as are in the ministries of the
Church [is given] some kind of [Grace], some share of these Gifts, but the
proportion is [according to the measure of the gift of Christ], who being the
Donor, and there being no merit in the Receivers, ought to be at liberty to
give more or less as seems fit to him, with respect to the Persons station or
capacity Non quod mensura Christi diversa sit, sed tantum gratiae ejus
infunditur quantum valemus haurire, Hieron. in Jovin. l. 2. T. 2. p. 110.
. So that if you contend about this, you must quarrel with the Bestower, not
the Receivers of these Gifts.

Ver. 8. Now that Christ is the Distributer of these Gifts, may be proved by a
Prophecy of David Psalm. lxviii. 18.
, for he foresaw our Saviors Resurrection and Ascension, long before they came
to pass, [wherefore he saith] by the Spirit, as Princes on the day of their
Triumph are wont to scatter large Donatives among their People; so Christ [when
he ascended up on high] and returned back to Heaven, like a Victorious General,
[he led] in Chains Satan and Death, which had brought mankind into
[captivity]; these being now by him taken [Captive]. He received as a Reward
from his Father a power to distribute variety of the Holy Spirits operations,
[and gave] these different [Gifts] which he had so received Hebr. (...) signif.
Tam accepit, quam dedit, ut Sir. Arab. and Apostolus hic. Vid. Pocock. miscel.
c. 2. p. 24.
[unto men] of all ranks; but especially to those whom he had chosen to serve
in the various Offices of his Church: So that David long since foretold, that
which now you see accomplished.

Ver. 9. No doubt the Psamist foresaw this, and all our Saviors acts. He knew
him to be very God, and that he came originally from Heaven. [Now] when it is
said [that he ascended] to Heaven again [what is it but] a plain indication
[that he also] had [descended first] both [into] the Virgins Womb at his
Incarnation; for man is said to be formed in [ the lower parts of the Earth
Psalm. cxxxix. 15.
]. And (as the Fathers expound it (...). Theophil. Infernum sub terra esse nemo
jam ambigit. Hieron. in loc. ita Pseud-Ambr. ibid.
, in his descent into Hell, which is generally described as being far under the
Earth; whither he went down as a Conqueror into Satan's Empire of Darkness, and
having spoiled Principalities and Powers, openly triumphed over them, and then
ascended with the Keys Coloss. ii. 15. Rev. i. 18.
of Death and Hell both. Which mysteries, no doubt, the Spirit had revealed to
holy David.

Ver. 10. But to return to my Argument, all this was done by Christ alone, [He
that descended] first to Earth, and then into Hell [is the same] Lord Jesus who
[also ascended up] after he had completed our Redemption, to his Kingdom of
Glory, which is [far above all] those visible [Heavens] wherein the Sun, Moon
and Stars are placed. And then he reassumed his original Dignity, and was
replenished with all those gifts and graces that his Church needed, not for his
own sake, but [that he] out of his overflowing fullness [might fill all things]
that were defective (...). Form. Ord. Euchol. p. 292.
in his Church, and especially that he might supply the various Orders of
Ministers therein, with gifts suitable to their several stations.

Ver. 11. From hence it was, that soon after his Ascension there was such a
plentiful effusion of the Spirit, which manifested it self in so great a
variety of Gifts, that one man was fitted for the higher, another for the lower
Ministries of the Church. For [he gave some] proper gifts to be [Apostles] and
his Chief Representatives in planting and governing his Church. He also gave
[some] the gifts of expounding the Prophecies of the Old Testament, and of
foretelling future events, whence they were called [Prophets,] whose principal
work was to convince the Jews. Then for the conversion of the Gentiles, he gave
[some] the gifts of writing the Gospel by inspiration, and Preaching it to
Infidels that never heard of it before, which were styled [Evangelists.] Now
these were Ministers in extraordinary at the first planting of Christianity:
but for ordinary Ministrations that were to continue always in the Church, He
gave [some] proper gifts to rule and preside over the Believers of a larger
Territory, who were Bishops or [Pastors, and] to others under them he gave such
gifts as fitted them to instruct the People in all holy Religion, who were
called Doctors, or [Teachers] and afterward Priests. But Christ as the great
Master of his Household the Church, has appointed these several Offices, and he
alone gives them Qualifications suitable to their proper business.

Ver. 12. So that none ought to envy at any of these Persons, whose gifts are
not derived from themselves, nor designed for their private honor or
advantage, but are given to them, especially to those of the ordinary and
durable Orders [For the perfecting of the Saints] in knowledge and practice of
the higher Mysteries and Duties of Christianity, which is the proper Office of
Bishops, [For the work of the Ministry] in Praying, Preaching and taking Care
of the Poor, which is the business of Priests and Deacons in particular; but
then in general all of them have their Gifts and Offices given and appointed
[For the edifying of] the whole Church, which is [the Body of Christ] and ought
to be continually improved in virtue and knowledge.

Ver. 13. And because there will always be imperfect Christians, therefore
there must always continue in the Church diverse Orders of Minister [till we all
come] by their Doctrine, Discipline and Example to a perfect agreement [in the
unity of the Faith, and] have such large measures [of the knowledge of the Son
of God,] that every one may arrive [unto] the state of [a perfect man], and
being fully illuminated and sanctified, may reach [unto the measure] and
proportion [of the stature] which each Christian is to grow up to, out [of the
fullness of] that grace, that ever flows from [Christ Jesus;] and when his
Church is thus universally filled with his grace, then he will transplant it
into his glory.

CHAP. II. Of the Gospels.
1.
THere are two Gospels chosen for this Occasion, the first is taken out of St.
Matthew. ix. ver. 36, 37, 38. of which I shall only note, that in the Ordinal of
Edward the 6th the Gospel was Matthew. xxviii. 18, etc. See Sparrow 's Collect.
p. 150.
, but that being properly the Mission of the Twelve, as Apostles; it was
thought more proper to remove that to the Office for Bishops, and to read the
Apparatus, to their first solemn Mission as Preachers, related Chap. x. 1, etc.
to which this Gospel is the Preface, and should not be separated from it, as it
was by the division of Chapters in our Bibles; and the suitableness of it to
this Occasion shall now be made evident.

The Analysis of St. Matthew. ix. 36, -- 38.
This Portion of the Gospel declares, 1st. The misery of a People without a
Pastor, Ver. 36. 2ly. The reason why many were needful then, Ver. 37. 3ly. The
method to be taken for a fit supply, Ver. 38.

The Paraphrase of this Gospel.

St. Matthew. ix. 36. OUr Lord came into this World to intstruct first the Jews
in the ways of God, and had preached already to many of them; [But when he saw
the multitudes] that thronged after him, and longed to hear his Heavenly
Doctrine, being more than he alone could teach, [He was moved with] pity, and
had [compassion on them] as a poor desolate People, neglected by the Scribes
and Pharisees, [because they fainted Gr. (...) at Chrysostom. leg^t, (...) Hieron.
item spoliati.
] for want of Sound Doctrine, [and] by reason of the heavy burden of
Superstitions which they laid upon them [were scattered abroad] by ravenous
Wolves, even false Teachers, who drew them into little Sects and Parties, and
so made them as miserable and helpless [as Sheep having no Shepherd] to guard,
unite, or feed them; which are destitute of all good, and exposed to all manner
of evil. Even such a dispersed, straying and miserable Flock were the Jewish
People at that time.

Ver. 37. And when he had resolved in his mind how to help them, [Then says he
to his Disciples,] who were not yet ordained, to assist him in preaching the
Gospel: You see how desirous these People are of Knowledge, how ripe for
Instruction Sat temporis ad messem naturalem, Spiritualis autem jam alba and
parata. Aug. and ex eo Lyra in Johan. iv. 35.
, yet none take care of them. [The Harvest] and success of good Preachers unto
willing minds [truly is] like to be very [plenteous;] many are prepared to hear
and be converted, [But the Labourers] who should gather them into the true
Church, as into the Granary of God [are few.] None but John Baptist and my self
having yet taken any pains this way.

Ver. 38. But it is evident there wants more assistance. Now you know the Master
always appoints his own Workmen, [Pray ye therefore] most earnestly, before I
ordain you, to God, who is [the Lord of the Harvest,] whose own this People
are, who sowed these good desires in their hearts, and who only can send such
as may help them to grow to maturity; beg I say of him [that he will]
commissionate and [send forth] many more diligent, faithful and able [Labourers
into his Harvest] to fit his People by grace for his Kingdom of Glory. It Is God
must qualify Ministers for this Great Work; and therefore I direct you thus to
pray before your Ordination. See Chap. x. 1.

Of the Second Gospel, St. John x. ver. 1, -- 16.. 2.
For variety here is another Portion of St. John's Gospel, being our Savior's
own accurate description of the Duty of a good Shepherd, and the Faults of a
bad one. I find it was anciently appointed to be read at the Consecration of a
Bishop Vid. Lectionar. in Pamel. Liturg. Tom. 2. p. 61. Et Mabil. Litur.
Gallic. l. 2. p. 165.
. But it is also equally proper for the Ordination of a Presbyter, and therefore
our Reformers placed it here See Spar. Coll. p. 165.
. And because it is useful as a constant Monitor to all that are in Holy
Orders, therefore the Gallican Offices direct it to be read (in natale
Episcopi) on the day of a Bishop's Consecration every year. And the principal
of the two ancient Synods (yearly kept up still in the North) is fixed upon
that Week, when this Gospel is read, I am the good Shepherd.

The Analysis of St. John x. ver. 1, -- 16.
This Gospel consists of Three Parts. 1st. A Parable concerning, 1. The
Entrance and Design of a Bad Shepherd. Ver. 1. 2. A Good Shepherd, 1. His right
way of Entering, Ver. 2. 2. His being accepted by the Flock, Ver. 3. 3. His care
of them, and their love to him, Ver. 4. 4 Their aversation to Strangers, Ver. 5.

2ly. The occasion of explaining it, viz. their not understanding it, Ver. 6.
3ly. The explication it self, wherein, 1. Jesus is asserted to be the right
Shepherd, Ver. 7. 2. And proved to be so, by 1. Comparing him with others, Ver.
8. 2. The Happiness of those under his care, Ver. 9. 3. The blessed Design of
his coming, Ver. 10. 4. The Danger he keeps his Flock from, Ver. 11. 5. The
Mischiefs others expose them to, Ver. 12, 13. 6. His Love to the Flock already
gathered, Ver. 14, 15. 7. His Resolution to call in others that as yet were
wandering, Ver. 16.



The Paraphrase of this Gospel.

ST. John x. ver. 1.] I have been telling you that the Scribes and Pharisees
pretended to know much John ix. 39, 40, 41.
, and to be the only illuminated Teachers of this People, who are Gods Flock:
But [verily verily] with great truth, and earnestness I must deny it, for [I
say unto you] if you saw a Man creeping by some secret way into a Sheepfold,
you would not take him for the true Shepherd, for [He that enters not by the
Door] that is by God's Commission [into the Sheepfold] with a lawful call to
undertake this charge, [But climbeth up some other way,] and out of Ambition,
or Avarice takes up this Employment [the same is] either [a Thief,] who comes
secretly Gr. (...). Fur qui occulte, Latro qui manifest spoliat innocents,
Voss. Etymolog.
to seduce some of the Sheep, as false Teachers and Heretics use to do: Or a
violent Man, [and a Robber] who comes like these Scribes and Pharisees, by
Force and Persecution to drive the whole Flock together, out from that Fold
into which God has begun to gather them.

Ver. 2. These therefore are not the true Pastors [But he that enters in by
the Door] that is, comes to this Office by no indirect means, nor on any evil
design, but by a Commission from God, he [is the true Shepherd of the Sheep,]
and you ought to own them as such, who can prove their Mission both by
Scripture and by Miracles.

Ver. 3. To such an one agree all the marks of a good Shepherd, for [to him the
Porter] that is (in ordinary times the Bishop, or Ruler of a settled Church
gives admittance, but in extraordinary times as these are) the Spirit (...),
Theophil.
gives allowance to, and [openeth] to him the meaning of the Scriptures by
Inspiration [and the Sheep] find his explaining of them so clear and so
convincing, that they [hear his voice,] that is believe and obey his Doctrines.
And in requital of this, the good Shepherd takes such peculiar notice of every
one of them, that he knows them particularly [and he called his own Sheep] each
[by name Nomina plurimis sine nomenclatore reddidit, de Adrian. Spartian. in
Vit. p. 90. ita alij de Julio Caesare.
,] as an Evidence that the Lord knows which are his 2 Timothy ii. 19.
. And according to the Custom of the Eastern World, where the Shepherds went
before and led their Flock, (and did not follow and drive them as among us.) So
this good Shepherd goes before his Sheep, by his Example Psalm. lxxvii. 20.
Quid faciunt oves? quocunque pastor eos ducit sequuntur eum, Midras in loc.. 23.
caleth them after him by his word [and leads them out] into the green and
wholesome Pastures of Truth and Holiness, not into the barren precipices of
Error and Impiety.

Ver. 4. It Is easy to discover the true Shepherd, for [when he puts forth
his own Sheep] to feed in the green Pastures of Gods word, besides the Waters
of comfort Psalm. xxiii. 2. (...), Athanas. dial. 2. contr. Maced. Cibus
aeternus non est alius nisi verbum Dei, Caes. Arel. Hom. 20.
, [he goes before them and] practices that which he preaches, which makes
[the Sheep follow him] by imitating his Example, and obeying his Precepts [for
they know his Voice,] and find it very agreeable to the will of God, and so
think they are bound in gratitude to him, for sending them such a Pastor, to
follow him.

Ver. 5. But as for those Pastors who maintain Errors in Opinion, and allow
Practices contrary to God's word, the good Sheep will avoid such. [And a
Stranger will they not follow] being accustomed to see better Examples, and
hear sounder Doctrine. They will not imitate his doings, nor give heed to his
seducing voice [but will flee from him] as a dangerous deceiver, [for they know
not the voice of strangers,] who teach and live contrary to God's word.

Ver. 6. [This parable spoke Jesus unto them] whom he had chosen to be his
Disciples, [but they understood not what] was the full import and meaning of
it, nor did they sufficiently comprehend, what [things they were] that he
designed to inform them of, by these mystical words, [which he spoke unto them.]

Ver. 7. [Then says Jesus to them again,] by way of explication, that they
might not be ignorant of so important a truth, [Verily, verily I say] and
solemnly affirm [unto you] that I am now comparing my self with the late
Teachers of the Jews; and I must tell you [ I am the Door (...). Theoph. in loc.
,] that is the right way for the going in and coming in [of the Sheep] which
belong to my Heavenly Father, to whom I will certainly lead them, by a right
Faith and a holy Life.

Ver. 8. [All that ever came before me] since the true Prophets deceased (...).
Theoph.
, pretending to be Messiahs, as Theudas and Judas of Galilee Act. v. 36, 37.
, and the present Scribes and Pharisees, who without a call from God, have
taken on them to teach this People, [are Thieves and Robbers,] who sought to
destroy the Flock of God; and as to the Goats (the vicious and ill disposed
Capri dicuntur peccatores, quia est animal foetidum and Luxuriosum. Lyra.
(...). Theoph. Ovis apud Aegyptos sig. hominem purum and mansuetum. Pierius.
Hierogl. (...). Vid. Theoph.
), they have made prey of them, [but the Sheep,] such as were innocent and
sincere [did not hear them,] so as to believe their false Doctrines, or to obey
their mistaken and loose Directions; but as you see they now in great
multitudes follow after me, and long to hear me.

Ver. 9. And it is happy for these well-meaning People, that they have
renounced their teaching for mine, because I assure you once more [I am the
Door] and only true way which leads to life and happiness Johan. xiv. 6. Qua
vis ire? ego sum via: Quo vis ire? ego sum veritas: Ubi vis permanere? ego sum
vita. Aug. hom. 34. Vid. Ambr. de Bon. mortis, cap. 12.
. [By me,] and the Faith which I teach, [if any Man enter] into my Heavenly
Fathers Fold [he shall be] eternally [saved] in the next World, [and] while he
lives in this World he [shall go in and out] freely, and with great security,
that no evil shall happen to him (...). Theoph. in loc.
. Besides, his Soul shall be plentifully supplied with my grace, whatever want
of it others sustain (...). Idem.
; he shall always be well fed [and find Pasture] to nourish him, and make him
grow in Wisdom and virtue.

Ver. 10. The difference between me and these false Teachers is easily
discerned; they cannot but know [the Thief comes not] for their good, [but for
to steal] secretly some of them, and carry them to their own Party, [and to
kill] by persecution such as will not yield to their Errors; [and] consequently
[to destroy] the lives of such as they cannot, and the Souls of as many as they
can seduce. But it is equally evident, that [I am come] from Heaven for no other
end than to save them out of these cruel hands, [that they] who will hear and
obey my Voice [might have life] even in this World, [and that they might have
it more abundantly] in the next, where my Sheep shall live for ever and ever.

Ver. 11. [I am] one who may justly claim the Title of [the good Shepherd] from
the mildness, clemency and gentleness of my rule over this Flock; for though
this Name implies Authority Per greges regnum intelligimus, eo quod potestatis
sit gregibus praesidere. Ambr. de Isaac. c. 4.
, yet withal the Pastoral Government denotes care and kindness Superbum nomen
imperii, Pastoris vocabulo mitigat. Hieron. in Ezekiel. 27.24. -- molliorem
regentis affectum significat. Hilar. in Psalm. 2. -- (...). Gloss. Graec.
; So that he that is truly [the good Shepherd] is so far from destroying his
Flock, that if they be in danger, he not only exposes himself freely, but
[giveth his life for] saving [the Sheep.] And this Character I intend to make
good, for I will sacrifice my life to save my Flock from the malice of Satan
and his Instruments, and from the wrath of God.

Ver. 12. And herein I manifest my self to be the true Master of my Sheep; for
they in the first Ages, trusted not their Flocks to hired Servants, but were
wont to feed them themselves Antiqui Progenitores nostri pecora pascebant.
Joseph. in Ap. l. 1.
, and then if any danger approached, they were ready to defend them as their
own 1 Samuel xvii. 34, 35, 36. Genesis xxxi. 38, 39, 40.
. [But he that is an Hireling, and not the Shepherd;] no Master but a mercenary
Slave, [whose own the Sheep are not] he can have no true love or concern for
the Flock, and only aims at getting his Wages (...). Theoph.
: Wherefore when he [seeth the Wolf coming] he shifteth for himself [and
leaves the Sheep] to be devoured, while he runs away [and fleeth] as hired
Soldiers often do in a battle 2 Samuel x. ver. 10. cum. 13.

-- Fugiunt: ut quibus temere collectis, neque in victoria decus esset, neque
in fuga flagitium. Tacit. Hist. l. 2.


. [And] so without any opposition [the Wolf catcheth] some of [them, and
scattereth] all the rest of [the Sheep,] which will be the fate of as many Jews
as follow these false Teachers, who mind only their own gain and safety, but
will destroy at last, those they pretend to guard and feed.

Ver. 13. But those that are under my Care, no danger shall make me desert
them. It Is [the Hireling fleeth] to secure himself when any great evil
threatens his Flock: and this First, [because he is an Hireling] and so only
minds his Wages. Secondly, Because he only loves himself [and cares not for
the Flock;] he has no great concern for them, because he has no interest in
them.

Ver. 14. There can be no mutual endearments between a Flock and a hired
Servant, who feeds them only for his Wages, but [I am the good Shepherd] who
take such notice of those Sheep, over which my Father has set me, that I can
count them every one [and know my Sheep] and what each particular wants
Cognoscere pro curare and probare, Psalm. i. 6. and cxliv. 3. Matthew. vii. 23.
Drus.
. Nor are they ungrateful for my Affection and Care; for I first take notice
of, and love my Flock (...). Theoph.
, [And] then [I am known,] respected and beloved [of mine] own Sheep, who
renounce and despise all other Shepherds in comparison of me.

Ver. 15. This People of Israel are my Fathers peculiar Flock Psalm. c. 3.
, and therefore [As the Father knows me] and my great affection for them, he
has set me over them, [even so] full well [know I the Father] and his tender
regard for them Cognoscere pro diligere -- i. e. -- ea charitate qua pro ovibus
morior, quantum Patrem diligo ostendo. Greg. hom. 14.
. It is to please him that I now take such pains with them, such care of them.
[And I] am ready upon the same account to [lay down my Life for] the salvation
of the Jews, who are [the Sheep] of my Heavenly Father's Pasture.

Ver. 16. But the merit of that Death of mine shall reach further than the
Jewish Nation; my Father calls them his Flock. [And other Sheep I have]
resolved thereby to redeem, [which are not] as yet gathered in, and become
Members [of this Fold] (...). Theoph.
, even the poor Gentiles who are at present under Sathan's power, [them also I
must bring] out of that lost and deplorable condition wherein they lie; I will
call them by Preaching [and they shall hear my Voice,] so as to be converted
and live. After which I will take away that odious distinction between Jews and
Gentiles Coloss. iii. 11.
; [and there shall be] but only [one Fold,] even the Christian Church, [and one
Shepherd,] that is, my self, who will be the Supreme Head and Governor thereof.

CHAP. III. Of the Exhortation.
. 1.
THe next observable difference, is the peculiar admonition, which the Bishop
gives to all that enter into Priests Orders; that before they take this weighty
Charge upon them, they may be made duly sensible both of the Dignity and the
Duties of their Office, which are so necessary to be considered just now, that
other Churches have such a discourse Vid. Pontif. Roman. p. 41. in Ord. Presb.
, though in some it be less properly deferred till after Ordination Alia
formul. p. 55. Et Copthar. Ordin. ap. Morin. p. 507. item Lutheran. formul.
Lips. 1624.
But this is the fittest place for these Considerations, and ours the best, the
fullest and most accurate Form now extant, as will appear by the following
Analysis and Discourse.

The Analysis of this Exhortation.
The Exhortation contains Three Principal Parts 1st. An Introduction referring
to what they have heard. You have heard, Brethren, as well in, etc.
2ly. The particular Advice now given them, viz. 1. To consider very seriously
before hand, 1. The Dignity of their Office. We exhort you in the name of, etc.
2. The weight of their charge on the account of 1. The variety of their duty.
to teach and to premonish, etc.
2. The greatness of their trust. Have always therefore printed, etc.
3. The danger of their neglect. And if it shall happen the same Church, etc.


2. To act afterward with great, 1. Diligence to promote the good of their
People. And see that you never cease your labor, etc.
2. Gratitude to God who has called them to this Office. as well that ye may
show your selves, etc.
3. Caution toward Men, least they give any Offense. as also to beware that
neither you your selves, etc.

3. To use the most proper means for enabling them to do their Duty. 1. Prayer
for the aid of the Spirit of God. Therefore ye ought, and have need to pray,
etc.
2. Studying the Books of Holy Scripture. And seeing that you cannot by any
other, etc.
3. Leading a good Life. and in framing the manners, etc.
4. Avoiding secular Cares. And for this self same cause, etc.


3ly. A Conclusion of the whole. 1. Expressing the Bishop's hope, that they
have 1. well considered of their undertaking. We have good hope that you have
well, etc.
2. Firmly resolved both 1. To do those Duties. and that you have clearly
determined, etc.
2. To use these means. and that you will continually pray, etc.


2. Requiring from them a solemn Promise as to all the particulars. And now
that this present Congregation, (...)



A Discourse upon the Exhortation.. 2.
This necessary, pious, and comprehensive admonition is very properly
introduced by putting the Candidates in mind, as well of that which was said to
them when they were privately examined, (for it supposes, that the Archdeacons
gave them a Charge then,) as of that which has been just now read to them, out
of the Gospel and Epistle concerning the Dignity and Importance of this Office
whereunto they are called: Yet lest they should forget the private instructions
formerly given them, or not readily infer these things from the portions of
Scripture now read, The Bishop does once more exhort them in the name of Jesus
Christ (his and their Great Master) to remember how High their Station, and how
Weighty their Charge is. And first he declares the Dignity of their Office by
those various Titles given to those invested with it in Holy Scripture, and
then shows the various Duties which every one of these Names imports. The
Titles are, Messengers, Watchmen and Stewards of the Lord: The Duties, as
Messengers to teach, as Watchmen to forewarn or premonish, and as Stewards to
feed and provide for the Lord's Family. First, The Prophets (in the Old
Testament) and the Priests are styled the Messengers of the Lord of Hosts Isai.
xliv. 26. Hag. i. 13. Mal. ii. 7. See Mark i. 2.
. And to show they are no ordinary Messengers, they are in the New Testament,
called The Apostles of the Churches, i. e. sent by Christ to the Churches, with
his Authority to teach and instruct them Philip. ii. 25. and 2 Cor. viii. 23.
Ita Chrysostom. explic. (...). in loc. Philip.
, and therefore they are also called the glory of Christ, that is, such as
represent his Person, and show the glory of their Mighty Lord; even as
Ambassadors do wear the Character, and set out the Splendour of the Princes who
send them; and they are expressly named Ambassadors for Christ 2 Cor. v. 20.
. To whom all Nations did ever pay the greatest respect, even as to their
Masters Oratorem audire oportere jus gentium est, Donat. ad Prolog. Hecyr.
Sancti habentur legati, Pompon. L. Si quis D. de legate. Sanctum populis per
saecula nomen. Papin. Stat.
. So that they have the highest of all Offices in God's House; the most
honorable of all Employments, being sent to represent Christ Jesus, and to
declare his Will as his immediate Ambassadors, and his constant Envoys resident
among us here upon Earth to transact his Affairs among the Sons of Men, while
the Angels of Heaven (as their Name also imports) are his Messengers only in
extraordinary; yea, some think, that Angel in Judges Judge. ii. 1. Heb. Venit
Angelus, C. P. Jon. Et ascendit Propheta in legatione a coram Domino.
was a Prophet: and those Angels in the Christian Assemblies before whom the
Women were to be veiled 1 Cor. xi. 10. Sacerdotes and Ministros altaris
intellige. Primas. in loc. ita Ambros. and Eucher.
were the Clergy: who may properly enough wear the name of Angels, having an
Office so near unto, and like that of those blessed Spirits. Secondly, They
have the Title of Watchmen, which is an Office of very great trust, and the
Prophets are so called in a spiritual sense Ezekiel. iii. 17. and Chap. xxxiii. 2,
3, etc.
, for as the King trusts the care of his Soldiers or Citizens lives to the
Watchman's care, that if any danger approach, or Enemy draw nigh, while they
are asleep, the Watchman may give the alarm, and put them all upon their guard.
So our Lord Jesus has set his Ministers to watch over his Peoples Souls Heb.
xiii. 17. Graec. (...), etc.
, and will expect an account from them if any Perish by their wilful neglect.
For they are to warn the wicked of the danger of God's wrath if they do not
amend, to discover to the righteous where Satan has laid Snares for them, to
keep them from falling into his temptations; yea, the Watchman is called by
Isaiah, God's Remembrancer Isai. lxii. 2. Hebr. -- Posui Vigiles -- Qui estis
Domino a memoriis. Ita legit Gatak.
, that is One, who is (by his Prayers) to call in the aid of Heaven, and by
minding God of his gracious promises to help his People in their distress, to
procure them such succors as they need. So that without a Watchman the People
are never safe Semnosque non defendit excubitor meos. Sen. Thyest.
. No Officer is so absolutely necessary to the safety of a City, as he Psalm.
cxxvii. 1.
, who under God, is the principal security thereof. And doubtless the Spiritual
Watchman is as necessary and useful in the Church; and if he do his duty well,
his care, foresight and early warnings are the great security of his Peoples
Souls, who ought, as St. Paul has noted, to obey his Summons, and submit to
his Directions, whom God has so graciously appointed both to rule and watch
over their Souls. Thirdly, They are called Stewards of God, and of his
Mysteries Titus i. 7. and 1 Cor. iv. 1. (...).
. Which was anciently the highest domestic Office, and he who had this place
was a Superior over all the rest of the Servants, and Governor of the whole
Household Steward ab Anglo-Sax. Steda locus and ward custos, Locum tenens vice
Magistri. In Imper. Oriental. dicitur (...). Gallis Major Domo.
: Yea, the Masters Vicegerent. Our Savior describes both the Dignity and Duty
of such an one, viz. He whom his Lord makes to be the Ruler over his Household,
to give them their portion of meat in due season Luke xii. 42. Vid. Isai.
xxxvi. 22.
. Such was Eleazar in Abraham's Family, who is called the Governor over his
House, and the Feeder of his Household Genesis xv. 2. Gubernator Domus meae.
Chalil. and Verse. Arab. (...). Aquila, ibid.
; yea, the Ruler over all that he had Genesis xxiv. 2.
. To this high Dignity, to this great Trust are these Candidates now to be
admitted by Christ in his Family, for which (in his proper Cure) he is to
provide Spiritual Food for the nourishment of their Souls; he is to Feed them
with the Word and Sacraments, to direct all his Fellow Servants in their
several Duties, to see they do their business well, to comfort and encourage
the Diligent and Laborious, and to reprove the Dissolute and the Slothful:
Finally, As in the preceding Gospel, and elsewhere Ezekiel. xxxiv. 2.
they are compared to Shepherds; the Bishop tells them it is their duty, not
only to look to the orderly part of Christ's Flock that are within the Fold;
but if any (who by their outward profession did once belong to it) are now
strayed out of it by Heresy or Schism, or are led away by the evil examples of
this naughty World (as some even of God's Children may be, for a time (...).
Dictum S. Matthiae apud Clem. Al. Strom. 7.
;) these they must seek out, and labor to reduce to Christ's Church, by
convincing them of their Errors, and converting them from their Sins; that they
also may through Christ be eternally saved. Now this is indeed a very
honorable station, but withal a very difficult one, to instruct and warn,
preside over, and feed all regular Christians; to search after and bring home
all the irregular: this (as St. Chrysostom expresses it) is a burden too great
for an Angels shoulders, and they who undertake it may cry out in St. Paul's
words, Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. iii. 16.

And the weight of this Charge will still be more apparent if it be further
considered, of how great importance the affairs, and of how infinite value the
things committed to their care are. It Is not the affairs of one earthly
Kingdom, the safety of a fenced City, or the money and goods of one great Man;
but the concern of the King of Kings, the security of Christ's Church, and the
Souls, the Immortal Souls of Men, that are entrusted to their care. Thousands
of Gold and Silver cannot buy one Soul Psalm. xlix. 8. 1 Pet. i. 18.
; the precious Blood of Christ was the only thing in the World that could
purchase them: And of these Souls his Church is composed; which is his Body and
his Spouse Ephesians. v. 25, 26, etc.
; so dear to him, that he loves it as himself, yea better than his own life,
for he gave himself up to die for it; yet this Church and these Souls that are
a sort of Divine Beings lodged in Humane Bodies Quid aliud voces animam, quam
Deum in humano corpore hospitantem. Sen. ep. 31.
; and all that relates to their Salvation, the Blessed Jesus is now about to
commit, to the care of those, who are about to be Ordained: And if this be
always printed in their remembrance, doubtless they will be faithful and very
diligent to answer this mighty trust reposed in them by the Lord of Glory. For
his and their peoples sakes they should manage it with their utmost skill and
industry, for his Favor and their Peoples eternal Welfare or Misery entirely
depends upon it. But if this will not sufficiently work upon them, the Bishop
charges them to be good Stewards for their own sakes, because, as Humane
Masters do strictly call their Principal Servants to account, for all things
under their charge, and make them answer or suffer for all that is lost by
their default: So these Spiritual Stewards may be well assured, that their
Heavenly and All-seeing Lord (the Judge of all Men) will certainly reckon with
them for all that he has entrusted them with. So that if the Church in
general, or any Member of it in particular be damnified by their Folly, Fraud,
or Negligence; as the Sin is great to be false or negligent in such a Trust, so
the punishment shall be very great also. He has often declared, that their
Souls shall be condemned, and suffer for all those poor Souls, that perish, and
are lost by their wilful neglect. It was usual of old for a General to deliver
a choice Prisoner to a Soldier who was to keep him at the peril of his life,
which was forfeited if his Prisoner escaped 1 Kings xx. 39. Act. xii. 19.
, and God delivers up his own whom he has rescued from Satan, to the custody
of his Ministers with the same caution, having declared under the Metaphor of a
Watchman, that if any perish for want of due warning he will require their
Blood at the Watch-mans hand Ezekiel. iii. 18. and chap. xxxiii. 8.
; that is, he who wilfully loses another Soul, must satisfy God's justice by
the loss of his own: Which is so terrible, yet withal so seasonable a
consideration, That in the old Gallican forms of Ordination one part of a
Prayer is, That he may tremble for all the people committed to his care,
remembering that all their Souls are to be required at the Watchmans hand Orat.
in Ordina^. Episc. Lit. Gall. ap. Mabillon. p. 309.
. Plutarch relates, That Epaminondas killed a Sentinel with his own hand, whom
he found asleep, because he had hazarded the loss of his whole Army; and even
at this day the discipline of Camps condemns those that are set on the Watch,
if an Enemy approach on that side, and they give no warning. But if Ministers
do warn their people of the danger of Heresy or Schism, and of such Vices, as
they perceive they are most likely to be drawn into, and they disregard or
despise the notice, and will go on to Ruin; then they are Felones de se, they
are guilty of their own Destruction, the Priest is clear of blame, and shall
not suffer for their faults Ez. xxxiii. 3, 4. Nec populus debet sacerdotis
culpae deputare, sed suae, cum sacerdos nec orando, proficit nec loquendo,
Agobard. de jur. and priv. sacerd. p. 126.
. So that this account of his undertaking, need not discourage him from the
Office, but only should make him resolve to be diligent in it, because nothing
can hurt him but his own neglect: And thus the Bishop goes on to apply it;
charging them never to cease their Labor, but with their utmost care and
diligence to do all that in them lies, according to their Duty, to bring all
they have under their charge, to such unity in the Faith, and such perfection
in their knowledge of God, and to that measure of the Stature of Christ, that
there may neither Error nor Vice be found among them: Which exhortation is
grounded on that account which St. Paul gives of himself, and the discharge of
his Ministry in Asia: How that he for three years space had not ceased night
nor day to warn every one with tears Acts xx. 31.
. It Is a charge like that which the same Apostle gave to Timothy (when he had
ordained him) saying with more than ordinary zeal, I charge thee before God and
the Lord Jesus Christ (before whose Tribunal thou must give an account) to
Preach the word, to be instant in season and out of season, (that is in public
and in private) to reprove, rebuke and exhort, with all long suffering and
Doctrine 2 Timothy iv. 1, 2. (...). Theophil.

Ita D. Paul. Act. 20. v 20 (...).


, a dreadful place (says St. Chrysostom) for those who Preach not at all
(...), D. Chrysostom. in loc.
, and (I may add) for such as never speak to their people but from the Pulpit;
for Ministers ought not only to instruct, exhort and reprove in general, but to
apply themselves also in private, to the Ignorant and Erroneous, to such as are
negligent in good, and bold in evil works, for those instructions, exhortations
and reproofs are taken most kindly, and are most likely to operate, because
they are so peculiarly suited to that particular Man's case: In a word, let every
one who enters upon this Office, consider the end of his Ministry, as St. Paul
describes it, in the Epistle before Ephesians. iv. 12, 13. See the Explic. chap.
1.. 1.
, viz. To convince all the Erroneous, convert all the Vicious, and inform all
the Ignorant, till they have made them all perfect in Knowledge and Virtue,
through Christ Jesus: Wherefore this is the mark he must aim at, this is the
work he must continually carry on, if he would both save himself and those that
hear him 1 Timothy iv. 16. Aliorum salutem fac lucrum animae tuae, Hieron. Ep. 13.
Vide Philip. 1.19.
. It Is true, it requires much Learning and Judgment, and more Pains and
Watchfulness to do this well, but since it will in all probability tend to the
Salvation of many of them, and certainly end in the saving his own Soul; every
Minister should cheerfully set about this noble design, firmly resolve to carry
it on, and patiently endure all the difficulties thereof; and to excite him
thereto, the Bishop proposes two motives, to engage the Candidate to apply
himself with the greatest care and study, to the rightly discharging this
excellent and difficult Office (...), Arist. Eth. lib. 2. c. 3.
. The first with respect to God; that is, out of Duty and Gratitude to him, who
has placed them in so high a Dignity in his Family: As they have many
Privileges above others, so they have also greater Obligations, the trust which
God reposes in them, and the honor he confers upon them, binds them to more
than ordinary diligence, and it is required in Stewards that a Man be found
faithful 1 Cor. iv. 1, 2.
. Such Officers are accountable not only for their own, but their
fellow servants faults, if their negligence, or connivance occasion them, and
therefore their personal innocence is no security Quid proderit non puniri suo,
qui puniendus est alieno peccato? Prosper de Vit. Contem pl. l. 1. c. 20.
, with respect to their account with God: And 2ly, The same care is to be taken
with respect to Men; the Laity have but a single point to manage, viz. to take
care they do not offend God themselves, whereas a Minister must not only avoid
that which is evil in it self, but also fly from the appearance of it, and
every thing which may occasion his people to offend 1 Thessal. v. 22. Romans xiv.
21. and 1. Ep. Corinth. viii. 13.
. So that there are several innocent Words and Actions, which yet may be apt to
be misconstrued, that a Clergyman must abstain from, least others taking the
same liberty, and wanting the like discretion, may stumble at the Stone, which
the other stepped over without hurt: So that his duty is nice, and requires much
Prudence as well as Virtue, for he must be Virtuous for his own sake, and
unsuspected of Vice, for the sake of others Conversatio and casta and cauta
sit, ne forte cum mala vita non sit per lasciviam, mala sit fam^ per
negligentiam, Julian. de bon. vit. c. 22. -- Quod non sit ne videarecave. Ovid.
Tr. l. 5. El. 11.
. Some company he may not keep, some places he must shun, some exercises he
ought to forbear, least he give offense to weak, but well-meaning people, or
offer occasion to the wicked, to speak evil of his sacred Profession: Now to
take all the pains before spoken of with others, and keep so strict a guard
constantly over a Man's self, is so difficult an undertaking, that none can
naturally, or of themselves have a mind, or inclination to it; Nature delights
in ease and freedom, and would discourage Men from so laborious and strict a
course of life; wherefore, since it appears these Candidates are willing to
engage themselves to it, we conclude this will is given them by God alone, and
he only can make them able to perform, what his grace has moved them to
undertake.

. 3.
Upon which consideration, that God who directed their choice, can only furnish
them with abilities to discharge so great a Trust, the Bishop in the next place
shows them, the means to fit them for this high Employment. The first of which
is constant and earnest Prayer to God for his Holy Spirit, of which they need a
double Portion, both to direct their own lives, and to qualify them to be
guides to many others, without this they can do no part of their duty; they are
to pray with the Spirit, and with it also to praise God 1 Cor. xiv. 15.
; the Spirit must help them to intercede for others effectually Romans viii. 26,
27. Sacerdos abs te avertere iram Dei nititur, pro te Domini misericordiam
deprecatur, Cypr. de laps.
. For they are to be common intercessors for all mankind, especially for their
own people. The Spirit must open the meaning of those Divine Writings, which
himself indicted, to him that would teach others; and finally the same Spirit
must prosper his Preaching and make it effectual, so as to produce in his
Hearers all sorts of Virtue, which are therefore called the Fruits of the
Spirit Gal. v. 22.
; in a word, a Minister ought to be a Spiritual Man Chap. vi. 1.
, (as St. Paul calls those of this Profession) that is to have a large measure
of the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, wherefore he ought daily and fervently
to pray for its assistance, which upon so many accounts he continually needs. A
second means to fit a Minister for this weighty charge is, to be very studious
in reading the Holy Scriptures, and very inquisitive to learn the meaning of
them, which is properly added to the former advice of praying for the Spirit,
least the Candidates should think, (with those who called themselves gifted
Men, in those times of Hypocrisy, when we had neither King nor Bishop) their
having the Spirit, would make Learning, Study and Reading unnecessary, whereas
we find even when Prophets were inspired, yet they were kept to Study in
Colleges 1 Samuel xix. 20. 2 Kings xiv. 38.
, and though Timothy certainly had extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost (far
above those pretenders;) yet St. Paul charges him, to give attendance to
reading 1 Timothy iv. 13, 14.
, which he calls kindling or stirring up the Gifts that were in him 2 Timothy i.
6. Gr. (...).
, a Metaphor taken from the Priests in the Temple, who laid on Wood and blew up
even that sacred Fire of the Temple, which at first came down from Heaven: But
now this is more necessary, since those miraculous gifts are ceased, and no Man
has any thing beyond the ordinary assistance of the Holy Ghost, to bless his
Studies and Labors: Now there is no way to understand the Scriptures, but by
skill in the original Tongues, consulting Fathers and Commentators, and
comparing one part of the Bible with another: Yet unless we do understand them,
we cannot do our Office well, for all our Doctrines and Exhortations must be
taken out from thence, we must instruct the Ignorant, confirm the Faithful,
convince Gainsayers, comfort the Sad, strengthen the Weak, exhort the
Negligent, and reprove Sinners with Divine sentences duly applied, and
carefully gathered from God's word, which gives Authority to all our
Discourses: This therefore must be constantly studied and well understood by
every Minister. And thirdy, It is necessary he should lead his life agreeable
to the same, and form the manners of his Family by that most perfect Rule,
because when he practices all the Duties, and avoids all the Sins himself --
Ipsa obmutescit facundia si aegra est conscientia, Ambr. in Psalm. 118.43.
, which he recommends or forbids to his people, his Example will give life and
energy to all his exhortations and reproofs, and neither his neighbors nor yet
his own Conscience can object any thing to them; whereas if he be known often
to neglect that which is good, or do that which is evil, his own Heart will
condemn him, and his people despise both his Counsel and his Rebukes: But of
this before Chap. 3. Qu. iv. The fourth and last means to fit them for this
sacred Office is, to forsake and lay aside (as much as is possible) all worldly
cares, and secular business, both because they have work enough in their
Spiritual Employment to take up all their time, thoughts and care; and because
their work is so far distant from, and so wholly unlike to the common affairs
of the World, that they cannot serve two such contrary Masters as God and
Mammon Matthew. vi. 24.
. Hence Synesius a Primitive Bishop Synes. Epist. 57. p. 198 and 199.
, often declares against being made a Judge, and says he could not manage both
secular and sacred matters; yea, if he were at any time entangled in worldly
business, he found himself unfit for Divine Administrations a long time after:
The Roman Laws did not allow a Soldier, to follow Suits at Law, or solicit any
affairs at the Court, or exercise any sort of Merchandice, as St. Ambrose has
observed Is qui imperatori militat a susceptionibus litium, actu negotiorum
forensium, venditione mercium prohibetur humanis legibus. Ambr. de Off. l. 1.
Vid. L. Milites 15. C. de re militari.
, believing this would hinder his Military duty, and when St. Paul alludes to
this, and says, No Man that warreth intangleth himself, with the affairs of
this life, that he may please him, that has chosen him to be a Soldier, 2 Timothy ii. 4. He evidently applies it to the Clergy, and intimates they cannot
please their Master Jesus Christ, whose spiritual Soldiers they are, ver. 3.
unless they renounce secular affairs: Upon which Text our Canon is grounded,
which forbids the Clergy to use any base or sordid labor Anglic. Eccles. can.
75.
. And to this agree innumerable Canons of the ancient Church: The Apostolical
Canons order those Clergymen (of what rank-soever) to be deposed, who take up
secular concerns (...), Apost. Can. 6. Bev. T. 1. p. 4.
. A Council of Bishops before St. Cyprian's time forbid them to be Tutors or
Executors Cypr. Ep. 66. p. 195.
. And the like was prohibited to all sorts of Clergymen, by the Fourth General
Council Council. Chalced. can. 3. Bev. T. 1. p. 113.
, and two more of the Apostolical Canons exclude them from being obliged to
serve in any Offices, Military or Civil Apostol. Can. 81. and 83. Bev. ib. p.
53. and 54.
, and by the ancient Ecclesiastical Laws of our old Saxon Church, a Clergyman
is not allowed to be a Merchant, a Soldier, nor a Lawyer Aelfric. Can. 30. ap.
Spelm. Council. T. 1. p. 579.
. Finally there is scarce any thing so often forbid, both by the Canons of the
Church Council. Elib. can. 19. Bin. T. 1. p. 194. Council. Carthag. 1. can. 6.
and 9. Council. ibid. 3. can. 15. and Arel. 2. can. 14.
, and also by the Civil Law Capitul. Reg. Fanc. lib. 1. c. 22. lib. 2. c. 37.
lib. 5. c. 107. item Justin. Novel. 123. c. 6.
, as the Clergies taking up secular Offices and Professions, or being too
deeply engaged in worldly business: Which seems to be one main Reason, why God
at first ordered and the Church afterward continued Tithes for their
maintenance, that others might Plow, Sow and Reap; yea, and breed Cattle for
them, to give them time and leisure for Study, and performing Divine
Administrations: Now where by the alienation of this proper Provision, or other
evil means, the Clergies poverty forces them to labor, or mind secular affairs
for Bread; they are to be pitied and excused, and the fault is in the State,
which does not provide better for them. But those who are well provided for,
and can live without intangling themselves in worldly cares, yet will follow
secular business, so as to hinder them from Reading, Praying for, and watching
over their Flock, these are really blameworthy: The spiritual duty of a
Clergyman, if it be well done, is enough to take up one Man's whole time and
thoughts, nor will any thing but necessity, excuse his spending his hours and
care in temporal affairs. This Exhortation, though it have been long, yet is of
so great importance, and so necessary to be always fixed in their minds, who
are now called to the sacerdotal Dignity, that the Bishop makes a brief
recapitulation of the whole discourse, charitably hoping they have thoroughly
weighed these things in private, long before they came to be ordained: And
resolved (according to St. Paul's advice to Timothy) To give themselves wholly
to perform this Office well 1 Timothy iv. 15. (...).
; and that forsaking all other unnecessary cares, they will turn all their
Thoughts and Studies to a right discharge of this Holy Function: He hopes
further, that (because Prayer and Reading are the proper means to fit them for
their Ministry, and make them improve and still grow better able to undergo it)
they will continually pray to God through Jesus Christ, for the assistance of
his Holy Spirit, and daily read the Holy Scriptures, both in public and
private; and thus they will increase in Grace, and in all Divine Knowledge, and
(as St. Paul speaks) become thoroughly furnished for every good work 2 Timothy iii.
17.
; this is the way to fit them in all Points, and make them accomplished and
able Ministers of the Gospel, especially if they take care to practice as well
as to understand the Rules of God's word, and make themselves and their
families Examples and Patterns of Godliness and Virtue. All this is the Priests
Duty, and as the Bishop's charity moves him to hope, concerning every one of
them, that he will do all this: So his Office binds him to require them. (as
St. Paul did Timothy, at his Ordination) to make this good Profession before
many Witnesses 1 Timothy vi. 12.
; That is, he now proceeds to oblige them, by a solemn Promise, to engage they
will most faithfully perform every particular Branch of these Duties; and since
the Bishop stands in God's stead, and every one of the Congregation is witness
to what is said; this Declaration is as sacred as an Oath; such a Promise binds
as strongly as any Vow; if they do not now intend what they engage, they lie
not to Men but to God; and if they be negligent to keep their words afterward,
it is equal to Perjury. Both God and as many as are Spectators at this
Ordination may condemn them out of their own Mouths: Their words will be
Witnesses against them, if they do not make them good, in this World to their
Shame, and in the next World to their Condemnation: Therefore, it is highly
necessary for every Candidate to consider these things very well, before he
promise them, and to endeavor to perform them all the days of his life.

CHAP. IV. Of the Questions peculiar to this Office.
. 1.
Quest. II. WHat has been said on the Questions at the Ordination of a Deacon
will suffice to be observed as to most of these, only where the Questions are
altered, and appropriated to the Order of Priests; we will explain them here.
The Second Question does materially differ, for a Deacons principal Duty being
only to read the Scriptures, it was enough for him to declare before God and
the Congregation, that he believed all the Canonical Books were divinely
inspired: But a Priest must further, First, Declare his Faith, That the Holy
Scripture contains all Doctrines that are necessary to be believed, and is
sufficient, through Faith, for our eternal Salvation. Secondly, He must publish
his resolution, to take all his Doctrines from thence, and promise never to
teach any thing, as of necessity to Salvation, that cannot be proved thereby.
For his Office is to preach all saving Truths, and teach his People all those
Duties that are requisite to bring them to Eternal Life. Nor is there any need
for the Candidate to hesitate at, or doubt of the Declaration or the Promise.
For, 1st. The thing declared is certainly true, the Infallible Word of God does
assure him, that Holy Scripture is able (without the help of Tradition, or New
Revelations) to make us wise to Salvation through faith in Christ Jesus 2 Timothy
iii. 15.
; that there is enough written in it, to make us capable of Eternal Life,
through believing Joh. xx. 30, 31.
; and that being received with meekness (and a due submission to its Doctrines
and Precepts) it is able to save our Souls James i. 21.
; Finally, That it is so perfect a Rule, That nothing can be added to it, or
taken from it Deuteronomy. iv. 2. Rev. xxii. 18.
. Wherefore unless we can be so impious to imagine, that the God of Truth
designed to deceive us; we must give credit to his Character of Holy Scripture,
and believe it contains all necessary Truths. And this was the constant opinion
of the Catholic Church in all Ages, as I have proved elsewhere. I will only
note here, that the Fathers declared Nothing was fundamental in Religion, which
was not attested by God's word Nullum fundamentum aut firmitatem possunt
habere, quae nullis divinarum vocum fulciuntur oraculis. Lact. l. 7. c. 2.
: and that a complete Systeme of Divine Mysteries was only to be drawn from
this Fountain Universa divinarum rerum Mysteria non nisi ex ipsis fontibus
hauriri queant. Sulp. Sever. Hist. Sacr. l. 1.
. Yea, this of old was the Doctrine of the Roman Church; for Pope Celestine's
Letter to Nestorius affirms, That he deserves an Anathema who adds to, or takes
from that Faith; which being fully and plainly delivered by the Apostles, needs
no increase, and must have no diminution from us Celestin. Epist. in Council.
Ephesians. Bin. Tom. 1. Par. 2. p. 136.
; but this was before they had brought in so many New Doctrines and Practices
grounded on Tradition only, that they were forced to decree at Trent, That
Traditions were to be received with the same pious Affection and Veneration
that they received the Scriptures Omnes Libres tam V. quam N. Testamenti -- nec
non traditiones -- pari pietatis affectu ac reverentia suscipit -- etc. Council.
Trid. Sess. 4. Decr. 1.
. But in the Primitive Ages, nothing but the Word of God was allowed to decide
controversies of Faith, and therefore the Holy Bible alone was placed on a
Throne in Christian Councils, as the only Judge in all such cases Vid. Council.
Aquil. ap. Bin. T. 1. Par. 1. p. 545. Council. Ephesians. ibid. Par. 2. p. 214.
. Wherefore it is very necessary every Priest should declare his belief of the
perfection of Scripture; and Secondly, That he should promise to teach no
Doctrines, but what may be proved by it. For this is the greatest security of
his being Orthodox which the Church can have, since no man can be an Heretic,
who takes his Faith from the plain Words of Scripture, and proves it by
necessary Consequences drawn from thence. And it is of such importance to the
Church, that those She admits for Guides to others, be not in a wrong way
themselves, that all the Reformed Churches ask the same Question of their
Candidates. The Lutherans say, Do you believe the Faith, which the whole
Christian Church believes, etc. -- And do you condemn all Errors and Heresies,
that are condemned by Scripture, and by the genuine Christian Councils
Creditisne fidem quam Universa Christiana Ecclesia credit, etc. -- Damnatis --
omnes errores and haereses per S. Scripturam and Christiana probata Concilia
damnatas. Form. Luth. Ord. Lips. 1624. item Form. Belg. Eccl. p. 261. Scotch
Psalter, J. Knox, p. 19.
. The Belgic and Scottish Churches ask the like Questions upon the same
occasion. For this is sufficient evidence, that they who answer this Question
sincerely, do not hold, nor will they teach any Heresy whatsoever; but more
particularly, this excludes all Papists and Enthusiasts from Holy Orders,
because the former pretend Traditions, and the latter New Revelations for the
proof of their False Doctrines; and though they seem very different, yet both
agree in denying the perfection of Holy Scripture, and both do this with the
same design, viz. that they may Coin new Articles of Faith, as often as they
please; which false Principles and dangerous Design, would make our Faith
changeable and uncertain; and nothing fixes our fundamentals in Religion, like
binding all Priests to a written and unalterable Rule. It is thought an
excellent means to preserve Men's civil Rights, to bind the Judges to decide all
Causes according to the Written Laws of the Kingdom Ut Judices secundum
Scriptam Legem judicent and non secundum Arbitrium suum. Capitul. Reg. Franc.
Tom. 1. p. 370.
. And it is equally prudent, and more necessary, to use this Caution in Divine
Truths, of which the Bible is the only Collection, and that Standard from which
no private Man may vary; he may hold some pious Opinions, and urge some
innocent Practices, from Reason and Antiquity, but these must not be pressed as
necessary to Salvation; for nothing is so, but what is contained in, or can be
proved by the Holy Scripture; and so long as we keep close to that Rule, no
dangerous Heresy nor notorious Corruption can come in.

. 2.
Quest. 3. Will you then give your faithful diligence, etc.]
This Question shows the matter and manner of their Duty in Divine
Administrations. A Minister is often compared to a Shepherd, whose Office it is
to feed his Flock in Green Pastures, and to lead them forth besides the Waters
of Comfort, and with his Shepherds Staff, to drive in such as wander into the
Valleys of Death and Destruction Psalm. xxiii 2, and 4.
. So our Spiritual Pastor is to feed and nourish his People, that are regular,
by the Word and Sacraments; those that are irregular, he is to fetch back to
the Fold by Holy Discipline, privately laboring to convince them of their
Errors, and convert them from their Sins; and if that be not sufficient, giving
them up to the censures of the Church for their Reformation and Amendment: This
is the matter of their Duty. As to the manner, they are to administer Doctrine,
Sacraments and Discipline, so as the Lord has commanded in his word, and so as
the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm do appoint; which are not (blessed be
God) two different ways here in this pure Church, because we have declared,
that we have no power to make any Laws in these matters contrary to God's word
Non licet Ecclesiae quicquam constituere quod verbo Dei scripto adversetur.
Reformat. Leg. Eccles. c. 11. p. 5.
. The Scripture teaches the manner of our Ministrations as to the main, and our
Offices and Canons for Discipline are drawn up by those Divine Directions, the
rest is supplied out of Primitive Antiquity, as to Ceremonies and things not
Essential, and both are finally confirmed by our Laws. Thus we have accurately
prescribed Forms for all our Ministrations; from which if any private Minister
might vary, and follow his own fancy, it would breed infinite Confusion and
endless Scandals; wherefore after the example of our pious Ancestors, we oblige
all the Clergy to Minister the Word and Sacraments, yea and Discipline also in
one Uniform Manner Cuncti Presbyteri omne Sacerdotale suum Ministerium, uno
eodemque modo and ratione studeant agere. Council. Cloves. Can. xi. An. 747.
Spelm. T. 1. p. 248.
: Which our Priests may safely promise to do, because this Church has taken
such exact care to come as near as possible to Holy Scripture in all these
particulars. So that for any Minister to come short of, or go beyond this
perfect Constitution, argues intolerable Pride and Folly, and discovers such a
presumption, as admits of no excuse, especially after he has so solemnly
promised before God and many Witnesses, that he will administer all these
according to the Rules of this Church. Moreover since he is now to take charge
of a Flock, he must not only rightly dispense Doctrine, Discipline and the
Sacraments himself, but must use all possible endeavors to bring his people,
to do their part of these Offices strictly and conscientiously, that is, the
younger are to come to Catechizing, they and the elder both to attend on
Prayers and Sermons; Parents are to bring their Children to Baptism, and all of
riper years must prepare themselves for the Holy Communion. He must also teach
them humbly to submit to private reproofs, and also to the public censures of
the Church, when their offenses deserve them. All which the Priests promise
they will do, by Gods help; and if they would often think of this promise, and
diligently as well as faithfully endeavor to perform it, Piety and Devotion
would once again flourish among us, and make this our Sion, the glory of all
Lands, and the praise of the whole Earth.

. 3.
Qu. IV. Will you be ready with all faithful diligence to banish, etc.]
The Shepherd is not only to feed and fold his Sheep, but also to watch over
them, that no ravenous Creature from without seize and devour any of them. So
our Spiritual Pastor is to be vigilant to discover, and courageous to drive
away, all those that spread erroneous and strange Doctrines among his people:
The Atheists and false Christians, Heretics and Schismatics are often
compared to Wolves Matthew. vii. 15. Joh. x. 12. Act. xx. 29.
and Foxes Cant. ii. 15. Ezekiel. xiii. 4.
, for their craft and cruelty, their mortal hatred to the Sheep, and their
lying in wait to destroy them; The Prophet likens them to evening Wolves Habac.
i. 8. Quia nocte praedantur: Unde Aelian. not de lupo. Quod -- (...), and
crepusculum lucis dicitur (...), Drus. obs. l. 13. c. 1.
, who come secretly in the Dark, and are very hungry, zealous and passionately
desirous, to pervert harmless and unwary Souls; like the Pharisees of old
Matthew. xxiii. 15.
. And lest their malice should be perceived, these ravenous Wolves disguise
themselves in Sheeps-clothing Matthew. vii. 15.
. That is, they pretend to great innocence and simplicity, and seem to pity the
mistakes, and desire the Salvation of such as they would insinuate into, under
which veil they are taken for Friends, though still they remain the worst of
Foes Erras si istorum -- vultibus credis, hominum effigies habent, animos
ferarum, Sen. Ep. 10. p. 406.
; for their words will eat as does a Canker 2 Timothy ii. 17. Gr. (...).
, or (as the Original intimates) prey upon them like a gangrene, which spreads
its Poison insensibly, till it becomes incurable and mortal: Doubtless, it is
very dangerous for the common people to converse with these Deceivers, because
they have not the skill to discover their Errors, nor Learning enough to
confute them; wherefore the Pastors are enjoined to watch Acts xx. 31. 2 Timothy
iv. 5.
, that they may find them out, and expose their abominable Errors and
pernicious Heresies, and set their mistakes as well as their malice in a true
light, which is not easy to do, considering: First, That many of these
Seducers are plausible, smooth and eloquent speakers, as Gennadius notes of the
Heretic Nestorius, and of one Paulinus -- Insignis in docendo extempore
declamator haberetur -- and p. p. -- eloquentia and abstinentia commendante,
Catalog. illustr. Hier. T. 1. p. 468. vid. p. 386.
. Now such do easily with good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of
the Simple; as St. Paul has noted, Romans xvi. 18. And it requires much Art and
Skill to prepare Antidotes against these gilded but poisonous Pills. Secondly,
others of these Deceivers pretend to more than ordinary Sanctity, and sometimes
are Men of good lives. So was Pelagius the great Heretic, as St. Augustine
confesses Aug. de peccat. merit. and remis. l. 3.
, and Foelix a Nestorian (as Agobardus notes) drew Men into approving his
Errors, Qui incaute admirantes ejus vitam probanda putant cuncta quae dixit,
Agobard. adv. Foelic. Urgel. page 3.
by their admiring his life Aug. de peccat. merit. and remis. l. 3.
. It Is true, We should not measure Men's Faith (as he says) by their Lives, but
their Lives by their Faith, because though some true believers perish by living
wickedly; yet no Man who does not believe aright can be saved by living
virtuously Idem ibid. p. 4.
. But after all, the Ignorant People, who see good Actions, but cannot discern
Error, are apt to believe there must be truth wherever there is goodness, and
thus also this disguise proves a dangerous snare, especially if the Orthodox
Pastor, be not also a Pious and Holy Man; wherefore where such deluders creep
in, he must strive to live better than they, and diligently teach his People,
that even Heathens have been good moral Men, and that they have good Examples
enough in the true Church for their imitation, nor need they part with their
Principles, if they desire to reform their Lives, since no Religion gives
stricter and holier Rules than ours: Thirdly, All that propagate false Opinions
in Religion, are very zealous to make Proselytes, so were the Donatists in
Africa, when they had fallen into Apostasy, they delighted to pull others down,
and accused the Orthodox, who stayed in the true Church as dull People Perditi
transitus suos consolari cupientes, caeteros ut similiter labantur invitant,
and residentes in sinu matris Ecclesiae ut tardos -- accusant, Optat. Milev. l.
6. page 99.
; they are first mistaken themselves in the true way to Bliss, and so spare no
pains to draw in others, because they imagine they are guiding Men to Heaven,
while they are going with them to perdition, and hope to secure their own
Salvation by being Instruments of the Damnation of others 2 Timothy iii. 13.
. Now in this case our Pastor must show a greater as well as a better grounded
zeal, to save his Peoples Souls, than they express to destroy them: Lastly, the
false Teachers, and especially those of the Roman Church, do creep in among our
Sectaries, and the worst sort of Enthusiasts (as has been proved by many
instances, here and in other Countries See the Book called Foxes and Firebrands
Aderant personati quidam qui Papae causam promoturi, dissensiones mutuas
promovebant, Comenij Hist. Eccl. Bohem.. 36.
,) and promote the Popish interest, by enflaming the differences among
Protestants. So that it concerns our Pastors to pull off such Men's Vizors, and
represent them in their true Colors, to all such well-meaning people, as are
in danger to be deceived by them. It Is true, all kinds of Seducers suspect
their own strength, and therefore they avoid Men of Learning, and such as
understand the Faith they profess; it is poor ignorant Men and those of the
weaker Sex, that they attack, and take no Captives but such 2 Timothy iii. 6.
(...), vocat Strabo Geogr. l. 7.
; as St. Hierom observes concerning Basilides and Marcus, two ancient
Heretics Hieron. Ep. 29. ad Theodor. p. 251.
. Wherefore our Pastor must have a strict Eye upon this part of the People
under his charge, and countermine the Enemy, by engaging them to labor, both
to understand and love their own Religion, and advising them not to rely too
much on their own Judgments. Upon the whole matter, vigilance and industry are
always necessary, but never more requisite than in these times, while reason of
State obliges this Government to continue that Toleration in this Reign, which
was (for very ill purposes) begun under another: This is a season, that
requires the Clergy by Writing, Preaching and private Conference, to keep as
many of their Flock as they can, from this Pestilence that walks at noon day
Psalm. xci. 6. Chal. Par. A caterva daemonum qui grassantur tu meridie, Polygl.
Bibl.
. And herein I cannot but observe, and commend the piety and diligence of many
of my Brethren, to whose care under God it is to be imputed, That this
Toleration hitherto has neither increased our Adversaries number, no nor
lessened ours, but we gain more and better people than we loose: May God of his
mercy grant, that the following Generations may still be secured by a constant
succession of such Laborers in his Harvest: Men that shall be able, by sound
Doctrine both to exhort and to convince the Gainsayers Titus i. 9. (...),
Theophil.
, to confirm the Orthodox, confute the Teachers of false Doctrines, and reclaim
their deluded followers: When a Pastor is endued with Learning and Judgment for
this good work, and also with Zeal and Piety to excite his Industry, he is a
mighty blessing to the Church in general, and more particularly to all that are
under his charge.

Yet there is another part of the Clergies duty contained in this Question, as
necessary as the former; and that is, to drive away Vice as well as Error, by
public and private Monitions and Exhortations, both to the sound and the sick
within their cures, when ever need requires: Sometimes a watchful Pastor will
discern some sorts of wickedness to abound in his Neighborhood, and against
such Epidemical Crimes, public monitions to convert the guilty, and open
exhortations, to secure such as are yet untainted, must be his business in the
Pulpit, and when any single Person is discovered to be tempted to any notorious
Sin, or has fallen into it; then the careful Pastor must go to the offender,
and privately exhort him to beware of that particular Sin, while he is only in
danger; or sharply admonish him for it, if he have already offended, because
(as was noted before) if any perish for want of due warning, God will require
their Blood at his hands: I grant there is great prudence to be used in
reproving, the quality and temper of the person, the nature and circumstances
of the Crime, as also the fitness of the Season, and manner of address must be
well weighed before hand: Our Superiors must be applied to with respect, and
yet with sincerity, our equals with friendly plainness, our Inferiors with
awful rebukes; if the offense be notorious, and the danger great and nigh, we
must not delay, but save them with fear, hasting to pull such out of the Fire,
as we would do a brand almost burned Jude ver. 23.
, if it be a secret and lately sprung evil, we may wait for a private
opportunity, and a gentle warning may suffice: The fittest Seasons are
generally before the receiving of the Holy Sacrament, or when the Party is
visited with Sickness, or under some great Affliction; or when the Priest has
had some opportunity to oblige him that he is to reprove: But whenever, or to
whomsoever we do this good Office, we must begin with gentle methods, always
expressing a true affection for the offender, a love for his Soul, and a hatred
only for his Sin Medicus saevit in vulnus, ut homo sanetur, quia si vulnus
palpetur homo perditur, Aug. V. D. ser. 15.
; it must appear, that you hate the Vice for the man's sake, foreseeing the
mischief it will bring on him here and hereafter, and if you can convince him,
that your reproof proceeds from a tender regard to his welfare, that notion
will open his Ear and Heart also to your affectionate admonition, and it is
probable you will save his Soul; But if he prove proud and foolish, obstinate
and scornful, you must use more sharpness Titus i. 13.
; and if private rebukes be despised you are (by our Saviors direction) to
complain to the Church Matthew. xviii. 15, 16 and 17.
, out of which such deserve to be cast, because while they are of it, they are
a scandal to it. And if reproofs were thus managed, they would be of
inestimable benefit, not only to private Christians, many of which who are
likely to perish eternally, might this way be converted and live: But also to
the whole Church, which by this method would become pure and holy, honored by
its very Enemies, and lovely in the Eyes of God and all good Men: The only
excuse on the Pastors side, is, that the offender (out of a sense of his guilt)
will be angry, since there are too many like Nero, forward to commit Sin, but
enraged when they are told of it Ut faciendis sceleribus promptus, ita audiendi
quae faceret insolens erat, Tacit. Ann. l. 15. p. 1088.
. Now if this be granted, first the criminals anger is a clear confession of
the justice and necessity of the reproof Qui mihi irasci voluerit prius ipse de
se quod talis sit confitetur, D. Hieron. ad Nepot. ep. 2.
, because it declares he is guilty: But then Secondly, this anger (if the Man
be not a hardened reprobate) will not continue long, if ever he become sensible
of his Sin and his danger, he must then perceive your charity and love: And
then he will hate his Flatterers, Prove. xxviii. 23. Fides in praesentia, eos
quibus restitit, offendit, deinde ab illis ipsis suspicitur laudaturque, Plin.
lib. 3. ep. 9.
and truly love you (p). It Is recorded of Amasis (who from a Captain of Robbers
was advanced to be King of Egypt,) that he enriched only those Oracles which
had discovered his thefts while he was a private Man, and so helped to reform
him Pontanus Bellar. Attica.
. However Thirdly, Though you suffer the wrath of a foolish Man by reproving
him, you gain the favor of Almighty God, and on the contrary, when Christ
enjoins you to speak, you displease him by a silent conniving, and only offend
a mortal Man by your speaking Inter haec quid agant quibus loquendi a Christo
Officia mandata sunt: Deo displicent si tacent, hominibus si loquuntur, Salv.
ad Eccl. l. 4.
. In which case our Lord has told you, which of these you ought most to fear
Matthew. x. 28.
; if he were a Prince that could kill your Body, that ought not to terrify you
so much as the wrath of God, who can cast Body and Soul into Hell: But here I
must observe, that it is not commonly the negligence of the Priests, but the
pride and obstinacy of the people, that hinders the discharge of the salutary
Office; they foresee, it is to cast their Pearls before such wretched creatures,
as will either rudely trample them under their Feet, or barbarously turn again,
and rent them with injuries and reproaches Matthew. vii. 6.
, in which case Reason as well as Conscience does excuse them if they be silent
Prove. i. 25, 26. Frustra niti, neque aliud fatigando nisi odium quaerere,
extremae dementiae est, Theod. a Niem de Schismate l. 1. cap. 5.
, for God has given up such to a reprobate mind. They think it a piece of
gallantry to despise the Profession, as well as the Monitions of a poor Priest,
but they forget he is God's Messenger, sent on purpose to save them from
Eternal ruin, so that this Contempt ends in an affront to the Divine Majesty,
on whose Errand they come, and whose Commission they have Luke x. 16. Piissimus
Dominus, Communem sibi cum servis suis, and honorem and contumeliam facit,
Salv. lib. 8.
; and in the certain loss of their immortal Souls Prove. xxix. 1.
; and if this be a privilege of great Men, they claim a right not to be
disturbed when they are about to destroy themselves: When St. Ambrose reproved
a noble Emperor for his faults, he thus expostulates, Who will you hear in Gods
cause, if you will not hear his Priest? Do you Sin at any ones peril so much as
his (who is to answer for your Soul)? Who will dare to tell you the truth, if
the Priest dare not do it In causa vero Dei, quem audies, si Sacerdotem non
audies? Cujus majore peccatur periculo? Quis tibi verum audebit dicere, si
Sacerdos non audeat? Ambr. Ep. 17. T. 5. p. 212.
? And it is observed by St. Cyril, that David, though a King, was not angry at
Nathan, though he sharply reproved him for odious Crimes, because he considered
the Sender, rather than him that was sent (...), Cyril. Catech. illum. 2.
. Alas those who despise the Physician of their Souls, do the greatest hurt to
themselves, for they provoke God and his Messengers both to desert them, and
then their disease is incurable, and their destruction unavoidable: So that I
heartily wish Men would, in honor to God and love to their own Souls, pay more
respect to the Calling, and give a greater regard to the prudent and seasonable
admonitions of their Ministers, and rather encourage them to so beneficial on
Office, than by their scorn and rage force them to neglect it, and leave them
to Sin without restraint, and consequently to perish without remedy.

. 4.
Quest. V. Will you be diligent in Prayers, and in Reading of the Holy
Scriptures, and in such Studies, etc.]
As the Priest moves in a higher Sphere, so he has a greater compass of Duty
than a Deacon. First, he is to be more diligent, both in private Prayer for the
help of God's Spirit and a blessing on his Studies, and in the daily repeating
twice the public and common Prayer in the Church, to which our Rubric binds
both Priests and Deacons, if they be in health, and not hindered by any urgent
cause See the second Rubric just before the Discourse of Ceremonies, and just
after the Preface.
, which constant Reading of Morning and Evening Prayer in public, is also
strictly enjoined by the ancient Canons Council. S. Patric. can. 7. Spelm. T. 1.
p. 52. and Council. Tolet. 1. can. 5. An. 400. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 597.
, and is most unaccountably neglected by too many among us, who have assented
and consented to this among other injunctions, yet rarely do it, to the great
decay of Piety in both Ministers and People, a fault that the Bishops ought to
see amended: But to proceed, 2ly, the Priest must have a larger share of
knowledge, both as to Scripture, and all that leads to the understanding
thereof, than a Deacon; wherefore he is here enjoined, more diligently to read
the Bible (of which before) and more closely to follow his Study in all those
parts of Learning which are the Handmaids of Theology, the Queen of all
Sciences. And 3ly, That he may be at leisure for this, he is to promise, he
will lay aside the Study of the World and the Flesh, which we have proved, are
impediments to, and really inconsistent with a contemplative life: So that the
principal thing here to be remarked is, the necessity, and the method of a
Clergy-mans studying: It Is certain he cannot Preach profitably, confute Errors,
defend the Truth, and solve cases of Conscience, without a complete knowledge
of God's word, to which he cannot arrive, (now inspiration is ceased) unless he
know most of the learned Languages, as well those in which the Holy Scriptures
were originally Writ, as those into which they were anciently Translated, and
by which the Fathers explained them: Moreover he ought to be well Read in all
parts of Natural, Rational and Moral Philosophy, and so must be skilful in
Logic, Metaphysics, Physics and the Ethics of the better sort of Heathen
Writers; To which should be added the knowledge of all parts of Philology: That
is, He should read the best of the Classical Authors, especially the Orators
and Poets wherein excellent morality is to be found, and the choicest Critics,
who treat of Phrases, Coins, Weights and Measures, with all those Rites and
Customs, which tend to illustrate the Holy Text: Nor ought he to be
unacquainted with History of all sorts, and especially the History of those
Ages which are coincident with the times, and of those Countries, which are
spoken of, in or adjacent to the places mentioned in Holy Scripture, to which
Chronology and Geography will exceedingly conduce. In short, there are few
parts of human Learning, that are not some way or other necessary to accomplish
a Divine. But what directly concerns him is, That which is properly called
Theology, and so he must be well versed in all Writers Systematical, Textual,
Historical, Polemical and Practical. The Systematical, are the Catechists
Ancient and Modern, and the Authors of whole Bodies of Divinity; The Textual
are the learned and laborious Commentaries of the Holy Fathers, and later
Orthodox Divines. The Historical are such as have writ the sacred story of the
Jewish and Christian Church in general, or the Lives of the Fathers, and most
eminent Bishops and Doctors, together with the Collectors of the Councils and
Ecclesiastical Laws of Christian Princes. The Polemical are the ancient
Apologists, and those Orthodox Fathers who defended the Christian Religion,
against Paganism and old Heresies, as also such as have maintained the Doctrine
and Rites of the Reformed Church of England against Papists and Dissenters:
Finally, The Practical Authors are the Editors and Explainers of Liturgies, the
compilers of Offices for private Devotion, and such as write about Piety and a
Holy life in general, or concerning any particular Virtue or Vice. And that he
may not lose time, either by an ill method of Study, or an ill choice of Books
in all faculties, there are some very useful Writers, who will direct him in
these matters, some few of which I shall only name, and refer my Reader to them
Hug. Grotij and alior. Disserationes de studiis instituend. Amstel. 1645.

Apparatus ad Theolog. per Steph. Penton Land. 1688.

Bishop Barlow' s direction for Study, and D. Bray' s Parochial Library.


, concluding with this advice, to keep Common places and Methodical
repositories, of all the choice things they would remember, for which there are
very good Rules in Drexelius Hierem. Drexelij Aurifodina, in ejus Oper. in Fol.
Tom. 4. page 739.
. And to this end a young Divine should be provided of a Bible, a Concordance,
a Common Prayer Book, and the Articles and Canons, all interleaved; with a
large common place Book, that may lie ready, the first to note down all choice
Explications of any Text, the second for the signification of Words and
Phrases, the third for what is agreeable to our Offices, especially in the
Primitive Writers; the fourth for such things in antiquity, chiefly as
vindicate our Doctrine and Disciple. And the last for a general Repository of
all Philological and Moral Notions: By the daily use of which a studious Man,
will not only surely retain whatever he Reads, even to his old Age; but will
always be furnished by consulting these Collections of his own, with variety of
proper Matter for Sermons, Disputations or Discourses upon any subject in a few
hours time, the advantage of which is so great (especially when our Memories
begin to fail) that such as have taken pains this way in their youth, can never
be surprised nor unprovided. This short account may suffice to show how
necessary it is, that a Clergyman should have a liberal Maintenance to furnish
him with some of the best Books in all Sciences secular Rudes secularium
literarum -- cum loqui nesciunt, tacere non possunt -- prius imperitorum
magistri quam doctorum discipuli, Hieron. ep. 8. p. 76.
and sacred: For what the Italian Proverb says of a well furnished House,
(that it) makes a notable Dame Camera adorna fa Donna savia. Prove. Ital. G.
Torrian. p. 16.
. We may say of a well filled Study, it makes an eminent Divine; and doubtless
we must ascribe the ignorance of some, and the looseness of others in Holy
Orders, principally to this fatal want, because it cannot be supposed that Men
of ingenuous education, should either be so dull as not to improve with all
those helps, or so wretched as to seek mean or loose company, when they have at
home the benefit of conversing with the most learned and best Men of all Ages:
And considering how large a field, he that desires to be an accomplished
Scholar, has to expatiate in, and what noble objects he has to pursue, if he
be never so young and strong, he has employment enough for his whole life, and
for all the hours he can spare from his Offices, and the necessary business of
his Family: He will have no time to squander away upon the World and the Flesh,
who has a generous ambition to improve himself in all these kinds of knowledge,
yet will find a satisfaction in this laborious course of Study, abundantly
sufficient to recompense him for all his pains.

. 5.
Quest. VII. Will you maintain and set forwards, as much as lies in you,
quietness, peace and love, etc.]
When we consider that Christ was styled the Prince of peace, before his
Incarnation Isai. ix. 6.
, that he was welcomed at his Birth with the Angels singing, Peace on Earth
Luke ii. 14.
, that his Gospel is the Gospel of peace Ephesians. vi. 15.
, and that he gives a peculiar blessing to the makers of peace Matthew. v. 9.
; we cannot wonder it should be one of the Duties of his Ministers to promote
Peace and Charity among all Christians, and especially among the people
committed to their special care. I have showed before in the Preface, how far
the chief Priests among the Heathens and Bishops of the Christian Church, were
privileged in taking up all public and private quarrels, and shall only note
here, that our Savior intended, all the Clergy should be concerned in this
Office of peacemaking, for they wait at the Altar, and are to oblige the
injurious person to leave his gift there, and to be reconciled to his Brother,
before the Priest may accept and offer it Matthew. v. 23, and 24.
, which no doubt gave occasion to those ancient Canons, that enjoin the Clergy
not to receive the oblations of such as were at enmity Council. 4. Carth. can.
93. ap. Bin. T. 1. p. 589.
, and order them to rebuke such as they perceived lived in malice, and if they
proved obstinate, to suspend them from the Sacrament, till they were made
Friends Council. Agath. An. 506. can. 31. Bin. T. 2. par. 1. p. 556.
; by which we may see that our Rubric which lays the same injunction upon
every Priest See the third Rubric, before the Communion
, is grounded on Holy Scripture and the Canons, as well as the Practice of the
Primitive Church: And if it were duly performed, as it is solemnly promised by
all the Clergy, it would be of inestimable benefit to the Laity, by preventing
all quarrels and dissension, hindering chargeable and expensive Law Suits, and
extirpating the mischievous effects of malice and mutual provocation,
introducing Unity, Peace and Concord, with all the blessed consequences of
Love, Charity and Beneficence: This would make Towns and Cities, Families and
Neighborhoods easy and happy, and every Man would share in this blessed
Tranquillity: There are in all places instruments of Satan, to sow and inflame
discord, and either out of ill nature or for gain Qui lites creant -- qui si
nihil est litium lites serunt, Plaut. in Penul. 3. 2. p. 874.
; to disturb the repose of Mankind; and who so fit as the Servants of the God
of Peace, to countermine those Agents of the Prince of Darkness? They can best
set forth the gracious promises made to Peace and Unity, the dreadful
threatenings against variance and strife, hatred and malice, they are most
proper to show their people the Sin, and mischief of living in Enmity, which
makes them and their prayers odious to God, and will hinder his remitting their
offenses against him, banish the holy Spirit of love from their Souls, and
qualify them for no other Society but that of Hell: And they who have such a
Pastor, ought to receive his advice and admonitions with all humility and
gratitude, and cheerfully to leave their quarrels to his mediation and
arbitrament: But if they shall on either side be found implacable, the party
who is willing to be reconciled, may be admitted to the Holy Sacrament Quid
faciemus in quorum potestate voluntas tantum pacis est, non effectus? Heir. Ep.
62.
, because the innocent must not suffer for the guilty, while the other (as our
Rubric directs) is to be suspended from it, and his obstinacy notified to the
Bishop, that by his Authority he may either be brought to a reconciliation, or
prosecuted for his malice: It Is evident, the Laity in the Primitive times,
voluntarily desired Bishops and Priests to decide their differences, and it is
remarked by the writer of St. Augustine's life, That at the request of his
people he spent the forenoon often -- and sometimes the whole day fasting,
while he was hearing their causes, but would not leave off till he had decided
them Interpellatus ergo causas audiebat diligenter and pie -- usque ad horam
refectionis, aliquando autem tota die jejunus, semper tamen -- dirimebat.
Possidon. in vit. Aug.
I doubt not, but the Clergy are now as willing to undertake this charitable
office (especially in such controversies where there is no Title or nice point
of Law to be determined) as those of ancient times, and certainly it would be
our peoples great advantage to accept of; yea, to encourage their Mediation.

. 6.
Quest. VIII. Will you reverently obey your Ordinary, etc.]
This being the same in our Offices both of Deacon and Priest, had not been
repeated here, but only to observe that the Roman Church only requires this
promise of Canonical obedience from Priests Vid. Pontif. Romans in Ord. Presb. p.
54.
, and that is, all the engagements they enter into, but only to say a few
Masses and pray for the Bishop, and these two last particulars are late
Additions Vid. Pontif. Innoc. 8. edit. An. 1485.
. For they were not in the Pontifical of Pope Innocent the 8th, Printed about
100 years ago: Now the engaging their Priests only to obey their Superiors (and
not to perform the Duties of their Office enjoined by Christ, as we do) Looks
as if they were more concerned for the Polity of their Church, than for the
Salvation of Souls, and considering the tendency of our distinct Questions, to
make our Priests careful of their whole Duty. I doubt not, but every impartial
Man will judge our Office excels theirs in this, as well as in most other
things.

CHAP. V. Of the Bishops and Peoples Prayers.
THe Priests having solemnly promised to perform all these necessary and
weighty parts of their Pastoral Office by God's help: First the Bishop openly
prays for them in these words:

. 1.
Almighty God, who has given you this Will to do all these things, Grant also
unto you strength, etc.]
The Lutheran Forms after the Questions and Answers, cited before, have a
Prayer very like this in substance Dominus igitur noster Jesus Christus, summus
Pastor and Episcopus animarum nostrarum, -- vos in hac fide -- and in
Christiano proposito clementer confirmet, and conservet. Form. Lips. An. 1624.
. And this being pronounced by the Bishop, who is Christ's immediate Officer,
must be looked on as a Benediction, and not barely Petitionary: Though we see
the Ordainer gives all the glory to God, ascribing to him that good will which
they have declared in freely undertaking these Duties, without whom we are not
sufficient so much as to think one good thought 2 Cor. 3.5.
, much less to make so many holy Resolutions. Now upon this ground, that the
pious inclination and religious purpose came from God, the Bishop proceeds
rightly to beg of the Divine Author of their good will, to grant them strength
and power to perform all that they have promised, which is no more but the
accomplishing of that Work which he has begun. They did own (in the first
answer,) that God's Spirit (they believed) moved them to take on them this
Sacred Calling, and he disposed them freely to engage, that they will do all
the Duties thereof. Now though resolving to do well be the beginning, yet
putting these Resolves in execution, is the finishing of every good Work; and
Performance is the only perfection of a Promise. The Bishop finds therefore God
has begun, and he hopes he will accomplish this Work; yea, he may say with St.
Paul to his Philippians, He makes this request with joy, being confident of
this very thing, that he who has begun will certainly go on to perfect this
good Work Philip. i. 6.
. Which place, as we find in the life of St. Bernard Vit. D. Bernardi, p. 1967.
, being read in the Church, the same day that the holy Father and his
Companions had vowed to live a very strict life, they were much encouraged, and
went away rejoicing. Our Lord has declared it is his method to give to him
that has already St. Matthew. xiii. 12. and Chap. xxv. 9.
. He that thankfully receives, and carefully improves a good thought into a
holy purpose, shall be enabled to do what he has resolved. Wherefore the
Persons, now to be Ordained, having found the grace of God Making them willing
to promise, may say with St. Augustine Ab illo in me perfici fideliter spero, a
quo inchoatum esse humiliter gaudeo; nec in eo quod non donavit incredulus, nec
in eo quod jam donavit ingratus. Aug. ad Maced. ep. 52. T. 2. fol. 48.
, They hope firmly that the same God will perfect in them, that which they
rejoice humbly to find he has begun. And they cannot doubt of that which he
has not yet given them, without being ungrateful for what he has already
bestowed on them. There is no reason why God gives the first Grace, that is
purely gratuitous, but to infinite goodness, it is reason enough to give the
second grace, to secure his first bounty; for the good inclination and holy
resolution must dissolve into air, without his further grace to enable us to
pursue and perform them. So that all those who freely make this Promise, need
not be discouraged at the variety and difficulty of their undertaking, but
cheerfully arise and be doing, being well assured the Lord will be with them.

Secondly. There is a space allowed for the People secretly to pray for these
Candidates, who are by the Bishop now recommended to be remembered in the
private Devotions of every one in the Congregation; for it is so much their
duty to desire the Church may in general be supplied with good Pastors, and
their interest to be under the care of such, that all of them who are present
are obliged to pray for these now to be sent into God's Harvest; and if any of
them be a Relation or Friend to some of those who are to be ordained, or be
likely to live in any of their Cures, then they will desire an opportunity to
make some special requests to God for them particularly: A Custom as ancient as
it is pious; in the East it is only used at the Ordination of a Bishop
Archidiaconus dicit ad Populum, Tollite in altum mentes and intellectum
vestrum, and postulate misericordiam a Deo clemente pro N. Morin. de Ordin.
Syror. p. 469.
; but in the West it is enjoined when a Priest is Ordained; and the old
Gallican Form was Vid. Mabill. Liturg. Gallic. l. 3. p. 307.
, The Bishop said to the People, Brethren, let us all join in one Prayer, that
he who is chosen for the help and furtherance of your Salvation, may by God's
merciful gift obtain the blessing of the Priesthood, so that he may never be
found unfit for his station; but that by the privilege of his Office, he may
receive the gifts and virtues of the Holy Spirit, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen. Which Form I do here transcribe, because if any want fit words for
this Secret Prayer, he may be assisted by this ancient composure.

CHAP. VI. Of the Hymn called, Veni Creator, etc.
. 1.
THe Holy Ghost is that Person of the Blessed Trinity, to which the
distributing of the several Offices in the Church, and qualifying the Persons
for them, is generally ascribed in Scripture Acts xiii, 2, and 4. Chap. xx. 28.
1 Cor. xii. 11.
; and upon that ground, it is fit a particular address be made to the Spirit
before the Ordination, which we do by the Hymn, which begins, Come Holy Ghost,
etc. Concerning which I shall observe, That it is said, to have been composed
by St. Ambrose, and is placed among his Works as an Hymn for Pentecost D.
Ambros. Hymn. 32. Tom. 5. p. 353. Veni Creator, etc.
, and on that day it is annually used in the Roman Church Breviar. Clem. 8. p.
625.
, and was so of old; for I have by me a very old Exposition of Hymns according
to the Use of Sarum, wherein this Hymn is explained by the Title of an Hymn for
the day of Pentecost Exposit. Hymnor. see. usum Sarum, fol. 30.
. Which Author tells us, The matter of it, is an invocation of the Holy Spirit;
the intention of the Composer was to beg of God, to purge our Breasts with his
heavenly Splendour, and enlighten us with the graces of his Holy Spirit. The
benefit to us will be the securing us against visible and invisible Foes, and
uniting us to him for ever and ever. Which short Paraphrase shows how proper it
is on this occasion; and therefore it was first inserted into the Office for
Consecrating a Bishop Finita Litania -- incipit Hymnus, Veni Creator. Form.
vet. circ. An. 1100. ap. Morin. p. 333.
; and with a later hand put into the Ordination of a Priest, about 500 year ago
Vid. id. ibid. p. 338. An. 1200.
in the Roman Church, and so it stands there to this day Pontif. Roman. p. 48.
. And the Protestants have so well approved of it, that the Lutheran Churches
begin their Office with the same Hymn Veni Creator Spiritus reple, etc. Form.
Luther. Lips. 1624.
. And our Reformers translated it into Meeter in the larger way in King Edward
the 6th's first Ordinal See Spar. Collections. p. 151.
. Since which time it has been abbreviated and put into fewer words, but to
the same Sense, as it stands foremost here. And I shall explain it by a
Paraphrase according to that Form, to show how proper it is for this very place.

A Paraphrase on the Veni Creator.. 2.
Ver. 1. To thee, O Blessed Spirit, who dispensest thy Gifts to such as are to
be admitted to Sacred Offices, we address our selves and beseech thee to [Come]
unto us, O [Holy Ghost], to assist us in this great Work of making these thy
Servants, Pastors of thy Flock. Do thou their, and [our Souls inspire] with
pious Resolutions and Grace to perform them. [And lighten] their Minds and ours
[with] all saving Knowledge, which like [Celestial Fire] comes down from above,
shines on our Paths with pure Rays, and directs us the right way to those
blessed Regions, from whence this Divine Illumination comes.

Ver. 2. As those who were to strive in the Grecian Games, had a Master, an
Aleiptes, to anoint their Bodies, and especially their Joints with Oil, to make
them nimble, vigorous and fit for Action (...). Lucinian. ap. Petr. Fabr. Agon.
l. 2. c. 2. p. 116. etc. 5. p. 127.
: So to us [Thou the anointing Spirit art] the great Disposer of us all to our
Spiritual Race, [who dost] make our Souls fit for all duties by [thy sevenfold
Gifts] Isai. xi. 2. Vulg. Lat. addit -- pietatis. inde Scholastici faciunt
septem Dona S. Sancti.
; that is, by the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Council and
Might, the Spirit of Knowledge of the fear of the Lord, and true Piety, which
thou do [impart] freely, and give in large measures to such as strive by
serving thee for a never-fading Crown of Immortality.

Ver. 3. Let us, and these thy Servants, now receive [Thy Blessed Vnction] even
those inlightning and healing Gifts, compared to Oil Oleum, been S. Sancto
comparatur, quia ardens illuminat, and medicans sanat, and aquis infusum
perspicuas eas reddit. Rab. Maur. de institut. Cler. l. 1. c. 30.
, but far exceeding it, both in their Original, which is [from above], and in
their manifold use; for to be anointed with this Heavenly Oil 1 John. ii. 27.
[is comfort] to the dejected, [life] to such as languish, [and fire] to warm
and inflame those who are remiss in duties of Piety and Charity, making them
full [of Love] both to God and to their Neighbors. Be pleased therefore thus
to anoint us, who need all these Blessed Qualifications.

Ver. 4. Material Oil, being inflamed, is soon exhausted, and then its light
ceases; but thy Spiritual Oil will burn and shine for ever. By it therefore
[enable] us to have a right judgment in all things, and direct us [with
perpetual Light] in all our ways, to cure [the dulness] of our slow
understandings, and remove the ill effects [of our] natural darkness, and
almost [blinded sight] which makes us so apt to err in Spiritual things.

Ver. 5. As the Jews when they Feasted and rejoiced, used to anoint their Faces
with perfumed Oil, to make their Skin smooth and fair, and give their
Countenances a cheerful air Psalm. civ. 15. and Matthew. vi. 17. Duo sunt liquores
corporibus hominum gratissimi, intus Vini, foris Olei. Plin. l. 14. c. 22.
; be thou pleased in like manner to [anoint and cheer our] Souls, which have
contracted a [soiled Face] and mournful Figure, in our late days of Fasting and
Penitence for our Sins; Seal our Pardon and Cheer our Spirits [with the
abundance of thy grace], which will extremely refresh us, and make us lovely in
our Redeemers Eyes, to whom above all things we desire to be acceptable.

Ver. 6. And that nothing from without may disturb our inward Joy and Comfort,
make the world peaceable; [Keep far] off from us all [our Foes] that would
invade us from Foreign Countries, and also [Give Peace] to us [at home] in our
own Land, that neither this Church or state may be shaken by Faction, Schism or
Sedition: And direct us as well as guard us, for [where thou art] our constant
[Guide, no ill can come] either to our Souls or Bodies.

Ver. 7. Where thou art our Teacher, Mysteries become easy to our Faith;
Therefore do thou [Teach us to know] the Blessed Trinity in Unity for our
everlasting Salvation John xvii. 3.
; even [the Father] Almighty our Creator, the Eternal [Son] our Redeemer. [And
Thee], O Holy Spirit our Sanctifier, who proceedest [of both, to be] really
Three Persons, and yet [but one] God.

Ver. 8, and 9. Which right Knowledge will direct us rightly to praise thee; So
[that] as it has been in the true Church [through the Ages all along] from the
beginning, [this may be] also [our endless Song] to be continued down to our
latest Posterity, Glory and [Praise] be given [to thy Eternal Merit]; who art
ever deserving from us and all mankind, fresh and lasting acknowledgments: O
Blessed [Father] beloved [Son and Holy Spirit], may the Trinity in Unity, and
Unity in Trinity thus be adored and glorified for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. VII. Of the Large Collect before the Ordination.
. 1.
THat Prayer was a Principal Part of this Office was showed before; the Forms
are various in diverse Churches, there is something like this of ours in
Antiquity Clement. Constit. l. 8. c. 24. fol. 141.
; but nothing is so full and so exact as this in any Church, being made at the
Reformation, and continued ever since, without any alteration.

The Analysis of this Collect.
This Collect has two General Parts. 1st. The Laudatory part, wherein there is
1. The Original cause of all God's Mercies. Almighty God -- who of thine
infinite love, etc.
2 Some proper instances, viz. 1 His giving us his Son. Has given to us thine
only and most dearly, etc.
2. Sending the Apostles and other Pastors. Sent abroad -- his Apostles,
Prophets, etc.
3. Their success and the effect of their preaching By whose labor and
ministry he, etc.
4. Providing this succession of Ministers. And for that thou have vouchsafed
to call these, etc.

3. An Act of Praise for them all. We tender unto thee most hearty thanks, etc.

2ly, The Precatory part, and there in, 1. The petitions for all Christian
people. 1. That they may be thankful. And we humbly beseech thee -- to grant
unto all which, etc.
2. And also grow in grace. And that we may daily increase and go forwards in
the knowledge, etc.

2. Those for Priests and people both. 1. That by both Gods name may be
glorified. So that as well by these thy Ministers, as by them over whom etc.
2ly. And his Kingdom further extended. And thy blessed Kingdom enlarged.

3. The pressing conclusion. Through the same thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
etc. Amen.



A Discourse upon the larger Collect.. 2.
ALmighty God and Heavenly Father, who of thy infinite Love, etc.]
Nothing can more fitly dispose us to praise Almighty God, who shows himself to
be our Heavenly Father, by providing a proper Ministry for his Spouse the
Church our Mother, than serious reflection upon the whole Economy of our
Redemption, and all the steps he has made toward this mighty blessing: So
that it is proper here to consider, that when our first Parents fell from their
Innocence, they brought two evils upon their Posterity: First, The Guilt, and
then the power of Sin. Now our Lord and Savior undertook the removing of both:
First of our Guilt by his Death, and Secondly of our Bondage under its power,
by his most holy Ordinances and his Word, and in order to this, he left his
Ministers in all Ages to apply these means to this great end: And therefore
upon the ordaining new Pastors, it is very fit we should acknowledge, 1st. In
general, The true original of that Fatherly care he has expressed by this
gracious Provision, which was no merit in us, but his infinite love and innate
goodness, we did not deserve nor could we requite such concern for our eternal
welfare, his own desire of our Salvation, and propensity to do good, alone
excited him, this favor was showed freely Gratia est gratis data non meritis
operantis, sed miseratione donantis, Aug. Ep. 120.
. Upon this principle, he first gave us his only, and (therefore) most dearly
beloved Son Genesis xxii. 2. -- Angl. thy only Son, ex Hebr. (...), at LXX. (...).
. Though he was and had been the delight of his Bosom from all eternity; yet
when our Salvation needed him; to be the Author and necessary cause of it Hebr.
v. 9. Graec. (...).
, He freely sent him, not only to take our Nature, but our Guilt upon himself.
For which by his Death upon the Cross, he did so fully satisfy his Fathers
justice, that he (who never boasted) said it is finished Johan. xix. 30. (...),
Theoph. in loc.
. And St. Paul has declared, There is now no more need of any other, or
further, offering for Sin Hebr. ix. 25, 26, and chap. x. 14.
, which our most learned Reformers judiciously put into this Collect, and say
he made perfect our Redemption by his Death, with a plain design to confute
that false Opinion of the Roman Church, who will have their Priests, to be
Sacrificers still, and pretend they are daily to offer up Christ's Body and
Blood as a Propitiatory Sacrifice, for the Sins of quick and dead: Yea, they
have now, put this into the Solemn words, by which they make a Priest and say,
Take thou power to offer a Sacrifice to God, and celebrate Masses, as well for
the Quick as the Dead Pontif. Roman. in Ordin. Presb. p. 50.
, and by virtue of this power of offering propitiatory Sacrifices, Bellarmine
affirms, Priests may be called Mediators Bellarm. de miss. l. 1. c. 17. p. 1014.
. So that Chemnitius does not misrepresent them in saying Chemnit. examen
Decret. Trident. par. 2. p. 260.
, They feign the Priesthood is necessary, that the Church may have Advocates to
plead her Cause before Christ the supreme Judge, and by offering a Sacrifice to
appease the Fathers wrath, and procure propitiation for the Church: Now this
Opinion, is but late and new, as appears by all their own old rituals, which
have no such Form in the consecration of a Priest Vid. Mabill. Lit. Gallic. p.
307. Morin. de Ordin. Lat. p. 264, etc.
, and consequently they are not essential to the being of this Order, because
then they who of old were ordained without these words, would be no Priests.
But besides the innovation, the Doctrine on which this Form is grounded, is a
blasphemous derogation to the one, only and allsufficient Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross, and an utter perverting of the nature and end of that Holy
Sacrament, which the Scripture never calls a propitiatory Sacrifice, but a
commemoration of that Sacrifice, and only a Sacrifice of praise, in remembrance
of that which Christ once offered: Wherefore it was necessary our Pious
Reformers should put into our Office, an antidote against this Poison; and
teach our Priests, that they are not appointed to add any thing to perfect the
work of Man's redemption, which Jesus alone Finished, nor are they now
constituted to Sacrifice an Expiatory oblation to God, but to teach and convert
Sinners among Men: Christ by his death has reconciled God to them so far, that
he is willing to pardon them upon their Repentance, and Ministers are now to
bring them to Repentance, and so reconcile God to them: This was the only
design of our Savior, when after his ascension, He sent abroad into the World
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Doctors and Pastors, viz. To go and teach all
Nations, etc. and to gather a great Flock in all parts of the Earth, who by
their Devotions and Holy lives, might set forth the eternal praise of his Holy
name: And thus we here commemorate the Author and the end of these Ministerial
Offices: But withal we remember also, the success of these first Preachers, by
whose Labors, out of the unbelieving Jews and Gentiles, very many millions of
Converts were made in a few years; yet the Collect notes, it was Christ who (by
these holy instruments) did gather this great Flock together, for nothing less
than a Divine power could work so great a Wonder; It had been impossible,
without the miraculous assistance of Jesus and his Spirit, that a few poor
despicable. Men without human Learning, or any force, should in so short a
space have triumphed over the obstinacy and malice of the Jews, who had
crucified their Savior; and over the power and inveterate prejudices of the
Gentiles, who worshipped Stocks and Stones, their fellow creatures in Heaven
and Earth, yea Devils and evil Spirits: Yet innumerable multitudes of these
were brought over to believe Doctrines, far above the reach of human Reason, as
well as contrary to all their former Notions, and persuaded to practice Rules
of strict Holiness directly opposite to their old vicious habits and worldly
interest: So that within an Age or two, The Apologist openly tells the Emperor,
that though Christianity was lately set up, it had already filled their Cities,
Provinces, and all eminent places of the Empire, even the Palace, the Senate
and Pleading places, leaving only the Temples for the Heathens Hesterni sumus
and vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas, castella -- palatium, senatum,
forum, sola vobis templa relinquimus, Tertul. Apol. cap. 37. p. 30.
. And the next Century was blessed with the Conversion of the Emperors
themselves, and the extirpation of Judaism, and Idolatry out of these parts of
the World: It Is true, the Apostles and their glorious Successors planted this
Faith by their Doctrine, their good Example, and their Miracles, and watered it
with their Blood, but God alone gave this wonderful increase 1 Corinthians. iii. 6.
. Now there are two Reasons why we remember this here. First, More remotely to
encourage our new Pastors to hope for the Divine assistance; since they are
appointed by the same God to succeed in the same Employment. Secondly, To
engage us to render most hearty thanks to the Lord for these great benefits
flowing from his eternal goodness; that is, for sending such useful orders of
Men into the World, to save so many millions of Souls, and for laying so strong
a foundation for his Church at first, that the saving knowledge of his Holy
Gospel has continued throughout all Ages, and spread over all Nations, so that
we whose Ancestors sat in the shadow of Death, we who live in the last of
times, and a remote Angle of the World, have this saving light clearly shining
among us: And here to heighten our gratitude, and tune our praises to the
highest key, we also fitly remember this present instance of God's goodness, in
calling these that are now to be ordained, to that same Office and Ministry,
which he first appointed for the Salvation of Mankind. This shows he takes the
same care of, and has as much love for our Souls, as for the Souls of our
Forefathers. He knows our Christian Priests also must be many, because they are
not suffered to continue by reason of Death Hebr. vii. 23.
. The individuals are mortal, and so a succession is necessary Deus qui
provides mortalibus successione, Orat. in Ordin. Presb. Clem. constit. l. 8. c.
24.
; it is certain, the particular Priests must die, but by this constant
supplying all the vacancies, the Priesthood becomes immortal Principes mortales
Rempublicam aeternam esse, Tacit. Annal. l. 3. cap. 6. page 301.
. Our dearest Lord promised his Disciples, when he gave them their Ministerial
Commission, that he would be with them always, even to the end of the World
Matthew. xxviii. ult.
. He knew they could not live so long; and therefore the promise is to all
their Successors (...), Theoph. in loc.
, to the Office rather than the Persons: For so long as there are Souls to be
saved (as there will always be to the worlds end) so long our most gracious
Lord has taken care there shall be proper orders of Men to save them, for
which if we have any sense of his goodness, or any concern for our own
Salvation, we are on this occasion bound humbly to thank, heartily to praise,
and devoutly to worship him, and this may suffice for the Laudatory part.

. 3.
And we humbly beseech thee, by the same thy blessed Son, to grant unto all,
etc.]
Having excited our selves to a vigorous Devotion, by these obliging memorials
of God's care for our eternal welfare, we fitly begin to pray it may not be in
vain. When the Vineyard is dressed with so much cost and pains, it is a shame it
should bring forth either no fruit, or only wild Grapes Isai v. 2. -- Pro uvis
labruscae, Prove. pro spe frustrata. Drus. prove. cent. 1. Class. 1.
; this will highly offend God, and end in our own ruin at last Hebr. ^^. 7, 8.
. Such kindness and culture deserves a very plentiful return Debemus imitari
agros fertiles, qui multo plus afferunt quam acceperunt; Cicer. de offic. l. 1.
. Heaven justly expects it, and therefore we Pray, through the Mediation of
Jesus Christ, That, not only we but all other Christians, who in any part of
the World believe in, and call upon God's holy name, by these Men's preaching
Romans x. 14, 15. Emissione auditus, ex auditu fides, a fide oration.
, may not only bless him at present (as is done in the words of this Collect)
but also continue to show our selves truly thankful to Almighty God, for this
his extraordinary care of our Souls, as well as for all other his benefits: Now
true gratitude to God for appointing and sending his Ministers, will express it
self, by our reverencing their Persons, attending on their Administrations,
giving great regard to their advice; their exhortations and reproofs, looking
on them as the Physicians of our Souls, and consulting with them, when we need
Direction or Comfort, Encouragement in well doing, or Aid in resisting
Temptation: If we were to pass a difficult and dangerous way, and had a guide
sent us by a kind friend, nothing can prove us grateful for the favor, but our
frequent enquiring of, and duly following this Director, and if our People do
not treat their Pastor so, they are unthankful to God, unkind to his Messenger,
and careless of their Souls health: By letting our Pastor know our case, he
will be enabled to apply proper remedies for our Ignorance or Infidelity, and
so we should daily increase in Faith and Knowledge, and answer the end of this
Heavenly Mission, by our growing up to a perfection in Christ Jesus Ephesians. iv.
13.
. If we see a Husbandman going to Sow we wish him good speed, even in common
Charity; but when our own Souls are the Field, and we now behold fresh
Laborers sent into God's Harvest, shall we not wish them success in the name
of the Lord Psalm. cxxvi. 5, 6. Ruth. ii. 4.
, especially since by their prospering we improve; it may please them, but the
profit is principally ours; yet so, as we only are the losers, if he do his
Duty, and we reap no advantage, for he shall be rewarded according to his
pains, not after his success 1 Cor. iii. 8. Gr. (...), Theoph. in loc.
. So that we are infinitely concerned to do our best that his Ministry may
profit us all, and then both these Ministers and those over whom they are
appointed may join in Glorifying God's name, the Pastor for God's blessing on
his Ministry, and the people for the good they have had by his labors. And
besides the glory thus coming to God, from those who are now made Christians;
his prospering the labors of those his Servants will also enlarge his Kingdom,
by the convincing of Infidels, and converting impenitent Sinners, who from
slaves of Satan and Heirs of Hell, may become Subjects to the King of Heaven
and Heirs of Glory: These are the desirable fruits, the happy consequences of a
good Pastors doing his Duty with success, and if we seriously consider their
number and mighty importance, it will move us earnestly to beg of God to bless
these Men's present undertaking and future endeavors, through Jesus Christ, who
Lives and Reigns, etc. Amen.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Solemn Words.
. 1.
HAving spoken of the Imposition of Hands (which Rite is common to all Three
Orders) in the former Part See Par. I. Chap. 4.. 1.
; I am now only to observe, that as the Priest and Deacon have distinct
Offices, so (in our Church) they are admitted to them, by a different Form of
words, which is more proper, than with the Greeks, to use the very same Form
for a Priest as they do for a Deacon, only naming the several Orders Vide
Euchol. p. 250. Collat. cum p. 292.
; herein therefore we follow the usage of the Western Church as the best, for
they have two distinct Forms for these two Orders Pontific. Roman. p. 53.
, and use the first part of this Form of ours, ( Receive thou the Holy Ghost,
etc.) without any variation. I confess Morinus affirms, that the ancient Forms
of Ordination, as well in the Latin as the Greek Church, were only Prayers for
the Holy Spirit, and invocatory, not indicative or imperative; which usage (as
he proves) began to be added in the Margin of the old Formularies about 500
years ago Vid. Morin. de Ord. Latin. in Vet. Form. circ. An. 1180. p. 338. Item
Exercit. 2. Par. 3. c. 2. p. 22.
. And after that, it was made by the Schoolmen, the Form of the Character, and
the sole words by which it was conveyed or communicated: I shall not dispute
that nicety, but since I find our Reformers have retained these Words, I doubt
not but they derived them from an higher Original, even from the Holy Gospel,
out of which I shall now show both parts of this Form are taken.

. 2.
Receive the Holy Ghost for the Office and Work of a Priest, etc. -- whose Sins
thou do forgive, they are forgiven, etc. -- And be thou a faithful dispencer,
etc. -- In the name of the Father, etc.]
This Form is taken from our Blessed Savior's own Words, after his Ascension,
when he solemnly Sent his Disciples to Preach the Gospel; for then he said,
receive ye the Holy Ghost, etc. (z): John xx. 21, 22, 23.
Hence the Lutheran Form prescribes the reading these very words out of St.
John's Gospel Legatur ex Johan. Cap. 20. Dominus noster Jesus Christus dixit --
Accipite Spiritum Sanctum, etc. Form. Lips. An. 1624.
; and then (after the Lord's Prayer and a Collect) that Office thus explains
them, We commend to you the Ministry of the Word of God, and the power of the
Keys in binding and loosing Sins, and in the administration, distributing and
consecrating the Venerable Sacraments according to the institution of our Lord
Jesus Christ, in the Name of the Father, etc. And doubtless no words can be
fitter, than those spoken on the same occasion by our Savior, who had been
sent by his Father (after the Holy Ghost descended on him) to Preach the
Gospel, which he had hitherto done by himself; but being now to leave the
Earth, hereby he delegates this Work to his Apostles, and sends them with the
like Qualifications and Authority, as he was sent by his Father. Now as Elisha,
being to succeed Elijah in his Office, was to have a share of his Spirit 2
Kings ii. 9.
; even so Christ gave to the Apostles, his Successors, the Holy Ghost, that is,
the ordinary assistance thereof, so far as was necessary, in order to reconcile
Sinners to God by preaching the Gospel. For we must distinguish this first
Mission for the ordinary Office of Pastors (which was always to continue in the
Church) from that extraordinary Mission and Miraculous giving of the Holy Ghost
on the day of Pentecost, after his Ascension. That made them Apostles, and gave
them an extraordinary Authority, necessary for the first planting of the
Gospel, which Office was to cease: But these Gifts of the Spirit, which our
Lord gave them, when he breathed on them, were such as were necessary for them,
and all their Successors to the end of the World; for so long, in this manner,
our Lord has promised to be with such as are called to be Ministers. So that
these Words, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc. are properly used by us on the
ordinary Mission of Pastors; and so it is declared to be only so far as is
necessary for the Office and Work of a Priest, -- (not to work Miracles, or
speak with other Tongues, but) in order to execute the several parts of the
Pastoral Office, viz. 1st. For the remitting and retaining Sins. 2ly. For the
dispensing of the Word and Sacraments. As to the first we must observe, that
the Fathers, generally explain this communication of the Spirit, to be a
granting to the Pastor the power of absolving such as are penitent, and of
denying absolution to the impenitent Qui Spiritum Sanctum accepit, and solvendi
peccata potestatem and ligandi accepit. D. Ambros. de Poenit. l. 1. c. 2.

Spirit. Sancti gratiam acceperunt qua peccata dimitterent, etc. Hieron. Hebid.
ep. 150. T. 3. p. 233.

Dicit, Accipite; and subjicit, Si cui, etc. hoc est Spiritus dimittit, non
vos. Aug. Hom. 23. p. 103.


, and so our Lord himself expounds it; for he adds -- to his giving them the
Holy Ghost -- Whose Sins ye remit they are remitted, etc. Now this power of
Absolution is one of the ordinary parts of the Sacerdotal Office, (as I have
showed before See Compan. to the Temple, Part 1.. 4. p. 43, etc.
): And therefore when Christ made his Disciples Pastors, he gave them the Holy
Ghost to this purpose, and a power to communicate it for the fame end to such
as they did ordain to succeed them Acts ix. 17. 1 Timothy iv. 14. 2 Timothy i. 6.
, because without this Power they could not rightly perform their Ministry. We
see that repentance and remission of Sins were always the main subjects of our
Saviors and his Apostles Preaching Mat. iv. 17. Luke xxiv. 46. Act. ii. 38.
and x. 43. and xxvi. 18.
. Now when hereby some were brought to unfeigned Repentance, and others
remained obstinate, it was absolutely necessary the Pastors should have
Authority to declare, that the Penitents should be absolved by God, to pray to
him to pardon them; yea, and to comfort them further, by pronouncing their
Remission in God's Name; and on the contrary, to declare the Obdurate bound by
the guilt of their Sins, and liable to God's wrath: yea, to pronounce them
Excommunicate, out of the Church, wherein Remission of Sins alone is to be had.
These Keys (St. Ambrose says) Every Priest, as well as Peter, does receive
Claves illas Regni Caelorum, quas in B. Petro, cuncti suscepimus Sacerdotes.
Ambr. de dig. Sacerd. c. 1.
; and upon this Principle the whole Conduct of keeping Men under censures for
longer or shorter time, according to the degree of their penitence, was
committed to Priests (by advice of their Bishops Con. Ancyran. Can. 2. and 5.
Bev. T. 1. p. 376, and 379.

Item Theodor. poenit. c. 43. p. 35. and ibid. observe. p. 113.


) by all the Primitive Canons, and under the same Regulation they enjoy this
Power at this day. Now if any think it too bold, for a Bishop to use the words
of Christ. I reply, he pronounces them as God's Ambassador, (as the Form it
self declares) In the Name of the Father, Son, etc. he acts only Ministerially,
God gives the Spirit by the imposition of his hands with the Presbytery Deus
dat Spiritum Sanctum, non enim humanum hoc opus -- Sed qui invocatur a
Sacerdote, a Deo traditur, in quo Dei munus, ministerium Sacerdotis. Ambr. de
Sp. S. l. 1. c. 7. p. 223.
; it is God's Gift conveyed by his Deligate, which is the way that he chooses
to bestow it; for he could have given St. Paul the Spirit immediately when he
called him to be a Minister, but thought fit to send Ananias to him (as the
Text expresses it) -- that he might he filled with the Holy Ghost Acts ix. 17.
. We have already showed, that the various Offices in the Church are
distributed by this Blessed Spirit; and why should we not believe (with St.
Leo) that he who imposes the duty will assist us in the Administration of it
Qui mihi est oneris Author, ipse fiet Administrationis adjutor, dabit virtutem
qui contulit dignitatem. Dict. P. Leonis mag.
. We cannot execute this Office, to which the Spirit of God has called us,
unless we do receive the Holy Ghost; so that we ought not to doubt, but God
will by this Rite and these Words give his Holy Spirit, when so many join to
ask it upon so great and necessary an occasion St. Luke xi. 13.
, especially if the Parties put no bar to it, by their unworthiness or
unpreparedness to receive it. Finally, Some will have this Form to be no more
than Optative, and say, that Receive the Holy Ghost, implies only May thou
Receive, etc. But I think there is no need to strain the words, because the
plain import of them is very proper for God's Representative in this case, as
has been already proved. But whether we interpret them Positively, or as a
Wish, let the Pastor firmly believe, that so much of the Holy Ghost and his
Gifts are now imparted to him, as are necessary for the discharge of that
Office to which the Spirit has called him, so much as will qualify him to
judge so rightly concerning remitting and retaining Sins, that God may ratify
his Sentence in Heaven, forgiving those he declares Penitent, and condemning
such as he pronounces Impenitent; and this will make him careful in his
managing of Sinners, and bring a great and deserved veneration upon all his
Solemn Acts of Ecclesiastical Discipline, as well as incredible benefit to his
Peoples Souls.

. 3.
2ly. The other part of these Solemn Words, are a strict charge to him that is
Ordained, to be a Faithful Dispenser of God's Holy Word and Sacraments]. I have
showed before they are Stewards of these Mysteries See. 3. supr.
, that is, (in the French idiom) Dispensers. And hence St. Paul calls his
Preaching, and other Ministerial Acts, a Dispensation committed to him 1 Cor.
ix. 17. Ephesians. iii. 2. Coloss. i. 25. ubi Graec. (...).
. Now as to the Word of God, the faithful dispensing of it, is to give every
Soul its proper Portion; so our Pastor must offer easy Truths, plain
Similitudes and Examples, to inform the Ignorant, to prepare higher Notions and
stricter Rules for the Stronger and more knowing; he must have ready Promises
to comfort mourning Penitents, Threatenings to warn bold Sinners; Counsel to
settle the doubtful Minds, Exhortation to quicken negligent Loyterers, and
Reproofs to check forward Offenders. All these are in God's Word; and every one
of these kinds, are proper Food at some times for the Souls that are under his
Charge; his Prudence must allot every one their Portion according to their
temper and necessity; and he must act faithfully, as well as wisely; he must be
impartial, and fear no Man for his greatness, nor despise any for his proverty;
he must not spare a Friend for Favor, no nor expose an Enemy out of Evil Will,
because their Souls are at stake; and there is a Curse upon those who do this
work of the Lord deceitfully Jer. xlviii. 10.
. But this relates chiefly to the Pastors private applications, besides which,
it is their duty to Preach once at least in Public, on Sundays and Holydays,
by the ancient and modern Canons also See xlv. Can. Eccl. Angl. Ut omnibus
Festis and diebus Dominicis unusquisque Sacerdos, Evangelium Christi praedicet
Populo. Egb. Can. 3. Spelm. T. 1. p. 259. id. Can. 52. Edgar. p. 454. Can. 23.
Aelfric. ibid. p. 578. Capit. Carol. M. l. 1. c. 166.
; and this Office they must be Faithful in, as far as a Public Place will
allow. They must conceal no necessary, nor publish any unnecessary Truths; they
must reprove in general the most prevailing Vices of their People, and exhort
them especially to such Duties as they are most negligent in: and if they know
(as he ought) the state of their Peoples Souls, they may so contrive this
general Discourse, that like a well-drawn Picture, it shall seem to look
directly at every one in the company; so that every one may easily know and
apply his own portion to himself. The same fidelity must be showed also in
dispensing both Sacraments, by taking care that Infants do not (by their
neglect die unbaptized,) nor forget their Vow after they have been baptized, by
preparing their people for receiving the Communion worthily, frequently
dispensing it publicly to those in Health, and privately to the Sick,
encouraging such as are fit for it to come often, and warning all notorious
Sinners, especially those in malice, to repent before they presume to come to
this Holy Table. And they that thus behave themselves in God's House Matthew.
xxv. 21. Euge, bone serve, etc.
, shall from their great Master hear that joyful Eulogy, well done, ye good and
faithful Servants, enter ye into the Joy of your Lord.

Having spoken of the delivery of the Gospel to a Deacon before Dis. on. Ord.
of a Deacon chap. 4.. 4.
, I am only to add, that the difference is, the Priest has the whole Bible
delivered to him, with words containing a Solemn Grant of full Power and
Authority to Preach out of it, and Administer the Sacraments according to it in
the Congregation, whereto he shall be appointed: And whereas of old, both in
the African and Western Churches as well as the Eastern, this rite was only
used at the Consecration of a Bishop, in later times it was used to a Priest,
who (as Isidore observes) has also the Dispensation of the Divine Mysteries
committed to him, and he is colleague to the Bishop in presiding over the
Church, in consecrating the Sacrament and Preaching to the people Presbyteris
sicut Episcopis, dispensatio mysteriorum Dei committitur, praesunt enim
Ecclesiis Christi, and in confectione divina corporis and Sanguinis Consortes
sunt cum Episcopis -- and -- in officio praedicandi, Isid. Hispal. de offic. c.
7.
; but with this difference, the Priest acts subordinately, and is confined
ordinarily to one Parish, but a Bishop is the Supreme in Ecclesiastical matters
through his whole Diocese: There are more Ceremonies and solemn words in some
other Churches, especially the Roman, where of late they deliver a Patin with
Wafers, and a Chalice with Wine and Water Accipe potestatem offerre sacrificium
Deo missamque celebrare tam pro vivis quam pro defunctis, Morin. de Lat. ord.
p. 319.
, giving them power to offer a Sacrifice to God, and celebrate Mass for the
Quick and Dead: But we may observe, Morinus could not find this Form in any
Ritual above 700 years old; So likewise the blessing, the several vestments and
forms of delivering them, the anointing the Priests hands in the Latin Church
Vid. Pontif. Roman. p. 47, and 49.
. The kiss given to the newly ordained Presbyter, by the Bishop and all the
Priests present in the Greek Church Euchol. p. 294. and notis p. 298.
, are justly laid aside by our Reformers, as being either innovations, or too
trifling for so grave an Office as this.

CHAP. IX. The last Collect.
. 1.
THere is nothing remaining of a material difference between the former Office
and this, but one proper concluding Collect, which seems peculiar to our
Church, and how suitable it is for the occasion, the ensuing Analysis and
Discourse will show.

The Analysis of the last Collect.
This Collect contains two kinds of Petitions. 1. For the Ministers. 1st. In
general for God's Blessing. Most merciful Father we beseech thee to send, etc.
2ly. In particular that they may be 1st. Holy in their lives. That they may be
clothed with Righteousness, etc
2ly. Successful in all their Labors. And that thy word spoken by their Mouths
may have such success, etc.


2ly. For the People. 1. That they may Reverently hear the Word of God. Grant
also that we may have Grace to hear, etc.
2ly. That in all other Acts they may aim at 1. God's Honor. That in all our
words and Deeds we may seek, etc.
2. The enlarging of his Kingdom. And the increase of thy kingdom, through,
etc. Amen.




A Discourse upon this Collect.. 2.
Most merciful Father we beseech thee to send upon these thy Servants, thy
Heavenly Blessing, etc.]
The ancient Forms of Ordination are usually concluded with a valedictory
Blessing, or else will a Prayer for a Blessing Benedictio Dei Patris, Filij,
etc. descendat super vos, etc. Morin. de ord. Latin. -- super hunc famulum tuum
-- munus tuae benedictionis infunde, Lit. Gallic. ap. Mabil. page 307. Et
Pontif. Romans p. 47.
, our Church uses both: The first Petition, being in general for a Blessing on
these newly ordained Ministers, is introduced with remembering, that the God we
pray unto is not only most mercyful in his Nature, but through Christ stands in
the relation of a Father to us, both which are motives to excite us to ask, and
grounds for our hopes of prevailing. The merciful temper of the Kings of Israel
encouraged their Foes to Petition for favor 1 Kings xx. 31.
: And it is our Saviors argument (x), that if earthly Fathers can deny nothing
which their Children crave, S. Luke xi. 9.
then doubtless our Heavenly Father will not withold his Blessing from us,
when we beg it so importunately: We know that the Man who is blessed by God
must be always successful, because the Lord makes whatever he does to prosper
Psalm. i. 3. Benedictio est augmentatio bom, Rab. ap. Fag. in Genesis i. 22.
, and indeed his Blessing comprehends all sorts of good things which we can
wish, or he can give, but more particularly. We first pray that their Lives may
be Holy, and this in David's phrase, whose Petition for Sion is, That her
Priests may be clothed with Righteousness Psalm. cxxxii. 9.
, which implies that Holiness is the most glorious of all Robes; the innocence
signified by their White garment (the clothing of the Saints Revel. xix. 8.
) makes them shine more, than all their other Sacred Vestments, and the Phrase
denotes further, their being full of all Virtues, wholly covered all over with
goodness; and no doubt a Priest so qualified is an honor to the Church, and a
mighty blessing to his own people. Secondly, Since they have promised
diligently to preach God's word, we pray they may be successful to that degree,
as never to speak in vain, which was a blessing granted to Samuel, one of God's
chosen Priests, that none of his words fell to the ground (b); that is, 1 Samuel
iii. 19. Cadere in terram, est perire. Matthew. x. 29. Nihil ex ijs quae locutus
est irritum fuit. Eucher. in loc.
failed of success: and he promises in Isaiah, that none of his words shall
return to him void, but shall accomplish his pleasure, and prosper on his
Errand Isaiah lv. 2.
. The Word of God is often compared to good Seed, and it is great pity all of it
should not bring forth fruit Matthew. xiii. 8.
. And when it does so, it brings abundant glory to God, and a mighty
satisfaction to his Messengers, if their instructions and advice, exhortations
and reproofs be always successful (as we pray they may) a good Pastor will
think all his pains well bestowed, though he were to have no other Reward. But
2ly, Since the effect of his Ministry depends upon the peoples receiving the
word of God aright, as well as upon his faithful dispensing it, and the hearer
must contribute as much to its success as the speaker (...), Plut. de audit.
; we pray for the people also, that they may have grace to hear and receive,
that which is delivered out of God's word, as the means of their Salvation, for
the Seed was equally good, but the Crop was different, according to the
diversity of the Soil Matthew. xiii. 4, 5.7 and 8.
, and we see that unbelief hindered the efficacy both of our Savior's
preaching and his miracles also Ibid. ver. 58.
: It is St. Paul's observation, that it was the Faith of the Thessalonians, and
their receiving his Preaching, not as the words of Man, but as the word of God
(as in truth it was) which made it work effectually 1 Thessal. ii. 13.
, and the word preached did not profit those who heard it without Faith Hebr.
iv. 2.
. So that being desirous the Preacher should be successful, we must pray for
the People, that they may receive his words as a means appointed by God for the
Salvation of their Souls: Not as if every word of a Sermon were the very word
of God (as some of our Dissenting Teachers have falsely and arrogantly
pretended,) but because Preaching in general, is an Ordinance appointed by God
for Men's Salvation Romans x. 13, 14, 15. 1 Cor. i. 21.
; therefore when the Preachers Instructions, Arguments and Admonitions are
taken out of God's word, or agreeable thereunto; then we must receive them with
great Reverence, not as if it came merely from him; that is, the Speaker, but
as Counsel, Comfort, Direction or Reproof, sent us from God himself for the
saving our Souls. So that we must lay up these things in our Hearts, and guide
all our Words and Deeds thereby: Now, if we do thus hear and receive the
Sermons preached to us, the blessed effect will be, that all our Words and
Actions will tend to the advancement of God's Glory and the enlarging his
Kingdom. We shall praise God daily our selves, and persuade others to join with
us, we shall glorify him also; not only with our Lips but in our Lives, for
Men will see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven Matthew.
v. 16.
. We our selves shall be so thoroughly converted as to demonstrate by our Deeds,
that we are faithful Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, and by persuasion as well as
example, we shall labor to bring in as many Sinners as we can to that due
obedience, which all Men owe to his Authority: Now since such blessed and
desirable effects will certainly flow from these Pastors faithfully dispensing
the Word of God, and the Peoples rightly receiving it; Oh with what Fervency
should we now put up these necessary requests; when we see them just ready to
put their sickles into Gods Harvest! May the gracious Lord of this Harvest, for
Jesus Christ his sake assist and bless both Priests and People, so shall his
Name be glorified, and his Kingdom increased, by large and constant Additions
to the Church of such as shall be saved. Amen.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE OFFICE For Consecrating BISHOPS, Where it differs from
the former.
A Preface, concerning the Election of Bishops.
. 1.
OF the Election of the Clergy in general, and of Bishops among the rest, till
the Empire became Christian, we have treated already; and showed that the right
of choosing was then in the Clergy; and the Peoples part was only to testify
their satisfaction in the choice; but this would not satisfy them after Peace
was restored to the Church, in great Cities especially, where the People fell
into such Factions and Mutinies, that Constantine was forced to interpose. Thus
at Antioch, the Citizens would have forced the Bishops, assembled in a Synod on
the vacancy of that See, to remove Eusebius from Caesarea, and make him their
Bishop, contrary to the Canons (...). Eusebius. vit. Constant. l. 3. c. 60. p.
382. etc.
; which the Emperor hearing, he forbid that removal, and proposed two Priests,
( Euphronius of Arethusa, and George of Cappadocia) to the Bishops, requiring
that one of them, or some other duly qualified, might be canonically chosen;
and the choice fell on the former of those nominated by the Emperor, viz.
Euphronius: So that the Popular Election was rejected, and the Bishops chose by
directions from the Emperor. It Is true, the People very often, with the
inferior Clergy, in places remote from the Court, pitched upon the Persons, and
desired the Bishops, in their Synod, to choose him, as it was in the Election
of Athanasius at Alexandria (...). Athan. Apol. 2.
, and so in many other places, that St. Basil tells the People of Neocaesarea,
It was their part to request, and God's to show who should be their Bishop:
that is, by the Votes of a Synod, which was then esteemed a declaration of Gods
Judgment (...). Basil. ep. 62. -- Nempe Synodi judicio, Petr. de Marc. de
Concord. l. 8. c. 5.
. And the usual method of Elections then, may be gathered from the Objections
against the making of Lucius, an Arian, Bishop of Alexandria, viz. that he came
not in by the judgment of an Orthodox Synod, by the votes of the Clergy, or the
request of the People (...). Theod. Hist. l. 4. c. 20. p. 131.
. But even this liberty of petitioning the Bishops, proves the People could not
Elect a Bishop. Nor did they always fix upon the Person; the Synod sometimes
named the Person, and the People afterward expressed their satisfaction, by
loud acclamations of Worthy, Worthy, as in the Election of Peter to be Bishop
of Alexandria -- (...). Theod. Hist. l. 4. c. 18. p. 127. An. 371.
. Nor did the Bishops, who strictly adhered to the Canons, like the
Encroachments of the People. Hence the old Bishop of Nazianzen writ to the
Citizens and Bishops assembled at Caesarea, then void, to recommend St. Basil
for that See Greg. Nazianz Ep. 22, and 23. p. 785.
, telling the People he knew him to be very fit, and if they would needs judge
of this in their Companies and Tribes, disturbing the exact manner of Elections
by the Crowds interposing, he would have no hand in it (...). Theod. l. 4. c.
5, 6.
. But where the Emperor was present, he generally recommended the Person; and
upon a vacancy at Milan, the Bishops assembled, desired Valentinian (then in
that City) to choose a Successor; but he telling them they were fitter to judge
than he, they went aside to consult, and then the People falling into Factions,
Ambrose, the Emperors Officer coming to compose the People, was accidentally
named; and the Emperor and Bishops liking the Person, he was chosen by general
consent. This indeed was an extraordinary Election, but we see it was intended
the Bishops should choose, and the Emperor approve. But that which made it most
commonly necessary, for the Emperors to interpose in Elections, was the violent
Seditions naturally consequent upon the Peoples pretending to choose. So it
happened at Rome, where upon a Competition between Damasus and Ursicinus, many
were slain on both sides, so that the Emperor's Officer was forced to quell the
Tumult, and punish the Ringleaders of that mutiny Socrat. l. 4. c. 20. p. 670.
Sozom. l. 6. c. 22. p. 385. A Valentiniano res composita est inter Damasum and
Ursicinum. Pamel. not. in Cypr. Ep. 52.
; and at last Valentinian fixed Damasus in the Papal Chair Vid. Rescript.
Honor. ap. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 721.
. So about fifty years after, a New Schism arising between the Parties for
Boniface and Eulalius, the Emperor Honorius decided the matter in favor of
Boniface, and (at that Pope's request) made a Law, That for the Future, if any
difference happened, he should be Bishop of Rome whom, by a New Appointment, the
Divine Judgment, and the Common Consent should choose; where by the Divine
Judgment, either the decision of a Synod, or perhaps, the Emperors
determination is meant, for the phrase is used in both senses. But in the East,
especially in the Royal City, the Bishop was pitched on by the Emperor.
Theodosius, when the Second Council was sitting there, ordered the Bishops to
present him a List of Persons fit to be chosen for the Sea of Constantinople,
then vacant, out of which he chose Nectarius, who was Ordained by the Synod in
the presence of the Emperor, all the Clergy and the whole City agreeing thereto
(...). Epist. Synod. 2. Council. inter op. Damasi, p. 74. An. 381.
. Upon his death the People falling into Factions, the Emperor privately sent
for Chrysostom from Antioch, and recommended him to a Synod of Bishops who
Ordained him, and the People agreed thereto Socrat. histor. l. 6. c. 2.
Theodoret. l. 5. c 27.
. About 30 years after, upon the death of Sisinnius, to prevent disorders, the
Emperor sent for Nestorius from Antioch, and got him ordained Bishop of
Constantinople Socrat. l. 7. c. 29. p. 755. circ. An. 426.
; and upon his being deposed by the Council of Ephesus, Theodosius the younger,
named Maximian to that Council, who ordained him to that See; and his known
worth made the choice acceptable to all sorts of people Talem illi Ecclesiae
constituendo Pontificem qui olim se dignum hoc fastigio omnibus quibus notus
est approbasset. Coelest. ep. 12. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 739.
; and Pope Coelestine, with regard to this choice of the Emperor and the
Council, says, he was made Bishop by the Divine Judgment -- Te Praesulem
divino judicio accepit. ejusd. ep. 13. ibid. 740.
: Yea, the Council it self speaks of a Bishop to be elected for Constantinople,
by the will of God, and the Favor of the Emperor (...). Council. Ephesians. Par. 2.
Act. 1. Bin. p. 210.
. Again before Maximian was buried, for fear of Mutinies and Factions,
Theodosius commanded the Bishops that were present to Ordain Proclus Bishop of
that City, (...). Socr. l. 7. c. 39. p. 764.
who had been in nomination before (r). The same usage also was continued in
the next Century, for Epiphanius declares he was made Bishop of Constantinople,
by the Election of the Emperor and Empress, to which also the honorable Men,
the Priests, Monks and faithful People consented Epiphan. Epist. ad Pap.
Hormisd. Bin. T. 2. Par. 1. p. 605.
. So in the Election of Mennas to the same See about the year 535. Agapetus
then declares there was the Emperors choice, and the consent of all the Clergy
and People (...). Agapet. epist. ibid. p. 686.
. So that in this City the Emperors had the chief hand in Episcopal Elections.
Yet we see in all Regular Elections there, and elsewhere, the Bishops met in
Council, not only to Consecrate, but to Judge of the fitness of the Party
desired by the People, or recommended by the Emperor; and therefore they are
said to choose Bishops, and to have the power of promoting such as are Worthy
-- (...). Council. Anl. Can. 23. Bev. T. 1. p. 450.
, that is, in their judgment. And if any objection were made, especially as to
the conversation of the Candidate, the Bishops were to examine and determine
the matter, before such as had been formerly acquainted with the Person
accused. For the African Code says, When we meet for choosing a Bishop, if any
Objection do arise, the three Bishops shall not determine it, but desiring two
more to be added to them, shall examine it before that People over whom he is
to preside, and then they may ordain him, if he be found innocent (...), etc.
Cod. Can. Eccl. Afr. Can. 50. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 761. Bev. T. 1. p. 577. ubi
dicitur, Can. 54. Council. Carthag.
. Nor did the Peoples desire of a certain Person give him that was so desired a
good Title; for another Canon of that Code says, He that is sent to take care
of a vacant See, shall not seize it on pretense that the People desired him
Cod. Can. Eccl. Afric. 74. Bin. ut supr. p. 770. Council. Carthag. Can. 77. Bev.
ut supr. p. 611.
; because the other Bishops were Judges whether the Party were worthy or no.
Hence St. Ambrose, speaking of Anysius, Bishop of Thessalonica, says, that he
was desired by the People of Macedon, and chosen to the Chief Priesthood by the
Bishops Ad summum Sacerdotium a Macedonicis obsecratus populis, and electus a
Sacerdotibus. Ambr. l. 3. ep. 22. p. 230.
. The same Father looks upon this approbation of a Synod as an indication of
God's choice, for he tells those of Vercelles Idem ibid. Epist. 25. p. 245.
, He that is to pray for the People, is to be chosen by the Lord, and approved
by the Bishops, least any offense be found in him, that is to intercede for
others. But that which secured this Right in the Bishops to judge of
Candidates, was a Custom which began in this Age (and which some weakly urge to
prove Popular Elections;) that is, The Clergy and Peoples subscribing a
Petition, and presenting it to the Metropolitan, who, with his Suffragans,
determined the Election as they saw fit. In the end of the Fourth Century, Pope
Siricius speaks of some that came from far, and had been approved by the
People; -- De longinquo veniant Ordinandi, ut digni possint, and plebis and
nostro judicio comprobari. Siric. Ep. 3. Bin. p. 561.
but must have also his judgment, as Metropolitan, before they could be made
Bishops (a). And within twenty years after, Zosimus his Successor commends an
Archbishop for keeping out Novices from Bishoprics, though desired by the
People, telling him, the Rules of the Fathers, and the Authority of the
Apostolical See, were on his side Tecum faciunt praecepta Patrum, tecum
Apostolicae sedis Autoritas. Zosim. Ep. 1. ibid. p. 711.
, adding withal, that these Men were let in by the remisness of such Bishops as
sought the favor of the multitude, and thought the good opinion of a Crowd to
be their highest honor Facit hoc nimia remissio consacerdotum nostrorum, qui
pompam multitudinis quaerunt. id. ibid.
. So that the Bishops were under no necessity to grant this Petition, if they
disliked the Persons; however the People did petition their Metropolitan, as we
see by that example of a Petition from the Clergy and People to Patroclus,
Metropolitan and Bishop of Arles Bonifac. Ep. 3. Bin. ibid. p. 721. An. 418.
; and Pope Celestine declares, none must be made a Bishop over the unwilling;
the consent and desire of the Clergy, People and Magistrates is required Cleri,
plebis and ordinis consensus and desiderium requiratur. Caelest. Ep. 2.. 5.
ibid. p. 736.
. But if they chance to desire an ill Man, the same Celestine says, The People
are to be taught and not followed by the Bishops, and if they know not what is
lawful and what not, should not be complied with, but rather admonished by
their Superiors Docendus est populus non sequendus, nosque (si nesciunt, eos
quid lictas quidve non liceat) commonere, non his consensum praebere debemus.
Celest. Epist. 3.. 3. p. 737.
. But none stood more upon this Subscription than Pope Leo; who decrees, That
Bishops are to be peaceably and quietly desired, and let them present the
subscription of the Clergy, the testimony of the Nobles, and the consent of the
Magistrates and People Teneatur subscriptio clericorum, honoratorum, Ordinis
consensus Testimonium and plebis, Leo. Ep. 89. p. 468.
: Yet still he refers all to the Judgment of the Metropolitan and says, None
can be a Bishop that is not elected by the Clergy, desired by the People, and
consecrated by the Provincial Bishops according to the Judgment of the
Metropolitan Nulla ratio sinit ut inter Episcopos habeatur, qui nec a Clericis
sunt electi, nec a plebibus sunt expetiti, nec a Provincialibus Episcopis cum
Metropolitani judicio sunt consecrati, Idem Ep. 92. p. 475.
. And more plainly in another place he says, He shall be preferred, who is
desired by the concurrent consent of the Clergy and People -- but if the Votes
be divided, He shall be chosen, by the Judgment of the Metropolitan, who has
most merits -- Si vota diviserint, Metropolitani judicio is alteri praeferatur,
qui majoribus studiis juvatur and meritis, Idem, Epist. 84. page 449.
. And it is very observable, these are all Directions given by Leo to
Metropolitans and Chief Bishops, who then were Electors. It seems also, that
about this time the same method was used in the East, for in the Fourth General
Council of Chalcedon it was ordered, That when a Metropolitan died, they should
gather the suffrages of the Clergy, possessors and honorable Men; and after
that, of all the venerable Bishops in the Province, and then he shall be
chosen, who shall by them be thought worthy Council Chalced. Act. 16 ^in Tom. 2.
p. 343.
. Where the Clergy are first and last in the Election, and here the
Metropolitan being supposed to be deceased, could not be named, but as to other
Sees, the final judgment was in him: For though Bassianus and Stephanus both
proved, they were elected by their several parties of the Clergy and People to
be Bishops of Ephesus, yet not being consecrated by a Metropolitan and his
Synod of Bishops, they were both ejected, by the 16 Canon of Antioch, (which
was read and approved in this general Council,) viz. That if any get into a
vacant See, by the choice of all the People, he shall be ejected if he came not
in by the Judgment of a Metropolitan and his Synod Council. Chalced. Act. 11.
Bin. ibid. p. 301.
. And it was so known an usage for the Clergy and People of a vacant Church to
petition the Metropolitan for a Bishop, that in a contest whether Nicomedia or
Nice were the Metropolis of Basilinopolis, Eunomius of Nicomedia says, he can
show the suffrages of the Citizens of Basilinopolis requesting a Bishop of him,
and challenges the Bishop of Nice, to show where they desired a Bishop from him
or his predecessors Council. Chalced. Act. 13. Bin. ibid. p. 309.
; and the cause was (for want of such proof) determined for Eunomius: Yet all
this must be so understood, as not to exclude the Emperor in the greater Sees
especially, where the Elections were made either by his Directions, or at least
confirmed afterward by his Authority: Of which this Council affords us two
instances; one in their Letter to the Clergy of Alexandria, certifying them of
the deposition of Dioscorus, and charging to secure, that which belonged to
that Church, and give an account thereof, to him that by the will of God, and
the consent of the Emperor should be ordained Bishop of that great City Council.
Chalced. Act. 3. Bin. ibid. p. 214.
. And Bassianus shows, that his election to Ephesus was confirmed by the Sacred
Letters of the most religious Emperor (...). Ibid. Act. 11. p. 300.
; but in lesser Sees, except in case of mutinies, they rarely concerned
themselves either in the East or in the West: After the Empire was divided, and
one of the Emperors lived in the West, he likewise interposed in the choice of
the Bishops of eminent places, as we have showed concerning Milan and Rome
before, and we add now, that the younger Valentinian confirmed the peaceable
Election of Pope Siricius by a particular Rescript, yet extant in Baronius
Nostro cum gaudio memoratus Episcopus, ipse (Siricius) permaneat, Vid. Baron.
Annal. An. 385. Tom. 4. p. 435.
. And it is probable while the Emperors had any power at Rome, they generally
confirmed the Elections there which Platina confesses Platin. vita Sylverij
An. 537. p.
, and that confession of Faith, which the Popes upon their Election, sent to
the Emperors of the East, before the Goths had conquered Rome Foelicis 3. Ep.
2. ad Aug. Zenon. Bin. ut supr. p. 448. Ci^c. An. 483.
shows; they desired their confirmation, although a little before Odoacer King
of Italy had made a Law, that no Pope of Rome should be chosen without the
advice and consent of those Kings An. 482. Vid. Bin. Tom. 2. p. 525.
; which Law, a spurious Council under Symmachus pretends to repeal An. 502.
Vid. Nota^ Bin. in Syn. 4. Roman. p. 527.
. But there is no credit to be given to that repeal, because Symmachu^ himself
came into the Chair by Order of Theodoric a Gothic King of Italy, who also
drove away Laurentius his Competitor Theodor. lect. collect. lib. 2. p. 186.
Zonaras vit. Anast. T. 3. p. 121.
. And Symmachus could not modestly kick down the Ladder by which he had
ascended, nor durst he have curbed the Gothic Kings, who then used the same
Power that the Emperors had exercised before, and particularly in Papal
Elections, insomuch that when Boniface the second made afterward an attempt to
exclude these Kings from Elections, upon second thoughts he revokes that Canon,
and owns himself guilty of Treason for making it Papa se reum confessus est
majestatis, Vita Bonif. 2. Bin. p. 643. Ar. 530.
. And upon his Death the Romans came to Athalarick and petitioned for a Pope,
and he made Laws to regulate future Elections An. 532. Epist. Reg. Athalaric
Bin. ibid. page 653.
, which was in the time of Pope John the second, whose next Successor but one
was Sylverius who (as Platina says) was created Pope by the command of King
Theodatus (without staying for a Decree, says Anastasius) whereas before the
Emperors Authority interposed, not that of these Kings; but now Theodates's
Threats were more prevalent than any rational Decree: Platina ut supr. And
Roman Forgeries part 4. p. 267, 268. But Vigilius (when Belisarius had restored
the Eastern Emperors Authority in Italy) coming to be Pope, by the favor of
Justinian and his Empress; set up the Eastern Emperors Title to order and
confirm Elections, which they did, till the Gothic Princes again prevailed: It
is too tedious a Story to relate the particulars, and Bellarmine as well as
Pamelius have saved me the labor by confessing, that this Power remained
either in those Eastern Emperors, the Gothic Kings, or the Emperors of the
West for above 600 year together Bellarm. Apol. pro resp. ad libr. regis cap.
6. and Pamel. not. in Ep. 52. Cyprian.
; that is, until Pope Calixtus wrested it out of the hands of the Emperor Henry
the fifth, about the year 1120, a fair time, if we reckon from Constantine the
great (as we have proved we may) to make good a right even by Prescription,
being about 800 year together: But if any more Evidence were requisite, the
Authors who writ about Investitures do abundantly prove this, and Aventinus
positively affirms, That Kings in that Age chose whom they pleased into the
College of Bishops, when any vacancy happened Avent. Ann. l. 4. p. ^78.
, and adds, The Popes were then chosen by the Priests, Gentry and Commons, and
the Election was good, if the Emperor approved it Idem, Annal. lib. 5. p. 446.
. But the Empire declining, and the Papacy increasing in power, the latter
shook off the imperial Authority, to confirm the Possessor of St. Peter's Chair.

. 2.
But of old not only Emperors, but all Kings in their own Dominions claimed and
used a power of nominating, or approving all their own Bishops, as soon as they
became Christians. I shall instance chiefly in the Kings of Spain and France,
who being descended of those Nations, that conquered part of the Roman Empire,
exercised the same Authority in Episcopal Elections, that the Emperors had
formerly done: In Spain, before the Gothic Kings received the Faith, the
Bishops met in a Synod had a Petition from the Clergy and People, and they made
the Election, according to the custom of that early Age, as appears by a Letter
of those Spanish Bishops met on such an occasion, writ to Pope Hilary about the
year 462 Omnis clerus and plebs ejusdem civitatis and optimi and plurimi
provinciales (Irenaeum) successorem a nobis speraverunt, Epist. Episc.
Tarracon. 2. ad Hilar. Bin. T. 2. p. 425.
. But when the Kings of Spain were become Christians; Baronius owns, that long
before the XII Council of Toledo (viz. An. 681.) those Princes had challenged a
right to nominate their Bishops to a Synod who were to consecrate them Baron.
Annal. in An. 681. number. 60.
. And he observes that this method causing delays, by Reason Synods could not
be so often convened as vacancies happened, therefore that Council of Toledo
made this Canon: That -- it shall be lawful for the Bishop of Toledo (the
Metropolitan) to consecrate such Bishops into vacant Sees, as the King had
chosen, and he did approve as worthy -- Quoscunque regalis Potestas elegerit,
and jam dicti Episcopi judicio dignos esse probaverit, etc. Council. Tolet. xii.
can. 6. Bin. Tom. 3. page 274.
. And in another Council there, we have an instance of a regal Election, for a
Bishop named Sisebutus being there deprived for Treason, the Council confirmed
Foelix, whom the King had before appointed, for his Successor, and he was then
acknowledged the lawful Bishop of that See -- Alio tamen principali Electione
ibidem instituto, Council. Tolet. XVI. praefat. ibid. p. 318. An. 693.
. Which Prerogative, the succeding Kings of Spain enjoyed and used for many
Ages: So they did also in France, as appears from Gregory of Tours, who writ
his History about the year 590. And he generally speaks of all Bishops as
chosen by the Kings, from the days of Clovis the first Christian King ( An.
490.) until his own time, out of whom many instances are collected to my hand
Vide Exempl. Collect. per Bilson. de perpet. gub. Eccles. cap. 15. p. 352. etc.
. And whereas some very unfit persons were sometimes advanced by the Court,
without the consent of the Metropolitan: A Synod at Paris (An. 559.) decreed,
That such as were made Bishops by the King without the Metropolitans consent,
should not be received by the People Council. 3. Paris. Can. 8. Bin. Tom. 2.
par. 2. p. 247.
. But when by virtue of this Canon, the Bishops degraded one so nominated, and
sent a Petition to the King to choose another, he was so enraged, that he used
the Messenger very badly, and took upon him to restore the ejected Bishop Vide
Gregor. Turon. lib. 4. cap. 26. p. 147. and Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. p. 215.
. Now since all the Predecessors of Charles the great had exercised this Power,
while they were only Kings of France; no doubt he did not lose it, by being
made Emperor, as to his own Kingdom; and if he had any grant of such a Power
from Pope Adrian, it must only be understood as a confirmation of those Rights
in his new Conquests, which the Eastern Emperors and other Princes before had
there enjoyed, and so I understand that Speech of Gregory the Sixth, ( Circ. A.
1046.) recorded in one of our old Historians, who on his Deathbed said, Our
Predecessor Adrian of famous Memory is commended, for granting the investiture
of Churches to Charles the Great; so that a Bishop elect, could not be
consecrated till he was first invested by the Kings delivering to him a Ring
and a Staff Malmsbur. de gest. regum, lib. 2. p. 47. b.
. It Is certain, this Emperor did nominate his Bishops. Which was a point so
well settled in the days of his grandchild Charles the Bald, that the Bishops in
a Synod say to him, speaking of this matter, Bishops are given us by God, and
regularly appointed by you -- Episcopi a Deo dati, and a vobis (i. e. Regibus)
regulariter designati. Synod. ap. Theod. Vill. cap. 2. An. 845. Capit. Tom. 2.
page 9.
. So that for the King to appoint Bishops was then thought, a regular way,
which also appears by the Testimony of Pope John the eighth ( An. 872.) who
says, The assent of the Emperor, is to be expected in the promotion of Bishops
Johan. 8. Ep. 34. ap. Bin. Tom. 3. par. 2. p. 13.
; and he calls him a lawful Bishop, who was chosen by the Clergy and People,
and confirmed by the Emperor Idem, Ep. 70. ibid. p. 24.
. The same Pope desires Caroloman to make Gospert, the Deacon, Bishop of
Vercelles Idem. Ep. 71. ibid. page 49.
, and he affirms in another Epistle, that this Prince gave him that Church
after the manner used by his Predecessors -- More praecessorum suorum regum and
imperatorum, Id. Epist. 223. p. 69.
. It Is needless to proceed lower, where instances are without number,
especially since the Kings of France still claim this power, though some of
later Ages, have allowed the Popes to confirm, such as they had named to some
of the greater Sees. That which is most directly to our purpose is to show, the
grounds on which our own Kings of England claim this Royal Prerogative, to name
their Bishops: Which are first ancient usage, for our eldest Historians speak
of the Saxon Kings even from their first conversion, as chosing and appointing
Bishops: So Bid tells us, (soon after Christianity was settled here) that
Ecbert and Oswy (two Saxon Princes) named Wighard to be Archbishop of
Canterbury, with the consent of the Holy Church of England Bed. Histor. lib. 3.
cap. 30. p. 248. and lib. 4. cap. 1. p. 253. cir. An. 666.
. And the History of S. Wilfrid alone is sufficient proof, that the Election of
the Clergy and People, confirmed by the Pope, was not able to make a Bishop
without the Kings allowance Malmsbur. de gest. Pontif. l. 3. in Wilfrid.
. King Alfred named Denewolf to be made Bishop of Winchester Idem, ibid. p. 138.
, and he chose Asserius Bishop of Schireburn Id. de gest. regum lib. 2. cap. 4.
p. 24.
. Robert was preferred to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, upon the
nomination of King Edward the Confessor Id. ibid. cap. 13. page 45.
. And Ingulphus speaking of that Princes time says, for many years before
that, the Elections of Prelates had not been free and Canonical, (that is, made
by the Clergy,) but the Court conferred all Dignities of Abbots and Bishops, as
they thought fit A multis annis retroactis, nulla electio Praelatorum erat
libera and canonica, sed omnes dignitates, tam Episcoporium quam Abbatum --
Regis Curia -- conferebat, Ingulph. fol. 509. b.
. Which plainly looks back to the usage in the times of the old Saxon Kings. So
that Eadmerus need not have represented it as a new thing in William the
Conqueror, to appoint Bishops Eadmer. Histor. nov. lib. 1. p. 6.
. It Is true, he did nominate Remigius to the Sea of Dorchester Matthew. Paris.
An. 1085. p. 12.
. And he is said to have chosen Lanfranc, to be Bishop of Canterbury Malmsbur.
de gest. Pontif. p. 116. (b.)
; but so had all his Ancestors done: And so did his Successors: For King
William Rufus on his sick Bed, named Anselm for the Sea of Canterbury then void
Idem, ibid. lib. 1. p. 124. (a.)
. It Is true, that haughty Prelate, encouraged by the Pope, labored to wrest
this Privilege from King Henry the first, but his procurator at Rome protested
to the Popes face, That his Master would part with his Kingdom, as soon as with
his Right to Elections Matthew. Par. Ann. 1103. page 59.
. And though he forbore a while to use his Prerogative herein, upon his being
reconciled to Anselm; yet upon his Death, he chose Rodulph to succeed him Idem,
ibid. An. 1113. page 65.
in that See: And afterward he nominated or recommended all other Bishops that
were preferred in his Reign, it being recorded by an ancient Historian that
this King made four Bishops in one years time Henr. Huntingd. An. 1123. lib. 7.
Histor. page 219.
. And the same Authority was exercised by the following Kings, who besides this
first Title of usage had, Secondly, another founded upon Law and Common Right,
as being Patrons and Founders of all English Bishoprics, which they had
endowed with Lands and large Possessions. And the Civil Law ordains, That if a
Man build a Church, and provide for the Clergy that are to officiate there, he
and his Heirs shall name a fit Person to be ordained to it Justin. Authent.
collat. 9. Tit. 6. Novel. 123. cap. 18. p. 172.
. So that the Kings of England have as just a right to the Patronage of
Bishoprics, as private Patrons, Founders and Endowers of lesser Benefices,
have to present to them. And this Title is urged in that excellent Letter to
Pope Clement the sixth, writ by King Edward the third, together with the former
claim of immemorial usage; where he thus speaks, From the very beginning of the
Church in this our Kingdom of England, the Memorable Piety of our Progenitors,
Nobles and faithful Subjects, have built Churches, endowed them with large
Possessions, and given great immunities to them. For which Reason they placed
fit Ministers in them; As to Cathedrals, our Progenitors aforesaid have for a
long time, upon any vacancy by their Royal Prerogative, freely bestowed them on
fit Persons -- etc. The whole Letter is extant in Tho. of Walsingham Tho.
Walsing. Hist. in Edward. 3. An. 1343. p. 150.
, and deserves to be Read, because it shows the ill consequences of the Pope's
interposing in these Elections: From meddling wherein he was soon after excluded
by the Statutes of this Realm, An. 25. Ed. 3. and An. 13. Rich. 2. The former
of which Statutes, mentions a Grant from former Kings to Deans and Chapter,
that they might freely elect their Bishop. Provided, and upon these Conditions,
First, That they desired the Kings leave to elect: And, Secondly, That after
they had chosen, they did obtain the Royal Assent: Which method is still
observed among us, only the King recommends a Person to the Clergy, when he
grants them license to elect; yet so, as there have been instances (where just
ground of objection appeared against the Person so nominated by the King,)
where the Clergy have humbly remonstrated to the Kings Majesty, in order to
obtain a second Nomination: There is one Reason more, why our Kings should
nominate their own Bishops; and that is, because they are Peers of their Realm,
and diverse of them are, or may be employed in Offices of the highest trust
under the King, and therefore it is fit, he should chose the Person, who is to
make so considerable a Figure in the Government, and may have so great a share
in the Administration thereof: Yet still, not only the Chapter of the vacant
Church, but the Bishops who consecrate him have sufficient Security, as to his
ability for so sacred an Office, and his care to perform all the Duties of it,
by the very Form of Consecration, which now we shall go on to explain.

The end of the Preface.
A DISCOURSE UPON THE OFFICE For Consecrating a BISHOP, Where it differs from
the former.
CHAP. I. Of this Office in general.
. 1.
ST. Cyprian, to show the great use and necessity of a Bishop, compares him to
the Shepherd of a Flock, the Pilot of a Ship, and the Ruler among the People Ut
pascendo gregi pastor, ut gubernando navi gubernator, ut plebi regendo rector
redderetur. Cypr. Ep. 58.
; and implies that as a Flock cannot be fed without a Shepherd, a Ship steered
without a Pilot, nor a Multitude kept in order without a Governor, so neither
can a Church be managed or preserved without a Bishop; which being the highest
Order in the Church, and those who are advanced to it, being constituted
Supreme Ecclesiastical Rulers, not only over the People, but also over the
inferior Orders of the Clergy; therefore the Holy Scripture gives very strict
Rules for the choice of Bishops; and their Admission to this Dignity has been
very solemn in all Ages. At first, by Fasting; Prayer and Imposition of Hands;
and afterward with more ceremony. The first General Council requires three
Bishops at least shall perform the Consecration Council. Nicaen. I. Can. 4. Bev.
T. 1. p. 63.
, which was grounded on those Apostolical Canons made in the Ages of
Persecution Can. Apostol. I. ibid. p. 1. and not. Bevereg. T. 2. p. 10.
, and that shows this practice (which we still retain) is very Primitive. And
so is their declaring of their Faith, and the strict scrutiny into their
Manners, with the laying the Holy Bible on their Head, though no express
Constitution do appear to enjoin these things till the 4th Council of Carthage
Acts xiii. 3.
. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 1, and 2. ap. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 588.
There is no doubt, but there were Forms of Prayer, and particular
Supplications for the Holy Spirit, used even from the Apostles Times, and by
their Examples Acts xiii. 3.
; and therefore Mystical Prayers, are the very definition of this Ordination
(...). Balsam. in 1. Can. Apostol.
. But those now extant, (though some of them be very ancient) yet are of later
date: However there have been such Forms in all Churches, in the Eastern or
Greek Church, as also among the Syrian and Ethiopick Christians, and in all
Eminent Churches of the West. The oldest of which are elaborately collected by
Morinus in his Learned Commentary of Ecclesiastical Ordinations, which I shall
have often occasion to cite in the following Pages, by comparing those Offices
with our modern English Form, to which also I shall sometimes compare not only
the present Roman Ordinal, but also those Ancient Formularies of the Gallican
Church, and of this Nation Extant ap. Baluz. append. ad Capitul. Tom. 3. p.
1372. and ap. Mabillon. Liturg. Gallican. l. 3. p. 307. and in Theodor.
Poenitent. p. 283.
, while they were in Communion with Rome. From all which it is easy to
observe, that the Roman Church has exceedingly varied from it self; the oldest
Offices whereof were very short, containing few Ceremonies, and diverse Prayers,
with a brief Exhortation: But of late they have added abundance of frivolous
and superstitious Ceremonies and Benedictions, which crept in, while Ignorance
and Error prevailed in all these parts of the World, as is fully demonstrated
by an exact Author Antiqu. and Recentior. Officia Roman. Collat. vid. ap.
Mason. de Minister. Anglican. l. 2. c. 17.
, to whom I refer the Reader. And I shall only note here, that our judicious
Reformers, in compiling this Office (as well as in the rest) have cast away all
the Roman Superfluous and Corrupt Innovations about blessing Vestments,
anointing, delivering the Ring, Pastoral Staff, etc. and so have reduced the
substantial Part of it, as nigh to the Primitive Forms as our Circumstances
could bear; but have enlarged it with diverse pertinent places of Scripture, and
proper Questions, as also with accurately composed Prayers: So that now we may
affirm, our Form of Consecrating Bishops is the best and most adapted to the
occasion, of any Office extant in the World, as will more particularly appear
in the subsequent Discourses, upon that which has not been already treated of
in the Former Offices.

CHAP. II. Of the First Collect.
The Analysis thereof.
This Collect consists of Two Parts, 1st. An Introduction, commemorating, 1.
That which Christ gave to his Apostles. Almighty God, who by thy Son Jesus
Christ did give, etc.
2. That which he enjoined them. and did charge them to Feed the Flock.

2ly. The Petitions that are grounded on it, 1. For the Bishops, that they may
Teach and Govern well. Give grace to all Bishops, the Pastors of thy Church,
that they may, etc.
2. For the People, that they may obey them in both. and grant to the People,
that they may obediently follow the same;
3. For both, that they may be finally saved. that all may receive the Crown of
Everlasting Glory, through, etc,



A Discourse on the First Collect.. 1.
Almighty God, who by thy Son Jesus Christ, did give to thy holy Apostles
many excellent Gifts, and did charge them, etc.]
Nothing can be more proper to begin the Consecration of a Bishop, than the
commemoration of those Gifts which Christ gave, and that Charge he laid upon
his Apostles, the First Bishops of his Church; the same Charge being incumbent
upon Bishops now, which was given to the Apostles; and as they have their Duty,
they need some measure of their Assistance. The Apostolical Office was only
temporary, while the Church was planting; but the Bishops, by their
appointment, were fixed to Feed and Rule it, after it was Settled, unto the end
of the World. Hence they were in all Antiquity counted the Successors of the
Apostles, and the Fathers call the Apostles, Bishops Apostolos, i. e. Episcopos
and Praepositos, Dominus elegit. Cypr. Epist. 65. Ipse enim -- imponens Manum
Apostolis ordinavit eos Episcopos. Aug. in N. Test. Qu. 97. Tom. 4. p. 179.
; and as commonly give Bishops the Title and Name of Apostles Apostolorum
honorem possidentes habere nitentur and meritum. Hieron. Epist. 13.
: yea, all Bishops were then styled Apostolical, and their Sees Apostolical
Seats Episcopatus dicitur Apostolatus. Sidon. Apollinar. l. 6. ep. 7. and l. 7.
ep. 4. Et unusquisque Episcopus sedit in Apostolica sede. Idem l. 6. ep. 1. and
4.
. Although of later times the Popes and Bishops of Rome, have arrogantly made a
Monopoly of those Titles. But this right of Succession, and community of Names
being general, doubtless it is very fit, when any are to enter into this
Venerable Order, to commemorate first, what Gifts God, through Jesus Christ,
gave to his Apostles, since we may reasonably believe, so far as their Office
and Duty is the same, so far his Goodness and Bounty will move him to supply
them also, with Gifts suitable to their need. He gave to his Apostles many
excellent Gifts indeed, which St. Paul enumerates, viz. The Word of Wisdom and
of Knowledge, the Gift of Faith, the Power of Healing and Working Miracles, the
Spirit of Prophecy, the Skill of Discerning Spirits, and of Speaking as well as
Interpreting diverse Tongues 1 Cor. xii. 8, 9, 10.
. Some of which were Miraculous, and peculiar to that Age, and therefore are
now ceased; but those of Wisdom and Knowledge, and a sound as well as a strong
Faith, are still necessary, and therefore permanent. So that we may justly beg
these Gifts for our Bishops; so the Greek Church pray, That God would
strengthen their Bishops with the Grace of his Blessed Spirit, as he
strengthened his holy Apostles (...). Euchol. in Ordinat. Episc. p. 303.
, which is a very natural deduction; especially considering, Secondly, The
Charge which Christ first gave to his Apostles, viz. To feed his Flock: These
Words were spoke to St. Peter, but in him the rest were intended; yea, all the
Successors of the Apostles are obliged by this Charge as well as they John.
xxi. 16. Cum ei dicitur ad omnes dicitur, pasce Oves meas. Aug. de Agon.
Christi. c. 30.
; and therefore both St. Paul Act. xx. 28.
and St. Peter 1 Pet. v. 1, and 2.
repeat this Charge, and Enjoin the Bishops which they had chosen to Feed the
Flock of Christ; the Burden goes with the Honor, to every Bishop that is, or
shall be Consecrated to the Worlds end. And therefore we commemorate this, as
their present Duty, and accordingly pray, that this and every other Person who
is called to so great a Charge, may have grace to perform it very well. In the
Petitions we give Bishops the Title of Pastors of Christ's Church; and our Lord
himself first had both these Names, being called the Pastor, or Shepherd and
Bishop of our Souls 1 Pet. ii. 25.
. He is the Chief Pastor 1 Pet. v. 4.
, and they under him are also Pastors of their several Portions of Christ's
Flock, where they Preside in his Name, and Rule by his Authority, and for which
at last they must render him an account Singulis Pastoribus portio gregis
ascripta quam ^ogat unusquisque rationem sui actus Domino redditurus. Cypr. ad
Cornel. ep. 55.
. For while he was on Earth he Fed his Flock himself, by his Preaching, his
Example, his Exhortations and Reproofs, and loved his Sheep so entirely as to
die for them; whence the Greek Church desires of God to make this Bishop an
Imitator of his true Shepherd (...), etc. Euchol. p. 303.
. And then only he deserves the same Name with his. Great Master, when he
follows his Example, in his fervent love of, and diligent care for the Souls
committed to his Charge. Methinks the consideration of this sharing with Jesus
in the Pastoral Office, should make the Bishops very careful and faithful in
executing the same, for which they have such a Pattern, and concerning which
their All-seeing Master will call them to so strict an account. And it should
also make the People reverence, and love them exceedingly for their Works sake.
Wherefore we now proceed to pray for both Pastors and People. First, For the
Bishops, to whose Dignity a weighty Burden is annexed, (as was noted before
Nomen sonat plus oneris quam honoris, non ut praesit, sed ut prosit, eligitur.
Durand. rational. verb. Episc.
), that is, First, diligently to Preach God's Word. Secondly, Duly to
administer the godly discipline thereof: agreeable to the Metaphor of a
Shepherd, who is first to Feed, and then to Govern his Flock; to both which
David alludes Psalm. xxiii. 2, 4.
. As to the Former Duty of a Bishop's Preaching, though he have no Superior to
require it of him, he should voluntarily Preach on all occasions. Thus we find
St. Cyprian preached in the times of persecution Cypr. ep. 52.. 2. p. 114.
, and daily treated upon the Gospel -- Quotidianis Evangeliorum tractatibus.
Id. de bon. pudic. initio.
. St. Ambrose declares, that his custom was continually to admonish his People,
that is, in his Sermons Vulgus jugiter monere consuevi. Ambr. de dig. Sacerd.
c. 1.
; and from the Works of St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine and St. Cyril it is
manifest, that those Primitive Bishops preached almost every day, as St. Hierom
also remarks of Proculus, a French Bishop Pontifex -- qui quotidianis
tractatibus iter tuum dirigit. Hieron. ad Rustic. ep. 4. p 49.
. But of this I shall treat hereafter See Chap. viii.. 1.
, and show, that even in our days many pious Bishops do preach very often, both
in their Cathedrals, and in Cures where there is but mean provision for this
Office, whereby they both set a good Example to the inferior Clergy; and (since
their Dignity gives great weight to their Exhortations and Reproofs) it is
likely they may hereby promote the Salvation of many People: this Petition
therefore that Bishops may diligently preach God's Word, is still very fit to
be made. It Is true, Secondly, There is another part of their Office, wherein
the Priests are not joined in Commission with them, so that the main Burden
thereof lies on their Shoulders; and the male administration of it must wholly
lie at their Doors, which is, the due Exercise of Church Discipline, which may
justly be styled godly, both from the Original of it, being taken out of God's
Word; and the End of it, which is to promote Virtue and Godliness. And this is
a more necessary part of the Bishop's Office than Preaching, which he should
principally intend. There are some Causes too difficult, and some Offenders too
great or too obstinate for the inferior Clergy, and there the Bishop must
interpose, by first Admonishing, and then Censuring such as notoriously offend
in Faith or Manners; a good Pastor must not only Feed the Sound, but Heal the
Sick and Wounded Sheep; Seek them that are Lost, Bring home such as are gone
Astray; Separate those that may Infect others, and finally Cast out them that
are Incurable. Now to do this Duly, that is, as often as there is occasion, and
by a right manner of proceeding, requires much skill and pains, and will take
up much time, and need continual application; but the benefit and comfort
arising from the faithful discharge of this difficult Province, will abundantly
requite the labor of it here, yet it shall be rewarded eternally hereafter,
when the great Shepherd shall appear. In the next place we also pray for the
People, that the Bishop's diligence and care may have a due effect upon them,
even that they may obediently follow their Exhortations, and Advice from the
Pulpit, and patiently submit to their Monitions and Censures, while they
exercise the Acts of Jurisdiction: It Is Solomon's Observation, that a wise
Reprover should have an obedient Ear, and then only he is successful Prove. xxv.
12.
. And we have many pious Bishops (blessed be God) who are diligent in
Preaching, and (as far as their present circumstances will permit) are ready to
exercise the Godly Discipline of the Church; yet alas, they have not the
desired success, through the Pride and Negligence of the People; wherefore we
beg of God to dispose them to Obey and Submit, which are both their
indispensable Duties, required expressly by God himself, who charges them To
Obey those (Spiritual Pastors) who have the Rule over them, and submit
themselves Heb. xiii. 17. Graec. (...), scil. eorum mandatis -- and (...),
poenis just impositis. B. Sanderson. in loc.
; and there is a cogent reason taken from their own benefit, because (says he)
they watch for your Souls as they that must give an account, that they may do
it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you Non dixit,
non expedit illis, sed -- vobis, ipsa tristitia prodest illis, sed non expedit
vobis, nihil autem nobis volumus expedire quod non expedit vobis. Aug Ver. Dom.
Ser. 16.
. A good Bishop is set by Christ as a Watchman over his Peoples Souls; and if,
when his Master calls him to an account, (as he will do) he cheerfully reports,
they were willing, humble and obedient, that will procure God's mercy to them.
On the contrary, if he be forced to complain of their stubbornness with grief,
he shall be rewarded for his pains, and they alas! must be condemned for their
hindering the success of his Labors, which is their loss and not his. It Is
great pity a good Bishop should not meet with an ingenuous and tractable
People, for then both he and they, as this Collect notes, shall receive the
Crown of Everlasting Life: He shall be Crowned for his Diligence, and they for
Observing his Preaching, and Submitting to his Discipline: Which therefore we
beg for Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

CHAP. III. Of the Epistles.
. 1.
OUT of Holy Scripture, the Rule for our Spiritual Guides to walk by, there are
several Portions taken, proper for the several Orders of the Clergy: The first
for the Consecration of a Bishop, is out of the first Epistle to Timothy, Chap.
iii. ver. 1, etc. an Epistle so adapted to this Occasion; that in all the Old
Lectionaries, and Ordinals of the Western Church Vid. Pamel. de Liturg. Tom. 2.
p. 61.

Lectionar. ap. Baluz. append. ad Capitular. Tom. 2. p. 1350. and 1373.

Item ap. Morin. de Ord. Lat. Par. 2. p. 321.


, (where Epistles and Gospels are only in use) this Portion is always the
first; and where there are seven or eight for variety, this is never omitted;
because it contains those Divine Directions which the Holy Spirit, by St. Paul,
gave to Timothy, concerning the Qualifications of a Bishop, and describes all
the Virtues they of that Sacred Order ought to be endued with, as well as the
Vices they must be clear from; and the Method will appear in this Analysis.

The Analysis of 1 Ep. Timoth. iii. ver. 1, -- 7.
This Epistle sets forth, 1st. The usefulness of the Episcopal Office in
General. Ver. 1. 2ly. The Qualities required in such as are admitted to it. 1.
Those that are External. 1. His Reputation, Ver. 2. 2. His state of Life, Ver.
2.
2. The internal Virtues that must adorn his Mind. 1. Watchfulness, Ver. 2. 2.
Sobriety, Ver. 2. 3. Affability and Courtesy, Ver. 2. 4. Liberality and
Bounty, Ver. 2. 5. Diligence and Industry, Ver. 2.
3. The Vices from which his Conversation must be Free. 1. Intemperance,
especially in Drink, Ver. 3. 2. Furious Anger and Fighting, Ver. 3. 3.
Sordidness, Ver. 3. 4. Fretting and Impatience, Ver. 3. 5. Evil Speaking and
Railing, Ver. 3. 6. Covetousness, Ver. 3.
4. Those which respect his former Character, as to, 1. His Ordering his
Family, Ver. 4, and 5. 2. The Time of his Conversion, Ver. 6. 3. His Carriage
before that, Ver. 7.



A Paraphrase upon this Epistle.. 2.
1 Ep. to Timoth. iii, ver. 1. Having chosen thee, O Timothy, to preside over
Ephesus, the Metropolis of that part of lesser Asia, these are the Rules I send
thee, to direct thee in choosing and admitting Bishops to govern in those
Churches, that are subordinate to thee: And first, as to the Office in general,
some may wish it for the Dignity of it, but [this is a true saying] it is
indeed an honorable place; but attended with so much difficulty, that [if a
Man desire the Office of a Bishop] and knows what he wishes for, [he desireth]
not so much a Station of Honor and Profit, (which are accidentally, and in
some times only annexed to it) as [a good work (...), Theophil. (...), Zonar.
in Council. Ephesians. ap. Bev. T. 1. p. 110. Opus non dignitatem, laborem non
delicias, Hieron. ad Ocean. Ep. 83. T. 2. p. 500. Non est dignum ut inde exigas
honorem unde refugis laborem; Bern. Epist. 87.
.] An employment that is very laborious; yet very useful and necessary for the
Service of God and the Church, the good Order of Christian Societies, and the
Salvation of Men's Souls: He is to be an Overseer of the Flock which Christ has
purchased with is Blood, and must give an account to him of his charge; and
therefore the first thing you that are to choose, and he that is to be chosen
are to think of, is how far, he who seeks this place, is qualified to discharge
so difficult and painful an Office, that is, of so great importance to our
Religion.

Ver. 2. Concerning which take these directions, [A Bishop] First, [then must]
have so led his life as to [be blameless] and of an unspotted Reputation; for
since others that are Criminal are to be accused and censured by him, it is
necessary that none of them can recriminate, or justly accuse him: Secondly, As
to his Estate of life, he may be a married Man, but not one that has used the
scandalous liberties which some take, of Polygamy, or Marrying after Divorce
(which the Christian Law calls Adultery Placuit ut secundum Evangelij and
Apostoli disciplinam, neque dimissus ab uxore, neque dimissa a marito alteri
conjungentur: Sed ita maneant, aut sibi reconciliantur, Council. Milevit. can.
17. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 705.
.) No, he must be [the Husband of one Wife] only. Otherwise he will fall under
the suspicion of being immoderate in his Lust, which is a blemish not to be
endured in so sacred a Character: Thirdly, As to the Virtues that he must be
endued with, the inward Qualifications that respect himself are, that he be
very [Vigilant] and watchful over the Souls committed to his charge, that no
harm happen to them Constantius Pogonatus in Council. 6. vocat S. Episcopos --
(...), Bin. Tom. 3. part 1. p. 217.
. And that he may be always fit for God's Service, he must always be [Sober]
and have the use of his Reason: And as to the Qualities which respect other
Men, toward them he must be affable, courteous, and [of good behaviour] which
is very winning, and apt to gain him respect from all. And so it will also, if
he be [given to hospitality] and delight out of his own and the Churches
Treasure, (with which he is trusted) to keep a good Table, to feed Men's Bodies,
especially the Strangers and indigent: But since his principal concern is about
Men's Souls, let him however be [apt to Teach] and Preach the Gospel, which is
the food that nourishes unto Eternal life, and those engaging Qualities before
named, are chiefly designed to make way for his Doctrine, since Men's affection
for the Speaker add weight and efficacy to the Discourse.

Ver. 3. Having declared the Virtues wherewith a Bishop must be endued, we
proceed to reckon up the Vices he must be free from Virtutibus vitia opposuit,
didicimus quales esse debeant, discamus quales non esse debeant sacerdotes,
Hieron. Ep. 83. p. 501.
. He ought indeed to be clear of all sorts of Crimes, but especially he must be
one that is [not given to Wine] or any sort of Strong-drink in excess, which
was severely prohibited, not only to Aaron and his Sons under the Law by God
himself Levit. x. 9. (...), Hecat. de templ. Jud.
. But to the very Gentile Priests, also by Heathen Lawgivers Porphyr. de
abstin. l. 4.. 6. p. 150. etc.
; and therefore this intemperance is much more to be avoided, by the highest
Order of Christian Ministers, who are employed in the most sublime Mysteries of
the best Religion, and ought to have their Minds always clear Ut sensus
officium exhibens Deo semper vigeat and tenuis sit. Hieron. ad Ocean. Ep. 83.
p. 501.
. Nor must he ever be so far transported at Offenders as to beat them, or give
them Bodily correction, he is an Officer of the mild Jesus, he may reprove
Sinners, but must be [no striker] Vid. Can. Apostol. 27. Bev. T. 1. page 17.
and Just. (...), Novel. 123. cap. 11. p. 171.
of them, that being the invading the Province of the Civil Powers, to whom
alone corporal Punishments belong [He must not however bear with offenders, who
offer Bribes, nor use any Sordid ways to get Money, that it may appear he is
[not greedy of filthy lucre] which would be very scandalous in a Person of so
high a Character, especially when they shall be well provided for otherways Hoc
neque in Sir. ne^ in Vulg. nec in 5 Mss. Graec. nec legitur in Hieron. Ep. 83.
and videtur comprehendi in (...), Beza in loc. Addo nec in Chrysostom. nec in
verse. Arab. aut Aethiop. and ordinem turbat. T. C.
.] If any Man injure him by evil Deeds, a Bishop must not be passionate and
furious, [but patient] and mild, after the Example of his great Master, and
that he may overcome evil with good Romans xii. 21.
. So also for the same Reasons, if any provoke him by evil words, he must [not]
render Railing for Railing 1 Peter ii. 23.
, like [a Brawler] for that is below his Dignity, a practice of rude and vile
people, and an imitating that evil which he is angry at in another, a
committing the Sin he condemns Ridiculum est odio nocentis perdere innocentiam.
Senec.
. And since he is the Steward of the Churches Treasures, and common Father of
the Poor; he must be very liberal [not covetous] of much Wealth, for that will
not only take off his thoughts from Spiritual things, but incline him to
defraud and oppress the needy, for whom it is his duty to provide.

Ver. 4. Moreover his former Conversation must be enquired after, for that will
give a prospect of his future Carriage: And first it should be observed, what
order he kept in his own Family, before he became a Candidate for this
venerable Office, if he be [one that rules well] all those that belong to [his
own House] so that none of them remain in error or infidelity Ut Episcopi --
non ordinentur priusquam omnes qui sunt in domo eorum Christianos Catholicos
fecerint, Council. Carthag. 3. Can. 18. Bin. T. 1. p. 575.
, but that all his Domestics be well instructed in the true Religion,
accustomed to daily Prayers, and regular in their Manners Ut quod populo
praecepturus est, prius a domesticis exigat. Hier. ut supr. Ep. 83.
. It must be enquired, if he have done the duty of a Husband and a Master well,
and especially if by [having his Children in subjection] so as they obey his
Commands, Reverence his Person, and submit to his Correction, he has given
good proof, that he is fit to be made a Father of the Church, his ruling his
Children [with all gravity] being the best Evidence, that he is like to govern
his People wisely.

Ver. 5. [For] it is plain, that a Family is the original of Societies (...),
Aristot. Oecon. l. 1. c. 1. T. 3. page 669.
, the foundation of higher and larger Governments, and particularly the emblem
of a Church, which is to be ruled Paternally (...), Theoph. in loc.
: And therefore [if a Man knows not how] or takes no care [to rule his own
House] well, which is the lesser and easier Province Prove. xxv. 21.
, [how shall he] be thought fit or capable to [take care of the Church of God,]
or of all the Christian in a whose Diocese, which is a far more difficult work.

Ver. 6. And as he should have given some experiments of his Prudence, so he
should also of his Faith, before he be a Bishop, and therefore he should have
been a long time a believer [not a novice Gr. (...), i. e. (...), quod
prohibetur item, Can. Apost. 80. Bev. T. 1. page 38. and Can. Nicam. 2. ibid.
page 45.
,] because (when inspiration ceases) he cannot of a sudden, be so thoroughly
instructed in the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, as to be able to teach
others Eruditorum sibi assumunt supercilium, prius imperitorum magistri quam
doctorum discipuli, Hieron. Ep. 8. T. 1. p. 76.
. So that such hasty Promotions should be avoided, least his People despise him
for want of knowledge and experience: And [least] he himself [being lifted up
with pride] and self-conceit of his own Wisdom (the common effect of a sudden
advancement) should do some extravagant and irregular things, and so [he] will
[fall into the Condemnation of the Devil] whose Sin was Pride, and his Judgment
to be excluded Heaven Judicium autem and ruina Diaboli, nulli dubium quin
arrogantia sit, Hieron. Ep. 83. p. 502.
. Or (as the word Graec. (...), Verse. in libro Edvard. 6. Least he fall into
the Judgment of the evil speaker. Sparrow's Collect. ut supra.
may signify,) so will he be obnoxious to the Calumnies of the Evil-speaker,
who delights to accuse a Prelate, and takes all occasions to aggravate and
expose his weaknesses.

Ver. 7. Nor must a Bishop only be such an one, as cannot be accused justly by
the Orthodox Christians. But [moreover he must have] so carried himself
(especially if he were a Convert) as to have gained [a good report] so far as
concerns his Life, [of them that are without] the Church; that is Infidels,
Heretics and Schismatics, who (though they will not speak well of his Doctrine)
must not be able to prove any old Crimes upon him (n), (...). Theophil. in loc.
Talis ergo sit Pontifex Christi, ut qui Religioni detrahant, ejus vitae
detrahere non audent, Hieron. ut supr. Ep. 83.
[Least he fall into reproach] by their Stories of him, and so become a scandal
to the Gospel -- Into rebuke and the Snare of the evil speaker, Verse. Ed. 6. ut
supra.
, though he be never so innocent at present, or (which is worse) least he
relapse into his old Sins, [and] so be drawn into [the snare of the Devil] and
consequently into everlasting Condemnation. And this may suffice for thy
Direction (O Timothy) in choosing those of the highest Order.

Of the other Portion for the Epistle, viz. Acts xx. ver. 17. to ver. 35.. 3.
The Lutheran Office for Ordination (often cited before) has part of this
Portion read on that occasion, viz. from ver. 28 -- to ver. 31. But I have not
observed the use of this whole elegant Oration of St. Paul any where but in our
Church, which had it not in the first Ordinal of King Edw. 6. It Is added since
with great Reason and so exact Propriety, that at first hearing all Men must
discern, nothing can be more suitable at the Consecration of a Bishop, than this
Pious and Pathetical address of our Eloquent and Divinely inspired Apostle,
when he took his last leave of the Bishops of lesser Asia; wherein there is so
lively and lovely a character of a faithful Pastor, as no Pencil but his, and
none but so guided could draw: So that the Candidates for this Order, ought
(when they hear it) to suppose St. Paul himself is speaking to them, directing
them by his Rules and his Example both, how to live, to suffer and to preach:
And exhorting, yea charging them, by the most cogent Arguments, and most moving
entreaties, to do their duty exactly in so great a trust; So that if they lay
it to Heart and duly consider it, this Portion of Scripture cannot fail to
inspire them with holy resolutions to follow such incomparable advice, and so
great a precedent.

The Analysis of the Second Portion of Scripture.
This place being S. Paul's Oration at Miletus has two parts. 1st. The Persons
to whom is was spoken there described. Ver. 17.
2ly, The Subject Matter of it, being, 1st. An appeal to their own experieence.
1. In general as to his whole carriage among them. Ver. 18.
2ly, In particular as to His piety and patience. Ver. 19.
His faithful preaching. Ver. 20, 21.


2ly. The account he gives them of his, 1. Constant intentions of doing well.
Ver. 22.
2. Future expecting to suffer evil. Ver. 23.
3. Steady Resolution to go on. Ver. 24.
4. Prospect of his approaching Death. Ver. 25.
5. Integrity during his past life. Ver. 26, 27.

3ly, His address to them, both, 1. By way of in junction. 1 His strict charge.
Ver. 28.
2ly, The reasons of it, 1 External. Ver. 29.
2 Internal. Ver. 30.


2. And by way of caution. Ver. 31.

4ly, His Prayer for them and the Reason of it. Ver. 32.
5ly His Example proposed to them, 1. Negatively against coveting. Ver. 33, 34.
2. Positively for Charity. Ver 35.




A Paraphrase on Acts xx. 17-35.. 4.
Acts chap. xx. ver. 17. From Miletus.]
A Port of Ionia on the Aegean Sea, where we touched in our way to Jerusalem,
[Paul sent] a Messenger [to Ephesus] the Metropolis of that part of lesser
Asia, beyond which we had Sailed, [and called the Elders] that is, the Bishops
and Pastors [of the Church] who resided in that and the neighboring Cities
Convocatis Episcopis and Presbyteris qui erant ab Epheso and a reliquis
proximis Civitatibus, Iren. lib. 3. cap. 14.
, and had (most of them) been both converted and ordained by him, that he might
take his final leave of them, and give them his last charge.

Ver. 18. Who speedily obeyed his Summons, though Ephesus was 30 Miles from
Miletus, and some lesser Cities were much further [And when they were come to
him] from every Quarter [he said unto them] Brethren, since I cannot any longer
personally attend this part of my charge (after Samuel's Example 1 Samuel xii. 1,
2, etc Ita Pericles moriturus, ap. Plut. in vit.
,) least Religion suffer by any blemish cast upon me, I will clear my
Character, by appealing to you all, because [ye know] and being of my earliest
Converts, can remember [from the first day that I came into] this part of
[Asia, after what manner I] lived and preached, ever since I [have been with
you,] ye have heard my Doctrine, and seen my Conversation [at all Seasons.]

Ver. 19. So that whatever the false Teachers shall say of me, you can evidence
my devotion, and my [ferving the Lord] with Prayers and Praises daily offered
up [with all humility of mind] remembering the glorious Majesty to whom I
addressed. You are witnesses of my Penitence for my own Sins, and my Charity
for the Souls of others, begging Mercy for both, with much Importunity [and
with many Tears] you know the trials [and temtations] I have had, the troubles
[which befell me] by the open rage, and danger I was in [by the lying in wait]
and secret Plots [of the Iews] who sought my life; and I hope my Patience and
Courage under all these Evils will be your Example, if ever the like Dangers
and Troubles threaten, or fall on you in the course of your Ministry.

Ver. 20. As to my Preaching you can testify, how faithfully and painfully I
discharged that part of my Office, in making known the whole Gospel to you,
[and how I kept back nothing] which Christ had revealed to me [that was] either
necessary to be known by you, or [profitable unto you] for regulating your
lives -- (...), Plutar. de vero amico. libr. (...), Ita Philo de Sejano Caij
amico, (...), De legate. ad Caj. page 1001.
. Nicer speculations I did not trouble you with, [but have showed you] all
those Heavenly Doctrines that are necessary to be believed in order to
Salvation [and have taught you] all the Rules fit to direct your Lives, both as
to the Virtues you ought to practice, and the Sins you must avoid; and this not
only [publickly] on the Lords day in your Assemblies: but privately [and from
House to House] at other times, I have instructed, exhorted and reproved
particular Persons as need required.

Ver. 21. Thus have I labored to save all sorts of Men, continually
[testifying both to the Iews] my own Countrymen living in Asia, [and also to
the Greeks,] who were Gentiles and Natives of the Country; that none could be
saved, but by [Repentance toward God] for their manifold Sins against his Holy
Laws, [and] by such a lively [Faith] as would produce a sincere obedience
[toward our Lord Jesus Christ] his Son and our Redeemer, because both Jews and
Gentiles had sinned, and could not be pardoned and justified, and consequently
not saved any other way.

Ver. 22. This I thought requisite to declare as to what is past: [And now] as
to that which is to come [behold] I am as undaunted as ever, for at this time
[I go bound] by a steadfast resolution of my own (...), Matthew. v. 3. Act. xx.
22. Adrian. Isagog. add, Act. xix. 21. (...)
, and a revelation communicated to me [ in the Spirit Spiritus S. afflatu and
mandato, Bez. in loc.
] upon a desperate adventure, even to take a Journey [unto Ierusalem] where I
have great and most malicious Enemies, and consequently I might be discouraged,
by justly suspecting mischiefs in general from them, though [not knowing]
particularly what are [the things that] are now contrived against me by them,
or that hereafter [shall befall me there.]

Ver. 23. I confess the particular sufferings are not revealed to me, I know no
more [save] only [that the Holy Ghost] has intimated to me, and each Prophet
that I meet with [witnesseth in every City,] that I pass through [saying] unto
me, I must expect Persecution in all places Acts xxi. 11.
, and foretelling me [that bonds and afflictions] of all sorts are already
prepared by my cruel Foes, and only [abide] or stay for [me] Si te digna manet
divini gloria ruris, Virg. Georg. 1. ubi Servius, manet, i. e. expectat.
, till I come within their reach, who hate me so mortally for my zealous
Preaching down their ceremonial Law, which I know Christ has abolished.

Ver. 24. All this I believe, and apprehend before I go thither [but none of
these things] Prisons, Stripes or Tortures, which would make some desert so
hazardous a Journey, do [move me] blessed be God in the least -- (...) in
Graec. (...), Suid.
from my purpose, or put me upon taking care to prevent them [neither count I
my life] which they will take away if they can, and which others would do, or
suffer any thing to preserve Job ii. ver. 4. Multi cruciatus suscipiantur certi
ut peuci dies adjiriantur incerti, August. Ep. 45.
, so [dear to my self], but that I would freely give it up, and suffer the most
tormenting kind of death [So that I might] be assured, by that Martyrdom, I
should [finish my course with joy] and the peace of a good Conscience: I am
willing to die in my Master's service, and like a faithful Soldier to fall upon
the Spot Adversis vulneribus omnes loca quae tuenda a Ducibus acceperunt
morientes corporibus texerunt. De milit. Athen. Justin. l. 9.
, when I have accomplished my Office, [and the ministry which I have received]
immediately from the mouth [of the Lord Iesus] who commanded me [to testifie]
Act. xxvi. 16.
both to Jews and Gentiles, the truth of [the Gospel] which reveals, that he is
the Savior sent unto them, by the pure mercy, and out [of the] free [grace of
God] to bring them all to everlasting life.

Ver. 25. [And] this protestation of my willingness to be a Martyr, is not in
vain, for [now behold] I tell you plainly, that by a general Revelation of the
Spirit, as well as by Rational Conjectures, [I know] my Preaching will e're
long cost me my Life; and [that ye all] who are here present, [among whom I
have gone] from City to City, and House to House, [Preaching] the true Doctrine
of [the Kingdom of God], must take your last leave of me, because it is
certain, after this, that you [shall see my Face no more] in these Churches,
and this part of the World.

Ver. 26. But though I foresee this, I am not so much concerned for my own
danger, as for yours, and the Churches Dilexi virum qui cum jam corpore
solveretur, magis de statu Ecclesiarum, quam de suis periculis angebatur. Amb.
de obit. Theodos. Tom. 1. p. 122.
. My principal fear is, that the Gospel I have preached, may suffer by the
Calumnies of False Teachers, or the Apostasy of some of you, after I am gone
away; [Wherefore I take you] for my Witnesses, desiring you not only to
remember, but [to record this day, that] which I solemnly affirm in the
presence of God (and you know to be true) I have so sincerely labored to
ground you in all fundamental Truths, and bring you to the practice of all
Holiness, that [I am pure] and can clear my self to God [from] being guilty of
[the blood of all men] that have been under my care, and from being the
occasion of any of your miscarrying eternally.

Ver. 27. For I have not shunned] any one opportunity to rectify and direct
your Manners, nor have I forborne [to declare unto you] as plainly and openly as
I could [all the counsel of God] concerning those admirable Methods, which his
Infinite Wisdom has contrived for your salvation by Jesus Christ, so far as it
was revealed to me, or needful for you to know.

Ver. 28. Now the dangers and difficulties which I met with, may occur to you,
to whom I must leave the Care of the Churches which I have planted: [Take heed
therefore] I charge you, first [ unto your selves Quis non videat quod tunc
Sacerdotes sibi attendunt, quando sancte vivendo faciunt voluntatem Domini and
fiducialiter praedicando Ecclesiae Dei prospiciunt. Prosp. de vit. contempl. l.
2. c. 3.
], that your lives be very holy and exemplary, for your own sakes, [and] in the
next place [to all the Flock] belonging to your several charges, [over the
which] you should reckon (not so much the hands of your Ordainers, as) [the
Holy Ghost] the Dispenser of all Gifts and Offices in the Church Luke xxiv. 47.
and Ephesians. iv. ver. 18, and 11.
[hath made you] Bishops, that is, [Overseers] to Rule by your Authority, and
[to Feed] with your Doctrine [the Church of God], being that body of Christians
committed to you, [which he] who is both God and Man [hath purchased] and
redeemed from eternal death (to which they were liable Mos erat apud Gentes
substituere aliquem qui morte voluntaria, eriperet alium a morte. Vit. Hadr.
ap. X. Script. Var. p. 64, 65.
, [with his precious blood] shed on the Cross. And since he loves them so
infinitely, and bought them so dearly, you cannot but think he will call you to
account for every one of them, that shall perish by your default.

Ver. 29. Perhaps you think this severe Charge needless, and fancy you shall
not either be negligent or unfaithful 2 King. viii. 12, 13.
; nor meet with so great difficulties as I have done: But I give it upon very
good grounds, [For I know this] by revelation, and now tell you, [that after my
departing] when you will want both my presence and assistance, then [shall
grievous Wolves], that is, Heretics Matthew. vii. 15.
in Sheeps clothing, especially the Nicolaitans Revel. ii. 6.
[enter in among you], pretending to be your Guides (...). Bato Dux ap. Xiphil.
in August. p. 215.
. But alas they will mislead their followers into damnable Errors, and teach
them to indulge themselves in vicious practices, to the final ruin of these
straying Sheep yea, they will, if possible, devour those within the Fold, [not
sparing] to set upon that part of [the Flock] which is yet untainted, whose
Souls they will also seek to destroy.

Ver. 30. Some of these may come from Antioch, or foreign Churches; but since
the worst of Enemies are those within -- Plus nocet hostis domesticus, Bern.
med. c. 14.
, I foresee that though now you seem all to be Orthodox, yet some [Also of your
own selves], whom I have made Pastors, in this pure Church that I have planted
Non se lupis opponunt, sed lupos agunt. Cypr. de dupl. Martyr.
[shall men arise] that will turn Wolves and False Apostles See Rev. ii. 2.
, putting on the highest Character, and making fair pretenses to Truth, and yet
[ speaking perverse things Prove. viii, 8. LXX. (...). Vulg. perversum.
], and broaching abominable Errors, contrary to the straight Rule of Faith
(...). Theognis.
, not so much out of a desire to direct others, as [to draw away Disciples],
and be counted the Heads of a deluded Party, that may run [after them] to
destruction.

Ver. 31. This alas will certainly be the case in my absence, [Therefore watch]
over this People, now left to your care, that none of them be seduced; consider
my example, if that will quicken you, [and remember] I have taken such care to
keep them from listening to Heresies, and admiring False Teachers [that by the
space of three years], at the several times of my being among you Act. xviii.
19. and Chap. xix. 10. cum Chap. xvii. 18.
, [I ceased not] with great diligence and zeal [to warn] all of you in general
by my public preaching, and [every one] in particular, and in private both [
night and day Noctes atque Dies, i. e. omni Tempore. Serve. in Virgil.
] of the danger of doting upon these Deceivers; and this with so great
affection for some that were like to be drawn in, and so passionate a desire to
save them, that my words were often mixed [with Tears]; which I hope you will
never forget.

Ver. 32. And now] after this warning, my dearly beloved [Brethren], since I
can no longer stay with you, or watch over you, putting you into a better hand,
[I commend you] all, most heartily, from henceforth [to God] for your Guard,
who is All-sufficient, and to the Scripture for your Guide, being [the Word]
that he caused to be writ [of his Grace] and infinite Mercy, to direct you in
the right way to Heaven, [which is able], if you study it, cleave to it, and
follow it [to build you up] and complete you in the knowledge of all Divine and
Saving Truth, by its Doctrines, [and to give you], by its Promises, the
assurance of your being rewarded for your Diligence and Fidelity in your
Pastoral Office, with [an Inheritance] in the Kingdom of Heaven [among them
that are] now glorified there, and formerly were [sanctified] here, even the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Saints and Martyrs, with whom you also (if you follow
these Rules) shall have your portion of bliss for ever and ever.

Ver. 33. Of which glorious reward nothing will deprive you sooner, than
seeking to make Temporal Advantages by your Spiritual Calling, which will show
you value not the Riches of Glory, and will put you upon pleasing the People,
that you may increase your own Wealth by their Gifts, rather than profiting
them and increasing their Graces by your labors; and herein I once more
propose my Example: You can bear Witness, that [I have coveted] no kind of
earthly rewards for my labor; though I was poor, yet I have desired [no man's
Silver or Gold] to enrich my self, by impoverishing others Ita versatus sum in
provincia, ut nemo posset vere dicere, assem aut eo plus, in muneribus me
accepisse. Gracch. ap. Aul. Gel. l. 15. c. 12.
; nor so much as taken any man's Meat [or Apparel], though sometimes I wanted
both; and many were so kind to me, as to offer voluntarily to supply me with
all sorts of necessaries of these kinds.

Ver. 34. I considered many of the Christians were poor and persecuted, and no
maintenance for Gospel Ministers could yet be established: So that I forbore to
use that power which Christ had given me St. Luke x. 7. 1 Cor. ix. 14.
, to ^equire sufficient provisions of those I preached to; [Yea, you your
selves know], the Church being in these circumstances, how [ that these Hands
(...), i. e. (...). Hesych. vid. Acts xviii. 3. Ita Abdolonymus ap. Q. Curt.
Hae manus suffecere desiderio meo.
] by working at the mean Trade of Tent-making [have ministred] and procured a
supply, not only [unto my necessities], but enabled me (who lived sparingly)
out of the surplusage of my labors, to relieve the Poor, [and to] give Food
and Raiment unto [them that were with me], even my Fellow Laborers; which was
enough to convince you all, that I sought not your worldly Wealth, but your
Spiritual Good and Eternal Salvation.

Ver. 35. I beseech you therefore to mind my Charge, and follow my Example, for
[I have] now [shewed you all things] that may qualify you to succeed me in
this Charge; and particularly during this unsettled state of the Church I have
set you a Pattern, [how that so labouring], as I have done, till God send
better times, [ye ought] both to maintain your selves, and [to support the
Weak] and Sick, the Poor and Needy Epiphanius meminit Servorum Dei, (...).
Panar. haer. 80.
out of what you can spare; [And to] encourage you to so necessary a Duty as
this now is, (...). Artemidor. l. 4. c. 3. (...). Epicurus.
you are, besides my Example, to [Remember the words of the Lord Iesus], not
written, but spoken to some of his Disciples that related it to me, that [he
said] be ye rather helpers of others, than accepters of their Gifts, for [It is
more blessed to give, than to receive], it is more like God, more comfortable
in this World, and shall be abundantly restored in the World to come.

CHAP. IV. Of the Gospels.
. 1.
IT IS certain, that in the Western Church of old, they read no other Epistle
and Gospel, but those for the day on which the Consecration happened; as
appears by the most ancient Formularies that are now extant, where there are
only directions when the Gospel was to be read, without specifying any
particular place Vid. Morin. de Ordin. Latin. p. 275.
. And hence, according to the Superstition of those times, from the words of a
Gospel read at a Bishop's Consecration, many conjectures were made, how he
would behave himself, and what fortune he should have: But afterward, one
proper Portion of the Gospel was fixed to be read Luke xxii. 24, -- 30. Morin.
ut supr. p. 307.
. To which, a little after, a second was added for variety Mark vi. 6. Id.
ibid. p. 323.
. In the Gallican Church there were also two Gospels, but both different from
the former, as may be seen in the Appendix to the Capitulars Matthew. xxiv. 45,
etc. and Chap. xvi. 12, -- 19. Ap. Baluz. append. ad Cap. Tom. 2. p. 1350.
. But in the Lectionary, Printed by Pamelius, there are no fewer than six
Gospels, all differing from each other, and most of them not being the same
with those two before mentioned. But no doubt these were put in only for
varieties sake, and to leave the choice to the Consecrater. I shall put them
all into the Margin Joh. xii. 24. Matthew. xxiv. 42. Mark vi. 6. Matthew. x. 1.
Luke x. 1. Joh. x. 11. Vid. Pamel. Liturg. T. 2. p. 60, etc.
that the Reader who is at leisure may compare them with those three that are
selected by our Church, viz. John xxi. 15. John. xx. 19. and Matthew. xxviii. 19.
which are peculiar to us (as far as I have observed) but are more pertinent to
a Bishop's Consecration, than any of those used abroad. The first of our
Gospels being the Commission and Charge which Christ gave to St. Peter, and in
him (as the Ancients note Cum ei dicitur ad omnes dicitur pasce Oves meai. Aug.
de Agon Chr. c. 30. Vid. Barrow 's Supremacy, p. 96.
) to all Bishops. The other two are the account of that general Mission which
our Savior gave to all his Apostles (whose Successors the Bishops are) as they
are severally related, by St. John and St. Matthew; concerning which two last
it may be noted; the former respects the Authority that Christ gave them over
those already converted, viz. to remit or retain their Sins, as they found men
penitent or impenitent: The latter relates to the Power he gave them to bring
Men into the Church, by first Teaching, and then Baptizing them. Of these I
shall only give a Paraphrase (omitting the Analysis) because the Portions are
brief, and the Method perspicuous.

A Paraphrase on John xxi. 15, -- 17.. 2.
John xxi. 15. The third time that our Savior appeared to his Disciples after
his Resurrection, [Iesus says to Simon Peter] one of his Chief Apostles, whom
he perceived somewhat dejected at the remembrance of his Fall, [Simon] I mean
thou that art the [Son of Ionas], thy Surname betokens Innocence and Integrity
Bar-Jona, i. e. filius Columbae. D. Hieron. in Matthew. 16.
; and therefore though thy denial of me seemed to argue, thou had little
regard for me, yet since thou have repented sincerely for that Offense: now I
will give thee an occasion to clear thy self by this Question, [Lovest thou me]
now I have taken thee into favor again, [more than these] thy Fellow Apostles,
who did not so openly renounce me? [He says unto him, Yea], I am verily
persuaded I love thee; but having once been so mistaken in my self Matthew. xxvi.
33, 35.
, I will make no more comparisons, nor rely on my own judgment (...). Theoph.
in loc.
, but humbly appealing to thy Omniscience, I hope, [Lord, thou], who know
all things, [knowest that I love thee]: Which humility and ingenuity of his, so
pleased Jesus, that immediately [he says unto him] perhaps thou may fear, I
have not forgiven thee so far as to admit thee to exercise thy Apostolical
Office after my Ascension, and therefore I Authorize and Charge thee in
particular, to [Feed my Lambs] those late Converts whom I must leave in the
midst of Wolves, take care of them, I am now Immortal, and returning to Heaven,
so that thou and the rest, who are or shall be Pastors, can show no more love
to my person Quid enim Petrus poterat praestare Domino, maxim jam immortale
corpus gerenti, and in coelos ascensuro, Aug. de Verb. Dom. Ser. 62. Tom. 10.
p. 57.
, therefore I will make this the sign of thine and their Affection to me (...).
Theoph. in loc.
even your instructing, exhorting and comforting this tender part of my Flock,
which the greatest of you all must not neglect nor despise, because I love them
entirely, and have bought them with my very Blood.

Ver. 16. But Jesus was desirous to give Peter a further opportunity to express
his love, and to take an occasion to repeat his charge; wherefore [he says
unto him again the second time] almost in the same words [Simon] thou [Son of
Ionas] let me ask thee once more, without any comparison, [Lovest thou me] at
least as well as these? And Peter was now well satisfied, his affection was
sincere and therefore [he says unto him] as before [Yea Lord,] I own thee for
my dear Master, my Savior and the eternal Son of God, and so I doubt not but
[thou know that I love thee,] for thou see all Men's hearts: Upon which
Reply, Jesus repeats his charge, and requiring the same evidence of his love as
before [he says unto him,] if thou love me [ feed my Hinc Petrus discit vocare
fideles, (...). 1 Pet. v. 2. Nunquid dixit ei pasce agnos tuos, aut oves tuas,
sed meos and meas, August. ver. Dom. Ser. 62.
Sheep] take care of the elder Christians also, for I commit the whole Flock to
you and your fellow Pastors, and you must reckon them not your own but mine, to
whom at my second coming, you must give an account for them, and therefore you
had need take care, that none of them be lost by your default.

Ver. 17. Yet as if this were still not enough, Jesus thinking it necessary he
should blot out his three denials by a threefold Confession, and give as many
proofs of his affection and zeal, as he had done of infidelity and fear Ut
trina confessione amoris, deleret trinam negationem timoris, Aug. ver. Dom.
Ser. 49. p. 41. ita Epiphan. haer. 59. Lib. 2. T. 1. p. 220. Isid. Peleus. lib.
1. Ep. 103. and alij apud Causab. exercit. p. 505.
. [He says unto him the third time,] the same words [Simon Son of Jonas,
love thou me] sincerely and fervently [Peter] not discerning the true Reason
of this third demand, and fearing it proceeded from his dear Master's suspicion
of his constancy [was grieved] in his mind exceedingly, [because he said unto
him the third time] as if he doubted it [lovest thou me?] Wherefore he replied,
with much vehemence [and he said unto him] I will no more affirm it, but hope
thou need not ask me so often about the sincerity, or constancy of my
affection, for [Lord, thou knowest] my Heart better than I, and see [all
things] clearly, and I hope [thou knowest] and believe for certain [that I
love thee] most ardently: Upon which [Iesus] being fully satisfied, renews
his charge, and [saith unto him,] do thou and thy Fellow-pastors [feed my
Sheep] by your Doctrine and good Example, by your vigilance over them, and
constant attendance on them, and then I will never question either thy love to
me, or doubt of theirs, for this care is an undeniable demonstration thereof;
because it is a certain effect of a true affection in a Servant, when he
diligently looks after his Master concerns, and this dear Flock is now that
which I most set my heart upon.

A Paraphrase on the second Gospel.. 3.
John xx. ver. 19. Though Christ had by the Angels, and by his own appearing
both to Mary, and the two Disciples going to Emaus, sufficiently testified his
Resurrection; yet some of the Apostles still doubting, he gave further evidence
thereof; thus, [The same day] that he arose on Sunday [at evening, being the
first day of the Week] in the Paschal Festival, to show that his Body was now
glorified [when the Doors] of that Room [were shut, where the Disciples] by
appointment all met and [were assembled,] but very privately, when it grew dark
[for fear of the Jews,] who generally suspected them for stealing away their
Master's Body, and would have destroyed them, had they found them Matthew.
xxviii. 13. Acts iv. 2, 3.
. In that seasonable time, while they were weeping and praying, tossed yet
between hope and fear [came Iesus] himself, none knew which way, for he was
(when they first saw him) amongst them [and stood in the midst,] and being
assured they knew his voice, he spoke immediately [and says unto them] in his
usual Form of salutation, [Peace be unto you] let no fear disturb you, I your
dear Master, wish you all happiness.

Ver. 20. [And when he had so said] that he might leave no scruple in any of
them, whether it were he or no [he showed unto them] all plainly [his Hands,]
with the wounds made by the nails appearing fresh, [and his Side] wherein that
made by the Spear was very visible, [Then were the Disciples] not only
satisfied, but also exceeding [glad, when they saw] it was really and certainly
[the Lord] Jesus who had been crucified, and now was risen again as he had
promised.

Ver. 21. When therefore their Faith was thus confirmed, and their Minds
composed [Then said Jesus to them,] I salute you [again] most heartily wishing
[Peace] and all Happiness, may now and ever [be unto you.] For I now come to
enlarge your Character, by making you my Deputies, and Vicegerents in the
Ruling and Feeding my Church: And that your Authority and Power may be equal to
your Trust. Behold [As my Father has sent me] with his Spirit, and in this
Name to be the supreme Pastor of this Flock, even [so send I you] with my
Spirit, and in may name (...) Sig. mittere cum potestate mittenti, 1 Peter ii.
14. Graec. (...), Et missi Dominici pro judicibus, Capitular. Franc. passim.
to gather together, instruct and preside over the Church in my absence, as my
Delegates and Representatives, till I come again at the end of the World; and I
expect that all who believe in me shall receive and obey you as such, for my
sake who send you.

Ver. 22. And when he had said this] to instate them into this Office, he also
made use of a visible significant sign: And to show the ability to execute it
aright came originally from the Holy Spirit, which he as the eternal Son of
God, had power to communicate [he breathed on them,] for breath is an emblem of
the Spirit, (called in Hebrew by the same name) and was used by God, when at
the first Creation he put the Soul and Spirit into Man, therefore when
Spiritual power and Energy was to be put into these newly created Officers,
Jesus used the same Symbol [and said unto them] to explain the meaning of the
sign [Receive] every one of [ye the Holy Ghost] and all his gifts that are
ordinarily necessary for the discharge of this your Pastoral Office, unto which
I now admit you.

Ver. 23. And leaving you my Ambassadors resident upon Earth, I do commit to
you and your Successors, the Ministry of reconciling Sinners unto me, upon the
Conditions of the Covenant of Grace which I have established in the Gospel, and
no otherwise. So that you shall not only have Authority by these Rules to
declare what things are lawful, and what unlawful, but to judge of Persons and
their Actions, and if any have Sinned, who truly Repent of it, you may not only
pray to God for them, and according to the Gospel promises give them hopes of a
Pardon: But (if you think their Repentance sincere) you may Pronounce it, and I
will confirm it; For [whose soever Sins you remit] in my Name, and on my
Conditions [they are remitted,] and I will forgive them according to the tenor
of my Gospel. [And] on the otherside [whose soever Sins ye] judge are not
sufficiently repented of, and so you [retain] your power of Absolution, and
declare their guilt remains upon them, such Men are liable to my final
sentence, for as to the Sins of these impenitent Wretches [they are retained]
and I will not forgive them, till they give better Testimonies of their
unfeigned Repentance Non praejudicamus Domino judicaturo quo minus si
Poenitentiam plenam invenerit, tunc ratum facit, quod a nobis fuerat hic
statutum, Cypr. ad Anton. Ep. 52.
. You know I am appointed the great Judge of all, and I (who alone have the
original power to Forgive or Condemn) invest you with this Prerogative, of
loosing the Penitent and binding the Ostinate, both to enable you the better to
deal with all sorts of Offenders, and to bring all Christian People highly to
Reverence (...), Theoph. in loc.
your Office, and greatly to regard your Censures and Absolutions.

A Paraphrase on the third Gospel.. 4.
Matthew. xxviii. 18. After our Lord had often manifested himself to be risen
again at Jerusalem; the eleven Disciples by his direction went into Galilee, to
a Mountain probably Tabor) where being assembled [Iesus came] as he had
promised, to take his final leave [and spoke unto them] to this effect: Having
now gone through all the Stages of my Humiliation, and perfected the work of
your Redemption; Now, by virtue of the eternal Covenant between me and my
Father [All power] and Authority is Graec. (...) Lat. potestas.
[given to me] to Order, Rule and Govern all things both [in Heaven] the
Triumphant [and] also [in Earth] the Militant part of my Church, Saints and
Angels there, and all Mankind here being subjected to me as their sole supreme
Head.

Ver. 19. As to the upper and glorious part of my Kingdom, whither I am now
returning, to be your Mediator there, I will manage that in Person. But you
shall be my Delegates here on Earth [Go ye therefore] as my Apostles, in my
name [and Teach,] the first Principles of my Religion unto [all Nations] in the
World; So as to convert both Jews and Gentiles to be my Disciples. And when
they believe my Doctrine, and will promise to live by my Rules, you shall
solemnly admit them by [Baptizing them] with Water, for remission of all their
Sins, using this Form; I Baptize thee [in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost] declaring thou art a Believer of the Doctrine of
the Holy Trinity, and by that distinguishing Article, receiving thee into
Christ's Holy Church, of which thou art now made a Member.

Ver. 20. As for those whom you have thus baptized, you must take care that
they understand and keep their Baptismal Vow, by frequently Preaching to them,
and [Teaching them] conscientiously and strictly to observe all things
whatsoever] I have revealed to be a Duty, and all that [I have commanded you]
already, while I was with you upon Earth, or shall hereafter by my Spirit
further enjoin to you and them, for keeping these my Commandments is the only
way to eternal Life I foresee you will meet with many difficulties, and much
opposition in doing this, and perhaps you may be troubled that I must leave
you, but go on courageously [for lo] though I am to remain in Heaven, as to my
Bodily presence; yet as God, I am Omnipresent, and by my constant assistance
and support you shall find, that [I am with you] as long as you live, and will
be with your Successors [always, even unto the end of the World;] then I will
come again in Glory to reward you and them, for all your Labors in my
Vineyard, and all your Sufferings upon the account of me and mine [Amen.]

CHAP. V. Of the Archbishop, and the Oath of Canonical Obedience to him.
. 1.
RUbr. -- And then shall be also ministered unto them the Oath of due Obedience
to the Archbishop, as follows.]
It has been fully proved by diverse learned Writers, That as soon as the
Christian Religion began to spread over the Provinces of the Roman Empire, the
Bishops of lesser Cities were subordinate to those of the greater, after the
method of the Civil Government; and this, in or soon after the Apostles times
Hammond. de Episc. jur. Disser. 4. c. 5. p. 189. Petr. de Marca de concord.
lib. 6. cap. 1.. 5. p. 175. Dr. Cave Dis. of Anc. chapter Gov. chap. 2. p. 90.
, for then the Bishops of the Proconsular Asia were subject to Timothy Bishop
of Ephesus, which then was the Metropolis of that Province: Which chief Bishop
was originally styled the first Bishop, as his Title is in the Apostolical
Canons, where the inferior Bishops are ordered to own him as their Head, and to
do nothing of moment without his consent Apostol. Can. 34. Bever. Tom. 1. p.
22. Graec. (...).
. In Africa, this principal Bishop was called the Primate Du Fresn. Glossar.
verb. Primates.
; but elsewhere, from his living in the Mother City, he was named the
Metropolitan Synod. Antiochen. Can. 9. Bev. T. 1. p. 438.
. And from his Authority over other Bishops, he was called the Archbishop, a
Title given to Peter Bishop of Alexandria in Dioclesian's time Epiphan. Panar.
haer. 68. fol. 318.
, and also to Alexander Bishop of the same See Athanas. Apol. 2. page 791.
, as also to Meletius Bishop of Thebais, the head City of a Province in Egypt
Epiphan. haer. 69. fol. 324.
. Yea, for some time this Name was given to the great Patriarchs, for Cyril of
Alexandria, and Coelestine of Rome, are frequently styled Archbishops in the
Ephesine Council Council. Ephesin. par. 2. Bin. Tom. 1. par. 2. page 168, 177.
etc.
; and Pope Foelix the third gives that Title to Acacius Bishop of
Constantinople Foelic. 3. Ep. ad Zon. Aug. Bin. T. 2. par. 1. p. 453.
. There were diverse Privileges belonging to the^^ Archbishops, but the
Principal was, that no Bishop in their Province could be ordained without their
presence, or consent (...), Nicen. can. 4. Bev. T. 1. p. 63. Vid. can. 6. ib.
p. 66.
. A right declared in the first General Council, and then thought so inherent
in the Metropolitan, that the Consecration was to be void without him, and
hence Synesius calls his Archbishop, The Lord of the Ordination (...), Synes.
Ep. 105. p: 249.
. To which Primitive Canon our Church so strictly adheres, that it is required,
the Archbishop shall by himself or his Lawful Proxy always consecrate every
Bishop. As to the Oath of Canonical Obedience which the Bishop ordained takes
to the Archbishop, no doubt it sprung from this Primitive Superiority in the
Metropolitan, but is of a later date. At first it was thought sufficient in
words to admonish the inferior Bishops to observe those Canons which declared
their subjection to the Metropolitan, but afterward a promise was required.
Which Anastasius, Archbishop of Thessalonica, at the Consecration of Atticus,
a subordinate Bishop, carried higher, and made him subscribe a Paper, for which
Pope Leo reproves that Metropolitan, as guilty of an unnecessary innovation Non
enim necessarium, fuerat ut obligaretur scripto. Leo I. epist. ad Anastas. 84.
p. 447. circ. An. Dom. 440.
. Yet in the following Ages this Promise was turned into an Oath, extended also
to Priests, who, as well as Bishops, were made to swear, That they were worthy,
would not break the Canons, and would obey their Ordainers, and the Church in
which they were ordained. Which Oath was declared dangerous and ensnaring, and
abolished by a French Council -- Jurare cegunt quod digni sunt, and contra
Canones non sint facturi, and obedientes sint Episcopo qui eos ordinat, and
Ecclesiae in qua ordinantur. Council. Cabilon. Can. 13. An. 813. Bin. T. 3. Par.
1. p. 193.
. However the Bishops promise of due obedience was then in use, as appears by
the Vatican Form of Consecration in that Age, extant in Morinus, where the
Archbishop only asks, Will you be obedient to my See Morin. de Ordin. Lat.
Form. and Vatican. in Consecr. Episc. p. 276.
. But in the middle of the next Century this Promise was much enlarged in the
Particulars, and turned into a solemn Profession made in the Name of God, Vid.
Morin. ibid. in alt. Form. circ. An. 950. p. 305.
amounting to an Oath Pontifices jurant ante Consecrationem, omnem morum
honestatem, and debitam obedientiam se exhibituros suis Ordinatoribus. Ivo
Carnot. ep. 73. circ. An. 1100.
, and within 150 year after, a formal Oath was again brought into use, wherein
the Parties Consecrated swore to live well, and obey their Ordainers Pontifices
jurant ante Consecrationem, omnem morum honestatem, and debitam obedientiam se
exhibituros suis Ordinatoribus. Ivo Carnot. ep. 73. circ. An. 1100.
. But whereas of old this Oath was only taken by each Suffragan to his own
Metropolitan, Pascal the Second, soon after, required all Archbishops to take
an Oath of Fidelity (as he called it) to the Pope; but the Archbishop of
Panormus in Sicily refused it as a New Imposition, which the King and Nobles
there wondered at, and disliked Decretal. l. 1. Tit. 6. de Elect. c. 4. p. 122.
Decr. Significasti.
; and that Pope there owns no Council had decreed any such thing; but he
required it of his own Authority. I know some would have this Oath to the Pope,
as old as Pelagius the Second, but his Decretal speaks of a Metropolitan's
declaring his Faith to be Orthodox Quicunque Metropolitanus intra tres
Consecrationis suae menses, ad exponendam fidem suam non miserit, -- etc.
Pelag. 2. ap. Great. Decret. Par. 2. Did. 100. cap. Quoniam, p. 182. An. 580.
, (a custom of which I shall speak shortly) which the Roman Parasites have
corrupted -- Dandae fidei causa ita legit. Remund. Rufus Defens. in Molin. p.
20.
as if he were to give his Faith -- or swear fealty to the Pope: a Custom so
modern, that in the elder Fomularies of Morinus (though some of them be 400
year later than Pelagius the Second) there appears nothing of it. And doubtless
it was hatched in the Hildebrandine Age, above 1000 years after Christ, being
more like an Oath of Allegiance to a Temporal Prince, than of Canonical
Obedience to an Ecelesiastical Prelate; and probably it was first administered
only to such Bishops and Archbishops, as were within St. Peter's Patrimony,
and subject to the Pope as a Temporal Prince, and so by degrees imposed upon
all the Bishops, especially the Metropolitans of the Popish part of
Christendom. The Oath it self, as it was at first, may be seen in the Body of
the Canon Law Decretal. Greg. 9. Lib. 2. Tit. 24. de Ju^ejur. c. 4. p. 8^7.
, falsely ascribed to Gregory the Third. But even that lofty Form did not
satisfy the Ambition of later Popes, who instead of swearing to desend the
Rules of the holy Fathers; put in these words, -- the Royalties of St. Peter
Regulas S. Patrum adjutor ero ad defendendum. in Decret ut sapr. Hodic Regalia
S. Petri.
, and the modern Form for a Metropolitan keeps both, containing many other
extravagant additions Vid. Pontifical. Romans p. 88.
, and being so worded, that every Popish King when he nominates an Archbishop,
loses a Subject, because he must swear fealty to another Prince Vid. Spalatens.
de Repub. Eccl. l. 4. c. 2.. 52. p. 425.
. Which was understood in England so well, even while Popery was professed
here, that William Rufus declared, Anselm could not keep his Allegiance to him,
together with this Obedience to the Apostolical Seat, promised against his will
Protestatus est illum nequaquam fidem quam sibi debebat simul and Apostolicae
sedis obedientiam, contra suam voluntatem, posse servare. Eadmer. Hist. Nov. p.
26.
. So that this Oath never was liked in the English Nation, and at last it was
declared treasonable, and forbid by Law: And not only so, but a short and plain
Oath is all that is now required of our Bishops, that they will pay due
reverence and Obedience to the Archbishop, the Metropolitical Church, and
their Successors. Now this only relates to Ecclesiastical Matters contained in
the Canons, and is no more than is necessary for the good Order and Government
of the Church; it no way interferes with the Temporal Allegiance due to the
King, and is much the same with that Question and Promise used 800 year ago,
and cited before out of Morinus. So that there can lie no Objection against it.
Wherefore it may lawfully be taken, and ought strictly to be kept, to maintain
regular Subordination and good Order in the Church.

CHAP. VI. Of the Exhortation before the Litany.
. 1.
BRethren it is written, Luke vi. 12, etc. Acts xiii. 2, 3, etc.]
The ground of this short Preface to the Litany, and other Prayers for the
Bishop elect, is laid on a sure Foundation, viz. The practice, first of Christ,
and then of his holy Apostles, whose custom of Praying before they
Commissionated any to be Pastors, and the Churches constant following their
Example, is equal even to an Express Command, for us to pray before all sorts
of Ordinations. And First, St. Luke (Chap. vi. ver. 12.) tells us, Our Savior
went into a Mountain to pray, and continued all night in Prayer to God: Adding,
ver. 13. And when it was day he called his Disciples, and of them he chose
Twelve, etc. From whence it is clear, that the Lord Jesus (who knew the hearts
of all men, and whose single request was enough with his Father, who heard him
always) spent one whole Night in Prayer, before he chose and sent out his
Apostles; and it is as plain, he did this chiefly for our Example, to show us
how to proceed on this weighty occasion. For he retires to a Mountain apart,
where it seems there was a House of Prayer (a Proseucha) built Graec. (...).
Verse. Syriac. Quoniam illic videbatur Domus Orationis: Dulplexarticulus
ostendit quod (...) de loco dicitur, ut and Act. xvi. 2. and Ham. Annot. ibid.
, to which in the daytime many resorted, but at night it was empty and free,
and there our Lord chose to spend his whole time in deep Meditation, and
fervent Prayer, before he entered on the same Work that we are going about; and
if we remember (what was observed before, upon Matthew. ix. ult. and Chap. x. 1.
See Disc. on the Office of Priests, in the First Gospel.
,) that he charged his Disciples to pray also, before he gave them their
Mission, it will effectually show with how great Devotion, not only the
Ordainer, but those to be Consecrated or Ordained also, should prepare
themselves on this solemn Occasion, Watching, Fasting and Prayer, being far
more necessary in our Circumstances than it was either in his or theirs. 2ly.
To this Example of our Lord is added, the imitation thereof by the Bishops and
Apostolical Men at Antioch, who (even when God immediately chose the Persons,
and allotted their peculiar Work) did not lay their Hands on Saul and Barnabas,
till they had Fasted and Prayed Act. xiii. 2, 3.
: Our Savior also was Fasting when he Ordained his Apostles, for it was early
in the Morning after a night spent in Prayer, that he called and sent them Luke
vi. 13.
. And this was one of those Ecclesiastical Matters upon which the Primitive
Bishops appointed the Christians to Fast and Pray Episcopi universae plebi
mandare jejunia solent, alicujus sollicitudinis Ecclesiasticae causa. Tert.
adv. Psych. c. 13.
. The inference from all which Premises naturally is, Let us therefore,
following the Example of our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, first fall to
Prayer, before we admit -- this Person, etc. Though we do believe he is
inwardly called to this Great Work by the Holy Ghost; yet we must by Litanies,
Supplications and devout Prayers, earnestly beg of Almighty God to enable him
to perform it to his Glory, and the Salvation of his own and many others Souls.

CHAP. VII. Of the Questions to a Bishop.
. 1. The Preface.
BRother, for as much as the Holy Scripture, and the Ancient Canons command,
that we should not be hasty in laying on Hands, and Admitting, etc.] This
Introduction is to show, that these necessary interrogatories, before the
admission of a Bishop, are grounded first upon Holy Scripture, even St. Paul's
charge to Timothy, concerning his not ordaining any without a previous
examination 1 Timothy v. 22. Citatur a D. Bern. and inde sic Eugenium alloquitur
-- Curae tibi sit maxim introducere tales, quos postmodum introduxisse non
poeniteat. Bern. de Consid. l. 4. c. 4. p. 887.
: Which St. Bernard expounds, of not ordaining any but such as they will not
repent afterward that they did admit. Secondly, This method of asking Questions
of the Candidate for a Bishopric, is grounded on diverse ancient Canons,
especially on that of the Fourth Council of Carthage, where it is expressly
required, and where all the particulars, to be enquired of, as to his Manners,
his Learning, and especially as to his Faith, are set down at large Qui
Episcopus ordinandus est antea examinetur, etc. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. l.
Bin. T. 1. p 588.
, and unless he could give an Account in all the particulars, the Metropolitan
was not to consecrate him. From this Canon (which also cites the place of St.
Paul), our Church has taken this Preface, being very like also to the most
ancient Forms used in the Western Church, as may be seen in Morinus, which thus
begins, The ancient Rules of the Fathers, -- especially the Canon of Carthage
ordains, according to that of the Apostle, Lay Hands suddenly on no man, etc.
Antiqua S. Patrum instituta -- at legimus in Canone Carthag. etc. -- secundum
Apostoli dictum. Morin. de Lat. Ordin. p. 275.
. And then all the Questions (like ours) tended only to try his Faith and his
Life. But after the Papal Monarchy was set up, about the year 900. two
Questions more were added, about receiving and keeping the Traditions of the
Fathers, and the Decrees of the Apostolical See, and about Fidelity to St.
Peter and his Vicar Vis traditiones -- Patrum ac Decretales S. and Ap. sedis,
-- etc. Vis B. Petro -- ejusque Vicario, etc. Morin. ibid. p. 320.
. And the Modern Roman Pontifical has made this Second Question still larger,
putting in the Pope's Name, and binding them to pay Fidelity, Subjection and
Obedience in all things to him and his Successors Vis B. Petro -- ejusque
Vicario Dom. nostro Dom. N. Papae -- suisque Successoribus Romany Pontif.
Fidem, Subjectionem and Obedientiam -- per omnia exhibere. Pontif. Roman. p. 62.
; which shows, that of late they are more concerned for Bishops subjection to
the Pope, than for their being Orthodox in their Faith, or Religious in their
Lives. But all this being mere Innovation, was justly expunged by our
Reformers; and we have reduced this Preface to what it was in the Primitive
Ages; yea, to what it was in the Church of Rome, while it was pure and
uncorrupted: And in this (as well as in many other things) we have left them,
only in those things wherein they had first left their own Orthodox and Pious
Predecessors, and so departed from themselves, and from the right way.

. 2.
Of the Second Question. Are you persuaded that the Holy Scriptures contain,
etc.]
This Question is the same with that which is put to a Priest, and had not been
necessary to be considered here, but only to give an account, that this is
instead of that large Declaration of Faith which every Bishop was obliged to
make before his Consecration in the Ancient Church; of which we will now
observe, that St. Paul makes it a necessary Qualification for a Bishop to hold
fast the faithful word as he has been taught, and to preach sound Doctrine
Titus i. 9.
. And doubtless care should be taken that he be very Orthodox, who is not only
to instruct a whole Diocese, but to teach and inspect the inferior Teachers;
which part of the Episcopal Office was of great importance in the Primitive
times, while such swarms of Heretics infested the Church of God: and hence
there was a very strict enquiry then made, (as appears by the Canons of
Carthage cited before) whether the Candidates for this Superior Order
understood and believed the true Churches Sense of all the Articles of the
Creed? especially about the Trinity, and the Incarnation, Passion and
Resurrection of Christ, (then most disputed about). To which were added diverse
Queries, concerning their renouncing the Heresies then infesting the African
Church, especially those of the Manichees, the Novatians, the Donatists, and
Pelagians, as may be seen at large in the aforesaid Council Council. 4. Carth.
Can. 1. Bin. ut supr.
. And the old Roman Formularies taken out of the Vatican keep almost the same
words (as we noted out of Morinus before) only requiring the Bishop elect to
give his assent explicitly to every Article, and (except the additions
contrived to support the Papal Supremacy) the Modern Pontifical varies but
little from the old Form. As for the Greek Church, it is certain it has been
very anciently used there, for a Bishop to make a full confession of his Faith
to the Metropolitan who Ordained him; from that passage in Synesius, who
(hearing he was nominated to be a Bishop, in order to excuse himself) pretended
he held diverse Heterodox Opinions, which he could not dissemble when he came to
be ordained, but resolved he would then declare them before God and Man, and
desires his Friend to tell the Archbishop (who was to consecrate him) all this
before hand Synes. Epist. 105. p. 249.
. And to this day the Greek Bishops, besides repeating the Nicene Creed, make a
large Confession of their Faith, concerning the Incarnation of our Savior, the
Unity of his Natures in one Person, the Trinity, etc. and they do also
specially name and condemn the Heresies of Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius and
others who had disturbed the Eastern Church Euchol. Graec. Ord. Episcopi, p.
306, etc.
. Which large Forms we now omit, both because most of the ancient Heresies are
now vanished, and also because we have other securities, that our Bishops are
Orthodox; but especially by the several Subscriptions they have made in the
lower Orders, whereby they declare their assent to the three Creeds, and to all
the Articles of the Church of England. Which method of Subscribing I could
prove to be as old as the time of the Nicene Council. And St. Hierom says,
such as refused it were put out of the Church, in his days Aut scribendum eis
fuerit aut exeundum de Ecclesia. Hieron. ad Pammach. Epist. 65. T. 2. p. 283.
. And this same Method is yet continued in the Reformed Churches of Helvetia,
where no man can be admitted to serve a Cure, unless he do first subscribe
their Confession of Faith, and promise to obey all the Rules made in their
Synods Vide Bullengeri ap. Melch. Adam. p. 493.
. And it is to be considered, that Subscriptions remain on Record, as a
perpetual Evidence against the Party, if he shall prove an Apostate afterward;
whereas a Verbal Profession may be forgot or mis-told by such as hear it but
once. And therefore it was required in the Primitive Ages, that all inferior
Bishops should send a Confession of Faith in Writing to their Metropolitans,
and they to their Patriarchs immediately after their Consecration: And the
Popes themselves (as I have showed elsewhere) for diverse Centuries, writ to the
Emperors, after they were advanced to the Sea of Rome, to prove themselves
Orthodox: But finally, this question of their believing all things contained in
Scripture, and promising to Preach nothing contrary to it, is sufficient to
secure the Church, that they are no ways Heretical, but sound and Orthodox in
all Points.

. 3.
Quest. IV. Are you ready with all faithful diligence to banish and drive away
all erroneous and strange Doctrine, etc.]
We have heard how strictly St. Paul charged the Bishops of Asia to watch
against those grievous Wolves, the Heretics, that were likely to break into
their Folds Acts xx. 29. and 31.
. And requires Titus the Bishop of Crete after two admonitions (if they
prevailed not) to Excommunicate an Heretical Teacher Titus iii. 10. Graec.
(...), i. e. Expulsus sit e numero gregis, Bez
, making it a necessary qualification of a Bishop, to be able by sound Doctrine
to convince the Gainsayers Titus i. 9. Graec. (...).
; that is such as speak against the Truths revealed in Scripture, and received
by the Church; for which end they promise upon the third Question, to exercise
themselves in Study and Prayer, to gain a complete understanding of the Holy
Scripture: And if a Bishop be thoroughly enlightened with this Divine knowledge,
the bright beams thereof will banish all Erroneous Opinions, and make them
disperse as the Mists before the Rays of the resplendent Sun: The inferior
Clergy may confute false Doctrines; but Bishops being supposed to have more
Skill and Experience, as well as more Age and Authority, they must drive them
away: They are set in the Watch-towers to discover Heresies, and like wise and
valiant Generals (one of which is worth a whole Army) 2 Samuel xviii. 3. Solent
-- plus reponere in duce quam exercitu, Tacit. de Morib. Germ. p. 663.
, must not only Fight against them themselves, but must advise, manage and
encourage all the Underofficers and Soldiers: Hence the ancient Canons lay
great stress upon the Bishops care in this matter: And order, That if any
Bishop let the Heretics alone in any part of his Diocese, and another Bishop
shall convert them, that Town shall be given to the latter Bishop Council.
Carthag. can. 122. ap. Ber. T. 1. p. 655.
. -- And the former Bishop is to be admonished of this neglect, so as if he
persist in this negligence six Months after such Admonition, he shall be
Excommunicated Ibid. Can. 124. apud eund. page 658.
: Wherefore when Riparius complained to St. Hierom, that Vigilantius spread his
Heresy in that Diocese where he was a Priest, the Holy Father wonders that the
Bishop should not restrain such fury Miror sanctum Episcopum in cujus Parochia
esse Presbyter dicitur, acquiescere furori ejus, etc. Hieron. ad Ripar. Ep 53.
T. 2. p. 152.
. And besides this promise, our Bishops are obliged frequently to confer with
Recusants, and to do their utmost to reclaim them: As our Canons enjoin Canon.
66. of the Church of England.
. And here I could give many instances of diverse of our learned and zealous
Bishops, who have not only secured their own People from Heresy and Schism,
but converted diverse Recusants of all sorts: And if all our right reverend
Fathers remembering this solemn promise, would apply themselves to this
necessary Duty, with a Zeal suitable to the occasion, their Dignity and Station
would give great weight to their Arguments, and their Example would also
quicken the inferior Clergy to do their parts, in the places that are under
their several charges: And multitudes of poor Souls bought with the most
precious Blood of Christ, now wandering in the dangerous and destructive Paths
of Popery and Fanaticism, would every were be happily reclaimed, and brought
over to the Church: To which pious and charitable design, I shall humbly and
briefly offer two or three motives. First, That the present Toleration (as to
Protestant Dissenters) having suspended the Bishops exercise of their Authority
in this Matter, there is no way left to reduce this sort of Recusants but by
Arguments and Persuasion; and as to Papists, those always were and are the
fairest ways of convincing them; nor if we had power, ought we to imitate that
unchristian Rigor, which we condemn them for using to, foreign Protestants
(...), Dict. Marciani Aug in Council. Chaled. Bin. T. 2. p. 361.
, so contrary to the practice of the Primitive Church Socrat. Hist. l. 7. c. 3.
page 733.
, as well as to the Spirit of the Gospel Luke ix. 55.
. Secondly, Let the goodness of our Cause be considered: Our Doctrines are so
plainly contained in Holy Scripture, our Offices and Rites so proper, Pious and
Primitive, and have been so clearly justified against all opposers, by many
eminent Writers of this Church: That if we can but win its deluded Adversaries,
to hear us Reason or Read our Books, there is little doubt of success; and
their Priests and Teachers know this, which makes them hinder them (as much as
in them lies) from hearing, or reading what we say or write: Lastly, Let the
vigilance and strangely busy zeal of Seducers be duly considered, who, like
their ancestors the Pharisees, compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, and
ply those they find doubting, wavering, or discontented, night and day by
Discourses, Books and fair Promises, and shall not we take as much pains to
save Men's Souls, as they do to destroy them? to propagate Gods Holy and Eternal
Truth, as they to disseminate their pernicious Errors? I shall add no more,
because I hope a word is sufficient to our worthy Bishops, who generally use
their utmost endeavors in this kind: And merit praise rather than need
Exhortation.

. 4.
Qu. VI. Will you maintain and set forward, as much as shall lie in you
quietness, love and peace among all Men, etc.]
There is no more expected from a Priest, but only to promote Peace and
Charity, and that is also the Duty of a Bishop as the former part of this
Question shows; but since the Canons of our own and the ancient Church, as well
as the Laws of this Land, have put the Ecclesiastical Discipline, into none but
the Bishops hands, who also have by God's word a just right to Administer the
same; Therefore it is required, that they shall further promise, To correct and
punish the unquiet, disobedient and criminous, according to that Authority
which they have both by God's Word, and the Ordinance of this Realm: I need not
repeat that which I have proved in a peculiar tract, viz. The Bishops having
this Authority vested in them both by Scripture and the Laws Ecclesiastical and
Civil See my Discourse of Excommunication printed at London, 1685.
. But I shall rather briefly show here, the manifold benefits that will arise
from their due Execution of this power, as to regulating the manners of those
within the Church, who only can be a scandal or an honor to it: There are many
faults among these (for the purest Principles and Holiest Rules, will not
always secure the innocence of such as profess to believe and follow them.) But
if the Rulers of the Church upon the discovery of them, zealously and prudently
labor to punish the offense and reform the Offender, they not only save the
honor of the Church, but probably the Soul of the Criminal also; which should
be the great end of Church censures, being a Power that is given for
Edification, and not for Destruction (as the Apostle declares See chapter 8.. 2. 2 Corinthians. xiii. 10.
.) Now since Bishops cannot amend the Evils they do not know; Therefore the
ancient Canons require, That they shall personally visit their whole Diocese
once every year Unusquisque Episcopus Parochiam suam omni anno semel circumeat,
Council. Calcuth. Can. 3. An. 857. Spelm. T. 1. p. 193.
; and the present usage is, for them to do this annually by their Archdeacons,
and once in three years by themselves; to enquire into all that is amiss, both
among the Clergy and Laity: Which is called their Visitation, with respect to
their name importing Overseers and inspecters (...), Graec. Acts xx. 28.
. The Emperor in the sixth General Council calls Bishops the Eyes of the
Church, and Isidore of Pelusium says, they should be all Eyes, to see every
thing (...), Orat. Imper. ap. Bin. T. 3. par. 1. p. 217. -- (...). Isid. Pel.
1. Ep. 149.
. So that they ought to look well to every part of their charge, and by their
Archdeacons and their own strict enquiry to labor to find out all Enormities
and Disorders within their Cognizance, that they may apply suitable remedies to
them: Their frequent presence in these Visitations must tend to discover many
Evils, and their Authority will conduce exceedingly to amend them; and thus the
negligences and irregularities of the Clergy, and all crimes of the people that
are proper for the Ecclesiastical Tribunal, might effectually be rectified, and
we become in this Sense, a truly Reformed Church: Nor will any thing more
universally promote the suppression of Atheism profaneness and debauchery
(which pious design, our gracious King and his Parliament are now intent upon)
than the restoring the Bishops to the full exercise of their Authority, in
these cases, and reducing of personal Visitations to their Primitive use, and
Religious ends St. Agobardus kept his great Diocese of Lyon's in excellent
Order, as he declares by yearly going round about it, and taking so strict care
of all his People, as to amend, whatsoever he found depraved; by the Rules of
Truth and Holiness, according to the power given him by God Agobardi Epistol.
ad Nebrid. oper. Tom. 1. edi^. Baluz. p. 103.
. And the inferior Clergy of old were very serviceable in their places herein,
being then enjoined to inform the Bishops (in these Visitations) of such as
were impenitent toward God, or cherished any notorious Sin, if they could not
bring them to repentance, because of their secular greatness -- Ut Sacerdos
faciat Synodo innotescere, si quem in parochia sua in Deum reperit contumacem,
vel qui grave aliquod peccatum foveat, nec hunc valeat audeatque ob metum
secularium ad reformationem perducere, Edgar. Can. 6. ap. Spelm. p. 448.
. Which is one of King Edgar's Laws, and is more briefly expressed in the
Capitulars, that such as will not amend on the Priest's admonition, shall be
cited before the Bishop Capitular. R. Franc. Tom. 2. cap. 8. p. 97.
. To all which must be added the care of Parish Priests to instruct their
Churchwardens, in the nature of their Oath, and the great benefit to the Souls
of their Neighbors, which will follow their impartial presenting all Offenders
and Offenses, for the happy reforming of both, as our own Canons direct: The
subordinate Ministers will find some cases too intricate for them to determine,
some Crimes too heinous, and some Criminals too obstinate for them to deal
with, and these must be referred to the Bishops Exodus xviii. 22.
. Who upon such information are to proceed with all demonstrations of Paternal
kindness Amari Parens and Episcopus debet, non timeri, Hieron. Ep. 62.
, toward the guilty Persons, for this, from those in so high a Station, will
open their hearts to receive their Fatherly admonitions, and when they see that
their Spiritual Father loves their Souls, and hates only their Sins, and seeks
their amendment not their shame, this may prevent the necessity of a censure,
and so the Parties may be restored by gentle rebukes, with all long suffering,
and by the Spirit of meekness 2 Timothy iv. 2. Galat. vi. 1.
. Whereas, if reproofs be given with Bitterness and Passion, they commonly
exasperate the offender, and move him to reject the admonition, and the means
of his Salvation Leniter castigatus exhibet reverentiam castiganti, asperitate
autem nimiae increpationis offensus nec increpationem recipit nec salutem,
Prosp. de vit. Contempl. l. 2. c. 5.
. Wherefore gentle methods ought first to be tried; but if they be too weak to
awake a Sinner; that is fallen into the Lethargy of obduration, then sharp
reproofs, public shame, and severe censures must be used Titus ii. 13.
; yea, they must finally be cast out of the Church, who will be a perpetual
scandal to it as long as they remain in it: These are the Rules of Scripture,
and the Laws of the Holy Fathers for bringing Sinners to Repentance, and
preserving the Church pure, and doubtless we can find out no better, nor do we
need any new Orders, if this godly discipline (which is much to be wished) were
universally restored: This did keep the Primitive Church Holy, and would make
ours so also, if it were duly put in Execution, and backed with good Laws to
punish such as did hinder or despise it. This is the discipline of which the
Fathers give so fair a Character Disciplina custos spei, retinaculum fidei, dux
itineris salutaris, fomes ac nutrimentum bonae indolis, magistra virtutis,
Cypr. l. de Disc. and Hab. Virgin.
, as to be the keeper of Hope, the anchor of Faith, the guide of our Heavenly
Journey, the food and nourishment of good Inclinations, and the Mistress of all
Virtue. If our Age can be persuaded to make the experiment, we shall soon find
the blessed effects thereof, in a general reformation of all their manners
however, who profess to be members of the established Church, and then other
Parties must amend those of their persuasion, if not for love of Piety, yet for
fear of Reproach.

. 5.
Qu. VII. Will you be faithful in ordaining, sending, or laying hands on
others.]
We have already proved, that the Bishops have the sole right to Ordain First
Preface.. 5.
, and shall only add one passage or two, out of Antiquity, to confirm that
great Truth: The writer of St. Fulgentius his life observes, That Thrasimundus
the Arrian Vandal King of Africa had forbid the orthodox Bishops to ordain any;
but they met in Council, and resolved they would confer Holy Orders, for
otherwise vacant Churches could not be provided of Pastors -- Regalis
Authoritas Episcopos ordinari prohibuerat, nec viduatis ple^ibus pastores
provideri licebat, Vita B. Fulg. c. 16. page 18.
. These Holy Confessors foresaw that if an heretical persecuting Prince should
suspend the Bishops from executing this important and incommunicable part of
their Office for some time, the Orthodox Clergy must entirely fail, and
consequently the African Church be destroyed, because the Persons single are
mortal, and the Bishops by ordaining new Men do alone make the Office immortal
by a Succession, that is to endure to the end of the World Matthew. xxviii. 20.
. And upon this Principle Sidonius severely censures those Kings of France who
kept many Bishoprics vacant, to gain the Profits of them as a Right to their
Crown, which (he says) threatened Ruin to the Gallican Church, because Bishops
had the sole power to constitute Successors to supply the Ministrations proper
to the lower Orders Summis Sacerdotibus morte truncatis, nec ullis deinceps
Episcopis in defunctorum Officia suffectis (per quos utique minorum Ordinum
Ministeria subrogabantur) ruinam imminere Ecclesiis. Sidon. l. 7. ep. 6.
. Since therefore they have this sole Privilege, doubtless it is very necessary
strictly to require a Promise from them at their Consecration, that they will
faithfully perform this great trust, of Ordaining and sending out fit Persons
to execute the Priestly and Episcopal Offices. For if they promote any that are
Heterodox, or Schismatical in their Opinions, Weak and Unripe in their
Judgments, or Vicious and Debauched in their Lives, either by negligence in due
examining them before, or (which is worse) by fear or favor be imposed upon,
it is the greatest Sin they can possibly commit, and they are answerable for
all the ill effects of admitting such Persons into so Holy an Employment. The
Roman Writers record of their famous Pope Leo the Great, that for forty days
together he fasted and prayed for Pardon of all his Transgressions, and that at
last St. Peter appeared to him, and told him all should be forgiven him, but
the Sins of his Ordinations Dimissa sunt tibi omnia peccata tua praeterquam
impositionis manuum. Pratum Spir. c. 149. ap. Bin. not. in Vit. S. Leonis.
. And there is thus much moral in the Story, that if a Bishop be of never so
holy a Life, and has few Sins of his own, by this means (as St. Paul speaks)
he becomes partaker of other men's Sins 1 Timothy v. 22. (...). Theop. in lo.
, because he is the occasion of all the ill consequences of putting an ill man
into Sacred Orders. And therefore many pious Bishops have opposed the Commands
and Menaces of Princes, and those of the highest Quality, who have urged them
to Ordain such as were evil and unfit; and have therein showed a commendable
Zeal for God's Glory, and the Good of the Church. In the ignorant and wretched
Ages, before our Reformation, this neglect had brought the Clergy into extreme
contempt, which I choose to express in the words of an honest Romish Author then
living, who says of the Bishops of his time -- They thrust men into Holy Orders
that are like a company of Jack-daws, Infamous, Boys, and Illiterate, such as
are not fit for any thing else, and are not called by God, contrary to the
Rules of our Forefathers; yet if any suffer a repulse, he flies to Rome, where
the most holy Fathers admit Hostlers, Cooks and Idiots, to the Altars of the
Great God; yea, such as in Germany would not be allowed to communicate among
the Laity, to the shame and grief of all good Men, till they have made the Name
of Priest to be a reproach; surely they must have evil thoughts of Religion and
themselves, or design to abuse Christian People who do such things; the Work
shows the Artificer, the Tree is known by its Fruit; may Christ save us; St.
Peter is asleep, and the other Simon, not to say Antichrist has got the
Dominion Aventini Annal. l. 2. p. 118. qui scripsit circ. An. 1500.
. Thus, alas, it was then, and no doubt it hastened the Reformation; and since
that in our Church, though some few do creep in that prove very unworthy, by
fair Certificates gained by favor, yet generally our Bishops and their
Archdeacons are very careful to keep out ignorant and scandalous Men, for
which they deserve the highest applause; and the general good Character of most
of the Clergy shows, that all due caution was taken in their Admission.

. 6.
Quest. VIII. Will you show your self gentle, and be merciful for Christ's sake
to the poor and needy People, and to all Strangers, etc.]
As Bishops succeeded the Apostles in all the ordinary parts of their Office,
so they did in the Primitive Times in their being Supreme Treasurers of all the
Oblations of the Faithful, and by their Order, they were distributed to the
Poor and Needy of all sorts, as I have showed at large elsewhere Act. iv. 35.
See the Divine Right of Tithes, Par. I. c. 4. p. 60. and Par. II. c. 15. p. 117.
. In those Ages therefore the care of the indigent lay almost wholly upon them.
So that the Ancient Author of the Apostolical Constitutions tells us they were
to be addressed to (at their admission) in this Form, O ye Bishops, be careful
to maintain all the Poor, so as none may want; Give to Orphans of the Gifts of
their Parents, to Widows those of their Husbands; make Marriages for such as
are grown up, get Work for the Artificer, show Mercy to the Weak, provide Meat
for the Hungry, Drink for the Thirsty, Clothes for the Naked, Medicines for the
Sick, and Relief for the Prisoners Constit. Apostol. l. 4. c. 2. fol. 60.
. In after times the case was altered in some measure, since the building of
Parochial Churches in all parts of the Diocesses, to which the Bishops granted
or confirmed all the Profits and Oblations (formerly paid and presented at the
Cathedral) arising within those Precincts, enjoining the Parish Priest to take
care of his own Poor. And since that our Secular Laws have provided for the
residence and relief of the Poor in every Parish; yet still there are very many
and great Objects of Charity, especially in great Cities; Decayed and Aged
Laborers and Tradesmen, Orphans and Widows, Sick and Lame, Blind and Maimed;
many undone by Fire and Water, Thieves and Robbers; many poor Strangers and
Travelers, and many confined to loathsome Prisons: To which the Bishop is
hereby obliged to be courteous and bountiful for Christ Jesus sake, who takes
that which is given them, as lent to himself, and will reward such Charity with
a Crown of Glory Prove. xix. 17. Matthew. xxv. 34, 35.
. His compassion interests him, so far in their wants, that he seems to beg in
them, and will be pleased by our giving them relief Egestuosus pro se tantum
and in se eget, Solus -- Christus est qui in omnium pauperuw universitate
mendicat, Salv. de gub. l. 4.
. Now if all desire to hear those comfortable words of our Lord (says St.
Hierom) come ye blessed of my Father, -- etc. for I was Hungry and ye gave me
meat, etc. -- how much more should a a Bishop (his Steward) desire to hear
them, whose House should be ready to receive all the necessitous Matt. xxv. 35,
etc. -- Cujus domus commune debet esse omnium hospitium, Hieron. in Tit. 1.8.
. It Is certain the Apostle's Rule, That a Bishop must be given to Hospitality 1 Timothy iii. 2. and Titus i. 8.
, does oblige in all Ages, and every one of this Order according to his
ability: And there are but few Bishoprics, which by the bounty of Christian
Kings and Prelates, Nobles and others of the Faithful, are not still endowed
with Lands and Revenues, sufficient to enable them to relieve many of the
indigent: Wherefore it is but reasonable, they should be required to promise at
their Consecration, to be Hospitable to Strangers, and Courteous as well as
Liberal to the Poor. And our Form is almost the very same, which has been used
on this occasion for 800. years, in the Western Church, as the old Formularies
and the Modern both show Pauperibus, and peregrinis omnibus indigentibus vis
esse propter nomen Domini affabilis and misericors? Morin. de Lat. ordin. p.
320. Pontif. Romans p. 62.
. And the ancient Canons do strictly enjoin, that every Bishop shall keep an
Hospital for the sick and infirm Council. Carth. 4. can. 14. Bin. T. 1. p. 589.
, -- and shall entertain People bountifully at his House and Table Council.
Matisc. 2. can. 2. and can. 14.
, -- especially the Strangers and the Poor, who are to be their daily Guests
Council. Turon. 3. can. 6.
. -- And in one word -- to be Hospitable and Liberal to all that need, even to
the uttermost of their Ability Council Meld. can. 28. Council. Aquisgr. 1. can.
141.
. To which one of our English Councils adds, That the Bishop shall keep a
Clergyman for his Almoner Council. Oxon. Anno 1222. Spelm. T. 2. p. 182.
. All which Ecclesiastical Laws show the constant Opinion of the Church, that
this Duty was most especially incumbent on those of this sacred Order: I could
here enlarge, by describing the great Examples of the Primitive Bishops, but
will content my self with two or three. St. Ambrose his House entertained all
the indigent Strangers at Milan, and when Augustine came thither a young
Student from Africa, he received him like a Father, and like a Bishop loved him
in his Travel Aug. Confess. lib. 5. c. 13.
; and when St. Augustine himself was made a Bishop of a very small City, he
always kept up Hospitality at his Table Hospitalitatem semper exhibuit,
Possidon. in vit. c. 22.
; yea, he entertained all comers and goers, and looked on it not only as
unchristian, but inhuman to do otherwise Aug. de vit. commun. cleric. Ser. 1.
Tom. 10.
. Yea, St. Gregory Bishop of Rome being informed, that a covetous and sordid
Person was nominated for the Bishopric of Ancona, writ to the Visitor, to put
him by, if that Report were true D. Gregor. Mag. libr. 12. Epist. 6.
. From whence Gratian infers, That it is a just ground to stop a Bishops
Consecration, if he be known before hand, not to be given to Hospitality
Hospitalitas usque adeo Episcopis est necessaria ut si ab ea inveniantur
alieni, jure prohibeantur Ordinari, Great. did. 85.
. Which Instances and Rules I can the more freely Record, because our Right
Reverend Bishops since the Reformation have been, and still are very eminent
for, and exemplary in their Charity and Hospitality, entertaining great numbers
at their Tables, and feeding many Poor at their Gates, giving while they live
great Sums to redeem Captives, release or relieve Prisoners, maintain poor
Scholars, desolate Widows and Orphans, especially those of the Clergy; and at
their Death leaving (when they were able) great sums of Money, with Houses and
Lands, to Colleges, Schools, Hospitals and other pious uses, in so much that
some of our liberalest foundations for Piety and Charity now remaining in
England, are of their Erection and Endowment, or however they have been great
Benefactors to them: I need only point at some such Bishops in the Margin Vita
Math. Parkeri per Godwin. p. 220. Bishop Andrews fun. Sermon. p. 19. The fun.
Sermon. of Dr. Cosens, Bishop of Durham, the Life of Archbishop Williams Par. 2.
p. 31. Bishop Warner's fun. Sermon.
. But it were to be wished, we had a complete History of the Lives and great
Charities of our Protestant Bishops, many of whose immense liberalities of this
kind, ought to be kept in everlasting remembrance, the collecting and
publishing whereof would highly tend to the Honor of God, the Credit of the
Church, and of this Venerable Order, as also to the Encouragement of their
Successors, and many others to imitate their good Examples.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Collect before the Consecration.
. 1. ALmighty God and most merciful Father, etc.]
The large Preface to this Prayer, is the same almost verbatim, with that which
follows the Veni Creator, and precedes the Ordination of a Priest, where it is
explained already Disc. on the Ord. of a Priest.. 7.
. That which is peculiar to this Form is only two Petitions for the Bishop now
to be admitted, viz. That God may grant him grace -- 1st, To Preach the Gospel
willingly; and 2ly, to use his Authority wisely: And 3ly, here are the motives
to the Consecrators and Consecrated, exciting them to make these requests. 1.
The benefit of God's family committed unto this Stewards care. And 2ly, The
Salvation of the Stewards own Soul. We have touched upon most of the particulars
before, and shall only remark here.

First, That as to a Bishops Preaching, it is expressed by his being always
ready to spread abroad the Gospel, which is, the glad tidings of Man's
reconciliation with God: A Message of that mighty importance, that the highest
Ministers of Religion are honored, by having the Privilege to deliver it, and
an Angel was the first Preacher thereof, in verbis de praesenti S. Luke ii. 10,
11.
. The Gospel signifies Good tidings, and so it is to a poor Sinner, that has
been truly humbled for his Sins, and seen how justly he has deserved God's
wrath; to such an one the feet of him that brings this joyful news, that God
will pardon him, and be reconciled to him, are so beautiful, that he is ready
to kiss and adore them: The consideration whereof, should make Bishops (the
principal Ministers of this reconciliation) always ready to publish a thing so
necessary and so acceptable: And this is no more than what St. Paul requires 1 Timothy iii. 2. Gr. (...).
. That a Bishop should be apt to teach; the word imports, Ability and
Inclination both: For Preaching was esteemed so principal a part of a Bishop's
duty in the first Ages, that the Apostolical Canons order such as neglect it
shall be Excommunicated Apostol. can. 58. ubi Balsamon not. (...), Bev. T. 1.
page 38.
, because it was then so appropriate to this Office, that none but Bishops did
use to Preach, a Custom continued in Africa till St. Augustine's time Possidon.
in vit. D. Augustine. c. 5.
. And long after that the sixth General Council enjoined The Bishop should
Preach every day, or however upon Sundays, to instruct both his Clergy and
People (...), Conc. in Trull. can. 19. Bev. Tom. 1. p. 177.
, where one of the Scholiasts observes, this Canon was obeyed by the Patriarchs
of Constantinople, to the time of the Emperor Alexius Comnenus An. 1110 Vid.
Annot. ibid. T. 11. page 131.
. In the Roman Church, the Bishops had neglected this part of their Office most
shamefully long before the Reformation: But since that, in our Church the pious
Prelates have been very frequent Preachers, and innumerable of their excellent
Sermons in Print, demonstrate they were as eminent for, as frequent in their
Preaching: I have seen a Register which Archbishop Mathews (who is commended
by Mr. Camden for his eloquent and constant Preaching) kept, wherein he noted
almost every Sunday what Church he preached in, and what Text he preached on,
and sometimes with what hopes of success: It must be confessed (to the honor
of this Church) that there are now in so many places Priests that are learned
and able Preachers, far beyond what the last Century afforded, that Bishops
preaching is not now so necessary as it was then; yet doubtless they are highly
to be commended, who do often Preach both in their Cathedrals, and also in the
adjacent Country Cures, where small allowances will neither support nor
qualify a Preaching Minister, there their Labors will certainly be very
acceptable, and highly beneficial, and wherever they Preach, it is certain
they will have numerous and attentive Auditories, and may reprove, rebuke and
exhort with more Authority (and probably with better success) than a private
Minister can do: Wherefore we ought to pray that our Bishops may frequently and
freely preach the Gospel, though they have no peculiar Church under their
special charge, nor Superior to enjoin them; it is more pious and more
honorable for them to Preach, because it is a free-will-offering, and their
whole Diocese is in some sense their Cure.

. 2.
Secondly, We pray they may have Grace to minister the Discipline of the Church
wisely and profitably, expressing it in the words of St. Paul, by using their
Authority, not to destruction, but to salvation 2 Cor. xiii. 10. Gr. (...).
, that is, not to hurt, but to help: Which intimates the difference between
Secular and Ecclesiastical Power. The Temporal Magistrate is also the Minister
of God, but he bears a Sword, not only to be a terror to evil Doers, but to
make them suffer evil who have done it, and to cut off and execute notorious
Offenders. But God's Spiritual Minister is only armed with a Pastoral Staff,
and a Rod Psalm. xxiii. 4. 2 Corinthians. iv. 21.
; neither of which are designed to kill, but to reform such as go astray; his
Authority is that of a Father, who may correct a disobedient Child, but not
destroy him; yea, the very end of his Correction must be to save the Offender.
A Bishop has a Power given him by God, to warn the Unruly, and if that take no
place, to suspend and excommunicate them; yea, to oblige them to give some
public Testimonies of their Repentance, before he do restore such; but this
still aims at saving the Man, and destroying nothing but the Vice: For so soon
as God touches the obstinate Sinners heart with a sense of his Sin and Guilt
(which this dreadful Anathema binds upon him); our Spiritual Fathers are ready
to absolve, receive and embrace these their Prodigal Sons, after the example of
their Great Master; yea, either by Personal application, or (where that cannot
be) by the Parochial Priest; our Bishops are to take care, that Sinners
remaining under this heavy Sentence (which will certainly prejudice them at
God's Tribunal) may not die in their obstinacy and impenitence; so that they
try all methods, to help and profit them by this godly Discipline: But if all
prove finally ineffectual as to the single Offender, the keeping out one so
infected from the Community of Christians, is not only for the honor, but also
for the security of the whole Flock; and that is one main end of Church
censures: not for revenge, but to support the honor of Christ's Laws, to
admonish others to amend, and warn all not to despise this salutary Authority,
as Lactantius notes Surgimus ad vindictam, non quia laesi sumus, sed ut
disciplina servetur, mores corrigantur, licentia comprimatur. Lactant. de ira
Dei, p. 809.
. And this merciful Petition, clears our Church from that which we do so justly
condemn in the Roman; where (as was noted) They make their Bishops swear to
persecute Heretics, whom they ought rather gently to convert, and set up
Ecclesiastical Tribunals of Inquisition, to cause men to be cruelly put to
death for Opinions differing from theirs; by which a good Author tells us, that
even within the narrow limits of the Low Countries, in the compass of Fifty
Years, they executed above 100000 poor Christians, merely on the account of
Religion Camerar. Op. Hor. Subseciv. Tom. 3. c. 2. p. 8.
: Besides innumerable Cruelties of the same kind, that are registered in bloody
Characters, in all the Countries of Europe, where they have power: This is
using their Authority to hurt, and to destruction with a witness: but oh how
contrary is it to the Spirit of the Gospel, the Example of the Apostles, and
the Opinion and Practice of the Primitive Church? When Athanasius was falsely
accused but of killing one man, the Catholics detest the slander, and say, Our
Church uses no slaughter nor bonds; our Bishops never sent an Executioner or a
Jailer to any man Caedes and vincula aliena sunt a nostra Ecclesia, etc. Vid.
Synod. Epist. ap. Bin. T. 1. p. 402.
. And for their poor excuse, that the Clergy only turn them over to the Secular
Power: That was the very crime of Ithacius and his Party of Bishops, who
instead of converting the Priscillian heretics, by Evil Counsel applied to the
Secular Judges, that by their Sentence, and their Executions, these Heretics
might be driven away from the Cities -- and when he got them condemned to die,
it was looked upon but as a piece of Craft to retire from the Judicature,
because he knew the wicked design was sure to take effect Parum sanis Consiliis
seculares Judices adeunt, ut eorum decretis and executionibus Haeritici urbibus
pellerentur -- Ithacius -- subtrahit se cognitioni frustra, callido jam scelere
perfecto. Sulp. Sever. Sacr. Hist. l. 2. p. 422, and 430.
. And it is certain, that not only St. Martin was highly offended at these
bloody proceedings Idem Dialog.. 15. p. 565.
; but a whole Synod of Orthodox Bishops in Council assembled condemned the
Fact, and excommunicated all these Sanguinary Bishops Council. Trevir. An. 386.
Bin. T. 1. p. 563.
. But Rome is now so different from the Ancient Church, that they call that
Zeal, and make it Meritorious, which the Saints they adore, and the old
Catholics whose Title they usurp, condemned a Impious and Detestable.

Lastly. Though there are many Motives to make these Petitions, there are only
two expressed in this Collect, but both are very cogent. First. The benefit of
the People who have such a Bishop set over them, as frequently Preaches, and
wisely Dispenses the Discipline entrusted to him, he is an inestimable blessing
to his Diocese, his Clergy and Laity both are happy in so industrious, prudent
and faithful a Steward, who gives all their Portion in due season, and thereby
promotes and secures the Salvation of many. But, 2ly. This is not all, for his
Gracious Lord and Master Jesus Christ (the Judge of all) has promised an
Everlasting Kingdom of Joy to reward such Servants for all their Care and Pains
St. Matthew. xxiv. 45.
. So that earnestly desiring the Bishops Eternal Happiness, we do earnestly
pray he may have Grace to manage thus; and methinks the very mention of it,
should inflame the pious Candidate with holy desires and firm resolutions to be
diligent and faithful in the discharge of these Duties, since it is certain he
shall be infinitely overpaid for all his trouble, by the never-ceasing Joys of
Heaven, where no Stars shall shine so bright Dan. xii. 3.
, none so highly shall be rewarded Matthew. x. 41.
as Prophets, Righteous Guides of Souls, and such as are the Happy Instruments
of Turning many to God.

CHAP. IX. Of the Solemn Words.
. 1.
REceive the Holy Ghost, for the Office and Work of a Bishop, etc. -- and
remember that thou stir up the Grace of God, etc.
The Order of Priesthood is so near the Episcopal, that the Words at the
Admission to both are very much alike, only because their Duty differs in some
Points; therefore the one has the Spirit communicated for the Office and Work
of a Presbyter, the other for the Office and Work of a Bishop; and since the
power of Binding and loosing was given to the Candidate, when he was ordained
Priest, that is not repeated now, since every Bishop must pass through that
Order first. But instead of that Form, here is added, that reasonable
admonition of St. Paul to Timothy, To stir up the Grace of God, that is now
given them, by the Imposition of Hands; to which the reason of the Charge is
annexed, viz. because God has not given us the Spirit of Fear, but of Power,
and Love, and Soberness. The Consecrated Bishop ought firmly to believe, he
does now receive the Gifts and Graces of the Holy Spirit, so far as is
necessary for his Office, as we have proved before Disc. on the Ordin. of a
Priest, Chapter viii.. 2.
; and we see here St. Paul takes it for granted, that Imposition of Hands, did
convey it to Timothy; for he has said God gave him the Spirit, and his Grace,
by this Rite, and his Successors in the Dignity have the same need, and the
same method is used now: But least this Privilege should make them proud and
negligent, they are first put in mind that the gifts of the Spirit, are like
the Celestial Fire in the Jewish Temple, which came from Heaven, yet was to be
kept alive by human industry, and continual putting on of fresh fuel (...),
Theophil. in 2 Timothy 1.6, 7.
. Even these Gifts and Graces will be extinguished, if those that have received
them, do not continually endeavor to quicken them, by daily and devout Prayer,
diligent and constant Reading and Study, and by being ever employed in all
sorts of good Works: God does not give them his Spirit to exempt them wholly
from working, but to engage them to cooperate with him; and therefore it is
St. Paul's Argument, for our working out our own Salvation with fear and
trembling, because God works in us both to will and to do Philip. ii. 12, 13.
; Yea, he calls the omitting to do our parts, receiving the Grace of God in
vain 2 Corinthians. vi. 1.
; and our Savior shows, that Servant was condemned, who only kept his Talent
safe, but did not improve it St. Math. xxv. 24, etc.
. Such being like idle Saylors who lie in the Port, but neither fit up their
Vessel, spread their Sails, nor use their Oars when a fair Wind blows Isidor.
Peleusiot. lib. 2. Ep. 2. p. 126.
. Wherefore, First they must beware of sloth and presumption, and be
perpetually stirring up the Gifts they have received: But 2ly, Least they
should on the other hand, doubt and despair, of ever being able to surmount the
difficulties of this weighty Employment, they are told what kind of Spirit it
is, which they have received. First, Negatively, not the Spirit of fear, or of
Bondage Romans viii. 15.
, the dastardly Spirit of Slaves, who serve their Lords for dread of Stripes,
and tremble at a like danger from other Hands: No, they have received a nobler
Spirit, and like Freemen go on courageously, and serve from a principle of
love and gratitude. Hence, 2ly, Affirmatively they are told their Spirit is
first the Spirit of Power, which is mighty through God, to the pulling down of
strong holds, and the casting down every high thing that exalts it self
against the Knowledge of God 2 Cor. x. 4, 5. (...), sunt loca art munita;
(...) quae natura muniuntur, Vid. Veget. de re milit. l. 4. c. 1. and Filesac.
select. lib. 1. cap. 7.
. A zealous Bishop endued with this Spirit of Power, may boldly attack, all the
artificial fortresses of Argument, wherein cunning Heretics enskonce their
false Opinions, and shall pull down all the lofty brags, whereby obstinate
Sinners hope to secure their evil practices; God will enable him, to convince
the former, and convert the latter, bringing the one by a right Faith, and the
other by a holy Life into subjection to Jesus Christ, his Courage ought to be
undaunted, because his assistant is Almighty. Secondly, He has received the
Spirit of Love and Charity, which will inspire him with a tender pity for the
Souls of the Erroneous and debauched: He considers their woeful delusion, their
increasing guilt, and imminent danger of Damnation, and therefore he pursues
them with Entreaties, Arguments and Importunity, as St. John did his relapsed
young Man Vid. Histor. apud Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 17. p. 68.
, not ceasing till (if possible) he has brought them to a better mind:
Thirdly, It is the Spirit of Sobriety and Prudence 2 Timothy i. 7. Graec. (...).
, to distinguish it from the wild and giddy Spirit of Enthusiasts, who have
Heat without Light, and Zeal without Knowledge Romans x. 2.
. The Spirit of God endues our Bishops with Wisdom, to choose the fittest
seasons, properest Methods, and the most seasonable ways of Application, and
enables him steddily to go on, till at last by God's Blessing he has gained
his Point: There are but few, and those too of the worst sort of offenders, who
can resist such addresses: The Philosopher thinks there are certain sparks of
goodness in all Men's Breasts, which being assisted with a gentle Breath, would
soon show themselves kindled with a little Admonition Omnium honestarum rerum
semina animi gerunt, quae admonitione excitantur, non aliter quam scintilla
levi flatu adjuta, ignem suum explicat, Sen. Ep. 94. p. 348.
. But we know, all professed Christians, have the general assistance of the
holy Spirit, to incline them to receive truth, when it is made manifest to
them, and approve of Virtue fairly represented. So that if our Bishops, will
stir up their own Gifts, their bright Flames, will kindle their Neighbors
Sparks, and bring them who sat in Darkness, to see the light of Truth, and walk
in the lucid paths of Righteousness.

CHAP. X. Of the Delivery of the Bible.
. 1.
UNto that which we observed before concerning delivering some of the Books of
Scripture, to all that enter into any Order Ecclesiastical, we are here only to
add, that of old it was only the Gospels, which were laid on the Head and
Shoulders, and that of Bishops alone Episcopus cum ordinatur duo Episcopi
ponant and teneant Evangeliorum codicem super caput and cervitem ejus, Council.
4. Carthag. Bin. T. 1. p. 588.
, and there it was held for some time, either by the ordaining Bishops (l), as
in the modern Greek Church, Euchol. in ordin. Episcop. p. 310. and p. 302.
or by the Deacons which assisted at the Consecration Constable. Apost. l. 8. c. 4.
, as was the ancienter usage, and as they still do in the Nestorian and
Eutychian Forms Morin. de Syror. ordin. p. 466. and 487.
. Of which custom St. Chrysostom notes this as the Reason, why they lay it on
their Heads. To teach them, that the Gospel is the true Crown of Glory, which
they have now put on, and that though a Bishop be above all others, yet he must
be under these Laws (...), Chrysostom. Orat. 62. Tom. 6. p. 645.
. And the Prayer now said in the Greek Church hints, the resting the Book on
their Shoulders implies, That they are thought worthy to take on them the Yoke
of Christ (...), Euchol. ut supr. p. 302.
. The other Syrian Christians called Maronites, put the Book into their Hands,
as we do also Vid. Morin. de Syror. Ordin. p. 429.
. Those of Rome seem to have designed the retaining both Rites, for first the
Gospel is open, and laid on the Candidate's Head and Shoulders Pontifical. Romans
page 67.
, and afterward shut and put into his Hand Ibid. page 79.
, with this form of words, Take the Gospel, go and Preach it to the People
committed to thee, for God is able to make his Grace abound in thee, who lives
and reigns now and ever. Amen: Our Church delivers the whole Bible, and that
but once, and into the Bishops hand only, into which he must take it always
afterward, as often as he Reads or Expounds it. And to mind him that is
consecrated, how essential a part of his duty this is, the Ordainer gives him a
strict charge with it, almost in the very words of St. Paul to Timothy 1 Timothy
iv. 13. and 15.
, which being indicted by the Spirit of God, for this very occasion must be
confessed to be the best for explaining this Primitive Rite, and the words are
so plain and proper, that they need no more than a Paraphrase.

A Paraphrase on the Exhortation.. 2.
1 Timoth. iv. 13, etc.]
It Is certain, St. Paul delivered the Scriptures which were then written to
Timothy his new made Bishop, and probably he did it at his Ordination, for he
calls it the Pledge committed to him 2 Timothy i. 14. and 1 Timothy vi. 20. (...).
, which he most strictly charges him to keep, as Men do the Securities for
their Inheritance, or their Seals and Grants (as the word imports (...),
Hesych. p. 729. (...), Idem page 328.
.) And what the Apostle says to him of the use of it, is very proper now to be
said to you, who are called to the same Office: First in private [give heed
unto] what thou observest in [reading] the Holy Scripture, that thou may
perfectly understand it thy self; In the next place furnish thy self out of it,
with fit passages to be used in public, and serve [to exhortation] when thy
Flock grow remiss, or to instruction [and Doctrine] when thou would teach
the Ignorant: Herein are all the fundamental Principles of Faith, and all the
necessary Rules of good Life, therefore continually [think upon the things
contained in this Book] of God now delivered to thee; above all thy other
Studies, be sure to [be diligent in them.] For this is a Bishop's main business
1 Timothy iv. 15. Graec. (...) i. e. (...), Theoph.
, who must be so very ready in the knowledge of sacred writ [that the encrease]
of his skill to manage all parts of his Office daily [coming thereby, may] not
only be evident to himself, for the satisfaction of his own Conscience; but
also [be manifest unto all Men,] especially to those under his charge, who
enjoy the benefit of their Pastors improvement. The peoples duty is less than
thine, they are only to secure their own Souls; but thy charge is greater, as
thy dignity is higher In maxima fortuna minima licentia est, Sallust. in
Catilin.
, for thou must not only [take heed to thy self,] that thou believe rightly,
and live holily, but also watch over thy Flock Nihil aliud est imperium, ut
sapientes definiunt, nisi cura salutis alienae, Am. Marcellin. l. 39.
, and have a strict regard to thy Preaching [and to] that [Doctrine] by which
thou teach Faith, and good Life to others, that it be pure and sound: And
though this double care be difficult, it shall be doubly rewarded Secundum
molestiam Merces, Mos. Maimon. Pref. ad Pirk. Ab.
; therefore be careful in teaching Gods Commandments, [and be diligent in doing
them] that thy words may profit others, and thy own piety profit thee [for in
so doing thou shall both save thy self] and be eternally rewarded, [and] in all
probability [them that hear thee] shall by thy endeavors be saved also;
however thou shall have a double portion in glory: As to the rest of thy
conduct, remember thou art set over those whom our Lord has purchased with his
dearest Blood: Therefore I charge thee [be to the Flock of Christ] what he has
made thee, and expects thou should be; even [a Shepherd] to take a tender
care of them [not a Wolf] (to which ravenous and devouring Creature, heretical
Pastors, and covetous or cruel Rulers are often likened -- (...), de Cambyse
and Xerxe. Max. Tyr. dissert. de Scien. ita dicitur Romanos Dalmatis (...),
Scil. pro Praesectis, Xiphil. vit. Aug. p. 215.
.) It is thy duty to [feed them,] Spiritually by the Word and Sacraments, and
temporally by thy Table and thine Alms. It would be unpardonable in thee to
prey upon them that thou should provide for, therefore for Jesus sake
[devour them not] by insinuating false Doctrines into their Minds, by
unseasonable Severities, or infamous Oppression: Far be this from thee, who
have promised to be a good Shepherd, and know the Scripture, declares it to
be thy Duty See Ezekiel. xxxiv. 4. and 16.
, to [hold up] and support [the weak] Christians, and confirm such as are
wavering in the Faith, to [heal the sick] who are infected with ill Examples,
and their Souls smitten with Sin, the worst of all Diseases Morbi
perniciosiores pluresque sunt animi quam corporis, Cicero Tusc. qu. l. 3. p.
358. Vid. Isai. 1.5.
; these do thou take care to reform and cure, [bind up the broken] hearted Luke
iv. 18.
, who are in great trouble for their Sins, or much dejected by their
Sufferings, these must be comforted: If any have strayed but little from the
Churches Communion, thou must labor to [bring again] these Wanderers into
Christ's fold, and not despise them, as [the out-casts] that are unworthy of thy
care: Finally, if any be utterly perverted, or grown very wicked, thou must not
despair of their Conversion, but enquire after, and [seek the lost] Sheep, and
try thy utmost endeavors to regain even these poor Souls, after our Lord's
Example Luke xix. 10.
. You are also made chief Rulers in God's Church, to punish the Evil, and to
amend them; as also to encourage and reward the good 1 Pet. ii. 14.
. So that in your Acts of Jurisdiction and Government, you must always make a
prudent mixture of Mercy and Judgment, as the Cases and Circumstances require.
And if you would quicken the better sort with hope, and keep the worse in awe,
since hope and fear are the principles of Virtue (...), Plut. de liber. educ.
p. 12.
, you must [be so merciful] and ready to pardon lesser and penitent Offenders
[that you be not too remiss] when there is reason to punish, either to bring
the Sinner to Repentance, or keep the Sin from spreading Vitia transmittit ad
posteros, qui praesentibus culpis ignoscit, Theodoric. ap. Baron. An. 494. n.
38.
. Yet be sure, (when you are forced to censure an obstinate person,) you do [so
minister discipline] with all tenderness to his Soul Qui cum triste aliquid
statuit fit tristis and ipse, Cuique fere poenam sumere poena suit, Ovid. de
Pont. l. 2.
, as to convince him [that you forget not Mercy] and are ready to absolve him
upon his repentance: These are the methods of the Lord Jesus, and will please
him so highly [that when] he that is [the chief Shepherd] of this Flock,
returns from Heaven, and [shall appear] in Glory to reward his Faithful
Servants [you may receive] from him (not a sading Mitre, with which you are now
to be adorned,) but that which is infinitely more desirable, even [ the never
fading Crown 1 Peter v. 4. His verbis clauditur Offic. Ordin. ap. Luther. Lips.
1624. -- Postquam defecere cuncti flores, madefactus aqua reviviscit and
hibernas coronas facit -- quoniam non marcescat. Plin. de spica Amarantina Not.
Hist. l. 21. c. 8.
of Glory] everlasting, an abundant recompense for a few years labor: Yet this
he has promised, and therefore you may expect, and we do beg it for you,
[through Jesus Christ our Lord] Amen.

CHAP. XI. Of the concluding Collect.
. 1.
AFter the Communion is over, all the ancient Formularies conclude with a
Collect as we do, that of the Western Church, in this place, is very like ours
in substance Da ei quaesumus, verbo and exemplo quibus praeest proficere, ut ad
vitam cum grege sibi credito perveniat Sempiternam, etc. Pontif. Romans p. 84.
Leg. credito.
. Only our Form is larger, and expressed in the very words of Holy Scripture,
and especially in the words of St. Paul, relating to his beloved and lately
consecrated Bishop Timothy, which cannot but be very proper on this occasion.
The particulars take in all the necessities and duties of one that is admitted
to this Order, the Expressions are so plain, and the Method so clear, that a
brief Analysis and Discourse, is all that is requisite, because we have already
Treated of the same things.

The Analysis of this Collect.
The concluding Collect contains. 1st, A Preface directed to God the Father,
Most merciful Father,
2ly, Diverse Petitions. 1st, In general for, 1 Gods Blessing We beseech thee to
send down upon this thy, etc.
2 His Holy Spirit. And so endue him with thy Holy Spirit.

2ly, In particular as to 1 His Preaching. That he preaching thy word, may not
only, etc.
2 His Example. But also may be, to such as believe, a whole some, etc.
3ly, His reward. That faithfully fufilling his course at the latter, etc.


3ly, A Doxology directed to Christ. Who lives and reigns, one God with the
Father, etc. Amen.


A brief Discourse on this Collect.. 2.
Most Merciful Father, we beseech thee to send down, etc.]
The providing and qualifying faithful Pastors to be set over his Flock, is an
illustrious instance of God's Mercy, and therefore we call upon him, by the
title of most merciful Father: He knows and pities the wants of all his
Servants, and those in the highest station having the most difficult
Employment, need the greatest assistance; They may labor, but all in vain,
unless God's Heavenly blessing crown them with success (e), otherwise they may
complain, 1 Cor. iii. 6, 7.
with St. Peter, that they have toiled Night and Day and taken nothing S. Luke
v. 5.
. So that our first general request for this Master-workman, that is now just
going into God's Harvest, is the same with that usually said on such occasions:
The Lord prosper you, we wish you good luck in the name of the Lord Psalm.
cxxix. 8.
. But secondly we consider, he cannot rightly perform any part of his Duty,
without an extraordinary assistance of the Holy Spirit, which we therefore
humbly pray for: We do not question but he has received the Spirit of God, by
the imposition of Hands, (as we noted before) and therefore this second general
Petition, has respect to the measure and degree of the Spirit, which must be
large in a Bishop, who must be endued with so much Grace, and so many Gifts of
the Spirit, as will enable him to Preach successfully, to live exemplarily, and
to persevere even to fulfill his course. No ordinary Portion of God's Spirit
will fit a Man for all this; and therefore we beg a large proportion of Gifts
and Graces, because this is an extraordinary occasion. From these general
Petitions, we pass to survey the several parts of his Duty, as they are laid
down in the Epistle to Timothy; who being made Bishop of Ephesus was, first as
to his Preaching, charged to be instant or earnest; that is, diligent and
zealous 2 Timoth. iv. 2. Graec. (...) Vulg. inst.
. To Preach coldly makes no impression, and makes the People think, the
Preacher is not affected with those important Truths he delivers to them Si vis
me flere dolendum est primum ipse tibi --.
. And this earnestness he must show in all parts of his Sermon; whether he
reprove Sin, or beseech them to practice Virtue, he must warmly describe the
odious nature and dreadful consequences of all sorts of wickedness, so as to
make the guilty tremble, as St. Paul did that impious Roman Governor Foelix,
when he discoursed of Judgment to come: So also, he must most affectionately
recommend all Holy Duties and Religious Actions, describing the Wisdom of
undertaking them, the easiness of performing them by God's help, the peace and
comfort which flow from having done them here, and the infinitely glorious and
eternal rewards prepared for them hereafter; and all this, with such moving
Oratory and pressing entreaties, that he may win his people to love God, and
delight in that which is good: And when there is occasion in private to
admonish and rebuke an Offender; we pray he may do it without fury and passion,
like a true Spiritual Father (...), Theophil. in 2 Timothy 4.2.
; with long suffering and all patience, pitying the infirmities of Human
Nature, and considering the policy of the tempter; and taking time by Doctrine
to instruct them concerning the heinousness of their Fault, and also the
necessity and advantage of a speedy and sincere Repentance: Secondly, As to the
Bishop's life we turn St. Paul's charge to Timothy into a Prayer, viz. That he
may be to such as believe, a wholesome example, for his people to imitate in
all points 1 Timothy iv. 12. Graec. (...), i. e. (...), Hesych. p. 924. (...),
Theoph. in loc.
, that he may serve them as a complete Copy to write after: First, in Words, by
discoursing always wisely, gravely and profitably to them: Secondly in his
Deeds, that his Conversation may be Courteous, Innocent and Useful to all his
Neighbors: So as to procure him Honor and esteem from all both Clergy and
Laity: Thirdly as to his internal disposition, that he may abound in Love and
Charity, giving liberally, forgiving freely, wishing and endeavoring most
sincerely to do good to all Men Graec. hic habet -- (...), quae ordinem
turbant, and absunt haec verba a Verse. Aeth. M.S.S.A. item a Sir. and Latin.
Polygl. p. 826. Nec apud veteres plerosque Patres leguntur. Beza.
. Fourthly, As to his Principles. We pray he may be exactly sound in his
Judgment, and Orthodox in the Faith. So that his Doctrine may be a Standard to
try the Opinions of others, and a true guide to all that shall consult him:
Lastly as to his Body, that he may be exemplary for keeping it in all Chastity
and Purity, abstaining not only from all Actions which defile, but from all
wantonness in either Looks or Behavior, which are not allowable in any, but
are most intolerably scandalous, in one of so high and holy a Character, who is
also under peculiar Obligations, to censure and punish others for Offenses of
this kind, and must be always fit to serve God with a clean Heart: Lastly, We
consider the happy issue of St. Paul's perseverance in this faithful discharge
of his Office, and the comfortable prospect he had of a glorious reward
prepared for him for his constancy; and so conclude our Petitions by praying,
that this present Bishop may after the Example of that great Apostle,
faithfully fulfill and finish his course in this manner, and then we are
assured, that at the great day of Judgment (commonly called the latter or last
day) that Crown of Glory 2 Timothy iv. 7, 8.
, shall be bestowed on this Pious Bishop; which is far above the merit of the
greatest Righteousness; yet it is promised to and laid up for all Christ's
faithful Servants, especially for his Ambassadors, who have represented him on
Earth, and shall share with him in the Joys of his Heavenly Kingdom. He that is
our Venerable Bishops Master, is to be the Judge of him and all Men; and it is
certain, he will reward his immediate and deserving Servants, not only so far
as they Righteously deserve for their Labor, but as far as they can hope for
from his infinite goodness: And least it should be doubted, whether Christ's
Power be equal to his unquestionable kindness, we conclude this Collect, with
commemorating, that he Lives and Reigns with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
one God, and shall do so for ever and ever, World without End. Amen.

A TABLE OF THE PARTICULARS Contained in these Discourses.
THE Preface, Chap. I.. 1. Page 1. Of the Three Orders,. 2. p. 3. Of the Honor
of the Clergy,. 3. p. 16. Of the Examination,. 4. p. 42. Of the Solemn
Admission, and the Bishops Right,. 5. p. 45. Of the Excellency of our Form,. 6.
p. 55. Of the Canonical Age,. 7. p. 60. Of the Testimonials,. 8. p. 64. Of the
Learning of those that are to be Ordained, and their Knowledge in Scripture,.
9. p. 67. Of the times and place for Ordination,. 10. p. 76.
The Office for Deacons. Part I.
OF the Form in general, Chap. I.. 1. p. 81. The Analysis thereof,. 2. p. 84.
Of the remote preparatives, Chap. II. Of the Sermon. 1. p. 85. Of the
Archdeacon presenting, the Bishops receiving, and the Habit and Posture of
those presented,. 2. p. 87. Of the Words at Presenting,. 3. p. 96. Of the
Appeal to the People,. 4. p. 99. Of Popular Elections,. 5. p. 103. Of
Impediments alleged,. 6. p. 116. Of the Congregations Praying for those that
are to be Ordained,. 7. p. 119. Of the more direct Preparatives, Chap. III. Of
the place of this Office,. 1. p. 124. Of the proper Collect in General,. 2. p.
125. A Discourse upon it,. 3, 4, 5. p. 128. Of the Epistles in General,. 6. p.
138. Of the first Portion, 1 Timothy iii. 8.. 7. p. 141. Of the second Portion
Acts vi. 2.. 8. p. 147. Of the Oath of Supremacy,. 9. p. 153. Of the Questions
to a Deacon in General. 10. p. 164. Of the Analysis of them,. 11. p. 167. A
Discourse on the several Questions, to a Deacon,. 12. p. 168. And therein -- of
the inward Call, Qu. 1. ib. Of the outward Call, Qu. ii. p. 173. Of the belief
of Scripture, Qu. iii. p. 176. Of public Reading thereof, Qu. iv. p. 179. Of a
Deacons peculiar Duties, Qu. v. p. 184. Of their own, and their Families good
Lives, and of the Marriage of the Clergy, Qu. vi. p. 200. Of their Canonical
Obedience, Qu. vii. p. 213. Of the Ordination it self, Chap. IV. Of the
Imposition of Hands,. 1. p. 218. Of the Posture at Ordination,. 2. p. 222. Of
the Solemn Words,. 3. p. 224. Of delivering the New Testament,. 4. p. 227. Of
the Consequents after Ordination, Chap. V. Of the Gospel in General,. 1. p.
231. Of St. Luke xii. 35, etc.. 2. p. 233. Of their receiving the Communion,.
3. p. 238. Of the concluding Collect,. 4. p. 241. Of the time for continuing in
the Order of a Deacon,. 5. p. 255.
The Office for Priests. Part II.
A Preface concerning the Dignity of this Order,. 1. p. 259. Of the Epistle in
General, Chap. I.. 1. p. 267. Of the proper Epistle, Ephesians. iv. 7.. 2. p. 269. Of
the first Gospel Matthew. ix. 36. Chap. II.. 1. p. 274. Of the second John x. 1..
2. p. 277. Of the Exhortation in General, Chap. III.. 1. p. 288. A Discourse
upon it and therein -- of the weight of their charge,. 2. p. 290. Of the means
to fit them for it, viz. Prayer, Reading, Holiness and avoiding secular cares,.
3. p. 301. Of the Questions peculiar to a Priest, and of the sufficiency of
Scripture, Chap. IV.. 1. p. 310. Of their Administrations, Qu. III.. 2. p. 314.
Of their opposing Heresy, and reproving Sinners, Qu. IV.. 3. p. 316. Of Prayer
and diligent Study, Qu. V.. 4. p. 327. Of promoting Peace and Charity, Qu. VI..
5. p. 332. Of their Canonical Obedience, Qu. VII.. 6. p. 335. Of the Bishops
and the Peoples Prayers, Chap. V.. 1. p. 337. Of the Hymn Veni Creator, Chap.
VI. 1. p. The Paraphrase thereof. 2. p. 342. Of the large Collect before the
Ordination in General, Chap. VII.. 1. p. 346. Of the Preface or Laudatory
part,. 2. p. 348. Of the Precatory part,. 3. p. 354. Of the Solemn Words in
General, Chap. VIII.. 1. p. 358. Of their receiving the Holy Ghost,. 2. p. 359.
Of dispensing the Word and Sacraments. 3. p. 364. Of the last Collect, Chap.
IX.. 1. p. 368. A Discourse upon it. 2. p. 370.
The Consecration of a Bishop. Part III.
A Preface concerning the Election of Bishops,. 1, 2. p. 375. Of the Office of
a Bishop in General, Chap. I. p. 389. And of the ancient Formularies,. 1. p.
399. Of the first Collect in our Form, Chap. II. p. 403. Of the Epistles in
General, Chap. III.. 1. p. 412. The first 1 Timothy iii. 1. etc.. 2. p. 414. The
other Epistle Acts iii. 17, etc.. 3. p. 421. The Para phrase thereof,. 4. p.
424. Of the Gospels in General, Chap. IV.. 1. p. 436. Of the first John xxi.
15.. 2. p. 438. Of the second John xx. 19.. 3. p. 442. Of the third Matthew.
xxviii. 19.. 4. p. 445. Of the Archbishop and the Oath of Canonical Obedience
to him, Chap. V.. 1. p. 447. Of the Exhortation to pray, Chap. VI.. 1. p. 453.
Of the Questions to a Bishop, Chap. VII.. 1. p. 456. Of Declaring his Faith,
Qu. II.. 2. p. 458. Of his conferring with Recusants, Qu. IV. 3. p. 461. Of his
Visitations, and their use, Qu. VI.. 4. p. 465. Of his care in Ordaining
others, Qu. VII.. 5. p. 470. Of his Charity and Hospitality, Qu. VIII. 6. p.
473. Of the Collect before Consecration, Chap. VIII.. 1. p. 479. Of his
frequent Preaching, ibid. Of his Ministering Discipline,. 2. p. 482. Of the
Solemn Words to a Bishop, Chap. IX.. 1. p. 487. Of Delivering the Bible to him,
Chap. X.. 1. p. 491. A Paraphrase on the Exhortation,. 2. p. 493. Of the
concluding Collect in General, Chap. XI.. 1. p. 498. A Discourse upon it,. 2.
p. 500.
The End of the Table.
An Advertisement of some Books Printed for Robert Clavel, in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Daily Office for the Sick, compiled out of the Holy Scripture, and the
Liturgy of our Church; with occasional Prayers, Meditations and Directions, And
an Office of Thanksgiving, the Second Edition Reviewed.

The Christians daily Sacrifice duly offered, or a practical Discourse teaching
the right performance of Prayer, by Lancelot Addison, D. D. Dean of Litchfield.

A Letter in Answer to a Book, Entitled Christianity not Mysterious, as also
to all those who set up for Reason and Evidence, in opposition to Revelation
and Mysteries. By Peter Brown, B. D. Sen. Fellow of Trin. College Dublin.

The Acts and Negotiations, together with the particular Articles at large of
the General Peace concluded at Riswick by the most Illustrious Confederates
with the French King, to which is premised the Negotiations and Articles of the
Peace concluded at Turin between the same Prince and Duke of Savoy, in 8o.

Johannis Clerici ars Critica, etc. in 8o.

The genuine use and necessity of the two Sacraments, namely Baptism and the
Lords Supper, with our obligation frequently to receive the latter, in small
120, by Lancelot Addison D D. Dean of Litchfield.

The Church History cleared from the Roman Forgeries, and Corruptions found in
the Councils, and Baronius, in 4 parts, by Tho. Comber D.D. Dean of Durham 4o.

An Historical Vindication of the right of Tithes from Scripture, Reason, and
the Opinion and Practice of Jews, Gentiles and Christians in all Ages, with a
Discourse of Excommunication, by Tho Comber D.D. Dean of Durham in 4o.

A Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of Durham, on the 2d of December
1697, being the day of Thanksgiving for the Peace: By Tho. Comber D.D. Dean of
Durham.

A Sermon preached at the opening of the Lecture at Maldon in Essex, lately
established by the Lord Bishop of London: By William Brampston late Fellow of
Queen's College in Cambridge.

Mr. Stalker's Book of the Art of Japanning.

A Volume of Sermons on the following Texts, Jo. 13.13. Matthew 11.30. Hebrew
12.28, 29. Acts 16.30. Acts 16.30. Acts 16.3^. Mark 10.17. Three Sermons on
Luke 18.8. Matthew 14.9. Jeremiah 45.5. By Tho. Pierce D. D. late Dean of Sarum.

Mr. Scrivener's Body of Divinity in fol.

The History of the Execrable Irish Rebellion in 1641. By Dr. Burlase in fol.

The History of the Turks in 2 Vol. in fol.

A Treatise of Spousals and Matrimonial Contracts, by the late Famous and
Learned Mr. Henry Swinburne.

Bishop Pearson's Opera Posthuma Chronologica in 4o.

Bede's Tracts in Latin 40.

The Dean of Durham's short Discourss on the Common Prayer in 8o, and on the
Offices for the 5th of November 30th of January and 29th of May.

Ogleby's Aesop in 2 Vol. with 160 Cus, sold cheap.

The Frauds of the Romish Priests, the Journey to Naples, and the History of
the Monastical Order, by Mr. Demilion.

The Art of Gauging: By Tho. Everard Esquire: The 3d Edition.

A Defense of Pluralities, etc.

Martindal's Survey Book, or Land meeters Vade mecum.

A Treatise of Preternatural Tumors, in 8o. with Cuts.

An Enquiry into the Right use and abuses of the Hot, Cold and Temperate Baths
in England: By Sir John Floyer Knight. M. D.

FINIS.

