A General Table OF EUROPE, REPRESENTING The Present and Future State thereof:
VIZ.

The PRESENT
GOVERNMENTS, LANGUAGES, RELIGIONS, FOUNDATIONS, and REVOLUTIONS both of
Governments and Religions.
The FUTURE
MUTATIONS, REVOLUTIONS, GOVERNMENT, and RELIGION of CHRISTENDOM, and of the
WORLD, etc.

From the Prophecies of the three late German Prophets, KOTTERUS, CHRISTINA,
and DRABRICIUS, etc.

ALL Collected out of the Originals, for the common Use and Information of the
ENGLISH.

Printed for Benjamin Billingsley, at the Printing Press in Broadstreet, 1670.

GENTLE READER,
THis little Piece of History has stuck in the Birth well nigh a whole year;
and at last is forced to come forth an imperfect Embryo, through the unhappy
Midwifry of the Press.

Yet for thy encouragement, thou ought to know, That there is none such ever
yet extant in the English Tongue. For, for the first Part; there is, (1.) Not a
more modern and later History of Christendom in English; Nor (2.) a better in
so small a Volumn: viz. None that gives a better account of the last
foregoing, and this present Age, (which two chiefly concern us to know) that
is, of the last considerable Affairs of the World, and present state of things.
We say, there is none extant, of the like nature, so short and comprehensive.

And for the Second Part, It is the most wonderful strangest History ever yet
known in the World, in the English, yea, or any other Language. And indeed, not
to be paralleled by all History and Antiquity. Whether those Prophetical
Revelations be from GOD, Man, or the Devil; yet they exceed all comparison. If
they be from GOD, they are the strangest and most miraculous, ever since the
Apostles days. If they be Delusions and Imaginations of Man, they are the
strangest ever suffered, or invented by Man. If lastly, Devices, Fascinations,
and Bewitchings of the Devil, (transforming himself into an Angel of Light,
etc.) they are the strangest still; and the least Footsteps of his Cloven Foot
to be discerned, that ever was in any of his Juggles. Only we have been
unhappily hindered by the Press, from giving you a short view and taste of the
Prophecies themselves, as was really intended.

And these two things may perhaps help to make it go down with the Reader, as
it is, notwithstanding all its faults. For it is confessed, there are many
Defects, procured through manyfold Occasions, not fit here to be mentioned. And
if, Worthy Reader, thou knew all Circumstances, thou would certainly be so
candid, as to pardon all Faults: Which I doubt not but thou will (at least) for
the good will and Endeavors of the Author.

Farewell.
ERRATA.
Courteous Reader,
These three or four places thou must needs be desired to amend, before thou
read the Book. All other faults we are forced to let pass, etc.

Page 15. line 15. for [of Inorganick, etc.] read [To which add, The greater
knowledge of, and insight into, the Inorganick Motion and Fermentation of
Nature, and Cultivation thereof.] And blot out those words, [as it were
Mechanic.]

Page 72. line 20. blot out those words, [or Nevers,] and interpose these, [the
Prince of Conde, whom the King of France, etc.]

Page 113. line 5. Note, There was such News at that time, that the Vizier
himself was slain in a violent Onset, etc. This Book should have come forth
then.

Page 159. line ult. for [Holiness] read [unholiness.]

A General Table OF EUROPE, In its Present and Future Appearance.
The First Part, Comparative.
Of the Advantages of Europe, in comparison of other Parts of the Universe.
The ARGUMENT.
Europe compared with other Parts, and former Times, for Arms, Arts, Commerce,
and Religion. The pre-eminence of Empire and Arms. The pre-eminence of Arts and
Sciences. The Chinois high esteem thereof. Of Riccius and Adams, Jesuits
there. The Emperors great Grace and Favor to Adams. His Edict and Charter in
favor of the Christian Religion, engraved on a stone at the entrance of their
Church, and Title given to it by him. The Jesuits Inscription thereon. The
pre-eminence as to former times, in many rare Arts and Inventions. The
pre-eminence of Riches and Commerce, Shipping and Navigation. The pre-eminence
of Religion, or Privilege of Christendom. Christendom the Glory of Europe. All
its Advantages founded on Christianity, and Disadvantages on
Pagan-and-Anti-christianism. Shameful Dissentions of Christians and Christian
Princes and States. Lamentable Disorders, Persecutions, and Inquisitions for
Religion and Conscience in Europe. Liberty of the same commended. Revolutions
of the World. Present flourishing of Europe.

EUROPE is at this day the most flourising part of the Universe, for Empire,
Religion, and Learning, Arts and Arms, and all the high distinctions of Humane
kind. And as she now exceeds all other Parts; so the present all former Ages
and Generations. It is not our purpose at present in this General Table to make
Comparisons, and set her off by the others sad countenance: but only, in first
drawing some plain and rude Lineaments, to expose to general view her present
Portraiture and Appearance; with some prospect of her future.

Europe then might be compared either with other parts, or former Times of the
World; and every way we should find her to excel. For though for largeness of
extent she yields both to Africa and to Asia; yet she surpasses them in
politeness, and they all seem rude and barbarous in comparison; and has got
those advantages and felicities above them, that all their Riches cannot equal.
And if for vastness of single Empire, and Treasure, and dependencies thereon,
she cannot come in competition with the times of the Roman Greatness, yet take
her divided, and all her parts together, and she far exceeds them. And by how
much her Empire since has been disposed into diverse hands; by so much have her
several parts been more puissant and flourishing. The whole Glory of Europe
then was contracted into a very narrow compass and one little corner only, and
(as I may say) Toe of Italy. For what was England, France, Spain, and Germany,
etc. to w^^^ ^^^y are now? surely infinitely more inglorious and despicable. She
could not then look down upon her Feet and inferior parts, and not be like the
Peacock, ashamed in the height of all her pride.

For if we should compare her, for Arts or for Arms, for the Virtues of War and
of Peace, and therein all things else, (her Courts, her Camps, her Schools, her
Cities, and her Fields) we should find no degrees of comparison, nor room in
this Table. We will only touch upon things loosly here, as besides our present
intent.

Asia perhaps has shown Europe that prodigious Art of Powder and Cannon: But
Europe, in revenge, has requited her with another as great, and by the Chard
and Compass taught her, and the World besides, the use of that Invention. For
with her Ordinance and Men of War, she has secured all the Coasts both of
Persia, and the Indies, and those moreover of Ethiopia and of Peru. She has
quelled the Sophies and the Mogulls, and seized on their Harbors, and utterly
destroyed the vast Empires of Mexico and the Ynca's.

Those grand Heroes of the first and second Monarchy, and of the two last also,
so noised of in History, never drove their Conquests so far as we. And all the
Exploits of a Cyrus in Asia, of a Cambysus in Africa, of a Darius and his Sons
in Europe, and not long since of a Tamberlane in all three, no not of an
Alexander and of a Caesar themselves, come not near the bold courses and
Enterprises of our Western People, who are seized on all the Coasts of the
Ocean, and make all the Puissances of the two Continents to tremble. And they
may be paralleled with a Charlemaign, with a Great Henry of France, with a
Gustavus of Swede, and a Prince of Orange, etc.

The Grecian built his Glory, and erected Triumphs of Victory, and Trophies of
Honor, upon the delicacy of the Persian, and nakedness of the Indian; and the
Roman, for the most part, upon the division or rudeness of the Nations, and
weakness of the poor barbarous and undisciplined people. 'Twas easier then to
overrun a Kingdom, than now to take a Town.

The Asians generally are sunk into laziness, effeminacy and cowardice. It Is
not many years since, that under the Conduct of a Degesfield in Dalmatia, ten
Christians have beat an hundred Turks. The Cavalry, the Infantry, the
Fortifications, the Engines, the Instruments and Weapons of War, offensive and
defensive; the Stratagems and Plots, the Military Discipline and Skill, the
War-Ships, or Men of War, and Fireships, is beyond all former times, or other
parts of the World. Candia and Venice alone, at this day, is a notorious
instance of the particulars. The Ships and Sea Fights of England and Holland
are not to be matched by all Antiquity, or other Parts of the World.

France is able to raise 200000 men, and scarce miss them in her Cities, or her
Fields; which the whole Ottoman Empire cannot do, without laying it self waste.
And it goes in like manner with England, Germany, and many other Countries. And
for Power and Force by Sea, all the other three parts of the World together,
cannot match three only Europaean Nations.

As for the Arts and Sciences, Inventions and Improvements, she still carries
it higher from all the rest; and they now have their Reign and Empire only in
her Dominions, and that more glorious than ever. Asia, from whence they first
came, must now call her Mistress. And haughty China her self, submits now to be
her Disciple. Greece and Old Rome too (where they were once confined) must now
abate their Pride, and yield to her the pre-eminence. For though there was a
time when the Greeks and Romans counted all besides Barbarians, and rude, yet
they could not do so now, should they appear with all their Bays and Laurels.
And though China has presumed her self hitherto the Eye of the World, yet she
has of late been so dazzled with the splendour of her Rays, that she is not
ashamed to confess her self blind in comparison. The learned Jesuits made them
first see the disparity; for they were struck with such wonder and amazement at
their appearance, as if they had never seen the Sun before, nor Learning ever
arose in their Hemisphere; and could not sufficiently admire at their Science.
We will produce here, to this end, their Story, out of Kircher's China
Illustrata, which is but of yesterday, and make it appear what Veneration they
had for the Europaean Arts and Mysteries.

Riccius the first Propagator of the Christian Religion, and Adams the last
Instaurator and Finisher of the New China Calendar, not without the general
applause and congratulation of the whole Empire, were had in such high esteem
amongst them, and received such Honors and Favors, that hardly any History
can parallel.

Riccius, a learned Mathematician, did so allure the mind of the Viceroy of
Canton, where he first landed, with Curiosities of Art and Science; that as
neither He nor all China ever saw the like, so he received them like Angels
descended from Heaven, rather than Inhabitants and Strangers of the Earth; and
all the Learned amongst them strove for his acquaintance, and sent to him from
all parts, desirous to behold the wonderful things which he had brought with
him, and to be acquainted with his Arts: And though nothing but what is common,
and obvious amongst us here, yet they seemed a kind of Miracles to them.
Amongst other Things, was admired a Clock* curiously contrived, which showed
various distinctions of hours with the course of Sun and Moon. A Glass- Trigon,
which some supposed an inestimable Gem, others a piece of the Heavenly Spears.
Geographick Maps, they wondering to see Worlds, and vast Empires and Kingdoms
beyond their Walls; Imagining that China was set in the midst of the Earth,
like a large Gem in a Ring, and all the rest but as Gold to the Diamond; and a
little troubled to find their spacious Empire, beyond which they thought there
was none, confined to such a remote corner of the East, and Europe divided into
so many glorious Monarchies and Kingdoms, so far distant in the remote Recesses
of the West; and the whole Earth so surrounded by the main Ocean, and severed
into so many Continents, Lands and Islands, and as it were New Worlds. In so
much that Riccius seeing them a little displeased, was fain to describe the
World in a larger form into two Hemisphears, so as China should stand in the
midst: And therein afterward illustrated all Countries and Parts in the China
Character and Language; with which they were infinitely taken, and flocked in
multitudes to see, so that the House where it was could not contain them; And
therefore at the Viceroys charge it was cut and printed, and Draughts thereof
sent through all the Empire, which made all the Learned and Curious admire him,
as another Atlas dropped down from the Stars, and most famous Astrologer of the
whole World. And with these and the like Rarities and Curiosities of Art, he
became admirable throughout all the Empire.

Adams transcended him, and by reason of his incomparable skill in the
Mathematics, and their own Language, became yet more famous; And at last
highly courted and carressed by the new Tartarian Emperor himself* who made him
one of his most intimate Familiars and Counselors, and Mandarine of the first
Order, and assigned him the highest place in the Astronomical Tribunal, for
emendation of the Calendar, commanding all Astronomers throughout his Empire to
observe his Orders. He wondered at his infallible Prediction of Eclipses, at his
expertness in casting Ordinance, and Counsel in State Affairs. He honored him
as his Father, with highest love and affection, thinking something more than
humane in him. And when few were admitted to his presence besides his Queens
and Eunuchs; yet he had leave wher-ever he found the King, at home or abroad,
to approach unto him; which was scarce granted to any else: called Him in their
language, Venerable Father; and four times in one year came to visit their
House and Church. Would visit all the corners of their College with him, and
divert himself with him alone in his sorry Chamber, laying aside all State and
Ceremony, fit for so great a Monarch; and observed toward him by all others;
sometimes sitting upon his Straw-Bed, made like a Monks; sometimes upon an old
Stool, to contemplate the Rarities of Europe; yea, was pleased also sometimes
to taste of the domestic fruits of their Garden, with great satisfaction and
pleasure; admired at their Altars and Pictures, their Splendor and
Curiousness; at the Fairness and Elegancy of their Printed Books, the Letter
and the Cuts. But that which is more than all Complements, he commanded by his
Royal Edict, to be engraved on an huge Marble-Stone, erected before the Doors
of their Church, (which was also built through his favor, and finished Anno
1650.) his Royal Approbation of the Christian Religion, partly in the
Tartarian, and partly in the China Character and Language, which Charter to
this very day is exposed to be seen in the Jesuits Gallery at Rome, as it was
printed in China; (and is moreover drawn by an excellent hand in China and
Tartarian Characters also, white, upon a black Fund or Bottom in the said
Gallery likewise;) The tenor whereof, (that you may see the high esteem of
this learned Jesuit, for his Art, and Skill and great Science) is as follows.

A Chinese-Tartarian-Edict: WHEREIN
The Approbation of the Christian Religion, engraved on a Marble Monument,
which was erected before the Doors of the Temple of our Savior, for a
perpetual Memorial of the Thing, at Pekin, the Royal City of China, by Command
of the China-Tartarean Emperor XuNCHI, in the year of Christ, 1650.

ACCORDING TO THE COMMAND OF HEAVEN.
The CHARTER: Cut in China and Tartarian Characters.

THe Heavenly Science Astronomy, which our Ancestors always made highest
account of, deserves that We also should follow their steps, and extol it above
the Skies; especially seeing the same was heretofore under diverse Emperors
wholly declined and decayed, and again restored, and chiefly in the time of the
Empire of Juen, Emperor Tartarean, who governed the Chinois above 400 years
since, was rendered more exact by Co ru kim, and finally at length did too much
err in the last times of the foregoing Emperor Mim. There has been found one
Johannes Adamus Schall, coming from the utmost West into China, who was expert
not only in the Art of Calculation, but also in the Theory of the Planets, and
whatsoever pertains unto Astronomy. He being brought before the Emperor our
Predecessor, by his Command undertook the care of the Acadamy of Mathematics,
and Restoration of Astronomy. But because many understood not the fruit that
flows from this Science, it could not then be concluded, that the Subjects
should use that Science of his. But now when I came to the Empire, and my first
care was, for the Order of Times, for the Good of the Realm, in the Autumn of
the very first year of my Reign, seeking an experiment of that Art, which John
Adams had restored, I commanded to be observed most diligently, the Eclipse of
the Sun calculated by him sometime before; And it being found that, as well the
Moments of Time, as the Ecliptic Points, with all other Circumstances, did
exactly answer his Calculation. And again, in the Spring of the following Year,
when an Eclipse of the Moon offered it self, commanding the same to be
observed, with the same diligence, I also found that not to err an hairs
breadth neither; wherefore I presently apprehended that this Man was presented
to us from Heaven at such a time as this, wherein I undertook the Government of
so great an Empire, and thereupon committed the whole presidence of the
Mathematick Tribunal to him only. But because John Adams from his Childhood is
chaste (and has led a single life) nor will meddle with any affairs not agreeing
with his Religiousway of life, I thought necessary, by absolute command, to
oblige him to undertake this charge, and to add the dignity of the second
Order, according to the Title of Master of the Heavenly Areana's. In which
office being now employed some years, he adds daily more and more study and
diligence. And because he has a Temple near the Gate of the City, called Xun
che Muen, where, according to the Rites of his Law, he offers Sacrifice to God;
I also contributed some supply toward the building and adorning it: And when I
entered that Temple, I perceived the Images and Utensils to have the appearance
of extraneous and foreign things also. And concerning the Books of the Law,
which I found placed on a Table, when I had asked what was contained in them?
the said John Adams answered, That they contained an explication of the Divine
Law. And truly I, seeing I had formerly applied my mind to the Doctrine Yao Xun
Cheu, and Cum Cu, I perceived something out of their Books. In the Books Foe
and I au, although I read some things, yet nothing sticks in my memory. But
seeing I could not hitherto, by reason of the grand Affairs of the Kingdom,
look into the Books of this Divine Law, but only by the by; I cannot give an
exact judgment out of them, concerning that Law. But yet when I consider John
Adams, who having lived for many years among the Chinois, and with us, both
observes and practices this Law, I judge it to be exceeding Good. For John
Adams does so reverence his God, that he has dedicated this Temple to him,
conforming himself to this Law, with so great modesty and integrity of his
Person, for so many years, always after the same manner and method; and not a
jot varying therefrom: This truly is an express sign, that it is a Law of the
highest perfection, wherein John Adams himself is seen to excel with such most
approved virtue; seeing what that Law teaches, namely to serve God, obey Kings
and Magistrates, to do evil to no man, to seek the Public, and our Neighbor's
good, he exactly fulfills with his fidelity. And would to God Magistrates, and
all my Subjects, would imitate this his Industry and Diligence in serving God,
and keeping the Divine Law, and would but come any thing near it, in obeying
their Emperor; without doubt it would go far better by many degrees, and more
prosperously with me, and the whole Kingdom. As for me, I mightily approve of,
and commend this his mind, and this Law; And therefore in perpetual memory of
this thing, I prefix before his Church, this Title, I um hiven hia Kim, That
is, An excellent place to penetrate Heaven. Given at Pekin, in the seventh year
of Our Empire.

Whereby may be seen the Emperor's high esteem of this man, and consequently
of the pre-eminence of the Europaeans Science and Art. For the Church it self
it was built upon the account of the restoring the China Calendar, as appears
further from the Inscription of the Church it self, by the Jesuits.

The Inscription of the Church at Pekin, of the Society of JESUS.
AFTER the Faith first carried by St. Thomas the Apostle; and after the same by
the Syrians, in the time of the Empire I am, again further propagated; Thirdly,
again under the Empire Mim, after the same, St. Francis Xaverius, and Fa.
Mattheus Riccius being Leaders, By men of the Society of Jesus, both by Word
and Books, in the China Language, divulged, indeed with very great study and
labor; but by reason of the Inconstancy of the Nation, scarce sufficient; the
Empire being now devolved to the Tartars, the same Society, for a Crown of the
labors, in restoring by Theirs, the Calender, called Hien Lie, A Temple to God
the Best and greatest, publicly at Pekin, the Court of the Kings of China,
HAS ERECTED AND DEDICATED IN THE YEAR, MDCL. Xun Chi. VII. John Adam Schall a
Zell, a German, professed of the Society of Jesus, and Author of the foresaid
Calendar, out of the labors of his hands, bequeaths this House and Patience to
Posterity.

And moreover, he was so delighted with Globes and Spheres, and Astronomick
Instruments, sent for out of Europe that he would permit them no where but in
the Closet of his own Chamber, and would be instructed in the use of them, by
the Jesuits, whom he bore out against all the envy and opposition of the proud
Chinese, who thought They should give the Laws of Arts and Sciences to all the
World, and not receive them, from obscure Barbarians, and unknown Sons of the
Earth, as they thought. Indeed it is pity the Christian Faith should be conveyed
thither by no better hands; and that it should be so mixed and marred with
their Jesuitism, which yet they were so cunning as pretty well to hide and
conceal; and like the Serpent, first to get in their head that afterward they
might wind and wriggle in their whole body: As appears by their Catechism,
which we shall insert at the end of this Table, by way of Appendix, that you
may have the sight thereof herewith; And because it is a very good one, for the
most ignorant sort of people to apprehend; else how could they think to win
others from Idolatry, that are such gross Idolaters themselves. Also great
pity it is that they that are so merciless and cruel to all other Religions,
and Christians themselves at home, should find such favor for their own
abroad For the Law of Nature is, Retaliation; and the Law of Arms and Nations
is, Give and take Quarter.
. But however that which is Good and Laudable every where, is to be approved
of. And it is to be wished, that all zealous and sincere Protestants, would
rather be more ready to imitate, than envy their proceedings.

And if we compare latter times with former, we shall sind the Arts and
Sciences never more flourishing; And though many rare ones, it must be
confessed, have been lost; yet amends has been made for that, in more and
better, and more universally useful, found out. All Antiquity cannot show the
like to PRINTING, the Chard and Compass, Powder and Cannon, Circulation of the
Blood, and perhaps hereafter may be added, the Universal Character and
Language. PRINTING it self is so rare an Art, that Bodin says, That alone may
contend for prize with all the Inventions of the Ancients; whereby may be
dispatched in a day (and with greater fairness, and much more neatness and
elegancy by far) as much, as by the swiftest Pen in some years. By the
Loadstone, Magelane, Drake and Candish have sailed round the Earth, and proved
Antipodes to be neither a Romance nor Heresy; and have found out greater
Worlds, than all the other known, and enlarged Commerce to the utmost East and
West Indies. So that, We Are not to Ceres so much bound for Bread,
Nor yet to Bachus for his Clusters red,
As Segnior Flavio to thy witty Trial,
For first inventing of the Seamans Dial.
The use of the Needle turning in the same:
Divine Device! O admirable Frame!
Whereby through the Ocean in the darkest Night,
Our hugest Carracks are conducted right;
Whereby we are stored with Interpreter.
Truce-man, Guide and Lamp,
To search all corners of the Watery Camp.
Whereby a Ship that stormy Heavens have hurld,
Near in one Night into another World,
Knows where she is; and in the Chard descries,
What degrees thence the Aequinoctial lies.
DUBARTAS.

And as by the Chard and Compass new Worlds have been discovered; so by Powder
and Cannon they have been conquered: And wicked Mortals seem now to imitate the
dread Thunderer and his Thunderbolts, by those terrible Instruments of death
and execution, which Liphus therefore calls the Invention of Spirits and not of
Men: and yet they sooner put an end to fight, and perfect victory, than all the
lingering tools of death among the Ancients. The Turks employed a Piece of
Ordnance against Constantinople, that required seventy yoke of Oxen and two
thousand Men to hale it along. The Circulation of the Blood is such an
invention, for which the Ancients would certainly have deified the Author, no
less than Ceres* or Bachus, Aesculapius and Apollo. The Universal Character and
Language, almost equals that of Letters, in the Invention, as it is far beyond
it in the Thing.

They have no less also transcended the Ancients in Chemistry, and
Destillation, of Inorganick, and, as it were, Mechanic Motion, and
Fermentation of Nature; To wit, of the Principles, Particle, Ferments, and
Archeus's (or Vital movers) of Nature, and all natural Bodies; specially as to
the Blood and Fevers, and all preternatural Effervescencies of this Microcosm,
or little World of Man. And indeed, in all the New Modern Mechanic Philosophy,
or, as it were, Mechanism and Magnatism of Universal Nature. Viz. In all the
Atomick, Chymick, Magnetic, Magic, and whole Mechanic or Corpuscular
Philosophy, both the rational and the experimental; or in another sense, the
indeed Mechanic (i. e. Operative) Philosophy; In all the Mathematics and
Mechanics, their Subtilties, Rarities, Curiosities, and Wonders. If Archytas
had his Dove, Regiomontanus had no less his Wooden Eagle and Iron Fly, animated
as it were with artificial life and soul.

Why should I not the Wooden Eagle mention,
A Learned German's late admired Invention,
Which mounting from his fist that framed her,
Flew far to meet an Almain Emperor.
And having met him with her nimble train,
And weary wings, turning about again,
Followed him close unto the Castle Gate
Of Norimberg; whom all their Shows of State,
Streets hanged with Arras, Arches curious built,
And Pageants with their rich devices guilt;
Gray Headed Senate, and Youths gallantize,
Graced not so much, as only this Device.
DUBARTAS.
He goes on, and describes the Fly.

Once as this Artist more, with mirth their meat,
Feasted some Friends, whom he esteemed Great,
From under's hand an Iron Fly flew out,
Which having flown a perfect round about,
With weary wings returned unto her Master,
And, as Judicious, on his Arms he placed her.
O Divine Wit! that in the narrow Womb
Of a small Fly, could find sufficient room
For all those Springs, Wheels, Counterpoise and Chains,
Which stood instead of Life, and Spurs, and Reigns.
DUBART.
And if the Persian King had his Sphere of Glass, in imitation of the
Celestial Orbs, wherein he could sit, and see all their Motions transparent;
and Archimedes also had his Sphere: Ferdinand the Emperor had no less his of
Silver, which he sent to the Great Turk, carried by twelve men, and unframed,
and reframed in the Grand Segnior's presence, by the Maker, who likewise
presented him with a Book of the mystery of using it.

Nor may we smother, nor forget ingrately,
The Heaven of Silver, that was sent but lately,
From Ferdinando, as a famous Work,
Unto Bizantium, to the greatest Turk.
Wherein a Spirit still moving to and fro,
Made all the Engine orderly to go.
And though the one Sphere did always slowly slide,
And contrary the other swiftly glide;
Yet still their Stars kept all the Courses even,
With the true Courses of the Stars of Heaven.
The Sun there shifting in the Zodiac,
His shining Houses, never did forsake
His pointed Path. There is a Month his Sister
Fulfilled her Course, and changing of her Luster
And Form of Face, (now larger, lesser soon)
Followed the Changes of the other Moon.
Idem.
Stevinius had his Sailing Coaches in the Netherlands, of incredible swiftness,
so that they have been seen to Sail thirty Leagues in a day; which Grotius
affirms, he would never have believed, had he not seen with his own eyes.

Ships for the Sea, first Typhis did invent,
Jove Sailing Chariots, for the Firmament.
But for the Land Stevinius alone;
For neither Jove nor Typhis this will own.
Grotius.
We might instance in rare and wonderful Clocks, Watches, and Pendulums,
Wind-guns, etc. In our wonderful Telescopes, Microscopes, Thermometers,
Barometers, Air-Pumps, Pneumatick and Hydraulick (i. e. Air and Water) Engines;
Perpetuum Mobile's, etc. and infinite other Mathematick and Mechanic, Music,
Optic and Architectonick Instruments, Engines, Machines, and Devices, (whereof
the Ancients had nothing like) and all the other Arts and Sciences, whether
Mental or Manual, (if it were not beside the present business of these Tables
in this place, and wherein we have been too long, and digressed too far
already) but that we could not well avoid it, by reason of the many new
appearances of things on the present Stage of Learning in our days: We will
only hear the Poet once more on the curious contrived Clock and Dial at
Stratsburgh, in short thus.

But who would think that mortal hands could mould
New Heavens, new Stars, whose rolling courses should
With constant windings, though contrary ways,
Mark the true Monds of Years, and Months, and Days.
Yet it is a story that has often been heard,
And by an hundred Witnesses aver'd.
Dubart.
The business of Experiments, i. e. Their Study and Practice was never so far
prosecuted and advanced by the Ancients, as in our days. Nor did they ever
conspire into such universal and comprehensive Societies and Assemblies of Men,
of all Qualities and Conditions, for all possible advancement of Learning, both
in recovering the lost Arts, perfecting the old, and finding out of all manner
of new; which alone is that, which above all things else, lifts up Europe at
this present above all the World, and all preceding Ages. Was it ever known
before, that Gentlemen, Nobles, Kings and Princes did combine into such
Glorious Assemblies? Or when did they ever turn Philosophers, Experimenters,
and Operators; and as I may say, Mechanics, before? The Academies of Italy,
those of France and Germany, and above all the Royal Society of England, are
beyond all president of other times.

We might instance further in her Riches and Commerce, her Shipping and
Navigation, and show how she exceeds all the rest in these advantages;
insomuch, that for one Egyptian or Persian that comes into Europe, there passes
into Egypt and Persia, an hundred English, an hundred French, an hundred
Spaniards, an hundred Italians, an hundred Germains, and an hundred Dutch; and
an hundred times more for one American. The Phoenicians, and the Carthagintans;
the Tyrians, and the Sidonians, were renowned of old for great Navigators and
Merchants, yet they only Coasted it about the Inland and Midland Seas, but
durst never venture to cross the main Ocean. Into what a narrow compass then
was their Knowledge and Commerce confined. The Ancients ingrav'd Non ultra,
upon Hercules's Pillars, at the Mouth of the Streights, and a greater part than
all the other three of the known World besides, was wholly Terra Incognita to
them. They were beholden to the Lights of Heaven for a Guide in a dark night,
and to grope by Starlight, were lost in a Mist, and feign to ply it up and
down the Shores only; whereas now they are able to cross it from the North Pole
to the South Pole, from the Rising to the Setting of the Sun, from Nova
Zemblia, to Magellanica, and from India beyond Ganges, to America, and the
Western Indies.

The prodigious advance of Shipping of our days, is eminently seen in the
Hollanders, who are said to build a thousand Vessels every year fit for
Navigation and Commerce, whereof the least, for matter and making, besides
Tackling, stands them in no less than two thousand Crowns. And many times, as
Pontanus affirmed long since, arrive at Amsterdam as many Ships in a day, as
there are days in the year. The English and the French come not much behind,
and many other Nations in their proportion. The Fleets that enter the Thames
and the Texel, the Guadelquivir (at Sevil) and the Tage, (at Lisbone) the
Seine, and the Lloir, (in France) are ample testimonies of her abundance and
pre-eminence. It must not be denied, That Europe receives more from other parts
of the World, than she repales. But in this very thing it is, That her Commerce
becomes glorious to her, since she knows how to make it so to her advantage.
She parts with a little of her Brandies (or Aqua Vitaes) and Draperies; or at
best a little Coral and Amber; But she has not Magazines enough to hold all her
precious stores that come to her from the Indies and Persia, from Barbary and
Egypt, from New France and New Spain, from Brasil and Peru; besides what is
done within her self, and her own bounds.

Hence come our Sugars from Canary Since from diverse other places.
Isles,
From Candy, Currants, Muscadels and Oils.
From the Molucco's, Spices. Balsamum
From Egypt. Odours, from Arabia, com.
From India, Gums, rich Drugs, and Ivory.
From Syria, Mummy. Black, Red, Ebony,
From Burning Chus; From Peru, Pearls and Gold.
From Russia, Furrs, to keep the Rich from Cold.
From Florence, Silks; From Spain, Fruit, Saffron, Sacks.
From Denmark, Amber, Cordage, Firr, and Flax.
From France and Flanders, Linen, Woad and Wine;
From Holland, Hops; Horse, from the Banks of Rhine.
From England, Wool. All Lands as God distributes,
To the Worlds Treasure, pay their sundry Tributes.
Dubart.
It would trouble Arithmetic many times to find Numbers to answer the quantity
of pounds of Sugar, of Peppers, of Cinamons, of Cloves, of Mace, of Nutmegs,
and all other Riches from abroad. To say nothing of Pearls and Precious Stones,
of Silks, nor of Cottons, of Bezoart, nor of Indigo, of Gumlac, nor of
Purslanes, of Saltpeter, nor Salt-Amoniak. And to set aside Drugs and
Medicaments, Tobaco, and Castors, and abundance of Mullet, one of the most
excellent Fish of the Ocean, which alone makes the Riches of five or six good
Cities. In a word, all the Riches of the Earth, and all the delights of the
Sea. So that though every Land do not bear all things, yet they need want none;
and may so change Commodities, as if they had changed Countries one to the
other.

And yet though Diamonds, Pearls, and Spices, are only fetched from the
Indies; yet some return is made for them in Coral and Amber, which Europe
exchanges, for the Jewels of Asia. The Japons, all their Passion is for Coral,
as much as ours for Diamonds and Pearls. Insomuch that a Grain of the bigness
of an ordinary Egg, is there worth 2000 Crowns. And in the North of Asia and
Cathy, much is vended; where all the people wear Bracelets thereof, about their
Necks, Arms, and Legs, and make it their principal Ornament. And use the
greatest Grains thereof for their richest Purses, which they wear by their
sides. And for Yellow Amber, a great quantity is consumed in China, for when a
person of quality will make a splendid Treatment; at the end of the Feast they
bring three or four Censours, wherein they sprinkle Aber, sometimes to the
value of a thousand Crowns; being the more they burn, the more it is for his
glory that Treats; and is much used in Fumes, upon all other occasions, the
smell thereof being agreeable to them, and the flame having something which
other flames have not. Hence Amber is one of the best Merchandises that Europe
can send into Asia, and the Holland Company reserve it particularly to
themselves, to sell it dear at Batavia to the Chinese.

If Europe then at present carries it so high both for Arts and Arms, for
Riches and Commerce, (the main Props of States and Kingdoms) and all things
else comprehended in them; And if she now enjoyes all these advantages, before
all other parts and more than ever heretofore; She has yet that which carries
her still higher, and whereof to glory further, (as the highest prerogative of
humane kind.) That She is no longer Europe but Christendom. I say Christendom,
and that she has embraced the true Religion, and rejected Idolatry, and the
false Worship of the Pagans. And though a new Romish and Papal Superstition and
Idolatry overspread one half and more of her Dominions, and with grief it is to
be confessed, that it is every where also yet but a lamentable Christianity,
and an Heathen- (a Pagan, Unchristian, and very Antichristian) - Christendom,
or Christian-Heathendom; rather where Heathenish Wars and Fightings,
Heathenish Rites and Customs, and Heathenish Superstitions; where Heathenish
Sects and contendings about needless Ceremonies and Opinions, Heathenish Zeal
and Fury against pure Religion, and undefiled; (like that of the Heathen
against Socrates, for owning the true God) and Heathenish Vices and Crimes
reign and rage throughout; yet the true God is outwardly worshipped and owned;
The Doctrine, or rather Mystery of a Crucified Christ, but alone truly deified
and adorable Man, (above all the Hero's, and Gods, and Saints, and Divine-like
Persons of the Pagans, or Prophets of the Jews, and Mahometans; The Man Jesus,
true God and Man, (O the Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the flesh! etc.
hid in times past to the Gentiles, etc. but now revealed to the Nations of
Europe more than ever, and more than to all other parts of the World) I say,
the Mystery of a Crucified Christ, but true deified Person, the Man Jesus, the
Savior of the World, is openly professed by all, and seriously believed in by
thousands, (O adorable Jesu! who would not read thy Story, and study thy Acts,
and Heroic Deeds and Virtues, and imitate thy life, and believe and obey in
thy Kingdom?) an infinity of Souls are gained to him, an infinity of Victories
got over the Devil, and an infinite of Trophies erected upon the ruins of
Idolatry.

But indeed the grievous and shameful Schisms and Vices, the lamentable
Dissentions and Divisions of Christians, and Christian Princes, so prodigally
throwing away so many thousand men's Christians Lives, nay and Souls, in
unchristian-Christian Quarrels, is the reproachful blur to all her Puissance
and Splendour; and which will never cease, nor the Christian Religion ever
flourish and prosper in the World, as it ought, and Kings be her Nursing
Fathers, and Queens her Nursing Mothers, till they be more sunk and baptized
into the thing, than the name Christianity, and answer thoroughly their
Magnificent and Specious Titles of Mass Catholic, most Christian, etc.
Majesty's. And when once the Turks Fingers, all four, shall grow together;
Then, alack! and not before, we may hope to see our Masters agree and co-unite.

Still Christian Wars, they will pursue and boast,
Unjust Successes gained, whilst Candy's lost.
Which may now e'ne just take up Rhodes Complaint against them all.

All gaining vainly from each others loss,
Whilst still the Crescent drives away the Cross.
The Cross which they ought to take for their Device or Motto, which is
believed to have been given from Heaven, to Christendoms first Emperor, in this
overcome. But it is hoped that the two generous Nations of England and Holland,
which are able to do much when they are entirely united, will keep their Union
firm, for some nobler Enterprise worthy of themselves, and the high Reputation
they have gained in the World.

But that which more than all Eclipses and stirs her present Splendour, and robs
her of her Crown and Glory of Religion, and hinders the progress and
flourishing thereof in the Earth, are the cruel and bloody Inquisitions and
Persecutions for Religion and Conscience, of her several Sects and parties
within her self, which are more merciless to one another than they would, or
ought to be to Pagans, Turks, and Infidels; or Turks, Pagans, and Infidels
would be, or are to them; and give less liberty of Religion amongst themselves,
then they may find there amongst Barbarians.

Which plainly shows that there lacks only common Candor and Ingenuity, and but
tolerable civility of men, (much more of Christians) not to talk of prudence,
to introduce a reasonable Liberty of Conscience; and but that aequanimity and
largeness of heart for Religion (as is for other matters) amongst different
persuasions; and that only due liberty and freedom thereof, that is the common
right of mankind; even if it were but that, they would give to one another,
which they would have, and may and do receive, among Idolaters, Heathens, and
Mahometans, (for the Christians have their Churches and Temples in Turkey, and
even China it self, though they have none permitted here neither) I say, there
lacks only this reasonable liberty and largeness of Christian Religion, to
make Christendom and the World happy.

So then Europe is at this day the most noble and fairest part of the Grand
Continent for Religion, Learning, Civility and Policy; for the Arts and the
Arms, and all that is Gallant, and Polite, or Handsome, and deserves to be
styled, The Temple of Religion, the Court of Policy and Government, the Academy
of Civility and good Manners, the Mistress of Arts and of Arms, of Shipping and
Navigation, and indeed the Paradise of all humane Felicities in comparison.

For so it is, that all things have their Revolutions and Periods, (both in
regard of Times and of Places, from one place to another, in one Age, and then
in another) and that the people which now live between the Euxine Streights,
and the Atlantic Ocean, eclipse all the Sparkling and Pomp of Ancient Persia
her self. In a word, is not France at this day incomparably more flourishing
than ancient Gaul? Great Britane, has it not quite another countenance, than
when it bore the name of Albion? Or had Caesar then found them in this Estate
could he easily have made them Roman Provinces? The Tartarians, and Americans,
the Canibals, and Man-eating Barbarians, shall perhaps in some Ages after be
civilized like us. Have not the good Letters and good Manners, and all the high
Marks of Distinction, that difference, Mankind, passed insensibly from Chaldee
into Egypt, from Egypt into Greece, from Greece into Italy, and from thence
into the rest of Europe?

Greece is become a sad and darksome Cell,
Where naught reigns now but Ignorance and Hell;
Whence th'hideous Turk has frighted all that is fine:
Greece now is but the shadow of old Greece's Prime.
Muses! no more go seek those pleasant Mountains,
Where Language that is Divine was taught; those Fountains
Are now sealed up; sweet Hippocrene clean dry;
And Pene' quite forsook of Company.
That charming Vale, where the Laurel used to grow,
Is now frequented by the croaking Crow.
The universe has often changed its face,
Rome then received, when Athens did you chase.
Your Altars now reach these remoter Climes,
Under thick darkness bid in elder Times;
Grudge no more then your Aganippe's sourse,
You may one day reign in the Grand Atlantic Course.
The Banks of Tigre are no longer inhabited but by Tigres. The Plains of
Palestine are ill cultivated. Grand Caire, how vast soever it may be, resents
nothing of the glory of Memphis, and has changed its fortune with its Name.
Peloponnesse and Achaia, have no more the great Captains, nor the famous
Philosophers; and are to be numbered with the Lands which the Volga and the
Tanais water with their Streams; the only portion of our Europe, that has
nothing of Gallantry, nor Polite. All her other Regions, which way soever one
turn, are absolute Mistresses of Arms, Commerce, Arts and Sciences, and give
Laws to all the Earth.

But we have been too long upon Comparisons, which we should not have so much
as once begun, had not our Author first entered us, and led the way. And
therefore passing by further, we come to a plain-general-Table of Europe,
considered absolutely in her self.

And therein also wholly passing by her Natural Description of her Situation,
Extent, Climate; of her Parts, Lakes, Rivers, Mountains, Mines, etc. of her
Quality, natural Riches, Commodities precious Things, and Products of Nature,
which never vary, but appear almost the same in every Map. We shall only take
notice of her in her Politic Capacity, and things subject to change; and under
certain chief Heads of the most material things occurring, draw very plain and
distinct Tables, both General and Particular, of the present Face of Things.

For the use only, and general Information (both plain and brief, as in Tables
or Draughts) of ordinary, and the less knowing sort of People.

Table General. The Second Part.
Description Political of EUROPE.
CHAP. I.
The ARGUMENT.
General brief Tables of the present Governments, Languages, Religions,
Revolutions, etc. of Europe. The Governments Civil and Ecclesiastic in
general. Table Methodick of each Estate Sovereign. A List of Sovereign Princes
in their prime or declining Age. Numbering of the Languages of Europe, Mother
Tongues, Dialects, and Offsprings. Universal Language. Partition of the World
according to the different Religions. Parallel of Countries and Provinces,
Papist and Protestant. The one spread as far by the English and Hollanders, as
the other by the Spaniards and Portugals Navigations, Table of the Revolutions
of this last Age. Wars, and Treaties of Peace. Pretensions and Interests of
Europe in General.

EUrope (as has been enough seen) being the most accomplished and
considerable, though the least part of the Earth; and at this day more then
ever heretofore, deserves chiefly, and in the first place, to be taken notice
of by us, as she appears at present.

To which end we shall first draw a general Table of the whole, and then
particular Tables of each part; In both delineating only bare and naked
Draughts, as it were* of the present Governments, Languages, Religions, Riches,
Forces, and Commerce, Revolutions, Pretentions and Interest, etc. of Europe;
with other memorable and observable Things, and Occurrences, as they fall in
our way; first in General, and then in Particular, in the distinct description
of each Region and Country thereof.

GOVERNMENTS.
We begin therefore this second Part General, with the General Governments of
Europe, intending only General Heads of Things in this General Table.

Government is considered either as Civil or Ecclesiastic. The Civil
Government of Europe in general, is either purely Monarchick, of a single
Sovereign, or Aristocratick of the Nobles and Senators, or after a sort
Democratick, and Popular, of the People, commonly called, Common Wealth, (for
there is scarce any that is purely so, except you will reckon some few among the
Petty Cantons of the Suisses, which make but a little member of that great
Body) or mixed of these. But more particularly, whether one or the other.

The Principal Crowns, and States Sovereign of EUROPE, (for they are not all
worthy of the high Title of Monarchies) may be reduced to Empires, Kingdoms,
Principalities, Dutchies, and Republics, or Commonwealths; together with the
Papality and State of the Pope, as a Temporal Prince in Italy, and the County
of Venaissy, which makes a Sovereignty apart.

After which rate Europe has two Empires, seven Kingdoms, seven Electorships,
and of late years, an eight; seven grand Dutchies, seven Republics or
Commonwealths, three grand Principalities, (which are now all tributary to the
grand Segnior) and a Papality.

The two Empires, are the Empire of Germany, half Monarchy, half Commonwealth,
the Emperor not being absolute, but only in the Lands whereof he is Lord and
owner. And the Empire of the Turks, who are subject to one only Monarch. Some
add the Empire of Russia for a third.

The seven Kingdoms, are the Kingdom of France, Spain, Portugal, England,
Denmark, Sweedland, and Poland. The first, the most perfect, and descends only
to the Heirs Male, ever since the Salique Law. The five next admit the Females;
and all are haereditary save the last, which is Elective. But though all these
Estates be purely Monarchick, yet the three latter (besides Poland) are not
absolute Monarchies, nor leave their Kings so much elbow-room, nor their
Commands so absolute and Sovereign as the other.

There are moreover in Europe other lesser Kingdoms comprehended under these;
as those of Bohemia and Hungary, under the Emperor. That of Navarre, under the
Crown of France. Those of Naples, Sicily, Sardinia, and Maiorck, under the King
of Spain. And those of Scotland and Ireland, under the King of England.

The Seven Electors, three Eccleasiastick, four Saecular, and of late a fifth,
are the Archbishop of Mentz, Dean of the College of Electors, Lord
High-Chancellor of the Empire in Germany. The Archbishop of Colen, Lord
High-Chancellor of the Empire in Italy. The Archbishop of Trevers, Lord
High-Chancellor of the Empire in France. The King of Bohemia at this time
Emperor, (till the young King his Son come to be installed therein) chief
Cup Bearer of the Empire. Count Palatine of the Rhine, heretofore the fifth
Elector, chief Almoner of the Household; now the eighth, and Lord
High-Treasurer, since the Duke of Bavaria newcreated was put in his place; The
Duke of Saxony, Lord High-Marshal, (or Sword Bearer); and the Marquess of
Brandenburgh, Lord High-Chamberlain, and who has the largest Territories next
the Emperor himself.

These Electors are Sovereign in their Estates, and though Members of the
Empire, yet can make Peace and War when they please, whereof we have at this
present a sad example between the Elector Palatine, and the Elector of Mentz,
with the Lorrainers.

The Ecclesiastic Electors ever had the precedence of the other, by reason of
the height and Supremacy of the Pope in Temporals, and the Saecular Power of
the Bishops in former times.

The seven Grand Dutchies or Dukedoms which have each their particular Lords
and Masters, are the Dukedom of Moscovy, (the Prince whereof assumes the Title
of Emperor, and by some is reckoned among Empires; As indeed to say the truth,
it is a Dukedom on which depends thirty other Dutchies, and three Kingdoms,
which exceed Germany and Poland in extent, and notwithstanding all their Cold,
are filled with Inhabitants. And the Duke himself is absolute over his
Subjects.) The Duchy of Savoy, at this day, the first in Europe, the Duchy of
Tuscany, of Lorrain, of Saxony and Bavaria, whose Dukes are Electors, and the
Duchy of Holstein. As for the great Duke of Lithuania, he is subject to the
King of Poland, and the Duchy of Milan to the King of Spain. And the other
petty Dutchies of Germany and Italy, are not of any force or reckoning with
these seven.

We must crown all these Dutchies or Dukedoms, with the one only Arch-Dukedom
of Austria, whereof the Emperor is Master; and add that all these Estates have
nothing mixed in the form of their Government, and that they acquiess under the
Authority of one alone.

The seven Commonwealths, are those of the Suisses, of Venice, of the United
Provinces, of Genoa, of Lucca, of Geneva, and of Raguza. For the petty
Commonwealth of St. Marine, must not come into this Range.

As for the Hans-Towns, and free Cities of Germany, they acknowledge some
subjection or other to the Empire, etc.

The three grand Principalities are, Transylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia, all
three tributary to the Turk. As for the Prince of Precopia, or lesser Tartary,
called the Crim Tartar, he is now made slave to the Turk, and over him a
Beglerbeg, or Bassa, to command in chief.

It will not, perhaps, distaste the Reader to give a List here of the present
Kings and Princes, according to their different Ages together.

The King of Spain, Swedeland, the Prince of Orange, the Land-grave of
Hesse-Cassel, the Duke of Mantua, the Duke of Modena, are yet in their Minority.

The King of France, England, Portugal, the Elector of Bavaria, the Duke of
Saxony, the Duke Regent of Holstein, the Dukes of Lunenburgh, the Landgrave of
Hesse-darmstat, the Duke of Mickleburgh, the Prince of Mount-Belliard, the
Prince of East-Friezland, the Marquess of Bada, the grand Duke of Moscovy, and
the grand Segnior; All these Princes are in the prime of their Age, and like to
reign long.

Those that have passed the middle of their days, and begin to draw toward
their evening, are the Pope, (always) the King of Poland, who has now lately
resigned his Crown, and none other yet chose; the King of Denmark, the three
Electors Ecclesiastic, three of the Secular, the Palatine, the Elector of
Saxony, and of Brandenburgh; the three Princes of Transylvania, Walachia, and
Moldavia. The Duke of Lorrain, Wittenburgh, Newburgh, Brunswick, Wolfen-Buttel,
the great Duke of Tuscany, and the Duke of Parma.

The Ecclesiastic Government of Europe, in general, is either Papal, owning
the Pope as Supreme; or Episcopal, owning the King as Supreme, in all causes;
and Archbishops and Bishops under him; called also Prelatical, (as in the
Church of England) or Super-intendent, which is a kind of Episcopal among the
Lutherans, but yet owning no Head of the Church, neither Pope, nor King, or
Civil Magistrate, to order the Affairs of the Church, as such. The
Presbyterian, or Synodical, owning a Presbytery, or Synod, as Supreme, and
Lay Elders, etc. but no Bishops, nor Super-intendents, as in France, Holland,
etc. As for other forms of Government, there are none established any where by
public Authority. And this is the present face almost of Europe in General.

LANGUAGES.
The present Languages of Europe, for we pass by those that are out of date, as
the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, which are rather Scholastical, than National,
and only used among the Learned, may be reduced to three, the Teutonick, the
Sclavonian, and the derivatives of Latin and Greek corrupted. By the way only
take notice, that the Arabic Tongue is the same in Asia, that the Latin is in
Europe, and that by its help, one may march from the Bosphorus in Europe, to
the furthermost Lands of the Indians. We find not therefore in Europe more then
two Mother Tongues at present, which have each their several Dialects, with
some sprouts, as it were, of the two dead Languages, Latin and Greek.

The two Mother Languages then, are the Teutonick, and the Sclavonian: The
Sclavonian is familiar at Constantinople, and even at Grand Caire; And has for
its principal Dialects, the Rheuthenick, or Russian, for the Moscovites; the
Dalmattan for the Transilvanians, and Hungarians; the Bohemian, and the
Polonian; the Illyrian, Jazigian, etc. with some others which have their course
amongst the Walachians, and the Moldavians, and the lesser Tartary.

The Teutonick has three principal Dialects, the German, the Saxon, and the
Danish. And of these again issue forth other Idioms, as the Flemish, or
Low Dutch, the English, the Swedish, the Cauchian of the East-Friezlanders,
(amongst themselves only, for they use Dutch to strangers) the Language of
Norway, and of the Suissers.

The Greek Language, Mort, or dead, but less corrupted than the Latin, has
diverse Relics, and shootings forth in diverse Isles of the Archipelago, in
Achaia, and Morea, under the great Turk, and is better preserved here in these
named, then in any other Province of Greece.

The States General of the United Provinces, did some years since contribute
liberally to the charge of an Impression of the New Testament in Vulgar Greek,
whereto there has been joined the Ancient or Original Greek, for the
consolation of those poor people that groan under the Tyranny of the Ottomans.

The Latin, the other Tongue Mort, has but three principal shoots or branches,
the Italian, French, and Spanish. But this last has an huge medly of barbarous
terms left from the Moors. And under these three are to be comprehended the
Savoyan and Piemontian, those of Sicily, Sardinia, and of the Grisons in the
Alps.

We might find out yet seven other Tongues in Europe, but of far less extent
then the preceding, and not noised of in the World; As the Albanian, (or
Epirotick) in Epirus, and Macedonia; The Bulgarian for Servia, Bosnia and
Bulgaria, under the Turks. The Cossack or Tartarian of the lesser Tartary, in
the Taurica Chersonesus, and all along the River Tanais. The Finnick, in
Finland, and Lapland, Provinces of Swedeland. That of the Wild- Irish and
Scotch, in Ireland, and the West of Scotland. The British, or Welsh, in Wales,
and some parts of Cornwall in England, and half through Bretain Armorica, or
Little Britain, in France. And lastly, the Biscayan, on this side, and that
side the Pyrenean Hills, and near to the Cantabrian Ocean, as little understood
to the rest of the World, as the old British it self. Besides some Arabic, not
worth mentioning in the Mountains of Granada, called Alpuxarras ever since the
Moors possessed those parts.

Of all these Languages there are some Masculine, but something rude and harsh,
as the German, and in some sort the Spanish, through the Relics and mixture
of the Moorish; And some Faeminine, but more delicate and fine, as the Italian,
and in some sort the English, Which are more graceful in the mouths of the
Women, (and become them best) than the Men's, who cannot use too much gravity in
their Speech.

Moreover the Language of the Spaniards is said to be Manly, the Italian,
Courtly; and the French, Amorous; The German is like their Nation, Warlike. The
English is now become a complete mixture of all, viz. old Dutch, or Saxon,
Latin, and chiefly French, with some sprinklings of Spanish, and Italian;
flourishing now at length with a rare choice out of all; occasioned by the
constant travels and education of our English Gentry and Nobility (and Scholars
with them) abroad.

By reason of all which diversities of Tongues, there has been not only
Designs, but real Endeavors and Essays, and of late more than ever, toward
an Universal Character and Language, to avoid the confusion of these. And of
all, the Universally Learned Wilkins excels; and has wonderfully outdone all
the Ingenioso's, Virtuoso's, or Literado's of the World, that have gone about
it, or meddled therewith. And it no longer lies now on the Inventors, but the
Learners (no less than the whole Worlds) part, who are hardly taught all one
thing, to make it familiar and easy, that is, Universal.

RELIGIONS.
Three Religions do at this day divide all the Earth, Heathen, Mohammedan, and
Christian. The first is, without doubt, the largest; the second, in like
manner, carries it from the third, and best; but with this difference, that
this last is more concentred together, and fills the most peopled Provinces of
the Universe.

As for the Jews, they are no Nation, but dispersed in all, have no fixed Seat,
Principalities, nor Magistrates. Yet their number is great, both in Poland and
Greece, and all the Turks Dominions; besides some sprinklings in Italy,
Holland, etc.

Paganism, or Heathenism, embraces more than three quarters of both the
America's, and more then two thirds, even of Africa and Asia also. All that
prodigious space of Ground of the America's, greater than all the other three
parts of the World besides put together, is filled with Idolaters, who worship
Animals, Vegetables, Stars, and Devils. And comprehends innumerable vast
Regions, (populous) Nations, and mighty Kingdoms. And in Africa and Asia in
like manner, a fearful company of Nations, Kindreds and People live in thick
darkness of Paganism and Ignorance of the true God.

Mahometism never yet had footing in America; But in Africa, the mighty
Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco, the Jurisdictions of Tremisen, Algiers, Tunis,
Tripolis, of Barce, and Egypt. In Asia, the Grand Seignor, the Kings and
Princes of the three Arabia's, the Grand Cham of Tartary, the King of Persia,
the Grand Mogul, the Kings of Visapor, and Colconda. The Kings on both the
sides of Coromandel, and of Malavar. The King of the Maldives. The King of
Achem, and all the Princes of the Grand Isle of Sumatra; The Emperor of Java;
The King of Bantam; and other Princes of the Neighboring Isles; For their
people are generally Idolaters. Which we ought no more to wonder at, than at
the medly that is found in like manner among Christians themselves.

Christianism makes two Grand Branches, the Trunk or Body whereof is in Europe,
but the Branches extend themselves far and near into all the parts of the
Universe, both Asia, and Africa, and America. And they are the Eastern
Christians, (or the Eastern and Greek Church) the Roman Christians, or Papists,
(the corrupt Church) and the Protestant Christians, (or Reformed Church) both
members of the Latin, (or Western Church) in opposition to the Greek, or
Eastern. The Greek Church differs chiefly from the Latin, about the Profession
of the Holy Ghost, and some other Points and Articles of Faith. The Protestant
from the Papistical, chiefly about the Popes Supremacy and Infallability,
Sacrament of the Altar, and Indulgences, which gave the first occasion, and
other corrupt Points and Doctrines, stablish'd since by the Council of Trent.
The Romans call themselves the Catholic Apostolical Church, but most unjustly,
and all the rest Heretics: and the Protestants reckon themselves the only
true Catholic Apostolic, and call the others the Antichristian, Babylonish,
or false, and themselves the Reformed Church; which indeed is true, so far as
they are truly reformed. But yet it is much to be feared, and shrewdly to be
suspected, that Antichrist reaches further than Rome, and that all Rome, it is
to be hoped, is not Babylon.

The Christians of the East make up a great number, and possess large
Countries; the Christians Roman, and the Christians Protestant, may dispute for
Number and Power, and make comparison. We make none here, but only of the
Provinces which they possess, without going beyond our mark, intending only a
bare Relation, or plain Table, and no Zeal of Comparisons.

In the Eastern Church are also many differences crept in; but the Greeks bear
the chief sway, although both the Armenia's, who make a company apart, are a
considerable Body. We put all together here, the Greeks, the Abyssins, the
Armenians, and the Muscovites; the Nestorians, the Cophites, the Maronites, the
Georgians, the Jacobites, and the Melchites, or Assyrians. In the Reformed
Church of the Protestants, are the two great Sects of the Lutherans, and the
Calvinists, which we put both together, as Protestants united against the
Romanists, and now also laboring hard on both sides to unite among themselves,
though the latter only took the Title of Reformed.

As we blame the pride and haughtiness of the Chinese, who before that the
Tartars had humbled them, believed that all the rest of the Universe, beyond
their Mountains and Walls that encompass them, was wholly desolate or
barbarous. In like manner ought we not to suffer an infinity of Ignorants, who
because, perhaps in Colen, they see but an hundred Protestants, or so,
presently imagine the same of all Germany, and of the whole World, and reckon
their Church Catholic, when it is but a moity of the least part of the Earth;
and not esteeming things but by their outward splendour and glittering, pass
unjustly from the unequal esteem, and false count of their number, to the
unequal esteem, or false count of their Virtue and Cause. Besides the advantage
of Number is no great advantage. The Mahometans on this account carry it from
the Christians; and the very Heathens from both. So that neither the one or the
other have any great reason to glory. The only glorying is to have God on their
side. But let us come to the Countries which each possess.

Europe, as was said, is almost all Christendom. Yet Idolaters and Heathen are
still found in the cold Region of the Laplanders; and although they are
distinguished into Danes, Swedes, and Moscovites, yet they hardly obey, either
the Duke Moscovy, or the King of Suede, or of Denmark* Mahometanism is more
spread, but not beyond the Turks Territories: It is followed at Constantinople
in Romania, and in the places of Dalmatia and Hungary, where he is Master. It
has its course, also in the Taurick Chersonese, and the lesser Tartary. But all
these Countries together, make not above one tenth part of Europe.

Lastly, Judaism only lurks in little corners and holes of Christendom, and
dares hardly show its face but with some kind of disgrace and infamy; Witness
their yellow Hats in Italy and Avignon, for a mark of dishonor. Yet the Jews
have their Synagogues, and their principal ones are at Amsterdam, Avignon,
Rome, Venice, and diverse other places of Holland and Italy. They are found
moreover at Franck-fort, Hamburgh, and other Cities of Germany, and some at
London also through connivance, though the Laws be against them. But they are
least troubled in Poland and Bohemia; and there, as well for their Number, as
for their Privileges, through the force of Silver Weapons, they make something
a greater noise than elsewhere. Greece is yet fuller, they have free Trade at
Constantinople, and Grand Caire; They manage principal Affairs; they have
places of Profit and Revenues, and generally they are powerful through all the
Ottomans Empire. For Christians, according to the three Branches of
Christianism mentioned, viz. the Christians of the East, the Christians Roman,
and the Christians Protestant, they take up all the rest.

The Christians of the East, or the Eastern Church, advantagiously divide with
the Mahometans, and the Jews, all Greece, and all the Neighboring Isles of the
Archipelago. And in Mount Athos alone, for which cause they have since given it
the name of Monte Sancto, or the Holy Mountain; one may see twenty four
Monasteries of Caloyers, or certain Monks of the Order of St. Basil, (of which
Order generally the Greek Church are) to the number of six thousand.

And under this Branch comprehending all the several Sects that use different
Liturgies, the Eastern Church is extended yet further into Russia, who are all
thereof; and out of Europe into Ethiopia, and Egypt in Africa; into Georgia,
Armenia, Assyria, and Persia in Asia, and if one would, even to India it self,
and to the Kingdom of Tenduc, on the North of Cathay, where Mark Polo found
some Christians of St. Thomas the Apostle.

Each of these Sects has their Patriarchs, and these Patriarchs, like as the
Bishops also, are all Monks of one of the two Orders of St. Basil, or St.
Anthony, his follower.

For the other Religions, the Roman Religion is absolute Mistress in Spain,
Portugal and Italy. The Religion Protestant in the Islands of Great Britane, in
Swedeland and Denmark.

The Roman Religion bears the sway entirely in the Spanish Provinces of the Low
Countries; the Protestants in the United Provinces.

The Roman Religion reigns solely in the petty Cantons of Switzerland; the
Protestant in the great Cantons.

The Roman Religion has the upper hand entirely in the Countries of the three
Electors Ecclesiastic, of Mayence, Trevers and Colen. The Protestant in the
Countries of three of the Electors Saecular, the Palatinate of the Rhine,
Saxony, and Brandenburgh.

The Roman Religion has not any mixture apparent in the Haeredetary Countries
of the Emperor, Austria, Bohemia, Moravia, Tirol, Carinthia, Stiria, and
Carniola, nor in the Electors the Duke of Bavaria.

The Protestant has little or none at all, in Suavia, Silesia, both the
Prussi's, Pomerania, Hiss, the Archbishopric of Breme, and in the Dukedoms of
Holstein, Lunenburgh, Meckleburgh. But in the other Provinces of Germany, as in
the Dutchies of Cleveland, Juliers, Alsatia, Westphalia, and Franconia, the two
Religions are almost equally divided, except that the Protestant has all the
Authority in its hand in the grand Imperial Cities hereof, and the Hans Towns,
which make up the number of an hundred and fifty, whereof there are but very
few to be excepted. The most famous are Nurenburgh, Franck-fort, Worms,
Stratsburg, Ausburg, Ulms, Ratisbone, Spire, Strelsond, Wismar, Rostoch,
Stetin, Osnaburg, Brunswick, Breme, Hamburgh, Lubeck, Dantzick, Elbing,
Conigsberg, where the Magistrate is Protestant. There is but only France and
Poland, where the number of the Romans surpass the number of the others, and
where nevertheless these have the free and public exercise of their Religion,
and each live together in peace; though the Romanists daily incroach upon the
Protestants, and increase, and the others decrease, and lose their Privileges
and Power, for want of some Heroic Princes to maintain them.

To conclude; The Roman Religion has been carried to the ends of the World,
into the East, and into the West Indies by the Spaniards and Portuguese. The
Protestant has been carried to the same places by the English, and the Dutch,
and the French also are settled in the Isle of Madagascar in Canada, in Africa,
and in America, and take their course also through Asia, insomuch that all are
there generally called Franks. But these are almost universally French
Catholics.

But to take things apart; The Roman Religion is spread in some Maritine places
of Asia, and has it is principal Seat at Goa, a Puissant City on the Western
Coast of the Peninsula on this side Ganges. The Protestant upon the shores of
the same Asia, and has its principal Seat at Batavia, a City upon the Southern
Coast of Grand Java, which the Commerce of the Hollanders has rendered famous.

The Roman Religion fills some places of the Eastern Coast of Africa, as
Melinda, Mosambica, Quiloa; The Protestant some places of the same Africa, upon
the Western and Southern Coast, as in the Kingdom of Congo, Guiny, and Cape
Verd.

The Roman Religion possesses in America, Mexico, and Peru, the Isles of Porto
Rico, St. Domingo, and Cuba; also Brasil and Canada, and some of the Antilles
Islands. The Protestant, in like manner, in the same America, New England, New
Swede, New Denmark, New Holland, and Virginia, and now of late the Island of
Jamaca, and the two thirds of the Antilles Islands, and heretofore the Northern
part of Brasil, etc.

By all which you may see how little reason of Geography the Religion Roman
has, to appropriate the Name Catholic.

The Jesuits, as has been seen by the first part, have also promoted their
Religion, even into China, but it is not yet become National or powerful.

It rests only to draw hence their Proportions, thus;

The Proportions of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, ought to be considered,
as 1, 3, 4, and 7. So that taking only the Inhabited part of the World, the
Christians possess about a sixth, the Mahometans a fifth, or something more;
and the Heathens two thirds, or hardly quite so much. So that dividing all the
known Regions of the Earth into thirty equal parts; The Christians part shall
be as five, the Mahometans as six, and the Heathens as ninteeen, which is very
near two thirds of thirty. As for the Christians that are found in Asia,
Africa, and America; their petty number is, as it were, swallowed up in this
fearful multitude of Mahometans and Idolators, and is elsewhere
counterballanced by that of the Mahometans in Europe. And if to the Lands
discovered, one join that great Southern Continent, which comes near to the
very Equator, and coasts, as it were, continually from East to West, the two
other Continents of Asia and Africa, so that it seems to be as large as Europe,
Asia and Africa put together; then the Heathen will surpass the Mahometans and
the Christians in an excessive proportion; for they will then have near as much
more; for it is to be believed, that that part of the World has no other for its
Inhabitants than Idolaters; seeing that they found no other at the point of
good Hope, and toward the straight of Magellan, which are the most
neighboring Lands to this vast Continent of the South, whose shores only are
known unto us.

These are the three grand Branches of the Christian Religion in Europe, out of
which arise only three other that are become distinct and National, viz. the
Lutheran, the Calvinist, and the Episcoparian, all of them Protestant and
Reformed; All of them deny the Popes Supremacy and Transubstantiation, etc. The
Calvinists deny both Transubstantiation of the Papists, Consubstantiation of
the Lutherans, and Episcopacy, and the Discipline of the others. And these
again the Presbytery of the Calvinists, Consubstantiation of the Lutherans, and
Transubstantiation, Supremacy, etc. of the Papists, only retaining Episcopacy,
(which they contend to be Primitive) and some Popish Ceremonies, (which they
contend to be indifferent and lawful); all of them at great variance, and with
much zeal and animosity each against the other.

There are indeed many other Sects, and Parties, and Opinions shooted out of
these; but none to be accounted General, National, or Powerful, though such as
have raised great Disputes, and Contentions, and overwarm Fewds and
Zealousness; and some to Separation from all the former.

And they are either such as are, or may be common to all other, such as are
chiefly those about Doctrine; as Arminianism and Antiarminianism, Socinianism,
or Antisocinianism, etc. according as Reason and Faith directs each. The
Socinians are chiefly in Poland; The Arminians are spread every where. Or else
such as separate from all others, chiefly about Discipline, as the Brownists,
Independants, etc. chiefly in England, and New England; the Anabaptists in
Germany and England also, etc. and other places; the Quakers, the latest of
all, in England, etc. The Latitudinarians, who submit to any Discipline, and
contend only for the Substantials of Religion. Seekers, or Spiritualists, who
submit to no Religion, as whose Religion is to be, not so much against, as
above all Religions, or Forms of Religion; All which are comprehensive of most
others and, are all generally Libertinarians, more or less; that is for liberty
of Religion.

Amongst such a company of Religions in the World, what other means possible
can there be for Unity, Peace, and Love amongst Christians, or mankind; but
Liberty rather than Uniformity? For how is it possible there should be
Uniformity long, where there is only necessity, not consent and harmony?

There are but few places where liberty of Religion is tolerated, and those
with difference. Among the Turks in Poland, Germany and Holland, generally all,
more or less. In France, the Protestants only. In New England all, but errors
judged fundamental. The Jesuits in China, and in Italy, and Avignon, the Jews.
But the World will then only be happy, when it shall once become Universal,
that is, as large as the very Universe it self; and men's minds like to Truth it
self, noble and free, and not narrow, but large spirited and diffusive, like
the infinite Creators, who would have all men to be saved, and that by
persuasion, and not force, because impossible. But we pass by this less
pleasing particular.

As also the Commerce, Commodities, Riches and Forces of Europe, of which it is
enough to say in general, that she commands by Sea all the Riches of the World;
and of which enough before, till we come to more particulars, which are best
referred to each several Country.

REVOLUTIONS.
The late grand Revolutions of Europe have been either of States and Kingdoms,
whether for Dominion or Religion; or of Religions themselves, or of both
mixtly. We shall only look so far back as to take a view or prospect of the
present face of things, and the Foundations of the present Governments and
Religions before mentioned.

The Foundation of the present Germane Empire, in the House of Austria; which
grand Revolution has made it, as it were, Haereditary; and put a period to
Liberty of Elections.
I. ABout the year 1250. the Empire being greatly distracted through the Popes
means and practices (who for above an hundred years had notoriously usurped
authority over the Emperors, and made a common practice of excommunicating them
in a manner successively, for so many years one after the other); the Empire, I
say, being distracted into many Factions, each Faction chose a King of the
Romans, or Emperor; insomuch that there were now at one time three Elected
together, and a*fourth a year or two after bought it, and presently left it
again, and then for several years without any. The Empire fluctuating thus for
about twenty years, and after so long an Interregnum, the Princes of Germany
met at Quidlinburg, and made a League of Defense together about the year 1270.
Thereupon Pope Gregory the tenth sends order to them to choose an Emperor,
unless they would have one chose for them. Meeting therefore at Franck-fort*
they chose (out of one of the weakest Families, every Faction grown jealous,
and fearing the other) Rodolphus Earl of Hapsburg, in the year 1270. to be
Emperor, the Raiser of the present House of Austria upon this occasion, and
grand Revolution; for by War, and by his Imperatorian Power, gaining Austria,
and other Territories adjoining, he confers them upon his Son: And so the Earls
of Hapsburgh become first Dukes, then Archdukes of Austria, about the year
1280. and so propagated their power far and near unto our times.

By this time the seven Electors had rooted themselves in their usurped
Electorship, which began first by bare permission, and under pretext of
avoiding confusion, and for better order in the Election, to take the Votes of
all the other Princes of Germany, what should be best for the Common Interest,
afterward used and usurped as their privilege, and so continued it, till they
got to be established therein by the Golden Bull.

II. The Golden Bull, or Seal, is constituted as the perpetual and fundamental
Law of the Empire, (not to be altered by the Emperor, no not with the Electors
consent themselves) by Charles the Fourth, in the year 1356. Yet to which since
has been added, Capitulations of the Emperor, with the Electors, and Princes of
Germany.

In the Golden Bull was contained the Privileges, Liberties, Order, and mutual
respect between the Emperor and Princes.

In it the seven Electors were established by public Sanction, and Law of the
Empire; before sometimes more, sometimes less, usurped the Power to themselves,
which bred dissentions and confusions always in choice.

Also to hinder Haereditary Succession, that three Emperors of one and the same
Family should never be chosen together, as had been by Power, Interest, and
Factions formerly accustomed to keep it in one House; which how well observed
the Story will show, it having continued in that Line ever since, and become in
a manner quite haereditary, and scarcely to be altered.

In it also was decided between the House of Bavaria, and the Palatine, the
Controversy about Electorship, which was by perpetual right then annexed to
the Palatinate, and ever since continued so till the late German Wars; before
each claiming the Electorship, which therefore often disturbed their number to
be more or less than seven.

III. About the year 1500. the State of Burgundy, which contained the Low
Countries, was by Marriage with the Heiress thereof, added to the House of
Austria, which further strengthened it.

About the same time under Maximilian the first, the public Courts of
Judicature, which followed the Emperors Court, always before were fixed to a
certain place; and this is called the Imperial Chamber, the Supreme Tribunal,
and Appeal of Justice, in which in Civil Matters, the Emperor and all the
Princes should be subject, and the greatest Controversies be submitted to its
Judgment.

It was after two removes fixed at last to Spires; hence the Chamber of Spires
famed over all; and the Empire also divided into ten Circles, by the same
Emperor, at the same time.

IV. The Heir of Burgundy (i. e. the Emperors Son, by his Wife Heiress thereof)
marrying with the Heir of Spain, unite the Kingdom of Spain and Burgundy, and
the House of Austria together, and so the King of Spain becomes Archduke of
Austria, Duke of Burgundy, and Lord of the Low Countries, and after his
Grandfathers decease, Emperor also, viz.

Charles the Fifth, Son of Philip King of Spain, Son of Maximilian the Emperor,
succeeds his Father in his Estates of Inheritance of Spain, Burgundy, and the
Low Countries, Austria, etc. and by Election, his Grandfather Maximilian in
the Empire, in the year 1519. under whom the German Empire rose to its greatest
height and enlargement ever since the dismembring of it. And indeed with this
addition of Spain, Burgundy, and the Low Countries, Naples, and Sicily, it
might equal it under Charles the Great, when it had France and Italy Members
thereof, or subject thereunto; besides the Dukedom of Milan fell to this
Charles; also the Kingdom of Tunis, and other parts in Africa became Tributary;
and moreover, married the Daughter of Portugal, and so laid a Foundation for
that Kingdom also. But if you add the West Indy Kingdoms, the Kingdom of Mexico
overcome, Anno, 1521. the Kingdom of Peru, 1535. It had more extent, though not
greatness and power, than all the Roman Empire ever had. And had not the French
opposed him, he had overran all Europe, and been Universal Monarch.

He had Prisoners at the same time, the French King, and the Pope of Rome. He
ruined the League made by the Protestants at Smalcalde in Germany. Took
Prisoners the Elector of Saxony, and Landgrave of Hassia, drove the great Turk
from Vienna, as well as won Tunis. But the Turk soon broke his Power in Africa,
and being hunted out of Germany, he resigned all his Estates and Kingdoms; the
Empire to his Brother, who had been before elected King of Hungary and Bohemia,
Anno 1526. and by the procurement of this Charles, elected King of the Romaus,
1531. and now by his Resignation, Emperor, 1558. The rest of his Estates to his
Son Philip the Second King of Spain, and so went off the Stage, and died
private in a Monastery, after he had been glutted, as it were, with the pomp
and vanity of the World;

As Emperor of the Germans, King of Castile, Aragon, Naples, Sicily, etc.
Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Prince of Belgium, (or Low Countries)
etc. King of India, and the Ocean, etc. Lord of Africa, etc. But in the end
only Monk.

V. From this time the Austrian House took such rooting in Germany, that the
Empire is in name rather Elective, but in reality Haereditary, and become the
Inheritance, as it were, of a Family; Specially after he brought in the custom
of creating King of the Romans, during the Emperors life, as he did to his
Brother, Anno. 1531. (which is a Title proper to the Emperor) notwithstanding
the Elector of Saxony, who by many Arguments showed, how it tended to inervate
the free election of the Emperor.

VI. Under this Charles, all Germany, both Empire and Church, is rent into two
grand Factions or Parts, Roman Catholics, and Protestants; the Protestants
again into Lutherans and Calvinists; and from this division arose the two grand
Wars, the Smalcaldick and Bohemian.

The chief cause was the general hate of the Roman Court and Tyranny, (and base
abuses and corruptions thereof) both by the Princes and People, ready to take
any occasion against them.

But the occasion was the common selling of Indulgences by an impudent Monk;
whom another Monk, but honester, opposes. Thus the two Instruments were two
Monks, one a very Knave, or at best, corrupt ignorant Friar; the other an
honest, sincere, and well-meaning Soul, as well as zealous, Martin Luther by
name, (such as were many in those days, as Thauler, whom Luther much esteemed
and praises); or if you will give him a truer name from his Deeds, Martin
Marr-Pope, who at first taxes only the abuse, and observes the corruptions of
the Church, become too notorious for any honest heart; but finding no
amendment, nor reformation, but things worse and worse, makes a general
defection, Anno. 1522.

This was no sooner done, but the Reformers make a new Schism, and divide
between Luther and Zwinglius, 1524. which rose to two grand Factions,
afterward by the name of Lutherans and Calvinists toward the year 1560. the
cause of much woe to Germany, and never reconciled, neither by Princes nor
Pastors, till the treaty at Munster, 1648.

Thus Germany, and almost all Europe, became divided into two General Factions
or Parts, Papists and Protestants; but Germany into three, Papists, Lutherans,
and Calvinists: which has been the principal cause indeed of all Mutations and
Revolutions in all the Kingdoms and States ever since almost. Hence the
Revolutions of the Low Countries, of France, of England, of Bohemia, etc. must
be derived, as from their original Head and Spring.

The head of the Catholics was the Emperor, and Popish-Princes; of the
Lutherans, the Duke of Saxony; of the Calvinists or Reformed, the Elector
Palatine.

VII. And these preceding, occasioned also other Religions, and Wars for these,
at least defensive. For at this time of contending for Liberty and Reformation,
arose other Sects also, aiming, or pretending higher Reformation in Religion;
So that in the year 1525, one Thomas Munzer occasions the Rustic War of the
Countrymen. In the year 1534, succeeded the Anabaptists at Munster.

In the year 1529 arose the name Protestant, in the General Assembly at Worms,
when the Elector of Saxony, the Landgrave of Hasse, the City of Noremberg and
others protested against the Decrees of Caesar, and appealed to an
Universal-Council. In the year following 1530, the Confession of the
Protestants, called the Augustan Confession, was published.

VIII. Upon these Grounds chiefly, and a little after the Troubles and
Interruptions by the other Sects mentioned, breaks forth the Civil War between
Caesar and the Protestants, called the Smalcaldick War; Anno 1547, which they
began at Smalcaldia in Hassia: where Caesar prevails, ruins their League made
there, the same year begun and ended. Soon after the Protestants revive;
prevail, and in the end force the Emperor out of Germany; procure the Passavian
Transaction, (or Peace made there) An. 1552, where by a perpetual Edict is
established Liberty of either Religion, Roman Catholic and Augustan
Confession, (that is, Protestant.) So the Protestants by agreement and compact
obtained full liberty and exemption from the Papal yoke, and Peace in Germany
till 1618.

IX. When chiefly from the same hidden causes, grounds and motives, the
Bohemian War began: For about the year 1612, Germany was again divided into two
parts, the League, and the Union. The League contained the Papist Princes, the
Union the Protestant. Thence about the year 1618, the Bohemians, according to
their priyiledge, rejecting the Emperor, as never formally nor legally chosen,
(as they had formerly done Uladislaus the 3d.) elect the Count Palatine King of
Bohemia, and crown him at Prague. Whence the Bohemian-War arose, and spread
over all Germany; changed first into the Saxon, and then into the Swedish-War,
for the support of the German Liberty, and lasted for thirty years, till the
Treaty at Munster.

X. The Duke of Bavaria overcoming the Bohemians, and the Palatine expelled,
demands and obtains the Electorship, (which for a hundred and fifty years
before had been claimed and controverted, but by the Golden-Bull decided to the
Palatine) notwithstanding the Duke of Saxony and Marquess of Brandenburgh
gainsaying, but not daring to resist; about the year 1620: And so the Palatine
was ejected out of the upper Palatinate, and the first place among the
Electoral Princes Secular, as well as the Kingdom of Bohemia.

XI. And thus we are divolved amidst the late German-Wars, which we can but
only hint at: Anno 1625, the Duke of Saxony slain. King of Swede enters Germany
in behalf of the Protestants and Princes Liberty, An. 1630: Next year the Swede
and Saxon come and prevail. Swede strikes League with France.

King of Swede killed, after famous Victories and Conquests. Tilly General of
the Imperialists dies of his wounds, after glorious Victories against Bohemia,
Palatinate, Denmark and Saxony, both the same year, 1632.

Swede confirms his League with Protestants the next year, 1633. Confederates
overcome Imperialists, 1634.

Anno 1635, Duke of Saxony transacts with the Emperor, makes Peace, whereby the
Duke of Brandenburgh, and other States accept the Conditions, and pass with him
over to the Emperors part. The same year the King of France denounces War
against the Empire.

Anno 1636. Duke of Saxony slain by the Swede. The Imperialists driven out of
Pomerania by the Swede, 1638. But the Palatine Princes are overcome. Saxon and
Bohemia invaded, 1639.

Anno 1640, The Swede repelled out of Bohemia. The War still continues hot.
Several Sieges and Battles till the End, as there had been from the Beginning
thereof.

In 1647, The Swede making Truce with Bavaria, moves into Bohemia. Is expelled
thence. The Emperor prepares War again, and prays to the Virgin.

Anno 1648, General Wrangel with the French invades Bavaria. Ejected again.
General Conigsmark seizes on the Tower of Prague and sets against the City.
Munster-Treaty ensues. And so the Thirty years War begun, ends also at Prague,
wherein 325000 perished. Of such direful consequence is the want of Liberty of
Religion; For the Emperor, a bloody enemy of the Protestants, occasions this
long War, etc.

XII. The Peace at Munster changed the state of the Empire, and reduced it to
that form which it now appears in. For the Swede carries clear away the
Bishopric of Breme and Verd, and the French Alsatta. The Palatine is restored
to his Estate in part, and made Eighth Elector, with the title of L. High
Treasurer of the Empire, which had hitherto but Seven. The Protestants lastly,
both Lutheran and Reformed, are asserted into full Liberty of Religion, whom
the Papists never prevailed against so much by Force, as by Cunning and Plots
in time of Peace. And therefore had always need to add the Wisdom of Serpents
to the Innocence of Doves.

So Peace has ever since continued to our times, which we are now come unto;
whereof the most remarkable passages in brief are,

Frankendale restored to the Palatine, 1652.

Leopaldus Ignatius, the present Emperor, chosen King of Hungaria, and
inaugurated, Anno 1655. Crowned King of Bohemia, 1657. In which year the
Emperor dies, also.

Bishop of Munster besieges Munster the same year. And the States assemble at
Frank-fort to choose Emperor,

Leopold K. of Hungaria and Bohemia, elected King and Emperor of the Romans,
1658.

Munster again besieged by its Bishop, the Citizens stoutly resist, 1660. But
forced the next year to receive his Soldiers, and lie at his mercy; and a
Citadel imposed over them to keep them in awe, and so reduced to obedience.

The same year, viz. 1661. the Turks (who had been pretty quiet ever since the
Janissaries had deposed and killed the Grand Senior, 1648.) now invade
Transylvania. The Imperialists march against them into Hungary and
Transylvania. The Turks subdue a great part of Transylvania, and constitute a
new Prince thereof Abaffy.

1662. Count Serin spoils the Turks Countries. Turks take Fogaras Castle;
domineer, establish Abaffi, who besieges Clausenburg. Raised by the
Imperialists. Turks make a treacherous and perfideous Truce in Transylvania.

The Turks again invade Hungaria, 1663. Besiege and take Newhausel and other
places in Upper-Hungary. The Emperor married to the Infanta (2d Daughter) of
Spain.

1664. Zeckeild and Clausenburg betrayed and sold by the Soldiers to Abaffi.
Count Serin with Auxiliary Forces invades the Turks Countries, takes strong
places. Burns the five Protestant Churches, returns laden with prey. But killed
by a wild Boar, (after Peace made with the Turks) the year after, viz. 1665.
Assembly of Emperor, Electors and Princes, and States of the Empire, to consult
against the progress of the Turk; and to solicit Kings, Princes and States
for help. At length Peace made with the Turk, 1665.

War between the Elector of Mentz, or Mayence, and the Elector Palatine, 1664,
not yet allayed. Also between the two Dukes of Luneburgh, for the division and
succession into their elder Brother's Estates: begun and ended almost at the
same time, toward the beginning of 1665.

Between the United Provinces and Bishop of Munster, during their differences
with England; but soon ended.

1668. Battle fought between the Palatine and Lorrainers. Victory dubious,
rather inclining to the Lorrainers. Palatine seeks help. Endeavors for Peace,
now on foot.

The Revolutions of the Electoral Estates, etc.
To the Revolutions of the Empire, pertain those of the Electoral Princes,
(under which the Kingdom of Bohemia) those of Hungary and the three grand
Principalities, Transylvania, Walachia and Moldavia. Of which briefly.

All the Princes of Germany anciently were Electors in common; and no
distinction between Electors and Non-Electors.

The Princes, and consequently the Electors, were and are absolute Princes, in
their own Estates.

Electors began about the year 1000, under Otho the third; by permission only
for convenience of taking Votes, and avoiding Confusions, and by the prevalency
of the more potent, under specious pretenses.

No certain number of Electors at first, but sometimes more, sometimes less.

By use and tacit confent at last, Seven only introduced, chiefly about the
year 1200.

But finally established and confirmed by the Golden Bull, 1356.

An Eighth instituted for the Palatine by the Treaty of Munster, 1648, who was
outed of the fifth.

The Ecclesiastic Electors had the precedence, through the usurped Sovereignty
of the Pope above the Emperor, and power of the Clergy and Bishops in those
days.

The Archbishop of Mentz, Chancellor through Germany, Dean and President of
the College of Electors, to convocate, preside, propose and conclude.

He has the privilege of crowning Caesar, except at Aken, i. e. Aix la
Caplle, in the Dukedom of Juliers, which belongs to the Elector of Colen.

The Archbishop of Tryers, Chancellor through France. And of Colen, Chancellor
through Italy, who pretends right of crowning Caesar; whence in the Diet at
Ratisbone, some ten years since, he departed without saluting Caesar; And this
had like to have broke out into a public quarrel.

The Secular, are the King of Bohemia, the Duke of Bavaria, Saxony,
Brandenburgh, and the Palatine.

The Electorship of the Palatine, with his Country the Upper Palatinate, was
conferred on the Duke of Bavaria, by Munster-Treaty, 1648. It was anciently
called the Electorate of Bavaria, the Palatine being of that House. And so that
long dispute ended, which had lasted above three hundred years.

The Duke of Bavaria exercises the Vicarship in vacancy of the Empire; But the
Palatine disputed it at the choosing of this present Emperor, 1658.

The Duke of Saxony convocated the Protestant Princes, 1630, for a Defensive
League, who conclude to maintain Liberty by Arms; and so it becomes a Saxonick
War.

He unfaithfully and unjustly transacts Peace alone with the Emperor, after the
Battle at Norlington, and other Princes yield to his Articles, 1635. This Peace
causes a new War with the Swede and French confederate, never ended till 1648.

Duke of Saxon marries, 1663, with the eldest daughter of Denmark.

The Marquess of Brandenburgh has the largest Dominions of all, being Duke of
Pomerania many ages since. Prussia was divided between him and Poland; he to
have the title of Duke of the whole, and to hold his part with some Homage to
Poland, An. 1525. The Swedes since have disturbed him both in Pomerania and
Prussia. By the Treaty of Munster, Upper- Pomerania and Stetin, etc. to remain
to the Swede; the Lower to Brandenburgh; The Arms and Titles to both. He
obtained the Fee-Simple of Prussia, 1611. In 1658, Prussia is made an absolute
Dukedom, free from all dependence or homage on Poland; Understand still the
Duke's part of Prussia. Konigsberg refused; yet 1662 acknowledges the Elector
Supreme Prince; And his Sovereign Power over Prussia established, 1663, when
they swear to him again.

The Elector Palatine was made 8th Elector, and so who for so many years had
been first, was now last of all the Princes Electors. He is restored to the
Palatinate in part since Munster Peace. War since with Mentz 1665, and
Lorrainers at present, before hinted.

Late Revolutions of Bohemia in short.
The King of Bohemia, Elector, and one of the Estates of the Empire, first
among the Secular Electors, has now only a Vote, but not the right of Session
and Suffrage in the Electoral College, nor Universal Diets of the Empire.

Bohemia distracted and ruined, came at last to foreign Kings, and in the end
to the House of Austria, above an hundred years since, and so continues.

Moravia and Silesia were many ages since added to Bohemia* and have ever since
followed its fortunes.

The Kingdom of Bohemia was ever elective, till the late Bohemian Wars lost
them that privilege, as it were.

About the year 1618, they exclude the Emperor, (according to privilege) a
bloody enemy of the Protestants, and choose the Palatine King, as has been
shown, Chief heretofore of the Electoral Princes, and Head of the Protestants,
Cavinists, whence ensues the bloody War of Thirty years durance.

Since which made in a manner an Hereditary Province of the Empire, and House
of Austria.

The Empire having no open formidable enemy at present, save the Turk, in
Hungary and Transylvania, we shall here subjoyn the present face of things
there.

Of Hungary.
Hungary being ruined by the Tartars, about Anno 1242, began to seek foreign
Kings about the year 1300. At length the Emperor and Austrian Family obtains it
about 1440. But afterward ensued grievous wars with the Turks, against whom
Huniades a famous Hero.

The Emperor contending with the Prince thereof, who was chosen by the Estates
of the Kingdom, and for his assistance made use of the Turk, about the year
1520, loses the greatest part thereof to Solomon the Magnificent, whence
continual Wars with the Turk, who besieges Vienna it self, 1529. The rest the
Emperor is King of. Between whom constant Wars, Truces, and Breaches and
Invasions again. After this time Transylvania dismembered from Hungaria. About
the Bohemian War great Troubles here also for Liberty of Religion, which had
been before granted them by the former Emperor.

Of Transylvania, Walachia, and Moldavia.
Transylvania eastward of Upper Hungaria, heretofore for long time a Province
and Principality thereof, and so of the Empire; from which swerving,
constitutes a peculiar Principality, distinct from the Kingdom of Hungary,
under the protection of the Turks, about 1560. The Princes nominated and
substituted by the Turk in opposition to the Emperor. The Protestants choosing
rather to fall under the Turk, than the Emperor, finding more mercy and liberty
from him; or rather from between both: Their Princes being maintained and
substituted by the Turk against the Emperor, and again defended by the Emperor
and Poland from being made wholly thrall to the Turk, to whom their Princes are
tributary.

Hence Wars and Troubles with the Princes of Transylvania as well as Turk; they
often by War invading Caesar.

First, Bathor makes work, 1601. Next, Botskay makes war, about 1606. Then
Bethlem Gabor, a professed enemy of the House of Austria, and Defender of the
Protestants, drives Gabriel Bathor, the former Prince, out of Transylvania,
1620; having invaded Hungary the year before 1619, but after a great noise did
effect little, even at this time of the Hungarian and Bohemian Wars; laying
down his Hungarian Diadem 1622, and reconciled to the Emperor: Anno 1644,
Ragotzi moves into Hungary, takes places, and makes Peace a year or two after.
Since George Ragotzi the second, mingling himself rashly and improvidently in
the War between Sweden and Poland, and beaten by the Polander 1658, and
overcome by the Turks at Clausenburg, Anno 1660, died of his wounds there
received, at Waradin; Unhappy Prince! seeking another, loses his own. And so
the Ragotzies were overturned, and quite outed.

Barkay is substituted by the Turks the same year, opposed by Kemini-Janos,
Ragotzi's General, who was chosen by the Estates. The Turks take several strong
places, amongst the rest Waradin, the Gate and Sluse as it were, or Keys of
Germany on this side the Danow.

Anno 1661, Count Serin bestirs himself against the Turks, fortifies a Castle
in his Island. Kemini-Janos takes Barkay, and kills him and his Brother. The
Imperialists march into Hungary and Transylvania against the Turks, who subdue
a great part thereof, take Newstadt, constitute Abaffy, Prince.

1662. Kemini-Janos makes work for Abaffy, but betrayed by his own, is killed.
Count Serin is active, vexes the Turks. They take Fogaras Castle, and domineer
throughout. Take Deva, and establish Abaffy. Clausenburg a long time in vain
besieged by Abaffy, relieved by Imperialists. Turks make a treacherous Truce in
Transylvania with the Emperor.

1663. Turks again invade Hungary, take New-hausel, and other places in
Upper-Hungary. Clausenburg, and another Hold betrayed, and sold by the
Soldiers to Abaffy. The French do exploits, and get renown against the Turks,
having been sent to the Emperor's assistance: Peace made 1665.

Walachia bordering Southward of Transylvania and Moldavia, has been a long
time a Province of the Turks, receive their Prince from that Court, are
tributary, yet often cause troubles.

Moldavia eastward of Transylvania, has also been a long time a Turkish
Province. They nominate their Prince; are tributary; yet not so fully in their
Power as they would desire.

And so we pass to the Empire of the Turks.

The Foundation and Revolutions of the present Turkish Empire.
Osman or Ottoman rising to be Sultan in Asia minor, i. e. those parts of Asia
toward Europe, (where the Turks then had only footing, being quite driven out
of Persia, and all their Eastern Kingdoms by the Tartars) after the death of
Sultan Aladine the 2d or 3d, the last of the other House, lays the Foundation
of the present Empire and Family, about the year 1300: subduing all the other
inferior Kingdoms of the Turks there in Asia minor, among whom the Empire was
divided after Saladines death, without Heirs.

About 1350, they cross the Hellespont, or Narrow-Sea, out of Asia into Europe,
hiring the Genoa's Ships: For what footing they had before in Gallipolis was
inconsiderable by Land; having subdued Nice, the Imperial Seat of the Eastern,
i. e. Grecian Emperors, in the time of Ottoman before mentioned.

From that time they get ground in Europe; take Adrianople, their first
Imperial Seat in Europe; and the Countries of Servia and Bulgaria. In the year
1370* a great part of Thrace, and Macedonia and Achaia in Greece: but loose
most part of their Empire in Asia, by Tamerlane Emperor of the Tartars, to the
year 1400. But soon recover it again, and reunite the whole Turkish Kingdom,
and enlarge it with the Conquests of Dacia, and part of Sclavonia, and
Transylvania, and the rest of Macedonia in Greece. About 1420. take from the
Constantinopolitan, or Greek Empire, all Achaia, Thessaly, Epirus; shake the
State of Hungary. Uuder Mahomet the 2 d, called the Great, about 1450, this
Empire rises to its height, taking Constantinople it self, the Imperial Seat,
and the whole Greek Empire, making it the seat of Empire to this day. He
conquers two Empires, the Constantinopolitan, and of Trabezund, (a new erected
Empire of the Greeks distinct from the Constantinopolitan) twelve Kingdoms,
innumerable Provinces, and two hundred Cities, and so put an end to the whole
Greek Roman Empire. About 1480, they drive the Venetians from Morea, (or
Peloponnese, a part of Greece, on the East whereof lies Candy over against it,)
and part of Dalmatia, and get some Countries, or Kingdoms in Asia also.

Toward the year 1520, they subdue the Mammalucks of Egypt, Grand Caire, their
Royal Seat; also Palestine, Syria, Arabia; bringing all under their Yoke.

After the year 1520 Solomon the Magnificent, the most Powerful of all the
Turkish Emperors, and Scourge of the Christians, surprises Rhodes, Belgrade,
Buda, with greatest part of Hungary; and Babylon, Assyria, and Mesopotamia in
Asia from the Persians. But in vain besieges Vienna, An. 1529, with three
hundred thousand men, and lost eighty thousand before it in a months time.
Never the like Siege read of. This Hungarian War lasted all Solyman's time for
forty years.

About 1567, take from the Venetians Cyprus, and from the Moors Tunis (then
under the power of Charles the fifth, King of Spain) and Algiers, both in
Africa; with their Territories; after their defeat in the famous Sea Fight at
Lepanto, by the Christians.

After the year 1600, the Hollander first makes League with Achmet, and the
German Emperor afterward; He succeeded at nine years old, the elder being
killed by command of the Father.

Osman or Ottoman the 2d, unsuccesfully making War upon Poland, and
endeavoring to remove the Seat of Empire from Constantinople to Cair in Egypt;
his Janissaries seditious, take him and strangle him publicly, 1622, and fetch
Mustapha, whom they had, after two or three months reign, imprisoned a long
time before, and make him Emperor again. A Novelty never heard of before in
this Kingdom, it being the Grand Segniors common policy to strangle all the
younger Brothers. However Mustapha, younger Brother of Achmet, was preserved,
either because Achmet being a younger Brother himself, took pity on him, or
because he having no children of his* own, was not permitted to kill him. But
no sooner* had they set Mustapha up again, but they plucked him down the next
year, and make him lay down his Empire, 1623. and set young Amurath 4th, or
Morat, in his place; since which things Turkish Majesty and Authority has grown
vile amongst them.

Morat the 4th, a younger Brother also of Osman's, spends his stomach against
the Persians, and with incredible preparations, and an eight years Siege and
War, recovers Bagdad, or Babylon, as they call it.

Ibrahim, Brother also of Morat, preserved by his Mother in his Brothers life
time, and by her deposed again, for interdicting her the Court, spends several
years in the Wars of Candy against the Venetians, without success; for which,
and his being too much under the power of his Wives, whom he followed more then
his Wars, was strangled by his Subjects in the year 1648. whom Mahomet the 4
th, ten years old, succeeded, and continues War against Candy; now reigning
Lord of all this vast Empire, containing all Dacia, and Greece, the greatest
part of Sclavonia, and Hungary, the Isles of the Aegean Sea, and a great part
of the Taurick Chersonese in Europe; and in Asia, innumerable Provinces and
Regions; and in Africa all Egypt, the kingdoms of Tunis and Algiers, with the
ports of Snachem and Erocco. And whose style is as swelling as their Empire:
Solomon stiling himself in his Letters to alerius, Grand-Master of the Rhodes;

SOLOMON. King of Kings, Lord of Lords, most high Emperor of Constantinople and
Trabezond; the most mighty King of Persia, Syria, Arabia, and the Holy Land;
Lord of Europe, Asia and Africa; Prince of Mecca and Aleppo, Ruler of
Jerusalem, and Sovereign Lord of all the Seas and Isles therein.

The Turks first invaded Candy, Anno 1645, and have ever since with all their
might, year after year attempted it, and drove them out of all but Candy, to
which they have laid close Siege this two years last past, without
intermission, and made several Mines, Batteries, and Assaults against it this
present year, but repulsed with incredible Courage and Warlike behavior: So
that there has not been the like Siege known in this our Age. It Is thought the
Turks have lost near fourscore thousand men against. The issue whereof, the
Pope has more cause to fear than any other Prince next to the Venetians
themselves.

The Foundation and Revolutions of the present Empire of Russia.
The Prince hereof in his Ambassies with the Turk, Emperor, and Pope, King of
Swede, and Danes, etc. styles himself Tzar or Emperor; though with the Poles
only, Great Duke. Therefore we shall add this to the Empires also.

The last Emperor but one of the old Royal line, was John Basilid, that most
famous Tyrant, who extended his Empire, even unto Persia and the Caspian-Sea,
made War upon Livonia or Liefland, where receiving great defeats and losses,
acted with rage and fury, commits horrible slaughters everywhere, both of his
own, as well as of his enemies, and killed his hopeful Son John with his own
hands. With this king the English first began to confederate.

To him succeeds, An. 1583, his Son Theodore, of a good disposition, the last
of the former race; who dying without issue, Russia becomes distracted with
unheard of Confusions and Miseries: For through fault in Government, and the
Line failing, there sprang horrible Factions and Commotions in the kingdom for
ten years, scarce to be paralleled in History.

For John Basilid having two Sons left, Demetrius and Theodore, the former was
secretly made away and killed, before his Father's death, and Theodore leaving
no issue, leaves the kingdom to his Brother-in-law, who proving an unmerciful
Tyrant, The Jesuits take occasion to suborn a certain Scholar of theirs in
their College in Poland, a Russe by Nation, for the true Demetrius made away;
so cunningly, that none of the Russians, especially the fickle-minded
multitude, doubted, but that it was the true and lawful Heir indeed, and
therefore generally flock to him, which the other Tyrant seeing, either with
Grief or Poison ended his days, An. 1605. and the false Demetrius made
absolute Monarch of Russia. The king of Poland and the Pope favoring the
design. But the Russes soon smelling him out by his foreign manners and
customs, The Nobles conspire against him, and behead him the next year.

The Impostor slain, the stronger Faction thus prevailing, make Zusky the Chief
their Conspiracy, An. 1606, Emperor.

But then presently another Demetrius, as escaping by Miracle, and by and by in
opposition to him a third, begin to peep up, one in the Western, the other in
the Nothern parts by several Factions, so that still Demetrius as often as
slain, rises again. But this last soon vanished.

Hereupon the Poles, the Swedes, and the Tartars take their advantage, break-in
on every side, under pretext of help, and the Russians become a prey to them
all.

The Swedes help Zuskie, and the Poles Demetrius, Anno 1611, the Swedes take
Novograd, and the Poles Smolensko.

The Russes, weary of these Impostures and Confusions, seek out for a foreign
Prince, An. 1612* some for the Pole, others for the Swede. The Pole takes Mosco
(it self) and with Fire and Sword lay it in the dust, 200000 Russes perishing
therein. The Swedes eject the Poles out of Mosco again. But the Southern Russes
take Zusky, send him into Poland, and by recommendation and the power of the
Polanders, choose the King of Polands Son, create him Great Duke: and the
Northern choose Charles the Brother of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden.

But the Russes loath to fall under the power of the Poles, and desirous of
settlement after such tiresome confusions, and seeing themselves a scorn and
prey to strangers, do by the advice and counsel first of a Butcher only, seek
out a fit person of their own Nation, and make choice at last of their
Patriarch of Mosco's Son, An. 1615, who presently makes this Butcher Treasurer
and General, and at length settles this vast Empire, and manages it in a more
constant way of Peace with the Turks, Tartars, Poles, and Swedes, than any of
his predecessors before, and founds the present Family and Empire.

Yet the second Demetrius's Widow hires the Cossacks to set up her young Son,
not of age, who takes many Eastern Provinces of Russia, with the Title of
Kingdom for her Son, the fourth false Demetrius; But this Kingdom lasted but
two years: for both Mother and Son were taken and slain by the Russes.

So the Emperor first makes peace with Swede, who restored to him the Great
Dukedom of Novograd, but keeps Livonia, (and other Northern Provinces) with the
City Novograd, and add it to their Crown, since the occasion of War between
them. He then besieges Smolensko 1634, and there receives a great and shameful
Overthrow and Destruction by the Poles; which Dukedom has ever since been the
Apple of Contention, as well as formerly, betwixt them. He reigned till 1645.

To whom succeeded his young Son Alexius, the present Emperor; In 1646 they
made peace with Poland, and during the Kings minority there was some troubles
and distempers in the State, and an horrible Sedition 1648. but all soon
quietly settled.

Anno 1654. The Moscovites invade Lituania; overcome Smolensko; and 1655, take
Vilna; invade Livonia. 1656, The Cossacks (a Confederate Army of Rogues and
Robbers, that take either side for their Prey, or Money, or other ends and
designs, or as they are pleased or displeased with affairs; and belong chiefly
to Poland;) they join with the Poles, and defeat the Moscovites, anno 1659. The
Poles prosper. But the Cossacks at last break Faith, and again rebel to the
Moscovites; and invade and spoil some Provinces.

An. 1660 Czarneckie in Lituania beats the Muscovites. Their Army also in
Poland under Zeremetzie reduced to straits, and forced to surrender themselves
to the Poles. Vilna in Lituania besieged by the Poles till next year. An. 1662,
The Moscovite beats the Tartars; Overcomes the Cossacks under Chimilinsky; But
again overcome by Cossacks and Tartars. And 1664, The Moscovites overcome, and
beat by the Pole. Peace since between them. The Emperor of Moscovia now
sollicits for the election of his Son to the Crown of Poland, offers fair
Conditions, and that he shall change his Religion from the Greek to the Roman;
which would have much influence upon the Jesuits perhaps, and zealous
Religionists of the Papists; if Reason of State otherwise did not hinder.

The great Enemies you see of the Russes then are the Pole, the Swede, and the
Tartar, helped by the Turk: Anno 1230, the Tartars overran all Russia, and made
it tributary, and for three hundred years kept their Power over it more or
less, and gave and took away Dukes over them, as they pleased. Anno 1500 Basil
shook off this yoke. Yet Anno 1570 an hundred thousand Tartars on a sudden
overran Mosco, and laid it wholly in Ashes.

The Poles and Russes strive for the Dukedom of Smolensko and Severia, which
both claim; and both win and take continually. Of late years the Cossacks with
all Ukrain, revolted to the Russes. But since Peace and Compositions of things
made.

The Swede and Russe contend for Livonia. The Swede by success of Arms has
expelled both the Russe and the Pole, and annexed it to their Crown. Hence the
Wars between the Russe and Swede continually. Riga has been often attempted and
besieged in vain by the Russe. But we pass to their next neighbor Poland.

The Revolutions of Poland.
Poland has for many ages been a distinct Sovereignty.

The first that was elective, was Piastus (after the failure of the former
line) a plain Countryman, elected Duke of Poland, An. 800. Afterward became a
Kingdom, still in Piastus's line.

An. 1320. Silesia fell from Poland to Bohemia, and could never be recovered.

An. 1386. They made the Great Duke of Lituania, by marriage into their King's
Family, King; and so joined that great Dukedom to Poland.

An. 1466. Casimir adds Prussia; and 1561 Livonia is added to it also.

The Royal Family being extinct, they choose foreign Princes, anno 1573. and
first choose the Duke of Anjou, Brother of Charles the 9 th, King of France,
about the year 1575. But he quickly left it for the Crown of France.

An. 1579, they chose Bathor Prince of Transylvania, by recommendation of the
Turks. He firmly united Livonia to the Crown, and had a great hand upon the
Moscovites.

He dying without issue, they chose Sigismund the King of Swede's Son, about
the year 1590; (whose posterity has ever since enjoyed it; but now the line
fails.) He joined the Kingdom of Swede and Poland; But turning Papist,
endeavors by the Jesuits persuasions to disturb Religion in Swedeland, and so
was ejected, and losing his Patrimonial kingdom, only keeps Poland. Hence those
lasting Wars between the two Nations.

To him succeeded Uladislaus, famous for the memorable Victory against the
Moscovites, besieging Smolensko, an. 1634.

After whose death, Anno 1647, The kingdom became extremely imbroyl'd by
Factions, specially by the mutinous and seditious Cossacks (a Rebellious Army,
as it were of Boors, and Moss-troopers, that live upon prey and rapine, and
serve any side, as was hinted (risen first and chiefly out of the wild parts of
Poland, Lituania, etc. next Russia;) who at this time began to be more
troublesome than ever, during all the present king Casimir's Reign, and not
fully settled till very lately; and perhaps not to hold long neither.

King Casimir succeeded, an. 1648. so troubled all his days, that he has been
a long time weary of his Crown, and now at last laid it down, not obtaining
leave to nominate his Successor.

The better to understand the late Revolutions of Poland, in brief, take them
thus.

Poland has suffered great Revolutions and Troubles, from foreign Enemies,
Rebellious Cossacks, and Confederate Nobles. Grand Enemies are the Swede, the
Russe, the Tartar, and the Turk.

The Wars with the Swede are for Livonia, for pretense to the Crown of Swede,
for Titles and Arms. Hereupon the late king of Sweden overran in one year
almost all Poland, but lost all again the next. But these pretenses now cease
in the present king, having no heirs.

With the Russes for several causes before mentioned: With the Tartars,
(commonly called the Crim Tartars, distinct from those in Asia; these bordering
upon Russia and Poland) who make yearly Incursions almost for prey and plunder;
either as friends or enemies, all is one. Therefore the Tartars do not seek to
conquer so much as to plunder Poland.

But the greatest Enemies are the Turks, ever since they got Walachia,
Moldavia, and Transylvania, the Walls and Bulwarks as it were of Poland, and
also the Tartars to be subject to them. But they have yet threatened more than
done any thing; and little has passed, besides consultings and fears hitherto
betwixt them.

The seditious and mutinous Cossacks have done most mischief. One of the chief
causes of their Rebellion was the great oppression of the Natives, by the Jews,
in all the Customs and Tributes almost of the Kingdom, granted to them by King
Casimir, and ever since possessed by them, by the means of Esther a Jewish, in
behalf of her Nation, who obtained great Privileges for them.

And in the late fatal Confusions of Poland, the Russians again besieged
Smolensko, and seized not only on it, but all Ukrain, or black Russia, and
great part of Lituania.

The occasion whereof was, first, the Jesuits taking away the Russes Temples,
and hindering the free Liberty of Religion to them. Next, the Nobles Tyranny
over the Peasants, killing them at their pleasure. Hence enraged, they rise up
against their Masters, kill the Jesuits and Priests, call the Cossacks and
Tartars to their help, and mutual prey.

These mischiefs increased during the Poles dissension about Election of a
King, and had like to have ruined all Poland.

After long Contentions, they chose Casimir, Brother of the deceased King, who
being not enough assisted by his People* backward then to wage War, is
circumvented by the Cossacks, and forced to those Conditions of Peace that the
present Necessity required.

To all which Evils succeeded War with the Swedes, and lastly with the Nobles
under Lubomirskie, about nominating a Successor during the King's Reign, etc.
We will recollect and sum the passages according to the years they happened
in.

Uladislaus dies, 1648. Casimir constituted, 1649, who marches against the
Rebellious Cossacks.

The King marries his Brothers Widow, 1651. Poles beat Tartars and Cossacks,
and put them to flight.

1654. The Moscovite with 40000, breaks into Lituania, and takes Smolensko, so
often won and lost. For An. 1500 a Poland Nobleman betrayed it to the
Moscovite. The Poles recover it 1610. The Moscovite attempts it 1634, but
beaten then shamefully, and now take it, etc.

1655. King of Swede marches against Poland, and overrun all in a years time.
The Brandenburgh per force Confederates with him.

1656. Moscovite takes Vilna in Lituania.

1657. Ragotzi marches into Poland: but loses all his Army, and then his own
Country. The Elector of Brandenburgh agrees with the Pole, prevailing against
the Swede.

1658. The Rebel Cossacks overcome by General Wyhoskie.

1659. The Cossacks joined with Poles, beat the Moscovites. The Poles prevail,
and prosper. At last the Cossacks break Faith given to the Poles, and again
rebel to the Moscovite, and spoil the Poland Provinces.

1660. The War between Swede, and Pole confederate with Brandenburgh, ended,
and peace made; and Brandenburgh made absolute over Prussia, 1663, and they
swear to him again.

The Moscovite overcome by Pole and Czarneskie. Also the Moscovian Army under
Zeremetzie reduced to straits, forced to yield. Vilna Tower besieged by Poles
to the next year.

1661. The Poland Army, and Lituanian Army confederate together against the
King. Whence many Mischiefs to both Countries. Czarneskie adhering to the King,
overcomes the Moscovites, under Cowanskie; Vilna and other places in Lituania
taken from the Moscovites.

1662. The confederate Army under Schwidersky make a stricter Confederacy; and
several thousands enter Prussia, and demand Tribute or Taxes.

The Cossacks under Chimilinsky besieging a place, are beat by the Moscovite
under Romadonofsky. But the Moscovites afterward are overcome by the Cossacks
and Tartars.

The Lituanian Confederate Army kill their chief Marshal and Treasurer.

1663. The Confederate Armies in Poland and Lituania dissolve their
Confederacy, and agree with the King, and their General Lubomirsky, victorious
in Battle against the King, restored again. And so the Civil War between the
King and Nobility drew toward an end.

1664. K. of Poland takes many Towns from the Cossacks. A famous Victory by
General Packs or Pasky against Wikousky General of the Rebel Cossacks. They are
reduced under the King's power to obedience. The Moscovites overcome by the
Lituanians. Since peace and settlement of things has been transacting on all
sides, not without difficulty and new troubles to the King, about nominating
his Successor, being ever since about laying down his Government.

And now at last, having first quieted and satisfied all parties as much as
possible, has left the Crown unto Factions and Competitors, (not being able to
nominate a Successor before he left it) and eased himself of such a burden. The
whole business now being about Succession, concerning which observe.

Of the Election of Poland,

First, the Power of the Nobles; Secondly, the Competitors for the Crown.

For the Power of Election.
1. The Power of the Nobles is exceeding great, and each single Noble is as it
were a single King, and has Sovereign power over his Slaves, even of Life and
Death.

2. The Nobles choose the King, and prescribe what Laws they like.

3. If any will not accept these Laws, they proclaim PIASTUS, i. e. they will
go to the choosing of some Rustic, or plain Countryman of their own Nation.

4. There are perpetual strifes between the Nobles, and Senators, or Council.
The Senators favor the King, the Nobles the Kingdom.

5. There is a like power of all the Nobles, so that one dissenting, the other
Suffrages are void; and one only Noble has right to intercede in the Diet, or
Parliament, against all, and to plead the Cause.

When all the rest had given their consent, a Noble stands up once and said, I
do not consent. Being asked his Reason; says, Because I am a Noble: Nor did
they reckon the Decree good, till they had his Consent.

6. In the Parliament or Diet of Poland, the Deputies of the Nobility, and the
public Liberty, (called Land-Nuncio's, or Messengers) to plead strongly their
Cause against the King and Senators of the Kingdom, are of greatest Authority.
For the Nobles are always afraid lest they should lose their Privileges to
the King, which are so great.

Next for the Competitors Eligible, know,

First, that though the Kingdom be Elective, yet they never past by the Kings
Family to choose others; but when the Line fails, then they seek strangers, and
grievous Factions arise before they can agree.

Secondly, The Competitors have been (1.) the Moscovite, because of the same
Language, and Nation originally, and Neighborhood. (2.) The Crim Tartar,
urging that He is powerful, and able to bring an hundred thousand Horse into
the Field; That he is hardy, and can live at a low rate; That as for Religion,
so controverted and disputed in Poland with such Commotions, he will not stand
for that, they shall have what they will: Thy Luther, says he, My Luther; Thy
Pope, my Pope, as once in his Ambassadors Letters Credentials he wrote; And
that rather than put them to any charge to find his Table, he could live with
Horseflesh. His Embassy thereupon entertained with laughter. (3.) The House of
Austria, specially since one Faction chose the Archduke Maximilian: but the
prevailing, the King of Swedes Son by the King of Polands Sister; yet
Maximilian reserved both right and title. (4.) The King of France, ever since
Charles the 9 ths time, when they chose his Brother the Duke of Anjou,
afterward King of France. Ever since which the French have always cherished
some party against the House of Austria and Emperor; specially after that the
last King but this, viz. Uladislaus, fetched his Wife out of France, marrying
the Duchess of Nevers, whom this K. Casimir his Brother, also married after
his death. (5.) Of late there also was great endeavors (and underhand) for the
Prince of Conde's Son, Duke of Anjou, after this Kings death, or some other
addicted to the French. But this distasted the Nobles and would not do.

But since the Resignation of the Crown, the present Strivers for it are the
Moscovit's Son, who will turn Romanist, and makes fair promises for it. The
Duke of Newburgh, or Nevers, whom the King of France endeavors to promote; and
the Emperor and other Princes put in for others. But all lies in the will and
pleasure of the Nobles, as they can agree.

The present king Casimir is above threescore years old, and besides his age
and the ordinary cares of a Crown, has never had one peaceable moment; but
perpetual troubles all his days, either with the Cossacks or Tartars, or the
Moscovites, or the Swedes, or the Confederates; So that he has had reason
enough to be at last weary of a Crown in his old days, and to rest; And indeed
lays it down not without honor, having first reduced the Confederates, and
settled affairs, else had done it sooner, lest it should be thought he did it by
force, and because he could keep it no longer, rather than choice; and rather
outed of it, than voluntarily left it.

Note, that these Cossacks, so often mentioned, inhabit the Eastern parts of
Poland toward the Russes and Tartars, and made but one Body under their
General Chimilnisky, who some years ago made a great noise in the World; But
were of late divided into three Bands, whereof one adheres to the Moscovite,
the other to the King of Poland, and a third contend for Liberty under the
Orders of their General Tetera; Beside the Army of the Confederates that was,
but now dissolved.

By all which it appears that Poland has declined much. 1. By the loss of
Walachia and Moldavia to the Turks. 2. By the Revolt of the Cossacks and black
Russes, with all Ukrain. 3. By the Moscovites possessing, or spoiling and
laying waste a great part of Lituania. 4. By the Confederacy and Civil War of
the Nobles with the King, Victors in fight under Lubomirsky; though at last,
weary of their own Confusions, both sides hearkened to Reason, and made a
Composure. And thus much of the confused story of Polands Confusions. Sweden
lies next concerned in our way.

The Revolutions of Swedeland.
The three Kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, of old were often united
and reunited, till at last 1523, finally severed. For Christiern the 2 d, King
of Denmark, conquering Sweden, used his Victory so cruelly, and his own
Subjects so insolently, that both Kingdoms enraged rose up against him, as a
Tyrant, outed him of all his Kingdoms, and cast him in Prison, where he
miserably ended his days, after thirty six years Imprisonment, An. 1559.

For Erick, of an old Royal Blood of Sweden, being carried by Christiern after
his Conquests, as a pledge, into Denmark, pitying his own Country, escapes
from amidst of Hunting, in the habit of a Cowherd, or Fisherman, or both,
secretly to Lubick, and from thence privily conveyed to Swedeland; where he
gets an Army against Christiern; whose Uncle Frederick, renouncing all right to
Sweden, makes a League with Erick, and so both Nations join to deliver
themselves from the Tyrant. This Erick first brought in Protestantism, i. e.
Luthers Doctrine.

2. Erick seeing the liberty of making Kings begot and continued troubles,
obtained of the States to make it an Hereditary Kingdom.

3. His Son succeeded, Anno 1561, who wars with the Dane, and at last for
Tyranny outed of his Kingdom by his Subjects, and cast into Prison, dyed
miserably.

4. The next King delivered Livonia from the tyranny and heavy pressures of the
Russians after the year 1570, and added it to his Kingdom, which he enlarged
far and near through Lapland, part of Russia, all Ingria, and Livonia.

5. Sigismund his Son by the Sister of Sigismund King of Poland was created
King of Poland, Anno 1587. and succeeded in Swedeland, anno 1593; thereby
uniting both Kingdoms. But chosen King of Poland with this condition, that he
should add Livonia for ever to the Crown of Poland. But being a Papist, he
would have brought Jesuits, and the Roman Religion into Sweden, and they
refusing, would have done it by force; whereupon his Uncle Charles, the former
kings Brother, began to oppose him, whence a grievous and long War between both
Kingdoms. He had been made Governor and Viceroy, as it were, during his
Brothers absence in Poland, and at last King, (by the favor of the Calvinists,
who now began to appear in this kingdom, the Lutherans being not very
favorable thereunto;) Anno 1607, He made perpetual Wars against the Russes,
Poles and Danes, and so prepared his Nation by use of Arms as it were, for the
succeeding Wars of Germany under

6. Gustavus Adolphus his Son, the Greatest and most victorious of all the
Kings of Swede, and who first raised its fame in the World, with incredible
success of Arms overruns Germany, frees the oppressed Princes of Pomerania and
Brandenburgh, restores the Duke of Meckleburgh, takes all Places and Cities
that lie in his way; beats Tilly in two great Battles* overruns a great part of
Bavaria, and at last killed in fight 1632, after such two or three years
Success only.

During his Daughters minority, the Wars are continued in Germany till the
Treaty at Munster, 1648. By which War the Swedes obtained, besides vast Riches
and Spoils, and inestimable Treasure, large Provinces near the Baltick-Sea, or
Sound; the Dukedom of Breme and Verd, saving the Liberty of the City to it self
still; all the further Pomerania, Vismar, and other smaller Territories, etc.

Anno 1650, Christiana is crowned, a Princess for Arts, rather than ARms or
Government, and weary of her Kingdom or Subjects, or they of her, leaves it,
An. 1654. Before which, the same year, Conigsmark invades the Bishopric of
Breme again, and possesses it. Christiana turns Catholic, travels to Rome,
etc. Her Story is common.

She having no Heirs, her kinsman Charles, Gustavus the 10 th, descended from a
Sister of Gustavus Adolphus, Daughter of Charles the 9 th, King of Swede,
succeeds, is crowned the same year, and married to the Duke of Holsteins eldest
daughter; and for glorious feats of Arms and Conquests immitates his Uncle
Gustavus Adolphus; and soon also taken away.

An. 1656, The Moscovite invades Livonia, in xain attempts Riga.

An. 1657, King of Denmark invades Breme, takes Verd, whilst the King of Swede
is busy in Poland; who hastens thence, invades Holstein, drives the Dane from
the Dukedom of Breme; besieges Verd in vain.

The Elector of Brandenburgh having the same year deserted the Swede, and
agreed with the Pole.

An. 1658, The Swede invades Fuinen Island* marches over the Sea on Ice with
his Army into Sealand, drives the Dane to the Peace at Rotchild, to follow
Poland again; but before all things fully ended, and for some new actings and
emergencies, invades Sealand again the same year, takes Cronenburg, and at last
besieges Copenhagen it self a long while, which reduced to straits, the
Hollanders to relieve with Provisions and Forces, have a Fight in the very
Danish Creek or Strait. About the same time also the Brandenburgh and
Imperialists march into Holstein against the Swede, and drive him out.

An. 1659. Fuinen Island recovered by the Dane and his Confederates, with other
Islands, and the Swede overcome there.

The Elector of Brandenburgh also with his Confederates the Poles, etc. marches
into Pomerania, takes several places, besieges Stetin three months, etc. whilst
the Swede busied against the Dane.

An. 1660. Peace made with the Pole and Brandenburgh Confederates, against the
Swede: as also with the Dane. The Ring about the same time dies, leaving his
young Son Charles the 11 th, about five or six years of age, Ring at present.

An. 1661. The Swede makes peace with the Moscovite. Ever since they have been
preparing great Armies, and hovering up and down, none scarce knows on which
side, or on what design. Time must show.

Revolutions of Denmark.
Christiern the 2 d, being abhorred by all the North Ringdoms in common for his
barbarousness and tyranny, was by the Decree of the Danes, Swedes and
Norwegians, outed of his kingdoms, as beforesaid, which endeavoring to regain
by Arms, was taken and miserably thrown into Prison, where he lay about thirty
seven years; and ended his days; and the Union of both kingdoms formerly made,
was quite dissolved. For Frederick the Uncle of Christiern renounced all right
in Sweden unto Erick king thereof, upon his Confederacy with him, against
Christiern that Tyrant.

Hereupon the Nobles, to whom Christiern had been odious for his Tyranny over
them, through means of the Citizens and Commons favoring him against them,
elect his Uncle Frederick Duke of Holstein, Ring of Denmark and Norway, upon
certain Conditions, and with great and large Privileges to themselves
reserved, An. 1523, which they stiffly always maintained, and afterward under
Frederick the 2 d, increased, and made them far greater, so that they had right
of Majesty and Sovereignty in common with the Ring, till lately in the year
1661, that they lost their ancient privileges.

This Frederick the first reformed Religion in both his Countries, according to
the Confession of Ausburgh, or Augustan Confession, that is, the Doctrine of
Luther there agreed on.

He being dead, great Factions and Troubles about a Successor arose, one party
being violent and strong for Christiern in Prison, who proceeded so far as to
besiege Copenbagen; But Christiern the third, being elected by another, with
great troubles suppressed the other, and perfected the Reformation begun by his
Father.

Christiern the fourth engaging in the German Wars against the Emperor for the
Liberties of Germany, lost a great part of his Dominions by the prevailing
Imperialists, but soon compounded the business upon very good Terms, and was
restored to all his own again, An. 1629, The Swede then coming in like a
Tempest upon the Emperor.

An. 1643. The Swede moves into Holstein and Jutland, and overcomes the Danes.

1644. War between Swede and Dane (with various fortune) by Sea and Land;
whereby the Swede loses places in Germany: but the Imperialists coming to help
the Dane, are beat.

1645. Peace made between Swede and Dane. and 1648, Frederick the 3 d, the
present king succeeds. An. 1657, Ring of Swede invades Holstein etc. before
mentioned.

1659. The Swede assaults Copenhagen, is repulsed with great loss. The Dane and
his Confederates recover Fuinen, and other Islands, and overcome the Swede,
etc. as before.

1660. Peace between them, whereby the Swede obtains Seandy, Hallandt and
Blecking from the Dane for ever.

This year was made the greatest mutation in the Ringdom of Denmark; The Ring
made absolute and supreme Lord, which depended before on the Senate of the
kingdom, and as it were redeemed from the servitude of the Nobles. The Nobles
lose all their Privileges, and the Crown made hereditary to both sexes, which
before depended on Election; And all this by the States of the kingdom
conferred on him, partly for his constancy and firm adhering to them in Person
during all the Siege of Copenhagen, as well as for other Reasons of State and
Inconveniences, made more evident and sensible by those Wars.

1661. Norway swears homage and fealty to the Hereditary Prince.

1663. A Plot and Conspiracy discovered against the Ring of Denmark. Afterward
in the late Wars between England and Holland, and Dane confederates with
Holland. But we hasten to France.

The Foundation and Revolutions of the present State of France.
1. There have been three Races or Lines of the Kings of France, the
Merovinian, Carolinian, and Capetine or Saxon Line.

2. Pepin Maire of the Kings Palace, a place of vast power and privilege, and
Father of Charles the Great, deposed Childerick the last of the Merovignian
Line, the Pope approving thereof, and confirming it. To whom succeeded Charles
the Great, about the year 770, Ring of France, and after large Conquests,
crowned Emperor of Germany by the Pope, Anno 800, which the Pope ever since
pretends to be his Gift.

3. About the year 988. Hugh Capet Earl of Paris, a place of something the like
power with that of Maire formerly, outed the Caroline Family.

4. This Capetine Race has gone in three Families. First, in a direct Line till
1328. Then in the House of Valois, till Henry the 4 th of the House of Bourbon,
an. 1589. And ever since under Lewis the 13 th and 14 th in the same House. For
Henry the 3 d, the last of the Valoises, created king of Poland, fled privily
thence, upon the death of his Brother Charles the 9 th, Ring of France, and
succeeded him thereupon. Anno 1574 makes war against the Hugonites, (then in
Arms upon the horrid Massacres not long before committed upon them) and makes a
new League with the Guises, called the Holy League, to root out the Hugonots.

For about this time there had been Commotions and Wars for Religion and
Self-defence, upon the growth of Calvin's Doctrine and Reformation; and the
Ringdom became divided into two Factions, partly Ecclesiastic, the Catholics
and Hugonots; and partly Civil, the Duke of Montmorrency, or Conde, (that is
the Bourbons) and the Duke of Guise, (that is of Lorrain, of the Race of
Charles the Great*) Hence sharp Wars. The Bourbons side with the Hugonots, The
Guises with the Catholics; (which was called the Holy League.)

In the mean while the Guises upon these occasions studied to exclude the House
of Bourbon underhand, viz. Henry the 4 th Ring of Navar, and next of kin to
this Ring and House, (as inclining to the Hugonets) from succession, and to set
up themselves, ruling the king as they pleased.

Who at last seeing himself abused, and designs upon him through the power and
favor of the Catholics to the Guises, the Head and Ringleaders of them, sides
with the Hugonites, or they with him, besieges Paris, which they had seized on;
but was there stabbed by a Monk, made use of by the Guisans and that Faction,
an. 1589. and so the Family of the Valois ended, and the Bourbons succeeds,
Namely

Henry the 4 th, next Heir Male, King of Navar, who continues War against the
Leaguists, who strongly opposed him; but he greatly breaks them, till at last
seeing Religion the only hindrance to his quiet settlement in that Crown, and
the quite ruining of that League against him, was prevailed on to turn
Catholic, and so established the present House of Bourbon, and granted good
terms to the Protestants, but was afterward stabbed by Ravillac, of the Romish
and Jesuitical Faction.

The first occasion (as was hinted) of these Troubles was the Massacre at
Merindal, Anno 1545. but specially the great Massacre at Paris, and thereupon
presently throughout the whole kingdom, an. 1572. from which time the Holy
League began;

Which was a Sacred Confederation of the Pope, king of Spain, and Duke of
Guise, for the Catholic Religion, and to root out Heretics. And to that end,
to set up some more Catholic and zealously affected and engaged King and
Interest, either the King of Spain, or Duke of Guise of the Family of Lorrain,
descended from Charles the great, on whom the Pope pretends to have bestowed no
less than the Roman Empire upon its ruin; and the kingdom of France upon its
alienation to Pepin his Father.

Lewis the 13 th his Son succeeded 1610, the most absolute King of France since
Charles the Great: For he reduced the Protestants to his obedience, and all the
Forts and Castles held by them, to the number of three hundred, diminishes the
Liberty of Religion granted by Henry the fourth by Decree, ordering that all
the Protestants should be in all things equal with the Catholics, and enjoy
the same Privileges and Immunities. In which War the Siege of Rochel was most
famous, where all the Art of War was shown: Anno 1628. taken, and its Walls
demolished.

Cardinal Richlieu was his chief Counselor and Minister of State; under whom
he brings all France into one entire body and state; yet Liberty of Religion by
agreement continued to the Protestants. And from that time bent all his Horce
against Spain and House of Austria then increasing.

So by the Conduct of Richlieu, accomplished great things in Italy, Germany,
Spain and Flanders, as well as his own Kingdom. So that by the peace at Munster
between both Emperor and Spain, all Alsatia was added to France, and the
strongest places on this side the Rhine, and a good part of Flanders, etc.
whereby France recovered the bounds as it were of ancient Gaul. The Dukedom of
Lorraine also during the German wars was put into the protection of France,
about the restoring of which there has been some difficulties of late, or
demurres.

An. 1642. Lewis the 14 th, four years old succeeds, in whose minority the
Queen Mother managed affairs with Cardinal Mazarine a stranger, which stirred
the envy and hatred of the French against him.

1650. The discontented Princes are imprisoned, which causes intestine
commotions, the Prince of Conde chief.

1651. They are freed. Mazarin driven out of Paris and banished. But, the King
entering his 14th year, recalled. Conde arms against the King.

1652. At Mazarin's return, now Civil Discords revive. But the Cardinal outdoes
them, and becomes more potent and glorious. Prince of Conde takes the Spaniards
part in Flanders. Afterward Mazarine made Peace with England.

1660. The Wars between France and Spain for twenty six years ended, and Peace
made. The Kings marriage with Spains Infanta follows; by Mazarin's and De
Haro's means. Which has since occasioned the late War in Flanders. Conde
reconciled to the King, and restored. Since which the Protestants never in
lower condition, nor more under the hatches* and have lost more by this Peace,
then ever they did by their own Wares. Aurange taken into the Kings protection,
and unwalled.

1661. Duke of Orleans the Kings Brother, Marries the Princess of England. The
Duke of Lorraine sells his Provinces to the King of France, his Nephew
dissenting. The rest since are flesh in memory. Namely the Political and
Civildeath as it were of the Protestants since the General Peace 1660, and
since this last Peace also. The Wars with England, France confederating with
Holland; or rather poizing the lighter Balance, or weaker side. The
Comprehension of the Jansenists, and the four Jansenian Bishops, with the chief
thereof, Doctor Arnaud, within the Bounds of the Romish Church. Marshal Turein
turned Catholic. So that France is like to be one entire Body of Catholics,
which no doubt is one main design on foot of the Pope and Jesuits, who by
strange and unobserved artifices sway Princes, and their grand Ministers of
State, etc.

The Foundation and Revolutions of Spain and Portugal.
After the breaking of the Roman Empire, there was a Kingdom founded over all
Spain and Portugal by the West Goths, coming out of Italy.

This Kingdom was destroyed afterward by the Moors and Saracens.

The Goths began soon after to revive again, and to erect several lesser
Kingdoms, by degrees as they could; which in time were variously united and
disunited again, and perpetual Wars with one another.

The grand division at last was into the kingdom of the Moors and of the
Christians, or Goths.

The Moors Kingdom in the end fixed only in Andalusia, or most Southern parts
of Spain.

The Christians became divided also in time into four chief Kingdoms, Castile,
Arragon, Navarre, and Portugal; which could never unite till.

1. Ferdinand the Great, surnamed the Catholic King of Arragon, laid the
Foundations of the last and greatest Monarchy of Spain, by marriage with Isabel
Queen of Castile, etc. toward the year 1480. in which Race continued ever
since.

Whereupon mighty things ensued: (1.) Perpetual Union betwixt those two potent
Kingdoms. (2.) The utter rooting out presently thereupon the Moors and Saracens
from the kingdom of Andalusia; (who had held Spain more or less in subjection
for seven hundred years) Anno 1492. Upon which they presumed to style
themselves King and Queen of Spain, i. e. all Spain) to the prejudice of
Navarre and Portugal, who were yet distinct Kingdoms. (3.) The seizing on the
kingdom of Navarre, whereto belonged Naples and Sicily, etc. (4.) The discovery
of the New World, America, the year 1492. After which they had the title of
Catholic by the Pope, to the prejudice of all other Kingdoms. (5.) The
marrying of their only Daughter and Heir to Philip the Emperors Son, Archduke
of Austria, Prince of the Netherlands, thereby uniting those great Estates; and
laying the Foundation also for the present Austrian Greatness and Family,
continued ever since, by so many intermarriages, between the Spanish and
Imperial branches of that potent Family.

And thus the Spaniards first became considerable in the World, and a Terror to
Neighbors; and suddenly looked like the beginners of a fifth, or Universal
Monarchy of the World, at least the New-World:

Which they affected, first, in Title, Getting (1.) that of Catholic Kings,
after they had usurped that of Kings of Spain; as designed by the Pope for
Universal or Catholic Monarch, to promote the Catholic Cause on Religion; to
root out Heretics, etc. which has been always their pretext, and which they
have been always zealous and mighty sticklers for. And (2) they have hereby
claimed prerogative over all other Kings, and by pretext of their Title, have
ever since looked on themselves as the Greatest Monarchs of all the World; as
indeed they had the greatest Dominions. And this would have been a fair step to
be the Head of Kingdoms, as the Pope was of the Church. And just such
beginnings had the Pope himself over all other Bishops.

Secondly, by Arms. For there remained two kingdoms in Spain: Portugal and
Navarre* both which they seize on. First that of Navarre, and Naples, etc.
Whence perpetual Wars ever since with France in Catalonia, etc. For this
Kingdom, which still retains the Title, and by Arms continually requires the
possession. And then of Portugal by Philip the 2 d, about sixty years after,
viz. about the 1560.

Thirdly, by Shipping and Sea-Forces, or Power at Sea; specially afterward
with their Invincible Armado in 88, wherein were above thirty thousand
Soldiers, to join with as many out of the Netherlands. And again afterward
with as great Preparation against the Hollanders, (but to as little purpose
too) in the year 1640; aiming at Superiority and Dominion of the Northern Seas,
and consequently of all the World. But the Hollanders and English were grown,
by that time of the World, too big to do any good on them.

2. To Ferdinand the Catholic succeeds Philip Archduke of Austria, etc.
beforementioned, Son to Maximilian the Emperor, about 1504.

3. After whom comes Charles the 5 th, An. 1516. king of Spain, Archduke of
Austria; Duke of Milan, Burgundy, Brabant; Earl of Catalonia, Flanders,
Holland, etc. and Emperor of the Germans; under whom the Monarchy of Spain grew
toward its greatest height;

He added the Realms of Mexico and Peru, the Dukedom of Milan, and several
Estates in the Netherlands; Marched into Africa, possesses Tunis, and other
parts thereby disposing Kingdoms there at his pleasure. But was at last soon
outed of the Empire, as a foresaid, leaving Spain, and the Netherlands, and
other Spanish Territories too.

4. His Son Philip the 2d. An. 1558. under whom this Kingdom recieved its
utmost increase by Portugal and the East Indies therewith; and also its
greatest decrease by the Netherlands.

For upon the death of Sebastian King of Portugal, slain in Africa, without
Issue, appeared six chief Competitors for the Crown. Of all whom the Duke of
Braganza had most right; but the King of Spain, notwithstanding all the help
from France and England, got it. And so was the first of the West-Goths since
the Moors, that obtained the Universal Monarchy of all Spain, and both the East
and West Indies; (besides the Belgic Provinces and other dominions in Europe;)
in so much that they could brag that the Sun rose and set in their ground. So
that now the whole bulk of his swelling titles was completed, viz.

King of Spain, Castile, Leon, Arragon, Navar, Jerusalem, Naples, Sicily,
Sardinia, Majorck and Minorck, and of the Isles and Continent of the Indies,
and of the Main Ocean, King; Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Lorraine,
Brabant, Lucenburg, Gelderland, and Milan; Earl of Hapsburg, Flanders, Artois,
Henault, Holland, Zealand, etc. Marquess of the Sacred Empire; Lord of
Friezland, Meckleburgh, Ulricht, etc. Great Lord of Asia, and of Africa.

5. Which mighty Monarchy, laboring with its own weight, soon began to fall
into pieces; (1) through exhausting of its people, and want of men by naval
expeditions into both Indies; by many and long Wars; by ejecting the Moors and
Jews before and afterward, etc. by the Spanish Inquisition and grievous Taxes
and oppressions of the Countrymen, and laborers. (2) By wasting of its Riches
and Wealth; by Wars, and imprudence. (3) By loss of kingdoms and Provinces, as
well as great defeats of its Armies, and Armado's. As namely the loss of the
Netherlands, the Defeat in 88, the long Wars with the French, (who always
opposed this rising Monarchy on all sides) which brought lastly the revolt of
Portugal and Catalonia; and so the loss of half their entire united Monarchy;
besides the new conquests in Flanders, the last year, by the French; all which
have made pretty wide gaps in those numerous swelling titles.

6. But this great Kingdom was chiefly impaired by the Revolt of the
Netherlands, and Portugal.

For this Philip in endeavoring to bring Tyrannick Government both Civil and
Religious, specially the last; by the bloody Inquisition; and to reduce them
back a gain by force to the Church of Rome, from that Reformation of Religion,
which was now every where begun (whereof he was a violent Enemy;) was by a
great part of the Provinces confederate together, rejected from being their
Prince, An. 1581. for seeing the Spaniards would bring in absolute domination,
both over Soul and Body, they became desperate, to the death, declare him for a
Tyrant, and perpetual Enemy; and by eighty years Wars brought the Spaniard to
an open confession or conviction of his bad Politics, for Force of Religion;
and taught them, and the World too, if they will be taught, this Rule, That a
free Nation must be governed freely.

For the Pride and Tyranny, specially in Religion, and the unmerciful
Inquisition, filled all Christian People, with Hate and Terror of the
Spaniards; specially these most concerned. For by no more powerful argument did
the Prince of Orange inflame the Netherlanders Spirits, than saying, That These
burn men alive for Religion; which set them all on fire.

So ill does Force upon either men's Civil or Religious Liberties, conduce to
establish Princes, where Subjects are once sensible of them.

And that Religion had a chief hand in these Revolutions, you must know that
the main design then driven on by the Catholic Princes and Party, was the
defense and propagation of that Religion, the Protector whereof the King of
Spain vaunted to be, and the extirpation of Heretics, and so to make the King
of Spain Universal and absolute, and truly and indeed Catholic, (at least by
some, etc.)

In such sort, that about 1560, Charles the 9 th, king of France, with the
Queen Mother Katherine of Medices (a busy and Imperious Queen) and Isabel this
king of Spains Wife, and the Duke of Alva, make a league, to join the Power
and Policies of both Nations, to root out the new increasing Heretics; The
Hugonots out of France, and the Protestants out of the Low Countries, and
Germany; and immediately ensued the Holy League in France, (wherein this King
was a mighty stickler also) and then those wars here.

So that he not only confederated with the Leaguists against the Hugonots; but
also about the year 1580, (when the other would not do) endeavors also, upon
the same account, to hinder the Reformation growing in his own Dominions, by
bringing in the Inquisition and arbitrary Government amongst them, whereby he
was wholly driven out of those Provinces, confederating together for their
Liberty and Privileges.

And indeed, except men's Civil Liberties be first invaded, their Religious can
hardly be.

To recover which Countries, they exhausted all their strength in vain for
eighty years, till they were at last forced to a shameful submission in the
Treary of Munster 1648. therein renouncing for ever all Right, etc. and treat
with them and their Ambassadors, as free and absolute Sovereign Estates.

For by this time they had other Bones, that touched them nearer, to pick, and
a greater Enemy to deal with; and a worse and nearer Neighbor, which
occasioned the defection of Portugal and Catalonia.

For the Portuguese in the year 1640; through Richlieu's Policy and
Contrivance, revolt; and set up the Duke of Braganza, right Heir to the Crown;
and the Catalonians turn to the Protection of France, the same year.

Thus Spain that had the four chief parts of the World, Europe, Africa, Asia
and America, and possessed more Countries and People than all the ancient
Monarchies put together, has been shrewdly and dangerously enfeebled in some of
its principal Limbs, and never likely to recover its first strength.

It Is observed from the Story, that this Kingdom got its great increase by
Marriages, but lost always by Arms. Three Marriages specially enlarged it* 1.
Of Maximilian the Emperor with the Heiress of Burgundy, whereby all the
Netherlands, or Belgium, came to the House of Austria. 2. Of Philip the first
the Emperor's Son, with the Daughter and Heiress of Spain, (besides the
Marriage of Ferdinand with Isabel) her Parents (which laid the first Foundation
for Spains growth and greatness) thereby uniting Austria, Belgium, or the
Netherlands and Spain, and of the Empire it self under Charles the 5 th,
Philip's son. 3. Of this Charles the 5 th, with the eldest Daughter and Heir of
Portugal, whereby his Son Philip the 2 d claimed and got that kingdom also;
though against the fundamental Law thereof, that the Crown should not go to an
Alien, etc. But enough concerning the increase and decrease of this mighty
Monarchy.

7. Philip the 3 d succeeds about the year 1500, and finding his Estates almost
destroyed by those long and chargeable wars with Holland, England, etc. first
makes peace with England, and afterward a Twelve years Truce with the
Netherlands.

Which done, he totally banishes all the new Christians (i. e. all the Moors
turned Christians ere now) out of Spain, and afterward was active for the
Imperialists in the Protestant Wars of Germany.

8. An. 1621. succeeded Philip the 4 th, who got into his hands all the Lower
Palatinate, from the Elector Palatine in those Wars.

But lost the whole Kingdom of Portugal and Province of Catalonia, before
hinted, with many of the best Towns in Flanders, (not yet recovered from the
power of the French) and some parts in Italy, etc. but many more lost this last
year, besides, etc. To particularize the Times a little;

Anno 1578. Sebastian king of Portugal, helping Mahomet to recover the kingdom
of Fez and Morocco, was slain in Africa; and so Portugal with all the
Territories in Africa, and the East Indies, fell to Spain, as beforementioned.

An. 1581. The Netherlanders revolt.

1588. Their Invincible Armado beat by the English.

1604. Spinola takes Ostend, and the Prince of Orange Sluse.

1609. Twelve years Truce with Spain.

1621. Truce ended.

1625. Breda surrendered to Spinola: but retaken by Hollanders.

1629. The Hollanders intercept the whole Spanish Silver-Fleet, very rich,
coming out of their Haven in the West Indies (viz. the Port of Havan) under
Admiral Hayne.

1635. War renewed between France and Spain, which lasts for twenty years, till
1660, in Flanders and Catalonia. All which time various fortune, Sieges,
Battles, and taking and losing places.

1640. Portugal and Catalonia revolt.

The Great Spanish Armado beat by Trump in the Chanel, the same year.

1643. French beat the Spaniards in the bloody Battle of Rocroy.

1646. French take Dunkirk.

1648. Peace between Spain and Netherlands, after eighty years Wars.

1654. A Plot discovered against Spaniards in Flanders. The Duke of Lorrain
sent prisoner into Spain. The French relieve Arras, with great victory and
slaughter of Spaniards. French under Duke of Guise invade Naples, but repulsed.

1656. French besiege Valentia. Relieved, with great victory and slaughter of
them.

1658. The French and English take Dunkirk. This delivered to the English. The
French have Graveling and other places. Jamaica lost to the English the year
before, or more.

1659. Mazarine and D' Haro contrive Peace, and Marriage, and Interviews of
both Kings. Duke of Lorrain released, returns into France. Sells his Provinces,
which he hardly knew how to get from, to the French king, An. 1662. Peace
between the two Crowns agreed 1660.

1660. Spain renews Preparations against Portugal.

1661. Spanish Armies move into Portugal. The next year, 1662, again invade
Portugal, take several places. Queen of Portugal goes for England. Tangier
delivered to the English.

1663. Spaniards like to gain Portugal; But beat notoriously at Evora in a most
memorable Battle. Towns taken from the Portugals in the East Indies by the
Hollanders; viz. Cauchin and Canamor, etc. Infanta of Spain betrothed to the
Emperor; but departs not till 1666.

An. 1662. Queen Mother of Portugal removed from Government, and the King
administers.

Several Victories year after year against the Spaniards, by assistance of the
English.

1664. King of Spain dies. Since which time, endeavors for Peace by Mediation
of England, but not thoroughly effectual till 1668.

1666. King of Portugal married to a Princess of France.

1667. The King deposed by his Brother and Subjects; who now rules as Regent,
and marries the Queen, etc. And now Peace made with Spain, who owns it a
kingdom, 1668.

The French invade Flanders in right of his Queens Dowry, and take many
Territories. But Peace soon made, or rather but a making; for they cannot yet
agree on it.

As for the Revolutions of England, they are better known generally to
Englishmen, than can be in short described.

Of the Foundations and Revolutions of the seven present chief Dukedoms, with
the Archdukedom.
The Archdukedom of Austria was first a Marquisate, then a Dukedom; Afterward
they were Kings of Hungary and Bohemia: Afterward Emperors also, as still at
present. And therefore shall say nothing further thereof; save only that the
Austrian Power has grown peculiarly by Marriages. First, The Emperor Maximilian
the first, obtained Burgundy and the Netherlands. Philip his son, Spain with
its dependencies. And Philip the 2 d, (by his father Charles the 5 th's
marriage) Portugal and all its dependencies, as before hinted.

Of the great Dukedom of Tuscany or Florence.
The grand Dukedom of Moscovy is now reckoned an Empire. The great Dukedom of
Lituania is subject to Poland. The great Dukedom of Finland, to Swedeland.
There remains only one Sovereign Great Dukedom, and five Dukedoms. As for the
Dukedoms of Saxony and Bavaria, they have the higher titles of Electorates.

The Great Dukedom of Tuscany was anciently a Free State: but never any more
turbulent with Factions, and several forms of Government in the State; and most
commonly between the Nobles and Commons: till at last when there was no end of
these Contentions, the People prevailed against the Nobles.

Among the Commons, the Medices, princely Merchants, were chief Adversaries of
the Nobles, and highly in favor with the People. So that about the year 1410
John de Medices maintaining their Liberty, was so advanced, that he not only
got a great party; but almost a Sovereignty in the City.

About the year 1433, it began to be changed into a Monarchy, or single person.
By Cosmo his Son, called Father of the Country. The occasion was the faction of
the Nobles against the Medice's, who by an unjust Judgment banish Cosmo; but
recalled again the next year by the Commons, and constituted in a manner Prince
of the whole Commonwealth, as the Father of his Country, saving still the
Liberty of the City.

His Son by the same moderation and favor of the people, (which yet
continued,) obtained in like manner the principality, notwithstanding all the
opposition of the Nobles; to suppress which, took up all his Son and successors
time also.

At length, but too late, the people fearing to be made hereditary to this
powerful Family, chose another eminent Person: But he knowing and considering
the fickleness and unconstancy of the Multitude, that new Houses as they are
soon in, so as soon out of their favor, confers all his interest upon the
Medice's again; as a potent Family that had long governed the City. Against
whom another faction conspired; but without effect. And now they seek more
firmly to establish themselves.

For about 1494. for clandestine transactions with the King of France, (come
into Italy) without the Magistrates, they were ejected as Enemies of their
Country, but restored again through the Popes means, by the King of Spain and
Naples, 1512.

But afterward Rome being taken, and the Pope himself (who was of this Family)
by Charles the fifth, Emperor, King of Spain, Naples, etc. the Florentines
recover their ancient Liberty again by the help of the French. The Pope to
revenge this affront transacts a Peace and Accommodation with the Emperor on
this condition, that he should restore Florence to the Medices, which after two
years Siege and resistance was recovered against the French, An. 1530. by the
said Charles; who creates Alexander di Medices first Duke thereof; who built a
Citadel to aw the People. Catharine di Medices Queen of France was his sister.

Cosmo his successor, 1537, extends the Dukedom far through Italy, and by his
great wisdom and prowess sways the affairs of Italy; and 1569. was Crowned in
the Court of Rome, by the Pope, first King of Tuscany; but, the better to
pacify the Emperor, (who pretended it to be his right to create Kings and
Dukes) it was turned into that of Great Duke only; adding thereby only the
title of Great; and so has continued in this Family ever since.

Of Savoy.
Savoy lies between Italy, France, and Switzerland, upon Germany, etc.

Becoming a part of the Kingdom of Burgundy (after the breaking of the Roman
Empire,) passed with that falling Kingdom to the Empire of the Germans, about
the year 990. In the distractions whereof, the several provincial Earls and
Governors for the Emperors, seizing on their several Provinces, there arose
thereout the great Estates of Sovoy, Provence, Bresse, the Commonwealth of the
Switzers, and the Grisons, etc.

In the year 999. Beroald of Saxony, forced to flee out of Germany, for killing
the Emperor, his Uncle's Wife for Adultery: with the consent of the King of
Burgundy, then deprived thereof, made himself Earl of Savoy.

La Bresse in France, was by Marriage, added thereto, 1285. And 1363. the
principality of Piedmont, and so they become Princes of Piedmont and Earls of
Nize.

Amadee the 8th. By the Emperor in the Council of Constance is created first
Duke thereof, An. 1414.

An. 1536. the then Duke was spoiled of all his Estates by the King of France:
But upon Peace made by their successors afterward, restored again, 1558.

Afterward by Marriage they were allied and depended much upon Spain. But
Amadee Victorio marrying the Daughter of Henry the 4th, became allied to
France, changed his dependences, and held more close to the French.

1600. The Country of Bresse was given to the French, for their pretentions to
some other Estates.

His Son Charles Emanuel the 2d, left at three years old in the hands of his
Mother, an. 1637. The French upon pretense of preserving the Country for him,
against the incrochments of the Spaniards their neighbors, in Milan, made
themselves Masters of the greatest part thereof; being the Wars then newly
began between France and Spain. I suppose restored since in whole or in part.

An. 1662, the Duke of Savoy Persecute's the Waldenses in Piedmont, and
bordering, etc. There is a perfect antipathy and contrariety betwixt those of
Savoy and Piemont.

An. 1664, or 63, he further persecutes the Waldenses or Protestants, who
resist stoutly and defend themselves by War, through assistance of Neighbors,
and go armed to their work and Harvest. At last Peace soon made etc.

Of Lorrain.
Lorrain lies between Germany and France; of small compass now, not above 100
miles long, and sixty or seventy broad: but formerly a large and potent Kingdom
(after the division and breaking of the Roman Empire) undergoing various
fortunes, sharings, and partitions between the Emperor and French. At last the
Emperors conquered it from the French. At length, An. 981. This part now
remaining, (and something more) was given by the Emperor to his Cousin Charles
(a second Son) of France, (and afterward Heir to the Crown, had he not been
outed by Hugh Capet) and made Duke thereof.

An. 1078. By Marriage it came to Godfry of Bologn, afterward King of
Jerusalem; as also his Brother Baldwin; Duke of Lorrein first in his stead;
then also King of Jerusalem: upon whose absence, it fell to their Nephew, (who
obtained it of the Emperor) Earl of Limburg, and so came to the Limburgers.

An. 1430. It came to Rene Duke of Anjou, and King of Naples, of which outed by
the King of Arragon, and making the King of France Heir to the other, leaves
only Lorrein to his Son.

An. 1473. For want of Heirs Male, it came to the Earls of Vaudemont by the
Mothers side; where it continues still.

About 1100, the rest of Brabant (till then a part) was torn from it by
several, upon their absence in the holy War.

An. 1329. The Earldom of Guise was added, whence that potent Family of the
Dukes of Guises, who being head of the holy League pretended to the Crown of
France against Henry the 4th, as an Heretic, and therefore incapable, etc.
(since which the Catholics of France will have none but Catholics to be
capable to have or hold the Crown of France, and that they are no longer his
Subjects bound to obedience, than that he is Catholic: yet this is but vulgar
opinion bred amongst them ever since; but no constitution) Henry the 3d, who
was yet of the League, perceiving, and at length sensible of the Guises
ambition and practices for the Crown, even against himself, etc. sends for the
two Brothers to his Court at Blois, and there commands them to be slain in his
Chamber in his presence; which fact so enraged those of the League, that he was
glad of the assistance of the Hugonots, and to side with them. But
excommunicated thereupon by the Pope: yet Henry the 4 th, after he had broke
the neck of the League; yet to be settled secure in the Ringdom against this
faction, was by the practices of some won over to Popery, (though himself
likewise before excommunicate by the Pope) the better to be universally owned
and received as Ring, who would hardly have any but a Catholic. Such is the
Zeal of People on all sides about Religion when it is not according to
knowledge. And this is to this day rooted in the generality of France, which
may be one reason to make the Ring carry so high an hand over the Portestants;
the better to please his Catholic subjects under all his Exactions, and to
oblige them to his designs, etc. and bind them by Religion in opposing the
contrary, than faster to himself.

An. 1630. The Duke of Lorrain engaging in the Wars of Germany for the Emperor,
lost a great part to the Swede. And the Ring of France picking a quarrel with
him, at the same time deprived him of the Duchy of Bar; and falling into
Lorrain with a puissant Army, when the Suedes were there, compelled him to put
into his hands and protection his chief City, Nantz, and by consequence all the
rest of his Estates, An. 1633. and never since could be restored.

Since the general Peace with Spain 1660, he sold (per force) his Estates, or
the best part to the King of France; his Nephew dissenting. Nor has much left:
yet now makes War with the Palatine, and is too hard for him hitherto.

Of the Dukedom of Holstein.
Holst in was part anciently of the great Dukedom of Saxony. Lotharius Emperor
and Duke of Saxony, gives it to the Earl of Schumburg, with the title of Earl
thereof, An. 1114.

The King of Denmark, by his Mothers side, succeeds An. 1459. Enlarged with
Ditmarsh by the Emperor, and made a Dukedom. 1474.

An. 1500. Ditmarsh recovers its liberty from the Dane, subdued again by the
Dane, an. 1559.

An. 1560. It was given by the King of Denmark to his Brother, viz. the Title
and a good part of the Country, who governed it interchangably with the Ring in
their several Turns.

An. 1580. It came under the protection of the Danes, and performed homage by a
perpetual League with the Danes.

Issue Male failing of these Dukes, the Title was conferred afterward on the
then another King of Danes Brother, where it continues.

Of late arose a controversy between the King of Denmark and the Dukes of
Holstein about some places, but composed in the late Swedish Danish-War. For in
the Peace at Rotschild between the two Kings 1658, the Dukes of Holstein are
made absolute Princes, exempt from all homage or subjection to the Dane; But
the Dane in the second transaction of that Peace, (it being broken before fully
ended betwixt them) opposed it; But at last the Business was composed.

The King of Swede, Charles Gustavus Adolphus, had married the eldest Daughter
of Holstein, an. 1654. that same year he was made Ring.

Of the Commonwealths; and first of the United-Provinces.
The Tyranny of the Spanyard was the occasion of this Commonwealth, as
aforesaid.

The end of which Tyranny was to suppress the growing Reformation of Religion,
and by force to reduce them back to the Church of Rome. To which end Philip the
2 d. transported with Catholic Zeal, invades not only their Religious, but
Civil Liberties: (without which little good was to be hoped for against their
Religious) and by this twofold Tyranny, endeavors absolute Dominion over them.

The Religious Tyranny was chiefly the Inquisition, and more Episcopal Sees and
Courts. The Civil, was in many respects: But their chief Prerogative was, that
if the Prince by violence or wrong, did infringe any of the said Charters and
Franchises, the people after declaration thereof made, might go to election of
a new Prince.

Ring Philip was so Zealous in the Cause of the Romish Church, that it is
thought that his eldest Son, was put to death, with his consent, in the
Inquisition House, for seeming favorably inclined to the
Low-Country-Hereticks, as the Spaniards called them.

At length when they could no longer endure the Spanish Tyranny, they begin to
vindicate their Liberties and Privileges by Arms, under the Prince of Orange,
about 1568. which lasted eighty years, till 1648. during which time, it became
the School of War for all great Captains and Warriors. The Ring of Suede,
Gustavus Adolphus, is said to have exercised Incognito, as a common Soldier,
under the Prince of Orange.

The first Province was Holland, about 1570. and others afterward. An. 1579. A
Confederation is first made at Utricht of perpetual Union and League by certain
Laws and Conditions, against the Spanyard. And An. 1581. they declare by
writing directed to all People, that Ppilip of Spain was fallen from the
Government; and take a new Oath, which bound them never to return to the
Spanish obedience. But you must know first, that after intolerable persecutions
of the Lutherans, (in such sort, that within forty years an 100000 had been
destroyed and more) the Nobility exhibited their humble petition, an. 1566.
whereupon they were nicknam'd Beggars, which Title they accounted their Honor,
and take the Arms of Beggars upon their Clothes, with this Symbol, True to the
King to the very Bag.

The same year the commom people ^^se every where in Tumult, and with their
Arms frequented Sermons in all places, and practicing force against Churches
and Temples, broke in pieces Statues and Images, etc. And so the War began. And
at length, as has been hinted, abjure all fidelity and obedience for ever
solemnly to the King of Spain; and resolve to die, and undergo any death,
rather then yield; and never to have any Peace or Reconciliation, so long as he
made the least pretense of Right to this Commonwealth; (which after eighty
years, they forced him solemnly to renounce) and with so much Arder, Zeal, and
Confidence, that they had rather all Holland and Zealand should be sunk in the
Sea under Water, then again submit to the power of the Spanyard. The Hugonots
in France much about the same time, upon Henry the 4 ths turning Catholic,
took another course, and agreed upon Terms, which have been but ever since a
breaking.

This done, according to their Rights and Privileges, they go to elect a new
Prince; and seeing the Spaniard too hard for them, they seek the protection of
strangers, and had rather endure any Master then the Spanyard. First the
Archduke, the Emperors Brother. Then the Duke of Anjou, Brother to Henry the 3
d. Ring of France, An. 1582.

The Prince of Orange being stabbed at Delph by a Monck, An. 1584. they sue to
Henry the 3 d. who was too busy at Home with the holy League, etc. to take
care of strangers. And therefore 1588, seek to Queen Elizabeth, as distressed
States; and she of the same reformed Religion too. Who refuses the Government:
but sends relief, by an Army under the Earl of Leicester; with Cautionary Towns
put into his Hands.

Hereupon growing prosperous, But jealous of the Earl, they resolve to govern
and establish the Commonwealth among themselves, so that the Hollanders choose
Prince Maurice, and the Friezlanders Prince William, Earls of Nassaw, for
Governors Captain Generals, by whose conduct and conquests, the seven
Provinces were wholly vindicated from the Spaniard, and reduced into one entire
Body of Commonwealth, An. 1594. And afterward so prospered and succeeded, that
before they would hearken to any treaty or accommodation, they forced the
Spaniard to this conclusion, to treat with them as a Free State, in the year
1609. and then made a twelve years truce only. And 1621. renew the War again,
but not so hot as at first, etc. till the Treaty of Munster 1648. whereby the
Spaniard renounces all pretensions for ever, and acknowledges them for a
Free State* and only dependant on God. A War so shamefully begun, and (after
fourscore years) so shamefully ended; in a Glorious and Eternal Peace made with
them for ever.

Liberty of Religion, according to the Laws of their first Union at Utrecht
1579, was the foundation, and has been, and is, the preservation of this
Commonwealth.

The Reformed Religion Protestant (or Calvin's) was publicly established. The
Anabaptists, or Mennonites and others, had their public Temples or
Congregations. Only Papists, (and Socinians since) for reason of State were
forbid the public exercise of Religion, to this Day; as disturbing the Peace.

Though the War was Civil, and for their Civil rights directly, (as knowing
well they could not violate and invade their Religious, without violating and
invading these first) yet the end, motive, and occasion principally was
Religion, (and upon that account, and indirectly Religious) on both sides. Zeal
for Religion on both sides, moved both to contend for their pretended civil
rights and claims. And so 'twas not a War for Religion, but as they say, a
Defensive War only, for their Civil Rights and Liberties, though in order, and
subserviency to Religion. And yet there was at the same time more Papists, then
Protestants (then called Lutherans at first) in these Countries.

They indulge Liberty of Religion, with which their State begins and stands.
But Trade and Riches has almost eaten out Pure Religion.

For other particulars, the chief are hinted before under Spain, etc. and we
must be short.

An. 1662. War between England and Holland: 1653. a great Sea fight. The
Hollanders are beat. Peace made 1654.

An. 1652. The King of France, and Holland make a strict League; having made a
new League also before with the King of England, after his restoration. But a
breach soon arose, etc.

Of the Republic of the Switzers.
These Countries lie bordering upon Germany, Savoy, etc.

Upon the fall of the Roman Empire, after various Fortunes and Masters, coming
under the possession and power of the Austrian Family, and Emperors thereof
afterward, and overburdened by the Tyranny of the Austrian Governors, and
Lords sent amongst them, and their encroachments upon their Liberties, and so
weary of them, and finding an opportunity, amidst the distractions of the
Empire by the Pope, etc.

The Swisse constitute a Confederate Republic, (i. e. contract an offensive
and defensive League amongst themselves, for desence of their Liberties) Begun
1305, but not finished till 1511. For when they did endeavor by force, to make
them, of a free Nation of the Empire, the Austrian's own proper Subjects, and
to bring in Arbitrary Government, by force also they opposed.

First three Rusticks or chief Country men made a League amongst themselves of
expelling Tyrants, whereof each brought his Town or Village into Society. The
rest came by degrees afterward successively; til in the end after two hundred
years from the first beginning of their League, to the finishing them, they
amounted to the present number of thirteen Cantons, or distinct Parts and
Corporations. Besides several other Towns and States, without the bounds of
their Commonwealth, also joined and comparted together with them, for common
defense and safety.

And becoming Invincible in innumerable Battles and Victories at the first,
foreign Enemies durst never attempt them more. But since, frequent Civil Wars
amongst themselves; but never to break their first Confederacy, but still
friends again.

Their Confederacy and Liberty was confirmed and allowed afterward by the
Emperor, Lewis the fourth, of Bavaria, for adhering to him against the faction
of Austria for the Empire at the same time.

After their forementioned Victories, and Valor shown in those Battles and
Wars eminently, becoming renowned for Soldiers, the French King takes them
into pension in his Wars, (who became likewise a member of their Corporation)
which being afterward denied, they serve the Pope, who styled them Defenders of
the Church, An. 1510. The King of France thinks it best to take them again into
pension, 1522. upon very advantageous terms to themselves, and as burdensome to
him. They became Mercenary also to other Princes. Any might have them for their
Money. Hence reproached for a Mercenary Nation, trusted by none. But the King of
France bid highest for them. And at this day they are in all Armies and Wars.

Since that agreement, they obtained also sixteen hundred to be of the French
Gaurd; the King preferring them for their Fame and Renown. At last upon the
differences of Religion, they became divided also in pension. The Popish
Cantons taking pension of the Pope and King of Spain; the Protestants of
France; and the mixed of both; and all of the Venetians. There was not long
since, some difficulties about their Pension and Agreements, etc. They sent
Ambassadors to the present French King; who magnificently received them; and
things composed, etc. An Army consisting of Swisse Foot, and French Horse; is
accounted of all the most excellent.

About 1516. Zuinglius, a Canon of the Church, begins the Reformation of
Religion here at Zurich, as Luther had before with good success in Germany.
Whom followed those of Bern and Basil, etc. (to the number of four) in whole;
and two other Cantons in part, which to this day remain mixed of both. Those of
Lucern, and the rest, to the number of seven, remain wholly Papists. Geneva
also soon after followed those of the Reformed, under Farel and Calvin.

So that now this Commonwealth became divided into two factions, and thence
broke out into cruel Wars, between Zurich and the Romish Cantons. The
Protestants at the beginning are worsted. Zuinglius himself Slain in the head
of the Battle, 1531; his heart remaining whole (like Cranmers) in the midst of
the Fire, untouched, as is said, after all the rest consumed to Ashes.

At last after various successes and defeats on both sides, they agree the
business upon this condition, That every one should embrace what Religion they
liked, and force be offered to none for Religion: but that the ancient first
League should be inviolably and religiously kept and observed. And so indulging
each other the free exercise of their Religion, they break not League for that
matter, nor ever have to this day, till lately; notwithstanding any Civil Wars
of Religion or State, that have since happened. Being it seems pretty equally
poised and balanced on both sides.

But here it will not be amiss to note that these two, Zuinglius and Luther,
went two several ways, specially in point of consubstantiation, or real
presence.

Hence the Protestants became divided in Germany into Lutherans and Zuinglians,
afterward called Reformed. And the Names of Ubiquitarians and Sacramentarians
every where break forth, as has been hinted before, under Germany, etc.

Calvin afterward rising in the place and stead of Zuinglius at Geneva, added
some Tenants about Predestination, Freewill, Universal Grace, and Perseverance
in Faith, which further heightened and aggravated the Differences betwixt them.

About these arose afterward in Holland great contentions with the Arminians,
which caused the General Synod at Dort against them, An. 1618. etc.

But to return to Germany. Between these two Religions of the Protestants arose
grievous discords, not only Theological but Political. For that many would
exclude the Calvinists or Reformed, from the Peace of Religion agreed on at
first by the Augustian Confession at Ausburgh, and banish them out of Germany.
Whence those violent Tumults of Ausburg in the Assemblies, or Meetings of the
States, against the Elector Palatine 1560. and again against the succeeding
Palatine Elector, 1590. and of Lipsia and Brunswick, 1595. And this might be
one reason perhaps of the Elector, the Duke of Saxony's siding at first with
the Emperor against the Palatine, in the Bohemian-German Wars, about the year
1619. the Palatine being head of the Calvinists or Reformed, and then also the
chief of the Electoral Princes* and the Duke of Saxony of the Lutherans. But
afterward fearing the Emperors prevailing and greatness, (who had ejected the
Palatine) and the coming in thereupon of Gustavus Adolphus in defense of the
German Princes Liberties, the Elector of Saxony convocates all the Protestant
Princes at Lipsia, an. 1630. where they concluded of a defensive League against
the Emperor and Imperialists, and that Liberty was to be propagated and
maintained by Arms. But after the King of Swedes death, etc. he deserts them,
and by himself alone injuriously agrees with the Emperor against the Swede and
the rest, etc. The conditions of which Peace others also accepted and agreed
to; as before has been intimated.

In the end at the conclusion of these Wars of Germany by Munster Treaty. 1648.
This Political differance was reconciled, and they agreed and united into one
common name of the Augustan Confession at first made, in the beginning of the
Reformation, as aforesaid. The Theological differance ever since, both Princes
and Divines at this day labor hard to compose; and it is hoped that a bridle
will be put upon the Tongues and Pens of the Pastors and Professors, that they
do not condemn, but tolerate one another mutually, and friendlily dispute their
controversies amongst themselves. In France they have of late proceeded so far,
as to allow and embrace communion with them, and in their Churches and
Sacraments; (if they will) which made the Friars and Jesuits write, that they
might as well hold communion with them, and be reconciled to the Church of
Rome; for that the Consubstantiarians was as far from the Sacramentarians, as
the Transubstantiarions: but sufficiently answered. Yet the Swedes have this
present year lately decreed and enacted by Law, for all to lose their native
freedom, that shall bring up their children in any other Religion, then the
Lutheran. But to return to the Switzers.

This concord of Religion then made between them, lasted till 1654, when a new
War kindled amongst them again, for Religion, and the Protestants cruelly
Murdered and Slaughtered. For when some Families of the Canton of Switzers,
and other Cantons had embraced the Gospel, they cruelly put them to Death. This
those of Zurick, and Berne would not suffer. After long contestation, at last
they come to Arms; and fierce War begins between those of Zurick and Lucern,
till at last the French King interposing (and England) this War was composed
the same year; and the civil commotions for Religion begun, presently ended;
the Duke of Savoy likewise not only then, but since persecuted the Waldenses in
Piedmont, as there has bin hinted, etc.

An. 1663. the Duke Palatine of Newburg, by his edict commands all Protestant,
Lutheran, or Reformed, out of his Dominions. The Elector of Brandenburg by way
of retortion, in like manner, commands all Papists out of his. This should have
been noted there.

The last year upon Jealousies of the great preparations of the King of France,
against some Neighboring Countries of the Empire, and his thriving Greatness,
this Commonwealth raise an Army of fifty thousand, which chiefly diverted him
from his then intended designs.

The thirteen Cantons are Switz; Uren Underwald, first united. 1305. Lucern
added 1332. Zurich and two others, 1352. Bern, 1353. Friburg, and another,
1481. Another and Basil, 1581. and the two last, 1511. two hundred years from
the first. Seven are Papist, as Switz, Lucern, etc. four Protestant, as Zurich,
Basil, Bern, etc. (Bern is of all the largest and most potent, etc.) and two
mixed of Both.

Of Geneva.
The Sovereignty of this City, or Commonwealth was anciently in the Earls
thereof at first Imperial Officers only: but at last the haereditary Princes
thereof.

Between these and the Bishops, arose Controversies for the absolute Command.
At last the Bishops (being under the Pope, Powerful in those days) obtained of
the Emperor, to be sole Princes thereof; free from all Taxes, and not
accountable to any, but the Emperor. But to maintain it, they were fain to call
in the Earl of Savoy then; who takes upon him, first as Protector of them only;
but afterward as Lord in chief. Whence his pretense to it still. And in this
Sat it stood, till the year 1528. the Bishop being their immediate Lord, under
him as supreme.

But then Religion being altered in the Canton of Bern adjoining by Zuinglius,
etc. Viret and Farellus, endeavor it in Geneva also. But the Bishop and Clergy
oppossing it, by Persecution, Violence, and Tyranny, the People defend
themselves, and their privileges, and by force expel the Bishop, and his
Clergy. And though the Bishop made many fair overtures, yet would they never
harken to any accommodation, nor ever admit him again; and so changed the
Government of the state also; disclaiming all allegiance both to Duke and
Bishop; and standing on their own Liberty, as a free Commonwealth, like their
Neighbor Canton, who had sped so well under theirs.

Calvin afterward, An, 1536. confirmed them in these beginnings, made them
abjure the Pope, and never more to admite their Bishop, And then sets up his
Ecclesiastic Discipline, (called since Presbyterian, by the Form thereof by
Presbyteries) and gets it ratified by the Senate, An. 1637. But the next year,
with Farel, was bannished; but sued to return again, which he would not, except
they would oblige themselves solemnly to his Form of Discipline; which upon
better Consideration, they condescended to, An. 1541. And so he returns, and
his Discipline becoms established. The Tithes converted to the use of the
State; for Pensions for Ministers, etc.

Afterward comes Beza, and not only recommends it as convenient, but imposes
it as necessary, and of divine right; therein going farther and higher then
Calvin. And so by these two chiefly it spreads it self over all France,
occasioning afterward those grievous and lamentable Commotions and Troubles,
before mentioned there, as it had done likewise by Luther in Germany. Which are
not to be attributed to Religion, but the Lusts of men. For whence come Wars
and Fightings, Amulation, Strife etc. are they not from your Lusts?

For the greater safety of their State, and preservation of their Religion,
they joined themselves in a constant and perpetual League with the Canton of
Bern. An. 1528. communicating to each other the freedom of their several
Cities; and by that means reckoned in some sort of Commonwealth of the
Switzers, from the very beginning.

An. 1589. The Duke of Savoy besieged it; But they were assisted by
neighboring Princes, and States, etc. so that he could do no good upon them.

Another time the Pope, French King, Spaniard, and Savoyard had designs upon
it; But the Emperor then offered assistance Yea, sometimes the Duke of Savoy
has assisted them against others, rather than they should fall into any other
hands then his own. An. 1602. The Duke of Savoy attempts Geneva by arms.

The Duke has of later years often threatened, and made preparation against
them, but without effect. The King of France never thoroughly enough favoring
his design; or else quite against it, etc. And so flourishes in Arts and Trade,
more then Religion, which (as almost through all France) is become merely
formal; for which God is at this day purging, and fanning them in France or
else quite rooting them out. they have retained only the first form of Doctrine
and Godliness; but not the power thereof; peremtorily and stiffly rest in the
first Reformation, and would never hearken of further progress, as the manner
is of most Churches, that settle upon their old Lees once. Is it not seen even
in New England it self, as well as, etc.? from the very self same spirit that
drolls in the unlucky witty Hudibras; thinking strange, that Reformation should
be always doing, and never done.

As if Religion were intended,
For nothing else; but to be mended.
From hence no doubt was it, and a firm persuasion of the Divine Right of
Beza's Government, as if they had already attained to the perfect form, that
the French Synod at Carrenton, made a public decree against the Independency
of Churches, etc. An. 1644. whereas that form only is to be embraced and
preferred which upon all emerging curcumstances, conduces most to the present
Power of Religion, and Godliness. For that is Reformation; and not Form or
Forms, though never so pure otherwise; for that very thing makes them Impure.
Except what is plainly manifest out of Scripture, and to abide for ever. But we
intend a short History, not Dispute, etc.

Of the Commonwealth of Venice
The terrible noise of the Huns for the Conquest of Italy, and their expedition
under Attila their King, occasioned many Noble and Principal Families with
their several retinues, to betake themselves to these small Islands and
inaccessible Marshes of the Adriatic Sea; where they build for the time only,
several habitations, An. 421. and finding themselves safe and impregnable began
to build Towns, and Cities, or Corporations. An. 452. Till in the end, Aquileja
and the neighboring Cities being destroyed by Aquila, and these Barbarians,
An. 456, they then fled from all parts like Exiles hither, with a purpose and
resolution to settle; and so by the destruction of Aquileja takes such
increase, that it assumed the just form of a Commonwealth. For whom soever the
Hunnes, Goths, and Lombards (the Nations that harassed Italy) drove from the
Continent, they presently betake themselves to Venice, (now begun to be so
called, from the name of their Nation) as to an Haven of security.

They had first yearly Tribunes, according to the number of Islands into which
their City was divided, for two hundred years. then succeeded Dukes, An. 697.
but soon after changed into yearly Masters of the Militia, which lasted but Six
years, and returns to Dukes again; whose power at first was greater; but
afterward restrained to be merely Titular.

Under this form it thrived exceedingly, and became exempted from all
Jurisdiction, either to the East, or West Empire, upon the division of Italy
made by Charles the great, betwixt himself, the Popes and the Eastern Emperor,
and left wholly as a free State acknowledging no superior. For Pepin King of
France, Father of Charles, had invaded them, with a puissant Army, but was beat.

They then extend their Empire far and near by Sea and Land, through Dalmatia,
An. 990. and become freed from all Tribute to the Constantinopolitan Emperor of
the East; from whom at length they obtained it, and Croatia in full right.
Afterward Corfu and Chius, Islands. And from that time called themselves Lords
of all the Adriatic Sea; and that right confirmed by the Pope; An. 1177. for
defending the Church stoutly against the Emperor. And from that time marry the
Sea yearly with a Ring.

It got its greatest increase about An. 1204. by the chief Islands of the
Mediterranean Sea, Candy and diverse other Places, And then spread it is Empire
through the Continent of Italy, under pretext of freeing the Cities from
Tyrants, and upon the distresses of their Neighbors for their assistance, etc.

An. 1207. The Genoese, a State grown powerful by Sea, contend with them for
Sovereignty of the Mediterranean, by seven several Wars in order; vanquished
their fleet, and brought them on their knees, in so much that the Senate sent
them a blank Charter, and bid them write what conditions they pleased. And had
utterly lost all if the Enemy could have used his fortune with moderation. But
the Genoese Admiral grown proud of his advantage, and insolent with this great
success would have the City wholly at his disposal: which made the City
desperate, and venturing last Stakes, beat them, pursue them Home, and utterly
crushed them for ever after. For after many various successes and events of War
on both sides, they got, An. 1381. the better of them absolutely, and made them
quiet, never daring afterward to contend in War, but apply themselves wholly to
Gain and Merchandise. Which misfortunes were occasioned principally by their
own divisions, and endless factions, at Home, as shall be touched on afterward.

Being now Lords Paramount at Sea, they increase amain by Land, (as even now
hinted) through the factions and divisions of their Neighboring States;
whereby one piece or other is still added, either Sold or Morgaged, or given,
for their assistance. And so became possessed of innumerable places belonging
to the Empire, the Pope, Milan, and Kingdom of Naples; working their greatness
out of others ruins; which sordid kind of Merchandise drew all the Princes of
these parts afterward to make War upon them, every one to recover by strong
hand, what they had extorted from them in their necessity.

Being therefore arrived to their greatest height and power, after mighty
Tempest of War, they begin to decline from about the year, 1500. For now all
Europe conspired to extinguish this Commonwealth: the Pope being chief Author.
A League then is made between the Pope; Emperor, King of France, King of
Spain, (wherein lesser Princes joined) at Cambray in the Netherlands, An. 1508.
So secret and private, that they were oppressed before they understood it; and
so were wholly almost overcome, and scarce had any thing left but their City;
fell down at Caesar's feet, and cry Peccavi. By which submission they outlive
this confederacy, to see it desolved; and thereupon easily recover again from
each single, what they had lost to all; save Naples only. And have ever since
thought it their wisest course not to conquer, but to keep; and to become
Mediators and Reconcilers, rather then Medlers, between differing Princes; And
by privy Leagues, rather then open Wars do defend themselves against the
Emperor, and House of Austria.

Their latest Enemies, and of this age have been the Pope, the Emperor, and
above all the Turk. The Pope An. 1605. excommunicates the Commonwealth of
Venice (1) Because they would exclude all Ecclesiastics from Government (2)
because they would pay no pension to the Court of Rome, and though good
Catholics, yet little cared for the Pope.

The occasion was the difference between the State and the Churchmen. The Pope
defended the Churchmen: and the Venetians their Laws, and the right of Majesty.
They arm against the Pope* the French and Spaniard stand lookers on; the French
to quench, and the Spaniards to inflame the Fire. Only the Hollanders bring
help to the State. And at last ended the Popes ridiculous War, but with
perpetual Banishment of the Jesuits, for adhereing to the Pope, and would by
no means be entreated to tolerate them in their Territories; till ten years
since through necessities of the Turks Wars, and for favor of the late Pope,
they were restored again, but on strict conditions, etc. These Jesuits were
once also expelled out of France; for King-killing Documents, and practices:
but soon cunningly worked themselves in again there.

An. 1616, There was War between the Venetians and the Austrians. But the
Holanders helping them, Peace was soon made. The occasion was about some Rights
in Istria and Friuli, etc.

An. 1645. The Turks invade Candy, and soon make themselves Masters of all;
save the City of Candy it self; which they have maintained for above this
twenty years, against all the Ottoman Power, to the amazement of the World.
Specially this two last years close Siege.

1650. The Venetians resist stoutly against the Turks both by Sea, and Land.

1659. They do famous things against the Turks, by Sea, and Land. But too
greedy of Plunder, are driven back again to the Walls of Candy.

1661. They defeat and scatter the Turks Fleet notably, bringing relief to
Canea. Since which time they have, for this two or three years, laid close
Siege to the City, wrought their Mines, Planted their Battries, attempted
several Storms and Assaults, but still repulsed with incredible courage and
conduct to the loss of, first or last, it is thought, near 80000. of their Army,
and the Vizier himself, as is reported, lately killed in a violent onset. The
like Siege has not been known in our Age, (where all the Art, Valor, Skill and
Prudence of War, both of defense and offense, has been shown, to the wonder of
all Europe;) And perhaps hardly ever before, etc.

Of Genoa.
They were anciently a large and flourishing Commonwealth; getting their
liberty out of the divisions of Italy, among several Lords and Masters: and
were too potent for the Venetians, as before hinted: But through their own
divisions and factions, at length loose almost all their estates, to Potent
Neighbors, and enemies. The City being (miserably) torn in pieces by endless
and perpetual factions.

The Berengarij, as Kings of Italy opposite to the Emperor, made them free, An.
899. And first under Governors till 1100. Then Consuls to 1194. then Mayors.
And then added Governors of the People to them, etc. with wonderful fluctuation
and inconstancy, through the multitude of factions, etc. At last to alay the
factions between the Nobles and Commons, a Duke was created by the people (for
every two years,) of the Nobility, or the Commons, An. 1327.

Those factions were first between the Dorij and Spinoli, on one side, and the
Flischi and Grimaldi on the other. About 1174. Next of the Negri and Mollani,
against the Salvatici and Embriam, about 1289. and lastly frequently between
the Nobles and Commons; which brought them to this forementioned Government.

Which factions did so weaken them at home and abroad, that they became of far
less reputation and authority then anciently. For this great City Commanded the
Ocean, and all the affairs of Italy, in a manner once. And brought the
Venetians under, to their last gasp as it were, but through these divisions
lost almost all their large Estates, and reduced to that narrow compass, they
have now at present. For neither did their factions change or cease with their
Governments.

This Government by Dukes continued (yet not without Parties still, as between
the Spinoli and Dorij themselves, An. 1336. and the Nobility and Commons 1339.
and the Guelfi and Gibellines, etc.) till the French were called in by the
Guelfian faction, About An. 1390. for they were so broken, that they were feign
to put themselves under the protection of Neighbors, to defend that little
they had left. And so they deliver themselves up to the King of France.

Afterward, An. 1403. they put themselves under the protection of the Dukes of
Milan, which were sometimes under the obedience of the French, sometimes of the
Spaniard.

But after many changes and alterations of this kind, they are at length
restored to liberty from the Empire of the French, by Charles the fifth, An.
1522. and the New form of Government instituted by Andrea Dori, An. 1528.
called therefore, Father of their Country; and Dukes are created every two
years by lot. This lasted till 1574.

When dissentions arose between the Nobles and Commons, but composed by the
Emperor, King of Spain, and the Pope.

But not being able to preserve their freedom restored so to them; they finally
put themselves under Spain, who becomes their Protector; and thereupon, all
occasions of War borrows Money of them upon use; by which, and by their Trade
with Spain, they have exceedingly thriven, and grown excessively rich;
contenting themselves only with Riches and Trade, without aiming at Dominion:
And though far inferior to the Venetians Military Power: yet in Riches and
Wealth equal or exceed them. And as they Squeeze the King of Spain with the
Interest, so he sometimes, to be even with them, pays them without the
Principal.

Of Lucca.
Between Florence and Genoa lies this Commonwealth. It Is territories only
eighty miles compass.

In the dismembring of the Kingdom of Italy from the Emperors, into pieces, and
several parcels, they at last purchased their fredom of the Emperor.

In the beginning, it was tossed with Tyrants. The chief was Castruccio; who
had made himself absolute Master thereof. The Emperor under pretense of freeing
it, from that faction, seized on it again. But sold again to the Genoese by the
German Garrison there left, and having passed through many hands, the Emperor
got it again; of whom they once more purchased their desired liberty; and to
secure themselves, demolished the Castle built by Castruccio.

An. 1400. Paulus Guinisius tyrannized over them: But dying in prison, An.
1430. they recovered their liberty, and alone have kept it entire; of all the
Cities of Italy, (besides the Commonwealths, mentioned.)

But not finding themselves able to maintain it, they put themselves under the
protection of their potent Neighbors, changing their patrons, as most conduced
to their preservation. And seeing they could expect no help from the Emperor,
and finding no security from Genoa, and as little from Florence, both which,
they severally tried, they put themselves at last into the protection of the
Duke of Milan, and in that right are patronis'd by the King of Spain, becoming
Lord of Milan; and keeps its liberty entire from being made a prey to Princes,
not by its own proper power; but the emulation of Neighbors; yet stands in
perpetual fear of the Great Duke of Tuscany, who pretends to it, as once under
the Commonwealth of Pisa now subjected to him, etc.

Of Ragusi.
Ragusi is a free Commonwealth in Dalmatia upon the Sea side, (both Town and
Territory) not subject as all the rest, either to the Turk or Venetian; between
both preserving its, Liberty; and is a noted Empory, rich and strong in
shipping, and of great Traffic; yet of much more Wealth heretofore then at
present. And traded to most parts of the Western World, in those great Vessels,
called from hence corruptly Argusis; the last of which, their Trade decaying,
they lent to the King of Spain, for his expedition against England in 88. where
it was lost, etc.

There remains but one Sovereign Estate more, which makes a distinct Government
from all the rest; and that is a Religious, or Estate of the Church; called the
Popedom.

Of the Papality, or Popedom, and Papal Kingdom.
The Papal Power, and Principallity, is either Spiritual, or Universal Bishop,
Infallible Judge of Truth, with universal power of Excommunication, that is, as
supreme Head of the Catholic, or Universal Church: (at first founded upon
Temporal power and greatness, and upheald by it, as well as Spiritual
prerogatives, previledges, and power. Else he had never been owned as Supreme
Head, etc.) Or secondly, Temporal; and this is again founded upon the
spiritual. So that it is a mixed dominion of spiritual and temporal power. As
chief or High Priest, and a King, or temporal Prince. Which he pretends to,
over all; but enjoynes but in very little part.

This Dominion and Kingdom thus mixed, is either imperfect, and limited* as what
he has in and over other Ringdoms, (the Clergy specially) Being Head of their
Church in their Kingdoms: or perfect, absolute and Sovereign* as any other
Temporal Prince over their Subjects, as in the Estates and Lands of the Church
in Italy, etc.

The foundation, and likewise Superstructure of this Religious Principallity
(consisting of such twofold power,) was first laid, and then built and
perfected by the working of the Mystery of Iniquity, gradually. Which to scent
and hunt out, would require the History of all ages and places; and too long
therefore for this short Table: Yet to represent it obvious at one view, we can
but briefly take notice, and touch upon only the chief matters of fact, without
excursion or comments.

(1.) There was first distinction of Clergy and Laity. (2.) distinction,
degrees, and dignities of Clergy, for order and unity, to avoid schism, and
factions. (3.) These degrees, dignities, and distinctions of offices in the
Church, suited and proportioned very much, to those in State, and those
Independent on the state, thereby setting up Imperium in Imperio, or a
Government in Government. (4.) Contending for preeminence, priority,
precedence, and supremacy in the several Churches and Governments. (5.) Lastly
an universal supremacy, i. e. of one over all. First Spiritual, in
Ecclesiastic affairs. Secondly Temporal, in Politic affairs; at least aimed
at, endeavored, and pretended, and in some measure usurped, and possessed.

The spiritual supremacy began by Pope Boniface, about An. 606. under the title
of universal Bishop, to which several things conduced. (1.) First,
Accommodating the Honors and Governments of the Church, to those of the
present state, that is, of the Empire become Christians; and so mixing
Spiritual and Temporal power, and setting up Empire in Empire, under
Constantine the Great, turned Christian. For because, they must needs
acknowledge, according to that famous maxim amongst them, that the Church was
in the Commonwealth, not the Commonwealth in the Church; Therefore upon that
foundation, the Fathers in the Council of Calcedon, raised this superstructure,
that the Honors in the Church should be accommodated unto those in the State.
From whence would easily follow, an Head of the Church, as well as of the
Empire, at least as far as the Empire reach.

Hereupon Constantine dividing the Empire into fourteen Diocesses, each Diocese
into Provinces, and each Province into Cities, and placing in every Diocese a
Vicegerent, or Viceroy, in every Province, a President, and in every City, a
Defendor, or Governor: the Church accordingly institute, for every Vicegerent,
a Primate, or Patriarch, in the principal City of the Diocese; for every
President, a Metropolitan, in the Metropolis of the Province; and for every
Governor, a Bishop in every City, with permission of the superior Emperor; and
then a Pope over all would follow of course naturally, for the Emperor himself,
etc. in the chief seat of the Empire.

(2.) There was suiting Temporal means Tithes, Revenues, Riches, proportional
to the Honors, Dignities, Degrees and Offices of Government in the Church, by
the said Constantine, which a Voice in the Air proclaimed to be a Pest sown in
the Church.

(3.) The Bishop of Rome remained as yet, at least accounted the most Orthodox,
and their Religion, as in the heart and center of the Empire, seemed most to
flourish. Hence (1.) frequent appeals to this Church as the truest and best.
(2.) Thence assuming to be supreme Judge and interpretor, or moderator of
controversy, of Truth and Error, and to be vindicators of the Canon or rule of
Faith. (3.) Lastly to be the only infallible Judge and determiner, and as it
were, Rulers or overrulers of the Cannons, and to sit in the Temple of God as
God; and all to submit to the decision of the Bishop of Rome, at least
presiding in Council.

(4.) The Bishop of Romes Seat, was the Seat or metropolis of the Empire,
thereby gaining great authority, power, and privileges, and no less fame,
esteem, and repute over all the World, etc. But we can but hint things here in
brief.

(5.) The Empire began soon to be divided into the Eastern and Western. Where
upon the Eastern Bishops contend for precedence and supremacy upon the removal
of the Seat of Empire to Constantinople, and the outward flourishing of that
Church.

(6.) At last upon the further breakings and weaknings of the Empire, he
obtains of Phocas, killing the Emperor Mauritius in a tumult of the Soldiers,
the absolute supremacy, and Title of Universal Bishop, about 606. as aforesaid.

In these contentions for this spiritual supremacy, they pretended for their
Title, and claim the donation or delegation of Christ thereto, the Succession
to St. Peter, the donation and Constitution of Constantine, the first Christian
universal Emperor, etc.

Having got the Supremacy of the Church in spirituals, the same mystery of
Iniquity works for Supremacy also in Temporals, over all Emperors, Kings, and
Princes, and as it were universal Monarchy. For from universal Bishop, clearly
follows universal Excommunication, even of Emperors, Rings and Monarchs,
afterward practiced. From Excommunicating, deposing. From deposing, disposing
of Ringdoms. From disposing (to whom should he be more kind then himself)
Usurping and possessing. So naturally one Wedge drives in and makes way for
another; And having got in his head, casily wriggles in his whole Body, etc.
Besides the Church was to be preferred above the State, and the Head of the
Church, above the Head of the State. And so the Spiritual Supremacy prepares
and makes way for the Temporal* For there is no end of Pride, and Ambition, so
long as any equal or superior; unless he be above all that is called God, like
Lucifer, who would be above God himself, and all Government or subjection. But
we must not insist.

As to this Temporal Power, Particulars of fact in brief lie thus; as well as
we can observe things, as they fell out. Only first take notice the foundation
of his spiritual Supremacy a little more particular, in the order of time.

(1) By the Council of Nice in Constantines time, the four Patriarchs, of Rome,
of Jerusalem, of Alexandria, and of Antioch, were all equal. (2) about the year
410. the Bishop of Rome, would pretend to be the first Patriarch; and to that
end falsifies the Canon, and sends it to the Council of Carthage, where it was
rejected as false. (3) The Imperial Seat being translated to Constantinople,
the Bishop thereof was made a fifth Patriarch in order, and not long after the
second, the rest oppossing, etc. in vain. (4) The Lombards overcoming Italy,
and the Pope not well pleased with the Emperor, etc. The Bishop of
Constantinople, endeavors the Title of Universal Bishope, and obtains it of
Mauritius the Emperor, the Bishop of Rome, to the utmost opposing, and
exclaiming against it, as intolerable Pride, and the sign of antichrist. And
whether out of a good mind, or because he could not be uppermost himself,
laments the corruptions of the Church and Clergy. For of the Priests, he
complains, the World is full of them, and yet but few Labors in the Lords
Harvest. We take upon us the office, but discharge it who list; And I think no
dishonor to God can be showed so great, as that which it tolerated in Priests.
For they are come now to that pass, that they jear at him that lives humble,
and continently, and takes better courses, then themselves, which Mantuan
versifies on, to this purpose,

Poor Curats only keep Pope Gregory's Laws,
And fish in Rills, and Rivers surface sweep;
But fatter Jacks, and Carps, escape their paws
Mudding themselves in Coverts of the deep.
It Is Prelates sink St. Peter's larger Net,
And 'lone in the deep, all sort of Fish do get.
The said Gregory cried out, O times, O manners! The world is all on fire with
Wars; Christians are destroyed by Idolaters; Cities and Temples, by Barbarians;
and yet Priests, as it were, insulting over Calamities; usurp the names of
vanity, and make ostentation of profane Titles to themselves; thereby taxing
this arrogance of the Constantinopolitan Patriarch. (5) Phocas killing
Mauritius, and invading the Empire, to oblige the Bishop of Rome to keep Italy
the better in quiet and obedience; grants the dignitiy of Universal Bishop to
Boniface requesting it, and decrees the Sea (or Seat) of Rome, to be the Head
of all Churches. Which decrees Boniface publishes in a Synod of 62 Bishops, and
obtains it, not without opposition and contention, etc.

After these things, the Eastren or Greek Church broke off from the Latin or
Roman. Italy by several Masters began to be quite plucked from the Empire, and
Rome to come into the Popes power, and several Schisms and Heresies in the
Church, and contentions and quarrels between Popes and Emperors thereupon, etc.
The Pope alienates the Romans, or people of Italy and Rome from the Emperor,
brings them to oppose him, amidst the troubles of Italy. And condemns Emperors
of the East of Heresy, and at last excommunicates them. And out of the ruins
of Italy, works his own greatness, and by his means, and through his occasion,
a new Empire is set up in the West, by the Franks, under Charles the Great: and
great Temporal Power, and Dominion, and Estates, accrew'd to the Church; and
the Pope at length claims superiority above the Emperors themselves, etc. As
the following particulars will manifest.

After the Supremacy of the Pope thus established, the Greek Church in the
East seperates from the Roman; not only for Primacy, but other high points of
Religion; as was now said.

About the year 710. arose the controversy about Images. And about 726. the
Pope excommunicates the Emperor for his Edct against Images, who laughs at it,
and excommunicates him again for an Idolater; and forbids Revenues and Taxes to
be paid in Italy.

Upon these differences Italy is torn from the Empire by diverse Usurpers, and
Rome by the Pope, etc.

An. 712. Lands and Teritories are first conferred on the Church by some new
Conquerors, And soon after more. And at last, most he now possesses, by Pepin,
and Charles the Great.

For about this time, Charles Martel Maire of the Kings Palace, recovers France
from the Infidel Moors and Saracens; which drew the heart of the French toward
him, creating him Duke or Prince of France; and might have had the Kingdom too,
if he had been so aspiring.

Pepin his Son under color of Election is made King; The lawful King having
his Pole shaven, and feign to retire into a Monastery, the Pope approving these
proceedings; and investing and confirming Pepin in the Kingdom.

But the Pope being distressed in Italy, calls in Pepin therefore, whom he had
so obliged, to defend him, and the Church, in this Style, Peter the Apostle of
Jesus Christ, to you the most Illustrious King Pepin, and to all Bishops,
Abbots, etc. I the Apostle Peter, whose Adopted Sons you are, admonish you,
that you perfectly come, and defend this City, etc. And doubt you not, but
trust assuredly, that I my self, as if I stood before you, do thus exhort you,
etc. and that I, Peter, the Apostle of God, will at the last day yield you
mutual kindness, and prepare you Tabernacles in the Heavens.

Upon this quarrel of the Popes, Pepin and his Son Charles destroy the Kingdom of
the Lombards in Italy, and give large Territories to the Church. And these
things made way, and gave occasion and opportunity, for Charles, upon his great
conquests, to set up the German Empire of the West Franks. The Pope in requital
confirms Pepin in the Ringdom of France, gives his Son Charles afterward the
Title of most christian King, and crowns him Emperor of the Romans, at Rome An.
800. From which he would pretend to be above Emperors and Kings, and to be his
right to Crown, confirm, and depose them, if not dispose of their Kingdoms.

But Charles (at length) reassumes the ancient and original Imperial Dignity and
Power, to Govern the Church, call Councils, and order Papal Elections, and
confirm and invest them, etc. against all begun usurpations and encroachments
of the Pope; and aws Italy; And keeps the Pope still Subject; which Authority
of the Empire was pretty well upheld, during the Caroline Race.

The Pope in the mean while under pretext of the Christian Religion, and
converting Infidels and the Nations, increases in Wealth, Power, and Authority
over the World, Thundering out these Decrees of Holy Church; Out of the Church
no Salvation. The Pope's the Successor of St. Peter, the visible Head of the
Church, the Vicar of Christ on Earth. His right, as aforesaid to create,
confirm, excommunicate, and depose Kings, and dispose Kingdoms for the cause of
Religion, etc. That they are Heretics that dissent from the Roman Church, the
only true Catholic Church; or are Enemies to it, etc. Hereby the Consciences
of the Nations, Princes, and People, converted to an outward christianity, are
awed, and filled with Reverence, and Zeal for the Church; to convert, or root
out Infidel Nations, etc. and to do any Benefices, or Services for the Church;
As the most acceptable Service to Christ, whom they began to acknowledge, and
Worship, as their God and Savior.

Hence, almost all the Nations subject themselves to the Pope, as Head of the
Church, yea and in Temporals also in a great measure, nay some to hold their
Kingdoms of him, etc. As if they could not any better way recompense Christ's
Vicar, for the benefit of their Eternal Salvation, then to submit themselves,
and all theirs to his dispose. And this Opinion was brought about to prevail in
the World, that they might redeem their sins by good deeds and charitable works
and services, for the Church against it is enemies, etc. Hence Riches, and
Revenues of the Clergy, and Hosts and swarms of clergy men. Hence Churches,
Temples, Abbeys, Monastries without number, etc. for the Redemtion of Souls.
Hence Expeditions, Holy Wars, Leagues and undertakings for the Church. Hence
Pardons, Indulgences, and devices for money, etc. 'Twould be endless to mention
particulars, etc.

The Pope having thus erected his Throne in the Consciences of men, and
strongly seated there, through Ignorance and blind Zeal and Devotion, begins to
play Rex in the World.

Besides there being perpetual emulation of Princes, specially in Germany and
Italy, for Empire and Dominion, etc. The Pope interests himself in one part,
and the other for fear of excommunication, or force, becomes subject to him.

The Pope therefore now practices all ways he can against the superiority of
the Emperor, and from being any ways subject to his Authority, or control and
to undermine all Supremacy in Temporals, presuming that all power is given to
him, both in Heaven and Earth, in the Church and State, etc.

'Till in the end, they come not only to let the Emperors have nothing to do,
in their Election, Confirmation, and Investiture; but also to have all in a
manner themselves to do, in the Creation and Coronation of the Emperors.

Not long after the Caroline power and race declining, and that partly through
the Popes practices, Italy is usurped by several Tyrants against the Emperor,
and almost wholly broken from it; wherein the Popes have a finger, and make
their own advantage upon these distractions of the Empire.

For An. 884. Adrian the 3 d. denies the Emperors Authority, necessary to the
creating Popes; and about the year 900. the Empire is wholly and perfectly
translated, from the French or Caroline race, to the Germans, by Pope
Agapetus's plotting.

And about the year 1000. as some write, Gregory the fifth, appoints Electors
for choosing the Emperors, whereby they afterward became weakened, and the
Empire broken into factions and parties; and the Pope thereby to have the
better opportunity to work his own ends; and to raise his greatness out of
others ruins; striving now to be uppermost, not only in Church, but State too;
and to be above even the Emperors themselves.

For after this time open and down right Tyranny over the Emperors, begins to
manifest it self. First Pope John, takes away all choice of Popes from the
people, to the Clergy only, upon this plausible ground, That the People are to
be taught, not followed. Next Clement the 2 d. about 1047. set up by the
Emperor, against other Anti-Popes, by the Authority of a Synod, caused the
Romans to renounce by oath, the right they claimed, in choosing Popes.

Then about 1050. Leo the 9 th. invested by the Emperor is persuaded by
Hildebrand to put off his pontificalibus or papal Robes, in his journey from
Germany to Rome; to wave the Emperor, and have a new election from the Roman
Clergy; and then made Hildebrand Cardinal, who managed all at his pleasure.
After this Nicholas the 2 d. about 1060. takes away the election from the Roman
Clergy; bringing it about to a College of Cardinals also then instituted; that
is, of Spiritual Temporal, or Lincy-woollcy Princes like himself the Supreme
Emperor, as it were; for the greater grandeur and more magnificent authority of
his Almighty Holiness; who was now almost got to the top of Empire, Supremacy,
and Omnipotency. For it was decreed in Council, the Pope only to be chose by
Cardinals, whose Wounderful Worships or Eminencies might lift him up one step
higher, even as it were, into Heaven, to be God on Earth. For so some thought
fitting afterward, to style forsooth his divine Majesty, etc. And then they
order that no lay Person should confer Ecclesiaslick Investiture. For what
should the Church concern them? But yet they themselves would invest and Crown
Lay Princes. For though the State had nothing to do with the Church: yet the
Church had to do with the State, in order to the good of the Church,
necessarily. And therefore the Church must now comprehend the State; And as it
was above it; so now must rule it for it is own good; as the less worthy, for
the more worthy. And therefore the chief Churchman, must be both Supreme Bishop
and Emperor, or high Priest and King. That is, the Vicar of Christ must be like
his Master, and of the same Authority in the World, to whom all power was
given, both in Heaven and in Earth; thus the Mystery of Iniquity wrought with
all deceitfulness, etc.

Accordingly the next year, or two after, Alexander the 2 d, is elected by the
Cardinals only, without the Emperor; who complains of this as against his
right. Hildebrand stoutly maintains it, That the Emperor had no right in the
Election of Popes. Alexander inclining to yield to the Emperor, is soundly
box'd by Hildebrand, then imprisoned, and at length poisoned, to make way for
this mighty man of metal, this Universal Monarch.

Pope Hildebrand by name, who the first usurps the Power and Right, of Supreme
and Universal Monarch; as Boniface had before of Supreme, and Universal Bishop:
at least lays the foundation thereof, and endeavors it. Thus Hildebrand and
Boniface notoriously founded the Popedom, or Kingdom of the Beast.

For first An. 1073. he sets up himself without any election, either of
Emperor, or Clergy; but the thing being disputed, and the Emperor striving to
vindicate his right, He refers himself to the Emperor and Princes. The Emperor
(Henry 4 th) thereupon confirms him: but the Imperial Majesty was thereby
debased and impaired. For (2.) afterward he sets himself might and main
against him; And (3.) excommunicates, and so deposes him; and sets up
Competirors among the Princes and Electors, sending a Crown to Rodolph, or
Ralph, with a verse upon it, to this sense*

The Crown which The Rock.
Petra gave to Peter, Peter on Ralph, bestows in Meeter.

(Petra from whence Petrus or Peter, signifying, The Rock, that is, Christ.)
and makes him rebel against his Master: And likewise sets up a second after
him, when he was foiled; and involves Germany and Italy in horrible confusions,
and fractions; and Pope-like, pronounces Absolution thus, We do absolve from
their Oath of Allegiance, all that are sworn to excommunicate Princes. So
arrogating the power of deposing and making Emperors to himself, and confirming
his usurpations, by a packed Council held at Rome.

At last (4 ly) the Emperor through these means and practices deserted by all,
is fain to submit, and (to get off his excommunication and be absolved,) forced
to come suppliant (together with his Emperess, and young son, the Prince)
before Hildebrand, barefooted and bare legged, in the cold of Winter, all
ragged and torn, and with a pitious Countenance and in a lamentable posture, to
knock at his Palace Gate, and with tears beg admission, and there to wait three
days fasting, till his Highness (now as well as his Holiness) with his Minion,
Madam Mathilda, or as they called her St. Peter's Daughter, (that left her own
Husband to live with this Holy Father, and other Grandees, and Roman Courtiers)
despisingly looking out of his window, in the mean while, could be at leisure.
But at last on the 4 th. day (having, it seems, done penance enough,) being
admitted by her mediation, he imposes on him most intolerable conditions, and
unworthy of the vilest Slave, and by Oaths, Curses, and horrible imprecations,
obliges him never to receed from obedience to the Pope.

These things so transacted, not only the like are practiced by his Successors,
to the Emperors following: (as the story will show:) But not long after also,
they likewise decreed it by their Canons, and Ecclesiastic, Pontificial Laws,
viz. The Roman High Priest, to be over all, not only in Spirituals; but also in
Temporals. All Kingdoms, and Empires, to depend on him; and to order and
administer all, as judged convenient for the Church, etc. That is, to be
Supreme Head both of Church and Sat. And in one word Supreme Universal Monarch
of the World.

So that now the Pope begins to take upon him as High Emperor, or King, that is
above all Kings and Emperors, as well as High Priest, and to play Rex indeed.
At least laid the foundation, or groundwork, and first beginnings of all that
tremendous and terrible Pontificial Power and Omnipotency, (namely in Church
and State too,) afterward, over all the World.

The Pope then is now become both Universal High Priest and King; (For so their
Canons, and Canonists, would now about this time have him to be, viz. Supreme,
nay, Only Monarch of the World, and Universal over all. For so Baronius, a
chief Author, contends at this time, That none on Earth ought to be called
Monarch but the Pope.) We shall have him God too by and by. And the same
Baronius sticks not at that; but proclaims him, not only greater then Emperors
and all Kings; but also calls him, Lord God. And the Canon says no less, both
for his Kingship and Godship too. But we must for brevity, pass by these
things, etc.

After these usurpations of Hildebrands, the succeeding Popes follow his
practices toward the succeeding Emperors; and never leave excommunicating and
deposing them, till either by force, or fraud they brought them in a manner
under their Girdle, and that at last, they durst no more come into Italy, nor
meddle with the affairs thereof: but by their stirring up, or backing of
parties, and factions were finally outed of all their Provinces and Estates
there; and not only so, but in the end lost almost all their power, and
authority in Germany too; as after we shall see.

The Princes and Nations also, after grievous Wars, Quarrels and Troubles,
(caused partly by his and his Clergy's, and Zealous Religionists means,) being
by degrees brought under, and subdued, one after another, did by their consent
also, at length approve those their Decrees, and Canons; and own him as Head;
at least of the Church, to excommunicate, etc. (and consequently to depose from
Government of the Christian-Flock, as Infidels and Enemies of the Church.) And
so subjected their Kingdoms, both People and Clergy, very much in temporals
also; which they did, either for fear of the Clergy, and superstitious people,
who had a carnal and furious zeal for the Pope, as Christ's Vicar; the Church,
as out of which no Salvation; and that Religion, as most suited to the natural
man, and the peoples humors and lusts and very apprehensions of God, Religion,
and the way of Salvation, etc. or else through their own blind Devotion, and
Religious Superstition; or at best pious Veneration of the Christian Religion,
Church, and chief Pastor and Priest thereof, at their first turning Christians;
(which was for the most part but to an outward christianity neither, etc.) and
in those times of gross darkness, and ignorance of the inward Mystery thereof,
etc. All which things by the sequel of the story will more plainly appear.

And now being thus raised to an earthly power, they quite and clean forget the
salvation of Souls, sanctity of Life, and the Commandments of God, Propagation
of Religion, and charity toward men: And to raise* Arms, to make War against
christians, to invent new devises for the getting of money, to profane sacred
things for their own ends; by fine tricks, fair and specious shows, and
pretenses, to get into the affections of Princes, and oblige them to them; by
several arts and ways to keep the people in ignorance and obedience, though
with the reigning of all manner of vice; to get all the chief Preferments,
Benefices and Revenues of the Church into their disposal, and the whole Army,
and interest of the Clergy, at their service and devotion, in these corrupt
ways, and for such like unworthy ends; to possess the Consciences of men with
an opinion of their infallibility, and undoubted power, not only in Heaven and
Earth, but also over Pur gatory and Hell; viz. to bind, and loose, to save or
damn; and that for money, and filthy lucres sake; And lastly to make the whole
Gospel, and Christian Religion, a pretext only to get and increase Church.
Power, Dominion and Riches, yea and with the Goods and Treasures of the Church
to enrich their kindred, and base children, and raise their families, etc. I
say these and such like things and practices, become their only study and work,
and the great business of (that is of him, that would be accounted) the chief
Shepherd and Bishop of Christian Souls, etc. We will instance only in some of
the most notorious particulars, and matters of fact, as they occur in time, by
the usurping and incroaching Popes, following; from this Hildebrand, founder of
the Popedom, as has been shown* about* the year 1073.

Next about the year 1090. his successor Urban the 2 d. excommunicates the
Emperor likewise and deposes the Antipope by him chosen; and thereby sets all
christiendom in a combustion, for these two Popes. Therefore in stead of Urban
called Turban (or disturber) And then likewise by his Religionists and Clergy,
stirs up, and inflames all christendom with a zeal, for that bloody Holy War
for recovery of the Holy Land from the Saracens.

Which War consisted of twelve expeditions, (and of many hundred thousands at a
time for the space of above 200 years together, to the ruin of so many
millions of Lives) with the Arms first of the Cross, and afterward of a Globe
too, upon their Habits, signifying that Christ crucified (And to be sure the
Pope as his Vicar) ought to be Lord of the whole World.

To allay the quarrels of Christian Princes at home, this Cross is often
preached up, with wounderous Zeal. So that the main Religion of the World, (the
Rulers and People,) generally in those days, lay mostly in outward Christianity
against Infidels* Turks, and Pagans; and enlarging of this Visible Church, as
out of which no Salvation, etc.

But in the mean while this exhausive War of Christendom, every way made for the
Papal Interest: The Popes having thereby greater opportunities to work their
own ends out of poor Christians misguided Zeal; and by weakening and diverting
the Princes, to strengthen and settle themselves: for during all this time most
cruel and perpetual wars continued at home, between the Popes, and Emperors,
for Imperial, and Papal power, and privileges; the Pope: still usurping and
domineering every day more and more.

About 1100. Paschal the 2 d, excommunicates the said* Emperor Henry the 4 th*
also; sets his only son Henry the 5 th* against him, to persecute him to death*
who by the Bishops is persuaded to perjury also against his own Father* whom
the Pope caused, after he was dead, to lie likewise unburied, five years
together. He denied the right of investiture of Bishops to the Emperor and
other Imperial privileges. And then excommunicated the son, now as devoutly as
he had done the Father. And entertained and upheld Anselme Archbishop of
Canterbury in rebellion against his Sovereign.

This Paschal also first of all, leaves off closing his letters with the year
of the Emperor, and substitutes the year of his Popedom.

An. 1120. Calixtus the 2 d. made Gregory (set up Antipope by the said Henry
the 5 th.) to ride through Rome upon a Camels back, with his face toward the
Tail, and the tail in his hand for a bridle. To show, no doubt, that he held up
the Tail (Caesar) and not by the Head, (St. Peter) etc. and then thrust him
shaven into a Monastery.

About 1150. the Papal Canons and Decretals are first hatched; which afterward
in process of time were brought into use, and set up and prevailed in the World
and the Church, in opposition to the Civil and Imperial Law; and chiefly to
advance the Pontificiall Omnipotency, as themselves phrase it. And this Canon
Law or Divinity (not the Law of God,) became in time almost the only divinity,
and study of the Prelates, and great Church men, who studied little else, then
to gain and increase Church Power, and Treasure; to get all into their
clutches, and to keep all people in slavery, and subjection to their Authority
and Religion.

And for others there began to creep in a Scholastic Divinity, and Philosiphy,
out of the Fathers, and Aristotle together, not the Scripture: And this
Philosiphic-divinity brought all confusion of Opinions, and learned Ignorance
and Error into the world. And for the more piously inclined and devout, a
practical Divinity of Monkish Legends, or pious Tales, and at best but devout
stories of the Sanctimonious lives of Saints, etc. all which still made for the
Pope.

About 1160. Alexander the 3 d. opposses the Emperor, Frederick the first and
excommunicates him, thundering out curses, and raising War against him every
where, and by the French Kings favor settles himself in the Popedom. The
Emperor notwithstanding takes Rome, and drives the Pope to Venice for
protection, and sends his Son, with an Army after him, whom they beat and took
Prisoner near Venice. The good Father therefore to preserve his Son, is forced
to submit, and to prostrate himself before the Pope openly in the great Church
at Venice, to kiss his feet. Where setting his foot on the Emperors neck, he
impiously and imperiously was not ashamed to say, Thou shall tread upon the
Lion, and the Adder, and the Dragon shall thou trample under foot. And when the
Emperor took the boldness to reply and say, I do it not to you, but to Peter;
The proud Beast goes on, To Peter and to me too. And from this time forth, and
for evermore forsooth, it must be an high favor to kiss his Toes, as much as
other Princes hands. And all this is, Your most humble Servant of the Servant
of God, (his Title once) come too.

Beggars, of all men, proudest are,
When once they got into the chair,
This Pope likewise upheld Thomas a Becket, against his King, here in England;
and made the King submit to the lash, for St. Thomas's death, (for his Holiness
Sainted the Traitor) and upon his submission granted to him and his heirs, The
title of the Kings of England. (As if they never had it since the Conquest of
right before.) Hence it is observed, says the Popish writers, That all Kings
of England must acknowledge the Pope for their Landlord. And in like manner his
predecessor Hadrian the 4 th. about 1555. gave Ireland to the Kings of England,
for a penny to be paid yearly out of every house; (as much as a shilling now.)
But As long as there is a Goose or Gander,
We must remember Alexander.


If it were but for this verse sake, which ends a copy sent to him, by a
Monkish Rimer, little better in the Latin.

About 1190. Celestine Crowns the Emperor with his foot, and then spurns it off
again; with this saying, By me Kings reign. He set all Princes almost together
by the ears, that Rome might gain with siding with one part, or the other, and
making them friends again. And this was, and is a constant practice with them,
and a principal matter, whereby they stand. For if one deserts them, another
still upholds them, for their own interest which is mingled with the Papal,
over all the World.

About 1200. Innocent the third raised the Otho's against Philip the Emperor,
resolving, that he would uncrown him, or be uncrown'd by him, because chose
without his liking. And as soon as Otho himself was made Emperor,
excommunicates him too* as also King John of England; Peter King of Aragon, and
Raimund Earl of Tholoss. And decreed in a Council held at Rome, from thence
forth the Pope to have the correction of all Christian Princes, and no Emperor
to be acknowledged, all he had sworn obedience to him. In pursuance whereof
deposes the said King John, and gives away his Kingdom to the French King;
causes him to surrender his crown to his Legate; interdicts him the Kingdom for
six years together; and makes him stand to his mercy to have it again; and upon
the restoring to make it Tributary, fining it, at the yearly rent of 8000.
Marks; to be held of the Pope in fee-farme, And his usurpations were so great
here in England, That the Nobles writ in their Letters to their Bishops, To
such a Bishop, or such a Chapter, who had rather dye, then he ruined by the
Romish Taskmasters. Likewise the said King of Aragon, Naples, and Sicily, etc.
was forced also to subject his Kingdoms, as feudatory to the Church of Rome,
and to be held of the Pope.

And now also was brought up that Idol of Transubstantiation, and adoration of
the Host, to subject the people to a more divine Reverance, and external
devotion, and deportment, toward their Holy things, and mysteries; (which is
wonderful to behold even to this very day) and to make their Religion and
Priests more Venerable; at least this has been the efect thereof; What matter
of Zeal, Fury, and Persecution this became afterward, all stories and ages
ring of; as if it had been to deny God indeed, and Christ, and all Religion, to
deny this their Idol God; they had and have to this day so possessed people
with such a fond Imagination. God also giving them up to believe lies, and to
err concerning the Faith, mistaking the Letter, for the Spirit.

Also that devise of Auricular confession was introduced about this time; which
aws the people exceedingly likewise.

Moreover about the same time arose those deadly seuds, between the Papaline
Guelphs and Imperial Gibelines, (or if you will Elfs and Goblins, so called as
is thought from their terrible doings, etc.) which destracted all Italy; and
contiuned for many ages after; which factions were stirred up by the Pope and
his Agents means and practices, etc.

It was about the year 200. likewise, that Philip King of France was
excommunicated; and then it was said, In the year of the Reign of Christ, not
of Philip.

Also 1204. the Sea of Constantinople and the Greek Church and Emperor, became
subject to the Roman, for above 30. years, through their projects, etc. And
about 1220. the East as well as Westren Emperor, was crowned at Rome by the
Pope; no longer now as a Servant, you may now well think, but their Lord, and
Superior; by what has been already rehearsed. For in this Popes time, some
thought fitting to make this Emblem; There are two great lights. The Sun, that
is, the Pope; and the Moon, that is the Emperor. Nay the high Papalists would
have none to be truly Monarch, and Sovereign, that is absolute and Independent,
on any other as Supreme, but the Pope, as before has been intimated.

About 1240. the twentieths of Ecclesiastic Revenues are obtained for the
Pope. It came afterward to the tenths, nay the fifths, and fourths too in some
Kingdoms, etc.

About 1245. Innocent the fourth excommunicates the Emperor Frederick, the
fourth time (having been three times before by former Popes) though he had been
his greatest friend; and deposes him, the King of France in vain interceeding;
and sets up Anti-Cesaers, because his Highness forsooth, would not stope low
enough to his Holiness; and in the end because he would not bring him enough
under, got him poisoned.

The four orders of the begging Friars, viz. the Dominicans, Franciscans,
Carmelits, and Augustins, began to swarm under him, as their great Patron; and
by their voluntary humility, and external devotion to uphold this their exalted
and triumphant Church, and Religion.

This Pope demanded also the payment of the Twentieths, before granted, and
afterward of the Tenths of all Revenues and Profits of the Church, adding
grievous threatenings, if they were not paid; and by his Legate in Poland, one
fifth of all: Afterward he persuaded the French King to make War against Henry
the 3 d. of England, and to make him either yield to all the Pope demanded, or
to drive him out of his Kingdom.

An. 1255. The King of Lithuania being converted to Christianity is crowned by
the Pope, and subjects his Kingdom to him. For if they would be Christians,
they must all acknowledge Christ's Vicar, or else be Infidels still; for all
other Christianity now was almost fled the Earth.

An. 1260. The Pope translates the Kingdom of Naples, and Sicily, which the
King of Aragon had made feudatory to the Church, (as before etc.) and which the
former Pope also would have sold to Henry the 3 d. of France from the right
owners; and bestows it on the French most bountifully.

And now was the Pope come to the hight of power, riches, and authority, and to
have mighty interest in the World; and now all the Nations, worshipped the
Beast. The Princes generally began to make appeals to the Roman Court; and the
people were devoted to the Romish Laws, Customs, and Religion. The Pope had now
the creating of Electors of the Empire, almost as he listed; and consequently
the Emperor, in a manner at his beck.

About 1270. Rodolph of Napsburg (or Ausburgh) the first of the Austrian House,
was afraid to go to Rome to take his Crown, or to meddle with Italy; Because,
as he said, The Fox, saw no safe return of his Predecessors, out of the Lions
paws. And to be quiet in Italy, he granted Romania, and Ravenna to the Pope.
An. 1279.

About 1280. The Popes having raised and fomented a quarrel, between the King
of France and the King of Aragon, for the Kingdom of Sicily, whence grew the
Massacre of the French, called the Sicilian Vespers, (wherein upon the toll of
a Bell, all sorts of French were cruelly butchered) Pope Martin the 4 th. for
this excommunicates, i. e. deposes Peter of Aragon and the whole Kingdom. (Had
they done it on the Popes behalf, it is like it had passed for a noble action,
as many worse have done.) The King he contemned the excommunication; But the
Sicilians; they, it seems, could not be quiet in their consciences, or rather
in their Kingdom, for so bloody a fact, without doing penance to the Pope, and
comimg to ask pardon of him; which their Ambassadors did, by delivering their
Supplication in this manner, saying three times, O* Lamb of God, that take
away, the sins of the World, have mercy upon us. And this was an expedient
Salve, on both sides, to be quiet. They hitherto have played Rex, that is King;
now it seems, they would act God on Earth too.

An. 1283. The said Pope sent his Legate into Germany to gather Moneys, etc.
and three or four years after requires one fourth of all Ecclesiastic Revenues
of Germany, degrading a Bishop for deposing it; and also within a year more,
requires it again. He also set a Vicar of the Empire over Italy: For now the
Emperors durst come no more thither, nor no longer meddle with the affairs
thereof; loosing almost all their right, power and possessions there.

An. 1293. To the inauguration of Celestine the fifth, formerly a devout Monk,
two hundred thousand people resort. But he was too honest and simple an Hermit
to hold it out above a year. For resolving to be strict in reforming the
Church, he was quelled by one that fained himself an Angel, speaking through a
Trunk in a Wall Celestine, Celestine, g ve over the Chair; for it is above they
ability; (He meant sure Honesty.) Whereupon he would not hold it, though the
French King much persuaded him; and decreed, That the Pope might quit his
place, and turn Hermet (and honest) again; which he did to that end; but was
hindered, imprisoned and made away by the impostor, that had deceived him, viz.

Boniface the 8 th. who, the next year 1294. entered like a Fox; but reigned
after like a Lion, and at last dyed wretchedly like a Dog. He exempts the
Clergy, by his general Bull, or zeal, from all taxes and payments to temporal
Princes. Which was complied with by the Clergy of England, etc. He threw ashes
into an Arch Bishops Eyes on Ashwensday, because he was a Gibelline, and took
the Emperors part; excommunicated Philip King of France, and gave away his
Kingdom to the Emperor; and boasted, That all powers were subject to him.
Instituted the first Jubilee of Triumph therefore; when in that great concourse
of people (and to make it great indeed, every one that did repair to it, was to
have a plenary remission of all his sins; What better invitation, could there
be devised, besides the fine sight to be seen) The Pope (carried in Procession
in a Chair of state; wirh a Sumptuous Canopy born over his Head by Kings, or
Nobles, for so he is in the year of Jubilee,) showed himself openly, before
them all, one day in the habit of a Pope, and the next, in the habit of an
Emperor, and every day caused two Swords to be carried before him, in token,
that all power Ecclesiastical and Civil, did belong unto him, Yet King Philip
in contempt of his Bull of excommunication, gave the proud Fool his own,
writing back thus, Let your mighty Foolship know, that we are subject to none
in Temporals.

And from this time forward the year of Jubilee has been used, as a constant
Fair, as it were, for the trade of Indulgence;, Agnus Dei's, and other fine
Sanctified knacks, That so the people invited thereby, to come or send from all
parts to Rome to spend their Money, might not have nothing for it. This was a
pretty step toward making pardons and indulgences directly sealable
afterward. And that it might not be so long a coming, they not long after
reduced it, from every hundredth to every fiftyeth, and at last to every
twentyfifth year.

In his time about the year 1300. the forementioned factions of the Guelphs,
and Gibellines, the one for the Pope, and the other for the Emperor, grew to
their height, and have lasted all ages ever since, almost to ours more or less.

Not long after Clement the fifth removed the Sea from Rome to Avignon in
France, where it continued seventy years. His inauguration was ennobled with
the presence of several Kings and Princes; in which Pomp, he lost a Carbuncle
out of his Hat, valued at a great rate. He rooted out the Knights Templars, as
too good for his turn; excommunicated the Florentines, Luccans, and Venetians.
Whose Duke, he made come, and beg pardon, chained like a Dog, and fed under his
Table. He excommunicated the Emperor of the East because he would not subject
himself, and the Greek Church to the Roman, nor suffer appeals to Rome, as his
Father before him had done. And likewise durst, neither fearing God nor man,
forgive presently the Monk that then poisoned the Emperor of the West in the
Host, etc.

They were now arived to their utmost height, and became so insolent and
imperious, that they could be endured no longer. So that about this time there
were several Meetings and Assemblyes of the Empire against their intolerable
domineerings.

An. 1333. The Pope leaves at his death, a vast treasure of twenty milions of
Crowns, which they had amassed thus together, by their extortions, and devises.
For all things e're this time had been become saleable at Rome.

Now it was that the Emperors, wholly in a manner, depended on the Popes will
and pleasure; who assume right and Sovereignty over the Cities Subject to the
Empire in Italy. And the Emperors give up, as it were, all their Power and
Authority, so long contested for, to the Popes. For Clement the 6 th. after
1340. to diminish still more and more the Emperors Right and Authority, created
Vicount Vicars to rule the Empire. Yet the Emperor again in requital,
instituted other Vicars to govern the Church. This and other things so netled
him, that he would never be reconciled with the Emperor, except he put himself,
and all his, into his Holiness disposal. Which for quietness sake, and to
prevent the shedding of Christian blood, the Emperor does: The Princes of the
Empire exclaim against the Popes tyrannical usurpations. The Archbishop of
Mentz is deposed for but speaking on the Fmperors behalf: and the other
Electors, partly bribed, and partly awed, agree to set up his Son. Thus the
Empire went down, and the Popedom up. And then cozens the world with his year
of Jubilee, reduced to every fifth, and the fine trick of Indulgences, to
please the people, and drive a gainful trade to the Popes. He gave away the
Canaries also to King Lewis. And fifty thousand persons had access to his
presence, in one day, and dismissed again.

About 1352. The Emperor, to gain Pope Innocent the 6 th's favor, grants him
in a manner all his Authority in Germany; and three years after is crowned at
Rome, by the hand of the Popes Legate; (himself residing still at Avignon)
promising not to stay one day longer at Rome, (now the Pope was absent) then
after his Coronation.

About 1380. Clement the 7 th. is set up Antipope, by a company of French
Cardinals against Urbane the 6 th. for being against returning to Avignon. The
French and Spaniard side with Clement: the Italians, English, Dutch, etc. with
Urbane. Rome is miserably plundered by Clement, and his party. One Popes Bulls
roared against the others. And all Christendom divided. This schism lasted
near fifty years.

An. 1404. Innocent the 7 th. demands the Moiety of Ecclesiastic Revenues; but
is stoutly denied both in France and England.

About 1417. Upon the appearance of Wicklif, Hus Jerome of Prague, Savanarola,
etc. in the world and their followers, it is decreed in Council, That a Council
was above the Pope. And 1431. The Council of Basil, summon the Pope, and put
forth a bold Sanction, called therefore the Pragmatical Sanction, against him,
and depose him

About 1464. Paul the 2 d. sells all for money. Reduces the Jubilee to every
twentyfifth year to get the more, to maintain Sumtuous and Pompous Habits for
himself and Cardinals; and Diamonds, Saphirs, Emeralds, Jaspers, Pearls, and
all precious Stones, for his Mitre, etc.

An. 1492. The Pope gives the East and West Indies to the Spaniard, and the
Portugal, and divides the whole, (new world at least,) betwixt them, as the
first discovers; and not long before gave the title of Catholic King to Spain,
for the conquest of the Infidel Moors in Spain.

An. 1503. Julius the 2 d. A Martial Pope, passing over the Bridge of Tyber,
brandished his Sword, and threw his Keys into the River, saying, That if Peter's
Keys would not serve his turn, Paul's Sword should. And yet they have done more
in the world by the Keys, then ever by the Sword. He excommunicated the King of
France, who regarded it not; but printed Money with this Inscription, I will
destroy Babylon. He was in the end deposed likewise by a Council in France,
like as the Council of Basil had done before, to one of his predecessors, as
was hinted.

An. 1512. Leo the 10 th. an Atheist, hugged and blessed himself, as it were, to
think What great Riches, that fable of Christ had got them. And yet not enough
for his turn, and to supply his vile and enormous extravagancies. Wherefore he
goes about to raise sums of money by common, open, and notorious sale of
Indulgences and Pardons in Germany. (They were (...) ous they are still. By the
fullness of power, which he that raigns above, has given to me, whom alone he
has set over all Nations and Kingdoms, to pull up and pluck down, to destroy,
etc. (The Devil began to rage now, to see his Kingdom go down so;) We depose
Elizabeth from the right of her Kingdoms; and we absolve all her Subjects, from
all manner of Oaths of Allegience, which they have sworn unto her. He does all
he can likewise by Treasons, Murders, and Poisons against her, and all Princes
inclinable, or but favorable to the Reformation. His instructions by his
Legate, to the Emperor was, Neither Faith, nor Oaths to be kept with Heretics,
etc.

An. 1572. Gregory the 3 d. celebrated the horrible Massacre of Paris, with
public Triumph at Rome: and sung the Te Deum, etc. therefore. For they had
hopes to have quite rooted out the Protestants.

After 1580. Sixtus the 5 th. excommunicates Henry the 3 d. of France, for
killing the Guises; and making use of the Protestants on his side. Commends the
Murdering of him in a set speech, amidst his Cardinals; Blesses the Banner of
Spain against England in the famous expedition, in eighty eight, to ill
purpose. For his Benediction proved a Curse. Quarrelled afterward with Spain
for Naples, etc.

About 1590. Gregory the 4 th. exhausted the Treasury of the Church in the Wars
of France, against Henry the 4 th. and the Hugonots. Cursed, that is,
Excommunicated that King for an Heretic and Apostate from the Church; and sent
his Nephew General to the French Wars, against the Protestants.

An. 1592. Clement the 8 th. never lets the said King to enjoy quietly his
Kingdom, 'till he brought him to turn Catholic again, to be settled therein;
But yet lost his life notwithstanding by the Jesuits practices, for not being
good enough to them, and too good to the Protestants still. For because he was
not turned such a zealous Papist, as to be absolved from his excommunication by
the Pope; but that one of his own Bishops served his turn well enough;
therefore he must pass for a Tyrant, and be stabbed: And yet to absolve him
after he was dead, (when be sure he could do no more harm, nor ever turn again)
for turning Catholic in his life, Two Ambassadors must be sent to Rome, to be
whipped by the Pope in his stead, who at the end of every verse of the eleventh
Psalm, gently strikes with his Rod, the prostrated Suppliants. He
excommunicated-likewise the Duke of Ferrara, and added his Dukedom to St.
Peter's Patrimony, as a good parcel of Land. And would not grant the title of
King, to the great Duke of Moscovy for inclining to the Greek Church, more
then theirs. And lastly endeavored before hand to prevent King James
succession to the Crown of England, hoping to reduce it again to the Church, as
they had done before Queen Mary.

An. 1595. Leo the 11 th. had this Luciferian Motto over his triumphal Pageant,
Worthy is the Lion (his name) by virtne of the Lamb, to take the Book, and open
the Seals thereof. They cannot leave their Pride and Blasphemy, 'till they are
quite whipped out of Gods Temple, where they sit as Gods. Nay yet more.

His successor Paul the 5 th. had such inscriptions, as these, given him. To
Paul the 5 th. Vice-God. Most Invincible Monarch of the Christian Commonwealth,
and most Zealous Conservator of Papal Omnipotency. And caused this Plate to be
marked with this Inscription, Cousecrated to the Eternity of the Burgesian
Family. But higher was that upon the Gates of Tolentum in Italy, To Paul the
third the most high and mighty God on Earth; though one should have thought,
that the Reformation then begun in the World, out of policy should have taught
them, more Modesty. For the Devil when ill at ease, a Monk would be, etc.
Surely Lucifer, that fell from Heaven (asspiring to be above, God, as the Pope,
all that is called God,) was the first Pope in Heaven, and the Father of these
his Sons on Earth.

About 1605. He excommunicated the Venetians, for maintaining stoutly their
Rights of state, and withstanding his incroachings; whereupon War insued;
Baronias exhorting the Pope thus, Arise and Eat the Venetians; as if it had
been as easy, as to eat his dinner. But he found them a tough Morsel, which
he could not get down; and so was held to hard meat. But a Cardinal of France
made up the business as well as he could; but could not without enough
dishonor to his Popeship. He by briefs, or writings, (sent to the Loyal
Catholics, of England,) forbad the Oath of Allegiance to King James from his
own Subjects. He laid a great Tax also on the Clergy in Italy, to uphold the
good old Catholic cause, in the Wars of Germany, about 1618. and a new Order
of Knighthood was erected at Vienna, the Imperial Court, for all Heroic
Catholics, under the Patronage of the blessed Virgin, St. Michael, and St.
Francis, to root out the Heretics. But all would not do. For they increased
and multiplied. The Powder plot in England was also in the beginning of his
Popedom, set on foot by the Jesuits, and their accomplices, in England. An. 1605.

An. 1621. Gregory the 5 th. elected by way of adoration; instigates the French
King against the Protestants. Canonizes Ignatius, the founder of a company of
Incendiaries, that is Jesuits (for so they have proved ever since.) Baptized
with not the Holy Ghost, but with Fire; answerable both to his Name, and Motto,
and their Natures. Quarrels with the Venetians, for entertaining Greeks, now
they had no wars with Infidels, the Turks. To whom the Venetians wisely
replied, That they held all Infidels that opposed their Commonwealth.

An. 1623. Twenty four of the Cardinals grew sick upon the quarrelsome and
ambitions choice of Urban the 8 th. whereof ten lost their lives, with diverse
of others. Father Paul a venerable Religious Monk, who stood up high for his
Venetians, against the Jesuits, who pragmatically stood up for their Pope, (for
which they were deservedly banished by the State;) not till now smarts, and is
wounded for his crime of Loyalty to them, and petty treason as it were against
the Jesuits; etc. this Pope made War against the Duke of Parma, and Florence,
for the Dukedom of Castro, etc. And no doubt he had an underhand, or little
finger at least, in the bloody Massacre of Ireland 1641. by the Catholics.

Afterward Innocent the 10 th. pronounces void, and goes about by his Legate
to null the Peace of Germany made at Munster 1648 between the Protestant and
the Papal princes, (where the Protestants, both Calvinists as well as
Lutherans, were esserted into full and free liberty of their Religion;) as
hurtful and dangerous to the Church forsooth. But Germany no longer now fears
their loud Bulls roarings and bellowings as formerly; and do but laugh at such
the vanity of his Omnipotent Impotency.

After 1654. Alexander the 7 th. determines new Articles of Faith against the
Jansenist's, and condemns them for Heretics. The Church of France begin to
vindicate their Liberty against such new decrees, and power of the Pope, It
grows to a great faction between them and the Jesuits. The Pope and his
Instruments, make the King look upon them as a dangerous Sect, and as it were a
new kind of Calvinistical Papists, that would both join against the true French
Catholics, and endanger France, both Church and State, as much as formerly
those Hugonots. But they increased notwithstanding, and several Bishops, Clergy
men, and others adhered to them against the Novel Usurpations and
determinations of the Pope, who would feign have been accounted infallible in
his Court and packed Consistory at Rome, without a general Council. And fowl
work had like to have ensued; but that the King and Pope together, have lately
within this year or two, devised an expedient latitude, for the dissenting
Bishops and Leaders; least the rent should be made greater, willing to make use
of any Salvo for such a Sore, etc.

An. 1662. The Popes Guards, (by his Brothers design against the interest of
France) assaults the French Ambassador; which was connived at by the Pope, and
his Brother, (who set it on foot) countenanced, and due Justice evaded. The
King demands satisfaction; prepars a great Army to enter Italy, (whereof some
had in a manner begun to enter.) which made the Pope tremble; and the French
sing heartily, Rome is ours already etc. yea the grand Ball at Court (since
become a common Tune or Air too in England) began thus,

Great King will you profane
Your Rapier in vain,
Your young brave Conquering Blades,
Against Chaplains only with Beads, etc.
But his Holiness wisely submits, and drives on a Treaty for Satisfaction and
Accommodation, and thereby condescended to set up at Rome a Pillar of
Remembrance, as it were, for the Injury, and Affront offered. Upon which
submission, the King of France recieves his Ambassador through all his
Kingdom, with extraordinary Magnificence, and ever since has been very kind to
his Holy Father; and lately out of complement granted the present Pope leave,
to take down this too lasting a Monument of their reproach: but all no doubt
for further ends to himself, which he is driving on in the world, etc.

And while the King was thus good to the Church. The Pope takes that
opportunity, to see if he could get to be owned, as infallible in France, and
supreme Judge and determiner of Controversies, and differences of Opinions in
Religion; finding by woeful experience, they should never have that property of
a Vice-God, Omnipotency in the, World, before they had thisof Infallibility.
This was toward, and in the year 1666. by Alexander the late Pope. But that
year has not proved so kind and lucky to their projects, as they looked for.
Nor could they fool France into such a praemunire.

This Pope has had little to do yet, but patch up the Jansenian Breaches, to
avoid further mischief; (as but now hinted.) To mediate between France and
Spain, as much as he could; and to invite Princes against a less worse Enemy to
Christendom, than himself, the Turk; who never did it half so much harm; nor
ever will. Yet the Noble Venetians deserve Succor, and the Pope destruction.

Yet so it is that the Kings, Princes, Clergy, and People of the Earth, have so
drunk of, and been intoxicated with the Cup of Romes Fornications, that
notwithstanding all the evil they have suffered by her Domineering and
Tyrannizing over them, their Kingdoms, Subjects and People, both Soul and Body;
as by the foregoing story may in part appear; yet they love to commit folly and
abomination with her still; and her fine and goodly Religion, so carnal, so
pleasing and suitable to flesh and blood. But in the end, sure God will put it
into their hearts (when he shall once have opened their Eyes, to see what
miseries and mischiefs, she has brought upon all Kingdoms and Nations, and the
whole World too, at least occasionally, or even but to see their own interests
and concerns) to hate the Whore and burn her with fire.

Daemonis Ira premens, odijs ac fraudibus orbem
Implet, nec damnis hominum exsaturata quiescit.
The Devil filled with Rage, the World does fill,
With Wars and (tricks)
Cheats, to rule it at his will;
And for more mischief is more greedy still.
The Devil,
Of Evil,
Will never have his fill.
This is the Kingdom of the Beast, and the Synagogue of Satan; or a General
draught of the hellish Hierarchy of Rome, or Popedom of King and Priest Lucifer
on Earth.

The pretended grouuds and foundations of their Popedom, Spiritual, have been
already hinted before. Those for their Temporal are much of the same nature,
viz. That the Pope is Christ s, that is God's Vicar, or Vicegerent; and so not
only Viceroy, as it were, but Vice-God on Earth, which title they dare own;
That He Is Visible Head of the Church, and so of the State too, in order to the
Church. For that the Church is above the State; The Head of the Church above
the Head of the State. The State for the Church, not the Church for the State;
and therefore dominion to be founded in Grace, etc. And so no Enemies of the
Church, Infidels, or Heretics to be capable thereof; but to be destroyed, and
rooted out, etc. (which are, all they shall judge so.) Likewise many Rights,
Privileges, and Favors granted by Constantine the Great, Charles the Great,
and other Emperors and Kings. As also usurped and long permitted, or connived
at Customs, Examples, Presidents, etc.

But in one word, an outward Carnal Religion in the Letter without the Spirit;
The form of Godliness without the Power. Christians both Pastors Preachers and
People, first not having the Spirit, nor the wisdom from above, namely the
wisdom of God, and the Power of God; but the wisdom of man, or that which is
worse, the wisdom from beneath, earthly, sensual, and devilish. Hence
Ceremonies without substance; external and carnal Ordinances, Commandments,
and Inventions of men, in the Worship and Service of God; Love of the World,
and things of the World; Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, and Voluptuousness; and
Preaching, and professing Religion for such ends; and taking all up from
tradition, authority, and forefathers, etc. Whence contentions and divisions
about needless Opinions and Ceremonies; for Dignity, Superiority, and
Supremacy; for Riches and Honors, etc. and then a pompous, gaudy, and merry
Religion, to please the people, and gratify the outward man; to maintain and
uphold the greatness, power, pomp, and pleasures of the Clergy; through the
secret and mysterious working of Iniquity, in men of corrupt minds, and erring
concerning the Faith, and the Truth; which was after godliness, etc. with some
frightful devices to scare and awe their guilty, fearful, and slavish
Consciences; and other petty ones again to pacify, and allay them; mistaking
the whole Mystery of Godliness, and inverting it into a Mystery of Iniquity,
one degree of Error and Corruption bringing in another; I say all this; is the
foundation and Superstructure of this Kingdom of darkness and of Hell. For the
natural man perceives not the things of God, and of the Kingdom of God.

As for the Popes Temporal Principality, and Sovereign Estate in Rome, and
Italy, (and Avignon,) called the Estate or Land of the Church, and St. Peter's
Patrimony; The foundation thereof as a peculiar and distinct Sovereignty apart;
besides the forementioned grounds of the donation of Christ to St. Peter, (and
his Successors) as his Sea, etc. it depends over and above, on the forged and
counterfeit donation of Constantine; on the real donation of Pepin and Charles
the Great, etc. on the Countess Mathilda's last Will and Testament. (All which
gave liberally to St. Peter;) and lastly on Usurpation, Arms, and Violence.

And notwithstanding it is convenient situation for the command of all Italy,
and the perpetual fractions there formerly; yet they could never so wisely
manage their Pope-craft as yet to possess themselves, like the ancient Romans,
of the whole; which remains divided among many Princes and Sovereign Estates.
As the Estate of ancient Lombardy, (under which is contained the Dukedom of
Milan subject to Spain, the Dukedom of Mantua, Modena, Montferrat; and the
Principality of Piemont, which belongs to Savoy) The great Dukedom of Tuscany
or Florence. The Lands or Estate of the Church, or the Popes Patrimony. The
Kingdom of Naples, with Sicily, and Sardinia under Spain. And lastly, The
Commonwealth of Venice, Genoa and Lucca.

An. 1595. The Pope challenged the Dukedom of Ferrara, for want of lawful Issue
in the right of the Church, and partly by force, partly by composition, united
it for ever to the Sea of Rome.

An. 1626. The great Dukedom of Urbin foremerly made fudatory to the Church,
and held thereof in homage for want of Heirs, of right fell to the Pope, etc.

About 1647. The Pope seized on the Dukedom of Castro, from the Duke of Parma,
upon the account of feudatory Quitrent, due to the Popes, whence arose War. But
the Controtroversie was composed by the authority of the King of France, in
their late treaty, 1664. when agreed, that Castro should be restored to Parma,
and the Duke to pay the money due, etc. And then agreed likewise, that the K. of
France should restore Avignon to the Pope, which he had seized on, not long
before, upon the quarrel about his Ambassador at Rome; which was acordingly done.

And thus we have in general represented the foundations and Revolutions of the
Papal Hierarchy, or Kingdom of the Pope; both Temporal and Spiritual; its rise,
growth, increase height and decrease; not being able well to comprehend so long
and mysterious an History, and so confused with all others in less room, and
willing only to touch upon chief particulars of their usurpations,
incroachings, and domineerings, down to our times, that so you might have a Map
or Table, and plain veiw, as it were at once, of this Ecclesiastical and
Priestly Kingdom. All which 'twas necessary to fetch so high, the better to
understand the coherence of the story and present State thereof, with the
Affairs and Revolutions (both of the Governments, and Religions) of all
Christendom; which it has so wretchedly involved it self with.

The sum of all, in short is this.

The Popedom was, a digging, working, and preparing, as it were, underground,
about 400. years most eminently from Victor, about the year 192. and others,
(especially afterward from under Constantine the Great about the year 300.) to
Boniface the 3 d. About the year 600. As Covetous, Proud, Corrupt, Opinionated,
and in one word Apostate, Luciferian Bishops, Pastors, and Priests; that had
fell from their first standing, and foundation of the Apostles, that is, the
primitive purity and simplicity of the Gospel, to devised Fables, Ceremonies,
Inventions, Constitutions, and Prudentials, etc.

The Popedom Spiritual, or Universal Hierarchy, was founded by Boniface, as
Universal Bishop, and high Priest. And from him to Hildebrand, for about 400.
years more. Hence the Titles of Divine Celestial Majesty. The Popedom Temporal,
was founded by Hildebrand, as Universal Monarch. Hence from both Innocent the
8th. is stilled, one above all Principalities and Powers, and every name that
is named in this or the other World.

And the Height and flourishing of both, under Alexander the 3d. and Boniface
the 8th. who boasted that all powers were become subject to him, etc. to the
dawning of the Reformation, by Wicklif, etc. another four hundred years, the
Brightness whereof has been ever since, by degrees, a consuming it. And if we
may guess, by the Stars, the last great Conjunction of the two Superior Planets
in the fiery Trigon in 1663. (which never happened before since Charles the
Great's time 800. years ago) they bode no good predictions, for the Popedom;
but look as if they would burn up (Alsted says) all the dross and dregs of
Rome, more then the fire of London was ever like to do, as they accounted of
the Protestants. But we must not think that Rome is only in Rome, though there
she sits as a Queen, seeing no sorrow.

During the first 400. years they contended for preeminence, privileges,
dominion, and riches to maintain it; and began to Lord it over, and incroach
upon other Churches, as the best. the most orthodox, and most Apostolic; as
the chiefest, and most flourishing and Imperial Church.

For Pope Victor about the year 192. excommunicated the Eastern Bishops, for
not keeping Easter the same day with him; concerning which point the West (or
Roman) Church afterward prevailed, under Constantine the Great, by the Council
of Nice; the Eastern standing for the tradition of St. John, and Philip; the
Western for that of St. Peter, and St. Paul.

Afterward they induced Constantine upon his Infant conversion, as the first
Christian Emperor, to be good to the Church which had so suffered under the
Heathen Emperors; and to make it great, glorious, and flourishing in the world;
and peace settled in the Church; together with Dignities, Dominions, and
Preferments, (in a politic and prudential way namely to avoid Heresies,
Schisms, and Factions of Opinions, etc.) they began now to Lord it over one
another, and over Gods Heritage, which they had not opportunity to do before,
under persecution; nor sufficiently to show the rottenness of their Religion at
the heart.

They brought Constantine to decree, Tithes to be paid of all things to all
Churches; At which time was heard this voice in the air, now is poison poured
into the Church; which refers to the pride of the Bishops and Clergy, which
these riches occasioned afterward. For Hormisda was so malpert upon it, about
the year 500. as to excommunicate the Emperor, because he stood upon it That it
was the Emperors part to command, and not be subject to Bishops.

During the next 400. years, they contended with the Eastern Bishops and
Patriarchs of Constantinople for Universal Supremacy, devising diverse sad
stories and complaints; and incroached more and more upon the Emperors, and
civil matters of State; and became as well Troublers of the Empire, as of the
Church.

For the other four hundred, they contended with the Emperors themselves, for
Universal Monarchy; (or Supremacy in Church and State;) iuterwove Temporal
Jurisdiction with Spiritual, and at last withdrew themselves from all
subjection to the Emperors, and brought them indeed under their feet; usurping
and enlarging power and dominion to themselves, out of others ruins, etc. as
by the forgoing story may partly appear.

But this last (near) 300. years, they have swelled only with Titles, and big
words, and roared a little with their cursed Bulls with short Horns. And thus
Pride begat Prelates, Prelates Patriarchs, Patriarchs Popes, (answerable to
worldly Empire, and Dignities,) and Popes would be Kings and Emperors, and not
only so, but Gods too; but indeed and in truth very Devils. For Pope Sixtus,
they say, gave his soul to the Devil for seven years Popedom. Such a sweet
proud Tyranny it is.

And now this long lived Popedom, is come to its old age, and drawing toward
its end, and from 666, plainly lies a dying; against which year it strove, as
it were, for life again, once more, in England, Ireland, Holand, France,
Poland, Suitzerland, Piemont, etc. with struglings in the world afresh, are to
be reckoned, but as lightenings before death; Unto which, if it fill up the
100. current, or more, 'twill but be answerable to such tough, and lasting
heart of Oak, too great to be rooted up in one generation.

In a word four hundred years, or more, a rising, as we may say; four hundred a
growing, and increasing; and four hundred more a flourishing in it is height;
and toward three hundred a decreasing. So that least of all, of any Kingdom,
can it be said of this, Few though evil, have the days of the years of the
Popedom been; Taking evil for wicked and mischievous, or doing evil, etc. And
so significently enough, and not unworthily, may his Evilness, now be stilled,
Pope; that is, Ancient, or old Father. But There is another Reason. Would you
know why?
Their Bastards swarm as thick, as Stars in the Sky.
But we meddle not with the Personal Vices of his Holiness.

Conclusion.
Thus have we seen in this last and worst age of the World, all Christendom all
on a flame of Wars and Confusions like Wildfire every where, catching from
Country to Country, and then taking its course round. Neither has any Nation
escaped scot-free from Stupendous Revolutions both Ecclesiastic and Civil.

We have seen within the compass of a few years, above a thirty years bloody
War in Germany, almost laying it desolate, which divided it self into several
Streams, as first the Wars of Bohemia, then of Denmark, then of the Swedes, of
Saxony, of the French, of Hungary, and of Italy too, etc. Above a fourscore
years War in the Low Countries, with all the cruelties imaginable, and at last
the most mighty Monarch of Christendom outed of his own dominions by his
Subjects and forced to acknowledge them a free State by a public Treaty at
Munster. 1648. A twenty years War between the two most mighty Monarchs and Sons
of the Church; with the Revolt of Catalonia; A threescore years Usurpation of
the Kingdom of Portugal from the right Heirs, brought to naught in a day, and
without blood; but near a thirty years effusion of blood and Treasure ensuing
thereupon; yet at last that great Monarchy forced to consent to the lopping off
this so Principal a member from its body, by a late Peace. 1667. above a twenty
years Wars of the hugeous Grand Turk against Christendom.

We have seen a lamentable twenty years Civil Wars in England, etc. The whole
Subversion both of Church and State. A Glorious King brought before the
Tribunal of his own Rebellious Subjects, and unmercifully put to death by a
faction of Republicans; An ancient, and flourishing Monarchy lapsed into a
short lived Commonwealth, A State, A Protector, and a Miraculous return to
where they began, an unheard of Restitution of the Banished and wonderful
preserved Prince, without War or Bloodshed.

We have seen the mightiest Emperor, deposed and strangled by his own Vassals,
in the same year, 1648. and his Successor much a-doe to escape the Rout in
1656. (that made sixteen Bashaws, one Vizier, forcing the Emperess and the High
Priest, (almost equal with the Emperor himself) to the Seraglio, etc.) And the
Brother of a King to depose his Prince, under pretense of Loyalty and the
public good, keep him in durance, (Rule in his stead) and make the Father and
High Priest of the Church give his Queen to him for wife; and all the Princes
of Christendom* even their late Master of Spain too himself by their Embassies
and for their own Interests, to approve in a manner all; and to Complement the
new Prince Regent from all parts.

We have seen also above twenty years civil Wars, Broyls, Commotions and
Factions in Poland; and the poor old King made weary of his Scepter by his own
restless and unconstant Subjects.

We have seen him, and a Queen besides, to lay down their Crowns of their own
accord, for a more quiet and happy life.

We have seen a Universal Calm as it were, and Peace for a while; but a sudden
Eruption of fierce Wars again, both by Sea, and Land; and again, a present deep
Silence, and stand as it were, of a sudden, and the World gazing on one
another, what they are about to do* etc.

Lastly we have seen Grand Eclipses, Conjunctions, Comets and new Stars,
Innumerable Prodigies, and Signs in the Heavens, in the Earth, in the Waters, a
raging Plague marching from Country to Country together with raging Wars, and
the most dreadful Fire, that ever was designed or contrived, of one of the
greatest and most flourishing Cities in Christendom. And behold greater things
yet to come! chapter following, etc.

An additional Observation, concerning the late Popes designs.
There has already been hinted his new Negotiation with the Kings of the Earth
to establish the Papal Sea's Infalibility* He had a great zeal besides in
rapairing the Church of St. Peter Paul, and to erect there a new Apostolic
Chair. And would have imposed this Inscription thereon (although hindered by the
wiser Cardinals) In the year of the Apostolic Authority restored, the first.
He spent likewise all the time of his Priestdom, in adorning Rome with new
Palaces and Basilicon's* especially in raising a Palace designed for the future
choice of Popes, called the Conclave, into a stupendons Grandeur. To Erect
which, that there might not want room, he commanded many Streets of the City
with Temples and Monasteries to be demolished; and sent for all sorts of
Artificers out of Italy; as if, like Nebuchadnezer he meant to say. This is
Babylon the Great which I have built, for an house of my Kingdom, and for the
Glory of my Majesty, etc.

And now we should pass to the Foundations and Revolutions of the present
Religion of Christendom; but that they would swell this Table (of the general
heads of things only) into a volumn; already too larg; And for that they may be
also somewhat apprehended, from this general View, of the Revolutions of States
and Kingdoms.

Behold the desolutions of the Earth;
For want of the King of Peace to rule!
The Pretensions and Interest of Europe.
The pretensions of Europe are either of one part, to another, as of England to
France; Spain to Portugal, etc. of which 'twill be needless to speak a word: or
else to other parts of the World, as to Asia, Africa, or America. Of which a
word or two. These pretenses are founded on wrong and false titles; as Right of
discovery, or of Christianity and Religion; and the Popes donation and disposal
of the whole Infidel world accordingly thereupon.

For toward the year 1500. Pope Alexander the 6th. as if he was Master of the
whole Earth, distributed, by his Bull, all the new World between Ferdinand the
5th. King of Spain, and John King of Portugal. Here was a wonderful donation
indeed, of the World from East to West, parted between two Princes.

And to make them agree, it was accorded, that the Portuguess should equally
share from the fortunate Islands, or Canaries, by one straight line from North
to South, for the first Meridian, an hundred and eighty degrees (that is, one
half of the World) Eastward; and the Spaniard, as many Westward; And that both
one and the other, should have right to take possession of all the Earth they
could seize on; and all upon this title forsooth, That they should convert the
Infidels, and Barbarous Nations to the Christian Faith; which they did indeed
more like Infidels and Barbarians then Christians. So mankind preys one upon
another, like ravenous Beasts and Birds of prey; Neither can the Protestans
perhaps much reproach the Papists upon this account; and both will always
agree in this point, that glory and gain, are not to be neglected, what ever
becoms of Christianity or humanity it self.

But when the Portuguese through ignorance and impudence, judged that they had
wrong done them, (as yet ignorant that the World was round, or might be sailed
round,) by great importunity, they extorted, that the first Meridian, should be
removed from the Canary Islands, to the Azores, three hundred miles more
Westward. Hence the first Meridian ever since, has place not in the Canaries,
but the Azores Islands. the cause of which mutation, is not the declination of
the Margent, and variation of the Needle, or Compass: but this division between
the Portuguess and Spaniard.

Now by this change, it happened that the Portugals afterward obtained Brasil
in the West Indies, which fell within the Meridian of the Azores: but the
Spaniards reaped a far greater advantage; because they from that time challenge
right to the greatest part of the East Indies, viz. the Philippy Islands,
(which they have to this day, to the Molucco's, and others, etc. then out of
dispute the Portugals. And this made the Spaniard always retire and adhere to
the Azores for the first Meridian.

As for the Interests of Europe, in these sad dis-unions, revolutions, and
confusions of Christendom; The Interests of the whole and of every part seems
mainly to be, to agree in Religion, and known Articles of Faith; and not devour
one another, as Infidels and Pagans, for Opinions or Ceremonies; and exclude
not only one another their Church; but their Nation and the World too, for
Heretics; or if not agreement; at least Freedom, and liberty of Religion;
which is no unpracticable Romance we see also for Christian Princes to unite,
not so much against the Turk, as with one another; and not destroy and ruin
one another Kingdoms, and so many Subjects lives, in unnatural unchristian
Wars, and quarrels; and lastly each Nation to accord and conspire together into
mutual correspondence and free intercourse, in all their most excellent and
useful things, of Nature, Art and Religion.

That so true Religion Learning* Arts, Sciences, Commerce, and Traffic, and
all things else for the Common weal of mankind, may flourish, and be advanced
in the World; that Mercy and Truth may meet together, Righteousness and Peace
may kiss each other, on the Earth; which they have so long for saken.

But first.

There are a sort of Popelings yet behind
Must ride the Devil off on's legs, and break his wind.

CHAP. II. Of the future State and Revolution of Europe, both of Church and
State.
OUT OF Drabicius the Seer, concerning wonderful things shortly to come: As the
ruin of the House of Austria, of the Pope of Spain, etc. by the Turks,
Tartars, King of France, etc. conversion of the Turks, Jews, and Heathens.
Reformation of the World, and Church by the Secular Powers. The Renovation and
Restitution of all things at hand. New Heavens and new Earth, viz. Church and
State, etc.

The Preface.
WE should now finish this Table, but that we think it meet to add a second
Chapter of the Prophetic History of Europe; not from the uncertain conjectures
of Astrologians and Politicians, but Revelations truly accounted Divine.

If it more immediately concern all to know the present State of Christendom,
and of this last age above all before, that are past and gone, and almost
forgotten; yet that is principally in order to what is to come: And so much
more it concerns us to consider what shall be hereafter, then the things that
have been, and are.

And indeed this all men's minds generally are most inquisttive after, yet few
will have faith to believe. And hence the knowledge of things to come, is one
part of History, as well as of those that are past. Wherefore I shall think it
no unacceptable service to my Country men, and not unbefitting this place, to
represent to view a summary draught also of those wonderful Visions and
Revelations of Dabricius, by the Godly and Learned esteemed Divine; at least
that few yet dare say are mere phanatick delusions, or diabolical; that so this
Historical Table or Representation of things last past, and next to come; may
be for more profit and advantage, and of greater use, to the English Reader.

It Is certain all the world expects some great Catastrophe and Revolutions at
hand, and great have lately past in all Nations, preparatory thereunto. All
Astrologers gaze for it; All Politicians presage it, all Theologers divine it;
And generally All People, Jews, Turks, Christians, Papists and Protestants,
seem to bespeak as much. As if some dark intelligence were hovering up and
down, to abode and whisper some such matter presently to betide the world. The
Jews stand gazing for the Kingdom of their Messiah; the Turks, of their
Mahomet; The Christians of their Christ, and the Papists of their Antichrist.

The Planetary Conjunction, and new Stars, the dreadful Comets, and terrifying
Prodigies. The remarkable predictions, and prophetic Spirits, yea the very
false prophets too, in several Countries; The wonderful providence, and
strange revolutions and alterations of this last Age, specially those of late;
as the great Eclipses not many years ago. The new Star in 1572. in 1604. and
lately in 1660. The fiery Trigon begun 1603. and ended with that great
Conjunction of the two superior Planets, Saturn and Jupiter, in that fiery
Trigon, in 1663. never before this eight hundred years (viz. at the beginning
of the German Empire by Charles the Great) and hoped to be the last being the
seventh only of the world; having never happened but six times before, since
the Creation. And this being also the third Conjunction of those superior
Planets (which is every twenty years) in the seventh fiery Trigon, and falling
in the year 1663. (Rome, Rome! remember sixty three and three, was said of that
year by the Astrologers.) and the great congregation of all the seven Planets
(in the fiery sign of Sagittary also) preceding it (which whether ever
happened before since the beginning of the world, is not known) makes some, not
only take a Sign, but a beginning of some great Mutation in Religion and
Government. In Religion, namely the conversion of Jews, Turks and all the
Nations of the Gentiles. In State, the subversion of all Tyrannical Rule and
Domination, and all manner of oppression and violence in the Earth. The too
late Prodigious Comets succeeding about a year after, (as well as those in
1652. and 1618.) Saturn being in the House of Infirmity; for six month before;
concerning which there is extent, a strange Prophecy found by Capistranus above
two hundred years ago, and printed above an hundred ago at Venice, and
afterward (upon the Comet in 1618. appearing,) at Pargue in Germany in 1620.
and said by the said Capistran to be one of the Sybill's, twenty years before
Christ; concerning the ruin of the Pope and Emperor, and return of the
Apostolic times. There is also some thing particular mentioned in Capistrans
explication concerning France, (and others) Aix la Chapelle, which is forgot.
The Prophecy, said to be of the Sybills; was only in figures of a Woman with a
Triple Crown, embraced by a Crowned King or Emperor. With a Wheel with twelve
spokes denoting the Cardinals, like the twelve Apostles. with the Arms of
France, Low Countries* etc. with other particulars forgotten. From one Angel
appeared a blazing Star, darting upon the Woman and Emperor, etc. Capistran by
a prophetic Spirit wrote an explication, of every particular, in short Motto's
writ underneath each; which he buried in a wall, (not daring to make it known
in those times. Being an enlightened Monk) and was found an hundred years
after, and Printed as was said at Venice. The Motto under the Comet is only
remembered, viz. Saturn in the house of Infirmity, which some Astronomers say,
could be meant of no former Comet, but this last only, having examined it by
their Rules. Since this we have seen the sudden irruption of the French into
Flanders, etc. and the peace soon made again at Aix la Chapel, and yet indeed
as good as no peace, but rather a truce. It were well this prophecy were better
looked into to see whether any thing solid to be observed therein; or any thing
that may answer and concern the present affairs, or the late Comet yea, or no.

In fine the most lamentable Wars, Plagues, Fires, and sad calamities and heavy
and grievous judgments of Gods wrath abroad in the Earth* especially the
astonishing Blazing Fire of London, soon after in 1666. The powerful approach
and threatening of the Turks, and their dreadful design upon Christendom, the
universal unsettlement and shakings of Kingdoms and Nations, the high
Animosities and Jealousies of Princes, and States, the cry of Subjects, and
general failing of men's hearts for fear, and expectation of others, and the
total deluge of prophauness, atheism, impenitency and unbelief, with their
desperate effects, namely all injustice, oppression wars, and persecutions, and
universal corruption of manners, which make the whole Creation (of Church and
State) groan for ease and deliverance from such heavy burdens; all these
things, I say, seem to forspeak or intimate some dreadful matter drawing near.
Methinks one may hear as the sounding of the Hoofs of Horses at hand; and that
all things will not continue still, as to this day, for ever. The sixth day (or
thousandth year) of the world is drawing on toward Evening, and the Sabbath of
the world to begin, etc. The number of the Beast 666. almost reckoned; If we
expect the number of years from the Birth and Death of Christ; Behold 1666! is
the number of this Age. (...) the number of a man, some more curious and witty,
parhaps, then wise and prudent, would have spelt it out of the last Popes Name,
and Office, or Title thus, ALeXanDer EpIsCopVs RoMae, which is 1666. or out of
all his Names only, viz. Christian Name, Sirnam, and added Name, thus. FabIVs
ChIsIVs ALeXanDer. which makes 666. the number of a Man's name. Then some have
added thereto VII. viz. Alexander VII. which makes 666. or 1666. and VII. over
which VII. if you add to the VII of Alexanders name, make XIV. and shows the
XIV chapter of the Revelations, where first is shown, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen. And they have observed it as ominous also in the present King of
France's Name. LVDoVICVs XIV. Behold 666, and XIV over. And because these are
past, parhaps the same francyful wits may rove still upon the XIV. over, etc.
And so there will be no end of such imaginations, etc. And therefore we pass by
all such witty conceits as to unworthy of so great a Mystery, more solid is
that of a Prophet amongst our selves reckoning 1666 from the death of Christ
(whereby he got the Victory over all his Enemies,) rather then from his Birth,
though the foundation was laid there. Further of the year 1670. I know not why
Philip Nicholai wrote, That if it did not bring the end of the world, yet it
should bring some wonderful and unexpected alteration of things. But we pass
over these and such like things, etc. and come to Revelations truly divine; or
which to be sure are most strange, if not true. Judge nothing before the time.

But first by the way we will entertain our Reader with the proud Sultans
defiance of Christendom, (who first in disdain of the Emperor, and all
Christian Princes, had struck off eight hundred Prisoners Heads, before the
Emperors Ambassador himself.) Though indeed notwithstanding; a fickle Peace has
since been patched up; and his power bent only against the Venetians etc.

The Great Turks Letter of Defiance to the Emperor, upon his last Incursion
into Hungary with an Army of 250000. men, (besides his Tartarian Hirelings)
after the year 1660.
Mahomet, Son of the Emperor, Son of God, thrice Heavenly, and thrice known by
the renowned Emperor of the Turks, King of Greece, Macedonia, and Moldavia;
King in Samaria and Hungaria, King of Great, and Lesser Egypt; King of all the
inhabitans of the Earth, and the earthly Paradise; Gaurdian of the Sepulcher of
thy God, Lord of the Tree of Life; Lord of all the Emperors of the World, from
the east even to the west, King of all Kings; grand Persecutor of the
Christians, and all the wicked; the Joy of the flourishing Tree; the Chieftain
and Gaurdian of thy Crucified God; Lord of the Hope of thy Nation;
WE send greeting to thee, Emperor Leopold;if thou will be our Friend, and
submit to our Domination, then we will that thy Greatness be Ample.
Since these times thou have violated and shunned our freindship, without
having ever been offended either by War, or the fighting of God. Thou have
taken secret designs with other Kings, and other Confederates, in envy to shake
of our yoke, in which thou have done imprudently. This is it, for which thou
and thy People ought to live in fear, and to have no other hope but death, for
which cause thou have prepared thy self; But we tell thee, that we will go
forth, and be thy Conqueror, and we will pursue thee from the East even to the
West, and will make thee know our Majesty; even to the utmost confines of the
Earth, thou shall know our effects to thy great damage; of which we assure
thee, and will have thee to expect our Greatness. Thy hope shall melt away,
which thou have in thy Cities, and Fortresses. We resolve absolutely to beat
down and raze all that appears any thing considerable to thine Eyes. And thou
should not expect any other thing or friendship* and should not put
confidence in thy strong Walls; for we have set up a resolution to destroy thee
without remedy. It pleases us to forage Germany, and to leave it behind us,
to the memory of our Bloody Sword, to the end all these things may be manifest
to all. It pleases us to establish our Religion, and root out thy crucified
God. And we fear no colors; neither can there be any succor for thee, that
thou may escape our hands. It pleases us also to condemn to the Chain thy
holy Priests, and to deliver to the Dogs, and other Savage Beasts, the dugs of
thy Women. Therefore thou shall do very wisely, if thou renounce thy Religion.
Otherwise we do order and appoint, that all be delivered to the fire. This
which is said may satisfy thee; and thou may comprehend by this if thou will, what our will is; and the things concerning which we have discovered the
disposition of our suspicion toward thee.


Then besieging Newhausal, (his General) sends this proud Summons.

I that through the Grace of God, and through the Miracles of our Prophet, who
is the Son of both Worlds, and by whom there is Happiness and Glory; I that am
the first of the Council, and General of the most mighty Emperor of the Turks,
that is the King of all Kings upon Earth, to you Adam Forgats, that are the
chief among the Nobility of Hungary, do make known, that through the command of
my gracious Lord, I am come with his forces before Newhausel, to reduce it to
his obedience. Wherefore if you shall deliver up the place to us, you shall
have liberty to march out, with what belongs to you, from the Highest to the
Lowest, and to what place you please: And he that will rather stay, shall keep
his goods and Estate: But if you will not yield, we will take it by force, and
every man of ye, from the Highest to the Lowest, shall be put to the Sword. If
the Hungarians did but know the good intentions of the mighty Emperor, they and
their Childern would Bless God for them.

Peace be to the Obedient.

But to the business, namely Debricius's Revelations. But we must endeavor
briefly first, to prevent all occasion of prejudice and rash and indiscreet
judgment and sensures of the impenitent unbeleiving and erring World. By
telling how they have been approved of as truly from God, by most Godly and
learned Divines here in England, as well as elsewhere, and all possible ways
and means to have been used to discover any cheat or imposture; which none have
been able to do for this thirty years together.

To clear the Readers way to the things themselves, we shall only give a brief
account of the last most severe and rigorous examination of Drabricius, in
brief thus.

Drabricius seemed to promise from God victories, and the Kingdom to Ragotzi
(and other things to others, etc.) who yet was killed by the Turks in 1660.
which most of all made his Prophesies suspected. Those of his fraternity
therefore seeing all things go worse in Hungary; and least they should all
suffer for the fault of one, they take council together to remove from
themselves all suspicion of compliance or conspiracy with him.

The principal therefore among them was Felinus a Pastor of the Exciles at
Puchow who wrote a book in latin called the Ignis Fatuus, or false fire of
Nicholas Drabricius. Endeavoring to demonstrate, all the Revelations of
Drabricious either to be mere figments of his own brain, or mere satanical
delusions; and dedicated to the Belgic Churches in Holand, which yet those
from whom he required it to be printed, thought not advisable yet to do it; but
rather thought him too rash and hasty. This Pastor dying according to Gods
threatening by Revelations to Drabricius. Veterinus, another of the Seniors of
the same Church, not at all terrified at this event, a chief instigator of
Felinus, undertakes the cause, which the aforesaid Pastor lost his life in, and
by diverse writings, letters, and epistles, to diverse persons, bitterly renews
the accusations, and mightily urged the Edition of the false fire, and assumed
a Physician, the more to help him therein.

So that new Dissentions, Divisions, Schisms, Hatreds, and Scandals arose, and
even those who were most persuaded of these Revelations began to hesitate and
doubt. Therefore taking counsel together they decreed to bring this cause
before God, in seting a part days of prayer, and fasting, (the means to cast
out Devils) and lastly to give a Solemn Oath, the only ordained means of God,
to put an end to all striffe. The Solemn Form of Prayer used among all, both in
Holand and else where we shall not insert here.

At this time one of the Juniors of the fraternity returned into Hungary sent
by Comenius and others with these instructions. (1.) To inform the Brethren
(where ever in any place congregated) of the modren state of the controversy,
and what we thought needful to be done; and to require a fraternal cooperation
to take away scandals. (2.) That the state of the controversy lay in this,
Whether Father Nicholas Drabricius did really and in truth, undergo any divine
Revelations, or whether obstinately and impiously fained them. Some Godly hope
the first; Paul Veterinus affirms the last. They were to see therefore on what
foundation, the one and the other built. And that it was decreed to commit the
Judgment to God the Avenger. And to bring him to an examination, such as had
never yet been, by a most dreadful Oath, which is the Divine Institution, for
the desiding of controversies; and an extraordinary one also, in such an
extraordinary case. And the very form thereof out of the Divine Scriptures, to
be offered to Drabricius; which if he submit to, and take, that it is our duty
to leave the Judgment and Vengeance to God. And Veterinus if he will not rest
in that, to take heed least he provoke the just Vengeance of God, in seeking to
take the Sword of Vengance out of his hands.

And lastly, whether Drabricius would confess, and acknowledge, or could
remember, or any ways find out any thing of his own added, or mixed therewith,
if he submitted to this determination. With an Epistle to the Pastors and
Elders of both the Churches, Puchow and Ledna; subscribed by I. Amos Comenius.
John Bitner. Nicholas Gertichius. Daniel Veterus.


Which we shall also omit, and think it sufficient to set down the Oath it self
only.

The Execration, or Curse of the Oath shall be performed thus, in these words.
I Nicholas Dribricius aggrieved with the suspicion of some, as if I did utter
in the name of God, words not commaned from God, but rashly devised by my self,
and thereby draw off men from God, to him that was no God, which according to
the Scripture is to be led into error by a spirit of Fornication, and to go an
whoring from God, and is an Abomination worthy of death, arrogantly to speak in
the name of God what God has not commanded; I therefore to testify the truth
in the sight of the God of truth, and to free my self from that ungodly crime
endeavored to be cast upon me, and my neighbors from all hurtful and
pernicious error (that they may not sin against the Innocent, and by unbelief
of the words of God harden themselves in impenitence, and be a cause to others
also to harden themselves) Behold I take upon me all the Curses, which, against
this kind of Iniquity, God has either pronounced out of his most Holy Mouth, or
has demonstrated by Praesentanious examples of his just fury. I therefore say
boldly with David, If I have done this, if this Iniquity be found in my hands,
let the Enemy pursue my Soul, and overtake it, and tread down my life in the
Earth, and bring my Glory into the Dust. And as such, who* Prophecy lies in
Gods name, whom God sent not, neither has commanded them, nor spoke unto them,
yet for their own ends Prophecy a false Vision, and Divination, and a thing of
naught, and the deceit of their heart; as God has condemned by his decree,
that they shall perish by Sword and and by Famine. Likewise that the foolish
Prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing, but prophecy
vanity, and divine lies, that they shall not be in the assembly of his people,
neither shall they be written in the writing of the House of Israel, neither
shall they enter into the Land of Israel, that the people of God may know that
he is the Lord God* Behold out of the Mouth of God I pronounce the same against
my self, that if I be such a one, it may happen to me in like manner, as the
Righteousness of God has spoken. Amen. Yea and if I have offered to bring
strange fire out of the forge of my own brain, and not taken from the Altar of
the manifest Word of the Lord, into the Tabernacle of the Church, and to offer
before the Lord, Let the just Zeal of God, show upon me the example of Nadab
and Abihu, that fire may go forth from the presence of the Lord, and devour and
burn up me in the midst of my Brethren: that I may dye before the Lord, and
Jehovah be sanctified in those that draw near unto him, and may be glorified in
the sight of all his People! Amen. Moreover if my heart has declined from God,
and the Word of his Law, to a strange Voice, that my mouth should arrogantly
speak in the name of God, the words of him that is not God, and my hands should
write my own Imaginations, Let the Lord give me for a Curse and Execration in
the midst of my People, making my tongue to rot in my Mouth, and my hand to
gangrene and perish in my Body. And I, Behold! even I, to these words of God so
pronounced by the Command of God, say, Amen! Amen! Numb. 5. v. 21, 22.

On the contrary, if my heart be clear from the wickedness, which my Accuser
seeks to make me guilty of, let the Lord arise for the fury of mine Enemies!
Let the Lord judge me according to my Righteousness, and according to mine
integrity let him pronounce for me, the just searcher of hearts and the reins!
And if the words which I have hitherto spoke and writ, have not been my words,
but in truth the words of God, which he has testified to be as fire (Jer. 23.
29.) so God cause them to be as Fire, and the People, adversary to God, as
Wood, which it may consume. (Jer. 5. 14.) But if I have hitherto kept my self
clear from the crime of adulterate words of God, let God cause all these Curses
to be of no effect or hurt; and all my labors undergone by the command of God
for the Nations of the Earth, to be so much the more fruitful, to multiply the
seed of God upon the Earth. (As it is promised Numb. 5. 28.)

Amen! Amen! Amen!
The Answer of the Ministers V. D. with the Elders of the Church of Puchow and
Ledna to their Superintendent, viz. Comenius.
FIlial obedience, with desire of the divine protection in such times of so sad
calamities every where, etc. Beloved Father in Christ, your Letters dated to us
jointly, and signed with the subscriptions of the Reverend Fathers I. B. and N.
G. and D. V. were delivered to us by the hand of our beloved Brother S. I.
safely arriving here, the 8 th of July. Whereby, understanding your pleasures,
Reverend Fathers, we have done what you required of us, according to the
instruction given. Of the process of which whole Action, behold we inform you
sincerely and with a pure conscience, in such sort as the things were
transacted.

(1.) First I the Pastor of the People of Puchow, presently the same day that I
received yours, calling together the Elders of my Church, and my fellow
Labourer, unsealed in their presence your letters that concerned us jointly;
and perceiving the contents, I wrote the next day early to the Brethren of
Ledna, and informed them that our fellow Brother sent to us was come, and had
brought singular commands to us all, and entreated them to come unto us, which
they did the same 9 th of July at evening. Where I delivered into Drabricious's
hands those that concerned him, and invited him to lodge with me all night, and
the rest should understand what the business was to morrow.

(2.) The next day, after public prayers in the Holy Congregation, we entered
into mine, the Pastor's, House. Where after a general salutation of Drabricius,
(which could not be done conveniently in the Temple,) I said, that we had an
hard business before us, and therefore need again begin with Invocation of
mercy from God, to obtain the Grace of the Holy Spirit. When Drabricius said,
Do you pray here, I will go aside into my Chamber, and perform my prayers also.
And so went out.

(3.) We therefore, first, singing that Psalm, Come Holy Ghost, etc. we all
prostrated our selves on our knees, and powered forth our Groans to the Lord, in
a prayer appointed for this very purpose.

(4.) After prayer, we sat together in Assembly, and the Pastor of the place
giving thanks that they had appeared at his desire, informed them what was to
be done. Then the Common Epistle to all was read. Next the Oath prescribed for
Drabricius (at the horror of which almost all of us stood astonished and
terrified.) And Fr. Samuel gave his Instructions to be read.

(5.) After some deliberation had upon these things, Drabricius was called, and
being asked by the Pastor of the place, whether he would hear the Letters from
the Reverend Superintendents, dated to this Assembly, and understand the
contents? He assented, adding, I was not ignorant for some weeks what was about
to be done concerning me; For the Lord showed it to me. If I had known before,
I would have took you along with me, to see. I replied, let that alone in its
own place. Let us come to the business.

(6.) First therefore was read unto him the common Epistle; Then the form of
the Oath (but before this was read I did admonish and beseech him, that he
would weigh all things seriously. For therein were terrible things, and the
matter here in agitation concerned the Salvation of his Soul.) And lastly the
instructions given to Sam. Jun. To all which when he thereupon answered
nothing, He was again asked, Whether he was willing to be dealt with according
to these prescripts here? He answered directly. Yes, I will.

(7.) Whereupon the third Question was proposed. Whether therefore he did
account, and would have accounted all his Revelations for truly Divine? And
whether he did yet assert all those things to be spoken to him and written of
him, by the Command of the Omnipotent God Jehova, who is not only Merciful, but
is Just also, without any additions? He answered, I do assert so. Yea and I
take it upon my Soul, that nothing has been added by me, and that nothing has
been spoken by me, for any lucre sake, or in favor, or hatred of any person.

(8.) Proceeding further, we asked, Whether he would confirm it by such an Oath
as was prescribed? And again we exhorted him, not to act precipitantly, but to
deliberate, yea and to take time for deliberation; that we would indulge him
therein. He answered, There Is no need of deliberation. And rising up, and
lifting up both his hands to Heaven, He thus speak; I take upon my soul,
whatever there is contained in these Revelations written by me, has not at all
been devised by me, nor any thing of mine own added; but only those very things
which the Lord the Doinator, has commanded to be written. And I firmly believe
the Holy Blessed Trinity will own all these for his, as for those which are
commanded to be written by the Eternal Wisdom it self.

(9.) Entering forth therefore unto the Table, and taking the form of the Oath
into his hand, he pronounced in order, clearly, distinctly all things (omitting
nothing, rather here and there superadding some things for more vehement
asseveration sakes) with so great zeal, that all we present seeing and hearing
these things, stood astonished. Some of us also trembled and wept. But in the
very midst of the Oath he looked forth out of the Window (which was open)
toward Heaven, crying out, Do you not see, friends, do you not see? But we
asked not what he saw* (which in conference with Fr. Sam. J. three days after,
he said he saw the Angels present with him) When he was come to the last words,
about his Adversary, there he wept; having pronounced all things concerning
himself with great boldness and courage.

(10.) Having ended the Oath, he sat down, and laying his face upon the Table,
he put that Paper (out of which he had recited the Oath,) after thrice kissing
it, under his face. And then (All of us being astonished and silent) suddenly
with drew himself away) and sung the hundred twenty third Psalm* (To thee have
I lift up mine eyes who dwell in the Heavens. As the eyes of servants look
unto the hands of their masters, so our eyes look up unto the Lord our God,
till he have mercy on us. Lord be merciful to us! Lord be merciful to us! for
we are exceedingly filled with shame. Our soul is exceedingly laden with
scoffings and reproaches, and with the contempt of the proud) which when we all
sung together and it was ended, He falling upon his knees* (and we with him)
poured forth most fervent Prayers unto God, that God would deliver his Name
from Reproach, etc.

All which things, to be performed after this manner, all we underwritten do
testify both on our Consciences, and with our hands.

At Puchow, July 16 th. 1663. Paul Laurine. P. T. Pastor of the Church of
Puchow of the Helvet. Confession. Ezechiel Alfeus. Paul Vetterin; (his
advarsary.) Nicholas Pilsin. Paul Horatschek. Luke Cales, of the Church of
Lednick Pastor. Tobias Jeffon Preacher of Gods Word. Wenceslaus Godfry. Bielsky
de Karissow (A Noble man) Samuel Junius.



Hence therefore all should acquiesce without further a-do; and leave all, both
him and his adversary, to the divine judgment and determination.

Yet Vetterin his Adversary, though present himself, and amazed thereat, seemed
to give glory to God, and by his hand given, promised silence, and subscribed
the Testimony given together with the others; yet not satisfied, and relapsing
into new thoughts, has writ his dissatisfaction not only to his Adjunct
Comenius, but has been also more bitter and violent against Drabricius then
ever, for several reasons (here omited) And caused the new Pastor, Laurin, also
to waver, and suspect evil of him; and to invocate God for judgment against
Drabricius, etc. who at last answered in a writing, called his Confession,
which he was commanded by God should be put as a close to the new edition of
his Revelations, where you have it also. After these things so transacted, Paul
Laurine, the new Pastor of the Exiles, and now become a new Adversary of
Drabricius, a young healthful and lusty man, was taken ill (the Physicians said
of an Hectic, which in vain they labored to cure) and dyed soon after,
Veterinus still living etc.

There is added also the Judgment of two Godly English Divines, with diverse
forcible Arguments for the divine Authority of these Revelations, too long for
this preface.

To the Objection, of things not coming to pass accordingly, etc. Comenius,
amongst many other things at large, replies thus. (1.) That what ever is
denounced of God and is not done to day, may be done to morrow, as with
Nineveh, etc. (2.) That which is not fulfilled acording to the Letter in our
sense, is fulfilled according to the Spirit, in Gods sense and meaning, as of
the eternal Kingdom fothwith of the Messiah, the Son of David. (3.) What is not
done, the condition being altered, was yet to be done, the condition not
altered. As Nineveh, if it had persisted without Repentance, etc. see Jer. 18.
6, 0. Add hereto, that it is certain the divine Prophecies were neither
heretofore fulfilled in the letter, nor are at this day. Whence so many wild
ravings of phrenzy, as it were, of the Jews, about the letter, etc. That
Prophetic predictions are conditional. That there is possibility of fulfilling
most still. That where there is not such a possibility, it may be then thought
that the Prophet has ventured to add something of his own, according to his own
sense and apprehensions. For Prophets are subject to Error, Passions,
Affections, etc. which the spirit of Prophecy does not always take away. And
that in such a case, the precious is to be separated from the vile, as God
commands, Jer. 15. 19. That all Prophecy is a Riddle and obscure; And therein
God is a God that hides himself* Isaiah 45. 15. etc. with many other things
more at large.

From all things therefore thus objected we are to leave the Judgment and
Execution to God; who in due time will manifest the truth or the falsehood
hereof, etc.

Besides Comenius, some years before, namely in 1658. finding all things go
contrary rather to his Prophecyes, wrote severely to him, and with great
rebukes, etc. who thus replied, lamenting.

I received yours full of Zeal, full of Lamentations, full of Interrogations,
to which you require me, a worm, contemned of men, condemned, half put to
death, to answer. Which after I had read over and weighed, I had resolved to
answer with silence, and to commend the matter to God the searcher of hearts,
yet crying aloud, Come expostulate with me! But the Lord suffered me not to
hold my peace, etc. But as for me, I must say with Jeremy, Woe unto me, my
Mother, that thou borest me, whom all do curse! I besprinkle these with tears,
with Jeremy, saying, In truth the Lord has commanded me, to write these
things. Yet behold the word of the Lord is made unto me for a reproach, etc. Is
it not the voice of God which says, The Lord does not any thing, unless he
reveals his secret to his Servants. And by Joel, he promises that it should
come to pass in the last times, That their young men should see Visions, and
their old men dream dreams. And why as yet, ye illuminated men, I beseech you,
do you expect the last times? But because the Lord has said unto me also (Jan.
14. 1651.) a man of polluted lips, That I should be his last Trumphet, Behold
I, behold with full confidence and assurance, in the sight of God, Angels and
men, do boldly speak, that they are the words of God, which I have wrote. And
except it were so, I know, that though I deceived men, yet I could not deceive
God, nor my own conscience; but should undoubtedly procure confusion and
destruction to my self. But behold, as I live, or dye, that I have written what
I have heard from the Mouth of God, let men take it as they please. To God be
praise, that now the world shall no longer be ignorant of those things, which
the Lord would have denounced and declared by me unto it. Let who so will
dispute against those things, but not against me. For the Lord has said unto
me, his worm, Thou art not of thus much, to defend thy self, much less me, and
my words; I will defend my self when I shall fulfill my words. The Sons of men
understand not the hight of my Councels, as neither also th Angels, until they
are fulfilled. I will finish what I have begun. Let who so will, be scandalized
as he will. Let this be for thy comfort, that what thou have wrote, thou have
heard of me, not from any one of men that are like unto thy self. Be confident
therefore with me my beloved Friend, that it will come to pass, that accusers
will grow mute when the hour of God comes. For the Word of the Lord will be an
heavy burden to deriders. But for us, let us more fear God, who has power to
kill Body and Soul; then mortal men who can do nothing, but what God permits
them. That of yours, God forgive us the hasty Edition of the Book, I thus
change. Praise be unto God, who has vouchsafed us to free our Consciences, in
not hiding from the Sons of Men those things, which the Mouth of God has
spoken.

Hereunto Comenius again, (from the increased taunts of diverse) and filled with
greater bitterness, retorted, If you, Friend, are so certain of Gods speaking
to you, that you are willing to seal it with your death, your certainty will
serve for your self, but not those, whom the contrariety of events renders
uncertain. And we see continual examples of such as have embraced errors for
truth, have been willing to lay down their lives for them, as for the very most
truth, being persuaded nothing else in the sight of God, then that they had
believed, taught and wrought things most true. And yet therefore did not Error
cease to be Error. You give firm belief to those words spoke to you, Thou art
that my last Trumpet. I but this perpetually remains a question, whose voice
that may be, etc. Do you bid us put our hope in God? There is no where, where I
can fix the Anchor of my Hope, but in him who knows the simplicity of my heart,
that I have feigned nothing here; nor have added any thing to, nor taken from,
nor changed those things, which were brought in the name of God. In the thing
it self if there be found error, the goodness of God will overlook the fault of
humane frailty, committed by no manner of fraud, or design. And this should be
taken as a sudden confusion in the sight and presence of God, instead of a
chastisment, more cautiously to lead our life. But if yet at length it shall
appear to have been the work of God, even this my fluctuation must necessarily
serve for the greater glory of God, and the comfort or instruction of the
Godly; Although I, as Moses, should suffer for it in this life. God only forbid
that others, or even all our Church, should necessarily suffer ignominy and
persecution for us. Whereas you exhort to praise God, that notice of these
things are given to the Sons of men, I know it is written, that also the fury
of men must at length praise God, and to that end, the wisdom of God is
illustrated by the foolishness of men. Yet the question remains, what we are to
do in the mean while. Some Friends here persuade Silence. Others to give glory
to God, and forsake Drabricius, from whom alone almost these scandals do come.
Answer what you think, and that presently. I will expect your answer with
uncessant sighs and breathings to God. And indeed most open heartedly, as at
the Tribunal of God, whither I cite you to appear. Deal I say heartily with me,
but even now at length, I adjure you by that tremendous Name, and the salvation
of your Soul, by not concealing that some of those things which are so
manifestly false, have been additaments of your own conjecture. This, if you
shall do, the scandals in great part will cease. Because we are admonished that
humane devisings are fallacious. I know no more efficacious remedy; and it
shall be, that God will judge you according to the Integrity of your heart, and
being propitious to us all, bruise Satan under our feet, although in our own
shame and confusion. May only the glory of Gods Truth stand unshaken, and none
of the Godly be made sad by us or for us, much less the whole Church. I again,
and again conjure you by God and your own Soul, deal sincerely with me, in this
matter, now at length. The Holy good Spirit rule you. Farewell.

To so many obtestations of his, Drabricius returned his contestations, more
sharply upbraiding the pusillanimity of his Faith. And wrote down advise and
counsel, what he should do, not in his own words, but of the very Oracle it
self. (Revelat. 460. afterward.) And at length also a Preface, wherein,
referring all things written by him to God alone, required them to be printed,
and made known to all Nations of the Earth, (as the last will of God.) Thereby
taking all our fears upon himself wholly. The Preface, or Appeal to Gods
Tribunal, goes before the Revelations.

And therefore seeing so great, learned and Godly a man, as Comenius, after so
long deliberation, and consultation with others, has thought it his duty to
publish and dedicate them to all the world, let none think amiss that they are
thus summarily hinted in English; which very great use may be made of, however
they prove, true, or false.

And the more to confirm Comenius herein, was, that Drabricius was not alone,
but two other Prophets of God had gone before, all testifying the same things
for the main substance and scope thereof. The first was Cotterus a German, the
second Christina a Polonian Gentlewoman. All whom, briefly thus, Comenius
compares together.

(1.) In respect of their end, for which they were raised, viz. One and the
same. To stir up the Godly to attend to the works of God, which he has now in
hand, in purging his Church with the fire of Persecutions, and soon after in
reforming it gloriously, and enlarging it through all the residue of the
Nations of the World.

(2.) In respect of time. Cotterus Visions began before the beginning of the
Pcrsecution (in Germany) An. 1616. and ended in their heat, 1624. Christina's
in the middle, about the time of Imprisonments, Apostasies, and begun
dispersion of the Church. An. 1628 and 1629. Drabricius's after their
dispersion, about the time of deliverance drawing on, and with it, from. 1638,
to 1664. (and some continuations since to 1668.) For an Argument that God never
forsakes his.

(3.) If you compare them in respect of Age. The first was of full Age or man's
estate, the second young, the third old. For a Testimony, that it is indifferent
with God, to use the Wit, Tongue, Hand, whether of Young, perfect Age, or Old.

(4.) If in respect of Sex. The first and the third, Men; the middlemost a
Virgin, to confirm that of Joel 2. 28.

(5.) If in respect of Condition. The first was a Tradesman, or Artizan, to be
banished afterward for the Word of God. The second a noble Virgin on both
Parents side, born in Banishment, and to suffer new Banishment. The third a
Minister of God's Word, settled in Banishment, and to be recalled out of
Banishment.

(6.) If in respect of their fitness hereunto. Cotterus altogether an Idiot,
ignorant not only of writing, but of all things (except his Trade or-Craft, and
a little knowledge of Religion) that are, or are done in the World. Christina,
could both read and write, and had learnt the Catechistical Principles of
Religion* but by her age incapable of high things. Drabricius not ignorant of
the Divine Scriptures, as became a Minister; but scarce acquainted with the
Latin Tongue; and wholly ignorant of Philosophy, History, and all Sublimer
things: For an Argument, That this is not a work of human wit, but of an higher
Virtue, namely of the divine influx.

(7.) If we consider the manner of Revelation. They were made to Cotterus by
Angels only. To Christina by Angels, and the Lord himself. To Drabricius only
by the Lord. And indeed to Cotterus sometimes by Ecstasies; yet for the most
part by corporal Apparition of Angels to the outward senses, in constant health
of Body. To Christina, by perpetual Exstasies; yet her flesh for the most part
prepared thereunto and as it were mortified by antecedent pains. Then also by
Dreams, and sometimes with her corporeal Eyes and Ears. To Drabricius by
Dreams, and by and by, by a lively Voice sounding in his Ears. The two first
could remember to a word (before they were committed to writing) what they had
seen and heard, if asked a thousand times, not changing a very tittle. But
Drabricius distrusting perpetually his own memory, was not able to write the
things revealed, without the Lord repeating, (and as it were dictating) unto
him. Which we conjecture to be from hence, that their impressions came by
ecstasies, their minds being wholly abstracted from sense. But his senses were
left in their former state, like to ours, etc. For he had only first a Dream,
and then a Voice when he was awaked out of his dream, God speaks after diverse
manners. Heb. 1. 1.

(8) If we regard the form of speech; the style is every where prophetic and
Divine, yet in Cotterus more sublime and high, in Christina more low, in
Drabricius more familiar.

(9.) If we attend the Types and Figures used, in Prophecy, there are many in
Cotterus, fewer in Christina, scarce any in Drabricius, or else presently
explained, etc. Cotterus declaring the morning, as it were, break of day,
rising out of the deep of night; Christina clear day light; Drabricius's points
out the Sun now rising.

(10.) As to their willingness to divulge these Revelations, and so to obey God
in them, Cotterus resisted three whole years. Drabricius concealed his first
Revelation five years; and being reiterated again and again, he as often
suppressed them a long time, till at length the Lion roaring, they began to be
afraid, and were compelled to prophecy, the Lord commanding.

(11.) If we respect the Opinion of men; All of them, were contemned and
derided by some; wholly condemned by others.; as frantic, or Impostors; yet
this could not stop the work.

(12.) If we observe to whom they were sent. They were all sent primarily to
their own Nation. Secondarily also unto others. Cotterus unto the Germans;
Christina to the Polonians; Drabricius to the Hungarians; and from hence to all
the Nations of the Earth, which they are all commanded to call unto, and
declare the last Will of God unto all.

(13.) If for what they were sent: the two foremost were simply Prophets,
foretelling things to come. But the last a Prophet, preaching what ought to be
done; exhorting to duty, and urging with promises and threatenings.

(14.) They were all commanded to conceal their Prophesies for a time, or to
communicate them only to the Godly, that were afflicted, for their consolation;
yet at last not to hold their peace but to speak to Kings, Princes, and all
People, universally: For Cotterus was sent to the Elector Palatine, King of
Bohemia; and was heard in the presence of the Grandees; as also to the Elector
of Brandenburg, more then once, but to the Elector of Saxony did his errand by
others, several times. Christina could not but write Letters to the Duke of
Fridland, and carry them her self; as also Drabricius to the Princes of
Transylvania. Therefore none of these things were done in a corner.

(15.) All of them were commanded to speak and do things unusual, absurd to
reason, perilous to their lives; declaring a thing incredible to the
Statesmen, the subversion of the house of Austria; and to most of Divines
offensive, and scandalous, the destruction of the Pope before the last day, yet
they were commanded constantly to speak and write these things. Cotterus also
to go to Glogovia where he knew he should suffer bonds and prison. Christina to
write terrible things against (the Imperial General) Wallestein and carry them
herself to his house; Drabricius to call the Nations together, against the
House of Austria, and Popedom, etc.

(16.) They were all severally examined by Divines, Physicians, Politicians and
Statesmen, and entire Universities, Consistories, Synods. Yet they all
perplexed the reasoning* of all the most High* Learned, and Wise, etc.

(17.) The last Revelation to Cotterus, which was of the tirrible execution of
God's Judgment against the Babylonish Whore; to Christina, which was against
Wallestein, (which had its effect) were made by Visions in their sleep; the
last made to Drabricius (when he was first commanded to put to a close) had its
beginning in sleep, but the rest awake; and his Eyes open, being roused up by
the clamors of the Jesuits; undoubtedly to represent, that although all may
seem to be but a dream, even to the Godly; yet it shall conclude in a real work
and effect; that the world by seeing may see.

(18.) The two first Prophecies ended in silence, after they had been commanded
once to seal them; suffering no more Visions, nor did see the deliverance. But
Drabricius after he was commanded to conclude, and dye; yet was again commanded
to resume both Life and a double Spirit to prophecy, and received a promise
not to see death, till he had seen the Glory of God spread upon the Nations of
the Earth.

And for further confirmation, it might be shown from Church history that the
spirit of Prophecy has always been in the Church, and that in several ages
God has raised Prophets, and sent Visions, and Revelations, unto men, But that
it would be to large for the design of this present Table. We will only name
the more known and recorded as Hermes the Shepherd; The Monk of Uguetine, Friar
Robert, Capistran, Lichtenbergts, Carrion, Theophrastus, St. Hildegardis,
Elizabeth, Mechthilda, Briget, Katharin Senensis, etc. Particularly in the time
of St. Bernard, about 1150. the Religious Virgin Hildegardis, approved of by
the same Father, and about the same time Elizabeth a German Virgin, Abbess of
Schonaugh, familiar with Hildegard. Friar Robert a Frenchman, about the year
1290. about the year 1370. St. Briget in Swedland. And 1380. St. Katharin of
Senna. And 1508. Joseph Grunpeck Priest, All of them for the main tending to
the same thing with those, Namely, taxing the abominable Corruptions of the
Roman Clergy, the whole Papacy, and Pope himself, and threatening destruction
thereto; besides many others more ordinarily inspired and enlightened; And
besides the several particular Prophets every where, in each Country,
concerning particular Nations, or Churches, etc. And therefore if Papists, or
those inclined that way, shall slight these Prophesies, as out of another
spirit; From what spirit then, have their own He and she Saints, Prophesied,
the same things; Therefore they may be their own Judges in this matter.

And Machiavil himself was not such an Atheist and Infidel, but that he
acknowledged Gods usual manner of foretelling all great Revolutions. I beseech
you, O Divines! says Comenius, let not Politicians exceed you, in attention to
the Words and Works of God; Machiavil, comparing former times with present, as
he easily confesses, He knows not the cause; so he also says it ought to be
acknowledged out of all Ancient, and Modern Examples; That all great Motions
whatsoever, that have happened either to a City, or a Country, have been wont
to be foretold, by either Guessers and Conjecturers, or some Revelation, or
Prodigies, or Signs in the Heavens. And confirms it by a domestic example of
Charles the 8th. his coming into Italy, foretold by Savanarola, that excellent
man, and Martyr, etc,

And more particularly to confirm also Cotterus and Christina's Revelations,
there are further convincing Arguments, as well as for those of Drabricius,
which would be too Heterogene to insert here fully.

Some of Cotterus's were sealed in the Court three times, by particular
relation from his own Mouth; The rest by Godly and able men, worthy of credit,
etc. And this was wonderful, that he had such a Divine memory of all impressed
into him, that he could recite each word, yea tittle, in the same order, he
heard them, although he should recite them an hundred times, which must needs
be from some extraordinary understanding and illumination. And are all
consonant to truth, respect Gods Glory, and full of comfort. And in diverse
Visions he (as the other two also) were encouraged not to regard what men said
or thought thereon at all, which he urged to the Lord as his trouble and
impediment, as may be seen notably in diverse Revelations, which we will pass
over with many other remarkable passages.

The chiefest enemy of Cotterus was one of the Emperial Tresurers of the
Exchequer,, who swore he would not rest till he saw him and another Minister
hanged; He was at last taken and brought before him, examined and at length
committed to Prison; All his writtings they could find seized on and examined.
At length he was brought forth to Trial and was questioned, From whom he had
these Fictions that he vented under the name of Visions. But he constantly
asserted, from no mortal Wight, but from those spirits which were wont to
appear to him, and again, disappeared. Which whether they were good or evil
Angels he, a simple Idiot, could not judge; but left it to the Learned and Wise
to do. The Earl that seized on him inclined to dismiss him on certain
conditions. But the Treasurer refused and was more violent; And the other
Minister questioned for his life. That with his most lying Pen abusing the
simplicity of a phanatick man, he had written Treason against the Emperor, who
excused that what they had done was by the command of the Senate. But the
Senate bailed their Pastor, under the penalty of two thousand Gold Crowns to
appear; but Cotterus, the Treasurer committed to closer prison, till he was
almost famished. An entire volumn of his Visions was by his enemies brought to
the Earl, who when he had read them, would no more meddle in the business, and
procured that Cotterus should have counsel to defend himself. The definitive
Sentence was not known; for the Treasurer being newly Married to a Noble Lady,
upon some occasions went a journey, and in his return was suddenly taken with
vehement gripings of the belly, one evening in the very Suburbs of Sprottavia
(where he threatened to see him hanged with the Minister) and possessed with I
know not what fear, would take nothing prescribed by the Physicians that was
called; But would defer it till next day, that his disease might better
discover it self; but dyed suddenly in the night, There, where he had purposed
to hang those Saints of God; which raised a terror in all the City, etc. So
that his Enemies being hereby terrified, durst not publish the Sentence against
him, but used him better in prison, and with more freedom to himself, and
access of his Wife and Friends; who urged his dismission or execution; so that
his adversaries being never at rest, after some months deliberation, brought
him forth out of prison, set him in the Pillory, in the Market place bound him
in an Iron Collor, and a paper affixed on his head, This is the false prophet
who has foretold those things which are not come to pass: And so was sent away
out of the City, by the common Executinor* and Banished, and lived so twenty
years, etc. Not long after the former Minister, and another friend of Cotterus,
had likewise a mervellous deliverance (by apparition of an Angel;) out of the
City upon the Imperial Armies entrance, etc.

Cotterus also had a Miraculous Cure and Recovery from an Epidemical Distemper,
which had seized on him, (with his Wife, Daughter, and another of the house, so
that they all lay down of it; At which time his Wife also saw one of the
Spirits enter the Room one evening. She asked her Husband who it was; who said,
it was one of the Spirits, that were wont to appear to him.

The Spirit wishing health to him, asked him how he did. As a poor miserable
man can be, said he, whom the Lord has visited. The Spirit then said, Be of
good cheer, God will raise thee up. Cut thee three morsels of Bread, Eat, and
take three spoonfuls of Ale, the disease will leave thee. He did so, and was
raped into an Ecstasy and had Visions, etc. And after returning to himself, was
wholly well.

We must also pass over the innumerable wonderful things, that in particular
concern Christina likewise, and her Ecstasies and Visions, etc. As (1.) how she
was wonderfully restored from her grievous distempers on a sudden, by a Voice,
in her Ecstasy, saying, I am he which kill, and make alive; at which (as at all
the rest following) the Physicians were confounded. (2.) That being an
healthful young Virgin, she was suddenly deprived of the use of her feet, for
six weeks, and not able to stand a moment, and without any help* suddenly
restored by a Vision. (3.) That she was suddenly struck dumb, for eight days,
and on a sudden also restored to speech. (4.) Suddenly struck Deaf, and Dumb,
with a Fever, and Delirium, and again suddenly recovered in her Ecstasy and
Vision. (5.) Intolerable pains, torments and disquietments on a sudden, and in
a moment delivered in an Ecstasy. (6.) Horrible and desperate temptations of
the Devil, overcome and vanquished wonderfully, by the Divine Power and
Presence with her in her Visions or Ecstasies in more then an ordinary manner.
(7.) Something inflicted by Gods immediate hand in a Vision, to remain all the
days of her life to humble her; but she discovered not what it was. (8.) Her
wonderful Death and indeed Resurrection, as we may say. All which her Tutour
Comenius was an Eye witness of. This last we will give you more fully and
particularly, for the confirmation of all.

The Virgin struck with an Apoplexy, and forwarned by diverse Signs of imminent
Death.
On the second of Jan. 1629. at break of day, desiring to rise from her Bed,
she beheld a Woman all in Mourning Habit, with a Vail, covering her face all
over, standing by. With which sight affrighted, she leapt out of Bed, and her
Chamber; and told not till three days after, upon occasion, what she had seen.

Eight days after she was warned by an Angel of an Apoplexy to befall her
speedily. Which Dream having wrote down (as all her former) she declared to
none. At night rising from supper, she fell down suddenly, struck with a Dead
Palsy on her Tongue, Right Hand, and Foot, etc.

Next day at night calling for her Tutor Comenius, she declared to him her
approaching death by an Apoplexy. She also heard strange knockings, and as it
were strikings of a Clock, for several hours. At last one of the company, a
Senator and Magistrate of the City, said, I have counted the strokes now
twice. they are thirteen. Then they all counted, and found just so many, six
several times over. Afterward it sounded, three times four, and one besides;
By and by, four times three; and one again; six times two, and one; and then
two times six, and one. Infine, the same number thirteen repeated, eighteen
times over, and then ceased. They all then began to presage her death thirteen
days after. The next day also in the presence of much company, was heard a
noise preceding, intimating that it was about to strike. It struck then
twelve, nine times. The next day only eleven, four times. And ceased till the
day before her death, which happened just thirteen days after accordingly.

A Certain Pastor coming and speaking to comfort and prepare her against
approaching Death: She said, when he was gone to her Tutour Comenius. That good
old man little thinks that he must first of all the Pastors pass into the
Eternal Country. Being asked. How she knew? I was now with the Lord, said she;
And I saw Pastors, who live here, coming, one after another, of whom he was
first. Comenius asked, what Pastors? she reckoned up several, even Stadius, a
lusty, strong, and healfull man, and younger then all the rest. Comenius then
asked, concerning himself. I saw not you, said she; and therefore I asked the
Lord, who answered, he cannot come yet; For he have some yet to reconcile. It
fell out accordingly; The said Minister went first, and one after another, even
Stadius himself at last, in the fourtieth year of his age, An. 1634. and
Comenius yet lives now forty years since, who testifies all these things to be
true, as in the sight of God; whose Testimony the world knows too well to be
slighted. But to return to her.

Several Students desiring some written remembrance from her, she not only
wrote her own name; but also places of Scripture, and with her left hand
(though never before) as well as ever with her right. And on the very day of
her death, she gave to her Tutour Comenius, her Bohemian Psalter, and wrote in
the Frontispeece an excellent Valedictory Ejaculation, as it yet remains to be
seen, -- Bring back Jehova, our Captives, like streams into a dry Land, etc.
And underneath, This I have written for a Remembrance to my Nursing and Beloved
Father in Christ, J. A. Comenius. Christina Poniatovia.

The night before her death, several present, One knocked at the Gate. They
opened, and saw no body; So that they were all aston shed. Then presently they
heard knockings by her Bed side, two several times. All present rising up
amazed, strokes were heard upon the Table (whereat they all sat before) five
several times. After Singing Psalms, etc. She desired all to depart, and leave
her a light, that she should pass that night waking; and ordered, Pen Ink and
Paper to be brought her, and wrote with her left hand, (1.) Her Will, (2.) An
Epistle to her Lady where she resided; and, (3.) The forementioned Valediction
to her Tutour; and spent the rest of her time in reading and prayer. After
midnight she heard knocking again, and a Voice. Come, come, come! Next morning
she said, she waited for five a clock at night, and bid farewell to all that
came to visit her.

About three a clock the Superintendents of the Bohemian Church, with some
other Pastors, thought good, to examine her of her Faith, Hope, and Conscience,
specially in the business of her Visions. Whether she did yet assert, to have
them truly from God? whether that was certain? whether she was sufficiently
assured? That she would confess now, being about to go into the presence of the
Eternal Judge, what ever she was Conscious to her self of. She answered, as
truly as God is God; so truly are these Revelations his Work. Which God will
make your Eyes to see. Being asked, had she then written and sealed, what she
had revealed to her, in good Faith and Truth? She answered; whatsoever I have
heard, and was commanded to be written, is all written, not one tittle omited,
added, or altered. And for the things I saw in Visions, I have expressed as
well as I could in my own words, but with no fraud or counterfetting, God
knows. Then she blessed them, etc.

Her Death and Resurrection.
Half an hour before five she would be lifted up out of her Bed; And then cried
out, Lord Jesus have Mercy upon me, and put an end to my pains. About five, she
bad her last farewell to all, with her left hand, being not able with her right,
etc. And after prayers of all present, she fell into a fit, and so quietly
departed.

But after some time, all went away save two Ladies, and Comenius, with the
Nurses, and when her feet and hands were quite grown cold, and stiff, like any
dead person's; Then those Ladies and Comenius also departed, leaving the
Nurses, to lay her out. But whilst they were yet going out of the door, one of
the Nurses cries out; They looking back, saw her risen straight upright upon
the Bed; and asking for her clothes. Comenius entreats them to leave her, and
went down with them, full of fear and trembling All; leaving only their
attendants to relate what was done. Comenius returns, goes into his Study; But
Behold! She was now dressed, and stood at the Wather-cistern, washing her Hands
and Face; and his Wife with two other Nurses looking on. Comenius stood
astonished, My Christina, what is the matter; In the Name of the living God
tell me! She; I live, you see; And goes on to wash again. Comenius again, For
Gods sake, what is the matter! may we believe our own Eyes? She, I live! And
your hand and foot whole and perfect? Perfectly, said she. But what has been
done? She; I was now with my Lord; but am commanded to return to enjoy his
goodness in the Land of the Living. Ask no more now, to morrow I will note down
the whole business. So they sat down to supper, and she with them very cheerful
and well. But eat nothing. Many Friends and Neighbors came in, -- etc.
Afterward she sung Psalms, etc. and next day wrote down all for a close of her
Revelations, which you have afterward.

Of the whole, Comenius says, this is certain, that it seemed a true and real
death in our eyes; and that she could not in a moment be restored to life,
health, and full strength, without the special and immediate Power of God
intervening.

All other Divines also after various and different apprehensions of the thing,
yet were all at length inclined to think it a true Miracle, etc.

And not long after there was a strict, and solemn examination of her Visions,
and all these things, in an Assembly of Divines, where they could not consent
to give their Judgment absolutely; But only decreed silence, to avoid all
offense, and scandal to the Church; till God and time should discover further,
etc. Also some years after another assembly met, when events seemed not
answerable to predictions; where yet they could not condemn the thing, but
commit it yet unto God.

She lived after this, fifteen years, married twelve, had two Sons, and three
Daughters; one Son, and one Daughter yet alive.

The brief Series of the remarkable Vicissitudes of her life, added to her
Funeral Sermon, was this.

Christina Poniatovia, was born of Noble Parents at Lescina in Prussia, An.
1610. And with the same Parents, (suffering Persecution in their Country for
the Gospel) came into Bohemia, An. 1615. Whence being again driven away with
them by the storm of Persecutions, and going into Moravia, she was committed to
some Noble Matrons, to be bred up in Services and the exercises of virtue; and
at length the last time removed with others into Banishment; She lost her
Mother, An. 1626. her Father, 1628. She began to be admitted to that
extraordary and miraculous work of God, An. 1627. which ceased, in the
recalling of her dead, in the Eyes of men, into life. An. 1626. at Lesna in
Poland, where three years after, by the will of God and her Tutors, she was
married, etc.

She underwent several examinations, first of her Father, a solid Divine, and
most violent opposer of Neoterick Revelations; who endeavored both by Letters,
dehortations, obtestations, and severe threatenings to stop her; till by all her
answers, and his own Eyes, he apprehended the error to be in himself, and gave
glory to God. The next, was of Divines, Politicians, Physicians, inquiring most
curiously into all things; but could find nothing but the Finger of God, etc.
Then by the Pastors and Elders of the Church at the hour of her death, as
before. And the worst of all was of the Devil, both at the beginning, and
afterward several times, undergoing horrible temptations, etc. Besides all the
Divine Trials, and Testimonies, etc.

Very remarkable also was the Devils Mock-Games, that he played about this time
by raising other false ecstasies in some. Whereof Comenius mentions two. First
of a Virgin undergoing Ecstasies, in a Village which Christina's Father passed
through, with a throng of people about her, An. 1628. Speaking wonderful things
in her Fits, foretelling Persecutions of the Church, exhorting to repentance,
and persuading to constancy in the Faith etc. Hereby it was thought that God
had raised up others in like manner to confirm the same things. But after
strict inquiry all appeared to be nothing but a few frivolous Dreams of one
sick, or at least slight Mockings of Satan.

But more cunningly the Devil played his part at Geneva the same year, whereby
the Learned there were for a time prejudiced against these Revelations; when as
before both Diodat, Vedelius and others by letters approved them. But the Devil
at last smelt of Hell, and the truth of these thereby more appeared. The story
in short, this.

The Son of a Senator twelve years old was seized with a Disease; by and by
began to speak unusual things, at length asserts, that he was, that very
Spirit, which had shown Lions, Men, and other wonderful Visions, that should
certainly come to pass, to Christina, a Virgin of Poland, etc. which things at
first though they seemed to hang together well enough, and further confirmed
the Divines, (so that they wrote letters thereof.) Yet when by degrees he at
length swarved unto frivolous matters, and at last things manifestly absurd in
the presence of two Divines, one of them said, I see the finger of Satan, etc.
Which mockages continuing for some days made all suspected. So that after
solemn prayers and fasting of the Senate, Pastors, and the Church, during which
the unclean Juglar began strange postures, and to be troublesome, etc. amongst
other things saying, They will not believe, that I am a good Angel sent of God.
But I will prove it by a Miracle; And snatching some way or other a Knife*
thrust it into his Breast, and drew it out again unhurt, and fell upon the
ground, crying, Behold a Miracle! At last the unclean spirit seeing he must be
gone out, wreath diverse ways the youths body, belching out of his mouth
Blasphemous and obscene words, till he was forced to give place to the prayers
of the Church, and the Power of God. But the youth was conscious of nothing,
etc.

More cunning yet was that (to invalidate Drabricius's Visions) of a Soldier
in 1659. who falling sick, got leave to return home, and languishing away
seemed to dye, and was ready to be buried; but when the Neighbors came to his
burial, they felt his Breast to be something warm, and deferred it till the
Morrow; and then the next day, for eight days, no other sign of life
appearing. But he, the Night before Burtal, rises up, declares that he had
special Commands to Prince Ragotzi, (under whom he had served) requires
admission into his Castle, two miles off. Is admitted, the Chancellor, and
Master of the Hall, and others present; relates his Commands from God; That the
Prince take Arms Courageously against the Turk; that God would raise up the
Emperor of Mosco* to help him; who should come and besiege Constantinople with
an huge Army; At the same time, that the Prince go against Buda, (the
Metropolis of Hungary,) at Whitsontide to take it. Rehearsing these things on
his bended knees, he arose, praising God, that he had granted him to fulfill his
Commands; These things could not but seem contrary to Drabricius's. The Prince
it should seem, believed him: for he acted according to these things, not the
other of Drabricius; And Drabricius himself also believed this to be a Prodigy
from God himself: by a Vision concerning this thing. Wherein yet God asserted
no more than this. (1.) That his words, by Dribricius were also true, if the
Prince would have followed them. (2.) That Counselors that follow the
figments of their own heart, seduce themselves, and know not how to counsel
neither themselves, nor their Masters. (3.) And that those that do so, shall be
destroyed. Whence it may be well thought, that this was a Satanical Mockery,
both the Sickness, Death, Resurrection, and Prophecy; seeing nothing fell out
accordingly, but rather the ruin of the Prince, who was seduced, like Ahab by
Zedekiah and his companions: God giving them up to believe a lie, who will not
believe the Truth. And therefore this is to be reckoned of the same nature with
the former Ecstasies mentioned of the Geneva Boy, opposed by Satan, to the
Exstasies of Christina.

As for the Evidence of Events. Whatsoever concerned her own person, always
came to pass. But for those things which concerned the World or the Church,
although they may seem contrary, yet because there seems to be a disposing of
Providence toward the accomplishment of the main: we may say with St. Austin
(says Comenius) when many things are fulfilled, He is preverse who contemns a
Prophet. Divine Prophesies, said a great man, always smell of their Author, to
whom a thousand years are but as one day, and one day a thousand years. And
about the events of Prophesies there are three cautions. (1.) of Chrysostom,
That all Prophesies are not fulfilled to Sense, and the Letter, etc. and he
instances out of Scripture. Thus Jacob who received so many Blessings from his
Father, scarce enjoyed one, etc. (2.) Of Grotius, that for some things not
fulfilled, are not to be called in question those things that are clearly
fulfilled. As the Jews bring many things obscure, or that receive a diverse
signification concerning the Messiah; for which those that are manifest ought
not to be denied. (3.) Of God, To believe in Hope against Hope; and not pass
rash judgment through unbelief on Divine predictions, though they never appear
to our apprehension, etc. for Gods thoughts are not as our thoughts, etc.
Again, all things were not evidently fulfilled to appearance, to the Ancient
Prophets. Therefore deriders said, Where is the Word of the Lord, let it come,
etc. Jer. 17. 15. But God does not want causes, to defer his promises, or
threatenings, or to change them, and has been pleased to render reasons. Jona 4.
Jer. 18. Psalm. 89. 1 Samuel 2. 30. Besides we understand not as his Works, so
neither his Words, till performed, and that not always. Ezekiel. 2. 5. John 16.
The Beginning of a thing is taken with God for the thing it self. God measures
days and hours, not as we. That which is not fulfilled to day, may be to
morrow. As Ninive after forty years: though not forty days. Gods Mercy is so
great, that he seems to appear false, rather then not merciful. If, lastly,
events do'nt answer, blame man as some way faulty. Thus Comenius. And
Drabricius himself in several Visions, is advertised to the same sense and
purpose, etc. But these things have been hinted once and again before.

But Behold the Atheistical age! who think God reveals nothing now unto men.
All humble and sober observance of extraordinary Signs, Dreams, Ecstasies,
prophetic Inspirations, Angelical Apparitions, Prodigies in the Heavens, etc.
(As Comets, New Stars, Suns, unusual Tempests, Sights of Armies fighting in the
Air, Sounds of Drums and Trumpets, etc.) passes for foolish superstition or
fancy. And all is attributed either only to natural causes, or chance, or vain
imagination, and nothing to God. Which God grievously complains of, Amos 4. 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. This is the last security of the World, that Faith will
not be found on Earth, etc. And as in the days of Noah (when all were so
secure) so it shall be in the last days, all things shall be full of Prodigies
in Heaven, and Earth, of Blood, Fire, and Smoke; of Dreams, Visions, and
Prophesies. Joel 2. 28. etc. Matthew. 24. And things speak as much; so many
various Prodigies in our age in Heaven Earth, Sea, and several Creatures, were
never in any Age before; even in Germany alone, within this half Century, so
many have been noted and recorded of this kind, as never the like. And of
England the same, etc. Surely God means hereby to have men warned of greater
and more wondrous works of his providence shortly to follow. Nor were ever more
Prophets, and divinely inspired, then in this Age; at least since the Apostasy
of the Church. For there were and are, Men and Women, Old and Young, Noble and
Ignoble, Learned and Unlearned, Clergy and Secular, who have had true
prophetic Dreams, Illuminations, Raptures, Angelical Apparitions, and
speakings with God; who have spoken and written unusual things of the enkindled
Wrath of God, of approaching Judgments, and the Universal change of Things.
Especially in Bohemia and Germany, where the terrible Persecutions of the
Church were foretold to begin. Of whom sixteen, that had Visions and
Revelations, and also printed, Comenius reckons up. And it is not unknown that
of late, and now, there are Prophetic spirits in Holland and England, etc. But
of all these the most Eminent are these three, Cotterus, Christina, and
Drabricius.

There were also between Christina, and Cotterus two other Prophets,
foretelling the imminent Judgment upon Babylon, and of the wrath of God,
kindled against the World, and of the Plagues a coming. The one a plain Country
man, to whom, at his work in the Field, an Augel of the Lord appeared, An.
1625. The other a Tailor, who from 1625. to 1628. had a certain voice sounding
round about him, revealing things to come, and commanding him to write them.
And at length an Angel in a visible form appeared unto him, to take his
farewell, with these words; Because thou so much desire to see me, although I
am by nature invisible, etc.

And thus I hope we have not been too tedious to clear our Readers way from
prejudice, which we could not do with more brevity so as we ought; And that
they will think so long a preface altogether necessary, and no ways
impertinent. If at last there should prove nothing in all these things,
certainly the divine Providence seems to play with poor Mortals; and the story
deserves to be recorded.

We will conclude with Comenius caution concerning Christina. Not to pass rash
Judgment, or overhasty Execution. This is the property of all Prophesies,
that they first fulfilled, before they are understood; And if it shall happen,
that the events prove otherwise; yet these things will be profitable and
serviceable to Posterity; I pray and tall to witness. Let it suffice our Church
once to have dared what no university or Consistory before us has attempted,
to pass a Condemnatory Sentence against these things. Let it suffice I say, and
serve for a caution. I, if it shall please the Lord to call me hence, will seal
it with my Death; that I have forwarned that the Church no more offend in this
kind; And that not one, or two, or three, usurp power to determine of such
matters, which regard the judgment to the whole Church, and so of Posterity it
self also. Yea, and if any one dare commit this Book to the fire; such a one as
he, I cite to the Tribunal of Christ, there to give an account of his
inordinate passion and affection.

I wrote these things with mine own hand, so dictating, an Heart full of the
fear of God J. A. Comenius.



And yet further before we end this long preface (which so mainly concerns the
validity of all that follows, and is for an Apology.) Those that do not, must
know, that our Author Comenius, is the only surviving Superintendent, or
Bishop, of the Bohemian Church now in Exile, forty years and over; A man of
universal knowledge and learning, of a large and delusive spirit, and of a
sincere and single heart; as all Christendom can bear witness of. A true
Virtuoso of all Divine and Humane Science and Experiance; A man given to no
fancies and whimsies, nor self ends and designs; But of vast and universal Aims
and desires, for the universal good of Mankind, the World and the Church; and
one that has sore travalled for the promoting of universal Knowledge,
Literature, Art, Sience, and Virtue, both Humane and Divine; as appears by the
Janua Linguarum, and his other labors; and more particularly his late Treatise
for the spreading of Light, and Knowledge universally, dedicated to the Royal
Society of Englands Virtuoso's. And lastly one that most severely rebuked
Drabricius for still persisting in his wild Fancies and Dreams (as he then
thought) till he was at length convinced of the Finger of God therein; as
appears by the concertation he had with him, as follows.

Drabricius in his Visions, had promised him an Associate, called his Adjunct,
to help carry on this work of God in the World, which was this Comenius. And
indeed who so sit? And first he was commanded by the Lord to inform Comenius of
his first Visions, and to send them to him; which accordingly he did, about An.
1644. And this was all that ever Comenius had to do concerning them, till 1650.
when after that the General Peace of Munster seemed to defeat all their hopes
and expectations, Comenius was by Providence unexpectedly brought into those
Parts again, about Affairs of the Church. There Drabricius was urgent with him
to go to the Prince; He replied. What do you hear, my Brother; Are not you
awake yet out of your Dreams? (Condemning, as well as others all of Vanity,
Because they did not reach the prophetic gravity of Style like Cotterus's and
Christina's, and the events seemed to answer much less) You first offered the
Crown to the Father, and now deluded of that Hope, you would go to the Son. In
the name of God, see what you do; and desist to delude your self and others.
The man shed Tears, and lifting up his Eyes and Hands, I could twice wash my
self, with my Tears, says he, As much as has already been powered forth of
them, that God would spare me miserable man; But I cannot obtain. Have you then
Visions yet, said Comenius? It is a bove a year, said he, that I have had none;
yet I know, that there is not an end of them. How do you know? The Lord told
me, says he; and commanded that they should be sealed, and kept for your
coming, and delivered to you. For that you should come into this Land; Behold!
Here, I deliver them; and besought him to read them. Do not you faigne this I
pray, said Comenius. He calls God to witness! Comenius asked, when did you hear
that concerning my coming hither? Three years since, said he, presently after
the Princes death, when through impatience of these mockeries, I would have
burnt those. But the Lord forbad; you will find it there written.

Comenius upon Meditation, Prayer, and Conference with Friends, found his mind
changed. So many causes, offering themselves for taking a Journey to the
Prince, which before he had not observed. And calling his Brethren to pray
together, he did accordingly, etc. And so afterward the Visions returned to
Drabricius again, more solemn then before; and ever since to this time.

In which at diveres times Comenius was commanded from the Lord to write them;
to translate them into the Latin Tongue, to divulge them speedily, through all
public places, and streets of the World; to translate the Bible into the
Turkish Language; to communicate them to Kings, and Princes, and all Orders of
men; and being backward and wavering, was still commanded, pressed, and
threatened to go on, to write and publish them, and to invocate and to cry aloud
upon all Nations of the Earth, in order to the accomplishment, and execution of
these things, etc.

All which this Adjunct of the Lords Prophet (not daring to tergiversate, or be
disobedient to Gods call) has done, as well as he could, or is about to do; and
durst not but do.

Accordingly therefore this excellent Man begins with the dedication and
consecration of the whole to Christ Jesus himself, and an appeal to him, The
Eternal Word, Wisdom, and Truth etc.

Hear us King of Glory! now crying unto thee, for thy Glory sake; and thou who
art our Sun, show us clearly to all under the Sun, as the clear Sun does all
things visible at noon day, what there is in these leaves; whether it be thy
Light and Truth, or the frauds of thy black Enemy! Amen! Amen! Amen! O Light of
the World! we appeal, in exposing this thy Cause, to the public view of men,
against the Prince of Darkness; we appeal from the Darkness to the Light; from
the prejudice of fools, to the judgment of the wise; from the rashness of the
profane, to the reverence of the Godly; from the ill informed to the better
informed; finally, from every humane Tribunal, to thy Tribunal it self! Thou
King of Kings, in whose hands are the hearts of King, as Rivers of Water, to
turn them which way thou will, give unto all that shall go about to judge of
these things, a teachable heart, like Solomon's* to judge rightly of things, and
to discern between good and evil.

He that reads, let him understand!

The next Dedication is, to all Kings and Powers, all Crowned Heads, and
Vice-Gods of the Christian World, etc.

If any thing yet remain to be done seriously about these things, this one
thing is it, By an accurate and solemn Inquisition to examine, whether these
things be truly so, or no; or whether humane figments only, covered with the
Cloak of divine Revelations? and that then, if any fraud be detected, the false
witnesses to be punished according to the Laws of God and man.

We fly therefore to your Tribunal, O Kings, for such a scruting! beseeching
you all by the adorable name of God, to suffer your selves to be persuaded,
that nothing under Heaven greater can at this time be undertaken and performed
by you, then this very question to be determined; Is it the Voice of God that
sounds here, or no, etc.

Seeing O Kings, Princes, Commonwealths! your duties are here set before your
eyes, with wholesome Counsels, for the public safty, be you entreated in the
name of God, and by your own, and the Worlds salvation, this thing in the first
place, to take these very Books into your protection, and command them to be
exposed openly through all the Booksellers Shops of your Kingdoms and
Provinces, as freely as any other Books whatever of good note; Instilling into
the Christian People, the fear of God, reverence of Kings, and amendment of
life; As freely I say (as other Books of this nature) as the Book of the three
men, and three spritual Virgins, Hermis Pastoris, Ugutine the Monk, Friar
Robert; and Hildegard, Elizabeth, and Mathilda, published by Jacob Faber at
Paris, 1513. (who all had Revelations and Visions like these, etc.)

Hear O Kings, Princes, Commonwealths and every Power among Christian People,
this Book which is offered to you stirs you up against no man, but exhorts you
all in the name of God to do your duty in stopping the confusions brought in by
Satan, and restoring the order instituted from God. As yet promising
Benediction if you yet admit counsel, or denouncing the last Wrath, Plagues and
Destruction, if you yet harden your selves. Let the fear of the Lord therefore
be with you, and deligently put in execution all things. It is your glory O
Kings to be nursing Fathers, etc. and also it is your Duty to restrain any.
Church, that, degenerating into Babylon, exercises fierceness and cruelty: and
if the Spouse of Christ, putting on a whorish dress, waxes wanton, to hate the
Whore, and make her desolate and naked, and to eat her flesh, and burn her with
Fire; God putting it into your hearts to do his pleasure. And no longer to give
your Kingdoms to the Beast, till the Word of God be finished Rev. 17. -- But
behold in our times the words of all the Prophesies old and new are
consummated, which the universal commotion of Nations, which you see, and the
universal change of things, which you shall shorrly see* do witness. Ho!
therefore take again unto you your power, and leave not your Scepters any
longer, in a strange and wrong hand; I have commanded you, O Kings and Princes,
that you your selves Govern; For you have even your name from me (Gods on the
Earth) not from an Angel, or any creature, says the Word of God to Drabricius,
etc.

But what must you do when you take unto you your power, O Kings? That very
thing which the King of Kings (whose Ministers you are at this time) requires
of you, TO REFORM THE WORLD AND ALL THINGS IN IT, THROUGH ALL NATIONS. For he
who has long since, by the mouths of his most holy Prophets said, that he would
make all things new, on you O Kings, as his Vicegerents, he confers this Honor,
that this glorious Renovation be begun by your happy undertaking, and be done
by your Co-working and Authority, through the whole world.

And then shall be the peaceable state of the World and of the Church in the
Kingdom of the Messiah, promised in Paradise, in the destroying of the Devils
Kingdom; And which all the Patriarcks looked for; and the Prophets prefigured
in types; and the Apostles prophesied of; and the Prophets, and Prophesies of
God ever since have declared; And which is so often reiterated in these Books,
that Peace shall return to the Earth before the end of the World, with the
divine benediction poured forth upon all. Drabricius Rev. 107. Peace, such as
never was the like from the beginning of things. Rev. 149. when all Ways, all
Paths, all the Trumphets, all Books, all Voices, and Languages of all People
and Nations shall agree in one angle of PEACE, and in one common CHARITY, Rev.
384. when the spiritual Jerusalem shall be built anew* so beautifully, that the
very times of Solomon may not be compared to these, Cotterus. 18. When the
Messiah shall plant new Hevens and new Earth, viz. new Churches and a new
State, wherein dwells Righteousness.

Which manner of things seeing they cannot but be an exultation to true
Christians, and that this Book declares them; suffer it, as well, ye, O Roman
Chatholicks (Princes) as others, whosoever love the coming of our Lord Jesus,
suffer it to live, and to be taken for a public Testimony of Gods being yet
God, doing nothing without revealing his secret to his servants the Prophets.
And for a public looking, or perspective-glass, rationally to view all things
which are here doing in the Ages of the world. And for the last protestation
and bearing witness of God, that it will not be his fault if a new deluge come
upon the impenitent world. And then lastly, for a Public Alarm, or
Sermon-Bell, to Universal repontance; and for the last Trumphet, after whose
sound great Voices shall be made in the Heaven of the Church. The Kingdoms of
the World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, who now shall
Reign throughout all Ages forever.

Rather do this, O Kings and Powers, for the Honor of Christ, now taking unto
him the Kingdoms of the World under the whole Heavens. Learn who is the King of
Kings, against whom the Heathen rage in vain, and the People imagine a vain
thing etc. To whom the Nations are given for an inheritance, and the ends of
the Earth for his possession; who shall rule them with a Rod of Iron, and shall
break them as a Potters vessel. Understand now therefore O ye Kings, be
instructed ye Judges of the Earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before
him with trembling; learn discipline, lest his wrath at length be kindled, and
ye perish in the way; understand the mystery of these times, why the Nations
are troubled and distrubed, and the Kingdoms declining* why the whole Earth is
moved at the Voice of God; Namely, that these are the works of the Lord, and
set as Prodigies and Signs upon the Earth, to take away War even unto the end
of the Earth; To snap the bow in sunder, to break the Weapons in peieces, and
burn the sheilds with Fire* Therefore cease, O ye Kings, from War, and see that
the Lord is God, that God will be exalted in the Nations, that he will be
exalted in the Earth, etc.

O therefore Christian Kings take heed any longer to stand against the Prince
of Peace, Christ, with your furious Arms, disturbing and laying wast his
Kingdom, which Kingdom you your selves are, as also the Universal Christian
People committed to you. Or it shall come to pass that he will find some one to
send upon you, even from the utmost East, to devour your Armies if you will not
know the thoughts of the Lord, nor understand his counsel.

Therefore, Kings! begin to know from his Oracles old and new, founding in this
very Book also, that the Lord be not enraged against you and you perish in the
way, But how?

First, By putting an end among your selves, and all Christian People, to WARS:
because now is the time for the King of Peace to Reign, etc. O Christian Kings*
Princes, Commonwealths, be Ministers of this Peacemaking King, and cease to be
a reproach to Christ: For God will scatter the Nations that delight in War.

2dly. All mutual PERSECUTIONS for Religion are presently to be laid aside
also, which God never commanded; but Satan began by Cain, and by Ahab and
Jezabel and the Babylonians, and Antiochus and Caiphas with their bloody
Hypocrites, and continued by Nero, and other Pagans. But among Christians, only
the impious Arrians, dispairing to defend the depravity of their Opinion by
Scripture, first attempted to usurp against the most manifest Doctrine and
practice of Christ and the Apostles, and the holy Doctors and Martyrs of the
Church, who had rather be killed and devoured like Sheep* then kill and devour
like Wolves.

Thirdly, Not to permit him neither, who usurping primacy in the Church, and
supposing it to be defended by him* with Sword and Fire, has now for some Ages
raged; do not suffer him to continue his rage and cruelty; but that he also
laying aside his Savageness, may become a Lamb of Christ's flock, or an innocent
Lion. Be mindful of that wise saying of Steven King of Poland, that God has
reserved three things to himself, 1. Creation out of nothing, 2. Foreknowledge
of things future, 3. Domination (or Lordship) over Consciences* Which the Roman
Pope has attempted to usurp, and without either any Divine command, or humane
leave, has dared to build himself a Kingdom over all Kingdoms of the World,
and to maintain it by Sword and Flame. And to lord it over the Consciences of
all men, even of his Brethren, the Bishops, and that which is more, of Kings
themselves, who represent the divine Majesty on Earth. Which what is it else,
but to climb into Gods Throne? which if ye, O Kings* the Vicegerents of Divine
Majesty on Earth, continually tolerate, God protests that he will no longer
tole ate. And to that end begins his Judgments against him, and you, and the
world.

4thly* That what the season of the present Broils and Troubles of the world
require of you, O Kings, that every one of you most solemnly proclaim to all
your People universally public Prayers, Fastings and amendment of life, and
thereby true and general repentance; after the example of the King of Nineveh.
Because this is the time, of which Christ says* that there shall be great
Tribulation, such as has not been from the beginning of the World, nor ever
shall be.

O ye Sons in high places! now God arises to judge the Earth and to take his
inheritance in all Nations!

5thly. If upon universal repentance God spare you, a most solemn reformation
and amendment of things is to be thought of. Inquire into the Books of the
Lord, old and new; hear your St. Bridgets most excellent counsel, when St.
Bernard inquired the counsel of God from her. He that sat upon the Throne
opening his mouth said, Hear all my enemies, living in the World! (because I
speak not to my Friends, who follow my will) hear all Clergy men, Arch Bishops,
Bishops, and all inferior orders of the Church! hear all Religious and Regulars
of what soever order! hear Kings and Princes and Judges of the Earth! and all
Ministirs and Subjects. Hear Women, Queens, and Princesses, and all Ladies,
Mistresses and Servants, and all of what soever order and degree, great, and
small, that inhabit the world, these words which I, even I who have created
you, now speak unto you etc. -- After complaining of all their sins, impieties
and vices -- Therefore I swear by my Deity, that if you dye in the state
wherein you are, you shall never see my face, nor escape my punishments, etc.
-- Therefore return ye unto me with humiliations, and I will receive you
graciously as Sons, etc.

And therefore for such an universal and serious return, because serious and
solemn thoughts once at length are to be entered upon, counsel is given you even
in these Books, O Kings! of convocating an UNIVERSAL COUNCIL out of all
Christian People, Holily to conspire together in a common universal repentance,
and universal serious deprecating, and amendment of so great exorbitances now
among us, etc. and to return all from curiosities and niceties about Articles
and Questions of Faith which has distracted us, and from the many* bypath of
error which we are run into, and from earthly desires and lusts which have led
us away into mutual strifes and Wars; unto the simplicity and puriry of the
Christian Faith and Life. That all Christian Dissensions, Strifes, Hatreds,
Wars, Devourings and Destroyings, may be changed into Concord, Peace, Love*
Safety and Felicity; and to this, the only way is a COUNCIL truly universal,
truly free, truly congregated in the Holy Ghost. -- Arise, O Christian Kings!
help things every where grown desperate! the Patronage of this Book belongs to
Kings, because it comes in the name of the King of Kings, (and is printed with
privilege of the King of Kings, and committed to the favor of all the Kings of
the Earth every where to spread and divulge it) and contains nothing hurtful to
any; but profitable, and most useful to all.

If you hear not these divine counsels, O Christians! the Lord will send more
Plagues, Intestine Wars, Famine, Plague, Savage Beasts, i. e. Men worse then
Beasts; so that Christians shall be more savage, and rage one against another
more inhumanly, then Turks and Barbarians, because the condemnation of the
great Whore is at hand.

-- Not for our selves, O Kings and Princes! do we, the Publishers of this
Book, require your protection thereof; but for your selves* and the Christian
People, lest you perish from the fury of all the divine premointions. It is
comfort and protection enough to us, from God, who can boldly say, with
Hildegardis, I have both spoke and writ these things not according to the
invention of my own heart, or of any man; but as I have seen, heard, and
perceived them in the Heavenly places (or visions) through the secret mysteries
of God. -- Therefore, hear ye! who preside in the place of God on Earth!
undertake so to manage this cause of God against Satan or of Satan, against God
(for so different persons interpret differently) that it may be ended, and none
may err concerning these things. This lies upon you upon a double right. 1st.
because you are Kings. 2dly. Because you are the Churches nursing Fathers, etc.

Therefore constitute, forthwith a Judgment, O ye who judge the Earth, wherein
may be decided, whether our God, that has pity toward us all in common,
speaks here things profitable to his Reaple, or some Devil instill things
hurtful.

-- If the latter, that the false prophets and fainers of dreams may be put to
death, and iniquity be taken away from the midst of the people; Deuteronomy. 13.

And, because the Eclesiasticks are ordinarily inclined to slay the Prophets,
behold! we solemnly appeal from all Universities and Consistories to your
tribunal, O Kings, and secular Powers. Like Jeremiah from the Priests to the
Princes, and to the King himself; and Paul the Apostle, from the Council of the
Priests, to the Political Judges, Felix, Festus, Agrippa, and lastly to Caesar
himself.

We beseech you undertake, 1st. the Patronage of this Book. Permitting none to
rage against it, till plenary examination and delusion of the cause. For what,
have these papers offended in receiving these Lamentations, Mournings, and
Woes? especially denouncing no sad things to the people of God: But to Sodom,
Egypt, Babylon, the World, Hell and the Devils afflicting the people of God.
Nor persuade any Nation or any Man, any Rebellion against their Kings, but all
Loyalty; that all things may return from all manner of confusions, into all
manner of order and peace. Lastly, because This Book is one of them by which
God Convocates the Kings of the Earth, from the four Corners of the World to
reverence him, it is your part therefore O Kings! not to hinder but promote
this Trumpet of God, if you would be Ministers of his Kingdom.

Next, The publishers themselves of this Book commend themselves to your
Patronage, O Gods, Protectors of the Earth! That you permit no unjust violence
against them. As the Princes and the King himself did not against Jeremiah, and
Baruch, nor the Tribune of the Band, and Felix Governor of Judea, against Paul.
For it would be most unjust, by force to act any thing against him, who
appealing to Justice, sets himself before the Judgment. As the Jewish Priests
with their flatterers did against the Lord himself, and against Paul, etc.

3. We commend to you, O Powers of the Earth! the very cause it self pleaded in
these Books, to be thoroughly examined; for in the name of one more powerful,
these Oracles do come fulminating, your People, your Priests, and your Selves
with your Princes, and citing all the inhabitants of the Modern World to a
certain supreme invisible, yet terrible Tribunal. -- For if the words which
these Books denounce, be truly the words of God, it is more Glorious then any
thing yet in the Church since the Apostles time. If Satanical Impostures, they
are more terrible and fearful ones, then ever any have yet been. If figments of
humane craft, nothing like has ever yet come forth in any Nation by any humane
wit. But whether this, or that, or the other, It is a matter most worthy of the
care of Kings, that at length what it is may appear, whereunto serious
Judgment is needful: not neglect, not contempt, not fury.

Hasten, O Kings! to know and examine what matter of things these are, before
all the Plagues here denounced be powered forth upon your Kingdoms. -- Deliver
these things to wise men, and fearing God, and of public spirits, seriously to
be weighed. If you hear humane counsels, why not also these, which many ways
may appear to come by men indeed, yet not from men.

If any one say; Dare you broach, and vend these things for Prophesies
undoutedly Divine? I will answer with Philip to Nathaniel, Come and see! For
the offices and marks of true Prophets are here (to declare to the people of
God, fallen into abominations, their sins. To denounce wrath and punishment to
the impenitent, and again Mercy and Grace to the penitent) this, and not
another thing (for the main scope and end) you shall see, is done here. Only be
sure to see, that you make your selves certain (which you may from the adjoined
history) (1st.) That there have been really and indeed persons in this our Age
who have written these things greater then any human wit. (2ly.) And that they
were simple Idiots, not able to fain such things. (Act. 4. 13.) (3ly.) And
Godly, fearing God, not willing to deceive. (4ly.) Encompassed with a cloud of
Witnesses, that there could be no place for Impostures. (5ly.) Lastly, that
many Godly and solid Divines, not in one Nation only, do give testimony that
greater wisdom shines forth in these things then that they can be attributed
to men; and that the whole work, is more sanctions and holy then that it can be
attributed to Satan.

Yet lest we may seem to obtrude any private Authority on the Public, we
earnestly entreat a public and solemn examination of these things, under your
Auspicions beginnings, O Kings. And that as soon as may be, while witnesses are
alive, who can give it on their Faith, that they have seen the fingers writing,
viz. Things flowing forth or droping from the pen of the Seers, not what they
themselves would, but what, (by themselves for the most part not understood)
some certain invisible dictatour instilled into them; which also their own hand
writing, viz. The originals themselves, kept in a certain place, further
testify.

The last thing we desire of you, O most serene Princes, is, that if these be
Counsels divine, you would seriously purpose and resolve to obey and execute
the divine Will, saying, All that the Lord has said, we will do.

-- Why may not these things be thus recommended, etc. seeing no man brings
them forth of his own daring; but they are offered in the name of God, who is
the God of all, and takes care of all. It is the Law of Arms and custom of the
Nations, that Trumpeters pass freely amongst the most deadly enemies, even
ready to give Battle, bringing* the command of their Principals. Why may not he
therefore be safe between the safeguards of your Majesty, O Christian Kings!
who is your Interpreter from the King of Kings?

But they who would persuade you that this Book is hurtful, stirring up to War,
and Arms; betray their folly, malice, and impiety. Because it does not make;
but (after the manner of all the Prophets) forewarn denounce, and threaten Wars
and Desolations, without Repentence, and Amendment. And because none has ever
drawn his Sword for the sake of this Book, when yet all people draw their
Swords one against another; who is so blind yet, and besotted, as not to see
his Arm stretched forth, out of whose mouth are denounced these things
beforehand. Was Rome unwise, in permitting it to be cried through all the City,
Hannibal*s before the Gates? Cease Mortals to be mad and quite out of your
wits. The voice of God and Angels, forewarning you from destruction, sound even
in these Books. --

-- The World is full of the Judgments of God. The present commotion of the
World, and so many unlooked for Mutations, do not signify nothing. -- Lest
therefore the Christian people be still so grossly ignorant as they are, of the
terrible Judgments of God now in the world, viz. of their Causes, Manner, End,
and Issue, do ye who preside over the people in the place of God, command, that
among other helps ministered from the divine Power, that these Books also be
publicly extant, and exposed to be sold, bought, read, and thoroughly
considered and examined; being certain that it will be for the great use of
Gods People, your Honor, and the Glory of God.

Yea, and read them your selves, and delay not to offer them to your
Counselors to be read and judged. Here is a thousand times a greater
business, then a Neighboring War or Peace. It Is worthy of all your Juncto's to
consult of.

Let not, O Kings, the King of Kings seem to be so slighted by you; or his
Messengers, (pretending at least) in his Name. -- etc.

Believe it, most Serene Princes! nothing like to this Book, has the World had
since the Apostles times. --

The next is, to all the Angels of the Churches, Bishops, Pastors, Doctors, all
Divines, and Theologers, and all Eclesiasticks -- where all prejudices of the
Wise, and Learned, and Religious, against these matters are clearly removed,
etc. --

It has pleased God in some Ages past to inspire beforehand, Men and Women
with a prophetic spirit (as in the Book called the Burden of the Church, and
in the Catalogue of the Witnesses of the Truth, and in Fabricius's Trial of
Visions, are cited) and in our age to stir up others, and in greater numbers
through Germany. Amongst whom seeing these three write what they are commanded,
of that stupendous mutation of things in the World now at hand, and the
Glorious Kingdom of Christ, Now, now to begin; And that indeed these are not
fained, as may appear plainly from the adjoined History. What hinders but that
all these things also be known of you, O Presidents of the Churches. It is no
burden to you to read humane commetaries upon the Scripture. Why do you neglect
to know these, that as truly, as God lives, are not Humane? -- Lay aside (or at
least suspend for a time) the cushion of carnal security! Rather read again
attentively both the divine Book of the Prophets and Apostles* and also these
new repetitions of the same things; and then if all things appear not a
thousand fold clearer to you then through your false spectacles; then let it be
free for you to take them up again. -- Unhappy interpreters of the Scripture!
who expressly deny what God expressly affirms in the Scripture; that the Lord
does nothing, but he reveals his secrets to his Servants the Prophets. From
whom therefore does the contrary assertion, that God does all things without
our privity, come? Expunge that out of your Bibles, or say God is not that
Ancient mankind-loving God, who takes pleasure to communicate his secrets to
men. -- I beseech you, O Theologers! be not more infidels to the world and
works of God then Machiavil, suspected of some of Atheism, as before quoted.
-- Take heed in the name of God, Theologers! to blind and hearden men, while
you would seem to make them see. The Apostles have not said to the people of
the new Law, Admit no more Prophecy; but he has said, Quench not the Spir^t,
despise not Prophecy, try all things, etc. -- O ye! that are appointed
Watchmen upon the Walls of Jerusalem, examine the state of your Churches;
Whether they be truly called out of the world, or rather relapsed into the
world, and become the verymost world indeed. If the whole matter were seriously
looked into, perhaps you would see what heretofore so many holy men have seen,
viz. Among Modern Christians almost nothing of Christ besides the name is
found; for as much as (1st.) The humility of Christ is turned into haughtiness,
from the highest head of the Church to the lowest. (2dly.) The Heavenly Kingdom
of Christ, into all things that are Earthly. (3dly.) The Gentleness of Christ
degenerated into fury and mad perverseness, of butchering one another, that we
are not now a tame flock of Tigers, Lions, Wolves, Serpents; But a flock of
Sheep, turned into Wolves, Bears, Dragons, Vipers, greedy of nothing but to
hurt one another in all the holy Mountains of God. (4thly.) Lastly, if it be
true what a holy man said, Christ reigns in internals, Antichrist in externals,
we are all now become Antichrists; Because none almost worship God in Spirit
and Truth. All living in the flesh, seek to deceive God with a little paint and
external daub of piety. Again and again, see what you do, O Theologers! lest if
you will not admit these Preachers, God send you more terrible Preachers;
Prodigies in Heaven and Earth, and Blood and Fire, and streams of Smoke; and
Fears, and Pits, and Snares; and that like People like Priest, etc. -- If
indeed they are Humane, or Satanical, you need not fear, but contemn them; but
if truly from God, woe unto you, Guides of the people! who in obedience of your
ordinary vocation most scornfully contemn these extraordinary things; that you
account them neither worthy to be seen, or heard, orexamined.

O Consecrated Heads to God! -- Be not like the Priests and Prophets of
Jerusalem, drunken with Error, not knowing the Seer, and ignorant of the
Judgment. Behold here, Seers! Behold an obscure question? Whether at this day
there be Seers, or no. Examine both it and them. But Judge not according to
outward appearance, but Judge Righteous Judgment says Christ. And what need
you be troubled at them, they are but the things foretold in the Scripture. Of
Tribulations to the wicked world, and Rest and Peace to the Church, etc. Which
if you cannot bear with in these Books, expunge them out of the volumns of your
Bibles. But if you can and ought to bear them there, bear them also here. That
old and new may accord together. If you scruple, because they were unlearned,
and Idiots, Gamaliel's counsel in full Council of the Pharisees, is moderate.
Abstain from these men, and let them alone, for if this counsel or word be of
men, it shall be brought to naught: but if it be of God, you cannot withstand
it, lest perhaps ye be found fight^^s against God. -- O Modern Councils,
Synods, Consistories, Universities, suffer the same words. Desist to prohibit
this Book. For no Human wit can refute, nor no human force or power oppose this
work of innovating the world, nor no humane goodness able to wish better things
to mankind.

-- If any dislikes this Counsel, and will try his strength, in overthrowing
this work, let him also attempt to stop the daily Rise and Set of the Sun; or
the Flux and Reflux of the Sea; or the Winds from blowing hither and thither;
But thou to thine own self, O man, art nor able to stop breathing in and out;
And how will thou go about to restrain the Eternal Spirits breathings and
inspirations? Cease ye Sparks to contend with the Flame; ye Rivers with the
Ocean; ye shall not prevail. Cease to befool men, by attributing to Man, or to
Satan, what cannot be attributed, neither to Man nor to Satan, viz. to speak
with the voice of God, and to seal his words with omnipotent virtue, to effect
them; by shaking, to wit, the Earth, and the Sea, and the Islands, and breaking
in pieces the Peoples, one by another. Behold! It is the Lord, who both speaks
and does! --

Let not the Protestants, and the Evangelicks, say they are reformed, and
comeout of Babylon, and forsaken Antichrist* Alas! Alas! We lack not Popes, but
Rome! the spirit of Antichrist has notforsaken us in all things, but only
dispersed it self into more things. How many Universities, Doctors, Masters,
Bishops, Pastors, we have, so many Popes. And every common man of the people,
would be a Pope and Dictatour, above all Law and Discipline. -- The
Thunderbolts of God comprehended in these Books, do reach all corrupt
Christendom. Let no party of Christians think that this Book is for them alone,
to destroy all others. -- The world is full of Babylonish works, therefore the
whole World is Babylon. And every Kingdom, State, City, House, Church, and
School, has its Babylon. -- Every Faction would build a Tower to climb into
the Heaven of Glory, nor will cease from their own ways and thoughts to bring
them to pass. -- Have we no Nimrods, hunters of Dominion and Lordship over
others; and destroyers of the Christian Evangelick liberty?

-- Antichrist is not hard to be found even among the Evangelicks, who for
liberty in Christ began to shake off, and would be now thought to have shook
off the Antichristian yoke* Either the Evangil, is not Evangil, or we are not
Evangelicks. But there are reformed Evangelicks. Would there were, not in name,
but in deed. For the Kingdom of God is not in Word, but in Power. -- That
Christians, as they now are, are of all which the Earth bears, most perverse
(as who do all things against their profession, believe against their Creed,
live against their decalogue and Law, pray against their Lords prayer, hope
against their hope) and before all other Nations to be reformed from the very
foundation, or to be rooted up from the very foundation, may be here read.
Alas! Alas! Moses and Mahomet have theirs more dutiful then Christ. For the
Jews strictly observe (through all sufferings) their Ceremonies. Christ has
commanded to worship God in spirit and truth only, and to love one another: and
no ceremonies, and yet these, Christians are mad for; and quite regardless of
the other. Charity alone was commended to us: not Ceremonies; yet these only
urged. Among us perpetual fallings out, all sorts of oppressions, bloody Wars,
and mutual horrid butcherings of one another, testify that we have no charity.
Mahomet forbad his, Wine; and they abstain. Christ forbad no good thing; and
taught only Temperance, yet Christians live most intemperatly. He forbad his to
dispute of Faith; they dispute not, content with their blind faith. Christ
taught to do, and not to say; (like the Pharisees) yet we do nothing, but scold
about Faith; but lead, for the most part, profane lives. Mahomet commanded to
tolerate both Jews and Christians, and they do, molesting none for difference
of Religion; But Christ has in vain forbid us to pluck up the Tares before the
Harvest; most deadlily raging against one another for Religion. And so all
things, otherwise then he has commanded, by whose name we are called.

-- O good Jesus! the whole universe of Christians seems to have conspired
against thee! and they are first or prime in persecuting thee, who have the
primacy in thy Church! etc.

But they are not fulfilled say some (of the wise and learned) in the
particulars. -- It Is answered -- In Prophesies (old and new) the scope of God is
not to satisfy humane curiosity about this or that particular thing or person;
But to ingenerate in men's minds, Terror in the Evil, Hope in the Good, and
Repentance and Patience in all. And we are not primarily to seek, what may be
future, as what is our duty; what God requires or forbids, promises or
threatens, and how to escape the Wrath, and to obtain Grace: which when men do
not, God blinds them, so that to them Every Vision becoms a sealed Book, not
able to be read; and the profane find there nothing, but stumbling stones of
offense, and darkness to blind them, and to grope in. That God fulfils things
in his own time and way, though we mistake; That Instruments miscarry; and God
defers; till the last, till the very hour of desperation, etc. He that believes
will not make have.

-- That in promises and threatenings God intends them conditionally, though
spoken, as it were, many times, absolutely. Of which enough already, etc.

-- O Protestants, Christians Reformed; Evangelicks! Because most of you are
contemners of extraordinary works of God, Visions, and Revelations, Charity
compels to warn you, that you do not proceed to sin against God, and your own
souls, by a pertenacious Judgment! condemning those things which you neither
understand; nor that you might understand, ever made it your work, or took any
leisure for. Run through all your Bibles, you shall never find God complaining
of men's too much credulity toward him, and his words, and other signs of his
Anger or Grace: but the contrary. Shall we therefore now amongst so many
Prodiges of Heaven and of Earth, and the cries of God, Angels, Men, and almost
of the very stones, and whilst the Signs of Gods Wrath dart forth every where
into our very faces, fear to sin by too much credulity? Specially when by new
Revelations no new opinion is suggested: only new incitements to weigh
thoroughly, the ancient words and works of God, and to return into the ancient
ways of Faith and Obedience; with perpetual revoking us from our negligence,
to the Scriptures? And shall we yet go on, to ascribe these things rather to
Satan, than give glory to God.

-- The conversion of the Jews, and the Nations unto God, with terrible
foregoing Judgments and Plagues, is the Theme of this Book. -- And therefore no
cause, why any one should like to condemn this Book, or prohibit it to any to
be read. For certainly Christians ought to rejoice, that what all have prayed
in the name of Christ this sixteen hundred years, is now declared to be at
hand. Dissenters in opinion ought to rejoice; Because an end of Dissentions is
declared, and Universal Peace and Concord establishing, Protestants ought to
rejoice; Because God himself protests for them. Catholics ought to rejoice;
Because the Pale of the Catholic Church is promised to be extended, even to
the ends of the Earth. Zealots ought to rejoice; who have hitherto laboriously,
might and main, persecuted those that erred in Faith; and dangerously (though
with never so much pious Zeal) endeavored to root out the Tares out of the
Lords Field; whilst, Behold! God himself now takes this, his own work upon
himself; to purge his own Floor. They that suffer (or have suffered)
Persecution, ought to rejoice; Because the times of refreshing from the
presence of the Lord, are declared. Neither ought this day of the Lord, coming
as Fire, terrify any man; Because this Fire is the Refiners Fire, and Fullers
Soap, wherewith the Sons of Levi, (namely the Clergy of all parties) are
thoroughly purged; that they may be refined as Gold and Silver, and the Church
offer again pure Sacrifice to God, as in former days, and the years of old. --

After these, a solemn Mission or sending this work by command from God, to the
most eminent Heads of the Christian World, in particular.

First, To Leopold, Emperor of the Romans. -- which begins thus.

Most Invincible and Victorious Emperor.
This Book which is sent unto thy Majesty is written by the command of God, and
published by the command of God, and sent to the heads of the World, by the
command of God; That all may understand, what is the last will of God, in the
last Age, etc. --

-- These things could not be concealed from your Majesty; (of all others)
because among the chiefest heads of the World, God has set you in the chiefest
place? and also because these Thunderbolts strike against you, amongst the
first, and against your most Serene House. -- Yet Grace is here offered to you.
-- See therefore what you do, most August Caesar! and that you may see, either
read these things your self, or if too long for Imperial affairs, deliver them
to be read, to your Counselors, Civil and Ecclesiastic, till the matter
appear. -- Let it pity you, for your self, and for your House, O caesar! that
you may break off your sins, and the sins of your House, by Righteousness. --
As yet they, whom your Father and Grandfather, have afflicted and persecuted,
pray for you and your house, crying, Father forgive them, they know not what
they do. -- The King of France is commanded here to remedy the confusions of
Christendom; yet if you, O first of Kings! will cooperate, -- to reduce all the
deadly factions of Christian people, into Unity of Love and Faith -- you will
do an acceptable service to God, and all Christianity. --


Next, To Alexander VII. the Roman Pope; or who ever next succeeds him.

Highest Priest of the Roman Catholic Church.
Among other Prerogatives of the High Priest of the old Law, were (1.) To
consult God in doubtful matters -- (2.) To be supreme Judges in all
Church Matters, with other chief Priests adjoined, for ease of so great a
burden. (3.) To restrain false Prophets. If therefore you, with your College
of Cardinals, by divne right, obtain the highest place in the Church, the same
prerogatives by divine right are due also to you. --

God was forced at length to send them Prophets extraordinary, to warn Princes,
Priests, and People of their duty. -- They accounted them for false Prophets,
Mocked and Killed them. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem! Thou who killest the Prophets,
etc. -- God in this present Book makes complaints in the Ears of Angels, and
men, against your prophanesses. -- And threatens his utmost Judgments. -- They
are offered here to be read to the World, by command from God. --

-- Do not, I beseech you, suspect these to be devised fictions of Man against
you, or published out of a corrupt affection and desire to rejoice at your
destruction. They seek to deceive you, who seek to instill such suspicions. --
We the publishers of these things, in the presence of the omniscient God,
protest with Mordecai, that we for the Salvation of the Church, are ready to
kiss even the soals of your feet. --

O Roman Pope! Let it pity you for your selves that you may hasten to prevent
the wrath of the Omnipotent. Let it pity you for your Church, lest leaving it
in Babylonish abominations, you deliver it up, to be scattered at length, by
the Thunderbolts of God. Let it pity you for so many Christian People, by your
obstinacy slid into so many Schisms and Heresies, that they may be reduced to
the Unity of the Faith. Let it pity you for so many people out of the Pale of
the Church, to whom a door of entrance is shut, through the confusions of
Christians. O Pope awaken! O Pope rouse up out of the sleep of drunkenness and
surfitting, wherewith your Flatterers have made you drunk and intoxicated you;
calling you, Christ's Vicar, and Infallible, etc.

-- If there be none on Earth that dare speak true things unto you, behold
monatory Voices from Heaven! -- Read this Book, and take care to have it read
by yours. Your Predecessors did not despise the gift of Prophecy in the
Church, (as some now do) but proved all things, to hold fast that which was
good. Therefore the Revelations of Hildegard, Bridget, Catharine, etc. were
judged to be without fraud, and admitted as worthy to be Canonical. Let the
same thing be done to these new ones. Let them be submitted to a lawful
examination; that it may appear what is needfal to be done; And it will appear
that these last Revelations are as truly divine. And that Gods will is that the
Kings resume their Scepters and Rule; and not the successors of the Apostles.
To spiritual men only spiritual things should belong. For that all confusion
has increased in the World, by submitting the secular power to the spiritual.
And that all things may be reduced into a beautiful order, that it is the will
of God, that a Council be called by the Authority of Kings; That is, that the
Christian People of all parties be congregated, and there all controversies be
heard, censured, weighed, decided, and terminated so; that by comman Jubilees
of Heaven and Earth, may be sung; Glory to God on High, on Earth Peace, good
will toward all men. -- O Modern Roman Popes! oppose not your selves as your
predecessors have hitherto done, never daring to submit their cause to a
General Council; Do you dare: why should you not? If your power over the whole
Church, and all Bishops, and over all Kings too, be of God -- O Roman Pope! why
do you rage so, against all your Modern Monitors, whether Doctors, or Teachers,
and Professors of the Truth? or whether Bishops, Pastors, or whole entire
Churches? or whether Kings, Princes, and Commonwealths? or whether New
Prophets? etc. Nor are the Modern, the only or the first; This thousand years
there have been the same complaints and lamentations; not only privately, but
by public cries, both by voice and writings -- And God has all along
admonished you by extraordinary Prophets of your own, and from among your
selves. Some ye have killed; some ye have persecuted; the rest you would not
hear, or understand or regard. As Johannes de Rupescissa, and others whom you
imprisoned. Mancinellus whose hands and tongue you cut off. Hus, Savanarola,
and others, whom you burnt. Although even some also you had canonized and their
Prophecies, and externally honored for Saints, who will witness against you.
--

O Alexander the seventh, to you I appeal by name, and most humbly pray you to
admit these words or speeches. As God lives, and your soul lives, I seek
nothing in this Book, or this new Edition thereof, but that the Christian
People with all their Prelates, may prevent the last Wrath of God. They are
serious things, and concern the Christian Peoples safety, or destruction. By
the tremendous Name of God, I pray, do not set them at naught. --

Peter could err; why not Peter's successor? Peter could be admonished of his
error by Colleagues; Why not also Peter's successors? Peter did not bear
disdainfully his admonition, yea sharp rebuke; nor let Peter's Successor. --

-- Therefore Alexander, highest Priest! suffer something to be said -- I will
deal plainly with you in the name of co-Brothers, all the Bishops of the world,
and in the name of the whole Christian People -- whether these three Prophets
of ours, were truly sent of God and commanded to speak, what they spoke. It is
not enough to deny; but come to examine. -- Whilst therefore sad things are
here denounced against you, O Roman Pope! in these Books, do not I beseech you
suspect any company of men have here conspired against you. Whether in jest and
sport, as your Pasquin and Morphory at Rome; or in earnest. Examine before you
contemn.

-- Thou, O Roman Pope! yet be entreated. If you are resolved to imitate Ahab,
the slayer of the Prophets; yet at least imitate his prudence and policy; i. e.
Be not more cruel toward these three Prophets speaking to you, and the word by
the command of God; then Ahab, toward his three, Elias, Anonymus, and Micheas.
1 Kings. chapter 18. and 20, 22. Elias required all I srael to be gathered
together, to see whether God was God, or Baal. Ahab consented, was himself a
spectator. You have sought us, O Roman Prelates! (whom you thought disturbers
of your affairs,) through all Nations and Kingdoms by your Persecutions and
Inquisitions. But they, behold! ready of their own accord, by command of God,
set themselves before you, to try, whether God be God, or Baal. And that all
the Christian People be congregated into Council, to this spectacle. Stand to
this therefore. Admit a just request. Gather a Convention together. Behold the
event! -- All your Counselors, with your false prophets, promise happy Omens
to you, as they did to Ahab. But behold here some Michea's, who have heard
another thing. Are they not to be heard also? Josaphat persuades. Nor let him
who is not more obdurate then Ahab, refuse. The event will show, whence these
things come. And it is just, that all People be called as Witnesses. It ought
to appear plainly by the public testimony of the world, if there be any true
God, and true Prophet of the true God, or no. We send these words, as
Micheas's, to all people, that they may be heard of all. -- O Alexander Pope!
humble thy self in Sackcloath, and Ashes; and command all in your great
Nineveh, so to do; If yet perchance at last, God may return, and pardon, lest
ye perish. --

Pope Alexander! from the beginning of the World, the Light of the divine Word,
has never so clearly shone, nor so many Prodigies broak forth in Heaven and
Earth, nor so many extraordinary Revelations and Prophesies; Nor so many and so
universal Commotions of the Nations, and Destructions, and Calamities following
them, and to follow. Woe unto you, if you lead the World to despise all these
things. -- Be moved at the sight of this Book! -- O Pope, be but in deed what
you are in name, The Head of the Church! Successor of the Apostles! Vicar of
Christ! and all will be well and safe. -- Lay down the Arms of the World. Put
on the Arms of the Church; of the Apostles; of Christ. You shall as certainly
overcome as they overcame -- Pope Alexander 7th! wise Pope! command St.
Hildegards Vision to be shown you. -- And you will see, nothing is said against
you here; but what has been said by your own Saints and Prophets before. And
for that reason never harden your self against so great obtestations of God, --
both old and new. Although you burn these Books; or reject them amongst the
prohibited Books, or take no notice of them; yet they will have their effect,
for which they are sent.

Whosoever of you, O Cardinals, Bishops, Prelates, Fathers of the society! have
access to the Pope, persuade him, not to be too hasty, to condemn this Book
(that persuades only such things) as an Heretic or Phanatick Book. Let him
rather read, or those that are sincere amongst you give it him to read, etc. We
read your Books of all kinds, even your Revelations from God. Why not you also,
these things which ours, the same God, (for we have no other) has vouchsafed
to reveal to us? And persuade him that he may say to himself and you, Let us
search our ways, and turn unto the Lord. -- To whom for a final determination,
Whether this be his Word or another, we must necessarily appeal on both sides,
as Elias and Micheas did. But Ahab and the People stood still. --

If you persist, and refuse to follow the Examples of Christ and his Apostles,
what will follow? Nothing else will remain, then either to oppose new Counsel,
more crafty than former; or new and greater force: But either, or both, alike
in vain. As Caiphas the High Priest of the Jews, did use both in vain; In whose
footsteps if it please you still to insist, Do what he did; Convocate
Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Doctors, and propound to
them, How no means hitherto used, avail any thing. And that now moreover, a new
danger is arisen, from new Revelations published, if they be admitted for
Divine; which deliver the power of Judging and Reforming the Church unto Kings.
Reformation (that unseen Reformation) heretofore attempted by Paedants only, or
certain Monks (Waldus, Wickliff, Hus, Luther, etc.) or a few Princes and Kings,
and not united among themselves, yet made you grievous work for some Ages: But
what shall we now do, if Kings themselves unite with their Counsels and Forces,
and set upon the work? We must therefore look about us quickly, and take new
Counsels; yea we must whet the Arms of both Swords, and call Fire and Water,
and Halters, and Gibbets, and Daggers, and Potions, etc. to help, etc. and ends
(with that which is the sum of all these Revelations; if he has not leisure to
read them at large) either to repent, or to perish. It is necessary, either a
Total Reformation, or a Total Destruction, one of the two.


In the third place,

To all most Serene Kings, High Princes, and Famous Commonwealths.
-- The God of Gods, the Lord has spoken. -- Behold! O Kings of Europe! God
calls you by the loud cries of this Book, and will put it into your hearts to
do his will. Come and behold what manner of, and how great things are here
offered to you in the name of the God of Gods. At the very first sight whereof,
will you not fear some fraud and cheat? (of Man or the Devil?) It ought verily
to be feared, and not you be deceived, in so great concerns. Take heed
therefore of being deceived, O Majesty's! -- These things come not from any of
Mortals; but from the very Immortal President of the World Himself. --


And lastly, To the King of France (who is here designed to be Emperor of
Christendom.)

Most Christian King Lewis XIV. Emperor of the French.
The Heavenly Majesty has vouchsafed a peculiar speech unto you by name, in a
Revelation to his Servant Drabricius, some ten years since, therefore will your
Majesty also vouchsafe a peculiar Audience to his Messengers, sent not with
naked words, but with testimonies gaining credit, and with most ample
instructions, unto you. -- Read, O King, or deliver these things to be read by
your wise men -- You, Great Lewis! King of France! does the great Lord -- by
name invite, yea call hither to his Glorious work of renewing the World. --
Take counsel with your Colleagues, the Christian Kings of Europe, to Convocate a
Council of the Christian World, to settle Truth and Peace, and Righteousness
therein. That Angels may again sing, Glory to God on High, on Earth Peace, Good
will toward men. If you will follow, most Christian King! with other Christian
Kings, the conduct of the Counsel of this Book, undoubtedly all the World will
shortly become Christian, and the Times Peaceful, Religious, Enlightened, and
Happier than Solomon's, according as God did of old promise, and does now remind
us of, that they are approaching. -- Prepare for Christ a quiet Kingdom in the
Earth, removing his proud Rival. -- Rejoice that the like things are commanded
and promised to you, as once to Cyrus; To be the Shepherd of the Lord (that is,
a keeper of his Flock, the Church, the whole Church; not any part only thereof,
as the Greek or the Latin, or the French, or the English, or German-Churches,
etc. For whoever calls on the Name of Christ are the People of Christ, and the
Sheep of his Flock) fulfilling all his will; saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be
built, etc. Isa. 44. 28. and 45. 1, 2, 3, 4. Cyrus the King, when after the
Conquest of Babylon he read the Prophecy of Isaiah, presented to him by the
Jews (as Josephus witnesses) and saw his name expressed, believed God; and
presently freed the People of God from captivity -- O second Cyrus revived!
will not you imitate etc. -- It is the work of the Devil, and of Antichrist, to
destroy and take away the Liberty of Humane Nature, which is the top of the
Image of God in Man. -- Whoever therefore shall be the Instrument of this
Glorious Restitution of things, shall be more than Cyrus, more than Alexander,
more than Augustus, more than Constantine, or Charles the Great.

Arise therefore against all Antichrists, i. e. Oppressors of Liberties, thou
King of France, King of Liberties! (for so the word signifies;) And succor the
Christian Nations wherever groaning under any Corporal or Spiritual yoke. Make
to cease unchristian Wars, and destroyings of one another, by Rapines, Fires,
Slaughters, etc. -- But especially free the Christian People from the
Slaughterhouse of Consciences, which they call the Inquisition, and execute by
Swords, Halters, Burnings alive, Prisons Banishments, and other kind of
Tortures. Let this most abominable Abomination be cast out of the Christian
World, as the manifest work of Satan by his Antichrists; which he began by the
impious Kill-Brother Cain, and continued by Pharao's, Readiness, Ahab's,
Jezebel's, Antiochus's, Caiphas's, Nero's, Julians, etc. but has brought to the
height only among us, these one or two Ages last past. -- Christ practiced or
commanded no force: but only to teach the Nations, and shake off the dust of
their feet, etc. -- There Is no necessity for Force and Violence; because
Religion cannot be forced nor compelled. -- They are plainly unteachable who do
not observe, that those former Persecutors gained nothing so, but at length to
ruin themselves. -- Christ lives, conquers, reigns with his: but Tyrants
perish one after another with theirs. Therefore take away that foolishness (as
Lactantius calls it) from the Christian People, most Christian King* Take away
that violent Tyranny of Consciences, and Bodies, from the Catholic People,
King of Liberties.

Most Serene of Kings! God and the Christian People expect nothing, but to
answer your Name, and what the Names and Titles given you by the Providence of
God, sound forth. Lewis, Deodat, XIV. most Christian King of France.
Lewis, Refuge of the People. Deodat, Given of God. XIV. -- Most Christian
King; Christ's Vicegerent, not Antichrists. Of France, i. e. Of Liberty.


The Devil, and malicious and evil-minded men, O King, will stand in your way;
which two things, you and all that love you for God's sake, ought to fear. For
the Devil, loath to have his Babylonish Kingdoms disturbed, will undoubtedly
withstand you. -- And malignant men seek your ruin, as they did of your
Heroic Ancestors, etc.

But wise men fear more, lest you your own self raise Impediments to your self
and to your Victories, O King! by harkning to evil Counselors and
Instruments, rather than to God. -- But and if you refuse, God will find out
another to plead his Cause.

We do not stir you up against the Church, greatest King! but for it. -- Nor
against the Roman (Church); but for it also, -- to restore it to its primitive
Apostolic state, from which it is deeply fallen. -- God threatens here to send
the barbarous Nations to reform us, if none else will lend an helping hand. --
Be entreated therefore by your own Salvation, and of your most ample Kingdom,
and the whole Worlds, not to let pass into the empty Air, these Voices both
Humane and Divine. --

The Holy Spirit write in your Heart, (if not in Golden yet in flaming Letters)
that twice-made Protestation, (to negligent Eli, High Priest, and disobedient
Saul)

Those that honor me, I will honor:
But those that contemn me, shall be contemned of me.
--.

In the Information to the Readers.

-- But are these things certain? or, are they not fables, contrived and
composed by the Art of some ingenious and witty to deceive?

It Is answered. It might be doubted at the first; and was everywhere doubted,
as the History of these things will show. But now there is no time for
doubting; seeing these things are confirmed both by abundant witnesses, and
confirmed by divine signs and miracles, as the same History will show, and now
publicly appears. And lastly, where the truth of the Predictions are in
apparent view, and the very event does seal their divine authority.

Machiavillian Politicians, Atheists, imagining the World to be ruled by Humane
Counsels, have laughed at these as Phanatick things. But behold! God shows
himself to be the Rector of the World. These things being powerfully fulfilled
which he has commanded to be fore-denounced in his Name. --

If any shall say therefore, This Book is the Trumpet to Wars. It must be
answered, It Is so indeed; but the Book of the Wars of the Lord, as the
Revelation of St. John, and the Book of all the Prophets; yea, and the Book of
the Gospel it self perhaps, according to that of Christ, Do you think that I
came to send Peace on Earth, etc. For this Book describes,

1. The Wars of God Jehovah against Idols. As Ezekiel. 30. 13.

2. The Wars of the Lamb against the Beast already heretofore sounded. Rev.
1714.

3. The Wars of the holy Spirit of God against all erroneous and unclean
spirits in the Earth. Zach. 13. 2.

-- I say, That here is the Revelation of the Revelation of Saint John, which
has distracted so many Commentators, differing among themselves. -- Therefore
this Book is a new Commentary upon the old Revelations of St. John; not a
Humane, but Divine. -- The former Edition was exposed to light with doubting
and trembling, and for censure only: This freely and confidently; not now so
much to judge whether these things be Divine; as to execute them as Divine, for
warning to the World. Now therefore we lift up our voice as a Trumpet, That
they may hear who had not heard, and they may believe who had not believed; and
may see with their eyes, and handle with their hands, who had not as yet
foresaw by Faith, That God is in the midst of humane affairs, and does
sometimes speak to men; doing nothing, but he reveals his secrets to his
servants the Prophets. -- There is need now of no vails, no secret muttering.
-- Now all must needs hear, both far and near, even to the utmost ends of the
Earth.

Be admonished therefore, O all ye, into whose hands this Book shall come, that
ye do not read it without St. John's Revelations, and without diverse reflection
to those things which are now a doing in the World. And then the very blind
cannot but see that it is God that here speaks, not man. And that it is God who
stirs up the Nations of the World one against another; not this or that man
predicting such things; or not one another themselves. And that it is God who
comes to chastize the Christians in his Indignation; not the Turks and the
Tartars. And lastly, that God himself is about to reform his Church; not the
King of France, or any other.

Cry unto God, O Christian People! Show pity, O God! Prevent blindness,
prevent stupidity. We are thy People. Permit not that all Visions be unto us as
a sealed Book which cannot be read. Do as thou have promised; that the day is
coming in which the Deaf shall hear the Word of the Book; and the eyes of the
Blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness; In thy Light beholding
light. And whosoever thou art that read these things, say with blind
Bartimeus, Lord that I may see!

Take this Book into your hands, O Christians of all parties! and know that
these things here offered, are like to those Ancient ones, the burden of
Babylon, the burden of Moab, the burden of Damascus, the burden of Egypt. --
Whoever art wise, despise not to be forewarned, and lay aside vain wrath
against these things. If these threatenings came from man, they might be
contemned, or the Plot counterplotted: But if from the terrible God who cannot
be resisted, take heed! -- But whether it be himself that speaks here, he will
undoubtedly know whoever reading all these things (together with the premised
Informations, and the conjoined History thereof) attentively with the fear of
God; and comparing all things with the events to which they dispose themselves,
shall purpose not to strive with the Fates, and the President of the Fates. If
any one be resolved the contrary, namely to think Ancient and new Prophecies an
antiquated thing no longer to be heeded, and the World now to be governed
either by Fortune, or Chance, or humane Counsels only, let him go on to stop
his ears, shut his eyes, and harden his heart past all remedy.

And lastly, he gives a large, sober and judicious Apology for the whole Book,
and Publication: -- Let them favorably hear me, All who fear God. As for me,
if for fear of men I do not what God and Conscience command, I expose my self
to his wrath, into whose hands it is intolerable to fall. -- If new hatreds,
calumnies, persecutions attend me for this new Edition, let the will of God be
done! I commit my self into his hands, either to protect me, or to deliver me
up into their hands who seek my soul. I am full of days (beyond David's age of
man) and full of the miseries of life; so that it is pleasure to say, It
suffices; Lord take away my soul! -- Away! let us not be wise above God! And
While he commands to speak, let us speak, whether any one will hear us or not.
-- Woe unto the soul, if seeing the sword, for fear of men he blow not the
Trumpet. -- I come unto thee, O Queen of Churches, the Roman, do not, I beseech
ye, suspect this Trumpet of God through any private grudge toward you, to
sound as it were a charge, either to stir up peoples hatred toward you, or
wars against you -- for it does not sound to war, but a retreat.

Men Catholics, and all that fear God, hear! Let any one of you read this
Prophetic Volumn a thousand times, he shall find it has no other scope than
what has in past Ages been expressed by the mouth of David and all the holy
Prophets; namely, that God will not always endure our Babylonish confusions,
and mutual Cain-like hatreds and slaughters; but sometime totally make an end
thereof, in the last days, etc. Isa. 2. Mich. 4. Zech. 9. and a thousand other
places, as well in the ancient Prophets, and Apocalyptical writings of the
Apostles, as in these revealed in our ages.

I protest therefore before God and his Angels, and Heaven and Earth, that this
Book is not published with an intent to injure any one; and that it is not to
be taken for a scandalous Libel, but an Historical Book, and Monitory to all
Christians without difference: That all may desist from mutual hatreds,
persecutions, slaughters, butcherings, etc. -- They are not dehortations
Humane; but of God himself, immoveably founded in the ancient Oracles,
reiterated only upon new occasions. The sum of which is, that all things must
be reformed among Christians, or all must perish. Mother of the Churches
throughout the West! Why do thou rage so against thy Sons, admonishing and
exhorting thee to repentance, and amendment? When this Book was quite ready,
and nothing of this Apology thought on, some Friends yet soliciting its
suppression, my Conscience did then dictate, that it was better to obey God,
rather then Men; and I cried unto the Lord; But he taught me to take unto me
this Buckler, and to lay open my heart before the eyes of Men, as it is known
in the sight of the Heart-knower. --

But I now ceasing here to speak unto you, O Christian People! Invocate thee,
who art God, for witness; that I have done, what thou have commanded, and
nothing else. Nor for any other end, then that thy last Will might become known
to them, to whom thou have commanded it should. Nor have prefaced these things
on any other hopes, then that men, rational Creatures, might learn to discern
and judge of things. -- Perform, O God! what thou have promised; Show, that
thou have spoken these things, and we compelled to write. And if any one would
hurt us, be thou a Wall of Fire unto us, as thou wast to Eliah. (as Dabricius
speaks, (Rev. 416.) Give into the Hearts of Kings, to do what thou have
commanded, by giving these things to Arbitrators, to weigh and consider; But to
such as are of a single heart, and have a light kindled by thy Law, and
Prophets; a light burning and shining in truth. (Rev. 259.) Give also, that
very Kings, and Princes, with Queens, and Priests, and all the People, may so
read these things, as Josias the King, with his Princes, the words of thy
threatenings, to tremble at thy Judgments, and repent. (Drabr. Rev. 325.) Thou
thy self, O Lord! work in those, to whom the voice of thy Trumpet shall reach,
that thy Word may be as fire, consuming the Abominations of Desolation. (Rev.
559.) And whomsoever these voices of thine shall sound about, that together thy
Celestial Light may shine about! That there may be none so blind with Zeal,
nor a Saul so obstinate in his Opinion, that may not fall down prostrate, and
cry, Lord! What will thou have me to do! Seeing the Abyss of thine Anger, to
have opened it is Jaws, to swallow up false Christians, except they repent*
(Rev. 325.) But if even yet, they will not permit thy Witnesses to speak, but
will command them to hold their peace, will stop their ears; it will be high
time that thy self, O Lord! speak for thine own self! Speak therefore! speak,
by the work it self; by accomplishment of the Predictions; that they may
understand that it is Thou who speak, and do* Bring forth thy Witnesses,
as thou have promised, whom the World may be full of. (Rev. 569.) O Lord, hear!
O Lord, forgive! O Lord, hearken, and do! Defer not, for thine own sake, O my
God!

In his Appeal, before his Epitome, such passages as these occur.

O thou Adorable! dwelling in the Heavens! give testimony, that Nothing is here
offered unto men in thy Name, which is feigned of men, and only covered over
with thy Name: That so if this Light of Revelations (for so the Book is called)
be lighted and kindled by thee in thy Church, it may be as inextinguishable, as
the light of the Sun and Stars in the Firmament: But if otherwise, and a trap
be laid for thy Christian People, bring to naught the fraud, with the Zeal of
thine own self, O Lord God of Zebaoth! That as every Plant which the Heavenly
Father has not planted, may be rooted up; so every light which the Father of
Lights, has not kindled, may be put out. Yea as Nadab and Abihu offering
strange fire before the Lord, which was not commanded, but were consumed with
fire from the Lord: So let the like Example be now shown, O God! That if any
have dared, and do dare to offer the figments of their own brain, in the Name
of the Light of thy Revelations, they may fall down dead in thy Presence, and
the Presence of all thy People. -- By thy commands, these things are brought to
pass. -- Behold! we again speak, seeing thou command and drivest us with
terrors! The words received, not from men: but from thee; whether they will
hear, or whether they will forbear. -- Never man spoke as Christ; and never
spoke Satan as these, even as God speak by his Prophets. (1.) Thundering against
the sins of men. (2.) Denouncing Punishments, and whence, except they repent.
(3.) Offering Grace to the Repentant. Which three so holy things, Satan neither
will, nor can counterfeit. And for men, they are above the wit of man;
especially of these men. Kotterus, an Artizan, and most simple Idiot.
Christina, a young Virgin, by her Age incapable of such things. Drabricius, an
old doting Man; (as his Enemies traduce him;) Do they not then speak things
more then humane? (Therefore being neither Humane nor Diabolical, they must
certainly be Divine.) But I cease to contend with Arguments, whether these
things be Divine, and not Humane, committing it to every man's own Conscience
and circumspection, and the divine Illumination. For as none can convince by
Arguments, whether it be Day or Ninght, except the Sun be risen, to cause day,
and men open their eyes: So none can better demonstrate, that God speaks, then
God himself speaking, and man attending to God; and that the Voice of God be
sealed also with Omnipotent Effects. That the very things may speak for
themselves, and their Author. (By the light only we see the Light, and things
done by day, etc.)

Will thou know therefore, O Man! whether God speaks here? three things are to
be done. (1.) To Pray, Lord! open mine eyes, that I may see whether it be thou
that speak, or a Spirit of Delusion. (2.) To hearken to the Voice of him
that speaks. That is to know and examine all things in order, and not be
ignorant of the particulars, and all circumstances. (3.) To look about
circumspectly, whether any such things be now a doing in the World or no, etc.

If for all this any one likes not to read this Book, let him do as he likes
best. Let him turn away his eyes, stop his cars, harden his heart, etc. And if
he will, add furies also, let him rear the Book in pieces, cut it, burn it, as
Joakim did, Jer. 36. Or fall on Gods Witnesses, as on Jeremiah, or Baruch, or
Steven, etc. But whosoever thou art, that art wise, take heed of Precipices.
It Is dangerous to meddle with Prophetic Matters. It Is most safe counsel to
abstain from these men. -- Specially the Persons that undergo and tell such
Dreams, Raptures, Apparitions, being otherwise innocent and harmless. Rather
say as the Pharisees of Paul, We have found no evil in this man: But if a
Spirit have spoken unto him, or an Angel, let us not fight against God. He
wages War with God, who by force seeks to oppress the Spirit of Prophecy. But
if by no obtestations we can obtain moderation with men, I humbly throw my self
prostrate with this whole Cause at thy feet, Lord Jesus! who art constituted
Judge of quick and dead; distinguish betwixt, and pronounce with thy true
Mouth, for the Truth, against a lie! --

But there are so many frauds and cheats in the World, will some say; But
however the Apostle bids, Despise not Prophecy. Try the Spirits whether they
be of God or no. Try all things, hold fast that which is Good. --

We will but add lastly, (having gone so far already, beyond our intent at the
first, in these Apologetick Discourses and Collections) the most weighty
passages, out of their solemn Prayer, and appeal to Christ, in that public
form, made for the trial of Drabicius, by the forecited dreadful Oath; All for
the further evidence and confirmation of the whole matter, with the candid and
ingenuous Reader; and to give the greater authority, if it may be, to such a
prophetic History, before we pass to the Prophesies themselves.

-- We know the impudence of that Enemy, who is so bold as to mix himself with
thy Sons, and to counterfeit an Angel of Light, when he is but the Prince of
Darkness; and to offer himself to be a Leader and Counselor to men, when he is
the worst and vilest Betrayer, and so to color over his Prophets and Apostles,
as to appear thy Prophets and Apostles. Yea, and to boast and set off himself
for thee; Antichrist for Christ. But we, alas! are too slow and heartless to
apprehend his so many Impostures, unless thou come in to relieve, O Helper!
He will confound, subvert, overturn all things. But where shall remain thy
Elogium, O Son of God! that thou appearedst to destroy the works of the Devil.
Appear therefore! O appear unto us also! in the present decision and danger we
now suffer from Satan! sowing among us Tares of scandalous Doctrine and Life,
and of false prophets, or else false zeal against them. Ah! suffer us not to be
befooled, this, or that, or the other way, for thy Holy Names sake! Let the
Father of Lies execute and perform the work of Seduction, and lying wonders in
them that perish; who have not believed the Truth. We thy humble Flock, who
have chosen to adhere to thy Word, Let thy holy Spirit preserve us from the
seduction of Errors! -- Or if it please thee to try us; yet let it not be as to
our souls. -- Whether as to Goods, Health, or Life it self, (as to Job, Paul,
and the Sons and Daughters of Job,) -- thy Will be done. But deliver not our
Souls to his power, we beseech thee! to wit, an Understanding and Will, to
befool, puzzle, and pervert us. That we may neither receive the works of Satan
for Gods; as Ahab; or abominate the Work of God for Satan's; as the Pharisees,
who deluded by Satan, execrated Christ as Satan; by it thereby blaspheming God
himself. --

Behold! behold! he goes on to sow the Tares of so many scandals amongst us
also, who suffer for thy Name! Also false Prophesies, as we fear, or false
Lights, to discern whether truly Divine, and from thee. -- But thou, O Lord!
with whom is light, and who alone see all things, and alone know to
distinguish Error from Truth; Why hold hold'st thou thy peace at these things?
Why hold'st thou thy peace so long, so many years? Is now thy Zeal or Fire
wanting to thy Clouds, to consume those that bring strange fire into thy
Presence; or to show who is thy true Prophet, or not; in the sight of all thy
People. Is there wanting a Sword to restrain Paschur, the Smiter of thy
Jeremiah's; or a blow to strike Hananias the false Prophet dead. (This year
thou shall die, and he did so, Jer. 28. 16, 17.) Or captivity to lead away
Amazias, the Informer against thy Amos.

O Lord, the Dominator! If any Crafts-master and Contriver of Cheats, have
befooled any one amongst us, so as to reckon his sad trifling Songs, or
mournful Ditties, for true Revelations Divine, and to vent them to others,
deceiving, and being deceived; Succor him! succor the rest of us! that we may
be as thy Mouth, separating the precious from the vile. But now, if any one of
us, willingly and knowingly, give up himself, as an Instrument to Satan, and in
thy Name, exercises impostures; Lord! make it manifest; and set forth such a
Messenger of Satan for an Example to the World. Thou sparedst not the Angels
that proudly sinned; neither spare these who imitating Satanical pride, draw
away themselves, and others, into Precipices of destruction.

On the other side, forsake not thy holy Jeremiahs, or Michea's, that are
bruised with a petulant Tongue or Hand; or thrust into Prison: But all
Paschurs, their Smiters, fill with fear on every side, every where, that their
eyes may see the truth of thy Words. --

And indeed accordingly, God begins to speak for himself, (so that there is no
need for man to speak for him more.) But where, and how? First, in the very Act
of Drabricius 's Oath. For there was this Dilemma. If I have not spoken thy
Words, O God! smite me in pieoes in the sight of all. If thine; show, that they
are thine, by fulfilling their truth. But behold! he does not yet sinite him;
(but suffer him to live very old) and on the contrary has smote several of his
Adversaries with death, according to the threatenings of God by him; and
particularly one of the Pastors, a new one, among those Exiles, who became a
new Adversary to him. Therefore he gives testimony, that they are not others
words. Secondly, In the Events themselves, much fulfilled, or daily fulfilling,
etc. Therefore what need of more words? etc. But to leave all to God, who
always accomplishes his words, first, or last, in his own time, and his own
way.

And thus we have at length brought a long-boding preamble to an end; which
has exceeded indeed the bounds due to this place: But being in, we knew not
how to give of, nor forbear such material passages, for the gaining greater
credit to the ensuing Relations; and which was almost absolutely necessary, to
prevent prejudice and offense against things of so strange a nature; That so
the Courteous Reader might the better take in good part the History, what ever
heed he give to the Prophecy.

For we divine full well, that most will but look upon them, as the Dreams or
Ravings of two old doting Seniors, now going down with their gray Hairs in
sorrow to the grave. But be they of God, Man, or the Devil, they are the
strangest things that ever yet appeared on the Stage of the World. And for that
end only we relate them here, as observable History, and matter of Fact; and
thereby, if they prove true, the future State of Europe. And have further
thought fit to represent the chief and most material Things, that Comenius has
recorded in behalf of their Truth and Verity, or wrote by way of Apology for
them. Which having done, we leave it to Time and Providence, to discover and
prove them, either Verities or Delusions; But however, whether one or the
other, most Remarkable. And yet one would think multitude of years should teach
wisdom, and make the experienced past all such dotages. Comenius is aged,
learned, sober and godly, known of all men; has had above forty years
knowledge and trial of these matters, as has been said before; And has observed
and delivered more convincing Arguments for their Divinity, than any has, or
can, against them. Has had the Testimony of the most illuminated Divines of
Christendom. Has found none to convince or condemn them of Imposture, upon fair
trial and examination; which most reasonable request, is all that is desired in
the face of all the Christian World, and ought not in justice be denied them;
Till which let all men be silent before God. For it is better to suspend
Judgment, than pass it rashly. None of these things have been done
clandestinely, or managed inconsiderately. They stand ready for the Bar of Man's
Tribunal; and in the mean while appeal to God. If they must needs be reproached
for these things, says Comenius, and that Christian People will sin against
God and their own Souls; for their parts, they will like Jeremy, appeal to God
and Men. First, And above all things, to God, the Supreme Witness, Judge and
Avenger of this Cause; and then to those who are in the place of God on Earth;
both Governors of States, and Churches too, humbly to plead this Cause before
them. --

Now if they be of Man, or the Devil, none ought to fear them, but contemn
them. And therefore none should be offended that they are thus brought to
light, and into English. For we intend them here, only as a most wonderful
History of the present Age, not to be passed over without taking notice of.
For, be they true, be they false, they will be found exceeding useful to the
Age, and to Posterity.

The Sum and Substance of the chiefest Prophesies of Kotterus, Christina, and
Drabricius, three late German Prophets.
OR, A Summary View of some most Solemn Divine Visions and Revelations, Had in
these our Days,
By Kotterus a Selesian, from the year, 1616, to 1624. By Christina a Bohemian
Virgin, in the years, 1627, 1628, 1629. By Drabricius a Moravian, from the
year, 1638, to 1668.
For the use of this Age.

Wherein, I. Lamentable Complaints are made of the extreme Corruption of the
Christian People. II. And the terrible Plagues of God, denounced against the
Impenitent. III. And how God will raze out the Babylon of false- Christians,
Jews, Turks, Pagans, and all Nations under Heaven; and set up a new truly
Catholic Church, to shine forth most gloriously with the Light of the Gifts of
God; and what its future State is now to be, even to the end of the World.


ALL Prophesies, before they have their effects, are Riddles and Ambiguities to
men: But when the time comes, and that happens which was prophesied, then the
Prophecy has a clear exposition. Irenaeus, Book 4. chapter 43.

Certainly, it must needs be confessed, That these things are once to be, or
have already been, or God to be accused of a lie. For there is so great
felicity promised to Christians in the Divine Oracles, and such perfect
knowledge of God, and obedience, and such universal Peace, as neither is, nor
ever has been in the World, etc. -- Castellio to our King Edward the Fourth.

I confess that I also was in that Opinion, that there were no Revelations of
Divine Authority since Christ and his Apostles; and so also I taught. But after
that I read these things more accurately, I use to say, That greater wisdom
shines forth in them, then that men can be their Authors, much less those from
whom they proceed: And that they seem to be things of a better Nature, and so
constantly continned such for many years; then that they can be attributed to
the Devil. -- Testimony of a great Divine.

Prophets are seldom or never believed. -- Another Divine.

Witness Jeremiah the Prophet, and all the Prophets of old.

Jerem. Chap. 36. And the Word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah, saying, Write in
a Book all the Words -- against Judah and Israel, and against all Nations -- If
perchance they will hear and return, -- Therefore Jeremiah called Baruch -- to
write from his Mouth all the Words of the Lord. -- And commanded him to go into
the Temple, and to read them before the People. -- Who did so. -- Which thing
being known, the Princes assembled in the House of the King, and sent to Baruch
to come unto them, with that Volumn, and said unto him, Sit and read these
things in our Ears. And he read; who when they had heard, -- were astonished;
saying every one to his next Neighbor, We ought to tell all these words to the
King. But they said unto Baruch, Go and hide thy self, thou and Jeremiah. --
And they went in unto the King. -- Who when he had read three or four Leaves,
he cut it with his Penknife, and cast it into the fire. Neither were they
afraid, neither the King nor his Servants; but commanded to apprehend them. But
the Lord hid them. -- And the Word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah, saying, Take
another Volumn, and write in it all the former words; and thou shall say unto
the King, -- Thou have burnt the Book; -- Therefore I will punish -- and bring
all the evil I have pronounced. -- And Baruch wrote from his Mouth all the
former words, -- And there were added besides uuto them many like words.

The Lord said unto me, Write these things, and hasten to divulge many hundred
Copies through all parts of the World. For this is my Will, that all Nations of
the Earth read those things which I have spoke unto thee. Drab. Rev. 55.

Now for these Prophesies, we shall first give you the scope and sum of them
beforehand in general, and then come to the Revelations and Visions themselves,
in particular.

The utmost scope of all these Revelations is, according to the manner of the
Ancient Prophets. (1.) To show unto Christians the manifold sins and
aberrations wherewith they have provoked, and do provoke God; and sad
Lamentations thereupon. (2.) To discover the Causes of the present Plagues and
Judgments, wherewith God breaks in pieces the World; and the Causes why Gods
Wrath waxes hot so against Christendom; and to excite and forewarn men to
attend seriously to the terrible threatenings of Wrath, and comfortable promises
of Grace. (3.) To show the way of escaping the Wrath, and preventing the last
destruction, and of obtaining the Grace. (1.) By general and universal
Humiliation, Repentance, Reformation and Amendment. (2.) By universal mutual
Love, Charity, and peaceableness one with another, of all Parties, Sects, and
Religions; That all Names of distinction be laid aside, and factious
contendings about Opinions cease; and that one common Faith and Love prevail
among Christians of all sorts, to preserve the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond
of Peace. And that all wicked unchristian-Christian Wars and Fightings, and
such cruel devourings of one another, not becoming that Name, whether for
Religion, or worldly Interests, be laid aside. And (3.) by offering and
communicating the same common Mercy and Benefit, that is, the Light and
Blessing of the Gospel, and thereby Universal Peace, Truth, Righteousness, and
Salvation to the Nations of the Earth. For that now God would have all the
World reformed, and blessed with all true Felicities, and Universal Salvation,
both Temporal and Eternal. In a word the Kingdom of God come, and the State of
the Divine and Holy Life, triumph, and be exalted over the Animal, Sensual,
Beastial, and Devilish. (4.) And lastly, That otherwise Christendom shall feel
the Power of Gods Anger, and of his wonderful Judgments; and the Vials of his
Wrath be poured out, etc. For that Christians ought first to reform, and begin
this Universal Restitution. Else that God will find others, but destroy them,
by one another; or by letting in the Barbarous Nations, the Turks and Tartars,
etc. in upon them. That the time of destroying and overturning is at hand. This
and such like is their general scope.

And more particularly to stir up Princes, Priests, and People, all to their
particular Duties. Kings, to execute the call of their high Function. To do the
Will and Work of God on Earth. i. e. To reform both Church and State; and to
take unto them their Scepters, and Authority, committed to them of God, out of
the hands of the Antichristian usurper, etc. To call a General Council, in
order to a Universal Peace, and Unanimity in Christendom; and to agree for God
and Religion; for the public good both of Church and State; For that God will
put it into their hearts to fulfill his Will, and agree, (or make one Mind and
Will) and no longer give their Kingdoms to the Beast; But that the Words of God
shall be fulfilled; To destroy Babylon, and all her Abominations and Idols,
etc. and to rule the World peacefully, under the Banner of Christ; and
universally reform it out of all its horrible confusions and disorders,
according to the Will, that is, the Word of God, etc.

And all Ecclesiastics, Angels of the Churches, Pastors, Bishops, and Priests,
to perform the Ministry of their high Calling, and the Service of God, and the
Church; to restore the Primitive Reformation, and do their first Works, and
repent, and no longer neglect the Catholic Church of God, through the whole
World, for worldly Dominion, Honors, Riches, and Interests: Nor to hinder
Universal Reformation, by wrangling and contesting for Opinions, Ceremonies,
Revenues, Prerogatives, and Privileges, and such like vanities; but rather to
promote Catholic Charity and Indulgence, and practice Christian Humility,
Self-denial, and all the excellent virtues of the best Religion in the World,
which they are Chieftains of; and to Sacrifice all their dearest concerns for
the Salvation of Men; And not mind their own things, but the things of Jesus
Christ, etc.

And all Christians to endeavor and begin Reformation generally in their
several places. For that now is the time of Gods reforming the World more then
ever; That toward the end thereof, it may be as from the beginning, viz. one
God, and one Worship of God, in Spirit and in Truth, without Idols and false
Godds, and false Worships; That all may inhabit peaceably the Earth, without
Wars, Fightings, Hatreds, Contentions, Envyings, Strifes, and without Sects and
Parties; lest his Wrath break forth upon them to the utmost, and there be no
Remedy for the Present Generation. All which things to be sure, are no other
then was the drist of all the Prophets, and extraordinary Messengers of God to
Men, of old; when that all ordinary Persons, Kings, Princes, Priests, or
People, were become so corrupt and exorbitant, that there were none that did
his duty rightly: but all desperately transgressed the Law of their God, and
provoked his Wrath without measure. For what else was their Burdens, but sad
Lamentations for the Peoples sins and wickedness; Exhortations to Repentance
and amendment; And denunciations of Grace upon Repentance, and of Wrath upon
Impenitence? etc. And what else are these likewise, as to their main Scope and
Intent?

The Sum and Substance of them in General, now follows. The Sum of all these
Prophesies in the General, is the same with all the Ancient Prophets, and
indeed an Explication of them; concerning the State of the Church in the last
days; And that our present Age, is the last time of the World, wherein shall
be fully and finally accomplished all Scripture Prophesies. I. Babylon the
Great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, typified by the
old, to fall, and its Builders to be dispersed, Genesis 11. Jerem. 50. and 55.
Revel. 18. II. The Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, to destroy the
great Image of Iron and Clay; and increase into a great Mountain, filling the
whole Earth, Dan. 2. III. The very Relics of all Nimrodian Tyranies and
Oppressions, to be abolished quite, and the Kingdoms given to the Saints of the
most high* Dan. 7. IV. Both the Beasts in the Revelations, The greater with
seven Heads, blaspheming God, and making War against the Saints; and the lesser
with two Horns, counterfeiting a Lamb; yet speaking like a Dragon, now to be
slain, Rev. 13. V. The great Harvest and Vintage of the whole Earth, at hand,
Rev. 14. VI. All the Vials of Gods Wrath a pouring forth upon the Earth, Rev.
16. VII. Till the great Beast that carries the Whore, with seven Heads and ten
Horns, be destroyed: and the Whore her self, forsaken by her ten Horns (viz.
Kings, her once defenders and lovers) be burnt with fire, Rev. 17. VIII. The
Lamb to be Victor over all Enemies. Satan bound in the bottomless Pit for a
thousand years. The Church to be quiet, Rev. 20. IX. And then the Marriage of
the Lamb to be solemnized under the whole Heavens, Rev. 19. X. And the Church
to appear in its Splendor and Glory, such as the Prophets have heretofore
described of old, Isa. 60. Rev. 21.


And indeed these Books of the three Prophets, are a very Revelation of the
Revelation of St. John, to end and decide all further contentious Comments
thereabouts. They being a new Comment, upon that old Revelation, not Humane,
but Divine; explaining what is that Babylonish Beast making War with the
Saints; and the great Whore, the Mother of Harlots, etc. riding upon the Beast;
and who are those Kings commanded from God to execute the Judgment upon Both.
And that those destroyers of Babylon, are now Born, now Chosen, and Called. And
that this whole affair is now in doing. And now shortly to be Sealed and
concluded by a full and complete effect, in the sight of Heaven and Earth. And
that we are now under the sixth Seal, sixth Trumpet, sixth Vial. That is, That
upon our times happens the great Earthquake, shaking the whole frame of Heaven,
both of Church and State, etc. -- and the day of his great Wrath come. -- And
the day of the sixth Trumpet; when the Angels, bound at the great River
Euphrates, shall be loosed, and come and kill the third part of men with Fire,
and Smoke, and Brimstome; although the rest that escape, repent not. -- And the
sixth Vial poured forth upon the great River Euphrates, to prepare a way for
the Kings of the East to root out Babylon; the unclean Spirits of Frogs,
mustering up heaps of Armies against them in vain; to the Battle of the great
Day of the Lord God Omnipotent; Which Day shall come as a Thief, on a sudden
and unlooked for. -- That so the seventh Seal being opened, Silence may be in
the Heaven of the Church: And that the seventh Trumpet sounding the Mystery of
God, foretold by his Servants, the Prophets, may be finished; Namely, That all
the Kingdoms of the World, may become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his
Christ's, etc. -- And that the seventh Vial being poured forth, there may be
Voices, and Thunders, and Lightnings, and Earthquakes, such as have not been
since men have been upon the Earth; whereby the Cities of the Nations may fall,
and great Babylon it self, etc. --

More expressly and particularly. I. That the World is become as corrupt now, as
it was in the days of Noah, before the Flood; and in Egypt, Babylon and
Jerusalem, when she rebelled against God; especially the Christian Nations; By
name, Germany and Italy. II. That the Roman Pope, is the chief cause of all the
confusions in the World; as who, having by force and fraud, seized on the
Government of the whole Church, has transformed the Spiritual Kingdom of
Christ (which is not of this World) into an earthly Kingdom; and with earthly
Arms and Counsels seeking to propagate it, fills all things with frauds, and
violence; as the true Antichrist, the Great and Babylonish Whore, drunk with
the Blood of the Saints. III. That the Beast, that carries the Whore, is the
Roman Empire; and particularly in some latter Ages, the House of Austria, the
spoyer or layer waste of the purer Church. IV. That God will no longer endure
these confusions and persecutions of the Church, and tyranny of Consciences;
but will again destroy the World of the ungodly, with a deluge of Blood. And
therefore that these things draw nigh. V. And to that end, That he will shake
Heaven and Earth; that is, stir up all the Nations of the whole World, against
one another; to bring on unheard of confusions of things, by most furious Wars,
through all parts of the Earth. VI. The issue of which Wars, to be, the
destruction of the Pope with his Kingdom; and the overturning of his principal
Supporter, the House of Austria. VII. And that by the Nations, provoked by
their Tyranny; flocking, as it were, thereto from the four Quarters of the
World. VIII. Yet the principal People, to be the Northern and the Eastern. IX.
By name, the Swedes, with their King; the Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and the
House of Ragotzi, were commanded to be called forth. X. But if these would not;
That then the Turks, the Tartars, and the Moscovites were about to be called by
God; Also the French with others from the West; to execute the Judgments of
God, in Germany, Italy, Spain. XI. And to come with unheard of swiftness; in
one Year, Month, Day, Hour; to the astonishment of the whole World. XII. And
the Turks, and Tartars, after execution done, to return with the Light of the
Gospel for a Reward. XIII. And Universal Reformation to follow; and change of
Things for the better, through all Nations of the World. XIV. The Laws and form
of which Reformation, are here also prescribed; Namely, Idols totally to
perish; and the most pure Spiritual Worship of God, who is a Spirit, every
where to reflourish, with unity of Faith and Order. XV. And then indeed to be
the peaceful, illuminate, Religious State of the World, and of the Church under
the whole Heavens; Universal illumination of the Gentiles; the Earth to be
filled with the Knowledge and Righteousness of the Lord; And the Kingdoms of
the World to become the Kingdom of the Lord, and of his Christ; Universal
Liberty, without tyranny and slavery of Body and Soul; Universal Unanimity,
without Wars, Quarrels, Dissentions, Divisions, Schisms, Sects, and Factions;
In one word, Universal Righteousness, Peace, and Love, even 'till the time when
Satan shall again break loose and trouble things: But Christ by the last and
final Fire, shall destroy the wicked and ungodly with the World it self; And
(the Universal Judgment of Quick and Dead being finished) shall begin Eternity
it self.


These are the main Things and Matters, which even all the three, Kotter,
Christina, and Drabricius especially, do prophecy and treat of. And withal we
are taught here, I. That Christ, the Savior of the World, is in no wise
partial: But that in every Nation, he that fears God, and works
Righteousness, is accepted of him. II. And for that reason, in vain do men cry,
Here is Christ! or there he is! For that he is every where, and would be
sought, found, acknowledged, loved, and worshipped every where; envying none
the participation of Salvation. III. That our violent Disputes about the
Articles of Faith, how wise soever they seem to us, are but foolishness with
God. IV. But that hatreds for differences in Faith, and seekings to Lord it
over one another, are a mere abomination. V. That to sit in the Chair of Moses,
or of Christ, or of Peter; without the verity of the Doctrine, and Life of
Moses, Christ, and Peter, is a vain thing; As also to boast of the Reformed
Religion in Doctrine, and Ceremonies, without a Reformed Life. VI. That now
Christ will tolerate no more, none for Paul's, for Apollo's, for Cephas's; But
only his Disciples, Friends, and Brethren, of what Party soever; saluting one
another mutually, as fellow-Disciples, fellow-Brethren, Fellow Servants. VII.
And that all Nations are about to be called to this Fraternity of Christ, and
Communion of Saints; And that God will have all things reformed after his own
Mind and good Pleasure. VIII. And that till this be, nothing but concitations
(and commotions) of all the Nations, one against another; and breaking one
another to pieces, etc.


And so now we come at length to the Prophesies themselves, in particular,
(having given you first, this general sum, and comprehension of them, by
Comenius) that so you may have some kind of view, and apprehension of their
peculiar Nature, Manner, and particular Circumstances. The chief whereof, and
their chief Passages, we shall only cull out, as abundantly sufficient for the
design of this Table.

And here Kotter's first offer themselves to us. Kotter Citizen and Tanner of
Sprottavia. Born in the Year, 1585. Prophesied from the Year 1616, to 1624.
Dyed in the Year 1647. Of his Age 62.


The sum of whose Prophesies in general, was to denounce War, Famine, and
Pestilence; which he was commanded to prophecy of, in the year 1616. when all
things were in profound peace yet throughout Europe. Then, (the Wars in Bohemia
beginning, and he stirred up by a new apparition of Angels, with new commands
to depose these things before the Magistrates, after three years former
silence) to prophecy ruin to the Empire and Popedom; And the last Universal
Plagues to be executed by the Oriental Monarch, with a deluge of Nations, etc.
Commotions of Kingdoms one against another, etc. And lastly happy and glorious
times after the fall of Babylon, etc. till the last Judgment, etc.

But to the Visions themselves. severe Inspection over the Press; In so much
that waiting almost a Year for an opportunity, (after all this had been
printed) we could by no means find any. And therefore are forced to break off
here abruptly and imperfectly; and so to let it come abroad unfinished into the
World. Which we hope the Courteous Reader will pardon, and accept heartily of
this as it is, till some better opportunity be found to publish the Prophesies
by themselves apart. And for the mean while, you have already here, the sum and
substance of them in the general; which may suffice in part, (upon such an
occasion especially) for this General Table, without a further taste of them in
particular.

We can but therefore only add the general Sum of the other Two's Prophesies
likewise in particular, viz. as follows.

Christina Poniatovia of Duchnick. Born in the Year, 1610. Prophesied in the
Years 1627, 1628, and 1629. Died in the Year 1644.


The Sum of her Prophesies in general thus. The Persecution waxing hot against
the Evangelicks in Bohemia, and the Proscription or Banishment of the Pastors
of the Churches, with all the Nobility, being now published; In the Year 1627;
it pleased God to raise up this Noble Virgin, the Daughter of a Noble, Godly,
learned Minister of the Divine Word; but a most stiff and fierce opposer of new
Revelations. Many things were represented to her in Ecstasies. As the Crown of
Life for Believers; The Marriage of the Lamb, etc. Then the Judgments of God
upon the Wicked, forestalling the Kingdom of Christ; and their horrible
punishments; and the Vengeance of God to be executed, by Nations called from
the North, and from the East. By name, Antichrist with his false Worships to be
rooted out, and his whole Kingdom burnt up, with the Fire of Gods Zeal, as a
Nest of all Abominations. Set forth further under the Fall of Babylon, and all
her Adherents, etc. All which were represented under innumerable and wonderful
Visions and Revelations. She was also commanded to write Epistles to the
Executors of Gods Judgments: and to foreshew places of Refuge for the Exiles,
with comfortable praedictions of their Return, etc. The great Battle was shown
her, with the Victory of the Lamb, though deferred for a time; and the
miserable oppression of the Church during that time: Yet notwithstanding that
Antichrist was to be cast down, with his Defender. For a praeludium of which,
She was commanded to denounce Destruction to their chief Squire, or Arm-Bearer,
General Wallestein; both by Writing, and by word of Mouth, in his very
presence. For she was sent to him with a threatening Epistle. Then afterward
she was commanded to go out of Bohemia into Poland, and to lead others the way
into Exile. Where also she had many Revelations, and suffered many grievous
bodily afflictions; and at last a kind of Death, or rather a true one, and
Resurrection, as it were, from the Dead.

Nicholas Drabricius a Moravian. Born in the year, 1588. Called to the Ministry
of the Church, 1616. Driven into Exile for the Gospel, 1628. Called to the Work
of a Prophet, 1638.
And continuing therein to this day.

The sum of whose Prophesies in general, Comenius gives also briefly thus.
Ragotzi, Prince of Transylvania, and a new King of Swede, (to be elected out of
the House of the Palatine, and a little after elected) are commanded to oppose
themselves, against all Oppressors of Liberty of Conscience. But when these
would not execute their commands, but do their own things, and that both were
taken away from the midst, (according to so many iterated Comminations) He is
commanded to call upon the Monarchs of greater Nations; Namely, (for to
chastize the sins of corrupt Christianity, or Christendom, and to abolish
Idolatry) the Emperor of the Turks, with the Nations of the East: But to repair
the State of the Christian Affairs, (and as long since God spoke of this last
time, by Isaiah, To build the old waste Places, to raise up the Foundations of
many Generations: And they shall be called the Repairers of the Breach, the
Restorers of Paths to dwell in) the King of France, with the Nations of the
West. Then which two, none are more powerful; If God once put it into their
hearts to perform his Will, though things seem to run cross at present. All
which things, with many others in particular, were communicated to him by God,
under innumerable strange and wonderful Visions and Revelations, continued for
so many years together, even to this very day.

Whose Books, says one, will exercise the Wits both of Learned and Unlearned,
so long, 'till God shows what lies under by the Events themselves. At length ye
shall understand his Counsel. At last, ye shall consider it perfectly, Jer. 23.
20.

And yet before we conclude, we have stole a few Sheets more out from among the
Prophesies, etc. For because that they so much concern the present Argument we
have hitherto been upon; Namely, the confirmation of the Verity and Divinity of
these Prophesies, which they tend mightily unto. And therefore, seeing we could
not produce the Prophesies; It was pertinent, and requisice to subjoyn These to
the foregoing Matters, before we quite break off and conclude.

The first Relation of Kotter before the Senate, of Angelical Revelations, had
by him for three years before, in the year, 1616.
ON the 29 th of August, 1619. Christopher Kotter appeared before the Senate of
the City Sprottavia, who were the Magistrates thereof; and having craved and
obtained liberty to speak, thus began. That he acknowledged that he stood
before them, to whom he was bound, by the Holy Law of an Oath, to speak nothing
but Truth. And that therefore in the present peculiar cause, for which he
appeared, he would in good faith relate nothing else, but what in very deed and
in truth happened to him, and is wont still to happen. He therefore declared,
that on June 11. 1616. it happened, that going to Gorlitz, he lodged at
Newhammer; whence the next morning being gone on his way, and past Gorlitz
Wood, and entered into an open plain, intending for Langenovia, his birthplace,
There approached a certain man on one side of him, of a most comely feature, in
Mourning Apparel, and black Boots; whom he suspected to be some Mine-man,
because the Neighborhood abounded with Iron Mines; but he drew nearer, and
lovingly saluted Christopher; inquiring, Whither he was going? And that
returning his salutations, he answered to his inquiries; And that while, by
this means, they came at length to familiar Speeches, and had proceeded almost
four Miles in company together on their way, discoursing with one another, it
fell out that entering into some narrow passages of the Road, this Companion
addressing himself more roughly to Christopher then he had used, cries out, Ho!
Thou man! I have something to tell thee which thou must relate to the
Magistrates Ecclesiastics and Saecular. Christopher amazed at these things,
and not knowing what should be the matter, the other went on, That the Wrath of
God is kindled against Mankind, and it hastens to inflict punishments in fury,
except they repent. To punish especially that pride, impurity, and contempt of
God, and of the Divine Word. When he had said these things, they were come to
the Meadow of Melchior Frank; where, because a Ditch was to be passed,
Christopher going over the little Bridge first, the other behind his back,
vanished he knew not whither, and so went on alone to Langenovia; but from
thence, after he had tarried a night with his Mother, to Gorlitz, to his
quondam Master in his Craft. And on the 14 th of March, entering the Temple,
heard a Sermon: and that when his thoughts disturbed so, from this late
consternation, could not be quiet; for his mind sake, he went even to the
Chapel, which they call Christ's Sepulcher. That there, the person beheld
lately, again appeared unto him, and repeating the same words, disappeared.
That the next day following, after Prayers in the Temple, and Sermon heard,
returning into the Suburbs, the self same person returned, accompanying him,
and reiterating what he had before said, vanished. That after this, going to
Langenovia, he remained a whole week with his Mother, lame of his feet, and
molested with many disquietments of mind. But that when after he was returning
back again to his business, to the City, that person met him in his Fathers
Field, recalling those former things to his memory. That thence betaking
himself homewards, and lodging at Sagan, as he went to Church in the morning,
the same Man met him again in the street, in the same feature, yet not in
mourning habit now, but of a Jacynth color. That he therefore, after Sermon,
went to the chief Pastor of the Church, M. Meisner, and related the Matter, as
it had happened, and desired advice. Who gave him this, That continuing fervent
prayers to God, he would, for a little while longer, suppress this thing in
silence, and as much as he could, shake those things out of his mind; mindful
of that, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. Yet adding, that
he would not be wanting to his duty to exhort men to Repentance; and that, that
Vision, if it came from God, as Author, would return again. That Christopher
therefore, obtaining this answer, went away, and going his way home, makes his
Kinsman, (whom he had turned a little out of the way in his Journey to see) and
(when at home) his Wife also, conscious to the whole matter. Being yet
admonished on all hands, to hold his peace, lest the fame thereof being carried
to the Magistrates or the Ministers, he might run some danger. And from that
time, that he never made any one acquainted with it; yet perpetually disquieted
in his own Conscience; till on the 14 th of April, 1619. The same person
clothed in Jacynth habit, appeared unto him again. At which sight, he was now,
not only not afrighted, but filled through and through with a certain intimate
and unwonted joy. But being asked (after first saluting of him) whether he had
taken care of the things he had commanded him; and when, not knowing what to
answer, he stood mute, That that man, with eyes lifted up to Heaven, said, Not
unto us, not unto us, O Lord! but unto thy Name give Glory! And turning to
Christopher, said on, But why did you neglect to perform that? Or has not thy
God deserved a greater thing than this at thy hands? Who has Created,
Redeemed, Sanctified, and Regenerated thee to the hope of eternal Life? Behold!
thy God has delivered up his Son to death for thy sake! and do thou refuse
to lend him thy Tongue? and to yield thy self an Instrument of his Work? I
declare plainly unto thee, except thou shall do this thing, that thou shall not
have quiet in thine heart. Nor this only, but thy Name also shall be blotted
out of the Book of Life. Why do thou fear men that are lighter then the
Leaves of the Trees, making a noise? Who indeed shall pass this threefold
Judgment and Censure upon these things? Some shall threaten thee, others shall
wonder, most shall slight. But thou, take heed thou regard none of these
things! Then the Spirit began to inform him, That the face of the present
times, was partly joyful, partly sorrowful. Joyful, for that they were times of
Grace, in which the Light of the Divine Word has shined in such clear
brightness unto men; sorrowful, for that men would not see this Light, but
keept their hearts darkened with Errors and infidelity. That these things were
more at large explained by the Spirit, but that all things were not retained in
his memory. At length that the Spirit said, Unless men shall go about
seriously, and in good earnest to amend themselves, That God was about to
punish them grievously with Sword, Famine, and Pestilence. And reaching forth
his right hand to Christopher, warned him further, to put off all fear. That no
hurt should besal him; and lastly added thereto, I will hasten my Word to
accomplish it. And that these things said, he disappeared. But that he was left
there alone, amazed at first, then casting his eyes round about, on all parts,
he saw, on one side, a white company of them that sung and tryumphed; but on
the other, a black company of them that wailed and howled; and that being
astonished with the Vision, he returned home.

In the Year 1620.
August 1. As he was again going to Gorlitz, the same Person that had so often
before, appeared now also unto him, while he bent his course from Newhammer to
Schonberg, at nine a clock in the Morning, inquiring of him, Whether he had
dispatched his Commands. I have, said he, but got nothing but mocks for my
pains. He went on admonishing, That without regarding those things, he would
boldly do the business. For that he had more things to make known unto him, not
only concerning men of inferior rank, but the King of Bohemia himself, etc. --

November 25. After several wonderful Visions, -- Then the Spirit crying unto
him by name, enjoined him to relate all those things he had seen, etc. to the
Senate. Commanding him also to take a Journey to the King, with other Messages,
etc. All which things accordingly Christopher rehearsed on the 30 th of
November, in open Court, at Sprottavia, the whole Council of the Senate, the
Kings Judge, and the Pastors of the Church present.

December the first, Being delivered by the Magistrates to the Pastors of
Sprottavia, he suffered a severe examination, That as he would be safe of his
Salvation, he would plainly declare whence he had these things; or whether or
no he did not feign them; or being feigned by some one else, he did not spread
them in the name of Visions. They inculcated to him, That he would consider
well, how great things they were he undertook; what an horrible crime he would
incur, if there were deceit underhand; To how great danger he exposed his
Conscience; how he would stir up the Wrath of God and men against him, and
involve Wife, Children, and many others with himself, into great mischief. He
having heard all things with a cheerful mind, and nothing afraid, Answered,
That he took upon him all the Curses; And wished all those things might happen,
if he ever spoke any thing besides those which he saw, and heard, and received
in command; That no such things ever happened to him, so much as in a dream; much
less was feigned by himself, a man ignorant of all things; Nor that any of
those things were received, or heard from any man; But that all those things
were so represented to him by Visions. But whether the Spirit was a good or
evil one, he could not discern; and therefore asked counsel and information,
whether any thing here was contrary to the express Word of God, or no? But yet
that himself judged him a good Spirit.

December the 5th, Commanded by the Spirit, he went to Breslaw to the King. And
on the 10th, being by means of the Lord Wilpret, Governor of the Kings
Treasury, (through the Dukedom of Glocovia) admitted unto Audience of the King,
(viz. Frederick) in the presence of three Princes, he declared all those things
which were commanded him, etc. --

In the Year 1621.
On the 9 th of January, going to Sagan, a little Youth, as it were, of six or
seven years old, appeared unto him, yet not in that form of countenance, nor
the same sound of voice as the former Spirit had; and wearing a three colored
habit, White, Sky and Flame-colour. This Spirit he conjured by the living God
who he was. And on bended knees, adored Jesus the Son of God; That seeing he
was that Savior, who has bruised the head of the Serpent, and came into the
World to destroy the works of the Devil, that through his Mercy and Merit, he
would vouchsafe him this Grace, That if this Vision was any Spectre or Ghost,
or any Enchantment of Satan, that he might be delivered from it. That he would
grant him to know it, and would make his Conscience quiet. Having poured out
this Prayer unto Christ, on a sudden he felt in his heart so great solace and
joy, that he could not express in words. But the Youth, calling him by name,
spoke to him in these words, I do not draw thee away from God, but draw thee
unto God, as has been before signified unto thee. And in the first place, I
show unto thee Christ and his Merit, in which alone only consists Salvation.
Remember therefore Christ crucified. But that thou desire to be made more
certain who I am, Know that I am sent from God, one of the seven Angels,
standing before the Face of God, etc. --

March 20. He went a Journey accompanied with a Friend* but his Angel appearing
unto him, led him out of his way into the Field, and asked him, If he had done
his Errand to the King? Who said, He had: but few gave heed; That he did expose
himself to laughter. The Angel comforts him, That he would not regard, though
none at all believed: And as the Prophet Elisha answered the unbelieving
Captain of Samaria, Thou shall see, but shall not enjoy: So it shall be with
them that will not believe. They shall see, but receive no benefit, etc. And
after several Visions and Discourses, the Angel also informed him what he
should answer Mockers; If any one say unto thee, How dare thou utter such
things too high for thee, nor ever likely to come to pass? Answer thou, Our
Conversation is in Heaven, from whence we expect our Savior Jesus Christ. They
will say, How thou a mortal man art not afraid to speak of Heavenly Things? Say
thou, I am indeed mortal, but I believe Christ will reform this mortal body,
and fashion it like his glorious Body. They will urge, That thy Predictions are
against reason. Thou shall answer, That God has made all things subject to
himself; nor is his hand shortened, that he cannot save; nor is any thing at
length impossible to him. Then the Angel enlarged this Discourse with an
excellent Passion Sermon, etc. --

Innumerable Instances of this kind might be collected out of his Prophesies,
but these may suffice, only one thing must not be omitted, to be left to the
prudent Readers consideration. And it is this.

In one of his Prophesies, the Burning of a great City is given, as a Character
of the time for fulfilling of these things. The words run thus.

-- But what the great Lion said, he was forbidden to reveal. For it was said
unto him, Let that day pass away first, wherein a certain great City shall be
burnt down with the flame of Fire. For then shall be fulfilled what the Lion
has spoken. These words seal thou up: but in the mean while, keep them to thy
self. --

The Speech or Sermon of the great Lion was uttered twice; first in a Lions;
secondly in a Humane shape, in the year 1623. And which he was commanded to
seal up; 'till when he was delivered out of Prison, in the year 1628. and then
he had liberty to declare it, etc.

Note. The Burning of a great City, is given as a Character and Mark of the
accomplishment of these things. Which the Northern Deluge, which presently
followed, pouring it self over all Germany, made us understand of the famour
City of Magdeburg* (In the Year one thousand six hundred thirty one) But
because there was then a return back of things, and a greater City
Constantinople, (wherein, in the year 1660. July 24, 25, 26. above 70000 Houses
were consumed; the eighth part of the City, and that the worser, scarce
remaining;) It is to be considered, Whether this Character do not square to
this rather. Certainly, weighing well the words of the great Lion, (in the
Prophesies) and considering the course of Modern Affairs, it will appear that
things are greatly changed by the approach of the Oriental Locusts. For
presently, in the Year following, 1661. the Turks possessed Waradin, the Key of
Hungary and Poland; and thence marching onward, subdued Transylvania, Walachia,
and Moldavia; now knocking at the Gates of Hungary; and what hereafter may be
done, God knows. These Divine Predictions, deservedly teach us, not to sleep
certainly, but to attend Comenius Annotat. But what and if the Great London,
the most considerable City in the World, for the Protestant Interest, and the
most envyed by the Papistical; and whose Burning was so remarkable, and in the
most Ominous Year too in all the Worlds account, 1666. and not without
suspicion of their finger in the Fire; and which, by most serious Christians,
is judged, a notorious Omen, to the great City Babylon, the Mother of Harlots,
to be burnt with Fire, should be here meant? Certainly it deserves some
consideration at least, and not to be wholly slighted and passed over; not so
much as taking the least notice thereof at all.

An Account of Christina's raising from the Dead, as it were, and return to
Life, writ with her own hand, and sealed up on the Monday following, (that
being on the Saturday) and which she annexed for a close to her Revelations.
IN the year 1627. December 30. when being afflicted with an heavy disease, I
wished for death; it was said unto me from the Lord, That yet was not the time,
but that I should remain in this Mortality, till the Term come, which he
himself had put. But when I besought that that Term also might be shown unto
me, to prepare my self so much the more vigilently for death. He answered,
There shall be yet a year added to thy life, in which I will use thee for my
works. He added, But do thou not desire to supervive, when Jehovah shall put
on strength, and his glorious Majesty? And when he shall destroy his Enemies?
And when the mighty shall be scattered by him; and so those things come to pass
which have been foretold thee. I answered thereunto, Lord! thou know that
thy Eternal Delights are sweeter to me, then all those things which thou
revealest unto me. But he rebuked my impatience, dehorting me from weariness;
so he went away from me. Now all the following year, 1628, He made no mention
of my life or death, except in the last Vision. Moreover, that I was to
undergo also one disease. Then in 1629. January the 9 th, It was declared unto
me by an Angel, that I should be visited from the Lord in a Dream with a
Disease, by name, the Apoplexy; which also came the same day in the evening. I
therefore, because the year was now gone, the Visions had now ceased, believed
that the very time was now approaching, which the Lord had spoke concerning.
And that I should not now escape this Disease, I therefore prepared my self in
mind and conscience, and my desire was to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.
Which hope, certain antecedent signs also did strengthen. As were certain
knockings, or beatings under my Bed (and under the next Table) four several
evenings; (many that visited me being present, and hearing) so iterated, that
each day the number was less by one stroke. At length, on the 26 th of January,
it sounded one; and afterward five; which having heard, I believed, as also
the rest, That one only day of my life was now remaining; and an end to be to
morrow evening, at five a clock. Therefore watching all that night, and praying
and meditating on eternal life, and this blessed departure* I decreed to pass
hence. But hearing by night a certain voice, as it were of a man, three times,
Come, come, come! Unusual Joy being shed abroad through my Soul, I slept a
little. But Saturday morning, at break of day, when more vehement pains
oppressed me, I could not but interpret that Voice to have been a Divine Call.
I bad farewell therefore to my beloved Friends, visiting me all that day. And* I
was always worse and worse; till evening approaching, my Sight, Hearing,
Memory, Speech, and at length my Spirit failed me. And I felt my self to go
forth with my Spirit, and to be carried into Heaven; where surrounded with a
great shining, I saw an huge company clothed in White. And the Lord stepping
forth, took me in his embrace; saying, The Lord has done whatsoever he would
in Heaven and in Earth! For the Majesty of his Power is exalted, and there is
no counsel of his Will, nor does it admit any. For who has known the mind of
the Lord, and who has been his Counselor? Return therefore unto the place
from whence thou art come forth; and the breath of the most High shall vivify
thee. Arise, walk* farewell to thy Disease; and behold the goodness of Jehovah
in the Land of the Living, exulting in his virtue. For the dead shall not
praise Jehovah, nor admire his Works, when they go down into the place of
Silence; but the living, the living shall bless thee from this time, and for
ever. God Jehovah dwells on high, and has exalted his Right Hand over all
Nations! And does wonderful things, as it pleases him, at all times. He is the
God of the living, who also draws forth out of death, and who gives life even
for ever. Therefore sadded with these things, I begged, that he would signify
unto me, How many the days of my life should be* But he said, Thy times are in
the hand of the Lord. He has measured thy years, and hid thy term from thee.
Live therefore, and enjoy the goodness of God upon the Earth amongst his
Saints. But sanctify thy years to God thy Creator, and live righteously. But
thy reward and thy portion shall not wither away, nor perish; but thou shall
find it, and shall rejoice concerning it, and in it, unto eternity. That also
which the most High does with thee, accept gratefully, and go not contrary to
thy Creator, by thy impatience. Go thy ways now, and return, for it is Jehovah
who does good to thee, and has a care of thee. Therefore offer unto him the
sacrifice of praise, and render thy Vows to the most High; giving thanks also
unto him, that he works the Work of Salvation in thee, and will still work,
even until he shall blessedly finish it, unto the praise of his Grace, but unto
thy Honor. I wish use thee no more unto my works, neither will I come unto
thee. Now therefore glorify God in thy Body and Spirit, which he has given
thee. Acquiesce now in Heart and Conscience; and give honor to God who does
all these things, to the praise of his glorious Grace: My Peace be with thee!
After he had said these things, I falling down, worshipped him; And together
also returned into life. Sad indeed, yet restored that very moment, to full
vigor, and health, and strength. To this great God, be Honor, Praise, and
Empire, unto Ages of Ages, for ever. Amen.

Come we next to Drabricius's Dedication of all to Christ, (which he was
commanded to prefix before his Prophesies) together with his last Protestation
and Prayer, etc.

To the most Serene, most Invincible King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, JESUS
CHRIST, the Eternal and only begotten Son of God, and the Virgin Mary; who is
the Alpha and Omega, the first Born from the Dead, whose Name is Wonderful,
Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father; who has loved us, and
given us good hope through Grace; To whom only is due all Kingdom, Power, and
Empire, unto all everlasting Ages; Amen! Hallelujah!
ALL Nations of the Earth, hear! All Inhabitants of the World attend, Small and
Great, Rich and Poor!

I Nicholas Drabricius, by Country a Strasnian, by Nation a Moravian; by the
destinate Counsel of God, chosen and called to the Ministry of the Church of
God, and to Preach the Gospel of Christ; and lawfully ordained in the year
1616. But then afterward in the year 1628, with many other Godly Persons,
keeping Faith to God, to Conscience, and to the Church, driven into Exile, by
Ferdinand the 2 d* Roman Emperor, for the Verity of the same Gospel, and for
the Testimony of Jesus Christ: So that leaving my Country, and the Inheritance
of my Parents; and plundered moreover by the Spanish Souldery, only my Wife and
Children escaping; and wandering in exile unto the Land of Hungary, in the
territories of the most Illustrious Lord, the Lord George Ragotzi, Prince of
Transylvania, the first of this Name; I took up my Seat under the Castle of the
Town Ledvitz. And there, with many other Families of pious fellow-exiles,
amidst extreme miseries and sorrows of poverty; yet humbly and patiently I
served my Christ for fifteen years. But here (in the year, I say, 1643. Jan.
23.) it pleased God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, by virtue of the
Holy Spirit of God, according to the chosen good-pleasure of his Counsel, to
admit me his little Worm so far, and to that end* That in the day of this last
Age, might be made known by me, as his last Trumpet, to Nations, and Peoples,
and Tongues of the whole Earth, the last Will of God. By which his Divine
Majesty, Wills and Commands, that Kings, Princes, Counts, and all Potentates,
of the Eastern and the Western; of the Northern and the Southern Lands, do unto
the Roman Pope, as unto the Babylonish Whore. That all Idolaters, Heretics,
Atheists, and false Christians, adhering to her, perish. And that to the Turks,
Tartars, Jews, and other Nations inhabiting under the Sun, Light shine forth*
For these ungodly, long since fore-ordain'd to this damnation, (as who turn the
Grace of our god into wantonness, and deny the alone Heir, God, and our Lord
Jesus Christ, Jud. v. 4.) are even they, who have segregated themselves from
God, and his Holy Law; sensual, not having the Spirit. (v. 19.) All whom God
destinates to destruction, by the force and right of his Law, and by the force
of the secular Power, into whose heart he has given, and in these last days
does give, and will give, to conceive hatred against the Whore, and make her
deserted and naked, and eat her flesh; but burn her, her self with Fire;
(Revellations 17. 16, 17.) For to save others with fear, and snatch them, as it
were, out of the flames; and to hate the Cassock, Cap; and Hood, spotted with
the touching and defilement of the flesh; with which the Guardians of the Whore
being endued, do with a ridiculous haughtiness, and opinion of sanctity, besot
themselves and others; stalking up and down, shaven like fools; girt with Cords
like Hangmen, and with naked Feet and Thighs like Whores; designing to be seen
of men, and to be extolled with praises. Woe unto them! for they have gone into
the way of Cain, and running greedily after the error of Balaam for reward,
feed themselves; Clouds without Water; unfruitful Trees; wandering Stars; to
whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever* (Jude v. 11, 12, 13.)

The Wisdom of God has also by me, lamented over the Political consusions of
Kings and Princes, of Lords and Subjects: by denouncing his Will; That there be
made a Renovation of good Order, after the Rule of his Law in Church and State.
By prescribing what manner of Persons Kings ought to be, and others placed in
Power. And what the Ministers of the Church, and Pastors of Souls, with their
Revenues on both hands; and what Schools, and all Orders universally: And how
in every Nation under Heaven a Monument is to be erected, to oblige themselves,
and their Posterity after them, to serve the one God. The Mouth of the Lord
has spoken concerning this to me, and by me, unto all, in the year 1651. March
26. Determining the Inscription of the Pillars, in these words; Our God Jehovah
is one God in Essence, but three in Persons; Whom alone we will serve for ever,
through all our Generations. Amen therefore! So be it! That it may be fulfilled
what was foretold, Zeph. chap. 3. v. 9. That it should come to pass, that a
pure Language be restored to the people, that they may all call upon the Name
of the Lord, to serve him with one shoulder. And as in Rev. 15. v. 4. That all
Nations come and worship before God, because his judgments are manifest. That
all under Heaven may profess the Doctrine of Faith, delivered by Moses, and the
Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, and to the Faithful their successors, to
these very last times of the World; in which the Wisdom of God by me also
cries, and sounds, as with a Trumpet, by declaring his Will. That errors of all
kinds cease: But the Verity of the Words and Life of the Lord Jesus to shine
forth, after the ruin of Mystical Babylin, and the going forth of the People
of God therefrom; as it is written in the Revelations, which who so reads, let
him understand; being certain, that no Prophecy of Scripture is of any private
Interpretation. For that the Prophesies came not of old time by the will of
Man; but holy Men of God, spoke (and do speak) as they were (or are) moved by
the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.

Know therefore! know all Nations and Tongues of the universal World, high and
low, rich and poor, learned and simple, in whom soever the fear of God, and the
use of sound reason is! That the Speeches written by me, and often watered with
tears, (now with sear, now with joy) have not been, nor are my Speeches,
proceeding forth from my will, or Wit, and my Judgment, (which is plain and
simple in me, and too dull for such and so great things as these) but from the
mouth of God the Creator, God the Redeemer, and God the Sanctifier; and
represented unto me intelligibly, and to my mind and memory, as a man,
perceptibly: To which I give, and do give, wholly give, belief; by many now,
and various Experiments, undoubtedly made certain and secure, that the Holy and
Blessed Trinity will own them for theirs, and in very deed and fact demonstrate
their verity. Not then, or so, when, and how, I, or thou, whosoever thou art,
will or will'st; but then, when the time and hour of the Judgment determined
by the Will of his Majesty shall come. Because it is necessary that that remain
true, once pronounced; A thousand years are with the Lord as one day, and one
day as a thousand years. I therefore every way weighing and pondering the
matter, I denounce to every one contradicting*me in these things, and
condemning them for something, not yet approved by the event; Behold! I
denounce, That I cite him to day, and will cite to morrow, and so long as I or
thou be alive, and in the point of mine and thy death, and in the day of that
last tremendous Judgment in the illustrioous coming of our Lord Jesus Christ;
I cite him, I say, into the presence of the Clarity of the most High and most
True God, with whom is no acceptance of persons, who alone is Judge of Quick
and Dead; judging not according to the sight of the Eyes, nor reproving
according to the hearing of the Ears; but judging the Poor in righteousuess,
and reproving for the Meek of the Earth in equity, (Isa. 11. 4.) And I cite him
into the presence of Seraphims and Cherubims, and the whole celestial
Hierarchy; I cite him into the presence of the Patriarks, Moses, and the
Prophets, and Apostles; I cite him into the presence of the boly Doctors, or
Teachers of the Church, Cyprian, Ambrose, Augustine, Bernard, etc. And of the
Martyrs, Wickliff, Hus, Jerome, etc. And into the presence of the holy
Reformers, Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, and their Successors, faithful Lights of
the Church, etc. Full of hope and confidence toward God, and the Father of the
Lord Jesus, that if any one of you, O men, whosoever he be, shall condemn me,
the least of all the Servants of Jesus Christ, with this my Work performed
dutifully, yet laboriously, to his holy Name; yet that I, and these my Words
and Speeches, shall not be condemned of my God, nor of his Angels, present with
me always, as my Witnesses, nor of my own Conscience, than which (after God,
and his holy sacred Word, and Faith given to me toward it) I have nothing
dearer in this Life. Bending my Knees before God and the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, That he would not desert the Work begun in us, but would keep me
and thee, whoever art implanted into the Root Christ, blameless; and make me
and thee, through Death, not to come into Judgment, but to pass into Life;
where the Sun shall not fall upon us, nor any heat; but where the Lord shall
wipe away all Tears from our Eyes, etc.

So to me, and thee, who read these things, be propitious the Dominator of
Heaven, Earth, and Sea, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,
Blessed unto Ages of Ages, for ever. Amen!

Nic. Drabricius, Str. M. P. P.


Of the last Protestation of Drabricius, which he called a Confession, with a
Prayer adjoined: wherein he resigns all his concerns to God, and bids farewell
to all the World.
VEterinus not contented with what had passed in his Examination, although
equally present with others, and astonished, he seemed to give glory to God;
and by giving his hand, promised silence, and with others subscribed his
Testimony to the whole Business, as it was acted: Yet relapsing into other
thoughts, not only wrote to Drabricius's Adjunct, that he could not yet
acquiesce; but went on to molest Drabricius, falling upon him more sharply than
ever; pretending the causes of his unquietness: 1. That they had not satisfied
him concerning so many things yet to be fulfilled; which, that he should
believe to have proceeded from the mouth of the Omuiscient, he could by no
means be persuaded to. 2. That he saw what causes Drabricius had of forswearing
himself; namely, Self-love, and Covetousness; that he might not deprive himself
of the Opinion which he now saw raised of him, and of the Benefits begun to be
now offered to him for his Prophecies; and adding also blasphemy against the
Dictator of Oracles, calling him, That vain and lying Fellow, and other foul
things. By which also he rendered the new Pastor Laurinus wavering anew, and
suspecting ill, and to invoke also the Judgment of God upon Drabricius, as his
Epistle testifies.

Both of them was admonished of modesty, Veterinus especially, not of me only
(the Adjunct) but also of others that were nearer unto them, Divines and
Statesmen, That he would not disturb the affairs so composed, but rather would
perform promised silence, and would by our example expect the Judgment of God,
and pray that God would not defer it. But all in vain. For he senta violent
Writing to Drabricius, importunately urging that he would answer him. And when
Drabricius, out of the fervor of zeal, trampled it under foot, others being
present, (adding, Thus says Jehovah, So will I tread upon the Enemies that
blaspheme my Name) and cast it into the fire; Veterinus not only sent back the
same Writing to Drabricius, but also sent it abroad unto diverse, stirring up
all against the false Prophet.

Drabricius therefore at length answered by Writing, which calling his
Confession, he sent, (by Command of the Oracle in a Revelation) that it should
be affixed to the new Edition of his Revelations, in stead of a Close; which
therefore his Adjunct accordingly did.

A Confession Made unto the Glory of God, and to fore-arm from Error all who
shall read the Revelations made unto me from God, of whatsoever State and
Order, Dignity or Vocation they shall be, upon the face of the Earth, in the
Year 1664, June 30.
I Nicholas Drabricius a Strasnian, Exile of Christ, by this my Writing
confess, That certain Observations of Paul Veterine, Inhabitant of Puchow,
directly tending to the abuse of the Divine Name, and the Voice through me made
to the Nations of the Earth, Eastern, and Western, and Northern, and Southern,
have come to my hands: By which, I stirred up unto zeal, purposed to snatch up
the Sacred Book, and on whatsoever place I should light, to take that for a
foundation of my Answer: I opened therefore, and beyond hope presently are
offered to my Eyes those last words of David, (2 Samuel 23. 2.) The Spirit of the
Lord has spoken by me, and his Word by my Tongue: Which admiring, I opened
again, and fell upon those words of Samuel, (1 Samuel 7. 2, etc.) If ye do return
unto the Lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange Gods, Baalim and
Astaroth, from among you; (but in the Papacy, Idols and Images of He and She
Saints) and prepare*your hearts unto the Lord, to serve him only, etc. And I
will pray for you unto the Lord; and he prayed, and the Lord heard him; and the
Lord thundered with agreat Thunder upon the Philistines, and discomfited them,
and they were smitten before the Children of Israel: And Samuel builtan Altar
unto the Lord, etc.

When furthermore I turned over three leaves, there came in sight the 14 verse.
of Chap. 12. of the same Book, If ye will fear the Lord, and serve him, and
hear his voice, and not disdain the mouth of the Lord, ye shall continue: and
v. 20, 21. Fear not, but serve the Lord with all your heart; follow not after
vain things, Idols which will not profit you, because they are vain.

At length I opened anew, and found Chap. 1. of the Book of Wisdom, where it is
said, That Wisdom enters not into a malicious Soul: And although the Spirit of
Wisdom be a kind and loving Spirit, yet it acquits not a Blasphemer of his
Lips, because God is Witness of his Reins, and a true Searcher of his Heart,
and Hearer of his Tongue. Therefore he that speaks unrighteous things cannot
be hid, nor escape Judgment, for the correction of his Iniquities; and the
Mouth that belieth, slays the Soul.

It slays indeed: I, which in my time also mine Eyes have seen how many, by
the blasphemous speech of their mouth, and by the Writings of their hands, have
procured destruction to themselves; being made a Spectacle to Angels and Pious
Men, in whom is no guile; Such, (as by the goodness of God) there are many
every where, Men great, and illuminated, Divines and Statesmen, through
Hungary, Holland, and England, found: Who, how sincerely and reverently they
receive the Words of God by me pronounced, have testified it by their Writings;
after that God had given it into their hearts to see, and know, and understand
the hand of God to have done this, and the Holy One of Israel to have spoken by
me (Isa. 41. 20.) now in the last days of the World: A'so concerning Gog and
Magog, (Ezekiel. 39. Rev. 20.) That they are about to be rooted out, with all
Errors of depraved Doctrine.

Wherefore I Nicholas Drabricius forewarn all who have read the forementioned
VVritings of Paul Veterine, and beseech them by the Bowe's of the Mercy of God,
That they take heed to themselves thereof; as being guileful, false, drawing
their Rise from Satan the Father of Lies; of which Father of Lies, Christ
says, That he came and took the words of God out of the hearts of men, lest
they should believe and be saved, (Luke 8. 12.)

But let all know that the Lord is my God, who vouchsafes to speak to me
unworthy; and that I, and my Adjunct, who in my stead declares the Words of God
in the Latin Tongue, to the Nations of the Earth; and lastly, the Promoters of
the Work, added unto us from Heaven, seek no other things, (God lives, and our
Soul lives in God) than the Honor and Glory of God first: The Honor, I say,
of the Omniscience and Veracity of God; who, as he has promised, the Beast
being cast down, and the Babylonish Whore burnt, and Satan bound, to renew to
himself his Church on the face of the whole Earth; So he is about to do it now
in our days: That all the Kingdoms of the World may become our Lords, and his
Christ's, (Rev. 11. 15. and Chap. 17, 18, 19, 20.)

Next we sought also (by the Command and Charge of the Lord our God) our
Neighbors good, both of Christians especially before others, and also of the
yet Infidels, Turks, and whatsoever Pagans, that they may be converted from
Idols, and other Abominations, to the Living God, and his holy and pure
Worship: Of which things, what the Wisdom of God, in the year 1653. Nov. 8.
spoke to me, may be read in these Revelations. For all these are destitute of
the true and saving Faith of God, given to the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
and other Saints; Instead of the Law of God, the Turks having their Alcoran,
the Jews their Talmud; but many Christians, the Pope, and other Leaders of
Errors.

Thirdly, We sought also with a dutiful, faithful, and simple, and sincere
mind, to execute the Commands of God, without all respect to men, by testifying
to all, (whether it please all, or displease some; and whether they will hear
or forbear, believe or not believe) That God never willed, nor yet wills the
Death of a Sinner; but that all converted from Impiety, Errors and Iniquities,
do Judgment and Justice; Giving to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to
God the things that are Gods.

Therefore the Wisdom of God Commanded me to speak unto the House of Austria,
(with her Supporters, the Spaniard and Pope; Him, as a broken Reed; This, as a
Firebrand burnt; and to others) That the Lord of Heaven and Earth was about to
do unto the House of Austria, as he did unto the House of Ahab; and to his
Counselors and Prophets, as Elias did unto the Baalites; whom in the sight of
all the People he slew with the Sword. As it was said unto me in the year 1644.
April 12.

Therefore I Nicholas Drabricius, a Witness of the Veracity of God, (a Witness,
I say, unto my Self, and unto others, the Godly) that the Lord does not any
thing, but he reveals his Secret to his Servants the Prophets, (Amos 3. 8.) The
Lion therefore roaring, who is not afraid? And the Lord commanding, who
prophesies not? (v. 9.)

Our Predecessor John Hus, about to glorify God and his Truth, by his Death,
said to his Persecutors, An hundred years being rolled about, ye shall answer
to God and to me. I his Follower say the same thing to my Persecutors; and cite
you, Gods and mine Accusers, to the Tribunal of Jesus Christ, that you there
answer for your Blasphemies, who in me unworthy, blaspheme God and his Spirit.

As if now he had not promised in the l^st days, To pour out his Spirit upon
all Flesh, that your Sons and Daughters may prophecy, and your old men dream
dreams, and your young men see Visions, (Joel 2. 28.) Like as is done even to
me an old man, (now almost fourscore years old) by the undeserved grace of God.
And before me, to Christopher Ketter, and to Christina Poniatovia, whom also I
(as many other godly persons) account for a Servant and an Handmaid of the
Lord; and acknowledge the like things to have been declared unto them, as unto
me, (of the Plagues of God a coming upon Christendom from the East, as they now
begin to come) from the same merciful God, always fore-warning the World.

I Drabricius was not (that I may speak with Amos, contending with his
Detractors) a Prophet or a Prophets Son, (Amos 7. 14.) But the Lord commanded
me to write the Word heard out of his Mouth: And I wrote for the most part by
night, in the dark, on a Stone Table, or even with Chalk, lying by my Bed side,
in a Chest; Performing my duty laboriously (26 years) to my Lord; neither
changing any thing, but just as the Lord and my God vouchsafed to speak
concerning Christians and no Christians, Kings and Kingdoms, Lords and
Subjects, Priests and People: Especially concerning Idolatry and Images, even
of our Savior crucified, hanging stretched, through the Temples, Streets, and
Highways; exposed to Winds, Rains, and the making of Nests for Birds; for a
scandal and laughing stock to Infidels, Jews, Turks, Tartars, who in the year
1663. making an Irruption into Moravia, stood amazed at this amazement of
Christians.

And because Gods will is according to the words made known unto me poor
miserable man, that they be converted to that Faith given to the Saints, he
will therefore certainly take away those scandals, and the Authors of scandals,
men gone into the way of Cain, feeding themselves fat, Clouds without Water,
carried about by the Wind; Trees withered, unfruitful, twice dead; Waves of the
Sea, foaming forth Confusion; and wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the
Tempest of Darkness for ever, (Jud. 11, 12, 13.) complaining Murmurers, walking
after their own lusts, whose mouth speaks Pride and Arrogance, (verse. 16.)
Mockers, (18.) Sensual, not having the Spirit. (19.)

Of whose number is Paul Veterine, wholly burning with hatred against me,
without all fear of God, and shame of men; tearing and bespattering me with
malicious Writings; not seeking after the glory of God, or the saving Good of
his Neighbors: but that he may bring the Speeches of God into suspicion and
reproach; wholly after the Example of the worst amongst the Pharisees, who said
of Christ, He has a Devil, and is mad; why do you hear him? (Joh. 10. 19.)
Although the more Moderate said, These are not the words of one that has a
Devil, (v. 2.) As even now many moderate men, (even in remote Countries) say
concerning the Words of the Lord pronounced by me.

But I, with the Apostle Paul, (2 Cor. 1. 23.) call God for a Record upon my
Soul, (believing with my whole heart, and confessing with my mouth, that I also
am a little Sheep of Christ, for whom he the good Shepherd, laid down his life,
Joh. 10. 11.) That I have neither spoken nor written any thing, but what the
Lord and my God commanded me to write with mine hand, all the time of so many
years, and to this very day, seeking to please not men, but God.

For I can with Paul (a chosen Vessel to bear the Name of Christ before the
Gentiles, and Kings, and the Children of Israel, Act. 9. 15*) confidently say,
that I have the same Spirit of Faith; So that I dare say, I believed, and
therefore have I spoken what I have spoken, and written what I have written, 2
Cor. 4. 13.)

And first indeed to my beloved Adjunct* John Comenius, then residing in
Hungary; afterward departing, by command of the Lord, into Holland, that he
would make all these things known to Christian Peoples, in the Tongue known to
the Europaeans, the Latin. But for the Turkish Nation, that he would take care
to have the Sacred Books of both Testaments adorned in their Tongue; at the
Cost and Charges which the Princess, the Mother of the Ragotzi 's, ought to
furnish him with. But She esteeming more the Dirt of the Earth, (Gold) than the
Words of God; although often admonished, did none of those things: and which is
more, was the cause why her Sons also did nothing about those things. And
therefore God took away Mother, with Father, and Sons, and the Uncle Ladislaus;
one only Granchild, Francis, being left; To what end, He himself only knows.

But that they object, That the Crown of Hungary was promised to them; It is
true; But the Condition often iterated, That they would purge this Land from
Idolatry; deliberating and consulting upon this matter, with the Eastern and
Northern: But what did it profit to be admonished? When neither They, nor the
King of Swede, would do any of those things; they drew themselves by their
disobedience headlong into destruction, as the World now sees.

Therefore I Drabricius publicly profess, That I believe with my whole heart,
that Divine Promise made by Haggai, I am with you, faith the Lord, (Chap. 1.
13.) and iterated by our Lord Christ himself, Behold! I am with you always,
even unto the end of the World, (Mat. 28, 27.) And again pronounced by Haggai,
(Chap. 2. v. 22, 23.) I will shake the Heavens and the Earth, and I will
overthrow the Thrones of Kingdoms; and I will break in pieces the strength of
the Nations, etc. And to Christ, declaring the distress and pressure of
Nations, (Luke 21. 25.)

And that I expect, yea, now see with mine Eyes, how the Lord overthrows the
Chariots and the Riders, that every one may fall by the Sword of his Brother,
(Hag. 2. 23.) And that, by it, the glory of God may be revealed; That all Flesh
in like manner may see that the Mouth of the Lord has spoken (Isa. 40. 5.) by
us Two also, to you, O Nations! That the will of God is, That the Beast
counterfeiting a Lamb, but speaking like a Dragon, together with the false
Prophet, (that wrought Miracles before him, seducing those who had received the
Mark of the Beast) be both apprehended, and cast alive into the Lake of Fire,
burning with Brimstone, (Rev. 19. 20.)

But the Beast being destroyed, and the Whore (drunk with the blood of the
Saints, and the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus) burnt with fire, (Chap. 17. 16.)
That the Kings of the Earth who have committed Fornication, and lived
deliciously with her, bewail her, and lament for her; standing afar off, for
fear of her Torments; and saying, Alas! alas! That great City Babylon, that
mighty City! For in one hour is thy Judgment come! (Rev. 18. 9, 10.)

But at the length Babylon being overturned, that all Nations of the Earth run
together into the Unity of the Faith, and Acknowledgement of the Son of God,
unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ,
(Ephesians. 4. 13.)

I Drabricius dare, I dare, with the Apostle Paul, say, That I in my Writings
have not sought my own things, (as appears others do, Phil. 2. 21.) but the
things which are Jesus Christ's; doing nothing through strife or vain glory, but
in humility. (v. 3.) For I have learnt out of the Word of my God, That God
resists the Proud, but gives grace to the Humble, (1 Pet. 5. 5.) and puts down
the Mighty from their Seats, and scatters the Proud in the Imagination of their
Hearts, and exalts the Humble, (Luk* 1. 51.)

And because with the Apostle, I believe with my Heart, and confess with my
Mouth, That Prophecy never comes by the will of Man; but holy men of God to be
inspired by the holy Spirit, and to speak, (2 Pet. 1. 21.) Therefore I hope
also that it will be given unto me, from the Lord and my God, to overcome the
malicious Enemies of God and mine, (1 John 2. 3.) Because the World passes
away, and the Lusts thereof; but he who does the will of God, abides for ever,
(v. 17.)

Therefore into whose-soever Hands or Eyes (of those known or unknown to me, in
any Nation) mine, and my beloved Adjuncts Labor shall come; I beg and pray,
and in the Name of God with Adjuration entreat, Grieve not the holy Spirit of
God, whereby you are sealed up unto the day of Redemption, (Ephesians. 4. 30.) Being
solicitous to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, (v. 3.) That
we all may be one Body and one Spirit, as we are called into one hope of our
Calling, (v. 4.) For there is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all, (v. 5, 6.) who
believe that we are Called and Chosen, (Romans 8. 33.) And that our names are
written in the Lambs Book of Life, who was slain from the beginning of the
World, (Rev. 13. 8.)

If any have Ears to hear, let him hear! (v. 9.) Let him hear, I say, and weigh
well, who is that Lord of the holy Prophets, who is wont to send his Angel, to
show unto has Servants the things which must shortly be done (Chap. 22. 6.) He
himself namely, who is the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End; who Is,
and who Was, and who is To Come, (Chap. 1. 8.) That Omnipotent Prince of the
Kings of the Earth, who has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, to whom be
Glory and Empire, for ever and ever! Amen! (v. 5, 6.)

Take heed also All, I beseech you, of that Pharisaical haughtiness, to disdain
others, and say, I thank God I am not as other men, or as this Publican, (Luke
18. 11.) For God resists the Proud, but gives grace unto the Humble, (Jam. 4
6.) Detract not from one another, Brethren! For he that detracts from his
Brother, detracts from the Law, (v. 11.) As that light Soul, Veterine, does to
me his Brother; and which is more, the Servant of Christ, and Minister of the
Gospel, and Pastor of Souls; whom the Apostle reckons worthy of Double Honor,
(1 Timothy 5.) by by word of Mouth, and Pen, lyingly spreading concerning me,
whatsoever he can, unto my contempt; even also upbraiding me with the wounds
that were given me, wholly innocent, (in the year 1635.) by a drunken Fellow,
Martin Stuniak, furiously meeting me on the Highway: For which things, this man
having suffered Judgment, of the Equestrian Order, of the County of Trencinia,
ought to have lost his Life; but that at the Intercession of the Lords, the
Judges, I freely granted him his Life, and permitted him to remain quiet, with
a Pecuniary Mulct.

Whosoever therefore thou art, that shall read these and the like slanders of
this Calumniator; especially where he derides the Threatenings of God made by me
unto him also, as vain; I beseech you, suffer not your selves to be carried
away for the sake of a Fool (who says in his heart, There is no God, Psa. 14.
1.) for to taunt at the slow Judgments of God.

Which is not mine Admonition, it is the Apostles; That we must not judge
before the time, till the Lord come, who will inlighten the hidden things of
Darkness, (1 Cor. 4. 5.) For he says, who testifies these things, Behold! I
come quickly! Amen! Come, Lord Jesus! (Rev. 22. 20.) Come now also, and show
the Verity of thy Speeches, pronounced heretofore by John* but lately by
Kotter, Christina, and Me, thy unworthy Vessels. That the Church on Earth may
now make Responsals in singing, to the Angels in Heaven, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen!

Although, not according to our times, and the terms of days and years, which
our foolish Reason is wont to fix unto thy Work, O God! but according to thine
own measuring; with whom one day is equivalent to a thousand years, (2 Pet. 3.
8.) For the Lord is not slack concerning his Promises, as some men do count
slackness, (and among those my blasphemous Slanderer) But is long-suffering to
usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance, (v. 9.)

The impatience of the Bethulians did tempt, or try to prescribe unto God,
Bounds of their Deliverance: But they are greatly checked of Judith, because God
receives not counsel from men, (Chap. 7. and 8.)

And what was there could seem more equal in the eyes of men, than that Moses,
(as being faithful in all the House of God, and through so great Labors of
forty years, with hardship passed through) should introduce his People into
that desired Land of Promise? Yet the Lord for one only mistake denied him,
although he earnestly prayed, committing this Charge unto another: And he must
acquiesce: For who may say unto him, Why do thou thus?

What did Jonas's Murmurs, that God had forgiven to the Ninivites the
destruction denounced by his preaching Prophet, avail?

Contend therefore, thou also, Veterine! or whosoever is like thee, with God;
that he does not fulfill all things promised or denounced by Threatenings! But
does he not fulfill? Does not so many Commotions of the Nations, and initial
Desolations every where testify? Would to God the words of God may not be
fulfilled on thee, and those like unto thee! VVo unto you who are wise in your
own Eyes, and prudent in your own sights, (Isa. 5. 21.) Contend therefore not
with me, but with the Lord; who has commanded me to write these things that
are written.

But I am not better than Jeremiah the Prophet, unto whom proud men cast in his
teeth, (as thou Veterine lately to me) Thou speak a Lie; The Lord our God
has not sent thee. (Jer. 43. 2.) When yet I may even as confidently as
Jeremiah, say of a truth, The Lord has sent me to speak (and write) all these
words, (Jer. 26. 15.)

But my God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, has not left me without
Consolations against you; so often promising me protection against you; and a
demonstration of the Verity of his words, in the very work or deed it self: And
the Destruction of Unbelievers, and those that devise evil things against me.
And behold! How faithful is God! He has preserved me hitherto, and preserves
me in the midst of my Enemies. But my Detractors, where now are they? Sapor,
Effron, Felinus, and others? As every one filled up the measure of his
virulency, so he was snatched away hence.

Nor let others expect any other thing; even entire Nations; according to those
words of the Lord; Out of my Mouth has proceeded this, which I have declared
to thee, decreed in my Eternal Counsel, concerning those things, which I will
have done in the last days of the World: When I will with punishments refrain
the Blasphemies of the Nations, wherewith they injure me and my Name. The Earth
shall tremble, and they that dwell therein: For the burning of my Zeal has
fallen like the Sun, upon those who will not know me, (Rev. 211.) And
elsewhere, Whoever speaks unto you otherwise, than I, by my faithful and true
Witnesses, let him be Anathema* (Rev. 250.) Again, Let my Contemners expect no
other thing, than Plagues for Plagues, and Contempt for Contempt: For with me
there is not another Way, nor to me another Door, beside Obedience, Faith,
Love, and Patience, with fear of my Judgments, (Rev. 257.) All which things, I
would to God my Detractors would read! Perhaps they would return to themselves,
acknowledging the Truth and Severity of God in has Threatenings.

Concluding this my Speech, I Nicholas Drabricius will say with Job, O that my
Petition might come from the God of my Salvation! That God would grant me the
thing that I expect! That he would break me in Pieces when he begins, if
falseness be in my mouth, (Job 6. 8, 9.) Why therefore have ye detracted from
the Speeches of Truth, seeing there is none among you who can reprove me? (v.
25.) Seeing it is God alone who reveals deep things out of darkness, and
brings out to light the shadows of Death; who multiplieth the Nations, and
destroys them; and when they are overthrown, restores them entirely again,
(C. 12. 22, 23.)

Last of all, I the abovesaid, confess, That the Speeches which I have written,
but my Adjunct published, are not the Speeches of an Angel, (otherwise always
present with me, and carrying my Prayers to the Throne of God) Much less mine,
a sinful man's; but are the Speeches of my very Lord Jesus Christ himself, (who
is the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End of all things) proceeded from
his Holy Spirit; who is the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, and the Spirit
of Counsel and Strength, and of the fear of the Lord: Who has formed me also
from the Womb for his Servant, to bring back Jacob again to him, and that
Israel may be gathered unto him; and I was glorified in the eyes of the Lord,
and my God is become my strength, (Isa. 49. 5.) who said also unto me, In an
acceptable time will I hear thee, and in a day of Salvation will I help thee,
(v. 8.) To whom alone, the Omnipotent, Wise God, as it was in the beginning,
so for ever world without end, Be Honor, and Power, and Glory, Amen! Amen!
Hallelujah! Hallelujah!

I have ended by the help of God the 5th of July, in the year of Christ, 1664.
which is of my Age the 76th, of my Ministry the 48th, of my Exile the 36th, of
the beginning of Revelations made unto me from the Lord, the 26th.
A PRAYER: Written by Command of the Lord, and my God, in the year 1653. April
18. and in the year 1664. June 30. commanded to be put for a close of my
Revelations.
O Eternal God! Holy Father! Incomprehensible in Wisdom, Judgment, Counsel,
Grace, and Justice; Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier; Father, Son, and holy
Spirit; Thou Holy One of Israel! who from the beginning have founded the Earth,
and the Heaven of Heavens are the work of thy Hands! Who sit on the Throne
of inestable Glory, in the midst of thy innumerable Hosts, Cherubims and
Seraphims, and Men triumphing through Martyrdoms, ministering to Thee day and
night, and singing, Holy, Holy, Holy, Jehovah Zebaoth! Behold, amongst them, me
also praising thee* O God! Acknowledging thee to be the Lord, with all the
Earth worshipping Thee, the Father everlasting! For that Thou have formed me, a
frail mass or lump of Clay, for a small Vessel of thy grace; and have called me
forth by my own proper Name, out of my Mothers womb, and have written my Name
in the Lambs Book of Life; And in these last days of the World, in a Nation
which has known thy Name, and heard the Voice of thy Trumpet, going forth from
thy Throne, have set me upon the Walls of thy Jerusalem, thy beloved Church,
for a Witness and Watchman, and for a Voice of one crying to the Nations; That
openly, in the sight of all Nations, I might declare the Day of Vengeance to
the Worshippers of Idols, and to all false Worships of those to do not rightly
acknowledge Thee the Tri-Une God, who live eternally: And again, The Day of
Grace to the Nations of the Earth, to acknowledge in the true Light, interior
and exterior, Thee the living God, and thy pure and chaste Worship; Such as the
Angels perform unto thee in Heaven, and thou would have performed to thee,
without Idolatrous Errors, on Earth; out of a pure Heart, and good Conscience,
and Faith unfeigned, in Body, Soul and Spirit, unanimously and humbly, in
simplicity of Heart.

Behold me, thy pitiful little Worm! and most inconsiderable Dust! (Refuse, or
Offscouring!) at the Threshold of thy House, thy beloved Church; and of that
small Portion which thou have gathered to thy self, under the Name of the
Brethren of Bohemia: Behold me in the days of its cruel Persecution, and sad
Exile in another Land the Hungarian; burdened, and hanging down my Head, with
the very Disease of Old Age! I did hear thy voice, of thee the living God,
speaking unto me I know not how; but speaking I know what: For intelligibly I
did perceive thy Voices, and clearly apprehended the sense; yea, and moreover,
I my self did speak unto thee the Invisible; I did ask Questions, and make
Answers: All things, with the unconfused and undisturbed Powers, and Forces of
my Mind. And my eyes saw the whole World in thy hand as a little Globe; and I
heard thee explaining those Mysteries; how thy hand contains all things. And
those other things, which would never have come into my mind, nor were
suggested by any of Mortals; I did receive from thee alone, my God! with fear
day and night; and did imprint them in my Memory; or also, through the^
commanding, in Tables and Papers. But thy face I, a man of poluted lips, never
saw; save only thy hand pierced through with a Nail, once extended toward me,
and put under my left Arm-pit, when thou swaredst, That thou would neither
leave thy Cause, nor me thy Servant: And thou have kept faith, O faithful One!
In the sight of mine Enemies, Domestic and Foreign. And that in sleep I
beheld thee, my beloved Savior! in thy diffrent Age and Habit, with Joy and
Tears, acknowledging mine indignity; and with covered face throwing my self
down at thy feet, and kissing them; and perceiving the Taste of Eternal Life,
with Sweetnesses unutterable by me. For thou made me to see even the Joys of
the Elect in Heaven, (as also the Torments of the Damned in Hell) and what
things in the world also, in respect both of Church and State, should be
hereafter; till even thy illustrious Return to Judgment. Which things, I
faithfully without any fraud, in simplicity of heart, with groans to thee;
whether thou had commanded by night or by day, did refer and put down into
writings: Adding nothing of my own, and respecting nothing of my own, nor any
other thing, besides thy Glory. And bearing many Prejudices, Reproaches,
Cavils, Twenty six whole Years, and Ten Months, and Three Days; Till now in
this Year 1664. an end being put unto thy work thou my Lord and my God, have
commanded to close, and shut up all these things with this Prayer.

Hear therefore, O Heavens! and perceive with your ears, O Earth! Behold! I
conclude dutifully! I conclude with weeping! Falling down at thy feet, Lord
Jesus! Kissing thy Wounds and Marks, and pouring out my Soul before thee. I ask
humbly, I ask confidently; First that thou would leave thy Holy Spirit for a
Guide, Counselor, and Comforter unto me, even until Death; and through him
would pour out a plentiful shower of Benediction upon all thy Speeches, which
thy mouth has brought forth in these last days of the World, by me thy sorry
Servant; which I receiving from thy mouth, have sealed up by thy Command; and
by a Man whom thou have adjoined to me for an help, have made known first
indeed to the Hungarian Nation, then afterward to other Nations also. Grant, O
holy God! That all, to whom the sound of thy Trumpet shall reach, may
acknowledge that they have come forth from thee; that thou may be glorified
in all Nations of the Earth. All which sanctify, O God! in thy Truth, to
acknowledge thy word through all Nations and Tongues; and thy Self to be the
Truth, the Way, and the Life. Cause, O God! That Kings, Princes, Subjects; and
Doctors, or Teachers of the Gospel, with their Hearers; and Parents with
Children, may be one in thee, and the truth of thy Word; and may know thee the
One only God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, (by whom all things were
made, and without whom nothing was made) in the Unity of the holy Spirit, God
undivided in Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Majesty and Glory, blessed for ever! I
ask, O God! I ask, That all the Islands of the Sea may now wax silent before
thee; that all the Ends of the Earth may be afraid, and fly to thee! May assume
new strength, may be carried with Wings as Eagles; and may run, and not be
weary, with us, to thee, the Fountain of Salvation; who speak Righteousness,
and art sufficient to save; nor art delighted with the death of a Sinner! O
Shepherd of Men! Convey over, but even now in the last days, all Nations under
thy Pastoral Rod; that they may be brought into the Bond of the Covenant.
Espouse unto thee, O God! the People in faith, that all may acknowledge thee,
Jehovah; to whom thou may say, My People; and they to thee, My God. Let Men,
thy Image, now cease to respect Stones, Wooden, Golden, and Silver gods; and to
exhibit honor unto those which are no Gods, but Vanity. Let the Society or
Tribe of Priests, cease to commit Preys and Robberies in thy Name; and with
their wickedness to rejoice Kings, and Princes with their lies; adulterating
all things: Appointing to themselves Kings, but not by thee; and setting up
Princes, whom thou do not acknowledge: but with their Gold and their Silver
making themselves Idols to their destruction. Root out therefore, O God! but
even now at length, Idols, with the Worshippers of Idols; and Errors, with the
Sowers of Errors: As thou did in the time of Elias, Ezekias, Josias. Let it
become manifest to the World, how great difference there is between Light and
Darkness, that Victory may give place to the Truth, and all men may learn to
walk in the Light; and being made the Sons of the Light, may be brought back
again to thee, the Fountain of Light. Gather together the sheep going astray,
straggling up and down, O Prince of Shepherds! by men chosen to this work, from
the East and the West, from the North and the South; giving faith in to their
hearts unto thy words; and by a strong and inflexible obedience and
dutifulness, to execute the purpose of thy Eternal Counsel; to bring Vengeance
upon Spiritual Babylon, and upon the Whore, sitting upon the Beast; that she
may no longer, by committing Fornication with her Abominations, seduce the
Nations on the face of the whole Earth. Grant, O God! that successfully and
happily once, may go on forward that wished for Recollection, or gathering up
together again, of thy Rational Creatures, out of the Streets and Villages, and
from among the Lanes, and out of the Highways; that they may be introduced
into thy House: Here indeed into the House of the Church, thy Sheepfold; but
there into the House of Eternity, thy Glory; where are many Habitations, and
Joys, never to be ended: Sitting down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, at thy
Table, O Jesus Christ! my only Savior, and of all that believe in thee:
Whither also my sel^, now hastening apace, I bid my last farewell to thee, O
World* to thee, my earthly Country! to thee, my Body! the Habitation of this
Soul. Farewell all beloved Friends in God! known and unknown to me. Ye who have
not known me in this mortality, shall see me in that day, wherein our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, by his illustrious coming, shall
gather us, called forth out of the Dust of the Earth, and from all parts every
where to himself. To whom be Honor, and Glory, and Empire, and Benediction,
for ever and ever. Amen!

After these things had been thus acted, Paul Laurine, a new Pastor of the
Exiles, and a new Adversary of Drabricius; a young man, and of a firm strong
complexion, and always otherwise lusty; was seized with an unexpected Disease,
(as has been before noted; the Physicians called it an Hectic; but in vain
was all their Physic) and departed this Life, about the end of September.
Veterine hitherto preserved; perhaps to behold the works of God; to which, he
stiffly and pertinaciously denies Faith and Credit; and to acknowledge his
Error. God have Mercy on him; even as also on us all, whosoever do err, with
whatsoever Errors! Amen! So Comenius.

We'll conclude only with a wise and sober Remarque, out of the Mystery of
Jesuitism, concerning the Prophecies of St. Hildegard; which very well agrees,
and may very well be applied to these.

-- Thus far (says he) the Prophecy it self: Of which, and the like, what to
think, and what credit is to be given thereto, others have given their opinion,
viz. That it is not impossible, Prophecies and Predictions of this kind, may
amount to no more, than the Dreams of melancholy, superstitious, and
distempered Persons: Such as of which, it may be said; Augurium vanum, vani
docuere Parents;
Cui credens dignus decipiatur erit.
Our vain Forefathers taught's vain Auguries;
Let them be cheated, that believe such Lies.
But to deny all credit to Prophecies, is to be guilty of an incredulity,
greater than that of the incredulous Thomas. Nor are we to think what God says
by the Prophet Joel, to be spoken in vain; That in the last days the old men
should dream Dreams, and see Visions; and the Sons and Daughters prophecy.
Many Examples might be alleged of Prophecies of this kind; which the Events
have confirmed to be true; and therefore they may challenge Belief, when they
are in their Effects fulfilled. Mystery of Jesuitism, concerning St. Hildegard
's Prophecies, approved of in the Council of Trier, and also by Pope Eugenius
the Third.

Remarkable also, is that of the Angel to Kotter, concerning the time of
accomplishment; -- What things are said unto thee concerning things future, are
not said after an human manner: But after a manner which thou shall never
attain by human Reason and Wit: Jehovah has these times in his power. Kotter.
Chap. 17.

Great and Mavelous are Thy Works, O Lord God Omnipotent! Just and True are
Thy Ways, Thou King of Saints! Who shall not Fear Thee, O Lord, and Magnify
Thy Name? Because Thou alone art Holy: Because all Nations shall come and
worship before Thee: For Thy Judgments are made manifest.

FINIS.
An APPENDIX of the planting of the Christian Religion in China, etc.
THE mavelous and unheard of Alterations and Troubles; The terrible and
bloody Wars, and most wonderful Revolutions even of all Asia and Africa, in
this present Age likewise; but especially of the mighty, ancient, and most
flourishing Empire of China; have been no less astonishing and stupendous, then
the Europaean; and those shameful and cursed ones of Unchristian, if not Pagan
Christendom: But would require another and larger Table to represent also a
general view thereof. And therefore we shall only add an Appendix, according to
promise, of some things remarkable, touching the Introduction of the Christian
Relion into China, by the Fathers of the Society; and the Queens, the young
Princes, her Son; the Mandarins and Colaos, and chief Ministers of State, etc.
Conversion from Idolatry to Faith in Jesus; and Worship and Confession of the
Son of God, so noised of in the World of late years. And probably, they would
have proved better Christians and Disciples under better Masters and Teachers,
then such Apostles as have now the glory thereof.

About the Year 1580* as soon as the Jesuits had, by fair shows of Religion
and Learning, found general success and acceptance in Europe, and well rooted
themselves here; With great Zeal they compass Sea and Land, as far as even the
East Indies, and China it self, to gain Proselytes; After the example of the
more devout Religious and Zealous Monks and Friar before them.

Riccius* at first mentioned and Rogerius, were the two first Fathers, who were
ordered to learn the China Charecter and Language, and sent thither. Who at
last entered into the City Canto, but fain to return twice disappointed of their
design, till in the end they make a new attempt, furnished with all
curiosities; together with a solemn Embassy, in form, to the Viceroy of Canto;
and so were received with all possible demonstration of respect; as before has
been related of Riccius, etc.

In process of time, many were Converted and Baptized* among whom were some
Mandarines and Calao(...) (chief Governors and Officers of the Kingdom.) But
the Priests and Priestlings stir up Persecution against them, make them odious
and abominable, and Teachers of new Godds; imprison, torment, and banish them.
But at length, through the favor of great persons, they obtained freedom and
peace, and the Christian Religion the more spread.

But by the way, Had the same measure been meted to the Jesuits there, by
Heathens, as they mete to fellow Christians here; or as we say, had they served
them in the same sauce, they might have had indeed a few Martyrs and Confessors
perhaps; but never Evangelists and Preachers, or Apostles of the Chinois,
unless at Stake only.

We shall not go about here to give the History of the manner of their
proceeding, in conversion of those Infidels and Idolaters; but only present you
with their Compendium (or Catechism) of the Divine Law in the China Tongue, as
we promised at the beginning; together with the Letters of their Queen, and
chief Minister of State, to the Pope, and their Answers, etc.

A Compendium of the Divine Law.
1. Perhaps some one may ask what God is? It Is answered, God is no other thing,
then the Creator of all things; as also the great Governor and Lord of all
things, who made the Heavens, who made the Earth, who made Spirits, who made
Men.

2. The Heavens, Earth, Men, and all things before were nothing, and afterward
were. Therefore before the Heavens, Earth, Men, and all things, there was some
Lord necessarily before to create them.

3. Because all things cannot be made of themselves; all have that from out of
which they are made, or a Maker of them; as Towers, Palaces, and Houses cannot
be made of themselves, but must necessarily be the work of some Artificer.

4. Therefore the Heavens, Earth, Men and Creatures, how can they be created of
themselves? There is therefore an Author of these things, whom we name God. If
men do name an Age Puencu, and make others like themselves, and a first
Grandfather. (Parent.)

5. Then these also were, after the Heavens and the Earth were. All had a
Father and a Mother, from whom they were procreated. And of these, to make a
Creator of Heaven and Earth, of Men and of Things, is a great Error.

6. Some will say, The Heavens, Earth, Men, and Things, seeing they depend on
God in their Creation; I am bold to ask, This God, of whom does he depend in
his Creation?

7. It Is answered, God is the first Root and Principle of Things; If he had
dependence in his Creation, for that very thing he would not be God.

8. For things either have a beginning and end; as Herbs, Trees, Fowls, and
creeping things; or they have a beginning and no end, as Heaven, Earth, Angels,
Devils, and the Intellective souls of Men; God only is without beginning and
end, and can give a beginning and end to all things.

9. If there was not God, there would not be other created things. As for
Example, Of one Tree, the Flowers, Fruits, Boughs, Leaves, and Body, are all
generated out of the Root. If there be not the Root, for that very thing the
rest will not be. But

10. Coming to the Root of the Tree, by no means is there another Root, out of
which to be sprung or proceed. God, seeing he is the Root and Foundation of all
things, out of what other thing can himself proceed?

11. God, when he first created all things, in the beginning, he divided the
Heavens from the Earth, created all species (or kinds) of things: Afterward he
created Male and Female; the Male was called Adam.

12. The Woman was called Eve. For these two had not Father and Mother, and are
the first Parents of all People; All else (as Fo Ki, not excepting those whom
they make Immortal.) All have

13. A Father and a Mother of whom they are born; and they could not avoid it,
but that sooner or later they should be corrupted and die. God, seeing he is
the true Lord of Heaven, Earth, Men, and Things, etc. together withal created
all things,

14. That they should be for men's use. Consequently it altogether behooves us
Men to love and worship God. By not loving and worshipping, great sin is
thereupon committed. For example, A couple of Parents produce a Son.

15. They nourish, cloth, educate him. If the Son know not to honor Father
and Mother, certainly he is called disobedient, and most grievously sins. How
much more,

16. Seeing God is the chief Parent of Men, does it not behove us to love and
reverence him, since it is now declared, what God, the Lord of all things is?
It is easy to explain the the things of this Age, (or World, that is of
Mankind.)

17. This same Man has naturally two parts, Soul and Body. His Body, although
it be corrupted and die, his Soul cannot he extinguished, even to eternity. For
in this Age (or time of the World) Souls have three differences.

18. The lowest Order is called the Vegetative Soul; namely, the Soul of Herbs
and Trees; This Soul helps Herbs and Trees to live and grow. Herbs and Boughs,
or Wood cut down, wither and perish.

19. Their Soul follows, and is extinguished. The middle Order is called the
Sensitive Soul; to wit, the Soul of Fowls, creeping things and Beasts.

20. This Soul gives faculty (or Power) to Fowls, creeping things and Beasts,
of living and growing; and makes withal that they hear and see through their
ears and eyes* and taste and smell through their Pallates and Nostrils: through
the rest of their Members, that they feel pain and pleasure, but yet they
cannot discourse and reason; and when they die, even their Soul also is
extinguished.

21. The highest Order is called the Intellective Soul, to wit, the Soul of
Man. This withal contains the faculty of the two Souls, the Vegetative and the
Sensitive. Therefore it can give a faculty to men of living and growing,
together also of feeling and sense.

22. Moreover it gives him a faculty of discerning all reason* to discern all
things by. His body, although it die, yet his Soul is perpetually conserved,
nor is extinguished. Therefore the Men of this Age only fear dead men, and do
not fear dead Animals. That arises from the natural discourse (or reason) of
man, that he can animadvert, and think after the death of men. Moreover the
Soul of man not dead,

23. Remains; and therefore can fear. But the Soul of creeping things and
Beasts, is totally dissipated, not can strike terror into us, seeing we know,
that the Soul of Man is not extinguished, it is not withal convenient.

24. To believe the error of Transmigration. It is convenient to know in the
time of life, to do good and evil; each o^ the Souls of men after death go to
the judgment of God* where they have a determinate

25. Place of their reward. One place is above, and ha^^ all felicity; namely,
which is called the Court (or Palace) o^ Heaven: That is the place of
remunerating the good. The second place is beneath, and has*

26. All bitterness; namely, which is called the Prison of the Earth, the place
of punishing bad men. For the Lord is most highly equal (or just.) There is
nothing of good which he does not reward; there is nothing of evil which he
does not punish. Nevertheless in the present Age

27. There are some which do ill, and are rich, honored, without trouble, and
joyful; There are, who do well, and are poor, contemned, and oppres'd with
calamity. It is certain God waits till the death of that man, and

28. After receives the Soul of the good Man, and takes it up into the Court of
Heaven to inhabit perpetual felicity; and receives the Soul of the bad man, and
sends it into the Prison of the Earth, to receive punishment without end. If we
grant that there are not

29. Rewards and punishments of Paradise and Hell, to remunerate the men of
this Age (or present life) who do good or evil; How are the good not deceived
then? And how much better a lot and portion do the evil enjoy? And how can God
be said most highly just?

30. Some one will say, That reward of good and evil, is it not also in the
present Age, (or life?) How goes the matter? It is answered; let us suppose
those that receive the remuneration of good and evil

31. Altogether to wait, even till after death; On that very account men will
be ignorant of the remuneration which is after death: And how will it be proved
to them that the Lord is above the Heavens. Therefore frequently those who
violate justice,

32. Fall into calamities, dangers and troubles, that they may amend their past
wickednesses, and beware of future. Those who are obedient to Reason, receive a
blessing descending upon them, to answer their good deeds past, and stir them
up to future.

33. But if any well-doer be in want, in dishonor, full of labors, and
calamities, perhaps it therefore happens, because that amidst their good works,
they have something of evil. Therefore God with these things.

34. Chastises him at present, but after death introduces him into the place of
perfect felicity, to enjoy perpetual felicity. If any do ill, and yet are rich,
honored, and happy, according to the Age (or present life.)

35. This therefore happens; Because amids their doings ill, they have some
good mixed. Therefore God remunerates them with these present felicities. But
after death tumbles them down headlong into the obscure Prison; that
perpetually they may receive all bitternesses.

36. The men of this Age, if they desire to avoid descending into Hell, to
undergo all torments, and to ascend into Heaven, to enjoy all felicity. Three
things are altogether necessary. First,

37. It is necessary to know the Lord of Paradise, namely God. For men of this
Age to inhabit in one another house, it is first necessary to know the Lord of
the house, then they may enter and stay.

38. How much less any one ignorant of the Lord of Heaven, can he ascend and
enter into the place of universal felicity. Secondly, It is necessary to know
the way to Heaven, namely the Law of God.

39. Men of this Age, ignorant of the way thither, whither they are a going; by
that very means cannot come there. And any one ignorant of the way into Heaven,
how can he possibly come there?

40. Thirdly, It is altogether necessary to go on through the way which they
now know. Because a man, although he knows the way which he desires to go, yet
if he sit idling at home, and go not forth to make progress, by no means will
he ever be able to come to his journeys end.

41. In like manner, he who desires to ascend into Paradise, the place of all
felicity, it is altogether necessary, that he do the works of the Divine Holy
Law. Some one will say,

42. God is the Lord of Heaven, Earth, Men, and Things; and his Doctrine is
withal the way to Paradise. Now I have clearly heard and understood this. Now
I desire to follow this Doctrine of the Holy God. How

43. Therefore shall I be able to do it? It is answered; He who desires to
follow the Holy Law, ought to have two aims. The first aim consists in this,
That he worship God with a perfect heart, because he is of Heaven,

44. Earth, Men, and Things, the Universal Lord, and created all things that he
might nourish us. The second consists in providing for a man's own Soul, to
avoid descending

45. Into Hell to receive all bitternesses, and obtain ascent into Heaven, to
enjoy all felicities* He who desires to obtain this; three things are
necessary, The first of them is, to keep the Commandments of God.

46. The second is, He ought to blieve the things of God. The third is, He
ought to receive Sacred Baptism, and to wash his past sins.

The Ten Commandments.
1. To Honor and Worship God above all things, 2. Not to name the Holy Name of
God, to utter a vain Oath. 3. To observe Holy Days. 4. To obey and honor
Father and Mother. 5. Not to kill men. 6. Thou shall not work Fornication. 7.
Thou shall not Steal. 8. Thou shall not bear Witness rashly. 9. Thou shall not
covet another man's Wife. 10. Thou shall not covet another man's Riches and
Matters.
The Ten Commandments, summarily taken, are reduced to two only; To love God
above all things, and to love men as ones self. This is that which of old God
from Heaven taught and commanded, that they should be honored and kept through
all Ages. The obedient to them ascend into Paradise, and receive felicity.
Those that walk contrary, descend into Hell, where they suffer torments. The
above written Articles are only a Compendium: If any one desire to have an
absolute knowledge of the Divine Law, it is necessary that he studiously apply
himself to the study of the Holy Books treating of the true Law of God, and go
to the Temple of Christians, to hear the Masters of the Law come out of the
West, Discoursing, Disputing, and Unfolding. Then they shall be able to
understand without doubting: and this thing cannot be fully done in few words.
This we have translated, as was requisite, verbatim, according to the property
of the China Speech, rather then the English.

From this Doctrine of the True and One God, rightly expounded, they proceed to
expound the holy Trinity of the One God; then to the incarnation of the Son of
God, the Eternal Word. After to the Sacraments by him appointed for the remedy
of Sin; and so of all the other Articles of Faith, from first to last; and when
they are well tinctured with these, they then innitiate them to a more perfect
course of the Christian Life.

And this is the manner how they propound the Christian Mysteries to the
Gentiles and Idolaters, beginning first with the principal Articles of the One
and True God, and the reward of the just and unjust, etc. as in this Catechism.

Besides this, they published innumerable excellent Spiritual Books, and Books
of Practical Divinity and Moral Philosophy, to which the Chinese are much
devoted, and endeavored to add to all, rare specimens of an innocent,
spiritual, and divine Life, if we may believe their own Testimony, which I
confess Protestants in this end of the World have little reason to do. For the
Ignatians of Europe, for the generality of them, are more excellent at Fire
Works then any thing else here; and the works of the Devil, then to work the
Works of God. But it is like they were better there; being likewise at the
beginning of their Order, more Spiritual and Religious, then ever since the
World has found them, especially England. And yet we have a taste of their
true Spirit, in their obstructions of the Hollanders Embassy there.

Their first great Disciple was Paul, the great Colao, or Governor of the
Chinese, and propagator of Christianity among them, Riccius put forth many
admirable Books in the China Language, viz. several Mathematical Books of
Euclid, Clavius, etc. Universal Geography, and History of the World, with
Globes, Maps, etc. Natural Philosophy, the Art of Dialling, Books of
Astrolabes, and Astronomick; Instruments of Music, Musical Instruments and
Organs. Moral Philosophy, about Friendship, moderating the Passions, and to
live according to the dictates of right Reason, and the rule of a good and
happy life. For the Chinois were much given to moral Philosophy, and the study
of virtue and happiness. And Ten Paradoxes, Moral and Spiritual, a Book famous
through all China and in great esteem and admiration among them, and
illustrated with Comments and high Encomiums, by the most excellent of all
their learned, Leo and Paul, young Convert- Colao's.

But that which wrought unexpressible compunction of heart in them for their
ill past life, (as they say) not only among the common people, but the greatest
and most learned of their Monarchy, viz. the Mandarins, and Colao's, and
Eunuchs of the Kings Palace, was the Catechism of Bellarmine, translated by
the said Riccius. The fame of which Book spread so, that they were fain to
print it a new several times, whereby the Christian Light and Knowledge shone
into every corner of the Land. With several other Books for the use of others
that should come thither out of Europe.

The next famous was Trigautius, Procurator of the China expedition, who
returned from China 1612. and returned thither again with all manner of
Rarities and wrote several Books for the use chiefly of the Europeans.

Next Father Rho, Professor of Mathematics in the Jesuits College at Milan,
who in a short time spoke and wrote their Language like any Native, and wrote
several Books for the use of young Converts, and with Father Schall, mentioned
in the first part, labored in Mathematics for the benefit of the Chinois. Who
both by common and joint study, put forth above an hundred Books; and
especially in emendation of their Calender: he was founder of a Church in the
Kingdom of Sciamsi.

Vagnonius followed, who found in the Province of Chianceu only (after his
return thither again from Banishment) 8000 Christians, and of those the chief
Learned, and Mandarines; and afterward died in Chianceu, Anno 1640. and wrote
many Books.

Diverse others also wrote innumerable Books for the European^ help; so that
there were Books written by them in the China Language by the Year 1636. to the
number of 340. The Mandarines and Colao's also, wrote Comments on their Books,
etc.

Also when their Converts began to be too numerous for the present Fathers,
they began an Institution of Chatechists from amongst them, to initiate persons
into the Christian Mysteries. These Catechists were persons much and long
versed in the Mysteries of Religion, and the Christian Law; and of a very
divine Life (better then themselves it is like by far) and such as were inflamed
with servour of the Apostolic Spirit and Zeal for the Conversion of others;
and they were not easily admitted unto this Office, but after long experience
first had of them, etc.

Their work was to go up and down the streets, and on all occasions by word and
example, to bring the rude and ignorant to the knowledge of the True God. And
as they have opportunity to sprinkle Infants and Children with Holy Water, to
communicate Spiritual Books to those that lacked; to resolve Doubts and
Questions, etc. And at a certain time of the day, when the Gentiles flock to
their Churches out of curiosity, to wait there, and to explain the first
Principles and Elements of the Christian Faith, which were wrote or engraven in
fair and large Tables and Characters, (hung up and down upon the Walls, and by
their splendid Altars) to any that were desirous or curious; and to show the
vanity of the false Godds: And moreover to invite them home for farther
instruction; And by these means they got many Proselytes daily. They are
obliged also every day to give an account to the Fathers, that are Superiors in
those places, what they have done that day.

The number of Christians in Pekin, was about fourscore thousand, about 1655.

And though this be short of the Apostolic way of Preaching the Gospel to the
Gentiles; yet they seem herein to outdo the Protestants, and in industry,
labors, and zeal, and more abundant then they, to propagate the Faith.

Look here, you Zealous Protestants, look with shame;
From hated Jesuits learn to spread Christ's Name,
And Heathens form their Idols to reclaim.
Things proving thus prosperous, they likewise had procured the Royal Patent
for Power and Liberty to divulge the Gospel through all the Empire, by the
favor of the Grandees of the Court and Kingdom. But the irruption of the
Tartars, about 1647. interrupted all. Which happened by reason of the Civil Wars
of the Chinois among themselves; which invited the Tartars to take the
opportunity to break into China, through the Portal of their great Wall, once
more, as they had done formerly before, in the Year 1256. which they held for
above 200 years, during nine Kings reigns; but were at last beat and kept out
again by the Chinois, till this last sudden and violent return.

But now they overran it like a flood, and subjected all China to their
Empire; the King of China was reduced to such streights, that finding no way to
escape from his own rebelling Subjects, and so great a Monarch forsaken of all,
rather desirous to die, then live to see worse; ended his days in a lamentable
manner. First, With his own hands killing his Mother and Daughter, and at
length grown desperate, hanged himself.

Amidst such great Confusions of the China Empire, the Christians grown to a
great multitude, were betwixt hope and fear; and wait with sollicitous hearts,
the new owned Emperors inclination, and found him in the end more favorable
then they could either wish or hope for. Especially upon the account of Father
Schall, before mentioned; as a Stranger of admirable prudence and skill, in the
Affairs of the China Kingdom; and to whom he might unbosom the secret counsels
of his heart securely; and as one highly recommended to him for his rare skill
in the computation of Time and Astronomy, and other Arts of Europe. And so made
him Mandarine of the first Order, and one of his supreme Counselors. And set
him about perfecting the reformation of their Calender, for the Universal
benefit and advantage of the Kingdom; as before has been declared.

After this was the Queen and her Son Converted and Baptized by the name of
Helena and Constantine, of which, her Supreme Minister of her Court, Pan
Achilleus, long before a Zealous Christian, more then once affectionately wrote
Letters thereof, both to the Pope, and to the General of the Jesuits Society,
to send more Laborers into China, as follows.

The Interpretation of the China Letter, from the Chancellor of the China
Empire, Pan Achilleus, a Chinois Christian, to our most Holy Lord, by the
Fathers Andrew Xavier, and Michael Boym, of the Society of Jesus, in the Court
of the Emperor of China, for the time, Assistants.
Of the most famous Empire of China, by the command of the Emperor; The
Universal Viceroy of Kingdoms and Provinces, Quam tum, Quam Syc, Fo Kien,
Commissary of the Militia by Sea and Land, Duke of the little petty King, Quam
Syc; Treasurer of the Revenues, and Solicitor; absolute and sole decider (or
Judge) of Causes in the absence of the Emperor; Chief Captain of the Imperial
Guard, Master of the Horse, Great Chancellor, Privy Secretary of the Emperor,
and Chamberlain, Pan Achilleus, Christian, on bended knees, and head bowed down
to the Ground,
prostrates himself before the Throne of the Vicar of God JESUS, on Earth; the
Universal Doctor of the Catholic Church, the true Lord, the most Holy Father.
I Achilleus weigh with my self, that being by Office, Keeper of the Privy
Chambers of the Emperor, yet led by error, I also take care of the Militia.
Whence I have diminished (that is degraded or debased) my self; and without
light, and Discipline (that is, Instruction) have augmented the multitude of
sins. Long since in the Northern Court or Palace, through the good Will of God,
I happened upon men of the Society of Jesus, who led me, who was rude and
ignorant, in the open Path, exhorting me, erring and going astray, to follow
the Faith. Wherefore, being with reverence expiated in the Holy Laver, I then
began to understand the documents (that is Fundamentals, or Principles) of the
Holy Doctrine, and its hidden Excellency, and high profundity. And then being
immersed in this study night and day, with a faithful heart, I have prosecuted
it twenty years and more; nor durst I grow slack in the least. So I have
procured the help of the King of Heaven, whom I know not how I shall be able to
answer. I had often a mind to come unto your most Holy Throne, and with
veneration to satisfy my eyes with your most Holy Countenance; But the matters
of the Empire were so various, and the Royal Affairs so perplexed, as they
were; permitted me not to perform the desires of my intimate Bosom. Wherefore
I am most highly aggrieved. The only thought (and grief) now, of me a Sinner,
from the bottom of my Soul, is in this, that the calamity of the Empire has not
yet ceased. Therefore on purpose I went and asked a man of the Society of
Jesus, Father Michael Boym, that in the next Ship that went away, he would
return back to the great West, and come suppliant to you, the chief Priest, the
most Holy Father, that before the Altar of the Saints, Peter and Paul, with the
universal Church of the whole World, with eyes lifted up to Heaven, you would
pray to God, that he would look down upon this Imperial House; with mercy help,
and conserve the Empire and set limits of future speedy peace; and together
would grant, that our most wise Emperor, who is the eighteenth Successor of
this Royal House, and the twelfth Grandchild from the first founder of the
Empire and Family; That himself (as Lord) with his Subjects, may adore Jesus
the Lord of the Heavens. This at length will be the entire happiness of our
China Empire. And indeed at present, the most entire, most wise, most clement,
the venerable Empress, of Christian Name, Helena; The Queen Mother of the
Emperor, of Christian name, Mary; The Queen his legitimate Wife* of Christian
name Anna; and the Son of the Emperor, Prince and Heir, by Christian Name,
Constantine, do all with humble hearts believe and worship the Holy Doctrine;
together they have the words of Speech, which they send to the most Holy
Throne. (viz. of the Pope) As for me rude Sinner, I humbly beseech you the most
Holy Father, That for the hour of my departure out of this life, you would
vouchsafe entire remission of the punishment of sins, and would send also many
men of the Society, into this Empire of China, who by their Doctrine may
convert universally the men of the Age, and may advertise them, with Repentance
to give good heed to Worship, and adore the Holy Law; nor may by a vain and
transient stay, be sent away with the Dust of their Feet snatched up, (that is,
quickly.) So at length I hope to attain Felicity truly never to have an end.
With Veneration, I have in small measure, by these things, explained the
Secrets of a simple ignorant Mind. I cast my self wholly to the Earth,
expecting a merciful beholding (of your Countenance) And no more.

Yum Lie, the fourth year, in order of the Revolutions of the Annual Letters
Kem In, the tenth Moon, eighth day; which was in the year 1650. the first day
of November. Further, nothing to be read.
The place () of the Seal, wherein after the China manner, (for they do not use
to write their Names otherwise) are engraven these words: The Seal of the most
Valiant Generalissimo of Arms, universal Viceroy.


The Interpretation of the China Letter, from the Empress of the China Empire,
the Lady Helena by name; and of the Queen=Mother, the Lady Anne; and the
Queen=Wife, the Lady Mary; and also of the Son of the Emperor, Prince and Heir,
the Lord Constantine. By Father Andrew Xavier; and sent to our most Holy Lord,
etc.
The Speech of Helena, the most Entire, most Wise, most Clement, Venerable
Empress, of the most famous Empire of China, before the Throne of the Vicar on
Earth of God JESUS, Universal Doctor of the Catholic Doctrine, the Supreme
Lord, the most Holy Father.
I HELENA, considering my self an humble Daughter, (that is, of low estate and
degree) of this China Empire; I am ashamed to abide in the Palace of the
Emperor. Heretofore I only knew the observance of the Privy-Chambers. I was
ignorant of the Law of Foreign Lands. It happened that a Man of the Society of
Jesus, Father Andrew Xavier, did stay in our Court, (or Palace) promulging the
holy Doctrine. By relation of others, I began to know him. And behold! I
believed, and with a Reverent Heart received from him the Holy Baptism. I
caused that Mary the Queen Mother of the Emperor, Anne the Queen, (his) lawful
Wife, and Constantine Son of the Emperor, Prince and Heir, (being withal
instructed,) did also receive the Holy Water; it is now the third year since.
Now although I ought with blood dropping, (that is, with drops of Blood) to
dissolve the Marrow of my Soul; yet I attain not to answer, and satisfy, no
not in the least. It continually comes into my mind, with Reverence to go unto
the Throne of the Most Holy Father, that in presence I may receive the Holy
Documents; only I fear the difficult passages to so most remote a Kingdom.
Therefore I am frustrate of my Desire. In the mean while, with profound bowing,
even to the Ground, We beseech You the Most Holy Father, That You would be led
before the Presence of the Divine Majesty, and out of Pious Affection toward
Us, who are obnoxious to Sins; and at the hour of Our departure out of this
World, You would vouchsafe to Indulge to Us entire remission of the punishment
of Sins. Withal, we beseech You, the Most Holy Father, that with the Holy and
Universal Church, You would deprecate the Supreme Lord for Us, That He would
confirm Our Empire; help and establish it (being once restored) with Peace; and
withal would grant that this Eighteenth Emperor of our Imperia House, who is
the Twelfth Grandchild from the first Founder of the Empire and Family, namely,
That Himself, as Lord, and all his subjects together also, may acknowledge and
own the true Lord Jesus. Finally, We ask You, the Most Holy Father, That You
would send very many Men of the Society of JESUS, who far and near, may divulge
the Holy Faith. These Things indulged to Us, will be Monuments of Your Pious
Affections toward Us. But other Things, which are in our Desires, We are not
sufficient to explain in Words. Only a man of the Society of Jesus, Father
Michael Boym, knows the Businesses of our Empire. We command him to return
Legate into the Great West, to propound Our Speech before the Most Holy Father.
He can particularly relate Our humble Will. We trust in the time of Peace, to
send Chinese Themselves Legates, who may present Our Duty at the Altar of the
Saints, PETER and PAUL, and offer Reverence. With Heads bowed down to Your
Feet, We hope the Most Holy Father will kindly look upon these Senses of a rude
Mind. This only the Speech.

In the year Yum Lie, the fourth of the tenth Moon, the eleventh day, which was
of the year from Christ, 1650. the fourth day of November.
The place () of the Seal, wherein after the China Custom, (for they do not use
to prescribe their Names otherwise) are these words engraved: The Seal of the
most Entire, most Wise, most Clement, Venerable Empress.


Here follow the Letters Responsory, from Alexander VII. Priest, Best and
Greatest: Dated both to the Queen, and to the Supreme Director of the Kingdom.
To our most Dear Daughter in Christ, Helena Taminga, Queen of China, ALEXANDER
VII. POPE: To Our most Dear Daughter in Christ, Health and Apostolic
Benediction.
WE have known from Your Majesty's Letter, how great was the Goodness and
Clemency whereby the God of gods brought You, wrapped up in blind Errors, and
lying Superstition, out of the Power of Darkness, to the knowledge of Light and
Truth. He does not forget to show Pity, nor retains His Mercy in Wrath. For
when You was a Daughter of This, yet the Omnipotent Lord looked down upon You;
who would rather be called, The Father of Mercy, than, The God of Vengeances
and Revenges. Now who can search out His Powerfulnesses! Or find out the Way of
His Counsels! Immense and vast Lands, whereof We have scarce heard any thing
with Our Ears, the Old Enemy has possessed with his Frauds and Fallacies. It
was but like a Fable, this mighty Kingdom; no less for the Deserts and almost
infinite distances of Places betwixt; than because the false Religion and
Worship has took up all things, possessed all, overspread all. What access
for Truth, through so many Seas, wanderings of Journeys, almost another Heaven
and Stars; when they were prohibited from all the Shoars, who desired a
commutation of this precious Pearl before Gold and rich Merchandise: And lastly
when they were defended by the impiety of the Mountains continuedly adjoining
to the Ocean, and by Laws and most strict Guards. The study of promoting the
true Faith, broke through and overcame all these things: By which so many
Dangers and Difficulties, Your Salvation has been sought. Whereby so much the
more attentively, Daughter in Christ, You are to recall into Your Mind the
Memory of so Great a Benefit, and make known these things to Your Children,
that they may put their Hope and Confidence in GOD, and not forget the Works of
GOD, and may enquire into his Commandments. Although also to the sum of Joy
which was brought Us, neither was this wanting, That Others also insisted on
Your Example. And the Royal Child Constantine does no more grow into the hopes
of the Kingdom, than of overturning Superstition. Him truly, as together also
All, We Fatherly embrace; and most lovingly bestow upon Your Majesty the
Benediction which You ask; and ardently pray God to make Your most Dis-joyned
Kingdom One with Us, both in Affection and Faith.

Given at Rome, at (or with) Saint Peter, under the Ring of the Fisher, the
18th day of December 1655. the First Year of Our Popedom. NATALIS RONDININUS.


To Our Beloved Son, Pan Achilleus, Eunuch of the King of China, Captain
General by Sea and Land: Beloved Son, Health and Apostolic Benediction.
YOur Letter brought Us great Joy: For from the Rising and Setting of the Sun,
from the North, and from the Sea, God has dealt Mercy to Us: And He who
heretofore on a sudden illustrated with the Water and Grace of Baptism, the
Royal Eunuch, mighty in much Treasure and Riches; now has called you, Beloved
Son, entangled with the Cares of this Kingdom, and the World; among which,
never scarce is found place for the Doctrine of Christ, which is counted
foolishness by the Men of this World; into the Light of his Son; that is, into
an Immortal and neverto-perish Inheritance of another and true Kingdom, The
Greatness of which Benefit, as it has affected Our Heart with great Joy; so
you will plainly understand what is due from you therefore, if you look unto
Him continually, who was made unto Us for an Example of his own Discipline. But
endeavor and co-work diligently, that this Work may be consummated, which is
begun in this most ample Kingdom, That there may be your Praise also in the
Gospel. For there ought to be no Vastness nor Longitude of Lands so great, as
to withstand that Faith which removes Mountains, or Charity which never fails,
endures, and works all things. By this we admit you into Our Bosom, whose Flame
toward you and these Nations, shall not be extinguished* no not by the
multitude of Waters which pass between Us, nor ever wax cold by any
Difficulties. But the Benediction which you ask for your Self, We most lovingly
bestow upon you.

Given at Rome, at (or with) St. Peter, under the Ring, etc. NATALIS RONDININUS.

Since these Transactions, the Emperor has thought fit, within these few
years, to send the Jesuits out of his Countries and Dominions; whether for
their Good Deeds or Bad Deeds, God knows! For indeed the Jesuits are like some
sorts of Persons; The more you know them, the worse you like them: And it were
well if the Western Kings and Princes would do so too. If Kings would think
upon it, there might be no Pope; since if Popes could well help it, there should
be no Kings. Doctor Sherman, in his late Account of Faith against the Papists.
-- For if there be any honest Jesuits in the World, we have little reason to
think them at this End thereof. For here, whatever they are elsewhere, they are
grown so mischievous, that every good Christian, especially Englishman, cannot
choose but be ready to help them to that, which their Arms (a Bow and Arrow)
have so long lacked; notwithstanding they Themselves too, have so well deserved
it; A String.


FINIS.

