A brief SUMMARY OF THE LAWS and STATUTES OF ENGLAND, So far forth as the
same do concern the Office of Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Constables, Churchwardens, and other Officers and Ministers of the Commonwealth.

Together with Diverse other Matters not only acceptable for their rarity, but
also very necessary for their great use and profit, for all persons, but
especially for such as bear Office in this Commonwealth.

Collected by Nicholas Collyn, of the Honorable Society of Lincolns-Inne,
Esquire; and sometimes Reader there; and an ancient Justice of the Peace and
Quorum in the County of Middlesex; and one of the four Pleaders of the
honorable City of LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by T. L. for Matthew VValbancke, at Grayes-Inne-Gate, 1655.

TO THE READER.
THis abridgement of the Laws and Statutes following, was Penned by one that
was an ancient Justice of the Peace in the Country, which he did for his own
convenience and ease: it being more plain and full, and yet more brief and
compendious, then any abridgments that are in Print, and an easy Pocketbook
to be carried about with facility as occasion may be offered, containing in few
words, most plainly and fully the effects and meanings of al laws and Statutes,
that concern the Justices of the peace either in their Sessions, or out of the
same, or that do concern the offices of Sherifs, Mayors Baylifs, Constables,
Churchwardens, Overseers for the Poor, Surveyors of the Highways, and al other
officers and ministers of the Peace and Commonwelth. This manuscipt with some
others, wereleft by the Author, or Collector, with some of his neerfriends, who
are ready and wiling, according to his mind, to make the same more common, that
so it may be the more useful to al officers and Magistrates, that have occasion
to inform themselves what the substance of the Law and Statuts are, that so they
may per form their several offices and duties in such manner as they ought to
do. The penner here of did it the first for his own particular use, not once
intending any other thing: but when some of his intimate friends who bore
office in the Common wealth, had once the knowledge of it and had perusedit,
they would never be without it, but made more use of it for a help to their
memory, than of any Printed Book whatsoever.

And as it was profitable to some few, so it may by the publishing of it, be to
many more for the future.
THE TABLE.
ALehouses, etc. fol. 1. Abjurgation, see Recusants 5. Affray, see Constables
18. Agnits Dei, see Rome. Apprentices, see Laborers 11. Archery, fol. 4.
Armor, fol 5. Arrow-heads, see Archery 2. Artificers, fol. 6. Assize of Bread
and drink, fol 8.
B
BAdgers, etc. fol. 9. Bark, fol. 10. Barator, ibid. Bailment, see Prisoners 7.
Bakers, see Assize and Artificers 1. Bastardy, fol. 11. Battery, see Assault.
Beggars, see Vagabonds. Bigamy, see Matrimony. Bowyers, see Archery. Brasier,
see Pewter. Brewer, fol. i3. Bridges, see high ways, 16. Buckstalls, see
hunters 5. Buggary, and Burglary, fol. 14. [15: Burning of houses, fol. 10.
Butchers, fol. 16. Buts, see Archery, 3.
C
CAlves, see Butchers 5. and Milch-kine. Captains, etc. fol. 18. Cattle, see
Forestallers, 5. Certiorari, see Removing of prisoners, etc. Champertors, see
Maintenance 2. Chance-Medly, see Manslaugh ter. Church and Church-yeard, fol.
20. Church wardens, fol: etc. 22. Clergy, fol: 24. Clerk of the Market, fol.
25: Cloth, ibid: Confederacy, see Masons. Conjuration, fol. 27. Constables,
fol. 29. High ways; fol: 36. Cook, see Butchers: Correction-house, fol: 37:
Coopers, fol: 38. Corn, fol. 40. Coroners, ibid. Cottages and Inmates, fol 42
Counterfeiting Letters and Tokens, fol. 43. Crosbowes, see Guns: Currier, see
Leather. Cutting out tongues, see tongues. Cutting of a pond head, see Fish 3.
Cutpurse, fol. 43.
D
Dear, see Hunters. Dyers, see cloth. Disturbing, see Preachers. 1. Dogs, see
Hunters. Drunkenness, see Alehouses 2, 4 Ducks, see Pheasants 3.
E
Eggs of Wild fowl, see Wild-fowle. Egyptians, see Vagabonds. Eyes, see Tongues:
Escape, fol. 44: Escheators, fol: 45: Estreats, see Sheriffs 1, 2:
Evesdroppers, see Good-behaviour: Extortion, fol: 46:
F
FAlse Tokens, see Counterfeitors: Faires, fol. 47: Pheasants, fol. 49:
Ferrets, see Hunters: Fighting, see Church. Fish and Fishers, fol: 52: Fish
days, and eating of Flesh fol. 54. Force, and forcible Entries, fol. 55.
Forestallers, fol: 56. Forgery, fol. 59: Foreign power, see Rome. Foul, see
Pheasants 3.
G
GAmes, see Plays. Goal, see Prison. Goldsmith and Gilding, fol. 60
Good-behaviour, ibid. Grayhound, see Hunters 6: Guns, fol: 61.
H
HAbeas Corpus, see removing of Prisoners. Hares, see Pheasants 36. Harvest,
see Laborers 3. Hawks and Hawking, fol: 64. Hay and Oats, see Inholder: Hedge
breakers, see Trespass. Herons, fol-66. High ways, fol. 67. Horses, fol. 72.
Horsbread, see Inholders. House-Doves, see Pheasants: Huy and Cry, fol. 72.
Hunters and hunting, fol. 75. Husbandry and Tillage, fol: 78.
I
Jesuits, see Recusants. Imbracery see Maintenance. Indictments, fol. 79.
Informer, fol. 80: Ingrosser, see Forestallers. Inholders, fol. 81. Inmates,
see Cottages, 3. Inrollments, fol. 81. Issues, see Jurors 2 Jurors, fol. 82.
L
Laborers, and servants, and Apprentices, fol. 83. Larceny, fol. 88. Leather,
ibid. Lying in wait, see Assault 3. Linen Cloth, see Cloth 5. Liveries and
Retainers, fol. 92 Logwood, see Dyers.
M
Mayme, fol. 92. Maintenance, fol. 93 Manslaughter, fol. 94. Mariners, see
Captains 4. Masons, fol. 99. Market, see Faires Mass, see Preachers 7.
Matrimony. fol 99. Malt, fol. 96. Milch-kine, fol. 97. Miller, see Toll.
Minister, see preachers. Misprision, see Treason. Mortuary, fol. 98. Murder,
see Manslaughter. Musters, see Captains, 2.
N
NEts, see Fish and Hunters 6. Night-walkers; see Good-behaviour. Nusances; see
High ways 6. 7, 14
O
OFficers; see Constables and Church wardens. Ordinary, fol. 100. Overseers of
the poor, see Church wardens.
P
PArliament, fol. 200. Park, see Hunters. Parson, vicar, etc. see preacher.
Partridges, see pheasants. Perjury, fol. 101. Petty Treason, ibid. Petty
Larceny, see Larceny. Pewter and Brass, fol. 102. Pigeons, see pheasants, 3.
Plague, fol. 102. Plays, fol. 103. Ponds, see Fish. Pope, see Rome. Poor
people, fol. 104. Poisoning, see Manslaughter Preacher, fol. 108. Priests, see
Recusants. Praemunire, see Treason. Presentment, see Indictments. Prison and
prisoners, fol. 111 Promoter, see Informer. Prophesying, see Conjuration.
Purveyors, fol. 116. Putting out Eyes, see Tongues.
R
RApe, fol. 118. Recusants, fol. 110. Regrators, see Forestallers. Removing
prisoners, etc. fo: 121 Repair to the Church, see Church 4. Rescues, fol. 121.
Restitution, fol. 122. Retainers, see Maintenance. Riots, Routs, etc. fol. 123.
Robbery, fol. 128. Rogues, see Vagabonds. Rome, fol. 129.
S
SAcrament, see preachers, 2. Salmons, see Fish. Schoolmaster, see Recusants
Seal; see Weights. Searcher; see Leather 1. 2. etc. Seed Corn, see Corn.
Seminaries, see Recusants. Servants, see Laborers. Setting Dogs, see Hunters
6. Sewers, fol. 130. Sheep, ibid. Sheriff, fol. 131: Shoommaker, See Leather
17 Shooting, see Guns. Soap vessels, see Coopers. Soldiers, see Captains, etc.
Spinsters and carders, see cloth 4. Stock of the county see Treasurer: Stolen
Goods, see Restitution. Subsidy, fol. 133. Swans ibid.
T
TAnners, see Leather 3. Testimonial, see laborers Theft, see Robbery.
Tillage, see husbandry. Tilemakers, fol. 134. Tinkers, see Vagabonds: Tippling
and Tiplers, See Alehouses 1. oll. fol. 135. Tongues, sol. 136.
Transportation, ibid. Traverse, fol. 138 Treason, fol. 139. Treasurer, fol.
141. Trespass, fol. 143. Trouts, see Fish. Turn of the Sheriff, see Sheriff.
V
VAgabonds fol. i44. Vessels, see Coopers. Victuals and victualers, fol. i47
Unlawful Games, see plays Undertake work and not finish see Laborers 8.
Usury, fol. i48.
W
WAges, fol. i49. Weanlings, see But cher. Watch and ward, fol. i49. Wax, fol.
i50. Warren, see Hunters 1, 2. Weavers, see Cloth 4. Weights and measures, fol.
i50 Wild, foul, fol. i52. VVines, fol. i53. VVitchcraft, see Coniuration.
Wood, fol. 154. Wool, ibid. Women, see Rape and Labourersie.
Y
YArn, fol. 54.
(...)
Resolutions of the Judges of Assize upon certain Questions touching parishes
etc. fol. i57. The Judges opinions concerning the commissions by which the
Justices sit at Newgate, etc. fol. 177. Coroners of their Office and Authority,
etc. fol. i83. In what cases a man shall have his Clergy and in what not etc
fol. i89.
A brief SUMMARY, OF THE Laws and Statutes Of ENGLAND.
Alehouses and Drunkenness.
An alehous keeper permitting any to continue drinking in (...) house.
1 IF any Inkeeper, or any Ale-house-keeper, shall suffer any person dwelling
in the Town, Village or Hamlet, where such Inn or Alehouse is, to remain and
continue drinking there, other then persons invited by Travelers, accompanying
them only, during their necessary abode there, Laboring men, and
Handicrafts-men for an hour at dinner time; and La bourers and workmen which
for following their work, lodge and victual in such houses, otherthen for
urgent occasions allowed by 2. Justices of the Peace, he shall forfeit to the
poor there for every such offense proved by two witnesses upon Oath, or seen by
a Justice of the Peace of that limit, 10. s. 1 Iac. 9. and P. 6.

By the Stat. of 7. Iac. 10. he shall be disabled to keep an Alehouse for 3.
years after.

2. Whosoever shall continue drinking in Inn or Alehouse in the town where he
then dwells contrary to the Stat. 1 Iac. 9. before mentioned, the said
offense being proved, or seen, as aforesaid, and presented within Six months,
shall sorfeit and pay to the use of the poor there, within a week after for
every such offense 3. s. 4. d. And if the offender be not able to pay the said
forfeiture, then he shall be set in the stocks 4. hours, 4 Iac. 5. and Poult
drunkenness.

Nota.
Note that if any Alehouse-keeper shall so continue drinking in the town where
he dwells, he shall be disabled three years, per le Stat. 4 Iac. 5. and 7. Iac.
10.

3. If any Inkeeper or Alehousekeeper, etc. shall utter or sell less than a
full Ale quart of the best Beer or Ale for a penny, and of small two quaits for
a penny, he shall forfeit for every such offense being proved as aforesaid, 20.
s. to the use of the poor there, 1. Iac. 9, and Peult. Alehouses, 7. etc.

But by the Stat. 7 Iac. 10. he shall be disabled 3. years.

A drunkard.
Whosoever shall be drunk, and thereof be lawfully convicted within Six months
after, shall forfeit and pay to the use of the poor there within one week 5.
s. and if he be not able to pay it, then he shall be set in the stocks six
hours, and if after that he shall be again convicted of the like offense, then
he shall be bound with two sureties in 10. l. to be from thence forth-of good
behavior, 4 Iac. 5. and Poulton drunkenness i, and 5.

Note that such offenders being once punished by the Ecclesiastical Laws,
shall not est soons be punished for the same offense, 4 Iac. 5. P. Drunkenness,
8.

5. Whosoever shall keep Alehouse without license, or contrary to the
commandment of two Justices of the peace one of them being of the quorum, shall
be imprisoned 3. days without bail, and before his delivery to be bound by
recognizance with two sureties not to keep Alehouse any more, as the Justices
shall think sit. And shall be also fined by the Justices in their open Sessions
for every such offense 20. l. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 26.

The penalty for selling Ale or Beer the persons unlicensed, see Brewers, 4.

An Alehouse-keeper once lawfully put down, cannot be allowed again but Nota.
in open Sessions, Juog VVarberton at Camor. Assizes, 1613. and Dalton 25. and
26. tamen quaere.

6. If a common Inkeeper, or Ale-house-keeper, shall refuse to lodge a
traveller, he ought to be suppressed, Dalton 25.

Archery,
^owes and Arrows.
1. ALL persons lacking or not using Bows and Arrows according to the Stat. 33
H. 8, 9. (except persons excepted by the Stat.) shall forfeit the several
penalties imposed upon them to the King and Informer, so as the suit be
commenced against them within a year after, See P: 1. etc.

Arrow. ^eads.
2. All false makers of Arrow heads shall be punished according to the Stat. 7.
H. 4. 7.

^orfeit (...). s.
3. If the Inhabitants of every Town and place shall not make and continue
their Buts as they ought to do, they shall forfeit for every month 20. s. 33 H.
8, 9

Armor.
Ride or go armed.
1. IF any persons (except the Kings Servants or officers in doing their
service, and their company aiding them in that behalf) shall ride or go armed
by day or night, or shall bring force in affray of the Kings people before the
Kings Justices or otherwise, they shall lose their Armor, and be imprisoned at
the Kings pleasure and may also be bound to the peace or good behavionr, 2 Ed.
3. 3. and P. 1.

Imbezel the Kings armor.
2. To imbezell the Kings Armor. Ordnance, or Victuals to the value of 20. s.
it is Felony, so as the offender be impeached within a year after, 31 El. 4 and
P. 3.

Recusants armor.
3. All the Armor, Gunpowder, and Munition soever of Recusants convict, other
than necessary weapons, shall be taken from them by warrant from four Justices
of the peace at their quarter Sessions; and yet they shall be charged with
maintaining the same, and with buying more in such sort as other Subjects are
according to their ability, 7 Iac. 5, and P. Recusants 75.

Artificers.
Artificers conspiring for the order of their work.
1. IF any Artificers, Workmen, or Laborers, shall conspire, promise, or make
oaths that they will do their work but at a certain price or rate, or will
not finish what another has begun, or shall otherwise conspire, for the order
of their work.

Or if any butchers, bakers, brewers, Poulterers, Cooks, Costermongers, or
Fruiterers, shall conspire, covenant, promise, ot take any oaths that they
shall not sell their victuals but at certain prices, every of them so ostending
being lawfully convicted thereof, shall forfeit for the first offense, i0. l.
to the King, and if he do not pay the same within six days after conviction,
he shall be imprisoned twenty days, and have only bread and water for his
sustenance, and for the second offense 20. l. or etc. and suffer the punishment
of the pillory, and lose one of his ears, and never be credited in matter of
judgment, 2 Ed. 6. 15. P. 1. and Just. 56. Nota.


Artificers are compelled to work in Harvest, See Laborers.

None shall occupy any Art but which has been an Apprentice, See Laborers.

Assault.
1. IF any shall commit unlawful Assault, beating, wounding, or such like
trespasses against the body of any one, or shall with force and aginst the Law,
take the goods of another, or shall do any trespass in the Lands of another,
they shall be imprisoned, and punished according to the offense by the Justices
discretion.

But the fines which they assess must be reasonable, having regard to the
quantity of the trespass, and the cause, 2. Ed. 3. 6. 33. Ed. 3. 1. and P.
Just. 18.

A servant or Workman assaults his Master, See Laborers.

Lying in Want.
Whosoever shall lie in a wait to rob Maine, or Kill another, shall be
imprisoned and fined. See Poulton, Just. 18.

Assize of Bread and Drink.
1. IF any common Brewer, Baker, or Tipler, have broken the Assize of Bread,
Beer, or Ale, he shall be fined by the discretion of the Justices, etc. And if
any Steward in Leet, or Officer in Market Town, shall take any fine for breach
of the Assize of Bread or ale in such cases where corporal punishment is
appointed, he shall be grievously fined, 51 H. 3. 13 Ric. 2. 8.

(...) break the Assize, the 1, 2, 3, time he shall be amerced.
3. If a Baker or Brewer shall break the Assize the first, second, and third
time, he shall be amerced according to his offense; except it be great, but if
his offense be great, or that he does offend a fourth time, or oftener, then the
Baker offending shall be set on the Pillory and the Brewer punished by the
Tumbrell; which shall not be pardoned for Gold nor Silver, 51 Hen. 3. and P.
Weights and Measures, 15.

Badgers, Laders. Drovers.
To whom and and where a Badgers License shall be made.
1. ALl licenses made to any badger, Lader, Kidder, or Carrier of Corn, Drover
of Cattle, Buyer or Transporter of Corn and Grain, Butter and Cheese, otherwise
than in the open general quarter Sessions of the peace holden in the Shire
where the party admitted, assigned, or allowed, does, or by the space of three
years before the Test of this License has dwelled, or other then to such
persons as is, or has been married, is ahoushoulder, no household servant or
retainer, and thirty years of age at the least, or to have continuance for more
then one year, or which bears not date the day and place where the Sessions
is holden, or is not signed and sealed with the hands and seals of three
Justices of the peace at the least there present, whereof one to be of the
quorum, shall be void, and the party which takes the same shall forfeit 5. l.
to the King and Informer, 5. El. 12. and P. 2.

2. Whosoever shall by authority of such license buy any Corn out of open Fair
or Market to sell the same again (except he be thereunto specialy licenced by
express words in his License) shall forfeit, ut antea, 5. l. 5 El. 12. and P. 1.

Bark.
Regrating or engrossing of Bark
1. Whosoever shall got into his hands any Oakenbark, to the intent to sell the
same again, shall forfeit the barks, or the full value thereof, i Iac. 22. and
P. Leather, i4.

At what time trees to be barked, shall be felled.
2. Whosoever shall sell any trees mere to be barked, where bark is worth 2. s.
2. load, without the charge of barking and pilling timber for necessary
building or reparations of houses, ships, or mils, excepted, but between the
first day of April, and the last of June, shall forfeit for every tree the
double value thereof, i Iac. 22. and P. Leather 15.

Barator,
1. A Common Barrator is he who is either a common mover, or stirrer up, or
maintainer of suits in Law in any Court, or else of quarrels in the County, and
not only in one, or two, but in many causes.

Such persons may be bound to the peace, or good behavior, and may be
imprisoned and punished according to the Justices discretion, 2 Ed. 3. 6. and
P. Justices i8.

Bastardy.
HE that is suspected to have gotten a Bastard, ought to be bound to the good
behavior, to the end he may be forth coming when the child shall be born,
Lam. i2.

Who shall take order for Bastardy.
Two Justices of Peace, one of them being of the Quorum, in, or next to the
limits where the parish Church is, in which parish any Bastard begotten, and
borne out of lawful Matrimony, shall be born, upon examination of the cause
and circumstances, shall and may take order by their discretions, as well for
the relief of the parish, and keeping of the child, by charging the mother, or
reputed father with the payment of money weekly, or other relief, as also for
the punishment of the mother, and reputed father, i8 El. 3.

Refusing to perfo^m the order.
If the mother or reputed father, upon notice thereof, shall not perform the
order of the Justices, subscribed under their hands, such persons so making
default, shall be by the same Justices committed to the common Goal, there to
remain without bail; or mainprise, except such persons shall put in sufficient
sureties to perform the said order, else appear at the next Sessions of the
peace to be holden in that County, and also to abide such order as the Justices
or the more part of them shall there take in that behalf, and if they take no
order there, then to abide the order before made, ibid. and P. 1.

Nota.
That the Mother may be examined upon Oath concerning the reputed Father.

The punishment of the Mother.
By the Stat. 7 Iac. every such lewd woman shall be sent to the house of
correction, there to be punished, and set to work for a year, and if she shall
often soons offend so again, then to be committed to the said house of correction
as aforesaid, there to remain until she can put in sureties for her good
behavior not to offend so again.

Nota*
But such a bastard child must be one that is left to the charge of the parish,
or like to be chargeable to the parish, 7 Iac. 4.

Quaere.
If the lustices may punish the Mother by force of the Stat. 18. Eliz. and
after send her to the house of correction, because Nemo debet his puniri pro
unodelicto.

Nota.
The mother may not be sent to the house of correction before the child be
born, Dalton.

Such child is not to be sent to the house of correction with the mother, but
rather to be kept in the town where it was born, and there to be relieved by
the work of the mother, and by relief commonly from the Father; yet it is
commonly used to send the child with the mother to the house of correction, de
eo quaere.

Brewer,
No Brewer shall be a Cooper.
1. IF any brewer which breweth beer or ale to sell, shall by himself, or other
to his use, occupy the mystery of Cooper, or make Barrels, etc. or other
vessels of wood wherein to put his Beer or Ale to sale, he shall forfeit for
every vessel made 3. s. 4. d. to the King and the Informer, 23 H. 8. 4.

The prices of Ale and Beer.
2. If any Beer Brewer, or Ale brewer shall sell his drink at higher prizes than
shall be appointed by the Justices of the Peace, etc. he shall forfeit for
every Barrel so sold, six shillings, for every Kilderkin three shillings, and
four pence; for every Firkin two shillings; for every lesser vessel twelve
pence, and for a greater then a Barrel, ten shillings to the King and
Informer, 28, Hen. 8. 4. and Poulton 2.

Nota.
3. The Justices of the peace for every shire where any Ale or Beere-Brewer
does dwell (out of a City, Borough, or Town, or other place where no head
officer has any rule) have power to Sess and Tax by their discretions the
prices of every Barrel, Kilderkin, or Firkin of Ale or Beer. 23 H. 8. 4. and
P. Just. 78.

None shall sell drink to an alebouse keeper unlicensed.
4. If any person shall by himself or otherwise, directly, or indirectly sell,
utter, or deliver any Beer or Ale to any person, or into the house or seller of
any person that then shall sell Beer or Ale as a common Tipler without License
then in force to sell Ale or beer, he shall forfeit for every barrel 6. s 4d.
and so after that rate for a greater or lesser vessel or quantity, 4. Iac. 4.
and P. Alehouses, so;

Buggary.
Buggary.
THe Justices of peace may hear and determine the said offenses of buggary, as
they do use to do in other cases of Felony, and such offender shall not be
admitted to his Clergy, 25 H. 8. 6. 5. El. 17. and P. 1.

Burglary.
Burglary.
BUrglars shall not have the benefit of their Clergy, 18 El. 6. But there are
four special things which must concur to make this Felony, viz.

1. The time only in the night.

2. The place either public, as the Church, or walls or gates of a City, or
walled Town, or private, as a dwelling, house, and then some body must be
within at the same time. Also the breaking in the night of a stable, barn, or,
other out-house adjoining or near the dwelling house, to the intent to steal,
is Burglary, though he take nothing. See Dalton.

3. The manner consists, partly in breaking of the house, and partly in
entering therein; yet it seems that he that is taken in the only attempt of a
Burglary, shall be hanged though he make no actual entry, as to put back the
leaf of a window, to draw the latch of a door, or turn the key in the inner
side of the door, to break a glass window and hook out any goods, or to come
down a chimney, etc.

4. The intent, which must be either to kill or rob some person, or do some
other Felony, See Dalton 223.

Burning of Houses.
TO burn a dwelling house, or other house parcel thereof, by night or day
feloniously is Felony.

So it is to burn a stack of Corn Feloniously.

So it is to burn a Barn adjoining or near a dwelling house in the night
Feloniously.

So it is also to burn a Barn in the day time having Corn in it, though it be
not adjoining to the dwelling house.

Butchers.
Kill not weanling 5.
1. IF a Butcher shall buy cattle, and sell the same alive, he shall forfeit to
the King and Informer the same cattle, 3 and 4 Ed. 19. 1. Iac. 25. and P.

2. If a Butcher or other person shall kill any Weanlings, Bullock, Steer, or
Heifer being under the age of 2. years, to the intent to sell the same again
whole or by retail, he shall forfeit to the King and Informer for every one six
shillings and eight pence, 24 H. 8. 2. 1 Iac. 25. and P. 2.

3. A Buther that sells swines flesh Selling measled or morein flesh.
measled, or flesh dead of the morein, after he shall be convicted thereof, shall
for the first time be grievously amerced, the second time be judged to the
Pillory; the third time he shall be imprisoned and fined, and the fourth time he
shall for swear the town.

And in this manner it shall be done of all that oftend in like case, as of
Cooks, etc. 51 H. 3. and P. 4.

4. If a Butcher shall gash or hurr any hide of Ox, Bull, Steer, or Cow, he shall
forfeit for every hide, 20. d. 1 Iac. 22.

Or shall water any hide, except in June, July, or Argust, or shall put to sale
any putrified, 3, s. 4. d. ibidem and P. Leather 1.

5. No Butcher or other person shall kill any Calfe to sell, being under five
weeks old, on pain to forfeit for every calf 6. s. 8. d. 1 Iac. 22. and P.
Leather, 2.

6. No Butcher shall be a Tanner simul and semel, under the pain of forfeiting
6. s. 8. d. for every day. 1 Iac. 22. and P. ibidem, 3.

Butchers conspiring to sell their meat at certain prices. See Artificers. 1.

Captains, Soldiers, Musters.
Soldier making away his horse or harness.
1. IF any Soldier serving the King in his wars shall give away any horse,
gelding, mare, or harness wherewith he was set forth, he shall be imprisoned
till he make satisfaction, 2 Ed. 6. 2. and P. Just. 84.

Absenting from the Musters.
2. If any person absenting himself without true and reasonable cause (being
commanded to Muster before any Having authority for the same) or not bringing
with him in a readiness his best furniture of array, and armor of his own
person, he shall be ten days imprisoned, or pay forty shillings fine, 4 and 5
P. and M. 3. and P. 12.

3. If any person authorized to muster or levy men for the Kings service in
war, shall take any reward for the discharge or sparing any from that service,
or shall not pay to his Soldiers their whole wages, conduct, and coat money,
within ten days after he shall receive the same, or for gain has licensed any
to depart out of the service, he shall forfeit for every offense ten times as
much as he takes, and pay to every Soldier treble the sum withholden, 4 and 5
P. and M. 3. 2 Ed. 6. 2. and P. 12.

4. Every parish shall be charged with ^ weekly sum toward the relief of
^ouldiers and Mariners by the more ^art of the Justices of the peace in their
general quarter Sessions next after Easter yearly, so as no parish be ra^ed
above 10. d. nor under 2 d. and so as ^he total sum of such taxations in a^y
County where there shall not be above 50. parishes do not exceed the rate of
six pence for every parish in the same County, 43 Eliz. 3. and Poulton 17.

A remedy for such as refuse to pay the said taxation, ibid.

5. Who shall collect the said taxation, and how, and when they are to dispose
of it, see 43 El. 3. and Poulton, ^18.

6. The Justices of the peace shall grant relief in quarter Sessions to
Soldiers and Mariners, and may alter and revoke the same again, ibid. and P.
19.

They may also alter and dispose of the surplusage of the stook, as the most of
them there shall think fit, ibid. and P. 24.

7. If a Soldier or Mariner shall be taken begging, or shall counterfeit a
Certificate, he shall for ever lose his pension, and be punished as a common
Rogue, ibid. and. P. 23.

Felony in Soldiers.
8. If a Soldier, Mariner, or Drummer depart from his Captain without license,
it is Felony, 18 H 6. 19. and P. 3.

9. If a Soldier or Mariner wande^ abroad without a Testimonial, it is
felony. So it is in every one wandering (...) a Soldier or Mariner, which shall
forge^ or counterfeit a Testimonial, 39 El. 17. and P. sub titulo Mariners 4
and 5.

Certificate.
10. How and by whom a Certificate of a Soldier or Mariner shall be allowed and
made, see 43 El. 3. and P. 19.

Church and Churchyard.
1. IF any person shall maliciously strike with any weapon in Church or
Churchyard, or draw any weapon there to that intent, and shall be thereof
lawfully convict, he shall have one of his ears cut off, and if he have no ears,
then he shall be burned in the cheek with a letter F. and stand (ipso facto)
Excommunicate, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 4. and P. Fighting 4.

2. Fairs or Markets in Churchyards, see Fairs.

3. If any shall feloniously take goods ^^t of any Church or Chapel, it is
^^lony, and he shall not have Clergy, ^^e P. Clergy i3.

Not reparing to the Church.
4. Whosoever not having lawful ^^d reasonable excuse to be absent, shall (...)
repair to his or her parish Church Chapel accustomed, or upon let ^^reof, to
some usual place where ^^mmon Prayer, is to be used every ^^nday, and other
Holyday, and there ^^erly and soberly abide during the ^^e of such common
prayer, preaching ^^other service of God, and shall be ^^ed in question within
one month (...)r default, shall forfeit for every de(...)t 12. d. to the use of
the poor where (...) offenders shall be resident and abi(...)g at the time of
such offense com(...)ed, 1 El. 2. 3. Iac. 4. and P. Recusants (...) 50.

(...)nd whosoever being above the age (...)6. years, shall not repair to some
(...)rch or chapel as aforesaid, shall (...)eit for every month 20. l. to the
King El. 1. and P. Recusants 3.

(...)nd whosoever shall keep, relieve or (...)our any such person, shall for se
it every month, i0. l. 3 Iac. 4. and P. Re(...)ts 5i. See Recusants.

Churchwardens, and Overseers.
1. IF the Churchwardens and O(...) seers of the poor of every (...) rish
shall not take order for (...) ting a work, or relieving their poor, (...) for
assisting the inhabitants and o(...) piers of land in their parish, or sh(...)
not endevor to levy such Assessments, (...) shall not meet together monthly and
(...) count as they ought, every one make(...) default, shall forfeit for every
de(...) 20. s. to the use of the poor. 43. El. (...) P. Poor 2. i2.

And if any Churchwarden, Overseer shall refuse to account, (...) Justices may
commit him to p(...) without bail till he make a true count, and satisfy and
pay so much upon the said account shall be re(...) ning in his hand, 43 El. 2.
and P. 4.

2. If the Churchwardens, etc. s(...) not truly collect, and pay over to (...)
high Constable of that Division days before the end of every qu(...) Sessions
such money as they ough(...) pay for the relief of the prisoners i(...) Marshal
sea and King's Bench, then t(...) shall forfeit for every default i0. 5. the uses
in this Act comprised, 43 El. 2. and P. Poor i4.

And they also forfeit 5. l. for not levying the money, and paying the same
money so taxed for relief of the prisoners in the common Goales of the County,
according to the Stat. i4 El. 5. and P. Prison 4.

3. If the Churchwardens and petty Constables shall not truly collect and pay
to the high Constables of that division ten days before every quarter sessions
such money as they ought to pay for the relief of Soldiers and Mariners, they
shall forfeit for every default 20. s. 43 El. 3. and P. Capt. etc. i7. i8.

4. If the Churchwardens or Overseers, or other officer to whom the money
forfeited by 4 Jac. for uttering Beer or Ale to Tiplers unlicensed shall be
paid, do not within convenient time truly bestow the same among the poor they
shall forfeit double the value thereof, 4 Jac. and P. Alehouses i2. i3.

5. The Churchwardens duty in levying the penalties of Alehouse-keepers, etc.
See Constables 9

Their duty in presenting the monthly absence from Church of Recusants, See
Constables i4.

7. Their duty in choosing days for amending the high ways, See Highwayes i.
ii.

8. They forfeit 5. l. for not receiving Rogues lawfully sent unto them.

Their duty for binding out poor children Apprentices, and employing their
money according to the Stat. 7. Iac. 3. See constables i5.

Clergy.
1. IN what cases clergy is allow(...) and what not, see Poulton i. etc.

2. Where clergy lies, it (...) grantable but once to one person (e(...)cept
he be within holy Orders) 4. H. 7(...) i3. and P i6.

Clark of the Market:
Common fin.
1. IF the Clark of the Market shall take any common fine to dispense with
faults, or shall ride with more than six horses, or tarry longer in the country
than the necessity of his business requires, he shall forfeit to the King for
his first offense, 5. l. for the second offense 10. l. and for the third
offense 20. l. 13 Ric. 2. and P. 1.

Weights and Measures.
2. He ought also for to have all his Weights and Measures signed according to
the Standard of the Exchequer with him, when he goes to assay Weights and
Measures, and he nor any other shall use any other Weights or Measure, i^ Ric.
3. and P. i.

Cloth.
1. THe Justices of peace in their several quarter Sessions may enquire,
hear, and determine every fault and offense made, or done contrary to the act
of 39 El. 20. concerning woollen cloth, see P. Drapery, 127, etc. and 43 El. i0.

2. If any person shall present any cloth which is defective or faulty contrary
to the Stat. 5 Ed. 6. the same cloth shall be by two Justices of the Peace cut
into three equal parts, where of the King shall have one, the presenter one, and
the third they shall retain themselves, 5 Ed. 6. 6. and P. Drapery 29.

Refusing to pay wages.
3. If Clothiers, or other Masters shall refuse to pay such wages to their
Spinsters, Weavers, and other workmen whatsoever as shall be assessed by the
Justices of the Peace at their Sessions, and shall be thereof convict, they shall
forfeit for every such offense, ten shillings to the party grieved, i Iac. 6.
and P. Just. 66.

4. If Spinsters, Carders, Weavers, etc. shall imbezel, sell or detain any part
of their Clothiers wool, or yarn, as well every one of them, as the buyers, and
the receivers thereof knowing the same to be imbezelled, being convicted
thereof by confession of the parry, or proved by one sufficient witness upon
oath, before two Justices, shall give such recompense to the party grieved, as
the Justices shall think sit, and if they be not able, then to be whipped and
set in the stocks near the place where the offense was committed, 7 Iac. 7.

Linen Cloth.
5. If any person shall wittingly use any deceitful art or means with Linen
Cloth, whereby the same is made worse for the use thereof, he shall forfeit his
said Cloth, and suffer one months Imprisonment at the least, and pay such fine
as shall be assessed by the Justices, 1 Eliz. 12. and P. Linen cloth 2.

Dyers and Dying.
THe default and punishment of Dyers, 23 Eliz. 9. 39. Eliz. 11. and Poul.
Drapery, 65. and Just. 82

Conjuration, Witchcraft, Prophesying
Conjuration or VVitchcraft where by any person is killed or lamed.
1. WHosoever shall use Invocation, or Conjuration of any evil spirit, or shall
consult. covenant with, entertain, employ, feed, or reward any evil Spirit, for
any intent; or shall take up any dead man, woman, or child, or any part of any
dead person, to be used in any manner of Witchcraft, Sorcery, Charm, or
Enchantment; or shall use Witchcraft, Enchantment, Charm, or Sorcery, whereby
any person has been killed, destroyed, wasted, consumed, pined, or lamed in
his body, or in any part thereof, shall, together with his Aiders, Abettois,
and Counselors, being Lawfully convicted, suffer death as a Felon, and not
have the benefit of Clergy, i Iac. i2. and P. 1.

Declaring where things be hidden for procuring unlawul love.
2. Whosoever shall undertake by VVitchcraft, Enchantment, Charm, or Sorcery,
to tell in what place any Treasure of Gold or Silver may be sound; or to the
intent to provoke any person to unlawful Love, or to impare, or destroy any
persons Goods or Cattle, or to hurt any person in body, although the same were
not effected, shall for the first offense suffer Imprisonment by the space of
one whole year without Bail, and once every quarter of the said year, shall in
some Market Town First offense.
on the Market or Fair day, stand openly on the Pillory by the space of six
hours, and there openly confess his fault and offense, 1. Iac. i2. and Poult.
2.

Second offense.
And for the second offense shall suffer death as a Felon, and not have Clergy,
ibid. and P. 3.

Prophesying.
3. Whosoever shall advisedly advance, publish, and set forth by writing,
printing, open speeches, or deed to any other person, any fantastical or false
Prophecy upon Arms, Fields, Beasts, or Badges, or upon any Time, Name,
Bloodshed, or War, to make thereby Rebellion, dissension, loss of life, or
other Disturbance within the Kings Dominions, shall for the first offense be
imprisoned a year without Bail, and forfeit to the King and Informer 10. l. And
for the second offense be imprisoned during life, without bail, and forfeit to
the King and Informer all his Good and chattels, 5 El. i5. and P. Prophesying.

Constables.
VVhoought to be chosen Constables
1. EVery Constable ought to be Idoneus homo, that is to say, apt and fit for
the execution of the said Office, and he is idoneus who has these three three
things, viz.

1. Honesty: 2. Knowledge. 3. Ability.
1. Honesty to execute his office truly without malice, affection or partiality.

2. Knowleege to understand what he ought to do.

3. Ability, as well in substance, or estate as in body, that so he may attend
and execute his office diligently, and not through impotency of body, or want,
to neglect the place.

And if any shall be chosen constable, which is not thus enabled and qualified,
he may be discharged, Dalt. s. 37.

The duties of constable^s.
2. All constables and other Officers ought to be attendant and assisting to
the Justices of Peace for the execution of the Stat. 33. and 37. H. 8.
concerning Retainers, giving of Liveries, Maintenance, Embracery, Bow-staves,
Archers, unlawful Games, Fore-stallers, Regraters, Victuallers, and Innholders,
upon pain to be fined by the discretion of any two Justices of the peace, P.
Just. 20.

Escape.
3. If a Constable or such other Officer shall arrest one for Felony, and after
suffer him to escape, it is Felony in such constable, of whatsoever other kind
the offense be; if the Officer shall by his will or negligence suffer the party
to escape, he shall be fined, which Fine shall be equal with the value of his
Goods, if his fault do so require, See the Duties o^ constables, f. 22.

Purveyor.
4. If a constable, or other head Officer shall be requested to resist Purveyor
which refuses to make ready payment of any Purveyance not exceeding forty
shillings, and he notwithstanding shall not aid and assist such own^r, he shall
pay to the party grieved the value of the thing taken, and his double damages,
20 Hen. 6. 8. and Poulton Purveyors, 22. and Just. 58.

Laborers in Harvest
5. If the Constable, or other such Officer of any Township upon request made,
and for the avoiding the loss of Corn, or grain, or Hay in the time of Harvest,
shall not cause all such Artificers and Laborers (as be meet to Labor) by his
discretion, to serve by the day, for the moowing, reaping, or inning of corn or
Hay, according to the skill and quality of the person, and such as refuse to
imprison in the stocks by the space of two days and one night, he shall
forfeit 40. s. 5 El. 4. and P. Laborers 13.

Search for Rogues, and convey them to the house of correction.
6. If Constables and Tything-men shall not make privy search within their
limits for Rogues and Vagabonds according to the Statute 7 Iac 4. Or shall not
safely convey all such Rogues and idle persons at the charge of the Hundred, as
by the Justices Warrant shall be sent to the house of correction, they shall
forfeit such Fines as the Justices shall think fit, not exceeding forty
shillings for every such offense, 7 Iac. 4.

7. If any Constable, or Tything-men shall not do his best endeavor to
apprehend such rogues as beg, (...)bide Apprehend Rogues as be, and punish them.
within his limits, or shall not cause them to be punished, and conveyed away,
according to the Stat. 39 El. 4. h^ shall forfeit for every default 20. s. ibid.
and i lac. 7. and P. Vagabonds, 5. and vide P. ii. how this forfeiture shall be
employed.

Outland sh Rogues.
8. If any Constable, Headborough, or Tythingman shall not punish, and convey
every Rogue and Beggar that shall be brought and set on land here, from
Ireland, Scotland, or the Isle of Man, according to the Law, he shall forfeit
for every default i0. s. 39. El. 4. P. Vagabonds 6.

Refusing to receive Rogues to convey them.
9. If any Officer will not receive a Rogue, to convey him according to the Law,
he shall forfeit five pounds, P. Vagabonds 5.

And if any being a sturdy or imputent Rogue shall be sent to a Town where he
ought to be sent, and shall be refused, that person refusing shall forfeit 5. l.
And he that is sent, is to be offered to the Churchwardens and Overseers.

Nota
To send Rogues by a general Pasport is a forfeiture of 5. l.

Hedge break^rs.
10. If any constable, or other inferior Officer shall not whippe such hedge
breekers, robbers of Orchards, and Gardens, cutting of Corn and Wood etc. as
shall be for that purpose committed to them by a Justice of the peace, he shall
be imprisoned without bail till it be done, 43 Eliz. 7. and P. Trespass 2.

Plague.
11. Every Constable, and other officer that shall willingly make default in
levying such money as they shall be commanded by the Warrants of any Mayor,
Justices of the Peace, etc. for the Relief of the poor infected with the
Plague, shall forfeit for every such oftence ten shilings to the use of the
poor infected persons, i Iac. 31 and P. Plague 3.

Drunk(...)
12. If any Constable or other inferior Officer, to whom it shall be given in
charge by precept from any Justice of the peace, within his Limits shall
neglect the due correction of a Drunkard, or the due levying of the penalties
imposed upon such offenders, where distress may be had, he shall forfeit ten
shillings to the use of the poor of the same Parish, 4. Iac. 5. and Poulton.
Drunkenness 2.

Alehouse keepers.
13. If any Ale-house-keeper shall be neglected by the Constables or Church
wardens not doing their duty in levying of the penalties etc. Or in default of
distress, shall not crucify such default by the space of two days then next
ensuing to the Justices within whose limits the offense shall be committed, the
Constables, etc. shall forfeit for every such default forty shillings to the
poor, 1 Iac. 9. and P. Alehouses 8.

Unlawful Games.
14. If constables and other head Officers shall not make due search Weekly, or
at the furthest once every month, where unlawful Games be, and execute the
Statute in all things according to the purport of the same, shall forfeite for
every Month forty sh. 33 Hen. 8. and Poulton Players, 6. 7. 8. See who shall
have Forfeitures, ibidem.

Poor children Apprentices.
15. If the Parson or Vicar of a Town or Parish, not corporate together, with
the constables and Churchwarrdens, collecters, and Overseers, where any sum
of money is, or shall be given to be employed for the binding out of poor
children Apprentices, or any of them shall forbear wilfully, or refuse to
employ such money according to their Duties therein, every of them so
offending, shall forfeit three pounds, six shillings, eight pence, for every
such offense, the one half to the use of the poor, and the other half to any
that will sue. 7 Iacobi 3.

Present Recusants.
19. If constables and church wardens, or where there be none, the chief
Constables of the Hundred shall not once every year present the monthly absence
from Church of Popish Recusants according to the Stat. of 3 Iac. 4. they shall
forfeit for every default twenty shillings, 3 Iac. 4. P. Recusants 41.

Watches set and kept
17. It that Constables do not see Wath duly set and kept from Sun setting till
the Sun rising, between Ascension day, and Michaelmas day, and make presentment
to the Justices of the peace at their sessions, of the default of watches, and
such as lodge Strangers, for whom they will not answer, they shall be fined by
the discretion of the Justices, VVinch. 13. Ed. 1. 5. Hen 4. 3. and Poult.
Watch 1, and 2.

Affray.
18. If a Constable being present at an Affray, shall not do his best endeavor
to part them, it being presented at the Sessions, he shall be deeply fined, and
the Affrayer at the discretion of the Justices, he may justify the hurting of
them if they resist, and may command assistance, and imprison the Affrayors in
the Stocks til they find sureties of the peace, Dalton fol. 28.

High Constables.
Highwaies.
SEE the Constables duties in choosing Surveyors of the Highwayes, Highwayes i.

Prisoners.
If the high Constable or other head officer shall not pay the money by him
received for the relief of prisoners in the Goal at the next quarter Sessions
to the persons appointed by the Justices to receive the same, he shall forfeit
five pound, half to the King, the other to the Prisoners, El. 5. i Iac. 25.
and Poult. Prisoners 4.

If the high Constable shall not pay at every quarter Sessions to one of the
Treasurers of the shire such money as the Churchwardens shall pay to him for the
prisoners in the Marshalsey, and King's Bench, he shall forfeit for every
default 20. s. 43 Eliz. 3. and P. poor people 14.

Maimed Souidiers.
If the high Constables shall not pay in like manner that money which the petty
Constable or churchwardens bring to him for disabled Soldiers, he shall
forfeit 40. s. 43 El. 3. and P. captains 18. See churchwardens 3. for the
constables neglect herein.

Correction-houses.
Houses of correction.
1. EVery Justice of peace in the county where there is not a conveient house
of correction with convenient backsides, and necessary (...)mplements, shall
forfeit 5. l. 7 Iac. 4.

2. The more part of the Justices may at any time of quarter Sessions, give
order for the erecting of houses of correction, and for stocks of money, and al
other things necessary for the same, or for the Government thereof, 39 (...) E.
7.

3. Houses of correction are to be purchased, conveyed, or assured upon trust
to such persons as by the more part of the Justices of the peace in their
quarter Sessions of the peace shall be thought fit. And such Justices may at
their said quarter Sessions, next after such houses built, and so from time to
time appoint Governors or Masters thereof, and may make them such allowance
and maintenance as they shall think meet,

And if the Masters of the houses of correction shall not every Sessions yield
a true and lawful account to the Justice of the peace of all such person as
they have committed to their custody, or if the said persons shall trouble the
Country by going abroad, or escape from such houses of correction, the most
part of the said Justices in their quarter Sessions may fine the said Masters
and Governors as they shall think fit. 7. Iac.

Coopers.
The prizes of Vessels.
1. THe prices of all Barrels, Kilderkins, Firkins, and other vessels to be
sold for Ale, Beer, or Soap to be uttered therein, made or sold out of any
City, Borough, or Town corporate, shall be taxed by the Justices of peace, or
the more part of them being present in the quarter Sessions yearly after
Easter, at such prizes as they shall think fit and reasonable, and if any Cooper
shall fell any of the same above such prizes assessed, and proclamation thereof
made, he shall forfeit for every vessel sold at a greater price, three shillings
four pence to the King and Informer. 8. Eliz. 9. and P. 1. and Just. 79.

2. If any Cooper shall make his vessels for Beer or Ale of unseasonable Woood,
or shall not make a Beer-Barrell The contents of ale and beer Vessels.
to contain 36. Gallons; a Kilderkin for Beer, 18. Gallons; a Firkin fur Beer
9. Gallons, and a Barrel for Ale, 32. Gallons, a Kilderkin for Ale 16. and a
Firkin 8. Gallons of the Kings Standard. And if any Cooper shall make any Vessel
for Beer or ale to be sold of any greater or lesser number of Gallons than is
aforesaid, unless he cause it to be marked upon every Marking of Vessels.
such Vessel the certain number of Gallons it contains, and that with his own
mark, he shall forfeit 3. shil. 4. d. 23 H. 8. 4. and P. 2.

Soap Vessels.
3. Whosoever shall make any Vessels that being empty contains not 32. Gallons
for the Barrel, 16. for the half Barrel, and eight for the Firkin, or weighed
above 26. pounds the Barrel, the half Barrel 13. and 6. and a half the
Firkin, shallose 3. shil. 4. d. for each one, 23 H. 8. 4.

Diminishing of Vessels.
4. Whosoever shall diminish any Vessel to deceive another shall forfeit 3. sh.
4. d. and be further punished at the discretion of the Officer, 23 H. 8. 4. and
P. 3.

Corn.
Seed corn.
IF any person shall buy Corn in any Fair or Market, for change of hi(...) Sed,
having then sufficient for hi(...) house, and for sowing of his ground for a
year, and shall not bring thither (if he might) so much as he did so bu(...) and
the same day sell it after the price then going, he shall lose double the value
of the Corn so bought, 5 Ed. 6. i4. i3 El. 25. and P. 30.

Transporting of corn, see Poult. (...), etc.

Coroners.
1. WHo shall be Coroners, and of whom, and where they shall be chosen, and of
what thing they shall enquire, see 3 Ed. i. i0. i4 Ed. 5. 8. P. i2.

2. If a Coroner be remiss in viewing a dead body murdered, or flain, and
shall not enquire of them that did the murder of death of their abettors, or
consenters, who were present thereat, and their names, or so found, shall not
enrole certify, and deliver his Inquisition according to the Law, he shall
forfeit unto the King five pound for every offense, 3 Hen. 7. 1. and Poulton,
12. i4.

Refusing to do his Office.
3. If a Coroner shall refuse to do his Office upon the view of a dead body, by
misadventure, without any fee therefore, he shall forfeit 40. s. i H. 8. 7.

His fee.
But upon an Inquisition taken upon the view of the body slain, he may take 13.
s. 4. d. 3. H. 7. 1. and P. i5. But if he take more, it is extortion.

4. Every Coroner which shall be absent from the assessing of wages for the
Knights of the shire, shall forfeit to the King 40. s. 23 H. 6. i1. and P. Parl.
12.

5. If a Coroner shall conceals, or not arrest Felons when he may he shall be
one year imprisoned, and make a grievous fine, or not being able, shall be
imprisoned 3. years, Westminster. 1. 3. Ed. 1. 9. and P. Felony 1.

6. If default be found in a Coroner for impannelling a Jury, or returning
Issues upon a commission to enquire of a riot, etc. he shall pay to the Kings
use 40. l. 2. H. 5. 8. and P. Ryots 7.

Cottages and Inmates.
1. NO person shall make, build, (...) rector cause to be builded (...) erected
any manner of Cotage for dwelling, or convert or orda(...) any building or
housing to be used as(...) Cottage for dwelling, unless he: do (...) thereunto
4 acres of ground at the (...) being his or their own Freehold (...)
Inheritance, lying near to the said Cotage, to be continually manured the^ with
so long as the said Cottage shall be inhabited, upon pain to forfeit to the King
for every such offense 10. l. 31. (...) 7. and P. (...),

2. Whosoever shall willingly maintain or uphold such Cottage, not having so
many acres so lying and manured, shall for(...) it to the King for ev(...)
(...)forty shillings, 31. Eliz. 7. 6. P. 2.

Inmates.
3. Whosoever shall place or willingly suffer any Inmates, or more than (...)
dwelling in one Cottage, shall forfeit^ to the Lord of the Le^te for every
month 10. s. 31. El. 7. P. 3. Just 10. 1.

Counterfeiting of Letters or tokens.
WHosoever shall falsely and deceitfully get into his hands, or possession any
money, goods, chattels, jewels, or other things of any other person, by color
or means of a privy token, or counterfeite Letter, made in another man's name,
the same being proved by confession, or (...)xamination of witnesses, shall
suffer any corporal pain (except death) as shall be adjudged, and besides the
party grieved shall have his remedy by action or otherwise for the same money or
goods, 33 H, 1. and P. and Just. 54.

Cutpurse.
A Cutpurse, not he which shall feloniously take any money, goods, or Chattels
from the person of another privily without his knowledge in any place
whatsoever, shall not have the privilege of his Clergy, but suffer death as a
Felon, 8 El. 4. and P. Clergy i.

Escape
1. Justices of peace in their Sess(...) may enquire of all manner (...) scapes
for Felony, 1 R. 3. 3. and so for Murder, and certify thereof (...) King in
his Bench, 3 H. 7. 1. and P. Ju(...)

Eseape of a Murderer,
2. If any person be murdered or (...) in the day, and the Murderer es(...)
untaken, the Township where the (...) deed is done, shall be amerced for(...)
said escape, 3 H. 7. 1. and Poult. 2.

3. Escape is of two sorts, viz.

1. Voluntary. 2. Negligent.
And for a voluntary Escape, if (...) Arrest or imprisonment were for F(...)ny,
it shall be adjudged Felony in (...) which did suffer the prisoner to
escap(...) etc.

Nota.
And note, that a ooluntary Escape (...) not Felony, if the Act done were (...)
Felony at the time of the Escape (...) but it is finable, and so is a
neglig(...) Escape, vide Dalt. s. 140.

Escheators.
Escheators see.
NO Escheator shall sell or let to farm his Office, nor make any Deputy, but
such as will a(...) for at his peril, and shall certify his (...) under his
Letters Pattents to the (...)surer and Barons of the Exchequer, (...)in twenty
days after, upon pain to (...)eit for every offense forty pounds (...) Ed. 9.
and P. Just. 19.

If an Escheator shall take for the (...)ution of any Diem claufit extremum,
(...)there Writ in any County above 40. (...)r 40. sh. where the Lands are not
(...)en in capite, he shall forfeit fonrty (...)ds to the King and Informer.
(...). 6. 17. and P. 9. And for taking a(...) 15. s. for the finding the office
of (...)ds not exceeding five pound per (...)m, shall forfeit for every offense
(...) pounds to the King and Informer. (...) H. 8. 12. and P. (...).

Whosoever shall take upon him to (...)ute the office of Escheator not ha(...)
Freehold of the yearly value of (...)ty Marks above all charges, he shall
(...)it twenty pounds, i H. 8. 8. 3 H. 6. (...) P. 5.

Extortion.
IN Sheriffs and their Ministers, (...) P. Sheriffs, 6. 7, 8, 9.

2. In coroners, see P. coroners, (...)

3. In Muster Masters, see P. Captains, 14.

4. In Escheators, see P. Escheato(...) 3. and 9.

5. In Ordinaries, see P. Ordi(...)ries, 2.

6. In the clerks of the Market, (...) P. 1.

7. In a Parson, Vicar; or cura(...) 5 El. and P. Fish-daies, 3 and 5 El. 4.
Laborers, 7.

8. In a spiritual person for a Mo(...)ry, 2 H. 8. 6. and P Mortuary 7.

9. In the clerk of the peace, for(...) rolment in the county, see Inrol(...)
P. 2. and 27. H. 8. 16.

And for Registring the License a(...) recognizance of a Badger, etc. see (...)
(...) 12. 3. El. 25. and P. Badgers 3.

Fair and Market.
A place appointed for a hors-fair.
IF the Owner, Officer, or Ruler of any fair or Market shall not yearly appoint
one certain open place here for the sale of horses, etc. and one ^fficient
person, to take Tole, and keep ^e said place from ten of the clock (...) the
forenoon until sun set, he shall (...)rfeit for every default, 40. s. to the
(...)ing and Infor. 2 and 3 P. and M. 7. and. P. 4.

2. When, where, and for whom role ^r horses must be taken, ibidem, and ^oul. 5.

3. The sale of any stolen Horse in a ^air or Market shall not take away the
^wners property, except the horse be ^penly ridden, led, walked, driven, or
^ept standing by the space of an hour, ^etween the hours of 10. in the morning
and Sun set, in the open place of the air, and lawfully toled, 2 and 3. P. and
(...). 7. and P. 5.

Nota.
And yet nevertheless the owner ^ay redeem the stolen horse within six ^onths
paying the price, 3 i El. 12. and (...). 8.

5. No person shall sell or put away any horse in any Fair or Market, un^ess
the, Tole-Taker, Book-Keeper, Bai(...), or chief Offic(...) thereof, will take
perfect knowledge thereof, and enter the sellers name, etc. into a Book kep^ for
horses sold, or unless the seller (...) bring to such Tole-keeper, or other
officer one cred^ble person testifying the he knows the seller, and there
ente^ into such a book, as well the sum a^ (...)be Seller must be (...) ^own.
the name, surname, Mystery, and plac^ of such Testifier, together with the
price taken for such horse, and no(...) shall so testify unless he do truly
kno^ the same; and no Tole-taker, etc. sha^ make entry of any such sale, unless
(...) know the seller or testifier of such horse and giving unto the buyer
requiring and paying two pence for the same (...) true and perfect note in
writing under his hand of all the contents of the same, upon pain that every
person offending in the premises shall for(...) or every default 5. l. and the
sale to be void, 31 El. 12 and P. 7.

5. If any person shall keep Fair (...) Market in the Churchyard, he shall be
punished at the discretion of the Justices, 13 Ed. 6. 1. and P. 10.

Pheasants, Partridges, etc.
Taking Pheasants and Partridges with snares.
1. Whosoever shall take or cause to be taken any Pheasants or Partridges, by
nets, snares, or other engines, upon the Freehold of any other, without his
special license, shall forfeit to the owner of the ground, and the Informer,
ten pound, 11 H. 7. and P. 1. and Just. 38.

Taking them in the night.
2. Whosoever shall take, kill, or destroy any Pheasants, or Partridges with
any net, or other devices whatsoever in the night time, (except unwillingly by
lowbelling or tramelling, who also shall then and there presently let them go
again) shall forfeit for every Pheasant 20. s. and for every Partridge 10. s.
to be paid within ten days after conviction, or in default thereof to be
imprisoned for a month without bail, and over and besides such forfeiture or
imprisonment, to be bound with sureties for two years, not to offend so again,
23. El. 10. and P. 2. and 5. and Just. 38. See who shall have forfeirures,
Ibid. P, 3.

Destroying certain games and their eggs.
3. Whosoever shall shoot at, kill, or destroy with any Grinne or Bow, any
Pheasant, Partridge, house Dove, or Pigeon, Herne, Mallard, Duck, Teale,
Wigeon, Goose, Heath-cock, Moregame, or any such foul, or any Hare, or shall
take, kill, or destroy any Pheasant, Partridge, house-Dove, or Pigeonwith
setting-Dogs, and Nets, or other Engines, or shall take the Eggs of any
Pheasant, Partridge, or Swans, or willingly destroy the same in the nests, or
shall trace or course any Hare in the snow, or take any Hare with hare-pipes,
Tracing Hares
cords, or any such Instruments or Engines, the same being confessed, or proved
by two sufficient Witnesses upon oath before two or more Justices, shall be by
them imprisoned for 3^ months without bail, or forthwith pay to the use of
the Poor there, 20. s. for every Foul, or Hare, and for every egg of
Pheasant, Partridge, or Swan, so taken or destroyed, or after one month after
his imprilonment become bound with two sufficient sureties in 20. l. a piece
not to offend so again, 1 Iac. 17. and Poult. 6.

Taking Pheasants or Partridges with setting-dogs.
4. Whosoever shall take, kill, or destroy any Pheasant, or Partridge, with
seetting-dogge, net, or any other engine the same being confessed or proved by
any sufficient witness upon oath before any two of the Justices of the Peace,
shall be by them committed for three months without bail, unless he forthwith
pay to the use of the Poor there 20. s. for every Pheasant or Partridge and be
bound in 20. l. not to offend so again, 7. Jac. 28. 5.

Note W(...) may take Pheasants. and Partridges, when and where.
5. By the Stat. 7 Iac. 11. He that has inheritance of 40. l. per ann.
Freehold of 80 l. per annum, or is worth in goods, 400. l. and their meniall
servants thereto authorized, may take Pheasants and Partridges in the day time
only upon their own and Masters free Warran, Manor, and Freehold, between
Michaelmas and Christmas, 7 Iac. ii.

Selling of pheasant, partridge, Deer, or Hare.
6. Whosoever shall sell, or buy to sell again any Pheasant, Partridge, Hare or
Dear nor brought up in the houses, or brought from beyond the Seas, shall
forfeit for every Pheasant 40. s. for every Partridge 10. l. for every. Hare
10. s. and for every Dear 4. (...)s the one moyty thereof to the Informer, the
other to the Poor, 1 Iac. 17. and P. 8.

Hawking of Pheasant or patridges.
See Hawks, 1. and 7. Iac. 11.

Keeping Greybounds, setting dogs and nets.
See Hunters, 6. and 7. and Poult. 6.

Fish and Fish days.
Taking of Salmons.
1. WHosoever shall take any Salmons between the Feast of the Nativity of the
blessed Virgin Mary and Saint Martin, in any Rivers or waters, or shall take
young Salmons at any Mill poole, or any other place, between the midst of
April and Midsummer, or at any time cast in to any waters any nets by which
the fry of any Fish may be taken or destroyed, shall for the first offense have
his not burned, for the second be imprisoned three months, and for the third a
whole year, 13 Edw. 1. 46. 13 R. 2. 19. and P. 1. and Just. 41.

Taking of spawn.
2. Whosoever shall with any Net, or other means whatsoever, take and kill any
young brood, spawn, or fry of any fish in any floodgate pipe, or tail of any
mill, wear, stream, or river, salt or fresh water, or shall take there any
Salmons or Trouts out of Season; that is, being keepers or shedders, or shall
take or kill any pickerell under 10. inches, or Trout Salmons and trouts out of
season.
under 8. inches, or Salmon under 16. inches, or Barbel under 12. inches fish
in length, or shall fish in any of the said places with any net, but such
whereof every mesh shall be two inches and (...) half broad, shall forfeit for
every offense 20. s. the fish and nets (Angling and the taking of Smelts,
Gudgeons, Eeles, etc. in places only where they have been usually taken
excepted) 1 El. 27. and P. 34. and Just. 40.

Nota.
This Statute does not extend to any River where the King has any yearly rent
or profit, ibid. and P. 5.

Destroying of any pools or fishings.
3. Whosoever shall unlawfully ^re (...) cut down, or destroy the head or dam
of any pond, more, stew, or several pir wherein fishes are put by the owner
thereof, or shall wrongfully fish in any of the same, to the intent to take
away the same against the owners will, shall pay to the party grieved treble
damages suffer three months imprisonment, and then to be bound to the good
behavior with sureties for seven years, and the party grieved may take his
further remedy for his loss and damages, and may release the suretiship of good
abearing, at any time within the 7. years, (...) El. 21. and P. 7. and Just. 34.

Fish and the eating of Fish.
WHosoever shall by writing or open speech notify, that the eating of Fish, or
forbearing of Flesh upon any days now usual observed as Fish-dayes, is of
necessity for Salvation of Souls, etc. shall be imprisoned and punished as
spreaders of false News, 5. El. 5. and 1. Iac. 25, and Poulton News 1. and 2.

Concerning fish days, and the eating of flesh in L^n^.
See 5 Eliz 5. 35. Eliz. 7 and 1 Jacob. 20. and Poulton, 1. etc.

Force and forcible Entries
Degrees of Force.
1. THere are three degrees of Force, viz.

1. Such as enter peaceably and then hold forcibly. 2. Such as enter with
force, and then hold peaceably. 3. Such as both enter forcibly, and hold
forcibly.
Forcible Entry.
2. Whosoever makes entry into any Lands and Tenements forcibly, and with
strong hand, and multitude of people, and hereof shall be lawfully convicted,
shall be imprisonned and fined at the Kings pleasure, 5 Ric. 2. 5. and P. 1.

Forcible entry; or forcible detaining of Lands.
3. Whosoever shall enter into any Lands or possessions with force, or entering
peaceably shall hold the same with force, shall be committed to the next Goal,
there to remain until they have paid a fine to the King, And whether the
parties which made such Entries be present or gone at the coming of the
Justice, he shall in some good town, or convenient place near where such force
was made enquiry by a sufficient Jury of the same County, City, etc. of them
which made such forcible entries, and if it be found that entry was made
contrary to the Statute, he shall reseize the said Lands or Tenements so entered
upon, and thereof, put the party in possession which was in such sort put out
15 Ric. 2. 2. 8 Hen. 6. 9 and P. 2. and Just. 8. 9.

Three years possession.
None shall be endamaged hereby, which have continued three years possession, 8
H. 6. 9. Nor any restitution upon any Indictment, 31 El. 11. and P. 4

Each man shall help to remove force.
4. If the Sheriff or any other of the County, shall not attend to assist the
Justice, and to arrest such offenders, he or they so offending shall be
imprisoned and pay a fine to the King, 15. R. 2. 2. and P. 5.

The Justices charges in the execution of these Statutes, are to be born by the
party grieved, Ibid. and P. 2.

Forestallers, Regrators and Ingrossers.
Who is a Forestaller
1. A Forestaller is he that buyeth, or causes to be bought, or makes
contract or promise for the having, or buying any victuals or wares coming by
land or water toward any Fair or Market to be sold, before the same shall be
in the Fair or Market, etc. Or that by any means makes motion to any person
for inhauncing the price of the same, or that does dissuade, move, or stir any
person comeing to the Martket or Fair to forbear to bring any of the same to
any Fair or Market to be sold, 5. Edw. 6. 14. and P. 1.

Who is a Regrator.
2. A Regrator is he that regrateth or gets into his possession in any
Fair or Market any Corn, Wine, Fish, Butter, Cheese, Candles, Tallow, Sheep,
Lambs, Calves, Swine, Pigs, Geese, Capons, Hens, Chickens, Pigeons, Comes,
or other dead victual whatsoever, brought to any Fair or Market to be sold,
and sells the same again in any Fair or Market there, or within four miles
thereof, 5. Ed. 6. 14. and P. 2.

Who is an Ingrosser.
3. An Ingrosser is he that ingrosseth or gets into his hands by buying,
contract, promise, taking other then by demise, lease, or grant of land of
tithe, any Corn growing in the field, or other Corn or Grain, Butter, Cheese,
Fish, or other dead victual within England, to the intent to sell the same
again. (But such as do buy Barley or Oats Who may Regrate. Ingrosse and
without Forestalling, and turn the same into Malt or Oatmeale, and sell it
again, and such Victuallers of all sorts as buy Victual without Forestallings
and sell it by retaile again, and Badgers and Drovers being lawfully licensed,
and not abusing their licenses, are excepted.) So be all buyers of Wines,
Oils, Spices, and other Foreign victual brought from beyond the sea
(...)there, except Fish and Salt only, 5. Edw. 6. 14. 5. Eliz 12, 13. El. 25,
and P. 5. and 6.

The punishment of the offender.
4. Whosoever shall be duly convicted or Forestalling, Regrating, or Engrossing
unlawfully within two years after the offenses, shall for the first offense
lose the goods or the value of them, and be two months imprisoned without
bail, and for the second offense lose double the value of the goods, and be
imprisoned six months without bail; and for the third, offense lose and
forfeit all his Goods and Cattle, stand on the Pillory, and be imprisoned at
the Kings pleasure, 5 Ed 6. 14 and P. 4. and Just. 3 i.

Live cattle.
5. Whosoever shall buy any Oxen, Runts, Steers, Kine, Calves, Sheep, Lambs,
Goats, or Kids, living, and sell them again alive, except he keep and feed
them five weeks, shall forfeit the double value of them, 5 Ed. 6. 14. and P.
Cattles.

Forestalling of hides.
6. Whosoever shall forestall any Hides or buy any out of open Market or Fair,
unless of such as killed beasts for their own provision, shall lose for every
hide vj. s. viij. d. 1 Iac. 22. and P. Leather 7.

Bark.
7. Regrating of Barks. See Bark.

Wool.
8. Regrating of Wool. See P. Just. 98. and Wool.

Leather.
9. Engrossing of tanned Leather: See 5 Edw. 6. and 15. and Poulton Leather 53.

Forging of Deeds.
WHosoever being once convicted or condemned of any of the offenses prohibited
by the Stat. of 5 Eliz. against the forging of evidences and Writings, and
shall eftsoons commit the like again, shall be adjudged a Felon, and not have
his Clergy, 5. El. 14. and Poult. 4.

A Servant taken with a forged Testimonial, shall be whipped as a Vagabond; See
Laborers.

Forging Tokens or Letters, See Counterfeiters.

Goldsmith and Gilding.
1. IF any Goldsmith, or worker of Silver, shall work any Silver that is not
(...)e in allay as the Sterling, or shall not set his Mark upon his woe(...)
before he set it to sale, he shall forfeite the double value, 2 H 6. 14. and P.
6.

2. If any Gilder shall offend against the Stat. 8. Hen. 5. concerning the
gilding of metal and other things, he shall forfeit ten times the value of the
thing gilt, and be imprisoned a year, 8. H. 5. 3. and P. 7. and Just 48.

Good behavior.
Against whom sureties of the good behavior may be granted.
SUreties of the Good behavior i chiefly granted against common Barrators,
common quarrellers, and common Breakers and perturbers of the peace, and also
against Ryoters, against such as lie in wait to Rob, Maim, or Kill, or shall
assault any, against such as are suspected to be Robbers upon the highwaies,
against such as are like to commit Murder, or other grievances to the kings
people; and also against such as be of an evil name and fame generally, or in
the place where they remain. 2 Ed. 3. 6. 34 Ed. 3. 1. and P. Just. 18. and
Dalt. fol. 16.

Also against him that is suspected to have got en a Bastard, Lamb. 122. Also
against Evesdroppers; also against night walkers, and such as shall sleep in
the day, and go abroad in the night, or use suspicious persons company, or
shall commit outrages, etc.

Guns and Crosbowes,
Keeping and shooting in Guns, etc.
1. Whosoever shall shoot in, or keep any Gun, Dag, Pistol, Crosbow, or
Stonebow, or shall carry in his journey any Gun, Dag, or Pistol charged, or Bow
bent, but in time of war, or to or from Musters, except he have in his own or
wives right(...). (...). per annum in Lands, Tenements, Fees, Annuities, or
Offices, shall forfeit for every offense ten pound to the King and Informer.
33. Hen. 8. 6. and Poulton 1. and 3.

The length of a handgun, hag, but demihake.
2. Whosoever shall shoot in, carry keep, use, or hand any Gun, but such as in
stock and gunne shall be a yard long; or in any Hagge, Demihake, Dag; or Pistol,
not being three quarters of a yard long, shall forfeite for every offense, 10.
l. 33 Hen. 8. 6. and Poult. 2.

And every person having 100. l. per annum, may seize and take away any that is
shorter, but must break (...) within twenty days after, under penalty of 40.
s. He may also take away every Crosbow from any not having Lands, etc. as
aforesaid, and keep it to his own use, Ibid. Who may take away the Gnn or
Crosbow from the offender.


Shooting in a City or Market.
3. Whosoever shall shoot in any gun, etc. near to a Market town, except for
defense of his person or house, or at a But or Bank of earth in a place
convenient, shall forfeite for every shoot ten pound to the King and Informer,
33 H. 8. 6.

And if any person under the degree of a Lord of the Parliament, shall shoot in
a Hand-gunne in a City or Town at any mark upon a Church, House, or Dove Coat,
shall forfeite ten pound, and be imprisoned for three months, 2. Edw. 6. 14.
and Poulton 4. The master commanding the Servant to shoot.


4. If a Master command his Servant to shoot otherwise then is aforesaid, he
shall forfeit ten pound.

Not^.
The King must commence his suite within a year after, and every other person
within a year after the offense was committed, for any penalty or forfeiture
given them by the Stat. 33 H. 8. 6. and P. 5.

Every man may arrest an offender
5. Every man may arrest an offender against this Statute, and carry him before
the next Justice, and such bringer shall have half the forfeiture, 33 H. 8. 6.
and Poult. 6. and Just. 45.

Hail shot.
6. Whosoever shall shoot hail shot, ^or more pellets than one at one time,
unless he be thereto licensed, shall forfeit ten pound, and be three months
imprisoned, (...) Ed. 6. 14. and P. 10,

Who may keep for shoot in guns.
See 33 Hen. 8. 6. and P. ^7.

Shooting at Fowls, or hares.
See Pheasants.

License to shoot at hawks
Such as are licensed to keep hawks meat, may not shoot at other Foul than are
mentioned in their Licenses, nor otherwise, nor elsewhere than is allowed by
the Stat, 1 Jac. 27. and if it be not contained in their said Licenses at what
Fowls they shall shoot, or if any of them so licensed, shall not (...) bound
(...) twenty pound not to shoot (...) any other Foul, then the said Licenser
Pl^c^^d to be void, (...) Iac. 27. 33 H. (...) 6. and P. 9. and Pheasants
(...). and Just. 38.

Hawks and Hawking.
Hawking at unseasonable times
1. WHosoever shall hawk at, destroy or kill any Pheasants Partridg with hawk
or do^ by color of hawking, between the fi(...) of July, and the last of
August, and (...) same be proved by the parties consession, or by two
sufficient witnesses upon oath before two or more Justices of the peace within
six months after the offense committed, shall be imprisoned for a month without
bail, unless he forthwith pay to the use of the poor there 40. s. for every
such hawking at Pheasant or Partridg, and (...). s. for every Pheasant or
Partridg(...) ^ac ii.

Hawking in Corn.
2. Whosoever shall hawk, or with Spannels hunt where any eared or codded Corn
shall be standing and not shocked or copped, shall forfeit to the owner of the
same Corn 40. s. 33 El. i0. and P. Pheasants 4.

Taking Hawks or their eggs out of another ground.
3. Whosoever shall unlawfully take away any hawk, or the eggs of any hawke
out of the woods or grounds of any other person, shall pay to the party grieved
treble damages, suffer three months imprisonment, and be bound with sufficient
sureties to the good behavior for seven years after, or else to remain still
in prison, and the party grieved may take his further remedy for his loss and
damages, and may release the good behavior before the seven years be expired,
5 Eliz. zi. and P. i. and 3. Just. 34. and ii. H. 7. i7.

Take or fear hawks
4. Whosoever shall take any Ei^er, Falkon, Goshawk, Laner, or Lanaret, or
purposely drive them out of their coverts or kill them, shall for feit ten pound
to king and informer.

Bearing of English hawks.
And whosoever shall bear any Hawk of the breed of England called a
Nesse-Goshawk, Tassel-Lanner, or Lannaret, shall forfeit the same to the king,
ii H. 7. i7. and P. 4, 5. and Just. 39.

Conceasing of hawks lost.
5. Whosoever shall find a hawke that was lost, and shall not forthwith bring
her to the Sheriff of the County to be proclaimed, but does steal it or carry
it away, or conceal it, he shall be used as a Felon for stealing (...) Horse,
34 Edw. 3. 22. 37 Edw. 3. 1^ and P. 2.

Herons.
Taking herons.
WHosoever shall take any Heron (out of his own ground) by craft or engine,
except it be by hawking or long Bow, shall forfeit for every heron six
shillings eight pence: and whosoever shall take young Herons out of the nest
without license of the owner of the ground, shall forfeit for every Heron 10.
s. to the King and Informer, 19 H. 7. 11. and P. 1. and Just. 35.

Shooting at heronswith gun or bow
See Pheasants.

Highwayes.
By whom, and when Surveyors shall be chosen, six days.
1. IF the Constables and Churchwardens of any Parish, shall not yearly in
Easter week choose Surveyors for mending the Highwayes, and appoint six days
for that purpose, according to the Statute, they shall be fined. (...), and 3.
P. and M. 8. 29 Eliz. 5. and P. (...), 2.

Surveyor, refusing his office.
2. If any Surveyor refuse to take upon him the Execution of the said Office,
he shall forfeit twenty shillings, Ibid.

The charge of a plow-land.
2. If any person having a Plow-land in Tillage, or pasture, keeping a draught
or plough, and shall not find one waine or Cart furnished to work eight hours
every of the said days, he shall forfeite for every of the said draughts
making default, ten shillings, Ibid.

What is a plowland.
A Plow-land is so much as one can plow in a year, Dalt. fol. 53. etc.

Two men instead of a carriage.
3. If any of the carriages of the parish shall not be thought needful by the
Surveyors to be occupied upon any of the said days, then such person as should
have sent carriage shall send for every such carriage so spared, two able men to
labor for that day, upon pain to forfeit for every man not sent 12. d. 2. and
3. P. and M. 8. 5 Eliz. i3. 29 Ed. (...) and P. 3. Cottager.


4. If any householder, Cottager, or Labourer having no Plough or draught shall
not by himself or some other, work eight hours of the said six days (...) the
highwayes, he shall forfeit for every default it. (...). Ibid. and P. 4.

5. Surveyors may by their discretion take other men's rubbish, stones, and
gravel upon their grounds for amending the highwaies, but must stop the pits
again within one month after such diging, upon pain to forfeit to the ow(...)
5. Marks, 5 El. i3. 29. El 5. and P. 5.

6. Surveyors may also turn a wat^^ course being noisome to the highwayes into
any man's ground adjoining, Ibid. and P. 6.

7. If the hayes, fences, dikes, or hedges near adjoining to any highway, shall
not be diked; scoured, repaired, and kept low, and all trees and bushes growing
in the same cut down, the owners shall pay for every default ten shillings, 5
El. i3. i8. El. i0. and P. 7.

8. If any Surveyor shall not within one month next after any offense done
against the meaning of these Statutes present the said offense to the next
Justice of peace, he shall forfeit for every offense not presented 40. s. And
the same Justice not certifying it at the next Sessions, 5 El. 13. 29 El. 5.
and P. 8.

9. If any offender shall obstinately refuse to pay his forfeitures etc. within
(...). days after lawful demand, he shall forfeit double the sum he should
have paid, Ibid. and P. 9.

10. If any person being assessed in Subsidue to 5. l. in goods, or 40s. in
lands, ^hal not find two able men to yearly (...) labor in the highwayes, he
shall be (...), i8. El. i0. and P. i2.

11. Whosoever shall occupy a plow-land in tillage or pasture lying in several
parishes, shall be chargeable to the making of the ways in the parish where
(...) dwells, i8 El. i0. and P. i3.

12. Whosoever shall keep in his hands several ploughlands in several
parishes, shall be charged with the repairing of the highwayes within the
several parishes where the said lands lie, (...). El. i0. and P. i4.

13. Every person that shall occupy any Lands adjoining to and highways where
any ditching or scouring ought to be, shall ditch and scour in his ground
whereby to conveigh the water out of the highway, upon pai^ to forfeite for
every rod not so done 12. d. 12 Eliz. (...)* and P. 15.

Casting soil into the highway.
14. Whosoever shall occupy any la(...) adjoining to any highway leading (...)
any Market town, and shall cast or l(...) the scouring of any ditch into the
hig(...)way, and shall suffer it to lie there (...) the space of six months to
the anno(...)ance of the highway, shall forfeite (...) every load 12. d. 18.
Eliz. 10. and P(...) 16.

Sluices to convey the water into the ditch.
Where any soil has been so (...) into the highway, that there is a B(...)
betweeen the said Highway and the Ditch, the Surveyors and workm(...) may make
Sluices to convey the wa(...) into the ditch, Ibid.

How and by whom the said penalties shall be levied, and employed. The ways
shall be 200^ foot broad.
See 2. and 3. Pl. and M. 8. 18. El. (...) P. i0, ii. and i7.

15. If any Lord of the soil shall n(...) enlarge, the highwayes from Market
(...) Market, so that no dike bush, or Tr(...) (except great) be within two
hundr(...) foot of each side thereof, for the bett(...) preventing of Roberies
and Murthe(...) he shall answer for any Felony d(...) therein, and for Murder
shall be fined at the kings pleasure, Stat. Winche(...) 13 Ed. 1. 5. and P. 18.

Bridges.
18. A remedy where it is not know(...) (...)ho ought to make or repair
Bridges. (...) H. 8. 8. 5. 1. 2. and 3. 4. and 5. and (...)* 70.

Notae.
If a man of his own accord shall ^ake or mend a Bridge, this shall no ^nde
him at any other time; yet if he and his ancestors, or any Corporation,
(...)ave done it time out of mind, although (...)ot of right, yet such
continuance shall (...)nd them and their heirs or successors (...)id Dalt. ^ol.
34.

Nota.
If a man make a Bridge for ^asement (...) his Mill, and that decays, the
party or any other shall be charged to repair (...)is, for it is no common
passage, Dalt. (...)l. 34.

Nota.
Such as are chargeable to repair (...)ridges, may enter upon any other
(...)ans Land or soil adjoining, and (...)ay lay their stone, time, timber, or
(...)there necessaries for the repairing there(...)f, and the owner of the lands
shall have ^o action against them therefore, be(...)use it is for the common
good, Dalt. (...)l. 34.

Horses.
THe Justices of peace in their (...)ter lessions may enquire of, h(...) and
determine all defaults (...) offenses done contrary to the Sta(...) 3^ H. 8.
i3. and 33 H. 8 5. concorning (...) keeping and breeding of Horses, see (...)
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, ii, 12. and Just. 47, (...)

Horse-stealers.
Horse (...)al^^s, nor their accessa(...) before nor after shall not have their
c(...) (...), (...) Ed. (...) 33. 3^ El. (...). and P. Cle(...)

Concerning stealing (...) Horses See faires etc.

Huy and Cry:
Huy and Cry must be made.
1. ALL Huy and Cry ought to be made from town to town, a(...) from country to
country, an^ by horsemen and footmen, otherwise (...) is no lawful pursuit,
27. El. i3. and p. i. 9.

2. Whosoever shall raise Huy and Cry without cause, or being raised upon good
cause, shall refuse to pursue and arrest Felons, or such as have dangerously
hurt any man, shall be fined at the Kings pleasure. 3. Ed. i. 9. and P. i.

2. Huy and Cry shall be levied against him that will not obey the VVatch in
the night.

What the party robbed ought to do which will take any benefit by virtue of
the Stat. of Huy and Cry, 27 El. i3. and P. 8. i0.

Hunters and Hunting.
Hunting Conies in the night in any Park or VVerren.
1. Whosoever shall in the night unlawfully enter, etc. and hunt, take, or kill
any Conies shall suffer three months imprisonment, pay to the party grieved
treble damage and cost, and be bound with sureties to be of good behavior
seven years after, 3 Iac. 13. and P. Forests 9. ii.

2. Whosoever shall by night or day unlawfully enter into any Park impaled,
or other several grounds enclosed for the keeping of Deer, and there unlawful
hunt, drive, or chase out, or take, kill, or slay any Deer against the will of
the owner or occupier of the same, shall suffer three months imprisonment, pay
to the party grieved ten pound, or treble damages and costs at his election. 7
Iac. 13.

Quaerel
Quaere if he shall not be also bound to the good behavior for seven years
after, according to the Stat. 3 Iac. i3.

Hunting in the night disguised.
3. To hunt in the night in any Forest, Park, or Warren, with Vizors, or
other disguisements, and to conceal the same, or any offender upon examination
before a Justice of the Peace, or to disobey any arrest for such hunting, or to
make rescues thereupon, is Felony; but to confess the truth is against the
King; but trespass fynable by the Justices at the next Sessions; Helony.
1 Hen. 7. 7. and Poult. 4. and Just. 16.

(...). Whosoever commits trespass in Parks, shall make great amends to the
party, be three years imprisoned, and bound with sureties not to comm^^ the
like offense, Trespass in Parks.
and be also fined at the Kings pleasure, VVestin. i. 3. Ed. i. 22. and P.
Forests. 3.

Buckstalls.
3. Whosoever having no Park, etc shall keep, or cause to be kept any D(...)
Hayes, or Bustalls, shall forfeite for every month, ten pound to any that
will sue for it by action of debt, etc.

The like penalty for every time for any that shall stalk, or cause others to
stalk with bushes or beasts at any Deer without the license of the owner. i9.
Hen. 7. 1i. and Poulton 2, and 3. and Just. 35.

Keeping of gray hounds setting dog or Nets.
6. Whosoever shall have or keep any grayhound for coursing of Deer or Hare,
or setting Dog or Net to take Pheasants or Partridges, unless he have
inheritance of ten pound per annum, Freehold of three pound per annum, or is
worth in goods two hundred pound, or be the son of a Knight, etc. or son and
heir of an Esquire, etc. shall be three months imprisoned, unless he
sorthwith pay to the use of the poor there 40. s. i Iac. 27. and P. Pheasants,
7.

None shall hunt but he that has sufficient living.
If any Artifycer, Labourer, or other Layman not having Lands or Tenements of
40. s. pe annum, or any Spiritual person, not having Living worth i0. l. per
annum, shall have or keep any Grayhound, Hound, or other, Dog to hunt, or shall
use Ferrets, Hays, Nets, Harepipes, Cords, or other engines to take or destroy
Deer, Hares, Conies, or other Gentlemen's Games, he shall be imprisoned by the
space of a year, i3. R. 2. i3. and P. 1. and Just. 36. And if any person not
having Lands, Notae.
etc. of the clear yearly value o^ 40. l. or not worth in goods 200. l. shall
shoot with gun or bow at Deer, or Conies or shall keep any buckstals or engines,
hayes, gate-nets, purse-nets, ferrets, or coniedogs (except Keepers,
VVarrenners, and owners of Parks, and can make 40. s. per annum of the increase
of Conies) every man having i00. l. per annum, may seize and take, and keep to
his own use for ever, such Guns, Bows, buckstalls, etc. 3. Iac. i3. and P. F
orests i0.

Selling deer or bare.
See Pheasants, 6.

Tracing or shooting at Hares. Hunting in Corn.
See Pheasants, 3.

See Hawking in Corn, 2.

Husbandry and Tillage,
SEE 39 El. i and 2 P. i, etc. and Justice 44.

Whosoever shall offend against the said Statute, shall forfeit 20. s. for
every Acre of land converted from Pasture to tillage, whereof one third part to
the Kings own use, one other third part to the King, for relief of the poor
of the Parish, and one other third part to any that will sue for it; 39 El. 2.
and P. 24.

Within what time the offenders shall be sued.
Note, that no offender shall be impeached or sued by virtue of this Act,
unless such suit be commenced within two years after the offense done, ibid.
and P. 26.

Indictments, and Presentiments.
1. ALL Indictments and Presentiments ought to contain certainty, and therefore
most commonly five principal things be requisite in Presentiments before the
Justices of the Peace.

1. The Name, Surname, addition of the party indicted.

2. The year, day, and place in which the offense was done.

3. The name of the person, to whom the offense was done.

4. The name and value of the things in which the offense was committed.

5. The manner of the fact, and the nature of the offense, as the manner of the
Treason, Murder, Felony, Trespass, vid. Iam. fol. 487.

What words not necessary in Indictments, See 37. H. 8. 8. and P. i.

Process against Inditers in another County, 5 Ed. 3. 14. and P. 5.

Indictments of persons dwelling in foreign Counties, 8, H. 6. 10. and P. 3.
Process upon Indictment of Felony, See 25. Ed. 3. 14. and p. 5.

Where Justices of the Peace may charge one Enquest to Indict another, 3 H. 7.
1. and P. Jurors 9. and Just. 45.

By what persons and by whom impannelled all Indictments shall be made, P.
Jurors 7.

Indictments taken before Sheriffs in their Turns shall be delivered to the
Justices of peace of the same Shire, under the pain of ^0. l. 1 Ed. 4. 2. and
P. Sheriffs 12.

Justices of peace may award process against them that be indicted in the Turn,
ibid. and p. 13.

Informer.
IF any Informer or Promoter shall compound or agree with any person for any
offense against any penal Law, without the order or consent of some of the
courts at Westminster. or shall willingly delay or discontinue his suit once
commenced, he shall lose 10. l. and stand on the Pillory two hours, 18. El. 3.
5. and 27. El. 10. and P. Action popular.

Inholders,
1 NO Inholder, dwelling in any Market Town wherein is a common Baker that has
been Apprentice three seven years, shall within his own house make any
horse-bread, nor dwelling in any other through-faire shall make it
insufficiently, and not of due Assize, upon pain to forfeit the treble value,
13. R. 2. 8. 32. H. 8. 41. and P. 2. and Just. 50.

No Inholder or Hostler shall take any thing for Litture, nor excessively for
Hay, nor above a half penny in a bushel for Oats above the common price in
the Market, upon pain to forfeit the quadruple value of that, which he shall
take more, 13. R. 2. 8. 4 H. 4. 25. and P. 1. and Just. 50.

Inholder keeping misorder, see Alehouses 1. etc.

Intolements
ALL Deeds to be enrolled must be enrolled within six month after the date
reckoning 28. days to every month, and must be indented Revera. And if it have
no date, then within the six months after the delivery, and if it be enrolled
the last day of the six months it is good, and any one Justice of the Peace
may join with the Clerk of the peace, in taking the inrolement of an Indenture
of bargain and sale of Lands, etc. lying in the County where he is Justice, 27
H. 8. 16. and P. 1.

Jurors, Juries and Enquests
Juror taking reward to give his verdict.
1. IF any Iuror in an enquest shall take any thing to make his presentment
favorable, he shall forfeit decies tantum, and (...) he have not so much, he
shall be one year imprisoned, 34 Ed. 3. 8. 38 Ed. 3. 12. and P. 4.

No juror returned without his addition.
2. If a Iuror be returned without an addition by which he may be known, the
party that returned him shall lose 5. Marks to the King, and as much to the
party grieved.

Gathering issues not due.
The like penalty for gathering issues when they are not due, 27. El. and P.
33. 3^.

See more concerning Jurors, P. 1. 8. etc

3. Jurors to enquire of forcible entry, The sufficiency of jurors, to enquire
of forcible entry. Sufficiency of jurors to enquire of a Riot, Rout, etc.
ought to have Lands or Tenements of the clear yearly value of 40. s. 8 H. 6.
9. and P. 12.

4. Jurors returned to enquire of a Riot, Rour, or unlawful Assembly, must
have Lands in that County of 20. s. per annum, of Freehold, or 26. s. 8. d. of
Coppyhould, ultra reprisas upon every of which, the Sheriff ought to return 20.
s. in Issues for the first day, and 40. s. at the second day, 19. H. 7. 13. and
P. Riots 14.

Nota.
But if it be upon a Commission, then the Jurors ought to have 10. l. per annum
at least, ibid m. and P 6.

Laborers:
What persons shall not be retained under a year.
1. IF any Clothier, Tailor, Shoemaker, Tanner, Ba^er, Miller, etc. shall
retain any servant to work in his Science or Art for less than a year, the
Retainer shall be void, 5 El. 4. and P. 1.

Refusing to se ve.
2. Who are compellable to work in Handy-crafts and Husbandry. ibid. and P. 2.
3.

3. Who are compellable to work in Harvest, P. 13.

4. If any person shall give any wages (...)ing or taking wages contrary to the
Statute.
contrary to the rates of wages, of servants and Laborers appointed, and
proclaimed, he shall be imprisoned i0. days without bail, and forfeit 5. l.
and every person taking such wages and being thereof convicted, shall be
imprisoned 2i. days without bail, 5 El. 4. and P. 4.

How the wages shall be rated, See P. Just. 66.

Putting away a servant.
5. If any person shall put away his servant before the end of the term
without a reasonable cause allowed by a Justice of the Peace, or at the end of
his term without a quarters warning before given, he shall forfeit 40. l. 5.
El. 4. and P. 5.

The Servant departing from his master.
And if any servant shall depart without such cause before the end of his term,
or at the end thereof, without such warning given before two lawful witnesses,
he shall be imprisoned without bail, till he be bound to the party to serve
and continue with him, ibidem and P. 6.

Servants-shal not depart into o^aer towns without testimonial.
6. If any person retained in husbandry, or other the Arts, before mentioned,
shall after his retain expired, depart out of one Country, City, Town, or
Parish, to another without a Testimonial declaring his lawful departure, he
shall be imprisoned till he procure such Testimonial, which if he cannot do
within 2i. days after the first day of his imprisonment, then he shall be
whipped, and used as a Vaggabond ibidem, and P. 7.

No servant shall be relieved without showing his testimonial. Counterfeit
test monial, Nota.
And every person which shall retain any such servant without showing such
Testimonial, shall forfeit for every such oftence, 5. l. 5 El. 4. and P 8.

And if any such persons shall be taken with a counterfeit or forged
Testimonial, he shall be whipped as a Vaggabod, P. 8.

7. How long workmen shall continue at their Labor, 5. El. 4. and P. 9.

Undertaking work and not finishing it.
8. If any shall undertake work by the great, and shall unlawfully depart
before it be fynished, he shall forfeite 5. l. to the party from whom he shall
so depart, and be Imprisoned a month, 5. El. 4. P. and. i0.

9. If any Servant, Workman, or Labourer, wilfully, and maliciously make any
assault or (...)ray upon his Master or Dame, or other person, having the Charge
of such workers or work, he shall suffer one years imprisonment, or less, at
the discretion of the Justices, and such further punishment as they shall think
fit, not extending to life or limb. 5. Ric. 2. and P. i2.

Women cempelled to serve.
10. Women of the age of i2. years and under 40. and unmaried, may be
compelled to serve, 5 Eliz. 4. and P. i4.

11. Servants of the age of 18. years, and not being an Apprentice, going away
Servants imbezelling their Masters goods
with, or converting to his own use any Money, Jewels, Plate, Good, or
Chattels of his Masters or Mistress, and of his or her delivery to keep, of the
value of 40. s. to the intent to steal the same, is Felony, 21 H. 8. 7. 5. El.
i0. and P. Stealing 1.

Laborers Servants, and Apprentices.
Taking Apprentices contrary to the Statute.
12. Whosoever shall take an Apprentice contrary to the Law, shall forfeit for
every Apprentice 10. l. 5 El. 4. and Poulton 2. 6.

None shall occupy any draft, but which he has bin an apprentice.
13. Whosoever shall exercise any art or manual occupation used, 5 El. not
being brought up therein, as an Apprentice seven years, or shall let any to
work in it, which is not a workman, or Iourney-man by the year, or has served
as an Apprentice 7. years, shall forfeit for every month 40. s. 5 El. 4. and P.
20. A remedy for an apprentice misused by his Master.


14. If any disagreement shall be between a Master and his Apprentice, which
cannot be reconciled by a Justice of the peace, etc. for want of conformity in
the said Master: then the said Justice shall take bond of the Master to appear
at the next Sessions, and upon his appearance and hearing of the matter, the
Justices there, or four of them at the least, where of one to be of the quorum,
may discharge the said Apprentice by writing uuder their hands and seals, or
punish him, as by their discretions shall be thought meet, 5. El. 4. and P. 25.

Nota.
An Apprentice cannot be discharged, unless by writing.

How and by whom any money given to any Town, for binding out Apprentices,
shall be employed, see (...) Iac. 3.

Servants departing into another shire, vide P. ^8.

Nota.
Laborers or Workmen conspiring for the order of their work, see Artificers.

Larceny and petty Larceny.
Larceny.
WHosoever shall feloniously take the Goods of another exceeding the value of
i2. d. removed from the body or person, it is Larceny, a(...) and punishable by
death, except he be saved by his book.

Petty Larceny.
But if the thing stolen be under the value of i2. d. it is petty Larceny, and
not punishable by death, but he shall forfeit his goods and chattels.

Leather, Tanner, Currier.
SEE i Iac. 2. and P. 4.

Who may be a tanner. A Tanner shall not be a cutter of Leather.
A Tanner shall not use any other Trade, cutting or working Leather, simul and
semul upon pain to forfeit the hides and skins, i Iac. 22. Poulton 5.

How hides shall be used in vanting.
See i Iac. 22. and P. 9.

3. VTho may buy rough hides or Calves skins, or tanned Leather not wrought,
ibidem and P. 6. and 8.

4. If a Tanner shall raise his hides, with any mixtures contrary to the
Statute, he shall forfeit the same hides i Iac. and P. i0.

5. Whosoever shall put to sale, or depart with any untanned Leather red and
unwrought, but in open Fair or Market in the place thereof prepared, unless
it has been first lawfully searched, and sealed according to the Stat. or
shall offer to put to sale any Leather before it be searched and sealed
according to the Stat. shall forfeit for every Hide or piece of Leather 6. s.
8. d. and for every dozen of Calves skins or sheep skins 3. s. 4. d. and the
Hides or Skins, or the the value of them, i Iac. 22. and P. ii.

6. Shall be forfeited ibid and Poulton.

7. Whosoever shall set his Fats in Tanne-hills or other places where the
woozes or leather put therein shall or may take any unkind hear, or shall take
and put any leather into any hot or warm woozes, shall forfeite for every
offense ten pound, and stand on the pillory three Market days, ibid. and P. 13.
and 45.

8. If any Currier shall curry any Leather, contrary to the Stat. 1 Iac. 22. or
shall spoil or hurt any Leather, by scalding, shaving, or gashing it, he
shall lose for each skin marred a Noble, Curriers.
(except gashing) and for gashing double so much as the Leather is impared; 1
Iac. 22. and Poulton 17. and 45.

A Currier shall not use any other trade cutting leather.
9. No Currier shall be a Tanner, Cordwainer, Shoemaker, Butcher, or other
Artificer, cutting Leather, simul and semel, upon pain to forfeit three
shillings eight pence for every skin, 1 I^^. 22. and P. 20.

Within what time leather shall be curried.
10. If a Currier shall refuse to curry within eight days in Summer, and
sixteeen in winter, any Leather brought to him by any cutter of Leather, or his
Servant, bringing with him good scull for liquoring the same, he shall forfeit
for every hide 10 s. 1 Iac. 22. and Poulton 21.

The penalty for not appointing Searchers.
11. If a Lord of a Fair or Market shall not yearly appoint and swear
Searchers, Sealers, Triers of Leather, according to the Stat. he shall forfeit
for every default five pound, and if the persons so elected and appointed shall
not forthwith do their duties, they shall also forfeit five pound for every
default 1 Iac. 22. and P. 22. vide Poulton 26.

A Searcher omitting his duty, or taking bribes.
12. If any Searcher or Sealer of Leather, shall refuse with speed to seal
good Leather, he shall forfeit for every offense 40. s. Or if he shall take any
bribe, or exact any undue fees, he shall forfeit for every offense 20. pound,
or if he shall refuse to execute the said office, Denying of the office.
he shall forfeit 10. l. 1 Iac. 22. and P. 31.

Denying of Search.
13. Whosoever shall deny or withstand any such Searchers, he shall forfeit for
every time, 5. l. ibid. and P. 36.

Selling leather not registered.
14. Whosoever shall put away any tanned Leather red and unwrought, without
registring the same, and the price, shall forfeit the value of the Leather; 1
Iac. 22. and P. 36.

Buying leather not sealed or registered.
15. Whosoever shall buy any tanned Leather, before it be searched and sealed,
or carry it out of any Market, or Fair, before it be registered, shall forfeit
the Leather, or the value, 1 Iac. 22. and P. 37.

Shoemaker.
16. If any Shoemaker shall make any Boots, Shoes, etc. contrary to the
Statute: Or shall show, to the intent, to put to sale any Shoes, Boots, etc.
upon the Sunday, shall forfeit for every pair 3 s. 4 d. and the true value of
the same, 1 Iac. 22. and P. 23.

See 1 Iac. 22 and P. 41, and 45. Forfeited Leather shall not be sold to him
that will sell it, ibid. and Poulton 42.

Liveries and Retainers.
IF any person by himself or other for him shall give any Livery of Sign or
Company, or Badg, or retain any man other then his household, servant, Officer,
or learned man in the Law, he shall lose 5. l. and the retained as much for
every month that he is so retained, 8 Ed. 4. 2. and P. 5.

Mayme.
Mayme.
WHosoever shall mayme another of any Member, whereby he is less able to fight,
as by putting out his eye, striking off his hand, finger, or foot, beating out
his fore-teeth, or breaking his scull, shall be grievously fined, Lamb. 429.

Maintenance, Champerty. Embracery.
Maintenance inquiry of riots, Routs, etc. Forcible entries by maintenance.
Maintenance of suits.
SEE Riots.

See P. forcible entry 6.

2. Whosoever shall unlawsully maintain, or cause, or procure any unlawful
Maintenance in any Action, Suit, Demand, or Complaint in any of the Kings
Courts, etc. or shall unlawfully (...)eraine for Maintenance of any Suit or
(...)lea, any person or persons, or im(...)race any Freeholders or Jurors, or
(...)born any witness by letters or otherwise, for to maintain any matter or
cause, to the disturbance or hindrance of Justice, or to the procurement or
occasion of any manner of perjury by false verdict, etc. shall forfeit for
every offense 10. s. 32. H. 8. 9. and P. 4.

Nota.
But note that the Suite must then be Commenced within a year after the
offense.

Champertors.
3. Champertor is he which moves (...)pleas and suits, or causes or procures
them to be moved at his own Costs, to the end to have part of the Land, or
other thin in variance, and he that thereof attainted, shall be three ye
imprisoned, and further punished at the Kings pleasure, 33 Ed. 1. and P. 5.

Embracers:
4. Embracer is he which cometh^ the Bar with the party, and speak(...) in the
matter, and is there to sur(...) the Jury. P. And he shall be punish(...) as a
Juror, which takes reward to g(...) his verdict.

See Jurors, and P. Jurors, 56.

Manslaughter, and Murder
Manslaughter may be By Chancemedley, or by misadventure.

Chancemedley.
Chancemedley, is when men m(...) by mere Chance, and upon some unlooked for
occasion, without any former malice, and one of them is slain Se Defendendo is
when one kills another in the necessity of his own defense, Se defendendo.
and cannot otherwise escape with his life from him. But then he must fly so
far as he may, and till he b(...) letten by some wall, hedge, ditch, pre(...)
of people, or other impediment, wh(...) notwithstanding shall be committed
till the time of his trial, and shall lose his goods, and seek his pardon.

Nota.
Note the case of Darnel and Brouser, at Hertford Assizes, 1619.

Misadventure is when a man is doing of a lawful act without evil intent, and
another man is slain unawares thereby: As if a Labourer do work with an Ax,
and in fetching of his blow, the head of the Ax flies off, and kills one
standing by, etc.

Nota.
Note, that he which is acquitted of Murder, or Manslaughter at the Kings
suit, must be remitted to prison, or let to mainprize, till the year and day be
passed, and the party grieved may in the mean time commence his Appeal, 3 H.
7. 1. and P. 4.

Murder.
Murder shall be intended of them which be feloniously slain, and not where
an act is done by misfortune. Marlb. 52 H. 3. 26 and P. 6.

Poisoning.
Whosoever shall commit any wilful murder, or wilful poisoning of malice
prepensed, shall suffer death, and not have Clergy, 1 Ed. 6. 12. and P. 5.

In case of poisoning, the party must dye thereof within a year and a day
after, Dolton 213.

Stabbing.
Whosoever shall stab or thrust another that has not then any weapon drawn,
nor first stricken, the party so stabbing, or thrusting, so as the party
stabbed or thrust do die there of within six months after, shall suffer death,
and not have Clergy, i Iac. 8, and P. 7.

Malt.
Malt to be theee weeks in the whole time of making.
HOw long Malt ought to be in the Fat-floore, steeping and drying, And
whosoever shall do conrrary thereto, and be thereof convivcted by the
presentment of i2. men, or two sufficient witnesses, shall forfeit for every
quarter 2. s. 2 Ed. 6. i0. and P. i.

Such as mingle good Malt with bad to sell, shall forfe it to the King and In.
for every quarter so put to sale 2. s. El 6. i0. and P. 2.

Whosoever shall put to sale any. Malt not being well trodden, first rubbed
and fanned, shall forfeit for every quarter 20. d. 2. Ed. 6. i0. and P. 5.

Nota.
Malt made for a man's own provision is excepted out of this Statute, ibid.
and. P. 5.

And all offenders against this Statute must be sued or presented within one
year after the offense, ibidem, and P. 5.

Whosoever shall be Lawfully discharged and suppressed, touching his making of
Malt, and will not accordingly The number of Malsters may be restrained.
forbear, shall be three days imprisoned, and before his enlargment become
bound in 40. l. to obey such suppressing, 39 Eliz. i6. and P. 6.

Milch-Kine
A cow shall be kept for 60. sheep.
WHosoever shall feed above a i20. shorn sheep for the most part of the year
upon his grounds which be severali and for Milch-Kine, and shall not for every
60. Sheep keep one Milch-Cow, and moreover for every sixcore Sheep yearly A Cow
for i0. Bea(...)s feed, and for every two kine a Calf.
rear one Calfe during the time of keeping such Sheep, shall forfeite to the
King and Informer for every Cow not kept, for every Month 20. s. and as much
for every Calfe not reared, 1, and 3. P. and M. 3. and Poulton Cattle 3.

Whosoever (...)al feed upon his several pasture above 20. Oxen, Rounts,
Steers, Scrubbes, Heisters, Kine, and shall not for every i0. beasts keep one
Milch-Cow, and for every two Kine weane and rear up yearly one Calfe, (except
it die) shall forfeit ut antea. Provided that no person shall be compelled to
keep any Kine, or rear any Calfe for such sheep, or other Beasts, which he
keeps or feeds to be spent in his house; 2 and 3 P. and M. 3. 13. El. 25.
and P. Cattles 4.

Mortuary.
The day for all Mortuaries.
IF any spiritual person, or any for him shall take Mortuary (corpse present)
or any thing for the same in any place where the same was not used to be given:
or shall take in place where Mortuaries are used, any thing for Mortuary, where
the goods of the dead are under ten Marks, or more then 3 s. 4. d. where the
goods shall be of the value of ten marks, and under 30 l. or above 6 s. 8. d.
where the goods shall be under 40 l. or above ten shillings, where the goods
shall be above 40 l. he shall forfeit so much as he shall take over, and lose
40 s. to the party grieved. 21 H. 8. 6. and P. 1. 3. 7.

Masons.
TO cause Mason's to congregate themselves Chapmiers, is felony: And the Masons
which come to such Chapiters and Congregation, shall be punished by
imprisonment of their body, and make fine and ransom at the Kings pleasure, 3
H. 6. 1. and P. 1.

Matrimony, and Bigamy
To marry the former husband or wife living is felony.
IF any person being married, shall marry any other, the former husband or
wife, (being other then such person, whose husband or wife has remained beyond
the Seas 7. years together, or has absented him or her self one from the
other 7. years together within the kings time, the one not knowing the other to
be living, or that was before lawfully divorced, or whose former Marriage was
void by Law, etc.) every such offense shall be Felony, 1 lac. 11. and P. 8. 9.
But he shall be allowed Clergy. P. Clergy 17.

Ordinary:
IF any Ordinary or his Scribe (...)ster, etc. shall take greater Fees that are
allowed by the Sta(...)te, 21 (...) for the probat of a Testament, or Letters
of Administration, he shall forfeet for every offense ten pound to the King and
party grieved. And moreover to the party grieved so much as he shall take
contrary to this Act, 21 H 8. 5. and P. Probate of Testaments, etc. 1, 2: 3. 12.

Parliament:
WHo shall be a knight of the Parliament, with the (...) of their election, See
Poulton 4. and 9.

The order of levying and paying of the wages of the Knights of the Parliament,
see P. 12. and Just. of P. 52.

Perjury.
AGainst such as do procure wilful Perjury, see the Stat. 5. El. 9. and Poulton
1. and 6 Just. of Peace, 23.

Petty Treason.
IF a Servant kill his Master or Mistress, or a Wife her Husband, or any
Ecclesiastical person his Prelate, it is petty Treason, and this manner of
Treason does give the forfeit of the Escheats to every Lord of his own proper
Fee, 2, Ed. 3. 2. and P. Trea(...) 7.

Pewter or Brass.
In what place pewter ought to be sold.
IF any Pewterer or Brasier shall sell or exchange any Brass or Pewter (...)
only in open Fair or Market, or in his house, unless he be desired by the
buyer, he shall lose 10. l. for every default. Or if he work any hollow w(...)
of Lay Metal, which is not according to the Assize of Lay Metal wrought in
London, or set not his Seal or M(...) upon the said Ware, he shall lose the
value of the Ware, 19 H. 7. 6. 4 H. l. 7. P. 13. and 5. and Just. of P. 26.

Plague.
IF any person infected with the plague and commanded to keep house, shall
(notwithstanding wilfully and contemptuously), go abroad and converse in
company, having any infectious sore upon him uncured, he shall be adjudged a
Felon, and suffer death, but if such person shall not have such sore found
about him, then to be puniched as a Vagabond according to the Stat. ^9 El. 5.
and further to be bound to his good behavior for a whole year, 1 Iac. ^1. and
P. 2.

Plays and Games,
Maintenance of houses for unlawful games.
Whosoever shall by himself or any other, for his gain or living keep, or
maintain any common house, Alley, or place of playing at Bowls, Coytes, Closh,
Cayles, Tennice, Dice, Cards, Tables, Shovegroat, Foot-bail, or casting of the
stone, or any other unlawful play or game, shall forfeit for every day 40. s.
Playing as unlawful games.
And every person using and haunting such house or place, and there playing,
shall forfeit for every time 6. s. 8. d. 33 H. 9. and P. i. 5.

Person prohibited to play at unlawful games.
2. If any Artificer of any occupation or any Husbandman, Apprentice, Labourer,
Servant at Husbandry, Iourney-man, or any Servant of Artificer, or any
Mariner, Fisherman, Waterman, and Serving-man (other then of a Nobleman, or
of him that may dispend 100. l. per An. playing within the precincts of his
masters house) shall play out of Christmas at any of the unlawful Games, or in
Christmas out of his Masters house or presence, he shall forfeit for every time
20. s. 33 H. 8. 9. and P. 3 and 5.

Who shall have the forfeiture, ibidem and P. 7. and actions popular 1.

All Actions etc. upon this Stat. must be commenced within a year after the
offense, 33 H. 8. 9. and P. 7.

Players abusing the Name of God, forfeit 10: l. for every offense, 3 Iac. 21.
and P. 6.

Poor People
Overseers of the poor.
1. Who shall be Overseers of the poor of every parish, and when, and by whom
to be chosen, together with the duty of such Overseers, see 43. El. 2. and
Poult. 1.

2. If any parish shall not be able to elieve their poor, then two or more
Justices of the peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, dwelling in, or near
the same parish, or Division where such parish is, shall, and may tax any other
of other parishes, or out of any parish within the same hundred, to pay such
sum and sums as they shall think fit, according to the intent of the Law. And
if the hundred be not able, then the Justices of the peace, or greater number
of them, may at their several quarter Sessions, Rate any other of the parishes
thereunto, as they shall think fit, 43 El. 2. and P. 3.

3. Whosoever shall refuse to contribute according as they be assessed, shall
be distrained by Warrant from any two such Justices, and in default of distress
shall be committed to the common-Goale without bail, til they pay the same,
and the arrearages, 43 El. 2. and P. 4.

The punishment of thosewhich will not work.
4. Such poor as will not work, being thereunto a ppointed by the Church
wardens and Overseers, may be sent to the house of Correction by one, or more
Justices of the peace, 43 El. 2. and P. 4.

5. The greater part of the Justices at their general quarter Sessions may by
the agreement of the Lord of any wast or common, set up habitations there for
the poor, and place Tenements in the same, 43 El. 2. and P. 6.

6. Whosoever shall find themselves grieved with any Selle or Tax, or other
thing done upon the said Statute 43 El. 2. The greater part of the Justices at
their general quarter Sessions shall take such order therein, as to them shall be
thought convenient, which shall conclude and bind all parties, 43 El. 2. and P.
7.

7. If the Father, Grandfather, mother, Grandmother and Children, being of a
sufficient ability, shall not relieve their poor and impotent Parents and
Children, in such manner as they shall be assessed by the greater part of the
Justices at their general quarter sessions, every of them failing therein, shall
forfeit for every month 20. s. 43 El. 2. and P. 8.

8. If a Parish lie within two Counties, or part within a liberty, and part
without, the Justices shall deal and intermeddle only with so much of the said
Parish as lies within their limits, concerning the nomination of Overseers,
etc. 43 El. 2. and P. 10.

The forfeitures for not naming Overseers.
9. If the Justices of peace within their divisions shall not nominate
Overseers of the poor in every parish according to the Law, every of them
making default, shall forfeit for every such default 5. l. 43 El. 2. and P. ii.
which shall be to the use of the poor of the same pirish, and be levied by
warrant from the general Sessions, ibid.

10. How the forfeitures menmentioned shall be levied and employed, see 43 El.
2. and P. 12.

11. The Justices of Peace, or the more part of them at their general quarter
Sessions next after Easter shall rate every parish to a weekly sum, not above
six pence, nor under a half penny, nor the total sum of such taxation on the
Parish, to be above the rate of two pence for every parish in the County, for
relief of the Prisoners in the Kings Bench; Marshalsey, Hospitals and Alms
houses in the County, and shall also rate the sums to be sent to every of these
places, and elect a Treasurer for that purpose, and punish him that refuses,
43 El. 2. and P. 13, 14, and 16.

If any able person threaten to run away, and leave their families behind upon
the parish they shall be punished as Vagabonds, 7 Iac. 4. see Vagabonde.

Preachers and Ministers of the Church.
^isturb Preachers.
1. Whosoever shall of p(...)pose maliciously and contemtuously, molest, or by
any means hinder or misuse any Prea(...)lawfully authorized, in any his open
Sermon, or Preaching in any Church or other place used and appointed, and his
aiders procurers, and abettors shall be three months imprisoned, and further to
the next quarter Sessions, and then, upon his reconciliation before them, shall
be delivered out of prison upon sufficient bail for his good behavior to be
taken by the said Justice for a whole year after, 1 M. 3. and P. 1.

2. Whosoever shall by any contemptuous words, or advisedly in any otherwise
deprave, despise, or revile the blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ, shall be imprisoned and fined at the Kings pieasure, 1 Ed. 6. 1. and 1.
El. 1. and P. Sacrament 1. and Justices of peace 8.

3. If any Parson, Vicar, or other Minister, shall refuse to use the Common
prayers, or to Minister the Sacraments according to the book of Commyn prayer,
or wilfully standing in the same, shall use any other, form in open^ prayers, or
in administration of the^ Sacraments, or shall speak any thing in ^erogation^
of the said book, or any part thereof, and shall be thereof lawfully
convicted, shall for the first (...)ence forfeit to the King the profit of his
spiritual promotion for a year, and be six months imprisoned without. Bail:
and for the second offense be (ipso fa^^o) deprived of such promotion, and be
imprisoned a year; and for the third offense to be (ipso facto) deprived of
such promotion, and be imprisoned during his life. But if he have no such
promotion, then for the first offense he shall be imprisoned a year without
bail, and for the second offense during his life, 1 El. 2 and P. Sacrament 2.
and 3.

4. Whosoever shall in any Play, Song, or ryme, or by any open Word speak in
derogation of the said Book, or of any thing therein contained, or shall cause
or maintain any Parson, Vicar, or Minister to say any Common prayer, or to
minister any Sacrament in other manner then after the said book or shall
interrupt any Parson, Vicar, or ministers to say any open prayers, or to
administer any Sacrament, according to the said book, and shall be thereof
lawfully convicted, shall forfeit to the King for the first offense 100. Marks,
to be paid within six weeks, and in default of such payment to be impriso^ed
six months without bail, and for the second offense 100 Marks to be paid
within the said term, or to suffer imprisonment twelve months without bail:
and for the third offense all his goods and chattles, and be imprisoned during
his life, (...) El. 2. P. Sacrament 4.

Nota.
Such offenders shal' be indicted at the next general Sessions after the
offense committed, ibid and Poult^n 6, 7.

Also, if such offenders shall be punished by the Ordinary, and have a
Testimonial thereof under his Seal they shall not be estsoons punished by the
Justices. Ibidem and Poulton 6.

Saying or singing Mass.
7. Whosoever shall say or sing Mass and be thereof lawfully convicted, shall
forfeit 200. Marks, and be imprisoned a year, and from thence til he pay the
said forfeiture, and whosoever shall willingly hear mass, shall forfeit ^00.
marks and a years imprisonment, 23 El. 1. and P. Sacrament 11.

Licenses to such persons.
If any person, Vicar, etc. shall grant a License for eating Flesh to any
person, other than such as plainly appear to have need thereof, such license
shall be void, and such Parson or Vicar shall forfeit for every such License
otherwise granted five marks, 5 El. 5. (...) P. Fish days 3.

If any Parson, Vicar, or ^urat shall ^ake above 4. d. for entering into the
church book the License of a sick person to eat flesh upon fish days, it is
ex^ortion, 5 El. 5. and P. Fish days 3.

If any parson, etc. shall take above two pence for Registring a Testimonial,
^f any Servant departing from one place to another, it is extortion, 5 El. 4.
and P. Laborers 7.

If the minister of every parish shall not keep a Register-booke and there(...)
enter the substance of every Testimonial made for Rogues whipped within his
parish, he shall forfeit for every default 5. (...). 39, El 4 and P. Vagabonds 3.

The duty of parsons, etc. in binding o^^ Apprentices, and in employing of the
money given to such uses, 7 Iac. 3

Prison and prisoners.
Goalers (...), handling their prisoners straightly
1. IF any keeper of prison, or underkeeper shall by dares or pain compel any
his prisoners to become an approver against his will, he shall be adjudged a
Felon, 3 Ed. 3. 10. and P. 2.

2. Whosoever having authority of keeping of Goal; or of prisoners for felony
shall certify the names of every prisoner in his keeping, and of every person
to him committed for any such causes at the next general Goal delivery in
every County or Franchise where any such Goal is, upon pain to forfeite to
the King for every default, 5 l. 3 H. 7 3. and P. 3.

Relief of prisoners.
3. The most part of the Justices of peace of every shire may at their general
quarter Sessions rare and tax every parish within the said shire at such
reasonable sums of money for and toward the relief of prisoners in the
common Goal of the County aforesaid, as they shall think convenient by their
diferotions, so that the said (...)tion do not exceed above six pence; (...)
eight pence by the week out of cr(...) parish, 14 El. 5. and P. 4.

Relief of Prisoners in the Ma(...)sey and Kings Bench, vide P. (...) 11.

Breaking prison.
4. Breaking of prison by one being in there for felony, or by any under Arrest
for Felony, as well with(...) prison as within is Felony, 1. Ed. 2. l P. 5.

Escape, rescues.
5. If any Sheriff or Bal(...) (...) willingly suffer any Prisoner for
Fe(...)ny to escape, or if any shall rescue s(...) a Prisoner it is Felony,
vide D(...) fol. 238, 239.

6. A Prisoner shall be conveyed (...) the Goal at his own charge, if he have
ability, if not, the parish shall be charged, 3 lac. 10. and P. 7. and 8.

A prisoners goods shall not be seized ill he be attained, P. Sheriffs 14.

Removing of prisoners, see removing.

Bailement of prisoner
9. No Justice nor Justices shall let to bail any persons forbidden to be
hailed by the Stature 3 Edw. 1. upon pain to be fined by Justices of
Goale-delivery, 1. and 2. P. and M. p. Justices of peace, 106

Persons not baylable.
8. No prisoner which before was outlawed, nor he which has abjured, nor any
approver, nor he which is taken with the manner, nor he that has broken
prison, nor a Thief openly defanied and known, nor he which is appealed by an
approver, so long as the approver lives, except he be of good fame, nor he
which is taken for burning of a house feloniously, or for false money, or for
counterfeiting the Kings Seal, nor any excommunicate person taken at the
bishops request, nor he which is taken for a manifest offense, or for treason
touching the King, 3 Edw. 1. 15. nor he which shall confess a Felony or
Manslaughter before the Justice upon his examination, vide Dalt. fol. 285.
where bail is taken away by particular statutes for misdemeanors.

9. Such as be indicted of Larceny by Enquests taken before Sheriffs of
bayliftes by their office, or of light suspicion, or for petty Larceny, that
amounts not to the value of 12. d. if they were not guilty of some Larceny
before, or guilty of some receiving Felons or Thieves, or of commandment or
force, or of aid in Felonies done, or guilty of some other trespass, for
which one ought not to lose life or member, and a man appealed of an approver,
if he be no common Thief nor defamed, shall be let to bail by sufficient
sureties s. Ed: 1. 15. and P. mainprise, 2.

It seems also by Dalton, that persons taken upon suspicion of burglary,
Robbery, or Theft, if they be not of evil Fame: and also Accessaries may be let
to bail, vide Dalton; sol. 274.

10. Whosoever shall withold prisoners baileable, after they have offered
sufficient bail, shall pay a grievous sine to the King; and whosoever shall
take reward for the deliverance of such shall pay double to the prisoner, and be
amarced as aforesaid, VV. 1. 3 Ed: 1. 5. and P. mainprise 6.

One Justice of the peace may bail a prisoner, if it be not in case of felony,
or the like, or except some particular Stat. shall otherwise prescribe, Dalt.
fol. 33.

No person for manslaughter or felony, or suspicion of either being bail Two
Justices.
able by Law, shall be let to bail or mainprise by any Justice of the peace, if
it be not in open sessions; except it be by two Justices of the peace at the
least present together at the same time of bailement, whereof one to be of the
quorum, who before such prisoner be bailed, shall also take the examination of
the prisoner, and information of them that bring him, of the fact, and
circumstances thereof in writing, which together with the bailement they shall
certify under their hands at the next Gole deliverie, upon pain to be fined
for every offense by the Justices of Goal delivery. i and 2. P. and M. 13. and
P. Just. 106.

Purveyors
Taking ward, etc.
1. PUrveyors shall agree for the things they take; and shall show their
Commission, upon pain to lose their offices, 28 Ed. 1. 2. and. P. i.

2. If any Purveyor shall take any thing of any ma(...) (...) (...) to spare
him, and he therefore attained at the partied suite, he shall yield up to the
party grieved treble damages, and be two years imprisoned, 36 Ed. 3. 3. and P.
14.

By what measure purveyors (...) take.
3. If any Purveyor shall take corn by any other measure than by the striked
bushel, or by any other than eight such bushels to the quarter, or shall take
carriage thereof without making ready payment, he shall forfuite to the party
grieved, and be one year imprisoned, 22 Edw. 3. 14. and (...) 16.

4. If any Purveyor of the King shall take any thing of the value of forty
shillings or under, without ready payment, he shall pay the value to the party
grieved, and lose his office, 2. H. 4. 14. and P. 22.

When purveyors shall fell timber.
5. If any Purveyors of Timber shall sell for the Kings use any Oaken Timber
tree meet to be Barked, but only in barking time, other than Trees for
building or repairing the kings houses or ships, or shall take any profit by
the lops, tops, or Bark of any Trees taken by him, or shall take from the
owner any more of any tree then only the timber of the same Tree, she shall
forfeit for each etc. to the party grieved 4^. (...). 1 Iac. 22. and P.
Leather, 24.

6. Purveyor sshall not fell trees growing about a man's house, upon pain to
forfeit to the party treble damages, be imprisoned a year, and lose his
office, 25 Ed. 6. and P. 8.

Felony in Purveyors.
To make Purveyance without warrant 28 Ed. 1. 2. 20. R. 2. 5. and P. 9.

To take more Sheep before share time then be sufficient, 25. Ed. 3. 15. and P.
9.

To make purveyance without lawful apraisement, 5 Ed. 3. 2. and P. 17.

To take more than they deliver to the Kings house, 36 Ed. 3. 4. and P. 18.

To take Purveyance in other manner than is comprised in the Commission, 36 Ed.
3^ 2. and P. 19.

Nota.
Note that the Justices of the Peace shall deliver the Dockers of purveyors to
them delivered according to the Stat. 2, and. 3. P. and M. 6. and P. 28.

Charter.
No subjects Charter shall take any thing against the owners will upon pain of
imprisonment, 23 H. 6. 14. and P. 1.

Rape.
Ravish a Maid, etc.
1. IF any shall Ravish a Maid, Widow or, Wise above ten years of age against
her will, though she consent after, it is felony, 13 Ed. 1. 34. and P. 1.

Abusing children under ten years.
2. If any shall carnally know and abuse a woman child under ten years of age,
though she consent before, it is also Felony and without Clergy, is El. 6. and.
P. 2.

Taking a woman against her will.
3. If any shall take a Maid, Widow, or Wife, having lands or goods, or
being heite apparent to any, against her will unlawfully, other than is Ward
or Bondsman, it is felony both in him, and the procurers, Abettors and Receivers
knowing the same. 3. Hen. 7. i. and Poulton, Women 12.

Recusants, Jesuits.
1. WHosoever shall willingly receive, relieve, comfort, aid or maintain any
Jesuit, Seminary Priest, knowing him to be so, shall be adjudged a felon, and
not have Clergy, 27 El. 2. and P. Jesuits 3.

2. Whosoever shall conceal his knowledge of them, and shall not within it.
days after such knowledge discover the same to some Justice of peace, or other
high officer, shall be fined and imprisonned at the Kings pleasure. And it such
Justice or other such Officers, shall not within 28. days after give
information thereof to some of the kings privy Council, he shall forfeit ^00.
marks, 27. El. 2. and p. 10.

Keeping Recusants in his house
3. Whosoever shall willingly retain and harbor any person not repairing to
some Church, Chapel or usual place of Common prayer, to hear divine service,
by the space of a month together, not having a reasonable excuse, other then
his Father or mother, not having other sufficient maintenance, or the ward of
any such person, or any person committed to the custody of any by authority, or
shall retain, or keep in service, fee, or livery, any not repairing to some
church, etc. by the space of a month together shall forfeit for every month 10.
l. 3 Iac, 4. and P. 51.

Keeping Schoolmaster.
4. Whosoever shall keep or maintain any Schoolmaster which resorteth not to
the Church, nor is allowed by the bishop or Ordinary of the Diocese, he shall
forfeit for every month so keeping him 10. (...) And such Schoolmaster shall be
imprisoned for a year(...) without bail, and be disabled, etc. 23 El. (...).
and P. 2.

Abjurgation.
5. A Recusant not conforming himself, shall abjure the Realm, and the Justices
before whom such abjunation is made shall presently record the same and certify
it to the Justices of Assize at the next Assizes after, 35. Eliz. i. (...) B.
i9.

The penalty for a conformed Recusant which shall not receive the Sacrament,
etc. 3. Iac. 4. and P. 40.

Popish Relics.
Popish Relics shall be defaced at the general Sessions of the peace, 3 Iac.
5. and P. 74.

The penalty of such as come not to Church every Sunday and Holyday, see Church
3. and P. 50.

Felony in Recusants, see Poultes i9. 3.

Removing prisoners or Records.
ALL Writs of Habeas Corpus, or Certiorari, to remove any Record or any
Prisoner out of any Goal, must be signed with a Justices hand of the same
Court, i. and 2. P. and M. i3. and Poult. i.

Rescues.
Whosoever shall disturb or hinder by Rescues or otherwise the execution of the
Statute of Rogues, or of the poor, shall forfeit for every offense 5. l. and be
Bound to the good behavior, 39 El. 4. and P. Vagabonds 5.

To Rescue one for Felony is Felony Dalt. fol. 238, and 239.

Restitution.
Jesuits.
1. IF any Felon of goods, money, or chattels taken from any of the kings
subjects, shall be indicted, arraigned, and found guilty thereof, or otherwise
attainted, by reason of evidence given by the party robbed, or the owner of the
said goods, money or chattels, or by any other by their procurement, then shall
such party or owner be restored thereunto, and the Justices before whom such
finding guilty is, shall have power to award writs of restitution thereof, zi H.
8. ii. P. and i. vide plus Dalton, i85.

Taking stolen goods again.
2. If a man pursue and take a Felon that has stolen his goods, and then
takes his goods again, and suffers the Thief to escape, he is no accessory
for he may in initio agere civiliter or (...)minaliter at his pleasure; tamen
quaert.

But if he took his goods again to favor the Felon, it is Theft, but quaere
if it be not Felony et vide Terms of the Law, fol. i8 4.

If upon Huy and Cry a man do arrest a Thief that has stolen another man's
goods, and from the said Felon do take the good, and so let him go, this
makes him an accessory, if not principal, Dalt. 253.

Receiving or buying stolen goods.
TO receive or buy stolen goods knowing they were stolen, makes not an
accessory, unless he receive or aid the Felon himself, quaere and vide Dalt.
ibid.

If a stranger buy such goods for a valuable consideration it is less
dangerous, ibid.

Riots, Routs, and unlawful Assemblies.
The forfeitures of the Justices which do not execute this Stat.
THe Justices of peace which dwell nearest in every County where riot shall be;
together with the Sheriffs or under sheriffs of the same County shall do
execution of the Statute of Riots, within a month after every one, upon pain of
100. l. 13. H. 4. 7. and P. 2. and 5.

Note that the King shall bear their costs sustained in the execution thereof,
2. H. 6. 8. and P. 10.

In Riots, Routs, and unlawful Assemblies these circumstances are to be
considered, viz.

1. The number of the persons assembled. 2. The intent and purpose of their
meeting. 3. The lawfulness or unlawfulness of the act. 4. The manner or
circumstance of doing it,
The number which make a Riot, etc. What makes an unlawful assembly.
To make a Riot, Rout, or unlawful Assembly, three persons at the least must be
gathered together.

If three or more shall come or assemble themselves together, to the intent to
any unlawful act with force or violence against the person of another, his
possessions or goods (although they after depart of their own accord without
doing any, yet that is unlawful Assembly.

(...) Rut.
If after their first meeting they shall ride, go, or move forwards toward the
execution of any such Act, this is a Rout.

And if they do execute any such thing indeed, then it is a Riot.

Arrest Rioters.
2: If any Riot, Rout, or unlawful Riot.
Assembly be made, three or two Justices of the Peace at the least, and the
Sheriff, or Undersheriffe, shall arrest the offenders, and record that which
they shall find done in their presence against the Law, and such offenders
shall be convicted by the Record, in manner and form as it is contained in the
Stat. of forcible Entries, 17 R. 2. (...)* 13. H. 4. 7. and P. See forcible
Entries 2.

Enquiry of Riots. etc.
3. If such offenders be departed before the coming of the said Justices and
Sheriff, they shall diligently enquire within a month after, and the same shall
hear and determine according to the Law.

Certifying of a Riot.
And if the truth cannot be found, then within a month next after they shall
certify before the King and his Council; of the whole fact and circumstances
thereof, 13. H. 4. 7. and P. 2. and 3.

Note also that if the offenders shall traverse the matter so certified, the
same Certificate and Traverse shall be sent into the King's Bench to be tried,
ibidem.

The punishment of Riots.
4. Rioters attainted of great and heinous Riots, shall have one years
imprisonment, as the king and his council shall think good, 2 H. 5. 8. and P.
10.

Each man shall help to repress Riots.
5. Each man being able to travel shall help to repress riots, upon paino of
imprisonment and fine, 2 H. 5. 8. and P. 12.

6. The sheriff having a precept directed A Jury to enquire of Riots, etc.
to him, shall return twenty four persons dwelling in the Shire where the Riots
etc. shall be committed, whereof every of them shall have Land and Tenements,
within the said shire, to the yearly value of 20. s. of Charter land of
freehold, or 26. s. 8. d. o^ Copyhold, or of both above all charges, to enquire
of the said riot, etc. and shall return upon every of them in is^^res at the
first day 20. s. at the second day 4(...)under the pain of 20* (...) 9. H. 7,
13. and P. 14.

Maintenance whereby a Riot is not found.
7. If by reason of Maintenance or Embracery of Jurors, a Riot, etc. is not
found, the Justices and Sheriff besides such certificate that they be hound to
make according to the said Statute 13 H. 4. shall in the same certificate
certify the names of the Maintainers and Embracers, with their misdemeanors,
upon pain to forfeit 20. l. and imprisoned at the discretion of the Justices,
19 H. 7. 13. and P. 15.

Unlawful assemblies.
8. If any persons above the number of two, and under twelve, being assembled,
shall intend unlawfully with force to murder or slay any wan, or to cut, or cast
down any enclosure or banks of any fish ponds, or to do any the deeds mentioned
in the Statute hereafter named, and shall not depart upon proclamation, but
shall attempt to do any of these things, they shall be imprisoned a year
without bail, and pay treble damages and costs to the party grieved, 1 M. 12.
1 Eliz. 16. and Poulton 20.

Disclosing a commotion wherein one is moved.
9. If any person being moved to make commotion, or infurrection, or rebellious
assembly, shall not within twenty four hours after, disclose the same to a
Justice of peace, or to a Sheriff; or if any person shall stir or proeure any
other to make such assembly, he shall be three months imprisoned without
bail, unless he shall be discharged by three Justices of the peace, whereof
one to be of the quorum of the same shire where the offense shall be committed,
1 M. 12. 1 Eliz. 10. and P. 24. 30.

Rebellious Assembly.
10. The raising of unlawful assemblies to the number of twelve or forty, and
not to depart within an hour, being commanded by proclamation, and also the
relieving of any such persons is felony, i M. i2. 1 Eliz. i6. and P. 17, i8,
19. 28. 31.

Robbery, Theft.
Theft.
THeft is the taking away of another mansgoods, with an intent to steal them
against the will of the owner, and is of two sorts, Robbery and Larceny, Dalt.
fol. 226.

Robbery.
Robbery is the felonious taking of any thing from the person of another, or in
his presence against his will, and putting in fear thereby, and for which the
offender shall suffer death without Clergy, Dalton. fol. 227.

Highway.
3. Robbers in or near the highway shall not have Clergy, how much, or how
little soever they take away, 1. Ed. 6. 2. and P. Clergy, 131.

House.
Nor he which robs any house by day, or night, any person being in the same,
or thereby put in fear; nor he which robs any person at any part of his
dwelling, the owner, his wife, children or servants sleeping or waking within
the precinct thereof.

Tent or booth.
Nor he which robs a Tent or Booth, in fair or Market, the owner, his wife,
children, or servants being within the same

Robbing aany part of any house by day, of the value of 5.
Nor he which robs any dwelling house or out-house thereto used, in the day
time (though no person were therein) of the value of five shillings, or above.

Church or Chapel.
Nor he which does feloniously take goods out of any Church or Chapel, see P.
Clergy 13.

Rome.
AGainst such as maintain the Authority of the Bishop of ROME, see 5 El. 1. and
P. 1.

2. Against such as give or take absolution by any Bulls from ROME, or shall
obtain or get from the said bishop any manner of bull, writing, or other
instrument, or shall bring into this Realm any tokens or things called by the
name of Agnus Dei, or any Crosses, Pictures, Beads, etc. and their ayders, see
13. El. 2. and P. 2, 3, 4, and 5.

3: Against such as withdraw any from their obedience to the King, and their
Ayders, see 32. El. 2. and Poulton. 7. and 8.

4. Against such as extol any foreign power, etc. see 1. El. 1. and 5 El. 1.
and P. Crown 2, 6, 7, 8.

5. Against such as depart out of the Realm to ferve any foreign Prince, 3.
Iac. 4. and Poult. Recusants 48.

Sewers.
1. THe Just. of peace in their quarter Sessions may administer the oath to any
Commissioner of Sewers according to the Stat. 23 H. (...). 5. and P. 3, and 4.

2. Six Justices of the peace, two of them being of the quorum, may for a whole
year after expiration of a Commission of Sewers execute the laws of the
Commissioners of Sewers, unless that a new Commission of Sewers be published
within the year, 13 El. 9: and P. 16.

Sheep.
Transporting sheep.
1. Whosoever shall bring, send, or receive into any ship or bottom any rams
sheep or lambs being alive, to be conveyed out of the Kings Dominions, or
procure the same, shall for the first offense forfe it all his goods for ever to
the king and Informer, and be imprisoned one year without bail, and then in
some open Market, in the fullness of the Market on the Market day, have his left
hand cut off, and the same to be nailed up in the open place of such Market:
and for the second offense it is Felony, 8 El. 3. and P. 1, and 2, and Just. 15.

2. No person shall keep above 2000. sheep, reckoning after sixscore to the
hundred, upon pain to forfeit for every sheep more 3. s. 4. d. to the king and
informer, 25 H. 8. 13. and P. 3. and Just 15.

Sheriffs.
Estrcals shall be showed to the party and rooted.
1. IF a Sheriff or any of his Ministers which by force of the Green Wax do
levy the kings debts, shall not show to the party indebted the estreats sealed,
and Tor the same which is paid whereby the debt is another time demanded of the
same person, he shall pay to the party grieved his treble damages, and make
fine to the King, 42. Ed. (...)* 9. and (...). Estreats 2. and Just. 88.

2. If any Estreats of Issues has been gathered of any person, other then such
as by virtue of the said Estreat was of right chargeable or charged therewith,
the offender shall forfeit to the King five Marks, and as much to the party
grieved, 27 El. 7. 39 El. 18. and P. Jurors 34. and Just. 99.

3. In every Estreats of Issues against a Juror his addition shall be put,
Ibidem.

4. Justices appointed to oversee the Sheriffs Estreats, shall be named at the
general Sessions after the Feast of Saint Michael by the Custos Retulorum, or
in his absence by the eldest of the Quorum. 11. H. 7. 5. and P. Sheriffs 18.
and 20.

Justices shall view the Sheriffs estreats.
5. Sheriffs shall make no Estreats until two Justices have made the view of
them, which estreats shall be indented, and the Justices have one part, 11 H.
7. 15. and P. 14. 18. 20.

Indictment takenin the Sheriffs Turn shall be delivered to the red to the
Just. of Peace.
6. Sheriffs must certify the Indictments found in their turn or Law day to
the Justices of Peace at the next Sessions of the Peace in the County, under
the pain of 40. l. 1. of Edw. 4. 2. and P. 12.

The Justices shall award Process against those which be indicted in the
Sheriffs Turn. Ibid. and Poulten 13.

Extortion in Sheriff, so P. 5, 6, etc.

Subsidy.
IF any person that ought to be set to the Subsidy, shall by craft or covin
escape tamation, and that be proved before two Justices of the peace of the
County, he shall be charge d double so much as he ought to have been, and be
further punished at the discretion of the said Justices, 7. Iac. 22.

Swannes.
IF any person (or other) to his use use shall have or possess any mark or game
of Swans of his own, not having Freehold of five Marks per annum above all
charges, any other subject having Lands of that value may seize the said Swans,
as forfeited to the king and himself, 22 Ed. 4. 6. and P. 1.

The penalty for taking or destroying Swans Eggs in their nest, see Pheasants
etc. and P. Hawks 3. and 11 H. 7. i7.

Tile-makers.
The preparation of the earth for making tile.
1. IF tile-makers shall not dig and cast up their earth for Tile til after the
first of November, or shall not stir and turn it til the first of Febr.
following, or shall not work it before the first of March following, or shall
not work and try it from stones, veins, and chalk, or shall make or put to sale
any plain Tile under ten inches and a half in length, six inches and a quarter
in the breadth, and half an inch The length, breadth, and thickness of tile.
and half a quarter in thickness with convenient deepness; or any gutter tile
under ten inches and a half in length, with a convenient thickness, breadth and
deepness, they shall lose the double value to the buyer, and a fine to the
king, that is to say, for every hundred of plain tiles, five shillings; for
every hundred of rough tile six shillings eight pence, and for every hundred of
corner tiles two shillings, and after that rate for more or lesser, i7 Ed. 4.
4. and Poult. i, 2, 3.

Searchers of tile.
2. If the Searchers appointed for the oversight of the true making of Tile
shall not do their effectual diligence therein, shall lose for every default ten
shillings ibidem, and Poulton 5. and Just. 97.

Toll.
1. IF any Miller shall take excessive. Toll, or by heaped measure, he shall be
grievously punished 3 Ed. i. and P. 2.

Toll for Horses, see Faires.

Tongues, Eyes.
1. TO cut out the Tongues, or put out the Eyes of any of the kings liege
people, out of malice prepenced, is Felony. 5 Hen. 4, 5. and P. 1.

Transportation.
1. THe prohibition of transporting corn, is to be made by the most part of the
Justices of peace at their quarter Sessions, 13 El. 13. and P. Corn 7.

2. Whosoever shall against proclamation, thereof made, transportor carry out
of this Realm any Corn, Grain, or Malt, growing or made here; of Beer,
Butter, Cheese, or Wood, in any vessels, except to Barweck, or the Marches
thereof, without sufficient authority, or any seafish, or Herring(...) not
taken by a natural borne Subject here; or shall by any means convey, (...)
willingly consent to convey any of the said things to any vessel, being on the
sea, or any place or haven of this Realm to be transported over sea, or into
Scotland, without sufficient authority; or if any person having license to
convey any of the said things, shall fraught He that has license to transport
corn, shall lade it in one place.
or lade his vessel, or any part thereof, at any more places than one only, the
owner of the vessel shall lose it, the owner of the victual shall lose the
double value, and the Master and Mariners their goods, and have a years
imprisonment, 1 and 2. Ph. and M. 5. 13. Eliz. 11. and 13, and Poulton Corn 1.
and Just 27.

Lawful to transport Corn and Beer.
3. It is lawful to transport Corn and Grain when the prizes be allowed
reasonable until it be restrained again by the kings proclamation, 1 Iac. 25.
and P. Corn 6, 7, 8.

So may Beer be transported when Malt is not above sixteen shillings the
quarter, 3. Jac. 11. and P. Corn 6.

Traverse.
1. THe liberty of Traverse is commomonly restrained to indictment of
Trespasses, Centempts, Riots, and other inferior offenses.

2. To Traverse an Indictment, is to take Issue upon the chief matter thereof,
which is none other to say, than to make contradiction, or to deny the point of
the Indictment; As in a presentment against A. for a Highway overflowing with
water for default of scouring a ditch, which he and they whose Estate he has
in certain land there, have used to scour and cleanse A. may traverse either
the matter, viz. that there is no Highway there, or that the ditch is
sufficiently scoured, or otherwise he may traverse the cause, viz. that he has
not the Land, etc, or that he or they whose estate, etc. have not used to
scour the ditch, etc,

Treason.
High treason.
1. HIgh Treason called in Law Crimenlesae Majestatis, is a grievous offense
done or attempted against the State Royal, viz. against the King in his
person, the Queen his Wife, his Children, Realm; or authority, etc: See more P.
1. etc. and Dalt. fol. 198.

The punishment.
Such offender shall be hanged cut down alive, and quartered, and shall forfeit
all his lands and goods to the king, yea his entayled lands, and his wife shall
lose her dower, and his blood shall be corrupted, saving in certain cases, vid.
Dalt. fol. 205.

Praemunire
In case of Praemunire the offender shall forfeit all his Lands in fee for ever,
and all his goods and chattels to the king, but his lands whereof he has an
estate he shall forfeit only during his life, and shall be imprisoned during his
life, ibid.

Misprison.
Misprison is properly when one knows that another has committed Treasons or
Felony, but was not consenting thereto, and conceales the offense.

The punishment.
Such offender for Misprison of Treason, shall forfeit to the king his goods
and chattels for ever, the profits of his lands during his life. Dalton 103.
For Misprison of Felony, the offender shall be only fined, ibid.

Petty treason.
Petty Treason is when wilful Murder is committed upon any Subject by one that
is in subjection, and owes faith, duty, and obedience to the party Murdered,
Vide Petty Treason, fol. 82. 6.

The punishment.
The punishment for Petty Treason is this, the man so offending shall be drawn
and hanged, the woman shall be burned alive, in case as well of petty Treason,
as of high Treason, I Ric. 3, 4. But in case of Felonies, the judgment both of
man and woman is to be hanged.

The forfeitures.
The for feiture of Petty Treason is the King shall have all his goods, and for
his Lands the king shall have Annum diem and vastum, and the Escheat thereof,
shall be to every Lord of his own proper fee.

Treasurers:
THe Treasurers of the Country are to be chosen at Easter sessions by the more
part of the Justices, and are to be such as at the last taxation of the Subsidy
next before the said election were valued and assessed at 10. l. in lands
yearly, or 40. l: in goods and shall continue but one year, and then give up
their charge and account at Easter Sessions, or within ten days after; and if
any Treasurer, his Executors, or Administrators shall fail to give up his
account within the time aforesaid or shall be otherwise negligent in his
charge, then it shall be lawful for the more part of the Justices in their
Sessions to assess such fine upon him, his Executors, Administrators, as in
their discretions shall seem convenient, so it be not under 5. l. 43 Eliz, 3.
and P. Capt. 18.

2. The Treasurer shall assesse relief to Soldiers or Mariners upon a lawful
Certificate, and shall keep a true book of computation of the money they lent,
and a Register of the names of such as they give relief unto. And every
Treasurer returning, or not accepting the Certificate brought unto him, shall
write and subscribe the cause of his not accepting, or not allowing thereof,
under the said Certificate, or in the back thereof. And if any Treasurer shall
wilfully refuse to give relief according to this Act, the Justices in their
S^^ons may fine such Treasurer by their discretions, 43 El. 3. and P. Captains
19, 21; 22.

The surplusage of the stock.
The surplusage of the stock of the more part of the Justices in their quarter
Sessions, be ordered, distributed, and bestowed upon such good and charitable
uses, and in such form as are limited in the Statutes made in force concerning
the relief of the Poor, and punishment of Rogues and Beggars: 43 El 3. and P.
Captains 24. See more P. Poor people 14, 15.

How the Forfeitures shall be employed, see 43 El. 3. and P. Captains 26.

Trespass:
WHosoever shall cut, or unlnwfully take away any Corn or grain growing, or rob
any Orchards or Gardens, or break or cut any hedge, pailes, railes, or fence,
or dig, pull up, or take up any fruit(...)ree or trees, in any Orchard Garden,
or elsewhere, to the intent to take or carry the same away; or shall cut or
spoil any Woods, or under Woods, Powles or trees standing, not being Felony,
and their procurers and receivers knowing of the same, being thereof
(...)awfully convicted by the consession of the party, or by the testimony of
(...)e sufficient witness upon oath before (...) Justice of the peace etc.
shall give the party such satisfaction as such Ju(...)ice shall appoint, and
within such ^ime as he shall appoint, the same to be only for the first fault.
And if such ^ffenders shall not be thought able to give satisfaction, then to
be whipped and also for every such offense after to (...)cceive the same
punishment of whipping, 23 El. 7. and P. 1.

A Constable refusing to punish such ^ffenders, see Constables 10. and P. 2.

No Justice of peace etc. shall execute this Statute for any of the said
offenses done to himself, unless he be associated and assisted by one or more
Justices whom the offense does not concern, 43 El. 7. and P. 3.

Vagabonds and Rogues.
Who shall beadjudged incorigable bohues to br burned.
SEE 39 Eliz. 4. 4. and P. 2. and 7. But note that that act does not exte(...)d
to any children under seave^ years old.

All common players of Enterludes and Glassmen shall be accounted rogues 1 Iac.
7. and P. 2.

A Servant taken with a counterfei(...) or forged Testimonial or not procuring
a Testimonial according to the Stat. 5. El. 4. shall be taken and punished as
a Rogue: see P. Laborers 8.

A Soldier or Marriher begging, (...) counterfeiting a Certificate, shall be
accounted a Rogue, 34 El. 3. and P. Capt. 23.

And all such as wilfully go abro(...) out of houses infected with the
Plagu(...) though they have no sore upon them shall be accounted Rogues, and
more over be bound to the good behavior for a year. 1. Jacob. 31. and Poulton
Plague 4.

And all able persons threatening to turn away and leave their family upon the
Parish, the same being proved by two sufficient witnesses upon oath before two
Justices of the peace, shall be punished as Rogues, unless they put in
sufficient sureties for the discharge of the parish, 7 Iac. 4.

Who shall be adjudged Vagabonds and Rogues.
All such able persons as shall run away out of their parishes, and leave
their families upon the parish. 7. Iac. 4.

All such as appear to be dangerous to the inferior sort of people, or
otherwise be such as will not be reformed of their Roguish kind of life by the
former provision of this Act, shall be sent to the house of correction, or Goal
of the County by two Justices, one of them being of the quorum of that limit
til the next Sessions, and then by the consent of the more part of the Justices
in their open Sessions, shall be with an hot burning Iron, of the breadth of
two pence, with a Great Roman R. upon the Iron; and then shall be sent to the
place where they last dwelt, if they have any dwelling, it not, then to the
place where they last dwelt for the space of a year, and if that cannot be
known by their confession or otherwise, then to the place of their birth.

Who shall be adjudged a felon
And if after such punishment they offend again in begging or wandering contrary
to the Law, they shall be adjudged Felons and not have Clergy, 39 El. 4. 1. Iac.
7. and P. 4.

Rogues ought to be conveyed from parish to parish.
To send rogues by a general Pasport without conveying them from parish to
parish, is a let to the conveying of rogues according to the Statute, and so a
for feiture of 5. 1. upon them, and to go with such a pasport is but still to
continue a rogue to be punished by whipping, see the duties of Constables, fol.
25. 7.

Outlandish Rogues.
If any Mannish, Scottish, or Irish rogue shall come into this kingdom, he
shall be punished as a rogue, and conveyed to the next port or parish where he
landed, 39. El. 4. and P. 16. See the constables duty herein, Constables. 18.

Every person shall apprehend such Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars as he
shall see or know to resort to his house to beg or receive alms, Every person
shall apprehend rogue.
and him shall carry (or cause to be carried) to the next Constable or Tything
man, upon pain to forfeit for every default 10. s. 39 El. 4 and P. 5.

How these forfeitures shall be employed, See 37 El 4. and P. 11. see more
Constables 7.

Victuals and Victuallers.
Corrupt Victuals.
1. IF any Victualler shall sell, or offer to sell any corrupt, or unwho I some
Victual, he shall be fined by the discretion of the Justices, 51 H. 3. Statute
Pistorum, Cap. 7. see more Butchers 3.

Victual shall be sold at reasonable prize.
2. If any Butcher, Fishmonger, Inholder, Tipler, Brewer, Baker, Poulterer, or
other seller of Victuals, shall not sell the same at reasonable prizes, and for
moderate gain, he shall lose the double value of that he received, 23 Ed. 3. 6.
and P. 3. and 4.

3. Victuallers conspiring for selling their Victuals, see Artificers, 1.

4. When and in what cases victuals may be transported, see 1 and 2. P. and M.
5. and Poulton 8. and Justices 27. and Corn 1. and 7.

Usury.
Selling wares, and buying them again
1. IF any person shall by himself or any other, sell any Merchandise or wares
to any other, and shall within three months next after by himself, or any other
buy the same, or any part thereof again upon a lesser price, knowing them to be
the same: Or if any person shall by any corrupt Bargain, Morgage or other means,
take in gain above the rate of ten pound for a hundred pounds for one years
forbearance, and so after that rate more or less, he shall lose the treble
value to the king and Informer, and be imprisoned and fined at the kings
pleasure. 37. Hen. 8, 9. and P. i, 2, 3, 4. and i3 El. 8. 39 El. i8. and P. 6,
7.

Nota.
He that takes ten pound or less in a hundred, shall forfeit the Interest only
i3 El. 8. 39 El. i8. and P. 8. and Just. 9i.

Wages.
Wages of Servants, see 5 El. 4. and P. Laborers 4. and Justices 66.

Wages of knights of the Parliament see 23 H 6. 6. 1i. and P. Parliament i2.
and Just. 52.

Wages of Justices of the peace, see i4. R. 2. ii and P. Justices 6, 7. and 5
El. 4. and P. Justices 68.

Wages of Weavers and Spinsters, see Cloth 3.

Watch and Ward.
IF the Watch in every town be not kept from Sun setting to Sun rising, between
Ascension day, and Michaelmas day, to arrest Night-walkers and strangers that
pass by in the night, the Constable, shall be fined by the discretion of the
Justices, Stat. Winton. i3 Ed. i. 3. and 5 H. 4. and P. i, and 2.

Wax:
IF any person shall sell, or shall set forth Candles, or other works of Wax to
sale at higher prices then after the rate of four pence the pound over the
common price of plain wax between Merchant and Merchant, he shall be fined to
the King, and shall forfeit his work, or the value of it: 11 H. 6. 12. and
Poult. 8. and Just. 42.

Weights and Measures:
Lawful Weights, see Poult. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

^one shall (...)ey or sell (...)t with ^eigbts and ^easures (...)gned and
(...)inted.
Whosoever shall buy or sell by unlawful Weights or Measures, or shall buy or
sell in any City or Market with any Weight or Measurethat is not lawfully
marked or signed, the same shall be broken and burnt, and the offender shall
lose for the first offense six shillings eight pence, for the second, thirteen
shillings and four pence, and stand on the pillory, 11 H. 7. 4. and P, 9, 10.
and Just 92.

Common weights.
If they of the town where the Kings Standard is appointed to remain, should
not have their common Weights and Measures signed, or shall not have thereby
signed weights and measures sold to all that have required the same, they shall
be fined and amerced, Officers shall view and examine weights.
and so shall the head Officers of market towns, which shall not twice yearly
make view and examination of weights and measures there, 11 H. 7. 4. and P. 7.
and 10.

Seal weights
If any person shall take above one penny for sealing a Bushel-measure, or
above one penny for sealing a hundred weight, or above a half penny for sealing
half a hundred weight, or above a farthing for a less weight, he shall forfeit
forty shillings, 7 H. 7. 3. and 11 H. 7. 4.

False Weights.
Whosoever shall buy Corn by heaped measure in any place, except within
Shipboard, or shall use double measure, the one to buy, the other to sell
with, he shall be grievously fined and imprisoned 17 Ric. 2. de Pistor. and 11
H. 4.

Countterters of Weights.
All falsiers of false Weights shall be imprisoned without Bail, til they be
acquitted or attainted, and if they be attainted, their bodies shall remain in
Prison till they have made fine and

VVild Foul and their Eggs.
Taking, or destroying the eggs of VVild Foul.
WHosoever shall willingly with draw, purloin, take, destroy, or convey any Eggs
of any Wild-Fowl from any Nest or place where they shall be laid by any kind of
the same Wild-Fowl, between the first of March, and the last of June yearly,
shall be imprisoned one whole year, and forfeit to the King and Informer for
every Egg of any Crane or Bustard so destroyed or taken from any nest or place
20. d. and for every Egg of every Byter, Heron, or Shovelard 8. d. and for
every egg of every Mallard, Teale, or other Wild-Fowl used to be eaten, a
Penny. 25 H. 8. ii. 3 Ed. 6, 7. and P. i. and Just. 9i. and vide plus Pheasants
3.

Wines.
1. SUch as sell Wines in gross, contrary to the Prizes assessed, shall forfeit
for every vessel so sold, forty shillings, 28 H 8. i4. and P. 2. and Just. 94.

2. If any person authorized to sell Wine by Retaile, shall sell the same above
the Prizes thereof limited by the Kings Proclamation, if there have been any,
and shall be convicted within a year after, he shall lose for every Galion 3.
s. 4. d. and so after that rate, 28 H. 8. i4. and 5 El. and P. Just. 94, 95.

Denying to sell Wine at the prices assessed.
3. If any shall deny to sell Wines at the Prizes assessed, they shall forfeit
the value of the Wine so desired to be bought, and the Justices may upon
request enter and sell the same desired to be bought, according to the prices
set down, and take the buyers money toward the satisfaction of the forfeiture
24 H. 8. 6. and P. 3, 4.

VVoods.
IF a Lord or owner of Woods or under Woods, and the Tenants or Inhabitants,
(having common therein) cannot agree in dividing the fourth of the said Wood,
but shall desire the aid of the Justices of the peace of the same shire where
the Wood lies, the more part of such Justices (not being a kin to the said
Lord or owner) shall sever and set out the said fourth part of such wood, 35. H
8. 17. and P. 8, 9.

Wool and Yarn.
IF any shall buy woollen Yarn, and not make Cloth thereof, he shall forfeit the
Yarne and foursold damages and be two years imprisoned, and fined, 8 H. 6. 5.
and P Yarn 4.

2. If any shall buy wool but of the owner of the Sheep and Tyth, he shall
lose the value thereof, E. 4. R. 2. 4, and P. 1.

RESOLUTIONS OF THE JUDGES OF ASSIZE, UPON Certain QUESTIONS, touching
Parishes, etc.

Mich. An. Dom.

MDCXXXIII.

LONDON, Printed by T. L. for M. Walbancke, MDCLV.

RESOLUTIONS OF THE JUDGES OF ASSIZE, UPON Certain QUESTIONS touching Parishes,
etc. Mich. An. Dom. 1633.
QUEST. I.

Whether the churchwardens and overseers of a parish, with the assent of two
Justices of Peace, one being of the quorum may by the Statute of 43 E. cap. 2.
or any law enforce a parishioner of the same Parish to take a child of a poor
Parish^oner of the same Parish, who is not able to keep his said Child, to be
an Apprentice?

Resol. The Statute of 43 Eliz. which says that the Churchwardens and
Overseers of the parish shall put out children to be Apprentices, necessarily
implies, that such as are fit must receive such Apprentices, and the putting
out of poor children is one of the best ways for providing for the poor.

quest. II. If they may, then whether they must give money with him, and who
shall determine what sum shall be given, if the party that is to take such
Apprentice and the Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor, cannot agree
thereupon?

Resol. There is no necessity that money must be given, but that must be left
to the discretion of the Overseers (all circumstances of age and ability
considered) and if they cannot agree with the party, then the Justices of the
peace near adjoining, and in their defaults, the Sessions of peace are to
determine the controversy.

quest. III. Whether a Knight Gentleman, Clergyman, or Yeoman, or one that is
a Sojourner, using Husbandry, Clothing, Grazing, or the like, may be enforced
to take such an Apprentice?

Resol. Every man who by his Calling or Profession, or manner of Living
entertaineth, and must have the use of other servants of the like quality, must
entertain such Apprentices, wherein discretion must be guided upon
consideration of all circumstances.

quest. IIII: Whether a wealthy man keeping few or no Servants, nor wanting a
servant, but living privately may be enforced to take such an Apprentice; if
not, then whether he may be taxed toward the putting forth of such an
Apprentice?

Resol. For the receiving of such Apprentices, The Answer may be referred to
the Question next before, but out of doubt every such person must contribute to
the charges, as to other charges for the provision for the poor.

quest. V. Whether they may enforce a parishioner of one parish to take such a
child apprentice that is of another parish, but within the same County or
Division, if the proper parish be notable to provide for the children of the
parish?

Resol. The Justices may provide Masters for them in other parishes within the
same Hundred; and if the Hundred be not able, then out of that Hundred in the
rest of the County, as for the provision for the poor.

quest. VI. If such a Parishioner may be enforced to take such an Apprentice
and shall refuse to take such Apprentice but also be bound to appear at the next
quarter Sessions or Assize, what shall be done then?

Resol. If any refuse, let such a one be bound to the next Sessions or Assizes,
if he refuse to give such bond, let him be sent to the Goal, there to remain
until he will give such bond.

quest. VII. If such a Parishioner who refuses to take such an Apprentice shall
be bound over to the Sessions for not taking such Apprentice, and when he
appears there shall likewise refuse, what shall be done unto him? and what
shall be done to the parents of such children who refuse to suffer their
Children to be put out Apprentices, themselves not being able to maintain them?

Resol. If at the Sessions or Assizes such one refuses to take such an
Apprentice, and his excuse be not allowed, it is fit he be bound to the good
behavior. And as it will be a good course to indict such a refuser for a
contempt, and thereupon to fine and imprison him, if he refuse to be bound to
the good behavior, let him be imprisoned till he will; and the Kings book of
Order directs that such be bound with good sureties at the Counsel-Board. And
if the Parents of such poor children do not suffer their children to be bound
Apprentices, or being bound to entice them away, themselves not being able to
maintain them, let them be committed to the house of Correction.

Quest. VIII. Whether it be in the power of any general quarter Sessions to
mitigate any penalty upon a Statute Law, if the party indicted shall submit
himself to the fine of the Court, and wave the Traverse.

Resol. If the party be convicted, or confess the fault, it is not in the power
of the Court to mitigate the fine, in such cases where the Statute makes it
certain, but if the party indicted confess his innocence, yet quia noluit
placi tare cum dom. rege, put himself up into the grace of the Court, the Court
may impose a moderate fine, and order to forbear the prosecution.

quest. IX. If a man be bound to appear at the Sessions, and shall tender
submission to the Court, whether the Sessions may stay the indictment, and
mitigate the fine as aforesaid, upon the confession of the fact.

Resol. This is answered before in the next precedent Article.

quest. X. If a man be convicted for being drunk, tippling, or keeping an
unlicensed Alehouse; or being licensed, for suffering others to remain tippling
in his house, or for swearing, or for driving of cattle upon the Sunday
contrary to the Stat. in that case provided, whether the Justice of the peace
(before whom he was convicted) or any other Justice of the peace may discharge
him of all; or part of the forfeiture or punishment appointed by the Statute?

Resol. The Justices have no such power of mitigation after conviction, where
the statute appoints the measure of the punishment.

quest. XI. Whether a Constable may upon a warrant for carrying one to the
house of Correction, for keeping an unlicensed Alehouse, upon the second
conviction break open the house where the party convicted is, to apprehend him?

Resol. This question is to be advised upon; it is but in general t(...)arms,
and referred to be considered in the particular where it appears.

quest: XII. If any woman unmarried be hired from week to week, or from half a
year to half a year in one parish, and there is begotten with child, and then
goes from thence to another parish where she is settled in serv^ce by the space
of two or three months, and then is discovered that she is with child, the
question is, whether she shall b^ settled in the parish where she was bego(...)
with child, or in the parish wherein she was last settled?

Resol. The place where such a woman was lawfully settled is the direction in
this case, not where she was begotten with child.

quest. XIII. If a woman servant unmarried be gotten with child, and then goes
out of her Masters service before, or after it is discovered that she is with
child, and the reputed Father be run away, or is not able to free the parish,
whether the Master may be forced to provide for her til she be delivered and a
month after?

Resol. If the Master have legally discharged his house of such a servant, he
is no more bound to provide for her than any other.

quest. XIV. In case a parish consist in part of ancient Demeasne, and part
Geldable; an Assize is made for the relief of maimed. Soldiers Goal, etc.
according to the Stat. of 24. Eliz. cap. 2. Whether the Tenants in ancient
Demeasne shall contribute with the Geldable for the payment of this Assize?

Resol. The Statutes do not distinguish, between the ancient Demeasne and the
Geldable; in these cases, ubi Lex non distinguit, nec nos dstinguemus.

quest. XV. Whether an Indictment of forcible Deteinor be within the Statute
of 21 Iac. 5. and not to be removed by Certiora. unless the party indicted
first find sureties according to that Statute: and whether the party indicted
be to be bound himself, or may send sureties to be bound in his absence to
prosecute according to that Statute. And whether an Indictment of forcible
Entry, etc. found at a quarter Sessions, and certified unto the quarter
Sessions, be to be removed by Cortiorar. without sureties according to the
Statute.

Resol. This is fittest to be left unto the Court of King's Bench, to whose
commission, and jurisdiction this is most proper.

quest. XVI. If one be convicted upon the Statute of 3 CAROL. R. cap. 13. for
driving of Cattle upon the Sunday through several parishes, whether he shall
forfeit twenty shillings to every of the said parishes, or only to one, if to
one, then to which of them?

Resol. This Statute gives the forfeiture but of one twenty shillings for one
Sabbath day, although the driving be on that day through several parishes
therefore where the action is first attached, and distress taken, that parish
shall have the benefit of the forfeiture, and none other.

quest. XVII. If one who is under the age of thirty years, or brought up in
Husbandry, or a Maidservant brought up in any the Arts or Trades mentioned in
the Statute, 5 Eliz. cap. 4. and not enabled according to that statute to live
at his or her own hand, shall be warned by two Justices of the peace, to put
him or her self to service, by a day prescribed by them, and shall not do the
same accordingly, but shall after continue living at his or her own hand, what
course shall be taken with such a person, and how punished?

Resol. Such persons living out of service, and not having visible means of
their own to maintain themselves without their labor, and refusing to serve
as an hired servant by the year may be bound over to the next sessions or
Assizes, and to be of good behavior in the mean time, or may be sent to the
house of Correction.

quest. XVIII. Whether the Tax for the relief of the poor, upon the statute of
43 Eliz. shall be made by ability, or occupation of Lands, or both: and whether
the visible ability in the parish where he lives, or general ability
whatsoever: And whether his Rent received in the Parish where he lives shall be
accounted visible, and whether he shall be taxed for them only, and not for any
received from other parishes.

Resol. The lands within each parish is to be taxed to the said charges in the
first place equally and indifferently; but there may be an addition for the
visible ability of the Parishioner, according to good discretion, wherein if
there by any mistaking, the Justice etc. or the Sessions must judge between them.

quest. XIX. Whether the Tax for the County stock, Goal, house of Correction,
is to be made by the Statute 14 Eliz. and 43 Eliz. by ability, and upon the
Inhabitants of the parish only, or upon them, or the occupiers of lands
dwelling in that parish; or whether such as occupy Lands in that parish, and
dwell in another parish shall be taxed?

Resol. If the Statutes in particular causes give no special direction, it is
good discretion to go according to the rule for taxation for the poor.

quest. XX. Whether any taxes ought to be made for the charges that petty
Constables and Burgholders are at for conveying of Rogues from parish to
parish, and relieving of them, and how to be rated?

Resol. It is fit to relieve the Constables and Tythingmen, in such sort as it
has been used in several parishes where they live.

quest. XXI. Whether a Justice (...) peace may discharge a servant being with
child from her service, allowing (...)hat as a reasonable cause that she is
(...)ereby made unable to do her service which otherways she might have done;
(...)d if he may discharge her, whether ^e parish shall provide for her til her
delivery, if she cannot provide for her (...)lf, and so also if her time be
expired before her delivery, who shall provide (...) her after the time ended.

Resol. If a woman being with child (...)ocure her self to be retained with a
(...)aster who knows nothing thereof, (...)ems to be a good cause to
discharge (...)r from her service: But if she be (...)ten with child during her
service, it (...)meth to be otherwise; but the master neither case must turn
away such a (...)vant of his own authority, but if (...)r term be ended, or she
lawfully (...)charged, the Master is not bound to (...)vide for her, but it is
a misfortune (...)len upon the parish, which they must (...)re as in other
cases of casual impo(...)cie.

quest. XXII. Whether one being (...)vered of a Bastard-child in one pa(...),
and goes into another parish and (...)omes vagrant, and so is sent to the
(...)ce of her birth, her bastard-child be(...) under the age of seven years,
shall settled with the mother, and there (...)intained, if the mother be not
able to keep it, not the reputed father found; or whether it shall be sent to
the place of its birth, as being settled with the mother, whether the parish
where it was born shall be ordered by the two next Justices to pay a weekly sum
toward the maintenance of it?

Resol. The bastard child must be placed with the Mother, so long as it is
within the quality or condition of a Nurse-child, and then it is fit to be sent
to the place of its birth, to be provided for, the Mother or reputed Father not
being able.

quest. XXIII. A man with his Wife and Children takes a house in one parish for
a year, and before the end of his term is put out of possession, and after
takes part of an house as an Inmate in another parish, from whence he is also
put out in two or three days, and then not being able to get any dwelling,
they come to lie in a Barn in a third parish, where the husband falls sick, and
the wife is delivered of another child, where ought these to be settled?

Resol. If a man or woman having an house or habitation in one parish be thrust
out of possession, this is an illegal unsetling, which the Law forbids; for
none must be enforced to turn Vagrants, and such a one must be returned to the
place where he or she was lawful settled, and the child also that was born in
the time of this distraction.

quest. XXIV. Whether an Apprentice put out by the Churchwardens etc: according
to the Statute, to a Master in another parish, if his Master die and leave no
Executor fit to keep an Apprentice, or able to place him, shall he be provided
for in the parish where he was Apprentice, or shall be sent back to that parish
from whence he was put out?

Resol. Servants and Apprentices are by Law settled in that parish, and if they
become impotent there, the parish must bear the adventure after their term or
time be lawfully en(...)ed.

quest. XXV. What is accounted (...) lawful settling in a Parish, and what
(...)ot?

Resol. This is too general a question to receive a perfect answer to eve(...)
particular case which may happen, (...) generally this is to be observed, (...)
the Law unsetleth none who are (...)ully settled, nor permits that to be (...)e
by force or compulsion: and eve(...) one who is settled a Native,
House(...)lder, a Sojourner, an Apprentice, or Servant for a month at the
least, with (...) a just complaint made to remove (...) or her, shall be held to
be a settling.

quest. XXVI. A rogue is taken at A. and will not confess the place of his
birth, neither does it appear otherwise but that he confesses the last plece
of his habitation to be at S. hereupon he is whipped and sent to S. at his
coming to S. there the place of his birth is known to be at VV. and thereupon
the Rogue confesses it to be so, whether he might without new vagrancy be sent
to VV.

Resol. In this case it is fit to send such a Rogue to the place of his birth;
but this is but a mistaking, and no legal settling.

quest. XXVII. If an Indictment be preferred to the grand Inquest of the
quarter Sessions of the peace, against one for Murder, Manslaughter, Robbely,
Felony, or petty Larceny, and Ignoramus found thereupon, whether the said
Sessions may deliver the party by proclamation, or not.

Resol. Not by Proclamation but for Petty Larceny, and other petty Felonies in
discretion the Goal may be delivered of them.

quest. XXVIII. If a Constable be chosen, and refuse to take his Oath, what
shall be done? And whether a Constable may make a deputy, and by what means?

Resol. The refusal or neglect to take Oath in such case, is a contempt worthy
of punishment, and the best way is by Indictment, and thereupon to fine and
imprison him; and the making of a deputy is rather by toleration than by Law.

Quest. XXIX. If a Constable die, or remove out of his place where, etc. how is
his place to be supplied?

Resol. By the Lord of the Leet, if that time fell near, if otherwse by the
Sessions, but if that be too far off, then by the next Justices.

quest. XXX. If a poor weak man be chosen Constable or Tything-man be unfit for
the place, how he may be removed, and a fresh sworn in his room?

Resol. The Justices must help this, and (...)f the Lord of the Leet have power
to choose a Constable or Tything-man and perform it so ill, that is a just cause
to seize his liberty.

quest. XXXI. If a Nurse-child, a Scholar at a Grammar School, or in the
University prove to be impotent by sickness, lameness, lunacy; or discovery of
Felony, how such persons shall be disposed?

Resol. A Nurse-child, or a Scholar at the Grammar School, or in the
University are not to be esteemed as persons settled there, more than Travelers
in their Innes, but their settling is where their parents were settled, or
themselves were last settled.

Quest. XXXII. What proportion Parsonages, or Tithes shall bear to the taxation
of the poor of the Parish.

Resol. The Parson having the Tenths or Tithes of the Parish, it seems good
and equal that he shall pay the Tenth part of the rate of the poor in that
respect.

quest. XXXIII: Whether for placing of the poor of the parish not to be
removed but by consent of the parish, these poor men may not be placed etc.
Inmates for a time?

Resol. They may by express words of the Stature of 43 Eliz.

quest. XXXIV. It a Parishioner, or owner within a Parish, do bring into the
Parish, without the consent of the parish, a stranger of another parish, which
is, or apparently like to be burdensome to the parish, how they may ease
themselves.

Resol. By taxing such a one to the charge of the rates of the poor, not having
respect to his ability, or the land he occupies, but according to the damage
and dangerhe brings to the parish by his folly.

quest. XXXV. For VVarding in the day time for apprehending of Rogues, whether
the Constable may not enlarge it?

Resol. VVarding in the day time is of great use, and must be left to the
discretion of the Constables, or direction of the Justices to vary according to
the occasion.

quest. XXXVI. Whether Alchouses ought to be allowed in Through-fair Towns,
and others in other places to be restrained only to sell to the poor out of
doors.

Resol. The Justices shall do very welto allow none but in places sit for their
s^itua^^on and user, and to moderate the number.

quest. XXXVII. A man for his quality otherwise sit to be a Constable or other
officer of that nature, procures himself to be the Kings Servant extraordinary,
and by that would excuse himself to serve in the country.

Resol. A servant extraordinary may well perform his ordinary service in the
Country according to his quality.

THE IVDGES OPINIONS Concerning The Commissions by which the Justices sit at
Newgate.

viz.

Goale-Delivery, and Oyer and Terminer.

MDCXXXIII.

LONDON, Printed by T. L. for M. Walbancke MDCLV.

THE Justices OPINION, Concerning the Commissions by which the JUSTICES sit at
Newgate, viz Jail-delivery, and Oyer and Terminer. MDCXXXIII.
Vide Stanford; anciently Felonys include all trespasses, therefore the
Justices of Goale-Delivery have power to hold plea of trespasses against them
in prison or upon bail render themselves.
THe Justices of Goale-Delivery there, may try all Prisoners in the Goal or by
bail, or such as being Indicted will render themselves, generally for all
Felonies, and also for such other offenses as are particularly assigned to them
by Statute.

The Statute of 4 Edw. 3. cap. 2. does give them power to receive Indictments
against prisoners, and such as are upon bail, and to proceed to try the same
(viz.) Indictments taken before the Justices of the peace, and by equity
thereof all Indictments before Vide 1 Mar. Dier 99. Justices of assizes held
plea of all appeals of Felony or Murder against one in prison by their gene
rall commission, so by the same reason to take Indictments.
Coroners, 3 Mar. Bro. Commission 29. says, that the Commission is, Ad deliber
and. Gaolas de Prison. in eisdem existen. but they cannot take indictments as
Justices of Jail-delivery, but being Justices of the Peace they may take
Indictments, and then try the same, or else to receive Indictments taken before
Justices of the Peace, but it stands with reason, that they may take
Indictments against Prisoners, but not against them that are at large: For in
as much as power to deliver the Goal is given them, consequently they must
have means to do so, which is by Indictments: Ideo quaere.

Howsoever it is clear, they may enquire of many offenses, and take.
Indictments in such cases where power by any Statute is given to the Justices
of Goale-Delivery to make enquiry of.

When an Indictment is taken before Jusc^ces of Goal Delivery, in such cases
where they have authority by Law or St. it there the title of the Indictment
is, that apud Go alam deliberat. tent. before the Commissioners of Goal
Delivery, I. S. was indicted, and the Record must be made up so:

And whereas by virtue of the Stat. 4 Ed. 3. Indictments taken before Justices
of the peace, or Coroner, or any other against prisoners, then the Entry of the
Indictment is returned, Memorand. quod ad generalem Sessionem tent. Before A.
B. Justice. ad pacem in Com. M d. or London, I. S. was indicted and tried before
Justices of Jail-delivery, and by virtue of the said Statute Indictments taken
before Justies of the Peace in London or Middlesex, and tried before Justices
of Jail-delivery.

The Commission of Oyer and Terminer is, ad inquirend. and determinand. they
may enquire of all the offenses mentioned in the Commission, allbeit the
Offenders be at large: But they cannot try Prisoners upon Indictments taken
before any other then themselves, as the Justices of Goale-delivery may by the
aforesaid Stat. unless there be a special Commission made, as it was in the
case of the Earl of Leicester mentioned in Plowdens Commentaries: For the
ordinary Commission of Oyer and Terminer is, ad inquiread. audiend. and de
e^minand. therefore they cannot determine things unless they made enquiry
first; and on the other side also, the Justices of Goale-Delivery may try
Indictments taken before Justices of the Peace; yet if one be indicted before
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, the Justices of Goale-delivery cannot try
the same, because the Records of the Commission of Oyer and Terminer, are to be
returned into the King's Bench: 24 E. 3. 31.

The Commission was, and the Records of the proceeding before the Justices of
Goale-Delivery are to be returned to the Custos Rotulorum of the County, when
the same persons are Justices of Goale-Delivery, and Oyer and Terminer, they
may sit the same day and place, and enquire by the same Jury, but the Entry of
the Records must be several, according as the Indictment is.

At the Assizes in the Country the Justices have their several power, as
Justices of Goale-Delivery, Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of the Peace, but
when the Records are made up, they must be according to the power they made
election to proceed upon, this is the regular and legal course: But the Clerks
of Assize promiscuously made Entry thereof: But if a W^^t of Error be brough,
they must certify according to Law, or else it were erroneous, and so upon a
Certiorar.

The Sessions of peace at London may begin at Guildhall, and there adjourn to
Newgate, if some Indictments be at Guildhall, then these must be so certified
if otherwise at wewgate, then the Adjournment must be mentioned, and that the
Indictment was then taken.

Note that the trial of Indictments taken before Justices of the peace of
London cannot be tried at Newgate, as in nature of a Trial before Justices of
the peace of London; for many of the Commissioners for Jail-delivery are not
Justices of the peace for London: But in such case the Trial must be before
the Justices of Goale-Delivery, as upon Indictment taken before Justices of the
peace of London, and in like case of Indictment taken before Justices of the
peace in Middlesex.

But if Indictments at Newgate be originally taken before Justices of
Goale-Delivery, then it is considerable how the Jury sworn and impannelled to
enquire at the Sessions of the peace for London or Middlesex, serve to present
Indictments before the Justices of Goale-Delivery at Newgate, unless the
custom and usage w^l warrant that the two several Juries sworn at the Sessions
of the peace for London or Middlesex, and also by the same oa^^ and impanelling
to serve for the Grand Jury for the Com. of Gaole-delivery, and Oyer and
Terminer.

Upon conference with Mr. Keeling, and the Clerks for Newgate, of London and
Middlesex, and the clerks of Assizes, and view of their several Entries, a
more mature and certain resolution may be given; this being in have, and
without such consideration as were requisite.

CORONERS of their Office, and of their Authority. And where a man shall
Approve, and where not. And which shall be good Appeals for Approvers, and of
the answers unto them. And where a man shall have Sanctuary, and where not. And
where a man may Abjure, and where not.
NOte that the Office and Authority of a Coroner is to sit, super visum
corporis of them that die otherwise than by the visitation of God, and to take
sufficient Record of the view:

Also to Abjure them that ought to be Abjured, and for to record that And also
to Record Appeals, and Accusations of Felons that approve. 22 E. 3. And
unlawfully to take Pleas of the Crown, and to present them as it appears in
the Stat. of Westminster. the first cap. 10. And to take Appeal of Robbery and
Felonle, 9 Hen. 6. fol. 4. and 37. quere if they may proceed in that; for the
Book says that they may record Non-suits in Appeals, and give judgment upon
Outlawries. 9 H. 6. 4. 37.


5 Ed. 8.
The Coroner certifieth into the King's Bench, that W. C. received A. B. as he
was carried to be hanged, and conducted him to the Church of S. This is no good
Record; for he can certify nothing but, super visum corporis, or by special
Writ to him directed.

A Coroner is made in the time of King Henry the eight, and the Coroner sits
in the time of the King that now is, super visum corporis, and takes a
sufficient Indictment, and certifieth, it, that is a good Record, and the Court
may proceed upon it. 4 E. 4. 44. For the Coroner is made by Writ, 4 Ed. 4. 44.
and he shall endure till he be discharged by Writ: contrariwise it is of them
that be made by Commission; for by the Kings death their power is then
dissolved.

A Coroner sits super visum corporis and takes a perfect Indictment, and
another Coroner of the same Shire sits after, and takes another Indictment,
the second Indictment is void, 5 R. 2. 10. and 7. For by the first sitting the
Enquiry is perfectly determined and ended. 5 R. 2. 20. and 7.


A man indicted of Felony confesses the Felony, and approves, and has a
Coroner assigned him, and he approves one of Felony in another County, this is
a good Appeal, 9 H. 6. 45. 29 Ed. 3. 45.
But the Coroner cannot make Process to them, but he must certifice the record
to the Justices of the Goale-Delivery, and they shall make the Process.

Approvement is as much to say as an Accusation, and it must be after
judgment, and it must be made by him that is indicted of Felony, and has
confessed the Felony; and upon this the Justices may assign a Coroner to hear
his Approvements, and to record them, and a certain time shall be assigned him
to Approve; but it is at the discretion of the Justices if they will permit him
to approve or no: And if he approve out of the time to him assigned, it is void.

If a man plead not guilty to the Felony at the Issue, and after he will
relinquish the Issue, and confess the Felony, he shall not be suffered to
become an Approver, 21 E. 3. 10. For he has taken a peremptory Issue, and 21
Ed. 3. 10.
is found two times false; one is by committing the Felony, another is by
taking of that false Plea, and therefore he shall not be trusted to approve,
o^thers.

25 Ed. 3.
If one that is robbed bring an Appeal against one which confesses the
Felony, he shall not be suffered to approve; for an approvement is only for
the profit of the King, and in this case the party shall not be so long
delayed; and in an Appeal, the Defendant shall not be suffered to approve.

A man is in prison for Trespass, and will confess Felony, he shall not be
s^ffered to approve, for he is not in prison for Felonly.

21 Ed. 3.
A man that is Outlawed of Felony, he shall not be suffered to approve; for
this Outlawry is an attainder in Law, and a man attainted cannot approve; for
he is out of the protection of the King and his Law; and this approvement is an
Action, and a man out of the Law can use no Action.

11 Ed. 3.
A man approves I. S. being an Alien born, and now being in Spain, this is no
good approvement; for he cannot be summoned by Process to answer:

A man cannot approve another after that he himself is abjured, for none can
approve but such as may have judgment to be hanged, and so cannot a man abjured.

17 Ed. 3, 4
A Clerk convict escapes out of the Bishops Prison, and makes another Felony,
and confesses that Felony, he shall not approve, for he has another judgment
before, and he is out of the Law, and cannot be adjudged again.

25 Ed. 3. 19.
If the Approver misrehearse the appealee, either by his name, orthe color of
his horse, he shall be hanged incontinent.

19 H. 6. 22 Edw. 3.
If a man be indicted for forging of false money, if he confess that Treas^n he
may approve others.

21 H. 5. 38
If one confess the Felony, and approve another which joyneth the mise by
battle, that not guilty, and when the approver comes to the field to fight, he
relinquisheth his approvemens, he shall be hanged incontinent, and the other
shall go quit; for this does countervail a vanqu^ishment.

An Approver appealeth himself, and I. S. for that they break out of N. in
which they were for Felony, this is no good approvement, for one cannot approve
another of felony, but of such whereunto himself was party, and the breaking of
the prison was several escapes; for one was not party unto the escape of the
other.

An Approver approves another which pleads not guilty, the Ki^ pardons the
approver, the appeallee shall go quit, contrariwise it is if the appealer dye
in Prison.

An approver appealeth another, for that he did receive goods knowing they were
stolen; this is no good approvement. 25, Ed. 3. 25.


25 Ed. 3. 12. 7. 10 Ed. 4. 17. 3 Ed. 3. 36
An approver approves another of a Felony whereunto himself was not privy nor
party; this is no good approvement.

An approver appealeth one which appears, and upon that the appealer takes
his Clergy, the appeallee shall be arraigned upon the Felony for the King.

21 H. 6. 45.
An approver appealeth I. S. and there is no such in rerum natura, the approver
shall be hanged incontinent,

The Justices of the Jail-delivery or of Oyer and Terminer, may assign a
Coroner unto him that will approve, but Justices of peace cannot.

1 Iac. 25. and 28.
Sanctuary taken away by the Statute Ideo, etc.

In what Cases a Man have Clergy, and what not. And where the Ordinary may
refuse the Clerk, and where he may challenge him. And where the Abuses of the
Clergy shall be punished. And where it is Finable. And which Acts shall be
judged an Escape, and which not.
NOte that if a man be convicted of wilful murder, poisoning, robbing of a
Church, or Robbing by the Highway, or for Burglary, where any is put in fear of
their life, or for stealing of horses, mares, or geldings, these persons shall
not have their Clergy, by the Statute of Anno 1 E. 6. cap. 12.

Such as for the offenses aforesaid, be arraigned and stand mute, or challenge
peremptory above the number of twenty Jurors, or will not answer directly to the
Felony, they shall not have their Clergy by the aforesaid Statute, but in all
other cases they shall have their Clergy, as they might have had before the 24.
day of Apr. Anno 1 H. 8.

A man arraigned of Rape shall not have his Clergy, ^er. Stat. El. 18. cap. 6.

1. Ed. 6.
A man that is Bigamus (that is twice married) or has married a Widow, is
arraigned of Felony for stealing of a cow, shall have his Clergy, that is given
by the Statute of Anno 1 Ed. 6.

A man is arraigned for robbing of a house in the night, where none was put in
fear of their life, he shall have his Clergy.

22 Ed. 3. 35.
A clerk convict kills his Keeper and escapes, and is taken again, and
arraigned of Felony, he shall not have his Clergy. 22 Ed. 3 fol. 25. For
frustra legis auxilium in vocat qui in legem committit.

A man indicted acknowledges the Felony and approves, and when the appeal
appears, the appealee prays his Clergy, he shall not have his clergy.

He that is arraigned of any Felony whereof he might have his clergy, if he
stand mute or otherwise abuse himself, so that he should be put to his
penance, yet he shall not lose the benefit of his Clergy, for he is not put
from that by the Statute.

21 Ed. 3. Coron. 461.
If a woman be arraigned of Felony, if she can read, she shall have her Clergy
in all cases as if she were a man.

A man is arraigned of felony, and prays his Clergy and cannot read, he shall
be committed to the Ordinary, and after he has judgment of death, and then he
prays his Clergy, and can read, he shall be committed to the 34 H. 6. 55.
Ordinary; but it seems that that is at the discretion of the Justices.

9 Ed. 4. 29.
A man takes a church for Felony, and will not confess the Felony to the
Coroner, and is drawn out of the Sanctuary and arraigned, yet he shall have his
Clergy if he can read.

22 Ed. 3. 35.
A man is arraigned and prays his Clergy and can read, and the Ordinary will
not demand him, yet he shall have his Clergy.

9 E. 4. 3. 29. 8 H. 4.
A man is abjured and taken again, and yet it is demanded what he can say
whereof he should not die, and he prays his Clergy, if he can read he shall
have it.

3 H. 7.
In an appeal of Goods stolen the Defendant shall have his Clergy.

A man is arraigned of Felony, and attainted, and has judgment of death and is
delivered to the Goalor to be hanged, and he prays his Clergy, if he can
read, and there be an Ordinary to allow him, he shall have his Clergy.

If the Ordinary keep a Clerk convict more easily or more streighly then he
ought by the Law, the King shall reform him; and if he deny a Clerk ^n make his
purgation, where he may make his purgation by the Law, the King shall compel
him to suffer the prisoner to make his purgation.

If a Felon pray his Clergy when he may have it by Law, and the Ordinary refuse
him, the Ordinary shall be ^m^rced, and the prisoner shall be hanged.

FINIS:

