Three CONSIDERATIONS proposed to Mr. William Pen, Concerning the Validity and
Security of his New Magna Charta for Liberty of Conscience, by A. Baptist;
which may be worthy the Consideration of all the Quakers, and of all my
Dissenting Brethren also that have Votes in the Choice of Parliament Men.
I Desire you M. Pen, and all my Dissenting Brethren to Consider, and then
Answer this:

First, What validity or security can any pretended or designed future New Law
or Charter have, when we see so many of the present Laws we already have may
be, and are by the Dispensing Power Dispensed with? Have we, or can we have any
Higher Power here in England, than King, Lords and Commons in Parliament
Assembled? The Laws that are now Dispensed with and rendered useless, were they
not made by that Power? Pray tell me, can your New Charter [if you had it] be
made by any Higher or other Power? And M. Pen, let your Brethren, and us know
your mind honestly. Do you think there is any Temporal or Spiritual-Power here
in England above the Dispencing Power? And can you make it appear to us?

Shall your New Charter have a Penalty inserted to be inflicted on the
infringers or breakers of it or no? if not, what will your New Charter
signify? Not three skips of a Louse; and if it have a Penalty, Cannot any King
by his Prerogative and Authority Royal, Dispense with the Penalty? And what
will it signify then?

That you need not doubt at all, but may be certain of this; you shall hear
what Roman Catholics have already told us, and judged is the Law in this
matter; nay, and such a Right so inherent and so inseparable from the Crown,
That a King cannot divest himself of it if he would, nor is bound by his Word
or any Declaration he makes, no not in or by Parliament.

Take it in M. R. Langhorns own words in his Book, touching the Kings Right in
Dispensing with Penal Laws, p. 3, 4. That this Trust, and this Power of
Dispencing with Penal Laws, are inseparably united unto the Royal Person of the
King, that he cannot transfer, give away or separate the same from himself;
consequently it is inherent in his Royal Person, that is, in his Crown. Coke
lib. 7. fol. 36.

That the King cannot by his Grant, nor yet by Act of Parliament, Bar (...)lf
of any that is inherent in and inseparably annexed into his Royal Person, for
that in so doing he should cease to be King, and consequently change and
subvert the Government, which our Law allows not.

That (therefore) when ever the King to gratify a Parliament, does Consent in
Parliament to any Law, by which he seems to strip himself of, or depart from,
any Prerogative, or Right, which in truth is inseparable from him as King; or
when the King in Parliament or otherwise by any Declaratory Words or Speeches,
seems to relinquish such Right: such Consent to such Law is no more than an
Agreement on his part not to use that Right ordinarily; but only in
Extraordinary Occasions, when in his Princely Wisdom he shall find it
necessary, and for public good. But this Bars him not to use this Right again,
when he sees just cause so to do, Nor can any Declaratory Words spoken by the
King, or his assent incerted into an Act of Parliament, Estop the King in any
Cause of this nature. So far he.

Now where is the assurance then of Will. Pen's New Charter for Liberty? Who can
tell what King we may have after our present Sovereign, whether so merciful or
so just? Or what Sheriffs the next King may choose, and what Returns of
Parliament Men they may make; for you know the forfeiture on the Sheriffs
making a false Return is no great matter, and cannot a King pardon it by his
Dispensing Power or Authority Royal? What will, nay what can your New Charter
then signify, when it either is or may be (according to your own Doctrine)
either invalidated, disanulled, or anihilated in an instant?

Secondly, Pray M. Pen, Consider what your New Charter can signify, so long as
there is a High Commission Court, or a High Commission for Ecclesiastical
Affairs set up? Cannot those Commissioners take any of your and our Preachers,
Teachers, or Ministers to task when they please? Cannot they when they have a
mind to it, Suspend Mr. Pen, or George Whitehead, M. Alsop, Mr. Lobb, or Mr.
Mead, or Mr. Bowyer, as well as the Bishop of London, D. Sharp, or D. Doughty?
Notwithstanding your New Charter? Cannot the Court when they will, or shall
think fit, or be commanded, Suspend, Silence, or forbid any or all the
Dissenting Ministers to Preach any longer in their Meetings, if they will not
read any Declaration or Order whatever, that the King shall set forth and
require them to Read? Remember the Magdalen Colledge-Men, Remember also that
Sauce for a Goose is or may be Sauce for a Gander.

This Consideration is further grounded on the Words in their late Order set
forth in the Gazette, For Contempt of his Majesty's Authority Royal; Now let us
see before we leap, whether that will run no farther than just M. Pen will have
it. Can he stop the Current of it when he pleases? If he could we are not sure
he would, for formerly he had no great kindness (we know) for us Baptists and
other Dissenters and if he could and would, we are not sure of his life how
long. Therefore it will be the greatest piece of weakness and folly in the
world for us to dance after his and the Jesuits pipe alone, contrary both to
all common sense and reason, and our own general interest.

Thirdly, And above all Consider what Security or Validity this New Charter can
be of, when there is a standing Army kept on foot? Do Guns hear Reason, or
regard Laws? Will Dragoons mind Charters, or Arguments do you think? Pray M.
Pen tell us whether they have done or do now so in France? We need not go far
off for an Instance, it is so near us as fifty or sixty miles, which one would
think is nigh enough to open our Eyesight, if we are not strangely infatuated
and given up by the Almighty to ruin and destruction, which the good Lord (...).

M. Pen, How have the Dragoons minded our Properties (in these early days) in
diverse places here in England already? What think you of their Carriage and
Quartering, will it agree with your New Charter for Liberty? The Inkeepers and
Victuallers beside many other can give you an account, now if you were truly A
Friend for Liberty for Liberties sake, as you publish and pretend to the world,
you would mind and inform us, and your Brethren of these and the like things,
and not mincingly pass them over, and both delude and deceive us and them.

Many perticulars more might be enlarged here, but a word to the wise is enough.

I desire M^ Pen only to weigh seriously, and give an honest, clear and
satisfactory Answer to these three points; in the mean time it appears to be
highly the duty of all Men, as well Dissenters as others who have Votes in
choosing Parliament Men; above all to choose such faithful Patriots as will take
care of these things already hin^ed, and others that may be brought before
them; that our Liberties, our Laws, and our Lives may be preserved from ill
designing men, add from future Quowariauto's; and all the high Violaters and
Infringers thereof called to an account, and justly punished. This will well
become them and secure us, more than any titular Charter whatever.

Liberty is indeed a fine word, but remember (Brethren) what the Apostle Peter
has told us, That some there were that while they promise them Liberty, they
themselves are the Servants of Corruption, and observe what follows, for of
whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in Bondage: how do you, how
will you like that Word? The Name of Liberty signifies nothing without the
Substance, and the Continuance, Certainty and Security of it.

Let us endeavor to secure our Substantial Liberties, our English Liberties we
have and ought to have, rather than to get the Name of New ones, which may
fatally bring us into greater Bondage in the end.

Did you never hear of a certain Act or Bill for the Repealing of a Penal Law,
that was lost (when the late King was to have Signed it) betwixt the House of
Commons, and House of Lords, by a strange Trick of an honest Clerk of the
Parliament.

Do not part with a Goose, for the sticking down a Feather.

Children know, and can tell us, A Bird in the Hand, is worth two in the Bush.

Finally Brethren, Let us be of one mind in our great Concerns, though we may
differ in some Circumstances, and small trivial things.

Let us not in revenge (though it be sweet) put out both our own Eyes, to put
out one of our Brothers. Let us not be so silly, to destroy our selves, to hurt
others.

But let all Protestants Unite in mutual Condescension, Affection, and
Interest; it is high time: Remember our Savior has told us, a House divided
against it self cannot stand. Nothing will Save us but Union. Let Brotherly
Love and Charity continue.

Farewell and be wise whilst you may, lest you repent where it is too late. and
your repentance will do you no good.

