Fraud and Violence Discovered and Detected: OR A REMONSTRANCE OF The
Interessed in the Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura of LONDON. WITH
A Narrative of the Proceedings in the CASE (depending before the STATES GENERAL
of the Seven United Provinces) between the Assigns of William Courten and the
East India Company of the Netherlands.

ALSO Several Reasons and Arguments for the speedy decision of Differences (by
Amicable Conferences of State) arising upon Depredations and Spoils.



Fiat Justitia pereat Mundus.

By GEORGE CAREVV Armig.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid for the persons concerned. M. DC. LXII.

An Introduction To the TREATISE.
GReat Adventures are accompanied with Equal hazzards and advantages, and men
of noble principles rather take encouragement to improve their Country by
lawful Enterprises, than to sit still and suffer Penury through fear and
negligence: The wisdom of all Ages provided safe Conducts for Merchants, under
the sanctuary and protection of Jus Gentium, and National Treaties; therefore
they that suffer Injuries by the Insolent Subjects of Foraign States, without
seeking Satisfaction and Reparation answerable to the Damnum Emergens, forfeit
not only their own Proprieties, but betray both the Honor and Justice of
their PRINCE, and the Strength and Courage of His Subjects. Felons by the Law
of ENGLAND are not admitted Counsel, or any Testimonies upon Oath; for that
such Criminal offenses are contra Pacem and Dignitatem Domini Regis, etc. and
Murderers are punished with Death by the Law of all Nations. Trespasses
according to their circumstances are considered in the Eye of the Law: To
strike a Peasant bears an Action, but to strike a Peer bears a greater:
Robberies committed at noonday, in the open Roads, are laid to the Countries
charge; for that Theives were harbored within the Jurisdiction of a Civil
Government: Among the Greeks; if a Murderer flew into any City for refuge,
they Apprehended three of the Inhabitants, and kept them in safe custody until
Justice were done upon the Offender: To deny or delay Justice, is Injustice;
and where there is a Persistency in it, Grotius (who was both a Divine and a
Civil Lawyer) says that Letters of Reprisal are consonant to Law, and therein
Nations as well as Persons are concerned: The Sacred Scripture directs a
threefold Restitution for Goods unjustly taken, and the Church of Rome
Excommunicates those that detain any thing from persons suffering by Distress
at Sea, accounting it so Detestable a sin, that they are Accursed, and shall
not obtain Remission until they have made full satisfaction. Generous Spirits
are obliged by Kindness, being sensible of Honor and Gratitude; but the
Jewish generation of obstinate men, that deems it no sin to cheat Christians,
being Incorporated into the East India Company of the Netherlands, holds it
more shameful to Restore than to Steal; and for their private Interest, will
(if possible) Engage the Seven Provinces in an unlawful War, than yield to
reasonable terms for their Peace. There are many that justly call themselves
Sufferers in this case, and Poterunt litem inceptam prosequi, not doubting in
the least of a good Issue upon the foundations of Justice and Equity: The
precept of Law is to Do right to Every man; and Demosthenes the renowned
Orator defines it to be the Gift of God as well as the Decrees of Learned men:
The Laws of ENGLAND are most clear in the Point, under which (qui se jacturam
passos dicunt in duabus Navibus, etc.) they are subject, there needs no
Commentary upon the Text, being established upon the grounds of right reason
and judgment.

Having glanced at the several Heads in the following Discourse, before I come
to the Proceedings upon the Controversy begun, it is necessary to open the
Cause, that the Reader may not be perplexed in various turnings to lose his way.
I shall then in Bona Esperanza sail to the Henry Bona Adventure, and enter the
Particulars of the Goods and Fraights taken in on their Trading Voyages, and
declare the accounts, and opinions both of the most Learned in the Laws, and
experienced in Policies and Reasons of State that say, If the full Loss and
Damages be not satisfied according to the Proofs in the Admiralty, the
Conclusion (for English Affairs) will be far worse than the Premises.

[Veritas non quaerit Angulos.]
The CASE between the Assigns of WILLIAM COURTEN and the East India Company of
the NETHERLANDS.
KIng CHARLES the First (of ever glorious memory) most seriously considering
that Trade and Navigation was a principal means to bring Honor and Wealth to
His Kingdoms, and finding by sad experience that the East India Company of
ENGLAND rather persued their present profit by a Running Trade, than to settle
themselves in places of strength, that might give encouragement to future Times
for adventuring any Commerce with the Indians, or defend themselves against the
violent and apparent Injuries of the Hollanders, who daily insulted over them,
to the Dishonor of GREAT BRITAIN, Decrease of Customs, and Expense both of
His Majesty's Subjects and their Fortunes: His Majesty duly considering the
premises, did by His Commission under His Royal Signature, bearing date the 12
th. of December, 1635. (the Uiceroy of the King of Spain having concluded a
Truce and Free Trade in the East Indies with His Majesty) give license, power
and authority to Sir William Courten late of London Knight, Endimion Porter
Esquire, Thomas Kynaston, Samuel Bonnell, Merchants, and others; to Set forth
under the Command of Captain John Weddall and Nathaniel Mountney, the good
Ships called the Dragon, the Katharine, the Son the Planter, the Ann, and the
Discovery; with Gold, Silver, Merchandises and Provisions, fit for Trade, not
only to Goa, the Parts of Mallabar, China and Japan; but also to Cape Bona
Esperanza, the Island of St. Laurence and Parts adjacent, the Coasts of
Mosambique, Sofola and AEthiopia, the Island Succatora, the Coast of Arabia,
the Gulf of Persia, the Coast of India, the Island of Zelaon, the Coast of
Cormendell, the Gulf of Bengala, the Coast of Pegu, Achen, the Island of
Sumatra, the Straights of Malacca, Sindea and Bandea, with the Islands of Java,
Macassar, Borneo, Gillolo, the Maluccose Islands, with Nova Guiana, and the
Coasts of Tartarie; or to any other place whatsoever, where occasion of Trade
or Discovery should lead them: And (amongst other powers and privileges)
granted Authority to take possession for His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors, of all such Lands as they should discover and conceive might be of
Advantage and Honorable for the Crown of ENGLAND to own or hold; giving to the
said Sir Will. Courten, and other the Adventurers with him, and their Heirs for
ever, one full moiety or half part of the Lands and Benefits whatsoever
thereunto belonging; reserving the Sovereignty thereof, and the Interest of
Disposing the other part: And in order to a Friendly entertainment of the
English by the Natives, His Majesty sent several Letters under His Sign
Manual to the Indian Kings, for the kind reception of those His Subjects
aforesaid: Nevertheless (in the said Commission) His Majesty declared His
meaning and intent, that the old East India Company shall not be restrained,
hindered or impeached, of, in or from a Free Trade and Commerce to any of those
Parts, any thing to the contrary notwithstanding; Saving and excepting a
certain clause in the Grant, concerning the Discovery of a Passage into the
Atlantic Sea, and the Benefits thereby accruing; and the Land to be discovered
and taken possession of by the said Sir William Courten and his Partners as
aforesaid: Provided also, that Sir William Courten and other the Adventurers
with him, their Agents and Assigns, shall not be privileged, licensed or
enabled to Trade where the East India Company had settled Factories, Plantations
or Trade before the 12 th. of December, 1635. And to show a signal testimony of
His Majesty's favor to this Foundation, there was in the said Commission power
and authority given to make use of His Majesty's Common Seal engraven with a
Lion passant gardant between three Imperial Crowns, to seal all Letters,
Certificates and matters of Concernment in the said Trading Uoyages: And as a
further ensign of His Majesty's most gracious care for the safety and
preservation of the Shipping in that Employment, did authorize and require Sir
William Courten, his Partners, etc. to carry in all their Ships the same Flags
and Colors which the Kings Ships and none else ought to bear. And in persuance
of the said Commission Grants and Authorities aforesaid, the said six Ships
were set forth and sent to the Parts and places aforesaid. Sir William Courten
having upon his own account adventured the Sum of 120000 l died being
indebted to several persons that had lent him many great Sums of money upon his
own and his Son William Courten's personal Security: His Majesty then minding
to give all further encouragement to the surviving Adventurers, did of His
especial grace, certain knowledge and mere motion, by His Letters Patents
under the Great Seal of England, bearing date the first day of June, 1637.
grant ratify and confirm unto Endimion Porter, William Courten Son and Heir
and sole Executor of Sir William Courten; Thomas Kynaston, Samuel Bonnell,
Captain John Weddall and Nathaniel Mountney, and every of them, their Partuers,
Agents and Assigns, all the said Powers, Privileges and Authorities mentioned
and contained in the former Commission; with license from time to time, during
the space of Five years next following to set forth and send one or more Ship
or Ships, Uessel or Uessels well fitted and provided for Trade, to the Parts
and places aforesaid; Captain Weddall and Mountney with the former Ships having
Traded for the space of Eighteen months upon the Coasts aforesaid, purchased
several places for Factories near the Sea, and possessed themselves of some
Uacancies of Land (lawful for them to do) and then sent home the Son and the
Planter richly laden with Goods to a great value. The Hollanders perceiving
that both the Indians and Portugals had naturally more kindness for the English
than the Dutch, Envyed thereat, and sought all indirect means and practices (as
formerly they had done) to destroy them and their Foundations, declaring all
men to be their Enemies that dealt with the English. Afterward Capt. Weddall
and Mountney, as they were bound homeward for England, in the Dragon and
Katharine, laden with Oriental Wares and Merchandises, to the value of 150000 l
Sterling and upwards, near the Cape Bona Esperanza were most barbarously
murdered by the Dutch, and the Ships both sunk (as by strong presumptions and
relations of several persons hereafter mentioned may appear) which put the
Company upon great streights.

William Courten then Borrowed the Sum of 28800 l. of Sir Paul Pindar Knight,
upon his personal security in the same year his Father died, toward
satisfaction of such persons that called in their moneys; afterward prevailed
with Sir Edward Littleton Baronet, his Brother in Law, to become bound with him
for diverse great Sums of money to diverse other persons, amounting to 68000 l.
or thereabouts, which was taken up at Interest to carry on the said Trade in
India as aforesaid. And in the Year 1641. having with his Partners set forth
seven other Ships, well provided and furnished with Gold, Silver, Merchandises,
Ammunition and other provisions fitting for East India Uoyages; did by an
Indenture or Bill of Sale, bearing date the 26 of April 1642. made between the
said William Courten of the one part, and Sir Edward Littleton of the other
part, recite the said Letters Patents, And whereas the said William Courten,
and the parties named in the said Patent, in persuance of the powers and
authorities therein granted, had set forth and sent out to the East Indies and
places before mentioned the said 7 Ships herein particularly mentioned, viz.
The Loyalty of London, of the Burden of 340 Tons or thereabouts, under the
charge and Command of John Durson Master; the Bona Esperanza of London, of the
Burden of 240 Tons or thereabouts, under the charge and Command of John
Dowrifh Master, the Hester of London, of the Burden of 230 Tons or
thereabouts, under the charge and Command of Robert Hogg Master; the Unity of
London, of the Burden of 160 Tons or thereabouts, under the charge and Command
of Henry Russell Master; the Paradox of London, of the Burden of 120 Tons or
thereabouts, under the charge and Command of Adrian Mathews Master; and the
Planter of London, of the Burden of 260 Tons or thereabouts, under the charge
and Command of John Benning Master: And whereas the whole Adventure of and in
all the said Ships, being divided into Eight parts, the Adventure of him the
said William Courten, amounts unto Seven parts of the said Eight parts; and
the other part is the Adventure of all the rest of the Adventurers and Parties
herein before mentioned.

And whereas the said William Courten has at his own proper costs and
charges, and for his own proper account, by several Polices or Writings of
Assurances, bearing the several Dates herein mentioned, assured himself lost or
not lost from London, to the parts and places aforesaid in Trade, and from
thence to London again with their Lading; that is to say, by one Police dated
the 13 day of April, 1641. upon the said Ship called the Paradox, the Sum of
3450 l. by another Police dated the 6. day of October, 1641. upon the Bona
Esperanza, the Sum of 3400 l. by another Police of the same date, upon the
Henry Bona Adventure, the Sum of 3200 l. by another Police dated the 18 of
April 1642. upon the Loyalty, the Sum of 5250 l. by another Police of the
same date, upon the Hester, the Sum of 3650 l. by another Police of the same
date, upon the Unity, the Sum of 3150 l. as in and by the said Polices or
Writings of Assurances may appear.

And whereas the said Sir Edward Littleton, at the request and for the only
proper debt of the said William Courten, and as his Surety, stands bound to
several persons for several great sums of Money, and the said William Courten
is willing to secure the said Sir Edward Littleton, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators; and to save him and them harmless concerning the same: Now,
This Indenture witnesses, that the said William Courten in consideration of
the premises, and for diverse other good causes and considerations him thereunto
moving, has given, granted, bargained and sold, and by these presents does
give, etc. unto the said Sir Edward Littleton those his two Ships called the
Paradox and Hester, with their Appurtenances, Stock and Stocks, Merchandises,
Assurances; and all his Part and Parts, Portion and Portions of all Freight and
Fraights, Eoods, Ladings, Wares, Returns or Proceeds whatsoever, arising or
growing out for or in respect of any Parts and Shares which he the said William
Courten has in the Loyalty, the Bona Esperanza, the Henry Bona Adventure, the
Unity and the Planter: to have, hold and enjoy the said Ships and Premises; and
all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Claim and Demand whatsoever of him the
said William Courten, of, in and to the same, unto the said Sir Edward
Littleton, etc. for evermore; with a Covenant therein against all former
Encumbrances: Provided always that if the said William Courten, his Heirs,
Executors or Administrators, or any of them, shall or do within the space of
Seven and twenty months next ensuing the date of the said Indenture, pay and
satisfy all and every sum and sums of Money for which the said Sir Edward
Littleton stands bound with the said William Courten, unto such person or
persons unto whom the same are or shall be due; and do from time to time, and
at all times hereafter save harmless the said Sir Edward Littleton, etc. from
all manner of Suits, Troubles, etc. by reason of the same; That then this
present Indenture and Bill of Sale to be void: And it is agreed, expressed and
declared, that in case the said Sir Edward Littleton, etc. shall at any time be
damnified concerning the premises, or any part of the said Debts, that then it
shall and may be lawful for the said Sir Edward Littleton, etc. to grant,
assign and set over the said Ships, Goods, Adventures, or any part or portion
thereof, to any person or persons whatsoever, for the payment and discharge of
the said Debt, and the surplus to be accounted to the said William Courten,
etc. In witness, etc.

Sir Paul Pindar having continued his money at Interest in the hands of Mr.
Courten for the space of Five years, upon the personal security of Mr. Courten,
and Samuel Bonnell, there being then due to him for the forbearance thereof the
sum of 4800 l. Sir Paul Pindar pressed for further security, and at length
prevailed with Mr. Courten and Sir Edward Littleton for satisfaction of the
said Debt to make a Grant or Bill of Sale of the said Ships in manner and form
following, viz.

By an Indenture tripartite, bearing date the 19 of December, 1642. made
between the said William Courten of the first part, Sir Edward Littleton of the
second part, and Sir Paul Pindar of the third part; reciting the Letters
Patents from the King, the several names of the Ships, with their Burdens and
Lading, Polices of Assurances, and the Consideration of Mr. Courten's former
Grant to Sir Edward Littleton of the 26 of April last, with the Provisoe
contained therein as aforesaid; and then mentioning the particular sums of
money that William Courten, and Samuel Bonnell, stood engaged by several Bonds
to Sir Paul Pindar, with their dates and times of payment, being accounted up,
Principal and Interest together, amounting to 28800 l. And that for 4000 l.
thereof, 200 Bags of Pepper was sent upon Sir Paul Pindar's account to Ligorne,
there remaining only due unto Sir Paul Pindar the sum of 24800 l. In
consideration whereof, and for better security, the said William Courten and
Sir Edward Littleton granted, bargained and sold the said Ships, the Loyalty,
the Hester, the Bona Esperanza, the Bona Adventure, the Unity, the Paradox and
the Planter; with all the Fraights, Adventures, Returns, Polices of Assurances
and other Proceeds whatsoever; and all the Right, Title, Interest, Estate,
Claim and Demand of them the said Sir Edward Littleton and William Courten, to
Sir Paul Pindar, etc. as his and their own proper Goods and Chattels for
evermore; with Covenants that they were free from Encumbrances, etc. according
to the Laws of Oleron. In which Indenture tripartite was also contained a
Provisoe, That the said Sir Edward Littleton and his Assigns should and might
order and dispose of the Returns and Proceeds of the premises: First, for the
payment of Sir Paul Pindar out of the Loyalty 5000 l. out of the Hester 4000 l.
out of the Bona Esperanza 3000 l. out of the Bona Adventure 2500 l. out of the
Unity 2500 l. out of the Paradox 2000 l. and out of the Planter 5800 l. at
certain days after the Returns of the said Ships, the Surplus to satisfy the
Engagements of Sir Edward Littleton: And it was agreed, that in case any of the
said Sums of Money should be behind and unpaid, that it should be lawful for
Sir Paul Pindar to pay himself out of the Goods and Merchandises upon the
Returns with Costs and Damages, and account to Sir Edward Littleton for the
overplus: And it was also agreed, that in case of Shipwreck Sir Paul Pindar
should not suffer any loss or damage, but that he should and might sue the
Polices of Assurances, and be accomptable also for the overplus to Sir Edward
Littleton, toward discharge of the Debts he stood Engaged with William Courten
as aforesaid. In witness, etc.

As additions to Mr. Courten's Misfortunes, the Civil Wars broke out in England
soon after he set forth these last Ships, which gave the East India Company of
the Netherlands further advantages to dispoil him, and his Friends that
assisted him in his reputation. And about the Month of January 1643. the Henry
Bona Adventure being laden with Pepper, and other Indian Wares bound homewards
for England, was driven upon the Island Mauritius by distress of weather,
where the Dutch under a pretense of helping the Master and Seamen to save the
goods, seized and possessed themselves of Ship, Tackle, Ammunition, Merchandise
and Provisions, and converted the same to the use of the said East India
Company; and Adriaen Vanderstell the Governor of the Island sent away the
Master and Mariners without any manner of succor or relief; to the damage of
Mr. Courten and the rest of the interessed, the sum of 10000 l. and upwards.
And about the Month of June 1643. the Bona Esperanza making a Trading Voyage
from Goa to Maccao, in the Straights of Malacca, was violently set upon by two
Dutch Ships Men of War (belonging to the said Company) called the Vendillo and
the Portogallo, whereof Signior Fermeren, and Signior Gealand with the
Lieutenant of the Fort at Malacca were Commanders, who in an hostile manner
killed the Master Roger Tuckerman, and diverse Seamen more, wounded many others,
took the rest Prisoners, and robbed them of all their Goods, Merchandise, Books
of Accounts, Writings and Papers; and afterward led the Mariners about the
streets of Batavia in derision of the English Nation, dragging also the Kings
Colors after them in triumph, contrary to the Laws of Nations and Common
amity: all which tended to the damage of Mr. Courten and the interessed in
that Voyage, the Sum 75000 l. or thereabouts, the particulars whereof appear
by the authentic proofs taken (in perpetuam rei memoriam) in His Majesty's
High Court of Admiralty in England.

Upon the news of these violent and inhumane dealings, Mr. Courten was forced
to absent himself from the Exchange, his Bills were protested in England,
Holland and Zeland, so he became insolvent, and was outlawed with Sir Edward
Littleton in the Years 1644. and 1645. for the Sum of Fifty thousand pounds, or
thereabouts: Sir Edward Littleton being then sequestered for his Fidelity and
Allegiance to his Majesty, and in the actual Service of the King, could not
appear to prosecute his action either before the Parliament or the Courts of
Holland, for reparation of the said violent injuries aforesaid.

Sir Paul Pindar having taken up several great sums of money, and advanced
them to the Kings use, was with the rest of the Commissioners for the
contracted Farms of the Customs, Fined 150000 l. by the Parliament, and also
prosecuted at Law for the said Debts, whereby he became a Prisoner to his own
house, and during the late distempered Times made incapable to look after his
proportion of the said Damages from the East India Company of Holland.

Mr. William Courten being indebted (as it is pretended) unto one Jacob Pergens
of Amsterdam, one Peter Boudan Courten of Middleburg, David Goubart, and others
their Confederates in London, combining together, persuaded Mr. Courten to
appear before John Marius Public Notary, and make a Procuration bearing date
at London the 27. of October 1645. giving power to the said Pergens to implead,
recover and receive of the said Company satisfaction for the Losses and
depredations aforesaid, but to the use of Mr. Courten.

Afterward perceiving the Times grew more desperate, and that Sir Edward
Littleton and Sir Paul Pindar were plunged into most lamentable conditions and
oppressions, they insinuated to Mr. Courten that notwithstanding the former
Deeds of Bargain and Sale to the said Sir Edward Littleton and Sir Paul Pindar,
their Estates being confiscated, and themselves lost irrecoverably in opinion
of the world, he might make other Transports of the said Ships Bona Adventure
and Bona Esperanza, with the Goods, Effects, and Proceeds thereof, to him the
said Pergens, for satisfaction of his pretended Debt aforesaid. Mr. Will.
Courten being divided in his own thoughts, told the said Confederates that he
could not do any such acts without arraigning his own understanding, and
wounding the reputation of himself and his Family; yet notwithstanding through
much importunity and persuasion, being driven to great necessity, having lived
in obscurity three years together, he came privately on the 10 of December. 1647.
before Joshua Maniett Public Notary at London, and took upon himself to uake
an absolute Transport and Bill of Sale of the said Goods, Ships and all
Proceeds coming and arising from them, to Jacob Pergens now as his own proper
Goods.

About six weeks after the said William Courten arrived in Holland, and
delivered to Mr. Jacob Pergens and David Goubart the Counterpart of the said
Tripartite Indenture signed and sealed by Sir Edward Littleton and Sir Paul
Pindar, in whose hands the same is yet remaining, who then were advised by
their Advocates upon perusing of the said Deed to persuade Mr. William Courten
to make another Transport in Holland, who came privately to the Hague in his
passage toward Italy (where he dyed) and appeared before Solomon Vander Heyde
Public Notary, upon the 22 of Febr. 1648. and took upon him to make another
Transport or Bill of Sale, reciting the names of the Ships, particulars of the
Goods and Fraights, and then granted them to the said Pergens in rem suam,
accepting of some small parcells of money for his charges, and so took his
Farewell of the said Pergens, Boudan Courten and Goubart, leaving the shame upon
them and the East India Company, who fraudulently combined to oppress the
Fatherless and Widows, and intended to deceive them of their Just Rights.

And the better to color over their practices and designs, they procured
Letters from His late Majesty (when he was under the treachery of a
Presbyterian Party, and the force of an Independent Army) to be sent to the
States General of the United Provinces, and Sir William Boswel His Majesty's
Resident at the Hague, as follows. Celsissimis ac Praepotentibus Dominis,
Dominis Ordinibus Generalibus Unitarum Belgii Provinciarum, Confoederatis and
Amicis Nostris Charissimis.
CArolus Dei Gratia Magnae Britanniae Franciae and Hyberniae Rex, Fidei
defensor, etc. Celsissimis ac Praepotentibus Dominis Dominis Ordinibus
Generalibus Foederatarum Belgii Provinciarum, Confoederatis, and amicis Nostris
Charissimis, Salutem, ac utramque felicitatem; Cels^ssimi ac Praepotentes
Domini Confoederati and Amici Charissimi, queritur bonus civis Noster, dilectus
and fidelis nobis, Gulielmus Courtenus, illatum sibi Grande Damnum Anno 1643.
quum ejusdem binae naves, Commercii causa ad Orientalis Indiae plagas emissae,
una expugnaretur in freto Malaccae, altera tempestate in Insulam Mauritii
conj^cta, diriperetur, ac detineretur, utrumque intentatum a subdit is Vestris
ad Orientalis Indiae Societatem Vestram pertinentibus, quodque sat is sibi
(just) fieri ab eadem societate sapiu^ efflagitavit; quam conventuram brevi
quum intellgamus, placuit, Residenti Nostri Equiti Boswellio Hagae moranti
mandare, ut Courteno ferat opem, ac rem omnem diserte aperiat V. V.
Celsitudinibus simul, and ab iisdem ejusmodi petat directionem, qua eadem
societas ad rationom satisfactionis ineundam adducatur; Residenti nostro
praefato fidem in hiis integram, reliquisque ex part nostra proferendis coram
iisdem V. V. Celsitudin. negotiis, eadem, V. V. Celsitudines, ut semper, cum
favore and benignitate dignabuntur aahibere, Quas de caetero salvas
slorentesque Deus opt. Max. quam diutissime conservare velit: Dabanim ex
Hamptoniae Curia Octobris die nona, Anno salutis M D. CXVII. and Regni nostri
XXIII. P. P. V. V. Celsitudinum.

Bonus Amicus CAROLUS R.
Facta Collatione consonuit cum suo Originali, subsignatum erat.

I. SPRONSSEN.




To Our Trusty and Well-beloved Sir William Boswell Knight, Our Resident with
the States General of the United Netherlands at the Hague.
CHARLES REX.

TRusty and well-beloved, We greet you well, herewith you will receive two
Letters from us, one to the States General of the United Netherlands, the
other to the Prince of Aurange, and a Copy of each, by which you will see they
are but creditive, and referring to that you have from us in Charge, which is
as follows; That a Ship called the Bona Esperanza of London, belonging to
William Courten Esquire, laden with his goods, and with other goods and moneys
of certain Portugalls, chanced to be assaulted by two Ships of the Netherlands
East India Company in the Straights of Malacca, upon or about the 26. of June
1643. (as she was Sailing on her voyage from Goa to China) where after a bloody
fight and much of her Company slain, she was overpowered by the Neatherlanders
serving the said Company, who used the rest with great rigor, and disposed of
Ship and Lading at their Pleasure, which else might have probably brought home
to Mr. Courten a return of Threescore thousand pounds, or better.

Like Information we have concerning another Ship to him belonging, called the
Henry Bona Adventure of London Fraighted with Pepper, and other Spices, to the
value of 7884. pounds, and with Iron near 300. pounds worth, which by the
stresse of a Harrican, was forced upon a part of Mauritius Island, the 25. of
January 1643. and there with all tackles and goods detained by the
Netherlanders serving the said Company: Of both which, that just restitution be
made or sufficient reparation, and allowance for Damages, is, That we are
Humbly Prayed to recommend, and by you our Public Minister with the said
States General to demand and require; Wherefore we will and command you soon
after receipt of these, to Inform your self fully by conference with James
Pergens Merchant of Amsterdam (who has the managery of Mr. Courten's affairs
in Holland) of the whole State of the Seizure and value of the said two Ships,
furniture and fraights, and the damage sustained by the Owners of them, with
other the circumstances pertaining thereunto; Wherein, when you are
sufficiently instructed, we will and require you then to present our said
letters Creditive, and in pursuance of them to Press for Satisfaction, (by
restitution or otherwise) speedily to be made by the Netherlanders East India
Company aforesaid: In the Negociating of which we would have you use your
utmost Care, and most earnest endeavors, and therein to advise and assist from
time to time the said Pergens the best you can; Which will be grateful and
acceptable to Us. Given under Our Signet at Hampton Court the 9. day of October
1647.

Concordat cum Original. Quod Attestor. J. Beeckman Not. Publ.




Having thus far given a perfect Narrative, with the Abstracts of several Deeds
and Writings out of the Originals, to which I refer, now follows in course the
Second Part of the Case, wherein is set forth the Practice and Combination of
Mr. Pergens and his Confederates; and the prohibition of Sir Paul Pindar, with
the Proceedings of Jonas Abeels at Amsterdam thereupon.

SIr Paul Pindar being advertised by some Friends that William Courten had
taken upon him to make other Procurations, Transports or Assignements of the
said Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventure, and of the Goods, Ladings and
Effects, to Mr. Jacob Pergens, notwithstanding his former Grants, Bargains and
Sales for such valuable Considerations as aforesaid; then the said Sir Paul
Pindar by Procuration bearing date at London the 11. of February 1647.
empowered Jonas Abeels Merchant of Amsterdam, to Implead the said East India
Company, and to recover and receive of the said Company all such sum and sums
of money, Costs and Damages as were and should be coming unto him for the
Losses and Spoils aforesaid; which act was attested by Joshua Maniet Public
Notary aforesaid.

Before any Treaty or Agreement could be made between Pergens and the Company,
Jonas Abeels insinuated (to the Directors of the said Company at their Chamber
in Amsterdam, by Gerrit Coren Public Notary) his Procuration and quality; and
that Sir Paul Pindar had a Transport or Deed of Assignement of the said Ships,
Goods and Ladings from William Courten and Sir Edward Littleton under which he
claimed, and that in case they made any Agreements with Mr. Pergens or any
other it would tantamount to no effect, giving the Bewinthebbers or Directors a
Copy of the said Deed of Assignment, protesting against them for the Damages
already sustained, or that should be sustained, by reason of the premises, as
appears by the said Act of Insinuation, in the Register at Amsterdam the 25 of
May 1648.

Jonas Abeels hearing afterward that (notwithstanding his Insinuation) Mr.
Pergens was in Treaty with the East India Company, did (as directed by his
Advocate) arrest in the hands of the said Company, all which by Liquidation or
Avoit the said William Courten had made in regard of the said two Ships Bona
Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventure, and the Goods therein laden, and that the
sum of 2500 l. sterling, covenanted to be paid out of the Henry Bona
Adventure, by the said tripartite Deed to Sir Paul Pindar, should be paid to
the Arrestant in his said quality, before any money might be paid to Mr.
Courten or others, van syuen voegen. meaning Sir Edward Littleton or his
Assigns, which could not then appear for the reasons before mentioned. Actum
at Amsterdam the first of October 1648. and was signed by Gosen Daniells
Messenger of the City of Amsterdam, and entered in the Arrest Book Signed with
the Letter G fol. 161. abstracted from the Original, kept at the Chamber of the
said East India Company.

In the year following (the King of Great Britain being murdered) the
Committee of Seventeen met at Middleburgh, where Peter Boudan Courten dwells,
and as one of the said Committee, he himself procured to be made the pretended
Agreement following, without any notice of Sir Paul Pindar's Interest, Sir
Edward Littleton's Right or Mr. Thomas Kynaston and the rest of the Proprietors
proportions, who were also imprisoned, sequestered, and ruined for the Kings
Cause, neither was there in the said pretended Agreement any mention of the
Mariners wages or their other particular losses, nor even the Damage of Mr.
Thomas Newman, the Cape Merchant in the Bona Esperanza, who lost all in that
Bottom, which he had gotten together, in his Five years service of Mr. Courten
and Company before, nor of the least recompense or compensation to the Widows,
and many poor fatherless Children of Roger Tuckerman the Master, the
Boatswaine, and five other Seamen that were ( for some Reasons) killed in the
defense of the ship, against the said Robbery and Uiolence. All which proved to
the loss and damage of the true Proprietors and Interessed the sum of 84516
l. 11 s. sterling, besides the said blood, inestimable loss of Trade, and
Imbezilment of the Original Contract under the hand and seal of the King of
China, concerning the Liberties and Privileges of his Ports to Mr. Courten and
Company; for all which there was no procurations given from the Proprietors to
Mr. Pergens to agree upon any terms whatsoever, they not doubting then of
plenary satisfaction, when the King should resume His Crown and Kingdoms. A
Copy of the Original Agreement in Dutch, Between Mr. Pergens and the East India
Company.
ALsoo differenten ontstaen sijn tusschen de Ed: Bewinthebberen vande
Nederlandsche Geoctroyeerde Dostindische Compagnye ter eenre, mitsgaders de Ed:
Jacob Pergens, end David Goubart, so voor hem selven end als Procuratie
hebbende vande Ed: William Courten, end andere Geinteresseerdens inde ghemelte
differenten tot Londen ter andere zyde, ter seecke van saecker Schip genaemt
l'Esperance inde Iare 1643. voorleden omtrent de Stadt Malacca vande Ministers
vande ghemelte Compagnye om redenen daer toe dienende, met sijn ingeladen
goederen aengehouden, mitsgaders eenighe geberghde goederen uyt het Schip Henry
Bonaventura op't Eylandt Mauritius verongeluckt end van daer op Batavia
ghebraght; So is it dat de voornoemde Jacob Pergens end Goubart ter
Uergaderinge van Seventiene de gemelte haer Pretensien (om eenmael van de selve
af te sijn) eyndelijck begroot hebbende op even Sum van hondert duysent
guldens, end daer op gehoort sijnde de presentatie vande gemelte Uergaderinge
van't seventigh duysent guldens naer dat haer Ed: de resterende disterende
dertigh duysent guldens al end geheel aende nyt spraecke van dese Uergaderinge
gesubmitteert hadden, aende voornoemde Pergens end Goubart, voor all de
gemelte haere Pretensien end ankleve van dien egeene uyt gesondert of
gereserveert, by desen toe gheleyt hebben de Sum van vyf en tachtigh duysent
guldens mits voor den Ontfangh vande gemelte penningen stellende suffisante
cautie voor all namaninge: Alle't welcke by de ghemelte E: Pergens end
Goubart gehoort sijnde, daer mede contentement genomen hebben; Alles ter goeder
trouwe sonder argh often list, sijn daer van gedaen maecken twee alleens
luydende Acten, end we dersyts tusschen gemelte Parthyen geteyckent binnen
Middelburgh in Zeelandt den 18 Septembris 1649 Was met verscheyde handen
onderteyckent:

Jacob Pergens David Goubart I. C. Hayman Jacob Rogh P. Boudan Courten P. D.
Carpentier P. van Santen Adriaen Besemer Ian Vrericks Abbekerck Herke Iansz
Noortlandt.

Naer gedane Collatie is dese Copye jegens den Principalen van word te word
bevonden te accorderen, sulcx betuyghe ick Keyserlijck end by den Ed: Hove van
Hollandt, Mitsgaders de Groot Achtbare Magistraet der Stadt Amsterdam
Geadmitteert en openbaer Notaris binnen deselve Stadt Residerende, end hebbe
in oirkonde van dien mijne Notarie signature hier onder ghestelt desen 27
Januarij 1651. was onderteeckent I. G. vander Ven Notaris Publijcq.



A Translation of the Agreement from the Dutch Original.
WHereas Differences are arisen between the Netherland East India Company on
the one part, and Mr J. Pergens and D. Goubart, as for their own Interests, and
being also authorized by Mr Will. Courten and others at London concerned in the
same business on the other part; touching a certain Ship named the Bona
Esperanza, which was in the year 1643. seized on near the Town of Malacca, [and
that for some Reasons] as likewise some goods that were taken into custody,
which were in the Ship named the Henry Bonaventure that did miscarry near the
Island Mauritius, which said goods were brought into Batavia; For which subject
those Interessed in the said business (and to make an end thereof, and of
their pretenses, the said James Pergens and Goubart, did in the Assembly of the
Seventeen, value their Loss at the sum of One Hundred Thousand Gilders;
whereupon they had a presentation of Seventy Thousand Gilders offered them by
those of the Assembly, they referring the other Thirty Thousand Gilders to the
Judgment of the Assembly. But finally at last were agreed to give to the said
Pergens and Goubart for what pretenses they had, the sum of Eighty Five
thousand Gilders, they giving also good and sufficient Security to in dempnifie
the said Company for the said payment, which being taken into consideration by
the said Pergens and Goubart they were fully satisfied therewith without any
dissimulation, whereupon two acts were made of this agreement and exchanged to
each other party and signed in Middleburgh the 18 of September 1649. Subscribed
by several persons.

James Pergens David Goubart J. C. Hayman Jacob Rogh P. Boudan Courten P. D.
Carpentier Pieter van Santen Adriaen Besemer Jan Vrericks Abbekerck Herke Jansz
Noortlandt.


The Copy of the Security.
I underwritten do put my my self as Security in full manner and form for the
said Eighty five thousand Gilders, the 20 of September 1649.

Signed Peter Boudan Courten.

The Copy of the Ordinance.
The Treasurers please to pay to Jacob Pergens Fourteen thousand one hundred
sixty six pounds thirteen shillings four pence Flemmish, according to the
Contract thereof made of the 17 in Middleborough the 20 of September 1649.

Jacob C. Hayman. and Nicholas Vander Merckt.
Sum is -- 141661 l. -- 13 s. -- 4. d.

Under is written,

I underwritten do acknowledge to have Received the contents hereof in
Middleborough the 20 of September 1649.

Signed Jacob Pergens.


After Examination with the Originals. I Notary do find the same to agree in
Middleborough, the 28 of July Anno 1654. Under is written, in Testimony of me,

Signed Daniel van Humen Notary Public.





Mr. Jonas Abeels being informed that an Agreement was made at Middleburgh,
renewed his former Insinuation and Arrest for further Damages, and petitioned
the East-India-Company for a Copy of it, which after many requests and
solicitations was granted, who was advised by his advocates (as to Sir Paul
Pindar 's Interest and demand) to sue the Company, who made this conclusion in
Court against the said Company as follows, viz. The Declaration or Resolution
of Jonas Abeels in the Court of Amsterdam.
Jonas Abeels als Gemachtigde van Sir Paul Pindar Ridder tot Londen, als
d'Accie end Transport hebbende van Willem Courten end Eduart Littleton heeft
ter Uierschare done dachvaerden de Bewinthebberen vande Oost-Indische Compagnye
ter Camere alhier, end Concludeert by de middelen, in tijden end wijlen, is it
noot, naerder te done deduceren; dat de Heeren Ghedaeghdens gehouden sullen
sijn te kennen often ontkennen, ten minsten ter goeder trouwen, den voorsz
Instrumente van Transporte by den voornoemden Courten, end Littleton ten
behoeve vande voorseyde Here Ridder, gepasseert op den negenthienden Decembris
1642. Engelse stijle, of dat op even uytkomt inden achthienden Iare vande
Regeringe van wijlen Carolus, eerste Coninck van dien Name van Groot Britangien
op den 19. der voorsz Maent, en dienvolgende de Gedaegdens gecondemneert sullen
werden vermogens de vorige gedane insinuatie en arresten, aenden Eysscher inde
voorsz qualiteyt te betalen, end by provisie te namptiseren de sum van Uijf
en tachtich duysent guldens, by de Gedaeghdens geaccordeert, end aengenomen te
betalen, voor de schaede end pretensien by Willem Courten en consoorten
gepretendeert, over het aengehaelde Schip de Bonne Esperance ghenaemt, end de
ingeladen goederen van dien, end het gene by verongelucken van den Schepe
Henry de Bonaventure in handen is vande Ministers vande voorsz Compagnie
ghekomen was, metten Interesse vande voorsz sum van Uijf en tachtigh duysent
guidens, 'tsedert den dach vande Accoorde tot de effectuele genietinge toe, met
de kosten, often anderen, etc.

Schepeenen stellen de saecke in Statu, behoudens Uierschaer Recht. Actum den
17. February 1651. Presentibus,

Dr. Albart Panter, Barnard Schellingar end Dr. Kornelis van Dronckelaer.

The Translation of the Original aforesaid, with the Proceedings.
Jonas Abeels impow'red by Sir Paul Pindar Knight, at London, as having the
action and Assignment of William Courten and Edward Littleton, has in Court
caused to be summoned the Administrators of the East India Company of the
Chamber here, and Complains (by reasons to be further deduced in time and
place, as shall be needful) that the Worshipful Defendants shall be bound to
acknowledge or deny, at least in good faith the said Instrument of Assignment
passed by the before-named Courten and Litlteton to the use of the aforesaid
Knight, on the 19. of December 1642. English style, or (which comes to one) in
the 18 year of the Reign of the Late CHARLES the First, King of that name of
Great Britain, on the 19. day of the aforesaid Month; and in consequents
thereof, the Defendants shall be condemned upon preceding Insinuations and
Arrests done, to pay unto the Plaintiff in the said quality, and by provision
to deposite the sum of Eighty and Five Thousand Gilders, by the Defendants
agreed and undertaken to pay for the Damage and pretense which by William
Courten and Partners is pretended for the seized Ship called the Good Hope and
the Goods therein Laden; and for what is accrued by the Miscarriage of the Ship
the Henry Bonadventure, in the hands of the Ministers of the said Company, with
the Interest of the said sum of 85000 Gilders, from the day of the Agreement
until the effectual enjoyment thereof, with the Costs or otherwise, viz.

The Court of the Last of May 1651.
Jonas Abeels, as impow'red of Sir Paul Pindar Knight, at London, as Till the
next Court.
having the Action and Assignment of William Courten and Edward Littleton, has
in Court caused the East India Company to be summoned as above in all things.

At the Court the 21 June in the year 1651.
Jonas Abeels, as impow'red of Sir Paul Pindar Knight, at London, In statu
saving the right of the Court.
against the East India Company, and further as above in all things.

At the Court of the 13. of September 1651.
Jonas Abeels as Attorney of Sir Paul Pindar Knight, at London, against In
statu.
the East India Company, and further as above in all things.

At the Court of the 8. of November 1651.
Jonas Abeels as Attorney of Sir Paul Pindar Knight, at London, as having In
statu saving the Right of the Court.
the Action and Assignment of William Courten and Edward Littleton against the
East India Company, and further as above in all things.

At the Court of the 14. of February 1652. N. S.
Jonas Abeels as Attorney of Sir Paul Pindar Knight, at London, against As
above in all things.
the East India Company, and further as above in all things.



Then the Company summoned Mr. Pergens and made this Conclusion following
translated from the Original.

THe Directors of the East India Company at the Chamber here Complainants
against Jacob Pergens for himself, and as accepting the Citation for Peter
Boudan Courten dwelling in Zealand, as having put themselves for Security for
all after Claims of moneys received by the said Pergens of the Directors of the
East India Company in Zealand, by virtue of the agreement made with the
East India Company, that he shall be condemned to indempnifie the Plaintiffs,
and to save them Free of Costs and Damages from or of the claim and conclusion
which Jonas Abeeles (who calls himself the impow'red of Sir Paul Pindar, who
says he has Assignment from William Courten and Edward Littleton) is this day
making and taking against them, and without Diminution of the Defendants
defense against the said Abeeles, Qualitate qua, and their right against the
said Boudan Courten, further making demand of Costs, etc.

This present Translation agrees in substance with the Original.

Quod attestor Rogatas and Requisitet.


I. Daniel. N. Publicus.

Mr. Jonas Abeels upon News of Sir Paul Pindar 's Death, proceeded no further,
for want of new procuration; whereupon the said Complaint and Conclusion fell
without any determination, then the Dutch War broke out: Now follows the third
part of the Case.

The Claim of William Tombs Esquire for the Ship the Bona Esperanza, Freight and
Goods, on behalf of himself and others Ieteressed therein.
THe proceeding and Acts made and sped in the said Claim, before the English
and Dutch Commissioners, viz. John Exton, William Turner, Doctors of Laws;
William Thompson, Thomas Kendall, Adrian van Almond, Christian van Rodenburgh,
Lodowick Hours, and Jacob Oysel, by virtue of a Commission bearing date the
25. day of May 1654. are as follows, viz.

Tuesday the 30. day of May 1654.
Which day the foresaid Claims of William Tombs was amongst others on behalf
of the English Nation exhibited, and by the said Commissioners admitted.

Tuesday the 6. day of June 1654.
Whereas the foresaid Commissioners had Ordered and Decreed, that Repertories
should be made and exhibited of all the Claims exhibited on both sides, the
foresaid Claim of William Tombs was accordingly entered in the Repertory of the
English Claims, under the number 15. and in these following words, viz.

No. XV. William Tombs Executor of Sir Paul Pindar, Interessed in the Bona
Esperanza and her Lading, seized in June 1643. in her passage for China by two
Dutch men of War, and on the behalf of the Mariners of the said Ship, demands
for Damages 72564 l. as by his Claim. No. XV. 72564. l. 0. s. 0. d.

Friday 21. July 1654.
Appeared before the said Commissioners, Mr. Kynaston on the behalf of William
Tombs Englishman, and presented certain proofs relating to the fifteenth
complaint of the English, which proofs were written in Nine Skins of Parchment,
under the great Seal of the High Court of the Admiralty, together with the
Translation of Eight Depositions, and two Schedules, contained in the said
Instrument and Translated into Latin. All which the said Commissioners did
admit so far as by Law they are admissible.

Tuesday the 25. day of July 1654.
Which day the said Mr. Kynaston, on behalf of William Tombs aforesaid,
exhibited a certain Indenture contained in two Skins of Parchment, wherein he
alleged that the Interest of Sir Paul Pindar to whom the said Mr. Tombs is
Executor, is set forth, which being admitted, he produced as a Witness upon
the said Indenture Robert Cuffe, who being admitted and Sworn, declared that he
was present at the Signing, Sealing, and Delivery of the said Instrument, as by
his Deposition or Affidavit endorsed on the back thereof more plainly may
appear, whereto he subscribed with his hand, and acknowledged the same being
repeated to contain the truth.

Tuesday the first day of August 1654.
The said Mr. Kynaston appeared and alleged that the Cause on the behalf of
William Tombs touching the Ship Bona Esperanza, was fully instructed and ready
for hearing; at whose Petition the Commissioners Decreed that the said Cause
should be heard on Thursday next in the Afternoon, in case the Claims touching
the Ships, Concord and St. Anthony, which are first to be examined, be fully
discussed by that time.

Thursday the 3. of August 1654.
Which day was wholly spent in the examining the Cause touching the Ship
Concord aforementioned.

Friday the 4. day of August 1654.
Before the said Commissioners, the Deputies for the Dutch East India Company
being present, appeared Mr. Thomas Kynaston and Henry Robinson abovementioned,
at whose Petition the said Commissioners then 'monished the said Dutch Deputies
to prepare themselves if they think fit, to the defense of the several Spoils
whereof the English in their Claims (comprised under the Numbers 8, 9, 11, 15,
20, 24, 32, 33, 34, 40, 41, 46, 47, 50, 51, 52, 53.) have complained against
the said Dutch East India Company, which they intended to hear upon their first
opportunity.

Extractum hoc concordat substantialiter cum Originali

Quod attestor

Guilh. Chrymes Actuar. Assumptus.


The 13 day of August 1654. personally appeared before me William Chrymes
Notary Public, Mr. Thomas Kynaston, and protested of his diligence in seeking
and endeavoring after the obtaining a certain cause by him solicited on the
behalf of Mr. Will. Tombs and others the Interessed, in the presence of

Ex. Tho. Bedford.
Ex. Edm. Arnold Not. Public.


William Tombs finding that the Dutch Commissioners would not do him justice
in England, was unwilling to follow them to Amsterdam as they desired, to
proceed against the Company, where Jonas Abeels had done for Sir Paul Pindar
before; and being very sensible how tedious, vexatious, and expensive the Court
of Holland, the Hogen Rade, and the Revisions, were at the Hague, after the
first Trial was over before their competent Judges (as they call them) in the
Cities; Considering those things, and being afflicted with some other troubles,
he was not able to contain himself with patience, but chose rather a quick
dispatch and hanged himself in the year following: Whereupon Letters of
Administration de bonis non cum testamento annexo of Sir Paul Pindar were
granted to Sir William Powell alias Hinson, who claims the part and proportion
due to Sir Paul Piudar; and Sir Edward Littleton did by his Deed of Assignment
dated the 23 of August 1656. grant and assign all his right, property and
Interest of, in, and unto the said Ships, Goods, and Effects whatsoever, unto
John Ayton, George Carew, and their Assigns for ever. And although they could
not appeal for justice to the Parliament before Cromwell 's Usurpation, being
Delinquents, and in Cromwell 's time could not prosecute their pretenses in
Holland being his declared Enemies; yet now our Good Hope is, that we shall
receive our good Adventure with reparation and damages, since the King of
Great Britain is restored: Therefore I shall now go forwards, and prosecute the
Suit begun at the Hague.

G.C.



To the Right Honorable Sr George Downing Knight Envoy Extraordinary of His Most
Sacred MAJESTY of Great Britain, etc. To the States General of the UNITED
PROVINCES.
MUCH HONORED SIR,
PAtriots of their Country, Especially such as are found for their Abilities
sit to serve the King in Foreign affairs, have commonly those faculties which
render them most worthy of Honorable Employments, and they which are capable
to deal with the Hollanders are known to be courageous, patient, and faithful.

Your Honor may please to remember when I brought the Kings Letter to the
States General at the Hague in April last, with his Majesty's directions to
your self, strictly commanding you to require speedy satisfaction and
reparation for the loss of the Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventure of
London, two Ships as significant in their names as the Damages grievous in
their nature; I told your Honor there was just grounds of Complaint, which
should be vigorously prosecuted, wherein I have found great experience of your
favor and constancy toward us.

Oratory is fitter for Comedies then Cases, I have therefore in plain terms set
forth the true State of the whole matter, with some observations upon former
proceedings to satisfy all persons concerned, that several actions and
complaints have been brought in this case in the late distempered times some of
them through delay of Justice suffered non-suits, others by denial, and death
of the parties abated, Moritur actio cum persona, and diverse through the defect
of Commissioners appointed to hear them were dismissed without any
determination, But this lis incepta now brought in a Politic way in the Kings
Name, with your assistance, those which are the sufferers poterunt litem
incoeptam prosequi, etc. Sir you have kept up our good adventure and good hope
from sinking, and although their ladings were surprised in the Straights of
Malacca and at Mauritius, if they be not restored by your friendly conferences,
I doubt not but to reprise them in the Downs, or Narrow-Seas, and question not
a full satisfaction as clear as the Sun at Midday without abusing the Kings
goodness, or deserving any punishment for making the world acquainted that
since the East India Company of the Netherlands will not acknowledge our right,
its easily granted they must pay for doing us wrong: Honored Sir, you have to
do with a Crooked Generation of men, and Nunquam efficies ut recte
ingrediantur Cancri. I shall not trouble your Honor any further at present,
but to give you the most hearty thanks and prayers of all the interessed, and
acknowledge my self

Gray's Inn Novem. 5. 1662. Ever Honored Sir, Your most Obliged Servant GEO.
CAREVV.

To the Kings Most Excellent MAJESTY
The Humble Petition of Sir John Ayton Knight, George Carew and Charles
Whitaker Esquires, on the behalf of themselves and the rest of the Creditors of
Will. Courten, Sir Edward Littleton and Sir Paul Pindar, deceased, and of
others Interessed in the Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventure of
LONDON.
SHOWS,

THat William Courten Esquire, and other Merchants in Company with him, were
Authorized by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, quod Trade unto
the East Indies, China, and Parts adjacent; and in persuance thereof, settled
several Factories and Plantations near the Sea Coasts, convenient for Trade,
and (amongst other Ships) set forth in the Year 1641. the Bona Esperanza, and
Henry Bona Adventure of London.

That to carry on the said Enterprise, they became Indebted to Your Petitioners
and others in many great Sums of Money.

That the East India Company of the Neatherlands, out of a design to destroy
Mr. Courten and others in their Shipping and Trade, violently Seized and
Confiscated the Bona Esperanza in the Year 1643. and the Goods and
Ships-provisions of the Henry Bona Adventure, to the Damage of the Petitioners
and the Interessed 160000 l. and upwards, as by the Case annexed with the
Account and Proofs taken in Your Majesty's high Court of Admiralty, may appear.

That your Petitioners and others Interessed, in regard of their Allegiance and
Fidelity to Your Majesty's most rightful Cause, were both hindered and denied
Justice against the East India Company of the Neatherlands, at home and abroad,
although they often required the same.

Your Petitioners do therefore most humbly pray, That Your Majesty would be
graciously pleased to interpose with the States General, and grant Your
Petitioners Your Majesty's Letter of Recommendation, requiring speedy
Reparation for the Damages aforesaid, according to the Rules of Justice, and
the Proofs taken in Your Majesty's Court of Admiralty; or otherwise to grant
Your Petitioners Letters of Reprisal against the people of the Low Countries
for satisfaction of the said Damages. And Your Petitioners shall pray. John
Ayton George Carew Charles Whitaker.
Presented to His Majesty Feb. 27. 1662^. Account of the Loss and Damages
annexed to the Petition of Sir J. Ayton, etc.
For 327 Bahar and 132 Catti of Pepper, containing 125895 l. taken out of the
Henry Bona Adventure, and unjustly detained by the Governor of the Island
Mauritius, and converted to the use of the East India Company of the
Neatherlands, to the value of -- I. S. D. 7343 -- 17 -- 0 For 30000 l. weight
of Spanish Iron at 18 s. per Hundred, as it cost in London -- 0270 -- 00 -- 0
For the Ammunition, Sails, Cables, Anchors, Victuals, Wine, Rice, with other
Provisions and Necessaries of the Ship -- 1000 -- 00 -- 0 8613 -- 17 -- 0
Besides, for Demurrage of two Ships that were sent purposely to take in the
said Pepper, Iron, and other provisions saved out of the Henry Bona Adventure
-- FOr 10 Packs of Bays, Amber, Cloth and other things carried from England in
the Bona Esperance, to the value of -- 1100 -- 00 -- 0 Amber and several Indian
Wares taken in Acheen, to the value of -- 1200 -- 00 -- 0 For 40 Bags of
Pepper, 16 Cases of Cinnamon, choice polished Amber and other Merchandises taken
in at Carwarr and Goa, valued -- 2700 -- 00 -- 0 [All which are particularly
mentioned in the depositions of the Admiralty.] -5000 -- 00 -- 0 FOr 180 Tons
of the Bona Esperanza let to Fraught to the Portugals from Goa to Maccao at
8000 Rials, to be paid there in Goods or Money, and every Rial of eight being
then worth 5 s. sterling, would have yielded two for one invested in
Merchandise from thence to India -- 4000 -- 00 -- 0 For 32000 Rials of eight
for the Fraught back from Maccao to Goa, which yielded usually two for one in
the Trade for those Parts. 8000 -- 00 -- 0 2750 l. Sterling left at Canton in
ready money in a former Voyage to be laid out in China Wares, and lost by
disappointment of the Ship, and the Papers that were taken away from the
Factors and Mariners -- 2750 -- 00 -- 0 19750 -- 00 -- 0 That 19750 l. invested
in India Commodities, would have yielded in England upon Returns from thence
three for one, which in -- 59250 -- 00 -- 0 The Ship Bona Esperanza with
Ammunition, Tackle and Apparel, worth then to be sold -- 4000 -- 00 -- 0 For
the Fraught of the whole Burden -- 10000 -- 00 -- 0 The Mariners particular
Losses -- 2554 -- 14 -- 0 By the Bona Esperanza -- 75804 -- 14 -- 0 By the
Henry Bona Adventure -- 08613 -- 17 -- 0 84416 -- 11 -- 0 The principal Damage
that Voyage -- 84416 -- 11 -- 0 Interest for Eighteen years at 5 l. per Cent.
-- 75800 -- 00 -- 0 160216 -- 11 -- 0

Besides the inestimable loss of Trade, the Murder of the Master and four of
the Mariners, the rest imprisoned and kept in Irons a long time after, to the
ruin of their wives and children, all to be accounted and compensated
accordingly.



LETTRE Aux Hauts and Puissans SEIGNEURS LES ESTATS GENERAUX Des PROVINCES
UNIES.
HAuts and puissants Seigneurs nos bons amys alliez and Confede ez, sur les
plaintes reiterees que nopu viennent de fair, plusieurs de nos bons subjects
les interessez aux navires le Bona Esperance and le Henry Bon Adventure de
Londres, nous ne leur avons seen refuser les fruicts effectifs de ceste
protection que nous devons a touts noz suiets, veu particulierement, que c'en
sont de ceux qui ont fort merit de nous par un attachement fidelle a nos
interests ce qui a mesme differe durant les derniers disordres arrivez en nos
Royaumes la satisfaction qu'ils auroyent peuse promettre dan un cause si just,
nous avons done order au Chevalier Downing nostre Envoye Extraordinaire de
vous fair scavoir l'affaire au long avec les preuves evidentes qui en out este
faites dans Nostre Cour d'Admiraute, and ce qui c'est pass en suitte de dela,
par ou l'on pent juger de la justice de la cause, qui a este recogniie mesme
des parties adverses and quelque satisfaction en ayant este desia donnee quoy
que de sous une fraud tres grossiere, mais qui ne doit unllement prejudicier
aux persons qui y ont le vray interest; l'affaire estant d'une valeur tres
considerable and qui faict seule les fortunes de tant de nos bons suiects, Nom
nous trouvons obligez de vous la recommander avec d'autant plus d'empressement,
and d'en demander tres instamment satisfaction selon les preuves qui en ont
este faictes and suivant les reigles de la justice and de ceste Amity and
bonne correspondence que nous souhaittons conserver tousiours ferme and
inviolable avec vous, ce n'est pas en effect sans regret que nous sommes
contrains par les justes plaintes que nous font de jour enjour nos suiects de
vous donner des importunitez de cette nature; Mais les soins and veilles
perpetuelles que nous faisons pour leur bonheur Nous doivent particulierement
interesser a tout ce qui leur arrive, and l'on se doit bien assurer qu'on ne
pourra les molester aux moindres circumstances de leur commercesans nous
chocquer and nous engager en mesme temps aux effects d'un just ressentiment.
Au rest nous nous remettons aux loix de nostre amity commune pour une prompte
satisfaction dans cette affair priant le Seigneur de voue avoir hauts and
puissans Seigneurs, nos bons amys alliez and confederez, en sa saint Guarde.
Escrit a nostre cour a Westminster ce 21. Mars l'an 1661/2 and de nostre reign
le quatorze.

Vostre bon amy CHARLES R.
Concordat cum Originali.

Edw. Nicholas.



To Sir George Downing, about the Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventure.
CHARLES R.

TRusty and Wellbeloved, We greet you well; You will herewith receive Our
Letters to the States General, in favor of several of Our good Subjects
interessed in the good Ships the Bona Esperanza, and the Henry Bona Adventure
of London; wherein We thought good at the humble Suit of Our said Subjects, and
out of the gracious sense We have of their unjust sufferings in that business,
particularly to recommend it to the said States General, that a full and speedy
satisfaction be made to Our said injured Subjects; which We will that upon the
Delivery of Our said Letters, you fully represent in Our Name to the said
States, together with the sense We more especially have of the evident
Oppression and Violence so many of Our good Subjects have so long lain under:
And further that you solicit by all good means a speedy issue and account of
this Business, which We will that you thereupon return unto Us, wherein We
expect your best care and diligence. And so We bid you heartily farewell. Given
at Our Court at Whitehall the 21 of March 1662.

By His Majesty's Command. Edward Nicholas.

A True Translation of the Kings Letter from the French Original to the Lords
States General.
MOst High and Mighty Lords, Our good Friends, Allies, and Confederates; Upon
the reiterated Complaints of many of Our Loving Subjects, the Interessed in the
Ships the Bona Esperanza, and the Henry Bona Adventure of London, We could not
refuse the effects of that protection which We owe to all Our Suubjects,
Considering more especially that they are such as have very much merited by a
faithful adhering to Our interests, which during the late disorders in Our
Kingdoms, hindered them to crave that satisfaction which they might have
assured themselves of from Us, in so just a Cause; We have therefore given
Order unto Sir George Downing Our Envoy Extraordinary, to make known unto you
the business at large, with the clear and evident proofs which have been made
in Our Court of Admiralty, and that which has intervened since concerning the
same, whereby the justice of the Cause may be known, which by the Adversaries
themselves have been acknowledged, and some Satisfaction already given,
although most grossly fraudulent, which ought not any way to prejudice the
persons who have the true interest: The Business being of a very considerable
value, and wherein the fortunes of so many of Our Subjects are concerned, We
hold our selves obliged to recommend the same unto you with much importunity,
and do earnestly require present Satisfaction answerable to the proofs which
have been made according to the Rules of Justice, and the Amity and good
Correspondence which We desire with you ever to conserve firm and inviolable.
It is not in effect without regret, that we are constrained by the just
Complaints unto Us daily made of Our Subjects to importune you in this nature,
but the Care and perpetual Desires which We have for their welfare obliges Us
particularly to be interessed in all that which occurs unto them; and every one
ought well to assure themselves, that none can in the least circumstance molest
them in their Commerce without assailing and thereby engaging Us at the same
time to a just resentment thereof. We refer Our Self unto the Laws of Our
Common Amity for a speedy Satisfaction in this business, desiring God to take
Your High and Mighty Lordships, Our good Allies and Confederates, under his
Holy Protection. Writ from Our Court at Westminster the 21 of March 1661/2. and
of Our Reign the Fourteenth.

Your good Friend
Concordat cum Original.

Edw. Nicholas.



A MEMORIAL Delivered unto The States-Generall: Concerning the Ships, Bona
Esperanza, and Henry Bona Adventure of LONDON.
THe underwritten Envoy Extraordinary of His most Sacred Majesty of GREAT
BRITAIN, etc. Does herewith tender to their Lordships a Letter from the King
his Master, concerning two English Ships belonging to London, the one called
the Bona Esperanza, and the other the Henry Bona Adventure; the former hereof,
was in the Year 1643. violently set upon in the East India, between Goa and
Maccao in a hostile manner in the Streights of Malacca, by two Ships belonging
to the East-Indie Company of this Country, the one called the Vendillo, and
the other the Portogallo, whereof one Geland was Commander in chief, and
carried to Batavia, and there both Ship, Goods and Tackle all confiscated: And
the other having in the Year 1642. come on ground on the Island Mauritins, was
there both Ship, Goods and Tackle seized upon by some of the said Company.

The said Envoy Extraordinary does in the Name, and in persuance of most
precise Orders which he has received from the King his Master, demand that
Satisfaction and Reparation be forthwith made to the Persons interessed and
injured.

And whereas it may seem strange that this matter should be set on foot at this
time, when as in the Year 1654. Commissioners were sent to England, who did end
several matters relating to the East Indies; and whereas in the Year 1659.
several matters of a fresher date were also ended, and thereby a period put to
all other matters of Difference which had happened about the same time, and
were known in Europe before the 20. of January in the said Year, it is to be
considered that the Persons Interessed in these Ships, were such as for their
singular and extraordinary activity to His Majesty of blessed memory, Father to
the King his Master, were tendered incapable of persuing or obtaining their just
right at home or abroad; and upon that account it is that the business of
these two Ships remains yet in dispute, though several matters of a much
fresher date have been ended, and satisfaction given: And seeing this has been
the real occasion of this delay, the King his Master does no ways doubt but
that their Lordships will in so much a more eminent manner put forth and show
their Justice for their relief.

Given at the Hague this 19. April 1662. New style. GEORGE DOVVNING.

The Second MEMORIAL.
THe underwritten Envoy Extraordinary of His most Sacred Majesty of GREAT
BRITAIN, etc. having yesterday again received most strict Commands by the hands
of one of the principal Secretaries of State, from the King his Master, sitting
in full Council, earnestly to press their Lordships the States General, that
Satisfaction and Reparation be forthwith made to the Persons whose Cases are
set down in his last Memorial; Does (as in Duty bound) hereby make known the
same to them, and desires that it will please their Lordships to take such
Resolutions thereupon as the Justice of the said matters do require, and as may
give contentment and satisfaction to His Majesty, whom the said Envoy
Extraordinary does find to concern himself very much, and to be determinately
resolved to have Right done to His Subjects therein one way or another.

Given at the Hague this 11. May 1662. New style. GEORGE DOVVNING.

Mr. Carew 's Insinuation to the East India Company of the Netherlands.
ICk George Carew Schilt-knaep, als by den prerogative Hove van Enghelant,
ghestelt zijnde tot Administrateur van all de naergelatene goederen van wijlen
de Here Willem Courten, Ridder, in zijn leven woonachtigh tot Londen in
Engelandt, als mede gemachtight by procuratien van de Here Willem Powel Ridder,
Administrateur van all de goederen, naer-ghelaten by wijlen de Here Paul
Pinder Ridder, oock voor sijn selven, end de Here John Ayton Ridder,
geassigneerde van de Here Edward Littleton Ridder, end als procuratie hebbende
van de Curateurs, ghestelt over den Boedel van Willem Courten zalr. end andere
geinteresseerde, in de Negotie op Oost-Indien, volgens Octroy van sijne
Majesteyt Carel d' Eerste hooghloffelijcker memory verleent, in den Jaer 1635.
in dier qualiteyt versoeckende, alsoo gemelten Willem Courten zalr. by de
Ministers van d' Oost-Indische Compagnie beschadight is geweest, in den Jaer
1642. door het onthouden der geberghde goederen, Ammunitie end
Scheeps-gereetschappen, uyt het Schip genaemt de Henry Bonaventure op 't
Eylandt van Mauritius aen Landt, end in possessie van Adrian vander Stelt
gebracht, als oock door 't vyantlijck aentasten en veroveren van't Schip
genaemt Bona Esperance, in den Jaer 1643. in de Straet van Malacca, door twee
Schepen van Oorloge, genaemt de Vendelo, end Portugallo, d'Oost-Indische
Compagnie toebehoorende, tot Batavia opgebracht end aldaer geconfisqueert,
end alsoo sijne Majesteyt van Engelant Karel de Tweede, by sijne Missive aen
haer Ho: Mo: de Heeren Staten Generael, in date den 21. Martij laestleden,
versocht heeft dat den gemelten George Carew in sijne qualite voorsz. mocht
hebben vergoedinge over de schade aen meer-gemelte Willem Courten zalr. end
sijne mede-geinteresseerde aenghedaen als voorschreven is, dat ghy Notaris
onder genoemt u soude willen transporteren ter camere van d'Oost-Indische
Compagnie alhier, end van de Heeren Bewint-hebbers versoecken dat sy souden
gelieven hare Ho: Mo: de Heeren Staten Generael te dienen van bericht, om alsoo
voort te procederen tot vereffeninge end vergoedinge van de voorschreve
geledene schaden.

HEden den achtsten May anno 1662. hebb' ick Henrick Venkel, by den Hovevan
Hollandt Geadmitteerden Openbaer Notaris to Amsterdam resideerende, ten
versoecke van den Here George Carew Schilt-knaep, my getransporteert end
vervoeght in 't Collegie van de Heeren Bewinthenbberen der Geoctroyeerde
Oost-Indische Compagnie Camere deser Stad, end aldaer ter vergaderinge van de
gemelte Heeren, 't boven-staende versoeck voor-gelesen end bekent gemaeckt.
Waer op 't gemelte Ed: Collegie schriftelijck ter antwoorde gaf, dat sy bereydt
sijn, 't bericht dien aengaande aen hare Ho: Mo: te geven, so haest end als
wanneer haer Ho: Mo: sulcx van de gemelte compagnie sullen komen te
vereysschen. Aldus gedaen binnen Amsterdam: present Abraham Kock end Theodorus
Crous als Getuygen.

Quod Attestor

To the Worshipful Mr. Vandam Advocate to the East India Company of the
Netherlands, and the rest of the Commissionated Bewinthebbers resident at the
HAGUE.
SIRS,
I Thought it convenient before I return for England, to use all ways and means
for an accommodation, that the East India Company of the Netherlands may be left
without excuse, as also the States General, if any thing happens to the
prejudice of the Public for a private Difference, which might be composed
upon reasonable and honorable Conditions. And lest you should suffer by any
mistake, I have given order to this Gentleman (the Bearer hereof) to show you
my Answer by way of Reply to your Objections, concerning the Treaties of 1654
and 1659. made with the two late Usurpers Oliver and Richard. I told you in my
last, that an Amicable conclusion would conduce more to your advantage than a
Public dispute: It Is possible you may think to evade our Pretenses by
Practice or Pleading, and forget what you have gotten by destroying that
foundation which Sir W. Courten laid in his Trading voyages to China and Japan.
Please to be as ingenious in your speedy Answer, that it may not be
impertinent, as I am to you in what I intend for Replication. I hope you will
deal justly, and restore what you have violently taken from us; otherwise you
may be well assured the Interessed will expose the rest of their fortunes and
endeavors to acquire a due Satisfaction, and no ways despair in so just a Cause
of the assistance and protection of him that is able to revenge injuries and
oppressions. I only wait for an Answer to several Memorials, etc. given in to
the States General on our behalf, that the King may understand your meaning,
whether you desire a fair correspondency with the Crown of England, or not. I
have no more to say within my Commission, but to let you know that I am and
desire to be

Your assured Friend and Servant George Carew.
Hague June 7/17 1662.
At the Court at Whitehall the 6 th. of June 1662.
Present Lord Chancellor Lord Treasurer Lord Privy Seal Duke of Albemarle
Marquess of Dorchester Lord Great Chamberlain Earl of Portland Earl of Anglesey
Earl of Carlisle Earl of Carbery Lord Seymour Lord Hatton Sir William Compton
Mr. Treasurer Mr. Vice-Chamberlain Mr. Secretary Nicholas Mr. Secretary Morice.


Upon the Petition of Sir John Ayton Knight, George Carew and Charles Whitaker
Esquires, on behalf of themselves and the rest of the Creditors of William
Courten, Sir Edward Littleton and Sir Paul Pindar (this day read at the Board)
Showing that the Petitioners in persuance of His Majesty's Letters of the 21 of
March last, to the States General at the Hague, requiring Satisfaction and
Reparation for the two Ships, the Henry Bona Adventure and Bona Esperanza,
belonging to Mr. Courten, which were violently taken and confiscated by the
East India Company of Holland, contrary to the Laws of Nations, and common
Right; And that His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary with the States being fully
instructed, had fairly proceeded therein, in order to the Ascertaining of their
Damages sustained thereby: And that notwithstanding the Commissioners of the
East India Company of Holland have acknowledged the Fact, and are by Advocates,
on both sides, sufficiently convinced, that they ought to give Satisfaction
accordingly; Yet the States General do hitherto delay to give Answer to the
several Memorials delivered in reference to His Majesty's Letters, albeit they
have been pressed by daily solicitations; out of design (as is conceived) of
having the Treaty perfected with an utter exclusion of the Petitioners; which
would tend to their unsupportable loss, the ruin of many hundreds of poor
persons, the unconscionable advantage of their Adversaries (the Dutch) and
discouragement of all English Merchants from Trade. Upon consideration whereof,
It was Ordered that Sir George Downing Knight, His Majesty's Envoy
Extraordinary with the States General of the United Provinces of the
Netherlands at the Hague, do further and effectually proceed with the said
States according to His Majesty's Letters aforesaid, in requiring due
Satisfaction to be made for the Damages sustained by His Majesty's said
Subjects, and procure their speedy Answer to such their just Demands; And
thereupon to Report the same to this Board with all convenient speed.

EDW. WALKER.

Au ROY de la GRAND BRETAGNE.
SIRE,
NOus escrivismes a Vostre Majesty il y a aujourd' huy huitjours, au suiet
d'une affair, sur laquelle nous attendons une response d'autant plus
favorable, que le proceed de l'Admiraute de Londres, don't nous nous plaignons
en nostre lettre, choque egallement et le droit des gens et la Souverainete de
Vostre Couronne. Presentement nous nous trouvons obliges de vous entretenir
d'une affair moins importante en effect, mais don't les suittes pourroient este
assez fascheuses, pour nous convier a les prevenir par des esclaircissements
necessaries pour la conservation de la bonne Intelligence enter Vos Royaumes et
ces Provinces. Il a plu a Vostre Majesty par sa lettre du 21. Mars dernier,
que nous avons receue le 20. Avril en suivant, nous presser de fair donner
satisfaction aux interesses des deux Vaisseaux, nommes la Bonne Esperance et
Henry Bonaventure, don't l'un fut pris en l' An. 1643. par deux Vaisseaux de la
Compagnie des Indes Orientales de ce Pais, dans le destroict de Malacca; et
l'autre eschoua presque en mesme temps sur les costs de l'Isle de Mauritius,
ou les gens de la mesme Compagnie profiterent des Marchandises, qui en furent
sauvees. Cen'est pas a nous a justifier le proceed de la Compagnie des Indes en
cette rencontre, mais nous ne pouvons pas nous plaindre point de l'andace de
ceux, qui ont le front d' Importuner Vostre Majeste, et de mandier son
intercession pour des affairs, non seulement Vieilles et surannees, mais aussi
tells que nous ne les pouvons accorder avec honneur, ny eux les demander en
conscience. Ce qui s'est pass en l'An. 1654, et le traitte fait l' An. 1659.
ont esteint et mortify les pretensions de cette nature, de sort que nous nous
en pourrions servir comme d' une raison generale contre toutes les demandes de
cette nature, et nous dispencer d' une explication plus particuliere sur celles
qui font parler presentement Vostre Majesty. Et neantmoins nous voulons bien
l' Informer tres particulierement de l' Estat de cett' affair, pourveu qu'elle
'nous permette de protester icy, que nous ne pouvons pas nous engager a une
nouvelle recherche des chooses reglees par des traittes precedents, et que ce
n'est que pour cette seulefois, et pour demander justice de ceux, qui abusent
de la bonte de Vostre Majesty, et de nostre patience, que nous desterrons par
maniere de dire, une affair, don't la memoire deuroit estre abolie il a long
temps; Nous ne nous estenderons point sur les raisons, que la Compagnie peut
avoir eues, pour prendre le Vaisseaux la Bonne Esperance, et pour se prevaloir
des debris de celuy de Henry Bonaventure abandonne par le patron et par les
Matelots Anglois; Mais nous nous contenterons de respondre a celles, don't on
s'est servy pour surprendre la religion de Vostre Majesty, et pour l'obliger a
recommander leurs interests mal-fondes. Nous vonlons bien croire, que les
interesses en ces deux Navires ont rendu de signales services au Feu Roy de la
Grand Bretagne, de tres glorieuse Memoire, mais ils ont fait violence a la
verite quand ils ont voulu fair acroire, que ces services les ont empesches de
parler pour leurs interests sous les Usurpateurs. Nous pouvons fair voire, et
en avons mis les preuves convaincantes enter les mains de Vostre Envoye
extraordinaire que ces interesses bien loin de n'ofer reclamer leur bien
pendant les troubles, ont bien expressement form leur demand par escrit par
devant les Commissaires establis en l' An 1654. sous le nom de William Toombs,
en qualite d'Executeur du Testament de Paul Pindar, qui est celuy de la part
duquel on renouvelle anjourdhuy la mesme demand, laquelle ils estendirent des
lors jusque a la sum de de soixante douze mill, cinq cens, quarante Six
livres Sterlins. Il nestoit point du tout necessaire neantmoins que les dits
Commissaires decidassent ce different, Veu qu'il avoit desia este vuide par une
transaction enter les parties a l' Amiable, moyennant la sum de quatrevingts
cinq mill livres tournois, que la Compagnie des Indes de ce Pais a
effectivement payee. Les interesses semblent presupposer, que Jacob Pergens et
David Coubart, qui ont fait cette transaction n'estoyent point qualifies pour
cela: mais nous avons en main, et avons communique a Vostre Envoye
Extraordinaire, des preuves au contraire si evidentes, que le Soleil ne l' est
pas plus en plein midy. Coubart estoit proprietaire en party du Navire la
bonne Esperance, et en avoit toute la direction de la part de tous les autres
interesses, et en cette qualite Il l'avoit love a William Courten qui l'avoit
frette, et qui a pass procuration en bonne form pour ses interests a Jacob
Pergens. Ceux qui renouvellent aujourd huy ces poursuittes mal fondees ne le
peuvent pas nier, ny contester les acts authentiques, comme la procuration, la
transaction, le cautionnement, l'ordonnance et la quitance, que l'on produit
pour cet effect; Cest pourquoy ils se sont advises de dire, que William Coutten
n'a pu passer procuration, au prejudice du transport qu'il auroit fait de son
droit a Paul Pindar des le mois de Decembre 1642. Mais nous opposons a cette
raison controuvee les lettres et les declarations expresses du Feu Roy Vostre
Pere, d'immortelle memoire, qui en nous escrivant du 9. Octobre 1647. c'est a
dire cinq Ans apres ce pretendu transport, dit bien precisement, que ces deux
Vaisseaux don't il est question, appartiennent a William Courten, et non a Paul
Pindar. Il confirm cette verite dans une autre lettre, que sa Majestic escrit
du mesme jour au Sr Boswel, alors son Resident aupres de nous, on il luy
recommande bien expressement les Interests dudit Courten, et luy ordonne
d'assister de son Conseil et de ses Solicitations ledit Jacob Pergens, qui
faisoit les affairs de William Courten en ce Pais. Nous ne pouvons sans fair
tort a la Memoire du feu Roy, alleguer les lettres de la Maison des Seigneurs
d' Angleterre, qui confirment ce que nous Venous de dire: mais nous croyons y
devoir adjouster, que ledit Paul Pindar, ayant pu^ se refoudre en l'an 1651.
afaire adjourner par devant les Eschevins de la Ville d' Amsterdam les
Directeurs de la Compagnie des Indes Crientales en la Chamber de la mesme
Ville, et a conclurre a ce qu'ils fussent condamnes a luy payer la susdite
sum quatrevingt cincq mill livres tournois, Il n'a pas continue ces
procedures quand il a este inform de chooses cy dessus mentionnees, et il ne se
trouvera point, que depuis ce temps la il ait fait aucunes poursuites en ce
Pais. Ce qui est une preuve invincible de l'Injustice de ses pretensions, et
nous fait esperer que Vostre Majesty ne laissera pas impunie l'audace de ceux,
qui par des plaintes injuri euses et mal fondees pourroyent troubler la bonne
correspondence, que nous pretendous cultiver tousjours de nostre cost enter
Vos suiets et les nostres. Nous esperons aussii que Vostre Majesty connoistra
en ce que nous venons de dire, l'equite de nostre proceed, et lasincerite de
nos intentions, a entretenir religieusement l'amitie qui jusques icy a este si
utile al'un et a l'autre Estat, et a meriter l'affection, qu'il a plu a Vostre
Majesty nous tesmoigner. Nous nous en promettons les effects, et cependant
nous prions Dieu.

SIRE De combler le Regue de Vostre Majeste de felicite et benir Vostre
Person Royale de sante et de tres longue Vie. A la Hay le 22. Juin 1662. De
Vostre Majesty Bien humbles Serviteurs Les Estats Generaux des Provinces Unies
des Pais Bas. Josan van Schriecket.
Par ordonnance d'iceux

J. SPRONSSEN.



The Translation of the States Letter to the King, June 22. 1662.
WE did write to your Majesty some eight days ago in relation to a business
whereto we Exspect your answer, so much the more favorable, as the proceedings
of the Admiral Court at London (of which we complained) entrencheth equally
upon the law of Nations and the Sovereignty of your Crown; now we find our
selves obliged to write to you of a business of less importance in effect, but
whereof the consequences may prove so troublesome, that they Invite us to
prevent them by a necessary clearing thereof, for the preserving of a good
Intelligence betwixt your Kingdoms and our Provinces. It pleased your Majesty
by your letter of the 21. of March last (which we received the 20. of April
after) to press us to give satisfaction to the Interessed persons in the Two
Ships called La Bonne Esperance and Henry Bonaventure, whereof the one was
taken Anno 1643. by two Ships of the East India Company of this Country in the
Straits of Mallacca; and the other about the same time, struck upon the Coast
of the Isle Mauritius, where the people of that same India Company, made their
benefit of the goods that were saved. We are not to justify the proceedings of
that Company in that Encounter, but we cannot but complain of the boldness of
those who are so impudent as to importune your Majesty, and to crave your
Intercession in a business that is not only so inveterated and overgrown with
years, but also such as we cannot with honor condescend to, nor they with a
good conscience demand; That which past in the Treaties of Anno 1654. and 1659.
having Extinguished and mortified all pretensions of that nature, so that we
might serve our selves therewith, as with a General reason against all such
demands, and justly be dispensed with from giving any more particular account
of that your Majesty recommends to Us, yet we will inform your Majesty most
particularly of the true state of that business; Provided that your Majesty
permit us to Protest, that we cannot engage our selves to make a new research
of things concluded by former Treaties, and that shall only be for this one
time, and to crave justice to be done upon those that have abused both your
Majesty's goodness and our patience, in ripping out of the grave (as we may
say) a business, the Memory whereof ought long ago to have been abolished: we
shall not enlarge our selves upon the reasons, which that Company might have
had to take the Ship La Bonne Esperanza, and to make their benefit of the
Shipwreck of the Henry Bonadventure, being abandoned by the English Master and
Mariners; we shall content our selves to answer to those Allegations which the
pretended Interessed have used to surprise your Majesty's goodness, to move
you to recommend to us their so ill-grounded interests: we will believe that
the Interessed in these two Ships, did very great service to the late King of
glorious memory, but they say more then truth, when they would make believe,
that these services hindered them to crave reparation in the Usurpers time, for
we can make it appear, and have sent the convincing Proofs to your
extraordinary envoy, that they were so far from daring to do it, that they gave
in their demands in Writing to the Commissioners established Anno 1654. under
the name of William Toombes, as executor of the Testament of Paul Pyndar in
whose behalf the suit is now renewed, which was extended then to the sum of
72546. sterling. It was not necessary that the said Commissioners should have then
decided that difference because it was already decded by an amicable
Transaction betwixt the parties for the sum of 85000. Livers Turnois, which the
said Company really paid, though the Interessed seem to presuppose that Jacob
Pergens and David Goubart (who made this Transaction) were not qualified to do
it: but we have by us, and have communicated to your extraordinary Envoy, such
evident Proofs on the contrary, that the Sun is not more Clear at Midday.
Goubart was Owner of a part of the Bonne Esperanze and was empowered by all
others that were Owners thereof, and in this quality William Courten hired her
from him and fraughted her, and made a legal procuration of his Interest to
Jacob Pergens; Those that now renew their ill-grounded suit can not deny it,
nor controlle the Authentic Acts and Deeds past, as the Procuration, the
Transport, the Assurances, the Orders and Discharges which are produced;
Therefore, they have advised to say, that William Courten had not power then to
give a Procuration in prejudice of the Deed of Conveyance, which he made of all
his right in these Ships to Paul Pindar in December 1642: But we oppose this
new forgery by the express Letters and Declarations of the Late King your
Father of Immortal memory, who writing to us the 9 of Oct. 1647. five years
after that pretended Transport, says punctually that these two Ships which are
now in question, appertained to William Courten, and not to Paul Pindar, and
confirmed this truth by another Letter written the same day to Sir William
Boswell his Resident then here. Whereby he recommends expressly the Interest of
the said Courten in the said Ships, and commands him to assist by his Council
and Solicitation the said Jacob Pergens, who prosecuted Courtens business in
this Country, We cannot without wronging the Memory of the late King, allege
the Letters of the House of Peers in Parliament to confirm what is said, but we
conceive our selves bound in duty to add that the said Paul Pindar having had
sufficient time to be resolved, in the year 1651. caused to be summoned the
Directors of the East India Company of Amsterdam, to appear before the
Magistrates in the Stathouse there to hear themselves condemned to pay to him
the foresaid Sum of 85000. Livers Turnois, but he did not prosecute the summons
when he was informed of the particular proceedings beforementioned; and it
will not be found that since that time he made any further suit in this
Country, which is a most Invincible Proof of the Injustnesse of these new
pretensions, and gives us hopes that your Majesty will not suffer unpunished
the boldness of those, who by their injurious ill grounded complaints, would
trouble the good Correspondence, which we daily study to entertain betwixt your
Subjects and ours. We hope also that your Majesty will see clearly by that we
have said the equity of our proceedings, and sincerity of our intentions to
entertain most Religiously the Friendship, which hitherto has been so
profitable to both Nations, and to merit the affection which it has pleased
your Majesty to profess unto us, whereof we promise our selves the effects,
and in the mean time Pray God, etc.

Your Majesty's very Humble Servants the States General of the United Provinces
of the Low Countries.

Antwoort van de Heeren Staten Generael der Vereenighde Nederlantsche
Provincien, op de Memory door den Ridder George Downing extraordinaris Envoye
van syne Majesteyt van Groot-Britannien, etc. aen haer Ho: Mo: overgegeven den
20 April, 1662.
DE Staten Generael der Uereenighde Nedetlanden geexamineert end overwogen
hebbende seecker Memoriael, by den Here Downing, extraordinaris Envoye van den
Koning van Groot Britannien, etc. den 20 April lestle den aen hare Ho: Mo:
gepresenteert, raeckende onder andere seeckere twee Engelsche Schepen, 't eene
genaemt la Bonne Esperance, end 't andere Henry Bonne Aventure, daer van't
eerste in den Iare 1643. soude wesen genomen in de Straet van Malacca door twee
Schepen van de Oost-Indische Compagnie deser Uereenighde Nederlanden, end 't
laetste ontrent de selve tijdt gestrandt wesende aen 't Eylandt genaemt
Mauritius aldaer met sijne Ladinge by die van de selve Compagnie soude zijn
gesaiseert; versoeckende hy Here extraordinaris Envoye voornaemt, dat daer
over prompte satisfactie, end reparatie aen de geinteresseerden, en
mishandelden, gedaen moge worden; met byvoeginge, dat alhoewel het ten eersten
aensien wat vreemt soude konnen schijnen, dat de voorsz. saecke tegenwoordich
op 't Tapijt werdt gebracht, nademael in den Iare 1654. Commissarisen
gonomineert, end naer Engelandt gesonden zijn geweest, om af te done
verscheyde saecken Oost-Indien raeckende, end dat in den Iare 1659. oock waren
getermmeert geworden de saecken van jonger date, dat echter daer en-tegen te
consideren stand, dat de geinteresseerden in de voorsz. Schepen haer soodanich
hebben gesignaleert voor den overleden Koningh Hooghloffelijcker Memory, dat
sy selfs niet derven hebben declameren 't gunt haer toehoorende, end in dier
voegen tot nu toe over 't geene voorsz. is, noch geene reparatie bekomen
hebben, alhoewel veel andere saken naer date van dien voorgevallen, zedert
getermineert, end oock over de selve behoorlijcke reparatie geschiet zijn;
hebben hare Ho: Mo: naer genomen informatie, over 't geene voorsz. is, goet
gevonden den voorsz. extraordinaris Envoye daer op mits desen tot antwoort toe
te voegen, dat hare Ho: Mo: geenstnts souden konnen bewilligen, dat eenige
saecken voor date van den voorsz. Iare 1654. gepasseert end voorgevallen,
contrariede solemnele Tractaten daer over tusschen beyde de Natien gemaeckt,
often oock anderen by het Tractaet van den Iare 1659. gemortificeert, als nu
wederom levendich gemaeckt, end op nieuws in dispute gebracht souden werden,
wat redenen van exceptie daer toe oock souden konnen often mogen werden
voergewent, als houdende sulcks van seer vervaerlijcke consequentie, en de
capabel, om door veele nieu we disputen over well geassopieerde saecken, de
Natien ten weder zijden merckelijcke te ontrusten, end de goede intelligentie
tusschen de selve te verstooren, 't welck alhoewel by sich selven, end alleen
genoech is om daer op de voorsz. oude saecke van de handt te wijsen, gelijch
hare Ho: Mo: oock van nu voortaen niet gemeynt zijn over saecken van
diergelijcke nature sich eenichsints in te laten, often tijdt te spenderen, end
moyete te done, om haer op de eygentlijcken toe-dracht van de selve te laten
informeren) so hebben hare Ho: Mo: echter, om all voldoens will, end ten
overvloet, voor dese reyse alleen, in de voorsz. saecke, doch sonder tot
anderen in consequentie te mogen werden getrocken, hem Here extroordinaris
Envoye well willen aenwijsen, eerstelijck, dat de voorsz. geinteresseerden, seer
abusivelijck, end contrary de waerheyt, haer tegens den voorsz. generalen
Regul trachten te behelpen met de voorsz. hare voorgewende exceptie, van dat sy
luydens als getrouwe Dienaers van den overleden Koningh, onsterffelick
Gedachtenisse selfs hare Actie niet souden hebben derven intenteren, gedeurende
de jonghste disordres in Engelandr voorge vallen.

End ten anderen mede, dat oock buyten de voorsz. Tractaten voor haer uyt
saecke van de voorgeweden pretensie geen recht ter werelt gevoren, often overigh
is.

Wat het eerste belanght, is het so verre van daer, dat de voorsz.
geinteresseerden, gedeurende de voorseyde disordres niet souden hebben derven
reclameren 't gunt haer in desen was competerende, dat ter contrary sy luyden
daer over in den voorsz. Iare 1654. haren eysch well expresselijck voor de
wederzijts geordonneerde Commissarisen ingebracht, end schriftelijck over
gelevert hebben op de naem van Willem Toombs, als Executeur van den Testamente
van den Here Paulus Pindar, uyt wyens hoofede de tegenwoordige pretensie oock
wederom were geresusciteert, hebbende den voorsz. eysch doenmales seer
enormelijck geextendeert tot twee-en-seventich duysent viif hondert
ses-en-veertich ponden Sterlings, gelijck all 't selve naerder kan werden
afgenomen uyt de Copy van den voorsz. eysch hier nevens ge voeght onder Number.
l. waer mede dan oock de voorsz. voorgeweden exceptie, als tegens de notoir
waerheyt voorgestelt, teenemael komt te corrueren.

Wat nu het voorsz. tweede point aengaet, sullen hare Ho: Mo: in desen met
ophalen de redenen waer door de voorsz. Oost-Indische Compagnie deser
Uereenighde Nederlanden in den voorsz. Iare 1643. gesustineert heeft,
gerechticht, end genootsaeckt geweest te zijn, het voorsz. Schip la Bonne
Esperance, ontrent Malacca aen te halen, end te confisqueren; nochte oock in
wat voegen het voorn. Schip de Henry Bonne Aventure, by den Schipper, end het
Engelsche Scheeps-volck 't eenemael was geabandonneert, met schriftelijcke
verklaringe dat sy haer leven niet in pericul wilden stellen om daer van yets
te salueren, end dat sy dienvolgende well mochten lijden, dat het voorsz. volck
van de voorsz. Nederlantsche Oost-Indische Compagnie haer best deden om 't
voorsz. Schip, often d'ingeladen Goederen van dien, so veel doenlijck, te
bergen, maer alleenlijck, dat over 't even end 't ander verscheyde klachten
gevallen zijnde, eyndelijck de voorsz. saecke geheel end al inder minne is
afgehandelt, end daer over getroffen even finael Accoordt tusschen de voorsz.
Oost-Indische Compagnie deser Uereenighde Nederlanden ter eenre, mitsgaders
Jacob Pergens end David Goubart, so voor hem selven, end als procuratie
hebbende van William Courten, end andere geinteresseerden in de voorsz.
differenten ter andere zijde, end dat voor even sum van vijf-en tachtich
duysent Carolus Guldens, daer op oock het reel accomplissement end d'effective
voldoeninge van de zijde van de meergemelte Oost-Indische Compagnie is
gevolght, als hy Here extraordinaris Envoye uyt de Copy van't voorsz.
Accoort, met d' Act van Borchtochie, mitsgaders ordonnantie en quitantie all
onder Number. II. hier by gevoeght, nader sal gelieven at te nemen, zijnde sulcks,
dat de voorsz. David Goubart voor 5/16 is geweest Reeder end Eygenaer van't
voorsz. Schip la Bonne Esperance, end die van tijdt tot tijdt daer over uyt
den hoofde van de gesamentlijcke Reeders het bewint heeft gehadt, gelijck hy
oock in die qualiteyt het selve Schip aen den voorn. William Courten verhuyrt
end dienhalven de certe partije gemaeckt end geteeckent had, behalven dat
noch daer en boven den voorn. Jacob Pergens tot 't geene voorsz. is, van all
de bordere Reeders end Eygenaers was geauthoriseert, by procuratie
substitutiel op hem gepasseert den 12/22 Mey 1648. daer van en den gemelten
Here extraordinaris Envoye, indien hy sulcks soude mogen desidereren, mede
Copte ter handt gestelt sal worden, hebbende vervolgens den voorn. Jacob
Pergens den voorsz. David Goubart, mitsgaders oock all desselfs mede Reeders
uytgekoft, end effectuelijck voldaen, als hem Here extraordinaris Envoye, met
exhibitie van dr contracten end quitantien daer over gemaeckt, end
gepasseert, end noot zijnde, mede gedoceert sal worden.

End ten eynde hem Here extraordinaris Envoye voorn. oock blijcken moge hoe
abusivelijck tegenwoordieh in dispute getrocken were de qualiteyt die den
voorn. Jacob Pergens tot het afmaecken van de voorsz. questie gehadt heeft, so
zijn hier by gevoecht onder Number. III. de procuratie daer toe den 27 October./6
Novem. des Iaers 1645. by den voorn. William Courten op den selven Pergens
gepasseert, mitsgaders twee solemnele transporten van de voorsz. geheele Actie,
't eene van den 10 December, 1647. end 't ander van den 22. Februarij 1648.
daer op gevolcht.

End hoe abusivelick de voorsz. tegen woordige Pretendenten daer tegens hebben
gelieven te poseren, dat de voorn. Paulus Pindar, uyt wiens hoofde sy luyden
zijn agerende, al op den 19 December des Iaers 1642. Stilo Angliae, by
transport van den voorn. William Courten, end Edward Littleton, de
voorgerderde Actie soude bekomen hebben, kan handtastelijck blijcken
eerstelijck uyt de Missive van den overleden Koningh van Groot Britannien
Hooghst: Gedacht: over, 't selve subject aen hare Ho: Mo: geschreven den 9.
October des Iaers 1647. daer by Hoochst-ged: sine Majestyte uytdruckelijck
verklaert, het recht over de voorsz. twee Schepen hier boven breeder geroert
den voorn. William Courten, end sulcks niet den gemelten Paulus Pindar te
competeren, recommanderende dienvolgende, dat daer over aen den selven Courten
satisfactie moge gedaen werden, end noch naerder uyt de Missive by mere
Hoochstged: sijne Majesteyt ten selven dage eschreven aen den Here Boswel,
doenmaels van sijent wegen alhier geresideert hevvende, waer inn naer eene
gelijcke verklaringe, den gemelten Here Resident Boswel, by sijne Majesteyt
expresselijck gelast were, sich over 't voorsz. subject ten vollen te laten
informeren van den voorn. Jacob Pergens, als hebbende het maniement van Mr.
Courten's affairen n i Hollandt, ock hem Jacob Pergens daer inn te raden, end
van tijdt tot tijdt be hulpelijck re zijn, naer sijn vermogen, welcke beyde
Brevien mede hier nevens gevoecht zijn onder Number. IV. daer by haer Ho: Mo: noch
souden konnen voegen gelijcke brieven van het Parliament van Engelandt, end
mere andere Acten tot confirmatie van't geene voorsz. is, indien de selve haer
met verseeckert hielden, dat den mere gemelten Here extraordinaris Envoy e
Downing, end den Koningh van Groot Britannien sijn Meester, naer so even
solemnele verklaringe, end voorschriit van sijne Majesteyts Here Uader
onsterfel: Gedacht: haer desen aengaende ten vollen sullen houden voldaen;
konnende echter niet voorbygaen, sijne Majesteyt alhier in passant te
informeren, hoe den voorn. Paulus Pindar, onaengesien t geene voorsz. is, in
den Iare 1650. end 1651. noch gelieft heeft gehadt door sijne gemachtighden
Jonas Abeels (welckers procuratie oock noth voor handen is) de Bewinthebberen
van de Oost-Indische Compagnie ter Cameae tot Amsterdam, over 'tgeene voorsz,
is, in Rechten te betrecken, voor Schepenen de selver Stead, end aldaer te
concluderen dat de gemelte Bewinthebberen gecondemneert souden mogen werden,
aen den voorn. Pindar te betalen end by provisie te namptiseren de voorsz.
sum van vijf-en tachtich duysent Carolus Guldens, by 't voorgeroerde Accoort
aen den voorn. Pergens end Goubart belooft, met den interesse van de selve
sum, zedert den dagh van den voorsz. Accoorde, tot de effectuele genietinge
toe, als by Extract uyt het Register often de Roll van Schepenen voorsz. onder
Number. V. hier by gaende, breeder kan werden afgenomen, edoch doenmaels aen den
voorn. Pindar of desselfs Gemachtighde 't geene voorsz. is voorgehouden, end
mogelijck oock hem door mere andere proeven, die mits het verloop van tijdt als
nu hare Ho: Mo: niet konnen gesuppedieert werden, zijn notoir ongelijck
vertoont geweest zijnde, heeft hy daer op de voorsz. buyten verder vervolgh
gelaten, end zedert de selve tijdt tot nu toe, dat wy konnen bevinden, dare
over noyt eenige verdere poursuite hier te Land gedaen, sulcks dat hare Ho:
Mo: haer ten hooghstden verwonderen, dat d' Executeur van sijn Testament in den
voorsz. Iare 1654. de onbeschaemtheyt gehadt heeft van die saecke wederom
levendigh te maecken voor Commissarisen in 't selve Iaer van wederzijden als
boven gecommitteert, end aldaer uyt saecke voorsz. te done den voor geroerden
enormen eysch van over de twee-en-seventich pondent Sterlings, end noch veel
mere, dat sijne Erfgenamen of yemandt anders nyt sijne hoofde, de voorsz. nu
so volkomentlijck gemortificeerde Actie, noch wederom na so solemnele
Tractaten van den Iare 1654. end 1659. heeft derven ophalen, end daer over
den Koningh van Groot Britannien importuneren, mitsgaders Ho: Mo: de moete
vergen om so ouden end ongefondeerden saecke andermael na te sien; end
versoecken hare Ho: Mo: mitsdien, dat hy Here extraordinaris Envoy e voornt:,
all het selve aen den Hoochst-gedachten Koningh van Groot Britannien soodanich
gelieve te representeren, dat sijne Majesteyt daer over tegens de Uervolgers
van dien, moge betonen sijn rechtveerdich resentiment, op dat annere daer door
mogen werden afgeschrickt, sijne Majesteyt end haer Ho: Mo: over diergelijcke
oude, end albereyts gemortificieerde actien, verder importuyn te vallen. Aldus
gedaen end gearresteert ter Uergaderinge van de hoochgemelte Heeren Staten
Generael in's Gravenhage den 22 Junii 1662.

JOHAN van SCHRECK
Ter Ordonnantie van de selve

J. SPRONSSEN.



Replique du Chevalier GEORGE DOVVNING Envoye Extraordinaire de Sa Majeste de
la Grand Bretagne, etc. Sur la Response des Estats Generaux des Provinces
Unies, sur son Memoire du 20 Avril 1662.
Delivree aux dits Estats le 14. Julii 1662.
LE soussigne Envoye Extraordinaire de sa Majeste de la Grande Bretagne, etc.
ayant receu, examine and considere la Response de leurs Seigneuries les Estats
Generaux des Provinces Unies, du 22. Juin dernier, sur'son Memoire du 20. Avril
precedent, pour autant que le dit Memoire concern deux Navires Anglois
appartenants a Londres, l'un appelle la Bonne Esperance, and l'autre appelle le
Henry Bonaventure, trouve que la matiere de fait don't on a fait des plaintes
n'est aucunement deniee, mais confessee and recognue. Mais touchant sa demand
la dessus pour satisfaction and reparation aux persons endommagees, il semble
que leurs Seigneuries le voudroient eviter sur deux fondements.

Le premier, sur celuy des Traictes es Annees 1654 and 1659.

Le second, Que mesme sans lesdits Traictes il ne leur appartient ou rest
aucun droit a cause de la ditte pretention.

Quant au premier, le dit Envoye Extraordinaire ne peut qu' observer, que non
obstant que leurs Seigneuries au commencement de leur Reponie alleguent
fortement les dits Traitez, and a la fin d'icelle accusent les persons qui
demandent satisfaction, de grande impudence, parce qu'ils osent (comme il leur
plaist dire) fair revivre ou mettre en controverse ces affairs ou
pretentions, and d'en importuner le Roy de la Grand Bretagne, and de fairs que
leurs Seigneuries prennent la peine de les examiner: il n'y a pourtant dans la
ditte Response pas un mot pour expliquer comment ces chooses sont esteintes and
abolies par les dits Traittez, and certainement ceux qui voudroient par encre
and papier donner satisfaction pour des dommages si considerables, devroient
parler clairement and distinctement, and mettre horse toutes disputes ce qu'ils
pretendent and alleguent, don't le dit Envoye Exraordinaire ne trouve dans la
ditte Response aucun mot: and s'il avoit pu trouvet dans la plus exact and
pleine examination d'icelle la moindre couleur and fondement pour alleguation
de cette nature, il ne les auroit pas importune d'une Response sur ce point:
Mais leurs Seigneuries luy donneront permission d'affirmer qu'il ne trouve ny
en l'un ny en l'autre des dits Traittes aucune chose qui puisse empescher cette
reclamation.

Quant au Traitte de l'An 1654. il esteint vrayement toutes pretentions au
regard des dommages faits durant la derniere guerre, comme il appert par le
troisiesme Article d'iceluy, mais ces chooses estoient faittes long temps
auparavant, and n'y ont aucune relation, and le dit Traitte estoit si loin de
les abolir ou esteindre, que par le 30. Article d'iceluy un moyen particulier
and extraordinaire a este specify pour donner satisfaction d'icelles, and si
on pouvoit avoir pretendu que les complaignants n'avoient poursuivi ou
accomplice que de leur part devoit estre poursuivi and accompli selon le dit
Article, ou que les chooses eussent este par iceluy aucunement finies and
determinees, ou qu'il y auroit eu quelque clause ou mot denotant que le chooses
qui par ce moyen ne seroient este terminees, non obstant que les complaignants
auroient poursuivi and accompli ce que de leur part devoit estre poursuivi and
accompli, seroient neantmoins abolies and coupees; il y pourroit vrayement
avoir este mis une belle pretention contre eux: mais les persons endommagees
combien qu'ils attendoient peu de bien des Usurpateurs en ce temps la, estans
tout a fait horse de faveur a cause de leur fidelite extraordinaire envers sa
Majeste de glorieuse memoire, and trois d'ioeux de nom exceptez and condemnez
dans tous leurs biens: neantmoins se voyans dans la derniere necessite ou de
poursuiure le dit Article and fair leur demand ou estre pour jamais exclus
and coupes de leur droit, une demand fut faite devant les Commissaires seants
a Londres, dans le temps limite par le dit Article, and poursuiuie, comme il
apparoistra par* l'escrit cy annex marque B Number. I. mais le temps de 3. mois
limite'aux dits Commissaires fut expire sans donner aucure sentence ou
determination d'icelle: Et quant a l'autre remede mis dans le dit Article, a
scavoir par Commissaires des Cantons Protestants des Suiffes pour determiner
dans 6 mois apres, toutes chooses qui ne seroient decidees par les dits
Commissaires a Londres; s'ils se fussent ensemblez a cette fin, et les
persons interessees dans les dits Navires ne se fussent addresses a eux,
alors il y eust pu avoit quelque couleur de pretention contre eux: mais ils ne
se sont jamais assemblez, aussi n'estoit ce leur affair, ny en leur pouvoir de
les fair assembler. Et consequemment cela ne leur estoit pas prejudiciable
qu'ils n'avoient pas este assemblez: mais au contraire une-matiere de grief and
d'injure, au seul advantage de la Compagnie Orientale de ce Pays, laquelle par
ce moyen les a detenus tant d'annees d'avantage sans satisfaction. Pose que les
Commissaires, que par le dit Article se devoient assembler a Londres ne
l'eussent jamais este, ou qu'ils n'eussent este qu'apres le 18. May, le jour
prefix par le dit Article, apres lequel ne seroit admise aucune allegation, en
pourroit on de la tirer un argument contre les Parties pour les frustrer de
tous autres remedes ou que leur pretentions seroient esteints par le dit
Traitte? L'argument est le mesme a l'esgard des autres Commissaires, lesquels
se devoient assembler apres en Suisse; tellement qu'il n'y a rien plus clair
que les persons interessees dans les dits Navires demeurent iu statu quo, and
a leur liberte de demander justice and satisfaction par autres voyes.

Et quant au Traitte de l'An 1659. il n'y peut encore rien estre plus evident
and manifest qu'en ce que le dit Traitte ne coupe ny exclude cette afffaire
dans la moindre chose, parce que la clause generale a la fin d'iceluy n'exclud,
ny n'abolit pas generalement routes les affairs qui estoient cognues a Londres
le 20. Janvier 1659. mais seulement (comme il appertpar la ditte clause,)
tells affairs qui estoient arrivees environ le temps que les Navires le
Postillon, Frederic, Francoys and Jean, furent pris, ou apres, and non pas,
auparavant, don't la cognoissance estoit venue a Londres le 20. Janvier 1659. Et
l'occasion d'inserer cette clause generale estoit cellecy, qu'environ le temps
que le Postitton, etc. furent pris and confisquez dans les Indes Orientales par
la Compagnie Orientale Flamende ou un peu apres, and que ce futsceu a Londres
le 20 Janvier trois ou quatre autre Navires Anglois furent arrestez par la
ditte compagnie Orientale, mais apres quelque temps relaschez pour pourfuivre
leur voyage, and ayant a la sin consenty icy de donner satisfaction pour le
Postillon, Frederic, Francoys and J^^^, lequels avoient este pris and
confisquez, on insista absolument (comme quelques una de leurs Seigneuries
scavent fort bien) and a la fin apres longs debats fut accord, que s'ils
vouloient donner satisfaction raisonnable pour ce qu'ils avoient pris and
guard, une clause seroit inseree pour couper les autres pretentions, pour des
chooses seulement arrestees pour quelque temps, mais apres rendues, and sur ce
seul poinct fut inseree la ditte olause, and tellement couchee qu'elle
s'estendroit seulement la, and non pas outre: clest a dire d'abolir toutes
pretentions pour toutes chooses qui estoient arrivees dans les Indes Orientales
environ le temps que le Postillon, etc. furent pris, ou apres, and non pas
auparavant, bomme il appert par la clause mesme cy annex marque B Number. II.

Tellement que leurs Seigneuries ne peuvent que voir combien loin il est
d'aucune prejudice ou contrariete aux dits Traittez des Annees de 1654. and
1659. d'avoir a cest heure mis cette pretension sur le Tapis, and sur ce point
on se pourroit avoir es^argi beaucoup plus: Mais puis qu'il a pleu a leurs
Seigneuries de l'admettre; le dit Envoye Extraordinaire n'adjouste plus la
dessus, mais seulement de les fair souvenir, que ny l'un ny l'autre des dits
Traictes estoient faits avec le Roy son Maistre ny avec aucun de ses
Predecesseurs, and par consequent qu'il n'est aucunement oblige en droit de les
advouer: Et cela estant ainsi, and que tout ce que sa Majeste fait en les
admettant, n apoint d'autre fondement que fes inclinations envers ce Pays: ne
seroit ce pas une reconnoissance bien estrange and une just cause de
provocation, and tell que sa Majeste ne peut aucunement souffrir, de ne se
monstrer bien satisfaits de leur accomplissement and observation, selon la
naifue and genuine teneur d'iceux, mais de les detourner a unsens force and
extorque aux prejudice de ses Subjects, and tell don't on n'a pas song au temps
qu'ils ont este faits, et qu'on n'eust pu avoir demand des Usurpateurs mesmes
avec lesquels ils furent faits, ny de sa Majeste s'ils eussent este conclus
avec luy ou avec aucun de ses Predecesseurs.

Or quant a la second objection: a scavoir, que mesmes sans les dits Traictez
il ne leur appartient ou rest aucun droit a cause de la ditte pretension: Pour
preuve dequoy il a pleu a leurs Seigneuries d'alleguer deux chooses.

Premierement, les raisons par lesquelles la Compagnie Orientale de ce Pays,
sonstint avoir pu avec justice and avoir este contrainte d'arrester and
confisquer le Navire la Bonne Esperance; and quant au Henry Bonadventure, qu'il
estoit entierement abandonne par le Patron and Matelots, and qu'ils estoient
contens and ne firent aucun difficulte que le peuple de la Compagnie Orientale
de ce Pays sauvast le dit Navire avec sa charge.

Secondement, Que ceste affair a este en fin entierement and absolument
terminee a l' amiable par un dernier accord enter la ditte Compagnie des Indes
Orientales de ces Provinces Unies d'une part, and Jacob Pergens and David
Goubard tant pour luy que comme ayant procuration de William Courten and autres
interessez; and ce pour la sum de quatre vingts cinq milles livres tournois,
a quoy la ditte Compagnie, a reellement and effectivement satisfait en suitte.

Quant au premier de ces arguments, le dit Envoye Extraordinaire ne peust que
remarquer que leurs Seigneuries n'y insistent pas du tort, mais seulement le
touchent en passant, ny mesme ne le marquent pas de leur caractere,
l'appellants seulement les raisons de la Compagnie, and sans specifier aucun
d'eux en particulier; and en effect ce n'est pas marveille, puis qu'on ne
pouvoit commettre une plus grande and inexcusable violence and vollerie, que
celle de la prise de la Bonne Esperance, un Navire appartetant a Londres,
envoye de la, tout charge des Marchandises Angloises and Portugaises, (ces deux
Nations estans alors en paix avec ce Pays) and allant de Goa verse Maccao,
toutes deux places appartenantes aux Portugais, and cesans que ceux de la Bonne
Esperance eussent done le moindre sujet ou occasion de cette violence: ll ne
se peut aussi voir une plus grande inhumanite que. la demiere, le Navire le
Henry Bonaventure n'estoit pas abandonne par le Patron on Mattelots, comme il
appert pas les escrits cy annexes marquis C Number. I, II, IV. Mais quelques uns
d'eux ve^^ans aux Flamens, pour les prier de les assister pour sauver leur
Navire and Marchandises, ils ont pris and guard tout pour eux mesmes: Et quant
a ce qui est ditd'un certain escrit sign par eux, qu 'ils ne vouloyent
hazarder leur vies pour sauver quelque chose: Leurs Seigneuries trouverout
r^eponse suffisante la dessus par les dits escrits, que les Anglois
continuerent de demeurer en leurs Navire, and qu'ainsi par les loix and droits
de Gens cem'estoit pas naufrage: Et encore qu'ils ont assiste pour sauver les
Marchandises and les provisions du dit Navire, comme il se voit par les dits
escrits, aux quels vous me permettre adjouster que la ditte Compagnie depuis
s'est accordee avec les Portugais, de leur payer la sum de cent milles
Patacons pour leur interest dans les Marchandises qui estoient dans la ditte
Bonne Esperance, de laquellesomme quatre vingt mill Patacons furent
actuellement payez: and quant aux Anglois dans le dit Navire, and dans le Henry
Bonaventure, quoy qu'ils n'estoient pas du toirt favourises du appuyes en ce
miserable temps par ceux qui avoient alors en leurs mains le gouvernement;
neantmoins la ditte Compagnie (pour gaigner quelque pretexte de les avoir donn
e quelque satisfaction) paya a un certain Jaques Pergens and Goubard la sum
de 85000 guldens, and ce dans un temps auquel ses affairs de sa Majeste
decedce estoit enson Royaume dans le plus grand disordre and confusion sans
pouvoir donner la moindre assistance a quelque Anglois outre mer, estant
environ le temps de son tres execrable meurtre: and person ne doutera que
srle ditte Compagnie Orientale s'avoit pu aucunement justifier ce qu'avoiteste
fait, ils n'eussent pas pay a eux tell sum, specialement en un tell temps.

Quant au second argument; dans icelny est vrayement la vie and la force de
cest affair, and si l'accord fait avec Pergens and Goubard est un bon accord,
a Dieu ne plaise que la Compagnie des Indes Orientales, en soit derechef
importunee, mais s'il n'est pas tell, les reclamants ont une belle and libre
voye ou verte pour demander satisfaction.

Quant a la pretention de Goubard, elle est seulement sur 5. parties de 16. du
Navire Bonne Esperance, mais il navoit rien a fair avec le Navire Henry
Bonaventure, ny avec la charge de l'un ny de l'autre: and quant a son accord en
ce qui touch son particulier, on l'admet pour bon and sans question: Mais
quant au dit Pergens qui n'estoit pas interesse dans les Navires ny dans leur
charge, mais reclame en virtue d'une certain procuration and transports de
Willem Courten: le dit Envoye Extraordinaire respond que la ditte procuration
and transports estoient tout a fait vuids and nuls, comme il appert par
l'escrit cy annex marque D Number. l. par lequel le dit Willem Courten avoit
absolument transporte end' Annee 1642. tous ses droits and interests dans les
dits Navires au Sieur Paul Piudar and au Sieur Eduard Littleton, and ce sur une
consideration valide pour la sum de 88000. livres sterlings sum capitale
prestee a Iuy.

Et outre cela, le dit Gourten estoit declare insolvable and Bankroote pour la
sum de 150000 livres sterlings (procedes de ses grandes pertes aux Indes)
long temps devant la date la ditte procuration and transports donnes au dit
Pergens, comme il appert par l'escrit cy annex marque C Number. III and estoit
consequemment par les loix de toutes les Nations incapable pour fair aucun
Act de disposition de ses biens.

Et il n'est pas horse de propos d'observer que quoy que la Compagnie Orientale
de ce Pays, desirant fort de gaigner quelque pretexte, comme s'ils avoient
acheve cette meschante affair, paya cette petite and inconsiderable sum de
85000 guld. (car en effect elle estoit tell, non en sa consideration, mais en
comparaison de ces pertes and domages) neantmoins elle scavoit alors si bien,
combien peu de fondement avoit la pretention du dit Pergens, qu'ils ne luy
payassent un denier qu'apres les avoir done bonne caution de render la ditte
sum avec l'interest, s'ils seroient cy apres troublez cette affair, comme il
appert par l'escrit cy annex marque D Number. IV. laquelle securite est tousjours
bonne, de sort que la ditte Compagnie n'y peut rien perdre.

Et pour ce qui est en outre allegue, comme si le dit Pergens avoit
effectivement pay and content tous les autres interesses dans les dits
Navires, si cela fut vray ils seroient fort a blamer de demander satisfaction
pour la second fois: Mais cela est absolument faus, ny est ce qu'aucuns des
reclamants ayent jamais receu du dit Pergens ou d'aucun autre sur cette compte
directement ou indirectement la valeur d'un denier.

Et quant aux deux Lettres escrittes par sa feu Majeste touchant cette affair
en l'annee 1647. l'une a leurs Seigneuries, and l'autre au Sieur William
Boswel, qui estoit alors son Resident en cette Cour, le dit Envoye
Extraordinaire ne se peut assez esmerveiller, que leurs Seigneuries feroient
aucune mention d'icelles. Qu'estoient ces Lettres si non Lettres de
recommendations en terms generaux? Sa Majeste estoit elle alors en condition,
pour examiner au fond, ou regarder dans les affairs? Avoit il son Conseil ou
son Admiraute aupres de luy? Il scavoit que William Courten avoit equippe les
dits Navires devant la guerre civil en ses Royaumes, and estoit inform que
les dits Navires furent pris par la Compagnie Orientale Flamende: Et qu'est ce
qu'il demandoit en ses dittes Lettres? Seulement qu' avec assistance de leurs
Seigneuries la ditte Compagnie Orientale pourroit estre induite a la raison,
comme sont les mots dans fes Lettres a vos Seigneuries, and au Sieur William
Boswel, pour urger que satisfaction de 68880. livres sterlings, pourroit
promptement estre faitte par la Compagnie Orientale de ce Pays: Mais si cette
satisfaction qui se doit fair au dit Sieur Courten, devroit estre faitte au
Sieur Paul Pindar, and au Sieur Eduard Littleton, and a ceux qui reclament sous
eux, ou audit Pergens, ny l'un ny l' autre Lettre n'en parlent point: and
encore qu'elles en avoient parle, cela n'eut en aucune facon altere ou
determine l'affaire don't il est question. Qu'il me soit permis demander a vos
Seigneuries, si vous prenez quelque Lettre du Roy mon Maistre pour preuves and
evidences pro ou contra, combien qu'escrittes sur la meilleure and la plus
exact examination, (luy a peine recommandant quelque affair, jusques a ce
qu'il l'aye premierement fait considerer, examiner, and rapporter a luy par
quelques uns de son Admiraute ou Conseil prive) vous les faites seulement un
fondement pour regarder and examiner les affairs, and ne juges pas selon eux,
mais selon que vous trouvez les affairs sur la preuve and evidence. Et comment
vient il, que ces Lettres de sa Majeste sont produittes en cette sort? Si les
transports du dit Courten aux Sieurs Pindar and Littleton sont bons, rien de
cette nature les peut fair invalides, ny s'ils estoient invalides, les fair
bons.

Quant a ce que leurs Seigneuries touchent, que le Sieur Paul Pindar, es Annees
1650. and 1651. a poursuivi les Directeurs de la ditte Compagnie Orientale
devant les Eschevins a Amsterdam par Jonas Abeels, son procureur, mais faisoit
tomber le process, and ne l' a point renouvele pour autant qu'ils scavent, and
par la veulent suggerer, que le dit Sieur Pindar auroit estre convaincu: Le dit
Envoye Extraordinaire replique, que le manquement de la poursuitte n'estoit pas
sur un tell fondement, mais cause par la mort dudit Sieur Pindar, par laquelle
la procuration du dit Abeels aussi cessoit, and la guerre s' alluma un peu
apres enter Angleterre and ce Pays, a la fin de laquelle les persons
interesses dans les dits Navires, poursuivirent leur reclamation devant les
Commissaires qui s'assemblerent alors a Londres, and auroient voulu fair le
mesme en Suisse, si l'instrument lesquel y devoit estre envoye, eust este
envoye, and des Commissaires assemblez la dessus, l'envoy duquel instrument and
la convocation desquels Commissaires n'estoit pas leur affair, ny en leurs
pouvoir de la fair.

Et pour ce qui estoit de quelque recommendation apres ou demand a leurs
Seigneuries, leurs persons estoient trop noires aux yeux de ceux qui
gouvernoien^t alors pour esperer quelque chose de cette nature, and demeuroient
ainsi sans esperance and assistance jusqu'au Retoor de sa Majeste tres sacree,
nostre legitime Roy and Souverain, lequel voyant ces miserables and fidelles
subjects encore sans satisfaction, and neantmoins (par bon heur) point exclus
par quelque Traittez ou transactions faites en ces temps la, apres meure
deliberation and advis de son Conseil Prive, par sa Lettre datee a Whitehal le
21 Mars, recommanda fort cette affair a leurs Seigneuries. Et le dit Envoye
Extraordinaire a encore par la penulti eme post receu un autre Order du dit
Conseil, de demander and insister instamment que prompte satisfaction soit
faitte aux dittes persons, and avec toute diligence fair rapport a eux, de
ce qu' aura este fait: Et ainsi il demand par celle cy que tells ordres soyent
donnez, que la ditte Compagnie Orientale sans plus de delay leur pay ce qui
leur est deu pour les dits Navires and Marchandises, lesquels ont este si long
temps and avec tell violence detenus de eux a la ruin de tant de familles,
and au profit inestimable de la ditte Compagnie Orientale, laquelle n'a pas
seulement jouy, durant tout ce temps, du benefice de leur argent, mais aussi
par la entierement discourage and ruin le Commerce des Anglois pour China, and
ces quartiers la, and l' attire quasi entierement a eux mesmes: Faict a la Hay
le 1 3/^ Juliet 1662.

GEORGE DOVVNING.

The Reply of Sir George Downing, Envoy Extratraordinary of His MAJESTY of
Great Britain, etc. delivered the 13. of July 1662. upon the Answer of the
Estates General of the United Provinces, to his Memorial of the 20. of April
last.
THE underwritten Envoy Extraordinary of His most Sacred Majesty of Great
Britain, etc. having received, examined and considered the Answer of their
Lordships the Estates General of the United Provinces, of the 22 of June last
past, to his Memorial of the 20. of April foregoing: In so far as the said
Memorial did concern two English Ships belonging to London, the one called the
Bona Esperanza, and the other called the Henry Bonaventure; finds that the
matter of fact complained of, is not in the least therein denied, but confessed
and acknowledged; yet as to his demand thereupon for satisfaction and
reparation to the persons injured thereby, their Lordships endeavor to avoid it
upon a double ground:

First, Upon the account of the Treaties made in the Years of 1654. and 1659.

Secondly, That though the said Treaties were not, yet that the persons
claiming have no right to what they demand.

Now as to the first, the said Envoy Extraordinary cannot but observe, that
though their Lordships do in the beginning of their said Answer strongly
allege the said Treaties; and toward the end thereof, do accuse the person
demanding satisfaction of great impudence for daring ( as they are pleased to
term it) to revive these pretenses, and to importune His Majesty therein, or
trouble their Lordships with so much as the examination thereof: yet
notwithstanding throughout the said Answer, there is not so much as one word to
explain how these matters are extinguished or voyded by the said Treaties; and
certainly those who would make satisfaction for so considerable damages by Ink
and Paper only, had need make out very clearly and distinctly, and past all
dispute, what they pretend and allege; of which nature the said Envoy
Extraordinary finds not one clause or word in the said Answer, and could he in
the strictest and throughest examination thereof, have found the least color
or ground for an allegation of that nature, he would not have troubled them
with an Answer to that particular; but their Lordships must give him leave to
affirm that he does not find in the one or the other of the said Treaties, any
thing that does extinguish or debar this demand.

As for the Treaty of 1654. it does indeed ( as is set down in the third
Article) bar and cut off all pretenses in respect of damages during the late
War; but these were matters which happened many years before, and had no relation
thereunto; and which the said Treaty was so far from abolishing or taking away,
as that by the 30. Article thereof a particular and extraordinary way was set
down for the making satisfaction for them. And if it could have been pretended
that the persons complained had not of their part persued and fulfilled, what
was of their part to be persued and fulfilled by virtue of the said Article, or
that these matters had been thereby in any kind ended or determined, or that
there had been any clause or words denoting that what matters should not be
that way determined, notwithstanding that the parties complaining should have
accordingly done and fulfilled what was thereby required to be ontheir part
done and fulfilled, should yet be abolished and cut off, there might then
indeed have lain from hence some pretense against them; but the persons
injured, though expecting very little good from the then Usurping Powers (being
all of them out of favor, upon the account of their extraordinary loyalty to
His late Majesty of glorious memory) and three of them excepted by name, and
forfeited as to their whole Estates; yet seeing themselves in that exigency,
that either they must in persuance of the said Article put in their claim or be
debarred their rights; a claim was put in before the Commissioners sitting at
London, within the time limited by the said Article, and pressed and persued,
as will appear by the Writing hereunto annexed, marked with the letter B. Number.
I. but the three months time limited to the said Commissioners did expire,
without giving any sentence or determination therein; and as to the further
remedy set down in the said Article, (viz.) Commissioners of the Protestant
Cantons of Switzerland, to determine all such matters within six months after
as were not decided by the aforesaid Commissioners at London, if they had met
accordingly; and that the persons claiming interest in these Ships had not
addressed themselves unto them, there might then indeed have been something of
a color and pretense against them; but they never met, nor was it their
business, nor in their power to cause them to meet, nor consequently could
their not meeting be any prejudice to them; but on the contrary, a matter of
grievance and injury, to the only advantage of the East India Company of this
Country, who have thereby kept them from satisfaction so many years more:
Suppose the Commissioners who by that Article were to meet at London, had never
met; or suppose they had not met till after the 18. of May, the day prefixed by
that Article, after which no newallegation should be admitted, should from
thence an argument have heen drawn against these persons, that they were cut
off from all other remedy, or that their pretenses were extinguished by that
Treaty? and the argument is the same as to those other Commissioners, who
afterward were to have met in Switzerland; so that there is nothing more clear
than that the persons interessed in those Ships remain in statu quo, and at
liberty to demand justice and satisfaction by other means.

And for the Treaty of 1659. there is nothing also can be more clear than that
that Treaty does not in the least cut off or debar this matter; the general
clause in the end thereof not debarring or cutting o^^ all matters generally
that were known in London the 20. of Jan. 1659. but only (as may appear by the
said general clause thereof) such matters as happened about the time that the
Postillion, Frederick, Francis and John were taken, or afterward, not ( or
before) but ( or afterward) known at London the 20. Januar. 1659. and the
occasion of incerting that general clause was this, about the time when the
Postillion, etc. were taken and confiscated in the East Indies by the Dutch
East India Company, or a little after, and which was known at London the said
20. of January, there were three or four other English Ships stopped in the
East Indies by the said Dutch East India Company; but after some time set at
liberty to pursue their respective Uoyages; and it being at last yielded unto
here to give satisfaction for the Postillion, Frederick, Francis and John,
which had been taken and confiscated, it was absolutely insisted upon ( as some
of their Lordships very well know) and at last after long debate consented
unto, that in case they would make reasonable satisfaction for what they had
taken and kept, a clause should be incerted to cut off those other pretenses
for what they had only stopped for some time, but afterward set at liberty;
and accordingly upon this single score that clause was incerted, and was so
penned as to reach its end and no further; that is to say, to cut off all
pretenses for all matters happened in the East Indies about the time the
Postillion, etc. were taken or afterward, (not or before) as it appears by the
Writing marked with the letter B Number. II.

So that hereby their Lordships may see how far the now setting on foot the
pretenses of the persons interessed is from being in any kind prejudicial or
contrary to the Treaties of 1654. or 1659. concerning which much more might be
said, but that their Lordships are pleased having made this objection
themselves, to wave it, and to admit the debate of this matter, upon which
account also the said Envoy Extraordinary says no more of it, but only to put
them in mind that the said Treaties were neither of them made with the King his
Master, nor with any of His Predecessors; and consequently, there lies not upon
him the least obligation in point of right to take any notice of them; and that
being so, and that their being admitted by His Majesty, is merely out of good
nature and kindness, would it not be a strange requital, and a just cause of
provocation, and indeed such as His Majesty can in no wise suffer, not to rest
well satisfied with the accomplishment and observation of them according to
their literal and genuine meaning? but to put a forced and extorted sense upon
them, to the prejudice of His Subjects, and such as was never intended at the
making of them, nor could never have been demanded or expected from the
Usurpers themselves with whom they were made, nor from His Majesty, if they
had been made with Him or with any of His Predecessors.

Now for the second Objection, (viz.) That though the said Treaties were not,
yet that the persons claiming have no right to what they demand; for the making
good thereof their Lordships are pleased to allege two things.

First, those reasons by which the East India Company of this Country maintain
that they might with justice, yea that they were constrained to seize and
confiscate the Ship Bona Esperanza; and for the Henry Bona Adventure, that she
was wholly abandonned by her Master and Mariners; and that they were willing,
or made no difficulty to suffer the people of the East India Company of this
Country to save the said Ship with her Lading.

Secondly, that this matter has been entirely and absolutely ended by an
amicable accord between the said East India Company on the one part, and Jacob
Pergens and David Goubart on the other part, and that for a valuable
consideration of 85000. gilders; which sum has been in persuance thereof
really paid by the said Company.

Now as to the first of these Arguments, the said Envoy Extraordinary takes
notice that their Lordships do not insist upon it, but only (as it were en
passant) hint thereat; nor do they so much as put their own stamp upon them,
only calling them the said Companies Reasons, and without setting down any of
them in particular. And indeed no wonder, seeing that a greater and more
uncolourable violence and robbery could not have been committed than was that
of the taking the Bona Esperanza, a Ship belonging to London, set out from
thence, laden only with English and Portugais goods, both at that time in
peace and amity with this Country, and bound from Goa to Maccao, places both
belonging to the said Portugais, and without the least occasion offered by the
said Ship, nor could there be a greater in humanity and barbarism than the
latter; the Henry Bona Adventure not being abandonned by her Master and
Mariners, as will appear by the Writings marked with the letter C Numb. I. II.
IV. but only some of them coming to the Dutch, and praying for their assistance
toward the saving of their ship and goods, they under the notion of assisting
them take and keep all to themselves: And for what is said of a certain Paper
signed by them, that they would not hazard their lives to save any thing, their
Lordships will find sufficiently proved by the said Writings, that the English
did actually continue in their Ship, and so that it was no Wrack by Law:
Moreover, that they did assist in saving the goods and Ships provisions, as is
abundantly proved in the said Writings; to which give me leave to add, that the
said Company did since agree with the Portugais to pay them 100000 Rials of
eight for their Interest in the Goods in the said Bona Esperanza, whereof
fourscore thousand was actually paid; and for the English concerned both in
the said Ship, and in the Henry Bona Adventure, though they were such as for
their Loyalty could have nothing of favor or countenance in in their
concernments, nor indeed have common justice done therein in the late
distracted Times; yet the said Company did ( to gain something of a pretense,
as if they had made satisfaction to them) pay unto Jacob Pergens and Goubart
the sum of 85000 gilders, and that in a time when the affairs of His late
Majesty, in His Kingdoms, were in the greatest disorders and confusion, and
not capable to give the least protection to any English man beyond the Seas,
being about the time of His most execrable murder; and so no man will doubt
but that if the said East India Company could have justified in any measure
what was done, they would not have parted with such a sum of money, especially
at such a time, upon pretense of any damage done to the English.

Now as to the second Argument, herein is indeed the life and force of this
matter; and if the Agreement made with the said Pergens and Goubart be a good
Agreement, God forbid the East India Company of this Country should be called
upon again; but if this be not a good Agreement, then the Pretenders have a
fair and free way open for their demanding satisfaction.

Now as to Goubart his pretense, is only to ^^/16 of the Ship Bona Esperanza,
but had nothing to do with the Ship Henry Bona Adventure, nor with the Lading
of either of them; and as for his Agreement, in so far as his personal
concernment went, it is admitted for good and not questioned; but as to the
said Pergens, who had no interest in either of the Ships or their Lading, but
claims by virtue of certain Procurations and Transports from William Courten:
The said Envoy Extraordinary does answer that the said Procurations and
Transports are utterly void and null, as appears by an Indenture hereunto
joined marked with the letter D Number. I. whereby the said William Courten had in
the Year 1642. absolutely transferred all his right and interest in the said
Ships unto Sir Paul Pindar and Sir Edward Littleton, and that upon a most
valuable consideration for the sum of 88000 pounds sterling, principal money
lent unto him.

And moreover the said Courten was declared insolvent for 150000. pounds
sterling, by reason of his great losses in the Indies, long before he gave the
said Procurations and Transports to Pergens, as appears by the Writings of the
letter C Number. III. and consequently was incapable by the Laws of Nations for
the doing of any act for the disposal of his goods: And it is not amiss to
observe, that though the East India Company of this Country, out of their
desire of gaining something of a color to have ended this foul business, did
part with that inconsiderable and pitiful sum of 85000. gilders, (for so
indeed it was, not in it self, but in comparison of these losses and damages.)

Yet that they were at that time so advised of the ungroundedness of the said
Pergens his pretenses, that they did not part with a far thing to him till he
had given them good security to repay the said money, with interest, in case
they should be further troubled in this matter, as appears by the Writings
marked D Number. IV. the which security is still good, so that the said Company
can be no Losers thereby.

And for what is further alleged, as if the said Pergens had really and
effectually paid and contented all the other persons interessed in the Ships
and Lading; if this were indeed so, it would be justly blameworthy for them to
demand satisfaction a second time; but it is utterly false and untrue, nor has
any one of the persons pretending ever received from the said Pergens, or any
other, upon this account, directly or indirectly, the value of one farthing.

And as to the two Letters written by His late Majesty concerning this business
in the Year 1647. the one to their Lordships, and the other to Sir William
Boswel, His then Resident in this Court; the said Envoy Extraordinary cannot
but greatly wonder that their Lordships should so much as mention them? what
were those Letters but Letters of Recommendation, and in general terms? And was
His Majesty at that time in a condition strictly to examine or look into
matters? had He His Council or His Admiralties about Him? He knew that William
Courten had set out those Ships before the Civil War in His Kingdoms, and had
been informed that the said Ships had been taken by the Dutch East India
Company; and what did He demand in His said Letters, but only that by the
States General their help the said East India Company might be brought to
reason, as are the words in His Letter to them; and as are the words in His
Letter to Sir William Boswel, to press that satisfaction for 68884 pounds
sterling, might speedily be made by the Netherlands East India Company; but
whether that satisfaction to be made to the said Courten was to be made to Sir
Paul Pindar and Sir Edward Littleton, and those that claim under them, or to be
made to Pergens, neither of those Letters do speak; and if they had, yet would
not that in the least alter or determine the case in hand: Let me ask your
Lordships whether ye take any of the King my Master His Letters to be proofs
and evidences pro or contra, though written upon the best and through'st
examination (He scarce recommending any matter till first considered and
examined, and reported to Him by some of His Admiralties or Privy Council; but
only make them a ground to look into and examine matters, and judge not
according thereunto, but as you find matters upon the proof and evidence.

And how comes it to pass that these Letters of His late Majesty are produced
in this kind? if Pindar and Littleton's Transports from Courten be good,
nothing of this nature can make them invalid; nor if they were invalid, make
them good.

And for what their Lordships do hint that Sir Paul Pindar did in the Years
1650. and 1651. prosecute the Bewinthebbers of the East India Company, before
the Magistrates at Amsterdam, by one Jonas Abeels his Procureur, but did then
let the said Suit fall, nor has to their knowledge since revived it, and so
would thereby insinuate as if the said Pindar had been convinced of his error,
and thereupon let it fall: The Envoy Extraordinary does reply, that the fall of
the said Suit was not upon any such ground, but was occasioned by the death of
the said Pindar, by which the said Abeels Procuration also ceased, and the War
between England and this Country broke out a little after; at the ending
whereof, the persons interessed in the said ships did enter and pursue their
claim before the Commissioners that then met at London; and would have done the
like in Switzerland, if the Instrument which was to have been sent thither, had
ever been sent, and Commissioners met upon them: the sending of which
Instrument and convoking of which Commissioners was not their work, nor in
their power to do.

And as for having their affairs afterward recommended to their Lordships in
any particular way, their persons were too black in the eyes of those that then
ruled, for them to hope for any thing of that nature, and so remained hopeless
and helpless till the Return of His most Sacred Majesty our rightful and lawful
King and Sovereign; who finding these His distressed and most loyal Subjects
without satisfaction, and not excluded from it by any Treaties or Transactions
made in those Times; upon full deliberation and advice of His Privy Council,
was pleased by His Letters dated at Whitehall the 21. of March last, earnestly
and perticularly to recommend this matter to your Lordships as appears by the
Writings marked with the letter A, under the Numbers of I, II, III, IV, V. and
the letter D, under the Numbers I, II, III. And the Envoy Extraordinary has
moreover by this last Post but one received another Order from the said Council
further, instantly to demand and insist that satisfaction be forthwith made to
the said persons, and to report with all speed what He shall do therein to
them: And he does accordingly earnestly demand that such orders be given, as
that the said East India Company do forthwith, without further delay, pay unto
them what is their due for their said ships and goods, which have been so long
and so violently held from them to the ruin of many families, but to the
inestimable gain of the said Company; who have not only all this while enjoyed
the benefit of their Moneys, but thereby also utterly discouraged and
overthrown the Trade of the English to China and those Parts, and engrossed the
same wholly to themselves.

Given at the Hague July 13. 1662. N. S. GEORGE DOVVNING.

Memorandum,
THat Sir George Downing sent his Secretary several times, to the Deputies of
the States General (that were appointed to Treat in English affairs) for a Copy
of these Reasons, bywhich the East India Company (as was mentioned in the
States Answer) could justify the taking of the Ship Bona Esperanza, nay that
they were constrained to seize and confiscate the same, that there might not
remain the least apprehension that the fact was justifiable; the said Reasons
were often demanded, and although a short Memorial to that purpose was given
in to the States before the Reply, yet could not be obtained. It Is to be
notified, by the Pieces or Copies of Writings received by Sir George Downing
with the States Answer in Dutch, and numbered with several Figures, are under
these significations, the Paper marked Nomb. I. is the Claim exhibited by Mr.
William Tombs (Executor to Sir Paul Pindar) for 72346 l. before the Dutch and
English Commissioners in the year 1654.

The Papers marked with Nomb. II. are the Agreements between the Company and
Pergens, the Acquittance for 85000 Gilders, the Order to the Treasurer, and the
Caution given for the said money by Peter Bondan Courten.

The Papers marked with No. III. are Copies of the Procuration and the two
pretended Transports or Bills of Sale from Mr. Courten to Mr. Pergens.

The Papers marked with No. IV. are Copies of the late Kings Letters from
Hampton Court in the year 1647. the one to the States General, and the other
to Sir William Boswell.

The Paper No. V. is the Conclusion of Jonas Abeels, upon his Action or
Complaint before the Magistrates of Amsterdam for the said 85000 Gilders: But
as to the Insinuations and Arrests of Jonas Abeels, or the Declaration of the
Schepens thereupon: the Company had not instructed the said Deputies of the
States to make any Answer to them, nor unto the Reasons aforesaid.

Authentic Copies of the Acts, Deeds, and Writings, delivered by Sir George
Downing with the Reply to the States Answer, with the several Letters and
Numbers under these significations following.
THe Deeds from William Courten to Sir Edward Littleton, and from both to Sir
Paul Pindar, marked with the Letter D No. I. II.

The Depositions of the Witnesses taken in the Court of Admiralty, concerning
the matters of fact and Damages, marked C No. I. II.

The Certificate from the Commissioners upon the Statutes made concerning
Banckrupts, marked C No. III.

The Agreement between the Mariners and Adrian Vanderstell, concerning the
Henry Bona Adventure, marked C No. IV.

Sir Paul Pindars Procuration to Jonas Abeels, D No. IV. Anno 1647.

The Summons and Proceedings before the Magistrates or Schepens at Amsterdam, B
No. I.

The Certificate of Sir Paul Pindar's Death, B No. III.

The Acts and Proceedings of William Tombs before the Dutch and English
Commissioners, Anno 1654. B No. II.

The Petition of Tho. Newman and the Mariners, to the said Commissioners, Anno
1654. B No. IV.

The Petition of Henry Powell on behalf of himself and the Creditors claiming
under the Statute the Damages of both Ships, Anno 1654. B No. V.

The Petition of Sir John Ayton, George Carew, and Charles Whitaker to the King
A No. I.

The Deed of Assignment from Sir Edward Littleton to George Carew, John Ayton,
and others, D No. III. Anno 1656.

Letters of Administrations granted to George Carew, of Sir William Courten's
Estate, and of Sir Paul Pindar's to Sir William Powell, A No. II.

Several Proeurations to George Carew from Commissioners of Banckrupt, from Sir
William Powell, Sir John Ayton, Thomas Kynaston and the rest of the interessed,
A No. II. III. IV. V.

Notwithstanding all this, the report went at the Hague, that the Kings
Commissioners appointed to Treat with the Dutch Ambassadors at London, had
excluded us from any extraordinary remedy by the Treaty, whereupon I presently
sent this Letter following to the said Commissioners.

These for the Right Honorable George Duke of Albemarle, and the rest of the
Commissioners appointed by the Kings most Excellent Majesty to Treat with the
Dutch Ambassadors.
Right Honorable,
MAY it please your Lordships, I am commanded by the Creditors of Mr. Courten,
Sir Edward Littleton and Sir Paul Pindar, that have entrusted me with their
particular Complaint against the East India Company of the Netherlands, to give
your Honors an Account of my Transactions at the Hague, with these following
Considerations; that a right understanding might prevent the Miscarriage of
their business. A Demand was made of the States General (on their behalf) in
the Kings Name upon His Majesty's justly grounded Letters of Recommendation.
The Bewinthebbers of the Company at the first Treaty offered 85000. Gilders,
with Interest since the Year 1649. (provided I would by consent simul and semel
commence the Suit against them and Jacob Pergens before the Magistrates at
Amsterdam) in Satisfaction. Afterward the States of Holland persuaded them to
decline any further Treaty, upon pretense the King had promised their
Ambassadors that no Damages in the East Indies should be insisted upon before
the 20. of January, 1659. I shall not trouble your Lordships with perticulars,
but refer your Honors to the enclosed printed Reply given unto the States
Impertinent Answer of the 22. of June last.

The Interessed of the Ships Henry Bona Adventure and Bona Esperanza are above
Three hundred several persons, many of them Orphans and Widows, whose Fortunes
were bound up in the sad and deplorable condition of those two worthy
Gentlemen, Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pindar, That lent the late King (of
ever blessed memory) 95000 l. for the Ordinary support of his Crown, before the
late War, and borrowed 120000 l. upon their Credit, to carry on the China and
East India Trade, by the late Kings especial appointment and Commission, in the
Year 1636. which the Dutch by Violence and Rapine have destroyed, and yet the
Complainants not any ways satisfied, included or excluded by any Agreement,
Treaty or Confederacy in the Years 1649. 1654 and 1659.

Since the Reply to the States Answer was dispersed in English, French and
Dutch, most of them are ashamed of themselves, and several of the Provinces are
much troubled for the Injuries and Oppression we have suffered, and will
protest against the rest, if we have not speedy Reparation made answerable to
our Damages.

The persons concerned would rather perish than ask any thing inconsistent with
the Honor or Safety of the King and Kingdom, and they should forseit their
own judgment and reason to Imagine that the King would put His Subjects into
a worse condition than the Treaties of Oliver and Richard the Usurpers had left
them; or, that the Commissioners appointed in this Treaty should allow the
Preamble lately sent to the Dutch Ambassadors to incert before the Articles
(newly started, contrary to the Instructions of the 10. of May last) intending
by general words to make void all private Actions depending between the
Subjects of England and the People of the United Provinces, opposite to the Law
of Nations and all Common Right.

The King was graciously pleased to promise that he would not insist upon
Commissioners for Damages of His Subjects in Europe before 1654. or in the
East Indies before 1659. but leave them to other Remedies: But in this
extraordinary Case of Oppression and Injustice, the King recommended it to the
States General for their Examination; and if we should now accept of 85000
Gilders with Interest, in full satisfaction for such great Damages so highly
disputed by the Kings command, and most precise Orders of the Councel-board; It
were not only to admit of the Companies silent Reasons for Taking the Ships,
but equally to betray the Dignity of the King and His Crown, the Strength and
Courage of His Subjects, and the Justice of our Case; which we cannot do for
consequence sake, being ready for Judgment in a way of State at the Hague, and
some of the Company willing to give Satisfaction in this our Case as the States
shall appoint.

The Holland Interest is Trade, and their Business to Discourage all others but
themselves: When they are called to Account for Violencies and Robberies
committed at Sea, their Pensioners or Statesmen give ill language, and would
insinuate to the King, that it obstructs the good Intelligence held between the
Crown of England and the States of Holland; whereupon they have taken great
advantages, and by those mistakes have been further encouraged to proceed in
their wicked practices; knowing that to Implead them in their own Courts of
Judicature, would but add Mischief to Misery, being both Parties and Judges
themselves: Yet, if they lose but a Herringboat, the whole Province is
concerned to recover it, or satisfaction.

They are a Generation made proud and insolent by the condiscention of Princes,
and so much the more considerable in the World, as the King of Great Britain is
pleased to grant them in Treaties and Alliances: They are men not to be obliged
by Kindness, the Sovereignty being in the Common people, who are altogether
insensible of Honor, living upon the spoils of Nations, and growing rich by
the vanity, sloth and excess of their Neighbors.

My Lords, Admit the King should refuse to Treat without caution to perform
their Articles, rather than they would want the benefit of English Harbors in
Winter, or the Countenance of Great Britain all the year, they will subscribe
to any condition; knowing that France and Spain holds correspondency no longer
than they have a fair opportunity to reduce them to their first principles, or
requite them in some other kind.

The Frontier Towns are wholly kept by English, Scotch and French, that know
both the strength and weakness of their Country, and they are forced to
continue their Armies as much to govern by an Arbitrary way at home, as to
defend themselves from Invasion abroad; their Shipping must be supplied by
Strangers that are not any way concerned for the defense of their Country,
therefore the King may take his advantage, and set a valuable price upon his
own Inheritance which God and Nature has endowed him withal.

My Lords, I know they hunger after a nearer Alliance with the King, and had
rather be at Enmity with the whole world than not in Amity with England. They
term the Union with the King like man and wife. I humbly beseech you, in the
name of all the Interessed persons for whom I am concerned, that by some
special Provisoe in the Treaty, Ours being an extraordinary Case, It may be
reserved to such Remedies as the King and His Council shall think fit;
otherwise, all English men beyond the Seas that have heard the noise of this
Case, will despair of any protection, and resolve if the King cannot have that
Reputation throughout the world that no Kingdom or Nation whatsoever shall
dare to affront His Merchants at Sea, their Trade will be wholly left to them
that so earnestly pursue it. I beg your pardon for my boldness, and leave all
to your grave wisdoms and considerations, subscribing my self

From my Lodgings at the House of Nassau in Papa Street at the Hague, July
17/25. 1662. Your Honors most faithful and humble Servant George Carew.

The third Memorial of Sir GEORGE DOVVNING to the States General.
THe underwritten Envoy Extraordinary of His most Sacred Majesty of Great
Britain, etc. is very sorry that he must still reproach their Lordships, that
yet to this day since the Return of his Master into His Kingdoms, there is not
one Example made by them or their Order for satisfaction and reparation to any
of His Subjects, in any of those many and grievous Complaints, which in His
Name, and by His special Orders have been from time to time made unto them; the
which their Lordships must think cannot but nearly touch such a King and such a
Neighbor, and the more when He considers how frequent the Examples of their
Justice were in the days of those who usurped His Crowns and Authority; and
also how many Examples have been of His Justice from day to day toward their
Subjects at the request of their Ambassadors, by the interposition of His Royal
Authority.

And though it is now a considerable time since he the said Envoy Extraordinary
did give in to their Deputies, his Replies upon what had been given him by them
concerning the Ships Bona Esperanza, Henry Bona Adventure, and the Ship
Charles; by which it appears to the whole World, how groundless and frivolous
were the Shifts and Pretexts which those who have done these Robberies and
Uiolences would avoid the making satisfaction for them, yet he has not since
that time heard one word from them or from their Lordships concerning them.

And he does herewith further complain, that a certain English Ship called the
Content of London, whereof one William Jordan was Commander, sailing out of the
Downs, in the Month of October last, for the Coast of Africa, was there in a
hostile manner set upon by two ships belonging to the West India Company of
this Country, the one called the Golden Lion, and the other the St. Barbara,
and taken, the People stripped and plundered; and he does demand that
satisfaction and reparation be forthwith made to the persons interessed, as
also to those concerned in the Experience, the Ship Daniel, Brazil Frigot,
Leopard, St. John Baptist, and others, concerning which, complaints have been
made to their Lordships.

And de does hope that he shall at last be able to give an account to His
Master of the real effects of their Justice, without which it is but a
prostituting of His Honor and Dignity to continue the sending His Subjects
hither, and endeavoring to obtain reparation for them in this neighbourly and
friendly way. Given at the Hague this 6/16 August 1662.

George Downing.

The Answer of the Lords States General (Translated out of the Dutch Original)
to Sir GEORGE DOVVNING's Third Memorial.
THE States General of the United Provinces, etc: having seen, examined, and
considered, a certain Memorial delivered by Sir George Downing Envoy
Extraordinary from His Majesty of Great Britain, etc. in his late conference
with their Ho: Mo: Deputies; as also his Memorialls presented from time to
time, concerning the Ships called the Bona Esperanza and Bona Adventure: After
mature deliberation; they have thought fit to declare by these presents, that
their Ho: Mo: did not in the least doubt, but that the said Envoy
Extraordinary, and the King His Master, would have acquiesced in the particular
informations and circumstances comprehended in their Ho: Mo: Answer on the 22
of June last, touching the same Subject, protesting that they did only cause
this to be done for better information and no otherwise; but finding contrary
to what was expected, their Ho: Mo: can assure the said Envoy Extraordinary,
and the King His Master, with all truth and sincerity, that they find nothing
in the said Memorial, nor in the said Pieces joined, that can in the least
weaken the force of the said Information, whereupon their Ho: Mo: would enlarge
themselves, were it not that by the Treaties of 1654 and 1659. these, as also
all other pretenses, known by the one side or the other, before that time ought
to be considered, as matters extinguished, whereby their Ho: Mo: think it not
fit to enter into any dispute with the said Sir George Downing, being that the
same has been presented to His Majesty by the Ambassadors of this State, and
caused the said matter to be deliberated on in his Council, who did acquiesce
therein, as it does evidently appear by His Majesty's solemn Answer, Signed by
one of His Secretaries of State, and delivered to them on the 25 of May last;
as likewise in his Majesty's solemn Declaration made to the Ambassadors in
their Audience at Hampton Court, the 4. of July last; and their Ho: Mo: do only
depend upon His royal Word passed at that instant, as also upon those reasons
which are equitable and just, passed in their Ho: Mo: Assembly at the Hague,
the 26 of August 1662.

Second Reply of Sir GEORGE DOVVNING Envoy Extraordinary from His MAJESTY of
Great Britain, etc.
Presented to the Estates General the 1. of Sept. 1662.
THE underwritten Envoy Extraordinary of His most Sacred Majesty of Great
Britain, etc. having yesterday received the Resolution of their Lordships the
Estates General of the United Provinces, of the 26. instant, in rejoinder to
his Reply of the 13. of July last, concerning the ships Bona Esperanza and Bona
Adventure; and having considered and examined the same, finds it only to
contain thus much: That their Lordships did not doubt but that he the said
Envoy Extraordinary, and the King His Master, would have acquiesced in their
Answer of the 22. of June last; and that they do not find any thing in the said
Reply, nor in the pieces thereunto joined, that can in any kind weaken the
force of their said Answer; and this is the whole of their said Resolution: But
as to the producing of any new matter on the behalf of the East India Company
of this Country, whereby to better their cause, or to show or make out that the
matters set down in the aforesaid Reply, and made good by the pieces thereunto
joined, were in any kind ill founded or mistaken: The said Envoy Extraordinary
does not therein find one word or syllable of that nature.

Were this a dispute between their own Subjects, it might suffice for them
despotically to affirm that they do not find that the reasons given by the
person injured, in reply to what is said by the person doing the injury to be
of value, and to command him to acquiesce in the Declaration of that their
pleasure or opinion; but this dispute is not between them and their Subjects,
but between them and their Neighbors, between the King His Master and their
Lordships, and His Subjects and theirs; and it is their Subjects that have done
the wrong, and who did forcibly assail and attack His Subjects, and by violence
take from them their ships and goods, and are yet in possession of them, and
this is confessed: And so it is not enough that their Lordships are well
contented and satisfied, but it will be expected that they do either clearly
and perticularly refute and take away what is said in the said Reply, on the
behalf of His Majesty's Subjects who are thus grieved and injured, or cause
satisfaction and reparation to be forthwith made; or else His Majesty's
intercession in an amicable way is at an issue, and he must betake himself to
such other means as are capable to right His Subjects.

And for what their Lordships are pleased to say, that they should have
enlarged themselves further, but that this matter ought to be looked upon as
extinguished by the Treaties of 1654 and 1659. The said Envoy Extraordinary
does answer, that this is a begging the question; it being not only utterly
denied in the aforesaid Reply, that this matter is in any kind debarred or
mortified by either of the said Treaties; but it is in the said Reply
perticularly and at large shown how far they are both of them from any thing of
that nature: And on the other hand, their Lordships neither in the abovesaid
Answer of the 22. of June, nor in this their Resolution (though they would thus
pay His Majesty's Subjects with Ink and Paper) do not in either of them so much
as hint at any Article, Clause or Paragraph of the said Treaties, by which this
matter should ve so mortified and extinguished.

And for the Paper of the 15 of May last, signed by one of His Majesty's
Secretaries of State, and delivered to their Ambassadors at London, upon which
they would found that His Majesty had consented to the mortification of this
business: The said Envoy Extraordinary cannot but greatly wonder at an
allegation of this nature; What was then the dispute? was it about mortifying
or not mortifying of matters before or after, such time or times? that was not
the dispute, but only from what time matters should be decided by
Commissioners; and as to this, His Majesty was pleased in that Paper to declare
himself that he did acquiesce in what was urged by their Ambassadors, and that
he would not press any further Retrospect then 1654. as to matters out of the
East Indies, and 1659. for matters in the East Indies, as to the taking
cognizance of them by Commissioners, and as to what his Majesty should have
said in the Audience he gave their Ambassadors at Hampton Court the 4 of July
last: The said Envoy Extraordinary does reply, that their Lordships have in
writing, and so has he the said Envoy Extraordinary what His Majesty did then
say, and he does positively deny that there is therein any word or syllable
concerning the business of these two ships, or that does in any kind concern
the point in hand; and for the verifying hereof, he refers to the Paper it
self; nor did at that time or any other time any thing pass His Majesty or His
Commissioners in any conference with their Ambassadors, other, then that for
matters before 1659, in the East Indies, his Majesty would not insist to have
them decided by Commissioners, but that he did ever yield that they should be
cut off from all other remedies, this is utterly denied; and if he had, to what
purpose had been the continued Orders of his Majesty and his Privy Council for
the pressing satisfaction in this business? it being to no manner of purpose to
have pressed for satisfaction while the Treaty was in hand, for a business
which was to be cut off by the said Treaty, in case it came to a close; it
being beyond doubt that if their Lordships had had assurance that the said
matter was to be cut off by the said Treaty, there was nothing of satisfaction
to be expected, until they saw the issue thereof.

The said Envoy Extraordinary cannot but further take notice, that their
Lordships in their foresaid Resolution speak not a word of their agreement with
Pergens; nor is it strange, seeing the transport by which he claims, bears date
some years after Courten had made over all his interest in the said ships to
Sir E. Littleton and Sir P. Pindar, for the sum of 68000 l. sterling money lent
to him; and moreover, that the said Courten was insolvent at the time of his
making the said Transport to the said Pergens, and consequently incapable by
the Laws of Merchants, both in England, here, and elsewhere, to dispose of one
farthing.

Moreover, the said Envoy Extraordinary cannot but let their Lordships know
upon this occasion, that since the giving in of his Reply there are certain
authentic writings and Papers come to hand at London; by which it appears
that Sir Paul Pindar upon the 25 of May 1648. hearing that the Directors of the
East India-Company of this Country were in Treaty with Pergens, did by his
Procurer Jonas Abeels insinuate to the Directors of the said Company at
Amsterdam his arrest and attachments, and declared himself to be the true
Proprietor of the said ships, and of all damages and losses thereby,
protesting against the said Company in case they should make payment to any
other: Moreover, that upon the 10 of November. 1648. the Senators or Eschevens of
Amsterdam did declare the Arrest of the said Jonas Abeels to be good and valid,
and adjudged the same to be so; and the agreement made with Pergens was not
till the 18 of Septem. 1649. so that this transport to Pindar is not a thing
that has been kept concealed till now, but the said Directors had timely and
legal notice and advertisement thereof, but did notwithstanding thereof agree
with Pergens, he proffering to acquit them for so small a sum as that 85000
Gilders; and that if they should have been able to have made good this
agreement, they had for a matter of nothing ended a business of this value, and
if they could not yet were sure not to be losers, the said Pergens giving them
good security in that case to repay the said money with Interest, after the
rate of 4 per cent for such time as he should have it in his hands, and which
security is yet good.

Moreover, upon the 26 of November. 1649. which is about seven weeks after the
aforesaid Agreement, the Senators or Eschevens of Amsterdam did again declare
the attachment and arrest of Jonas Abeels to be valid, and the Law to be on Sir
Paul Pindar's side, with all costs and damages.

And although such a rejoinder as this of their Lordships, in a case of this
nature, could not but seem very strange at any time, yet much more at this,
when it is known to all men that the conclusion or breaking off the Treaty with
His Majesty, and consequently the good correspondence of his Kingdoms and these
Provinces, depends singly upon the issue of this business; and if his Majesty
were no ways satisfied with their Answer of the 22 of June, what can be
expected to be the issue of this Resolution? And if it shall be said, what?
will his Majesty stop a whole Treaty of that nature upon a particular business?
The Answer is ready, that it is not his Majesty but their Lordships that do
stop the Treaty upon this business; his Majesty did not desire nor intend that
so much as mention should be made thereof in this Treaty, but to have left it
to its course in the way it is; but their Lordships did of late offer certain
preambles and general clauses to be inserted into the Treaty for the utter
mortifying and extinguishing of it, or at least (as they have since been
pleased to qualify it) for the removing it out of the amicable way in which it
is now, and has been these many months depending between their Lordships and
him the said Envoy Extraordinary; and in which it is so far advanced, that all
in a manner has been said that can be said on either side, and thereby to put
the persons who have already suffered so many years, and by which some of them
have been utterly ruined, to a new, vast and endless dispute and charge
elsewhere, the which their present low condition, and His Majesty's honor can
in no ways admit; especially when he considers that in the year 1659. the
business of the Postillion, Frederick, Francis, and John, three Ships of London
taken about Bantam in the East Indies, by some Ships of the East India Company
of this Countreywas examined, debated, and determined, not by the ordinary
Judge, but in a politic way by their Lordships, in like manner as is now
actually depending the business of these two ships.

And the said Envoy Extraordinary cannot but put their Lordships in mind upon
this occasion, that their Lordships in their Resolution of the 10. of May last,
given to him by their Agent de Heyde, will find that then there was no preamble
before the Article concerning Commissioners, whereby to mortify matters before
1654. and 1659. respectively; yea that toward the close of the said Resolution
they would persuade to have accepted the term of 1659. for Commissioners, as
well out of the East Indies as in the East Indies, upon this Argument, that
though the Commissioners should only have taken cognizance from 1659. yet that
such whose grievances were before that time, should not be deprived, but have
their liberty of other remedies: And if their Lordships please to look over the
Memorial of him the said Envoy Extraordinary of the 28 of June last, and which
was the occasion of the Audience of the 4 of July following, given by his
Majesty to their Ambassadors, they will find the words of the said Memorial to
be expressly these; ( That His Majesty was content that nothing should be put
upon the List of Damages, to be decided by Commissioners, as to matters
happened in the East Indies, which were known at London the 20. of Jan. 1659.
but would leave them to other remedies. These are the express words in the said
Memorial, whereby their Lordships may perceive how far it was from ever being
imagined, much less intended, that by yiedling Commissioners from 1659 all
matters before that time should be cut off from all other remedies, and
absolutely mortified.

And if it shall be objected, that if satisfaction should be made for these two
ships, that it might be an Encouragement and give occasion to others to bring
in their antiquated complaints also: It is answered, that though his Majesty
might with justice have insisted hereupon, and the rather considering how many
of his best Subjects were sufferers by this Country during the late Broils in
his Kingdoms; yet it has pleased his Majesty (to show His strong passion to
have this Treaty happily concluded) to admit of their late preamble, whereby
all differences of this kind before 1654. out of the East Indies, and all
differences in the East Indies before 1659. are mortified, excepting only the
business of the two ships; for the obtaining satisfaction for which he is
obliged both in honor and word; so that if the Treaty come to a conclusion
this objection is out of Doors; but if not, others whose number is not small,
as well as the persons interessed in these two ships, will put in for justice.

And whereas it is commonly scattered to and again, as if although the business
of these two ships were excepted or ended, that yet new difficulties and
matters would be proposed on the part of His Majesty, and so the Treaty still
kept often: The said Envoy Extraordinary does demand of their Lordships what one
difficulty has been propounded on His side for these six or eight months,
other than that one which deserves not be mentioned, viz. the having of some
other to be Umpire, and not the Switzes; and this being so, he cannot attribute
reports of this nature to any thing but very bad information, or no great
desire at least of having the Treaty brought to a good issue; and he does
assure their Lordships, that as the dispute about these two ships, its being
brought into the Treaty, arose not from His Majesty, but from this State; so
that no new matter will be propounded by Him or His Commissioners, but that the
business of these two ships being reserved to be continued in the way in which
they are, or immediately if their Lordships see good, brought to an issue, the
Treaty will be forthwith concluded: the which His Majesty does, and all good
men ought, to their utmost, to desire and promote, for the avoiding those
deluges of miseries which the breaking off thereof will certainly let in; and
it is an easy matter when waters are within their bounds to keep them so; but
very hard to return them to their old Channels when they have found a new one.

Given at the Hague the 30 of August 1662. George Downing.

Afterward the States General made several Resolutions, or pretended to make
such Resolutions, to send for their Ambassadors from ENGLAND, without any
Effects of the Treaty; whereupon their Ambassadors went several times to the
King and chief Ministers of State, solemnly to crave their Credential Letters
to be gone; which were prepared ready for them, and His Majesty ordered the
Secretaries of State that they should be delivered as soon as they pleased to
call for them: But afterward the Ambassadors, upon better consideration,
entered into further conference with the Kings Commissioners, and concluded the
Treaty with the Clause in the XV. Article, containing these words within a
Parenthesis ( hoc excepto, quod scilicet qui se jacturam passos dicunt in
duabus Navibus, videlicet, Bona Aventura and Bona Esperanza, poterunt litem
inceptam prosequi) which litem inceptam was agreed after three weeks debate on
it before the Treaty, and concluded, that it should be understood and construed
to be in the way it now depended between the King and the States General, and
not left to the ordinary course of Justice in Holland.

The Articles of the Treaty being thus agreed and concluded, after they were
signed by the Ambassadors and Commissioners, the Ambassadors sent them away by
a Gentleman of their own, with a Letter to the States General.

Articuli Foederis and Amicitiae inter CAROLUM II. Magnae Britanniae, etc.
Regem, and Ordines Generales Foederati Belgii.
POstquam Divina Providentia nuperos in Anglia motus suaviter composuerat, and
Serenissimum Magnae Britanniae Regem ad avita Regna ac dominia sua, admirabili
quodam populorum applausu reduxerat, dictus Dominus Rex eo statim curas and
cogitationes applicuit, ut pacem, amicitiamque cum Vicinis and Confoederatis
suis vel continua^et, vel redintegraret. Ex omnibus autem Gentibus, quae cum
dicto Domino Rege, vel cum Regiis Praedecessoribus suis unquam sociatae sunt,
nullas Celsis ac Praepotentibus Ordinibus generalibus Foederati Belgii
praeferendas esse censuit; tum quod dictus Dominus Rex, ejusque Praedecessores
propensum semper, and benevolum Animum erga dictos Dominos Ordines, eorumque
Rempublicam ostende int, tum quod mutua subditorum dicti Domini Regis
Dominorumque Ordinum Generalium commoda and commercia, and praesertim ejusdem
religionis professio, singularem quandam affectus, and consilii unionem, ad
uttiusque populi stabilimentnm and incrementum postulare videantur. Cumque
dicti D. Ordines moti super memoratis rationibus nihil antiquius habuerint,
quam ut omnimodo pristina foedera inter dictum D. Regem dictosque Dominos
Ordines renovarentur, and firmiori nexu stringe entur: Ideoque Legatos suos
Extraordinarios in Angliam miserint Dominum Ludovicum de Nassau, Dominum de
Lecke, Beverwaert, Odiocke; Simonem van Hoorn, Consulem and Consiliarium Urbis
Amstclodamensis, Deputatum in Consilio ordinario Hollandiae and Westfrisiae;
Michaelem van Gogh antehac Syndicum and Consiliarium Urbis Flissingensis,
Deputatum ad rations Provinciales Zelandiae; Joachimum Ripperda de Fermsum
Urbis Appingadam, Helm, Uytwaarda, Marsum, Byrsum, Salweert and Eversum;
Deputatos Hollandiae, Zelandiae and Groningue and Omlandiae in consessu Ordinum
Generalium, ad arctiorem firmioremque pacem and amicitiam cum dicto Domino Rege
ineundam: placuit dicto Domino Regi deputare ex part sua Commissarios and
Procuratores suos e secretiori sacrae Regiae Majestatis Consilio Iohannem
Baronem Robarts Custodem privati sigilli; Georgium Ducem Albemarle exercituum
in Magna Britannia and Hybernia Capitaneum generalem and equorum Regiorum
Magistrum; Edvardum Comitem Mancestriae, hospitii Regii Camerarium; Hieronymum
Comitem Portlandiae; Densillium Baronem Hollis; Antonium Baronem Ashley
Scaccarii Regii Cancellarium, and subthesaurarium; Carolum Barckly equitem
auratum, hospitii Regii Thesaurarium; Georgium Carteret, equitem auratum and
Baronettum, hospitii Regii Vice-Camerarium; Edvardum Nicholas, equitem auratum,
unum, atque. Guilielmum Morice equitem auratum, alterum primariorum Regis
Secretariorum, ut super proposito foedere cum dictis Legatis tractarent,
concluderentque secundum Litteras plenae potestatis, utrinque exhibitas:
Tandemque inter dictos Regiae Majestatis Commissarios ab una, Dominorumque
Ordinum Legatos ab altera part, conventum and concordatum est,

I.
Imprimis, quod ab hoc die sit vera, firma, and inviolabilis pax, amicitia,
sincerior, intimior atque arctior Confoederatio and Unio inter Serenissimum
Magnae Britanniae Regem, atque Celsos and Praepotentes Ordines Generales
Foederatarum Belgii Provinciarum, Terrasque, Regiones, Civitatesque sub
utriusque ditione sine distinctione locorum positas, earumque subditos, and
incolas, cujuscunque demum gradus fuerint.

II.
Item uti dictus Dominus Rex, dictique Domini Ordines Generales, maneant Amici,
Confoederati, necessitudine and amicitia conjuncti and adstricti, ad jura atque
immunitates subditorum alterutrius contra quoscunque demum tuendas, qui
utriusque status pacem, terra marive disturbare conabuntur, vel qui intra
alterutra dominia degentes publici utriusque status hosts denunciabuntur.

III.
Item quod dictus Dominus Rex, dictique Domini Ord: Gen: nihil agent, facient,
molientur, tractabunt, aut attentabunt, adversus alterutrum vel subditos
alterutrius, quocunque in loco, five terra, mari, portubus, districtibus,
finibus, and aquis dulcibus, quacunque occasion: nec eorum alter, vel subditi
alterutrius, dabit, praestabit, vel subministrabit ullum auxilium, consilium,
seu favorem, neque quicquam agi, tractari vel attentari ab alio quoviscunque
assentiet in damnum, aut praejudicium alterius, vel subditorum alterutrius, sed
omnibus and singulis de gentibus vel commorantibus, vel existentibus inter
alterutrius dominia, qui contra alterutrum quicquam agent, facient, tractabunt,
vel attentabunt, uterque express, and cum effectu contradicet, renitetur,
atque impedimentum realiter praestabit.

IV.
Item quod neque dictus Dominus Rex, vel dicta Respublica, neve ullus
exsubditis alterutrius, incolis, aliisque in eorum ditione commorantibus
alterutrius, Rebelli quocunque subsidio, consilio, studio sovebit and
adjuvabit, sed express contradicet, atque efficaciter obstabit, ne quid
auxilii, aut adjumenti ab ullo, qui aut ex subditis, incolis, aut commorantibus
in alterutrius Dominiis fuerit, ullis istjusmodi Rebellibus praedictis, seu
sint Viri, Naves, Arma, bellicus apparatus, aliave bona interdicta, neque
etiam, pecuniae, aut commeatus seu victualia, mari vel terra submittantur, aut
suppeditentur: atque omnes Naves, Arma, bellicus apparatus, aliave bona
interdicta, etiam pecuniae and commeatus ad quamcunque personam, vel personas
pertinentia, quae contra sensum hu jus articuli submittentur aut
suppeditabuntur, eidem parti (ubi personae contravenientes fuerint) addicentur,
and in fiscum cedent: quin and ii, qui scientes and volentes quicquam contra
sensum hujus articuli fecerint, commiserint, attentaverint, consiliumque
dederint, utriusque partis hosts judicabuntur, atque ibi perduellionis poenas
luent, ubi id commissum aut perpetratum fuerit: de specificatione autem earum
mercium, quae prohibitae aut contrabandae censebuntur, postea provisum erit.

V.
Item quod dictus Dominus Rex, dictique Domini Ordines Generales sibi mutuo,
sincere and fideliter (prout opus fuerit) contra alterutrius Rebels terra
marique opem ferent, viris and navibus ea proportione, eoque modo, iisque
conditionibus, de quibus postmodum convenerint, prout necessitas and rerum
alterutrius ratio tulerit, sumptibus tamen and expensis illius partis quae
auxilium rogaverit.

VI.
Item quod neque dictus Dominus Rex, neque dicta Respublica, subditive,
rebellem vel rebels, profugum vel profugos alterius declaratos, vel
declarandos, in ejus dominia, terras, regiones, portus, sinus, aut districtus,
eorumve aliquod recipiet, neque iis, vel eorum alicui in praedictis locis, vel
alio quocunque etiam extra sua Dominia, patrias, regiones, terras, portus,
sinus, aut districtus, auxilium, consilium, hospitium, milites, naves,
pecunias, arma, apparatum bellicum, vel commeatum concedet, praestabit, aut
ministrabit: neve alteruter istjusmodi rebels, profugos a quacunque persona,
vel personis recipi permittet in sua Dominia, patrias, regiones, terras,
portus, sinus, districtus: nec istjusmodi rebellibus, profugis, ullum auxilium,
consilium, hospitium, favorem, arma, apparatum, milites, pecunias, aut
commeatum praestari, ministrari, aut concedi permittet, sed express, and cum
effectu contradicet, obstabit, atque impedimentum realiter praestabit.

VII.
Item quod si alteruter, aliquem vel aliquos, suum vel suos fuisse vel esse
rebellem, vel rebels, profugum, vel profugos, and in sua Dominia, territoria,
patrias, portus, districtus, vel eorum aliquod, receptum, vel receptos esse,
aut ibidem commorari, satitare, vel profugium sibi quaetere, per litteras suas
publicas, and authenticas alteri significaverit, and declaraverit: tum illa
pars, quae hujusmodi literas receperit, vel cui taliter significatum, vel
declaratum fuerit, intra spatium viginti octo dierum a die predictae
significationis proxime and continue numerandum, tenebitur dicto rebelli, vel
rebellibus, profugo, vel profugis praecipere and mandare, ut extra sua Dominia,
patrias, regiones, terras, districtus, and eorum quodlibet singuli exeant and
recedant, and si quis praedictorum rebellium aut profugorum, intra decimum
quintum diem, a die hujusmodi praecepti and mandati non recesserit and
exiverit, singuli morte, and amissione praediorum, and bonorum mulctabuntur.

VIII.
Item quod nullus rebellis dicti Domini Regis Magnae Britanniae, in aliqua
castra, oppida, villas, portus, districtus, vel alia loca seu privilegio
donata, vel non donata, quae aliqua persona, cujuscunque status and dignitatis
existat, vel existet, infra dominia, and territoria Foederatarum Provinciarum,
quocunque jure vel titulo tenet, vel possidet, vel deinceps tenebit, vel
possidebit, recipietur; nec in ea per aliquam personam, cujuscunque status and
dignitatis fuerit, recipi, vel in iisdem commorari permittetur, aut
tolerabitur: neque dicti Domini Ordines Generales alicui ejusmodi rebelli in
locis praedictis, in navibus, militibus, pecuniis, commeatu aut alio quocunque
modo, auxilium, consilium, vel favorem per aliquam personam, cujuscunque status
aut dignitatis fuerit, de caetero dari aut praestari permittent, aut
tolerabunt, verum id public and diserte prohibebunt, atque efficaciter
impedient, and si aliqua persona, vel personae cujuscunque status aut
dignitatis fuerint, manens vel degens, manentes vel degentes infra dominia
Foederatarum Provinciarum, earumve potestates, contra hujusmodi conventionem
aliquid fecerit, seu fecerint, quod tunc omnes and singulae personae taliter
facientes, omnibus hujusmodi castris, oppidis, villis, praediis, caeterisque
locis, quae illi, vel eorum alter eo tempore habent, aut habet, vel quocunque
jure aut titulo se habere praetendent, vel praetendet, pro termino vitae suae
exuentur, and privabuntur: pariter nullus rebellis dictorum Dominorum Ordinum
Foederatarum Provinciarum, in castra, oppida, portus, caeteraque loca, eorumve
aliquod, sive privilegio donatum, sive non donatum, quod quaelibet persona, vel
personae cujuscunque status aut dignitatis existat, aut existant, quocunque
jure aut titulo tenet, aut tenent, possidebit vel possidebunt, infra Regna, vel
Dominia dicti Domini Regis Magnae Britanniae recipietur, vel a quacunque
persona, vel personis recipi, inibique versari permittetur, neque dictus
Dominus Rex Magnae Britanniae alicui ejusmodi rebelli in locis praedictis, in
navibus, militibus, pecuniis, commeatu, aut alio quocunque modo, auxilium,
consilium, aut favorem per aliquam ejusmodi personam, vel personas, cujuscunque
gradus sit, de caetero dari aut praestari permitter, aut tolerabit, sed public
and diserte prohibebit, and efficaciter impediet. Et si quis e dicti Domini
Regis subditis vel infra illius Dominia contra ejusmodi conventionem quicquam
secerit, vel attentaverit, omnes and singulae personae taliter facientes
omnibus istiusmodi castris, oppidis, villis, praediis, caeterisque locis, quae
illi, vel eorum alter id temporis habent, aut habet, vel quocunque jure, aut
titulo se habere praetendent, aut praetendet, pari modo pro termino vitae suae
exuentur and privabuntur.

IX.
Item quod dictus Dominus Rex Magnae Britanniae Subditique ejus, omnesque
Majestatis suae Dominiorum Incolae; item praedictae Foederatae Provinciae,
earumque Subditi and Incolae, cujuscunque ordinis and conditionis fuerint, ad
sese mutuo rebus omnibus humaniter atque amice tractandum obligabuntur, uti
terra vel aqua alterutrius Regiones, Oppida, Pagos, sive muro cincta, sive non
cincta, sive munita, sive non munita, portus etiam, and universam partis
utriusque ditionem in Europa libere and secure adire possint, in iisque versari
and commorari quamdiu voluerint, ibique sine ullo impedimento commeatum suum,
usibus quantum necesse erit, coemere, atque etiam negotiari, atque mercaturam
facere, quocunque mercium genere ipsis videbitur, easque advehere suo
arbitratu, aut exportare, dummodo, quae statuta sunt, portoria solvant; salvis
etiam alterutrius Dominii legibus, ac statutis omnibus; Ita tamen ut Subditi
and Incolae utriusque partis commercium suum exercentes in alterutrius
Regionibus and Ditionibus, non obligentur imposterum plus portorii, Census,
Vectigalium aut aliorum tributorum solvere, quam pro rata proportione, quam
alii Extranei solvunt in iisdem locis mercaturam exercentes.

X
Item quod naves, and navigia dictarum Provinciarum Foederatarum, tam Bellica,
and ad hostium vim propulsandam instructa, quam alia, quae alicui e navibus
Bellicis dicti Domini Regis Magnae Britanniae in maribus Britannicis obviam
dederint, vexillum suum e mali vertice detrahent and supremum velum demittent,
co modo, quo ullis retro temporibus unquam observatum fuit.

XI.
Item in majorem Commercii and Navigationis libertatem, conventum and conclusum
est, quod dictus Dominus Rex Magnae Britanniae, dictique Domini Ordines
Generales, in Portus suos, Urbes and Oppida, non recipient, neque sinent ut
ullus ex subditis alterutrius recipiat Piratas aut Praedones, iisve hospitium,
auxilium, aut commeatum praebeant; verum operam dabunt, ut praedicti Piratae
and Praedones, eorumve Piraticae participes, conscij, and adjutores in aliorum
terrorem investigentur, capiantur, and merito supplicio puniantur, omnes naves,
bona, and merces piratice ab iis captae, atque in portus alterutrius Dominii
advectae, quae quidem inveniri poterunt, imo etiam si venditae sint, justis
Dominis restituentur, and satisfactio dabitur vel earum Dominis, vel iis, qui
per literas procurationis eas res vendicaverint, modo ejus Dominii debitis ex
lege probationibus, in Curia causarum maritimarum appareat.

XII.
Item non permissum erit subditis Regiae Majestatis, Incolis Regnorum, aut
terrarum illi obedientium, aut Incolis and Subditis Federati Belgij hostile
aliquid, aut violentum invicem moliri, aut facere, sive mari, sive terra, nullo
praetextu aut color: and per consequens non licitum erit dictis subditis aut
incolis ab aliquo Principe aut Statu, quibus cum alterutro Foederatorum
discordia aliqua, aut bellum apertum est, literas patentes (quas commissiones
vocant) aut repressalias impetrare, and multo minus vi istarum literarum
subditos alterutrius Foederatorum aliqua molestia aut damno afficere: neque
etiam permissum erit armatoribus extraneis, non subditis uni aut alteri
Confoederatorum, habentibus commissiones ab aliquo alio Principe, aut Statu, ut
in portubus unius aut alterius partium praedictarum naves suas instruant, ea
quae ceperunt, vendant, redimere faciant, aut alio modo quo cunque mutent, tam
naves, mercimonia, quam alia onera quaecunque; and nequidem victualia coemere
illis licitum erit, nisi quae necessaria erunt ad perveniendum ad portum
proximum illius Principis, a quo commissiones obtinuerunt; Et si forte aliquis
subditorum Regiae Majestatis, ant dictorum Dominorum Ordinum Generalium emerit,
mutatione aut alio quocunque modo sibi acquisiverit, ejusmodi navem aut
mercimonia, quae a subditis unius aut alterius capta fuerunt, eo casu dictus
subditus tenebitur dictam navem, bona aut mercimonia restituere proprietariis,
aut refundere pecuniam pro dictis rebus solutam aut promissam, modo coram
consilio Regiae Majestatis aut dictis Dominis Ordinibus Generalibus
probaverint, sese earum rerum proprietarios esse.

XIII.
Item si dictus Dominus Rex Magnae Britanniae, aut Domini Ordines Generales
Foederati Belgii, ullum foedus, amicitiam, confoederationem, aut necessirudinem
cum aliis quibuscunque Regibus, Rebuspublicis, Principibus, aut Statibus
contrahent, aut paciscentur, alteruter alterum, ejusque Dominia in iis eorumve
quolibet comprehender, si comprehendi voluerit, atque de omnibus istiusmodi
amicitiae and Confoederationis tractatibus certiorem reddet.

XIV.
Item quod si acciderit, ut quam diu foedus, amicitia, and societas haec
duraverit, ab ullo ex subditis aut incolis alterutrius partis contra hoc
foedus, aut ullum ejus membrum, mari, terra, aut aquis dulcibus quicquam fiat
aut tentetur, amicitia haec, foedus and societas inter has nationes non idcirco
interrumpentur, aut infringentur, verum integra nihilominus perstabunt, vimque
suam plenariam obtinebunt, tantummodo illi ipsi, qui contra foedus praedictum
commiserint, singuli punientur, and nemo alius, justitiaque reddetur, and
satisfactio dabitur illis omnibus quorum adinterest, ab iis omnibus, qui terra,
mari, aut aliis aquis contra hoc foedus quicquam commiserint, ulla in part
Europae aut ubivis locorum intra fretum Gaditanum, sive in America, vel per
Africae littora, ullisve in Terris, Insulis, aequoribus, aestuariis, sinubus,
fluminibus, ullisve in locis cis caput Bonae spei intra anni spatium quam
justitia postulabitur, in omnibus autem (uti supra dictum est) ultra praedictum
caput locis, intra menses octodecim quam justitia praedicto modo postuletur;
Quod si vero faederis ruptores non comparuerint, neque se judicandos
submiserint, neque satisfactionem dederint intra hoc vel illud temporis spacium
pro loci longinquitate constitutum, praedicti illi utriusque partis hosts
judicabuniur, eorumque bona, facultates, and quicunque reditus publicabuntur,
plenaeque, ac justae satisfactioni impendenda erunt earum injuriarum quae ab
ipsis illatae sunt, ipsique praeterea cum in alterutrius partis potestate
fuerint, iis poenis obnoxii erunt, quas suo quisque crimine commeruerit.

XV.
Item conventum and conclusum est inter dictum Dominum Regem Magnae Britanniae
ac dictos Dominos Ordines Generales Foederati Belgii, quod Insula Puleron
restituetur dicto domino Regi, aut iis qui ad hoc diploma a Rege sub magno
Angliae sigillo acceperint, idque simul ac aliquis tali instructus diplomate
illuc pervenerit, and illam restitutionem petierit; and quo illud facilius ac
certius ad exitum perducatur ab Ordinibus Ceneralibus and societate Indica,
quae est apud Pelgas, diplomata ad hoc necessaria ipsi tradentur statim post
rat ficationem hujus Tractatus. Et quod per restitutionem istius Insulae
Puleron, actiones ac praetensiones omnes, quas subditi unius and alterius
partis ob damna, injurias and offensiones invicem in India illatas, and in
Anglia cognitas ante 10/20 Januarii 1659/8 siti competere putant, (Hoc excepto
quod scilicet qui se jacturam passos dicunt in duabus navibus, videlicet Bona
Aventura and Bona Esperanza, poterunt litem incoeptam prosequi) cessabunt,
extinguentur, and annihilabuntur eo quo sequitur modo, ut omnes offensae,
injuriae, damna, ao dispendia (excipiendo prius excepto) quae pars una ab
altera pertulit, aut quomodolibet se pertulisse causari posset in Indiis
Orientalibus, quorum quidem notitia aliqua fuerit Londini apud Anglos, aut
Hagae-Comitum apud Belgas, ante vigesimum diem Januarii anni 1659. Sti. Nov.
aut decimum Januarii anni 1658. St. V. in caeteris vero mundi plagis ex capite
quarumcunque actionum, aut rerum, quae contigere ante publicationem and
notitiam pacis inter utramque gentem initae die 4/14 Martii anni 1653/4 penitus
deletae atque extinctae remanebunt. Ita ut neutra dictarum partium alteri
negotium facesset ob aliquod istjusmodi damnum, offensam, injuriam, aut
dispendia (excipiendo prius excepto) sed earum omnium singularumque perfecta
erit remanebit que abolitio, omnesque eo nomine lites, actiones, cassae
nullaeque erunt; caetera autem damna, offensae, injuriae, and dispendia quae
gens Anglicana seu publico, seu privatorum nomine affirmare poterit sibi
obvenisse aut illata esse a Foederatorum Belgarum regimine, aut a societatibus,
vel privatis eidem regimini subectis; uti and vicissim quae Foederati Belgii
subditi seu publico, seu privatorum nomine sibi advenisse aut illata esse
causari poterunt ab Anglorum regimine, aut a societatibus, vel privatis iisdem
subjectis in Indiis Orientalibus, post diem 10/20 Januarii 1658/9 aut saltem
quorum notitia ante eum diem Londini, aut Hagae mitis non fuerit, atque in
caeteris mundi partibus post publicationem and notitiam pacis praedictae anni
1653/4 absque ulla personarum seu loci and temporis ulteriori distinctione and
exceptione submittentur, sicut hisce tabulis submittuntur, examini, arbitrio,
and decisioni Commissariorum, aut Arbitrorum, modo and conditionibus ut
sequitut.

Ut Commissarii in res praeteritas tantum constituantur; neutiquam vero in
futuras, quae post diem conclusi tractatus accidisse poterunt.

Ut commissio eorum in praeterita solummodo (ut jam dictum est) directa,
clausulam ullam generalem nequaquam eontineat, sed express circumscribatur ac
limitetur catalogo speciali, qui commissioni adjungetur, ita ut praeter
actiones eodem catalogo speciali qui commissioni adjungetur, descriptas, de
nulla alia re cognoscere ipsis integrum sit.

Ut autem de eo utrimque conveniat, catalogus ab utraque part conficietur, and
utrinque commutabitur, ut hinc inde rite, ac debite examini subjici possit, ac
si vel in hoc, vel in illo inveniantur res qualescunque ad Indias Orientales
spectantes, quae ante diem 10/20 Januarii anni 1658/9. Londini notae fuerunt
quoad actiones Anglorum, aut eodem tempore Hagae-Comitis quoad actiones
Foederatarum Provinciarum, vel in caeteris mundi plagis ante publicationem and
notitiam pacis praedicti anni 1653/4. acciderint, aut etiam aliae actiones ejus
naturae, ut hujusmodi arbitrio submitti minus aptae censeantur, eae catalogis
expungentur.

Postquam itaque de hisce catalogis utrinque conventum erit, annus integer
constituetur, quo, inter serenissimae suae Majestatis Ministrum atque Ordinum
Generalium Commissarios, Hagae-Comitis, negotia omnia iisdem catalogis contenta
per amica colloquia componantur, and praetendentes, vel eorum Mandatarii hunc
in finem speciali mandato muniti, ante exitum sexti mensis praedicti anni
Hagae-Comitis sistere sese tenebuntur.

Hoc autem anno elapso omnes eae actiones ob quas Praetendentes vel eorum
Mandatarii Hagae fuerint, eo intuitu, ut de iis amicabiliter transigeretur,
quod per legitimum testimonium ablegati Regis Magnae Britanniae and
Commissariorum Ordinum Generalium, aut alterutrius probare tenebuntur, and de
quibus tamen antea ita transactum non fuerit, ad dictos Commissarios
remittentur, ut tandem per eos aut componantur, aut decidantur; qui quidem
Commissarii post dictum annum elapsum, si aliquae actiones tunc temporis ita
amice non fuerint compositae, eo fine Londini convenient, eruntque quaterni ab
utraque part, instruentur autem and munientur authoritate, fietque porro haec
ipsa submissio, and progressus in omnibus and per omnia eodem prorsus modo quo
anno 1654. factum fuit. Ita tamen ut in hisce superarbitrium Protestantibus
Helvetiorum Cantonibus non deferatur.

XVI.
Item quod dicti Domini Regis subditi, quique sub ejus ditione fuerint, possint
libere, tuto ac secure in Foederati Belgii Provinciis, and singulis suis
Ditionibus in Europa, perque eas terra vel aqua ad ulla in iis loca, vel ultra
eas iter facere, perque ulla earum oppida, praesidia, munimenta, transire, quae
ullis in locis Foederatarum Belgii Provinciarum, aut alibi in eorum ditionibus
in Europa sunt, vel erunt, mereaturam in omnibus illis locis facere, eorumque
negotiatores, institores, famulive armati sive inermes (armati autem non
amplius quadraginta simul) tam sine bonis suis and mercimoniis, quam cum iis,
quocunque ire voluerint; poterit item populus and Incolae Foederatarum Belgii
Provinciarum eadem liberate frui in omnibus dicti Domini Regis ditionibus in
Europa, dummodo in hujusmodi commercio and mercatura, singuli alterutrius
Dominij legibus and statutis utrimque pareant moremquegerant.

XVII.
Item si naves mercatoriae unius aut alterius subditorum per tempestatem, vel
Piratas, vel aliam quamcunque necessitatem, portum unius, aut alterius Dominii
intrent, inde secure and libere recedant cum Navibus and mercimoniis absque
aliqua vectigalium aut aliorum jurium solutione; ita tamen ut onus non
distrahant aut divendant, aut venale quicquam proponant; nec molestiae
qualicunque, aut visitationi subjicientur, modo nec personas aliquas, nec
merces in navem receperint aut quicquam egerint contra leges, statuta, aut
consuetudines ejus loci ubi portus (uti praemissum est) intraverint.

XVIII.
Item quod mercatores, naucleri, gubernatores and nautae alterutrius partis,
eorumque naves, bona, aut mercimonia in terris, portubus, navium stationibus,
aut fluminibus alterius non prehendentur, vel sub arresto detinebuntur ex
edicto quovis generali aut speciali, sive ad bellum, sive ad alium quemlibet
usum, nisi summa necessitate id cogente, justa etiam satisfactione ob id data,
ita tamen ut detentionibus and arrestationibus quae ex jure and legibus
alterutrius Dominij recte atque ordine fiant, nihil hinc derogatum sit.

XIX.
Item uti mercatores utrinque, eorum institores and famuli, atque etiam
naucleri aliique nautae, tam eundo quam redeundo navibus per maria aliasque
aquas, quum in portubus alterutrius, aut in terra egressi, sui suorumque
bonorum defendendi causa, omne genus arma, tam offensiva, quam defensiva
gestent utanturque; verum ubi ad sua quisque hospitia, ac diversoria
pervenerit, ibi arma sua deponet, ac relinquet, donec rursus ad navem se
receperit, aut eo commeare velit.

XX.
Item quod naves praesidiariae seu Bellica alterutrius partis quamcunque in
mari navem, vel naves mercatorias, quae ad alterum vel alterius subditos aut
Incolas pertinuerint, quae eundem cursum tenuerint, idemve iter fecerint,
obviam habentes aut assequentes iis praesidio esse, easque defendere
tenebuntur, quam diu eundem cursum tenuerint contra omnes and singulos qui eas
vi adorientur.

XXI.
Item si qua navis aut naves, quae subditorum aut Incolarum alterutrius partis,
aut neutralis alicujus fuerint, in alterutrius portubus a quovis tertio
capiantur, quae ex subditis and Incolis alterutrius portus non sit, illi quorum
in portu aut ex portu, aut quacunque ditione praedictae naves captae fuerunt,
pariter cum altera part dare operam tenebuntur in praedictis nave, vel navibus
insequendis and reducendis, suisque Dominis reddendis, verum hoc totum fiet
Dominorum Impensis aut eorum quorum id Interest.

XXII.
Item quod scrutatores caeterique id genus officiales ex utraque part ad
normam legum alterutrius Dominii sese dirigent, neque plus imponent, exigentve,
quam per authoritatem sibi commissam and cepta mandata licuent.

XXIII.
Item si qua injuria ab alterutro Dominio ejusve subditis aut incolis illata
sit, sive contra ullos hujus Foederis atticulos, sive contra jus commune, uti
nullae literae repressaliae, mercae, aut contramercae, ab alterutto
concedantur, donec justitia prius juxta leges ordinatias postuletur; sin autem
illic justitia vel denegetur vel in longum protrahatur, tum uti dictus Dominus
Rex dictique Domini Ordines Generales aut delegati ejus dominii cujus subditi
and incolae injuria affecti sunt, ab altero in quo Justitia (ut supra dictum
est) denegatur aut differtur, aut ab illa potestate quae hujusmodi postulatis
audiendis constituta erit, public justitiam postulent, ut omnes hujusmodi
lites vel amioc componantur, vel ordinario legum processu; sin autem mora adhuc
interposita erit neque jus reddetur neque satisfactio dabitur intra tres menses
quam hu jusmodi postulatio lata fuerit, tum demum utrliterae repressaliae,
merca vel contramercae concedantur.

XXIV.
Item quod illi qui specialia diplomata aut commissiones ab alterutra part
obtinue int priusquam illa diplomata accipiant, coram eo judice qui ea ipsis
exhibebit, sufficientem fiduciariam cautionem interponent, per ejusmodi homines
qui respondendo pares sunt, and non ejus navis socii aut participes, se nullum
damnum aut injuriam alterutrius subditis aut incolis illaturos.

XXV.
Item conventum and concordatum est, quod utriusque partis subditis and incolis
ad Portus utriusque liber semper sit accessus, iniisque commorari, and inde
rursus recedere liberum and licitum erit, non solum cum navibus Bellicis, five
ad dictum Dominum Regem, dictosve Dominos Ordines Generales spectent, sive
eorum sint qui specialia diplomata obtinuerint, five tempestatis aut maris
periculo intraverint, sive ut naves reparent aut commeatum coemant, modo
octonarum navium Bellicarum numerum non excedant, fi sua sponte intraverint,
nec diutius in Portubus aut circa Portus haereant, quam ad navium reparationem,
coemenda victualia, aliasve necessitates fuerit necesse. Et si major navium
Bellicarum numerus data occasion ad ejusmodi Portus velit accedere, eas
intrare nequaquam erit licitum, nisi prius impetrata ab iis venia, ad quos
Portus illi praedicti pertinuerint, nisi tempestate, aut vi aliqua, aut
necessitate compulsae fuerint, quo maris pericula effugerent, quod cum
acciderit, Praefectum ejus loci, aut summum Magistratum statim de causa sui
advectus certiorem facient, nec diutius ibi haerebunt, quam illis a Praefecto,
aut summo Magistratu permissum erit, nec in iis Portubus commorantes hostile
aliquod, aut quicquam in praejudicium eorum molientur.

XXVI.
Item conventum and conclusum est, quod utraque pars vere ac firmiter
observabit atque executioni mandabit praesentem tractatum, omniaque and singula
in eo contenta and comprehensa, atque eadem ab alterutrius subditis and incolis
observari and ptaestari efficaciter curabit.

XXVII.
Item. ad majorem cautelam and securitatem tractatus hujus and confoederationis
a part dictorum Dominorum Ordinum Generalium Foederatarum Provinciarum,
eorunque populi sincere and bona fide praestandae, conventum and conclusum est,
sicut and dicti Domini Ordines Generales his praesentibus convenient, seque
firmiter obligant and devinciunt, quod omnes and finguli, quos aut quem, vel
ipsi, vel Ordines Provinciarum quocunque demum tempore eligent, constituent,
aut praeficient Capitaneum Generalem, Gubernatorem, seu Praesidem primarium,
sive Stadtho^der, Imperatorem Exercituum, seu militiae in terra, vel
Admirallum, seu Praetorem Classium, navium, copiarumve maritimarum,
obligabuntur, and devincientur, hunc Tractatum, and omnia ejus capitula
juramento confirmare, itaque sancte and cum juramento spondere, se quantum
possint, omnia ea religiose observaturos, and curaturos, ut ab aliis
observentur and executioni mandentur.

XXVIII.
Item conventum, conclusum, and concordatum est: quod praesens Tractatus, atque
omnia and singula in eo contenta and conclusa a dicto Domino Rege Magnae
Britanniae, dictisque Dominis Ordinibus Generalibus Foederatarum Provinciarum
per patentes utriusque partis literas Sigillo magno munitas, debita and
authentica forma, intra tres menses proxime insequentes (aut citius si fieri
poterit) confirmabuntur, and rata habebuntur, mutuaque instrumenta intra
praedictum tempus hic inde extrahentur, nec non and tractatus hic and
confoederatio statim a traditis and permutatis instrumentis forma and locis
solitis publicabitur.

Articulus Separatus.
SI forte aliqua Tapeta, Peristromata, Aulaea, Picturae, suppellectiles
cujuscunque generis, vel lapides pretiosi, Clinodia, Monilia, Gemmae, vel alia
quaecunque bona mobilia ad Regem Magnae Britanniae spectrantia, penes dictos
Ordines Generales, aut aliquem subditorum suorum jam nunc sunt, aut de futuro
reperientur, dicti Domini Ordines promittunt sese nullo modo protecturos
possessores aliquorum mobilium dictum ad Dom. Regem pertinentium, quae iis
auferri porerunt eo modo, ut nulla iniquitate, aut injustitia afficiantur illi,
qui gravabuntur illa sua sponte restituere: dictique Ordines promittunt sese
modo quam efficacissimo operam daturos, ut de plano and summarie in isto
negotio procedatur sine ordinaria forma, and modo procedendi in curiis usitato,
and ut justitia administretur, atque satisfiat dictae Regiae Majestati quantum
fieri poterit absque laesione alicujus.

Item quod si qui eorum qui rei sunt illius nefandi parricidij in Regem Carolum
primum beatissimae Memoriae admissi, ac legitime de eodem scelere attincti,
condemnati, aut convicti, vel jam sunt in Dominiis dictorum Ordinum Generalium,
vel postea illic advenient, statim quamprimum dictis Ordinibus Generalibus, vel
aliquibus officialibus suis innotuerit, vel relatum fuerit, praehensi in
custodiam dentur, and vincti in Angliam remittantur, vel in eorum manus
tradantur, qucs dictus Dominus Rex Magnae Britanniae iis custodiendis domumque
revehendis praefecerit. In quorum fidem praesentem articulum nos Commissarii
Sacrae Regiae Majestatis Magnae Britanniae subscripsimus, iisdemque sigilla
nostra apposuimus. Actum apud Whitehal decimo quarto die Septembris anno
millesimo sexcentesimo sexagesimo secundo.

Extraordinaer Schryvens van de Nederlandtsche Ambass: in Engelandt, meldende
op wat maniere noch eyndelick de Tractaten, met den Koninck geslooten sijn.
Mine Heeren,
NA het afgaen van onsen laesten vanden 8 deses, hebben wy de duplicata van
hare Hog: Mog: resolutie vanden 5 dito outfangen, en sijn wy op Maendagh
voorleden wederom met de Heeren Koninckl. Commissarisen in nader Conferentie
getreden, en all de o^^estelde artikulen distinctelick geresumeert, hebbende
vevdnden dat deselve in all deelen waren accorderende met het gheconventeerde,
alleen dat vande Engelsche side als noch bleef de selve difficulteyt,
namentlick dat de pretensie vande geinteresseerden in de bewuste Scheepen de
Bona Aventura en Bona Esperance mosten blyven geeximeert uyt de genitale
abolitie in it 15 Artikel geprojecteert, end dat het selve in it Artikel
behoorde te worden geinsereert, daer van sy in geenen deele verstonden te
wljcken, waer door wy ons gereduceert siende tot even absoluyte necessiteyt, om,
often die Heeren daer in te gemoete te gaen, often onverrichter sake te scheyden,
sijn wy nae ripe deliberatie en Examinatie van hare Ho: Mog: resolutien vanden
19 Juny, en derselver aenschryvens vanden 21 dito, heffens die vanden 5 deses,
met de Heeren Koninck. Commissarissen, eyntedat in het 15 Art. by parenthese
achter de woorden, sibi competere seputant, soude werden gevoeght dese clausul
( hoc excepto quod scilicet, qui se jacturam passos dicunt in duabus Navibus
Bona Aventura and Bona Esperance poterunt litem inceptam prosequi.)

Wy hopen en versorthen dat hare Ho: Mo: ons dese resoluytheyt niet qualick
ghelieven af te neemen, alsoo wy daer toe beweegt sijn geworden, om dat wy hier
komende te vertrecken onverrichter saecken onvermydelick veel swear
ongelegenheden te gemoet sagen, alsoo van goederhant bericht waren, dat de Kon:
albereyts order aen sijn afghesante inden Haagh had ghesonden, om sich bereyt
te maecken, om aenstonts op ons vertreck van hier mede herwaerts te koomen.

Waer door dan dit Tractaet ongeslooten blyvende, dese pretensien niet souden
werden geannulleert, maer de geinteresseerden vry blyven die te vervolgen so
sy geraden souden vinden.

Wy konnen mede niet oordeelen of het contenu van hare Ho: Mo: resolutie vande
21 July, is daer mede implicit voldaen, dewyle die woorden geen prejudicie
lijden, maer veel eer direct patrosineeren de meyninge van hare Ho: Mo: in it
voorseyde voorschryvens vervat, en in allen gevallen blijft het haer Ho: Mo:
vry, die saecken al schoon voor haer vervolght wordende daerinne te done en te
laeten't gunt sy sullen oordeelen recht en billick te sijn, sulcx dat hier door
mede in dit particulier de conditie van de Staet der Nederlanden niet is
verergeert; hebben oock niet gemeent te pecceren tegens de intentie van hare
Ho: Mo: niet toe te staen, dat dese clausule in het Tractaet selve influeerde,
en niet by even seperaet Artikel wierde ter neder gestelt, alsoo wy dat
onderscheyt niet geoordeelt hebben van soodanich gewichte te sijn, dat daer
over eenigh vorder dispuyt, en dienvolgende dilay vande conclusie deses
Tractaets behoorde te vallen, aengesien soodanigh separaet Artikel alter neder
ghestelt sijnde dat alleen om secretesse pleegh te geschieden, dit ooghmerck
niet soude konnen bereyckt worden, alsoo de gheinteresseerden niet sullen
nalaten haer pretensien te vervolgen: weshalven wy oock meenen in desen het
voornoemde aenschryven in substantie, en implicit te sijn voldaen, als mede
dat in it laeste van't voornoemde Artikel, achter het woort submissio ghevoeght
is het woort progressio, alsoo schijnt sich selven te wysen, dat even submissie
aen arbiters gedaen sijnde, de saecken die gesubmitteert sijn, moeten aldare
worden vervolght, derhalven dat niet discrepant verblyvende, hebben wy, nae dat
op gisteren wedersijts pouvoirs gesien sijn artikulen van het Tractaet, in
voeghen als booven is verhaelt, in it net uyt geschreeven, met die vanden Heeren
Commissarissen geconfereert, en d'accoort geworden sijnde, met d'onderlinge
teekeninge en besegelinghe bekrachtight, en alsoo de laeste hant aen dese so
langduyrige negotiatie gheleyt. De Heeren Commissarissen konden niet goet
vinden datmen wesijts beyde de Instrumenten teyckende, maer dat het geen by
haer aen ons wierde overgelevert, alleen by haer wierdt bevestight ex vice
versa, latende mede toe, dat hare Ho: Mo: pouvoir aen ons verleent, in het by
ons ondertekent Instrument, voor dat vanden Koninck wiert geinsereert,
allegerende dat all Tractaten by desen Koninck met Sweeden, Denemercken,
Portugael, op die manier waren getekent. Wy hebben niet gemeent hierinne eenigh
prejuditie voor hare Ho. Mo: te sijn gelegen, en is derhalven, om dit werck
niet te verachteren, de teyckeninge op de manier by hare Excel: geproponeert,
gedaen, op dat door nieuwe incidenten het Tractaet niet mocht worden verachtert.

Wy hebben geacht van ons devoir te sijn, het origeneel Tractaet, met even van
onse Edellieden aen hare Ho: Mo: te senden, die oock dese aen u Ed: overleveren
sal, en sullen wy so haest doenlijck, selver jae onder Gods genadigen
Zeegeen, noch inde toekoomende weeck volgen, om haer Ho: Mo: rapport van alles
te koomen done.

Hiermede. Mijn Heeren, etc. Chelcei den 15 Sep. 1652. gheteyckent van Hoorn M:
van Gogh.

The Translation of the Dutch Ambassadors Letter to the STATES, Chelsey 5/15
Sept. 1662.
SInce our last of the 8. Instant, we have received their Ho: Mo: Resolution of
the 5. Instant, and upon Monday last we had another Conference with His
Majesty's Commissioners, in which we did distinctly examine all the Articles
set down, and finding them in every degree suitable to what was agreed, but
only in this one Case, touching the pretenses of those Interessed in the Ships
the Bona Adventure and Bona Esperanza, that they must not be comprehended in
the General Abolition, as was projected in the 15. Article, and that it ought
to be inserted also in the said Article, so that the Commissioners would not in
the least go backward from that Resentment; We thereupon found our selves
necessitated to agree the said unto them, or else to take our leaves without
any effects: Whereupon we entered with His Majesty's Commissioners into
deliberation and examination of their Ho: Mo: Resolution of the 19. of June,
and that sent to us of the 21. of the same Instant; as likewise that of the 5.
of September. 1662. and we agreed, that in the 15. Article after the words, sibi
competere putant, there should be put into a Parenthesis this Clause, (hoc
excepto, quod scilicet, qui se jacturam passos dicunt in duabus Navibus, viz.
Bona Adventura and Bona Esperanza, poterunt litem inceptam prosequi:) We hope
that their Ho: Mo: will not take this resolution ill of us, for that we have
been entreated thereunto, and that we saw in case we should go away without a
conclusion, that great troubles would happen; and that we had it from a very
sure hand, that His Majesty had already given Orders to His Envoy residing at
the Hague, to make himself ready, that when we should come homewards, that also
without any delay he should hasten himself over; and again, the Treaty not
being concluded, those pretenses would not be disanulled, and that by that
means those interessed would have the freedom to proceed therein, as they
would think fit.

We cannot judge whether that contained in their Ho: Mo: Resolution of the 21
of July, is thereby satisfied implicitly, the words being no prejudice, but
very much agreeing to their Ho: Mo. meaning, sent Us in Writing since that
Instant. And although the said matter is persued by their Ho: Mo: Yet they have
the same means to do or leave what they shall judge fit or unfit to be done; So
that in this particular the Condition of the United Provinces is not in the
least prejudiced: we hope also not to have transgressed against the intention
of their Ho: Mo: in agreeing that the said Clause might also be included in the
Treaty, and not to be set down in a Separate Article, for that we did nor judge
that difference to be of so great importance, that any further dispute or delay
ought to be occasioned thereby in the concluding of the Treaty, and that
although such a Separate Article should be set down, as it uses only to be
done for Secretnesse sake, yet that this could not miss taking notice of, and
that the Interessed should not refrain persuing their pretenses; so that we
judge we have fulfilled the said Resolution implicit, as also in setting down
after the word Submissio, the word Progressio, for that it shows it self that a
business submitted must be there persued. And that nothing remain disputable,
after that each others powers were read, we did examine the Articles consented
unto, according to what mentioned before, and were written in a fair hand, and
conferred thereupon, and so agreed and made the said of force by Signing and
Sealing, so that we have put our last hands to this long and tedious
Negotiation; the Commissioners could not approve of having both Instruments
signed; but only that that delivered by them to us, should be only confirmed
vice versa, suffering also that their Ho: Mo: Power given to Us in that of Our
Signed Instrument, be inserted before that of His Majesty, alleging that the
Treaties made by this King with the Sweeds, Denmark, and Portugal, were all
signed in the same manner. We hope that not any prejudice can be occasioned
thereby to their Ho: Mo: since not to occasion hinderance, the signing was done
in this manner: according to what further was proposed by their Excellencies,
so that no new matters might have happened.

We have thought fit to send the Original of the Treaty by one of our
Gentlemen, and for our parts, we shall so soon as possibly (with Gods blessing)
hasten our selves homewards, which we hope will be the next Week, and then to
give their Ho: Mo: report of all.

van Hoorn M: van Gogh.

A MEMORIAL of Sir George Downing Knight, Envoy Extraordinary of His most
Sacred Majtie of Great Britain, etc.
Delivered unto the States General October. 3. 1662. N. S.
THe underwritten Envoy Extraordinary of His most Sacred Majesty of Great
Britain, etc. makes known to their Lordships the Estates General of the United
Provinces, that it has pleased the King his Master to give him leave to return
for England for a short time; but withal has commanded him by the hands of His
great Chancellor, before his going hence to demand in His Name, that
satisfaction be forthwith made to the persons concerned in the Ships ( Bona
Esperanza and Bona Adventure) and not to stir hence without such satisfaction
first made, or the final Answer had of their Lordships concerning this matter,
according to which His Majesty will govern Himself; and His Majesty does assure
Himself that their Lordships having had so fresh and pregnant testimony of His
most particular kindness toward this State, in the happy conclusion of the late
Treaty; and this being the only business reserved to be ended immediately
between His Majesty and their Lordships, in the manner it is now depending;
that they will not suffer any new eagroure to be raised by any hot debates or
lingering out of time; the former whereof His Majesty hopes they will avoid, and
the latter He is resolved no ways to admit; but that they will be pleased in
the quick and equitable ending thereof, to manifest the esteem they have of His
Majesty and his kindness, and their desires of having the Nations grow up into
a mutual and happy confidence upon the foot of the aforesaid Treaty.

Given at the Hague this 3. of October. 1662. N. S. George Downing.

Sir George Downing 's aforesaid Memorial rendered in French.
LE sonbsigne Envoye Extraordinaire de sa Majeste tres sacree de la Grand'
Bretagne, etc. fait scavoir a leurs Seigneuries les Estats Generaux des
Provinces Unies, qu'il a pleu au Roy son Maistre de luy donner conge de fair
un petit tour en Angleterre pour un peu de temps; mais aussi de le commander
par les mains de son grand Chancelier de demander avaunt son depart, que
satisfaction soit incontinent faite aux persons interessees dans les Navires
Bonne Esperance and Bonne Adventure, and de ne point bouger d'icy sans avoir
receu satisfaction, ou response definitive de leurs Seigeuries touchant cette
affair; selon quoy le Roy son Maistre se reglera; and sa Majeste se persuade
que leurs Seigneuries ayant receu ne tesmoignage si fresche and forte de son
amity tresparticuliere envers cet Estat, par l'heureuse conclusion du dernier
Traicte, and celle cy estant l'unique affair reservee d'estre vuidee enter sa
Majeste and leurs Seigneuries en la maniere dans laquelle elle depend
maintenant, qu'Elles ne voudront point qu'aucun nouvelle aigreur soit suscitee
par des grands debats ou long retardement: la premiere chose desquelles sa
Majeste espere qu'Elles eviteront, and pour la derniere Elle est resolve de ne
la point admettre: mais qu'il plaira a leurs Seigneuries de fair voir par la
prompte and equitable conclusion d'icelle, l'estime qu'Elles portent a sa
Majeste, and leur inclinations d'avoir les deux Nations augmentees en mutuelle
bonne intelligence and correspondence sur le pied du dit Traicte.

Faict a la Hay la 3. October. 1662. George Downing.

WIthin three or four days after this last Memorial was given in to the States
Deputies, there was ae Conference desired by the said Deputies, or some of
them; whereupon Sir George Downing met with the Pensionaris de Wit to hear
both parties, and Mr. Vandam (Advocate for the East India Company) offered
several objections against the right and pretense of the English, and chiefly
insisted at that time upon poterunt litem inceptam prosequi, and urged it to be
understood the Suit begun by Jonas Abeels at Amsterdam; but after some debate
it was then agreed and reconciled between Sir George Downing and the said
Pensionaris, to be the Cause depending upon the Kings recommendation before the
States General at the Hague; Sir George at that time further offering Letters
from both the Principal Secretaries to His Majesty, that the States Ambassadors
insisted upon that point many days before the Treaty was concluded, but it
would not be condescended unto. Mr. Oyens (the King's Advocate Commissionated
in Foraign Affairs) answered most of the Objections, and Mr. Carew (being then
present) desired that both parties might come with their Counsel fully
instructed at another time, to speak to the points only in controversy;
whereupon another Conference was appointed at Sir George Downing's House in the
Hague.

In the mean time the Advocates of the Company had several Consultations, and
Mr. Carew with his Advocates the like: And at the said Conference the
East India Company objected against the Interessed these things following, viz.

1. That res mobilis could not be granted without the possession delivered.

2. That by the Tripartite Indenture of Assignement or Transport from William
Courten and Sir Edward Littleton to Sir Paul Pindar, of the 19. December. 1642.
there was only a Security granted for Money lent, and not the real Interest
transferred in Ships or Goods to Sir Paul Pindar.

3. That in case of Shipwreck or other miscarriage, Sir Paul Pindar was not to
suffer Damage, but to sue the Polices of Assurances; therefore he can have no
pretense to the Ships or their Lading.

4. That Sir Paul Pindar could not claim his proportionable payments until some
months after the Return of the Ships to London, and therefore also he can have
no pretense to the Damages.

5. As to the Deed or Indenture of Bargain and Sale from William Courten to Sir
Edward Littleton, dated the 26 of April, 1642. it was only a Counter-security
against Engagements, and that he had not paid any money for Mr. Courten at the
time of Pergens his Transports; and therefore Mr. Courten was not divested of
his property in the Ships or their Lading.

6. That admitting Sir Edward Littleton's right, or any other Proprietor, they
were excluded from any new allegation or pretense, having not entered their
Claim in 1654. before the English and Dutch Commissioners, according to the 30.
Article of Cromwell's Treaty.

7. That as to the Commission grounded upon the Statutes made concerning
Bankrupts, neither the Statutes or Common Laws of England could be effectual or
take place in the Low Countries, where all things are Tried by the Civil Law,
or Law of Nations.

8. That admitting Mr. Courten were insolvent when he made the Transports to
Pergens, the Company could not take any such notice as to deem him incapable of
transferring his right to any thing he had in the United Provinces.

Wherefore they concluded upon the whole matter that Mr. Pergens his Agreement
was a good Agreement, and not to be avoided; more especially for that Jonas
Abeels after his Insinuations and Arrests made, was contented to accept of the
Eighty five thousand Gilders, having only jus ad rem and not jus in re; and
for that the Company could not have any recourse to Mr. Pergens for that Money
until the right was first determined in Law, Mr. Pergens having also had the
same recommendation by the Kings Letters; they therefore desired to be excused
from giving any further satisfaction therein.

The Answers following were given at the same Conference held at Sir George
Downings House in the Hague.
UNder submission it is conceived that the Interessed are before the King of
Great Britain's Minister of State, and the Deputies of the States General, in
an amicable way of Conferences, whereby the matters in debate are to be
considered politically: as to the Objections raised against their right, they
are most of them out of the Case, and the rest have been sufficiently answered
by Sir George Downing in his Replies to the States Answers upon his Memorials:
The Interessed did not doubt in the least, but that the East India Company had
been abundantly satisfied with the 15 Article of the Treaty, wherein all
Actions, Injuries, and Pretensions of the English are abolished and
extinguished (hoc excepto, quod scilicet qui se jacturam passos dicunt in
duabus navibus, videlicet Bona Esperanza, and Bona Adventura poterunt litem
inceptam prosequi.)

Upon the Petition (of the Interessed) to the King, setting forth the Case and
their Damages, His Majesty was pleased to recommend the same to the States
General, requiring speedy satisfaction and reparation, according to the Laws of
common Amity and Alliance held between the King and the States. And indeed,
when His Majesty considered the true state of the business, in its own nature
and circumstances, it could not in honor be otherwise concluded; yet I shall
speak something to the objections in point of Law.

Bracton says that an Action nihil aliud est quam jus prosequendi in Judicio;
Justinian says the same, and makes the distinction of two sorts, actiones
reales and actiones personales; Bracton makes a threefold distinction of
Actions; Real, personal, and mixed, actio realis in the largest sense is to be
understood for any thing wherein a man has a property, and may require it in
his own name, and not in another man's; actio personalis, is that which belongs
to a man by force of any Contract or Offense, etc. for which he may require
satisfaction by Law from the person offending; actio mixta, is that where a man
has not only remedy for the thing, but for damages against the person,
unjustly taking or detaining the same: there is jus quaerendi, and jus petendi,
there are actiones Criminales, and actiones Civiles; the former do properly
appertain to the King, propter pacem Regis and communem utilitatem, and when
Robberies, Murders, and Piracies are committed upon the Kings Subjects,
against Treaties of Amity, Confederacies, and Alliances, and upon such Ships as
carried the Kings own Colors, His Commission for Trade, and Signature in all
matters of Commerce, these are accounted Acts of Hostility and open defiance,
and not to be reconciled but in a way of State. Grotius in his Treatise De jure
belli ac pacis, makes this Distinction, and says, Bellum non dicitur actio sed
status, praelium autem dicitur conflictus ipse bellorum.

As to the Objection concerning Cromwell's Treaties, it needs no other Answer
but this, That as the King is not obliged to any thing in them, so he has not
admitted any thing of them to bar our extraordinary remedy against the Company,
for the violent injuries and damages sustained; and it would be a forced
interpretation, nay, a great piece of Nonsense, put upon the King and His
Commissioners, to imagine in the least that by the words poterunt litem
inceptam prosequi (should be construed) that the Interessed might be able to
prosecute the Suit begun at Amsterdam, which was lawful in the ordinary way
notwithstanding the Treaty, if any such Suit had been there begun by them; but
qui passos dicunt, begun no Suit at Amsterdam, their lis incepta was at
Whitehall upon their Petition to His Majesty, and prosecuted at the Hague by
His Majesty's Command, and several Orders from His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council. On the contrary, in the time of the Treaty, it was urged by the
States Ambassadors, that the States had sent instructions for a Clause to be
inserted, that the Interessed should be at liberty to prosecute their right
before the Eschevins at Amsterdam, and entreated the Kings Commissioners, that
it might be so inserted into the 15 Article of the Treaty, which was utterly
refused by the King, and in conclusion agreed upon, that the interessed should
not be left to the ordinary course of Justice in Holland, but proceed in the
way they had begun, upon their Petition, and his Majesty's recommendation to
the States General at the Hague. Whereupon the words Poterunt litem inceptam
prosequi, were inserted and thought sufficient to imply the sense of the
agreement and conclusion, as appears by the Ambassadors Letter sent from
Chelsey with the Treaty Sept. 5/15 1662. I only mention these by the way, since
Mr. Vandam was pleased to make those exceptions to the words in the Treaty, and
the Pensionaris made the other exception as to Cromwell's Treaty of 1654.

After Mr. Courten had once divested himself of his Property in the Ships, his
Stock in India, and the product of it (as nothing is more usual amongst
Merchants, then to sell their Shipping at Sea, Adventures abroad, and Actions
in joint stocks of Companies) all posterior Acts to Pergens were void, and both
the Company and Pergens in this Case, were left without any manner of excuse,
for that the Transports to Sir Edward Littleton and Sir Paul Pindar were
insinuated to them long before the pretended agreement.

The Case that Pentionaris de Wit put concerning res Mobilis (does not quadrate
with ours) where he says that Abraham the Shoemaker sold a pair of Shoes to
Adrian van Hoffe for a pattacone who left them in the Shoomakers custody until
he called again; in the mean time Abraham's Servant or himself, sold the Shoos
to Jacob the Jew for a Duccatone, who took them away and had the property by
Manuduction or Delivery; That Adrian had only his remedy against Abraham fot
the price, and not against Jacob for the Shoes: It Is granted, that Shops, and
Fairs, are Markets overt, and although goods were stolen and sold there, even
then the property is changed; yet in those Cases if it be found there was any
Combination between the parties, there is relief to be had against them; It Is
frequent in England, that both Buyers and Sellers of stolen goods, where they
were sold at an undervalue, have suffered as Accessaries when the Principals
have made their escape; pardon the meanness of the expression, I could not find
any thing that comes nearer to our point. The like is if a man voucheth a Horse
in Smithfield. The Company knew that Mr. Courten was not qualified to deal with
Pergens, and consequently that Mr. Pergens was not qualified to deal with the
Company, so the Compact between them was a mere Collusion. As to Sir Edward
Littleton, his Damages and Payments for Mr. Courten, the several Records in His
Majesty's Courts will sufficiently declare to the World what they are; but to
give the States General and the East India Company further satisfaction
therein, they shall receive Copies of the said Records, and also the opinions
of the most learned Common Lawyers of England, and Professors of the Civil Law
there; that all Contracts, Obligations, and Transports made in England, are to
be adjudged according to the Laws thereof.

Men's sana in Corpore sano.
To all Military Men, Merchants, and others of the English Nation, inhabiting
within the Seven United Provinces.
COUNTRYMEN,
IT was given for a general rule by William of Nassau, who was both an Eminent
Soldier and Statesman, That the Netherlanders should keep a fair Correspondence
with France, do justice to all Strangers, and (in all Revolutions of time) keep
a firm and inviolable Peace with England; and that when they failed in either
of those Principles their foundation would be shaken, and their Government in
danger of Subversion. To publish their Forgetfulness or Ingratitude to those
that have spent their Youth and Fortunes to render them considerable in the
World, is not to my purpose; or to tell them when they were made a Free State
at Munster, created both High and Mighty by the conduct of a Prince to their
General, they thought it time then to make Reformadoes of their Officers, put
them to Pensions and maintain their Low Countries without a Commander in chief,
is not my design: No, my business to those High and Mighty Lords, is for
justice against the East India Company of the Netherlands, in a politic way of
Proceeding; The dispute concerns Spoils and Robberies done upon the English in
times of Peace, (and that for some Reasons the Company reserve to themselves:)
And the King for either Reasons has been pleased to require just reparation in
this way of State, and to set a greater value upon the Lives and Fortunes of
His Subjects, then the Hollanders are willing to admit.

This is the Substance of the Ensuing Narrative, which when you have weighed
from what has been set forth in the foregoing part of this Treatise, and shall
consider all which follows, I question not but you may as much wonder at the
strange confidence of some persons in Holland, as at the patient forbearance of
others interessed in England. Pardon my Freedom, I find liberty in the Low
Countries, consists only in speaking their minds and parting with their money;
Yet I will not injure my Cause with Satirical Expressions, nor blame the Seven
United Provinces for a few unworthy Hollanders; although I must make a little
digression and tell them that Cowards cannot be honest, and covetous men dare
not dye: It is an observation in nature, that those Creatures which live upon
Herbs and Roots, are more fearful then those which eat flesh; and that where
the Elements are bad, the habit of the mind follows the temperature of the
body: But I descant not. The East India Company of the Netherlands, or some of
their Agents in Amsterdam, published the States Answers with several documents,
and entitled the Pamphlet, A Refutation of the Kings Letters and Memorials of
Sr. George Downing. The West India Company took the same liberty, and published
another Pamphlet as rude in the manner, as false in the matter, and reported
that the English had spoiled their Trade upon the Coast of Guiny, and that the
Royal Company had damnified them 80000 l. per annum, by invading their Rights
and Privileges. It Is frequent amongst Hollanders, upon any pretense of
Damages, to demand both Life and Goods, and take a Dollar: But it is
dishonorable for an Englishman to demand any thing he cannot justify, or take
any thing without a good reason for it. It Is possible I may meet with some
Englishmen in the United Provinces, that can forget their King and Country, and
others of our Countrymen that study more the advantage of the Hollanders then
the benefit of themselves and the English Interest; That man must be of a
strange Constitution, and most depraved in his Judgment, that had rather pay a
Gilder to the States, then a Stiver to his Sovereign Prince. I shall not hold
you any longer in Discourse, but come to the business in hand; I desire to be
tried by a Jury of Englishmen, that goes according to the Evidences before them
without favor or affection, though the States have in behalf of the Company
used all manner of shifts and evasions: Yet if I be found guilty of impudence
or impertinency, I will undergo their Censure and suffer any punishment; On the
contrary, I shall beg that favor of you, if the Cause goes with me, that you
will undeceive the Boors and Fishermen in the Low Countries, and tell them I
have endeavored to preserve a good Intelligence between the King Our Sovereign
and the States General, upon the Foundations of Justice and Honor.

I am your Friend and Countryman

Extract from the Register of Resolutions of the Ho: Mo: Lords, the States
General of the United Provinces.
May 10. 1662.
REport was made again by the Sieur Braechele and others of their Ho: Mo:
deputed, touching the Proceedings in England, and having also, according to
their Ho: Mo: Resolution of the 1. Instant, examined certain Letters and Papers
written and sent over by the Ambassadors of this State, at present in England;
which said Writings were dated at Chelsey on the 28. of April last, and
addressed to the Greffier Ruysch; Likewise caused to be read the same time, a
certain Memorial, the which was from word to word as follows;

1. The Commissioners shall only be for matters past, and not for any thing as
shall happen after the date of the Treaty made.

2. That their Commission concerning what passed as aforesaid, shall not
comprehend any general terms, but shall be expressly limited to a List which
shall be made, and that they shall not be to take cognizance of any other
matters whatsoever.

3. And for the agreeing to the like List, they shall form one of each side,
and exchange the said to be considered on reciprocally, and in case any
specification be found in the said, of matters known at Londonbefore the 20 of
January 1659. in regard of the pretenses of the English, according to the
Treaty of the 6 of February 1659. and at the same time known at the Hague, in
regard of the pretenses of those of the United Provinces, or of any other
Action by which the nature of the case will show it not fitting to be decided
in the like manner, that then the said may be first taken out of the said List.

4. This List being approved of by the one and the other, four months time
shall be Limited, in which they shall endeavor (His Majesty's Minister at the
Hague on the one side, and their Ho: Mo: deputed on the other) by friendly
Conferences to decide all matters comprehended in the said List, being such as
are happened in Europe; and for such as are happened out of Europe, eight
months shall be limited, and the pretendents, or such authorized by them, shall
be obliged to appear at the Hague the first day of the 4 months and 8 months
abovesaid.

5. And in case the 4 and 8 months may be expired, in which the pretendents, or
such authorized by them, had continued at the Hague, indevouring to decide such
their pretenses happened in Europe, and yet not come to any agreement, that
then the said pretenses shall be brought before Commissioners, and to be
decided by them, as likewise after the expiration of 8 months in regard of
matters happened out of Europe, and that after expiration of the 4 months and 8
months, there might remain any pretenses as yet in difference happened in
Europe, the said Commissioners shall assemble in the City of London, and their
number shall be four of each side, and be fully and wholly authorized even to
what it was in the Year 1654.

Whereupon being deliberated, it is approved that the said Memorial be sent to
the Ambassadors of this State at present at London, to serve them for
Instruction, and to use their endeavors that the said Treaty may be concluded
conformable thereto; and withal to make His Majesty the King of Great Britain
sensible, and his Ministers likewise, that their Ho: Mo: judge that His said
Majesty would assuredly bring himself into great inconveniences, in case that
the Terminus a quo should be as from the year 1654. as for matters out of the
East Indies, for that thereby His Majesty would be engaged to make reparation
for such Violences and Injuries done by His Usurpers Commissions and Authority,
between the years 1654. and 1659. and again others also which had unjust
pretenses in the said years, would by no means be debarred by the like Treaty,
for entering their Actions before the Judges, but have free Liberty of
Prosecution and demanding reparation; and for what happened in the late
conference touching that in the Fourth Article, concerning the words ubi
personae contravenientes fuerint, and contra quam peccatum est, there shall be
written to the Ambassadors, that their Ho: Mo: cannot imagine wherefore that
sustained by the English in that Subject should be different to the intention
of their Ho: Mo: for that they cannot believe that the said sustained by them,
can be of that substance to what specified in the Fourth Article touching the
Confiscations, and, that they must be for the benefit of their State; And in
case any such like Goods were confiscable by the said Article, and that they
are not taken by the Officers of their State at Sea, or otherwise, and brought
by them to their State, that then the Trial and Sentence must be at the place
of their habitations. On the other side their Ho: Mo: do not pretend the gains
of Confiscation, that in case that any of their Subjects might be taken, having
in them Arms, Moneys, or Victuals, etc. which they are intending to convey to
the Rebels of His Majesty the King of England, and that such being taken in
the fact and brought into England, that it is fit they receive sentence there,
by which their Ho: Mo: judge to have satisfied that propounded by the English;
and therefore the said Ambassadors shall keep themselves within those bounds,
without enlarging themselves any further, and to continue firm to the Intention
of their Ho: Mo: Whereupon the said Resolution shall be presented to the hands
of Sir George Downing Envoy Extraordinary by the Agent de Heyde, and to entreat
him to use his good Offices to His Majesty and His Ministers, so that this
Treaty may be concluded accordingly without any longer delay.

The States Letter to the King concerning the Ships stopped upon the account of
the Knights of Malta. June 15. 1662.
SIRE.
LA continuation des desordres qui ont commence sous les Usurpateurs de Vostre
Couronne, laquelle n'estoit presque point au pouvoir des hommes d'empescher a
l'entree de vostre reestablissement sur le Throne de Vos Ancestres, nous a
oblige a porter souvent nos justes plaintes jusques a Votre Majeste, mais nous
nous verrions necessitez de nous plaindre comme nous faisons presentement,
d'une procedure si extraordinaire, que jusqu'ici l'on n'en a point de ven
d'exemples, non seulement en des Estats qui font profession de vivre en bonne
Intelligence ensemble, mais mesme en ceux, qui ne se connoissent que par des
Offices indifferens de civilite and d'Humanite. Les Ambassadeurs de cet Estat
qui se trouvent aupres de la person dae Vostre Majesteuous donnent advis par
leurs dernieres lettres, que les Juges de l' Admiraute de Londres ont permis a
l' Agent du Cardinal de Heste de saisir au nom du Grand Maistre de Malthe, tous
les Navires Marchands appartenans aux Habitans de ces Provinces, and qu'en
suitte de cette permission il a effectivement faict saisir and arrester huict
Vaisseaux qui y chargeoient des Marchandises, and ce pour le desdommagement des
pertes que ceux de l'Ordre pretendent avoir soufferts, and de souffrir encore
fault de jouir des Commanderies situees dans l' Estendue des Provinces Unies,
and qui ont cy devant appartenu a l'Ordre. Cette affair SIRE, a este souvent
mise en deliberation en nostre Assemblee, Nous avons aussi nomme des Deputez de
nostre corpse, pour en examiner le merit, and nous allions prendre sur leur
rapport une resolution qui eust faict connoistre a toute l' Europe l' amor que
nous avons pour la Justice, quand nous avons sceu les procedures irreguliers,
violentes and ennuyes de cet Estat, and de l' Admiraute de Londres, nous avons
este surpris de ce que l'un travaille a perdre par sa Precipitation ce que ses
Maistres croyent pouvoir pretendre; mais nous avons este Extremement estonnez
de voir l' Admiraute de Londres qui doit estre composee de persons graves,
prudentes and esclaires, agist de la sort, en violant le droict des gens, and
en attentant a la Souverainete de leur Roy, a sa veue, and en sa presence, and
en une rencontre que Votre Majeste mesme ne l'auroit pas voulu, ny peu exercer,
sans chocquer le droict des gens. L'Empereur and les Roys de France and de
Espagne qui comme Princes, recognoissans l' Eglise Roman, peuvent avoir des
considerations particulieres, pour des biens de cette Nature, nous ont
recommande cet affair avec chaleur and empressement, mais pas un d'eux ne
s'est advise de Menacer cet Estat des repressailles, bien loin de souffrir,
qu'une Justice subalterne ayt permis de fair saisir effectivement ces
Vaisseaux, biens, and Marchandises de ceux qui ne doivent rien a l'ordre, and
sur lesquels le saisissant n'a aucun droict ni pretension; ils scavent que ces
provisions ne different des repressailes (que de nom, and qu'il ny a qui les
Souverains, qui les donnent a leurs sujets, a l'exclusion des estrangers, and
en ce cas d'vn Manifest deny de Justice seulement, la ou au contraire l'
Admirante usurp un droict, qui est reserve a Votre Majeste seule, en faveur de
ceux qui n'on presque aucun commerce avec vos Sujets, and qui ne scauroient
dire que nous ayons fait le moindre refus de leur render Justice: aussi sommes
nous entierement persuadez, que d'autant que quelques uns de vos principaux
Ministres ont proteste, qu'ils n'ont aucune connoissance de la demand de l'
Agent du Cardinal de Hesse, and de la provision accordee par l' Admiraute de
Londres, Votre Majeste ne desadvouera pas seulement leur proceed, mais se
ressentira aussi de l' attentat commis contre son autorite, and de l' Injustice
faicte a ceux, qui ont faict tout ce qu'ils ont pu, pour meriter l' Honneur de
Votre affection, and qui en ont eu des asseurances tres expresses de Votre
bouche Royale, de sort que nous nous dispenserions volontiers de vous donner
cette Importunite dans la croyance que nous avons que vous la previendrez, par
la main levee des Vaisseaux saisis, mais nous trouvons ceste enterprise de
cost and d'autre si Importante, and d'une consequence si fascheuse, que nous
avons bien voulu ordonner tres expressement a nous Ambassadeurs de la presenter
a Votre Majeste en des terms si efficaces, qu'ils puissent obtenir la
reparation du tort and de la violence, qui nous a este faicte, and empescher
que nous sujets, qui font leur commerce dans Vos trois Royaumes, en virtue de
bonne Intelligence, qui a tousjours este enter Votre Majeste and cette
Republique, ne soient plus inquietez de cette maniere a l'avenir; d'autant
moins, don't nous nous plaignons, n'ont merit ny Votre Amity ny vostre
protection, Et ainsi nous remettans a ce que nous Ambassadeurs vous diront tant
sur se suject, que sur les autres affairs, qu'ils ont a Negotier avec Votre
Majeste, nous prierons Dieu.

SIRE, etc.
The Translation of the aforesaid Letter out of the French Original. June 15.
1662.
SIR,
THE Continuance of those Disorders that commenced under the Usurpers of Your
Crown, which it was not in the power of men to hinder, at the Entrance of Your
Establishment on the Throne of Your Ancestors, has often obliged us to make
our Complaints to Your Majesty; but we now see our selves necessitated to
complain (as we do at present) of a proceeding so extraordinary, that to this
time there have been thereof no Examples, not only in those Estates which make
profession of living together in good Correspondence, but even in those, who
understand one another but by the indifferent offices of Civility and Humanity.
The Ambassadors of this State who are with Your Majesty's Person, give us
advise by their last Letters, that the Judges of the Admiralty of London have
permitted to the Agent of the Cardinal of Hassia, to seize in the Name of the
Grand Master of Maltha, all those Merchant Ships as do belong to the
Inhabitants of these Provinces, and that in persuance of this permission he
has effectively caused to be seized and arrested eight Vessels which were
there laden with Merchandises, and this for satisfaction of those Losses which
those of the Order pretend to have suffered, and yet to suffer, by reason of
not enjoying those Commanderies situate within the Extent of these United
Provinces, and which have heretofore appertained to the Order. This Affair SIR,
has been often deliberated in our Assembly, we have also nominated Deputies of
our Body to examine the Merits, and upon their report we were about to take a
Resolution which should make all Europe to understand the Love which we have of
Justice; but when we understood those irregular, violent, and injurious
proceedings of that State, and of the Admiralty of London, we were surprised in
this, that any one should labor to lose by precipitancy that which his Masters
believe they can pretend to, and we were extremely astonished to see the
Admiralty of London, which ought to be composed of grave, prudent, and eminent
persons, managed as it were, to the Violation of the Rights of Nations, and to
attempts upon the Sovereignty of their King, in His Sight and in His Presence,
and in an Occurrence, which your Majesty neither would nor could act in,
without entrenching on the right of Nations. The Emperor and the Kings of
France and Spain, who as Princes acknowledging the Roman Church, might have
particular Considerations for the Goods of this nature, have recommended to us
this Affair with pressing ardency, but not one of them has been advised to
threaten this Estate with Reprizalls, so far from suffering, that a subordinate
Jurisdiction, should permit an effectual Seizure of the Vessels, Goods and
merchandises of those who owe nothing to the Order, and against which the
person seizing has neither right nor pretension; they know that these
Provisions differ from Reprizals but in name, and that none but Sovereigns can
grant them to their Subjects, to the exclusion of Strangers and that only in
case of a manifest denial of Justice: on the contrary the Admiralty Usurps a
Right which is reserved solely to your Majesty, in favor of those, who have
scarce any Commerce at all with your Subjects, and who know not how to say,
that we have made the least refusal to do them Justice. So that we are wholly
persuaded, (inasmuch as some of your principal Ministers have protested, that
they had no knowledge of the demand of the Agent of the Cardinal of Hassia, and
of that provision agreed by the Admiralty of London) that Your Majesty will not
only disavow their proceedings, but will resent also this attempt committed
against Your Authority, and the Injustice done to those, who have done all they
can to merit the Honor of Your Affection, and who have most express
assurances thereof from Your Majesty's own Royal mouth; so that we could
willingly dispense with giving You the trouble of this Importunity, from the
belief we have of Your Majesty's preventing thereof by taking the Seizure off
these Vessels, but we find this entreprise, both of the one and the other side
so important and of so troublesome a consequence, that we have been willing
most expressly to order our Ambassadors to present and lay it before Your
Majesty in such efficacious words, as may obtain reparation of the injury and
violence which has been done us, and to hinder any further molestation in this
manner hereafter to be done to our Subjects, who upon account of the good
understanding which is between Your Majesty and this Republique, do Traffic
within your three Kingdoms; and this the rather, because those of whom we do
complain, have not deserved Your Friendship nor Protection. And so we remit You
to what Our Ambassadors shall say to You as well upon this Subject as upon other
affairs which they have to negotiate with Your Majesty. We shall pray to God

SIR, etc.
The States Letter to the King concerning the Ship CHARLES. June 27. 1662.
SIRE,
NOus avons differe de respondre a la lettre que Vostre Majeste nous a faict
l'honneur de nous escrire le 12. Septembre de l'annee passee parce que nous ne
le pouvions pas fair pertinemment, que nous ne nous fussions pleinement
Informs de l'Estat de l'affaire qui luy sert de sujet: Le Captain Enno
Doedesson Star, don't elle se plaint servoit en ce temps la, comme il fait
encore presentement, dans la flotte commandee par le Vice Admiral de Ruyter, en
la mer Mediterranee, and il estoit necessaire d'estre esclaircy par luy mesme,
de toutes les particularitez de ce qui pourroit estre pass enter luy and le
Captain Eduart Spragh, pour en pouvoir bien juger, and pour fair voir plus
clairement a Vostre Majeste la sincerite de nos Intentions; nous ne scavons si
le Captain Spragh a eu connoissance de l'esloignement de Enno Doedesson and
s'il a voulu se servir de son absence pour donner a Vostre Majeste des
Impressions contraire a une verite, don't il doit estre convaincu en sa
conscience; il scait and nous en avons mis les preuves enter les mains du Sr.
Downing, Vostre Envoye Extrodinaire aupres de nous, de quelle facon il a escume
la mer, particulierement en l'an 1659. en piratant sur toutes sorts de Nations
Indifferemment al'exemple de plusjeurs autres pirates Biscains; les exces
commis par ces pirates environ ce mesme temps, ou quelqnes annees auparavant,
and les incommoditez que le Commerce des habitans de ces Provinces en
recevoyent, nous avoient obligez en l' an 1658. a ordonner, par une Resolution
generale, a tous nos Capitaines and autres Officiers de Marine, de Traiter tous
ces armateurs Biscains, sans aucune distinction, en Pirates, de les attaquer
quelques parts qu'ils les rencontreroient en mer, and de les amener. C'est en
virtue de cet Order que le Captain Spragh a este pris, mais specialment pour
avoir este reconnu par trois Matelots, qui se trouvoient dans le board dudit
Enno Doedesson, pour avoir pirate, and pour avoir pris avec le mesme Navire
Charles, alors nom Sr. Carlos, entres autres un navire nomme le Maure
appartenant avec la plus grande party de sa charge qui consistoit en vins de
Canarie, and autres Marchandises a des habitans d' Amsterdam and de Middelburg
en Zeelande, Ce Vaissean, SIRE, fut pris par ledit Captain Spragh, and emmene
au Havre de St. Sebastien en Biscaye, au mois de Mars 1659. les proprietaires
and Fretteurs en Navire en ayant eu advis, en demanderent la restitution and
trouverent assez de Justice a la Cour de Madrid pour l'obtenir avec les despens
dommages and Interest, par un decret authentic du Roy d' Espagne, mais ledit
Captain Spragh, and ses Interessez au lieu d'y deferer, eurent l'assurance
d'arrester encore la Navire, and d'extorquer par ce moyen au bout de cinq mois
du patron and de ceux qui poursuivoyent le process pour les Interesses une sum
de sept mill doubles reaulx d'argent, and la moiete du provenu de trente
bottes de Vin de Canarie, quoy que des deux cens cinquante bottes, don't ledit
Navire estoit charge, il ny en eut que soixante and unze qui furent restituez
avec le Vaisseau, De sort que quand mesme ledit Captain Spragg n'eust pas
este du nombre de ces armateurs, ou plustost pirates Biscains, contre lesquels
nous avons pris cette resolution generale, and quoy le Captain Enno Doedesson
n'eust pas este oblige de l'executer a son esgard en cette qualite, il devoit
neantmoins le prendre, and l'amener, a cause de la Violence faicte audit Navire
le Maure, qui avoit este declare, par decret du Roy d' Espagne, appartenir, and
qui appartenoit en effect a les habitans de ces Provinces, a moins de manquer
au serment qu'il a l'Estat: Ainsi bien loin de blasmer son proceed, nous ne
craignons point de dire a Vostre Majeste que nous sum Marris, de ce que
l'accident qui arriva au Navire Charles scavoir qu'un des Matelots, prins dans
le mesme Navire, en enstant un tampon, qui bouchoit un trou, exposa le Navire a
un si evident peril de perir, que le Captain Wildtschot, a qui Enno Deodesson
en avoit done la conduitte pour l' amener en deca, fut contraint de
l'abandonner, le fit evader, and le soustraya aua penies qu'un just Sentence
eust peu prozoncer contre ses crimes: Nous avons si bien represente, and prouve
cette verite a Vostre Envoye Extraordinaire lequel nous avons pry de la fair
cognoistre a Vostre Majeste, que nous ne le voulons point Importuner icy par
une plus ample Deduction de cette affair, seulement nous trouvons nous obliger
de dire, comme nostre dessein a tousjours este de nous addresser au Roy d'
Espagne and a ses sujets pour la reparation des Violences, pertes and dommages
faictes aux habitans de ces Provinces, and par eux soufferts, parce que les
armateurs Biscains sortoient des ports d' Espagne; ainsi croyons nous avoir
droict de nous addresser a Vostre Majeste presentement que le Captain Spragg
est a vostre service and qu'il employe vostre nom and la poursuitte de ses
injustes pretensions, de vous demander justice contre luy, and qu'il soit
contraint par toutes voyes Justes and raisonables de restituer non seulement
les susdits sept mill doubles reaulx and la valeur de vins and autres
Marchandises qu'il a pris and alienez, mais aussi les autres chooses qu'il a
trouveeses and prises dans le Coffre du patron du Navire Maure, don't Vostre
Envoye Extraordinaire faict le detail and la valeur, Nous avons grand sujet de
l'Esperer de Vostre equite, and particulierement que Vous ne suffrirez point
qu' a l'avenir l'on se serve du nom and de l'autorite de Vostre Majeste pour
des affairs si mal fondees, and bien manis encore, pour taxer si legerement
nostre Proceed, and blasmer nostre conduitte, jusqu'a employer des terms, don't
l'on ne se sert que contre ceux, qui desnient onvertement la Justiee, mais
qu'elle aura pour ses bons amiss and voisins autant de consideration qu'elle a
de bonte pour ses sujets, don't l'on ne condamne point la conduite sur simple
rapport d'un tiers, and sans leur donner le loisir d'y respondre. C'est ce que
nous avons cru devoir dire a sujet de la lettre de Vostre Majeste en attendant
que l'on acheve les Informations que nous faisons fair des autres Violences,
extorsions and outrages, faicts par ledit Captain Spragg aux habitans de ces
pais, and cependant nous prier ons Dieu.

SIRE, etc.
The Translation of the aforesaid Letter out of the French Original. June 27.
1662.
SIR,
WE have delayed to answer the Letter which Your Majesty did the Honor to
Write to us of the 12. September of the last year, because we could not do it
pertinently, being not fully informed of the State of that affair which is the
Subject thereof. Captain Enno Doedesson Star of whom it complains, did serve
then, as now at present, in the Fleet commanded by Vice Admiral Ruyter in the
Mediterranean Sea, and it was necessary the matter should be cleared by Himself
in all those particulars, which might have passed between him and Captain
Edward Spragg, to the end we might be able rightly to judge of it, and to clear
to Your Majesty the sincerity of our Intentions. We know not whether the said
Captain Spragg had knowledge of the distance of Enno Doedesson, and if he
served not himself of his absence to give Your Majesty impressions contrary
unto a Truth, of which he ought to be convinced in his Conscience. He knows,
and we have put the proofs into the hands of Sir George Downing, Your Envoy
Extraordinary with us, in what manner he scoured the Seas, particularly in the
year 1659. by Pyrating upon all sorts of Nations indifferently after the
Example of many other Biscain Pirates: The Outrages committed about that time
and some years before by those Pirates, and the discommodities, the commerce of
the Inhabitants of these Provinces received thereby, obliged us in the year
1658. to order by a Resolution General all our Captains and Sea Officers to
Treat all those Biscain Ships of War, without any distinction as Pirates, and
to attaque them wheresoever they met them at Sea, and carry them away. It was
by virtue of this Order that Captain Spragg was taken, but especially for being
known by three Mariners which were then aboard the said Enno Doedesson, to
have Pyrated and to have taken with the same Ship Charles then named Sr.
Carlos, among others, a Ship named the Moor, belonging with the greatest part
of its lading which (consisted in Wines of Canary, and other Merchandises) to
the Inhabitants of Amsterdam and Middleburgh in Zeland. This ship SIR, was
taken by the said Captain Spragg and brought to the Haven of St. Sebastian in
Biscay in the Month of March 1659. of which the Owners and Laders having
notice, they demanded Restitution, and found Justice enough at the Court of
Madrid to obtain it with expenses, damages, and Interest, by an Authentic
Decree of the King of Spain; but the said Captain Spraegh and his Interessed,
in stead of delivering her, had the Confidence further to Arrest the said Ship,
and to extort by that means at the end of five Months, of the Master, and of
those which prosecuted the process for the Interessed, the sum of Seven
thousand double royals of Silver, and the moiety of the proceed of Thirty Pipes
of Canary, although of 250. Pipes with which the said Ship was laden, there
were but 71 restored with the Vessel: so that although the said Captain Spragg
had not been of the Number of those Rovers, or rather Biscain Pirates against
whom we had taken that Resolution General, and that Captain Enno Doedesson,
had not been obliged to execute it in his relation to that quality, he ought
nevertheless, to take and carry him away, because of that violence done to the
said Ship the Moor, which was declared by a Decree of the King of Spain to
belong, as it did in truth, to the Inhabitants of this Province, unless he
would have failed in his Oath taken to this State. So far are we from blaming
his proceedings, that we fear not to tell your Majesty, that we are sorry of
that accident which happened to the said Ship Charles, namely one of those
Mariners taken within the same Ship being a Cooper, bored a hole therein, and
exposed the Vessel to so manifest danger of perishing, that Captain Wildschut,
to whom Enno Doedesson had committed the Conduct of her to bring her hither,
was constrained to abandon her, which was the means also of the others Escape,
by which he withdrew himself from the pains of a just sentence which should
have been pronounced against his Crimes. We have so well represented and proved
this truth to Your Envoy Extraordinary, whom we have prayed to acquaint Your
Majesty therewith, that we will not importune You here, with an ampler and
longer account of this affair, only we find our selves obliged to say, that as
our manner has always been to address Our selves to the King of Spain, and
to his Subjects, for reparation of those violences, losses, and damages done to
the Inhabitants of these Provinces, and by them sustained, because those Rovers
came forth of the Ports of Spain; so we think it just for us to address our
selves to Your Majesty at present, because Captain Spragg is in Your Service,
and for that he uses your Name in the prosecution of his unjust pretenses, to
demand of You Justice against him, and that he be compelled by all just and
reasonable ways, not only to restore the abovesaid Seven thousand double
royals, and the value of the Wines and other Merchandises which he has taken
and alienated, but also other things which he found and took out of the Chest
of the Master of the ship Moor, whereof Your Envoy Extraordinary has the
number and value. We have great cause to hope for Your equity herein, and
particularly that You will not suffer that for the future any persons shall
make use of Your Name and Authority upon matters so il-grounded and yet hardly
labored, to the taxing, upon such frivolous occasions our proceedings, and to
blame our Conduct even in such terms, which are fit only for those who openly
deny Justice, but that You will have as much consideration for Your good
Friends and next Neighbors, as You have goodness toward Your Subjects, whose
carriage we condemn not upon a single report of a third person, and without
giving them space to reply. This is it which we have believed ought to be said
by us on the Subject of the Letter of Your Majesty, attending while the
Informations are finished, which we cause to be made of other violences,
extortions, and outrages done by the said Captain Spragg to the Inhabitants of
this Country, and in the mean time we shall pray to God

SIR, etc,
The Reply of Sir GEORGE DOVVNING, Envoy Extraordinary of His MAJESTY of GREAT
BRITAIN, etc. Delivered the 13. of July 1662. upon the Answer of the STATES
GENERAL of the United Provinces, to his Memorial concerning the Ship CHARLES.
THE underwritten Envoy Extraordinary of His most sacred Majesty of Great
Britain, etc. having received the Answer of their Lordships, the Estates
General of the United Provinces of the 27. of June last, to the Letter of the
King his Master, and to his several Memorials and complaints, concerning the
Ship Charles, finds that their Lordships do not deny the matter of fact
complained off, but offer in justification of what was done by Doedessen Star,
that Captain Spragg Commander of the said Ship Charles, was one of the famous
Pirates of Biscay, and in particular, that he had in the Year 1659. taken a
certain Ship of this Country, called the Moor, laden with 250. Pipes of Canary
wine, the whole, or at least the greater part thereof belonging to the
Merchants of these Provinces, and carried her to St. Sebastians in Spain, and
that upon this ground the said Doedessen Star had taken her in persuance of a
certain Resolution of this State, requiring all Captains of their Ships of war
to seize all private men of war of Biscay, as troublers of the freedom of
commerce and traffic by Sea.

And this being all that is alleged by their Lordships; the said Envoy
Extraordinary does very much wonder, that they should in their said answer
charge the said Spragg of impudence in applying to the King his Master, and
from him to their Lordships for Justice, and much more that they should take
upon them the patronage of this action of Doedesson Star's and make it their
own, this being no more in effect, than what was alleged in the Letter from
the Admiralty of Amsterdam to them, of the 1. of November last, and
communicated about that time to him, and consequently he does not see how, or
upon what account their Lordships, or he the said Envoy Extraordinary, should
be better satisfied with this Answer, than with the said Letter. Captain Spragg
was no more a Pirate than Doedesson Star, he had a Lawful Commission from the
King his Master, whose native Subject he was, to seize and take all Ships and
Merchandises belonging to any of His Subjects then in Rebellion against Him;
and in persuance thereof, meeting with the aforesaid Ship, and finding her to
be come from the Canaries, 19. parts of 20. of the Wine of the growth of which
place are constantly bought by the Subjects of His Majesty, and carried into
His Kingdoms, and there spent; and His said Subjects, being at that time in War
with the King of Spain, and upon that account in that very year making use, in
a manner, wholly of the Ships of this Country for the transport of the said
Wines to England, and having other probable grounds, that a great part at least
of the Wines in that Ship, did actually belong to the English, he thereupon
seized her, and carried her into St. Sebastian's; and what was there herein
done contrary to right, and not justifiable?

Had this Country ever any Treaty Marine with any of his Majesty's
Predecessors, or had they any such Treaty with the Usurpers at that time in
England, whereby to make free Ship free goods; and if not, wherein was the
default or crime upon strong presumptions and grounds for him, who had a
Commission to take Ships and goods belonging to England, to stop that Ship and
carry her into that place?

Had he kept her at Sea, or carried her into any other Country, and there sold
and disposed of her, this had been a default, but the King his Master, was at
that time within the Dominions of the King of Spain, and all such private Men
of War as had his Commission, had liberty to equippe, to sail out of and return
into all His Ports with their prizes; and accordingly the said Spragg sailed
out of St. Sebastian, and returned in thither with her, and there, by lawful
and due process and course in Law indevoured to make her prize; and is this
Piratry? or shall upon this account the said Spragg be taxed with impudence for
demanding of his Ship and goods?

Were there not in those days many Ships of this Country, that were stopped
upon the like ground, of having in them goods belonging to the enemies of the
English, and yet those that did it, not accounted or called Pirates? and have
not both formerly and of late several English Ships been stopped by the Ships
of this Country, upon suspicion of having in them goods belonging to the
enemies of this Country? and what upon trial have been found so to belong to
their enemies, actually confiscated, and the rest with the Ship restored? and
how is this then a troubling of the freedom of trade and commerce by Sea, when
the same thing and no other, is done to their people.

And in this very answer their Lordships do not affirm that the whole lading
did belong to the People of this Country, but as are the words ( the whole, or
at least the greater part) so that notwithstanding what as yet appears to their
Lordships themselves) although it is to be supposed that the Merchants
interessed in the said Ship put the best side outmost) Captain Spragg had just
grounds for the seizing of the said Ship, and the subordinate Officers of
Justice upon the place were so well satisfied therewith, that without a
superior command by favor from the King of Spain, he had obtained a sentence
of confiscation of the said Wines.

And had Doedes^n Star comported himself in like manner, your Lordships had not
been troubled with this complaint, but when he had taken the Charles he
forthwith plundr'd her to the very boards, yea took out of her all that was
good of her very sails and rigging, used the men barbarously and cruelly; and
when all was done, she was turned going at sea by Wilshut one of Doedesson
Star's Captains, in stead of bringing her into this Country to a lawful trial
and adiudication, the which he was obliged to have done, both by his commission
and his orders from the Admiralty of Asterdam, as appears by their
forementioned Letter to their Lordships of the 1. of November. last, and Captain
Spragg is so far from understanding the not doing thereof to have been any
thing of favor or good hay to him (as their Lordships would insinuate in their
answer) as that on the contrary he complains thereof in the highest manner.

And for what is suggested, as if Wilshut his quitting of the said Ship Charles
was out of necessity upon the account of her leakiness, this is a most
frivolous and groundless pretext; for Wilshut was then upon the Coast of France
(as is acknowledged in the said answer) and so if he had done nothing, but what
becomed an honest man, he might have carried her into some Port of France, to
have stopped her leaks, and then have brought her to this Country; but the
plain truth was this, Wilshut's own conscience (after some time of
consideration) accused him that they had done what they could not justify,
neither in France nor in this Country, and upon that account did not abandon
her as would be insinuated, but forced his Majesty's Subjects into her, and
with menaces bid them begone with their Ship as it was, or else that he would
still keep them in irons the whole summer: and that this was the truth and
bottom of the business, appears not only by the Examinations taken in the
high Court of Admiralty in England, but also by the aforesaid Letter of the
Admiralty of Amsterdam, the words whereof are these:

Pourtant s'il s'estoit return verse St. Martin susdit and illecq extendant
qu' a cause de la prise de la dite Fregatte en cette Rade existe roit beaucoup
des inconvenients, and considerant l'incommodite d'icelle and aussy jugeant
l'incertitude comment la ditte prise par nous pourroit estre consideree; il se
conseillist les gens y trouvez remettre en leur possession.

But suppose Captain Spragg had done amiss, yet he was a Subject to the King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, and the taking his Ship was in the Channel,
and in the month of July 1660. which was about two months after the return of
His most Sacred Majesty to his Kingdoms, and when he was in the full and
peaceable possession of them; and was this a justifiable way to begin by
execution? What injuries and violences have been done to His Majesty's Subjects
in the East Indies by the Dutch East India Company? Now many Piratries have of
late been committed by private men of War, and others of this Country upon
them? and has His Majesty begun by execution? has He granted an order to
seize the Fleet of this Country coming from the East Indies, or has he
declared all such Capers as fail from hence, troublers of the freedom of trade
and commerce by Sea, and given order to all his men of war every where to take
them, as your Lordships say they had done to those that failed out of Biscay?
which yet he has the same reason to do, they pirating continually upon His
Subjects, (and perchance there wants not complaints of the same nature from
other Christian Kings and Princes also against them) or would ye take it
kindly, if Spragg being at this time in His Majesty's service in the Streights
should endeavor to revenge himself upon Doedesson Star, who is also at this
time employed in that Sea; And yet if this course be justifiable in their
Lordships, it is without doubt as justifiable in the King his Master, and if he
should take this course, they would easily apprehend, what would be the
consequences thereof, nor it may be would there have needed so long and tedious
a solicitation in this case; But His Majesty is pleased in the first place,
(according to the Laws of friendship and good neighborhood) to apply to their
Lordships, and if justice and satisfaction can be had in a friendly way, it is
that he most passionately desires; but if not, the said Envoy Extraordinary
must again repeat that he will then be justified before the whole World, in
betaking himself to such further remedies as may be capable to procure releif
to the said Spragg his most loyal and faithful Subject, whom he cannot nor
will not suffer to go without real satisfaction; nor does he love to have his
Subjects acccused of impudence, when they only humbly address themselves to
him for help, and their complaints are by him in a friendly way transmitted
hither.

And the said Envoy Extraordinary does once more demand, that satisfaction and
reparation be forthwith made for the said Ship Charles, and so that after the
many proofs of His Majesty's zeal for the relief of the people of this Country
against Piratries of this nature, he may at last have one instance of theirs
toward his, nor can it now be doubted, seeing what was done in this matter was
not only done by their Lordships own men of war, but (as they are now pleased
to avow in their answer) in persuance of their order: It was too much that
Ships of war sailing with His Majesty's commission, were from time to time
taken by the Ships of war of this Country, during the late disorders, but that
any such thing should be attempted, or done, and that in His Seas, since His
return into His Kingdoms, His Majesty can in no ways digest or pass by
without ample and full satisfaction. Given at the Hague this 13 of July 1662.

G. DOVVNING

Advertisement
IN regard I was entreated by some of the Persons Interessed [1] in the Ships
Charles, Experience, and St. John Baptist, to press the States General and
their Deputies for satisfaction and reparation, for the damages suffered in
those [1] cases, I thought it convenient, in vindication of the English
concerned therein, to make mention of the proceedings aforesaid, and the rather
because of the aspersion most wrongfully cast upon them, and my self, in the
Low Countries, which were taken for granted by the Common People, being
published in Print both in French and Dutch, by the States or their order,
before any Replies were given to the same; And the Ten select Articles of
Cromwell's Treaty with the other things following are to be considered in some
Arguments raised upon Debates hereafter expressed, which I took notice of in
several Conferences between me and diverse persons at Amsterdam.

G. C.

Ten Select ARTICLES of the Treaty between O. Cromwell and the States General
of the United Provinces, 1654.
III.
ITem, That all Offenses, Injuries, Charges and Damages, which either party
has sustained by the other since the 18/28 of May, in the year one thousand
six hundred fifty two, shall be taken away and forgotten in such manner as that
hereafter neither party shall pretend any matter against the other for or upon
occasion of any the aforesaid Offenses, Injuries, Charges and Damages; But that
there shall be a perfect abolition of all and every of them until this present
day. And all actions for the same shall be held and reputed void and null.

VII.
That neither of the Commonwealths, or the People abiding, inhabiting, or
dwelling within either of them respectively, or within their power, shall
yield, give, or afford any aid, counsel or favor to the Enemies or Rebels of
either, but shall expressly, really, and with effect hinder any inhabiting,
dwelling or abiding within either of them or within their power, from giving
any aid or assistance unto such Enemies or Rebels, by Men, Shipping, Arms,
Ammunition, Money, Uictuals, or otherwise by Sea or Land: and all such Ships
Arms, Ammunition, Money, Goods, or Uictuals, of or belonging to any person or
persons whatsoever, that shall be provided, employed or made use of, contrary
to the intent of this Article, shall be confiscate and forfeited to the
respective Commonwealths. And the person or persons who shall wittingly and
willingly do, attempt, counsel, or be employed therein, shall be declared
Enemies to both Commonwealths, and shall suffer the pains and penalties of
Treason within the Commonwealth where the Offense shall be committed. And to
the end there may be a specification made of what Goods shall be deemed
prohibit, or contraband, Commissioners may in convenient time be appointed to
determine herein; Provided in the mean time that this extend not to the
impeachment of any thing contained in the present Article.

IX.
That neither of the Commonwealths, or the People of either shall receive into
any of their Jurisdictions, Countries, Lands, Ports, Creeks, or Precincts, any
person or persons, that are or shall be declared by either of the
Commonwealths to be Enemies, Rebels or Fugitives of the other; Nor shall
give, yield or afford to any such declared Enemy, Rebel or Fugitive within the
places aforesaid, or other-where, though out of their Territories, Countries,
Lands, Ports, Creeks, or Precincts, any aid, counsel, Lodging, Entertainment,
Soldiers, Ships, Money, Arms, Ammunition or Uictuals. Nor shall either of the
States permit such Enemies, Rebels or Fugitives to be received by any person
or persons whatsoever into their Jurisdictions, Countries, Lands, Ports, Creeks
or Precincts; nor shall suffer any Aid, Counsel, Lodging, Entertainment,
Soldiers, Ships, Money, Arms, Ammunition, or Uictuals to be given, yielded or
afforded unto such Enemies, Rebels or Fugitives, but shall expressly and
effectually oppose, withstand, and really hinder the same.

XIII.
That the Ships and Uessels of the said United Provinces, as well Men of War as
others meeting with any of the Ships of War of this Commonwealth in the
British Seas shall strike their Flag and lower their Top-sail in such manner as
has ever been at any time practiced heretofore under any former Government.

XVI.
That if it shall happen that during the Amity, Confederation and Alliance, any
thing shall be acted or attempted by any of the people or Inhabitants of either
of the said Parties against this Treaty or any part thereof, either by Land or
Sea, or other Waters, this Amity, Confederation and Alliance between the said
Commonwealths shall not be hereby interrupted or broken off, but shall
continue and remain in its full and whole power only in such case those
particular persons, who have offended against the said Treaty, shall be
punished and no other, And that justice shall be done, and satisfaction made to
all persons concerned within twelve months after demand thereof made, upon all
such persons who shall have done any thing against this Treaty, by Land or Sea,
or other waters in any part of Europe, or any place within the Straights of
Gibralter, or in America, or upon the Coasts of Africa, or in any Lands,
Islands, Seas, Creeks, Bays, Rivers, or any other places on this side the Cape
of Good-Hope. And in all places whatsoever as aforesaid, beyond the said Cape,
within 18. months next after demand of Justice, shall so as aforesaid be made:
And in case the persons so as aforesaid offending, shall not appear and submit
themselves to justice, and make satisfaction within the terms respectively here
before limited, the said persons shall be declared Enemies to both
Commonwealths, and their Estates, Goods, and effects whatsoever, shall be
confiscate and employed to a due and full satisfaction for the wrongs by them
done, and their persons be liable to such further punishment, when they shall
come within the power of either State, as the quality of their offense shall
deserve.

XXIV.
That in case any wrong or injury be done by either Commonwealth, or by the
People or Inhabitants thereof, against the People or Inhabitants of the other,
either against any the Articles of this Treaty, or against Common right, there
shall yet no Letters of Reprizals, Mark or Countermark, be granted by the one
or the other Commonwealth, till first Justice be there sought in the ordinary
course of Law; and in case that Justice be there refused or delayed, then, that
Demand be made thereof from the supreme power of the Commonwealth, whose
people or Inhabitants have suffered wrong, or from such as the supreme power
shall depute, to that Commonwealth where Justice is as aforesaid denied, or
delaid, or to such power as shall be by them appointed to receive such Demands,
that all such differences may be composed amicably, or in the ordinary course
of Law. But if there shall be yet delay, and that Justice be not done, nor
satisfaction given within three months after such Demand made, that then
Letters of Reprizal, Mark or Counter-mark may be granted.

XXV.
That all persons on either side that shall go out to Sea upon particular
Commissions shall be bound before they take out their Commissions to put in
good and sufficient Security by responsible Men not of the Ships Company,
before the Judges of the Court whence the said Commission is issued, that they
shall do no wrong or injury to the People or Inhabitants of either side.

XXVII.
That the Lords the States General of the United Provinces shall take care that
Justice be done upon those who were Authors or Abettors of the Murder
committed upon the English in Amboyna, as the Commonwealth of England was
pleased to qualify it, if any of them be yet alive.

XXX.
Item, Agreed, that at the time of the deliverie of the instruments of
Ratification, four Commissioners shall be nominated on both sides to meet here
at London, upon the eighteenth day of May next old style, who shall be
authorized and empowered, as also by these presents they are authorized and
empowered to examine and determine all the losses and injuries which either side
alleges to have sustained from the other since the year one thousand six
hundred and eleven, unto the eighteenth day of May, 1652. old style, as well in
the East Indies, as in Greenland, Muscovy, Brazeel, or in any other place, the
particulars of all which are to be delivered into the Commissioners nominated
as above, before the said eighteenth day of May under this restriction, that
after the said day prefixed no new allegations shall be admitted. And if the
abovesaid Commissioners shall not within three months space, to be accounted
from the said eighteenth day of May, come to an agreement, concerning the
differences aforesaid, delivered in writing and expressed in particular, That
in such case the aforesaid differences shall be submitted, as by these presents
they are submitted, to the judgment and arbitration of the Protestant Cantons
of Swisserland, who by an instrument for this purpose (the form of which is
already agreed upon) shall be desired to take upon them that Arbitration, and
appoint like Commissioners empowered and instructed to give final judgment
thereupon within six months next following after the expiration of the three
months aforesaid. And whatsoever the said Commissioners or the major part of
them, shall award and determine within the said six months, shall oblige both
parties, and be performed accordingly.

XXXI.
It is also agreed, That both Parties shall firmly and truly perform and
observe this present Treaty, and every Article and Thing contained and
concluded therein; and shall cause the same to be performed and observed by
their respective People, Subjects and Inhabitants.

The CLAIM exhibited against the Dutch, by Mr. Tombs, 1654.
EXTRACT.
Index five Repertorium Postulatorum quae ex part Mercatorum aliorumque
Anglorum contra Populos Foederati Belgii virtute trigesimi Articuli Pacis inter
utramque gentem nuper initae and stabilitae, and edicti ea super re postmodum
facti, and vigesimo quarto Maii 1654. promulgati, die Martis trigesimo viz.
Maii predicti coram Venerabilibus Dominis Commissariis hinc inde nominatis
exhibebantur.

GUlielmus Tombs Executor Testamenti Domini Pauli Pindar Militis interessati
in nave Bona Esperanza, una cum mercibus mense Junio anni 1643. dum Chinam
versus a Goa navigabat a duabus navibus bellicis ad Hollandos spectantibus
capta, pro suis and marinariorum damna reparationem petit ad summam septuaginta
duarum millium quingentarum sexaginta quatuor librarum Anglicarum -- 72546 --
00 -- 00.

Concordat cum suo Indice praemisso.

J. Spronssen.



To the Right Worshipful the Commissioners appointed by His Highness Oliver
Lord Protector, and the Lords States General of the United Netherlands, to
hear and determine all Losses between the English and Dutch, according to the
30. Article of the Peace.
The humble Petition of Henry Powell, Citizen and Draper of London, on the
behalf of himself and the other Creditors of William Courten late of London,
Merchant.
Shows,

THat by virtue of a Commission under the great Seal of England, grounded upon
the Statutes made concerning Bankrupts, directed unto James Winstanley and
others appointed to inquire into the Estate of the said William Courten, and to
distribute the same according to the Laws in that Case made and provided,
whereby the Commissioners found the said William Courten became insolvent, and
that the East India Company of the Netherlands and their Ministers abroad, had
seized and possessed themselves of two Ships belonging to the said William
Courten, called the Bona Esperanza and the Henry Bona Adventure of London, with
all their Lading, Goods, Merchandises, and Provisions; and also had done unto
the said William Courten and his Factors, many other violent injuries and
wrongs in the East Indies, whereby he himself and his Creditors are damnified
to the sum of 150000 l. and upwards; as by Authentic Proofs taken in the
Admiralty may appear.

The premises considered, and for as much as the Creditors of Mr. Courten are
entitled to the said Money accrewing by the damages aforesaid; Your Petitioner
therefore humbly prays, on the behalf of himself and the Creditors, that his
Claim may be entered, and receive such a speedy determination for relief of
himself, and many poor father less Children, and Widows, Creditors aforesaid;
as in all Justice and Equity the merits of the Cause shall require.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.

Hen. Powell.


Received and admitted Tho. Lovell.
May 12. 1654.
To the Honorable the Commissioners appointed by the Articles of Treaty,
between His Highness the Lord Protector, etc. And the Lords the States General
of the United Provinces of the Netherlands.
To Examine and Determine all Losses and Injuries which either side alleges
to have sustained from the other.
The humble Petition of Thomas Newman, Richard Wheeler, Francis Hill, and
Andrew Wetton, in the behalf of themselves and the rest of the Company, of and
in the Ship Bona Esperanza.
Shows,

THat the said Ship being set out in the employment of William Courten Esquire
Thomas Kynaston and Company authorized by virtue of Letters Patents granted by
the late King for Trading to the East Indies, in her passage from Goa to
Maccao, in the year 1643. at which time there was perfect peace and amity
between the English and Dutch; was contrary to the said Peace and Amity, in a
violent and hostile manner surprised and seized by two Holland Ships, belonging
to the Holland East India Company, the one called the Vendillo, and the other
the Portogallo; in which Ships Seignior Fermeren, Seignior Gealand, and the
Lieutenant of the Fort of Malacca, were Commanders, who all three at first came
aboard the said Ship Bona Esperanza, as friends in way of visit, and
accordingly parted; but soon after beyond all expectation of the Petitioners,
Shot a Piece of Ordnance in an Hostile manner, and forthwith killed the Master
Roger Tuckerman, and afterward in Fight took the said Ship by force of Arms,
to the damage of your Petitioner Newman at least 1400 l. he (being then Sole
Factor of the Cargozon) and to the Damage of the rest of your Petitioners and
the Company of the said. Ship 2000 l. which respective damages have ever since
tended, and do tend to the utter ruining of your Petitioners: All which appears
by the Claims and Depositions in the Admiralty, now brought before your Honors
by William Tombs Esquire Executor to the last will of Sir Paul Pindar Knight, the
Assign of the said Esquire Courten.

Your Petitioners in obedience to, and persuance of your Honors late
Declaration injoyning all Claimers to bring in an Abstract of their Damages in
particular, have presumed to present their Case as above by this tbeir
Petition.

Most humbly praying that their Claim aforesaid, may be distinctly set apart by
it self. And that they may according to the power and authority wherewith your
Honors are now invested by the Articles aforesaid, receive their several
satisfactions, answerable to their proportions of damages aforesaid.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.


Received and admitted Tho. Lovell.
May 14. 1654.
A Breviate of the Depositions taken in the High Court of Admiralty in England,
concerning the Ship Bona Esperanza, referring to the several Fol. and
Interogatories.
Fol. Inter. THat in 1641. William Courten and Company Fraighted and set to Sea
the Ship Bona Esperanza, wherein Roger Tuckerman was Master, on a Trading
Voyage to the East Indies. ROb. Gray 2 1 Rich. Wheeler 37 1 Says she went out
about 3. December. 1641. as he remembers. Fra. Hill 21 1 Tho. Newman 58 1 Says
the goods in her were consigned to the Factor of Courten and Company in India.
That 180. Tuns of the said Ship at Goa, was let to Freight by John Faren for
Courten and Company, to the Portugals for a Voyage from Goa to Maccao in China,
and from thence back again to Goa, and there was to be paid for outward Freight
8000. Rials of eight and 32000. Rials of eight, for her homeward Freight, the
rest of the Tonnage was reserved for Courten. Tho. Lamberton 71 2 William Page
47 2 Tho. Newman 59 2 Rich. Smith 30 2 Rich. Wheeler 38 2 That the Portugals
about March 1643. at Goa, put aboard the said Ship, goods of a great value, and
about 100. passengers bound for Maccao, which the Master and Company undertook,
and endeavored to perform the same. Tho. Newman 59 3 Will. Page 48 3 Says that
some goods were by the Portugalls laden, and some for Courten and Company. Rob.
Gray 3 3 Andr. Wetton 14 3 Tho. Lamberton 72 3 That besides the Portugals goods
taken in at Goa there were diverse goods taken in there, and at other places for
Mr. Courten and Company, to be carried to Maccao in China, which Ship set Sail
from Goa toward Maccao in April 1643. the last Port that goods were taken in
at, was Atcheene, and that all the goods in the Schedule in the 4. Inter.
mentioned, were the goods of Courten, and Company. Rob. Gray 4 4 Rich. Smith 31
4 Rich. Wheeler 39 4 Will. Page 49 4 Says they went from Atcheene in or about
May 1643. Tho. Lamberton 72 4 Says he cannot express the times, because the
Dutch took away his Papers, Writings, and Books of Account. Fol. Inter. That in
June 1643. the Ship with her Lading in her passage toward Maccao, was in a
Hostile manner taken by two Ships the Vendillo and the Portugallo, both
belonging to the Holland East India Company, having with a great Gun and small
Shot killed the Master Roger Tuckerman before any resistance was made by the
said Ship, and afterward by force took the said Ship and Lading, and robbed
the Merchants and Company of all they had, and carried all to Mallacco, being
under the Command of the Dutch. Tho. Newman 61 5 Rob. Gray 5 5 Andr. Wetton 15
5 Fra. Hill 24 5 Rich. Smith 32 5 Rich. Wheeler 40 5 Will. Page 50 5 Tho.
Lamberton 74 5 The Commanders of the Dutch Ships after three or four hours
Fight, took the Ship Bona Esperanza and all Lading, killed the Master and three
or four in Fight, wounded many, whereof some dyed, and used the rest of the
company very inhumanely. Rob. Gray 6 6 Andr. Wetton 16 6 Fra. Hill 25 6 Rich.
Smith 32 6 Rich. Wheeler 41 6 Will. Page 51 6 Tho. Newman 63 6 The Ship was
English built, and the Master and company were all English and Portugals,
except some Blacks, which were the Portugals slaves, and her Lading belonged to
the English and Portugal. Rob. Gray 7 7 Andr. Wetton 17 7 Fra. Hill 26 7 Rich.
Wheeler 42 7 Will. Page 52 7 Tho. Lamberton 76 7 Rich. Smith 33 7 That in
November 1642. the Peace between the Dutch and the Portugal was proclaimed in
India, which was before the taking of the Ship, and ever after assisted each
other. Rob. Gray 8 8 Andr. Wetton 18 8 Fra. Hill 26 8 Rich. Smith 34 8 Rich.
Wheeler 42 8 Tho. Newman 64 8 Says the Dutch kept the English Prisoners above
5 Months before they would let them go. That whilst the Ship was at Goa a
Lading for Maccao one Boreall was sent to Goa from the General of Battavia, for
the Dutch in India to Solemnize the confirmation of the Peace between the Dutch
and Portugals; and Newman says he saw the Articles. Tho. Newman 65 9 Rich.
Wheeler 43 9 Rob. Gray 8 9 Andr. Wetton 18 9 Fra. Hill 27 9 Rich. Smith 34 9
Tho. Lamberton 78 9 That in observation of the Peace the Dutch at Mallacco let
a Ship to freight to the Portugal to Trade in the Indies, and bound for Goa,
and Portugal goods Laden in her. Tho. Lamberton 79 10 Rich. Wheeler 44 10 Fra.
Hill 27 10 Fol. Inter. That after the Ship was taken some of her Company were
carried from Malacca to Batavia to which place came a Portugal Ship Laden with
Portugal goods, where the Dutch permitted them to dispose of their goods
without interruption. Rich. Wheeler 44 11 Tho. Newman 66 11 Tho. Lamberton 79
11 Rob. Gray 9 11 Andr. Wetton 19 11 Rich. Smith 35 11 That the 8000. Rialls
for outward Freight invested at Maccao, would have produced in India at least
4000 l. sterling. Will. Page 54 12 Tho. Newman 67 12 Tho. Lamberton 80 12 That a
Riall of 8. is worth in India 5 s. and 32000 Rialls makes 8000. sterling. Tho.
Lamberton 81 13 Will. Page 55 13 Tho. Newman 67 13 That if Mr. Courtens goods
had been sold at Maccao, and returns made to Goa, and from thence turned into
India goods, they would have produced at London, 36000 l. sterling. Will. Page 55
14 Tho. Newman 68 14 Tho. Lamberton 81 14 That there was left at Maccao upon a
former voyage for the Account of Mr. Courten and Company 2750. Tho. Lamberton
82 15 That 7750 l. in Rials of 8. invested at Maccao, and from thence
transported into India and there sold, and the proceed invested into India
goods, and those brought into England would there produce 35000 l. Tho. Newman
68 16 Tho. Lamberton 82 16 The Ships Tackle and furniture worth 4000. sterling.
Robert Gray 10 17 Andr. Wetton 20 17 Rich. Smith 36 17 Rich. Wheeler 45 17 Tho.
Newman 69 17 Tho. Lamberton 83 17 The particular of what the Factors and
Mariners have lost by taking of the said Ship, was 3516 l. Rob. Gray 11 19
Andr. Wetton 20 19 Fra. Hill 28 19 Rich. Wheeler 46 19 Will. Page 57 19 Tho.
Newman 69 19 Tho. Lamberton 83 19 Rich. Smith 36 19 Besides, The lives of the
Kings Subjects according to the value His Majesty pleases to put upon them,
considering the impoverishing of so many Families occasioned by the loss to the
Fatherless and Widows of the Mariners.

The Translation of the Agreement concerning the Henry Bona Adventure, between
the Mariners and Adriaen vander Stell.
I Underwritten Adriaen vander Stell Commander of the Island Mauritius, on the
part and behalf of the Netherlandish East India Company, do declare (upon the
Instant Request of Henry Glascock Merchant, and Edward Lock Master of the Ship
called the Henry Bona Adventure, that on the second of February last past at
night, there arose here a very violent Hurricane whereby they lost their said
Ship called as above, on the Northside of this said Island, and repairing
thereunto, I found the said Ship as yet whole and entire, setting upon the
Recist; I did also hear that the said Merchant and Skipper have oftentimes
Charged or Commanded the said Ships Company to save or preserve their Masters
goods, whether Peppers or other Commodities; whereupon the said Ships Company
Replied, that they did not desire to hazard their lives, for as to the goods
that should be so saved, when that they should be Transported into England,
they should not enjoy one Stiver Hyre for the saving or preserving of the said
Goods, insomuch that the abovesaid persons entreated me to save the said goods
with the Companies Mariners, for otherwise the said goods would in a short time
be swallowed up or Perished in the Seas. All that which is abovesaid I do
declare to be in substance the very truth, and shall verify the same more at
large according as the business shall require.

Done on the Island of Mauritius on the Northside of the said Island on the 10.
of February 1643.

Signed Adriaen vander Stell.

WE underwritten Henry Glascock, and Skipper Edward Lock, John Rogers Chief
Steereman, John Peacock Under-Steereman, and Edward Stacy Assistant, have at
sundry times required the said Ships Company to save or preserve and bring on
shore the Companies goods, whether Peppers, or other Wares or Commodities, and
because they refused so to do, and did not desire to hazard their lives to save
or preserve the said Companies goods, therefore we underwritten did Request the
said Commander Adrian vander Stell, that the same might be saved or preserved
by his People or Mariners, namely all that which should be found to be
remaining in the Ship, and in that respect we conceived that it was better that
the same should be saved or preserved rather then to suffer them to be
destroyed: And moreover that the Netherlandish East India Company, would be
pleased to do or act therein, according as they should find it most convenient.

Done upon the Island of Mauritius on the North-westside of the said Island,
this 10. day of February 1643.

And was Subscribed, Henry Glascock Edward Lock John Rogers John Peacock Edw.
Stacy.



Being examined with the Original the same is found to agree therewith, this
10. of March, An. 1643. upon the said Island Mauritius.

Signed Jacob vander Mersche.


Concordat substantialiter cum suo originali quod attestor.

J. Daniell. Not. Pub.



The Commissioners Certificate translated into Dutch out of the English.
ALsoo inden Name van sijne Majesteyt seekeer Commissie J. Winstanly.
van Banckeroute onder het groot Zegel van Engelandt gedateert des 26 Januarij
nu' laestleden gefundeert op Rich. Adams.
verscheyde Act by to Parliament aengaende Bankeroutes gemaeckt is vernieuwt
end geadderesseert aen ons wiens naemen hier onder geschreven staen, te gen
William Courten Coopman van Rich. Norton.
Londen; verclaeren at steren end certificeren by deses dat den voorn:
William Courten is banckerout geworden inden maent van Simon Smith.
September. int' Jare onses Heeren 1643. gelyck naer D'xaminatie onder Eede van
verscheyde Getuygen is blyckende, twelck wy Getuygen onder onse handen and
Zegels den 2 Feb. 1660.

Andere Copy Translaet.
ALlen den geenen die deses Jegenwoordiges sullen sien often hooren leesen, Sir
Richard Brown Ridder Bar. here Burgemaster, Schepenen, end Raet der stadt
Londen, done te weten dat op hujden deser int' hoff in person verschene end
gecompareert sijnde eerwaerdige Jacob Winstanly van Grays Inn, and Richard
Adams van Lincolns Inn, int' Graeffschap van Middlesex Schiltknaepen Drs. inde
Rechten, end Richard Norton end Simon Smith Cooplujden inde voors. stadt
persoonen van bekende Waerdicheit and vromigheit, and hebben voor ons
geproducert seekere Commissie verleent by sijne uytnemenste Majeste yt onder
het groot Zegel van Engelandt aen haer and andere daer in genoemt
geaddresseert, haer authoriseerende te ondersoecken de geleng their Staet and
qualiteyt van William Courten lest Coopman in dese Stat van Londen and andere
saecke dies aengaende te done and uyt te Wercken als by de selve Commissie is
geordonneert and de selve comparamer oock voor ons Producerende de attestatie
often Certificatie hier voords staende, Raeckende den voorn. William Courten
Banckeroute geconfirmeert end geattesteert met hare respective handen and
Zegels de Welcke Sy lieden tot meerder seekerheyt elck int bysonder voor ons
hebben geratificeert geapprobeert and geconfirmeert ons versoeckende dese met
onse verclaeringe te VVillen authentiseren en verkractigent eynde deselve tot
hare intentie volcomen effect match sorteren; waer omme; wy daer van hebben
gegeven dese onse opene verclaeringe and i^t eijcken dor waerheyt hebben dese
done Zegelen met het Zegel van Burgemaster ampt deser woorn. Stat Londen:
gedateert in Londen deses 6 Feb. 1660. end int' 13 Jaer van Regeringe van
onsen Souveraine Here Carel de tweede door Gods genaede Coninck van
Engelandt, Schotlandt, end Irelant, Beschermer de Geloofs; and was ondert
Welde hebben ter side gedruckt het Zegel der Stat Londen in Roode Wassche met
Wit Papier overdeckt onderstont Aldus getranslateert and met sijne originele
accorderende bevonden by my, and was onderteyckent I vander Heyde.

A Breviate of the Depositions taken in the Court of Admiralty concerning the
Ship Henry Bona Adventure of London.
EDward Lock says and deposes that upon the 24 of January 1642. in the
morning about Three of the Clock, the Ship Henry Bona Adventure of the burden
of 160 Tons laden with Pepper and Iron, for account of William Courten and
Company, whereof this Examinant was Master, coming to the West part of Sumatra,
was driven on Shore by an Hurricane upon the Island Mauritius, where the Dutch
did inhabit, and John Rogers says and deposes that the said Ship being bound
for the Port of London, for Account of the aforesaid Mr. Courten and Company,
laden with Pepper taken in at Tougouhe, that when the Ships Company found
themselves in great distress, after they had saved many Boats full of the
Goods, they desired the assistance of the Dutch, who came down to the Sea side,
and with the help of the Seamen saved all the Ships lading, provisions, and
tackle, but the Ship perished in the Sea. Edward Stacy says and deposes, that
about the time aforesaid, the said Ship struck upon a Rock near the Shore of
Mauritius, laden with Pepper, part whereof was taken in at Atcheene, and part
at Tougouhe, and some Iron carried from London, and that all the goods saved,
were left in the Custody of the Governor of the said Island, for the account
of Courten and Company, allowing the Dutch such salvage as was usual in such
cases, or as the said Companies should agree upon between themselves.

Henry Glascock Cape Merchant of the said Ship, upon the account aforesaid,
says and deposes, that the said Ship struck upon a Rock near the said Island,
and being in an apparent danger of perishing, he sent on Shore to Adriaen
vander Stell Governor of said Island for the East India Company of the
Netherlands, and craved the assistance of the Inhabitants of the said Island
toward saving the Ship and Goods.

That this Examinant shipped 327 bahars of Pepper, at the places aforesaid, and
says that there were 700 bars of Spanish Iron in her, that were left unsold
which were brought from London upon the Account aforesaid: That the said
Governor would not weigh the said Pepper although earnestly desired by this
Deponent and the Ships Company, he pretending they had no Scales.

That after much debate about the said Salvage, it was concluded and agreed
upon between the Governor and this Deponent, and the Examinant Edward Lock
Master of the said Ship, that it should be referred to the East India Company
of Holland, and Mr. Courtens Company to allow the men satisfaction for their
pains.

That according to the said Agreement there was a writing drawn up in English,
to which the Dutch Governor was desired to subscribe, this Examinant, and the
Master, with some others, having subscribed the same; who refused, pretending
he could not understand English, and the said Governor caused one to be drawn
in Dutch, and some of the Dutchmen there that understood both Dutch and
English, affirmed it was in substance the same with the other, or to that
effect, whereby the Examinant Edward Lock Master, John Rogers, John Peacock,
and Edward Stracy, all of the said ships Company did subscribe the same,
intending it to no other purpose but that the business should be suddenly
ended by the Agents or Ministers of both Companies in the Indies then Resident,
the one at Batavia, and the other at Goa, all which the Deponents affirmed to
be true by virtue of their Oaths.

The Authentic Copy of Jonas Abeel's Insinuation to the East India Company of
the Netherlands.
May 25. 1648.
OP huyden hebbe ick Gerriz Coren, Notaris Publijcque by den hove van Hollandt
geadmitteert, residerende binnen Amstelredamme, my met den getuygen naegenoemt
getransporteert end gevonden op to Oost-Indisch huys deser Stead, inde
vergaderinge vanden heeren Bewinthebberen der Geoctroyeerde Oost-Indische
Compagnie alhier, Inde haer E. met behoorliicke eerbiedinge, int den naem van
Sr. Jonas Abeels, Coopman alhier, als last, end procuratie hebbende vanden
here Paulus Pindar, Ridder der Stadt London, geinsinueert to gene volcht.

Jonas Abeels, als last end procuratie hebbende vanden here Paulus Pindar,
Ridder der Stadt London, volgens den instrumente van procuratie, by denselven
here Paulus Pindar, op den 11 dach Februarij 1647. Style van Engelandt voor den
Notaris Josua Mainet end sekere getuygen gepasseert; Doet mits desen de
tegenwoordige vergaderinge vanden aenwesende heeren Bewinthebberen der
Nederlantsche Geoctroyeerde Oost-Indische Compagne, insinueren end
interdiceren: Alsoo de Originele Insinuant, de Here Paulus Pindar voornt. als
actie end transport hebbende vanden Here Willem Courten Schiltknaep van
London, alleen gerechticht is tot het geene de, voorn. Comp. bevonden sal
woorden te moeten nitkeeren, voor de schaden end verliesen geleden end noch
te lyden door to onrecht saiseren end detineren van't Schip genaemt de Bona
Esperanza, anders de Good Hope van London, end d' ingeladen goederen, als oock
voor all de goederen end Coopmanschappen, gesalveert uyt het Schip, genaemt
de Henry Bona Adventure van London, welck voorn. Schip de Bona Esperanza, met
hier ladinge genomen is inde Oost-Indien, end de ladinge van't voorn. Schip de
Henry Bona Adventure (so de voorn. originele Insinuant verstaen heeft) op to
Eylant Mauritius gesalveert en genomen is geweest in to besit vanden here
Adriaen vander Stell, Gouverneur aldaer voor de voorn Comp. alles nae werden
uytwysen vanden voorn. instrumente van procuratie, end her transport vanden
voorn Courten, daer inn vermelt: Dat derhalven de heeren Geinsinuerden geen
penningen, ter saeck vande voorn schaden en verliesen, als ooch ter saecke
vande voorn. geberchde goederen, en sullen betalen aen iemant anders, als
alleen aen den Insinuant in qualite voorn. of sijn voorn. principale, often in
cas de heeren Geinsinuerde, desen niet tegenstaende, contrarien comen te done,
dat hen de sulcx geen betalinge en sal verstrecken, maer datse andermael aen
den Insinuant in qualite voorn of sijn voorn principale sullen hebben te
betalen. Daer van well expresselick protesterende, mitsgaders, in cas van eenige
contraventie, mede van all costen, schaden en interesse.

All to welcke by de heeren Geinsinuerden gehoort, antwoorden, datmen hen
soude geven copy end die 's anderen daegs leveren aen de Rekenmeesters. Aldus
gedaen binnen Amsterdam ter presentie van Ian Ianz end Adam Nijs, Inwoonderen
deser Stead, als getuygen, hier over gestaen des 25 May 1648. Onderstandt
Uytgegeven voor Copy, end accordeert met de principale by my: End was
getekent.

G. Coren. Not. Pub.
1648.
Certain Evidences and Presumptions concerning the Loss of the two Ships
called the Dragon and Katharine of LONDON.
OUt of the Book of Resolutions at Goa, in the Instructions given to John
Durson on his Persia Voyage: Also if you happen to meet with the Ship Hopewell
(Mr. Edward Lock, or whosoever Commander) inquire diligently of six Dutchmen
taken aboard the said Ship at her last being at Cocheen, who can make certain
Relation concerning the Dragon and Katharine, their sinking between the Island
of Ceylon and Mauritius, by six Dutch Vessels or Ships (as we are informed)
whereof the Ship called Amsterdam was Admiral. 21 November. 1644.

Subscribed per John Farren, John Darrell.
London 9 Junii 1641.
Francis Day says, that from Musulipatam he came to Surrat, and coming before
Goa, was forced to strike by the Hollanders, and a Boat from the Ship Amboyna,
came aboard to have a discharge how that they received no injury from the
Hollanders, which Discharge was written twice before it could be to their
liking, and amongst the Boats Crew, there was an Englishman, who told the
Purser of the Expedition, (as three or four men come home by the Crispiana, can
witness) it is well you struck, for all the Guns aboard were primed, and the
Linstocks ready, waiting for the word to give fire, and would have sunk you,
and God knows what is become of Captain Weddall, which words being spoken, he
was called away by the Commander into the Boat.

Subscribed Francis Day.

John Carter came home in the Crispiana, and afterward in the Bona Esperanza,
tells the same words as Francis Day abovesaid.

London 25 Jan. 1641. aboard the Hester at Blackwall, were William Courten,
John Rushout, Captain Robert Moulton, Anthony Robertson one of the Queens
Musicians, Edward Knipe, and John Benning, were told by William Tailor Masters
Mate, and confirmed by Robert Hogg Master of the Hester,
That William Tailor aforesaid going a Shore at Cocheene, William Gorlye the
Governor of the Town and Castle demanded or asked him among other things,
whether Captain Weddall was arrived in England with his two ships? to which he
answered he was not; and do you know what is become of the said two ships? he
answered he knew not; then said he you must know they were sunk by the
Hollanders about Ceylon: he asked how he knew this, to which he answered, here
are passed through this Town two Slaves, which were taken by the Hollanders,
and made an escape from them, which two Slaves have reported the same for a
certain truth to all the Inhabitants of Cocheen; the said two Slaves were then
gone for Goa or India, more particulars they neglected to enquire: after they
also asked what Hollanders should have sunk or taken them, answer was made,
part of the Fleet which lay before Goa, in the way home to Jacatra, whereof was
General one of the Holland Ships named Tervere.

Subscribed William Tailor.

John Benning Master of the Planter, affirms that Capt. Weddal's two ships,
viz. the Dragon and Katharine, according to the Invoyce were worth 150000 l.
sterling, if they had come to the Port of London, besides Mr. Mountney's Goods
valued at 20000 l.

London Anno 1644.
At the Return of Tho. Lamberton, William Page, Tho. Newman, and others, taken
in the Bona Esperanza going to China, and brought Prisoners to Malacca, with
ten wounded men which lay in the Hospital, where they found a Stochman lying
sick; he upon his dying told to the aforesaid men of the Bona Esperanza, that
he could not dye before he had declared that he was at the taking of the Dragon
and Katharine, which were going from India unto the Cape Bona Esperanza, by the
Holland ships, which coming fair by Capt. Weddall, and pretending to be bound
home, they invited him, with Captain Carter and both the Mountneys aboard,
where having feasted together, Capt. Weddall, and his friends were brought upon
the Deck, and told they must into the sea, whereupon more words past, and then
they were bound Back to Back, and thrown into the sea, those of the Dragon and
Katharine seeing the same, fitted themselves to fight, but were taken, and the
Ships robbed, and withal, (the men remaining alive) bored, and let sink into
the sea: he told that the same Fleet came to Malacca afterward, and the common
men were sent for the Molucca's, and that well known by many in Malacca, but
they durst not speak of it. The said Lamberton and others asked the Lieutenant
of the Town about the same, but he answered, upon their lives they should not
speak of such things.

Tho. Lamberton.

A Declaration of some further probable News of the Dragon and Katharine,
Captain John Weddall, and Captain John Carter Commanders, from the Mouth of
Boatswain went I Tho. Henton quondam Chyrurgion of the Ship Bona Esperanza
employed in the Service of the Worshipful Esquire Courten in Anno 1643. in the
Month of August, being by sinister occasion at Johanna, in the Ship Hopewell of
the old Company, at which time also was the Crispiana and Dolphin of the old
Company, there was also the Loyalty, Mr. John Durson Commander, belonging to
Esquire Courten had these following Relatitions of the Destruction of the
Dragon and Katharine by the Dutch as follows; This Boatswain Went was
Boatswain of the good Ship Dolphin Mr. Proud Master, in the said year 1643.
upon some Employment bound from Surat to the Southward, viz. to Cocheen a
Portugal Town, where, upon what occasions I know not, he had some conference
with a Servant of the Governor of Cocheen concerning the Dutch, the man told
him of a fight at Ceylon between the Dutch and English, viz. two English Ships
and five Dutch ships, the English named the Dragon and Katharine, both which
the Dutch overcame, sinking the one, and forcing the other on shore, and so
eagerly persecuted them, that some of the English having escaped Drowning, and
got a shore, the Dutch in their Boats hasted a shore likewise and cut them all
off, this Servant to the Governor was in the Dutch ships at that time in their
Service, when as they fought, and following the English a shore (he being one
among the Dutch) made escape to the Portugalls, and in time came to serve the
Governor of Cocheen.

This is the Relation that I heard Boatswain Went, relate, and indeed I went
aboard purposely about the business to enquire of him. I required to have the
Relation under the Boatswains hand, but I could not obtain it, by reason of the
shortness of our time, for they suddenly set sail from Johanna; also the
Boatswain said, the Governor of Cocheen knows the Matter, and upon inquiry if
he pleases, can produce you his Servant if he be living, if not, he himself is
able to give satisfaction therein. Uunderwritten

Thomas Hinton.

Duarte Defigueiredo de Mello Secretario de sua Majestade do estado da India
certifico que atsistindo na ilha de Ceylon soube por algus Prisoneires
Olandeses que se tomarao coms as duas naos do Capn. Guedal que hia da China
para Inglaterra as tomarao os Olandeses os no Cabo dobaa Esperanca et as
meterao ambas apique Isto tree o que me constou dos ditos dos ditos prisoneiros,
Goa a 22. de Abril de 1647.

Sotto scritto

Translated out of the Portuges into English.
I Edward Defigueiredo de Mello Secretary to his Majesty of the State of India,
do certify that being in Commission in the Island of Ceylon, I came to know by
some Prisoners of the Hollanders, that they met with two ships of Capt. Weddall
which were going from China to England, and that the Hollanders took them
toward the Cape of Bona Esperanza and sunk them both; This is what appeared
unto me by the relations of the said Prisoners, Goa the 22. of April, Anno 1647.

Was underwritten

To the Right Honorable the COMMITTEE of LORDS and COMMONS for the Admiralty.
The humble Petition of William Tombs.
Jun. An. 1645.
Shows,

THat by virtue of an Assignment from William Courten Esquire to Sir Paul Pindar,
and from him to your Petitioner, he is become possessed of the Ship the Planter
of London late come from the East Indies, and now in the River of Thames; and
your Petitioner being engaged for the Customs of the goods, which were entered
in the said ship by him, and further promised to see the Master and Mariners
wages fully satisfied, before the disposal thereof, has made sale of the said
Ship, whereby the said Customs and Wages might be speedily paid accordingly.

Now so it is, that one Thomas Kynaston has arrested the said Ship by Writ out
of the Admiralty, upon Account of some interest in her, and so hereby your
Petitioner is hindered to give present satisfaction for the Customs, and poor
Mariners wages, who daily out of their great necessity come upon him for the
same: Your Petitioner does therefore humbly pray this Honorable Committee,
that Order may be given forthwith for the sale of the said ship, for the speedy
payment of the Customs, the Master and Mariners wages, due from her; and if
she shall produce a greater sum, that the same may remain in Custody for the
true Proprietor, when it shall be adjudged in the Admiralty; to which your
Petitioner shall submit.

June 13. 1645.
At the Committee of the Lords and Commons for the Admiralty of the Cinque
Ports; Ordered, it be referred to the Judge of the Admiralty Court, to do in
the Matter prayed, according to Justice, taking Care that the State have right
in the Case of Customs, and the Master and Mariners in point of Wages.

Subscribed

July 1. 1645.
Upon Tuesday being the first day of July 1645. Tho. Kynaston against 21/32
parts of the Ship Planter and her Tackle and Furniture, against William Tombs
coming for interest herein, Yoe and Budd upon this day before Doctor Sames
Judge of the Admiralty Court, in his Chamber in Doctors Commons London, being
present Edward Brian Notary Public, appeared Mr. Budd Proctor for the said
William Tombs, and presented to the said Judge The Humble Petition of the said
William Tombs, directed To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons for the
Admiralty and Cinque Ports, together with their Order thereupon made, and the
said Budd according to the tenor or effect of the said Order, did in the
presence of Mr. Yoe, Proctor for the said Thomas Kynaston, desire the Judge to
decree the said Ship the Planter, and her Tackle and furniture to be exposed by
the Marshal of the Court to public sale, and to be sold to him that offers
most, and the Kings Customs and the salaries justly due to the Master and
Mariners in the said Ship, to be paid out of the moneys arising from the sale
of the said Ship; and he further desired that the residue of the said moneys
might remain with the aforesaid Marshal of the Court, until it shall be
otherwise Ordered in that behalf from this Court; All which the Judge at his
Petition decreed accordingly.

Memorandum, that Mr. Tombs sold the Ship Planter, the Salt Peter, Pepper, and
other goods in her, for Sir Paul Pindar's Account in part of the money due to
him.

The Impost and Excise in the Low-Countryes for the Public Charge continued
since the Union.
Pays by the Family, according as it is great or small, so much per an. Salt.
as they are taxed.

30 Stivers the Barrel of Beer Brewed in Holland. On Beer for Burghers.


34 Stivers the Barrel if Brewed in any other of the United Provinces.

118 Stivers the Barrel if Brewed without the Provinces.

2 Stivers per Barrel paid by the Brewer, and 12 Stivers for every Brewing
Tappers or Retailers.
for his Families drinking.

114 Stivers the Barrel if Brewed within the Provinces.

148 Stivers the Barrel if Brewed without the Provinces.

4 Stivers the Stope of French Wine, which is somewhat above a Pottle. On Wine.


6 Stivers the Stope for Rhenish, Spanish, or other sorts of Wine.

Tappers or those that sell Wine by Retail pay double Excise.

96 Stivers the Ame, which is 40 Gallons English measure. Vineager.


8 Stivers the Stope if made of Wine. Brande or Aquavitae


5 Stivers the Stope if made of Beer or Malt.

22 Stivers the Last of Wheat. Corn for Meetage.


25 Stivers the Last of Rye.

36 Stivers the Last of Rape seed, and other small seeds.

63 Gilders 12 Stivers the Last of Wheat or Meslin. Tobe grownd


31 Gilders 16 Stivers the Last of Rye

21 Gilders 4 Stivers the Last of Barley, Oats, and Beans.

11 Gilders 15 Stivers the last of Buck.

4 Gilders the Barrel, which contains 320 l. weight. Butter.


4 Gilders the But or Pipe. Oil.


3 Gilders the Tun of Train Oil.

1 Stiver the pound if made of Wax. Candles.


Stiver the pound if made of Tallow.

3 Gilders the 100 l. Starch.


6 Gilders 8 Stivers the Barrel, or Ton, Cake or Castle Soap of a Stiver Soap.
the pound.

1 Stiver the Barrel or Ton. Turffe and Coals.


18 Gilders the 100 Scales of Scoth Cole, each scale containing 250 l.

48 Gilders the Hood or Chaldron of Seacoles.

The eighth part of whatsoever it cost. Fire wood.


Horses three years old and above 2 Stivers per Month. Cattle.


Oxen or Cowes above three years old 3 Stivers per Month.

Oxen, Cowes, Calves, Sheep, Lambs, Hoggs, Pigs, etc. the seventh part Te be
killed.
of whatsoever they cost.

Barrel Fish and Herrings, 20 Stivers the Barrel. Fish.


Sturgeon, Salmon, etc. the ninth part of what it cost.

Of all sorts the Eighth part of whatsoever it cost. Fruit.


3 Stivers the pound weight. Tobacco.


Pitch the Barrel 16 Stivers. Pitch and Tar.


Tar the Barrel 10 Stivers.

English white Pack-clothes 6 Gilders the piece. Cloth.


Fine Worcester white Clothes 16 Gilders the piece.

Of low price, one Stiver per piece. Stuffes.


The twelfth part of the value or cost. Silks of all sorts.


The Ninth part of the value or cost. Tapistry and Gilt leather.


One sixth part of the yearly value or rent, if it be let, if not the owner
Lands and houses.
pays it by Taxation.

All Arable lands which are sowed, or Orchards planted, pay 2 Stivers per Acre,
every month to be accounted from the time of its sowing until it be mowed.

Of lands or houses pay the 40 part of whatever they are sold for, as often as
they are sold and alienated. Alienation.


Pay the 20 part of the Inheritance which comes by a side line if the legacy
Collateral successions or Legaters.
not given to a pious use.

For all men or maid servants, the Masters or Mistresses thereof pay one
Servants.
Gilder per an for every Servant.

Two Stivers for every small seal, and four Stivers for the great, to be set
Seal money.
on a Sheet of Paper; and to make this Tax considerable, it is ordered that
all Deeds, Contracts, Wills, etc. of what nature soever that are not so sealed,
shall be held as invalid, and no judgment to be given on them in Law.

All goods whatsoever sold by Weight, to be weighed, whereof there Weigh house.
is a set rate what each sort pays.

The Retailer or Shopkeeper does compound yearly for this Tax to prevent the
infinite trouble thereof. Which amounts to an innumerable sum yearly.

Besides all which there are Taxes extraordinary, as often as necessity
requires, whereof the States only are Judges, viz.

The thousand part, sometimes the five hundred, and sometimes the two hundred
part of every man's estate rich or poor, whereof none are exempt but such as
recieve Alms.

All men are taxed according to common report by the Magistrates of their
several Cities and Towns, and the party grieved at his Assessement declaring
upon Oath that his estate is not worth so much shall be relieved.

But its seldom that any make themselves poorer then common report speaks
them, for their own credit sake, and this amounts to very much. Whereby the
yearly revenue is made as great as the States themselves please, and renders
them so considerable, that they think themselves equal with most Princes of
Europe.

The repartition what each Province pays part to a hundred pound.

Gelderland pays 5-12-3 Holland pays 58-6-2 Zealand pays 9-3-8 Utrecht
pays 5-16-7 Vriesland pays 11-13-2 Overyssel pays 3-11 5 Groeuingen
pays 5-16-7-


XII. Select Articles of the Peace and mutual Commerse between Henry the
Seventh King of England and Philip Archduke of Austria and Duke of Burgundy,
concluded and Signed at London the 24. of February 1495. Taken from the
Original.
Artic. XIII. Mercatoribus utriusque Principis tutum libere habitare.
ITem, Conventum est ut supra: Quod mercatores utriusque partis partium
praedictarum, ac eorum factores, familiares, negotiorum gestores and ministri,
nautae, magistri navium and marinarii tuto and secure morabuntur in regnis,
dominiis, terris and patriis Principum praedictorum, and eorum utriusque; Nec
non in eorum portubus and littoribus cum eorum bonis, navibus and mercantiis
quibuscunque absque eo quod ipsi vel eorum aliquis ullum damnum, injuriam, vel
praejudicium aliquod, aliis mercatoribus cujuscunque alterius nationis, aut
eorum factoribus, negotiorum gestoribus, ministris, nautis, magistris navium
aut marinariis faciant, aut fieri procurent. Et quod mercatores aliarum
patriarum nationum, eorum factores, negotiorum gestores, ministri, nautae,
magistri navium and marinarii, mercatoribus and subditis alicujus Principis,
Principum praedictorum, nullum damnum, injuriam, vel praejudicium aliquod in
locis praedictis inferant, aut inferri procurent.

Artic. XIV. Piscatoribus utriusque Principis subditis tam per mare quam terra
liberum commeatum fore.
Item, Conventum est ut supra, Quod Piscatores utriusque partis partium
praedictarum cujuscunque Conditionis existant, poterunt ubique ire, navigare,
per mare secure piscari, absque aliquo impedimento, licentia, seu salvo
conductu. Et si contingat aliquos ex Piscatoribus unius partis, per fortunam,
tempestatem maris, vim hostium aut alio modo compelli intrare in aliquem portum
vel districtum alterius partis; Idem pacifice and amicabiliter recipientur and
tractabuntur, solvendo in locis ubi applicabunt jura and telonia praedicta, and
ab aliis portubus and locis poterunt libere recidere, and redire cum eorum
navibus and bonis, sine impedimento vel contradictione quacunque: Dummodo tamen
per ipsos Piscatores non committatur fraus neque dolus, seu per eos aliis
damnum minime fiat.

Artic. XVII. Cautio praestanda pro Navibus in Mare exituris.
Item ad finem, ut Captiones Navium, personarum and bonorum unius partis super
alteram de caetero cessent, conventum, concordatum, and conclusum est, quod
quandocunque aliqua Navis, cujuscunque Indigenae, unius vel alterius partis
partium praedictarum, exitura est ab aliquo portu sive districtu Principum
praedictorum, seu eorum alterius, Majores and Gubernatores Civitatis, Oppidi
sive villae, quibus portus sive districtus hujusmodi adjacent, quibuscunque
nominibus, Officiis aut appellationibus iidem Gubernatores censeantur, capiant
sufficientes securitates de and pro dominis, proprietariis, possessoribus,
magistris, Bursariis and Victuellariis navis hujusmodi, ad duplum valoris navis
apparatus, and victualium ejusdem, Quod magister ejusdem Navis, Capitanei,
Marinarii, and omnes in eadem Nave existentes, cujuscunque status aut
conditionis existant, servabunt pacem erga quoscunque subditos Principum
praedictorum, and quod nullam eis injuriam seu violentiam in terra, Mari,
fluminibus, aut portu aliquo facere vel inferri presumant. Quod si hujusmodi
securitatem praestare noluerint, non permittent, imo impedient express ipsos
Mercatores and gubernatores navium hujusmodi quoquo modo exire, nisi
proprietarii sive Bursarii ejusdem navis Regalem vel Archiducalem licentiam
respective suo sub sigillo eisdem exhibuerint, quod licite cum sua navi, sine
ulla cautionis praestatione exire potuerint. In quo casu si ipsi sic per
Principem suum licentiati, subditos alterius Principis spoliaverint aut
damnificaverint and solvendo non fuerint, tunc per eundem Principem sic
licentiantem plena satisfactio fiet partibus sic damnificatis. Quoties autem
securitatem praemissam Majores and Gubernatores Civitatum, villarum and
oppidorum, unius partis aut alterius exegerint, dabunt literas authenticas sub
eorum communi sigillo, proprietariis, possessoribus, magistris seu Bursariis
illius navis, sic assecurare testificantes ipsius securitatis praestationem, ad
finem, ut ipsarum literarum vigore navis hujusmodi, alios, ad quos forsitan
applicabit portus, absque nov a securitatis praestatione libere exire valeat.

Artic. XIX. Si Navis ab extranco capta fuerit in portu Principis.
Item, Conventum est ut supra: Quod si aliquae naves, per aliquem non subditum
Principibus praedictis, captae fuerint in portu aliquo aut Franchisiis alicujus
Principum praedictorum, tenebitur ille princeps, in cujus portu aut Franchisiis
navis illa capta fuerit una cum altero Principe pro testitutione dictae Navis
prosequi, sumptibus tamen and exensis damnificatae partis.

Artic. XX. Non impedient venientes ab orient.
Item, Conventum est ut supra: Quod nullum praebebitur impedimentum, per unam
partem vel alteram, venientibus de partibus Orientalibus, neutri parti
inimicis, cum vasis vel Navibus quibuscunque oneratis victualibus, mercantiis,
vel aliis bonis, versus Regna, patrias, dominia, aut terras unius vel alterius
Principum praedictorum.

Artic. XXII. Naves alterutrius libertatem subditorum habere.
Item, Conventum est ut supra: Quod Nautae, magistri Navium and Marinarii,
subditi praefatorum Principum, post adventum ipsorum ad portus unius vel
alterius Principum eorundem, poterunt libere imponere and ligare eorum Naves
tam oneratas and non oneratas, quam ad guerram dispositas, dummodo non fuerint
Piraticae, in eisdem portubus and littoribus eodem modo, quo poterunt ipsius
Principis subditi proprii.

Artic. XXIV. Si Navis naufragium fecerit.
Item, Conventum est, etc. Quod quotiescunque contigerit, aliquam Navem unius
partium praedictarum cum bonis and mercandisis oneratam, per fortunam
tempestatis maris, vel alio casu quocunque tangere terram and naufragium
facere, periclitari, aut alio modo quocunque perire, prope portus, limits and
costeras, vel in portubus, limitibus aut costeris alterius partis, licet in
ipsa navi non remaneat vir, mulier, puer, cattus, canis; vel gallus vivens,
bona tamen and merchandisae qualiacunque, quae ad terram applicabunt, vel
aliter servari aut recuperari continget, non propter hoc dicentur confiscata,
nec pro confiscatis reputabuntur, sed per Officiarios locorum, in quibus sic
casus acciderit, salvae and securae custodiae committentur, sub eadem sic
remansura per annum unum and diem tunc proxime and immediate sequentem: Intra
quem terminum si quisquam supervenerit, and si rerum ac bonorum ipsorum certum
proprietarium fuisse constiterit, res and bona, ipsi sine difficultate vel
dilatione aliqua plene restituentur, solvendo tamen iis, quorum opera and
diligentia res and bona ipsa recuperata, salvata, and custodita fuerint,
rationabiles expensas, and custodibus salarium competens, prout ratio and
aequitas postulabit.

Artic. XXV. Mercatores alterutrius licere domos habere.
Item, Conventum est ut supra: Quod Mercatores qui subditi sunt uni Principum
praedictorum, poterunt tehere and habere in villis and oppidis alterius
Principis domos and habitationes, pro ipsis and rebus suis in iisdem
recipiendis, servandis and exponendis: ibidemque iisdem Privilegiis,
libertatibus and Franchisiis, utentur and gaudebunt, quibus ibidem usi and
gavisi sunt ante quinquaginta ann. ultime and immediate praecedentes, adeoque
benign and amicabiliter tractabuntur in iisdem, sicut aliae nationes ipsas
villas and patrias frequentantes.

Artic. XXVIII. De damno illato.
Item, Conventum est, etc. Quod quotiescunque contigerit, subditos domini Regis
Angiiae a subditis praefati domini Archiducis, vel subditos ejusdem domini
Archiducis a subditis praedicti domini Regis Angliae, quoquo modo laedi vel
damnificari, non debent propterea per literas represaliorum, marcae, vel contra
marcae, aut alia mandata quaecunque (debitis admonitionibus and submonitionibus
non praecedentibus) qui damna non intulerunt, ad petitionem damnificatorum, vel
alio modo in personis vel bonis arrestari, vel quovis modo impediri aut
molestari. Nec guerra ob id fieri vel moveri debet, sed per Principes unius vel
alterius partis attentata, ipsa debite reparabuntur, and in priorem statum
reponentur; hujusmodique literae represaliorum, marcae, and contra marcae and
similia mandata quaecunque, nisi praedictis admonitionibus, quoad ipsas parts;
submonitionibus, quoad Principes praecedentibus and legitime factis, deinceps
omnino: Et si aliter concedantur, pro nullis habeantur.

Artic. XXIX. Praeterita represalia in suspenso habeantur.
Item, Conventum est ut supra: Quod omnes and singulae literae represaliorum,
aut de marca vel contra marca, ex Cancellaria vel alia curia Principum
praedictorum, aut eorundem praedecessorum, ad cujuscunque prosecutionem, vel ob
causam quamcunque ante concessae vel emissae, in suspenso tenebuntur, nec
poterit earum aliqua fieri executio, nisi super earum meritis habita cognitione
indicta, ad hoc per ipsos Principes specialiter deputandum, aliter fuerit
ordinatum: Et pari modo omnes and singulae depraedationes and violentae
captiones super mare hinc inde, ante diem October. decimum tertium ultimo
praeteritum factae, similiter tenebuntur in suspenso: nec poterit super iisdem
aut eorum aliqua actio intentari aut admitti. Nec literae represaliorum dari,
nisi super eorum meritis habita cognitione indicta, ad hoc per ipsos Principes
specialiter deputandum, aliter fuerit ordinatum.

Art. XXXIII. Deputati convenient pro sedandis discordiis inter mercatores
stapulae Calesiae.
Item, Conventum est ut supra: Quod in sedandum and componendum lites,
discordias and differentias, inter mercatores stapulae Calesiae and subditos
domini Archiducis, stapulam concernentes in villa Calesiae, primo die Maij
proxime futuro convenient deputati mercatorum utriusque partis: Et casu, quo
per ipsos deputatos hujusmodi lites, discordiae and differentiae, sedari and
componi non possint, fiet relatio Principibus praedictis, qui aliter pro
hujusmodi litibus discordiis and differentiis sedandis, prout ratio and
aequitas dictabunt, providebunt.

Artic. XXXV. Obligatio Nobilium and Civitatum.
Item ad securiorem and firmiorem tam amicitiarum quam Mercium Intercursus
observantiam, praefatus dominus Rex per suas literas mandatum dabit speciale,
Reverend. in Christo patri domino Ioanni Cardinali, Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo,
and Apostolicae sedis legato, Reverendiss. in Christo patribus, D. Richardo
Dunelmensi Episcopo, custodi privati sigilli; D. Thomae Wintoniensi Episcopo,
Ioanni Dinham, Domino Dinham, Thesaurario Angliae, Thomae domino Marchioni
Dorset; Ioanni Comiti Oxoniensi, magno Camerario; Edmondo, Comiti Suffolk;
Thomae Comiti Arundel; Thomae Comiti Derbiae; Georgio Comiti Salisburiae;
Ioanni Wallis Vice Comiti Dabiney, AEgidio, Domino Dabiney, Ioanni Priori domus
sancti Joan. Jerusalem in Anglia: Nec non Majoribus, Ballivis Civitatum ac
Oppidorum sequentium ut supra, Londinum, Eboracum, Bristollium, Wintonium,
Cantuaria, Rochestria, Southamptonia, Santwichum, Doberium, Linna, Dertmouth,
Plymouth, Hulla, Winchelsea, Bostonia, Yarmouth and Bervicum: Quod se
obligabunt and quilibet eorum se obligabit, in formam sequentem: Omnibus
Christi fidelibus has liter as inspecturis, visuris and audituris, Ioannes
Cardinalis Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis; Rich. Dunelmensis Episcop. Thomas
Winton Episcopus; Ioannes Dynham; Thomas Marchio Dorset, Joannes Vicecomes
Oxoniensis, Edmundus Comes Suffolk, Thomas, Comes Arundel, Thomas, Comes
Derbiae, Thomas, Comes Salisbur. Joann. Wells, Vicecomes; AEgidius Dabiney,
Ioannes, Prior domus sancti Joan. Jerusalem in Anglia: Nec non Majores,
Ballivis Villarum seu Oppidorum de Land. Eborac. Bristol. Winton, Cantuar.
Rochest. Southampton, Sandwich, Dover, Linne, Dartmouth, Plymouth, Hulle,
Winchelsea, Boston, Yarmouth and Berwick, Salutem in domino sempiternam. Cum
inter illustr. Principem Henricum, Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciaeque Regem, and
dominum Hiberniae, ex una, and Sereniss. Principem Philippum Dei gratia
Austriae Archiducem, Burgundiae Ducem, etc. ex altera part, quidam
amicitiarum, intelligentiarum, and mercium intercursus, Mercatorumque
communicatio, ac alia etiam eosdem Principes, and subditorum suorum, Regnorum
patriarumque utilitatem concernentia, tractatus and foedera, data 24 die mensis
Februarii anno Domini 1495. Londini inita, conventa, conclusa, and finaliter
determinata fuerint, quos quidem tractatus amicitiarum and mercium Intercursus,
vidimus and intelleximus and hic pro insertis habere voluimus: Noveritis nos
praefatos Joannem Cardinalem, Archiepiscop. Cantuar. Richar. Dunelmens.
Episcopos, etc. Et Majores, Ballivos Villarum sive oppidorum praedictorum, ad
Requestam and Mandatum praefati domini Regis, ac suarum literarum nobis in ea
part directarum and deliberatarum, quas hic pro insertis habere voluimus,
contemplatione, in bona fide promisisse, ac nos and quemlibet nostrum haeredes
and successores nostros, praefato illustris. Principi Philippo, Archiduci
Austriae, Duci Burgundiae, etc. ejusque haeredibus and successoribus, sub
hypotheca and obligatione omnium bonorum nostrorum praesentium and futurorum
obligasse, sic que per praesentes, promittimus and obligamus, quod
effectualiter procurabimus, instabimus, ac quantum in nobis erit essiciemus,
Quod idem dominus Rex, ejusque haeredes and successores, omnia and singula
praedicta, tam amicitiarum quam mercium intercursus, omniaque and singula in
eisdem contenta and specifica, a, been and fideliter tenebunt, observabunt and
ad implebunt, ac per nos subditos, Vassallos, quantum eos concernit, ac in
posterum concernet, been and fideliter facient teneri, observari and adimpleri,
and in contravenientes justitiam ministrabunt, seu ministrari facient. In cujus
rei testimonium, etc. Et pari modo illust. Dux, Archidux, per suas literas
mandatum dabit speciale, Reverend. in Christo patri and domino Henrico de
Bergis, Episc. Cameracensi, Carolo de Croy, Principi de Chimay, Philippo de
Burgundia, domino de Bevres, Joanni, domino Egmondo, Gubernatori, Hollandiae;
Wilhelmo de Croy, domino de Chievre, Antonio de Rellin, domino de Emeri;
Baldowino de Lannoy, domino de Molenbays; Francisco de Busleyden, domino
praeposito Leodiens. and sancti Donatiani, ac Joan. de Tinare, Denteville
domino Capitaneo de Brugis, nec non Burgimagistris Villarum seu oppidorum de
Gandavo, Brugis, Ypres, Dunkercke, Nieuport, Antverpia, Berges, Dordrecht,
Delft, Leyden, Amsterdam, Middelborch, Ziericzee, Vere, Mechlinia, and Bruxella
and Briela, quod se obligabunt, and quilibeteorum se obligabit, secundum vim,
formam and effectum obligationis praedictae, mutatisque in ea part mutandis:
Quas quidem omnes and singulas obligationes, modo and forma praemissis,
conceptas, 15. die Maij proxime futura idem Illustrissim. Rex Angliae in
Ecclesia beatae Mariae Virginis Calesiae, deputato vel deputatis dicti domini
Archiducis tradet, deliberabit, and tradi and deliberari faciet: Et pari modo
illustrissim. Dominus Archidux omnes and singulas obligationes, modo and forma
praemissis, conceptas 15 die Maij praedicto, in Ecclesia praedicta, deputato,
vel deputatis ejusdem Regis, tradet and deliberabit, aut tradi and deliberari
faciet.

One and Twenty Select Articles of the Treaty of Peace between the Crowns of
France and Spain, concluded and Signed upon the Confines of the Pyrenean
Mountains the 7 th of November 1659. Translated from the Original.
That all Enmity or Misunderstanding shall be forgotten by either parties, upon
occasion of the present Wars.
Art. IV. ALL occasions of enmity or misunderstanding, shall remain
extinguished and for ever abolished: and whatsoever has been done, or has
happened, upon occasion of the present Wars, or during the same, shall be put
into perpetual oblivion: so that for the future, of neither side, neither
directly nor indirectly, shall any inquiry be made for the same, by Justice, or
otherwise, under any pretense whatsoever: nor shall their Majesty's, or their
Subjects, Servants, or Adherents of either side, show any manner of remembrance
of any offenses or damages suffered during the War.

That the Subjects of both sides shall have liberty to trade in one another
Countries without any Lets or molestations.
Art. V. By means of this Peace and strict amity, the Subjects of both sides,
whatsoever, shall have liberty, they observing the Laws and Customs of the
Country, to go to and fro, to dwell, trad: and return into one another
Country, Merchandising, or as they shall think best, both by Land and by Sea,
or any other Fresh waters, to treat and trade together: and the Subjects of the
one shall be maintained and protected in the others Countries, as their own
Subjects, paying reasonably the Duties in all accustomed places, and such
others, as by their Majesty's and their Successors shall be imposed.

Privileges mutually granted in each others Dominions.
Art. VI The Towns, Subjects, Merchants, and Inhabitants of the Kingdoms,
Dominions, Provinces, and Countries belonging to the most Christian King, shall
enjoy the same Privileges, Franchises, Liberties, and Sureties, in the
Kingdom of Spain, and other Kingdoms and Dominions belonging to the Catholic
King, as the English have by right enjoyed, by the last Treaties made between
the two Crowns of Spain and England; and no greater Duties or Impositions shall
be exacted of the French and other of the most Christian Kings Subjects, either
in Spain, or any where else, within the Lands or other places of the Catholic
Kings obedience, then have been paid by the English before the breach, or then
are paid at this time, by the Inhabitants of the United Provinces of the
Netherlands, or any other strangers that shall be there the more favorably
entreated. The same shall be done, within the whole extent of the obedience of
the said Lord the most Christian King, unto all the Subjects of the said Lord
the Catholic King, of what Country or Nation soever they be.

The penalty of transporting prohibited goods.
Art. VII. In consequence of this, if the French, or any other of his most
Christian Majesty's Subjects, are found in the said Kingdoms of Spain, or upon
the Coasts thereof, to have shipped, or caused to be shipped upon their
Vessels, in what manner soever it may be, any prohibited goods, to transport
them out of the said Kingdoms, the penalty shall not extend further then has
been heretofore practiced, in such cases, toward the English; or then it is,
at this time practiced toward the Hollanders, in consequence of the Treaties
made with England or the United Provinces: and all Inquiries or Processes
hitherto made, about the same, shall remain null and be extinguished. The same
shall be observed toward the Towns, Subjects and Inhabitants of the Kingdoms
and Lands belonging to the said Lord the Catholic King, who shall enjoy the
same Privileges, Franchises, and Liberties, throughout all the Dominions of
the said Lord the most Christian King.

The form and manner of exhibiting Passes and Dockets as to the Spanish Ships.
Art. XIV. That the Ships and Barques, with the Merchandises belonging to the
Subjects of the Lord, the most Christian King, being come into any Haven of the
Lord Catholic King, where they used to come and trade before the present War,
and being willing from thence, to pass unto the Ports belonging to the said
Enemies, they shall only be bound to show to the Officers of the Spanish Port,
or of any other of the said Lord and Kings Dominions, from whence they are to
go, their Passes, containing the specification of the lading of their Ships,
attested and marked with the ordinary hand and seal, and acknowledged by the
Officers of the Admiralty of the places from whence they came first, with the
Declaration of the place, for which they are bound; the whole in the Ordinary
and accustomed Form: After which exhibiting of their Passes, in the form
aforesaid, they shall not be disturbed or molested, detained nor retarded in
their voyages, under any pretense whatsoever.

Passes as to the French Ships.
Art. XV. The same shall be done, as to the French Ships and Barques that shall
go into any Roads of the Catholic Kings Dominion, where they used to trade
before the present War, and shall be unwilling to enter into the Harbors, or
being entered there, yet will not unlade or break Bulk; who shall not be obliged
to give any account of their lading, but only in case of suspicion, that they
are carrying any contrebanda-Goods unto the enemies of the said Lord the
Catholic King, as aforesaid.

Passes to be shown upon great Suspicion.
Art. XVI. And in the said case of apparent suspicion, the said Subjects of the
most Christian King, shall be obliged to show in the Ports, their Passes, in
the form above specified.

Passes to be shown to the Spanish by the French in the Roads or the open Sea.
Art. XVII. But if they be entered into the Roads, or be met in open Sea by any
of the said Lord the Catholic Kings ships, or by private Men of War of his
Subjects; the said Spanish Ships, to avoid all kind of disorder, shall not come
nearer to the French, then the reach of the Canon, and shall have power to send
their cock boat or shallop aboard the said French Ships or Barques, and cause
two or three of their men only to go into them, to whom shall the Passes be
showed by the Master or Patron of the French Ship, in the manner aforesaid,
according unto the Form that shall be inserted at the end of this Treaty;
whereby it might appear, not only of their lading, but also of the place of
their abode and residence, and of the name both of the Master and Patron, and
of the Ship it self: That by those two means it may be known whether they carry
any prohibited goods: and that it may sufficiently appear, both of the quality
of the said Ship, and of its Master and Patron; unto which Passes and Sea
Letters, full Faith and Credit shall be given. And to the end their validity
might be the better known, and that they might not, in any wise be falsified
and counterfeited, there shall be given in, certain marks and subscriptions of
both the said Lords and Kings.

Contrabanda, Merehandize confiscated.
Art. XVIII. And in case there be found in the said French Vessels and Barques
by the means aforesaid, any Merchandises and Commodities, before declared to be
prohibited and contrebanda, the same shall be unladen, denounced and
confiscated before the Judges of the Admiralty of Spain, or any other Competent
Judges; yet for all that, neither the Ship and Barque, nor any other of the
lawful and permitted goods, Merchandises and Commodities found therein, shall
in any wise be seized on or confiscated.

Free Trade and Commerce mutually enjoyed.
Art. XX. All the Subjects of the said Lord the Catholic King, shall mutually
enjoy the same Rights, Liberties and Immunities in their Trade and Commerce,
within the Ports, Roads, Seas and Dominions of his most Christian Majesty. And
what has been abovesaid, that the Subjects of the said Lord, the most
Christian King, shall enjoy in his Catholic Majesty's Ports, ^^^n open Sea,
ought to be understood, that the equality shall be mutual, in all manner, on
both sides, even in case hereafter the said Lord the Catholic King, should
happen to be at peace, amity and neutrality with any Kings, Princes and States,
that should become the Enemies of the said Lord the most Christian King; each
of both the parties being mutually to use the same conditions and restrictions
expressed in the Articles of the present Treaty, concerning the trade and
commerce.

Further provision against Frauds and Inconveniences in Trade and Commerce.
Art. XXI. In case, of either side, there happens any contravention to the said
Articles, touching the Commerce, by the Officers of the Admiralty of either of
the two Lords and Kings, or any other person whatsoever, the complaint thereof
being addressed by the interessed Parties, unto their Majesty's themselves or
their Councils for the Navy, their said Majesty's shall presently cause the
damage to be repaired, and all things to be executed in in the manner
aforesaid. And in case, in progress of times, any frauds or inconveniences
should be discovered touching the said Commerce and Navigation, not
sufficiently provided against by the aforesaid Articles, new ones shall be
added thereto, of such other precautions, as shall be thought convenient on
both parts: The present Treaty remaining yet, in the mean while, in its force
and vigor.

Speedy Justice to be done to Foreigners.
Art. XXII. All Goods and Merchandises arrested in either of the Kingdoms, upon
the Subjects of the said Lords and Kings; at the time of the Declaration of
War, shall be uprightly and bona fide restored to the Owners; in case they be
found in esse, at the day of the publication of the present Treaty. And all
Debts contracted before the War, which upon the said day of the publication of
the present Treaty, shall be found not to have been actually paid unto others,
by virtue of Judgments given upon Letters of confiscation or Reprisal, shall
be bona fide acquitted and paid: And upon the demands and persuits that shall
be made about them, the said Lords and Kings shall give order unto their
Officers, to render as good and speedy Justice unto the Foreigners, as unto
their own Subjects, without any distinction of persons.

Actions to be tried when they first begun or did arise.
Art. XXIII. The actions that have been heretofore, or shall hereafter be
intented before the Officers of the said Lords and Kings, for Prises, Spoils,
and Reprisals, against such as are not Subjects to the Prince, in whose
jurisdiction the said actions shall have been intented or begun, shall, without
any difficulty, be returned before the Officers of the Prince, whose Subjects
the Defendants shall be.

Six Months time given in case of War to transport persons and goods.
Art. XXIV. And the better to secure, for the future, the Commerce and Amity
between the Subjects of the said Lords and Kings, for the greater advantage and
commodity of their Kingdoms, it has been concluded and agreed, That there
happening hereafter any breach betwixt the two Crowns (which God forbid) six
months time shall always be given to the Subjects on both sides, to retire and
transport their persons and goods, where they shall please: Which they shall be
permitted to do, with all liberty, without any hinderance; and during that time
there shall be no seizure made of their said goods, much less their persons
arrested.

Advocates and Proctors to be Assistant to either party that retains them.
Art. XXV. The Inhabitants and Subjects of either side, shall every where
within the Lands of the obedience of the said Lords and Kings, make use of such
Advocates, Proctors, Notaries, and Sollicitors as they shall please; whereunto
also, they shall be committed by the ordinary Judges, when need shall be, and
when the said Judges shall be desired so to do. And it shall be lawful to the
said Subjects and Inhabitants of both sides, to keep in the places of their
abode, the Books of their trade and correspondence, in such a Language as they
shall like best, either French, Spanish, Flemish, or any other, without falling
thereby into any molestation or trouble.

Consuls appointed for Commerce in both Nations.
Art. XXVI. The said Lords and Kings shall have power for the commodity of
their Subjects trading in one another Kingdoms and Dominions, to settle some
Consuls of the same Nation of their said Subjects, who shall enjoy the Rights,
Liberties, and Immunities belonging to their exercise and employment: And that
establishment shall be made in such places, where with a mutual consent, it
shall be thought necessary.

Letters of Marque and Reprisal in case of injustice.
Art. XXVII. All Letters of Mart and Reprisals that may have been formerly
granted, for what cause soever, shall be suspended; and none shall be granted
hereafter by either of the said Lords and Kings, to the prejudice of the
Subjects of the other, unless in case of a manifest denial of Justice only;
whereof, and of the Summons made about the same, such as shall sue for the said
Letters, shall be bound to bring good proofs according to the form and manner
required by the Law.

Overtures made by the King of France concerning the Kingdom of Portugal.
Art. LX. Although his most Christian Majesty has never been willing to engage
himself; notwithstanding the pressing instances made to him heretofore, backed
even with very considerable offers, not to make the Peace without the exclusion
of the Kingdom of Portugal, because his Majesty has foreseen and feared least
such an Engagement might be an unsurmountable obstruction to the conclusion of
the Peace, and might consequently, reduce the two Kings to the necessity of a
perpetual War; Yet his said most Christian Majesty wishing with an extreme
passion, to see the Kingdom of Portugal enjoy the same quietness, which so
many Christian States shall get, by the present Treaty, has for that end,
proposed a good number of parties and expedients, such as his Majesty thought
might be satisfactory to his Catholic Majesty; among which, though as
aforesaid his Majesty was no way engaged in that Affair, his Majesty has even
gone so far therein, as to be willing to deprive himself of the principal fruit
of the happiness and success his Arms have had, during the course of a long
War, offering, besides the places his Majesty does now restore by the present
Treaty, unto his Catholic Majesty, to restore yet unto him all the rest of the
Conquests generally made by his Arms during this War, and wholly to restore the
Prince of Conde; Provided and upon that condition that the affairs of the
Kingdom of Portugal should be left as they are now: which his Catholic
Majesty having refused to accept, but only offering that in consideration of
the mighty Offices of the said Lord the most Christian King, he would give his
consent for setting all things in the said Kingdom of Portugal, in the same
state they were before the change arrived there in the Month of December, in
the year 1640. pardoning and giving a general Amnesty for all what is past, and
granting the reestablishment into all Estates, Honors, and Dignities, to all
such, without distinction of persons, as returning under the obedience of his
Catholic Majesty, shall put themselves again in posture to enjoy the effect of
the present peace: At length, in consideration of the peace, and considering
the absolute necessity his said most Christian Majesty has been in, to
perpetuate the War by breaking off the present Treaty, which his Majesty found
to be unavoidable, in case he would have any longer insisted upon the
obtaining, upon that affair, of his Catholic Majesty, other conditions then
such as he offered, as aforesaid: And his said most Christian Majesty willing
to prefer, as it ought to be, and is most just, the general quietness of
Christendom, to the particular interest of the Kingdom of Portugal, for whose
advantage, and in whose behalf, his said Majesty has never omitted any thing
of what depended of him, and did lie in his power, even to the making of such
great offers as aforesaid, It has been at length concluded and agreed between
the said Lords and Kings, that there shall be granted unto his most Christian
Majesty, a space of three months time, to begin from the day of the exchanging
of the Ratifications of the present Treaty, during which his said Majesty may
send into the said Kingdom of Portugal, to endeavor so to dispose things
there, and to reduce and compose that affair, that his Catholic Majesty may
remain fully satisfied. Which three months being expired, if his said most
Christian Majesty's cares and offices have not had the desired effect, his said
Majesty will no further meddle with that affair, and does oblige and engage
himself and promise upon his Honor, and in the word of a King, for himself and
his successors, not to give unto the said Kingdom of Portugal, either in
general, or to any person or persons in particular, of what dignity, state,
condition, or quality soever they be, now or hereafter, any help or assistance,
public or secret, directly or indirectly, of Men, Arms, Ammunitions, Victuals,
Ships, or Money, upon any pretense, nor any other thing whatsoever, by Sea or
by Land, nor in any other manner. As also, not to suffer any levies to be made
in any parts of his Kingdoms and Dominions: nor to grant passage to any that
might come from other States, to the assistance of the said Kingdom of Portugal.

The King of France and Spain interposing with the Pope, on the behalf of the
Duke of Parma, for discharging the Debts due to the Apostolical Chamber.
Art. C. The two Lords and Kings, upon the like consideration of plucking up
the seeds of all differences, that might trouble the peace of Italy, have alse
concluded that they will jointly interpose, sincerely and pressingly, their
Offices and Supplications toward our holy Father the Pope, until they may have
obtained of his Holiness, the grace which their Majesty's have so often
demanded of him singly, in the behalf of the Duke of Parma, that he may have
power to discharge, at several convenient intervals of time, the debt he has
contracted to the Apostolical Chamber by like intervals; and that by that
means, and with tho engaging or alienating of part of his Dominions of Castro
and Roneiglion^, he may find such moneys as are necessary unto him for the
preservation of the rest of his Dominions. The which their Majesty's do hope of
the goodness of his Holiness; no less by the desire he will have to prevent
all occasions of discord in Christendom, then by his disposition to Favor a
House so well meriting of the Holy Apostolical See.

The chief Allies comprehended in this Treaty on the French Part.
Art. CXXII. Besides the Duke of Savoy, the Duke of Modena, and the Prince of
Monaco, who, as Allies of France, are of the chiefest Contractors in this
Treaty, as aforesaid, by the common consent of the said Lords the most
Christian and Catholic, shall be comprehended in this Peace and Alliance, if
they will be comprehended therein, on his most Christian Majesty's part, first,
Our Holy Father the Pope, the Holy Apostolical See, the Electors and other
Princes of the Empire, Allies and Confederates with his Majesty for the
maintaining of the Peace of Munster, viz. the three Electors of Mentz, Colen,
and the Count Palatine of the Rhine, the Duke of Newburg, the Dukes Auguste
Christian, Lewis and George William of Brunswick and Luneburg, the Landgrave
of Hessen-Cassel, and the Landgrave of Darmstat, the Duke and the Seigniory of
Venice, and the Thirteen Cantons of the League of Switzerland, and their Allies
and Confederates and all other Kings, Potentates, Princes and States, Towns and
particular persons, to whom his most Christian Majesty, upon a decent
requisition made by them for it, will grant on his part, to be comprehended in
this Treaty, and will name them, within a year after the publication of the
Peace, unto his Catholic Majesty, by a particular declaration, to enjoy the
benefit of the said Peace, both by the aforenamed, and by such as his Majesty
shall name within the said time: their Majesty's giving their Declaratory and
Obligatory Letters, required in such case respectively; and the whole with an
express Declaration, that the said Catholic King shall not have power,
directly, nor indirectly to molest, by himself, or by others, any of those, who
on the said Lord the most Christian Kings part, have been above, or hereafter
shall be comprehended by a particular Declaration: and that if the Lord the
Catholic King has any pretensions against him, he shall only have power to
prosecute him by right, before competent Judges, and not by force, in what
manner soever it may be.

The Allies on the Spanish Account.
CXXIII. And on the said Lord the Catholic Kings part, shall be comprehended
in this Treaty (if they will therein be comprehended) our holy Father the Pope,
the Apostolical See, the Emperor of the Romans, all the Archdukes of Austria,
and all the Kings, Princes, Republics, States and particular Persons, who, as
Allies of this Crown, were named in the Treaty of Peace made at Vervins, 1598.
and who shall have preserved, and do at this day preserve themselves in that
Alliance. To whom are added now the United Provinces of the Low Countries, and
the Duke of Guastale; as also, shall be comprehended all such others, as by
common consent of the said Lords and Kings, shall be named within a year after
the publication of the present Treaty, to whom, as also to the aforenamed if
they desire it in particular, Letters of Nomination respectively Obligatory
shall be given to enjoy the benefit of the said Peace, and with express
Declaration, That the said Lord, the most Christian King, shall not have power,
directly nor indirectly, by himself, or by others, to molest any of them: And
if he has any pretensions against them, he shall have power only to prosecute
them by Right before competent Tudges, and not by Force.

Mr. John Darrel 's deposition before one of the Masters of Chancery,
concerning the Dutch Agreement with the Portugals in 1644.
John Darrell of the Parish of St. Giles Criplegate in London Merchant; Aged
about Sixty and six years, deposes and says, That he, the said John Darrell
was at Goa, a Portugal City in East India, in the employment and service of
William Courten Esquire in the Month of January 1644. old Sile, and that on the 25.
day of the said month, being Saturday, a Dutch Ship bound from Surrat to
Batavia, came and Anchored without in the road of Goa, and that four or five
Dutchmen came then a shore to the English, or Factory there, and related to
Mr. Courten's Agent, John Farren, and to this Deponent, that upon an Agreement
made between the Dutch, and the Viceroy of Goa, they were to pay unto the
Portugalls the sum of One hundred thousand Rials of Eight, Spanish, for
satisfaction of the Portugal goods taken in the Ship Bona Esperanza, bound for
Maccao in the Employment of Mr. Courten and others; and that twenty thousand of
the said Royals should be detained for Mr. Courten toward his damages,
although it were not so expressed or agreed: And this deponent further says,
that on the next day being Sunday and the 26. of January one Senior Vanderstell
being chief of the Dutch Factory at Vingerly near Goa, with three others, and a
Churchman, came to the said City of Goa, and visited the said John Farren, and
this Deponent at the English house there, and brought with them Fifty thousand
of the said Rials, to pay unto the said Portugal Merchants, according to the
agreement with the Viceroy aforesaid; and said moreover, that they had Order
from the Governor and Council of Batavia, to defalk and detain Twenty thousand
Rials toward satisfaction of the English, interessed in the Bona Esperanza;
and that they had likewise order to present Mr. Farren, Mr. Courten's Agent,
with a considerable sum of money, to procure an accommodation and composure
of the difference with the persons interessed in the same, but further cannot
depose.

John Darrell.
Sworn this 14 of March 1661. before Sir Nathaniel Hobart one of His Majesty's
Masters of Chancery in the 14. Year of the Reign of King Charles the Second.

Not. Hobart



The Deposition of Tho. Newman Merchant, taken upon Oath the 28. of January
1662. before Sir Walter Littleton Knight, Dr. of Laws, and one of the Masters
in Chancery.
THomas Newman of the Parish of St. Botolph Aldgate in London Merchant, Aged
Forty seven years or thereabouts, makes Oath, that he, the said Deponent, was
Cape-Merchant, and Factor of the Cargazone, in the Ship Bona Esperanza,
belonging to Mr. William Courten late of London Merchant, and others; And that
he, this deponent in the year of our Lord 1643. making a Trading Voyage from
Goa to Maccao, was violently taken by the Dutch East India Companeys Ministers
in the Straits of Malacca, to his own particular damage at that time the Sum of
1400 l. sterling; and says, that to his own knowledge the several Depositions
of Robert Gray, Andrew Wetton, Francis Hill, Richard Smith, Richard Wheeler,
William Page, and Thomas Lamberton, since deceased, are all in substance true,
he the said Deponent being an eyewitness thereof, and long acquainted with
the trade of India and parts adjacent; and this Deponent says, that after the
Dutch Men of War had violently seized the said Ship, murdered the Master and
several of the Mariners, wounded eleven others, and taken both the Portugals
and English goods out of her, being a good new Ship and well built, took the
said Ship, with the Guns, Ammunition and Provision to Goa, to the rest of their
Fleet, and carried him, this Deponent, with Captain William Gurley Captain of
the said ship, and the Mariners, to Malacca, where they were all detained
Prisoners for the space of six months, and very inhumanely used, and afterward
sent to Batavia; and this Deponent says, that Captain Gurley with grief for
his losses and ill usage, as he was bound for England in the year 1644. died in
a Dutch ship called the Whale Fish, whereof the Here Caune was Commander, who
sold all his Clothes, and some Jewels that he had at the Main Mast, amongst the
rest, he this Deponent offered 250 Gilders for a Diamond Ring, but could not
have the same, which were all converted to the use of the said Caune as this
Deponent believes. And this deponent further says, That as to the 2750. l.
sterling, left at Maccao, in a former voyage, being to remain upon agreement
there for the space of three years, (for several privileges granted in Ports
and Trade) and provided that if Mr. Courten and Company sent any other Ship and
Merchandises thither within that time then the said 2750 l. should be paid to
the said Courten, in China goods at price current, otherwise the said money to
be lost: And this Deponent says, that he, this Deponent, and Captain Gurley
received Orders and Instructions from John Farren President for Mr. Courten at
Goa, concerning the same, to act therein accordingly; but the Dutch having
taken away all their Chests, with Papers and Writings, and disappointed them of
their Voyage, whereby the said money was lost: And this deponent says, that by
reason of the said spoils and violence committed by the Dutch, Mr. Courten's
Factories at Atcheene, Batacalla, Rajapore, Goa, Carwer, and Vizapore, were
disappointed of relief and reputation, whereby they were forced to sell off
what they had, for their own subsistence: But as to the particular damages of
the 72000 l. sterling of Mr. Coutten and Company, in the loss of their Goods,
and the intended voyage to Maccao as aforesaid, he this Deponent refers
himself to the depositions taken in his Majesty's High Court of Admiralty as
aforesaid.

Thomas Newman.
Mense Januar. 28. Anno 1662. Jurat coram me Walter Littleton Milit. Legum
Doctor uno Cancelar. Magistr.

Walter Littleton.



A Catalogue of their Names who by their Subscriptions are Capable of being
chosen COMMITTEES of the East India Company in England, for the Year 1662.
A
Sir Tho. Allen Knight. and Bar. Sir Joseph Ash Knight. and Bar. Daniel Andrews Esquire
George Arnold Esquire Thomas Arnold Esquire Joseph Alstone William Atwood Francis Ash
Francis Archer William Allington William Allen John Adrian Thomas Allen
Benjamin Albyn Capt. William Asbly.
B
George Lord Berkley Sir Joh. Brownloe Knight. and Bar. Sir Fran. Burdet Knight. and
Bar. Sir William Bateman Knight. Sir John Banks Knight. Sir Thomas Bludworth Knight. Sir
Theoph. Biddulph Knight. Sir Anthony Bateman Knight. John Bathurst Alderman Thomas
Barnes Esquire Thomas Bewly Esquire Robert Burdet Esquire Edward Bolle Esquire Benjamin Barron
Esquire Francis Bickley Esquire Thomas Bromfield Esquire Edward Backwell Esquire Capt. Arthur
Bayley Capt. John Brookhoven Richard Boylstone James Burton John Berrisford
Senior Henry Boon Thomas Bretton Nathaniel Barnadiston Thomas Blackerby
Michael Best Abraham Babington Richard Booth William Bulkley Humphry Brooms
George Blake Henry Barnard Capt. James Burkin Richard Beckford Samuel
Barnadiston Christopher Boon John vanden Bergh Thomas Bell Robert Beak Edwin
Brown Aaron Baker Timothy Baldwin Quarles Brown.
C
Sir Thomas Chambrelan Knight. Thomas Culling Esquire Richard Chiverton Alderman Thomas
Cullvin Esquire Richard Clutterbuck Esquire Henry Chowne James Clitherow Benjamin Coals
Francis Clark John Chevall John Child George Chandler Robert Clarkson Thomas
Chamber Peter Culley Robert Cranmer William Clark Francis Clark Samuel Crisp
Joseph Collier Humphry Cliffe John Cudworth Josiah Child Thomas Caine Thomas
Canham Robert Childcott Nathaniel Collier Joseph Colestone Ellis Crisp Robert
Callow Benjamin Collier
D
Sir James Drax Sir John Dethick Knight. John Duckenfield Esquire John Dickens Michael
Davison Josias Dewey Richard Davidg Francis Dashwood John Dogget Edward Dudsan
Robert Dawes William Drax Giles Dunstar Edward Dallow Peter Daniell
E
James Edwards Robert Ellis
F
Sir Thomas Foot Knight. and Bar. Sir John Frederick Knight. Sir Richard Ford Knight.
Edward Franklin Thomas Fox Simeou Fincham
G
Sir Nicholas Gould Baronet Sir Jacob Gerrard Knight. Thomas Gower Esquire John
Godscall George Gosfreight Maurice Githen William Gomeldon Robert Giffery John
Gould
H
John Hither Esquire Thomas Hussy Esquire Matthew Holworthy Edmond Harrison Henry
Hampson John Hobby Nathaniel Herne Roger Hatton John Harris Richard Hutchinson
Abraham Hovener Walter Hampton Rowland Hill Dierick Host Edward Hopegood
William Harrington Capt. Nicholas Hurlestone William Hooker Thomas Hawks
Robert Handson Henry Hunter James Hublon Senior Tobiah Harvey Thomas Heatley
Humphry Holcomb James Houblon Junior
I
John Iollife Esquire Arthur Ingram Esquire Thomas Iuxon Abraham Jaggard Robert Ingram
Edward Jackson Nicholas Juxon Phillip Jackson
K
Sir Jonathan Keate Knight. Thomas Kindal Francis Knight Esquire Robert Knightly
Randall Knipe
L
Phillip Lord Viscount Lisle Sir John Lewis Knight. Sir John Lawrence Knight. Sir Peter
Leere Knight. Robert Lant Esquire William Love Esquire Jarvis Lock Stephen Langham Godfrey
Lee James Leever John Lethulier Junior Peter De Lanoy Richard Lant Thomas
Lemhall Thomas Lewis William Lant Thomas Letchmer William Lowfield Anthony
Luther Thomas Lucas John Lane Thomas Langham
M
Sir James Modyford Knight. Tempest Milner Alderman Richard Mounteny John Mascall
William Meggs William Moyer Thomas Martin John Mews Barnabas Mere John Moore
Charles Mauriscoe Lawrence Martell Elias Morais
N
William Northy Humphry Nicholson James Noell
O
Colonel John Owen David Otgher junior Capt. John Owen
P
William Peake Alderman Charles Pitfield Esquire Walter Pell Esquire Richard Poulter
Thomas Puckle Anthony Philp Thomas Papillon Edward Pearce Samuel Phelps John
Parry John Page William Potter Thomas Pearl Thomas Plampin Paul Priaulx
William Parker Christopher Penn George Perryer
R
Sir Andrew Riccard Knight. Sir William Ryder Knight. Sir John Robinson Knight. Richard
Reeves Alderman John Ramsey Esquire Thomas Roberts William Robinson Thomas Rich
Edward Rodden Daniel Rawlinson
S
Sir George Smith Knight. Jacob Strange Henry Spurstow Richard Spencer John
Sweeting senior James Smith James Stanier Abraham Sayon William Sherrington
James Smith senior John Smith James Southerby Richard Sherbrook Francis Sone
Thomas Stock Richard Slany Simon Snow Matthew Sheppard junior Henry Sayer Roger
Scattergood George Snell
T
Sir William Thomson Knight. Maurice Thomson Esquire Charles Thorold Esquire Richard
Thorowgood Thomas Tomlins Henry Tulce Ieofry Thomas Capt. William Thomas Giles
Travers Colonel George Thomson Major Robert Thomson Stephen Thornley George
Tuke Francis Tryan John Turner Robert Thurkittle John Tivell Edward Tidcomb
Richard Turner Thomas Tyte John Thomson
V
Sir William Vincent Knight. Sir Thomas Vyner Knight. William Vannam Esquire Nicholas
Vanacker Peter Van de Putt
W
Sir Stephen White Knight. Francis Warner Alderman Rowland Wynn Esquire Richard Waring
Esquire Edward Wood Esquire William Williams Esquire Thomas Winter Samuel Wilson Thomas
Waring Henry Whittingham Edward White Gregory Westcomb James Vinstanly Andrew
West William Wildigoes Nicholas Wildbore Valentine Wanley Christopher
Willoughby Richard VVynn Thomas Wilson James VVancourt Capt. William Wildy
The Names of the present Governor, Deputy, and twenty four Committees.
SIr Andrew Riccard Knight and Governor SIR Thomas Chambrelan Knight and
Deputy George Lord Berkeley Sir Joseph Ash Knight and Baronet Sir William
Thomson Knight. Sir William Ryder Knight. Sir Anthony Bateman Knight. Sir Richard Ford Knight.
Sir George Smith Knight. Sir Stephen White Knight. Sir James Drax Knight. Sir William
Vincent Knight. Wiliam Love Alderman John Jolliffe Esquire Maurice Thomson Esquire William
Williams Esquire Mr. Peter Uan De Putt Mr. Samuel Barnadiston Mr. Thomas Kendall
Mr. Christopher Boon Mr. Robert Lant Mr. Thomas Winter Mr. Francis Clark Mr.
Christopher Willoughby Mr. Thomas Bretton Mr. Edward Pearce


NOte, That the whole Subscription of the East India Company of England, in
their last joint Stock, founded in Cromwell's time, was 800000. l. sterling.
whereof 400000 l. was paid, and the other ready to be paid, if the Company
could have employed such a Stock in India or parts adjacent.

Note, That in the first year after this undertaking of the English, the
Companies Actions in Holland, fell 40 l. and 50 l. in the rates current, but
when they understood how the English proceeded, they came to their full values
again.

Note, That when Sir William Courten set forth his Ships in 1635. and 1636. the
Dutch Actions fell far lower, and the English Actions of the old Company did
rise 20 l. and 30 l. in the 100 l. which never did the like before or after,
and (for those reasons) that Trade was undermined and spoiled by the Dutch.

Note, That every Committee man in the English Company, has a 1000 l. and
upwards, in the Stock, otherwise he is not capable of being chosen into that
office.

Note, That the Bewinthebbers or Directors of the East India Company in Holland
have the like sum of 1000 l. in the first principal Stock and upwards,
otherwise they are not capable of that employment.

Note, That the first original joint Stock of the East India Company of the
Netherlands, was 660000 l. sterling, in the year 1602. when they laid their
foundation of East India Trade, and that every 100 l. in that principal Stock,
is now worth 460 l. and upwards, which rises and falls according to news good
or bad every exchange time; but what a 100 l. in the several, first, second,
third, and fourth joint Stocks are worth in the old English East India Company,
is not certainly known.

Note, That the Company of the Netherlands are different in their principals of
Government and Trade both at home and abroad, from the English, which have so
much advanced the one, and abased the other.

Consulta and Sententiae Gualteri Walkeri Militis, Gulielmi Turneri, Joannis
Extoni, Timothes Baldvini, and Davidis Buddi, Doctorum and Professorum in Juri
Civili super argumento subsequente.
IN Causa nobis allata, tangenti naves dictas Bona Esperanza, and Henry
Bonadventure, pro quibus Joannes Ayton Miles, Georgius Carew, and Carolus
Whitaker Armigeri, pro seipsis (and Omnibus interessatis,) utpote qui in se
habent totum jus ad rem Gulielmi Courten, Edvardi Littleton, and Pauli Pindar
Militum defunctorum, repetundarum and damnorum Batavos postulant.

1. Argumentum. Gulielmus Courten Armiger, alijque Mercatores Londinenses, qui
cum illo Societatem iniverant, Literas Patentes magno Angliae sigillo
confirmatas obtinuerunt, quibus in Indiam Orientalem, Chinam, and Regiones
adjacentes, mercaturam exercendi ipsis jus erat concessum. Hac autoritate
freti, postquam aliquot negotiatorum seeds and Colonias in Oris maritimis
mercaturae opportunis posuissent, anno 1641. duas Anglicanas naves (inter
alias) appellationibus Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bonadventure insignitas,
necnon mercimonijs pretiosis probe onustas ad mercaturam in India Orientali
faciendam emiserant. Quarum Navium and bonorum parts septem ad praefatum
Gulielmum Courten ex proprio jure spectabant, reliqua octava ad caeteros
Mercatores Anglos.

2. Praedictus Gulielmus Courten per Syngrapham (quam Indenturam dicimus)
factam 26. die Aprilis 1642. inter ipsum and Dominum Edvardum Littleton militem
ob justam Considerationem inibi expressam, concessit, alienavit and vendidit
nominato Domino Edvardo Littleton, inter alias, supradictas naves Bona
Esperanza, and Henry Bonadventure una cum ipsarum onere, mercibus, proventibus,
lucris quibuscunque exinde exorituris, aut quae ad eum diem provenissent, idque
alijs amplissimis and laxissimis verbis, prout, etc. habenda and tenenda eidem
Domino Edvardo Littleton Executoribus and Assignatis suis ad usum suum proprium
tanquam sua propria bona and Catilla exinde in sempiternum; prout habetur in
memorata Indentura.

3. Postea vero, nempe 19. die Decembris 1642. per Indenturam tripartitam
factam juxta normam Juris Anglicani inter praedictum Gulielmum Courten ex prima
part, praedictum Dominum Edvardum Littleton ex secunda, and Dominum Paulum
Pindar ex tertia, Illi praefati Gulielmus Courten, and Dominus Edvardus
Littleton, ob Considerationem inibi expressam, concesserunt, alienarunt and
vendiderunt praedicto Domino Paulo Pindar (inter alias) naves praedictas Bona
Esperanza, and Henry Bonadventura una cum omnibus ipsarum armamentis,
aplust^ibus, oneribus, bonis, mercibus, reditibus, adventuris, pecunijs,
sortibus, pecul^js, in earum utraque existentibus vel quoquo modo
pertinentibus; itemque omnia emolumenta, commoda, lucra, beneficia, etc.
exijsdem navibus in varijs suis profectionibus exorientia and accrescentia;
necnon omne acplenum jus, dominium, titulum, vendicationem, and interesse
quodcunque ipsi praedicti Gulielmus Courten and Dominus Edvardus Littleton
eorumve alteruter ad omnia and singula praememorata habuissent, prout, etc,

4. His ita peractis, Societas Hollandorum Mercaturam ad Indiam Orientalem
exercentium, anno 1643. (dum inter Anglos and Batavos pax esset) incidens in
praedictam navem Bona Esperanza, eam hostilem in modum cum nonnullis navibus
suis invaserunt oppugnarunt vi expugnarunt and depraedarunt; Anglos autem
nautas, navi, mercimonijs, commodis, etc. exuerunt and spoliarunt. Itidemque
bona omnia and coma eatum praedictae navis Henry Bonadveniure ceperunt and
detinuerunt.

5. Quod vero ad damna and jacturas inde illatas attinet, praedicti, Dominus
Joannes Ayton, Georgius Carew, ac Carolus Whitaker Armigeri, etc. ad quos
secundum formam juris Anglicani, totum jus, and titulus, and dominium
praedictorum Domini Gulielmi Courten, Edvardi Littleton and Pauli Pindar
defunctorum pervenit, eadem sibi praestari, restitui and resarciri petunt ac
flagitant.

Adversum haec ex part Societatis Hollandicae praedictae octo Objectiones
afferuntur.

1. Jus ad rem mobilem nisi per traditionem transferri non posse.

2. Per Indenturam tripartitam factam inter Gulielmum Courten, Dominum Edvardum
Littleton and Dominum Paulum Pindar, datum 19. die Decembris 1642. duntaxat
convenisse de cautione sive securitatum pecuniarum creditarum, jus autem
plenarium ad naves earumque bona in Dominum Paulum Pindar nequaquam transtisse.

Verum contra hasce duas Objectiones primo notandum est, Gulielmum Courten,
Dominum Edvardum Littleton, and Dominum Panlum Pindar pariter omnes fuisse
Anglos, deinde praedictam Indenturam tripartitam Venditionis and Emptionis,
etc. factam fuisse ab Anglis in Anglia de navibus Anglicanis ipsarumque bonis
ac mercibus tunc temporis in eorum peculio existentibus, and Nearchorum
quorundam tutelae ac Curae dum in mari versarentur concreditis, etc. Unde juxta
leges Angliae ista venditio and emptio firma erat ac valida, and per
sigillationem and traditionem praedictae Indenturae jus omne ad emptorem
delatum est, citra omnem traditionis posterius celebrandae necessitatem:
siquidem clarissimum est ex jure Anglicano Rem mobilem (cujusmodi sunt naves
and mercimonia) ab ipsius proprietario qui ipsam interventu Nearchi in
possessione habeat, recte alienari posse; traditione opus non esse, at
sigillationem and traditionem syngraphae ad effectum juris abunde sufficere.

Quod cum ita se habeat, sequitur ex jure Anglicano Gulielmum Courten, quo
tempore praedictas naves and bona primitus Domino Edvardo Littleton concessit,
se jure suo ad easdem, exuisse; Cum autem deinde Gulielmus Courten and Dominus
Edvardus Littleton utrique simul Domino Paulo Pindar easdem concesserunt,
itidem eorum utrumque jus suum transtulisse, prout, etc. Adeo ut praedicto
Gulielmo Courten ex vi legis Anglicanae nullum ad praedictas naves jus deinceps
restaret.

1. Quorum intuitu clarissimum esse censemus de Contractu praedicto ab Anglis
in Anglia de navibus Anglicanis celebrato; juxta leges Civiles and recepta ac
communia Gentium Jura, judicium ferendum esse (quoad ejusdem valitudinem and
firmitudinem,) duntaxat secundum jus Anglicanum, non vero secundum quodvis
aliud. Ac proinde cum omnia ad firmitudinem secundum legem Angliae requisita
habuerit, everti non posse, tametsi circumstantia aliqua ex more alterius
cujusvis Gentis requisita careret.

Cujus sententiae robur multis exemplis and judiciis statuminare atque
indubitatum reddere possumus, si quando id postulabitur.

2. Nec difficile foret ostendere in hujusmodi casu etiam juxta Legem Civilem
and receptas Jurisconsultorum regulas ac sententias, in praedictarum
Indenturarum sigillatione and traditione ob considerationes inibi expressas,
revera fictam quandam rei ipsius traditionem inesse, quae ad transferendum jus
Gulielmi Courten primum ad Dominum Littleton, deinde ad Dom. Pindar sufficeret,
prout, etc.

3. Tertio Objiciunt Hollandi, Quod si naufragium vel aliud infortunium
accidisset, Dominum Paulum Pindar jacturam sustinere non debuisse, sed ex
Syngraphis Assecurationis remedium quaerere, ideoque illi jus ad Naves mereesve
non competere.

Haec Objectio admodum infirma videtur. Quippe notum est, tum in jure, tum in
praxi, Illum qui cum alio de avertendo periculo contractum secerit, posse in
casu domni agere contra Assecuratorem; ad illud autem non teneri. Actio enim
ejusmodi, cujus gratia Assecuratio facta est, non quidem obest sed remedii
ulterioris loco est; adeoque si libeat, omitti potest, retento nihilominus rei
dominio. Id quod non rar^accidit, nempe quoties pretium Navis aut Bonorum
Assecuratorum summam pecuniae in Contractu memoratam, 5, 6, 7, 8, aut 10,
vicibus exoperat; itemque in Captura Praedatoria (qualis in nostro casu fuit)
facta ab i^^ qui damnum praestare valent, quique in judicium in eum finem
vocari possunt.

4. Objiciunt quarto Domino Pindar non licuisse solutiones proportionnles suas
postulare, nisi aliquot mensibus post reditum naviam ad Londinum; proinde damni
emendationem non deberi.

Haec Objectio tum sanae Rationi, tum Juri Civili and Gentium repugnat.

Hollandi Naves and bona, de quibus Controversia est, praedatorie and manu
arrhata capiunt, alioqui Londinum ad possessionem. Domini Pindar reditura, ut
inde sibi debita perciperet. Unde clarum per Hollandos stetiffe quo minus naves
illae and bona ad Londinum pervenerint, simulque eosdem in causa suisse quod
Dominus Pindar pecuniis sibi debitis prorsus orbatus fuerit.

Regula. In jure Civili receptum est, Quoties per cum, cujus interest
conditionem non impleri, fiat quo minus impleatur, perinde haberi ac si
conditio impleta fuisset.

Adeo ut haec regula contra Hollandos valeat, ac si idem ab illis factum esset.

Quid? quod communis ratio ostendit Hollandos qui praedictas naves praedatorie
ceperunt, retinuerunt, ad usum suum converterunt, nec passi sunt ad Londinum
reverti, causari non posse aliquid contra Dominum Pindar eo quod ad Londinum
non redierint. Hoc enim esset, contra regulam Juris and aequitatis fructum
capere ex dolo suo proprio.

5. Quinto loco objisiunt, Syngrapham sive ladenturam Emptionis and Venditionis
inter Gulielmum Courten, and Dominum Edw. Littleton, datum 26. Apr. 1662. non
aliud voluisse, quam ut caveretur ei, contra sponsiones and Fidejussiones;
dictumque Dominum Littleton nihil pecuniarum pro Domino Courten persolvisse quo
tempore facta est alienatio ad Pergens. Proinde Dominum ad naves praedictas and
bona nondum a Domino Courten transiisse.

Huic Objectioni supra satis responsum est; Nimirum Gulielmum Courten, per
Sigillationem and traditionem Indentntae, sese omni dominio spoliasse, nihilque
juris habuisse quo tempore dicitur fuisse facta translatio ad Pergens.

6. Sexte, objicitur, Quod si jus Domini Edvardi Littleton aut cujusvis
alterius proprietarii admittatur, tamen nova alicui allegationi aut
praetensioni locum non esse, eo quod Vendicatio non delata fuerit ad Anglos and
Batavos Deputatos An. 1654. prout secundum Articulum Tractationis Cromwellianae
tricesimum fieri oportuit.

Verum hane Objectionem Articulus Tractationis inter Sacram Majestatem suam and
Ordines Provinciarum Confoed. initae, decimus quintus, prorsus tollit, utpote
in quo hanc Exceptionem reperire est. (Hoc excepto, quod scilicet qui se
jacturam passos dicunt in duabus Navibus, viz. Bona Adventura, and Bona
Esperanza, poterunt litem inceptam prosequi.)

7. Septima Objectio est, Rescriptum sive Commissionem fundaum super Lege
adversum Decoctores Lata, quod attinet, nec Statuta nec Consuetudinos Angliae
locum habere posse in Germania Iuferiori, ubi omnia secundum Jus Civil and
Gentium judicantur.

Resp. Jus Civil and Gentium de decoctoribus aliquid statuisse, eos infamia
notatos velle, bona Creditoribus distribuenda adjudicare, ipsis interdixisse ne
quos clandestinos contractus, compositiones, etc. quae Creditoribus obesse
possint, post decoctionem compertam faciant.

Et hujus quidem rei Societas Hollandica (vel secundum id quod ponunt in hac
septima Object.) notitiam habere debuit.

8. Octavo and ultimo objiciunt, si concedatur Dominum Courten solvendo imparem
fuisse, quo tempore facta est ad Pergens alienatio, societati illud innotescere
non potuisse, nempe cum incapacem redditum esse ad transferendum dominium
alicujus rei quam in Provinciis Confoederatis haberet.

1 Cui Objectioni respondetur primo societatem cognoscere debuisse quid in
hujusmod casibus Jus Civil and Consuetudo Gentium sanciverit, quorum vi
decoctores omni jure transferendi bona sua etiam in Germania inferiori
privantur.

2 Juris (quod obtenditur) a Domino Courten ad Pergens translationem, non
fuisse factam ante annum 1645 and 1647. Quo tempore Domino Courten nihil
prorsus juris erat aut tituli ad naves, bona, etc. praedicta; fiquidem omne jus
suum and dominium, (quemadmodum supra ostensum) ad Dominum Edvardum Littleton,
and Dominum Paulum Pindar, antea, viz. Anno 1642. transtulisset, concessisset,
and alienasset.

Et hic locum habet generalis Regula Juris recepta inter Gentes, Nemo plus
juris in alium transfer potest quam ipse habeat.

3. Societati significatum fuisse Dominum Courten totum jus suum multo ante ad
Dominos Edvardum Littleton, and Paulum Pindar transmisisse, adeoque ad Pergens
prorsus nullum transfer potuisse; nec Pergens potestatem habere tractandi cum
ipsis; quod si quid ita tractaretur, irritum and nuslum fore. Quare si his
monitis neglectis, postea obstinato animo ad contrahendum cum dicto Pergens
processerint An. 1647. ipsi in culpa sunt ut qui exiguo vel nullo pretio illud
ab homine comparare voluerint, penes quem nullum esset aut jus aut dominium.

Unde hic Regulae locus, Damnum quod quis culpa sua sentit, sustinere tenetur.


Add quod societas (uti accepimus) gnara vitiosam effe dicti Pergens
potestatem, cautionem sumserit de restituendo pretio si contractus in ipsorum
damnum cederet.

Quare cum Objectionibus singulis responsum sit, humiliter concludimus,
praedictis Objectionibus vel eorum qualibet (quae certe nobis invalidae contra
Petitores videntur) neutiquam obstantibus,

Praedictos Dominum Joannem Ayton, Dominum Carew, Dominum Whitaker, and Socios,
jus habere repetendi restitutionem, emendationem, and satisfactionem a
praedicta societate, pro damno and jactura praedictarum Navium, Bonorum,
Mercium, etc.

Gualter. Walker.
Guliel. Turnor
Jobannis Exton.
Timoth. Baldwin.
David. Budd.
Subscript. in presentia nos J. Daniel, Will. Allen. Notar. Public. 1662.



The Opinions and Resolutions of Sir John Glynn Knight. and Sir John Maynard
Knight, the Kings Sergeants at Law; Sir Edward Turnor Knight, Speaker of the
Commons-House in Parliament, and Attorney General to his Royal Highness the
Duke of York, Bennet Hoskins Esquire one of the Benchers, and Reader of the Middle
Temple; and Samuel Baldwin Esquire of the Inner Temple, Councellor at Law; given
upon the Case between the Assignees of William Courten and the East India
Company of the Netherlands.
WIlliam Courten being interessed in several Ships and Merchandises therein,
they are put to Sea on Trading Voyages to the East Indies.

26. April. 18. Carol. 1.

William Courten being indebted to several persons, and Sir Edw. Littleton
being bound for him to them, William Courten grants ( inter alia) the two Ships
Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bona Adventure of London, with the Freight, Stock,
Merchandises, and Polices of Assurance.

This Grant is made in consideration of 20. 5. and in general, for other
considerations, provided if that William Courten or his Executors, etc. pay the
Debts within twenty seven Months and save Sir Edward Littleton harmless, that
then the Grant to be void.

19. December. 18. Carol. 1.

William Courten, and Sir Edward Littleton reciting the first Deed and a great
Debt of 24000. l. for a further security of that Debt, grant to Sir Paul Pindar
his Executors and Assigns, all the Ships Apparel, Stocks of Merchandise, and
the Polices of Assurance, and all their interest therein under diverse
Agreements; the Effect whereof is, that Sir Edward Littleton shall and may
order and dispose of the said Returns for Pindar's satisfaction, by several
proportions out of each Ship, and the Residue to be to Sir Edward Littleton for
the purposes in the Indenture, and several other agreements; by all which it
appears that Sir Paul Pindar was not to have more then satisfaction of his
Debt, but after that satisfied in such manner as is expressed in the Indenture,
the benefit of the Surplus was to be for Sir Edward Littleton and William
Courten.

The Debts for which Sir Edward Littleton was bound, are not discharged within
the 27. Months, nor are yet discharged, as appears by the Bonds, Counterbond
and Outlawries upon record.

Then the ship Bona Esperanza is surprised in an hostile manner by the Subjects
of Holland, and the Bona Adventure and her goods also taken into their
possession.

1648. William Courten as is pretended in Holland, Assigns his Interest, and
all the Stock, etc. to James Pergens, who makes Composition for the same. The
Question propounded is, Whether the Assignment or Transport to Pergens be
valid, and the Composition made by him be good or no? or, Whether the Grant or
Transport to Sir Edward Littleton, or by him and William Courten to Sir Paul
Pindar be good or no?

We conceive that both Questions fall into one, for if Littleton's or Pindar's
Grant or Transport be valid, Pergen's Transport and Composition is void against
Pindar and Littleton, and so e convenio.

We conceive that by the Common Law of England, there can no doubt be made, but
that the interest and property of the ships and Merchandise in them, are really
and effectually conveyed and transferred first unto Littleton, and then unto
Sir Paul Pindar; and although it be so done under certain Conditions, or
Provisoes, and Agreements, yet till performance of such Proviso by Courten in
Littleton's Case, the interest remained in Littleton, and when that condition
was not performed (as to this day it is not) the Grant becomes an absolute
Grant, and Courten or his Assigns can never avoid it.

And as for Pindar's Grant, it is absolutely good, but the person of Pindar is
subject after satisfaction made to him of his Debt, to give an account, and
make satisfaction to Courten and Littleton, but that Power of drawing Pindar to
account, no way lessens Pindar his right and property, he is perfectly
Proprietarius by the Law of England.

And this being a Contract in England by Subjects of the Crown of England, and
touching their own interest, we see not how it can be otherwise interpreted.

When Courten grants his interest to Littleton, it has no condition, but that
if Courten pay the Debts within the time limited, when that time is expired,
and no payment made, the legal interest is absolutely out of Courten, and
becomes Pindar's, not as Assignee of Courten, but as Assignee of Littleton; yet
it is true, that Pindar after satisfaction to him of his Debts, was to make
satisfaction of the surplusage, but not at all till such satisfaction.

Then Courten's Assignees can have no more or greater interest then himself
had, nor could transfer any property to Pergens, because he himself had no
property in the thing, but only a possibility or power to call Pindar to
account for surplusage after satisfaction of Pindar's Debt, and not before.

As to these Eight Objections raised by the Hollanders, 1. That res mobilis
could not be granted without the possession delivered.

2. That by the Tripartite Indenture of Assignment or transport from William
Courten and Sir Edward Littleton to Sir Paul Pindar, of the 19. December. 1642.
there was only a Security granted for money lent, and not the real interest
transferred in Ships or Goods to Sir Paul Pindar.

3. That in case of shipwreck or other miscarriage, Sir Paul Pindar was not to
suffer Damage, but to sue the Polices of Assurances; therefore he can have no
pretense to the ships or their Lading.

4. That Sir Paul Pindar could not claim his proportionable payments until some
months after the Return of the ships to London, and therefore also he can have
no pretense to the Damages.

5. As to the Deed and Indenture of Bargain and Sale from William Courten to
Sir Edward Littleton, dated the 26. of April 1642. it was only a
Counter-security against Engagements, and that he had not paid any money for
Mr. Courten at the time of Pergens his Transports; and and therefore Mr.
Courten was not divested of his property in the Ships or their Lading.

6. That admitting Sir Edward Littleton's right or any other Proprietor, they
were excluded from any new allegation or pretense, having not entered their
Claim in 1654. before the English and Dutch Commissioners, according to the 30.
Article of Cromwell's Treaty.

7. That as to the Commission grounded upon the Statutes made concerning
Bankrupts, neither the Statutes or Common Laws of England, could be effectual
or take place in the Low Countries.

8. That admitting Mr. Courten were insolvent when he made the transports to
Pergens, the Company could not take any such notice as to deem him incapable of
transferring his right to any thing he had in the United Provinces.



They are of no value in our Law.

First, The possession by the Law of England goes with the property, and where
the right or property is, there by our Law is the possession, unless some other
Person obtain actual Possession as a Trespasser; and indeed for Lands in some
tuses, Delivery of possession is requisite, but never for Goods, the Master may
sell his Goods in the Servants or Factors Custody as well as if they were in
his own hands.

2. A Grant for Security of Debts, is as good as an absolute Grant to the end
intended, till the Debts be discharged.

3. As for the Objection that Sir Paul Pindar was to have advantage of the
Polices of Assurance, that is far from being solid, because no advantage can be
of the Police without the renunciation of the property, so without the latter
he cannot have the former.

4. Though Sir Paul Pindar could not claim his payments until some Months after
Arrival, yet that does not weaken his security, therefore the taking of the
Ship and goods is a damage to him, for which he is to be relieved. The fifth is
answered before.

As to the questions of State, or Civil Law, it is proper for other persons to
make Answer thereunto.

8. It behooves every man to take notice of another right, who meddles with the
thing wherein another has right; it is a bad defense for one Trespasser, to
say, I have satisfied another man for it, and it cannot be just when one man is
entitled to a satisfaction for a wrong done him, that it should lay in the
Trespassees power to make the person wronged remediless by payment to another
person; an English man's head being broken, cannot be cured by a Plaster
applied to a Dutch man's head.

John Glynn.
John Maynard.
Edward Turnor.
Ben. Hoskins.
Sam. Baldwin.
Subscribed in the presence of us J. Daniel, Will. Allen. Notar. Public. 1662.



Sententiae and Statutum Johannis Glynni and Johannis Maynardi Militum, Regis
Servientum ad Legem, Edvardi Turnori Oratoris in Consessu Ordinum Inferiorum
and Attornati Generalis ad Celsitudinem Regiam Ducis Eboracensis, Benedicti
Hoskensii Armigeri, unius Assessorum, Jurisque Lectoris in Hospitio Medii
Templi, and Samuelis Baldvini Hospitii Interioris Templi Armigeri and
Juris-Consulti; data super lite inter Assignatos Gulielmi Courteni and Indiae
Orientalis Societatem Batavam.
GUlielmus Courtenus possederat diversas Naves quae vela dabant ad mercaturam
exercendam in Plagis Indicis Orientalibus.

Aprilis die 26. Anno Domini 1641.

Gulielmus Courtenus plurimo aere alieno obstrictus, advincto insuper pro
pecuniis istis Edvardo Littletono Milite, duas Naves (inter alia) scilicet Bona
Esperanza and Henry Adventure appellatas una cum oneribus, Sort and peculio,
Mercibus and Syngraphis sive Politiis Assecurationis eidem Littletono and
Assignatis suis transtulit, etc.

Haec Concessio propter viginti solidos sive december aureos (quantula nempe summa
secundum Leges Angliae in omnibus pactionibus in nomine valoris scribi and
numerari debet) tunc solutos, facta est, cautumque ab eo est quod si ipse
Courtenus, Haeredes vel Executores ejus, debita sua intra spatium viginti
septem mensium persolverent, atque aere isto Edvardum Littletonum liberarent
integrumque restituerent, tum irritam Fore hanc Cessionem.

Decembris die 19. 1643.

Gulielmus Courtenus and Edvardus Littletonus, recitantes primam Syngrapham,
sive scriptum pacti, cumulatiusque Debitum viginti quatuor mill librarum, in
ulteriorem securitatem praestandam cesserunt Paulo Pindaro militi, Executoribus
and Assignatis ejus, omnium Navium istarum apparatum, totas merces tabulasque
assecurationis and omne interesse eorum, sub diversis conventionibus, quarum
haec summa erat, quod praedicto Littletono licitum usque foret, earum navium
reditus Pindaro satisfaciendo and solvendo ordinare and disponere, vicibus and
portionibus in utraque nave observatis, quodque restaret, Littletono competere,
ad usus, inter alia varia paota, in Syngrapha memoratos: per quae omnia liquet
quod Paulus Pindar miles, praeterquam debiti sui liberationem nihil postulare
potuit, sed post satisfactionem hujusmodi, residuum Littletoni and Courteni
commodo de jute vertisset.

Debita ea pro quibus Edvardus Littletonus obligabatur non intra viginti septem
menses, immo nec ad usque persoluta sunt, sicuti per Obligatoria scripta,
Contra-obligatoria, and forense decretum quo Exlex Littletonus conclamabatur,
plane manifestum est.

Postea, Navium praedictarum Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadventure, a
Foederatarum Provinciarum Subditis, contra Foedera pacis cum Anglis inita, vi
capta est una and hostilem in modum detenta altera.

Gulielmus Courtenus (ut prae se ferunt Belgae) transtulit in Hollandia omne
interesse and peculium suum, Jacobo Pergensio, qui reductis (sive conturbatis
tanquam) rationibus cum Societate ista pepegit. Ambigitur, utrum Assignatio and
Translatio haec Pergensio, and reductio deinde per illum facta, valeat necne,
vel an Cessio and Translatio Edvardo Littletono and ab illo simul and Courteno,
Paulo Pindaro facta, rata vel irrita habeatur.

Nobis videntur ambae hae questiones coincidere, nimirum si ad Littletonum aut
Pindarum cessio valida sit, reductio illa Pergensii contra Littletonum and
Pindarum omnino frustra est and sic e Converso.

Nostra pro Sententia, per Leges municipales Angliae, haud dubium est quin
interesse totum and proprietas Navium and mercium in iisdem, realiter and pro
effectu devehuntur deferunturque Littletono primum, and deinceps Pindaro;
Licetque id factitatum sit sub quibusdam Conditionibus, Cautionibus and
astipulationibus, tamen, quoadusque Courtenus, talemcunque stipulationem
praestitam daret, jus and interesse apud Littletonum manserat, and cum
Condition illa non perfungeretur (ut ne dum constat) cessio illa, omnimodo
absoluta est, neque possint Courtenus Executoresque ejus illam quoquo modo
frustrari.

Quod cessionem refert ad Pindarum, omnimodo illa rata est, tametsi persona
ejus post satisfactionem debiti sui rationibus and satisfactioni Courteno and
Littletono dandis subjiceretur, sed potestas illa cogendi Pindarum ad rationem
reddendam, Pindari jus and proprietatem neutiquam minuit, quia per Leges
Angliae ille perfect Proprietarius est.

Atque cum hic sit Contractus in Anglia inter subditos Coronae Angliae,
tangensque interesse eorum proprium, non videmus quomodo quis Secus illum
possit interpretari.

Quando Courtenus jus suum Littletono transtulit, nulla alia extitit Conditio,
nisi quod Courtenus debita persolveret inter spatium temporis definitum, eo
elapso nec solutione facta, toto jure and legali proprietate exuitur Courtenus
quod jam in Pindarum cedit, non uti assignatum Courteni sed Littletoni;
quamlibet verum sit, Pindarum post satisfactionem Debitorum suorum, quicquid
superesset reddere oportere, non tamen nisi post talem satisfactionem

Ideoque, Courteni Assignati, non habere possunt plus magisve Juris aut
interesse quam ipse habuit, neque transfer ille potuit proprietatem ullam
Pergensio, cum ipsemet, nullum proprietatem habuit, sed possibilitatem and
potestatem tantum, cogendi Pindarum ad rations residui reddendas post,
satisfactionem debiti sui ut supra.

Quod Hasce octo Objectiones ab Hollandis sugillatas spectat, nempe, 1. Jus ad
Rem mobilem nisi per Traditionem transferri non posse.

2. Per Syngrapham scilicet Indenturam tripartitam factam inter Gulielmum
Courtenum Dominum Edvardum Littletonum and Dominum Paulum Pindarum, datam 19.
die Decembris 1642. duntaxat convenisse de cautione sive Securitate pecuniarum
creditarum, jus autem plenarium ad naves earumque bona in Dominum Paulum
Pindarum nequaquam transiisse.

3. Quod si Naufragium vel aliud infortunium accidisset, Dominum Paulum
Pindarum jacturam sustinere non debuisse, sed ex Syngraphis and Politiis
assecurationis remedium quaesiturum, ideoque illi jus ad Naves mercesve non
Competere.

4. Quod Domino Pindaro non licuit, solutiones suas proportionales postulare,
nisi aliquot mensibus post reditum Navium ad Londinum, proinde damni
Emendationem illi non deberi.

5. Quod Syngrapha sive Indentura Emptionis and Venditionis inter Gulielmum
Courtenum and Dominum Edvardum Littletonum, data 16. Aprilis, 1662. nihil aliud
voluit quam ut caveretur Domino Littletono contra sponsiones and
fide-jussiones, dictumque Dominum Littletonum nihil pecuniarum pro Domino
Courteno persolvisse quo tempore facta est alienatio ad Pergensium, and proinde
Courtenum jure and titulo ad Naves praedictas and bona nondum privari.

6. Si jus Domini Edvardi Littleton aut oujusvis alterius proprietarii
admittatur tamen novae alicui praetensioni aut allegationi locum non esse, eo
quod talis vendicatio non delata fuerat ad Anglos and Batavos Deputatos Anno
1654. prout secundum Articulum Tractatus Cromwelliani tricesimum fieri oportuit.

7. Quod attinet Rescriptum sive Commissionem fuudatam super Lege adversum
Decoctores lata, nempe Statuta and Consuetudines Angliae, locum habere non
posse in Germania Inferiori, ubi omnia secundum Jus Civil and Geutile
judicantur.

8. Si Concedatur Dominum Courtenum solvendo imparem fuisse quo tempore facta
est ad Pergensium alienatio, Societati illud innotescere non potuisse nempe eum
incapacem reddicum esse ad transferendum dominium alicujus rei quam in
Provinciis Confoederatis haberet.



Hae nihil valent secundum Leges nostras.

Quia primo, possessio per Leges Angliae transit sive vadit cum proprietate and
ubi jus and proprietas est, ibi per Leges nostras invenire est possessionem,
nisi alius quisquis actualem possessionem obtinet, sub reatu Invasoris; and
reipsa quantum Fundos in aliquibus casibus attinet, Traditio possessionis valde
necessaria est, nunquam tamen quoad bona, quae Magister, in manibus sive
Custodia servi sui vel Institoris, tam legitime quam si apud ipsum essent,
posset divendere.

2. Cessio ad securitatem aeris alieni adeo valet, ut si absoluta esset ad
finem propositum.

3. Quantum ad objectionem quod Dominus Paulus Pindarus se resarcitum daret ex
Syngraphis Assecurationis, nihil in hac inest ponderis, quia prodesse hae
Syngraphae neutiquam illi potuerunt absque renunciatione proprietatis, ideoque
sine posteriori priorem tenere non potuerit.

4. Quamvis Dominus Pindarus non irrogare potuit solutiones praedictas quousque
aliquot menses elaberentur, hoc non debilitat Securitatem suam; captura Navis
and bonorum praedictorum damno sibi est and proptera resarciendus est. Quintae
prius responsum est, Questionibus enim scitisque status vel juris Civilis
aliorum est respondere.

Oportet unumquemque qui se intermiscet alienis rebus jus alterius probe
dignoscere, iniqua defensiuncula inferentis mihi injuriam est dicere, se ob
istam aliis luisse neque justum potest esse, cum aliquis jus ad compensationem
injuriae sibi allatae irrogandam habuerit, apud inferentem fuerit per
solutionem alteri factam, irreparabilem eum reddere. Laesum Angli Caput,
Emplastro Cephalae Batavi cujuspiam applicato, haud sanabitur.

Johannes Glynnus.
Johannes Maynardus.
Edvardus Turnorus.
Benedictus Hoskensius.
Samuel Baldvinus.
Subscribebatur coram nobis Johan. Daniel and Guliel. Allen Notar. Public. 1662.



INSTRUCTIONS given to the Chief Agent of Mr. Courten and Company, at Carwarr,
etc.
1. YOu shall take into your Custody and under your Charge, all the Goods,
Moneys and Merchandises, and other means which already are at Carwarr,
belonging unto me, or that shall hereafter belong unto me, or others for my
use, from other places to be Consigned unto you, or under your Command, to
other persons belonging to this Employment, and in service of this Factory. You
shall likewise in case of Mortality, make and appoint Chief for every of the
Factories on the Coast of India, which do belong to my Employment; And for
misdemeanors, have power to displace the Chief of the said Factories, And with
the advice of your Council, place fitter persons in their rooms: with other
Factories from Rajapore to Ceylon, and up in the Country; Who are to acquaint
you from time to time, the state of business, and yearly send up their Books to
Carwarr, to be by you examined.

2. Forasmuch as no Blessing is to be expected but from God, You shall provide
that the Service of God be duly performed, in the house twice a day, according
to the Liturgy of the Church of England: To the performance whereof, be careful
to call all the whole Household together, suffering none of the People to absent
themselves from Prayer or divine Service, unless by sickness, or any other
urgent occasion, which must be a sufficient cause, or punish the negligent
according to the quality of the omission; Every Sabboth-day call the whole
Household together, and employ the Forenoon and Afternoon in Prayer, hearing of
Sermons, or Chapters of the Holy Scriptures read, and other devout Exercises,
until it shall please God to allow you a Minister, for the fuller execution of
Divine Service.

3. You shall have to your Council the rest of the Merchants of the Factory,
with all other Merchants of Ships and Factories belonging to this Employment;
Then presently with them debate and resolve concerning Trade and other matters;
and in case of equal Voices, you shall have two Voices, a casting Voice besides
your own: The second of this Factory shall be Accomptant General, and keep the
Books of Business done in this and other Factories. The third person shall be
Secretary, to write Letters and keep Correspondence with all places which have
to do with this Factory. The fourth person shall be Cash-keeper, and daily
make up his Account with the Accomptant General. The fifth person in the
Factory shall be Ware-house-keeper, and daily give over to the Accomptant
General what parcels of Goods received or delivered, to be book'd in his
Journal and Lidger.

4. If any more persons be in the Factory bearing the name of Merchants, they
must be employed by Order of you and and your Council, about such business as
their abilities and the time shall most require; And when there are less
persons then five in the Factory of the quality of Merchants, (then you shall
report the business among those present according to every one his skill and
abilities, bearing your self such a part as may be requisite; which four
persons more or less to bear the said Offices, shall be elected by you and your
Council; and any one departing out of the Factory, shall give up Account of his
Administration, and another by you and your Council Elected and put in his room
as aforesaid; The Chief of the Factory or Agent at Carwarr, (which now is
appointed to be Mr. John Farren) at his arrival shall not be nominated by other
than my self. But in case of Mr. Farren his departing this Life, before he
comes there, then at the coming away of Leonard de Woodman, (who is now sent
for home) the Factory shall be governed by the Second, until further Order by
next Shipping, which Second is to be chosen by a Consultation of all the
Merchants, and is to execute the Orders with the Power given to Mr. Farren. And
in case that Leonard de Woodman be deceased, or come home with Capt. Hall, and
another left Agent by Mr. Hall, then such person shall be removed to be Chief
at Batticalla after Mr. Farren's Arrival at Carwarr.

5. Your Accomptant-general, or second Person of the Factory shall keep exact
and true Books of Accounts, of all Goods, Moneys, Debts and other means to me
belonging, under your Receipt of this Factory, charging distinctly every parcel
and quantity of Pepper, Saltpeter, and other Goods bought; and Cloth, Lead, and
Iron and other Commodities received for me and others, discharging the same
when you Ship away your India Goods, or sell Europe Commodities: He shall also
keep an Account of all the persons now in the Factory, or hereafter to come
there, giving them Credit within the line, and not the sum drawn out with the
rest of the Credit aboard the Ship, or in the Factories whence they come, the
Account it self being Copied at large in the Jornal, and in the Lidger brought
into a sum within the line pro Memoratum as aforesaid, for that this Factory
is not to be Charged with Ship and other Factories debts; but withal it is fit
that in the giving any one his Account, there should be remembered whence he
comes, and how much due to him in the last Ship or Factory, when any person of
the Factorie takes up Moneys or Goods, (which must not be otherwise than for
necessaries) such Money or Goods must be charged to his Account, and
acknowlegement taken in the Receipt Book; and at the departing of any person
from the Factory, his Account must be balanced and he made Creditor for his
wages, during the time of his abode there, the Copy thereof delivered unto him
with your Name, and the rest of your Councels hands thereunto; and another Copy
thereof must be sent home to me. If the Party departs this life, his Account as
aforesaid, with his Will and Inventory of his goods and Clothes must be sent
home and a Copy delivered to the Executors (if any present) his Goods and
Clothes first being sold, and the proceed thereof brought to his Account. The
Accomptant General shall take and examine the Books of Account which yearly
shall be sent unto this Factory, from the Factories of Rajapore, Rabag,
Batticalla, Camiavore, and others when more settled; the Contents of which
Books he shall extract and carry over into the Books of Carwarr, of which
Carwar-Books, Copies must still be ready to send home to me, by every Ship that
comes home, and belonging to this Employment; which Copy of Books shall be by
you, and the rest of your Council perused and signed by every one of the
Council.

6. The Secretary shall keep all the Letters with some directed to this
Factory, and Copy the same into a Book; He shall also write all the Letters
which from this Factory must be writ to me and others in India, of which
Letters, true Copies shall likewise be Registered into a Book; and he must be
careful to seal no Letters, until the same be perused by you and the Council,
and the hands of all them of the Council then present, thereunto, with the
Secretary his own hand last of all. He shall also make all the Wills and
Inventories of sick and deceased people of this Factory, whereof he is to keep
a true Register; He shall also keep the Book of Consultations, and a Book or
Jornal of Day-observations, touching Trade, News, or other daily passages, the
Copy of all which Books, the Secretary shall at all times have in a readiness,
and send home the same to me by every homeward-bound Ship; which Copies must
first by you, and the rest of your Council, be perused and signed, as in the
fifth Article.

7. The Cash-keeper must keep the Cash-book at large by Jornal and Liger,
Charging every Coin, as Pagoes, Santomees, Rialls of eight, Larrees and other
small Moneys on its several Account, with the quantity of the parts, for the
receipt, and discharging the same against its particular Account, when payment
shall be made thereof; the parcel of which Cash-book, must every day before
night be brought unto the Jornall, by the Accomptant General. The Steward
shall keep his books of house expense at large, and bring in the Weeks charge
thereof unto the Accomptant to be entered in his Jornal and Lidger of which Cash
and Stewards book, a Copy must be constantly in readiness, and after
Examination and under written by you and the rest of your Council, be sent
home to me by every Ship which is homeward bound.

8. The Warehouse keeper shall keep a Ware-house-book, wherein at large shall
be charged what Goods he receives into his Custody, which shall be discharged
again, when he delivers the same to be Shipped, or to those who buy the
Commodity, noting every particular of Condition, Quantity and Quality of the
Goods, and Copying every particular Invoyce of Cloth and other Goods into his
book, On the left side the parcel received, and on the right side the parcel
delivered or Shipped away, and of every parcel delivered and received, he shall
not omit to give daily before night, particular notice to the Accomptant to be
entered in his Jornall and Lidger. He must also keep a book of Charge upon
Merchandises, which he shall weekly sum up, and bring the same to the
Accomptant to be entered in his Jornall. He shall also keep a book of Presents,
wherein shall be charged the presents given, with a large Expression to whom,
and to what end. And in the Creditors side, bring in the presents received and
returned with a specification how they were disposed, of which Warehouse book,
Charge of Merchandise and Presents, Copy must be had constantly in readiness
to send at the coming away of every Ship signed and sent home.

9. Instruct and cause to be instructed all the Young Merchants and Youths,
resorting unto this Factory, not only to keep their books exactly, but also to
buy and sell all home and East India Commodities, with the knowledge of
Weights, Measures, Moneys, and Coins used there abouts, and other needful
parts to be performed in this Employment, let the Youths and other the Young
Merchants which are best able, learn the Sundry languages, be instructed to
speak, read, and write the same language, that hereafter all businesses may be
done and performed by them, without fear of being deceived by the cozening
Brokers and false Linguists, let me yearly be informed of the ability of every
one, not only in the Country language, but also in his books and industry in
dealing with the Country People, and dispatching of business, thereby to know
who may be preferred upon all occasions.

10. At every time when occasion presents, to send home Letters, do not neglect
to Advise me of all particulars of my business, chiefly by the homeward bound
Ships of this Employment; And when you write by the East India Company Ships,
by the Holland Ships, Portugalls, or Danes and French Ships, or by land as
hereafter expressed. You shall use the Figures and Ciphers, to deprive our back
friends of the Contents, when perhaps they may get our Letters into their
hands, you may write home by Land Via Surratt or Persia, sending your letters
to Balsora in the bottom of the Gulf of Persia, to be directed to the Consul
for the English Nation at Aleppo, to be further conveyed to me by way of
Venice, Lyvorne, and Marsellia, or else to write by Ship from Scanderoone, you
may also write home by way of the Red Sea, to be further conveyed to Grand
Cairo in Egypt, by the bottom of the Red Sea: This to be directed to Sir
Alexander Pagetti, a Venetian Merchant, and Consul of that Nation, with order
to send the letters to Alexandria, and further to Venice, Livorne or Marsellia,
to be conveyed unto me.

11. In House expense be frugall until further increase of Trade, you shall
not add to the building of Carwarr house, content your self with the house you
already built at Carwarr, only if you want Warehouse to preserve the Goods
you procure for England, and other places, let convenient rooms be made, also
for the Saltpeter man what is requisite to the furthering of his work; but in
digging of Ponds, Tanks, building Bridges, and other needless charges, do not
employ the Stock which is to be invested in Commodities? Be not too liberal in
presenting, for it is frugality which makes a Trade rich, and when presents
returns to you and others under your Command, let them not be applied to any
man's particular use, but brought into Account and Registered in the books of
presents.

12. Suffer no man belonging to this or other Factories, to Trade, for himself,
his Friends, or any body else, besides what is done for my Account: when any
body is found possessed with Money or Goods or both to be invested in Trade as
aforesaid, You shall take such Goods and Moneys from him, and dispose thereof
to my use, giving the Possessor a receipt for the same, signed by you and the
most part of your Council, for which I promise to make satisfaction to the
parties here at home at the first Ships return.

13. You shall direct all your returns, Bills of Lading, Letters, Books and
Accounts, Marked with the Mark in the Margin unto me, and order the letters
directed unto any else in England and Europe not to be delivered, before the
same be brought to my hands, and order from me procured for the delivery
thereof (which order you must renew at every Ships homeward dispatch) neither
shall you disclose there in the Indies by letters, words, or actions; the State
of business to Brokers, Merchants, and other the Country people, and less to
the Hollander, French, Portugalls, Danes, or English, and other employed in the
East India Companies service, for the old or new Stock.

You must be industrious and secret in all your dealings in all your Trade, for
it much concerns me to have the secrecy thereof reserved to myself, and the men
by me employed, and when any letters come to your hands sealed and directed to
me from some body in this employment, you shall not offer to open the same,
neither detain it in your hands, but send the same letters sealed as you
receive them, by all the speedyest conveyance you can unto me, neither shall
you open nor detain the letters which I send, to the persons employed in this
Service, but send or deliver the same sealed according to direction with all
speed possible, unless that such persons were deceased, run away, or come
home, before you receive such letters for them, in which case you may open the
letters to take course according as shall be required.

14. When you arrive in safety at Carwarr, you shall take full Information from
William Gorle, and the rest of the Merchants (the state of businesses thereof)
with their advice, and with the advice of Mr. Hogg proceed in the disposing of
the Hesters lading for Moneys, and in Trucke for Pepper, Cinnamon, Endicoe,
Callicoes, and other goods to be had there, and call the said Gorle and all
others which had charge committed to them, and of him receive the Patent of the
Great Seal of England, for your proceeding at Carwarr. You shall leave such
order at Cannanore, as with the advice of all the Merchants, and Mr. Hogg shall
find to tend to the most advantage of the employment, and leave William Gorle
chief, to whom you shall deliver my Orders and Instructions for his Government,
and settle the rest of his Council, according to the form therein specified,
with Copy of the same Instructions to the rest of those whom it concerns.

15. From Cannanore you shall proceed with the Hester to Cocheen, to put off
such quantities of your Cloth, Iron, Lead, and Baies as the place most vents,
and being needful, leave there of your Merchants for the disposing thereof,
where you shall keep a fair Correspondence with Senior Francisco Quetho de
Legorn, who was very Courteous to assist the Ships William, Planter, and
Hester, you may agree for a good quantity of Cinnamon, Pepper, and Callicoes,
which at the return of the Ship from the Northward may be received in case
there were not ready sufficient for the present; You may treat farther about
the Freight which last year was propounded by all the chief Merchants of
Cocheen for China, Japan, or Macasser, as appears by their letters to me,
whereby they promise to take a good parcel of Stammells and Venice red
Clothes, you may see by the Freights agreed by Capt. Weddall at Goa what to
ask, which if you obtain, no better employment is to be expected for the Ships.

16. Failing at Cocheen of a China Freight, or in case of agreement, you must
take so much time as may bring you to Carwarr, where you shall repair to Mr.
Leonard de Woodman, deliver to him my letter, and receive from him my Patent
under the Great Seal, and all the Instructions which he had from me, or from
Cap. Hall; all which having received from him, you shall take into your Custody
all his books and writings, and for his person send him aboard the first Ship
which then shall be readiest homeward bound. Being thus aboard you shall charge
him with the particulars in your Note for that purpose, and in the Jornall of
Richard Goodwin, the charge upon oath of Simon Graye, the note of Bobshenny
broker of Carwarr, and the Notes of Anthony Martin, and of his several Answers
keep a true Register, which you shall send home in Authentic manner; his
books you shall examine, and finding any Error, Dubious, or false parcel, let
the same Authentiquely appear, and send them home by the first homeward bound
Ships, and the Copy by the next Ships; Mr. Leonard de Woodman himself, you
shall send home in such degree as he shall propose himself upon Examination of
his charge, if Guilty, then send him home Prisoner, if clear himself of all,
then send him home chief Merchant as you found at first at Carwarr, to inform
me by word of mouth of the Trade up in the Countries where he oftentimes
traveled. In case of your first arrival Mr. Woodman were at Rabagg, or
elsewhere in the Country, you must send as soon as you arrive an Express for
him to come down to consult together for the good of the Voyage, and being come
down proceed as aforesaid, if he refuses to come down, you must send up to
Court for a Warrant, and mean while charge all the men in this Employment in
the Country by virtue of your Commission, and in his Majesty's name to follow
your direction, and thus force him to come down; mean while you must not apply
your self so much upon these particulars, as to neglect other business of
venting goods, and procuring lading for the Loyalty and Unity for England,
and for the Hester for such places as you shall resolve to send her, with the
advice of Mr. Hog, and the rest of the Merchants.

17. When you have placed your self at Carwarr, and settled the Government
prescribed by these Instructions you shall erect a factory at Batticalla, and
amongst other Merchants send Anthony Martin to reside there, because that he
speaks the Country language, and was there from the beginning, till the
demolishing of the house. The Pepper about Baticola is very good, but not so
good as that which comes from Rabagg and Houbilee, nevertheless procure a
Quantity, for when it costs but 30. Page at Candee, it is far better then to
pay 36. and 38. Page at Rabagg and Houbilee, besides the carriage down and the
Customs to be paid upon the way.

18. You shall send for Peter Demaisters, who is at present Chief at Rabagg, to
come to you, and send in his room to be chief there William Hicks, and in case
he should be deceased or returned, such other persons as you shall find able
for that place, for that the Hollanders which lie there, strive to under-sell
and over-buy all Commodities, and being Crafty Fellows, with their Insinuations
and other sinister and underhand dealings, come to know of Mr. Woodman and
Peter Demaisters the very secrets of this Employment; therefore it behooves you
to place one there, able to discover their underminings, and Encounter with
their dealings, Peter Demaister will do more Service under you at Carwarr.

19. You shall settle Mr. Albion Mottershed at Rajapore, with the rest of the
Merchants, in that form of Government in the Instructions for the Factory
expressed: And take up the Account of his dealings from the beginning until
now, for that I have as yet received none.

20. It is left to your Judgment and choice, whether to settle one or more
factories upon the Coasts of India, or Cocheen, Coulan, Calepatan, Dabull, or
within the Country at Dichallee, Houbilee, or other places where the Pepper
grows, what you resolve with the advice of your Council, let it tend to the
most benefit of this Employment, and be cautious in settling of Factories, that
the charge of the place be not more then the profits to be expected from thence.

21. The Ship Loyalty is fraughted by the Tonne at 21 l. per Tonne, Pepper 14.
C. C. per Tonne, Cinnamon at 16. C. per Tonne, Saltpeeter at 20. C. per Tonne,
and other goods accordingly; She is to stay from her first arrival in India,
the space of four Months to be unladen and to relade home; and if not
dispatched within that time, then to stay on demorage for six Months certain,
and eleven Months at the most at 300 l. per Month. The Unity is fraighted by
the great, at 2900 l. for the whole freight home, she is to stay in India, she
is to stay there until the first of January, if arrives there before the first
of October, and if comes later to Rajapore, then to stay three months unlading
and relading and dispatch; and if within that time the Ship should not be
dispatched, then to remain upon Demorage for six Months certain, and twelve
Months at the most, 150 l. per Month; the Copy of the Charter party you shall
find amongst the rest of your Papers, but the Charter party of the Unity is
sent by that Ship to Mr. Albion Mottershed, by the same Charter parties you
shall find the conditions more at large expressed. Endeavor to lade home the
two said fraighted Ships, before they enter upon Demourage, and put aboard the
Unity about 80 tonnes of Salt-Peeter or more, to bring her down, and be
careful to have the Ship well filled with Pepper, Cinnamon, and other light
goods, because that I am to pay no more for 180 Tonnes, then for 100 Tonnes;
see that the Hold be not employed to stow Ships provision, let it be contracted
to narrow compass, and cause all Bulk-heads in hold, made for outward
accommodation, to be taken down; and if the Breadroom be too big, fill the same
with goods or other provisions, the Loyalty being by the tonne is not material
to make her stowe so much and full.

22. During the time of the unlading and relading of the two said Ships, you
shall send them both to the Southward and Northward, with direction to gather
part of their lading, mean while let the Hester gather lading also for them,
and get such quantity of Goods down to Carwarr betimes, to be laden before she
enters into Demorage to be excused of 1800 l. which I shall be forced to pay
for six days Demorage, as you may farther perceive by Charter party; then you
may do me a wondrous good Service in dispatching the two fraighted Ships home,
and better in lading home all three, which shall recommend to your Diligence,
Industry, and Care.

23. In case that the Loyalty only could be dispatched home, for I shall
expect her at least, because it concerns me in the highest degree to have
returns next Summer, then you shall employ the Unity upon freight to Persia,
Red Sea, Cambaiae, Acheen, or China, in Company of the Hester to the most
benefit, and when you may get so much or more, as may clear the 150 l. per
Month, which I must pay for Demourage, but if no profitable fraights are to be
expected, you may lade her with Cotton, Gum-lack on Sticks, Cassumba,
Turmerick, and other goods vendible at Acheen, and send her thither consigned
to Mr. Henry Glascock, Chief of the Factory there; You must send for Acheen
also, by the Unity or Hester, all the Amber remaining at Carwarr, a parcel of
Iron, Lead, and Cloth, and mean while procure her lading home against
Christs-tide, 1643.

24. Provide for the homeward bound Ships, about 1000. Candees Salt-peeter,
which Costs at Houbilee 3 and 4 Pagoes a Candee, which Salt-peeter you must
cause to be refined by the Salt-peeter man, which goes with you, let it be
refined 30 per cent. finer, then what came by the William and Hester, for the
finer it is the better for sale, less freight and custom. Against next year,
you shall provide another 1000. Candees Saltpeeter, which must be ready in the
house before the Ships arrive out of England, and refined at leisure; You must
also provide a good parcel of Pepper for these homeward bound Ships, and no
less then 800. Candees which must be very well sifted, clear from dust, and
all the light Pepper or empty Husks fanned or milled out of it, for it is
better to throw away the dust and light Pepper, then to bring it home to
England, although I believe it will yield something in India, for dust is now
worth the 1/10 part of good Pepper, neither is light Pepper worth above the 1/3
part of good Pepper, which dust and light Pepper pays as much custom and more
freight then good Pepper, for the light Pepper requires three times more room
then good Pepper, so that the price of light Pepper which is here 6 d. whereas
the price of good Pepper is 18 d, per pound, but the custom thereof is 3 d. and
the freight 3 d. per pound; And for light Pepper 9 which with the custom makes
128 d. doubled the proceed besides 6 d. first Cost. The Cinnamon which you buy
must also be stickt, garbled, and all the black and thick sticks refused, and
if bought in a parcel together, it is better to throw them away then to bring
them home, for the consideration mentioned in the light Pepper; You have John
Smith a Grocer by Trade, who may constantly be employed about the Garbling and
choosing of Pepper and Cinnamon: Pepper of Cannanore, Callicutt, and Coulan,
sells here a penny in a pound cheaper then that which comes from Rabagg,
Houbilee or thereabouts.

25. By the Musters of Drugs and in the Instructions in 23 several papers, you
may perceive what Drugs fit for this place with price and quantity, you have
Stephen Hill Druggist, who may be employed in the choice and ordering thereof,
and buy such parcels as you find expressed when it may be done to profit, and
send the same home by every homeward bound Ship, besides you must provide for
Acheen, a good parcel of Turmerick, Gumlack, Mastick and Cassumba, which is a
dry flower dying Yellow, which you may also suffer to be garbled by your
Druggist, Cotton which Costs at Houbilee 2 pagoes a Candee, must also be
provided for Acheen, Turmerick Costs at Rabagg 6. in 7. Pagoes a Candee,
Gumlack on sticks at Houbilee 11 in 12 Pagoes a Candee. In the buying of
Pepper, Cinnamon, and other goods, take heed to buy none when they be most wet
or watered, whereby 20 per cent. may be lost, and more may be lost on the
weight, but bespeake if they are found moist, wet, or watered, they shall make
allowance, which may be tried in weighing of 100 l. neat, and drying the same
upon a Sail three or four days during the time of the Sun shining hot, and
after three or four days drying, weigh what the same loses from the 100 l.
aforesaid, and so a present experience may be made upon a Muster of a pound
dried by a fire. If Endicoe flat, and which may be had at about 100 Pagoes a
Candee you may have a parcel and send by the homeward Ships, and send home
also a parcel of Callicoes made thereabouts, that the sorts and prices may be
known, or order great parcels hereafter: inquire what Sugar to be had in the
Country, and what price, for I understand that great store of Goox or Jaggrye
may be had all the Country over at cheap rates, which being so, it may turn to
Account to send a Sugar-refiner to buy and refine the Sugar there, both to save
freight and custom: Inquire also what Bee-Wax may may be bought for, and
whether quantities may be had, it yields here always 5 l. per cent.

26. Endeavor with all the Industry you have, to sell all the Commodities which
are consigned unto you for Money, or in Truck for money and Goods, as above
expressed, and such other as hereafter you shall be informed here or at Acheen,
it is not safe to keep home Commodities unsold above 12 Months after landing
thereof, for besides the perishing of Cloth, commonly Goods kept long sell at
last cheaper then the first profer, and the yearly supply from home considered,
goods are not like to rise in price with keeping, Moreover the proceed thereof
lies dead, which otherwise may be employed in Commodities for Europe or
Acheen, so that you may conclude it is better to lose 50 per cent. upon goods,
then to keep them 12 months unsold. By the Invoyce of the Hester, Unity, and
Loyalty, you may perceive what kind of Commodities are sent from hence, per
next return advise me what other goods may be sold for profit, and be diligent
to find out the Trade of the place and Country to the full, and let me know
whether Lead in Pigs of 300 l. sell not for as much as Pigs of 100 l. or Bars
of 14 or 16 l. for betwixt Bars and Pigs here is always 14 d. per centweight
difference, that the Bars cost more. Also the price of Corrall Beads, and
whether a great difference be betwixt deep Red colored and a pale colored,
though the Beads be of one and the same bigness; Which sort of Beads and
bigness thereof sells with you, and what quantities a year, for being very
dear I must be fully informed of the price and request before can resolve to
send a considerable parcel: next year intend to send out a good parcel of
Corrall, mean while you may put off all the Corrall you find unsold in any one
of the Factories.

27. You must be careful to have all the Cloth of all the three Ships ayred as
soon as you come into hot Countries and in Sultry weather; You have a Packer
named William Gerishe, who with his Press may Pack up the Cloth again, as it
was before; which he may also effect a shore, and be constantly employed about
keeping the Cloth in good order.

28. You shall deliver a Copy of these Instructions, to all the Merchants of
your Council at Carwarr, and send the Copy by the Loyalty, with the Copy of
the Charge of Mr. Woodman, and all the other papers to be directed to all the
other Merchants at Carwarr to be penned in a consultation of all the Merchants
both of the shore, and of the Ships present, and to rule themselves
accordingly, in the settling a Council and Government as is prescribed; In case
your Ship should arrive upon the Coast sooner then the Hester, or else the
Hester miscarry, or lose her Monsoones, or that (which God forbid) you should
depart this life before your coming to Carwarr.

29. By the premises you are certified of the general heads of this business,
of this Employment, which strive to perform to my most advantage, and for what
omitted, or else herein contained, which might be contrary to the most
beneficial course, you shall have in all times power, (with the advice of your
Council) to alter and redress the same, and to resolve for the best, which
your resolutions I approve, as if hereby prescribed, conditionally that all
times when such happen, you shall Register such Consultations with the hands of
the Merchants present, and therein also inserted the reasons why so resolved,
in opposition of all these my Orders; And beseeching God to bless your
Endeavors, and Preserve you in health Remain,

Your Loving Friend William Courten.
Taken at Goa 11. Aug. 1645. from Mr. Robert Hoopers Copy.
Coins, Weights, and Measures in Goa.
Coins. 1 Cruzadoe is 12 Serafins 1 Serafin. 2 s. 6 d. Engl. or 5 Tangos, 6
Tang. 1 Patacoon. 1 Tangoe. 5 Unitens. 1 Unite. 15 Buzurocks. 1 Page 17 16 or
15. Tango. 1 Rial 8. 10 or 11 Tangos rising and falling. 1 Santomaz. de figur.
16 Tangoes. 1 Santomaz de cruce 15 Tangoes. Weights. 1 Quintall. 128 Ratas. 133
pounds English. 1 Rove is 32 Ratas 1 Rata. 16. Ounces. 1 Candee. 20 Maund. 500
pound neat Engl. 1 Maund. 24 Ratas. 1 Mark. Ounces 8. divided into 1/16 etc. 1
8 Ryals. weight makes a Mark. 100. Ratas is nearest hand. 102. pounds English.

Coins, etc. in Cannanore.
Measures. 1 Covad. Yard English. Weights. 1 Candee. 20. Maunds. 1 Maund. 24
Ratas. 1 Cannada nearest 3 wine Pints English.

Batticalla.
Coins. 1 Pagodie Tipkie is 15 Fnams in Gold. 15 Fanams. or 8 shill. Eng. 1
Fanam. 30 Tare. 1 Tare 4 Cashes being a small Copper piece. 1 Ryal 8. about 9
Fanams. 1. Santomes. 14 Fanams and 24 Tare. Weights. 1 Candee 20 Maund. 500 l.
English or thereabouts. 1 Maund. 40 Sear about 25 l. English. Measures. 1 Covad
from the elbow to the end of the little finger.

Carwarr.
Coins. 1 Pagodie Tipkie 14 Fanams. or 1 Ryals of 8. or 7s. 6 d. English. 1
Fanam. 45 Cashes. Weights. 1 Candee. 20 Maunds. or about 500 l. neat Engl. 1
Maund. 40 Sear. Measures. 1. Covad yard English.

Rajapore, Lickmidas and Samgee. December. 1644.
Coins. 12. Massa. makes 1 Tola. 24 Tola 1 Sear, being about 10 Ounces Troy,
or 11 haverdupois. Raiapore. 1 SearSil. val. 1 page Tipkie. or 8 Larees. or 1
page great at 9 Larees Rajapore per piece. 1 Sear Sil. val. page Tipkie. or 9
Larees. or 1 page great at 10 Larees, Sattole per piece. 13 Pice makes 1 Laree
Rajapore. 12 Pice 1 Sattole Laree.

Memorandum,
That by reason of the disappointment caused through the spoiling of the
Voyages of Mr. Courten 's Ships: The Factors were forced to borrow money in
Acheen at 10 l. per cent. a Month, which is the usual rate of moneys in those
parts, and for want of supplies their Credit daily impaired, until at last the
whole Trade and Factories were overthrown.

The Attestation of Mr. John Darrell Merchant, concerning Mr. Courten 's
Factors and Factories in the East Indies and parts adjacent, in the year 1644.
deposed in the Court of the Admiralty, in the fifteenth year of the Reign of
King CHARLES the Second. Anno Dom. 1662.
I Underwritten John Darrell of the Parish of St. Giles Cripplegate, London,
Merchant, do Testify and declare upon my corporal Oath, that according to
Articles and Covenants with William Courten late of London Merchant, I set
Sail from the Downs for the East Indies, in the Month of April 1644. in the
Fraighted Ship Loyalty, (with Cap. John Durson Commander) in the Employment of
the said William Courten and Company; and in September following, I arrived in
the said Ship at Jettapore in India, and going up to Rajapore, acquainted Mr.
Courten's chief Agent (Mr. John Farren) therewith, who by his Letter (contrary
to Expectation) certified us of the sad and distressed condition of Mr.
Courten's Factors and Factories, by reason of diverse and several Losses and
spoils of their Ships and Voyages, trading to and again for China and parts
adjacent; and that since the loss of the Ships Dragon and Katharine, the Dutch
East India Company had violently taken the Bona Esperanza, and seized the
Merchandise and Ships provisions of the Henry Bonadventure, and assailed Capt.
Blackman Commander of the Ship called the Great William, who very narrowly
escaped firing or sinking in the Straights of Mallacca, as they themselves and
diverse others very credibly reported in India to me this Deponent,

Whereby I do further declare and assert, that all supplies were wholly
prevented (and the said Factors wanting employment) their several remains of
Goods and Merchandise were consumed, great Debts contracted, and the Factories,
places of Trade, Customs, and Plantations of Dabull, Jettapore, Goa, Cocheen,
Coulan, Batticalla, and Allepore, along the Seacoast of India and Mallabar,
with Vizipore, Rabagg, Harripore and Rajapore, up-land, also Acheen upon
Sumatra in the Straights of Malacca, and Bellasore in the bottom of the Bay of
Bengala, together with China Trade, and Madagascar plantation, all undertaken
and settled by virtue of Letters Patents under the great Seal of England,
granted to Sir Will. Courten, and others upon good foundations of reason and
policy, yet by providence were suffered to be most wickedly destroyed to the
ruin of Mr. Courten and his Family, and the inestimable Loss of the whole
Kingdom.

And I do further declare, that in the year 1645. I came thence for England
again in the Ship Thomas and John, and Brought home the Books of Accounts
sealed up, and delivered them to Mr. Courten and his Lady, with the sad tidings
and relations aforesaid.

John Darrell.
Juratus Johannes Darrell 19o. die mensis Martii 1662. juxta super veritate
premissorum coram venerabili viro domino Gulielmo Mericke Legum Doctori and
Milite Surrogato venerabilis viri Johannis Exton Legum Doctoris Supremae Curiae
Admiralitatis Angliae locum Tenentis, Judicis sive Presidentis.

Testibus,

Samuel How Not. Publ. May. Cottle Not. Publ.
Will. Mericke.



(...) Sententiae and Judicium JURISCONSULTORUM BATAVORUM In JURE CIVILI
exparte Belgicae Societatis Indiae-Orientalis. Versae ex Lingua Belgica.
VIsa a nobis infra scriptis, copia cujusdam Contractus in Linguam Belgicam
versi 19 Decembris Anno 1642. inter Gulielmum Courten Armigerum Londinensem, ab
una, Dom. Edvardum Littleton Baronettum ab altera, and Dom. Paulum Pindar
Londinensem a tertia part initi, ut and impressa copia instrumenti
procuratorii 27 Octobris 1645. a praedicto Courten ad Jacobum Pergens,
concessi, copia quoque literarum a Parliamenti Superiori Camera Londini 20
Martii 1645/6 ad Residentem Strickland in favorem praedicti Courten, datarum;
similiter duabus impressis copiis Epistolarum a Regia sua Majestate Angliae,
tam ad Dominos Ordines Generales, quam ad Residentem suum in favorem negotiorum
praedicti Courten 9 Octobris 1647. Scriptarum; Item impressis copiis duorum
Instrumentorum transportationis, sive translationis, and procurationis, sive
mandati, quorum unum praedicto Courten 10 Dec. 1647. Land. and alterum vigesimo
secundo Februarii 1648. hic Hagae Comitis in usum dicti Pergens concessum erat;
porro copia cujusdam Insinuationis Dominis Directoribus Societatis Indiae
Orientalis Amstelodami 25 Maii 1648. per Jonam Abeels Mandatarium, and
procuratorem dicti Pindar, facta, ut and Arresti ejusdam primo Octobris 1648.
ab ipsomet super Societate ibimet loci fieri facti, uti and certificationis a
Consulibus and Rectoribus dictae Civitatis 7 Augusti 1654. datae cum insertione
excerpta ex Registro causarum Judicialium ibi loci, in quo dictum Arrestum 13
Novembris 1648. validum declaratur; sicut etiam copia instrumenti renovationis
dicti arresti data 2 Novembris 1649. ut and protestatione, 11 subsequenti and
diversis Excerptis ex Registro causarum Judicialium dictae Civitatis sub datis
respectivis ultimo Maii, 21 Junii, 13 Septembris, and 8 Novembris, 1650, and 14
Febr. 1651. continentibus Petitionem a dicto Abeels, nomine quo supra, contra
Dominos Directores Camerae praedictae, institutam, Decreto Scabinorum, in quo
ista causa salvo Jure Judicii in statu tenetur; praeterea excerpto ex eodem
Registro sub dato 13 Septembris 1650, continente Petitionem in casu
Indempnitatis contra Jacobum Pergens, and Cautionarium ejus a Dominis
Directoribus Institutam: Praeterea duobus excerptis ex Indice aut Receptorio
postulatorum, ex part Mercatorum aliorumque Anglorum contra Populos Foederati
Belgii virtute trigesimi Articuli pacis coram Commissariis hinc inde nominatis
continente primo Petitionem Gulielmi Toomes executoris testamenti dicti Pindar,
quoad navem dictam de Bonne Esperance ad summam 72546. and secundo Petitionem
dicti Courten, ad summam 60000 and Moultonii and aliorum propritariorum dictae
Navis ad summam 10000 librarum Sterlingarum; ut and Copia literarum a Regia sua
Majestate Angliae 21 Martii 1661/2 ad Dominos Ordines Generales datarum, ut and
Memoriali a Domino Residente Downing 20 Aprilis dictis Dominis Ordinibus
Generalibus tradito, ut and responso dictorum Dominorum Ordinum Generalium ad
idem dato; ut and expressis praetentionibus contra Societatem Indiae Orientalis
nomine and ex part praedicti Courten, and aliorum quorum interest, ratione
damni in Indiis Orientalibus passi, motis; ut and impresso altero memoratorum
Dominorum Ordinum Generalium ad Memoriale Equitis Downingii dicto die Sancito
and ultimo impresso responso vulgo Reply 13. Julii, and noviori memoriali primo
Septembris praeterito, contra illud a dicto Domino Downing exhibito, omnibus
Spectantibus ad naves dictas Bona Esperanza and Henry BonaAdventure, a dicto
Courten in Indias Orientales instructas; Quarum prima est Fisco addicta; and
Bona alterius postquam ad littus Insulae Mauritii pulsa esset tunc per
Ministros Societatis salvata sunt, and duobus questionibus ex inde propositis,
viz.

An Societas non obstante dicto contractu 19 December. 1642. Insinuationibus,
protestationibus, and Arrestis, cum dicto Courten, aut ejus Mandatario Pergens
decimo octavo Septembris 1649. potuerit valide transigere.

Secundo, Number dictus Pindar aut nunc ejus Administrator non teneatur respectu
societatis in dictam Conventionem cum Jacobo Pergens Mandatario Courtenii,
initam acquiescere.

Judicatur, salvo meliori Judicio, de dictis questionibus, Dominis Directoribus
dictae societatis liberum fuisse non obstante insinuatione and protestatione
vigesimo Maii; ut and Arresto primo Octobris ejusdem Anni supra Memorati, cum
dicto Courten, aut ejus procuratore 18 September. 1649. firmiter transigere.

Et consequenter dictum Pindar aut jam ejus Administratorem teneri in dictam
Conventionem cum Pergens initam, respectu Societatis Acquiescere; Idque has ob
rations, quod, etiamsi dictus contractus decimo nono Decembris 1642. dicto
Pindar titulo Emptionis and translationis videatur dare proprietatem dictarum
Navium, and Mercium in iisdem contentarum cum omnibus annexis, equidem non
comperietur, realem fieri traditionem, and possessionem earundem, a Courten and
Littleton, aliquo modo fuisse derelictam: Verum e contra quidem Express
stipulatur Courten and Littleton constituturam, ea condition ut Paulo Pindar
ex redeunte onere Navis dictae Bonne Esperance solvant summam trium millium,
and ex dicto onere Navis dictae Bonadventure 2500 librarum Anglicarum, dimidium
unum intra unum, and alterum dimidium intra duos menses, post reditum,
appulsum, and Exonerationem dictarum Navium Londini, aut alibi; and
solutionibus it a peractis dicto Littleton tunc liberum and licitum fore omnes
caeteros effectus dictarum Navium tenendi, habendi, and fruendi in sua
possessione in eam intentionem, quae magis exquisite in contractu exprimitur;
sicut and inter dictas parts (non obstante quod dictas Naves dicto Pindar
concesserint negotiati sint and vendiderint) express conventum and declaratum
est ipsum Pindar nullo modo laturum aut passurum aliquod damnum aut jacturam
quae per Naufragium aut alio modo posset emergere; sed omnia ista damna and
jacturae si quaedam evenerint (uti jam contigit) a praedicto Courten solo
ferrentur, and sustinerentur.

Nec conceditur Paulo Pindar ut Merces redeuntes aut onustas ipse acceptet aut
vendat quo sibi ipsi in conversione debiti sui solvat antequam dicti termini
solutionis expirati essent, and dicti Courten and Littleton dictas respectivas
summas ipsi Pindar non satisfecissent, sicut and eo casu tenetur ejus rei
rationem, proventus and reliqua Littletonio reddere; uti etiam, casu Naufragij,
aut hujusmodi alias infortunij nummorum assecuratorum, quorum Instrumenti, aut
Polici ipsi quoque titulo praetenso Emptionis plus essent assecurati quam
Pindar debebantur. Quo magis ex dicto contractu liquet, ipsas Obligationes and
alias Certiorationes (inter eas quoque cautiones Bonnellij in contractu A. L.
Intutam D. de praescript. verb. L. si uno impune D locati and L. si olci cum
Gloss. Cod. ibid Bald. in L. cum dotem in 2. Cod. de Jure dot. A. Mant. de
tacit et ambig. convent. lib. 2. tit. 2.
memoratas, dicti debiti sub Pindaro non obstante praetensa emptione, and
translatione dictarum Navium, bonorum contentorum, redituum and chartarum,
dictarum policen) mansisse, and ab ipso incassas esse detentas, ex eo quod ille
Pindar circa finem dicti contractus in casu plenae solutionis dicti debiti
promittit se easdem Obligationes and Certiorationes Courtenio and Littletonio
traditurum.

Ex quibus omnibus constat quod quamvis verba dicti contractus, dictent,
Courtenium and Littletonium Pindaro, dictas naves, merces, reditus, chartas
assecuratitias, etc. Pindaro concessisse, negotiatos esse and vendidisse,
reipsa equidem dicto contractu nihil aliud tractatum aut stipulatum esse, quam
dicto Pindaro pro magno suo credito securitatem, forma enim. and effectus
contractus magis inspicitur quam nominis impositio. A. vid. etiam Bald. B. ex
illo textu colligit argumentum a natura actus, nam cui convenit natura actus,
ei convenit ejus species, etenim de natura emptionis and venditionis est ut
perfecto contractu ad emptorem transeat periculum, and in cognoscendo speciem
alicujus contractus magis attendi debere Pacta in eo apposita, quam nuda verba,
docet, and pluribus exemplis illustrat post alios Mantica A.

Cum jam propriet as possessio and Administratio dictarum navium bonorum and
mercium penes illum manserit, ad quem antea pertinebant and per consequentiam
solus Courtenus demnum in casu Naufragij aut alij emergentis infortunij
sustinere debebat, aequum erat eo casu id ipsi committere, ut liberum esset
tractandi cum iis quos opinaretur sibi passum damnum reparare esse obligatos;
and quoniam per suum Mandatarium cum dictae societate utilioribus conditionibus
tractavit quam si actionem contra Societatem in usum assecurantium repudiasset,
and nummos assecuratitios ad summam 6600 librarum Anglicarum recepisset, aut
per Pindarum recipi sivisset, eam ob causam Administrator Pindari nullo cum
fundamento pactum cum Societate initum quaestioni exponere potest, speciatim
haud respectu Societatis quia Domini Directores neminem, ut proprietarium
dictarum Navium, aut one ris earundem agnoverunt, aut agnoscere potuerunt, quam
illum qui pro eo public agnoscebatur, and valde seriosis literis tam a
superiori Parliamenti Camera quam Rege Angliae sub dato 20 Martij 1641/6 and 9
Octobris 1647. recommendabatur, and cum cujus Mandatorio modo, aliquod tempus
ante primam insinuationem a Jona Abeels qualitate qua 25 Maij factam, in
transactione erant.

1. Sicut etiam Administrator tanto minus fundamenti habet pactum quaestioni
exponendi primo quod dictus Abeels dicta insinuatione non protestavit contra
pactum ineundum cum Courten, aut ejus Mandatario, sed solum contra
annumerationem nummorum cuidam alij quam suo Magistro D. Paulo Pindar praedicto
faciendam.

Secundo Quod dictus Abeels primo Octobris in sequenti nomine quo supra,
arrestari aut detineri curavit sub dictis Dominis Directoribus, omnia illa quae
illi (haec sunt verba dicti Instrumenti arresti) liquidatione aut conventione
cum dicto Courten ineunda ratione dictarum duarum Navium ipsi solvere deberent.
Quod Instrumentum cum eo modo quoque 13 Novembris 1648. in Registro causarum
Judicialium annotatum fuisset, arrestum a Scabinis validum declaratum fuit.

3. Quia 2o. Novembris 1649. nomine dicti Pindar, utpote habens actionem and
transportationem a dicto Courten ineunda aut (quod not andum) inita de dictis
navibus and contentis bonis ipsi Courten solvere deberent.

Quarto quiae secunda insinuatione and protestatione undecimi Novembris 1649.
and per consequentiam post transactionem cum Pergens factam iterum inheret
prioribus insinuationibus and arrestis a se dicta qualitate fact^s. Quae
instrumenta utpote legitima, Dominus Downing in memoriali suo dictis Dominis
ordinibus Generalibus primo Septembris praeteriti exhibito, appellat.

Quinto (quod magis est and plaene omnem excludit contradictionem) quia dictus
Abeeles in Iudicio 20. Maii Petitionem instituens contra dictos Dominos
Directores rursus dicta qualitate Mandatarij Pauli Pindar, ut actionem and
translationem a dictis Courten and Littleton habentis conclusit ad agnoscendum
aut negandum, at minime bona fide dictum pactum decimi noni Decembris 1642. and
per consequentiam ut vocati (Gedens) Desendants.
condemnarentur, secundum dictas iusinuationes and arresta, solvere sibi petit
supra dicta qualitate, and provisionaliter consignare summam 85000 florenorum,
quam vocati annuerant and in se ut solverentur ceperant pro damno and
pretensionibus quae Gulielmus Courten cum suis praetendebant ratione dictarum
Navium, cum usura dictae summae a die conventionis, ad realem solutionem, and
ut latius ex dicto instrumento videre est. Quae causa cum dictae die in
Statutis and ab ipso rursus dicta qualitate decimo Tertio Septembris 1650. in
Iudicio oblata esset, and Domini Directores eo tempora contra dictum Jacobum
Pergens Petitionem in casu indemnitat is instituissent and eadem causa decimo
quarto Feb. 1651. ut ante it erum oblata, and in statu posita, uti ex dictis
instrumentis liquet, omnia praedicta non reputari possunt, quam iterativae
promulgationes dicti pacti ex part Pindari. Et quoniam Administrator bonorum
ipsius ultima conventione inter Regem Angliae, and has Provincias inita in
integrum restituitur quo ipso liberum sit litem motam (quod est, and solummodo
intelligi potest, de praedicta lite coram Iudicio Civitatis Amstelodamensis a
Jona Abeels nomine Pindari, contra societatem intentata, prosequi) nullas ea
propter rations comperimus quare aut quomodo Administrator transactionem aut
conventionem cum Pergens, ut procuratore Courtenii, initam, jam contra
Societatem, questioni exponere aut in disputationem trahere posset.

Quod porro dictus Courten in plena possessione dictarum Navium and bonorum in
iisdem onustorum manserit, and per consequentiam translatio proprietatis,
juris, and actionis in dictas naves nihil aliud fuerit quam pignus and
assecuratio pro dicto Pindar, exinde quoque apparet, quod in catalogo
praetensionum quem presents praetendentes imprimi curarunt page 2. ponitur,
Courtenium per amicos suos and correspondentes societatis BelgicaeIndicae,
rogasse ut eadem vellet mandare Gubernatori Insulae dictae Mauritii, ut
redderet bona servata, and commeatum nauticum e praedicta nave Bonaventura; ut
ex eo, quod ibi porro dicitur, aliam navem Bataviam dictam and ibi damno dicti
Courtenii fisco addictam fuisse, and page 3. pro computatione Gulielmi Courten
in nave Bonne Esperance onustam fuisse in Mercibus Judicis, uti supra
expressis, summam 5000 librarum Anglicarum. Et quoniam tempore initae
conventionis supra memoratae, naves jamdudum discesserant and in Indiis erant;
ea de re sustinere quoque haud potest possessionem talium mercium per dictum
contractum a Courteno in Pindarum transiisse; quin hoc dicto, quod deberet
periculum and damnum quod inde emersit oneri Pindari verti, cum res unaquaeque
suo Domino pereat; Quod jam contra verba contractus certaret, quin uti
praedictum est, omnia damna and jacturae oneri solius Courteni redundare
debebant, ea de re juxta dictam regulam quoque Dominium mansisse intelligi
debet, and solummodo contractum pignorantium iniisse, ut liquide aparet ex
exordio dicti contractus, ubi dicitur Pindarum cum cautione Bonnellii non esse
contentum, and Courtenum and Littleton valde inclinare, ipsi talem ulteriorem
securitatem in solutionem Crediti dandi quam fas and necesse esset; and quamvis
ibi dicunt ipsi concedant negotientur and vendant naves, cum suo onere and
redeuntibus bonis, quia equidem (uti in facto informamur) naves non ad Courten
aut Iattleton pertinebant and quod onustae merces imo ipsae Chartae
assecuratitiae multo magis valerent, quam Creditum Pindari assurgebat quod
etiam redeuntes merces eo tempore aestimari non potenant, and quod Courten and
Littleton ex proventuille duos menses post appulsum and exonerationarum navium
in se recipiebant A. and inter alios ex Skeneo in Reg. Majest. Scot. lib. 2.
cap. 18. 85. si donationem ipsam Seisina fuerit subsecuta perpetuo res manebit
illi, Cui facta fuit donatio, and heredibus suis, si vero nulla fuerit Seisina
subsecuta ex tali donatione nihil efficaciter pe^i potest, quia ut intelligitur
secundum Regni consuetudinem potior est nuda promissio quam aliqua mera
donatio, and in not. ibid. in verb. si vera autem donatio terrae vel
hereditatis, sine Seisina, and possessione nihil operatur, quia traditione
dominium acquiritur, and vulgo acceptum est, Chartam sine Seisina nihil juris
tribuere, quia Charta nihil aliud est quam nuda promissio cum scil. quis
promittit se daturum, hujusmodi promissio nullam inducit obligationem, vulgo
enim dicitur, nulla Seisina, nulla terra; and lib. 2. cap. 33. verse. 14. Ille
praefertar qui Seisinam obtinet, quia melior est conditio possidentis and lib.
3. cap. 10. v. 2. perficitur emptio and venditio cum effectu, ex quo depretio
inter contrabentes convenit, ita tamen quod secuta fuerit rei venditae vel
emptae traditio and eod. lib. 3. cap. 3. ver. 1. cum autem mobile vadium
dicitur pignus, quia res quae pignori datur cum sit mobilis, pugno sive manu
traditur, nam contrahitur pignus cum ejus Seisina and possessio datur
creditori, ut hic dicitur, quia rei interventus est necessarius, sine quo non
contrahitur obligatio pignoris, quae tum de mum oritur, cum res est tradita,
eandem sententiam late confirmat Thomas C^ugier in tract de Jur. Angl. lib. 2.
tit. 1. v. 4. 5. in fine, sine Seisina data liberum tentmentum. Feoflamento,
dono vel locatione non transsertur and tit. 8. v. 19. ut donatio suis numeris
absolula sit, traditione vel quasi confirmari debet, traditio autem vel Seisina
quot modis fiat alibi diximus and lib. 3. tit. 24. v. 3. in emptione and
venditione rei requiri traditionem rei quia traditionibus and usu captionibus
dominia rerum transseruntur.
obligationes Pindaro suo onere plen^ redimendi and quod easdem retinebat, ut
tunc cassat as aut delatas traderet; quod ille interea non tenebatur in damno,
sed quod damnum and commodum pro solo Courten essent. Quod etiam comercium in
India Orientali nomine solius Courteni agebatur and nomen Pindari ut
proprietarii navium and bonorum (sicut in facto informamur) nunquam in eo notum
fuit; certo certius est Pindarum dicto contractu non potuisse jus proprietatis
in naves and bona in questione acquirere, ea propter quod absurdum esset quod
Pindar per dictum contractum acquisivisset jus reale ad vindicationem navium
and bonorum quae tempore contractus, in Indiis, and antequam ejus notitia in
Insulam, dictam Mauritius, aut Goa esse posset, respective capta and in Littus
pulsa sunt, nam quamvis (cui non adhibetur fides sed quidem ejus contrarium ex
Statutis and famosis Doctoribus and Juris peritis Anglicis urgente necessitate
ostendi potest A) talis consuetudo in Anglia esset quod ibi simplices
translationes bonorum mobilium sine traditione reale jus in eadem darent, illud
equidem intelligi non posset de navibus and bonis extra Angliam quae ab emptore
aut ejus agente non essent acceptata, sed voluntate and consensu sub primo
proprietario

(...) THE CONTENTS.
ABstract of the Kings Letters Patents granted to Sir William Courten and
Company, Anno 1635. fol. 1

Certain Evidences and Relations concerning the loss of the Ships Dragon, and
Katharine. 98

Mr. William Courten's Expedition to the East Indies with seven Ships 1641. 3

Abstract of an Indenture or Bill of Sale of the seven Ships to Sir Edw.
Littleton for Counter-security and payment of Debts 1642. 4

Abstract of a Tripartite Indenture between William Courten, Sir Edw.
Littleton, and Sir Paul Pindar for security and payment of 14800. l. 1642. 5

A Breviate of the Depositions taken in the Admiralty concerning the Henry
Bonadventure. 96

A Breviate of the Depositions taken in the Admiralty concerning the Bona
Esperanza. 91

Agreement between the Mariners and Adrian vander Stell Governor of Mauritius,
concerning the Henry Bonadventure Anno 1643. 94

The Petition and proceedings of William Tombs before the Lords and Commons
for the Admiralty concerning the Ship Planter An. 1645. 102

Abstracts of Procuration and Transports from Mr. Courten to Jacob Pergens,
Anno 1645. 1647. and 1648. 7

Letters from King Charles the First in Latin and English to the States
General and Sir William Boswell on behaelf of Mr. Courten and James Pergens
1647. 8

Abstract of Sir P. Pindar's Procuration to Jonas Abeeles of Amsterdam 1647. 10

Jonas Abeeles Insinuation to the East India Company of Holland, and Arrest
made in 1648. ibid.

Authentic Copy of the Insinuation and Arrest in Dutch. 97

Agreement made between the East India Company, and Mr. Jacob Pergens, 1649. 12

Proceedings of Jonas Abeeles against the East India Company before the
Escheevens or Magistrates of Amsterdam. 14

Ten Select Articles of the Treaty between O. Cromwell and the States General.
85

Abstract of the proceedings of William Tombs Executor of Sir Paul Pindar,
before the English and Dutch Commissioners Anno 1654. 15

The Petition of Henry Powell on behalf of himself and the general Creditors of
Mr. Courten to the English and Dutch Commissioners Anno 1654. 89

The Petition of Tho. Newman Merchant and the Mariners concerning the Bona
Esperanza to the English and Dutch Commissioners Anno 1654. 90

An Epistle Dedicatory to Sir George Downing Knight, Envoy Extraordinary of his
most sacred Majesty of Great Britain, To the States General of the United
Netherlands. 16

The Petition of Sir John Ayton, George Carew, and Charles Whitaker to the
Kings most excellent Majesty. Feb. 1661. 17

An Account of the Loss and Damages of the Henry Bonadventure and Bona
Esperanza annexed to the Petition. 18

Lettre Aux Hauts et Puissans Seigneurs les Estates Generaux Des Provinces
Unies. 19

The Translation of the Kings Letter out of the French Original into English.
20

The Kings Letter to Sir George Downing Knight Envoy, etc. ibid.

Sir George Downing's first Memorial given unto the States General concerning
the Interessed in the two ships Henry Bonadventure and Bona Esperanza. 21

Sir George Downing's second Memorial to the States General concerning the
Henry Bonadventure and Bona Esperanza. 22

Mr. Carew's Insinuation to the Directors of the East India Company of the
Netherlands at Amsterdam. ibid.

Extract from the Register of Resolutions of the States General May 10. 1662.
(translated into English.) 73

Mr. Carew's Letter to the Commissioned Bewinthebbers of the East India Company
at the Hague. 23

An Order of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council upon the Petition of
Sir John Ayton, etc. 24

Lettre Au Roy de la Grand Bretagne a l'Estates Generaux des Provinces Unies. 29

A Translation of the States Generals Letter to the King of Great Britain into
English out of the French Original. 27

Antwoort van de Heeren Staten Generael, der Uereenighde Nederlantsche
Provincien op de Memory door den Ridder George Downing extraordinaris Envoye
van syne Majestyt van Groot-Britannien, etc. aen haer Ho: Mo: overgegeven den20
April, 1662. 29

Replique du Chevalier George Downing Envoye Extraordinaire de Sa Majeste de la
Grand Bretagne, etc. Sur la Response des Estats Generaux des Provinces Unies,
sur son Memoire du 20 Avril 1662. 33

The Reply of Sir George Downing Envoy Extraordinary, etc. in English. The
Answer of the States General of the United Provinces to his Memorial of the
20 th. April 1662. 38

A Memorandum of the particulars of Docquets, Deeds, Writings, and Papers
mutually delivered by the States General and Sir George Downing upon Answer
and Reply. 45

Mr. Carew's Letter to the Commissioners appointed by the King to treat with
the Dutch Ambassadors at London. 46

Sir George Downing's Memorial to the States General concerning the Bona
Esperanza, Bona Adventura, Experience, Daniell, Brazell Frigott, Leopard, and
Saint John Baptist. 48

The States Answer to the last Memorial. 49

The second Reply of Sir George Downing to the States Answer. 50

Articuli Foederis and Amicitiae inter Carolum II. Magnae Britanniae, etc.
Regem, and Ordines Generales Foederati Belgii. 55

Extraordinaer Schryvens van de Nederlandtsche Ambass: in Engelandt, meldende
op wat maniere noch eyndelick de Tractaten, met den Koninck geslooten sijn. 63

A Translation of the Dutch Ambassadors Letter out of the Original into
English. 63

A Memorial of Sir George Downing delivered to the States in English upon the
return of the Dutch Ambassadors into Holland. 66

The same Memorial rendered in French. 67

Eght Objections offered by the Dutch in a Conference between Sir George
Downing, and the Pentionatis de Wit against the English interessed, and their
Claim. 68

Answers to the eight Objections in a Conference held at Sir Geo. Downing's. 69

Declaration and Certificate in Dutch upon the Statutes made concerning
Bankrupts. 95

The Opinions and Resolutions of Sir John Glynn, Sir John Maynard, Sir Edward
Turnor, Ben. Hoskyns and Sam. Baldwyn, upon the Case between the Assigns of
William Courten, and the East India Company of the Netherlands. 129

Consulta and Sententiae Gualteri Walkeri Militis, Gulielmi Turnori, Thom.
Extoni, Timoth. Baldwini, and Davidis Budd, Doctorum and Professorum in Juri
Civili super Casu inter assignat. Guliel. Courten and Societat. Oriental.
Holland, etc. 119

Sententiae and Statutum Johannis Glynni, and Johannis Maynardi Militum,
Edvardi Turnori Milis, Bennedicti Hoskensij and Samuelis Baldwini Armigeri, and
Juris-consulti data superlite inter assignatos Gulielmi Courteni, and India
Orientalis Societatem Batavam. 127

A Deposition of Mr. Thomas Newman Merchant, taken before a Master in Chancery
concerning the Damages of Bona Esperanza 1662. 114

A Deposition of Mr. John Darrell Merchant, taken before a Master of Chancery,
concerning the Portugalls Goods and Agreement, etc.

An Epistle Dedicatory to the Millitary Men, Merchants and others of the
English Nation inhabiting within the United Netherlands. 71

A Letter from the States General written in French to the King, concerning
the Holland Ships detained upon the Account of the Knights of Malta. 75

A Translation of the French Letter into English. 76

A Letter from the States General sent to the King concerning the Ship
Charles. 77

A Translation of the same Letter into English from the Original. 78

Sir Geor. Downing's Reply to the States General concerning the Ship Charles. 80

Advertisement concerning the said Ship Charles, etc. 84

One and twenty select Articles out of the Treaty of Peace between the Crowns
of France and Spain concluded in 1649. and Translated into English from the
Original. 108

Twelve select Articles of Peace and mutual Commerce between Henry the 7. King
of England, and Phillip Archduke of Austria and Duke of Burgundy, concluded
and signed at London the 24. of Febr. 1495. 105

The particulars of the Impost and Excise in the Low Countries continued for
the public Charge ever since the Union. 103

A Catalogue of their names in the East India Company of England, who are
capable of being chosen Committees for the year 1662. 115

Annotations upon both the East India Companies of England and Holland. 118

Mr. Courten's Instructions to his President and Factors in Carwarr, and
several parts of India and parts adjacent. 130

An Attestation of Mr. John Darrell concerning Mr. Courten's Factors and
Factories in the East Indies and parts adjacent. 137

Reasons and Arguments for speedy deciding of Differences (arising by
Depredations and Spoils) by Conferences of States. 139

Prologue to a private Conference at Amsterdam. 141

Conferences at Amsterdam between the Interessed Requirors and the adverse
Requirees, and others. 143

Epilogue.

FINIS.
Several Considerations offered to the High Court of Parliament, both for the
Restoration and Increase of Trade. fol. 1

Sir William Courten's Propriety and Claim to the Island of Barbados, or An
Appeal to the King against Force and Oppression. 17

Postscript:


