A RETROSPECT INTO THE KINGS CERTAIN REVENUE ANNEXED TO THE CROWN, Under the
SURVEY of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer: WITH THE Proceedings upon two
several Petitions Presented to his MAJESTY, Concerning the Chauntry Rents, etc.
And the First Fruits, and Tenths of the CLERGY.

AND Several Considerations Offered to the High Court of Parliament, showing
how all the Kings Rents above twenty Shillings a year may be more speedily
brought into His MAJESTY'S Coffers without Charge, according to the Ancient
Course of Exchequer, and the Laws of ENGLAND.

WITH Some Reasons, and Arguments, given for the due payment of Tithes, Annexed
Inseparably to the Office of the Ministry; With further Persuasions to the
Bishops, and the Rest of the Clergy, to render the just Proportion (of their
Livings and Spiritual Promotions according to the improved Value) due to the
King as Supreme Pastor, and Governor of the Church.

AND Diverse Observations concerning the Rights, and other Revenues of the
CROWN, Demonstrating the several Conditions, and Qualities of those men that
Diminish the KINGS Tributes.

Quisquis Deum reveretur, Regem honorat, diligitque proximum, is Deo quae Dei
sunt, Caesari quae Caesaris, denique revera suum cuique tribuit.

By George Carew of Grayes Inn, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1661.

TO THE Right Honorable, EDWARD Lord HYDE, Baron of Henden, Lord Chancellor
of England; THOMAS Earl of Southampton, Lord High Treasurer of England; And the
Rest of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable,
I Observe in the Act of Free and General Pardon, passed at the Parliament,
begun at Westminster the 25 day of April, in the 12th year of the Reign of our
most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second; That in the very next
Clause of Exception (after Offenses for Conjurarations, Witchcrafts and
Charms) are Rancked Accomptants, Receivers, and Collectors, that detained the
public money of the Nation in their hands: The Ancient Genious of our
Forefathers, in Framing the Court of Exchequer, with that Policy and Art; was
such, That all parts of the World admired that Court, for the Excellency and
Invention of it; wherein was observed a Method, that although Land and Money,
there was ever in plenty, Ebbing and Flowing. Yet the Prodigal, Coveteous, and
Ambitious, Minister, Receiver, or Accomptant, with all his Sleights and
Stratagems, could not deceive the King without Discovery. The Course of that
Court being altered (upon the Dissolution of Abbeys) there followed great
Losses to the Crown, The King has been paid most of his small Rents with Pen
and Ink and Dog-Latine since the Course of the Excheq. has been Altered, and
the Subject often vexed and grieved without cause as in Baron Trevers time, a
Tenant in Yorkshire was put to 3l. charge by Tho. Westly a Messenger for 4d.
Rent, Charged upon his Estate without his knowledge; Many of the like cases
have happened by false returns and Allowances, of Supers, etc.
and many Inconveniences and Grievances to the People: In the Imperial
Chambers abroad, The public Books of Revenues lies open to the view of all
people, that any kind of Fraud may be discovered, or better advantages found
out for the Imperial Estate: My Lords, I am confident your own Honors binds
you, beyond all other Obligations in the world, to Promote those things that
may be for the Preservation and Improvement of the Kings Prerogatives, Honors,
and Revenues, Annexed to his Crown: wherein truly consists the Happiness and
Glory of the whole Kingdom: There be two Contradictions used amongst men,
easily Reconciled by your Lordships: Summa ratio est summum jus, and Summum
jus; summa injuria. In Extraordinary matters not properly relieveable in any
other Court; The Lords in Parliament have the Prerogative, (for their
Excellency, in Knowledge and Wisdom) to Determine such Cases by their own Power.

May it please your Lordships, I am Entrusted as an Executer to pay several
Portions, and Legacies, to Hospitals, Free-Scholes, and poor Children out of
money left in the hands of Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul Pinder, who parted
with it to the late King, upon his Letters Patents, and other Assignments, out
of the Revenue in the Exchequer, before the late War: Not doubting the Credit
of the great Seal of England, and payment of the Exchequer, I took upon me, the
Execution of the Trust, and paid some part of the Legacies out of my own
Estate: And notwithstanding I have used my endeavors with others, to get in
the said Debt, yet I am daily sued by the Legatees for not recovering the Money
charged upon the Revenue: wherefore I humbly conceive, that such Accomptants
and Receivers which Convert the Kings Revenue to their own Use, do not only
Wound the King in Chief, but the whole Nation in General; and those poor
Hospitals and Orphans in particular, that I am troubled for. All which I submit
to your Honors Considerations, and Subscribe my self,

April 20. 1661. Your Faithful Servant, THOMAS GOULD.

THE PREAMBLE.
IT was the Practice of former Ages, when they met in Parliaments, to examine
the Causes of the Kings Necessities, and to make those that were not Faithful
in their Offices to Relieve the King, as they did by Hugo de Burgo, and the
Accomptants of the Revenue in HENRY the thirds time. King JAMES and King
CHARLES the first (of ever Blessed Memory) were both Large-Hearted, and (as
Princes naturally are inclined very Bountiful. Q. ELIZABETH left a Plentiful
Revenue to the Crown of England: King JAMES, in Favor of the People, sold most
of the Lands in Fee-Farm; An Invention found out to prevent an Act of
Resumption. The Flowers of the Crown ever since have been gathered by those
that gave the King only the Stalks, which brought the King into many great
Debts, that stand Charged upon the Revenue left unsold. And it so happened, I
became Entitled to a Considerable part of the Money, and in Prosecution of the
said Debt, by Administering upon some Estate, I was Involved with a Corporation
of Creditors, that were likewise Concerned for diverse Sums of Money, which Sir
William Courten, and Sir Paul Pinder had lent to the King: This gave me
Occasion to look into the Revenue of the Crown, and to make several
Applications to Committees (in the Violent and Distempred times) for
satisfaction of the said Debts, Damages is 346000l. concerned in it, are sixty
four Persons of ^ons, many of them ^verished for want of
but I could have no other Terms offered, then Allowances as Debentures
toward purchasing Crown Lands, Bishops Lands, or Delinquents Lands, (so
called) which I utterly refused. Since his Majesty's Restoration, the
Creditors have been more earnest upon me; some crying out I should appeal to
the King, The Mirror of Justice: Others to the Hierarchy of the Church, and
persuade them to render that Part of the Revenue (due to the King) improved to
their hands with the Creditors money by those Men that obstructed the Payment
of the Kings Debts: Others to the Lords, that have a great Sense of the Kings
Honor, and the Regalia he lately parted withal: Others to the Commons that
hold the Purse-strings of the Nation, and have been pardoned great Arrears and
Accounts which should have satisfied the Creditors Demands. Being so divided in
their Judgments and Opinions, they brought me several Papers of perplexed
Notions concerning the Revenue of First Fruits, and Tenths of the Clergy,
belonging to the King for his Supreme pastoral Charge and Government of the
Church, with several Observations on that, and the rest of the Revenues;
showing how the King was made insolvent in those times. All which I have
according to my promise (avoiding Prolixity) put into some kind of Method,
under several Titles, describing the several Tempers of such Persons as are
guilty of defrauding the Crown: I have been true to my own Resolutions, and
dealt impartially with all Men, as the Creditors desired. I did also according
to their Request before, Apply my self to his Majesty at White Hall, where I
found many Petitioners, some craving Reward, others begging Relief for
Sufferings and Services done, both to his Majesty, and His Royal Father, (of
ever Glorious Memory) neither of them minding how the King should now support
himself in his Imperial Estate answerably to the Majesty of so great a Prince,
and the Honor of so great a Nation: I then cast about me to find out some
expedient whereby I might be rather Serviceable to the King, than Burdensome
or Grievous to the People, and yet satisfy my self. In order thereunto I
presented these Petitions following according to their several Dates: Whereupon
there have been some Proceedings, but nothing finally determined. All which
rest under the Consideration of his Majesty and his most Honorable Council in
Parliament. I have contracted all things into as narrow a compass as I could of
so much matter, not doubting, but that it may find Room amongst other Weighty
Affairs. I leave it therefore at the Parliament-Dore for them to do what in
Honor and Equity the Merits of the Cause require.

April 23. 1661.
Veritas non quaerit Angulos.
George Carew.

To the King's Most Excellent MAJESTY.
The Humble Petition of Walter Devereux, and George Carew, Esquires.
SHOWS,
THAT there are diverse Collections in your Majesty's Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales, that were formerly Granted to several Men, of mean Quallity,
and Condition, by Patents out of the Exchequer, during pleasure, to receive the
Chantry Rents, Pensions, Portions, and Foreign Rents, amounting formerly, to
Six Thousand Pounds yearly, or thereabouts, belonging to the Crown of England.
And that the said Collectours, were allowed the certain Fees or Sallaries,
which were annexed to those Collections, in the Times of the Abbots, and Friars.

That through the Neglect, Poverty, or other Dafault of the said Collectours,
and Accomptants; the Crown of England, has lost Two hundred thousand Pounds in
that Part of the Revenue, since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, which
stands charged in Super upon those Bailiffs, or Collectours, in the several
Auditors, and Receivers Accounts, to the great prejudice, and Dishonor of
your Majesty's Revenue, which may hereafter, be more faithfully discharged,
with advantage and conveniencie to your Majesty, and your Subjects.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, That your Majesty would be graciously
pleased, to Grant your Petitioners a Patent under the Great Seal, for their
Lives, to Collect the said Chantry Rents, Pensions, Portions, and Foreign
Rents, allowing them the said Fees of the several Collections; and your
Petitioners shall give good Assurance of their Fidelity, and Trust in your
Majesty's said Service. And your Petitioners shall pray, etc. Walter Devereux.
Geo. Carew.


His Majesty was graciously pleased afterward, to refer the Contents of the
Petition, to the Lord High Treasurer of England, who made another Reference, as
follows. viz. September 17. 1660.
I Desire the Lord Chief Baron, and the rest of the Barons of his Majesty's
Exchequer, and Master Surveyour General of his Lands, calling to them, the
Clerk of the Pipe, his Majesty's Auditors, and Receivers of his Revenue in the
several Counties, or whom else they please, to examine the Reason, why this
Part of his Majesty Revenue, mentioned in this Petition, is so ill Answered,
and so great Arrears upon it. And to Consider the best way to prevent it in the
future. And in Case the Proposition, of the Petitioners for reducing all into
one Hand, or Collection, may contribute thereunto, to Certify me there
Opinion. And to that end, I pray them to hear, what the Petitioners shall in
that kind Propose, and what Security the Petitioners will give to acertain
those Rents. And upon the whole Matter, to certify their Opinions what is best
to be done in Order to this Part of his Majesty's Revenue, and his Majesty's
Service therein.

THO. SOUTHAMPTON.

To the King's Most Excellent MAJESTY.
The Humble Petition of George Carew, Thomas Gould, and John Culpeper,
Esquires, on behalf of themselves, and the rest of the Creditours of Sir
William Courten, and Sir Paul Pinder, Knights, Deceased.
SHOWS,
THAT King CARLES the First, (of ever Blessed Memory) for the ordinary support
of himself in his Royal Estate at home, and for the necessary supply of his
Ambassadors abroad, borrowed several great Sums of Money of Sir William
Courten, and Sir Paul Pinder, and others, amounting to 150000. Pounds, and
upwards, which was taken up by the said Sir William, and Sir Paul, and others,
of several Men upon Bonds.

That many of those Persons are since deceased, By the last general Pardon, the
Clergy were forgiven 50000. pounds, which was due to the King upon Bonds, for
First Fruits and Tenths. The Layity, by the King's happy Restoration, were put
into possession of such Estates, that were their own inheritance. But the
Bishops, etc. into improved vacancies, that were under Consideration of the
Law, for many years together.
and have left their Widows, and Orphants, in a sad, and perishing Condition
for want of Bread. That for security and re-payment of the said Money (with
Interest) his late Majesty did for himself, His Heirs, and Successors, before
the year, 1640. by Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of England, and other
Assignments, upon the Lands and Revenues within the Snrvey of the Exchequer,
give Warrant, and Commandment, to the Lord High Treasurer, Chancellor,
Undertreasurer, Chamberlains, and Barons of the Exchequer for the time being,
to pay the said Debt. That there is yet, notwithstanding, resting due unpayed
of the said Debt, the Sum of 140000. Pounds, or thereabouts, as by the Books of
Issues remaining with Sir Robert Pie (Auditour of the Receipts) and the
Accounts stated (remaining with the Auditors of the Impressed) may plainly
appear. That the Money now belongs to your Petitioners, by Virtue of Letters of
Administration to them granted, in right of themselves, and other Creditours,
and the poor Orphans, and Widows aforesaid. That the Revenue of First Fruits,
and Tenths, is not duly answered by the Clergy into your Majesty's Exchequer,
according to Law, and the Rights of Proportion which belongs to the Crown of
England, there being great Improvements made of New-buildings, draining of
Fens, taking in of Sea-grounds, breaking up of Parks, and Chases, Increase of
Rents, and many other ways of advantage, and profits to the Clergy: which
ought to be accordingly considered to your Majesty, and paid in proportion into
your Exchequer; as a means to give satisfaction to your Petitioners most just
Demands.

The Premises considered; and for as much as your Petitioners may be partly
satisfied out of the improvement of First Fruits and Tenths, and your Majesty's
Revenue made treble as much, as has been formerly paid into your Treasury; The
Nation generally satisfied therewith, Religion, and Learning both advanced, by
considerable Augmentations, that may be further given to poor livings besides.

Your Petitioners therefore do humbly pray, that your Majesty would Grant them
a Patent of the First Fruits and Tenths, for the Term of one and thirty years,
at the yearly Rent of threescore thousand pounds, upon the Conditions, and
Proposals, as in the Paper hereunto annexed, are expressed and set forth. And
your Petitioners shall pray, etc. October 22. 1660.

Several Reasons, Arguments, and Propositions, offered to the King's most
Excellent MAJESTY (for the Improvement of his Revenue in the First Fruits, and
Tenths of the Clergy) Annexed to the Petition of George Carew, Thomas Gould,
and John Culpeper, Esquires; for a Patent of the First Fruits, and Tenths, for
the Term of one and thirty years, at the yearly Rent of threescore thousand
Pounds.
THAT whereas in the 26th. year of King Henry the Eighth, Note, the Current
money of England much infeebled since those times.
The Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons assembled in Parliament, with his
Royal assent, did Ordain, and Enact: that the Kings Highness, his Heirs, and
Successors, Kings of this Realm, should have, and enjoy for ever, the
First Fruits, and Profits, for one year, of every person, and persons, which
should be nominated, elected, presented: or by any other ways, or means
appointed, to have any Archbishopric, Bishopprick, Deanary, Prebendary,
Parsonage, Uicarage, or any other Dignity, or Spiritual Promotion whatsoever
within this Realm, of what name, nature, or quality soever they be, or to whose
Patronages, or gifts soever they belong; the First Fruits, Revenues, or
Profits, for one year, of every such Dignity, Benefice, or Spiritual Promotion,
whereunto such person, or persons, shall be Nominated, Present^d, Elected, or
Appointed. And that every such person, or persons, before any actual, or real
possession, or meddling with the profits of any such Dignity, Benefice, Office,
or Promotion Spiritual, should satisfy, content, and pay, or agree to pay to
the Kings use, at reasonable days, and times, upon good Sureties, the
First Fruits, and Profits for one whole year, into the Kings Treasury. And it
was Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord Chancellor of England,
and Master of the Rolls for the time being, and from time to time, at their
will and pleasure, should name, and depute by Commission, or Commissions, under
the great Seal, fit persons, to examine, and search for the just, and true
values of the First Fruits, and profits, by all ways, and means that they can,
and to Compound, and agree, for the Rate of the said First Fruits, and profits,
and to limit days of payment upon good security, which should be in the nature
of a Statute Staple.

AND whereas it was Ordained, See the several Presidents, and Commissions, with
Returns of full values, in Queen Elizabeth's Time.
and Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the Kings Majesty, his H^irs,
and Successors, Kings of this Realm, shall yearly, have, take, and enjoy, and
receive, united, and knit to the Imperial Crown for ever, one yearly Rent, or
Pension, amounting to the tenth part of all the Revenues, Rents, Farms, Tithes,
Offerings, Emoluments, and all other profits, as well called Spiritual, as
Temporal, now appertaining, or belonging, or hereafter that shall belong to any
Archbishop, or Bishop, Dean, Prev^nd, Parson, Uicar; or other Benefice,
Spiritual Dignity, or Promotion whatsoever, within any Diocese in England, or
Wales. And that the said yearly Pension, Tenth, or Annual Rent, shall be yearly
paid to the Kings Majesty, His Heirs, or Successors, Kings of this Realm, for
ever; which was confirmed by several Acts of Parliament in 32. Hen. 8. and 34.
Hen. 8. and 37. Hen. 8. and 2. Edward, and 7th. of Edward the 6. and 1. Eliz.
And it was also further Enacted, and Ordained by the said Authorities, that the
said yearly Rent, Pension, or Tenth part, shall be Taxed, Rated, Levied;
Received, and paid to the Kings use, in manner, and form following; (that is to
say) The Lord Chancellor of England, for the time being, shall have Power, and
Authority, to direct into every Diocese of England, and Wales, several
Commissions in the Kings name, under his great Seal, to such person, or
persons, as the Kings Highness shall name, and appoint; Commanding, or
Authorizing the Commissioners, or three of them at least, to examine, search,
and enquire, by all the ways, and means that they can, by their discretions
of, and for the true, just, and whole entire yearly values of all the Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Tithes, Offerings, Emoluments, and Hereditaments; and
all other Profits whatsoever, as well Spiritual, as Temporal, appertaining to
any such Dignity, or Spiritual Promotions as aforesaid; Ordinary deductions to
be defalked out of the same. And that the several Bishops should be charged
with the Collections of the First Fruits and Tenths, in their several and
Respective Diocesses. And that upon the Bishops Certificate, any Incumbent,
refusing to pay his Tenths, shall be discharged of his Living.

BY the grave advice, (...) nullo queat esse modo (...) cujus Gubernandi (...)
non Regem sit (...).
and consent of all Estates, in so many Parliaments, the First Fruits and
Tenths were granted, and confirmed to the Crown of England, for the better
maintenance, and support of the Royal Estate; and if the People are since
multiplied, whereby there is a further increase of Rents and Tithes, and a
greater value upon all Commodities, the Crown Revenue should be improved
toward the Kings Innumerable Charges for the Government, and well-being of
those people, and holding correspondence answerably with all Foreign Princes,
for their Trade and Commerce.

KINGS and Queens of England* gave most of the Lands, Felicia illa olim
tempora, in quibus majus subditorum animis in sedit utilitatis Regiae studium,
quam rerum suarum cura familiarium.
Tenements, and Hereditaments, belonging to these Ecclesiastical Dignities, and
Promotions, and have also Erected diverse Foundations, Colleges, and houses of
Learning, and given large Inheritances, and Endowments thereunto; whereby most
of the Clergy have their Educations, and are made fit for those Dignities, and
other Ministerial Offices in the Church, without any great charge to their
Families, or Relations; therefore good Reason the First Fruits, and Tenths of
all their Dignities, and Benefices, should be paid to the King, whom they hold
of, as Patron Paramount, and as Supreme Governor of the Church, and Defendor of
the Faith of England.

THE Statutes, and established Laws of the Land, are made for the full payment,
and whole entire First Fruits and Tenths; wherein the Clergy themselves had
their Uotes in Parliaments. And it is as great Injustice for the Clergy to
withhold any part of the Kings dues, as others to deny them any part of their
Prediall, personal, or mi^t Tithes; the Subject in general suffers, wherein
the Kings Revenue is abated* which of Right belongs to the Crown. Every private
person may, as often as he pleases, Improve his own Revenue, as occasion offers.

THE meanest Subject is allowed the benefit of the Law, and the King does him
Justice, and maintains his property, according to the Common, and Positive Laws
of the Land. The King may expect the same Benefit of the Laws, and require his
own Rights, and Revenues, by those Rules of Justice, which all men are bound to
observe, and obey.

Three Objections raised against payment of First Fruits, and Tenths, answered
by the Petitioners.
1. THAT the Revenue of First Fruits, Object. 1.
and Tenths, is an Innovation obtruded upon the Clergy of late times.

TO this they Answer; That the First Fruits, and Tenths, were paid in the
Saxons times, as appears by Beda's Ecclesiastical History: As the King was to
the Church of Scotland.
and have so continued ever since in England to this very day; and that those
payments, or Tributes, Beda calls Vectigal, which signifies a Badg of
Subordination of the Clergy to the Supreme Civil Magistrate; and where they
have cast off this Tribute, the Civil Magistrate has been subordinate to the
Authority of the Church; it was paid by the Priests, in the time of the Old
Law, to the Sovereign Power.

2. THAT the First Fruits and Tenths are of a Popish Institution. Object. 2.


ANSWER. Vide Lord Burley 's Speech ^o Queen Elizabeth.
It may be satisfactory enough, That this Tribute of First Fruits, and Tenths,
has been paid to all Kings, and Queens of England, since the Reformation in
Henry the 8ths time; without any repeal of any of the said Statutes: but in the
time of Popery, viz. in the second, and third year of Philip and Mary, the Act
for paying of First Fruits and Tenths was Repealed, but confirmed again in the
very first year of Queen Elizabeth's Reformation of Religion from Popery, by the
Statute of 1. Eliz. chap. 4. with a Recital, and Ratification of all former
Statutes, that confirmed the same to the Crown, and have continued in force
ever since; so that, if the Tithes us Jure Divino payable to the Clerg^, for
their Administration of the Word, and Sacraments to the People, The
First Fruits and Tenths, Jure Politico, are payable to the King, their
Sovereign Lord, for his Administration of Justice, and maintaining the Rights,
Privileges, and Liberties, both of Church and State.

3. THAT the Clergy, Object. 3.
of all Orders, and Degrees, have lately suffered, and therefore ought not to
be raised in their First Fruits and Tenths.

ANSWER, That the King has suffered more, and his Revenue much diminished, by
the late War, which has been fomented, and encouraged, by many thousands of
the Clergy, now confirmed in their Livings; and the Commons of England would
more willingly pay their Tithes, if they were sensible, the First Fruits, and
full Tenths were to be paid to the King; as they lately expressed, in their
desires upon the like occasion, of improving that part of the Kings Revenue.

THE Incumbents have, Felo de se est quisquis de jure Regali demit.
and do daily take advantages for their Tithes of new Tillage, and other
^mprovements of Land, which ought to be proportionably answered to the King:
the Bishops, and (...) other persons in Spiritual Dignities and Promotions, do
raise their Tenants, and let the states to the improved values.

Three Proposals to the King.
1. THAT the said Petitioners will discharge 50000. pounds, The present yearly
Revenue of the First Fruits and Tenths, not twenty thousand pounds, all charges
deducted.
part of the debt, due from the England, during the said Term or one and thirty
years; without any defalcation, or other charges, or reprisal whatsoever.

2. THAT the Petitioners will not take any First Fruits of such Benefice, or
Living, which

3. THAT the Bishop shall not be troubled with the charge, See Seldom upon
Tithes, of the Eastern Countries.
or care of Collection of the First Fruits,

Three Proposals offered to the Clergy.
1. THAT upon the Nomination, Appointment, Election, or Presentation, of any
Spiritual person into the said Dignities, Benefices, or Promotions; and before
they enter into the actual possession thereof, they shall be bound in a
Recognizance, in the nature of a Statute Staple, with two sufficient Sureties,
to pay the First Fruits according to the full value, as shall be returned upon
a survey, payable within four years after such Nomination, Election,
Presentation, or Entrance, at eight several payments, by equal portions, every
six months; and that one years Tenths of every such Dignity, Benefice, or
Promotion, shall be deducted out of the said First Fruits. In case the
Incumbent by before all payments, the Security to be discharged according to
the time.

2. THAT whereas by the Liberty, and Disorder of the late depraved times, the
Clergy were not held in such Reverence, and esteem, by the Common people, as
the Dignity of their Calling requires; And they have been forced to commence
several Actions for their Tithes; and by reason of confe^^tious, and
distempered spirits, the Preaching of the Word of God has been unprofitable to
the people, that have taken a prejudice against the Ministry. Therefore a
short Bill shall be prepared by Council, and offered to the Parliament, That
an Act may be passed for the speedy recovering of Tithes, which have been paid
formerly, and the Title not in question; And that the two next Justices of the
Peace, adjacent to the place, may have power, upon Complaint of any Minister,
or other person, to whom the Tithes do, or shall belong, to issue forth their
Warrants, to distrain goods, and chattells of any person, or persons, refusing
to pay their Tithes, to whom they shall become due, and payable, as aforesaid.
That Love and Unity may be preserved between the Ministers and their
Congregations.

3. THAT forthwith Commissions shall be issued out in his Majesty's name, Vide,
Doctor John Gers^n h^s Treatise, called Regulae morales.
throughout England, and Wales; to examine, and find out the true values of
all Dignities, Benefices, Parsonages, and other Spiritual promotions
aforesaid: and to return the Surveys thereof, with the names of the Patrons,
and present incumbents; and in the mean time to suspend all proceedings in the
First Fruits Office. And that his Majesty would be pleased to appoint a
Secretary for Presentations (of all such Livings, as shall be in his Majesty's
dispose) wholly to attend his Majesty's service therein; to the end, that his
Majesty may be fully informed of the true value of those Livings. And whereas
for the ease of his Majesty: Several Livings, and promotions, were heretofore
in the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keepers dispose, to be so continued,
notwithstanding any new Return of a greater value.

Further Arguments, and Considerations will be offered in convenient time,
conducing much to the advantage of the King, the Benefit of the Clergy, and the
General good of the whole Nation; as occasion requires.

All which they humbly submit, George Carew, Thomas Gould, John Culpeper.

October. 22. 1660.
An Order upon the hearing of the Petition, referred to the Barons of the
Exchequer.
Veneris vii. die Decembris. 1660.
Anglia. Wallia.
UPon Reading the Petition of Walter Deverenx and George Carew Esquires;
presented to the Kings Majesty for a Grant to be made to them for their Lives,
upon the reasons in the said Petition mentioned of the sole Collection of that
part of his Majesty's Revenue, consisting in Chantry Rents, Pensions, Portions,
and other small rents issuing out of his Majesty's Mannours, and Bayliwicks in
England, and Wales, and of a Reference thereupon, made unto us, from the Right
Honorable Thomas, Earl of Southhampton, Lord High Treasurer of England, Dated
the seventeenth day of September, 1660. Whereby we are desired by his Lordship,
to examine the reason, why that part of his Majesty's Revenue, mentioned in the
Petition, was so ill answered, and so great Arrears upon it, and to consider of
the best way to prevent it for the future. And whether the reducing of it into
one hand, might contribute thereunto, and ^^hear the Petitioners proposals, and
what security they would give, to ascertain those rents; and upon the whole
matter, to certify his Lordship our opinions, what is best to be done therein
for his Majesty's Ser^^e, that in preparation for our better Information in the
Premises, the third day of this instant December, w^ issued our order to the
Auditors of his Majesty's Revenue, that they should prepare Certificates,
first, what the pentions, portions, Chantry rents, and Foreign rents, within
their respective Circuits did amount unto in the year 1640. Secondly, What was
Paid to the Receiver General, each of the several years, 1638, 1639, and 1640.
and what stands in Super, in the said Receivers Accounts of the said re^ts.
Thirdly, what were the yearly Fees allowed to the several Collectours of the
said rents, and what they are in Arrears to the Crown, and the said Auditors
were to let the said Petitioners see the sa^d Declaracions, and to attend us
with their Certificates this day. Now, upon reading the said Petition, (...)
Reference, and of the Proposals delivered in by the said Petitioners, and
hearing Mr. Sergeant Glyn, one (...) Majesty's Sergeants at Law, on the behalf
of the said Petitioners, and of Sir Edmond Sawyer, Master Kinsman, and Mr.
Philips, three of the Auditors of his Majesty's Revenue, and debate of the
said matter. ^or as much as the said Auditors, by reason of the shortness of
time, could not prepare their Certificates against this day; And to the end the
said Auditors, and other the Auditors may make perfect Certificates unto us,
for our better information, we do this day order, that the Auditors shall by
this day sevenight, bring unto us at Serjeants-Inn-Hall in Chancery Lane,
perfect Certificates of the yearly Revenue of the (...) Chantry rents, and
other rents before specified, both in England, and in Wales, what has been set
in Su^^r, in the several Accounts of the Receivers General, and other Ministers
since the first year of the reign of the late King Charles, unto the
seventeenth year of his reign, what has been answered to the Crown, in any of
those years and how long the Supers, that are in such Accounts, have remained.
And for that some Difference did arise between the said Auditors, and some of
the Clerks in the Pipe-Office, concerning Accounts, and the regular, and just
proceedings therein according to the course of that Court. We do further order,
that Sir Edmond Sawyer shall have liberty to peruse the accounts in the Pipe,
in the fourteenth year of the reign of the late King James, and some of the
Clerks of the Pipe-Office, to peruse the Accounts of the same year, remaining
in the custody of the said Edmond Sawyer. And also, that the said Petitioners
shall have liberty after Sealing-day next, to resort to the respective Offices
of the Auditors of his Majesty's Revenue, (...) convenient times, and to bring
along with them one of the sworn Clerks, in the Office of the Clerk of (...)
Pipe, to peruse, and see the Accounts concerning the said Revenue.

Exam. per Jo. Payn^. Matthew Hale. Edw. Atkins. Chr. Turnor.


At which time and place, the whole matter was again Debated before the Barons,
the Surveyour Gene^^^ of his Majesty's Lands, and others, the Auditors making
then great opposition, it was put off to another day. In the mean time, the
Petitioners delivered this following Instructions, touching Accounts in the
Exchequer.

The Ancient Way of Accounts in the Exchequer.
BY the Ancient Course of the view of the Account of every Accomptant in the
Exchequer after it be prepared, and written by the Auditour, ought to be
declared before the Treasurer, and Barons, or some of them, and the
Remembrancers, and Clerk of the Pipe, or their Deputies ought to attend that
Service. The Account being thus declared, is to be attested by the Auditors
above, and before the beginning of the Account. Auditors.
Tho. Comes Southampton These. Matthew. Hale Capital. Baron. Edm. Sawyer
Clericus. Thus naming those Worthies, before whom the Accounts was declared, as
also the Auditors, that prepared and writ the same.
Afterward the Accounts, with the Particulars thereof, ought to be forthwith
delivered by the Auditour, to the Kings Remembrancer, in whose Office it ought
to remain, as matter of Record for the King, and Subjects use, and the State of
the Account ought to be briefly entered there, and then the Account ought to be
delivered unto the Treasurers Remembrancer's Office, and the State thereof, to
be likewise briefly entered there. This done, the Account is to be forthwith
transmitted into the Office of Clerk of the Pipe, and the Accomptant's Tallies
are to be delivered to the Chamberlain'^ Deputies, to be by them (according to
the Trust reposed in them) rejoyned, and tried with the Counterfoyls before the
Barons, and proving true, to be forthwith delivered to the Clerk of the Pipe,
to be by him allowed.

And the Account being lodged in the Pipe, is to be duly examined, first, by
the Clerk of the Pipe, instrusted on the behalf of the Treasurer. Secondly, by
the Comptroller there entrusted on the behalf of the Chancellor, all tending
to the Service of the King.

And when after full examination all things prove clear, the Accomptants whole
charge, and discharge is to be engrossed in the great Roll, and all his
payments by Tallies, are to be allowed at the foot of the Ingrosment of his
Account there, and thus every Accomptant ought to receive his final discharge,
in, and from the Record, whereof for the common safety of King and People, the
Comptroller of the Pipe writes a Duplicate or Controlment Roll, Verbatim from
the said great Roll.

And all Debts whatsoever depending in any such Account are to be forthwith
particularly charged in the great Roll, and from thence written, and continued
in process to be levied, and answered to the King, if not otherwise legally
discharged.

December. 18. 1660. Wall. Devereux. Geo. Carew.


The second Order of the Barons. Die Veneris 4th Januarii, 1660.
FOR our better Information, in reference to the Petition of Walter Devereux,
and George Carew, Esquires, referred to Us by the Lord High Treasurer; It is
Ordered, That the several, and respective Auditors, do bring in before Us, the
last declared Receivers Accounts, with the Ministers Accounts, relating to the
same for one whole year, for, or before the Year, 1641. at Serjeants-Inne, in
Chancery Lane, on Friday the Five and Twentieth of this instant January; And
that the sworn Clerks of the Pipe be also then, and there* ready, with their
Certificates, relating to the Accounts, and course of the Exchequer.

Matthew Hale, Edw. Atkyns, Chr. Turner.


The Certificate from the Sworn Clerks of the Pipe.
To the Honorable, the Lord Chief Baron of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer,
and the Referrers, desired by the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of
South-hampton, Lord High Treasurer of England, to consider of the Petition to
His Majesty, of Walter Devereux, and George Carew, Esquires, with the Reference
thereupon, as touching their having a Grant, for collecting certain Rents,
Pentions, and Portions, now in the Charge and Collection of sundry Bailiffs,
and Collectors, accomptable only before the Auditors, in their several
Circuits.
May it please your Honors,
WE the Secondaries, and ancient sworn Clerks, in the Office of the Ingrosser
of the Great Roll, otherwise called the Clerk of the Pipe in the Exchequer, who
have hereunto subscribed our Names, have, in obedience to your Commands,
signified at Serjeants-Inne, the seventh Day of December last past, informed
our Selves of the Clerk of the Pipe his Title, and Claim, to have the Custody
of the Accounts, of all Receivers, Ministers, and other Accomptants whatsoever,
accomptable in the Exchequer. And we have likewise endeavored to inform our
selves so far, as (without the sight of the Accounts, now remaining in the
custody of the Auditors) we could, of the several Inconveniences which have
happened, or may happen, by the Auditors detaining, and keeping of such yearly,
and other Accounts: As also, of the conveniences which would infallibly arise
to his Majesty, and his Subjects, in case those Accounts should hereafter be
delivered over to the Clerk of the Pipe, as all other like Accounts have
constantly been, according to the ancient course of the Court. And humbly
certify, as follows, viz.

As to the said Clerk of the Pipe, his Title, and Claim, to have the Custody of
all those Accounts of Receivers, Ministers, and others whatsoever, which were,
or are accomptable in the Exchequer, now remaining in the Custody of the
Auditors.

We humbly conceive, That the said Clerk of the Pipe, his Title, and Claim, to
have the Custody of the Accounts of all Receivers, Bailiffs, Ministers, and
others whatsoever, accomptable in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, arises as
follows:

First, By the ancient, and long-approved course of the Exchequer; and by the
Ordinance made in Trinity Term, 16 E. 2. Cap. 7. the Accounts, of all
Accomptants whatsoever, accomptable in the Exchequer, ought finally to
determine in the Great Roll of the Exchequer, by Allowance which are there to
be made, by Tallies, Writs, and the King's Charters; And that, that course was
duly observed, until the first year of Queen Mary, that the Revenues of the
then dissolved Augmentation Court was annexed to the Exchequer.

Mary, and annexed to her Letters Patent, granted under the Great Seal of
England, bearing date the xxiiij. day of January, in the first year of Her
Highness Reign: By which she annexed all the Revenues of the Crown, which
immediately before that time, had been within the Survey of the then dissolved
Court of Augmentations, and General Surveyours, unto her Highness Court of
Exchequer; Which Courts of Augmentations, and General Surveyours she had
dissolved by other her Letters Patent, under the Great Seal, dated the xxiij.
of January, in the said first year of her Reign. The said Queen being empowered
by Act of Parliament, made in the said first year of her Reign, to dissolve,
and determine the said Courts, with others, and to unite and annex the same to
any other of her Courts of Record. Provided, That if she should annex the same,
or any other of her Courts to the Exchequer; That then all things, within the
Survey of the said Court so annexed, should be ordered in like manner, to all
intents, as the said Court of Exchequer, there was, or ought to be, by the
Common-Laws, and Statutes, of this Realm.

By which Articles, Ir. int. Com. Hill. 1. Ma. To. 55. exparte Rem. These.
it was ordained, and provided, by the said Queen, That the Accomptants, for
the said late Augmentation Revenue so annexed, should appear in the Exchequer
ever Hillary Term, to be sworn to their Accounts, for the Year ended at
Michaelmas before, and to make, and finish the same Accounts, before the xxiij.
of February then next following.

And that the Auditors taking the same Accounts, Article. 8.
should deliver them yearly, engrossed in Parchment, authorized, and allowed,
by the hands subscribed, of the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, Under-Treasurer,
and Barons of the Exchequer, or three of them at the least, whereof the
Treasurer, or Vice-Treasurer, to be one, into the Office of the Pipe, within
the said Court of Exchequer, before the xxth day of March, then next following,
so as further process might be thereupon made, if case should so require.

Which Accounts, Article 25.
should remain in the Charge of the Clerks of the Pipe.

And that all Accounts, Article 32.
and Declarations of Accounts, which then were in the said dissolved Courts of
Augmentations, should remain in the Charge of the Clerk of the Pipe in the
Exchequer, in such place as the Treasurer of the said Court should appoint.

And thirdly, and lastly, The said Clerk of the Pipe, claims to have the
custody of the said Accounts, by virtue of his late Majesty's Letters Patent,
under the Great Seal of England, bearing date the xvth of November, in the
Eighth Year of his Reign, they being granted unto him by the said
Letters Patent, under these words: Nec-non officium omnium and omnimodum
Comporum Ministrorum Receptorum and aliorum Compor* quor-que in Dco sccio Nro
haered. and Succes. nostrer. compitab.

And as to the Inconveniences which have risen to the Crown, or otherwise by
the Auditors detaining of those Accounts.

We have not yet seen any of the Accounts remaining with the Auditors, and
therefore we cannot so fully set forth the Inconveniences which have accrued
to the Crown and People, by the Auditors detaining of the aforesaid Accounts,
as otherwise, peradventure, we might. But those Inconveniences which we have
observed, touching those Affairs, are as follows:

Exchequer, Receivers and Bailiffs have not been, c^lled ad computandum, nor
returned to Issues, as they ought, when they declared their Accounts.

Exchequer, to be sworn to their Accounts, as they ought, they were left at
liberty to account only for what themselves pleased, and to pay it when they
pleased.

Supers in the Accounts of the Receivers, and Ministers, were not put in
demand, by the process of the Court, as they should have been, but slept in the
Accounts of the Ministers, and Receivers, sometimes 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, and
sometimes 80 years together, and was then bolted forth by parcels, when the
Acquittances were oftentimes lost, the parties that paid the money dead, and
the Lands thereunto liable oftentimes sold, to no small vexation of the Subject.

Exchequer, as by the course of the Court they ought, neither could Process
issue out.

Philips, and No^ts, and many more.

Super, which they might have commanded at their pleasure, respiting the
Recepts of them, till their Years Accounts were elapsed, that so they might pay
the present, with the precedent Years Rent.

Super, upon the King's Tenants, which they had long time before received, and
to continue it so, until the Parties were dead, and the Acquittances lost, ut
^ntea.

li. to 6 li. etc. Witness the Records of M. 4. Jac. To. 248. ex part Rem. R.
touching Fisher Deputy-Auditor, who being fined 2000 Marks for such Frauds,
acknowledged he had done no otherwise, then the rest of the Auditors were wont
to do.

Eliz. obstructed in the execution of his Office, there being some thousands of
Rents now due to the Crown, reserved out of Crown Lands, upon Letters Patent
granted in Fee, since 1 Eliz. reserved payable to the Bailiffs, and Receivers
of the Premises, accomptable only before the Auditors, which though not
answered for many years last past, could not with safety be put in process,
without great hazard of grievance to the People, until a full view was had of
the Receivers, and Ministers Accounts, now detained by the Auditors, whether
the same Rents be therein charged, or discharged.

Supers to remain therein, so long as themselves please: So as in truth, the
true state of the whole Charge, and Discharge of the Revenue, of no one County,
is at any time presented by the Receivers Accounts, to the view of the Lord
Treasurer, or any other that shall take the same; and herein will appear a
great Mystery.

Diverse Accounts depending before some of the Auditors, wherein great sums of
Money was due to the Crown, were kept privately sleeping by them for many years
together, until both the Ac^ompts, and Debts, were pardoned.

Eleventhly, Some of the Auditors have been imboldned to neglect the declaring
the Receivers, Ministers, Cornwall for diverse years, in the time of King
CHARLES the First.

Twelfthly, Some of the Auditors have neglected, for diverse years together, to
ingross the Receivers, Cornwall, for diverse years together, in the time of King
Chapter the 1. And the Accounts of the Tenths of the Clergy, for 20, or 30 years
together; and in diverse other Accounts of the New Impositions, taken by the
late Auditors of the Impost: And hereof they have appropriated to themselves
the several Offices, Trusts, Employment, and Fees of the Lord Treasurer,
Chancellor, Under-Treasurer, Chamberlains, Barons, both Remembrancers, Clerk
of the Pipe, and Comptroller, and their respective Clerks, making themselves
all in all, when, in truth, no one Officer of the Exchequer whatsoever, ought,
by the course of the said Court, to be solely entrusted with the Revenue of the
Crown.

Now the Conveniences which will arise to the King, and the People, in case
these Obstructions be removed, are briefly, the taking away, and preventing of
all the several Inconveniences, before particularly expressed: For if the
Accounts of the Receivers, and Ministers, be Yearly Engrossed, declared, Entered
with the Remembrancers; and their Payments by Tallies re-joyned, approved by the
Chamberlains, then their Accounts, and Tallies, will be delivered into the
Pipe, where the Receipts, and Payments, in the Accounts, will be controlled,
the Debts and Supers therein be Yearly charged, demanded, and levied, and paid
to the King's use; for which, both Accomptants, and Debtors, shall receive
their lawful Discharge. And furthermore, the sleeping Rents due to the Crown
(not yet in charge) will be thereby received, and the Clerk of the Pipe will be
hereafter, enabled the better to perform the Duty of his Office.

All which is humbly offered to Consideration. January 25th, 1660. By Rich.
Caril, Senior. Ben. Wallinger, William Burnet, Senior. Nich: Highmore. William
Saterthwait, Will: Burnet, Junior. Walter Wallinger.



Several Proposals, and Considerations, further offered by Walter Devereux, and
George Carew, unto the Lord High Treasurer of England, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, under Treasurer, Barons, and to all the Officers of His Majesty's
Court of Exchequer, declaring how the Kings certain Revenue may be brought into
the public receipt, by the Tenants, and the Sheriffs of the respective
Counties of England and Wales, (excepting the Chantry Rents, Pensions, etc.)
according to the ancient Course of that Court, Customs, and common Laws of
England.
THE said Walter Devereux, Vide, The Draught of a Warrant ready prepared, and
offered by the Auditors to the Barons, to sign for Messengers, to levy the
Kings Rents, although formerly adjudged illegal, at the Council Table.
and George Carew, having lately given several Proposals (under their hands)
remaining with the Lord chief Baron, and the rest of the Barons of his
Majesty's Court of Exchequer; and Mr. Pain, in the Kings Rememberancers Office:
concerning the collection of that part of his Majesty's Revenue; consisting of
Chantry Rents, Pentions, Portions, etc. Wherein they alleged, that there were
diverse inconveniences formerly suffered, and Abuses done to the Crown, and
People of England, by several miscarriages of Receivers, Collectors, and
Messengers; as also by Auditors, not duly declaring their Accounts. The scops
of all being an Introduction to a further service, intended to the King, and
Subject. The Auditors and receivers, unwilling to be brought to a fair Account,
used their utmost endeavors to obstruct the said Service, and to continue
their old practices: who tendered a new Warrant to the Barons for their
Approbation, That the Lord Treasurer might sign for Messengers; A strange kind
of confidence to frame their own designs, and conclude the Barons Opinions,
before they made any report to the Reference upon the former Petition, and
Proposals upon the reference concerning the Collection of the said Chantery
Rents, etc.

UPON the Dissolution of Abbeys etc. A poor Messenger in Yorkshire, purchased
Land, worth 300. pound per annum; by exactions, and oppressing the People.
There were several Auditors and Receivers, appointed to bring in the Kings
Revenue which was then, very great and troublesome, to collect out of several
Demisable Lands, Profits of Courts, Wood-sales, etc. which are since reduced to
certainties of Fee-Farms and Tenths, being such dry Rents, that neither rise
nor fall: Yet (to the wonder of the World (as Sir Robert Cotton observes)
although the cause be taken away, the effect continues. And notwithstanding the
^ings Revenue (in all Counties of England) is brought from one shilling to a
penny, yet the supernumerary ^fficers remain, to the great charge of the King,
and grievance of the People.

ANCIENTLY The Sheriff of every County was accountable for the Kings Rents, By
return of Clothiers, ^rasiers; and others that deal in Staple Commodities,
being advantageous to the Subject, to pay their money in London, where they
sell their Commodities, that are made in those Countries, and where the Cattle
are fed, that serves both Country and City.
and it would conduce much to the Kings benefit, and common good of the
Subject, if it were reduced into the same Method. The King would then be
certain of his Rents, and the Tenants of a good discharge, and still keep their
money in the Country, their travel and pains spared to carry their money to
Audits. There being several very considerable Fee-Farm Rents (viz.) in
Yorkshire, one Fee Farm Rent of 800 l. per Annum. In other Counties many
Tenants pay 500 l. others 7, 8, 900 l. per Annum, of Fee-Farm Rents. It is
therefore very absurd, unsafe, and chargeable, That the Kings great Rents,
should be paid to a Receiver, and he to pay them afterward into the Receipt;
So that when the Auditors, Receivers, Clerks Fees, Diet, Poundage, Arrears,
supers eight thousand pounds respite money, upon Account, always left in the
hands of one and twenty Receivers, at 3 or 400 l. a piece, and other allowances
considered, the Noble is brought to nine pence, the King impoverished, and
those Officers enriched, which has been the continual practice, ever ^nce the
Auditors and Receivers were appointed, to the damage of the Crown, many
hundred thousand pounds, part of which is not pardoned, That they stand
accountable for at this day.

The Proposals of Walter Devereux, and George Carew.
FIRST, Sir Ch^^stopher Hatton, Mr. Lions, and Mr Wharton, th^ee of the
Receivers of the Revenue, are 36000 l. in Arrear, which was occasioned chiefly
by the Auditors, not duly declaring their Accounts; so that they paid what
they pleased, and when they pleased, being under no control, that would
discover the fraud.
That all the Kings Rents shall be charged in the great Roll of the Exchequer.
And that the Tenants chargeable with any of the said Rents above 20 l. per
Annum, shall pay the same into his Majesty's Receipt of the Exchequer,
half-yearly, and be discharged of their payments, according to the course of
the Court, as by the Statute of 51. H. 3. and 10. E. 1. is directed. And such
as fail to pay their Rents, to be levied by the Process of the Court.

SECONDLY, That all the Kings Rents under 10 l. per Annum, in every County
(except the Collection of the Chantry Rents) to be charged in the Sheriffs
Accounts.

THIRDLY, That the Stewards and Bailiffs of the Kings Honors, Mannor^, Courts,
and Baylywi^ks, shall take the I^sues of their Offices, (or any others, that
will give most) at certain rates, (by Lease) according to the Quit-rents,
Fines, casualties, and other perquissts that they have yielded for 21 years
before the late War, and to pay the said Farms into the Receipt, or to the
Sheriff, according to the value respectively.

This being done, the King cannot be defrauded; his Revenue will be certainly
paid. The people duly discharged and accommodated. The yearly Account (without
difficulty) declared by two Auditors. The rest and the 21. Receivers wholly
laid aside as useless; All things then remaining upon Record to public view,
for the common safety of King and People.

Arguments raised from the Proposals.
WHEREIN will the supernumerary Auditors, and all the Receivers, be prejudiced,
if the King allow them Pensions, The Auditors, and Receivers, in many cases,
take upon them the Office of Treasurer, Chancellor, Barons, Chamberlains, and
Remembrancers.
answerable to their Salleries, and save forty thousand pounds per Annum, to
the King and People; As King Henry the 8th did, when he suspended many of them
as useless before? Or wherein will the Kings Tenants that pay the great Rents,
be prejudiced, if they pay the money into the Receipt, and receive legal
Discharges, which are recorded for the security of the People, The Chantry
Rents are troublesome to be brought into the Sheriffs Accounts; it is therefore
humbly conceived, that that charge is most proper for the Collectour General.
rather then to trust to Auditors Accounts in their own keeping, or to
Receivers Acquittances, which are often lost; and many years after, the Kings
Tenants sued and vexed with process causlesly? Or wherein will the Kings
Tenants of small Rents be prejudiced* if they pay them into the Sheriffs hands,
whose Deputies, Bailiffs, and Officers, in every Division, are ready, (at their
own doors) to receive them, rather then ride twenty or thirty miles to an
Audit, waiting and loosing their time, and often ve^ed with Messengers, to the
great Outcry of all people throughout the Kingdom? The like convenience will be
to the Kings Tenants of the Chantery Rents (as in the Method already proposed
by the said Walter Devereux, and George Carew, to the Lord chief Baron? Or
wherein will the Kings Honor or Profit be lessened by this Method, it being
more advantageous for all men to pay their Rents at home, then ride far to an
Audit to pay one shilling, and to eat and drink two shillings upon the Kings
Account, neglecting their own occasions, to a far greater loss^ otherways.

Objections raised by the Auditors and Receivers.
THAT the Revenue has been brought in by them above eighty years, Vide, the
Report of Sir Robert Cotton, concerning the Collection of the Queen's Rents
under half a Crown.
That they have Patents for their lives under the great Seal, to receive the
said Rents, and Audit the Accounts. That they bought their places at great
Rates, That the Kings Rents cannot be so speedily and safely answered by the
Tenants, Sheriffs, or general Collectors. And that the Method of the Kings
Household expenses, will not be observed, if the course be altered in bringing
in of the Revenue.

Answered by Walter Devereux, and George Carew.
THAT It was never intended, 4000. l. per Annum, is now, and has been for many
years paid into the Wardrobe, by several Fee-Farmers, and other Tenants.
that Receivers should be continued in that way of Receipt, after the Rents
were ascertained. But that the Revenue should be brought in again by the
ancient way of the Sheriffs. As by the Statute de Scaccario made the 5^ H. 3.
and the Statute of Rutland, in the 10th E. 1. The Kings Pa^ents granted to
Auditors, and Receivers for their lives, were ex gratia and mero motu, A
Receiver for Yorkshire lately gave 1800. l. for his place, a^ Assignee from,
an^^^er.
And if they have since bought their places of others, their Advantages must
accru^ to them, from the Injuries done to the King or People. That the Sheriffs
of all Counties, are persons chosen to serve the King and Country, being
Landed men, and of ability there, to answer the King and Subjects dues, they
taking Security of the Under Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Deputies and other Officers*
to be answerable to them for the Issues of their Offices at a day certain. And
the Lord Treasurer may design the payments of the Kings Revenue, according to
the several purposes ordained.

ORIGINALLY, The Kings Rents were paid in kind, by Cattle, Corn, Hay, Oats,
and other Provisions for the Kings Household. The inconveniency of that was
found great, for Tenants to bring their Carriages from places far distant to
the Court, so then by Agreement, they paid their Rents to the Sheriffs (the
grand Officers of the several Shires) who paid the said Rents Scaccario nostro
pondere and numero. Allowing 6 d. in the pound, for wearing of the money by
often telling. The uprightness of that Age was such, that they accounted the
Kings Rents sacred and individual, considering, that the Kings care and charge
preserved all men in peace and plenty. And the Sheriffs then, minding the
Commonweal, and good of their Country, answered the Kings Rents by Proxies at
London, who kept correspondence with Factors, Clothiers, Gra^^ers, and others,
trading from all parts of England to the City, and levied the Rents at his
leisure. By which means, he promoted Trade, kept the money still in the
Country, That employed Spinners, Weavers, and Husbandmen, which otherwise
their whole Market money had been carried out of the Country by Receivers and
Collectors. That came as strangers amongst them.

The Pr^mises considered, it remains under your Lordships consideration,
whether it be not fit for a Parliament to consult what is most necessary to be
done for the advantage of the King in his Revenue, and the Commodity of the
People in their payments, and to hear what further shall be proposed upon the
whole matter, for his Majesty's Service therein, all which is submitted to

January the 29th 1660. By Walter Devereux, George Carew.


THE Business tending to the well settling of his Majesty's revenue, under
Consideration of the Lord Treasurer, Anno. 16. Hen. 6. a writ was directed from
the King to ^he Treasurer, and Barons, wherein it appeared that one
extraordinary receiver was deemed a Burden, and unnecessary charg to the
Crown, and therefore according to the constant course of the Exchequer, the
Court thought fit he should be discharged of his receipts, and transferred to
^he Sherifs as formerly.
and others. The Petitioners not doubting, but the referrees, had been fully
satisfied in the Premises, concerning the Collections, and what was alleged in
the petition; left it for the Barons to report. And on the 13th. of May 1661.
Calling for their report, the Barons desired an information of the benefit
intended to His Majesty in the said Collection, some of them having forgotten
the perticulars, and also the discovery of the mis-carriages, and
inconveniences, which had happened by the default of the Receivers,
Collectours, and other Officers, relating to the said accounts. Whereupon it
was briefly answered by the Petitioners, that in their proposals (concerning
the said Collection) left with Mr. Pain, they had offered first, that they
would observe such a method in every County, that the rents should be duly
answered without the charge of Poundage, which the receivers had, besides the
Collectours fees* Secondly, without the charge of 2s. upon every account, which
the Auditors Clerks, were allowed for engrossing the accounts. Thirdly, that
they would give good Security to render a perfect Account yearly upon Oath, and
return the supers, and upon whom depending, that process may Issue duly out to
avoid the charge of Messengers. Fourthly, they would discharge the King of 1500
^b. being part of a Debt due by Letters-Patent charged upon the revenue. And
lastly, that they would Pay the said ^ents on the first day of May, every Year,
during the said term desired by their Petition, into His Majesty's receipt of
Exchequer.

And as for the arrears, and supers depending upon the former tenants, and
Collectours in the Ministers accounts, and receivers accounts, relating to the
same, which were occasioned through the default of the Auditors, and other
Officers aforesaid. The Petitioners, then informing the Barons, that they could
not so clearly make them appear without an express order to some of the Clerks
of the Court, to peruse their last declared accounts, and certify the same.
Several Clerks being then present, informed the Court, that it was a work of
time, but for their satisfaction, and upon the earnest desire of Mr. Walter
Devereux, one of the Petitioners, being a Member of Parliament, the Barons made
this following Order.

Die Martis xiiii. May 1661.
ORDERED, that the last declared accounts of the Ministers, and receivers in
the Counties of Wilts. Yorkshire, and Lyncoln-Shire be brought into the
Exchequer Chamber upon wednesday 15. of May by eight of the Clock in the
morning to be perused in the presence of one of the Auditors Clerks by Mr.
Hudson, Mr. Wilkinson, Mr. Carill, and Mr. Burnet.

Matthew Hale. Edw. Atkins. Chr. Turnor.


Notwithstanding Sir Edward Sawyer was unconcerned in the said order for those
Counties, yet he appeared the next morning before the Barons, and told them
that it was not convenient for the Auditors to bring their accounts out of
their Office, or that they should be perused without the Lord Treasurer were
first acquainted with the business (pro consequentia) and for that the Barons
O^der was not Obeyed, the Petitioners desired a further Order, which was
granted as foll^weth. viz.

Die Mercurii, xv. May 1661.
ORDERED, That Mr. Harpham one of the Attorneys in the Kings Remembrancers
Office, Mr. Wilkinson, another Attorney in the Treasurers Remembrancers Office,
and Mr. Burnet, one of the sworn Clerks of the Pipe-Office, do forthwith peruse
the last declared Receivers Accounts, with the Ministers accounts, relating to
the same, for the Counties of Wilts. Yorkshire, and Lincoln, or any other
Counties, and certify unto us the Arrears and supers in the said accounts, and
for how long time they have been depending their.

Matthew Hale. Edw. Atkyns. Chr. Turnor.


Mr. Kinsman Auditor for Wilts. had no declared accounts in his Office since
the 7th Year of King Charles the First. Quere whether the Baron^s were
satisfied with the Auditors Certificates as they pretended.
And Mr. Chislett Deputy Auditor to Mr. Gwin, for Lincoln shire told the
Petition^rs, they had given the Barons sufficient satisfaction by Certificate
under their (...) concerning the Supers, and Arrears in their accounts in
December last. And the D^puty-Auditor for Yorkshire had no declared account in
his Office since the 14th. of the late King Charles; But the (...) in persuance
of the last Order, caused the last declared accounts to be perused (with much
opposition, Sir Edward Sawyer telling the Auditors they deserved to lose their
offices for suffering those persons to ^ook into their Accounts) by the
Attorneys aforesaid, who certified the Barons the (...) under their hands, as
appears before the Barons Report in the 19. page.

To the Right Reverend Father in God WILLIAM By Divine Providence LORD
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY HIS GRACE, Primate of England and Metropolitan.
Right Reverend Father in God,
I HAVE observed in reading the Acts of Councils, and Parliaments, held by the
KINGS of England? That they have Supported themselves, repaired their Estates*
and paid their Debts, by improving the Revenue of the Crown, and lessening the
charge of supernumerary Officers belonging to the Exchequer. And although the
King has an absolute Sovereign power in himself to do it without Parliaments;
yet he has usually condescended, in such cases, to advise with the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons assembled in Parliament. The State held it
most just, in the seventh year of King Henry the fourth, to help the King out
of his own, rather then burden the People, and improved his Lands, although in
Lease. And also in Henry the sixths time, the King was induced by his Council,
to Convey to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and others, all Profits of Wards,
Escheats, and Forfeitures, etc. toward the defraying the charge of his House,
to prevent the immoderate Requests of importunate Suitors. May it please your
Grace, The Creditors that are concerned in the Petition for the improvement of
First Fruits and Tenths, of the Clergy, are many and troublesome, and of
several Opinions. They have urged me to write these further Arguments and
Persuasions to the Clergy, wherein is endeavored to convince all men, as well
of the undoubted Rights and Proportions due to the King from the Clergy* as
the Rights and Dignities due to the Clergy from the People. Yet I understand
the whole scope (of their Grievances) is to be relieved out of the late
improvements of Bishops, Deans, Non-Residents, Pluralists sine Curas, and
Ministers whose Livings are worth above a hundred pounds per annum. The Method
they intend to propose, I doubt not but may please your Grace, since they drive
so much at the Benefit of the poor Clergy, and to annex certain
Augmentations for ever to such Livings, and Vicaridges that yield not
sufficient Maintenance, and Encouragement to them that serve the Cure. My Lord,
I have a double Obligation upon me to honor the Clergy, above all other
Orders and Dignities, therefore desired Moderation, and added some thing of my
own short Observations, to the advantage of the whole Hierarchy of the Church
(only consistent with the old and sure Foundations of good Government) in the
English Monarchy. And, I question not, but the Cause of the Church, and the
Cause of the Widow and Fatherless, will find Audience and Relief in Parliament.

I shall not trouble Your Grace any further, then to acquaint You, I have
Printed but a small number of these Papers, to be delivered only to some of
the most Eminent and Honorable Persons of both Houses, and other particular
Friends that have a great sense of the whole Business, and a great Value for
the Clergy; there is much more to be said and considered, then what I have
written: All which I humbly submit to Your most Pious and Prudent
apprehensions, and shall ever study to approve my self,

Your Lordships Most humble and Faithful Servant: GEORGE CAREVV.

FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS, OFFERED TO THE CLERGY,
Concerning their first Fruits and Tenths, due to the KING, for his supreme
pastoral Charge (oppugnant to the Doctrine of Rome) Asserting the KINGS Right
to the Government of the Church, Vindicating the Bishops Office, Order, and
Dignity in England. Justifying Tithes (or bona Sacra) to be the Ministers
proper maintenance by Divine right. With several Arguments deduced from
Scripture, and reason (promiscuously delivered for the satisfaction of all men)
proving it both sacrilegious and distructive, to de^raud the KING in his
Tributes, Rights, or Revenues of the Crown.
WHEN a man reads with Patience, Regibus guber^andi Ecclesia^^ honor a Deo Opt.
Max. conceditur, non ut Doctrinam sacram ultro immutent, sed, quo e^ quae
praecepit Deus, praestentur sedulo ut prospici^nt.
and without prejudice, he gives himself the liberty of making a true
definition of those things, which comes within the reach of his own capacity to
judge. The Church is truly apprehended to be a State and Society of men
professing one Faith, serving one God, and confessing one Savior and Redeemer;
being a collective Body of several Parts, and Consistences, endowed with large
and Honorable Privileges (more ancient then any Society whatsoever) having
Communion with God and Angels; that was visible in the families of the
Patriarchs, before, and after the Food, called in holy Scripture, and by the
Fathers, a people chosen of God; unto whom his Son, and our Savior has
manifested those things, which before were kept secret; that this Church has
been strengthened, and confirmed by the blood of Apostles, Bishops, Preachers,
and holy Martyrs, against the gates, and Battelments of Hell. That Christian
King's, have the supreme Government of the Church; from whence Bracton, and our
ancient Common Lawyers of England, calls the Kings revenues sacra patrimonia,
and says, Omnis quidem sub rege, and ipse sub nullo nisi tantam sub Deo: so
that naturally, from thence (by the rules of Government, and protection)
arises, that the Clergy are to pay their tribute to the King as well as the
Laity. And they that deceive the KING, deceive themselves, and others.

MOses left this for a Law to remain for ever, Decimae de populo exigi alio
nomine non possunt (quae bonae sacr^) ut inde sit quo officiae Divina rite a
Ministris Ecclesiasticis peragantur.
that the Fathers should teach their children what the Lord had done in their
days, and to inquire in times past what was done even from the creation of the
World, whereby we may truly understand, that God ordained to himself, the
seventh part of our time, and the tenth part of our increase: Jus permaneat
semper nec unquam mutetur Lex vero scripta sepius: Man that is the measure of
all things, and has reason given him to discern between good, and evil; must
needs offend against the Law of his understanding, when he deal^ unjustly with
God or man. It was a great offense, and a cursed thing in the time of the Law
to remove the Landmark, and Ancient bonds between Neighbor, and Neighbor, by
reason of the great unquietness which was caused thereby: how much more do they
offend, which remove, and alter the proportion allotted to the service of God,
and the Church, and the Ancient bounds which our Forefathers have set between
the King, and his people. And they that deceived the KING, brought the
Callamities upen themselves, and the whole Nation.

WHen Saul was made King, Canones ubi jam sancti and ex Doctrina Christianae a
legum ^atoribus imperati fuerint protinus obligant, and apud omnes sub
eaditione degentes Divinarum institutionum vim obtine^t.
the High Priest became a subject, and the first Fruits, and Tenths which were
given by the other Priests, and Levites, to the High Priest before, ^as then
vested in the King, having the supreme pastoral Charge of the People: it was a
proverb amongst the Jews, that paying of tithes was a hedge to a man's
possession, and a settled maintenance for perpetuating of religion. Nature
teaches men to honor God with their substance. The Heathen themselves, which
had not the means to apprehend much, offered the tithe of their Corn, and Wine
to their Gods, making payment in kind for the plentiful increase they had,
before any use were made of the other nine parts; The Scripture, the rule of
our Faith, has left examples of that particular proportion, most fit to be set
apart for the service of God; and forasmuch as the Church of Christ has entered
into obligation; The Statutes and Decrees of the Land injoyning the payment of
tyths, it is a vanity, and a superfluous question to despute, whether they be
of Divine right. And they that denied the Kings proportion, ought not to
receive their own: the publi^ke revenue ought to be preferred before the
private.

It Is objected, we are now free from the Law of Mos^s, and not bound to pay
Tithes any longer; that Christ suffering, and offering up himself a Sacrifice
for sin; Aron's order remov^^ from the Temple, and the ^ffice of the preisthood
became Evangelical: it is granted, that the law was fulfilled but not destroyed;
the hoc agere was turned into Hoc Credere, yet the Text says, that Heaven and
Earth shall pass away, but not on^ tittle of the Law should perish; Faith is
proved by works, and if there wants Charity all is nothing: The Equi^able
Consideration for Tyths, continues upon the like conditions under the Gospel,
as they did before under the Law? the Priests and Levites took them for
expounding the Law, serving at the Altar, and Tabernacle, and offering up the
Sacrifices for the sins of the people, the Preachers and Ministers of the
Gospel receive the Tithe, and offerings, for administering the Word and
Sacraments, teaching the mysteries of Salvation, and offering up Prayers, as
daily sacrifices for the People: in the first 150 Years after Christ, the
Apostles, and Preachers of the Gospel, were dispersed, and had no settled
maintenance but the voluntary contributions of those that embraced their
Doctrine, and some that received their glad tidings of Salvation, sold all that
they had, and laid it at their feet. Tertullian, Cyprian, Clemens-Alexandrinus,
Eusebius, Irenaeus, and others, writ of their Diet, Habitation, and apparel,
and of several things indifferent in themselves, which altered with time, and
place, according to the Rules of Princes, and established Laws of their
Government

The people of God in the Primitive times desired a King to protect them from
their Enemies; and by Divine institution Kings were appointed to govern, ovum
Testamentum and si sit (...) Christianae Doctrinae sectissima, amen ab authorie
Regum vim Legis a^cepit.
and rule over them, who received the power both Spiritual and temporal into
one and the same hand, he made choice of the Priests and deposed them as
Solomon did Abiather, and placed Zadock in his rome, And the Law both Judaicall
and Levitical was made Canonical Scripture, by Josiah: The Rites and
Seremonies of the Church after Christ were debated and determined at national
Synods, and general Councils, and were made Cannon laws by the Emperors. The
Apostles persuaded the people to believe Christ's Doctrines, not upon pain of
death but damnation, and taught them to be obedient to their Civil Magistrates
for conscience sake, for that an Oath was the end of all strife. The old and
new Testaments were preserved by the holy Spirit, and Preached publicly in
England in the Year 250. Christus leges nova^ quibus ^eremur nullas edidit, sed
do^^^nam and monitae, (unde illis) ^^urae immortalitatis gloriae ^gni
evaderemus.
The Reverend and Learned Bishops in England in those days, much Honored for
their Constancy, and Zeal in Religion, were summoned to the General Councils
of Sardice and Nice, and much approved of for their Doctrine all the time of
Constantine the Great.

The Original of the POPE's Usurpation over CHRISTIAN PRINCES.
AS to the English Monarchical Government (under which our Lives, Pontifex
Romanus cum minu^^ Dominationis suae ambitum vi^ere^, novum Ordinem societatis
Jesu ad causa^^ suam sustentand^ ^^onstituit (...) f^lsis illuminationi^us sive
novis luminibus populo^ lementarunt and a legitimis Principibus alienarunt.
Liberties, and Estates are best secured by Magna charta, and the Petition of
Right) it is agreed there is but one man Supreme, all others act under his
name, by commision? The Clergy being subordinate to the Prince, having the
superiority over them, do submit themselves to his Government in all things
according to Gods commands; knowing there is no power but of God, and they are
ordained of God; That Kings are the Lords Anointed, his Image upon Earth,
Nursing Fathers of the Church, and Princes of the people of God. The Pope or
Bishop of Rome usurped his Authority of late times: Emperors and King's
formerly elected, degraded, and censured them. Theodoret employed John the
first Bishop of Rome in the nature of an Ambassador to Justinian the Emperor,
and for exceeding his Commission, he kept him in Prison until he dyed. In the
year 679. Pope Agatho besought the Emperor to forgive him the Tribute which
the Pope of Rome usually paid for his Consecration. One Almaine Emperor chose
Pope Leo the eight, John the Fourteenth, and Benedict the Fifth, and so
successicely* but as the Emperors did fall, so the Popes did rise: The Pope
himself will rather renounce the succession of Peter, then the Donation of
Charlemane.

The Church of Rome, I^re^urando Deus in testem ad^ocatur, ad^oque illius
attributae ag^oscuntur, atque etiam perjur^i ^index accersitur.
once a Member of the true Catholic Church, is fallen from the Principles of
the Apostolic, and primitive purity, both in Doctrine, and Manners, and came
to that swelling greatness by six steps Gradatim. The first, by Constantines
departing from Rome to Constantinople. The Second by the fall of the Empire in
the West. The Third, by the donation of Phocas. The Fourth, by the voluntary
Charter, that the Emperor of Constantinople made to Benedict the Second, In
the Year 684. The Fifth, by the amity between Zachary Bishop, of Rome, and King
Pipin of France, In the Year 751. The Sixth and last step, by the Constitution
of Seven Electours, by Gregory the Fifth a Germane born, Christus hic munus
regium non obiui^ sed id curavit ut homin^s regeneratos and ad adventun^ suum
secundum gloriosum, pr^parat^s haberet.
and Kinsman to Ot^o the Emperor. So the Beast that Obscurely sprung up,
increased and became insolently Triumphant over Kings, and Emperors; and sent
their Popish innovasions of Doctrine, and discipline into England i^ the Saxons
time. A Foundation laid in Blood, Treason, and Rapine, cannot support a Fabric
from falling to the ground.

IT is in vain to read the Desputations and Volumnes of Bellarmine, and others
that writ in the defense of the Church of Rome, Christus nullam hic potestatem
regiam exercuit. S. Petrus decet debere nos subjectos esse cujus humanae
ordinationi prop^^r Dominum; sive Regi ut ^^per-eminenti, sive Praeside^us, ut
qui per e^m mittantur tum ad ultionem facinorosorum* (...) ad la^dem been
agentium* ^^goniam ita est voluntas Dei, ut (...) agendo os obstruatis
Desip^^^tium hominum ignorantiae. 1. ^p. ^. 2. v. 1^.
that swept away the money of England under Color of indulgencies, that caused
the Common people to rob their Children to Enrich the Friars, and make their
posterity poor by such Charity and Devotion, not by the Scripture required: The
Church of God is built upon his name and word, that unmovable Rock; The keys
of heaven are Faith, and good works. The people are admitted in, or kept out of
the Church by the Ministers of the Gospel, according to the ordinances of God.
The Prophets foretold the Jews of a Messiah to re-establish amongst them the
Kingdom of God, which was rejected by them in the time of Samuel? This
expectation made them obnoxious to impostures, that have had the Ambition and
art (by plausible, and false Doctrines) to attempt, and deceive the people:
Christ himself, and the Apostles forewarned them of such false Prophets, and
told them further, that his Kingdom was not of this world; that the Kings of
Nations had Dominion over their subjects, but his Kingdom purchased by his
Blood, was not to be possessed until his second coming. The Devil seeks, by
suggesting a present Dominion, to weaken the Faith of Christians* Saint Peter
and the rest of the Apostles had Power given them to teach the people the
Gospel, and the mysteries of their salvation, in the Faith of Christ, and him
crucified; when Christian Sovereigns were Baptized into the Faith (by virtue of
their office) they obliged themselves to preserve the Doctrine of Christ* God
requiring the account from them, and at their hands, being not only Pater
Patirae, but Pater Ecclesiae, therefore Tithes, the patrimony of the Church,
should be maintained and kept inviolate by Kings the nursing fathers of the
Church.

AMongst the Emperial laws was omitted, the punishment for killing their
Fathers, supposing no man to be so horrid^y impious and wicked to commit such
an act of Paricide against the law of nature. It may be said as much, of those
men that Robbed and destroyed their mother, In Concili^ Generali Vien^ensi
Ratum est Decretum contra Fratres Mendicantes; eorumque Doctrin^m perstrinxit
Innocentius Quartus in Decretalibus in Aegliam transmissis, nbi appellantur
isti novi Praedicantes, qui docent and predicant contranovum, and vetus
Testamentum. In Decre^o illo ^use Statuitur Decimas a Ministris praedicantibus
and Ecclesiae Off^ciariis nequaquam esse ausere^d^s.
the Church of England; The Pope persuaded the Kings of England, that he was
the universal Governor of the Church, and he received the revenue of first
Fruits and Tenths from the Clergy which was due to the Crown, and the four
orders of Friars persuaded the people that tithes were given ex debito
Charitatis, and not ex debito Justiciae to the Secular Priests, and so got
several grants of them to themselves for their Spiritual labors, the other
supernumerary orders of Monks and Nuns further persuaded the Layety to make
Arbitrary Consecrations of Tithes to their Abbeys, and Monastries, and to
appropriate several Churches and Lands to their foundations of reputed Clergy,
Who by allowing several salaries to their stipendaries for serving the Cure,
gave advantage to Covetous men (upon the dissolution to dispoyle the Church)
who took grants of those impropriate Tithes, and turned them into Lay-^ees,
which was done more through the defect of Councils then any force of
Adversaries, in subjecting that Revenue of the Church to their humane titles,
supposing the property that God has in them might be changed to their own uses
by such contracts. Whereupon several poor scandalous Livings have since made
scandalous Ministers. That in many parts of the North, and West, of England,
the Vicars are necessitated to sell Ale, or go to their day-labour, for the
subsistence of themselves, and their Families. A grave Spaniard landing in King
Edward the Sixths time, near the Ruins of an old Abbie by the sea coast,
perceived a poor Clergie-man hedging in of his Glebe land, the Spaniard to
satisfy his curiosity, desired the Vicar to show him his Church, demanding
what was his maintenance, he told him he had twenty Nobles a Year, being some
part of God's revenue and inheritance, which was reserved to himself; the
Spaniard wept bitterly, and gave the poor Clergie-man all the money he had,
saying, That God had not been so provident for his Church in England as in
other parts of the World.

The Offices, Dignities, and Possessions of BISHOPS, DEANS, and PREBENDS,
VINDICATED.
EPiscopacy was practiced in the Apostles time, Vulgvs, ubi Ministros sibi
invisos habent, a Religione saepe desciscunt; quare expedit ut Ministri doct^
juxta atque pii sint quo^variis hominu^ ingen^^s undique occurrant.
and it was the constant Doctrine of all the Fathers, that Bishops succeeded the
Apostles in the first, and best ages of the Church, and ordained Preachers in
every City: Presbyterian Government was not thought on, before the Reformation
at Geneva, which is Aristocrary. And the Independent sprung up with the
New England Faction; whose Government is Democracy. At the first General
Council (after Christ) Bishops were planted in all parts of Christendom; both
for the purity in Doctrine, and the safety, and external state of the Church,
and have continued, ever since in England, until these late violent times of
Interruption, that brought their Bishoprics into Abeyance and Consideration of
the Law. Before the Foundations of Parliaments were laid, the Kings of England
called only their Prelates, and Nobles to Council with them; and the Affairs
of the Kingdom, was ordered by Edicts to the Officers, and Governors of the
several Counties. King Henry the First, in the Year of our Lord, 1102. invested
the Bishops by giving them a Pastoral Staff, and a Ring, testifying that their
Donation, was from their Sovereign. The Pope (at that time) questioning the
Kings Authority, and Right to investitures; the King sent expressly then to
Rome, Herbert Bishop of Norwich, and Robert Bishop of Lichfeild, to acquaint
him, that he would rather loose his Kingdom, then his Right, to Donations of
Churches. Asius the Oldest Bishop of his time (being about 300. Years after
Christ,) framed the Nicen Creed for the whole Christian World. Which much
improves the Benefit that the Church receives by Episcopacy.

Bishops have been Anciently Barons by Tenure, Olim digna prosaepia erant
oriundi sacerdotes, plerumque fi^ii nobi^ium minores; Postquam autem ita
pess^me vaslata est Ecclesia, pa^ca f^ere praemia quae ad doctr^nam
extim^larent, ita ut multi sacris O^dinibus ornati ad s^ivam po^^us am^ndari
qua^ ad suggestum Concio^^^orum vocari mercre^tur.
and had their Votes in Parliament by a double right, the one to advise in
framing of Laws, that they were not made repugnant to God's word, and the other
for their Temporalities, having Estates and Families of their own, subject to
the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom. It is a question whether such
Prerogatives can be taken away, which were originally annexed to their
Dignities, and Orders of their Persons and Offices. By the same Rule the Lords
temporal may lose their Privileges, prerogatives, and Preheminences (held of
the Crown) which they have above other men? Honors are rather Burdens then
advantages, rendering men obnoxious to great expenses, and offices do bring more
trouble then Profit, not acquiring any thing without Danger or envy; no man
should in reason envy his happiness that is rather a steward, and servant to
the people, then Master of himself, or his own Fortune. Non nobis nati sumus;
every man serves God, his King, and Country, in some Capacity or other, moving
in his station accordingly: And since the Bishops have been interrupted, and
kept from their Votes in Parliament, there has been disorders and Confusions
both in Church, and State, the Pulpets filled with Blasphemy, the people taugh^
rebellion, and Witchcraft, the Press open to all manner of seditions, and
Heresies, and nothing but violence, and oppression raging throughout the whole
Land, no man Considering that the cause of all these Calamities proceeded from
the Sacrilege, Pride, Envy, and Covetousness, of those Persons that made such
strange returns for all the labors, and Studies of so many learned Divin^s of
this Kingdom, by whose lives and Doctrines the Crown, and Scepter of England
has been exalted above the Pontifical Chair, and the people freed from the
Jurisdiction, and slavery of the Pope.

The Lands, Primae Seismae and Decimae Regi reservatac, arguunt eas sub illo
(...).
and possessions of Bishops, Deans, and Prebends, were given by Pious Kings,
and other (...) Benefactours* Originally in Franck-Almoyne for the service of
God, and the Church, and were insep^rably annexed to the offi^e and Dignity of
those orders, that they might have honorable support, answerable to the great
care, and ^harge they were entrusted withal. Their Maintenance ought to be
sufficient to keep them from Corruptions, and Sinister affections, and to do
acts of Hospitality, giving good examples to all men. Poverty breeds Contempt,
although the persons have extraordinary parts, and deserts above other men. The
meanest Corporations, and Civil societies of ^en, are allowed their Presidents,
Mayors, Councils, and Officers, to bear rule, and Government over the rest, and
they hold their Authority by the Kings Charter. It were very unreasonable in
Cities, Provinces, and (...)* to deny God a reverend Worship and esteem, and
the King his Prerogatives, in governing the Church according to order, and
deacency. The Heathen when they would secure their Treasure from Violence,
laid it in the Templ^s, Consecrated to their Gods, knowing that the most
inhumane men amongst them would not take any thing out of those places that
were dedicated to their Deities.

THE CONCLUSION.
THE Church is that in which men hope for Salvation (united under a visible
Government) here, and triumphant in Glory hereafter, going under diverse
elogies, both in Heaven, and Earth. That several Ministerial Officers
subservient in the Church militant, were ever allowed a sufficient, and
Honorable Maintenance, according to their order: In England, before the
Establishment of parochial right to Tithes; Barons laid foundations of
Churches at their pleasures, claiming only a right to the Advouson, and upon
lapse to the King as Patron Paramount, he presents to the Cure an Incumbent;
being lawfully ordained, the Bishop institutes, the Archdeacon, etc. inducts.
He then claiming a free liberty to persuade the People (by Preaching) to Faith,
and repentance, obedience to Princes, and love one to another, which is the
fulfilling of the Law, and by the ordinance of God and man, he so becomes
intitutled to Tithes, as his freehold, for Administering the word and
Sacraments to the People. Yet the unworthiness of Ministers does not make the
word unprofitable, or the ordinances uneffectuall: they may convert others, yet
be themselves Reprobates; and by Coveting more then their own, they have lost
a great part of that which was their due by Divine right. What Kings have
endowed the Bishops, and Dignitaries of the Church withal, they receive in a
double Capacity, both as Spiritual, Ignorantia aliquos reddit Impudicos, alios
vero Morigeros.

Scientia aliquos instat, alios deprimit.


and Temporal persons, substituted to govern, and rule under the King, over the
rest, contrary to the Doctrines, and erroneous opinions of Rome.

The Orthodox man blushes for the Generation that are not ashamed of themselves
for abusing the World, under a color of Religion, making in a wrong sense,
Godliness their greatest gain. He stands amazed at another sort of men
(Libertines) that were Proud, Malicious, and Covetous, who struck at the very
root, giving the greatest blow to the Church that ever was given, Protectio
trahit Subjectionem, and protectio mutuam trahit Subjectionem.

Illi qui seme^ ipsos ab authoritate Regia eximi nituntur aut sacram ejus
personam Calumniis* incursant, proculdubio erint obruti, and eorum Posteri ad
Internecionem deleti.


by any that professed themselves Christians. They were Emperick Statesmen
(ignorant of Natural Philosophy) destroyed mutual societies for want of
Learning, and Knowledge; they descovered their own weakness, and followed an
Ignis Fatuus, showing they were as unskilful to Govern as unwilling to obey,
those were the Men that obstructed the payment of the Kings Debts to Orphans
and Widows: They received the Kings Revenue, and built large Houses upon
Church-Land, and made other improvements to Ministers with the Creditors Money;
what is come to the Hand of the Clergy out of such improvements, beyond the
ordinary and usual Tenths, Fines, and ancient Rents, being divided between the
King and these poor Creditors, or at least his own just proportion out of the
improved value, according to Law, would give a great satisfaction to all
moderate Men; otherwise people will say, That Covetousness is great Idolatry,
and if it be in the House of God, what will not the Wicked do, those Examples
being brought in to Presidents.

If some Tenants have forfeited their right of improvement, for want of
Allegiance to the King, or that they have, under a force, purchased to preserve
their Possession, or otherwise justly offended God, and displeased the Clergy,
and lost their Tenant-right; these poor Creditors that Petition the King for
part of that improved Revenue which in charity belongs to them, etc. and have
not been guilty of any misdemeanour against his MAJESTY, ought in Justice to be
considered, which hitherto have been wholly neglected, and dealt unkindly
withal by the Clergy about Leases, all which is left to their own
Considerations. And whether it was the intent of the Donors, that improvements
made by Violence and Rapine, should go to the Church or the Exchequer, is left
to Divines and Lawyers to Judge; and whether they that detain the Kings Rights
and Revenues which should go toward the payment of His Debts, be not as guilty
of Opression and Cruelty, as those Violators of Religion and Law, were of
Sacrilege, and injustice, is left to the World to Judge.

SEVERAL CONSIDERATIONS Of the CREDITORS OFFERED (To the Lords, and Commons
Assembled in PARLIAMENT) Concerning the KING'S Revenue, and the Debts OF THE
CROWN.
1. A Business wherein all men are equally concerned, seldom any man makes it
his particular care to follow, which has been the cause that so often good
purposes fall to the ground; most men minding their own private interest before
the public good of their Coun^^ry, for which they are chosen, and trusted.

2. Many Men of abstruce learning, and great abiliti^^, do rather please
themselves with their own speculations, then look into the other concernme^ts
of the World; by managing those affairs which may advantage the King in his
revennue, or the people in their trade.

3. When the Kings present wants are considered, the greatness of his debts,
and the complaints of so many grants, it may not be unseasonable to enquire if
some men were not executors in their own wrong, and that diverse have built upon
other men's Foundations, to the great grievance of these which have suffered,
through Violence, and Oppression.

4. Those riches, and honors fall not out of the clouds (but are acquired by
honest art, ingenuity, and fidelity, to the Crown) which are permanent, yet
(...) she Crown be indebted, those persons are deficient that do obstruct the
payment of the Kings debt, by keeping back (...) proportion of money which
should contribute toward the discharge of the Kings obligations.

5. Anciently the Nobility, and Gentry, brought in the chief revenue to the
King, holding most of the Lands in their possessions, by Knights service, and
(...), which yielded Wards, Marriages, Reliefs, and several services to the
Crown, the trade of the (...) improved the Lands from 5 shillings an a^re, to
15. The Barons, and ancient Gentry have parted with (...) Merchants, and others
that have raised their Families, by industry thirst, and such like enterpris^s
(...) those purchasers were abated considerably in regard of the tenures, which
upon the foundations of law yielded (...) advantages to the King. And the
Creditors parted with large sums of money upon assignments of the pro^^^ of
that Court,* which cannot now be considered but out of the improvements in the
Exchequer, or the several (...) hold the Lands, which reap the great benefits
by taking away the Court of Wards, and Purveiances.

6. Formerly the Kings of England con^erred great offices of trust, Before the
Law of Property there was (...) theft, but since the positive Law was
established. Men know there duties, and the penatties, for Transgressing them.
upon the Clergy and called them to the Council table for their W^sdom, (...),
Religion, and experience. And they, gave them charge of the great Seal,
Treasury, etc. yet some of them were defective, and put upon the Kings mercy by
Parliaments, for wasting the revenue of the Crown. The Lords temporal have
likewise been often censured for procuring large proportions of the Crown Lands
to themselves, and their relations.

7. There has been Laws in force, that the mover of any gift, or the procurer
of any grant, should be fined the double value, until the Kings deb^s were
paid. And, in the Lord Burleighs time, a Customer of London was fined a
considerable sum of money for farming part of the Queens revenue at an
undervalue, to the prejudice of the Crown, and the damage of the people.

8. When the debts of the Crown were not so great, nor the wants so many, an
Ordinance was made pro hospitio Regis in the 3. Year of Edward the 2. and
Cardinal Walsey afterward amended the Books of orders, called Aulae Regis The
motive whereof was Al Honneur de dieu, and a H^nneur, and profit de saint
Eglise, and al h^nneur de Roy, and a son profit, and au profit de son peuple
etc. Henry the 4. caused his Son the Prince, and the rest of his Council to
ordain such moderate Governance of his house that may continue au plaisir, de
dieu, and du peuple, to preserve the Kings honor, and prevent secret waste.

9. It was a question put to a noble man in Henry the 3s. time, whether Honor,
or Religion tied him most to the service of the Crown, The Laws of England were
ever a^campted the Image of Wisdom the force and strength of ^reason, and
Argument. The Statutes passing the test of all estates, are likened to Gold
thrice refined.
he answered, they were individual Concommitants, and had equal operation upon
persons of worth, and understanding: Honors being sacred orders, and are used
both as Sheilds, and Ensigns, and they are obliged to defend the cause of the
Orphan, and Widow, next to the Honor of the King, of whom they hold their
Dignities. The King preserves the Law in its, Force, and Vigor, by his
subservient Ministers of Justice, whom all Estates are bound to observe; And in
token of subjection, the Prince himself disdained not the old Saaxon word
Ichdien, I serve; The chief Justice in Henry the 4. time, committed the Prince
for Contempt of the Court, and upon his complaint. The King greatly rejoiced
that he had such a Judge, that durst administer Justice upon his Son, and that
he had such a Son so gracious as to obey: and afterward Kings Henry the fifth
himself charged the Judges to minister the Law indifferently, that the
oppressed might be eased by speedy Justice, and the Offenders discouraged by
Judgment executed, that the Land might not longer morn for the iniquity of
former ages

10. The certain Revenue of the Crown was surveied, and sold by the late
pretended powers, wherein many Fee-farm ^ents, that before were continued as
supers, in the Auditors books, and receivers accounts, The purchasors made good
to themselves, which the King was either defrauded of by Auditors, receivers,
collectors, Bailiffs, or tenants; This revenice might be reasonably (...) 10
300000. pounds per annum, and upwards, upon (...). A prerogative which every
private per^son assumes to him^self.
And upon inquiry into the revenues, and profits, issuing out of all his
Majesty's Honors, castles, Manors, Lands, possessions, demeasn-lands, rents,
customary rents, fee-farms, farm-rents, and tenths reserved upon Charters, or
letters Patents of perpetuity, granted from the Crown (which made such a noise
in the World) considering the vast charge, and expense of Bailiffs, Stewards,
accomptants, Auditors, Receivers, Bedles, Collectors, and other that are paid
out of the Kings money, besides allowances to stypendaries, and sallaries, to
Vicars, chorals, Curates and Chaplains to Hospitals, and free Schools; for
procurations, and Synodals, to Archdeacons, and stypends to Auditors Clarks
for writing their accounts, and perpetual Pentions, Annuities, and Corrodies,
and yearly fees to Constables of Castles, Keepers of houses, Parks, Forests and
Chases, Surveyers fees, Woodwards fees, Reparations, respites, and other
allowances incident to this receipt, upon examination it was found, that there
came not clearly into the Kings Coffers above 97000 pounds per annum, but into
the purchasers purse, far greater sums; so that most of the Kings small rents,
as now ordered, are rather burth^nsom then advantageous to the Crown, the King
having granted away his wardships, Reliefs, Marriages, etc. for which tenure
many of those rents were continued.

11. The Tenants and common people of England ought to be kept in love and
strength to serve the King. English Men are to be led not drawn.
The State and Majesty of the Kingdom also to be continued that the King may be
feared abroad, and honored at home: And if the revenue formerly had not been
intercepted, exhausted, or misapplyed, those many evils upon all estates of the
Kingdom had been prevented.

And if the Parliament did seriously consider, that the Kings wants, and
engagements are as well encouragements to Enemies, as dishear^ning to Friends,
they would labor to fill his Coffers out of his own, and annex a revenue
inseparable from the Crown, answerable to the support of his Majesty, the
defense of the Kingdom, and that also might reward his Servants, by sufficient
pentions out of his Exchequer, rather then to give away old Lands of the Crown,
or new Escheats, and forfeitures, which come by Gods gift, to preserve Justice,
and Equity, and the splendor of the Royal Family.

There be many millions of people (in England and Wales) represented only by
the King (in Parliament) that have not forty shillings per annum freehold,
nor their voices in Cities, or Buroughs at Elections; who were born loyal, and
sucked in Alleagiance with their Mothers milk, their constitutions naturally
inclining, and submitting to the King, and are most willing to pay the Excise
for ever, out of their labors, and Bowels, if the charge in the collecting of
it, might be paid by those that receive the benefit, and allow nothing in
recompense for the Court of Wards, and purveyance to the benefit of the Crown,
or Advantage of those Creditors to whom, the profits of the Court was assigned
by the King for money lent upon that security.

12. Solomon says, That money answers all things, and oppression makes wise
men mad. Honors are but small additions, if they must be supported by the
people, and the persons that wears them exceeds not others in Virtue, and
Merit, as well as in order, and title. Men of true learning, and understanding,
do good offices for goodness sake, and study the benefit of their Country, by
easing the burdens of the poor, and yielding comfortable maintenance, and
encouragement to them that make others rich, and honorable by their labors.
In Italy, Princes, and the rest of the nobility, account it no indignity to
deal in Merchandising affairs, in other parts of France, and Germany, far
remote from the Seas, where they live, not so plentifully, they esteem it below
their quality, and out of a Custom, choose rather to put their younger sons
into the Wars, then adventure them for wealth, and experience into the World
abroad as Merchants, which has given such advantages to the Hollanders to
engross the trade, and money of Vrope into their hands: The old Dictate
confirmed that the Co^niers has it on their Back. the Citizens in their Books
and the (...) in their (...).
And its observed that Churchmen of these times, are not so public spirited
as in the former ages, which makes money so scarce, and Citizens complain of
them as much as their Tenants, and the whole Nation for their unkindness to the
King, not rendering him the tenth part of that he willingly, and freely gave
them of late, which the King might have kept in Commendam many years together,
as Queen Elizabeth often used to do. The Church of Rome takes the advantage of
raising considerable sums of money, by Ecclesiastical offices, and dignities,
above the degrees of secular Priests, which claim tithes ex condigno, from God
and the people, the others ex dono from the Pope, and his favorites, therefore
no symoney in opinion, where the benefit accrues, to a Common Good of the
Country.

Lewis, the 12th. of France, that was called the Father of his Country, raised
a considerable revenue by offices that were not Judicial; and Charles the fifth
prescribed it to his Son as a rule, in his last Instructions, drawing His
ground, and reason, from the practice of the ancient Romans, for that the Fees
of writs, etc. were as trespass offerings, and ought to come into the Public
Treasury, rather then into any private Purse, to enrich particular Men.

Those potent States abroad that were raised by the aids, and supplies of the
English Crown, took the boldness, and liberty not only to revile King James,
and the King of Denmark (terming them Bankrupt Princes) but also insulted over
their subjects, in the Indian Plantations, etc.) And in derision of the English
Nation they would usually say, the Dutch Merchants had gold Chains to reach
from Amsterdam to Whitehall, which would purchase any advantage in Commerce, or
expiate any Crime, and misdemeanour in their dealings, which gave them great
encouragement in their subtle and cruel practices to the prejudice of the King,
and Kingdom.

We the Creditours of Sir Paul Pinder, and Sir William Courten, and so
consequently the Creditors of the King, are bold (out of necessity) to ask the
Lords spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and Commons assembled in Parliament
releif, for the money so long detained from us, and if those things which are
proposed, be not by Your grave Wisdom, thought fit to be improved toward all
the Advantages mentioned, in the several Petitions, Arguments, Proposals, and
considerations; We leave it to your Honors to find out some other expedient
that may answer the Expectation of God, and the World.

Richard Banks, Thomas Coleman, William Smith, Thomas Gould, On the behalf of
our selves, and the rest of the Creditours.


The Creditors APPEAL, To the KINGS most excellent MAJESTY, and the LORDS of
His most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL, CONCERNING The Island of BARBADOS, and the
Ship Bona Esperanza, taken by the Dutch, Anno 1643.
TO relate all the services, and good offices done (to the Crown, and People of
England) by Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul Pinder were to write Volums in
their praises. And to show what Honor they did the English Nation abroad, what
advantages they brought to the King, and Subjects at Home, what encouragements
they gave to Seamen, and Merchants for increase of Shipping, and Trade; were a
just reprehension to some, and a recrimination to others, that by indirect
practices, have brought great Miseries both upon the Families, and Creditors,
of those two worthy Patriots of their Country.

In the Year 1626. Sir William Courten, sent Captain Henry Powel, Commander of
the good Ship called the William and John of London, with six and forty Men of
several Handycraft Trades, to plant and possess the Island of Barbados, which
was not before inhabited by any person whatsoever, either native, or others.
The said Captain Powel having landed his Men, and taken possession of the
Island for Sir William Courten, continued with them upon the Island, the space
of a fortnight, in which time they cut down some Woods, and built some small
Houses for their present conveniences; He then left them provisions, and
sailed to the Main upon the Coast of Guyana, and furnished himself with roots,
plants, fowls, Tobacco-seeds, sugarcanes, potatoes, and other materials, and
brought along with him thirty two Indians, which he placed upon the said
Island, who taught the English to plant the said roots, seeds, etc. (the first
that ever was planted there.) Sir William Courten sent another Ship called the
Peter, with a Pinnace called the Tomasine, commanded by John Powel, wherein
were threescore and ten Men and Women, with several materials also for planting
the said Island for Sir William Courten aforesaid, who were all landed there
before Captain Henry Powel returned for England, and had built a Fort called
the plantation Fort; That in the Year 1627 Sir William Courten set up the King
of Englands Colors, placed a Governor, made Constitutions, and Ordinances
there, according to the Laws of England, having procured a Patent, from King
Charles the first under the great Seal, in the name of Philip Earl of Pembroke,
in trust, to countenance the said Government, and Plantation. And before the
Year 1628 they had built three Forts, 100 Houses, began five plantations, viz.
the Corn Plantation, the Indian bridge, the fort, the Indian East, and Powels
plantation, all which was done at the proper Cost of Sir William Courten: that
about the Month of April 1628, the Earl of Carlisle, having a patent of the
Charebe Islands, sent a letter, directed to Captain John Powel, and Captain
William Deane in Barbados, and to others there, entreating them to give
entertainment and respect unto Captain Charles Wolverstone, whom he had sent
thither with several men from London, hearing it was a hopeful Plantation, and
to join with them in it. The Earl of Carlisle engaging himself upon his Honor
in the said Letter, that the said Wolverstone and his men should not give them
any occa^ion of offense or trouble in their said plantation; not suspecting any
prejudice from Englishmen, coming from a person of Honor, they entertained
Wolverstone and forty men or thereabouts with him: who seduced the people,
under pretense, of greater privileges in the said Island, and seized the forts,
and took Captain John Powel Prisoner, and others that would not adhere to them.
Then Wolverstone declared that he was there as Governor of the said Island for
the Earl of Carlisle. That in the Year 1629 Sir William Courten sent Captain
Henry Powel again in the good Ship called the Peter and John, with a 100 men
well provided with Arms, who took the forts, released John Powel and the rest
of the Prisoners, and brought the said Wolverstone away Prisoner to London, by
virtue of a Warrant under the hand and seal of the said Earl of Pembroke. The
said John Powel and his Company afterward continued in the quiet possession of
the said Island six Months or thereabouts; and then one Henery Hawley arrived
at the said Island in a Ship called the Carlisle, and invited the said John
Powel with others to an entertainment on Shipboard, who seized them and
carried them away Prisoners to St. Christophers, and sent a company of lewd
persons from thence, and daily supplies from other Merchants of London, who
usurped the whole Island, and Government from Sir William Courten and his
Company, contrary to the Law of God, and Nations. That several persons who
refused to join with the Earl of Carlisle, or those that pretended to have the
Power under him were stigmatized, whipped, imprisoned, and shot to death: And
then several men of mean quality, understanding the condition of the Island,
took advantage of the times, and went over with a company of loose and idle
persons who possessed themselves of the said Island, and plantations, and out
of the vast expense and charges of Sir William Courten and his endeavors, they
have gotten great estates, but have yielded no satisfaction, either to Sir
William Courten or his assigns, notwithstanding the said Sir William Courten
had two several Judgments against the Earl of Carlisle, and Wolverstone, upon
trials in the Court of Admiralty, concerning the propriety of the said Island.
The Power of the said Earl of Carlisle being greater at the Council table then
Sir William Courten or his interest, the complaint was suspended, and the
Damages, which were then thirty thousand pounds and upwards, wholly detained
by those that intruded and disseized the said Sir William, and his servants of
the said Island, and plantations.

About five Years after Sir William Courten died, and left several Factories,
in the East Indies, to William Courten his only son and heir, and his sole
Executor, who took upon him the execution of his Fathers Will, and joining with
Mr. Thomas Kennistone, and others, sent several ships, with Merchandises to the
East Indies, for supplies to the rest, and in the Year 1642 the good ship Bona
Esperanza of London, being fraughted by the said William Courten and his
Compartners, making a trading Voyage between Goa, in the East Indies, and Macco
in China, in the month of June 1643 the said ship was set upon by two Dutchmen
belonging to the states of the low Countries, and the East India company of
Holland, and after the loss of the said Master of the said ship, and several
seamen slain outright, with eleven more wounded in the defense thereof, the
said ship with all her Merchandise, was then taken and disposed of by the said
two Dutch-ships of Amsterdam, whereby the said William Courten etc. were
damnified to the value of threescore and fifteen thousand pounds and upwards,
besides the great loss and utter ruin of several men, women, and children,
whose husbands and Fathers were killed in the said service, all which is
sufficiently proved, upon record, under several testimonies, of authentic
witnesses taken upon Oath in the Court of Admiralty; since which time there
has been applications made to the East India Company of Holland for
satisfaction, but they being so powerful in their own Courts, and by their
influences in others, that there has been no restitution as yet made for the
loss and damages of the ship, Life, or goods to the said W. Courten, or his
Compartners aforesaid.

And for as much as Sir Paul Pinder, and two other Persons of Honor, became
bound for the said William Courten for 126000 pounds, and furnished him with
several considerable sums of money to keep up his credit, and expected certain
returns also from the East Indies, for their satisfaction, having his parts
assigned to them for Counter-security, which are wholly disappointed whereby it
is evident by this, and diverse other former sad examples, that many of this
Nation have been distroyed by such like attempts of the Dutch.

The premises considered, and for as much as Sir William Courten and Sir Paul
Pinder were such memorable Merchants, so good servants and Subjects to the
Crown of England, so great Benefactours to the Church, and such instruments in
the Commonwealth, and that it has been already a great reflection upon the
Honor of the Nation, and a great discouragment to others in following their
Examples, for being so slighted; it is therefore the humble request of all the
Creditors, that since these and other sad misfortunes have befallen the Heirs,
and Executors of Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul Pinder, by the violence of
these last 20 Years at home, and their great losses sustained by Violence
abroad, besides the Debts due from the Crown; that for the relief of many
hundred poor Men, Women, and Children, Your Majesty would be greciously pleased
to take the same into your most pious consideration, that a select Committee of
twelve Lords, and Commons in Parliament may be appointed to examine the whole
matters of fact, and make a report thereof to Your Majesty, and Your m^st
honorable Privy Council, to determine what in Justice the said Causes, may,
both from the said Planters of Barbados, and the Dutch East India Company,
according to the Laws of Nations, and the common protection due from
Sovereigns, to their Loyal Subjects, be reasonably required.

EPILOGUE.
TO reflect upon the late Distractions of the Nation, The great Debts of the
Crown, or the sadsufferings of the Creditors, were to Arraign all men's Actions:
that transgressed the rules of Law, and Equity In the English Monarchy (a
Government coming the nearest to Perfection in this Transitory World) The KING
in his Politic Capacity is not improperly likened to God, for Justice, and
Immortality; its observed therefore that he neither dies, nor does any Wrong,
and that from the KING the Fountain of Honor, and Justice the Laws like
Streams are conducted by the Judges, and dispersed to the people, and the
sacred Ordinances, by the Ministers of the Church, to their several Cures, so
essentially springing from that Bottom, the two main Pillars of good
Government, Religion, and Law, the two inseparable supporters of Regal
Authority: The Currents were stopped by defect in the Pipes. The Fountain, was
not dry, nor the Streams, but the aquaducts failing, when they plunged
themselves, and others into a Deluge of Miseries, and disorders; living upon
the spoils of the Crown with so many hundred hands in the Kings Purse, that
minded not the support of his royal Estate, nor the ordinary protection of the
People; which brought those Persons into extreme wants that supplied the King
with Money for his necessary occasions. The Wits and Inventions of other Men
were chiefly taken up about riches, and Possessions of the World, streaching
some things beyond their latitude, and depressing others from their Force, and
Power, which caused the Oppression of ehe Kings Creditors (which now lies under
Considerations of Parliament) either to be satisfied by a general Contribution,
of the Nation, or by improvement of what they have Proposed to the King, or by
the revennue in the Exchequer chargeable with their Debts.

KING CHARLES the first (of ever blessed Memory) asserted the due Honor of the
Clergy, the Rites, and Government of the Church, and his other praerogatives
also (which were not granted by the People that were reserved to himself, when
the positive Law of Nations was first Established) he maintained with Zeal, and
Constancy to the last. Affirming that no Man could be exempted from Obedience,
and Subjection under the Government of Kings any more then Children from the
Obedience they owed to their Parents, by the Laws of God, and Nature. And that
in the Estimation of right understanding Men.

They are very unworthy, and ungrateful to their Prince that seeks to defraud
him in any perquisite or revennue of the Crown, who studies daily at Court how
to preserve them in Peace, and Prosperity from Enemies at home, and abroad, He
that takes the value of a shilling from any Man's person upon the Road, dies
without Mercy, and he that Counterfeits a single Penny suffers Death by the
Law; yet he that robs God, and the King his Vicegerent goes unpunished for
Offenses of Fraud, and Sacrilege which has brought all the sad Calamities both
upon Church, and State.

If by this indigested Discourse (being straightened of Time) I have incurred the
Displeasure of some, or the hard Censure of others, I can justly answer them
both, that it was neither prejudice, nor intrest that engaged me, but Zeal to
my King, and Country, and the miserable deplored Condition of several Orphans,
and Widows that daily called upon me as administrator to seek some seasonable
Releif after so many Years sufferings, and forbearance of their Debts; And by
this way of improvement: I fear not but their Cause will find Patrons, and
Advocates, if they consider rightly the Benefit, and convenience that all
Estates may reap, where the whole Design looks toward the Glory, of God, the
Honor of the King, the Advantage of the Clergy, and the prosperity of the
whole Nation, to which all Men should subscribe.

Connecta pacis Deo concordia vinctus. Gratia soli Deoque Gloria. GEORGE CAREW.

Some Objections have been raised against the particulars following, which
shall be fully answered, and further invincible reasons given, and expedients
offered to the Parliament, in convenient time, which will appear conducing to
the benefit, and advantage of the King, and Subject.

Some Obstructions have been met withal from several persons that would rather
continue mistakes, and keep those things in obscurity, which ought to be
brought to Light, and discoursed properly to a Parliament.

Some Grievances there may be deser^ed, upon due examination of the Contents,
which cannot properly, be relieved any where, but in Parliament, unto whom the
persons concerned, do make it their Humble desires that A Committee may be
appointed, to debate those things which may give a General satisfaction to the
Nation, and a speedy remedy of several abuses, and inconveniences, daily
suffered by the King, and Kingdom.

THE CONTENTS.
AN Epistle to the Lord Chancellor: Lord Treasurer: and the rest of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy-Councel. 3. A Preamble to the whole Treatise
and Proceedings. 4. A Petition of Walter Devereux, and George Carew for the
General Collection of Chauntry rents, pentions, portions, and foreign rents, in
England, and Wales. 5. The Lord Treasurers referrence (upon that Petition) to
the Barons of the Exchequer, and others. ibid. An order of the Barons, on the
Lord Treasurers Referrence 8. The second Order of the Barons, in relation to
the Lord Treasurers referrence ibid. A Method of the ancient way concerning
accounts in the Exchequer. 9. A Certificate of the sworn Clerks of the Pipe
concerning the accounts, and miscarriages of Auditors, Receivers, and
Collectors. 9. 10. Several Proposals, and Considerations of Walter Devereux,
and George Carew offered to the Lord Treasurer, and others touching the Kings
certain Revenue, how it may be brought into his Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer
without Charge 11. 12. The Barons Report, upon the Petition, and Referrence,
concerning the Collection of the Chauntry rents, Pentions, Portions, etc. 13. A
Petition of George Carew, John Culpeper, and Thomas Gould, for a Patent of the
first Fruits, and Tenths at 60000 pounds per annum rent, for the term of one
and thirty Years. 5. The Arguments, and Propositions, annexed to the Petition
concerning the improved values of first Fruits, and Tenths, of the Clergy which
ought to be paid to the King. 6. 7. An Epistle to the Arch Bishop of
Canterbury. 14. Further Considerations offered (by the Creditors) to the
Clergy, concerning their due payment of first fruits, and tenths, to the King.
15. The Kings right to the government of the Church, and the original of the
Popes Usurpation over Christian Princes. 16 The office of Bishops, and
Dignitaries of the Church of England vindicated. 17. The Inference, or
conclusion from the Considerations offered to the Clergy. 18. Several
Considerations (of the Creditors) offered to the Lords Spiritual, the Lords
temporal, and Commons assembled in Parliament, concerning the Kings Revenue,
and the debts of the Crown. 19. 20. An appeal of the Creditors, to the Kings
most excellent Majesty, and the Lords of his most honorable Privy-Councel,
concerning the island of (...) and the Ship Bona Esperanza taken by the Dutch.
21. The Epilogue 22.
FINIS.

