CHRISTIANITY NO Enthusiasm: OR, The Several KINDS of Inspirations and
Revelations Pretended to by the QUAKERS, Tried, and found Destructive TO HOLY
SCRIPTURE AND True Religion: In Answer to Thomas Ellwood's Defense thereof; in
his Tract, Miscalled Truth Prevailing, etc.

Rev. 2.2. Thou have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not; and
have found them Liars. LONDON, Printed by T. D. for Henry Brom, at the Gun at
the West end of St. Paul's. 1678.

Imprimatur,

Guil. Sill.
Aug. 30. 1677.
The Epistle To the READER.
THere coming lately to my hand a Book called Truth Prevailing and detecting
Error, etc. written by Th. Ellwood; pretending to be an Answer to a certain
Tract, named a Friendly Conference between a Minister and a Parishioner of his,
enclining to Quakerism, etc. Composed by a Respected Friend of mine: and
understanding how that by the Quakers it was esteemed as one of their strongest
pieces, and by them thrust into the hands both of some Magistrates, and other
persons of several Qualityes, into whose acquaintance they could insinuate. I
set my self to the perusal of it: The Cavils, Sleights, false Quotations and
Untruths in several parts thereof, were easily discoverable; but the Pretense
to Immediate Revelation and Inspiration did most nearly affect me, that being a
tender matter, which ought not to be claimed without the Greatest Certainty,
nor so much as mentioned without the Highest Regard; because [the Glory of God,
the Authority of the Scriptures, the state and welfare of Humane Societies; The
Souls of all (especially of those who are so facil as to Believe such
pretenses) and the interest of the Christian Religion,] are all deeply Engaged
and Concerned in those Demands.

And having observed these and the like things:

1. That Bad men, Evil Designs, Inward Heats, Me^ancholy Fancies, Satan's
Suggestions, the want of better Arguments, or the like, have ^requently in all
the Ages of the Church, taken Sanctuary un^er so Sacred a cover, (as by ^he
Catalogue given Chapter ^he Sixth, does sufficiently appear: Which (if
necessary) might be enlarged in those several Periods downwards, to our own
late licentious times, when Inspirations and Heavenly Impressions were made the
Common stale for many purposes.)

2. That the same Grounds which can induce any man to incline to Quakerism, do
as strongly engage him both to Believe and own the several other Persons and
Sects which mak^ use of the very same claim, bot^ with an equal right, and wit^
an equal confidence, for when the Demands, Proofs an^ Reasons are alike, the
Reception and Entertainment ther^ of should be Answerable.

3. Having Considered Th. Ellwoods manner of Stating the Case, viz. [That all
Believers in all Ages, p. 228. and 229.
in some Degree or other, have inward Teachings and Immediate Revelations from
the Spirit of God which dwells in them.] By which way of procedure he has done
as much disservice to that Cause he designed thereby to support, as if he had
been Hired professedly to subvert it; for until he has proved all other
Persons in the World to be no Believers, (either not to have right Articles of
Faith, or, which is more difficult to discover, That their Hearts are not
sincere and true in the Belief of them) he has argued them into Inspirations
as good as his own, and there are many such men who do profess, and will make
out themselves to be as True Believers, as he is, or can be, and so at least by
his own Rule they must have an Equal share of Inspirations with him, whereby
the Revelations of one side will be endlessly clashing against the Revelations
of the other, and in such Contests men will not know which party to adhere to.

Such things as these being weighed, I determined to Examine his Pretensions in
this matter, and in Order thereto cast some thoughts together, chiefly in
reference to the Person and Prophetic Office of our Lord Jesus, which by their
Conceit of the Light sufficient within every man, and a perpetual Flux of
Inspiration from without are destroyed or rendered unnecessary. This being done,
I was not satisfied merely from Thomas Ellwood to take my measures, nor by one
Writer to judge of an whole Sect; (though we may justly fasten upon such a
Party (as challenges Immediate Revelation, both to the whole Body, and every
Believer and Member of it) whatever is written in matters of Religion,
especially in this highest part thereof, by any of their number. They also
using such Caution about Licensing and Printing their Books, as will appear
from their 5th. Constitution.) I therefore resolved to discover the Doctrine of
Thomas Ellwood 's Brethren, and accordingly searched into such of their Works,
or those they were concerned in, as in this Country I could obtain: it was some
trouble to learn their Names, and then procure them, and when had, it was but
small pleasure to peruse them: for whereas other Discourses do improve, delight
and reward, these did little better than amuse. Their Terms were so wrested,
and their Style so forced and improper, that we may apply to them, what Martial
said of Sextus his Books. Non Lectore tuis opus est, sed Apolline Libris. St.
In Praef. ad Libr. 1.
Irenaeus took the pains to Discourse with, to Examine the words and opinions
of the Valentinians, and such like Heretics, and even to read Commentarios
ipsorum, the very Books in which their Doctrines were contained, though they
were of so strange and disgustful a composure, that as Erasmus observes in his
Dedicatory Epistle before it [none could read them without weariness, unless he
was armed with a mighty Patience. quos nemo nisi patientis stomachi poterit
absque toedio revolvere.] Whereupon Tertullian says, Adv. Valent. p. 287.
That he was [omnium doctrinarum curiosissimus explorator.] And as those
Fathers observe, some Opinions are so Monstrous, so Trifling, and contrary to
sound Doctrine, that they do offend and jade the Reader: but withal the very
opening of such Ware, is a sufficient discovery of its Vileness: and I think it
is as easy a Work to understand the (...), etc. of the Valentinians, ( these
were their Terms of Art, and taken from the Scriptures also, but most horribly
wrested and perverted by them) as to apprehend some of the first Books of the
Quakers, which are full of such Scripture words, but new molded into their
Senses.

The Result of that Search with Respect to the Subject matter is here
presented; and their Doctrines did prove much worse than I expected to have
found them, greater depths of Satan, higher Mysteries of Iniquity, more
Equivocations and un-Christian Tenets, did appear than my Charity thought them
guilty of: Amongst other pieces, I think I have hit upon that which may be
called their New Gospel, and have discovered their very Head and Founder: but
if they like him not for their Father, I think we need not to be much at a Loss
to find out others: For besides some few Singular Fancies, there is not very
much that is New in their Opinions, and yet there is but little of the True Old
Christianity neither. Satan (we may reasonably think) has long ago canvassed
every word in the Sacred Book, from thence to form Heresies, and having run his
round, he does often new dress old Obsolete ones, turning them into other shapes,
by some slender Additions to make them be the less discernible: but whosoever
will compare the Doctrines of the Quakers with many of the rotten Condemned
Heretics, with some Fancies of the Monks in later times, of the Anabaptists,
Familists, etc. about the Reformation, of the Seekers, Antinomians, Ranters,
Dellists, and those other swarms of Locusts in this Kingdom, will be forced to
acknowledge that not only their Foundation is the same, but that also many of
their Opinions, even their Phrases, Words and Terms proceed from the same
Fountain.

Learned men do look upon them as so unreasonable and others do esteem them so
Obstinate, that either they are not worth meddling with, or that the attempts
will prove fruitless: But the Interest of true Religion, and the good of those
Souls for whom Christ dyed, are so Sacred, that no Endeavors to justify the
one and to save the other, ought to be Discouraged. And whereas Heretics have
one while questioned about God, at another time about Christ or the Holy
Spirit, sometimes the Holy Scriptures, sometimes the Church, the Sacraments or
single Articles have been debated. Quakers doly under those sad Circumstances,
of having licked up the Vomit, and imbibed the Errors about most of those.
[Denying the Trinity, and yet dividing the Godhead, Denying Christ's Body and
Bodily Presence now in Heaven, and our Redemption by him, Confounding Christ
and the Holy Ghost, engrossing Christianity to themselves; so as to Paganize
all other Christians, and instead of them taking in the Heathen World, to fill
up those Vacancies they have thrust us from (they being much more favorable to
them, as having Christ within them.) looking upon the Scriptures as dead
Letters, not the Rule either of Faith or Manners, that they signify nothing to
us without a new Revelation to impose them, and a further one to Expound them.]
With many the like Prevarications in the most Fundamental Articles of Religion:
and such Poisonous Doctrines require Warning and Antidotes from all hands.

This I have Related to show the Occasion of this Tract, and shall more
particularly address my self to such of the Quakers as are well-meaning
Persons, like Absaloms men, 2 Samuel 15.11.
in the Simplicity of their Hearts following their Leaders, but yet in
Preparation of Mind, being ready to embrace the Truth when fairly proposed,
and, as I hope, abhorring those Abominations which ly concealed under their
Doctrines, or are the direct Consequents of them: The great prejudice those
poor Souls ly under, is, That they are kept under with an Implicit Faith, and
scarce permitted to read Tracts against them, which are supposed to be but
Temptations to remove them from the Truth: But if any such well designing
Quakers shall meet with this, I desire them seriously to lay to Heart these few
following things, which are not here set down to anticipate, but either Briefly
to represent what is proved in the following Papers, or what might be more
fully showed, especially in reference to that dangerous Delusion, That the
Light within every man is the Lord Jesus.

1. That other Sects (whom you Disown and Condemn) have given out themselves to
be Inspired as much as you do, have spoken as well, have continued as long,
have been as numerous, have given as convincing Proofs as you can do, and yet
have been first Wandering, then Fallen Stars, and have come to nothing. If you
say, That theirs were Counterfeit, but yours True Lights, that is a pitiful
Begging the Question; or, If you say that their Light at first was Right, but
that they mistook in its use, this still concludes nothing; by what Arguments
you would confute your Corrivals, by the like we may confute you, they falling
as forcibly upon your selves, as upon any others else.

2. Consider that great Disservice which your trifling Expositions attempt to
do unto Religion, a taste of which we may take from your Inspired Allegorical
Interpretations Recorded in Chapter the 8th. [The Everlasting Gospel, The
Tabernacle of David, God, Christ, The Angels, The Devil, The Bottomless Pit,
The Beast with seven Heads, Babylon, The Mystery of Iniquity, The Man of Sin,
The Mystery of Godliness, Michael and the Dragon Fighting, Antichrist, The
Third Heavens, The Father of Lies, etc.] All these are made internal things, so
that a Quaker is well provided, having within and carrying about with him all
those; certainly he must be an empty House, that can entertain so many both
things and persons, and such a mixed Assembly.

3. That other Nations have had their Enthusiasts ( there being a kind of
Circulation of Errors) Germany had its Anabaptists, etc. In the last Century,
and its plenty of Revealers in late times; France had its Libertines; Holland
its Familists, and what not, and other Countries had their share: but the Scene
at present of Fanaticism lies most in England, for the Inquisition and Edicts
suppressing (as it is likely) the Alumbrados or Quakers in Popish Countries, they
were (I mean their Doctrines) transplanted hither, where, in a Soil at that
time well prepared for their reception and increase, they took good Root, and
thence shot forth their Branches into other Nations: nor must we think that
Quakerism is the last Sect, for though the very Dregs of many of the former are
squeezed into it, yet their own Divisions, perpetual Changings, the doting of
some persons upon Novelties, and the Craft of the great Enemy, give us Reason
to suppose that when men are grown weary of this, he will prepare a new one for
them.

4. That you would Consider your own Alterations generally observed both in
point of Doctrine and Behavior, for they are a clear acknowledgment that you
were mistaken at the first, to challenge Divine Motions for many things, and
yet in a few years to recede from those Commands, reflects upon the Spirit as
changeable, or your selves to have been Imposed upon: but if you were truly
Wise it would engage you unto a strict Examination both of your Foundation and
the several things erected on it: The old Marcionites changed thus, [Cottidie
Reformant illud, Tertul. l. 4. adv. Marc.
prout a nobis cottidie revincuntur, daily altered their Opinions, as the
Arguments of the others discovered their weakness and indefensibleness.] So do
you daily lick and new mold many of your Doctrines, as you are beaten from Hold
to Hold, though you continue still enthralled in the main.

5. That you would thoroughly examine the Truth or even Possibility of those two
(by you called) Fundamental Principles.

1. How your Light within can be the Christ, the Savior of the World, for it
destroys the Reality and Truth of his Humane Nature, and hereby you proclaim
your selves to be Antichristian in denying or destroying his coming in the
Flesh. How can his Body or his Soul be within every one of you? make out this,
and it will be an equal Evidence for Transubstantiation; but undoubtedly it
dethrones Christ from Gods Right Hand, and destroys our Faith, our Hope and our
very Religion, even the whole Covenant of Grace, all which are founded in the
Reality of his Person, as our Teacher and Redeemer; and we may apply to you
what the former Father urged, ibid.
[quali habitu -- quonam impetu vel temperamento, quo in tempore diei noctis ve
descenderit? in what Habit, Manner, Condition, in what Hour of the day or night
did he Descend, who saw him descend? who related it? who asserted such a thing
as should not easily be credited when asserted? Proculus affirmed he saw
Romulus ascend to Heaven, but the Christ of God has none to Witness his
descent] into your Souls, but this strange Principle of taking [the Light of
Nature, the Dictates of Conscience, and the Treasures of Knowledge reposited in
the Soul] for the Son of the Most High God, who also was the Son of Man, tends
to Repaganize mankind, and your disowning Baptism ( wherein the Devil, the
World and even Gentilism it self were renounced) is a fit preparation to make
men Heathens a second time.

2. Your other Principle of Perpetual Immediate Inspiration [as to the whole
Body of the Church in general, Im. Rev. in the Title Page.
and to every Member thereof, and to every true Believer in particular] lays
aside the necessity or usefulness of the Sacred Scriptures; for what signifies
the Bible, if it oblige none except it be renewed to them, nor can then be
understood until the Spirit come to expound it: the having no written Book, but
Immediate Teaching in all, would by your model have been far more beneficial,
and your Revelations about Worldly things, Idem, p. 6.
[as Plowing, Digging, going to a place, abiding in it, etc.] lays aside the
use of your Reasons, takes away the Comfortable trusting and relying upon
Providence, looks like a new way of knowing your Fortunes, and exposes the Soul
to the Delusions of Fancy and Evil Spirits whereby Satan may get that
employment, which is assigned to Reason, become the (...), the Coachman or
Driver, get into the Box, and hurry you at his pleasure.

6. That the great Testimonies of our Lords Prophetic Office are by himself
given, John 5.31. -- 40. the first is in v. 33. [Ye sent unto John and he bear
Witness unto the Truth.] Pointed out the Person of Christ, who was a man as
truly as himself. But Christ did not stand barely upon John's Testimony, v. 34.
no, nor did he bear Witness of himself, v. 31. But besides those which might
have been rejected as the Testimonies of men, he appealed to three undeniable
Evidences that God spoke by him. The first is in v. 36. [the Works which the
Father has given me to finish, the same Works that I do, bear Witness of me,
that the Father has sent me.] that is, the Power of Miracles was one evidence
of his being sent from God. The Second is in v. 37. Mat. 3.17. and 17.5. John
12.28.
[The Father himself which has sent me, has born Witness of me.] by those
audible voices from Heaven he gave Credence that Jesus was his Beloved Son, and
commanded [Hear him.] The third is in v. 39. [Search the Scriptures, for in
them ye think ye have Eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me.]
unto which that Text Rev. 19.10. is like [The Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit
of Prophecy.] or the punctual fulfilling in Christ's Person, Doctrine, Life,
Death, etc. What had by a Series of Prophets several hundred years before been
predicted concerning him, proved him to be the true Messiah. But Quakers
pretending the Christian Religion to have been lost for above 1500 years, then
giving out themselves to be the only true Christians, that [after the long
night of thick Darkness, p. 243.
which has covered the Earth, and that general Apostacy] the Gospel is now
again Revealed by them, give us no proofs of what they say, except a train of
Misapplyed words formerly used by other Enthusiasts, and which for the future
will not be forgot by their successors in the like claims, but they produce no
Divine Attestations, not one hair turned black or white by them, or if they
did, that alone would be no Evidence, so certain is that Observation of
Tertullian [edicens multos venturos, Adv. Marc. L. 3.
and signa facturos, and virtutes magnas edituros, aversionem etiam Electorum,
nec ideo tamen admittendos, temerariam signorum and virtutum fidem ostendit, ut
etiam apud Pseudo-Christos facillimarum, Christ's foretelling that false Christ's
would come and work Wonders, shows the uncertainty and rashness of Believing
them upon that account] the strongest proof is that of Prophecy [that more sure
word of Prophecy 2 Pet. 1.19.] even more sure than [the Voice from the
Excellent Glory, v. 17.] and therefore Tho. Ellwood should produce as
Determinate Prophecyes as those which limited the time of Christ's coming, to
prove it to have been foretold, that after 1548 years [the so long lost Gospel
was to be published in the same Demonstration of the Spirit as at the first]
and when that year ( in which our late Gracious Sovereign was Martyred) is
undeniably made out to be the precise time, he must proceed by some certainly
Divine Testimonies to prove that [He and his party are the sole Persons whom
God has raised up for the Redelivery of the Gospel, and that all other their
Competitors are but raised up by Satan to darken those Truths which the Quakers
now bring unto Mankind.]

As for us, we do not deny God's Gracious Communications, nor restrain his
Influences upon men's Souls, he may by Angels, or what ways of notice he please,
signify particular messages to some persons, but it is the claim [of Immediate
Inspiration now in the conveying, renewing or expounding matters of Religion]
which cannot be too much disowned, as the Subverter of our whole Christian
Dispensation and the Introducer of that dangerous dotage concerning the Seculum
Spiritus Sancti, For the Prophecyes and Promises of the old Testament
foretelling the coming of the Christ, He accordingly coming at the time
foretold; and when come, he being truly God, and yet instructing us in the
true nature of man (which humane nature he then had, still retains, and for
ever will retain) his Person being seen, heard, and conversed with; his
Miracles done before Multitudes of people, his Doctrine delivered by him whilst
he was on earth, and heard not only by Disciples and Enemies, but by 12 Select
Apostles appointed purposely for that very end as Witnesses. If the things of
Jesus were transacted outwardly and publicly as the things of men are (even
his most concealed Transfiguration was done before 3 Ey-Witnesses.) If the
History of Christ was recorded by such as were knowing Witnesses thereof. If
the Spirits inward Work chiefly consisted about such things as Christ had be
fore outwardly delivered, and if his inward Immediate Teachings might have been
made out to Inquirers by outward Proofs: If our Christian Religion was settled
by such Eye and Ear Testimony, and its whole Dispensation established by
outward and sensible Evidences: If the old Rule be true, Ecclesia ab Apostolis,
Apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo, that the Church received her Faith from the
Apostles, they from Christ, and he from God, as certainly this whole heap of
Evidences is true (and many more such might be added,) and their force can
never be shaken, Then Quakerism, which tempts us with another kind of Christ,
and another Scheme of Religion, is as Damnable and pernicious an Heresy, as
has assaulted Christianity at any time.

The Introduction In which an Account is given
Of the Quakers Original and Standing. Page 5 Of their Temper in Debates. Page
8 Of T. Ellwood's Learning and Honesty. Page 13 Of his daring Confidence. Page
18
The Contents.
CHAP. I. The State of the Case and the Manner of Proceeding. Page 22 CHAP. II.
How the Apostles came to the Knowledge of the Gospel. Page 31 CHAP. III.
Whether the Quakers be the Apostles Successors and receive the Knowledge of
the Gospel in the same manner as the Apostles did? Page 40 CHAP. IV. Of the
Quakers Renewed or Repeated Revelations. Page 51 CHAP. V. Of their Immediate
Revelations. Page 63 CHAP. VI. Of their Partners and Competitours in
Revelation. Page 70 CHAP. VII. Of their contradictory, different and designed
Revelations. Page 102 CHAP. VIII. Of their Expository Revelations. Page 127
CHAP. IX. Of their Demonstration of the Spirit and new Dispensation. Page 147
CHAP. X. Of their Experiences. Page 157 CHAP. XI. How the Primitive Christians
came to the Knowledge of the Gospel. Page 162. CHAP. XII. Of the Quakers
hearing the Voice of God, and some other claims. Page 166 CHAP. XIII. Of the
Texts of Scripture produced by T.E. p. 169. CHAP. XIV. Of his Destructive Rules
of expounding Scripture. Page 176 The Conclusion. Page 179
The Author living at a great Distance, these Errata's have escaped, which the
Reader is desired to mend with his Pen
Page 17. lin. 1. r. the Catholics and Nov. p. 21. l. 18. Dreamers. p. 23. l.
7. there upon. p. 24. l. 21. withal a. ib. l. 34. sects, or. ib. l. 35. have.
p. 41. l. 10 end. p. 46 l 32 an inference. p 47 l 2 Porphory. p 50 l 17 sole
teacher p 55 l 17. lines. p 61 l 11 dele some. [p. 78. in marg. aginst l. 1.
Principles of the Elect. p. 48. ib. aginst l. 3. Pen. naked Tr. p. 25. ib.
against l. 5. In Mr. Jenner, p. 173.] p 80 l. 31 Inspired. p. 81 in marg. l. 11
Bozius. p. 92 l. 21. dele and so. p 100 l. 9. indisputably. p 101 l 5 from. ib.
l. 13. dele of. p. 104 l. 4. this. p. 105 l. 6. contradictious. p 114 l. 15. of
Hon. p 117 l. 7. superfaetation. ib. l. 27. this. p. 123. Baptista catum
Syritus. p 126. in marg. Valentin. p. 127 l. 4. third Favor. p. 128 l. 18.
wake. p. 129 l. 3 -diation. p. 131. l. 26 dele whole p. 132. ult. no more p
133. l. 31. which is. p. 135. l 25 -ssed. ib. l. 31 dele the. p. 139. l. 8.
continues. p. 141. l. 28 that their. l. 36 Eben. p. 145 l 6. -tually than by.
p. 148. marg. Occum. p. 159 l. 3. collatis. ib. l. 17 invisible. ib. l. 24
dumb. p. 160. l. 6. powers. p. 166. l. 11. dele in. ib. l. 31. too general. p.
175. l. 19. Remanent. p. 178. l. 4. Thus he. ib. l. 15. in a. p. 180 l. 1.
Egyptian. ib. l 2. no nor. p. 184. l. 24. meetings. p. 186 l 7. dele which.
ib. l 16. condemned.

CHRISTIANITY NO Enthusiasm.
The Introduction.
THE Divisions among Christians being fomented by the Enemy of Souls, are as
Industriously retorted upon the very Profession, as they were vigorously
promoted; hereby some are encouraged to Separation, and others hence take the
Confidence to dispute the truth of the Religion it self, because of the various
Sentiments of such as own it. Celsus the Heathen Objected this early, to which
Origin. Cont. Cells. p. 117, 118.
Origin gives a Satisfactory Reply. And Vasens the Arian pretending to be
offended at the same, was satisfied by the Oration of Themistius, [ Socrat.
Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 27. 1 Cor. 11.19.
That there were fewer Differences among Christians than among Philosophers.]
Sozomen. Histor. Eccles. l. 6. c. 36.

The Apostle having foretold that there must be Sects or Heresies; instead of
being an Argument against Christianity, they prove one for it; all Callings or
Professions have their various Rules and Methods, few Laws are made which meet
not with various Expositions: Exact Agreement seems more like a Design or
Compact. It is more possible to be at one in the ways of Error: and in
darkness Men will stick closer together.

Whereas the more there is of Light and Truth, Satan is the more concerned
against them; and among such various Educations, Interests, and Tempers, it
cannot be Morally expected, but that some singular Sect-Masters Masters will
appear, and toll in Proselytes. And though our Differences are too many at
present, yet we can scarce pitch on any time during the Purity of the Church,
especially when Christianity was generally entertained, wherein there were not
as many different formed Parties as are now among us. But whilst the sense of
some Texts or Articles have been Debated, the Sacred Scriptures themselves have
met with severe measure: By some, their Authority and Truth have been disputed;
by others their Phraseology and Style: One while their Language is too plain,
not Courtly enough, nor strewed with Rhetorical Flowers.

The Heathens Objected this betimes.

That the Penmen were unlearned, Arnob. L. 1. Ab hominibus indoctis and
rudibus Scripta sunt, trivialis and sordidus sermo est. -- Barbarismis,
Solaecismis obsitae res vestrae and vitiorum deformitate pollutae.
the Style ordinary or mean, that there were Barbarisms and Incongruities in
those Books; that their address is fitted to the Generality or Common People.

This Weapon was made use of sometimes, Lactant. Lib. 5. C. 1. Haec imprimis
causa est, -- Scriptura Sancta fide careat, quod Prophetae communi ac simplici
sermon ut ad populum sunt locuti -- Nihil audire vel legere nisi expolitum
volunt.

Minutius Faelix has the like Cavil of Caecilius, and in Clemen's
Recognitions, L. 1. The like is insisted on Simpliciter and absque ullo dicendi
fuco.


and Satan, who is expert at the repeating his Old Stratagems, has new managed
it in the mouths of Profane Persons.

But his Arts also are many, and his Methods contradictory: He turns the
Reverse, as one while the Book of God is quarrelled at for plainness; anon it
is rejected in regard of its Obscurity and Darkness.

The Romanists make it difficult to be understood, Fiat lux. Cap. 3. Sect. 15.
p. 192. Sure footing in Christianity. Sect. Dis. p. 12, 13. G. Keith, Immed.
Revel. not ceased, p. 34. p. 96.
and dangerous to be read, to make way for the Proposals and Expositions of
their Infallible Head. And the Quakers do use the very like Expressions and
Exceptions, giving great Reason to suppose that they both are Hammered on the
same Anvil.

[We find it to hurt and weaken, and deaden us, to think any thoughts, even
from the Scriptures, but as the Life and Spirit of God influenceth and
concurreth -- If any time we do it, we find our selves rebuked and chastised by
the Lord for it.] And elsewhere, [ Scripture words are but as a sounding brass
and Tinkling Cymbal, a killing Letter; it is only the words that Christ
himself speaks, that are Spirit and Life, and they who seek Life in the Letter,
seek the Living among the Dead, for it declares of the Life, but it is not
therein, but in him.]

Among others, Thomas Ellwood, in a late Book, which he calls Truth prevailing
and detecting error, etc. makes it his professed business, Chap. 8. To draw a
Veil and obscurity over the Scriptures; questioning, and at last denying the
Bible to be the Word of God, p. 249. calling the Bible a dead thing, the
Scriptures dead letters. p. 250. whereas they dare call their own Printed Works
[Living Divine Testimonies] And T. E. The Works of William Smith
upon his Principles, cannot give the same Title to the Book of God which he
gives to his own, viz. Truth prevailing, etc. He further tells us that the
Scriptures are not sufficient to Salvation. p. 241. nor the -- Rule ibid. and
the like Contempts are most subtly insinuated. Withal he disbands humane
Learning from all Religious Concerns; affirming that the Bible is a sealed
Book; needs the same Revelation to understand it, that the Apostles had to
Write it; And all this is designed to usher in his parties pretended immediate
Inspirations, as the only certain means of understanding any thing in Holy Writ.

This seeming Dishonorable to God, Disgraceful to his Word, Dangerous to Souls
and the quiet of Kingdoms, and the whole being wrongfully stated by him; I have
herein endeavored an Examination of his Notions concerning this matter.

G. The Quakers plainness detecting fallacy. p. 71.
Whitehead acquaints us concerning the Quakers Writings [That some of their
Titles have not been strictly, but figuratively placed upon their Books,] a
Confession (which if pursued) gives us great Latitude, he neither naming what
those Books nor Figures are, a rare Art of Equivocation in the Frontispiece,
what figures may he pretend their Books to have within: and by this slight
they may evade the most pressing Arguments. And should I by this figure call
Ellwoods Book. [ Falsehood prevailing and protecting Error.] I should do no
Injustice, for it is but a pursuance of their own Concessions.

But to new a while his self pleasing title, why it is not less Humble than
Truth prevailing? is this given strictly or figuratively? or imposed by his so
much boasted of Inspiration? The World is too wise to be gulled with a book
that bears a feather in its top; it is truth we look for within, not
anticipating Titles without; Modesty and Reason go further than a hundred such
sounding Brasses, or tinkling Cymbals. Truth prevailing, etc. so sound some
other of their works, [Truth exalted and Deceit abased] [Truth lifting up its
head above scandalls] etc. But he may know that enemies to God and truth have
given such titles to the Creatures of their Brains; which he does to his Work.
Antiphon the Philosopher writ a Book against the very Providence of God, Orig.
Con. Cells. Lib. 4. p. 176.
(...), which he denied, and attempted to take out of the World; and yet he had
the Confidence to call it a Discourse (...), Concerning Truth. Celsus, that
bitter Enemy of the Christian Religion, wrote a tract against it, which he
named The true word or saying, Idem. Lib. 1. p. 14. and 31. In his Fragments
out of Eusebius p. 26 5.
(...).

Hierocles also no mean person composed one against the Christians, which he
entitled (...), the lover of Truth. So that bad lying Books may through
confidence wear good names; and yet all these three, [concerning Truth: the
True word, the lover of Truth] are more modest than Truth Prevailing alias
Rampant; but it is well Books can get Titles, for T.E. is shy in giving them to
men, his new Heraldry and learning orders, they must now have Epithetes and
Adjuncts, p. 45. [By Thomas Elwood] why Thomas? he does dis. own his Baptism,
why has he not changed that name which is the memorial of it: why nothing but
Thomas Ellwood? one while they were at another pass [ In the plain Answer to
his 18 Queries.
called of the World John Whitehead] [ In his Answer to the 15 New castle
ministers.
by one whom the World calls James Naylor] [ A shield of the Truth. Lib. 2.
Refert nosse ingenium and mores ejus eum quo velis congredi.
written from the Spirit of the Lord by one -- who is known to the World, by
the name of James Parnell] of late such alias's are omitted, for they continue
changing, and are but yet going on unto perfection.

It is a Rule in the Recognitions ascribed to Clemens, to know quibus sit
moribus and quibus artibus, etc. To understand the temper of that Person with
whom you have to deal; which must be observed, and I desire the freedom of
inquiring a while into the Quakers; particularly into our present Author, by
way of Introduction, and then shall address to the main Concern; His Repeated
Immediate and Expository Revelations, and his other Notions of the like Mold.

For the Quakers in general two things are not unfit to be considered, Their
Original or standing, And their Temper.

First, for their Original. It may seem more difficult to discover; where Sects
are not called from their Founder, but some property, etc. It may be harder to
trace them to their Head. The Quakers Original.
In 1652 their beginning is supposed, and then abouts they were so called and
known, but they themselves raise it four years higher. In Mr. Faldoes Q. no
Christi. Discourse bethe King and Hub. p. 3. p. 16.
John Whitehead fixes it in the year 1648. and Hubberthorne in 1660. told the
King that they were then twelve years standing. In that black year to these
Kingdoms their pretended light appeared; Considering these things, I am
inclined to affirm them an off-set of the Levellers, and anon shall tender
strong probabilities for it; proposing them to such, whose Age, Experience, or
Circumstances have qualified them for a further Discovery; only premising
somewhat which seemed preparatory toward their appearing.

In the North parts of England (where the Quakers were first known) There were
Grindletonian Familists, who taught [that Scripture is but for Novices, The
White Wolf. p. 39.
that their Spirit is not to be tried by the Scripture, that we must now go by
motions, not by motives, that when God comes to dwell in a man, he so fills the
Soul that there is no more lusting] with such like. When Hell was broke loose,
these and some others were maintained in 1645. which are sucked in by the
Quakers; as, Edwards 2d. part of Gangraena. p. 2d.
[That Christ's Presence in Heaven cannot be proved by Scripture, they pretended
Revelations and Visions, God conveys his Will immediately; not lawful to give
Thanks after Meat, that they are acted by Christ in all, that some are as
perfect here, as ever they shall be in Heaven.] Tho. Hall the Pulpit guarded,
in the Epistle.
Such a Catalogue we find in another with Additionals, which I shall not stand
to transcribe.

But the very draughts and even Body of Quakerism ly in the several Works of
Gerrard Winstanley, a zealous Leveller, wherein he tells of the arising of new
Times and Dispensations, The New law of Righteousness, dated Jan. 26. 1648
and challenges Revelation very much for what he writ. [ The Humane Body was
not the Christ, but the Spirit in that Body, in the Preface; p. 11. Christ the
anointing shall dwell in every one, as he dwelt in the man Christ Jesus, p. 13.
the Rising up of Christ in Sons and Daughters is his second coming; the
ministration of Christ in one single person is to be silent, p. 21. Father and
Son are all one, only the Father is the Universal power in the whole Globe, the
Son is the same Power drawn into, and appearing in a single person. p. 53.
Priests teach for hire, Tithes brought in by the Pope, p. 61. The Resurrection
is begun, p. 85. Without Voice, Vision, or Revelation men know not what they
speak, p. 103. The Righteous at Death enter into the Father himself, p. 111.
all Expositions are to cease, and we are to wait with a quiet silence. p. 112.
Speak from the Original light within.]

[Pag. The Saints Paradise.
1. Teaching out of Scripture is but man's teaching. p. 14. the anointing
teaches without the Scriptures, p. 23. you Idolize Scripture, p. 73. The
Father lies buried under the Unrighteous fleshly power. p. 81. Jesus Christ is
now upon his rising from the dead, the time is come. p. 83. Jesus is the light
within every one. p. 94. the Holy Law is not the Letter of the Scripture, but
the Spirit.]

[P. The Mystery of God revealed to his servants.
7. God will dwell in every Man and Woman, as he did in Christ the Pledge, or
first fruits. He makes seven several dispensations; the fifth is p. 31. Gods
manifesting in the flesh of Christ, the 6th is p. 32. Gods appearing in the
Flesh of his Saints tell the Resurrection day, which he makes a clearer
Dispensation than the former.]

[P. Truth lifting up his head above Scandals. October. 16. 1648.
11. A Christ within is thy Savior. p. 16. the Apostles seeing Christ ascend
was a declaration in Vision, of the Spirits rising up. p. 18. Christ's body went
into the four Elements to purify them. p. 19. his Spirit went into his Father.
p. 29. Father, Son and Spirit are three names of one power. p. 46. Magistrates
have nothing to do in matters of Religion. p. 70. you must have a command
within. p. 73. Humane Learning quarrelled at.]

[P. Fire in the Bush.
20. The Law, Spirit, God, Christ, Heaven, within you. p. 33. Christ the
anointing within leads into all truth. p. 46. the Seed or Christ is to be seen
within, he is no Savior that is at a distance; Jesus at a distance from thee
will never save thee.] With many such expressions over and over repeated.

That these are the Quakers Principles is well enough known, allowing some
little alterations, as few Sect-Masters but have their Doctrine varied by their
Proselytes; And the Religious Orders of the Church of Rome have suffered super
Reformations.

Now considering these Opinions, the Year, the Country ( as the Mystery of God,
is Dedicated to his beloved Countrymen of the County of Lancaster) the Printer,
Giles Calvert, New Law, etc. p. 44. ad. 75. Fire in the Bush. p. 64. ad finem.
An Humble Request to Ministers and Lawyers all over.
and that s^veral Levellers settled into Quakers, incline to take hem for
Winstanleys Disciples, and a branch of the Levellers. And what this man writes
of [levelling men's estates, of taking in of Commons, that none should have more
ground than he was able to Till and Husband by his own labor.] Proving
unpracticable by reason of so many tough old Laws which had fixed Propriety;
yet it is pursued by the Quakers as near as they well can, in Thou^ing every
one, in denying Titles, Civil Respects, and terms of Destinction among men, and
at the first they were for Community, A Faithful Discovery of Mistical
Antichrist. etc. p. 39.
[thinking it unreasonable that one man should have so much and another so
little; and some of them were not free to be tenants to other men.] And George
Fox said, [one man ought not to be above another] Informat. at Lancaster October.
5. 1652.

Besides these, the Quakers have some other Opinions most what Negative like,
touch not, taste not, handle not; which are the distinctive Shibboleths of the
Sect, yet possibly they may be in other of the works of Winstanley; however he
gives in these, some hints toward them. New Law, etc. p. 125. Truth lifting
up, etc. p. 43. p. 28. p. 68.
His new Spiritual man [will neither Preach nor Pray, nor say Grace when he
sits down to meat, as the Custom of Professors is] [Christ and his Apostles
did not Preach and Expound any Text Customarily, as the Parish Gods do] [the
second man will change Times and Customs] [all these outward Forms and Customs
are to cease and pass away] viz. Ordinances, Sacraments, Sabbaths, etc. And
herein the Quakers do follow him: and others of their Opinions might be added
or improved by their After teachers, and if we assert that Rome had an Agency
therein, at least as a pattern likely we should not be mistaken.

Trembling and Quaking was known before their Appearance [Thomas Newton had a
Vision by night of the Virgin Mary appearing to him, and saying; Newton, John
Gee foot out of the Snare. p. 63. 64.
see that thou do not take the Oath of Allegiance. He had other Visions besides
that, which if he should repeat, would make a man Tremble and Quake.] The
Alumbrades or Spanish Quakers, that are Seniors to ours above twenty years,
[had Burnings, Tremblings or Quakings, Dr. Causabons Knthusiasm. p. 174. Idem.
p. 161.
and Swounings.] The Holy Maid or Sister Katherine of Jesus [began her fit in
the Church with trembling; So that she set her wax Candle fall to the ground,
from that time her Visions began to be very frequent.]

The Quakers cannot well out go St. Mr. Fowlis H^st. Popish Treasons p. 2. 6.
Francis in perfection, for he was like Adam in Innocence; and kept the Gospel
exactly to a Letter, not breaking so much as a jott or tittle of it; If Quakers
receive the Gospel from the Lord, so did he; have they Revelations? both he,
Dominick, and Ignatius Loyola are equal with them. Loyola wrought Invisible
Miracles as well as the Quakers; and Dominick clear outwent them, for he
received the Holy Ghost with the same Glory of a slaming Tongue as the Apostles
did, and had also the Gift of Tongues given him by inspiration.

If Quakers refuse to Salute or put off the Hat, Dr. Stillingfleet's Idola. p.
273.
they have a good President, for the Founder of the Jesuits refused to put off
his Hat, or give any civil Titles to Men: The like Example they have for
refusing an Oath in Judgment, for not only the Menists of late, but the
Beguardi or Spiritual Brethren of the Franciscan Order made the like denial.
Idem. p. 255.


The Maintenance which the Quakers allow unto their Ministers, is much like
unto that of the Franciscans, who go about without their Purse and Scrip, and
are barefoot also, carrying Altaria portatilia, little Massing Altars,
Confessing People, and taking what they can get among them. The Dominicans got
also by this Voluntary Service; had no Rents, yet most Money; no Lands, and yet
most Corn. Such gratis Preachers as the Quakers pretend to desire, we find far
earlier than those Orders; even the old false Prophets, Ezekiel. 13.19. who took
handfuls of Barley, and pieces of Bread. And the Pseudo-Apostles, who (because
St. Paul Preached gratis, to some Churches) endeavored to imitate him therein,
2 Cor. 11.12. That wherein they Glory; they may be found even as we, [because
the Devil knew, that the Men of this World are most taken when Teachers take
nothing: St. Chrysos. Apud Theophyl. in locum. Oecumenius in loc.
(...), he taught the false Apostles to imitate or counterfeit that also.] [The
false Apostles abounding in Riches, took notheng, and Gloried upon that
account.]

Do the Quakers look upon others as Dunces, who follow not their Method? Keith,
Im. Rev. p. 68.
[Your Wisdom is foolishness, your knowledge is Darkness:] So did the
Franciscan Friars to purpose. [ Your Parish Priest is Idiota nunquam Theologiam
audivit, Bishop Usher de Christianarum Ecclesiarum successione and statu, p.
273.
etc. A Fool that knows nothing of Divinity; Blind leaders of the Blind -- come
to us, to whom the High, the difficult, Dei Secreta patuerunt, to whom the
Secrets of God are unfolded.] And as the Quakers do now insinuate and creep
into other Men's cures, so then did the Monks intrude themselves into the places
of the secular Clergy: So that many, even Noble Persons, Spretis propriis
sacerdotibus, made these Vagabond Friars their Teachers. The same Franciscans
also above four hundred years ago, were busy in making the new and highest
Dispensation; to wit, the Evangelium Spiritus, or Evangelium Aeternum, the
Eternal Gospel of the Spirit, which should succeed the Gospel of Christ; and
that the Quakers come near them in licking up their Vomit, 2. The Quakers
Temper.
will in its proper place appear.

As for their Temper, in the most it discovers it self very unlike the
Rational, Humble, and sweet Spirit of Christianity; and there is more
disadvantage in treating with them than any other Party; For,

We have no Solemn, Public Instrument of theirs,

Some of them give us reason to think, Geo. Bishops Looking-glass for the
Times, p. 1.
and that we must never know their Opinions; [There is no Religion under the
Sun, or no prescription that ought to be, as to any thing that relates to the
Worship of God, but what is within, in Spirit, and in Truth.] Away with all
Jewish and outward Worship, Forms, Constitutions, Canons, Orders, Decrees,
Directories, Catechisms, Confessions of Faith, Idem. p. 4.
Synods, Councils, Prescriptions, Ordinances of Men; all imitations of Christ
and his Apostles, and doing things by Example of them, where the same Spirit of
Jesus is not the Leader. Away with all National Religions and Worship: Christ
the Substance, the true Jew inwardly, the Circumcision in the Spirit, Christ
the Public Worship in Spirit and in Truth is come.] So that if we know not a
Quakers heart, we cannot know his Religion within it. And this he tells, he
wrote, [ as moved of the Lord, and doing his will, p. 236.]

There is no certain, stated, owned Rule, Penningtons Naked Truth, p. 22.
whereby they will be tried: The Scriptures are excluded from Trial of the
Spirits; the Spirit (they say) must do that. Wherein they beg the Question, and
should give some Evidence they have the Spirit, before they try Scriptures by
it: So that they devolve all upon their inward Motions, which being invisible,
and indemonstrable to us, and hugely dissonant among themselves, discover their
right Father, and hereby, we who deny new or renewed Revelations, are debarred
from having any Rule at all.

Their Style is so bitter, so stuffed frequently with cursing and railing, that
they may well think themselves Conquerours, when they have the last word, and
keep the Field with scolding: The want of Arguments is supplied by the want of
Modesty; and louder Clamours stand for calmer Reasons. James 3.13. 1 Pet. 3.15.
Instead of the meekness of Wisdom, and rendering a Reason of their Hope with
meekness and fear, Dirt and Rubbish is too often thrown upon Men, their Credits
blasted, their Souls damned, and their Livelihoods Subtracted.

To single out some few Evidences of their Temper. If a Man be infirm or
sickly, A Gagg for the Quakers, p. 12.
they say, [he is tormented for writing against them:] If a Man be Aged, then
he is called and treated as a Dotard; that was the Civility bestowed on Mr.
Jenner: Or if he dye during the Debate with them, as that Person did, then they
Triumph, [They sent such an Answer as broke his Heart;] it seems their Works
are a Killing Letter also. To one a great Name threatens, Reason against
Railing, p. 180, 181.
[That his Head shall not go down to the Grave in Peace; and by that he shall
know that not a lying or delusive, but a true and infallible Spirit has spoken
by him,] which being contingent in its self, may come to pass, to secure the
veracity of a Prophet.

G. Hicks third Dialogue, p. 85.
Whitehead told Mr. Hicks, That the Plagues of God would light upon him. And
the same having slandered another as a Gamer, etc. slighted it, as only done
by way of Quaery; an ungodly way of Blasting both Causes and Persons, and the
very Art and Practice of the Devil. Does Job Serve God for naught? But for an
Artist at Railing, let Edward Buroughs take it, who in a few Pages casts up
this and the like mire and dirt, foaming out his own shame; Burrough's Works,
p. 29-32.
[Reprobate, a Child of Darkness, a stranger to the Life, in the Sorcery and
Witchcraft, Dragon-Diviner, Liar, Antichrist, blind Pharisee, Blasphemer,
Accursed, Polluted, Filthy, Dead, Beast, the Plagues of God are added to thee,
Condemned into the Lake for ever, to be turned into the bottomless-pit, etc.]
with too much of such Hellish Language.

When Men speak against their Actings, Tyran. and Hypocrisy detected, p. 7.
Quakerism is Paganism, p. 68, 69, 70. Whitehead's Q. plainness, p. 54. and p.
80.
they can stop their mouths as Distracted Persons: Thus they said, [John
Pennyman was broken in his Brain.] William Russel was not only crushed, [
called Thief, Liar, Murderer, Devil, Cain, an Allegorical Drunkard; but Francis
Campfield desired that no notice should be taken of what he said, for he was
somewhat distempered in his Head.] When some of their Mysteries are divulged,
then they cry out, That no Credit ought to be given to such, for they are
Adversaries and Apostates.

They take it unkindly when the Authors Name is not set to such Tracts wherein
they are concerned, Truth prevailing in the Preface.
[as an unmanly dealing, and must have Caution or Security given to make good
the Charge;] considerable Upstarts indeed. Let him first give satisfaction to
that Holy Religion Legally Established, which he has so bespattered. But what,
is Truth concerned in an Authors Name? Or why are Quakers so solicitous about
men's Names, who account the Name Jesus so contemptible? Princip. of Truth, p.
12. Keith Univers. Grace, p. 30.
[ The name of Jesus and Christ without the Power, are but empty words; Nor is
the outward Name (Christ) that which saves.]

Why do their Books peep abroad without the Names of their Makers? As [Certain
Quaeries, and Anti-quaeries, Truth Exalted, and Deceit Abased. True Judgment,
or the Spiritual Man Judging all things,] cum multis aliis. But they would have
their Adversaries Names appear, thence to be able from his Person, Principles,
or Profession, to Fly-blow him: As, if a Conformist, then their Topics are
ready, of a Priest, a Time-server, etc. If a Dissenter, Pen's Rebuke to 21
Divines, and Windingsheet for Controver. Pen's Apology.
then the Scotch Covenant is raised from its Ashes, Dipper, Socinian, etc. fly
about, and 21 Old Divines are daringly encountered by one Hand.

If their Adversary have been a Tradesman, that is Objected, a Tailor, a
Brasier, etc. help to sill up the charge, which proceeding looks untowardly
from them who allow any to be Prophets; and pretending much Zeal against
Partiality, and respecting of Persons, they cannot be offended if another call,
their Dear Father of many Nations, George Fox, Josh. Coals Letter.
Winstanley's New Law, p. 96.
the Shoemaker of Mansfield in Nottingham-shire.

At this rate they proceed, as if they were engaged in some new Order of
Spiritual Knighthood, using the Style of Hectors; [ The poorest Man dares
throw the Glove to all the Humane Learning in the World.] Others, as Fox and
Buroughs, Challenge [ the Pope and all his Hierarchy, all the Priests of
Dublin, and all other People, and all the Doctors of Europe to come forth,]
etc. Sol. Eccles. Challenge, p. 2. Some Principles of the Elect People of God,
p. 51. Ellwood's Preface.
Another Hectors strangely, [He that cannot Fast seven days and seven Nights,
and wake seven Days and seven Nights, shall be accounted a Member of a false
Church, and a Heretic;] a new way of Trial by Lungs and Guts, worse than Fire
Ordeal. But the Quakers make odd Catalogues of Heretics; as, [Nimrod that
Heretic,] Epiphanius, in the Heresies before Christ, scarce thought that
Nimrod deserved that name; for it was Scythismus a diluvio usque ad turrim,
Lib. 1. Tom. 1. My Author is for [giving the World a man's Name with such an
Adjunct] in their Stilo Novo: and what their Adjunct is, appears enough from
the Instances preceding.

T.E. deceives us with the [No new Essentials of Religion,] as in its place
will appear. By Jesus Christ we understand the Son of the B. Virgin, now at the
right hand of his Father: but thereby they mean a Christ within. [ The light
and life of Christ within the Heart discovers all Darkness, New Law, p. 96. 2
Pet. 2.3.
and delivers Mankind from Bondage; And besides him there is no Savior.] So
that their words are Feigned, new stamped with their Senses; and the Style of
their first Writers is often very Barbarous, ending, when examined, in swelling
words of Vanity, or an unintelligible nothing: and, as Anciently was observed,
do provocare stomachum aut cerebrum, offend the Stomach, or disorder the Head.

This trick of taking words, and varying their sense and use, has been the old
way and Art to impose upon and to ensnare the unwary. Irenaeus frequently
observes it, Irenaeus Advers. Haeres, L. 3. C. 19.
[ That when (Heretics,) speak like us, they have a different meaning from us;
Similia enim loquentes fidelibus, non solum dissimilia sapiunt, sed and
contraria, speaking contrary, and often Blasphemous things, under such innocent
words as good Christians used; and so destroy such, as by the likeness of words
attract Poison.]

The same Father frequently acquaints us with their Arts; that as Satan took
Scripture when he Tempted Christ, Lib. 1. C. 15.
so do others take and wrest them also. [De Propheticis quaecunque
transformantes, coaptant, transforming words from the Prophetic Writings, they
adapt or fit them to their Project.] And elsewhere, [ Vides ad inventionem,
etc. L. 1. C: 1.
Thou see their invention whereby they deceive themselves, slighting the
Scriptures, and yet endeavoring from them to establish their Fiction.]. And
this is imitated by the Quakers, who dwell in the bark and outside of words,
and slight the Scriptures; and yet take some Words or Sentences thence, in
which they fancy such a meaning, and then the rest is thought to Chime and
sound in that manner. And what may not be made of any Book, even of the very
Bible, when it is transposed, inverted, and single Phrases or Sentences
disjoined from the rest, being chosen, receive such or such an impress, and are
brought in to speak to such a purpose This Old Art Irenaeus well Illustrates by
the semblance of such as transformed the Picture of a King into the likeness of
a Dog or Fox, by changing the site and posture of the Gemms and Parts, Quomodo
si quis Regis Imaginem, etc. Lib. 1. C. 1.
As if any should take the Picture of a King, well made by a Wise Artist out of
Precious stones, and destroying the Figure of the Man, should transfer these
Jewels, and by altering them, make it into the form of a Dog or Fox, and when
they were so badly disposed, yet still to say, this is that good Picture of the
King, which such a Wise Artist made, showing those Jewels, which at the first
were well made up into the Picture of the King, but were badly afterward
chopped, and translated into the Image of a Dog, etc. In like manner do these
transgress the Order and context of the Scriptures, and as much as in them
lies, do dissolve the Members of the Truth, and by such chopping and mangling,
do make one thing out of another, and so seduce many. Several also of the words
used by the Valentinians and their Predecessors, are used by the Quakers, as
terms of Art with their Signature upon them; as (...), etc. Prenae. Lib. 1.
Cap. 1. Epiphan. Haeres. 31.
Word, Life, (Power, Spirit) perfect or perfection, (so they called themselves,
The Seed of Election) man, (Earth and Mankind are frequent and synonimous in
Winstanley) stilness, depth, silence, which are Mystical words among the
Quakers; entering into the stilness, meeting God in silence, and the like. See
Mr. Faldoes Key.
They had also unscriptural terms of Art, Achamoth, Jaldabaoth, (...), etc. And
the Quakers have choice of theirs; as Ravend, ravening brain, inwardly ravening
from the Spirit, Vulturous Eye, the Seed in Prison, invisible Miracles, or
Miracles in Spirit, the Royal, Noble, Gentile Seed, taking away the Tables, and
many such like.

2. From them we shall now pass to make a few Remarks in the entrance upon
Thomas Ellwood, both as to his Honesty and Learning, and also his Courage and
Confidence in striking blindfold about him.

As to his Honesty and Learning: T. Ellwood's Honesty and Learning.
There is a Vein of Sophistry and tripping that runs through his Tract, and
when the paint is off, it is full of furrows and deformity; there are many
gross escapes which look ominously in a Treatise for Immediate Inspiration, so
that his search seems not to be after Truth, but Victory. I had thought that
after his Book had been several Months Public, some Friend or himself might
have observed the great unfaithfulness in many parts of it. But meeting the
30th. day of March with a Letter of his, in which he seems well satisfied with
his Achievements, that is, Glories in his shame; I found it convenient to
hasten the Examination of part of his Work. Part of the Letter is here
inserted, as a specimen of his temper, [ Some (thou say) will needs have me
to be a Jesuit; and why? Because of a little Learning: Must none then have
Learning but they and Jesuits? This is the common, but poor shift of Priests
hard beset: When they cannot maintain their ground, they cry out, their
Opponent is a Jesuit, as if none could be too hard for them but Jesuits, by
whom to be worsted they are not ashamed; to think it no shame, the more shame
for them. Well, Truth is too hard for them and Jesuits too. But whilst with
some I pass for a Jesuit, with others it seems I am but a Counterfeit: The
Name, they think, is feigned, there is no such Man, etc. If this were true, what
then? There Is such a Book to be sure; if there were no such Man as bears that
name, yet there must needs be such a Man as wrote that Book, for the Book could
not write it self. But a third sort, I perceive, would not allow me to be a
Quaker; and why? Because they think a Quaker could not have given such an
Answer: That proceeds from their Ignorance of Truth and the power of it: And
indeed the contrary is most true: Had I not been a Quaker, I could not have
given such an Answer.] And at that rate he goes on, ascribing his imaginary
Triumphs to that powerful Arm, which gave both the Weapon, and therewith skill
and strength to use it. Now, that this is a downright Fathering Lies upon God,
will be evident from three or four Instances out of many.

1. He deals unfaithfully with St. Basil, [Sirnamed, the Great,] p. 165.
bringing him into the Council of Chalcedon, refusing to swear, and commending
Clinias for the like denial. Whereas if the thing had been true, it had not
much pressed us; for what signifies the Example of one Pythagorean Philosopher
to the Laws of a Christian Empire? Or what availed one Basil (though Great) to
a whole Council of six hundred and thirty Bishops? Geo. Bishop in his
Lookingglass, p. 168.
Though a Quaker cry out against that Council, [What cluttering, what
clamouring, what being more like a company of Geese gigling their noises, than
a Council of grave Men and sober Christians.] But the thing it self is untrue,
for St. Basil was dead about seventy three years before that Council. He
flourished in the time of Valens, dyed about the year 378. The Council of
Chalcedon was held, say some, Anno Christi 455. or at the soonest, by Justell's
and Beverig's Computation, 451. under the Emperor Marcian, if he had looked
into his Brother Geo. Bishop as much as I have done, by comparing p. 122. and
166. together, it might have revealed something better to him. But poor George
was one of the Nonconforming Quakers, Dr. Lightfoots Harm. of the O. T.
and so his works are out of Vogue. Now this is a lying Wonder to purpose.
Christ raised Lazarus four days dead, the Witch of Endor brought up a supposed
Samuel, nigh two years after the Death of the true one. But T. E. haleth St.
Basil out of his Grave (where he had rested between 70 and 80 years) and brings
him into the Council, with a Quaker-like sullenness, speaking against the Laws
and Constitutions of the Empire.

He deals as dishonestly with the formers dear Friend St. Gregory Nazianzene,
whom he quotes p, 186. [in his Dialogue against swearing] whereas the very
Title of that Jambick 20th is [P P O S P O L g O P K O g S, adversus eos qui
frequenter jurant,] against those who swear Frequently, Customarily, often, not
against Judicial swearing before Authority: as he belyeth the Title, so also he
abuses the Dialogue it self; and that Eloquent Father who there expressly
allows swearing [(...), etc. B. when do thou allow the liberty of an Oath? A.
Then when its necessary, B. But when is it necessary, declare, is it that thou
may deliver any from great dangers? A. it is then lawful. B. or to free thy
self from some grievous crime? A. then it is also lawful, etc.] and in his
Jambick 15. He defines an Oath [(...), a making faith to a thing, by placing of
God a Witness present in the middle: (...), the swearing truly, or performing
what you swear, that is good or right swearing.]

P. 114. Solon (one of the Sages of Greece) he adds to him Sosiades (another of
those seven wise men] and quotes Stobaeus Sermon. 28. whereas there is a heap of
untruths in those few words.

For First, 1 Edit. Tiguri. 1543.
if I have Eyes in my Head there is not such a man named in that Sermon, nor is
it likely, the Discourse being (...), De Ocio, Concerning sloth, no nor in the
25. Sermon, concerning Swearing, nor in the 26. concerning Perjury, is such a
person once named.

Much less was he one of the seven wise men of Greece; Schrevelius gives seven
other names, but I suppose T. E. had seen [Sociad] set down in the 13 Quakers
Book against Oaths, and for the better Grace he dubbs him [another of those
seven wise men.]

Let him raise Hue and Cry, Suidas names none such. Diogenes Laertius (where he
is purposely reckoning them all up in his proaemium) owns no such person, nor
do my Circumstances give me Information, let him try if his Rider quoted p.

Page 20. He calls the Martyrs [our Godly Martyrs] as if they were the
Quakers Martyrs, when as they suffered upon an 100 years before his party
appeared; this is a most invidious, saucy and unjust pretension, to rob the
Church of England of the Glory of her Martyred Reformers; and withal to cast
dirt upon the present Church, as receded from her former Constitution. G. Keith
Im. Rev. p. 132.
But this he has from his inspiring Tutor [The new Protestant, the degenerate
Protestant (for the pure Primitive Protestants owned the true foundation with
us, though their Discovery of it was but little.)]

But why? [our Godly Martyrs] are Quakers Protestants? that they disown
abundantly [ Eccles. his Challenge p. 2.
from the Protestants to the Familists, the Quakers deny you all] [ Keith
Universal free Grace p. 5.
all these how much soever pretending to a Reformation are the Daughters of
Babylon] [ Smiths Spiritual Glass opened. p. 83. etc.
from the Pope to the Baptist they are all Born in one Womb.] [ Barclay in Q.
no Popery. p. 103.
Papists and Protestants are in the Root and Spring.] [ Howgils Glory of the
true Church. p. 12. and 23.
Protestants are in the Suburbs of the City of Rome.] [ Parnells shield of the
truth. p. 39.
Papists and Protestants spring from one Root.]

And we Protestants wholly deny Quakers the having Communion with us, and he
cannot but know that strong Proofs are offered by several to evince that the
Quakers are not so much as Christians, Mr. Faldo, Hicks, Russel, etc.
whose Service therein to the common Faith is commendable. And it concerns all
who hold the Lord Jesus the head, Col. 2.19. to strive for that Faith once
delivered, Jude v. 4. against the Quakers, who as far as in them lies, do take
away our Lord Jesus and do not tell us where they have laid him, giving us a
suppositious Savior, a dead instead of our living Child Jesus; an Image and
Bolster of Goats hair, in room of our true David, and and Novatians both united
against the Arians, Socrat. Ec. H. L. 2. Sozo. Ecc. H. L. 4. C. 19.
and afterward against the Macedonians.

But had T. E. designed to shame himself, he could not have made an apter
choice, than to call such men, [our (that is, the Quakers) Godly Martyrs.] to
rescue them from such a Rape: I might give an account of their Dignities and
Callings in the Church, that they compiled the Liturgy, the Book of Ordination,
etc. Dr. Heylins Ecclesia Restaurata. p. 125.
But the shortest way to discover their judgment, will be to look upon the
Articles of Religion drawn up, and prepared much by Archbishop Cranmer, and
agreed upon by the Bishops and other Learned and Godly men in the Convocation,
1552. Several of which were Martyred and Suffered for those and the very like
Articles. And they are drawn up as it were in a foresight of, and defyance of
Quakerism; there is as great a gulf between them, as that between Heaven and
Hell.

Article 1. Of Faith in the Holy Trinity. 2. That the Word, or Son of God was
made very man. 4. Christ sits in Heaven until the last day. 5. The Doctrine
of the Holy Scriptures is sufficient to Salvation. 6. The Old Testament is not
to be refused. 7. The three Creeds received, (any of which will stick in a
Quakers Throat.) 11. Our Justification is by only Faith in Jesus. 14. No man is
without Sin, but Christ alone. 18. Eternal Salvation only by the name of
Christ; 20. Of the Church. 21. Of the Authority of the Church. 24. Of being
called by men to Minister in the Congregation. 26. Of the Sacraments. 27. The
Wickedness of Ministers takes not away the effectual operation of Gods
Ordinances. 28. Of Baptism. 29. Of the Supper of the Lord. 30. Of the perfect
Oblation of Christ made upon the Cross. 36. Of Civil Magistrates and their
Authority. 37. Christian men's goods not common (against Father Winstanley.) 38.
Christian men may take an Oath. 39. the Resurrection not yet brought to pass.
Vltim. All men not to be saved; against Winstanley also. Never could man that
observed the truth of what he wrote have called the Compilers of such Articles
the Quakers Godly Martyrs. But the man who went naked, Faldo vind. of Quaker.
no Christ. p. 36.
said his body was all forhead. T. E. needs as much Brass to face out these
Worthyes for Quakers Martyrs.

These few I have singled out as a (...) or taste, what measure may be expected
from such complexions. The case of the (...). p. 37.
His other Authorities do much labor of the like Disease, as is evidenced in a
late sinewy Tract. But why should they bring in some partial dismembered sayings
of the Ancients, seeing they will not be concluded by them in other matters. So
true is that in them, which Mr. Chillingworth applied to the Romanists, [You
account them Fathers when they are for you, and Children when they are against
you.] Let him stick to his indemonstrable Revelation, and play in and out
there, rather than meddle with Humane Learning thus unsuccessfully and worse:
But his talk of Inspiration confutes it self, and his own Example is the best
proof, that as yet it has not advanced beyond a Dream.

But if that be pleaded which he suggests, [That in the Country for want of
Books, In the Preface.
he was forced to take some few Quotations upon Trust, but yet using much
Caution in his Choice.] It is Replied, that these are so gross and palpable,
that an easy Learning might detect them; and in a matter of such moment, which
the poor Quakers do implicitly believe and hug, he was obliged to the severest
Caution, nor to impose upon their tame and easy Credulity. And as to us who
know our selves fallible, and in Gods extreme account very imperfect, it must
be allowed for an excuse. But as for him who defends perfection, pleads for
Immediate Revelation, which his Master extends [to many things which are not in
Scripture so much as by Consequence:] Keith, Im. Rev. p. 6. 2d. Quib. p. 11.
Others of them challenging [Infallibility in all things and cases;] and he, as
a Believer, pretending the Unction whereby they know all things, p. 229. and
yet in many discovering, and in some confessing his Ignorance, [I know not,] p.
227. to him this Plea can be no Advantage, it pulling down that very thing
which he is building up. For if there be such a standing, perpetual Ordinance,
as Immediate Revelation, Gods Veracity and Goodness is concerned at that time
to let them be Infallible, when they are pleading, and become the Advocates for
it: But it is a good Confutation, when a Champion proves an Instance against
himself.

2. T. E'lwood's Courage.
As to his Courage and Confidence, they are high enough, showing great
dis-esteem to the Sacred Scriptures, as will appear in a proper place, by a
Catalogue of his Rules of Exposition, such certainly as the Sun never saw,
especially by such a pretended intimate of Heaven. We shall only now consider
his Carriage to most Orders of Men in the Kingdom, for he presumes to Tax our
World like Augustus Caesar. The King must be plainly T^ou'd, and the Head
covered before him. The Turkish Fashion they esteem most proper, and the
tuissare or thou'ing, which in Erasmus's time was opprobious among the English,
is dubbed into both Religion and Manners. My Lord the King is no pleasing
Dialect to these new Saints, it is Old Testament Divinity. Dread Sovereign and
Sacred Majesty must not now be used, p. 46. Who must have the Majesty then? Not
the King, I Will warrant you; it is taken from Him to be appropriated to their
own dear selves; take a few of their Expressions, having spoken against
Magistracy, and for the Destruction thereof, he proceeds, [ Fire in the Bush,
p. 39.
If you would find true Majesty indeed, go among the poor distressed ones of
the Earth:] [ Parnel's shield of the Tr. p. 25. 27.
Here is the ground of all true Nobility, Gentility, Majesty, Honor -- No more
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit -- Quakers are sprung of the Noble,
Gentile Seed;] [ In his Noble Salutation to thee, Charles Stewart.
from the Council and Nobility of the Royal Seed, the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, the Everlasting King of Righteousness, who reigns in George Fox the
Younger:] [ ^ In the Testimony from the Brethren.
The Quakers Ministers are the Dignities, and Government, and Dominion.]

The King must not write in the Plural Number, We, p. 27. though he be a
Public Person, and Act by Advice of his Council, [all that is sprung from
Pride and Flattery.] Besides this, he saucily and pragmatically medleth with
the Kings Revenues; the Office for first Fruits and Tenths offends him, p. 355.
[ No Flower can be fair in an English Crown which was taken out of a Popes
Mitre; if nothing else could be said against it, but that it once stuck in the
tripple Crown, that alone were enough to make it unworthy to be worn in an
English Diadem.] It seems he has more than this to Object against it; such
like things are frequent in their Books, which stealing out into the World, are
apt to leaven men's Spirits with bad Principles. One of them acquaints us [
Parnel's shield of the Truth, p. 19, 25.
What Magistrates they do not own, but deny and testify against; and to make
their Negative Power better Armed, he says, The Kings and Nobles of the Earth
shall be bound in Chains and Fetters of Iron.] This was Printed 1655. but lest
it should be only Serviceable in those times, Some Principles of the Elect
People of God, called Quakers, p. 89.
Isaac Pennington (a Name deep enough certainly in Royal Blood) to make it
current Quaker Doctrine now; re-prints that Book in 1671. leaving out the
beginning and end of it, but he has the Conscience and Confidence to re-print
those very words, out of what design, let our Superiors Judge. But lest since
then, so beloved a Doctrine of binding Kings should be forgot, they keep up the
Memory of it. The true Christians Faith and Experience, by William Shown, p.
136.
Another Book, Printed 1675, speaks home; [Christ Reigning in the heart gives
Power to bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles in Fetters of Iron: This Honor have
all the Saints.] To the like contempt of Authority write several of them;
Howgils glory, p. 107.
Kings and Magistrates, [as Christians, have no Priority, but as they stand in
the growth of Truth,] that is, in Quakerism.

[I charge you all by the Lord, Parnel's shield, p. 41. Will. Smith, passim.
Fire in the bush, p. 21, 22, 23.
to take heed of meddling about Religion -- meddle with such Affairs as you are
set about:] [Meddle not with Religion, keep within your bounds.] And
Winstanley, the Instituter of their Order, speaks roundly to all, [Four
Idolized Powers must down, The Imaginary Teaching, Hearsay, Book-studying
Power, or the Ministry: The Imaginary Kingly Power must be shaken to pieces in
all Nations: The Imaginary Law of Justice, which is but the declarative Will of
Conquerours, and buying and selling the Earth, and being enslaved one to
another, must all be destroyed at the Resurrection of Christ,] and that, he
says, was then beginning; and therefore the pretense to Revelation looks
a-squint upon the safety of Kingdoms: had not the Magistrates the Sword, they
might meet with as Reproachful words as the Ministers: and had some Persons
strength, their Principles might carry them to repeat the Munster Tragedy.

If this Measure be dealt unto the Prince, what will not be unto the Subjects?
The Peers and Lords must expect the like treatment from these Levellers;
[Ploughmen, James Parnel's shield, p. 24, 25.
Fishermen, Herds-men, Shepherds are Noblemen sprung of the Noble Seed; here
the true Honor is no more after the Flesh, but after the Spirit:] He that
boggles at using Sirs, p. 46. will stumble at higher Titles; and if this new
Critic may be credited, Titles are to cease, and Epithets and Adjuncts are to
succeed in lieu. Which Men are at Liberty to give or not to give, according to
their prejudicated or capricious fancies. He quarrelleth at several things
established by Act of Parliament; as the Book of Ordination is spurned at by
degrading the Clergy: the Confessing of our selves miserable Sinners, is
Chastised by his Ferula, p. 53. Tithes, an Ancient payment, of at least 800
years usage in this Nation, Sir Edw. Sandrs his view of Western Religion, Sect.
39.
are Declared by him Popish whereas the nonpayment of Tithes is grounded upon
Papal exemptions: And in Italy, the Popes Country, under his Nose, praedial
Tithes are not paid, but their Clergies Maintenance consists in Glebes and
Farms, which T. E. quarrels not at, p. 323, 324. so little is a Quaker
offended with an Italian usage. This Freeborn Man also quarrels high, that
none can bind their Posterity with Tithes, which strikes as fully upon
Hearth-money, or any descending Impositions.

The Judges and Courts, and all Judicial proceedings lie in his way; they sin,
and repeat sin, and establish sin by Law. An Oath of God must not be
administered to end Strife, but the Quakers Yea and Nay must be the Deciders;
and yet so uneven is their temper, that for Interest they will take an Oath;
Witness the Cases of Mead, Osgood, and several: so that their equivocating
justly deserves that Brand, [Quakers can take an Oath, and yet do not swear at
all.]

The Clergy, as far as in him lies, are run down; their Orders are taken away,
Chap. 1. Their Employment, Chap. 2-8. Their Maintenance, Chap. 9. with stripes
and buffettings all the way through.

Not so much as a Gentleman or stranger that ought to be called Master or Sir,
except in Law or Nature, p. 43. but by his Model, a breach of Gods Law is
committed: Thus is our Blessed Religion misrepresented, such disservice is by
Dreams done unto it; excellent temptations do these propound, to incline any to
turn Christians when they would thus degrade and depress Men, and set the
Tenant on breast with his Landlord. To draw Controversies to a speedy issue is
good, as has been done in singling out the Romish Supremacy and Infallibility,
because upon the Fate of them lesser Differences depend; so it is not worth the
while to stand upon thou'ing, and such affected singularities, the shortest cut
is to examine their Revelations, Infallibility, Immediate Commission, etc. for
the rest will stand or fall with these; and it may prove most successful to
show, that at the best they stand but on an equal level with other Men, and
what lower they may have depressed themselves, by belying the Holy Ghost, and
saying they are Prophets, and are not, deserves to be the matter of their sad
and serious enquiry. Taking then for granted, That God has revealed himself to
Mankind, That much thereof is committed to writing, and is upon Record in the
Bible, as T E. owns, p. 238. That the latest of these Books have been written
upon 1600 years since. I shall proceed upon this, and the Principles of Reason,
and the Judgments and Practices of the Quakers themselves, extracted out of
their own Works, and the Works of others whom we have all the reason to
believe; the things being matters of Fact, Tyranny and Hypocrisy detect. p.
48, 49.
and the Parties offering to make good their Charge before the Lord Mayor of
London, or any Alderman on the Bench, or any one of the twenty Common
Council-men.

And the Dispute being, whether the Quakers have any real Divine Revelations or
not; I durst refer it to the Judgment of indifferent Persons, though Heathens,
if they understood the concern, as Debates between Christians and pretenders
thereto, have been so ended.

CHAP. I. The state of the Case, and the manner of proceeding.
THomas Ellwood, in the Name of his Party, claims such Communications and
Heavenly Visits, as good Christians are not Conscious they receive, nor dare
tempt God in desiring. The proofs thereof he fetches from Scripture, wherein I
neither read his Name, nor that of Quakers; but if they conclude for him, they
conclude as strongly for me. I profess my self a Believer in that Jesus, who
made those Promises, and whom T. E. strangely over-looks: So that of the two I
am the more likely to have the greater share. And until he has proved me no
Believer (which to do will exercise his Faculty of discerning of Spirits) I
might set my Revelation to answer his; and hereby his Cause reaps no Advantage.

His Ghostly Father (from whom his Spirit has received much light, and yet he
is not so ingenuous as once to acknowledge it) Declares, Keith's Universal Free
Grace, p. 48.
[ no Man can be bound to believe, in that which comes not in a sufficient
way;] so that it is but reasonable we should be allowed to pursue that Rule,
and to demand an Evidence proportionable to their soaring Claims. Where our
Assent is required to any thing, God is pleased to afford us means for our
Conviction, and is satisfied with such a degree thereof, as the Evidences will
carry. When matters of Fact are concerned, the Testimonies of our own or other
Persons senses conclude us. When matters of Reason, thereupon using our best
Faculties, such a measure of Assent is sufficient, as those Reasons will
enforce. But when one tells me, He has received Divine Inspirations, thereby I
am Arrested; for I must not dispute any thing that is spoken by God: my only
enquiry is, whether God has really so spoken, as is pretended.

Which being a matter of great moment, God has abundantly provided, that we
should not be imposed on, by giving us both Caution and Security: And the more
diligent we are in examining and trying such Claims, the more is he delighted
with us, and will bless that Industry, Wisdom, and Obedience.

The Old and New Testament give us many warnings, about Dreamers, false
Prophets, etc. Command to beware of them; not to believe, but try them: And for
matter of Security, God has abounded in that, by furnishing his Messengers
with such extraordinary Powers, that thereby men's belief was both Commanded and
Secured, Mark 16.20
[ as they Preached every where, the Lord wrought with them, confirming the
Word with Signs following] or accompanying.

Nor did it seem consistent with Gods Wise Dispensation, to give Immediate
Revelations, and not to furnish the Receiver with such Divine Testimonials, as
might truly satisfy him that God spoke, and also command Faith and Obedience
from others.

Gods immediate Voice has not used to come so precariously into the World, to
be mis-pent and wasted for want of Evidence; and it might be an intangling
thought to an Inspirado, would he consider it, why the former old Revelations
should not at this day be as good to convey the Doctrine and meaning of
Christianity as the former old Miracles were, and are still sufficient to
settle, and seal its Truth; or that Miracles should be set as Seals to confirm
such revealed Doctrines, and yet those Doctrines in After-ages need as fresh
Revelations to convey and expound them; and in the mean time have no Miracles
to attest the Truth of those Expositions; especially when different pretenders
to Revelations bring as different Expositions; these do more and more ensnare,
but we may extricate our selves by allowing, as the old Miracles to be the
Seals, so the old Revelations thereby attested, to be the Objects of our Faith.

But when I find high Claims of renewed Revelations, and therewith as studious
an undervaluing and depressing the Honor of Miracles; and withal the rejecting
the Scripture, from being the Rule to try the Spirits by, as Quakers do; and
withal when I find such Caution used by Moses to satisfy himself and others,
that God spoke by him. None, especially if their Claims be really Divine, can
quarrel to have them examined by such means of Discovery, as a wise Religion,
and sober Reason afford unto us. Keith's Im. Rev. Title page.
But though T. E. was in the right, that there is such a standing Ordinance in
the Church of Christ of indispensable Necessity, as perpetual Inspiration, yet
he has but done half his work; he must go write another Book to prove that
among all the Societies of Christians disowning it, and the various Sects of
single Persons claiming it, his Party having the only enclosure thereof; their
Fleece to be wet when all others are dry about them: till this be done, his
Arguments are as equally Calculated for me (if I will) as for himself; and do
conclude as forcibly for Jacob Israel, or Muggleton, as for George Fox.

It would have been an ease, if his Discourse had been true; mere waiting is a
more facile thing than reading, meditating, or studying; and to a weak
Constitution, a Supine expecting would have been far more favorable than that
which wise and inspired Solomon called a weariness of the Flesh. Eccles. 12.12
Of the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, Sect. 36, 37.
What the Excellent Lord Falkland spoke concerning the Romish, may, with no
alteration, be applied to the Quakers Infallibility and Inspiration also: [ I
take no pleasure in tumbling hard and unpleasant Books, and making my self
giddy with Disputing obscure Questions; if I could believe, there should always
be (whom I might always know) a Society of Men, whose Opinions must be
certainly true -- so as I might be excusably at ease, and have no part left for
me but that of Obedience, which must needs be less difficult than the harsh
Greek of Evagrius, and the as hard Latin of Irenaeus -- and he would deserve
not the lowest place in Bedlam, that would prefer those Studies before so many,
so much more pleasant, that would rather employ his understanding, than submit
it:] The ease then would lie in having Inspirations, or sitting at the feet of
such as have them, rather than in employing time and strength in laborious
searches; only the way of Labor is the way of Gods Blessing.

But the whole Scene, as laid by the Quakers, is so distant from Gods way of
Dispensation, who was pleased to become God with us, to live on Earth to teach
us, which having performed, there cannot be much to be new taught now; and also
Immediate Revelation, when in use, yet being but rare, conferred on some, whom
God used as his Mouth to communicato it to others: and Religion being Published
in an External sensible way, and in like manner settled; to prevent such
delusions as might insinuate themselves under the cover of inward Suggestions,
we have no encouragement to sit down satisfied with these Internal and
indemonstrable transactions, being full of nothing but difficulties and
dangers: but we must take the more laborious way of searching the Scriptures,
praying, conferring and comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual. Sect. 9, 10.
The aforesaid Lord further urged, [ That the Romish pretense to Infallibility
was but an accidental Argument, because if any other Company had likewife
claimed to be Infallible, it had over-thrown all so proved; nay, it is but an
Arbitrary Argument, and depends upon the pleasure of the Adversary: for, if any
Society of Christians would pretend to it, the Church of Rome could make use of
it no longer.] Now, though the Disciples of Hetherington the Box-maker, even
before that Lord wrote, to wit, about 1625, had maintained, Dr. Dennison's
white Wolf, p. 72.
That [they could not err in giving deliberate Sentence in points of
Divinity,] as H. Nicholas had done before them; yet if that Noble Viscount had
lived till now, what would he have thought of the force of his former Argument?
when not only within this Island John Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton (who would
be taken for the two Witnesses in the Apocalypse) pretended, and were owned by
their few Disciples to be Infallible; but the more numerous company of the
Quakers do Challenge the same to their Party, and outdo the Romanists in the
variety of their Claims, of Inspiration, Immediate Revelation, Apostolical
Commission, of Christ the light within, of Infallibility, and discerning of
Spirits. So that now on this side Dover, we have Popes of both Sexes; Joan
belongs to England, not to Mentz; and we have many John's, above 24; but whilst
three different, if not contradictory Parties pretend to Infallibility, we have
Reason to suspect they are all alike Infallible. The Quakers have a pretty
Craft, but it may easily be seen through; The Apostles were endued with
extraordinary Powers, both inward and outward, now they Challenge to themselves
the inward, as Authority, Inspiration, Infallibility, Commission, Discerning of
Spirits, the inward Baptism with the Holy Ghost, etc. which being Internal and
indiscernable may be Challenged, and are not so readily confuted; but then the
outward, as the Miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost, the gift of Tongues, the
visible Baptism with fire, the ability of working Miracles of all sorts, the
Spirit of Prophecy or foretelling future things, etc. these being discernable
to the sense, capable of an easy detection; they do both deny them, and speak
slightly of their necessity or use. Though God conferred these outward ones as
undeniable proofs and convictions of the inward; and without which sensible
Testimonials, the internal would not have had that Operation, but have been
like Candles under Bushels; and this very Art lays no little prejudice upon
their Plea.

T. Ellwood's Notion of Divine Revelation is put into variety of Expressions,
which lie dispersed in several pages; his stating of things is different, and
the claims he makes are of several Natures: I shall put them into the best
Method I can, more orderly to examine them.

We may conceive some of them to be as the groundwork whereon he builds, the
other as the Fabric thereon raised. His grounds are two.

1. That [ the Apostles had an inward manifestation, and Immediate Revelation
of the Will and Mind of God to them, by the Spirit of Truth which dwelt in
them, p. 227, 228, 233.]

2. That [ the Apostles Successors, or all Believers in an extensive Relation,
receive the knowledge of the Gospel in the same manner, as the Apostles
received it, p. 228, 230, 233.]

Other things he Erecteth upon, or claims in pursuance of these.

1. They have [ renewed and repeated Revelations, p. 238, 240, 243. The good
Old Gospel is again revealed by the same Spirit, p. 254. 256.]

2. They [ have Immediate Revelations from the Spirit, as the Apostles had, p.
228.]

3. They [ have expository Revelations, the Spirit gives the true sense and
meaning of Scripture immediately, p. 238, 239, 251, 253, 255.]

4. [ The Gospel is now Preached in the demonstration of the Spirit and Power,
p. 244.] and they are the Persons without question who Preach it.

5. They [ know the Word of God by Experience, p. 249.]

6. [ The Primitive Christians had the knowledge of the Gospel by the immediate
Revelation of the Spirit, as the Apostles had, p. 233, 245. and the Quakers now
receive it in the same manner.]

7. They [ receive it by the gift of God, p. 245.]

8. They [ have heard the voice of God speaking in them, p. 249.]

9. [ Divine Revelation consists in opening and discovering, p. 249. 253, 255.]
that is, in expounding: And all this is done without any help of Humane
Learning, which is not so much as to appear between the first of Genesis and
the last of the Revelations, but has its Circle assigned, beyond which it must
not step, [reduced to its proper station and service which is to be conversant
in Natural, Civil, or Humane Affairs, p. 218.] Humane Learning is to do the
Drudgery of Translating, to put an English Bible into a Quakers hand, and must
presently with draw, the pretended Spirit then supervening, and opening each
Text of Scripture truly to them.

These are different Notions, and are too great favors for any Party on this
side Heaven; but its subtly done to choose so many, to leave room for
escaping, that if some prove deceitful, the rest may support their Partners. We
must attend his Motions, and examine them one by one, giving his own words
under each head; only some few things must be premised in passage.

1. I think he seldom or never names our Lord Jesus Christ (who dyed at
Jerusalem) as concerned in the revealing of Gods will. His Prophetic Office is
destroyed, or weakened by this Sect, and the Spirit is substituted in his place:
Thus, p. 245. when he says, [ the Author of our Faith is the same, the
Finisher of it is the same,] alluding to Heb. 12.2. Where Jesus, (to wit, the
Son of the B. Virgin) is named, yet he takes no notice of him, but turns it
another way. They received their Faith [ namely, by the gift of God,] they
received their Faith, he says there, in the same manner that the Primitive
Christians received it of old. Now, how that was, he tells us, p. 233, [ From
the Immediate teachings of the Holy Spirit which dwelt in them:] So that he
either lays aside our dearest Savior, or Confounds Jesus Christ, and the
Holy Ghost, as one and the same, which he does to purpose, p. 233. [Paul
received the knowledge of the Gospel from Christ revealed in him,] thence he
presently infers thus, [ The Apostles did receive the knowledge of the Gospel
from the immediate teachings of the Holy Spirit,] making Christ, revealed in
Paul, and the Holy Spirit to be the same.

2. He seems to make some concessions, to inform within what bounds they keep,
denying new Revelations, and yet he either has new ones or none, (as from his
Principles will be proved.) [p. 237. they expect not a Revelation of any other
Gospel, of any other way of Salvation, of any other Essentials in the Christian
Religion, they have but renewed Revelations, p. 238. Truths formerly revealed,
p. 254. The same good old Truths, p. 243 The good old Gospel again revealed,] a
concession that destroys his design, for having no new ones; the old do neither
need, nor are capable of Repetition.

3. The true Christians Faith and Experience.
He appropriates these receipts to himself and Party, [ We, p. 237, 245, 249.
Us, 254, 256. to all Believers, 228.] that is, to himself and Friends, for they
are the only true, [the others but Titular and Nominal Christians;] says
Will. Shown frequently, The Testimony from the Brethren.
[they are the Church of God returned out of the Wilderness.]

And this is large enough, Moses wish fulfilled, Numb. 11.29. All the People of
the Lord are Prophets. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? 1 Cor. 12.29. Yes,
among the Quakers. Had he Challenged some few Inspirations in pursuance of the
former, or some rare single notices from good Angels, they had been more
Modest; or an Immediate Revelation to ascertain him which Books were Divinely
inspired, and which not; it should have been confessed that some have gone that
way before him; Vindication of the Protestants grounds of Faith, second
Discourse, p. 308 Sect. 4.
[ not only the Enthusiasts and some Calvinists, but the Popish Guide in
Controversies; in Dr. Stillingfleet, says, That the ultimate Resolution of a
Christians Divine Faith, is into that particular Revelation first made known to
him.] But supposing there was such a Supernatural and infused assurance given,
yet it is not [ rational and discursive, says Mr. Chillingworth; it may be an
assurance to a man's self, but it is no Argument to another.] But one single
immediate Revelation is too scant for T. E. during his whole life time. He must
put God upon Miracles and unnecessaries, have what has been before Revealed,
though translated into the vulgar Tongue, renewed, repeated, re-revealed in the
same manner, and he must have Expository Revelations given him of the Sacred
Books besides. So that his own words contain the best his own Character. [ p.
101. he treads an unbeaten path. p. 246. he seems not rightly to understand
Revelation, but rather to have taken in some strange Notion concerning it.]

CHAP. II. How the Apostles came to the Knowledge of the Gospel.
HIS first rise is [ That the Apostles had an inward manifestation, and
Immediate Revelation of the Mind and Will of God to them, by the Spirit of
Truth which dwelt in them, p. 227.] this he would have, and so craftily brings
in, as if the Friendly Conference had so meant. [If by all those ways, he
intends no more than an inward manifestation.] But supposing this was true, as
he states it, yet it is not Large, nor Comprehensive enough; For the Apostles
had another Teacher, even an outward one, both before and besides the Holy
Spirit, and what Christian did ever yet lay aside, or overlook the Personal,
Oral Teaching of their Lord Jesus. Irenae. ad Here Is. L. 1. C. 1.
If Quakers delight to be called (...), the Spiritual and perfect from their
supposed Teacher the Spirit, as the Scholars of Valentinus did, we must adhere
to our elder name (...). from that Author and Finisher of our Faith. If Quakers
first make no distinction between the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, and
then would lay aside the God-Man Jesus, by making the Spirit inwardly supply
all; we Christians are instructed to hearken unto that Prophet, whom God raised
up like unto Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.15. and T. E. can scarce make Moses and the
Holy Ghost alike; we do Believe in and Obey that Beloved Son upon whom the
Blessed Spirit descended, Mat. 3.17. for we are commanded to hear him. Mat.
17.5. he discharged his Prophetic, as well as Priestly Office in our Humane
Nature; to this the Prophecies and Promises refer; and we must render to each
their due in the work of our Instruction, to the Son, as well as to the Spirit.

T. E. has made the most untrue and desperate choice that could be [ the
Apostles to receive the knowledge of the Gospel by the Immediate Revelation of
the Spirit] what is become of all the Promises of the Messiah? John 4.25.
[ I know that Christ when he is come, he will tell us all things] says the
Woman of Samaria.

But by Ellwoods model, he is com'd and gone, and has taught the Disciples
nothing; why did Christ choose the Apostles, Live, Converse with, and betwixt
three or four years Instruct them in the things of Gods Kingdom, if they were
no better for all those Divine Lessons which came from him, whom never man
spoke like unto? what quarrels have the Quakers against Jesus of Nazareth,
Luke. 24.19.
that Prophet, or Divine Teacher, mighty in Deed and Word before God and all
the People, that they must lay aside his Person or his Office, either
substituting the holy Spirit in his place; or making their great Idol the Light
or Christ within, to do all the necessary work of Instruction? Cannot T. E.
permit Jesus to be the great Lawgiver and Teacher, and then upon his bodily
removal from the earth, the Holy Spirit to descend, and build upon Christ the
Foundation, but as far as in him lies (in imitation of the Heathens quarrels
among their Deities) he must have the Spirit to drown the Word, the outward
incarnate Christ to signify nothing, but the inward Manifestation to
Communicate all.

Was it the Holy Ghost who assumed our flesh, lived, and preached and Sealed
the truth of his Doctrine with his Blood? or it was the (...), who performed
all those things, and of whose fullness we receive? were they the Apostles of
the Spirit, or the Apostles of Christ Jesus, who breathed on them, gave them
Authority and sent the Holy Ghost to enable them to execute their Commission?
Why do the Quakers thus confound the works of the Word and the Spirit? like the
Libertines [qui nihil ponunt inter filium Dei, Calvin adversus Libertin. Cap.
10.
and Spiritum ejus discriminis.] but suppose they were right about the Holy
Unity, that there is no destinction of Persons in the Godhead, but that they
are only different names of the same one Subsistence, yet T. E. has laid a
wrong Foundation, for it was not this Spirit which inwardly did all; But it was
Jesus the Son of Mary (be he but a piece of the Christ, or have he an Heavenly
body sheathed up within that which he took of the Virgin, or however else; for
they know not what to make of him, nor do with him: The man Jesus (who was as
truly visible in Jewry, as Ellwood was in the House of Pennington) stands much
in their way, and hinders their Light or Christ within) who called the
Apostles, taught and instructed them, as appears from the Series of the four
Gospels, which we shall adhere to, rather than to these, who do but dream
dreams, while they conceit that they see Visions.

This being the (...), that which is the procreative cause of so many
delusions, viz. a Disregarding Christ's Personal, Prophetical Office, and
placing their supposed Spirit in his room. I shall make a short Narrative how
the Apostles came to the knowledge of the Gospel, how Religion was delivered by
Christ, that it was settled in an outward, Bodily and Sensible way; and thereby
Ellwoods account of the Spirits doing the work, by his inward Immediate
teaching will appear not only distant from truth; but, the very subverter of
the Christian Religion.

God having at sundry times and in diverse manners made known his Will unto the
Fathers, at the last in the highest Dispensation (which is never to be out
dated) he spoke unto us by his Son (whom he has appointed Heir of all things)
that is by the God-man Christ Jesus, who took our flesh and blood, and was of
the same nature with us: this Son of God, was God himself, who came to visit
the earth, and be his own Interpreter, yet still he discharged this Office,
whilst he was Tabernacling in our Flesh.

He was God with us, instructing us in the likeness and true Nature of man, of
a Reasonable Soul and Humane Flesh subsisting. And thus I suppose those
Prophecyes were fulfilled [ Taught of the Lord, or Taught of God] he had the
Spirit without measure, he was the very Temple of God, the Holy of Holyes, in
and by whom the Divine Oracles were made known to Mortals.

The Divine Majesty resided in this man Jesus, all the former owned ways of
Revelation came to attend him into the World, to usher him into his Office, and
give Credence to what he spoke, and yet (excepting some short Sentences serving
as Testimonials to him) they were all silent while he was Teaching; but still
Jesus in Humane Nature took the Chair, and was Gods mouth and voice unto
mankind; as might be more fully and advantageously showed.

The Apostles conversed with Christ, saw, heard, eat, drunk, and lived with
him; how often is this referred to, of their being Eye and Ear Witnesses of what
he did and said? he taught them by Sermons, Parables, Conferences, explaining
things privately to them, during the whole Term of his Ministry, and after his
Resurrection. And must his whole Prophetic Office be thought nothing? and can
such select Scholars be still non-proficients under so powerful and so diligent
an Instructor? other Quakers think contrarily to T. E, and let one Infallible
buffet another.

[ Whilst Christ abode with them in his bodily appearance -- they had some
knowledge -- till the manifestation of the Spirit, Keith. Im: Rev. p. 162, 163.
they were ignorant of many things.] many is not all; that is for their
knowledge; and for their life, he says elsewhere [ the very Disciples
themselves while they followed Christ outwardly -- were truly Religious] and
another of them, [ surely none will or can deny, Idem p. 230.
who profess Christianity, but the Apostles, Tailors Faithful and True Witness
the Light, etc. p. 12.
in some measure before Christ's outward departure from them, had the Comfort of
the Holy Spirit in them, and were both Believers and obedient Children in their
measure, etc.]

What though the Apostles being involved in the fatal prejudices of their
Nation, were ignorant of some things, as about the Kingdom of God, the
Resurrection, etc. must they therefore know nothing of Faith, Repentance, a
Christian Life or Duty? Christ who knew them the best speaks otherwise, John
17.6, 7, 8. they have kept thy word -- they have known -- they have believed --
[(...), Chrysostom. apud Theop. in locum.
having known by my words, and by my Doctrine.]

The Apostles were as certain knowing Witnesses of Christ, as we can be of any
matters of Fact, and the Christian Religion was entertained upon their
Testimony; that they had been with, seen, heard and known Jesus. God would not
send that Religion into the World, which was to be the perpetual Rule of all
mankind, and command others to trust the bringers upon their inward
manifestations, which would have exposed, rather than have propagated Truth;
but what they spoke they attested as matter of Fact and Knowledge, all the
twelve having had personal converse with Jesus, upon whom the Holy Ghost
visibly descended, audible voices were heard, his Doctrine was delivered before
multitudes of Witnesses, men were persuaded by outward, sensible, even bodily
evidences, and not barely left to internal suggestions, in which there may be
great danger of Delusion.

And not only the Apostles Preached, but all the Penmen of the New Testament
wrote upon their certain knowledge. S. Matthew, S. John, S. James S. Peter and
S. Jude; had personal Conversation with and attendance on Christ, were able to
testify both what they saw and heard, S. Luke wrote part from his own
knowledge, and part from certain Information: The like Antiquity testifyeth
concerning S. Mark, S. Paul had that want of personal attendance and
acquaintance supplied by Christ's appearing and speaking to him, Acts 22.14,
Cateches. 10.
15. and 26.16. and in many other places. Hence Cyril of Jerusalem rationally
infers, That the Testimony of Paul, being an Enemy and Persecutor before must
needs be undeniable; though some suspicious person should allege that Peter
and John (...) were Familiars and Domestics; yet the Testimony of Paul, first
an Enemy to Jesus, and then a Martyr for him, cannot be denied. And this he
assigns as the Reason, why Paul wrote more Epistles than the rest, because
being a Persecutor before, his Doctrine could not be doubtful, but commanding
of our Belief; and therefore when Quakers think there may be new Inspired Books
now; That the closing up the Ganon of Scripture, [ is a limiting God from
moving or Inspiring any men, Quakerism no Popery. p. 62.
in any Age of the World to come, to write any Book or Books which may be of
equal Authority with the Scriptures.] They proceed upon gross mistakes; for
unless Christ converse on Earth again, and Ellwoods Monstrous fancy of
Repetition prove a real Certainty, there can be no such Inspired Books, as the
new Testament gives us, to be written in these Ages; or unless there be another
Dispensation, viz. that of the Spirit yet to commence, which Dream is the most
of all Destructive to Christianity.

Thus was Christianity made known and settled in the World, not by Philosophy,
or Rhetoric, or any Humane Art; but by two such Methods, as Heaven and Earth
cannot afford greater, which S. John calls the Witness of men, and the Witness
of God: the Witness or Testimony of men, is this already given; And Religion
being entertained upon that Account; to tell us of new Revelations now, is a
renouncing of the Faith of Christ, which does command Belief not only by inward
teachings, but outward proofs. But lest this Witness of so many men might have
been rejected, as proceeding from Delusion or Design, the Witness of God
interposed in so Public, visible and audible ownings both of Christ and his
Religion, that the World was not capable of receiving more unexceptionable and
convincing proofs.

And further, as for the Teachings of the Spirit, which T. E. only mentions,
they were of a different Nature from what he drives at; the supervening of the
Spirit was not to evacuate or obliterate what Christ on Earth had spoken. The
Testimony of the Apostles and the Spirit are conjoined, John 15.26, 27. he
conferring extraordinary gifts, to engage men to believe what they delivered
from their own personal, or certain knowledge; and where there were inward
teachings, there were outward powers to testify thereof to others, and still
the Spirit did but pursue Christ's teachings, acted in his Name, took of his,
and showed it to them, opened such things as they understood not, re-called to
remembrance such as they had forgotten, and instructed in such things, as
before they could not bear; as about the Sabbath, Circumcision, Christian
Liberty, and the like. Though I think, that Christ in our Nature in discharge
of his Prophetic Office, Publicly and Audibly made known all the Essential,
Eternal Duties, or all the parts of Everlasting Righteousness. And possibly in
strict speaking, that Inspiration which the Apostles had, ought not to be
called Immediate, especially not in every thing. Because it was conferred but
in pursuance of what our Lord had before orally delivered in matters of Duty:
for certain knowledge destroys not Inspiration, nor Inspiration certain
knowledge: Nor is the use of former helps rejected, but taken hold of by the
Spirit. Thus were the Apostles instructed, thus was our Religion settled, thus
must our Saviors Prophetic Office be secured, and his, and the Spirits
workings must not be confounded. And T. Ellwood's Method of the Apostles coming
to the knowledge of the Gospel, is not the Method of God's making. And let it
be further considered, if herein Satan's policy do not appear, what he cannot
effect by Atheism and Profaneness: he attempts by Enthusiasm, under the
pretense of an higher Religion, to root out the old one so Divinely and firmly
settled; for the taking away the rational motives to Faith, and the sensible
grounds of Religion. And devolving the belief and understanding of Sacred
things upon their pretended Revelations, Witnessings, and Experiences, renders
Religion both uncertain and indemonstrable. And while Men observe the
Differences, Contradictions, and Ungroundedness of such Claims; they will be
apt to entertain the like prejudices against the Christian Religion it self.
Supposing that it relies upon such grounds as their Witnessings and invisible
Inspirations; for so they bear the World in hand, Fox love to Mankind, p. 11.
[ What the Apostles said -- we do by the same Power and Spirit.] And in a
little time by such Arts, Religion will be in danger to be fatally undermined,
all being rejected together, as relying upon a like bottom.

But if T. Ellwood's Castle in the Air be erected, it is not material, though
Christianity be blown up; and if his Dreams be admitted, he seems not
concerned, what disservice is done to the other, though, blessed be Gods
goodness, he has rooted his Gospel in a different manner, as if purposely to
prevent Satan's transforming himself into an Angel of Light, and those pretenses
to Inspirations, which he has all along fomented. But though there were real
Revelations now, yet T.E. is the unlikeliest Person to be favored with them.
For he first enervates the written Word, as will in its place appear; and
withal over-looks the Essential Word, taking no notice of him whom God the
Father sent into the World, and sealed; endeavoring to annihilate that Jesus
(as to his Prophetic Office however) in whom the whole Covenant of Grace is
founded, and in, and by, and through whom all Blessings whatever are conveyed
to us. And this is a sad stumbling upon the very threshold, a fit Pillar for
nothing but a Monstrous Fabric. But to use his own words, [ Had he not been a
Quaker he could not have given such an Answer.]

CHAP. III. Whether Quakers be the Apostles Successors, and receive the Gospel
in the same manner as the Apostles did.
II. THE other Pillar is as rotten, that the Apostles Successors or all
Believers, do receive the knowledge of the Gospel in the same manner as they
did: In which three things are couched.

1. That all Believers, or the Quakers are the Apostles Successors.

2. That these Successors receive in the same manner as the Apostles.

3. The proofs produced to make out this claim.

1. That all Believers, or Quakers, are the Apostles Successors; if the first,
then he argues for all Parties, as well as for himself; and their Revelations
will outweigh his: a Turk is a Musulman, or Believer in the light within him;
withal he makes Christ to have a Monstrous Body, if all Believers be the
Apostles Successors. But his Charity without question designed the latter, by
using the first Person, We and Us: [ The Apostles Successors, p. 228. truly the
Apostles Successors in Faith and Doctrine, p. 230, 233] but he should first
have proved it, and not have begged the question. The Lamb's Officer, p. 11.
The Apostles Successors: a great Humility! Lately they were higher, even [
true Prophets and Apostles,] now they are dwindled into Successors; not
Apostoli, but Apostolici: They succeed them in Inspiration, Infallibility,
Divine Commission, Discerning of Spirits, he does well to add in Faith and
Doctrine. Pray proceed, you succeed in their Chairs, in their Bishoprics, in
their Power of binding and loosing, and prove it all, by succeeding in their
Miraculous Powers. But how do you succeed the Apostles? You differ vastly among
your selves, what time the Apostasy entered into the Church; but stating it (as
some do) to commence at the entry of the first Century, Smith's Spiritual glass
opened, p. 36 Keith's Universal Free Grace, 92.
then for 1548 years [ the Gospel Dispensation was lost, and is now revealed;]
[ Christ's Spiritual Dispensation is now again revealed in this day after the
Apostasy.] And so many years make an hiatus large enough to disturb Succession.
It Is not the Apostles, but Winstanley whom you succeed: [ In the year 1648 God
did cause a branch to spring forth out of the root of David, which was filled
with Virtue, J. Whitehead in Mr. Faldo's Q. no Christ. p. 16.
for the Covenant of Life and Peace was with him; he spread forth many
Branches, which did partake of the fatness of the Root, the weary came to rest
under his branches, with him was the Word of Reconciliation.] And to that
purpose the Blasphemous Harangue proceeds; so that you do but succeed that
Leveller, as Whitehead did in 1655. Ibid.
[ Being a branch of this Tree, viz. the branch before said, the life of its
Root caused me to blossom, and bring forth fruit, etc.] It is the Spirit of
Winstanley whereby you are Acted, and whether that be the Spirit of God
deserves your diligent enquiry.

But supposing, with the Socinians, that Doctrinal Succession is sufficient
without Personal, we can discern no likeness between their and your Doctrine.
You Allegorize that Baptism and the Lords Supper, which they practiced; you set
up that Christ within, whom they saw ascending into Heaven, there to abide till
the day of Judgment: You make but small esteem of those Scriptures which they
wrote, or commended as able to make the Man of God wise unto Salvation. They
did eat and drink with Christ; you have scarce allowed him to be a distinct
Person from you. They make Christ the Redeemer of Men; you must have him to
Redeem himself, even a lost God, and a lost Christ. They expected Justification
by the suffering Jesus; that you make a Doctrine of Devils, and will be saved
by your own Works, or by a Christ within you.

They believed Christ to be made a Sin-offering for them, you entertain him but
as your Pattern. They believed their dead Bodies should rise again, you do
style it a Carnal Resurrection; with several such irreconcilable differences
between their Doctrines and yours. There are other Fathers whom you succeed,
even many of the old Heretics, as might easily be showed, but especially Henry
Nicholas is your Grandfather; the Life and Spirit of Familism runs through
your writings, you have taken many things from the Libertines, Swenckfeldians,
and Anabaptists, the Antinomians also (as Saltmarsh, in his Sparkles of Glory,
and others of them) contributed toward your Original, for those and other
Sects agree much in one bottom; that of Immediate teaching, these prepared the
Materials, out of which your Father Winstanley formed the most part of your
Opinions, which being thrown together in a confused manner, you fancy the
result to be (...), an Image fallen down from Jupiter, and prettily style your
selves the Successors of the Apostles in Faith and Doctrine by Immediate
Revelation.

But supposing, out of an excess of Charity, that you are the Apostles
Successors: The next is more Prodigious.

2. That these Successors receive in the same manner as the Apostles, [in the
same manner] he prints in a different Character, p. 228, 230, 233. to show the
stress lies there, and he affirms it [ to be no presumption, ungodliness, or
absurdity in those who are the Apostles Successors in Faith and Doctrine, to
expect to receive the knowledge of the Gespel, in the same manner as they
received it, p. 228, 230, 233.] Expect and think what he please, Sober men can
judge the thought to be no less than madness, and the thing a mere
impossibility; for unless Christ be now on Earth, or T. E. was alive when
Christ was on Earth, and did personally attend him, he cannot have received as
the Apostles did; no, not though it was possible daily to repair to Jacob
Behmen's Theosophick School of Pentecost. But T. E. has out-gone that Father
(who being 1300 years nearer Christ's time, might have been sooner qualified for
it,) he has seen Christ on Earth, heard Paul in the Pulpit, and by this token
then, he saw Rome in its Glory. Did S. Mark know the Gospel in the same manner
as S. Matthew? Or came S. Luke to it by the same means as S. John? The one
says, 1 John 1.1.
[That which we have seen, looked upon, and handled:] The other, Luke 1.2.
[They that were eyewitnesses have delivered them unto us.] And if the
difference in coming to the knowledge of the Gospel was so early then, Quakers
can receive like none but false Apostles now; John 20.9.
our Lord pronounces a blessedness on such as have not seen, and yet have
believed: Some saw Christ, and some saw the Apostles who had seen Christ, etc.
The Doctrine of the Gospel was transmitted from certain eye and ear-witnesses,
who had Divine Inspiration also; and so much as God thought necessary for his
Church, was written by those Divine Penmen, and is contained and conveyed down
to us in that best of Books, called the Bible.

But must the first settling a Dispensation be always continued? Must those
manners whereby Religion was propagated, be perpetually maintained? Then
Miracles are as necessary in the present Church as in the Primitive: the ten
Commandments were delivered in Thundrings and Lightnings, were those repeated
every time the Law was read in their Synagogues and Houses? The Holy Ghost
descended wonderfully on the day of Pentecost, So Acts 4.31 and 8.17. and
10.44. and 11.15. and 15.8. and 19.6.
and generally there was an outward evidence of him upon Believers; but where
have we now such Miraculous Convictions of his Presence? Religion being once
settled by Gods extraordinary Power, needs not the daily renewing those
Wonders; and when other Miraculous gifts are ceased, and Prophecy is foretold
to cease as well as Tongues, and Tongues are undoubtedly ceased: It is strange,
and looks like giving God the Lie, to say, that Prophecy is longer lived than
the other. The first bringing in a Religion requires other Methods of
Conviction than are necessary afterward; for being entertained upon those
Evidences, The danger of Enthusiasm Discovered in an Epistle to the Quakers
and committed to writing, God continues it in a regular course, men
instructing men from these owned Oracles, as is well proved in a late Treatise.

George Fox upon T. Ellwood's Principles, may quarrel with Margaret Fell, that
she is not his Wife, because not made out of his Rib, as Eve was out of Adam's:
and Margaret Fell may retort, that George Fox is not her Husband, because he
was not formed out of the Earth, as Adam was. The Israelites might refuse to
Plough and Sow in Canaan, expecting the same easy Maintenance afforded in the
Wilderness: And we may Object, that now we are not to work, only to expect and
wait; the Earth ought to yield us Fruit of its own accord, as it did in
Paradise. T. E. needs the Breast and Spoon at forty years old as well as at
four months; and all Men and Women must come into the World in the same manner
with Adam and Eve, and this is the direct consequent of holding Nature and
Religion always in the Cradle.

But though Quakers did not hear nor see Christ, nor have had the Spirit
visibly descend, yet these Successors have the same inward Revelations with the
Apostles: If you prove it in the same manner they could, you shall have another
manner of return; till then, I shall be assured that God does not multiply
unnecessaries, nor grant things to satisfy wanton Humors. Whatever Immediate
Revelations the Apostles had, we have at this day the benefit of them in their
Inspired Writings; and God having conveyed them to us in an Intelligible Book,
it is not his Method to increase Revelations, to represent that immediately to
my Soul, which he has commanded me to read in a Book of his own Inditing.
Christ who raised Lazarus from the dead, could by the very same Word have
rolled away the stone that lay over him, but he was not Prodigal of Miracles;
Where other means can be used, Gods immediate Power will not be Arrested. He
therefore bids first, [ Take ye away the stone, John 11.39. which they obeyed,
v. 41.] and then he speaks with Power, Lazarus, come forth. If the Apostles had
Immediate Revelations, which I can read in my Bible, for me to say, I receive
them in the same manner, is a Delusion, and to desire the receipt, is a
Temptation. But suppose that Ellwood's Book was writ by Revelation, as his
Hectoring Letter imports, [May the Honor be returned to that Powerful Arm,
which gave both the Weapon, and therewithal skill and strength to use it:] And
suppose the Expositions he gives proceed from the same Fountain, still fresh
vexations do arise; for I am as much to seek how to understand his Book, as an
Epistle of St. Paul's: If Paul's Revelation cannot be understood without a new
one, no more can Ellwood's; the Successor must be like the Predecessor: and
therefore till he can either write, so as to be understood, or give us security
that he writes by Revelation, and withal assurance where to meet with another
Inspiration to capacitate us to understand his, Charity obliges him to keep
his sealed-up Notions to himself, and not to trouble the World with waste Paper.

But upon what grounds is all this claimed? Does he know by Inspiration, that
all Believers receive the Gospel as the Apostles did? No sure, for he turns
another way, attempts a proof thereof from Scripture-promises; but hereby he
makes Quakerism a little imbodyed: It Is not so airy and slippery as formerly, I
may now look at it, turn it about, and handle it; which leads to the third.

3. The Proofs produced to make out this claim, and they seem more like the
coherence of a Quakers dream, than the Logic of a waking Man, p. 228. Thus he
takes his rise, [ As our Savior prayed not for them only, but all such also
as should believe on him through their word. So what he promised concerning
sending the Comforter -- he did not promise with Restriction and Limitation
only, but with an extensive relation to all that should believe on him;] and
inference that is strangely wide, and destructive of his very design. Is there
no limitation because he observes none? Nor no restriction employed, where not
expressly given? From a Prayer for all, to infer a Promise to all, especially
when about different things, is a loose way of Arguing. Such a Writer may
commence any thing per saltum; and from Fisher's folly instantly jump into the
Porphyry's Chair. Christ's Prayers were always granted, and his Promises
fulfilled, but his Prayer and Promise must not be confounded: He made
Intercession for Transgressors; he Prayed, Father, Isa. 53.12. Luke 23.34.
forgive them, for they know not what they do. It would have been a closer
deduction, but untrue, thence to infer, that all Transgressors, and all that
know not what they do (be the Ignorance never so culpable) are forgiven. But
view the Prayer, and it confutes this perverting gloss: it was a Prayer for all
Believers [that they may be one;] that is, John 17.21.
live in all the Duties of Christian Unity. Had Christ prayed for Immediate
Revelation to all Believers in all Ages, that had been to his purpose, but it
is not named nor concerned here. And the very words of that Prayer in v. 20.
plough up his Fancy: [ For them also who shall believe on me through their
word,] where the Apostles Word, Doctrine, Preaching, and Testimony concerning
Christ, is made the Motive to Men's believing in him, and Immediate Revelation
is not once named.

He would have also the promise of sending the Comforter given without
Restriction; but in Scripture limitations must be given to general words,
according to matters, etc. concerned. Joel 2.28.
[I will pour my Spirit upon all Flesh.] is not upon Horses, Asses; no, nor the
unconverted Indians. John 14.26.
[He shall teach you all things] is not giving the skill of Astronomy or
Algebra: So the promise of the Spirit is not only to be understood with
Restriction, but the very Limitations are given, John 15.27. [Ye have been with
me from the beginning,] that limits it to the Persons of the Apostles, who
accompanied with Christ, beginning from the Baptism of John, Acts 1.22.
Hereupon Christ says, [Ye also shall bear Witness,] which none could do upon
their certain knowledge but his Personal Attendants. And John 16.13. [He will
show you things to come,] restrains it also to the Apostles, which clause T. E.
as too tough for him, ungodlily leaves out.

But to Argue upon their Principles, what is Ellwood concerned in Christ's
Promise made before his Death? when as he slights Luke 14.8. because spoken [
before the one Offering was Actually offered up, Edw. Buroughs. p. 47.
p. 37.] Another says, [A Command to one binds not another;] no more should a
Promise to one benefit another. [The gift of Tongues and working Miracles were
peculiar to the Apostles Times,] Geo. Whitehead's Reprehension.
and so was Inspiration also. Those Promises Christ made just before his Death,
having discharged his Prophetic Office, he betook himself to his Priestly; the
Multitude being gone, he addressed himself in his Sermon to his Apostles, whom
he left his Commissioners on Earth; and having finished his Prayer, was
presently Apprehended. Now, to enlarge to all Believers, what was spoke to that
select Company, will make wild Divinity: T. Ellwood so may pass for Thomas
Didymus, and challenge one of the twelve Thrones whereon to sit and Judge the
twelve Tribes of Israel.

But suppose he inferred truly in an extensive Relation to all Believers, till
he prove me to be no Believer, he has argued me to have Inspiration as well as
himself; and withal Faith being an Internal invisible Grace, without another
Immediate Revelation, I cannot be assured who is this true Believer, nor who
has the Spirit.

It may suffice humble Souls that those Promises may extend in some sort to the
whole Church diffusive; not to every single Man, no, nor Sect of Men; nor to
any Church of one Denomination whatsoever; and that God will bestow the Spirit
of Illumination and Sanctification upon sincere Christians. But that those are
different from the Apostolical Inspiration, without which a man may be saved,
and with which he may be damned.

To these he adds Auxiliary Proofs, as John 17.37, 38, 39. p. 128. in which
neither Repeated nor Immediate Revelation, as perpetual, is named: And he reads
it differently from his Master Fox, Great Mystery, p. 130. in the Spirit of the
Quakers tried. Universal Grace, p. 102
who thus turns it, [ Out of whose Belly, (viz. the Light Christ) flowed Rivers
of Living water:] as also the Text above is differently by him Interpreted;
from his Tutor Keith, [ He prays for them that they may be converted and
believe, as John 17.21.] That Text as to us is now abundantly fulfilled in that
Vital Principle of Holiness implanted in all Regenerate Hearts; whereas it does
explain it self, v. 39. to belong to the day of Pentecost. But T. E. deals with
it, as Satan did with that, Mat. 4.6. leaves out [the Holy Ghost was not yet
given, because Jesus was not yet Glorified;] Chrysostom. apud Theop. in locum.
because it looked unkindly on his Project, (...).

He brings in also, p. 229. 1 John 2.20, 27. wherein Immediate perpetual
Revelation is not named, but it refers to the Subject matter, the
discovering of false Teachers and Doctrines by the anointing, that gift of
discerning the Spirits then in the Church. But if T. E. conceit, that he know
all things, I shall grant him to succeed some in such thoughts, Irenae. advers.
Haeres. Lib. 1. C. 1. Origin. L. 1. p, 31.
the Gnostics and Valentinians, [ Abundantius gloriantur plus quam caeteri
cognovisse, Gloryed themselves to know much more than others. And Celsus had as
high conceits, [(...)] boasted he knew all the Doctrines and things belonging
to Christians.

His other Proofs from John 14, 15, and 16 Chapters belong in their proper and
prime sense to the Apostles, who were Christ's Attendants whilst he lived on
Earth, and his Commissioners and Witnesses when Ascended. The fancy [that
without Revelation we are left comfortless] is foolish, for God has afforded
the certain Original Revelations to us in his Bible, we have his Spirit and his
Comforts to many purposes besides Inspiration, and he is still with us in the
use of means, as he causes Corn to grow, and yet our Labor and Sowing are
required.

Thus, Vbi supra.
like those in Irenaeus, he does ex arena resticulas nectere, his whole Scheme
thus far is but a rope of Sand, drawn out of untrue and unconcluding Premises.
Jesus that Prophet is laid aside, and the Spirit made the whole Teacher; and
that Employment is devolved on him, to make way for their inward unaccountable
suggestions. Then he kindly supposes his Friends to be the Apostles
Successors, thence infers, that all must be taught for ever, as the Apostles
were. And lastly, attempts at some Proofs, which without a Quakers Spectacles,
cannot be therein spelled. Feed my Sheep, the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
etc. serve the Pope as clearly, and with more likelihood: The Disciples of H.
Nicholas may be esteemed the Nicholaitans, Rev. 2. or the two George Foxes be
Interpreted those little Foxes, Cant. 2.15. that spoil the Vines.

CHAP. IV. Concerning their Renewed or Repeated Revelations.
UPON these tottering Pillars he raises several and different Notions,

I. To begin with their Youngest, that which is their Fondling, viz. the Claim
of Renewed and Repeated Revelations, which (without offering one Text in favor
thereof) he thus wordeth; [p. 238. Not new Revelations, that is, new things
Revealed, but rather renewed Revelations, that is, Old things revealed anew:
The same Gospel, the same way of Salvation, the same Essentials of Religion,
the same Principles and Doctrines: in a word, the same good Old Truths which
were Revealed to the Saints of Old, and are Recorded in the Holy Scriptures,
Revealed now anew.] This he is large upon, p. 243. That they are again Revealed
by the same Spirit, which he calls a repetition of the former Revelations, p.
254, and 256.

But why names he not the Author of this knack? That would have looked
untowardly upon the Immediateness of it. Im. Revelation not ceased, p. 3.
But George Keith Inspired him therewith: [Observe the difference betwixt these
two, the new Revelation of new things, and the new Revelation of the good old
things, which are the Essentials of Religion -- The first of those two we do
not plead for, but the latter.] And elsewhere, p. 33.
[The same Eternal Life which first breathed them forth, does either again
breath, or speak them forth in us, or sends forth of his Living powerful
Influences into them, as they have a place in our Minds and Memories] this
latter, as more modest, is below Ellwoods purpose.

But though he takes the Words and Notions of Keith, the Revelation is still
Immediate; for their Institutor has prettily determined. Truth lifting up its
head, p. 38.
[If you would hear, then acquaint your seives with such, as can speak from a
Testimony within; for as they Received what they have from the pure teachings
of the Father: so this second hand teaching will be a pure Teaching unto you,
but be sure you do not prefer this second Teaching before the first, for now
the Everlasting Word and Gospel must reveal himself to you, or else you cannot
be satisfied:] Their own or others is first and second hand teaching; but
instructing from the Scriptures is not so much as third hand Teaching, and the
Scriptures are now out of date. [The Writings of the Apostles -- are to cease,
Truth lifting, etc. p. 30.
when the Lord himself who is the Everlasting Gospel does manifest himself to
Rule in the Flesh of Sons and Daughters.]

They have no New Essentials of Religion, this I thought spoke in our
Acception, about Fundamentals; till further Converse in their Works discovered
the Deceit, Keith. Im. Rev. p. 5.
for though one tell us [that less than one half of the Scriptures is a full
and perfect Testimony of all the Essentials] yet he spoils all in saying [That
the knowledge and belief of the History of Christ his outward Coming, Page 229.
Birth, Life, Death, Burial, Resurrection, etc. are such parts of our Religion
and Faith, as serve to make up the Intiredness, or Fullness of it, yet so as
true Religion may be without the express Knowledge and Belief of them:] So
that a man may be a Quaker Christian without the express knowledge of Christ in
the outward, either of his Name, Nature, Laws or Offices. The great Mogul has
true Religion as much as George Fox. This lays aside all that Jesus Was, Did,
Taught and Suffered, and contains all Heresies in its Bowels, even to the
denying the Lord who bought them. And another has writ a Folio to show [that
men should not be concerned about Faith or Creeds, Bishops looking glass for
the times.
but leave all to the Conduct of the Light.]

But what then are their Essentials of Religion? nothing of Jesus our Lord and
Savior, nothing that is a part of the four Gospels. [ True Christianity and
Religion may subsist without the History of Christ in the Letter, to wit, Im.
Rev. p. 243.
In the Mystery of the Life of Christ in the Spirit.] So that a Turk is a true
Christian, though he never owned but hated Christ: rarely allegorized, till our
whole Christianity is shrunk up into those four insignificant words, as so
used, which are fit for nothing but a Quakers Posy. And George Bishop crowds
all into that Everlasting Truth, viz. A looking glass for the times p. 235.
[ the Principle of God in Man, which is in every man a measure thereof, to
lead him and guide him, which is able to lead him into all truth, and to
deliver him from evil, and which will bring him to God.]

These are the new made Essentials of Religion, which the ancient Heroes knew
not of, who required from all Baptized persons the Profession of their Faith
about Christ in the outward, who scrupled the change of one Letter in the
Creed; but Quakers disowning visible Baptism, have sent away the Creed
therewith, lest the retaining of it should upbraid them. In the mean time the
Devil has ordered their Scene rarely: The Light, Christ within, renders the
Christ without much useless; he who shed his Blood for them, is no Essential of
their Religion, and their Inspirations supply the place of Scripture, being
preferred before it: So that their two Principles, Im. Rev. p. p. 43.
the Light and Motions, fairly lessen, if not discharge the Essential and
Written word of God. Christ in Heaven and the Scriptures on Earth signify
little to these self-made Pagans, who have enough within to carry them to all
that Heaven which their Faith expects. But to resume the claim of renewed and
Repeated Revelations; a Notion so strange that nothing but a search into their
Writings can Discover the sense or design of it. I must take the freedom to
present their thoughts of the Holy Scriptures, that by such preparatory tastes
we may be drawn on to swallow this Camel of Repetition.

To begin with their Founder [men must not walk by the Scriptures, Winstanley
in Truth lifting up, p. 39.
for this is to walk by the eyes of other men, and the Spirit is not so scanty,
that a dozen ar twenty pair of eyes shall serve the World, but every Son and
Daughter have light within themselves.] [You shall feed no longer upon the Oil
that was in other men's Lamps (the Scriptures; In the Title page.
) now it is required that every one have Oil in his own Lamp within himself;]
[Some walk by Example, Mystery of God, p. 35. The Saints Paradise. p. 1.2.
and have seen very little of the anointing in them, some walk more in Spirit
and Truth, as the anointing of the Father teaches them;] [teaching from
Scripture is not, but speaking from their own experience, that is from God.]
The like Notion breaths in T. E. Master Keith [The old Revelations -- given
unto the Saints cannot serve our turn, the Faith of another man is not
sufficient unto me, but I must be saved by the Faith, Knowledge and Experience
given me of God, of the self same things: the Revelation of them given of God
unto others cannot suffice me, nor were these things recorded in Writ, that I
should sit down upon the History, but to point us inward to that same Principle
of life -- revealing and working the same things in us, Page 34.
etc.] [We find it to hurt and deaden us to think any thoughts, even from the
Scriptures, but as the Spirit influenceth -- if at any time we do it, we find
our selves rebuked and chastized of the Lord for it] and in another place [we
must not obey Scripture without motions, but we may obey motions without
Scripture.] At this rate write others of them; to cull out some few from among
many, G. W. and Fox in the gag for the Q. p. 14.
[what Paul wrote unto the Ephesians and Colossions does not concern this
Generation;] [That is no Command from God to me, which God has given by way of
Command to another, Buroughs Works. p. 47.
neither did any of the Saints act by the Command which was to another, every
one obeyed their own Commands;] an excellent Engine toward God and man, no Act
of Parliament can bind a Quaker, except he be expressly named: George
Whitehead, Thomas Ellwood, etc. You by name must do so and so, this becomes
the Majesty of the Quakers. Smiths morn. Watch. p. 75. Smiths Demonstrat.
passim in their papers.
The Scriptures [are other men's Traditions; other men's lives and Labours] [the
Spirit of God must try all Spirits.] [the Scriptures are but a report or
declaration of the Condition of those who received them] [a true Testimony of
what the Saints were made Witnesses of] [no command in Scripture is any further
obliging upon any man, Smith Pen. in Faldoes vind. of 21 Div. p 97. Faldo Q. no
Chris. chapter 12.
than as he finds a Conviction upon his Conscience;] direct old Libertinism,
and Ranterism. They [make it Idolatry to follow the Precepts or Examples in
Scripture.]

Having thus depressed the written Word of God, yet to keep up some seeming
Honor to it, In his Letter
though to use T.E's. words [ it be an Hosannah in the morning, that ends in a
Crucifige ere night] they find out this Expedient; the Scripture as the Codex
wherein Gods will is Recorded, binds them not, but they have it renewed and
repeated to them; or as Naylor words it [God speaks to us by Scriptures when
they are given by Inspiration to us.] Light of Christ. p. 29
So that Repetition is but laying the top-stone, and improving or pursuing
their other claims.

T. E. is so confident, that he asserts, p. 239. Revelation is necessary (yea
of necessity) even to understand the Scripture, absolutely necessary, p. 238.
so received and understood -- and not otherwise, p. 251.] he must then have
every line in the Old and New Testament repeated, (not so much as [Abraham
begat Isaac] is to be omitted) else it is not understood by him, a thing that
is so Impossible, and so Impracticable, that it affords fresh evils each time
it is considered.

I might make short Work, what need the renewing of that to him, which he looks
upon as not obliging? as in its place will appear; or, as his Landlord conceits
[the one thing necessary to Salvation, Penningtons naked truth. p. 23.
not being contained in the Scriptures:] the Repetition thereof if true, yet
would be ineffectual, but in regard this fancy has been considered by none, I
know of, I shall a while view it, as that which makes the confusedst work in
Prophecyes, Historyes, and all the parts of Christianity: In brief, it revives
the Ministry of Angels, as the Conveyers of Gods Will in the Christian State,
it sets up Moses to be a Teacher, reinforceth Circumcision, the Tabernacle, the
Jewish Commonwealth, and the Law of Sacrifices; it raises up Multitudes of
Persons out of their Graves where they have rested some thousand years; it sets
up the Kingdoms of Egypt, Assyria, Syria, and the rest that bordered on the
Holy Land: it musters a great part of the World together, Kings and Kingdoms to
come and stand before him; it lays aside Christianity, destroys the Motives of
Believing it, making such a Miscellaneous hotch-potch of Religion, as Mahomet
did not hit on: it makes the whole Scripture Scenical, a Theatrical thing, that
like a Puppet-play goes round, is renewed, repeated, in plain English, acted
over before him.

The Portentousness of this chimaera will appear by looking on its Aspect upon
the old and new Testament, wherein we may consider Historyes, Prophecyes and
other mixed matters, and discover whether they be capable of Repetition. For
History, has God renewed to T. E. that Command of putting off his shoes from
off his feet? which was enjoined to, and done by Moses; have the Tempests,
Thunderings, Voices, which were at the giving the Law been heard by him? can
God speak to him from between the Cherubims and from the Door of the Tabernacle
which are not now in being? has he received with David, Answers from the Vrim?
or need he some outward light from the Breast Plate, who has such a Light
within? have the Angels Revealed those Messages to him, which they did to
Abraham, Lot and others? then Sodom was but fired the other day, or things are
burnt in Effigy before him. Have the Voices to Samuel been rehearsed to him?
or that to Elijah. 1 King. 19.15? then Jehu and Hazael are now alive, and T.E.
is an anointer to Kingdoms.

The like might be showed of all Scripture-Histories, that this Dream destroys
or confounds and intangles the Truth of all. For History relates things done,
Repetition looks on them as undone, and in doing; confounds times past, present
and future: disorders and mixeth both Persons and Matters, and by making
nothing distinct, leaves nothing true. Nicodemus came to Jesus by night, Thomas
put his hand into Christ's side, etc. If these (which we know from Scripture) be
repeated, then those persons must be now alive, if they be not repeated, they
are not understood. Is it not enough to have all these recorded in a Divine
History for our Admonition and Example? but these old Revelations must be new
Revealed, and Acted over to gratify a morose Illuminado.

This fancy does as much disservice to the Truth, and certainty of Prophecyes,
has T. E. laid 390 days upon one side in a Visionary Siege against Jerusalem,
gone to the River Chebar, beheld the draughts of a most glorious Temple, etc.
with Ezekiel? or has he had the Revelation of St. John repeated before him
Vision after Vision? This Supervisor general need but move a pin, and all the
Prophecyes present themselves before him. I have seen some Printed papers
joined at the end of a Quakers Bible, containing the Epistle of Paul to the
Laodiceans, the life of Paul, a Catalogue of several Scriptures which are
mentioned, but not inserted in the Bible, as the Prophecy of Enoch, cummultis
aliis; several Scriptures corrupted by the Translators; most of which are where
(...) is rendered otherwise than In: and Lastly the Differences betwixt the Old
English Translation and the New. All which reflects both upon the version now
used, bu especially are designed to render the Saored Scripture defective: that
there are other Revelations besides those therein consigned, and hereby to pave
the way for the Belief and Admittance of what they pretend to bring from Heaven
to us. The same Confidence and Principles may carry such persons on, to such
words [ as the Vision of Isaiah -- which he saw -- in the days of Izziah -- or,
The Testimony from the Brethren.
the Revelation of Jesus Christ -- signified to his Servant John] to annex such
like claims as this [ which Visions or Revelations begun to be renewed and
repeated to the Quakers in England (who are the Church returned out of the
Wilderness) in the year 1648.] Can T. E. have had the Prophecies of Daniel
reacted, as that St. of old had? then dead Belshazzar is now afoot, and
Nebuchadnezzar weilds his Scepter, the 70 weeks are never begun, nor never
ended, the Messiah must be uncut off, each time this Vision is renewed: but as
a Mass-Priest daily kills and butchers Christ, who yet lives for all that
Cruelty, so this renewing makes all things Scenical in Prophecy, but proves and
settles nothing.

The Prophets name their Parents, Places, with such Circumstances, owning it as
a Vision made to themselves. Moses, the Prophets, the Psalms are distinctly
named; this day, says Christ, this Scripture is fulfilled, but not any
Indication that those Prophecyes could be renewed; it cannot be proved that one
Prophet had the Visions of another Prophet repeated to him, no nor that the
same received the same exact Vision twice; so little is it probable that a
thousand can have the same for ever renewed downwards. This pretense in the
Issue destroys Christianity; for suppose that Mat. 1.23. (a Virgin shall be
with Child,) be renewed, then Jesus is not yet born, when a Vision is fulfilled
it is Impossible to have another: that it shall be fulfilled; or to desire one
to inform that it is fulfilled, is a like folly. It is equally as reasonable to
expect a Revelation that there was a K. Henry VIII. as that Jesus died at
Jerusalem, for it makes Prophecy to have no fixed, determinate, sonce, or
completion. Suppose the Revelations be repeated, then no part of them is yet
fulfilled; for what has been done, cannot be scened, or staged as undone: and
further it renders the Scriptures useless, for what need I buy a sealed Book
not to be understood, when I have it line by line inwardly rehearsed by a
supervening power to my own Spirit. Repetition also would swallow up that
Blessed Grace of Faith, the believing things credible as credible, and turn it
into sense and Vision, so that the desiring it (if possible) is either the
Mother or Daughter of Infidelity. There being also in tract of time some few
Variae lectiones crept into the Sacred Volume. T. E's Spirit (if right) will
make a stand at the wrong ones so that he can inform infallibly which is the
best Copy, and where words are to be inserted, altered, or omitted.

Upon his Principles, -- Revelations made to Women must be renewed to men,
which, in Case of Conception or Childbirth would look strangely, though of all
persons they seem the fittest for it. [your Mother the Pope] says Father Fox:
Lambs Officer. p. 18. Winding sheet for Controv. p. 1. Im. Rev. p. 118. Some
Principles of the Elect, p. 95, 96.
[Her is He sometimes] then He may be an Her at other times. [ Blessed are the
pure in Heart for they shall see Her;] in Imitation of Bonaventures change in
the Psalms. [(...), hic and haec Homo, as Dewsbury observes, who attempts to
baffle St. Paul about Women's not speaking in the Church, making the Woman to
signify either Sex, in which Christ is not the Head;] such chops as those
would make a man think them nearest a Kin to Tiresias the Prophet.

There are many particular Revelations concerning places, as Nineveh, Tire,
etc. Persons, as King Ahaz, Zedechiah, etc. Can these be reacted when both
Kings and Kingdoms are extinguished? but it is not worth the while to hunt this
fly; or pursue so serious a folly. Only these few things shall conclude it.

That if he speak Truth he must have received all the Revelations conferred to
the Saints of Old, before and after the Flood; those written in Scripture and
the unrecorded ones; or, if only those in the New Testament, then those of
Christ, the Apostles, particularly S. John, S. Paul, the 70 Disciples, and
those mentioned in the 1 Cor. chap. 14. that which was the Work of many Ages,
Periods and Persons, is in a trice Acted before him, which if it was really
done, I verily think he could not live; The Divine Light was so strong in a
Prophets Soul, that he could not long continue under it, but fell into
Consternations, or his Vision declined into a Dream, all the Scripture
Revelations (if the thing was possible) yet for length of time cannot be
renewed to him since his turning Quaker in 1659. He must have time to recruit
his Spirit between Vision and Vision, allow Liberty for other intervening
Assairs, converse sometimes as a man, and not always as a Prophet. And
Prophecyes in their preparatoryes and effects, in their solemnity and dress,
are not so soon gone through. Hosea was some 70 years a Prophet, and yet has
but left some 14 little Chapters. Isaiah was 45 years between the 6th and 36th
Chapters, which allows a year and a half to each Chapter. Let Ellwood Study
such things as these, and the Nature of the Prophetic light, it will make his
Spirit be humble and modest, and will Convince him that his Hairs will be gray,
before he see to the far end of the Revelations.

But possibly he foresaw not the Monsters he was hatching; let us turn the
Notion into what other more favorable shapes we can; as,

First, what was Revealed by several ways before, is now renewed to him by the
Spirit; This is nothing better, must the Holy Spirit repeat what was spoke by
Angels, Urim, Signs, Voices, Visions, Dreams, Prophets? Nay the very words of
Christ: I lay down my Life; My Flesh is meat indeed, I ascend to my Father,
etc. can the Spirit repeat these? for shame to Imbarque in such a leaky Vessel.

But Secondly, what was Revealed by the Spirit at the first, is by the Spirit
renewed to him now; try this also, and he will reap no Advantage. The Spirit
said to Philip, Go near, and join thy self to this Charet, Act. 8.29. is this
renewed? or is he Philip? is Candace now alive, or her Eunuch gone to Jerusalem
to Worship? The Spirit said unto Peter Behold three men seek thee, Act. 10.19.
is this renewed? then Cornelius is alive, and Ellwood is turned the Apostles
Curate. Agabus by the Spirit signified that there should be great Dearth
throughout all the World, which came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar.
Acts 11.28. If this be Repeated, then Paul is yet alive, and Claudius has not
yet began his Reign. But now the Spirit reveals to him, that he did Reveal the
Scriptures, but this reaches not his purpose, renewing or repeating old
Revelations, is a distant thing from one single inspiring Assurance. But the
Spirit now renews to him those Expositions which he made to others, this he
cannot mean, for those Expositions are not in Scripture, and his are but the
Repetition of what is therein Recorded: Withal he supposes the Spirit to turn
Expositor of the Sacred Text, but does not prove it, speaking of Scripture
Revelations, he should use the Word in the proper Sense, for the Subject matter
by God Revealed, and not foyst in an uncouth Notion of his own, That Revelation
is Exposition, turning the Spirit into a Glossary. So the Revelation of John
the Divine, is the Exposition of John the Divine, but this Fancy will be
elsewhere met with.

What Peter in the Recognitionsis related to have spoken [that those things
which are Revealed to others, Clements Recogn. L. 8.
some do apply as spoken to themselves] does well befit this novel Fancy of
Repetition. Christianity being a Certain True and Determinate Religion, so done
and spoken as is related, is not capable of Repetition, the things of Jesus
were True, Real and Substantial, not performed (...) but (...); its Faith which
makes them certain and even present to us, and not Hystrionical
Representations. Our Holy Religion is a rational thing, not a Drammatical
Imaginary show, to be done over and over as in a Scene. Christ lived on Earth,
Taught, Instructed, and lastly Dyed but once; which, Faith so receives and
Entertains, but Fancy cannot renew as daily in doing, that will destroy the
reality of the History, and make the very Religion to expire with it. If
Ellwood then feel such a thing, as renewing former Revelations, it is either
Satan's Delusion; or his own Fiction of Imagination.

CHAP. V. Concerning their Immediate Revelations.
II. BEsides their Repetition, they have Immediate Revelations [The Apostles
had an Immediate Revelation of the Mind and Will of God to them -- and these
Successors receive in the same manner, p. 228. The Ministration of the Spirit
by Divine Revelations was not to cease but continue inthe Church. p. 227.
inward and immediate teaching, p. 229.] The Revelations made to the Prophets
and Apostles, confirmed by Miracles, and Believed by Christians, we own. But
for any further ones, we can discern no Necessity thereof, or if there was, we
cannot discern that God by you sends them to us. It is not reasonable we should
believe you in such a Concern, merely upon your own Witnessings; nor will God I
hope Damn him who died before the Quakers, or never heard of them, or does
seriously search into, and yet disbelieve them; and to call them Immediate,
must needs reflect upon the Scriptures which are Means appointed by God, or
else are nothing.

[Immediate Revelation -- remains a Standing and Perpetual Ordinance in the
Church of Christ, Keiths Title page.
and of indispensible Necessity to every true Believer:] Living stone in 3d. Q.
Quibbles p. 11.
just such another Ordinance [ as giving the Hand, and pulling off the Hat,
which are to continue in the true Church.] To what end they enjoy this
Ordinance is differently related between the Tutor and his Pupil, the latter
claims it to the renewing old Scripture Revelations, denying they have any [
new ones as to substance, p. 237.] but Keith is open-hearted, tells what plenty
they have, and to what purpose: [things relating to our Conversation in the
World -- Commanding or Forbidding, Im. Rev. p. 5.6.
or Licensing us, how to carry and be conversant about them, -- as, in eating,
drinking, marrying, or giving in marriage, plowing, digging, or any other
employment, going, coming to a place, abiding therein -- things Revealed to
them from the Lord, which are not to be found in the Scriptures particularly,
not so much as by consequence.] Happy men, they cannot do Ill certainly, who
eat, drink, get Children, and know who get them, etc. by Revelation.

It Is strange to see men who are Wise in the World, to be so Fancyfull in
Religion, to Entitle God to the Risings and Bublings of their own Spirits, they
shut up those Reasonable Souls which God gave them, as Spirits in Prison. Anima
suilla pro sale, a Swines Soul serves for Salt, and a Quakers does no more,
just keeps his Body from Corruption. How low and cheap is Inspiration made,
when the Holy Spirit must be Employed in Inviting men to Dinner, and they must
be carried on by Wires and Pullyes, and not proceed by Humane measures.

T. E. has such Immediate teachings as the Apostles had, ask a Proof thereof,
the return is; They Witness it: but they will not swear it: and I think it
unreasonable to believe them on easier terms than our Lord himself was believed
upon. But whilst good Men are baffling Atheism with the rational grounds of
Christianity, Satan tacks about, and would baffle Christianity by Impostures.

Is Inspiration grown so common, that every one must have it? Or is God so
Prodigal of Miracles to exceed his regular Dispensations? St. Paul, who healed
the Sick, exerted not that Power on Believing Timothy, Trophimus, and
Epaphroditus. Christ increased the Loaves, and yet commanded the fragments to
be gathered up. Hebron was promised unto Caleb for an Inheritance, God could
have ordered the Lot to fall upon it, and yet it was settled by virtue of the
Promise: Where things can be had in an ordinary way, it is not Gods Method to
exceed, nor heap Miracle upon Miracle; his works are perfect, and immediate
answers were never common: the Lot must not pass upon that which was promised
before, that would have been irreligion, or a Tempting God.

There are no need of Teachers or Scriptures, if all receive immediate
Instructions. The Ancients were too curious in their esteem of the Bible, and
the Traditores had too harsh Measure. Though all Bibles were burnt, a Quakers
Light could, verbatim, write a new one, as Jeremy gave Baruch the same words a
second time.

The Jews say, one Prophet who has the Testimony of another Prophet is true. I
can discern no such attestation among them, as S. John gave to Jesus; but they
first make themselves Prophets, and then give Honor one to another. Till they
produce some undoubted Evidence, I am guilty of no sin in denying: I must
either see some Miracles, or have an Immediate Revelation my self, to assure me
that each of them has such and such Inspirations; and it being difficult to
distinguish between the Dictates of spirits, and the Fancies and Motions of a
Man's own upper and lower Soul. Quakers will need a second Revelation to
ascertain them of the first, and a third to ascertain them of a second, and so
forward; which is like the dancing of Fairies, a skipping and running round,
but an advancing nothing: And they are got into such a Circle, wherein they may
run themselves blind. They believe the Scriptures from their Inspirations, and
those again from the Scriptures, making one to prove another. The Spirit
ascertains them it is Gods Word, and from thence T. E. attempts to prove they
have the Spirit.

In that Debate at Jerusalem, Acts 15. it was not the Immediate Inspiration
which was the Rule, which certainly would, if every one had been so fitted, but
it was the Epistle from the Council that concluded all. Set up this Notion, and
there would be none to be Ruled, nor any such thing known as Obedience either
in Church or State; for Immediate Instruction must not be controlled by any
thing below it self, nor is it reasonable the Divine Voice should be prescribed
to. So that this pretense has an evil aspect upon Kingdoms, which have been
frequently disturbed thereby. Admit T. E. to be Heavens Privado to receive
immediate Communications from thence, we have no security, but the same impetus
may carry him on to imitate the Prophets words, [I have an Errand unto thee, 2
King. 9.5.
O Captain,] and to interrupt the Lineal Succession; for George Fox deserves as
much to be King of New Jerusalem, as John of Leyden; and a Shoemaker is as fit
to wield a Scepter, as a Tailor. Religion also can never be fixed or known
where Enthusiasm is avowed; for this days persuasion may be out-dated by to
morrows fresh Suggestion: The Quakers are much gone from themselves, and they
give no warrant but they will change and super-reform, till this weeks Idol
proves the next weeks Abomination.

They seem also too Covetous in their Claims, the Light and Inspiration are too
much for one Person; he that carries that Vrim in his Bosom, needs no other
Suggestions; and he who has Heaven open over him, darting in minutely Rays,
need not repair to his inshrined Light, or call for help (bring hither the
Ephod) to resolve him; but between them both, their Reason is extinguished.
Thus among Pagans and others, when Visions and Revelations have run highest,
Reason has suffered by them; but it is the more plausible way, to be intimate
with God, looks better than to search and prove: to wait and tamely believe
what starts up first, is more easy than to weigh, discourse, and judge aright;
but when Men grow Credulous and slothful, departing from sober Reason, and
known Rules, presently they strike in with Motions and Suggestions: and it is a
most gustful Idolatry to adore the Creatures of their own Fancy. But while
they, with the Egyptians, dare enshrine Apes, and Worship such Counterfeits as
Satan or their Souls afford, sober Christians will adhere to a sound Mind, and
a discerning Spirit, conducted by owned and certain Revelations, Dr. Causabon
Enthus. 170.
thinking that [Rational, intellectual Christian Knowledge is above all
Prophecy.]

What may not a Quaker vent under pretense of Revelations, if trusted without
Evidence? That which comes immediately is conferred instantly, and is at its
full strength when first given, as Tongues, Miracles, etc. True Judgment, in
the Title page.
But Quakers grow up into their knowledge. [To them who are growing up into
discerning and Judgment,] which he was moved to write for the simple ones sake,
King and R. H. p. 6.
p. 1. [We do grow daily into the knowledge of the Truth, in our Exercise and
Obedience to it;] [Not being grown into a good understanding to judge of
things,] Canon 6.
[There is Childhood, Youth, and Old Age in the anointing.]

Fox makes the Soul to be [a part of God, and of Gods Being, New Law, p. 19.
without beginning, and Infinite:] Then certainly such an Infinite Eternal
Being is equally Omniscient, and need not a perpetual flux of Revelation to
increase its knowledge: Christopher Tailor has the strangest Argument for
Revelation that can be produced; A true and faithful witness to the Light, p. 5.
[no Man knows the particular thoughts and intents of another Man's heart, but
by the Revelation of God's Spirit; therefore it must needs be the Revelation of
God's Spirit that makes manifest to a Man his own inward thoughts:] the Soul it
seems is a sleepy thing, privy to none of its own transactions; a Man's Reason
and Conscience help him no more at home, than they do to discover the bosom
designs of others; such dark Souls as these need all the light they can set up
for their direction: they call the Apostles [true Enthusiasts,] Q. no Popery,
p. 20. Q. is Pagan. p. 93. Im. Rev. p. 293.
[assert and contend for it in the best acceptance,] and withal acknowledge
the great power of Satan about Enthusiasms, [who transforms himself not only
into the likeness of an Angel of Light, but of God himself; and herein he works
most Mysteriously, takes upon him to open the Scriptures, unfold the Mysteries
of the Kingdom of God, reveal the hidden things of Nature, teach things to
come, and has hereby deceived and ensnared many Souls. This is the root of
false Enthusiasms, that they have their Raptures and Ecstasies, and strange
workings, accompanied with a wonderful readiness of utterance, promptness of
Speech, and Elocution, either in Poetry or otherwise.] So that by this
Concession, Enthusiasm has enabled Men to do more than the Quakers spirit has
enabled them as yet; and therefore we want a rational Satisfaction, why yours
which is less should be Divine, and the other which is greater should be
Diabolical, when as this has better Proofs, and both are equally invisible.
Ibidem.
[The loving God above all] is no Touchstone of Immediate Inspiration, the
Familists and others will snatch that from you; and till I can discern your
love, I must not trust your Inspirations. Quakers then must either do some
Miracles, as Seals that God speaks by them, or we must have undoubted
Revelations to assure us that they have true ones, else all their heats and
sensations must be ranked among Enthusiasms; or if Scripture-promises be
concluding, those must be such as none are concerned in but themselves by name,
and which I can understand without a Revelation, or am assured to be attended
with an Inspired Exposition of, in the very reading, which by its strength and
clearness shall force my understanding to a submission: Till this appear, I am
innocent in esteeming the Quakers but equal at most, and in some things
inferior to their many Corrivals.

To discover the weakness and danger of this pretense:

1. I shall instance in several Competitors, who have made the same Claim, and
produce equal if not stronger Motives of believing them.

2. Examine the Quakers carriages one to another in this matter, by which it
will appear they cannot believe themselves, but make an Art and Interest of it;
their Contradictions and strange carriage about their Inspirations are a
convincing Proof against them.

CHAP. VI. Concerning their Partners and Competitours in Revelation.
1. AS for their Competitours, they are both many and of different Judgments;
and if I believe one Party witnessing they have it, I am equally obliged to
believe another witnessing also. As Satan is Gods Ape in many things, so
especially in Revelation; he gulled the Heathen World by Oracles, Enthusiastic
Prophets, and the like: Mahomet pretended as high thereto as T. E. and was able
to produce as good Evidence. Success is the Quakers Argument, [Many there are
among us, Whitehead's Q. plainness, p. 33.
gathered out of other Churches, who are living Witnesses, both of the blessed
Operation and effects of the Power and Ministry of Christ Jesus among us -- and
we have a Record in many Consciences;] In the Cambridge Dispute, p. 34.
which very Argument he had elsewhere urged, and Mahomet may urge it to
infinite more advantage.

But from them let us look into the Christian World, where we shall find Satan
turned his Makers Rival, countermining God with Revelations, gulling all Ages
of the Church with Enthusiasts, and imitating Miracles with his lying Wonders;
for Enthusiasm is Satan's Engine, renewed often by him, called in to untie a
knot, to make good an otherwise indefensible Pass, and to supply the want of
better Arguments, Revelations being as common with them as Reasons are with
other Men.

The pretenders to Inspiration are many, I shall single out some in these
several Periods. In the Primitive Church, in the Romish Church, at the time of
the Reformation, and in the late unhappy Times in this Kingdom; and each of
these does produce as good Evidence as T. Ellwood can.

1. In the Primitive Church, which was not little pestered by the varions forms
which counterfeit Inspiration then assumed. It appeared in the Apostles days,
Satan set up his Trade so early. What warnings are there concerning false
Christ's, false Prophets, false Apostles? How were the Apostles galled with them
up and down in their several Plantations? 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15.
[False Apostles transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. -- Satan
himself is transformed into an Angel of Light -- His Ministers transformed as
the Ministers of Righteousness.] Thou have tried them which say, Rev. 2.2.
they are Apostles, and are not, and have found them Liars.] v. 20.
Thus [Jozebel called her self a Prophetess.] Likely these may be the depths of
Satan, v. 24. For there is a Mystery of Iniquity as well as of Godliness, the
Mystery of the Woman, as well as the Mystery of God. And the ability of knowing
who were Divinely Inspired is reckoned up among the (...) or extraordinary
gifts, 1 Cor. 12.10. (...), not barely the seeing into Men's hearts, as Peter
did to Simon, Paul to Elymas; Grot. in loc:
bnt it was [Dijudicatio qui Prophetae very essent qui falsi,] an Heavenly
discerning who were true, who false Prophets; and he lays down one Rule used in
Trial, if they withdrew Men from Christ, that is, slighted his coming in the
Flesh, which is done by them, who make Christ in the outward no Essential of
their Religion. Theophy. in loc. ite Oecumenius.
Discerning of Spirits was [(...)] to know who was a true Prophet, or who was a
Deceiver; [Nam and Divinatores per illud temporis erant, qui hominibus
imponebant,] for then false Prophets were risen, who imposed upon, and deluded
Men, as Oecumenius adds. And this Immediate Revelation and Power of
discerning continued till an intelligible Rule was settled, known and owned in
the Church, wherein are sufficient means for detection of Impostors; and to
this Irenaeus resorts in all his Debates with those Heretics.

2. Either those false Teachers mentioned in those Texts, or their Offspring
were the Gnostics and Disciples of Simon Magus, these, among other heights,
now Challenged by T. Ellwood's Friends, as (to be free from Sin, Perfect,
Spiritual, to know all things) pretended to Revelations, Orig. con. Cells. Lib.
5.
[Arroganti Gnosticorum nomine polliceantur novam quandam scientiam,] they
promised some high, new knowledge, Epiphan. in Haeref. Gnostic.
and [they were not ashamed to say, that our Lord Jesus Christ, [hanc turpem
Operationem ipsis revelasse, had revealed those filthy Opinions and Practices
unto them.]

And the Disciples of Simon, Carpocrates, Menander, etc. had affinity much one
with another, as the Libertines, Swenckfeldians, Familists, and others of late,
have with the Quakers.

3. Cerinthus Challenged Revelations, [as written by a great Apostle, and
feigned or related prodigious Narrations, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 3. Cap. 25.
(...)] as showed unto him by Angels, and then brings in Christ's Temporal
Reign, and his Dream of sensual pleasures. And Aretas understands Cerinthus in
that, In Apocalyp. Eusebius. Lib. 4. Cap. 7.
Rev. 2.2. [Novorum dogmatum annunciator.] Basilides also, another of the like
stamp, assumed the names of several strange Prophets to him, Epipha. Haer. 24.
as Barcab, Barcoph, etc. who also suggested to his Disciples, [Vos omnia
cognoscitis, nemo autem vos cognoscat,] ye know all things: George Fox was much
like them, Perfect Pharisee, p. 49.
who saw into the Heart of Mr. Nicols in Carlisle, declaring him to be an
Hypocrite, but could not tell his Name, when asked: and Keith delivers it as
Inspired Doctrine, Imm. Rev. p. 186, 189.
[ The Children of God have been in all Ages unknown unto the World, but they
have an Infallible knowledge one of another by the free gift of God, and when
he pleases he may conceal some Persons, that they may not be known for a time,
so Paul was unknown to the Brethren.]

4. Elxai appeared another false Prophet in the Times of the Emperor Trajan;
he wrote a Book [By Prophecy, Epipha. Haer. 19.
or according to a Divinely Inspired Wisdom,] and he endeavored to introduce
[Imaginaria quaedam velut ex Revelatione, certain imaginary fantastical things
as by Revelation. Augustine. Haer. 32.
] His followers [ the Helcesaits,] were a most impious and abominable People,
rejecting some part of the Scriptures, and choosing in the rest what would best
suit to their conceit, and those Opinions which they had imbibed. Origin upon
the Eighty second Psalm, relates, Apud Eusebius. H. Eccles. L. 6. C. 37.
That they carried [a certain Book about with them, which they affirmed did
immediately drop down from Heaven, and that whosoever heard and believed it,
should receive forgiveness of his sins, though that was different from the
Pardon which Christ conferred.] Eusebius indeed says, That [this Sect was
extinguished soon after its appearance,] and it is happy when the Church is so
soon rid of such pests: But Epiphanius affirms its continuance to the times [
of Constantius, when Marthus a Woman, Ita Epiphan.
and even in his own days, Et August.
Marthana her Sister were adored as Deities, because they were of the
Offspring of Elxai; and the Heretics took their very spittle, and reliquas
corporis fordes, and other Excrements, which they made use of toward the
Curing of Diseases.]

What Notion of Remission of sins some Quakers have entertained, Fox Juniors
Works, 163.
is too public, as also how their Works are said to be [Written, as moved and
given by that Eternal Power,] which is like the Helcesaits Book, [they come
down from Heaven;] and what Honor is done to some of their Grandees, was
evident in the instance of Naylor, and is sadly lamented by the dissenting
Party in those differences given to that [Worthy Man, Windingsheet, p. 3. p. 7.
G. F.] as Mr. Pen calls him, [many in the Ministry being wont to pull off his
Shoes.]

5. Marcus, Irenae. ad. Haer. L. 1. c. 8.
an Arch-Heretick, perverted many to him, [velut ad scientissimum and
perfectissimum,] as to a most knowing, and most perfect Man. By the assistance
of a Demon he also did seem to Prophecy [and quotquot dignas putat fieri
participes gratiae suae, Idem, L. 1. c. 9.
prophetare facit,] and he made such Women Prophecy as he thought fit to be
pertakers of his grace. He wrought most upon Women, especially the Honorable
and Rich, [aperi os tuum and Propheta,] he bad, Open thy Mouth, Ita Epiphan.
Haeres. 34.
and thou shall Prophecy. The same Father relates the manner how he effected
it, that raising their thoughts, their hearts being heated and panting, they
grew bold, and spoke strange doting things; and thereupon they fancied
themselves to Prophecy. He corrupted also many Women, and the very words which
Marcus gave unto himself, are somewhat like those Blasphemous ones given to Fox
by Josiah Coal: Augustine. in Haeres. 14.
His Women also Administered a wild kind of Eucharist, and Quakers have their
she-teachers. He also denied the Resurrection of the Flesh, which is Quakers
Doctrine; and said, That Christ did not suffer truly: he perverted by Charms
and strange Arts, Women to follow him; and it is reported, how many have been
subverted by the Quakers by a steadfast look, or a wring by the hand, etc.
without rational means of Persuasion; the sugared Language he gave his
Proselytes, [blandiens eis,] is imitated by ours also, The Spirit of the Hat.
p. 43.
who give their Females these Appellations, [Innocent Lasses, and Daughters of
Sion.]

6. The Valentinians made use of the same Plea, Tertul. in Valentin. Lib. 4.
[Quidni? quum Spirituale illud semen suum in unoquoque sic recenseant, si
aliquid novi, adstruxerint, Revelationem statim appellant praesumptionem, and
charisma Ingenium,] they do account the Spiritual Seed to be in every one; if
they do light or hit upon any thing that is new, they presently call that
Presumption or conceit a Revelation, and their own wit they do style an
immediate or extraordinary gift. And the same Father elsewhere relates, [Omnes
tument, De praescript. adver. haeret.
omnes scientiam pollicentur, etc. They are all puffed up, promise much
knowledge, their Novices are perfect before they be Instructed, their saucy
Women dare teach, heal, it may be, Baptize; their Ordinations were confused, a
Presbyter to day, a Layman to morrow; Laics do Priestly Offices, etc.]

7. Montanus and his Party claimed Inspirations as much as any, and his Sect
continued some Centuries, and their carriage was strangely ecstatical, which
showed they were not moved from the Lord. We have the judgments of some
Ancients in Eusebius concerning them, Hist. Eccles. Lib. 5. Cap. 14, 15, 16, 17.
[ That Montanus being alienated and ecstatical in Spirit, was Distracted; and
under the pretense of Prophecy or Revelation, he spoke unwonted things against
the Faith and Doctrine of the Church:] They boasted of their Martyrs and
Sufferings; Miltiades wrote against them, so did others; the whole Church or
Fraternity throughout the World disowned this Prophecy as accursed: He taught
to dissolve Marriage, had his Exactors or Collectors, who gathered many Gifts
and Oblations: His Prophetesses had run away from their Husbands, his Party
grew strong; they called Pepuza and Tymium, two little Cities of Phrygia, New
Jerusalem: (So Munster and Strasburg were called) and the Quakers once
Traveled toward New Malton, in Search of the New Jerusalem comed down from
Heaven, till the mire and rain wearied out their Zeal) The Pepuziani a branch
of them [had Women Bishops and Women Presbyters] upon the same Account that our
Quakers plead for their Prophetesses, Epiphan. Haeres. 49. Ibidem. Augustine.
Here Is. 27.
[because in Christ Jesus there is neither Male nor Female:] and Christ is said
to appear either to Quintilla or Priscilla, or both, when sleeping, and being
Clothed in a white Garment, to Inspire Wisdom, and to Reveal that to be an
Holy place, even the Heavenly Jerusalem. In prologis ad Naum and Abacuc.
And St. Hierom is sometimes confuting them [that a Prophet understands what he
sees, nec ut amens loquitur, nor speaks as distracted, as Montanus and his
Prophetesses doated] but Quaking which was thought the sign of their conversing
with God is now looked on otherwise, [that the Voice of the Lord was not
distinctly discerned there -- in stilness the mind is brought into a capacity
to discern the voice of the Lord. Living Stone in 3d Q. quib. p. 4.
]

8. The Messalians, Psalliani or Euchites laid claim to Revelations as much as
any other Sect [they were so assiduous in prayer, that it may seem incredible
to most that hear it, Augus. Her. 57.
] by a misapplication of those words, pray always, and pray without ceasing:
some of them would have named themselves to be whatsoever persons you would
have them [art thou a Prophet? he would reply I am a Prophet, Epiphan. Her. 80.
Theodoret. Hist. Eccl. L. 4. C. 11.
art thou Christ? he would reply, I am Christ.] but besides this they were
strangely Eathusiastical [ pretending they had the presence of the Spirit, and
calling their own Dreams and Fancyes Prophecyes,] their Opinions infected many
Monasteries and several Countries; they looked upon the Lords Supper to do
neither good nor hurt. Adelphius an old Professor among them, gave this Account
of their Faith. [That Holy Baptism profitted nothing, but only that perpetual
Prayer cast out that inward Devil, which every one received from their first
Parents, that then the Holy Ghost came upon them with his sensible and
invisible Presence, whereby they were freed from Sin, Ibidem
and needed neither Fasting nor Instruction; but that then they were able to
foresee future things, and to behold the Holy Trinity with their eyes.]

These are to the purpose T. E. Predecessors, several Bishops opposed
themselves to their pernicious Doctrines; and indeed we cannot do more
acceptable Service to the Spirit of truth, than by detecting the Spirit of
Error, though it appear in the guise of an Angel of Light, or have got a piece
of Scripture in its mouth; nay, though it pretend Antiquity: and get it self
wrapped in old Samuels Mantle, or come demurely in Sheeps clothing.

9. Aetius, an Arian Heretic (though one that did separate from his Communion)
was at the like pass with the former, [ Temeraria audacia elatus, Binius, Tom.
1. p. 486.
dixit, being puffed up by a rash boldness, he said, Deum sibi Revelasse ea,
quae usque ab Apostolorum temporibus hactenus occultaverat, that God had
Revealed those things to him, which till then he had concealed from the times
of the Apostles] say the Fathers of the Council of Constantinople, Theodor.
Hist. Eccl. L. 2. C. 28. Histor. Triparet. L. 5. C. 22.
apud Binium, and the like words of his are elsewhere Recorded. Serras, though
a Favourer of him, accused him [ by astrange height of Pride or Madness, to
have presumed and spoke higher things; that those things were now Revealed to
him, which God had concealed hitherto from the Apostles, and universis, from
all men.] And that is pretty Consonant to the Quakers Doctrine: [ have not we
had the Gospel all this time till now? Answer, we say no] the Gospel
Dispensation was lost, says Smith. [But Blessed be the Lord for his renewing
the Spiritual Ministry in our days.] and Ann Wrights Letter is full about the
same. [Since the Lord first called his Servants to publish his Everlasting
Gospel] the Gospel was hid from the Apostles days until it was revived in them.

9. Donatus to maintain his Schism became Enthusiastical, August. Epist. 165.
talking of Inspiration, or Communications of Gods Will to him by Angels. [
Ille eum ordinem Christianitatis Civitatis vestrae ut insinuaret, jussisse sibi
Angelum scribit, etc. that he might blast or Condemn the order or Profession of
Christianity used by your City, he writes that an Angel Commanded him; whereas
thou do not profess the Christianity of thine own City but that of the whole
World, wherefore if that Angel had stood besides thee, whom he by a Crafty
Novelty as we think does feign to have stood by him, for thy sake, and if the
Angel had spoke those words to thee, which he says, he does at the Command of
him, insinuate or convey to thee, thou ought to have been mindful of that
Apostolical Sentence, though an Angel from Heaven, Gal. 1.8.
etc.] It was their usual saying. Oravit Donatus and ei respondit Deus e Caelo.
God from Heaven, gave an Answer to the Prayers of Donatus: his Intimacy
therewith made him to be the Oracle of those times; and the Circumcellions, a
branch of them were mad with a sanatick Zeal.

These Instances are sufficient for the first Period, whereby we may discern,
that bad Designs sheltered themselves under this cover; and T. Ellwood is
either not Learned, or not Faithful in affirming [that in all Ages the Saints
have had Revelations in some Degree or other] for true Christians disowned
them, Page 237.
and only Heretics or Schismatics had recourse to them [but whilst new
Heresies were superinduced over the former, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. L. 4. C. 7.
which got the Custom, but were still subdivided into new Branches and several
kinds; the true Church increased in Unity and Glory] and if I be obliged to
believe T. E's. Inspiration, because he Witnesses he has it; I am equally
concerned to Credit the Proposals of a Donatist, or a Messalian, etc.

2. The Church of Rome has Plowed much with this Heifer, several Religious
Orders, and Doctrinal points have been hereby entertained. Dr. Stilling fleet's
Collections concerning this are Copious; but I shall Observe some few received
by such as belonged to our Country.

Thomas Becket [Divina Revelatione confortatus est, etc. In the Breviary of
Sarum upon his day.
was Comforted or Strengthened by a Divine Revelation, a Sign from Heaven being
showed unto him that he should return unto his Church with Glory, and then by
the Crown of Martyrdom go unto the Lord] [ two Catholic Maids were cast into
Ecstatical Raptures, Jo. Gee Foot out of the Snare. p. 59;
and possessed with the Virgin Mary, Michael, the Archangel, John the Baptist,
etc. and those Glorious guests did enter into them, and inhabit them] this is
somewhat like the Light within; Idem. p. 60.61 61.
but the next speaks home [Edward Hanz said he was Corporally possessed with
the Blessed Trinity, he received Oblations, suffered others to kneel before him
and said; I God the Father -- I God the Son -- do give you my Blessing, and do
command you to adore me -- he relates that he was in a Trance, and his Soul
did see very supernatural and admirable Joys. Unless God Almighty do take the
Creature, and speak in him, -- and then it is Gods own Word, and not the Word
of the Party,] Here was Revelation, Light, and the Worship of it, like the
Hosanna to James Naylor. P. 63.64.


[ The Virgin Mary appeared to Thomas Newton about the Oath of Allegiance, he
was a very Holy man, and had other Visions besides that] and [Mary Wiltshire
saw a strange Vision] many of their Revelations are put together; P. 109.
called [ Admirable and Notable Prophecyes, uttered by 24 Roman Catholics,
Printed 1615.] and Mr. Burton, in his Book of Melancholy, gives the Reason
whence they are so Subject to such Conceits.

Besides these, we may take a Trial of some few others, St. Hildegard is
[learned, whatever she wrote, ex Revelatione Divina, she did not speak or write
ought that should be called into Question, Trithemius
she spoke Latin by the Spirit.] Her Writings were Publicly read and approved
by Eugenius the third in the Council of Tryers (which Eugenius seems also to be
chosen Pope by Revelation. The Cardinals being [Divino nutu perciti] made
choice of the most Holy Eugenius: Platina in ejus vita.
) to take a taste of her Revelations, In her Letter to Eugenius [O mitis Pater,
etc. O mild Father, I, a pityful poor form, have written these things to thee
in a true Vision, in or by a Mystical breathing, as God would teach me: O
bright Father, In the Bibliotheca patrum Tom. 15.
in thy name thou came into our Land, as God predestined, and thou saw
of the Writings of true Visions, as the living Light taught me; and thou
heardest that Light with the Embraces of thy heart, now is part of this writing
finished, but still the same Light has not left me, but burns in my Soul, as I
have had it from mine Infancy, etc.] Good Quaker like Language. This Inspirado
Lady in an Epistle to Pope Alexander, determines for the Popes Supremacy [tibi
specialiter Idem verbum, claves Regni coelestis concessit] And to a certain
Priest she determines for Transubstantiation [ In vera Visione vigilantibus
oculis de Sacramento Dominici Corporis, haec verba audivi and vidi, etc.]

Another Holy Maid called Sister Katharine of Jesus [ had many Revelations and
strong Exstacies, Dr. Causabons Enthusiasm. p. 162. 163.
which held her 3 or 4 hours; she thought her self sometimes to be in Heaven,
and often saw, and sometimes suffered through fright the pains of Hell; she saw
the Soul of Christ in its purity, which drew her into an operation of the Holy
Trinity; she said, God does put his Power in me, God does put his Wisdom in me,
and his Knowledge.]

John Waldesso in his Divine Considerations, Rutherfords Survey of the
Spiritual Antichrist. p. 191.
says [ a Christian having served himself with Holy Scriptures, as with an
Alphabet, he afterward leaves them to serve for the same effect to Beginners,
he attending to the inward Inspirations; having for his proper Master the
Spirit of God; and serving himself with Holy Scriptures, as with an Holy
Conversation, and which causes Refreshment to him, altogether putting from
himself all these Writings which are written with an Humane Spirit.]

The Alumbrado's before named [held vocal Prayer and all other (outward) duties
of Religion Superstitious or unprofitable, Dr. Causabons Enthus. p. 174.
they thought those Quakings which they did find in themselves, were a
sufficient Token of Grace, (and ours have called it [ that Holy Duty of Quaking
and Trembling] and that they needed nothing else, Fisher in 3d. Quib. p. 3.
that had attained unto them; they pretended that they might see God visibly in
their exstacyes, etc. that all things ought to be done by Immediate Motions and
Inspirations, etc.] The Church of Rome proves her self the Temple of the Living
God from these Revelations, Borius de Signis Eccles. L. 6. C. 2. in Dr.
Spencers Prophecyes. p. 15. Keiths Im. Rev. p. 99.
or [ the voice of his Oracles heard therein, she has (she tells us) the
Spirit of Prophecy ( called the Testimony of Jesus) to bear Witness to her
Doctrine, Worship and Discipline; and to this purpose gives in a list of her
Prophets, and of their Wonderful Predictions.] And this very Argument is used
by the Quakers [J^sus Christ revealed in man (or Immediate Revelation) is the
Foundation of the true Church: and of every member thereof in particular; and
therefore if the true Church remain, this must remain also.]

And the Council of Laterane having prescribed Rules for the Preachers, Session
the 11. under Leo the 10.
adds an exception [ Caeterum si quibusdam, etc. But if to some the Lord
shall Reveal by Inspiration certain Future things in his Church, as he has
promised by Amos the Prophet, and Paul says despise not Prophesying; we will
not have such to be numbered amongst Fabulous or lying People, or otherways to
be disturbed.] Here is a Council defending Immediate Revelation, and if I
credit a Quakers pretensions that way, I am in point of Justice equally bound
to believe the Romish, and the Doctrines thereby confirmed, nay I am more
bound, in that the Romish Church has used this claim much longer, and pretends
to more Caution in examining the things thereby brought.

3. At the Reformation this pretense was industriously set up and carried on by
Satan, to weaken or defeat the endeavors of those Worthy Heroes. Calvin in the
preface says [That for twenty years, Satan endeavored to extinguish, Adver.
Libertin.
stifle, or defame that Evangelicall Doctrine which he saw appearing.] they
called them Literal Reformers, who had but faint and small discoveries of the
Spirit, etc. Muncer said [ the first Reformers were not sent of God, Bullinger
Adver: Anabap. L. 1. c. 1.
nor preached the True Word of God, etc.

Of these Conceited Devoto's there were several sorts; which did split and
subdivide more and more afterward.

1. The Anabaptists flew high with this claim, and it was the stale to carry on
each design. Their Founder Nicholas Stork, John Davyes Apocalypse.
had his visions; and God Communicated Himself to Thomas Muncer: John Matthiz
the Baker had Secrets revealed to him, which God had not Revealed to others: He
being Enoch the second, High Priest of God. Herman the Cobbler professed himself
a true Prophet and the true Messiah, etc. Their Stories are so known that it is
superfluous to relate them. John Buckhold had Revelations as plentiful as
Mahomet. This King of Justice Minted his Money with this Impression: Verbum
caro factum quod habitat in nobis; that is, the Word was made Flesh which
dwells in us; which is the Doctrine of Winstaenley, and of his Disciples,
that God is manifested in the Flesh of [Sons and Daughters, New Law of Right.
p. 33.
or in many Bodies, as Christ, or the Anointing was poured on that Humane Body
-- Jesus the Son of man, and dwelt Bodily there for a time.] So that Quakers
are Christ's now, as much as Jesus was on Earth, only he was one single Christ,
but this spreading power of Righteousness makes them many Christ's in many
Bodies.

But if there was perpetual Inspiration, Reason would adjudge the Anabaptists
and the others, being contemporary with the Reformation, more likely to have a
share thereof, than others at a great Distance from it. And so little did the
first Reformers favor them, that Luther Writ to the Senate of Mulhusium, to
beware of such Wolves: and Melancton expressly declares against them, De numero
Sacramentorum.
[ Anabaptistae fingunt expectandas esse novas Revelationes, etc. The
Anabaptists feign that there are new Revelations and Illuminations to be
expected from God, and that these are to be obtained with great Bodily
severities, as the Monks and Enthusiasts of old Feigned; These Fanatical
dotages are accursed; we contrarily do think, that God out of his Infinite
Goodness having Revealed his Will to us in the Gospel, other Revelations or
Illuminations are not to be expected.]

2. The Libertines took themselves to be Inspired, Calvin Advers. Libertinos.
C. ^.
and galled the Church much, [ totus little sermo de Spiritu est, Calvin Advers.
Libertinos. C. 2.
etc. all their Discourse was of the Spirit, Sometimes they used strange Words,
to bring their hearers into Admiration, and cast a mist about them, at other
times they used common words, Sed significationem little deformant, C. 7.
altering their signification; when any place of Scripture was urged, C. 9.
their Answer was, nos Literae minime obnoxios esse, that they were not
concerned in the Letter thereof; but were bound to follow the Spirit that
quickneth. It was their Principle, that the Scripture in its natural Sense was
a dead Letter, and therefore was not to be regarded; but to observe the
quickening Spirit: saying, Sublimius speculemur, let us look for higher things
than what the Letter affords; and let us seek new Revelations. They scarce
spoke two Clauses but the word Spirit was in their mouths; C. 10.
and made no Account of the name Christian, in compare to the name Spiritual;
persuading their hearers that they were Spiritual, purely Divine. Et jam cum
Angelis semiraptos esse.]

Antonius Pocquius, a great man among them, said [ Aspicite, adest tempus, etc.
Behold, now the time is at hand, wherein the Disciple of Elijah begged the
double Portion of the Spirit, and that was the time which Christ meant; when he
said, I have many things to say unto you, etc. Qualis ego sum; such a Teacher
did Pocquius boast himself to be, but he would not speak out, donec tempus
advenerit.]

3. Casper Swenckfield for thirty years together troubled the Church with his
Dreams; Rutherford, p. 15. Ex schlus. Selburgio.
he [ called for Spiritualness, and the Spirit, and the internal word, that we
must not depend on the External Word; he took several things from Papists,
Anabaptists, and Calvin, making a mixture of Opinions; he accused the Reformed
Pastors, that no man was better for their Preaching: extolling the Spirit as
doing all.] The Reformed Divines admonished and refuted him; his monstrous
Opinions were Condemned by a Synod at Norinburg, and by the Divines of
Mansfield; and he still persisted in them. He made the [Gospel to be the
Essence of God] which is the Doctrine of Winstanley [the Lord himself, Truth
lifting up its head. p. 30.
who is the Everlasting Gospel.] he made [Faith and Conversion to be wrought
Immediately] taught [that we must try the Word by the Spirit, and not the
Spirit by the Word; that no Doctrine, Sacraments, or any things written in
Scriptures do conduce to Salvation, but God is to be sought in his naked
Majesty, in Dreams, Inspirations and Revelations of the Spirit.

4. Henry Nicholas, In the answer to the Families Supplication.
the first Illuminated Elder of the Family of Love, put in as high for Visions
and Revelations as any of the rest, [ the power of the highest came upon his
Godded man, H N. and did instruct and speak such and such things to him] as his
words are at large set down: [H. N. by the Grace and Mercy of God, through the
Holy Spirit of the love of Jesus Christ, raised up by the highest God from the
Death anointed with the Holy Ghost -- Elected to be a Minister of the Gracious
Word, In the Evangel Regm. C. 1.
which is now in the last times raised up by God according to his Promises, in
the most Holy Scrvice of God under the Obedience of his Love:] and in a
Manuscript Epistle, written in an apish imitation of Clemens, Ignatius, or
those times, he declares his Divine Commission [ H. N. Jesu Christi Minister, a
Dco ad veritatem e Gratiae Solio, Epistola. H. N. ex Charitare Jesu Christi in
Angl. missa, etc.
Majestatis Dei testificandam, Electus, and ad Bonum nuntium de Regno Dei, and
ura Charitate retectae faciei Jesu Christi super terram annunciandum, ac
salutem in eadem manifest andam missus, quemadmodum de adventu ejusdem
charitatis, per Prophetas Dei, and Apostolos Jesu Christi prius significatum,
and Evangelizatum fuit --. Nos Dei Misericordiam, and sacerdotale munus nostrae
Administrationis sub obedientia Charitatis Jesu Christi accepimus, etc. And he
goes on, relating the great things that God was about to do, the danger in not
accepting his Ministry, that God was about restoring all things, the Earth to
be full of his Glory; applying twice that in Abac. 1. and Act. 13. Behold ye
Despisers, etc.] and the late New England Families were high in the same
pretense; that the Quakers have much affinity with the Familists, might easily
be showed, and they seem to have the most kindness for them, George Whitehead
[makes the Familists to have better Discoveries than other men:] In Cambridg
debate. p. 63.
and Keith determines that we must [ examine Revelations, Inspirations, Visions
and Openings by this of Divine Love.] Im. Rev. p. 241. Q^. love to mankind, p.
3 A Brief Rehearsal of the Belief of the Good Willing in England, which are
named the Family of Love, Print. 1575.
If it be alleged, that Quakers of late, do not so allegorize Jesus Christ as
formerly: I can produce the like outward ownings of Christ by the Familists [
the Apostles Creed at length owned by them: Jesus acknowledged to be the Son of
God, etc. in words much like the Nicene Creed; born of a Virgin, out of the
Seed of David, in whose name only and no other they obtain Salvation and
Remission of their Sins.]

5. Some time after the Reformation, Jacob Behmen, appeared, who received (if
we will believe him) his Mystical dark terms from the Father of Lights [ there
is but a glimpse of the Mystery, Signatura rerum. p. 209
in these writings, for a man cannot write them, if any man shall be accounted
worthy of God to have the Light inkindled in his own Soul; he shall see --
unspeakable things -- there is the Theosophick School of Pentecost, wherein the
Soul is Taught of God. Joh. 6.45. Joel. 2.28. -- he that can read his own Book
aright, needs no other, for therein lies the unction from the Holy one, In the
Preface.
which teaches him aright of all things] [ none can understand these obscurely
clear Writings, but they that have tasted of the Feast of Pentecost] says
Ellistone the Translator, and the Author himself says [I have set before the
Readers eyes, p. 201.
what the Lord of all Beings has given me;] and in the Preface to his 177
Questions [without Divine Light, p. 223.
none can be able to expound them, it is only the Spirit of Christ that gives
their understanding,] and he wrote from his own experimental Science. His
Notion of the [Signature opened by the Spirit, p. 1. and 2.
imprinting his Similitude in my Similitude, entering into another man's form,
and awakening in the other, such a form in the Signature. So that both forms do
mutually assimilate together in one form, and then there is one comprehension;]
is much like the Quakers Seed or Birth which is the Susceptive Principle,
conveying Inspiration from God into the Soul; there being a Revelation required
as well in the Hearer as in the Speaker, Im. Rev. p. 209.
[Theophilus had the Spirit Witnessing to the truth of the things, which gave
the certainty or assurance] [what the Apostles declared in words, from the life
of Jesus Christ revealed in them, the same Spirit answered and testified to the
truth of those things in their hearers.] It seems it was not the Apostles
certain knowledge of Christ, Idem. p. 58.
and the Miracles they wrought, which inclined men to believe their Doctrine;
but it was a light in them, which met with a Signature or Seed, or a congenial
Principle in others, that persuaded them to become, I dare not say Christians,
but Illuminado's.

Having tasted of Jacob Behmens Style, and the Subject being unpleasant, a cage
of unclean Birds, or an Herd of lying Prophets; of which, but one Sect, (be it
which it will) can but possibly be true. Before we descend to view the last
Scene of our own Countries Abominations; it may be a Diversion to present foam
of Geo. Foxes Divinity and Oratory, which if you have the Patience to read, you
shall not be Obliged to the pains of Studying or Understanding.

[ The Worlds Original, Some Princi ples of the Elect People of God, called
Quakers, p. 51.
is the many Languages, ( whose Original is Babel) which make Divines (as they
call them) sit a top of Christ. And the Whore sits upon the Waters ( as it is
spoken in the Revelation;) and John says, the Waters are Nations, Multitudes,
People, and Tongues, which Tongues they call their Original. To which Waters
the Gospel must be Preached, before they can be established.

And ye are to be redeemed from Tongues, and Tongues shall cease (says the
Apostle) and so from this Worlds Original, the beginning of which is Babel, and
which keeps in Babylon, the Saints are Redeemed; and this has been set up as
an Original among them who are alieniated from the Spirit of God in Babel,
where the Original of Tongues was in the days of Nimrod that Heretic, who
began to build Babel.]

The same Curious Writer has a rare gift in proposing Queries. Ibidem. p. 70.
[12. Q. Whether ever any Man came to see so far as Balaam's Ass, who saw the
Angel of the Lord? 13. Q. What are the Graves and the Tombs, and the
Sepulchers, and the Fowls of the Air, and the Nests they sit in, which Christ
spoke of? Answer in Writing the thing Queried, G. F.] They are the properest
for his Spirit to undertake. Clem. Recognit. p. 5.
The trifling question put to Barnabas was more witty. [Why a Gnat, being so
small a Creature, has six feet and wings besides; whereas an Elephant, so
bulky an Animal, has only four feet?]

4. In the late unhappy Times, when Hell was broke loose, our own Country
affords Instances too many, being as anciently credulous in believing pretended
Inspirations, so also then, in their production too fertile, and the Quaker is
Junior to the most of them, and they are all able to produce as good Evidences
and Deeds; so that it seems strange, the Quaker should ingross both the
birthright and the blessing too from all the rest.

1. The Seekers, or Religious Scepticks laid Claim to Inspirations; I call them
so, because those various differing Sectaries may be best comprised under such
a general name; Edward Gangre, second Part, p. 2.
[They affirm and hold, they have not only had Revelations, but they have seen
Visions also. The means of Gods revealing himself, and his mind and will to his
Servants, in reference to their Salvation, is immediately by himself, without
Scripture, without Ordinances, without Ministers, or any other means,] but
especially many in the Army about 1645. took themselves to be intimate with
God; Idem. p. 5.
[Some Officers and Soldiers affirmed, That they had had Revelations, and seen
Visions, and took upon them to Prophecy.] [A Lieutenant, a great Devoto,
denied the Trinity of Persons, affirming them to be three Offices, he denied
that Christ's presence in Heaven could be proved by Scripture, p. 7.
and made a great question whether there was a Resurrection or no.] Mrs.
Attaway the Woman-Preacher, then begun to exercise -- [Boggis wished he had not
known so much of the Bible, which he said, p. 163.
was but only Paper.] And Clarkson the Seeker [ vilifies the Scripture,
Ordinances, p. 165.
etc. would not have People to live upon black and white, and said, That they
of themselves were not able to Reveal God.] T. E. is the Successor of such
Blades as these.

2. The Antinomians maintained their undutiful Notions by recourse to this
Armor, and the Quakers have borrowed much from them, as (Perfection,
Discerning who were Elected, the Notions about Christ's Person, and Christ
within, humane Learning, and the like;) but I shall only consider their
Inspirations, a large account of which we find in one who diligently traversed
their Writings. Rutherford's Survey of Spiritual Antichrist, p. 173, 174, 175.
[ The Witness of the Spirit is merely Immediate, without respect to
Sanctification, or Acts thereof; all Doctrines, Revelations, and Spirits must
be tried by Christ rather than by the Word. A Christian is not to Pray, nor to
do any Spiritual Acts, but when the Spirit moves him thereunto. That all other
askings or seekings of God, which are not thus in Spirit, are but the askings
of Creatures as Creatures. p. 222.
The Scriptures are not to be understood according to Grammatical construction,
p. 229.
but as the Spirit of God reveals them. The mere Commandments of Scripture are
not a Law to Christians, p. 305.
but the Law written in our Hearts. The Holy Ghost comes in place of the
Natural Faculties of the Soul, and acts us immediately to all internal and
external acts, Part 2d. p. 195.
etc.] And that Amcrican Jezebel, Mrs. Hutchinson said, [That her particular
Revelations about events to fall out, p. 211.
are as Infallible as any parts of Scripture, and that she is bound as much to
believe them as the Scripture, for the same Holy Ghost is the Author of both.]

3. The Levellers do make out their Freeborn Community with Arrows fetched
from this Quiver. Winstanley, the great Master of the Craft, is exact herein.
New Law of Right. p. 46.
[ This Phrase, Mine and Thine, shall be swallowed up -- there shall be no need
of Lawyers, Prisons, or Engines of Punishment, no Beggar nor cause of
complaining -- there shall be no Buying nor Selling, no Fairs nor Markets, but
the whole Earth shall be a common Treasury for every man -- The Poor upon their
Commons, p. 47.
saying, This is Ours, the Earth and Fruits are common.] Now, this Platonic
fancyful Model he raises upon Revelation. [ As I was in a Trance, diverse
matters were presented to my sight, p. 57.
which here must not be related; likewise I heard these words, Work together,
eat Bread together, declare it all abroad: Likewise I heard these words,
Whosoever it is that Labors in the Earth for any Person or Persons, that lift
up themselves as Lords or Rulers over others, and that do not look upon
themselves equal to others in the Creation. The hand of the Lord shall be upon
that Labourer, I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it. Declare this all
abroad.] And this very Trumpet, he says, is [ still sounding in his Ears, p.
67.
Work together, etc. Surely the Lord has not revealed this in vain.] This
Heavenly Voice was so delightful, p. 58.
that he was [filled with abundance of quiet Peace and secret Joy;] and he
obeyed the Command of the Spirit, which bid him Declare it all abroad by word
of mouth and Pen; and he waited till [ God showed him the place and manner how
to work upon the Common Lands. p. 64.
I will then go forth and declare it in my Action, to eat my Bread with the
sweat of my brows -- looking upon the Land as freely mine as another; I have
now Peace in my Spirit, etc.] Fire in the Bush, the Preface.
And elsewhere upthe same Subject, he opens freely, [This Declaration of the
Word of Life was a free gift to me from the Father himself -- When I had writ
it, I delayed the sending it almost a fortnight -- then the Voice was ready --
go send it to the Churches,] which he did; [well, I have obeyed the voice, and
have sent this to you;] but what was the substance of the voice? That he
relates, [the voice is gone out, Freedom, Freedom, Freedom; he that has ears
to hear let him hear:] And what was this Freedom? Even a setting the Earth
free, a breaking down all Pin-folds, and laying all open to the Common.

Now, have not I an equal, if not greater Reason to believe, his so particular
and exact Revelations concerning Equality, rather than your general, and withal
mixed ones concerning other matters? Nay, have not you as much ground to
believe his pretense in this, as to take the very lineaments of your Profession
from him, and yet herein desert him, when as he Challenges Inspiration for
this, as fully as for any other Doctrine? But that you dare pick and choose,
mangle and alter your own Revelations as well as his, may in its due place
appear.

4. A Sober Answer, p. 56.
The Ranters deluded themselves and others with this blind, and Fox
acknowledged the affinity of his and their Principles, that black Divinity
challenged immediate Communications as fully as T. E. Some sweet sips of
Spiritual Wine sweetly and freely dropping, etc.
[A Prophecy, a Vision, a Revelation, and the Interpretation thereof,] in the
Title page; and as many pages as there are, we have almost as much talk of the
Spirit, [ That Tract is like the other Scriptures, p. 1. the Father secretly
whispering, would not have him set down Book, Chapter, or Verse, though he used
Scripture Language, p. 2. arise out of Flesh into Spirit, out of Form, Type,
and so into Power, Truth, etc. p. 4.48. and passim; hear what the Spirit says,
p. 10.] The Doctrine turned into a Prayer is a brisk one, [ Fall upon them
while they are eating and drinking without; p. 13.
let them eat and drink within -- bread in the Kingdom and drink Wine, new, in
the Kingdom, even new in the Kingdom, new in the Kingdom; not in the oldness of
the Letter, but in the newness of the Spirit.] The Elements, p. 6.
Formal Prayer, Baptism, Supper, etc. shall melt away into God: and at this
rate he proceeds, he Loved also a Woman Prophetess, even [ his dear Friend, p.
46.
Mrs. T. P. I had as live hear a Daughter as a Son Prophecy, and I know that
Women that stay at home divide the Spoil, Male and Female are all one in
Christ.]

5. The Fifth Monarchy Men were not only Citizens of the New Jerusalem, but
Candidates of Heaven, receiving much Intelligence from thence. Their Prophet
(for I know not what Sect else he should belong to) had several Visions of what
the All of All things was bringing to pass. The pouring forth of the seventh
Vial upon all Flesh.
[ The Father spoke to him as he lay in a Trance almost dead for 22 hours,] in
the Preface. [ Being chosen to declare those things, and publish them, as being
what the Prophets pointed at, his Name was changed from George, in a Vision, to
Jacob Israel Foster: and so, says he, I subscribe, or George -- Foster. or
Jacob Israel Foster.


His Visions are too many to be set down, as if he strove both to imitate and
outdo St. John, some few we shall take a taste of for their curiosity. [ He
had a Vision of the calling of the Jews, p. 19.
under the Emblem of a man that went up and down gathering men together: So
that the Jews now dispersed among the Gentiles were to return to their own
City, p. 33. p. 41. p. 55.
and there the Lord would Reign among his Saints in Mount Sion; for Judea was
the place where both God and his Spouse were to rest. Heaven, or the third and
highest Dispensation, must be about Jerusalem: for the Credit of our Nation,
the Chief or Principal Leader of this Expedition into the Holy Land, p. 39.
must be an English man whom God has chosen for that Work. When they came to
Jerusalem they were to dye, and presently to rise up again, and never to dye
more, and the time of restitution is to be in the year 7000. p. 40.
after which there is neither Hell nor Devils left:] with very many Visions of
the like Nature, delivered in such exact Circumstances, with so set and
composed a Countenance, and under such variety of Emblems and Figures, that he
deserves as much regard, as any other in the whole herd of Enthusiasts.

6. William Franklin, Mary Gadbury, and their Proselytes put in as strongly,
and produce as good proofs for Inspiration as T. E. can do; some take them for
Quakers, but the name was not then known, nor do I think they will own them:
But be their Sect without name, or what else, I am not concerned; it is only
their Revelations I must consider, for they had drunk their share of the Spirit
of Delusion then poured forth. Franklin affirmed, Humphrey Ellis his Pseudo
Christus, p. 7.
[ His Receipt of Revelations and Visions, which he endeavored to countenance
with fair and seeming Gospel Expressions; he pretended to Prophecy, to
foretell things to come, to speak with new Tongues, p. 36.
and babled out uncouth words. He also forgave Sins, and his Proselytes, as
Spradbury and the rest, were drawn unto him by Sights and Voices, with several
strange Relations.] His Whore, Mary Gadbury, called him [ the Son of God, p. 31.
the Christ, the Lamb slain, etc. She pretended to Visions, Voices, and
Revelations, was full of comfort, p. 8.
joy, and singing; had strange trembling Fits: She saw a Light as big as the
Moon, and many Stars; p. 10. p. 18.
she had a voice sometimes to seal up the Vision, and then would not speak; she
slighted Sacred Scripture, and yet delivered her Revelations in its Language.
p. 15.
They were commanded in a Vision to go into the Land of Ham, which, by a
suitable Exposition they Interpreted Hampshire. Their Proselytes, like the
Disciples of Marcus, had Voices, p. 22, and 28.
Visions, and Glories, insomuch that both a Minister, Mr. Woodward and his Wife
were deluded by them, he hearing Voices, and seeing Glories, and she seeing
Visions.] To this hight they had quickly arrived, till the Vigilance of the
Magistrates suppressed them. That Whore, with whom Franklin lay as a
fellow-feeler of her Misery, called her self [ the Spouse of Christ, p. 50.
the Lady Mary, the Queen, the Bride, and the Lamb's Wife:] Had she not been
ten years too forward, she would have been a fit Match for apretty pragmatical
thing of G. F. which begun to bleat in 1659. called the Lamb's Officer, gone
out with the Lamb's Message.

7. Lodowick Muggleton and John Reeve (giving out themselves as the two last
Witnesses, Rev. 11.3. as the Prophets of Christ, and the Sealers of the
Foreheads of the Elect and the Reprobate) appeared much contemporary with the
Quakers, being equal to them both in their Claims and Proofs of Inspiration.
But the Devils Malice herein outrun his Wit, for setting up so many
contradictory Competitours in Revelation about the same time, one of them is a
sufficient confutation of another; whereas had but one single Sect put in and
engrossed the favor of that immediate Heavenly converse, weak and simple Souls
might thereby have been sooner deluded; but to considering minds their so
fertile multiplication is their mutual Destruction. In what terms Muggleton
Challenged Inspiration, is not now proper to relate; for seeing that the Fire
has of late deservedly, by public Order, done Execution upon his Works, it is
not manners to rake such putrid stuff out of its ashes: Let all the like Tracts
and Pretentions meet with the like Purgation.

Only by way of Trial take this [whatever the Learned men of this World Dream
of finding out the Invisible things of Eternity, Reeves and Muggleton's Divine
Lookingglass, Cap. 36, p. 145.
by searching into the Scripture Records, and comparing them togeher, the
Divine Majesty has locked up all the Principal Secrets of the Scriptures in
his own Spiritual Breast, that he, by any Immediate Revelation, may dispose of
them into the Spirits of Elect Men and Angels, most advantageous for his own
Glory and their Consolation.]

8. Anna Trapnel exceeds both the Quakers and most of the other Pretenders, in
excessive fastings, Poetical Enthusiasms, lucky hits upon several things that
came to pass afterward, rapturous Devotions, The cry of a stone, Title.
Preface.
etc. [She was in the Visions of God by an Inspiration extraordinary and full
of wonder.] [England was the Valley of Vision -- the wise have stumbled at this
freedom of the Spirit in our days as well as in the days of Christ;] and yet
her Inspired Doctrines were contrary to the Quakers. [ God spoke to her, p. 3,
4, 9, 16. 36, 49.
showed her Visions and the new Jerusalem, a light shone, she was taken into
the Mount of God: She was another voice, a voice within a voice; Gods Heavens
came down into her Earth, 5. 7. 76.
she fasted 9, 11, 14 days, etc. was told by the Spirit of the Soldiers coming
to London, p. 4.6, 7.
had a Vision of the Scots overthrow before Dunbar, and of the Fight with
Holland, of the dissolving the long Parliament, 10.
calling the Jews, of the breaking up the Representative; had a Vision against
Rowse the Chairman, 13. 30.
and several Visions to inform her that Oliver would be Protector, which she
was troubled at, and foretold Gideon's, that is, his being laid aside,] with
many the like. No Quakers have come nigh her, Tyran. detect. p. 38. A
Visitation of Love to the King, etc 4, 5, and p. 58.73. p. 20. p. 35. p. 15.
for Ebbit's foretelling the Firing of London, was not believed by his
Friends. And Buroughs attempts to show, that the Quakers foresaw the Kings
Restoration, came not near it. She was for the Reign of Jesus, destroying the
fourth great Monarchy, foretold that all the Monarchies are going down, Jesus
was at hand. Among the rest, she foretold, [we must have no more Kings,] and
yet she was swallowed up of the Glory of the Lord.

9. The gifted Brethren (who with the next are the most orderly of all the
Pretenders else) made use of this Engine, by their Zealous Advocate, etc. Their
Request was the most modest, [Not to lay aside the Ministers, nor destroy
Church Order, Blake's Embassage from the Kings of the East, to his Highness
Oliver Lord Protector. p. 45. p. 47.
they only pleaded for an hour before or after Sermon^ wherein they might
exercise their Gifts; they allowed the usefulness of Study, that three hours in
a day close employed therein would make a brave Preacher, they offer to give
Security to Preach sound and Peaceable Doctrine, and begged but the liberty of
a Trial, how beneficial their Model would prove; offer upon misdemeanour to
call in, p. 42.
and take back the Offenders Commission, with a Dehortation to exercise any
more for the present; would have themselves not taken for absolute Ministers,
but Assistants; they engage not to meddle with Administering the Sacraments, or
other proper Ministerial Offices,] with many such fanciful things in their
Platform; and yet the conceit of Inspiration, together with acquired Abilities
was the cause of it. [ We leave Christ's Work with you, In the Epistle.
Churches -- the Spirit bid us do it; the Word and Spirit, and God himself is
for us: my Sons and my Daughters shall Prophecy; p. 11. and 23. p. 58.
hear this day what the Spirit says unto the Churches: None must Preach by
Notes, we love to drink from the Fountain (and yet they are for short work)
strive not to speak beyond the breathings of the Spirit. p. 61.
Hear what the Spirit says to the Churches in England, in this day of their
Visitation.] p. 70.
And the Socinians come somewhat toward this Model; Cateches. Eccles.
Polonicar. in Praefatione.
though [they deny Enthusiasms, Divine Miraculous Inspirations, or Prophetical
Authority to be claimed by them; yet they allow a great liberty of Prophesying,
that any one may Interpret, who has the gift of Revelation.]

10. The Congregation, or People commonly called Considerers, had recourse to
this, Trayte de la voye, etc. A Discourse of the way to the Kingdom.
though as sparingly as any of the others; [They were very much taken up in
studying the Book of Nature, saying, that alone is enough for all men, and that
the study of the Prophets lay therein. That Consideration was the Royal way to
the Kingdom. p. 76.
They acknowledge the Trinity and Christ's Incarnation, p. 80. p. 52.90, 100
used the Sacrament and the Lords Prayer; meddled not with Worldly or State
Affairs, p. 74.
were thrifty of their time; Married such as they loved upon first sight, 92.
p. 52.
were against the enclosing the Holy Spirit to any particular Sect of Men;
looking on the Creed as a sufficient instrument of Union among all Christians:]
p. 4.88.
But Immediate Inspiration was owned by them, p. 4.
[ The Voice of God that I heard, said unto me -- Immediately God himself
opened me by his Spirit, p. 6.
the way to the Kingdom resounding in my Heart. -- Monck Rogers being so taken
up with God, p. 50.
as not to remember the words a man just spoke to him is highly commended, --
the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding has appointed me to tell you -- and
such lights as God infused into any of their hearts, p. 72.
they thought themselves bound to communicate to others.] p. 94.


Here are Competitours sufficient, that agree in one bottom, though they build
different and contradictory Doctrines upon it; and all these (likely an hundred
to one; and in this very Kingdom of late ten to one) being the far greater
number are all against the Quakers: and therefore suppose the Scripture did not
please me, which of these Pretenders must I give Credit to? The others whether
old or late produce as good Proofs as T. E. can do; and if I favor one side
where the Evidences are equal, I become partial, and hold the Faith with
Respect of Persons. Do the Quakers say and witness their Inspirations? The
others do the like with an equal confidence. Do they Experience it? The rest
come not behind them. If their Refreshings persuade? the Leveller, and the late
named Whore can use the same Topic, and the Ranter is as brisk as any. If some
Scriptures befriend their Fancy? the rest, and all Heretics, and the Devil
himself, do bait their Hooks with wrested parcels of it. In case then of
different Revelations, to which must I adhere? Or shall I not suspend, until a
third Revelation do determine which side is in the right? Must we believe men
merely because they say so? Or are yea, yea, and a few Solemn looks, or wrings
by the hand Evidences that the Spirit is secretly whispering? They lay no
Obligation on us to trust them, rather than their Rivals. In their Words, Lives
and Writings they seem at least Fallible, like other men. Thomas Ellwood must
then produce better Evidences than the rest; otherwise we are Innocent. And he
has cut himself out work sufficient. 1. To prove that perpetual Inspiration is
certainly promised by God to all Believers. 2. He must prove that all other
pretenders do ly, in their claims. 3. That such as deny Immediate Revelation
have no share thereof. 4. He must by some undoubted Evidences prove that his
party are solely entrusted with this Ministration, and when this is done, he
must leave to us the power of Trial, and the Liberty of Judgment. For if each
must follow the Light, we are Innocent who do but follow our own Convictions;
and our case is infinitely more safe: for all parties agree that the Light of
Scriptures (by which we are guided) is Divine, but your new Light may prove
false, or Darkness, for any assurance you can yet give us to the contrary.

There are all these Co-claimers, hwo both say and show as much as Quakers, and
so each single party are an equal balance to them, much more all of them
together do strangely outweigh the Quakers next to youngest claims (unless the
Rule be now inverted verum quodounque prius, and what is latest must
necessarily be truest) which could only hold until a fresher Sect (suppose the
sweet Singers of Israel, or any such pretty name) do start up and out-date the
Quakers, but though all the other Competitors were in the wrong, that does not
infer T.E's. Friends to be in the right, for they may be equally mistaken with
the others in the like Bottom; unless they can produce some indisputable Divine
Amulet, or Preservative, which the others cannot. Nor can I find any solid
Reason, why I should believe the English, and disbelieve the Spanish
Alumbrados, when their Doctrines are much alike, and their Evidences are
exactly equal. And further one of these (who can set as good a face on his
cause, and use as brisk a confidence, and who excels Thomas Ellwood, as much as
one of the two Witnesses in the Revelations exceeds the Witnesses in general)
viz. Lodowick Muggleton from his supposed Spirit pronounces a Sentence and a
Curse upon the Quakers, 3d Q. Quibbles, p. 32.
[ Because I (says he) have passed Sentence upon the Quakers, they shall never
grow to have more Experience in Vision and Revelation, but shall wither.] which
Curse, from their Proteus like changing, the Disciples of Muggleton may
conclude to have seized on them.

Others that are Juniors or Co-temporary with the Quakers, from their Spirit
Condemn the Quakers. The cry of a Stone, p. 20.
So Anna Trapnel, [ Let them tell him ( viz. Oliver) of his Sins, and tell him
with Humility and tears, not as those deluded Spirits, that go running about
the streets; and say, We have such Visions and Revelations, who come out with
their great speeches of Vengeance, Judgment and Plagues; Oh, but thine that
come from thee, thou give them Humility, Meekness, Bowels, Tears] [Thou art
called only a Form, they call themselves a Christ.] [Oh, p. 50.
some poor Creatures call themselves Christ, because of this Oneness with
Christ -- when thy sweet wine comes forth, p. 68.
then they bring in their false Wine. Discourse of the way, etc. p. 62. p. 68.
] The Secretary of the Confiderers [prayed God to preserve him, for ever having
the Spirit of the Quakers] he had high thoughts of their way at the first, till
he [did discern the tracts of the evil Spirit that guided them:] several
Instances of which he enumerates, and says, The Spirit of Wisdom appointed him
to tell those things [to make them better advised in the choice of true ways
and in the distinctions of Lights.] p. 72.
And I have heard of a single Devoto, herded with none of the former, with the
greatest Confidence affirm, That God had Revealed to her, that the Quakers
would leave their Errors and return to the Church and Truth again.

But beyond these, because we in these Kingdoms may be interested and partial,
not passing right judgment, the Illuminados in another Country (who not being
engaged against ours deserve more regard) do expressly declare the Quakers to
be Impostors; and I suppose their Opinions, in other points of Religion to be
more sound, in that they deluded the Learned and useful John Amos Comenius.

The late German Enthusiasts are the persons, His. Revel. edit. per J.A.C.
1659. p. 189. In Dr. Spencers vulgar Prophecyes. p. 6, 7.
and their Condemnation of the Quakers I shall transcribe from a worthy hand,
my Circumstanstances not affording me as yet, a sight of the Book. [ They tell
the World that by how much the nearer that great day of the Lord is, the more
evidently and familiarly does he excite his Prophets, and that they understand,
the frequent possessions, Witch-crafts, and fanatical Enthusiasms of the
Quakers; Satanicas esse praestigias, quibus opera Dei obfuscare nituntur, ut
olim James and Jambres Mosi resistere; to be the delusions of the Devil,
whereby they endeavor to obscure the works of God, as James and Jambres
withstood Moses of old.] all these Condemnations of the Quakers from the
Spirit, should have force with them who acknowled Revelations at this day.

What if the Quakers be more numerous than some others of the like Kidney. That
is no Argument of Truth, else others would soon wrest it from them, as some
places, so some times are more prepared for productions of Monsters than
others; and the late unhappy times had piled up such Materials, that it was
easy for the Quakers to arrive at that Height by starting up as the scum and
froth of them all. Montanus spread his Poison through Phrygia, Donatus through
Africa, the Messalians through Syria, Pamphylia, etc. And Arius through the
World. The Familists T. E's. Grandfathers, are next to gone, and I hope his
Inspirations will run the same Fate and expire like theirs; and the Company
called Considerers foretell your extinction, Traite de la Voye Au Royaume. p.
18.
[time shall make you of the number of things past.]

CHAP. VII. Concerning their own contradictory, different and designed
Revelations.
WOuld a man be tamely satisfied, with Keiths Confutation, that [ the
Enthusiasts, against whom Luther wrote, were not true Enthusiasts, as the
Apostles were, Quakerism no Popery, p. 20.
but such as under a pretense of Enthusiasm both taught and practiced evil
things, and bastle each in the former list thereby, he must allow me with equal
reason, to turn it upon themselves, that [Quakers are not right Enthusiasts as
the Apostles were.] For it confutes themselves as much as others: and is a
Conviction on either hand equal with [mentiris Bellarmine.] But supposing my
temper or other motives incline me to overlook the rest, and become favorable
to T. E's. Friends, so as to Fancy or Wish that they really have what they
pretend; my next Inquiry is to whom must I turn? to the Conforming or
Nonconforming Quakers? to some single teachers, or to the Body of Ancient
Friends, and how can I infallibly know where that supposed Body lodges? or,
who are the Members of it? or when these little talkative Oracles speak by
Inspiriation, and when by their own afflatus? I would have a Reasonable
Religion understand what to believe, do and pray, and then proceed accordingly;
but if the Spirit that guides be inshrined in such a Body, against which so
many prejudices lie, the case of those Souls is very sad, whose Directions flow
from so foul a Fountain.

That they do not always act by Inspiration, Im Rev. p. 36.
we have a full Confession [not as if in every thing-we did act, think, speak
or write infallibly: -- nor as if in nothing we could act in a disjunction from
the Spirit; for we do freely acknowledge we are capable to run out, and both
think, speak, write and do things that are not only not infallible, but may be
wrong and false. Only what is done -- in conjunction with the Spirit of God,
and in his Immediate manifestation and cooperation in us, is infallible.] And
elsewhere he makes the like acknowledgement [ we are conscious to our selves
that both in speaking and writing, Q^no Popery, p. 33.
it is possible for us in some measure, more or less, to decline from those
infallible leadings, and consequently both to speak and write in a mixture.]
How can I then infallibly know when the Conjunction is? or be able in that
mixture, to separate the Divine from the Humane? or to know the Prophet from
the man? it may prove an Opposition or side Aspect, when I expected a
Conjunction, I may take him to be inspired when he writes of himself, and his
Wine may have a mixture of Water, if not Poison: If one Chapter or Section be
writ in Conjunction, and another not, he must both make an unequal Yoking, and
also affront the Spirit in not distinguishing [this I received from above, this
I invented of my self:] he also deludeth others, who in such mixtures do wrong
on one hand, they in swallowing the whole as Divine, we in rejecting the whole
as worse than Humane. Let him acquaint by some marks which parts are so, and
so; that we may pay our respects accordingly. Their manner also of wording the
Receipt, as [ I find it with me, I find it in my heart, I find it rising up in
me, etc.] Look more like an Answer from Pythia, which ascended up from the Feet
unto the Breast, then Divine Inspiration, which is an illapse, or influx from
Heaven. We are told [that the Children of God do infallibly know one another,
Im. Revel. p. 118, 189.
and hence have Unity, Peace and Concord one with another.] If this be true,
Quakers will scarce pass for Gods Children; for among themselves they are as
much distant, as the Poles, and as other Sects crumbled the Anabaptists into
70, and the Familists into very many; among the rest into those of Caps his
Order; so there are Quakers of the Hat; the prevailing party of the Foxonian
Order, and the Murmerers under the Banner of George Bishop and his associates.

Their mutual Carriages are unlike those of inspired men, and he who believes
their Witnessings must swallow contradictions, they set Spirit against Spirit,
the same against it self, and that bad Language which they first poured on
others, is now bestowed on their own dissenters. Their Contradictions,
Carriages and Expressions, are smartly exposed in three little Tracts, The
Quakers Quibbles in 3 parts.
which make unnecessary any large account thereof here: only I shall observe
some in prosecution of their Inspirations, and digest them into what Order so
much Variety and confusion will permit.

1. We shall consider their Contradictions, or Differences in Doctrine.

2. Their Carriages therein, and means of convincing one another.

3. Consider the debate about the Hat, and their Canons so far as Inspiration
is concerned.

4. Present other matters, that are subservient thereto.

1. Their Contradictions and Differences in Doctrine. To begin with T.
Ellwood's Tutor, Universal Grace. p. 6.
who [in a Book which he wrote from the Lord] produces twice or thrice, Joel
2.28. for his purpose, wherein are mentioned, Visions, Dreams and Prophecyes,
and yet he denies or minceth their having any of them. For Visions and Dreams
he avoids them [nor Dreams and Visions upon the imagination in the night
season, nor yet by Trances, Im. Rev. p. 7.
so called, which is by a cessation of the exercise of all the outward Senses:]
and for the other he denies the necessity thereof, as [signifying, p. 2.
foreseeing or foretelling things to come:] but the rest do not digest such
Doctrine. Will. Shewin outgoes St. Paul ten years [I knew a man twenty four
years ago who had Heavenly Sights, The true Christians Faith and Experience, p.
130.
and Revelations and Raptures into the Third Heaven, and heard and saw things
unutterable; and all before his Conversion and Regeneration] strange Doctrine
indeed, an unclean thing to enter into the Third or Highest Heaven, p. 129, 131.
In her Letter.
he names their Visions also. Smiths Wife had a Vision, signifying to her, her
Husbands Death, which brought her into the Stillness. They also challenge
Prophecyes, Some Principles, p. 26. Noble Salutation, p. 7.
[Sons and Daughters do Prophesy in our age, as formerly among the Apostles.]
[The Lord raised up many Servants and Prophets.] but least Prophecy should not
be taken in the proper sense, for foretelling, they speak out to that purpose,
Some Principles, p. 18. Preface to living Faith. The Glory of the true Church.
p. 27.
[it (to wit the light) will show you things to come] says Fox [Naylor often
Prophesied, as of things which we have seen come to pass.] [ The Spiritual,
through the Spirit of Prophecy, see when Bells, Hourglasses, Puspits, etc.
shall be no more adored.]

Thomas Ellwood seems to limit his Inspirations to such as are recorded in
Scripture, p. 237.
Keith enlarges them to all Humane concernments, as [ eating, Im. Rev. p. 6.
going, etc. which are not in Scripture particularly; no, not so much as by
consequence] Th. Ellwood is for the Immediate Teachings of the Spirit, without
any help from Humane Learning toward the understanding of the Bible, p. 219.
Im. Rev. p. 39. Winding sh. for controv. ended. p. 4.
others are more Wise, do not [exclude and shut out the Service and usefulness
of all means, and Instruments whatsoever, whether Books or Men:] and another as
freely acknowledges [ we cannot call it our faith or knowledge, till quickened
to it, by that eternal Spirit, be it mediately, or be it Immediately,] but here
lies the Fallacy, it is Immediate, though with means, with, and without, are
all one. [ such a way of Communication, Im. Rev. p. 42.
though it be through a means, yet this hinders it not in a true sense to be
Immediate.] to palliate this Paradox the better, we are informed that Dreams
and night Visions (those secret ways whereby God did communicate his mind) [
were but very shadowy and remote, Idem. p. 17.
and rather Mediate than Immediate] and if this liberty of confounding be thus
used, they may pass for Prophets when they please, p. 162.
Keith allows the Disciples to learn something from Christ. Thomas Ellwood
makes the Spirit to confer all the knowledge, so that Christ's words were
unintelligible, a mere gibberish or Jargon. Thomas Ellwoood makes the whole
Scripture Revealed or conveyed by Immediate Revelation, and what is not so
renewed is not understood. Keith is far more prudent, [ I grant that the
History, p. 232.
or Historical part of the Scriptures is not conveyed unto us (nor unto any
ordinarily) by Immediate Revelation.] Winding sh. 5.
Now the Gospels are undoubtedly Historyes of Christ, what he was, said, did
and suffered. Mr. Pen calls one of them [Johns History] and the rest deserve
that name as much, so that they receive not the Gospels by Immediate
Revelation. And the whole Bible is transmitted to us as matter of History,
wherein such Commands, Promises, etc. are comprised. And this concession of
Keiths pulls down Ellwoods whole Fabric. T. Ellwood does strangely interfere
with himself, p. 223.
he makes Tongues necessary to Preach to all Nations, p. 221.
and yet confesses it might be done by an Interpreter; p. 235.
often takes Notice of our owning the assistance of the Spirit, p. 211.
and yet cries out not a word of the Spirit of God, p. 231.
but Humane Learning all in all, he makes knowledge to be both the cause and
the effect, being strangely blundered to make out their Apostolical
Inspirations, without the Testimonials thereof, Miracles and Tongues. p. 237.
Lastly he makes the Gospel in all Ages revealed in some degree or other, which
he anon retracts, Revealed in the first ages of Christianity, p. 243.
and then brings on a long night of thick darkness, and a general Apostasy.

Others of them are not more Harmonious [ it was never his (to wit Christ's)
Faith to sue, Naylors living Faith, p. 7.
contend, etc.] Shield of the Truth, p. 3.
[we sue no man at the Law, but are sued by them:] but Thomas Ellwood is
differently minded [in civil cases it is no injustice for a man to recover his
due by Law] going to War is by some Condemned, p. 361. Bishops looking glass,
p. 203. Barclay in Q. no Popery, p. 100. Tyran. and Hipo. detected, p. 22.
[Wars belonged to the Jewish Administration, which had its end.] [Quakers deny
that it is Lawful for Christians to fight and kill one another in fighting.]
Others of them have both allowed and followed Wars, and [John Thompson owned by
others as a Quaker, was Master of a Ship, fought stoutly and killed many of the
Dutch:] one while they were against all forms, Great Mystery, p. 16.
[ Christ is the end of outward forms; Paul brought the Saints off from things
that are seen, and water is seen, and its Baptism] but now they are hugely
formal. True Christian Faith, p. 187.189.
[Godliness is not manifested without a form -- in thy Holy form of Godliness,
led into by the power.] [Justification by that Righteousness which Christ
fulfilled for us wholly without us, Q is Paganism, 8.9.10, 11. Prin.
was one while esteemed a Doctrine of Devils, his satisfaction counted
irreligious and irrational, that he fulfilled the Law only as our pattern, and
that Justification is by works] but the horridness thereof is now mollifyed
[The Spirit, Pennington's naked truth, p. 35.
the Life, the Blood of the Lord Jesus justifies.] [Justification, and the
things accompanying it, are the benefits of Christ's death.] The same person
renounceth [ all merit, and debt sprictly taken, defines justification as it
has respect to what Jesus did and suffered for us without us, Uni. grace, p.
103. Q. no Pope^y, p. 47.51.
etc. The procuring cause being Christ alone, who became the expiatory
Sacrifice and Propitiation unto God for our Sins.] Shown dawbs it over by
affixing an ill Doctrine on us [that Christ's Sanctification without us, True
Christian Faith, p. 69.
is imputed to a man whilst unsanctified:] which is not so bad as his own being
taken into the third Heaven, when unregenerate.

Fox at sometimes calls the Scripture a Rule [the Scriptures shall buffet you
about, Epis. to G.W Divin. of Christ. Q. no Pope, p. 24. in 3d. Quib. p. 36.
and you shall be whipped about with the Rule.] Keith calls it [a complete
external secondary Rule] Mr. Pen says [ the Scripture is much like to the
shadow of the true Rule, etc.] a very great Honor do they advance it to, to be
much like the Shadow, but not the Substance, nor the shadow. T. Ellwood daubs,
p. 241.
will allow it to be [profitable] and so are Tullyes Offices, but not to be [a
perfect and sufficient Rule in order to Salvation] and yet he has nothing
Revealed, but what is in Scripture; so that if this be not sufficient, the
Repitition thereof must be as defective, and having no new Essentials of
Religion, lesser than Inspiration, might convey the others; but at the last
their kindness allows the Scripture to be a Rule in Cursing and Railing; Hicks
3d Dialogue, p. 40.
[let it suffice that we give no harder names than the Scripture by Rule
allows.] With full mouth they declaim against Judicial swearing, and yet for
interest they can take an Oath; some of them would have no Creeds nor
Catechisms, others compose such things.

They are much entangled when to Date that Apostasy of Christianity which they
fancy: Some make it to come before miraculous gifts ceased, just upon the
Apostles death. In Mr. Jenner, p. 116. Fiery darts, p. 26.
So Joseph Frice [Since the Apostles days there has been a great Apostasy, and
a true Church of Christ could not be found] during all which time [the true
Church has been in a Wildernessed Estate] [Christ had not a Visible Church in
the World] says Farnsworth: G.W. and G. F. reply at Cambridge. Gag for the Q.
p. 5. Howgils Glory of the Church. p. 6.
and yet they quote broken sayings of the Ancients, who were within the
Apostasy: others of them do qualify the severity of the former [the Church of
Christ was glorious the first hundred years after his Manifestation in the
Flesh:] and Keith more enlarges the purity of the Church [the Testimony of
Antiquity in the purest times -- especially the three or four first Centuryes.]
Q. no Popery. p. 69. Spirit of the Hat, p. 9.
which at length they retort home [concerning the great Apostasy in this day]
among themselves.

G. In 3d. Quib p. 36.
Whitehead durst one while write [ That which was spoken from the Spirit of
truth in any, is of as Great Authority as the Scriptures -- and Greater, etc.]
Which being odious to all good minds, he declares confidently the contrary; as
if our observations were as stupid, as his Conscience [ nor did we ever prefer
our Books before the Bible -- but do prefer the Bible before all other Books
extant in the World] one while man must be thou would because God is so, Q.
plainness p. 70, 71.
The true Christians Faith, p. 187.
anon the Hat must not be put off to man, that must be reserved to God alone,
as a necessary piece of his Worship. These and many such are the crooked ways,
and interfering paths wherein their private Spirit is bewildred. Spirit of the
Hat, p. 25.


2. Having taken an Essay of their different Doctrines, it will be pleasant to
consider their Carriages in such oppositions; and the means they have of
convincing one another, for allowing no outward Rule, whereby they should be
concluded, Spirit is opposed to Spirit; and the boldest Face, or the best
Lungs, or the strongest Interest does carry it: and should I say I wrote this
tract by Inspiration, upon their Principles, they could not confute me, and
every one having the Light within, the comparatively small number of the
Quakers argues them to be in the wrong.

When differences arise among them, they esteem the diffenters to be cheats,
Mr. Jenner, p 86
the Woman at Dublin [ condemned their old Light, producing a span new one of
her own; the rest were displeased, saying, she was a false Prophetess; but she
still maintained that her Light came immediately from God.] Living Stone to the
Dissenters, made this Rejoinder [ you are led by a private Spirit, 3d. Quibble.
p. 19.
though you pretend it to be Universal; here is a deceitful whining Spirit,]
rarely confuted; for the other upon their Principles may better call
Livingstones, a private deceitful whining Spirit. Pens answer to Faldo, p. 53.
[ I declare in the name of all the right Quakers in the World] it seems he
knows all their Hearts and Principles, but how must we do that? what is the
Earmark of a right Quaker? can any of them be in the wrong? or is their
perfection gone? or is [Thee and Thou the pure Language.] Hicks 2d. Dialogue.
p. 12.
the badge of a right one, as Thomas Ruddyer would have it. Tyran. and Hipo.
detected, p. 16.
The former Author calls another dissent very prettily. [Imaginations and
Whimsyes] And I can as cheaply and Inspiredly call his and theirs, all by the
same phrases. Keith in a public dispute attempted to prove that Pen speaks by
Immediate Inspiration, Hicks 3d. Dialogue, in the Preface.
and yet others say [he is a heady, rash young man, we take no notice what he
says -- ] and Luddington looks upon him as not Catechized enough. [ I would
rather have compared him to Apollos, Q. is Paganism, p. 5, 6.
and wishing him a little more fully instructed in the ends of Christ's Life and
Death -- ] Gotherson Alarums them all to purpose, saying [ That wicked men are
crept in among them, Mr. Jenner, p. 177, 178, 179.
as Judas among the Apostles; calls their Spirit a blind ignis fatuus; that
they are led by Imaginations, Lusts and Fancyes. It is not as Roger Crab,
William Smith, and John Dunck surmise -- the head of the Serpent is too
powerful in Roger Crab and his followers.] With such like severity. And no
question but Crab could make the like reply, and Smiths Works are since
Printed, as Living Divine Testimonies, but whom must I trust, when such as
these can pass for Inspirations and Confutations of them? it is usual to call
one another Antichrist, Ranters, Scotch-men, Tailors, or what will look
illfavouredly, John Swinton wrote a Paper, Tyran. and Hipo. detec. p. 39 -- 42.
Spirit of the Hat, p. 35.
in [the express motion of God, who justified him in every tittle of it after:]
this he retracted and denied the Spirit in which it was Writ, saying [it was
fit for the fire, and was done in an hour of Temptation and Weakness] the
Account is large, and deserves reading; but what evidence had he, he was in the
right after retracting, more than when asserting? and if he for four or five
years together took the Spirit of Delusion for the Spirit of God, they can give
no security but it is the same Error that still enthralls them, contradictory
parties dare both use the name of the Lord [John Osgoods Marriage with R. T.
was well approved of, Spirit of the Hat, p. 30.31.
the Elder Rebeckah Travers and J. O. declared it to be of the Lord. John
Bolton with two or three more opposed its passing in the name of the Lord,
Tyran. and Hipo. detected, p. 22.
unless he would give Testimony against the Hat Spirit.] The like difference
there was about the Marriage of M. B. one part [ declared positively from the
Lord that it was to pass, Briggs told the Opposers that they opposed the mind
of the Lord, when as the good man knew not so much as the persons he spoke of,
Spirit of the Hat, p. 33.
the other part greatly opposed it under the same pretence] setting the Lord
against the Lord.

John Whitehead wrote a Letter in the name of the Lord, Tyran, p. 20.
Geo. Fox blotted out a line or more, altering it to a quite contrary sense,
without any liberty from Whitehead so to do; by which both the Spirit of God
and the Writer were belyed, and yet others of them justified that alteration.
Never did any in such a manner debase and prostitute sacred Inspiration, as
these Controulers, and Correctors of the Spirit do.

But as the Romish infallibility is by some shrunk into an Indefectibility, so
that of the Quakers keeps a somewhat like pace. Whiteheads Spirit offers it
self [ willing to receive Information] and in a Letter I have from a leading
Quaker, 3 Quib. p. 49.
he thus write on behalf of Keith [that if he have held any thing contrary to
the Testimony of Holy Scriptures, and sound Christian experience, he will be
willing to hear and be convinced by a sober Christian demonstration:] they
either have no Inspiration, or its impression is very weak, for if it was real,
it would assure it self both to them and others, and leave no such place for
second thoughts and demurrings. A just rebuke to 21 Divines, p. 22.
Pen says [ we ascribe not Infallibility to men, but to the Grace of God, and
to men so far as they are led by it; for that it certainly teaches what it
does teach:] an acute invention, so he certainly writes what he does write;
and I am as good an Infallible as he is: but this only covers and does not
cure, for still the Quaery recurs, how can I be infallibly assured, p. 7.
that such a person is led by Gods Grace or not, he also calls it [a being
assured of what a Christian ought not to make a doubt of:] but Certainty is
capable of degrees, and there is a vast difference between actual certainty,
and absolute Infallibility.

But it is well we have got Company, Whitehead at Cambr. p. 10. and Gag for Q.
p. 4. Ann Pearsons warning to Judges, p. 7.
other Professions are to be guided by Inspiration, [all Acts of Parliament are
to be made and received from God.] [Magistrates must make Laws by Gods Spirit,]
but not only Lawyers, but Physicians also instead of Curing these Enthusiasms,
are themselves to turn Inspirado's. Im. Rev. p. 69.
[ He reads Hypocrates, Galen, and other Writers concerning Medicine, and so he
thinks hereby to become a Physician, etc. Whiles their hands are out from the
Light of Christ which gives ability] Dr. Gray thus pretended Revelation for the
Secrets of Physic, The Q. Spiritual Court p. 39, 40.
whereas it was one Mrs. Slack of Islington who inspired him, and made him pay
sauce for it. Paracelsus would have been a good Physician for them, or Helmont
who at length obtained a Vision of his Soul, Dr. Charltons Ternary of Paradoxes.
being a [pellucid transparent Substance.] If Hermolaus Barbarus had had this
Light, he needed not to have gone to the Fiend to know the meaning of
Aristotle's Entelechy.

3. Consider the debate about the Hat, and their Canons, so far as Inspiration
is concerned, whether the Hat should be put off or no in Prayer, has caused
great heats among them; they who act consentaneously to their first Principles,
would have it left to the Spirits motions: The rest, who set up a Tyranny will
have it off, as matter of Decency, as significative that the Veil is taken from
their Heart, as expressive Honor to God, etc. The thing I debate not, but the
Consistency of it with their Doctrines, their Mournful Gildas makes a sad
Narrative of [what was made known, Spirit of the Hat, p. 9.
and manifested in him, concerning the great Apostacy] to wit, among
themselves, to such a height was it carried, that to keep on the Hat, was a
forfeiting of their Privileges. Perrot declared, Tyran. and Hipo. detec. p. 33.
[ I have received by express Commandment from the Lord God of Heaven, in the
day of my Captivity in Rome. viz, To bear a sure Testimony against the Customs,
and Traditions of the taking off of the Hat by men, when they go to Pray to
God, the which they never had by Commandment from God.] And yet this Revelation
is thrown by as a Delusion. Fox, and the ruling party, having determined the
Contrary, but it is hence Evident, that men may take that for Inspiration which
is not so, even among Quakers as well as other men. And Ben. Furley wrote a
large Letter, to show that such imposing, Idem. p. 67.
is contrary to the Freedom, or Motion of the Spirit of Life; and the thing
begot much confusion, some taking their Hats off at wrong times, etc. How can I
know which are the right Quakers, the Hat-men, or the others? Spirit of the
Hat, p. 32.
or should not I believe the Revelations of the weak side, rather than the Arts
and Tyranny of the stronger?

But the most unparalled Usurpation, Printed at the end of this Tract.
and Lordliness, consists in their Canons, or the Testimony from the Brethren,
which are a direct Receding from their first Principles. But experiencing the
Light in every one, to be the way to destroy all Government and Order; they
Mint a pretty thing, called the Light of the Body, in which the dispersed Light
is concentred, and to which it must be accountable; we shall first consider the
making and entertainment of this Testimony, and then some of the matter of it.

The makers thereof declare that [ through the Lords good hand being met
together -- were through the Operation of the Spirit of Truth, In the Preamble.
as God has put it into our Hearts. -- Art. 1. The Lord giving us to see --
being thereto encouraged by the Lord, whose Presence is with us, etc.] Which
imply that Testimony to be drawn up by Inspiration. Mr. Pen calls them
[inoffensive, Faldo's Appendix, p. 2.
nay Christian and necessary Resolves,] which sinks them far below Revelation.
But G. Bishop (who deserves as much credit as any of the party) wrote a large
Letter in Opposition to that Testimony [ having considered their Paper in the
Spirit of Truth, In Tyran. and Hypo. detect. p. 34.
he was moved of the Lord to let them know, etc.] and upon their first
Principles he proceeds, shaking down what the others later Model had erected;
but Gods Spirit is opposed to himself, and in such Wicked Debates, what side
must an Inquirer join unto? or what undoubted security can one party give of
their having the Spirit more than the other? it being in both alike Invisible,
and neither submitting to an outward Rule, nor giving outward proofs.

They enjoin them [to be read in their several meetings and kept as a
Testimony.] So W. D. sent his Papers [to be read in the fear of the Lord, in
the Holy Assemblies of the Church of the first Born] an insolent Act to impose
their Motions on others who are equally taught by God, their notion of [ the
Body of Friends, of good and ancient Friends, the Witness of God in Friends,
the Judgment of the Spirit of Christ in his People, good and serious, faithful
and sound friends, the Universal Spirit of Truth, etc.] are such canting ways
of inslaving Souls, that they exceed both implicit Faith, and all the
Intrigues of the Conclave: this being their new Maxim and Infallible Rule [
that the Body will have a true sense, Spirit of the Hat, p. 21.
feeling and understanding of Motions, Visions, Revelations, Doctrines, etc.
and therefore safest to make her my Touchstone in all things relating to God.]
But what signifies the Light in every man, or Immediate Revelation? they are
wholly useless upon these Principles; for if my Revelations must be tried by
the Body, what must I be guided by in the Interim, till their approbation be
sent in a Cloak-bag from London? but who are this Body? how many members go to
constitute it? Where is it deposited? In what place lodged? whence have they
this Authority? or, how can I infallibly know when they proceed upon
Inspiration? are they turned into Body, who were all Spirit? Thomas Ellwood is
a Nonconforming Brother, as he states things, but to have such a power over
others, requires a being deputed thereto, as Bishop well urged, but especially
the trying Divine motions in that manner, requires the highest degree of
Inspiration and Authority from God. Never did any turn Revelation into a craft
so much before, the Body to be sensible of Visions, etc. Where is this Body?
one in every County? or the Universal one at London? such a Representative,
mankind never heard of. The Apostles at the Council, Acts 15. received their
outward information from Paul and Barnabas, and so proceeded; but for a Body of
Friends to understand the motions of all the Members, makes such a trifling,
prodigious superfaelation of Revelations, as cannot be imagined, suppose the
number of Quakers to be 20000. each Believer of these has Scripture renewed,
has expository Inspirations on it, besides all that concern civil Life, as
eating, drinking, marrying, etc. Now what Body besides its own particular ones,
can possbly without omnisciency, have a feeling of those Visions daily
conferred upon each of that 20000? and if a man cannot obey his own motions
till Friends have approved, his Condition is endlessly perplexed, the Saints in
Heaven by a repercussion, or Speculum hearing their Votaries on earth, is
nothing so intangling as the Universal Spirits communicating all the
Revelations to the Body. But this expedient have they hi^ upon to keep private
Revelations in subjection, a pack of Gypsies, or Pluto's Court, may wish for
such Intelligence; but the Christian World, the Pope himself, and the Saints
above, are yet Strangers to this new way of Communication. But supposing his
Body be not capable of being the Rendezvous of all Revelations, but be
entrusted with [ a discerning Spirit, to discover what comes from the true
Light in any.] They ought to produce some deputation from those they represent,
and certain proofs that they cannot be Mistaken, in this snuffing of Lights,
and smelling of Opinions, as they should first prove to us, that they have
Revelations before they require our belief; the same they should make out to
their Friends, that the Light in the one is darkness if the other call it so;
but how can I justify my subjection to the Body, when contrary to my inward
Light? is not my Light as certain to me, as theirs to them? and more certain
than theirs can be to me? or am not I more assured of my own feelings, than I
can be of another Relations? does the Spirit jest with me in Discoveries, and
is he in earnest with them? if the Body judge me, what must judge the Body? or is
it so high a Tribunal, that there is no appeal from it? had God entrusted the
Body with (...) vast a Power, as legitimating Motions; he would have provided
we should have known what and where that body always is, when it deter mineth
duly, and all other requisits to the subm^^^ing my sensations to their
Decisions? If I write a thing by the Spirit and then submit that to the
Judgment of the Body, I show contempt to God, and blindness of Obedience, nor
can I expect God should Reveal himself to me, when I submit his conveyings to
another Corrections, one Infallible has not power over another Infallible,
nor does the truth of my Inspiration depend upon having others of my Judgment.
It is the Impression from God, and not another acceptance which is my
security, for certainly I must know my own Receipts, better than I can do either
those or the fidelity of another, but if twenty single ones be not infallible,
those twenty when collected into one body, cannot make up one infallible; nor
can I be satisfied that the Light in the body is more upright, than when
dispersed in the members, these proceed according to their supposed Receipts;
the others in lycensing thereof proceed by Art and Interest, and if one part of
the Body be liable to mistakes, why not the other? but they have made a good
advance, by removing the Light from the Members into the Body, the next step
conveys it into one Infallible Head, and they may pass for good Catholics of a
new Order.

Man and Forms used to be cried down, are to be kept under with the Power of
God, being without, they ought not to be Judges in the Church, being joined in
one with Heathens and Infidels. The Church has Power without the assent of
such as dissent, to determine, etc.] Mr. Pen may retract his Book of Liberty of
Conscience, none are to enjoy it but the Foxonian party, for to that purpose
Fox spoke in a selected great Assembly [ though many Friends have Writ for
Liberty of Conscience, The Spirit of the Hat, p. 41.
I never liked the Word, it is not a good Word, no Liberty to the
Presbyterians, no Liberty to the Papists, no Liberty to the Independants, no
Liberty to the Baptists, etc. Liberty is to be only in the Truth, and says he,
No Liberty out of the Power.]

Their Viewing Books before Printing, argues their Distrust, and Confusion
among Pretenders, T. Ellwoods Book was allowed by the Body, and some parts of
it breath not their Air: would they declare what Books they own, and what
Authors are Spurious, it might be an Act of Justice and Charity to their
Proselytes; but then the procedure in Condemning what came from the Lord, would
be ominous to their whole Platform.

Their setting up a Ministry is an Eclipsing, if not Extinguishing the Light
and Inspiration in each Believer, for their Genuine Consequent is, That both
Scriptures and Ministers are useless; and herein they are sadly divided, George
Bishop as moved of the Lord declares against a Ministry [ the Spirit of the
Lord in this day, Tyran. and Hyp. p. 35.
and in the days of the Apostles, bears not the same proportion: Then were
Apostles, Pastors, Teachers, Elders, etc. But in this day the Spirit it self is
Pastor, Teacher, Elder, etc. So that if the Spirit move any to declare or
speak, that is the Apostle, Teacher, Elder, etc. I know no Pastor, Teacher,
Elder, etc. But as I find moving in any to any of these things.] The eleven
Brethren from the Lord, defend a stated Ministry, condemning those that would
limit the Lord to speak without Instruments, or by what Instruments they list;
rejecting the Counsel of the Wisemer, and the Testimony of the Prophets, that
doing down the Ministry is a laying wast the Heritage of the Lord, Keith
attempts a reconciliation of these differences [ that their Ministry will
always be dear and comfortable to us, Im. Rev. p. 215.
but not absolutely necessary, being come to a Teacher, even the Spirit of
Jesus, etc.] but leaning to the Non conforming side, but how can the single
Teachers be Inspired or be Infallible, when the Body does supervise and Correct
that which they believe to be God's Spirit? or if the Body be sensible of the
Motions of Friends, why has it not a Prophetic glimpse of the Books and
designs of Enemies? but this setting up a Ministry and Canons is a receeding
from their first claims, and is inconsistent with T. E's Inspiration in each
Believer.

4. There are various other matters related to these, by which we may gather
their regard to Revelation; they obey when no Inspiration is named, supposing a
man to be habitually Inspired. To set down for the rareness there of one
Extravagant of George Fox, In the Romish Horseleach.
which can scarce be parallelled at Rome, the Friars Case was not so peremptory.

All Friends every where, on your Signs set not up the Image, or Likeness of
any Creature in Heaven or in Earth, but by the Power of the Lord, keep down all
the makers of such things, for the Ground of them is from the Heathen. But set
up a Bed-staff, Fire-shovel, Saw, Fork, Compasses, Andirons, Harrow, Plough, or
any such thing. And Friends every where admonish one another, Young and Old;
that ye do not run after the Worlds Fashions, which are invented and set up by
the vain and light mind; which if ye do, how can ye Judge the World for such
things? Away with your skimming-dish Hats, and your unnecessary Buttons on your
Cloaks and Coats, and on the tops of your shoulders behind, and on your
sleeves: Away with your long Slit-peaks behind on the skirts of your Wastcoats,
and short sleeves, punishing your shoulders so as you cannot have the use of
your arms. Away with your short black aprons, and some having none: Away with
your Vizards, whereby you are not distinguished from bad Women, and your
bare-necks, and your great needless flying Scarfs like Colors on your backs.
And so set not up, nor put on that which you did once with the Light Condemn;
but in all things be plain, that you may adorn the truth of the Gospel of
Christ, and Judge the World, and keep in that which is comely and decent.

George Fox.


Wherein he supposes that Bed-staffs, Fire-shovels, etc. are none of Gods
Creatures, when Art has passed over things they are no part of his
Workmanship. His injunctions for Habits are very Magisterial. Tyran. and Hyp.
detect. p. 11.
[ A Maid having a slit in her Wastcoat skirt behind, was commanded, in
Obedience to the injunction above, to sew it up; her reply was, She saw no evil
in it: and James Claypool like a Primitive Quaker, said, She should first see
the Evil of it in her self, before she judged it, and not (says he) because we
say it, but for these words he was forced to acknowledge his Error, Spirit of
the Hat, p. 42.
though in private he confessed it no Error:] but others obeyed this uninspired
Injunction. Fox gave out a paper, Spirit of the Hat, p. 42.
that [ his Marriage was a figure of of the Marriage between Christ and his
Church, and was above the state of Adam in his Innocence; in the State of the
second Adam who never fell.] but it was so ill resented, that the Inspired man's
Paper was called in again, Tyran. and Hypo. p. 18.
and so was Eccles his explication of his Blasphemous words about Fox,
suppressed. The Horrid words were these [ -- it was said of Christ that he was
in the World, Spirit of the Hat, p. 27.
and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not: so it may be said
of this true Prophet (Fox) whom John said he was not-] and at another time
[Blessed be the man that came out of the North, Tyran. p. 19.
Blessed be the Womb -- and Paps -- ] Jo. Coal Deifies him, [ Dear Geo. Fox who
art the Father of many Nations, whose Life has reached through us thy Children
even to the Isles afar off (viz. Barbados) to the begetting of many again to a
lively Hope, for which Generations to come shall call thee Blessed, whose Being
and Habitation is in the Power of the Highest, in which thou Rules and Governs
in Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is Established in Peace, and the Increase
thereof is without End.] A Letter of such Blasphemy as is not to be paralleled,
unless it be in that of Joan. Baptistacatum Spiritus, In Fowlis Histo of Popish
Trea. p. 37.
presented to Pope Innocent the Tenth, in allusion to his name Pamphilio, but
this Letter of Coal, though later in date, is placed first in the Quakers
Registry, that may well be applied to them, Rev. 13.1. [upon his Heads the name
of Blasphemy] and lest Fox should only be adored, Tyran. p, 53.
Naylor is highly advanced by R.T. Preface to the possession of the living
Faith.
I suppose Rebeckah Travers [as one redeemed out of the earth, in the Heavenly
was his dwelling, being Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, that he appeared in this
great City, in the power of an endless Life, to gather us unto God -- ] and yet
by good intentions, or figurative expressions, it is frequent to defend such
Abominations, the said R. Travers declared, Tyran. p. 45.
[ that if she had a motion from the Lord as she Believed, yet if Fox did not
own it to be so, she should deny it;] a most insolent denying God, and making
another Master of her Revelations. Newton did thus, took the Oath of Allegiance
notwithstanding his Vision, but what Sin is it to deny or suppress ones own,
and submit to another Inspiration? the Prophet that went to Bethel dyed for
this, for Revelations must be rescinded in the same way as conveyed, what is
inwardly enjoined must be as inwardly prohibited: the Spirits of the Prophets,
being subject to the Prophets concerns, but the time of speaking, that the
impulse was not so violent, but it might be restrained till others had done
speaking, or if it should concern Trial, then the Prophets, owned for such by
Divine Attestations, might approve and Recommend others; but a denying my
Motions at another pleasure is a contemning my Inspirer, or believing my own
Light, how can I submit to another. And when a Quaker changes, does he believe
himself to be more Infallible at one time, than at another? or to be more
Infallible then another man? and when one of their Revelation is Rescinded, as
that of Swintons, it is not done by Command from God, but by a Confession of
their own Mistakes. One Scripture Revelation no where offers to lessen or
Invalidate another Scripture Revelation: But the Quakers make slight account
of them, so that it cannot be the same Spirit. Thus Mr. Pen claims Revelation
against the Sacraments [ testify's by the same Spirit, Hicks 3. Dial. p. 65.
by which Paul Renounced Circumcision, that they are to be Rejected.] And
others deny and sadly Juggle about them: they are much fallen away from their
former Principles and Demeanors: what security have we how far they will go, or
where they will stand and fix? and in case of Difference between themselves or
the Scriptures, what must decide it? or by what do they try the Motions of
their Spirit? or why may not their Immediate Revelations alter as well as their
Doctrines? what marks have we to know when they speak or Write by Inspiration?
when at their own Motion? or what Reason have we to believe them when they will
trust the Revelation of none of their Competitours? Imme. Rev. p. 223.
when their Pretenses differ [ we have no new Revelations says T.E.] we have,
says Keith [what Evil is this? or rather is it not a blessed Dispensation?]
Whether must carry it? or must the latter be corrected by the former? and if
the Scripture be not the Judge, by what must the Debate about Revelation be
ended? by the Spirit? That is the thing in Question, and you must first prove
you have it, before you can prove any thing by it. Though we should think
Immediate Teachings needful; we cannot thence Infer them. But if God had so
conveyed himself, he would have so ordered, that all his Communications should
have exactly agreed, and have told us with whom we should find them.

Whether may not Quakerism be improved? another come and Super-reform the
Elders as they have done the Hat-men? Mr. Jenner p. 86.
[ The Quaker Woman at Dublin cried up her span new light, which the rest had
never seen nor heard of, and cried down their old light as darkness, pretending
to have hers Immediately.] And it is hard to discover, how upon their principles
they can confute her Rationally. sometimes they stop the Mouths of such, Tyran.
15. Silent meet. a wounder, p. 10.
as offer to speak in the name of the Lord. So Ann Mud, etc. Was pulled away by
violence? they are very curious in the time when the Spirit seizes on them [
the 22. day of the 7. Month the word of the Lord came unto W. B.] another is
more exact [ On the 31st day of the 10th. Month 1655. about 4 a Clock in the
Morning, the Word of the Lord came to Buroughs, etc:] the same could have gone
on to Minutes, Seconds, etc.

Revelation also is challenged for bad Desings, Hicks. 1 Dial. p. 26.
a Quaker Debtor, replied to his Creditor ['tis revealed to me, I ow thee
nothing.] p. 27. Ellis Pseudochristus, p. 27 Studelys looking glass of Schism.
Messages have been pretended sent from God, and the person has been proved
many miles distant, when the dreamer came to declare it, so Holbrow and Marshal
were deluded. Mary Gadbury pretended a Revelation to get some Cloth from Mrs.
Woodward, and such a Command must be embraced. Schucker beheaded his brother
Leonard by Inspiration? and Enoch ap Evan, upon partly such a pretense killed
his Mother and his Brother. Kays Answ. to 18. Quae. p. 5. Q. Spi. Court p. 7.21.
And two Quakers near Stokely in York shire, their Conscience bidding them
destroy Original Sin, they Apprehending that their Mother was the fountain
thereof, Murdered her. Fox challenged Inspiration for the Earths being flat,
Spirit of Hat. 27.
and that it was twelve a Clock all the World over: and he kept part of his
Commission concealed a long time. [Although I have not yet told it you, I do
now declare it, I have power to bind and to loose whom I please.] At this rate
he may keep an Instrument for Reconciling us to Rome, dormant by him? And
Revelations have put them both upon hardships and going naked. Idem. p. 20.


But all these contentions are nothing to such Inspirado's, they are yet Whole
and Sound [in the true Church unity stands in Diversityes] as if they had taken
the word of the Valentinians, Tertul. adve. Valcutin.
who take Diversity as a Charisma or gift: Concerning in Faldo. Q. no Christ.
p. 56.
nec unitatem sed diversitatem, and Pennington licks all right [the doing the
same thing, the thinking the same thing, the speaking the same thing, this does
not unite here in this state, in this nature, but the doing, the thinking, the
speaking of it in the same life, yea though the doings or thoughts or words be
diverse: yet, if they Proceed from the same Principle or nature, there is a true
unity felt therein, where the life alone is Judge.] And by this salvo, all
these Contradictions hurt their unity no more than taking an Oath does
prejudice their not Swearing.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning their Expository Revelations.
III. THe third which these Privado's of Heaven enjoy, is, They have Expository
Revelations so T. E. [p. 238. the Scriptures are understood only and alone by
the openings and discoveries of that Holy Spirit by which they were at first
revealed; those Divine Mysteries, are Mysteires indeed, and remain so as a
sealed book, until Christ (the Lamb) does open them, p. 239. nor can the
Doctrine of the Gospel, or the Mysteries of Gods Kingdom be known to man, but
by the Revevelation of the Holy Spirit -- Revelation is necessary (yea of
necessity) even to understand the Scriptures, the true sense man can never
attain unto, until the Holy Spirit Reveal it to him: to the like purpose he
writes, p. 251, 253. and 255. that the Spirits helping to understand the
Scriptures, is by its teaching the true sense and meaning of them, by opening,
discovering, and making known the Mind and Will of God therein expressed, This is
Revelation.] But there is a great Craft in this procedure, for he begins
with Immediate Revelation, but after he Ommitteth the Word Immediate and
slideth into Revelation in General.

But what makes he Requisite on our Part to receive this boon from the Spirit?
it is summed up into a narrower room, than the Essentials by Keith, viz. [
waiting p. 220. desiring and waiting p. 240] but especially humane Learning is
disbanded from the least concern, except Translating: T. Es. Spirit cannot
Translate a Greek Chapter, but it can Infallibly Expound an English one, that
is, it can do nothing discernible, but it can do all things Indiscernible. This
gaping way of Expounding was taught by Winstanley, New Law of Right. p. 111
[ all Expositions upon others words shall cease, they shall wait with a quiet
silence upon the Lord; Till he break forth within their Hearts, and give them
words and Power to speak. You must get [into the Holy Silence,] Silent Meeting
p. 8. 9. 10
and then the Spirit will Instruct you. But the Rule is Elder then the Quakers:
Hildegardis in that her Nonsensical Vision, Related to Arnold Archbishop of
Colen, determines [ qui autem Vult been Vigilare, hunc intellectum Percipiat,
Biblio patrum Tom. 15. p. 622.
etc. He that will make or wait well; shall have the Understanding of her
Vision.] And the Libertines, and Swenck field, the Familists, and all the herd,
not so much as Anna Trapnel, but they all are against learning, and for T. Es.
easy way of Inspiration, or Ministers to have no help, but to speak all from
the light within. So that there is nothing of Studying, Praying, Reading,
Meditating or Confering Required on our Part, but a Supine desiring and
Expecting, Reasoning is outdated by Yawning, and brains are Superseded by Mere
Attendance. Quakerism Nuzzles up in sloth and Idleness, they may Rest day and
night, and have the Law writ in their Hearts, without Exercising themselves in
it; their terms are so easy they will have Proselytes: Danger of Enthusiasm. p
71.
but says one [Jacobs Venison could not be right, it came so soon to hand.] To
which we may add, he lied in saying, the Lord his God brought it to him, when
it was his Mothers Art.

This waiting Prostitutes and lays the soul open to every Impression, what
starts up first is thought a Divine Irradition. The Devil loves a house so
garnished and Empty; and whilst Saul was thus waiting, he started up in the
Room and likeness of Samuel, their Inspirations are both Writing and Seal to
themselves, and being in such a passive stilness, they Interpret each forward
Fancy, to be the Whispering of the Spirit, that silent Attendance throws down
the mounds and Fences of our Spirits? and whilst we ly waiting we shall not
want the Entertainment and Variety of Suggestions, but be bewildred and run on
from one Imagination to another. But what need T. E. wait? Dr Causabons Enthu.
p. 162
the Spirit of Truth dwells in them, p. 228. and being Resyant, a short
Attendance might be Sufficient. Christ thus dwelt in the Holy Maid Catherine of
Jesus, as well as in Quakers, and their Inspirations coming to none but
Expecters, that is a sing of their Wrong Original, for we cannot Imagine that
God will Reveal his mind to such as do nothing, sooner than to such as read and
pray.

The ground for this Waiting, is taken from Acts 1.4. where the Greek is (...)
to tarry, or bodily to stay there, till the Spirit descended, as the last
verses of Chronicles are resumed at the beginning of Ezra. So the History Luc.
24.49. (where the Greek is (...) reside or sit you down there) is resumed Acts.
1. But it is not waiting in their sense, but bodily staying, and the very time
is limited, ver. 5. not many days hence; Cateches. 16.
how many days must we wait? ten or more? why goes not T. E. to Jerusalem and
there attend at the right place and time? Cyril of Jerusalem says (...) those
very words (...), etc. which he renews Cat. 17. and applies those Texts of John
wrested by T. E. to them (...). and makes the Visible descent of the Holy Ghost
on them, to be their being baptized therewith, and with fire.

Saint Paul advized Timothy to other means than waiting, and whether is
likelier to know Gods mind, he who in pursuance of his waiting, entertaineth
(in the mildest terms) the first motions of his own Spirit, as Divine
discoveries, and so [quicquid dixerint hoc legem Dei putant -- ad sensum suum
incongrua aptant testimonia -- and ad-Voluntatem suam sacram Scripturam
repugnantem trahunt-] take what they say, St. Hierome in his Epistle to
Paultnus.
to be Gods Law etc. or he who looking on the Scriptures as the word of God,
Reads, Compares, searches out their sense, taking the draughts of their
Religion thence, and leading a Conversation suitable. Theophylact was of a
different mind from Quakers [(...), in Argumento Epis. ad Romans
etc. the daily constant Reading of the Scriptures, brings unto the knowledge
of them, for he cannot ly who said, Seek and you shall find, knock and it shall
be opned unto you.]

T. E. does also Contradict himself, making the Spirit alone to Reveal, and yet
p. 238. he says, Christ the Lamb does open them, for he cannot make that Lamb
whom John Baptized and pointed at, to be that Holy Ghost, that descended on
that Lamb, though he make no Distinction between Father Son and Spirit; yet he
must not confound the Visible Lamb, with the Invisible Spirit; but whilst he
Repaires his sandy Foundation, we shall view his Structure raised.

The Socinians for the Explaining [of Prophecies, Cateh. Eccl. Po^lon. C. 3.
especially the obscurer, where Divine men have not already done it, or given
some hints that way, or where the event does not unfold them, require the
peculiar help of the Divine Spirit, applying 2 Pet. Mr. Boyls style of Scrip.
p. 38.
1.21. to that purpose) and all may accord with, that noble person that
[Obscureness is wont to attend prophetic Raptures:] and the assigning the
exact completion of many of them, hic labor, hoc opus est; but whether the
History, or their Motions be more truly serviceable thereto may appear in this
Chapter. But Thomas Elwood excepts no part, the whole is a Sealed Book to him
(even that David begat Solomon) till his supposed Interpreter unfold it.

The Difference then is whether the Scriptures be penned in such a Style, that
they need a second Immediate Revelation to confer their true Sense, and that
Art, Study, Industry, or humane learning (which is to be conversant in natural,
humane, or civil affairs p. 218, 219.) are no ways serviceable, which T. E.
maintains (which though it was true, yet we have no evidences to satisfy that
the Quakers Enclose and are Entrusted with handing these Inspired Expositions
to mankind, for taking our selves for Believers, we might put in for our share,
rather than they, we owning the Scriptures, and those he calls Martyrs more
than they do, and so granting his whole Article, we are no nearer Satisfaction
with whom that whole sole Power is lodged.) Protestants on the other hand
assert, That the Scriptures are so penned, that weaker Parts upon reading,
hearing the word, praying and endeavoring, may attain so much knowledge as
will save their souls, and that the more Recondite and abstrucer parts may be
understood by such helps, as God has afforded and does bless to his Church; as
Tongues, Historys, Idioms, Comparing obscurer with clearer texts etc. So far as
is necessary to Salvation, it not being required thereto, to, to be able to
give an Infallible Exposition on each line in those sacred pages. Now,

1. This does not Exclude Holiness of life, as a help to discern, the
Excellency of Divine truths. His secret is with the Righteous, Prove. 3.32. with
them that fear him, Psalm. 25.14. if any man do his will, he shall know of the
Doctrine whether it be of God, Joh. 7.17. Sapientia Christiani est timor, est
amor Christi, Salvian.

2. Nor Indifferency of Judgment in our search, Mr. Mede. Mr. Chillingworth.
freedom from the Studium partium, or the travelers Indifferency, as two great
names worded it.

3. Nor the Assistance of the Spirit, which assists to know as well as to will,
or do, inclines, inlightens, gives a Right Judgment in all things he sees
necessary, going along from the first preventing, to the utmost Persevering,
but the Difference lies in the kind, and the manner of its operation. This
Secret Working and Breathing, or as Mr. Pen words it more safely than T. E.
[secret strivings, Winding sh. p. 4.
discoveries and operations, fresh and lively touches,] is as much different
from Immediate Apostolical Inspiration, as Gods minutely Concourse is from the
Power of Miracles; when he alters or exceeds the Regular Established course of
Nature, so that we allow the Spirit to all purposes, but assert, God does not
Multiply things unnecessary.

T. E. folds his hands, and waits, and Inspired Expositions drop into him, we
are grateful for Scripture, and use our best means to Understand it, and think
the Spirit helps the most when we are the most Diligent, he is for such
Revelations as the Apostles had conferred instantly; we are for Gods ordinary
Assistance to our Endeavors, which yet Render us more Infallible, than his
calls do offer Violence to our Wills; We take the means and the Spirit
together, his Spirit Resolves all without means, we join the Spirit and means
together, as plowing, etc. on man's part; and Rain, etc. on Gods do Concur to
the producing Corn. T. E. will have the best crop, an hundred fold, but the
Rain must do all, he cannot Dig or Sow, yet his Increase is no less than
Apostolical.

The Divine Books are so composed that they need not a second Immediate
Teaching to give their meaning, but our Diligence in the use of means blessed
by Gods Ordinary Assistance, do give us such an understanding of them, as upon
our Obedience thereto God will accept to our Salvation: nor can we think it
likely that the Extraordinary Visibles, as Tongues, etc. should be all ceased;
and the Extraordinary invisibles, etc: Immediate Teaching, etc. should still
all continue.

The Unintelligibleness of the Scriptures, the Letter as Different from the
Spirit etc. have been so much insisted on, that I am forced to lay foundations,
and premise a few things which seem to command assent upon hearing.

1. That God, that Infinite Wisdom and Goodness is able to Express his mind, so
as his Words may be understood.

2. His Willingness to do it appears by what he has actually done, having
revealed much to men, is Comprised in the Bible.

3. His Truth and goodness will not allow him to put a trick upon his
Creatures, to speak words of a different, reserved, or contrary sense, from
common acception, usage of Speech, or their Importance. So that we cannot
suppose that the Scripture, the Instrument in order to our Salvation, should be
involved or designedly unintelligible, but the plainer part should unfold the
obscurer, Haworths Qconverted. p. 22. In. univ. gra.
and Jo. Crook confesses [ The Scriptures are true as God means them, not as
man by his conceivings interprets them.] and Keith often Refereth to the Truth,
Sincerity and Righteousness of God in his offers.

4. God having conveyed his mind by words, the understanding of his words must
be the best help to the understanding of his mind, and if by words Inspired,
then by those Inspired ones written, for writing neither destroys their sense
nor Obligation.

5. That the Holy Spirit does not Improve in knowledge, but was as able to
confer true meaning one thousand six hundred years ago, as he is at this day.

6. That the Sacred Penmen were sober understanding persons, and even without
supernatural assistance, could Speak and Write Intelligibly.

7. That the Supervening of the Spirit does not make men Fools, but betters and
Improves them, ascertaining the Truth, giving clearer Perceptions of it, and
Ability, fitly and aptly to Express it, they not receiving words without Sense.

8. That words spoke or heard may be Written, being Written they may be
preserved thousands of years, and still be understood, allowing for change of
times, Customs, Idioms, etc. And that the Orignal Language be not Extinguished.

9. That those to whom the Scriptures were spoke, understood their Sense,
though they did not see the Persons or Times in which accomplished, the Law was
so understood, that the Tabernacle was built and the Commonwealth ordered
according to its Prescription, so that the Writing was Intelligible, Spiritual
matters being therein veiled, but the literal Sense still abiding.

10. That it is Reasonable to suppose the Book of God to be understood by such
helps as other books are, as the Phrase, the Scope, the Coherence, etc. And
being a Public lasting Revelation, Reason inclines to Judge it should be more
Intelligible than any Private one.

11. That the Bible is as Intelligible as any Book of that Age, Considering its
greatness, several Penmen, Variety of matter, the Distance from us of the
things therein Transacted; the short way of Expressions used by those Easterns,
the Customs, Proverbs, etc. therein Referred to, especially the Sublimity of
the Matter, that therein God addresseth himself to men, speaks in the Language
of the Sons of men. That the Heavenly light assumes a covering, etc.

12. That we may allow God to use ornaments and graces of Speech, and
Figurative Expressions, as well as other Authors, for the Scriptures give
understanding, Psalm. 19.7. Making wise unto salvation.

13. Having abundantly Expresses all the parts of duty we may allow him
sometimes to dwell in the thick darkness, and be content if some things exceed
our reach: as is done with the Phoenomina of Nature. So the likeliest Instances
may Satisfy in the Application of Prophecies, where we mix Humility with
Diligence, God will pardon, though we miss of the Prime Intendment, and if not
future Ages, yet the next Word will read us such things as Ezekiels measures,
etc.

These and the like satisfy me of the no necessity of the second Expository
Revelations, for if God have made them dark, it is to Conciliate our Reverence,
that we may know our Distance, to whet our Industry, etc. But if one Scripture
Revelation need another to Explain it, that other will need a third to Expound
it, and that third a fourth, and so forward. For we cannot Reasonably think
that the Spirit Improves in speaking plainly, or that my single Inspiration
should be more clear than the Public Apostolical. But this is the smallest
part of the Trouble, for if I need a fresh Inspiration to explain, I need
another to ascertain that to be a Right Exposition, a third to attest the
second to be Right, and so in infinitum. Nay there will be an endless
Complication of them. I shall need a Revelation to ascertain this to be the
Scripture, then I need an Expository Revelation to understand that Revelation
and the Scripture, then I need an assuring Revelation to confirm those
Expositions, then further Expositions to understand those Assurances, and so on
for ever. Every Expository will need a further Expository and assuring
Revelation; and every assuring Revelation will need the like Assurance and
Explaining. So that if I do not stand to the certainly attested Revelations,
but call for more both to prove and Expound them, I shall cut my self out work
for ever, and such piling one Inspiration upon another will multiply
Difficultyes but Remove none. But though these Expositions were not only
necessary but actually conferred, the former difficulty Returns. viz. Certain
Evidence that God, by the Quakers only, sends his Inspired Expositions into the
World.

The Prophets suppose the Law to be Intelligible, Rescuing it from Corrupt and
false Glosses, and Pressing to its Practice. One Prophet though taking somewhat
from another, yet Employed not his Prophetic Light in writing Coments upon the
preceding? Luc. 24.27
But the Doctors, etc. pressed and opened to the People that which the Prophets
received Immediately from God. Christ Expounded Moses and the Prophets, showed
them fulfilled in himself, and yet those Divine Expositions are not Extant.
Peter says, There are hard things in Paul's Epistles, yet he makes no
Exposition of them, nor so much as names which are they, though wrested to
some men's Damnation.

Hezekiah and Josiah, etc. read the words of the Law and the Prophets, and the
people thought they understood the meaning of the words: and God accepted their
Reformation. And the new Testament, which is fuller of light, is not more dark
certainly, it is at least as serviceable to us, as the old was to the Jews,
Christ having taken the Veil from the face of Moses, has not another drawn
over his own.

How much is the Spirit different from the Letter? or the Veiled Sense how far
it is distant from the Apparent? you put the World in bad Circumstances, in
debarring us to Expound the letter, and Challenging to your selves the Spirit.
Pray what Teachings have you by the Spirit which we find not in the Letter? but
you have need to make so great a Distance, your Expositions are so wide, for
they do not appear to us in the letter, and yet they do not look like the
Spirit. But is there not a letter in your Revelations as well as a Spirit? are
yours all kernel, but the Scripture wrapped up in a thick husk and shell? you
dare not say so. God I dare say could speak as plain to St. Paul as to Ellwood.
We know your Opinions by words and letters, may we not know Gods in the like
Manner? Assert what difficulties you will in the letter, I dare make out that
your Inspirations (supposing them Real) labor under the like and greater
Prejudices: but by Gingling thus with misunderstood terms, men run themselves
out of their Religion and Reason. Does God send his love Letters into the World
and men can make nothing of it when they have it? his Style is not so dark as
yours, Perfect pha^ p. 3.
that needs a Lexicon to explain yours phrases, you think God to be such an one
as your selves, Psalm. 50.21. Pretending equality with him. I have observed as
much sense and life in a Chapter of St. Matthew, as in any part of Truth
Prevaling: nor can I work my self off, but that I can understand a Revelation
made to Paul, as soon as one made to T. E. supposing I had them both before me:
and the Apostles were as like to have clear Inspiratitions as any other Persons.

Did not Christ speak Intelligibly to such as heard him? have not the Apostles
plainly and faithfully set down his words? or, though he had spoke darkly, yet
the Spirits descent made things clearer, so that the darkness cannot yet
continue. We shall find some, and those no believers, who understood Christ's
words so as to leave them without Excuse. Pilate, the Pharisees, Scribes,
Sadduces, Officers, with the other Jews, though no Disciples, understood his
Language: Their sin is heightened, not from want of knowing what he spoke; but
non-Entertainment of what was so convincing.

Judas his Sin was heinous, and yet the Holy Ghost was not then given. This
Notion draws a strange cloud over Gods Proceedings, making all sins alike,
except in the degree of the Revelation: for where that is not, there being no
knowledge there can be no sin; and where Immediate Revelation is, it makes each
sin to be the Sin against the Holy Ghost. Whatever Ignorance we have in
Scriptures, upon Thomas Ellwood's Principle, is solely Imputable to the Spirit
not moving. Waiting makes us Innocent, God cannot damn any but such as have
^^^^ediate Inspirations, and to hear and not understand, though taken for a
sin, yet is not so much as a punishment by this man's Divinity; so that a Quaker
need not go to the Temple or Altar, but Cripple like to wait for the moving of
the waters. If Revelation come, he sets up for an Inspired Expositor, if not,
still he contiues an innocent Ignoramus.

Laws are penned in an Intelligible style, else they are snares, and men know
not when to yield Obedience, and the Scriptures were taken for a Law. The
Apostle is for an understood Language in Church Assemblies; much more then in
the Divine Oracles, which are Designed for the Generality, Ignorant as well as
Learned, and so can have no crafty, concealed or reserved Sense in them. The
matters of Necessary Duty and Faith may be soon known, and the Spirit Inclines
to love, Practice and believe them; and in the more Difficult things he so
Blesses the means, that we shall either know them or be pardoned; it is not
necessary to Salvation to be able to Explain each Verse in Scripture; a man may
have the true Spirit of God, and yet not understand the Apocalypse exactly. God
Requires Holy Living more than Accurate Interpreting, and an honest heart at
the last day, will go further than either a Critical or an Inspired head.
Quakers also should not urge that Scripture to us which they deny to be the
Rule; But Thomas Ellwood's manner of Proving is strangely wild: he affirms
Scripture cannot be understood without Inspiration, and to prove it, produces
Scripture, which cannot be understood without that Inspiration, which we deny
we have. Are those Texts so plain that they prove it in our way? or does
Inspiration light on those who Dispute aagainst it? Except it can be understood
without Inspiration, he should not Produce it to those who deny it, for the
proof of it; and as long as the manner of Interpreting Scripture is under
Debate, they should not produce one Text of it, till that debate be ended: but
his Proving from it, supposes it plain and full for that purpose, and is the
direct confutation of his own notion. Nor have Quakers showed so much gratitude
for the Scripture Discoveries, that God should discover more unto them. Nay
what need of Scripture if they must be Renewed, and cannot otherwise be
understood? God had better have left men to their inward Conductor, than to
make a book as a (...) a bal of strife, about the sense of which they are
quarelling, but can do nothing really with it when they have it. Nor did the
Apostles signify any thing upon their Principles, Revelation being required in
the Hearers as well as in the Speakers. Saints Paradise. p. 84.
[ By the Anointing ye can speak the mind of the Scriptures though you never
see nor hear, nor read the Scriptures from men.] How can we hear Christ if his
words be unintelligible? but Thomas Ellwood, 2 Quib. p. 34. Imme. Rev. p. 131.
Truth Exalted p. 9.
is singular, others bid us. [ Bring plain Scripture] says Fox, [mark this.]
says Keith [read with Vnderstanding] says another. What need of any
Translations, the Spirit can Expound Originals, as well as English? They used
to Renounce all Interpretations and Inferences, but now give them without any
security they come from God; there is much labor and Trouble in the trying of
Inspirations, and much danger also, so that we have Reason to bless God in
settling Religion in such a manner, leaving us his Word as the Record of his
Will, and giving us sound minds and sober Reasons therewith: If I see not
sufficient Proofs that you are Inspired, I shall sin in so tame an assenting to
your naked Proposals; and God who Commands us not to believe every Spirit, but
try them will never damn me for searching and Examining what is pretended to
come from him. He that Injoyns us to search his own Revelations, will not be
displeased if we use the severest Caution about others; he who questions, must
needs be in a safer state than he who easily believes, and he that compares and
weighs will be freer from Error than he who waits and Entertaines the first
comer.

Their two Principles of Christ, the Light and Immediate Teaching, are either
Inconsistent, or the one is superfluous; for in making but one Essential, they
Invalidate one of their two Principles. How do they understand their great
Text. John. 1.9. that Christ is a saving Light in every man? if by Immediate
Revelation, then the light does not discover all things, but needs another to
discover it self? If the Light Interpret it in Reference to it self, as most
Properly it should, [all Power in Heaven and Earth being given unto it.] Then
something is known without Inspiration Immediate? If he makes them both one,
then he confounds Keiths two Principles.

Has any Quakers known the Idioms, Customs, Proverbs, Rites, Histories, etc.
of Scripture by an Instant Discovery? I think that they are least learned, and
most Inspired men either could not expound, or would sadly differ, if an
Experiment was made of their Ability: an External Proposal has hitherto been
the means of conveying Christianity. If any Heathen did suddenly become an
Inspired Christian, this might befriend them, but their Englished Hai Ebr
Yokdan was not so. And the Quakers are men, who read and hear, and withal
fancy, and so form their Notions.

Whither may not a man hit upon those senses by Study, for which they Challenge
Inspiration? to single out Doctor Hammond as the fittest: because he has
Premised a Discourse to his Annotations on the New Testament, in Opposition to
their very Pretentions. Is there not one True Paraphrase or Interpretation in
that book? Say so, and you Confute your selves, for Doctor Hammond Expounds the
seventh Chapter to the Romans, to be understood of a man in an unconverted
Estate, and Keith owns that as the Right sense, using the same term [
metaschematismos, O no Popery p. 39. 40.
an usual figure; the Apostle, Romans 7th. from verse 14 to 25 describing not his
present Condition but the Condition of others and himself, as they were in the
struggling, etc.] Whence it follows, that either a man may attain to the true
sense of the Scripture without Inspiration, or may have it though he do not
know, but Disown and Write against it, which is not likely the Impression of
the Spirit, in such matters being strong and curious, but in either way we are
sufficiently secure, and God will not damn any for want of that which flows
merely from his Grace.

I cannot discover how I can understand the Quakers Books, for though they seem
to use inferences, so that I may consult my Reason, yet they being usually writ
[ from the Spirit of the Lord,] I need an Inspiration to understand them, as
much as any Verse in the Bible, and another to ascertain them to be Divine, and
so all the former difficulties recur: a Papist is much more modest, for though
he make his Church, or its Head, Infallible, yet he will confess his single
self Fallible; and Infallible claims needing Infallible Evidences, we can never
be certain of your Inspirations, without Public outward Demonstrations of them.

Truth loves calmness, and the still voice, Lo here, or there is Christ, are
not its Watchword, modest demands go furthest, when backed with strong Proofs.
I have the Liberty to try and judge rational Expositions, whereas your Inspired
ones impose upon me, but the Design is erafty, it is a kind of Sacrilege to
Dispute that which says, It comes from God: So that this pretense insconces
them, rendering those moving Oracles Sacred and Venerable; and, It Is better to
buy their Divine Living Testimonies, than a dark Lettered Bible. But I am at a
loss to know whether their Receipts are for their own use, or to Benefit and
Oblige mankind.

Other Quakers made the Spirit the Judge, the Instructor, the Rule, the Guide,
etc. Thomas Ellwood has got him a further Office to be the Expositor, but can
his Inspirations which die, if he do not speak or write them, be plainer than
those in Scripture, which are given to all, and have the advantage in Design,
in Continuance, in so many Expositions already upon them, some of which must be
Divine by T. Ellwoods Doctrine; Peter was sent to Cornelius, Ananias to Paul,
etc. There was a mistake certainly in such outward conveyances, and
attestations, the shortest and the safest cut, had been to direct them to
within, it would have saved charges their vicious Circle also intangles me, for
I cannot discover whether they know the Spirit or the Scriptures first? they
say, They know these to be the Scriptures by the Spirit, but then how do they
know there is a Spirit? that, they must not prove from those Scriptures,
whether do they believe the Scriptures before the conferring these Expositions,
or no? if before, then they believe they understand not what, nor wherefore; if
after, then the gloss is conferred before the Text; Secret things are made
known to Infidels, and Pearls are thrown before Swine.

But T. Ellwood does not walk in that way he prescribes others, to instance in
two or three which fall short of Inspired Expositions. p. 35.
[ may not improbably refer to that great Persecution raised upon Stephens
Death. p. 40.
] [Goodwins Antiquities produced about the Pharisees] [ who the Elect Lady was,
p. 47.
in what Relation John stood to her, or how far her Temporal Power might
extend, does not appear.] In a Discourse of Inspiration, as sole Expositor, he
is fallen to it, [ may not improbably, does not appear, and borrows some
Egyptian Jewels.] let him blot these out, for they cut the throat of his Book.
Universal free Grace, p. 75.
Keith is more sober, [ these plain Testimonies of Scripture needs no
explication, nor application of mine, what more plain and evident? can more
emphatical and significant expressions be used by men?] and he gives some good
ways of interpreting Scripture used by us [ that general Maxim of
understanding Scripture, Idem, p. 15.
is, That its words are to be understood in their whole Latitude and extent,
where no Cogent Reason moves to the contrary] [ they pass from the sense which
the words plainly import, p. 31.
and seek out another sense to the words, not from any necessity, but because
it pleases not their Corrupt Judgment] [plain and full Scripture Proofs, p. 39.
-- there is abundant matter in the words, or before, or after, to evince the
truth -- ] [we are to take the most usual and proper signification of the word,
p. 43.
p. 15. 46. 53. 61. 68. 101. 102. 106.
where no cogent reason moves to the contrary.] With several of the like
Nature; so that he has destroyed Thomas Ellwoods notion of the obscurity of
the Scripture, and Expository Revelations of its sense.

Having Considered their Doctrine, let us briefly view their Practice, in a
taste of some few out of many of their Inspired Expositions, and this sad
Account we may give of them, That if they had been hired to subvert true
Religion, they could not have done it more effectually, by transforming
Histories and Prophecies, as those in Daniel, the Revelations, etc. into
internal things, and making them vanish in frothy Allegoryes.

Phil. 3.21. New Law, p. 42. p. 40.
Changing vile Bodies is [ when Oppression and Injustice shall cease.] 1 Cor.
2.15. The Spiritual man's Judging is [ according to the Law of Equity and
Reason.] But it is different from T. Ellwoods Inspiration, Job. 1.6. Beelzebub
sat among the Sons of God [ that is among the five Senses.] Saint. Parad. p.
29. Fire in the Bush, p. 35.


1 Cor. 15.24. Putting down all Rule, is [ destroying all Government and
Ministry] 2 Cor. 12.3. The Seed or Birth is that [3d. Im. Rev. p. 11.
Heavens in which Paul on Earth, saw and felt things unutterable.] John. 14.2.
[ the spreading Power of Christ in all, New Law, p. 22.
is the Fathers House in which are many Mansions,] p. 132.134.
the New Covenant is [ Christ's spreading himself in mankind] Psalm. 24.1. Humble
Request to Lawyers, etc. p. 2. p. 6. p. 4. Univer. Gr. p. 55. p. 44. Noble
Salutation, p. 9. Saint. Parad. p. 45.
[ the Earth is the Lords that is man's.] [ Christ's speech to the young man to
sell all, concerns all people.] Isa. 2.4. and Ezech. 36.34, 35. Belong to the [
taking-in of Commons, Heath, and wast Land for all poor people.] The Light
within is [ the Everlasting Gospel which the Angel Preached;] The Tabernacle of
David is explained by the [ slain Image of God in man] or as another words it [
it is Gods own Eternal Witness in men] God himself is the [ tree of Life.] and
the [ Gospel.] Christ is [ the Image of God in Man, he breathed in him the
Breath of Life, then the Lamb was not slain.] Im. Rev. p. 71.
Christ is [ the true Jew inwardly, the Circumcision in the Spirit, the public
Worship in the Spirit and Truth.] Angels are [ Heavenly Principles and Graces,
Looking glass, p. 4. Saint Parad. p. 66, 67. p. 129. p. 37. Howgils Glory, p.
7. Saints Paradise. p. 19. Some Principles, p: 68:
and men taken up into God, as Moses and Christ were.] The Lambs Book of Lise
is [ his Divine Nature and Spirit.] The proud Flesh is [ the Devil or Father of
Lies.] Rev. 12.1. [ The Woman clothed with the Sun brought forth the Holy
Child Jesus,] that is, Jesus was Born after John's Banishment into the Isle of
Patmos. the Bottomless Pit is [ Corrupt Flesh] the Form of sound words is [ yea
and nay] or [ thou] as T. Ellwood seems to intimate, p. 27. there is no [
Devil, but Flesh and outward Objects] Dan. 73. [ the four Beasts are the four
Powers which are to be destroyed,] Fire in the Bush, p. 74. p. 23.
that is, [ Magistracy, Ministry, Law, and Propriety,] the Beast slain, Dan.
7.11. is [ all imaginary selfish power, hear what the Spirit speaks] Dan. 9.24.
the finishing transgression, True Christian Faith, p. 58. New Law, p. 32.
etc. is [ having the mind truly turned, to the appearance of God in Christ
within.] Rev. 13.1. [ the Flesh is the Beast with seven heads] but differently
expounded by T. Ellwood, p. 243. Rev. 3.7, 8. the Beasts having power over
Tongues is fulfilled by [ Masters of Arts, Truth exalted, p. 8.
Batchelors of Arts, Vice-Chancellors over Colleges and others.] Saint. Parad.
126.
The Light interpreted these two Texts [ Rev. 9.4. green grass -- is the tender
Sons of Christ, Matthew. 12.31. that old pusling Text, Sin here is the Serpent,
the Holy Ghost is the anointing, or Spirit Ruling in Flesh.] the two Witnesses,
N. Law, p. 80
are [ Christ in one Body, and Christ in many Bodyes] or, as another will have
them to be [ Christ the Light within, and Immediate Revelation, which have been
slain in man.] Babylon is [ the great City of Fleshly confusion] the Mystery of
Iniquity, Univ. Gr. p. 5
and the Man of Sin are [ the first Adam, New Law, p. 43. p. 94. Fire in the
Bush, p. 11. Im. Rev p. 8^.
the Mystery of Godliness is the second Adam] [Michael and the Dragon do fight
in mankind] the Battle between them is [ in the Heart:] the Temple of God, 2
These. where the man of Sin sits [ is man's Heart.] there he is Worshipped in [
the degenerate State.] p. 194.
Antichrist [ not a Person or persons particular, but a Spirit, True Christ. p.
185.
the very Spirit of Satan.] the Sin against the Holy Ghost is [ Sinning against
that Beloved Son, Im. Rev. p. 194. Truth lifting, p. 50. Fire in the Bush, p.
58.
or Body in whom the Father dwells Bodily,] [time is Monarchy, times are
Popery, and Reformed Episcopacy, the dividing of times is Presbytery,
Independency and State Government.] These are enough to cloy: Thus the men of
Revelations do expound.

CHAP. IX. Of their Demonstration of the Spirit, and new Dispensation.
IV. TO appear like the Apostles Successors the better, Univer. Gr. In the
Title.
they challenge [ the Evidence and Demonstration of the Spirit of Truth] worded
by T. Ellwood, p. 244. thus [ that the Gospel should be preached in the
Demonstration of the Spirit and Power, after the Apostasy as well as before.]
And this belongs to them, who are emerged out of the Apostasy, and are the
Church returned out of the Wilderness, Some Princ. p. 48. Smiths Gospel
tidings, p. 36.
they fancy themselves to be like the Apostles [ they Witness the Spirit of God
fallen upon them, as formerly among the Apostles] [the Gospel is now Preached
in the same Power as formerly] but their claim is ill bottomed and their
demonstration indemonstrable. First therefore we shall search into the sense of
that phrase. Secondly, give the Quakers opinion of Miracles. Thirdly, Supposing
that their Principles were right, thence infer that Miracles are as necessary
now as ever.

1. As for the meaning of [ Demonstration of the Spirit and Power, 1 Cor. 2.4.]
it is misunderstood by T. Ellwood if he think they have it like the Apostles:
Words and this Demonstration are by the Apostle opposed [ not with enticing
words, Ver. 1.4, 5.
with excellency of Speech or Wisdom] that is, with Oratory or Philosophy, and
Quakers bring no more than Words, and those misapplyed, and inward heats, like
the Disciples of Marcus, etc. but their internal sentiments, or Consolations
are not the Scriptures Power. Demonstration is not a thing of outward words, or
inward feelings [(...) nomine utitur, Beza in his shorternotes in Locum.
quo significatur probatio, quae fit certis and necessariis rationibus.]
Demonstration is a certain proof by necessary and concluding Reasons [habent
Mathematici, Grot. in Locum.
etc. the Mathematicians have their Demonstrations, etc. how much greater is
that Demonstration by such and so great Miracles. Dr. Ham.
] [ Not in Rhetorical Proofs, or probable Arguments but in plain
Demonstration.] So that it did not consist in inward, Grot. Theocum. in Loc.
but in outward Evidences and Proofs, what those were, we have recorded, ver.
1. declaring to you the Testimony of God, that is, the Gospel of Christ, or his
Death, but that which was delivered by the Apostles, as certain eye and ear
Witnesses of it, and to confirm that certain Testimony of theirs, God
superadded, the Demonstration or Evidence of the Spirit and Power, which by an
Hebraism may be conjoined [ Evidencing the Spirit by Power,] Theo. in loc.
(...), the Power of Miracles, were an Evidence that the Spirit owned and
confirmed their certain Testimony, or we may take Spirit and Power, as two
distinct Proofs of their outward attestations.

1. Spirit, the Evidence of that consisted in showing the Old Testament
Prophecyes were fulfilled in Christ: this Origin makes the demonstration of the
Spirit [(...), L. 1. con. Cells. and apud. Dr. H. in Loc.
etc. Prophecyes that are able to give assurance of the things that belong to
Christ] and thus Rev. 19.10. the Testimony of Jesus, is the Spirit of Prophecy,
the Series of all the Prophecyes so wonderfully fulfilled are an Evidence for
him: or, it may take in the New Testament Prophecyes, which are an Evidence for
Christ. The Revelations were by him committed to an Angel, and so to John: or
Spirit, may refer to those visible Demonstrations, when the Blessed Spirit
visibly descended upon Christ and the Apostles, Dr. Ham.
and so are that Immediate Evidence, the Spirit gave to Christ, or that Record
the Spirit bore so clearly explained in Dr. Patricks Witnesses to Christianity.
[Power] that hereby are meant Miracles is indisputable; Origin ubi Supra.
[(...), those Miraculous, stupendous actions, whose footsteps yet remain;]
[per signa and virtutes, etc. by the Holy Spirit, and by the Signs and Powers
done by him, we bring you Arguments or Evidences that we speak the truth, etc.]
Oecum. in loc. Ita. Grot.
that by the word (...) is meant either sanationes, healings in particular, or
Miracles in general, will be evident by a little observing its use. Mar. 9.39.
[ no man which shall do (...) a Miraclo in my name,] spoke with reference to
such as did cast out Devils in the Name of Christ, and did not follow him, Mat.
7.22, [ in thy name have done (...), many wondrous Works;] answerable to those
preceding, Prophesying, and casting out Devils, Luke 10.13. [ if the mighty
Works, (...), had been done in Tire and Sydon.] 1 Cor. 12.28. [(...), after
that Miracles.] As, Mat. 11.21.23, and 13.54, 58, and 14.2. Mar. 6.2, 5, 14.
and 9.39. Luc. 5.17. and 6.19. and 19.37. Act. 2.22. and 8.13. and passum.
] in all which and many other places, too long to be set down, it signifies
Miraculous Works, or that Divine Power which was the Evidence or Seal of the
Holy Ghost. The word (...) is not only set single, but with others that do
expound it, Romans 15.19. [(...), through mighty Signs and Wonders, by the Power
of the Spirit of God.] that is, those Signs wrought by the Power of the Spirit,
and Evidences of it. Better Signs of his Divine Commission, than the Bells and
Pomegranates were to the High Priest, etc. 2 Cor. 12.12. Truly the Signs of an
Apostle were wrought among you, in all Patience, in Signs and Wonders (...) and
in mighty Deeds. These are the Signs of an Apostle, and yet our new Apostles
and their Successors do no such things: and fully 1 These. 1.5. Our Gospel came
not to you in word only, but also in Power and in the Holy Ghost, and in much
assurance, that is, in the Power of the Holy Ghost, which is a plerophory, or
which gives much assurance; by transposing the words, of which many instances
are in Grot. on John 35. But Quakers have words merely without Signs or
Wonders, or certain Sensible Testimonies, or Humane Learning. One of them
acknowledges, they can give no outward Evidence [ seeing our Opposers require
of us, Q. no Popery, p. 62. 63.
to show, or evidence unto them, some Infallible (...) that we have the Spirit
of God, I would have J. M. to know, that the same difficulty recurreth, as to
the (...) of the Scriptures, it being a thing which cannot be shown, or made to
appear by any Evidence unto the carnal mind, which yet is evident unto the
Spiritual.] that is like the old Heretics, they are the Spiritual, others not
of their mind are the (...) the Animal or Carnal; but his Evidence for
Inspiration is far inferior to the Scriptures Authority. And in that very
Text, Rev. 14.6. produced by T. Ellwood of the Preaching the Everlasting Gospel
after the Apostasy, there is no mention of Demonstration or Inspiration, etc.
nor was there any need thereof, the corrupt Church among much dross preserving
those very Books, whereby her Errors were detected, and that was when all
Learning began to revive, true Religion and Learning moving in equal lines.

2. But Quakers have the demonstration, Qu. looking glass. A true Narrative.
though they slight the Miracles thereby employed, some attempts have been made
thereto by Charles Baylyes stroaking, Richard Andersons Cursing, In Mr. Jenner,
p. 93.
the Woman's pretending to raise the interred Corpse which were reinterred when
her folly had appeared. Sober Answer to Speed. p. 76.
Nicholas Kate of Harwell said [ That when the fullness of time was come, he
should work Miracles,] which yet is not come to pass, but the fullness of time
with such, New Law, p. 37.
bears a strange date [ the fullness of time is, when the first man has filled
the Creation full of his filthiness, and all places stink with
unrighteousness.] but visible Miracles failing, they turn it another way, they
work Invisible Miracles, or Miracles in Spirit, so did Ignatius Loyola, and [
doubtless to reach to the Soul, Pennington's naked truth, p. 28.
to quicken it, to cure its Diseases, is greater than the outward, and was
signified by the outward.] They work Miracles in [ a Spiritual way] T. Ellwood
makes Tongues to be be but mediums to convey their Message to others, p. 231.
3d. Quib. p. 75.
as if he durst outface the Apostle, who declares them to be a Sign to such as
Believed not, 1 Cor. 14.22. Keith prettily daubs it over [ that they witness
the Power working Miraculously in their Hearts, Im. Rev. p. 200.
raising to Life the dead Souls, etc. and these are the greatest Miracles, of
which the outward were but a figure.] William Shown almost bids defiance to
them [ we read not of very many converted by outward Miracles -- which are not
of absolute necessity in the Church, True Christians Faith, p. 150. 157.
but the inward are the greater Miracles, which Christ promised that those who
believed in him should do.] So that they do no Wonders, Title of a Book. Truth
exal. p. 11.
yet have [Silent meetings which are a Wonder to the World,] and do [Preach the
Gospel again with the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven.] And at this Rate they
may say or be any thing, Demonstrate though they cannot show, having the Power
but not the thing.

3. Supposing the Quakers Principles true, Miracles are more necessary now than
ever: For,

1. God wrought Miracles to convince Unbelievers, and in the Quakers Charity we
are no better [come you un-Christians] says the curious Pen of Fox [William
Shown calls us, 2d. Quib. p. 66.
titular and nominal Christians] through his whole Book [Christians according
to the Letter, Pennington concerning persec. Pref. Barclay in Q. no Popery, p.
106.
who are as great Enemies to the Spirit and Power, as ever the Jews were.]
[Worldly literal Christians both Papists and Protestants] now being such,
Miracles are infinitely necessary, to disabuse and to remove us from the Letter
into the Spirit, a mistaken Christianity being more obstructing and prejudicial
than mere Heathenism.

2. If Miracles were necessary when the Scriptures were Writ, which are a dead
Letter, a Sealed Book and worse; then are they much more necessary, when
Inspired Expositions thereof are given: To allude to T. Ellwoods terms of shell
and kernel, etc. God would not give a Demonstration, the shell was his, and
leave us at a loss, whether the kernel was his also, if he send Evidences along
with the bark, rind, etc. he would do the same much more with the Substance.
The Apostasy continuing 1548 years, we need signs, that this is the same
Doctrine with the old, especially if the Scripture, the Repository of that
Doctrine cannot be understood without Inspiration; there being many Pretenders,
we need a Sign, more at the unsealing than at the sealing of that Book: if to
receive the Letter, much more to understand the Spirit, the sense when given as
from God, needs most of all his Attestation to it, for the pretending to give
an Inspired Exposition of the Scriptures, is more than the bringing new
Scriptures, and needs greater Attestations, as much as the sense is better than
the Letter. And Thomas Ellwood knows not what he has, but if he have
Revelations they must be new ones, for Revelation being necessary to understand
the Scriptures; those Expositions Thomas Ellwood receives must be new, the
Repetition is the reacting the old, but then the Exponding is the conferring
new, which are not to be found within the Bible.

3. The debate being whether or no they be Inspired, upon their grounds,
nothing can end it, but the interposing of Gods Power: For to say, They Witness
it is a begging the Question, and to credit those Witnessings will expose to
delusions, to produce Scripture disowned by them as the Rule, is improper, and
concludes nothing; being it cannot be understood without Inspiration when
produced; or if it could, still it concludes as equally for any other Pretender
as for them.

4. He who abrogates a Divine Law, must produce greater Authority for so doing,
than that by which at first it was instituted. Thus Christ taking down or
altering that way of Worship which had been set up by a Power of Miracles in
Moses, produced greater Evidences than Moses that he was sent from God. And
that Quakers do abrogate Christ's Commands, is evident from slighting his
Sacraments, etc. Thus Shown concerning Baptism, and the Disciples and Apostles
having Baptized some, proceeds [ not discerning the times and seasons, True
Christians Faith, p. 79.
and the diverse Dispensations of God toward mankind since the fall, nor
perceiving the end of them lays hold of the shadow and figure instead of the
Substance, etc.] Allegorizing and abrogating Christ's Institutions.

5. He who brings a newer and an higher Dispensation, must produce visible
Evidence for so doing, in this indeed the Quakers are much divided. Some making
theirs a new Dispensation [new Heavens and a new Earth; Pennin. Conc. Persecu.
Pref. Idem in Faldo Quak. no Chris. p. 17. New Law, p. 14.
] [the former Dispensation was swallowed up -- by the breaking forth of a more
Lively Dispensation.] This Fancy runs through the Works of Winstanley, [the
Ministration of the Spirit, is now rising up, claims its due right by course.]
And having received it from God, he thus writes, there are seven Dispensations
[1. to Adam. 2. the Seed of the Woman from Adam to Abraham. Mystery of God. p.
21.
3. From Abraham to Moses. 4. From him to Christ. 5. God in Christ. 6. God in
the Flesh of his Saints, as before in Christ, which holds till the day of
Judgment, which is the 7th:] these he contracts into three, [ Moses, New Law,
p. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 120.
Christ, the Spirit: and as Moses gives way to Christ, so that single Body
Jesus gives way to the Holy Ghost, or spreading Power in Sons and Daughters,
and this begun in 1648.] and every such Dispensation is a full period or term
of Time: Mystery of God. p. 38. 40. Im. Rev. p. 18. p. 49.
others makes theirs to be an higher Improvement of the former Dispensation,
[the more Gospel times that were to come in the latter days.] [A spiritual
Ministry, a Gospel Ministry, a powerful Ministry is come and coming] or, they
would have it a reviving the Dead, Universal free Grace, 92.
or a restoring of the former lost Dispensation. [Christs Spiritual, inward and
powerful appearance, is now again revealed in this day after the Apostacy] but
every several way of stating makes it high, Howgils Glory of the true Church.
32.
[for the Everlasting Gospel was a thing beyond, above and before the Writings
of the new Testament.] and it requires the Spirits owning it, before any should
entertain it; for it is a mighty alteration, from a Bodily Christ without, to
an Invisible one within; and if the Man Christ wrought Miracles, much more
should Christ the Spirit, Act. 2, 22.
the visible Christ was a man approved of God, by Miracles, Wonders and Signs,
which God did by him, in the midst of them as they also knew; the new Invisible
Christ has nothing to approve him, but words and fancyes, but either at
bringing as Moses, at reviving as Elias, or at changing, as Christ of a
Dispensation Miracles were necessary: and though John the Baptist wrought no
Miracles, yet his coming was Prophesied of by Esaias and Malachy; nor did he
bring in a new Dispensation, only he prepared for it, but the Quakers
pretending to the highest Dispensation, that of Christ in the Spirit, which is
never to be out-dated, are to do greater works than Christ in the Body, and
Miracles being the Work of the Spirit, they being more necessary to it, than to
the Dispensation of Christ, Quakers are to have its Demonstration, both to
usher in its Dispensation, and also to assure us that they are the sole Persons
entrusted with the bringing of it.

But whence had they this Notion? there are Presidents enough for what is evil,
Montanus and Mahomet made use of this Weapon; David George took himself for the
true Spiritual David, sent to Restore the House of Israel by Grace, and that
all Dispensations before were literal and carnal; Henry Nicholas made seven
several Dispensations, but disserently computed from Winstanley, which likewise
he shrinketh into three, but the last, the highest, and most glorious was that
which he brought by Grace and Love. Jacob Israel made three Dispensations,
under the Emblem of three Suns; the highest is, Gods being in Sons and
Daughters at the new Jerusalem. Keith makes four Dispensations, Moses and the
Prophets, Christ in the Flesh, the Evangelists and Apostles, and the Revelaing
now Christ's inward appearance, Univer. Gra. p. 92.
like that which the Apostles had in their day, but the fullest President is
that of Abbot Joachim, and the Franciscan Friars, who about the year 1253.
Published a Book Evangelii aeterni nomine, set forth by Johannes de Parma, the
Design of which was to change the Gospel of Christ into the Gospel of the
Spirit [ that as the Sun excells the Moon, Bp. Usher de Chpist. Eccles. p. 277.
279.
or the kernel the shell (Thomas Ellwood's Comparison) so that of the Spirit
excells the Gospel of Christ, they said, The Sacrament of the Church was
nothing, that the Gospel of the Spirit was the only Gospel, p. 280.
that the New Testament is to be evacuated like the Old, that then men shall be
in the State of the Perfect, p. 281.
that the Spiritual Sense of the New Testament is not committed to the Pope,
but the Literal, p. 282. p. 283.
that when the Spirit comes, former things shall be counted old, that the
Preachers in the end of the World shall be of greater Dignity and Authority
than the Apostles] with much such stuff. These are Thomas Ellwoods Antecessors,
and the Pope condemned the Books writ against this Devilish Doctrine. p. 287.


CHAP. X. Concerning their Experiences.
V. THE Quakers know the Word of God and their Revelations by Experience, so
Thomas Ellwood [we know that the Word of God is quick and lively by Experience.
p. 249.
] but his Inspiration misinforms him about the direct sense of that place, Heb.
4.12. For it concerns Gods Oath, v. 3. Of Unbelievers not entering into his
Rest, which took hold of the Israelites, and we are warned to take heed of the
like Unbelief, because the word of God is Powerful, etc. that is, his
threatenings are not high ineffective words, but will seize on the impenitent,
it concerns Thomas Ellwood not to despise the teaching of Jesus, least his
Experience of this commination prove sad and irreversible: thus Dr. Hammond
from the Scope expounds it, and so St. Chrysostom [(...), etc. apud Theoph. in
loc.
the same word which punished them will punish us, for it lives always and is
never extinguished.] but Thomas Ellwood as formerly mistakes his ground work,
yet let it pass, there is not one word of Experience there, but when other
Arguments fail, they cry out [ We bear our Testimony, We Witness it, We
Experience it, etc.] who matters that? the term Experience is un-Scriptural and
indemonstrable concerning Revelation, and but rarely used concerning Graces,
the Pharisees had that common sense, John. 8.13. thou bear Record of thy
self, thy Record is not true, a rule that is owned by Christ Jo. 5. if I bear
Witness of my self my Witness is not true, and John 8.14. But Quakers can only
Witness for themselves, or at the farthest one for another.

William Shown in 19 Chapters conjoyns their Faith and Experience, whereas the
one is matter of Perception, the other the substance of things hoped for; Heb.
11.1.
the Evidence of things not seen, what is seen is not hope, and what is
Experienced is not Faith; but such sensual Spiritualists may say and have any
thing by such Confusion. New Law p. 11.
[Jesus declared in general terms -- leaving it to every Son, and Daughter to
Declare their particular Experiences; the Scriptures are but Christ in the
Letter, lying under the Experimental words of those Penmen.] Keith says, We
know that Immediate Revelation is not ceased [From the blessed Experience given
us of God therein: Im. Rev. Preface, and passim.
] but, what Experiences are these? not outward and sensible, but inward and
indiscernible, wherein Fancy, Natural Enthusiasm and Satan, can all play
Legerdemain to purpose. Christian Experience in matters of Duty is useful to
support in their Practice; but it is to be an after Argument, come in ad
corroborandum, for man's nature is of a strange Composition. Comforts have much
Dependence on the temper of the body, they are the more usual portion of Weak
and young beginners, nor should we hanker so much after those real sweets or
fancyful gusts; but be diligent in our Christian calling.

Inward Experience is no bottom for Inspiration Christianity was settled in an
outward sensible way, to forestal this Inward Wile of Satan. Moses though he
saw the bush burning, and had outward Evidences too, yet was not hasty in
believing. The Apostles, I think, Beza in loc. and in Act. 9.29.
demurred some while upon the Suggestions they received, Act. 16.10. [Assuredly
gathering.] from the Vision collates argumentis colligentes, conferring and
sitting as Artificers do piece to piece. Sancti non temere Visionibus quibusvis
crediderunt, they examined their very Visions, and were not hasty in
Entertaining them.

Their Experiences also consist in Comfort, the meanest argument whence to
infer Gods voice; [We know the Spirit of the Lord in his Shinings, Im. Rev. p.
28.
Warmings, Quicknings, Waterings, and Refreshings from and by himself,
sometimes, a day they could Feelingly and Experimentally speak of what God had
wrought in their Souls -- could tell of sweet hours of fellowship -- his
Revealing the hid Invisionble -- ] but others of different Judgments are as
high in Experiences and Comforts, p. 45.
New Law p. 64. Mist. of God pref.
Mary Gadbury was full of singing and joy. The Leveller, for that Doctrine of
Working in the Common, had peace of Spirit, and from that very thing (his Joy
and rest in God:) he was convinced of his Inspiration. The Ranters have store
of quiet. W. B. Silent Meeting. 5. Exomologesis, p. 631.
had more Refreshings in a dum Meeting than in an hundred Sermons. The Hearers
were refreshed at the Dutch Woman's ununderstood Preachment. Newton had much Joy
in his Visions; and the Ravishment and Spiritual Embraces injoied by the
Carthusians, were a great Motive to Mr. Cressyes Revolting. Flashes and
affecting Warmths are no Evidence of Truth; the Mass, or a Turkish Mosque will
afford such stirrings of the lower Powers.

He who from them approves or chooses his Religion is fitter to be a Palpitating
Disciple of Marcus, then a well-grounded Servant of the Lord Jesus.

But though they had true Experiences, that is no satisfaction to another, for
as God requires a Reasonable Religion, so a man should be able to Render a
Reason of his Hope. Christianity consists not in sensible Consolations, which
do ebb and flow, and are often Delusive, nor in the gratifying the inferior
Power, but in a sound Mind, a Living Faith, and a Conscientious Practice. And
Enthusiasm has carried others higher than the Quakers Spirit (be it what it
will) has yet carried them. Satan can [transform himself into the likeness of
God himself, Im. Rev. p. 239.
and Actually does it] so that men should be cautions about their comforts.

The presenting some of their Experiences, will discover their Excellency [all
that which you call the History, New Law p. 97.
is all to be seen and felt within you. Adam and Christ, Cain and Abel,
Abraham, Moses, Israel, Canaanites, Amalekites, Philistines, all those Armies,
the Land of Canaan, Judas, etc. are all to be seen within you] rarely
Experienced, Devon-shire house, or the Trojan horse cannot contain such a
Company. But Keith denying the History to be conveyed by Revelation, this man
makes out the Receipt by Experience. Saints Paradise. p. 29.
He Experiences what the Devil is [I shall show in my Experiences, what I see
and know the Devil is, viz. in the full body of him he is Unrighteous flesh,
and the Imaginations thereof, and every Lust is a particular Devil] he truly
found in his Experience that [the flaming Sword is the Enmity of Natures] which
Enmity he had before Experienced [to be the Devil and Murderer] and lastly
[from what he had Received and seen within him, p. 47.
p. 30. New Law. p. 103. True Christian. faith and Experience. p. 33^ 34.
he denies a local Hell.

Shown believes [Gods Oneness, Omnipresence, and his other Attributes from the
Manifestation of him in his own Heart, so he says, God is pure, from his
Appearance so pure in his heart.] strange Ideas have they of the Divine
Perfections, to measure them by their own sensations [he truly and
experimentally knows, p. 106.
that God cannot be tempted with Evil, because that Heavenly Light he is endued
withal cannot be Tempted with Evil.] [he can give an experimental account of
the two great Ordinances of Christ, Baptism and the Lords supper: p. 76.
] that is he has an experimental feeling of Allegories. Univer. Gra. p. 86. p.
117.
Keiths Experience made him [know and feel the seed in others] and he
experienced [ the belief of Christ in the outward, not to be necessary to
Salvation:] Q. no Popery, p 30. Some Prim. 120.
and from this head he insers the Apocrypha [to have proceeded from a Measure
of the True Spirit:] and Pennington bids [wait to feel] the glorious State of
the Church before the Apostasy. Such men's Faith consists in Experience, and
that in Fancy, but hereby they take away the very proofs of Christianity, p. 96.
[Women now are Witnesses of Christ's Resurrection] but thus, Pen. in Fall. vin.
of 21. Div. p. 7. True Christ. experience. p. 39.
They must [know only as they Experience.] and the knowledge of the Scriptures
avails nothing [Except accompanied with a living Experience of the same power
working after the same manner as it did in others, in times past who have left
their Testimonies thereof upon Record.]

CHAP. XI. How the Primitive Christians came to the knowledge of the Gospel.
VI. THomas Ellwood is the Successor of the Primitive Christians, as well as
of the Apostles, and he informs that [ the Primitive Christians did receive the
knowledge of the Gospel, from the Immediate Teachings of the Holy Spirit, p.
233. to the like purpose p. 245.] which he enlarges from the Primitive
Christians [ to have been in all ages Revealed to the Saints in some Degree or
other, p. 237.] This is matter of Fact, and the Truth of it Depends upon Proof
from History: not one word thereof is produced, and the former Instances about
St. Basil, Nazianzene, etc. do not encourage us to trust either his Learning or
Infallibility. We are now upon the Negative, and it belongs to him to prove out
of undoubted Histories that the Gospel came to be known in all Ages by
Immediate Revelation: we find the Fathers very learned, and coming thereto by
Study, and using such means of expounding as Protestants do. We find their
Expositions differing both among themselves, and from the Quakers; let Thomas
Ellwood show which Fathers were Inspired, which of their Works were writ by it,
how we must understand those Inspired Expositions of theirs; for they seem
likelier to have Immediate Revelation than any in this Age; In Epist. ad Paulin.
St. Hierom makes that Prophecy of Joel. 2.28. fulfilled [ super 120 credentium
nomina, and effusum iri in caenaculo Syon.] upon those 120 Names in Act. 1. and
at the descent upon the Apostles Act. 2. Cateches. 17.
And Cyril of Jerusalem refers it to the coming upon Peter and the Apostles.
And Theodoret makes it to receive its Evident, Comment. in loc.
and literal accomplishment at the day of Pentecost. Thomas Ellwood inlargeth
it to all Believers and all Ages. Whom shall we trust? But he making them
Inspired, I have more Reason to believe such great names, rather than his
Conceit.

The Pretense to Revelation was all along disowned in the true Church after the
settlement of Christianity. Cont. Haeres. 48.
Epiphanius condemns the Montanists for bringing in new Prophets, post terminum
Propheticorum donorum, after the Expiration of Prophetical Gists, and says,
They bring alios prophetas post prophetas, would introduce a new brood or
Series of them.

The Prophets of the New Testament are often by name recorded, l. 5. c. 15.
which is not done to any other of the (...), this was urged by Miltiades in
Eusebius, adding to them Ammias of Phyladelphia and Quadratus: and that if the
Montanists challenge Prophecy after the Prophets, others by the like rule may
challenge it after the Montanists, and so in infinitum. We are certain that the
Extraordinary Visible gifts are ceased, and thence we infer that the Invisibles
bore at most but an equal date with them, and that Miracles continued longer in
the Church than Immediate Inspiration is apparent in that we find footsteps of
the one, after the other was disowned, and the Divine will might soon be made
known, whereas the continuance of its Testimonials in the World some while
after was more necessary. Tertullian called his by the name of Nova Prophetia,
New Prophecy: an Evidence that the old was ceased, and how he was disowned by
the Church is Notorious.

Though there were many succeeding Prophets under the Law, that does not infer
it must be so under the Gospel, for those Prophets brought in Light by degrees,
and prepared the way for Christ: but then Prophecy lay Silent for about 400
years before his appearing, a sign that he came to fulfill and Seal up all, and
when God himself took the chair, and in our nature discharged his Office, it
fastens Imperfection on him, to maintain a Series of Prophets, to explain what
he spoke, or relate what he omitted. The new Testament foretells of false
Prophets, but no where promises a succession of new ones. Nor is it possible,
Christianity being entertained upon their Personal knowledge of Christ, and the
Visible Evidences of the Spirit; which also inwardly inclined men to search
into, to approve and chose what the Apostles, etc. outwardly proposed, and now
Learning and Meditation supply to us what the Spirit Immediately vouchsafed to
them, In Epistle ad Paulinuim.
as St. Hierom says [quicquid enim aliis exercitatio and quotidiana in lege
meditatio tribuere solet, is it is hoc Spiritus sanctus suggerebat.]

Thomas Ellwood makes some attempts of proof about the Reformation, as from
Tindal. p. 273 but neither renewed, Immediate nor Expository Revelations are
therein owned nor does it concern Notional (about which our debate is) but
Practical knowledge, he deals very unfaithfully with Bishop Jewel, who proves
from the Ancients, That many things are easy in the Scripture, p. 393. and he
strikes in with Harding about the darkness of Scriptures, and the understanding
of them, not by reading, but by special Revelation and Miracle. p. 394. And
that which the Bishop calls Help and Prompting. Thomas Ellwood transforms into
Inspiration and Revelation of the Divine Spirit. p. 275. Without humane
Learning Study or natural abilities and the Answer of Alphonsus the Spanish
Friar to Mr. Bradford becomes Thomas Ellwood's Mouth [You must be as it were a
Neuter -- as one standing in doubt; Pray, Fox his Mart. Vol. 3. p. 299.
and be ready to receive what God shall Inspire, for in vain labors our
tongue to speak else.]

But none of his Proofs concern Perpetual Immediate Inspiration, for the Spirit
giving assurance of the Scriptures, is a thing of a different nature.

The sense of the Reformers is discerned from the Homily, in the Exhortation to
the reading of the Scriptures, which requires our humility and diligent search
and often reading. And John Old, a Famous Divine in Edward the sixths days,
declares how they proceeded in interpreting Scripture [Touching the
Interpretation of the Scriptures, it must be expounded according to the
Proprieties of the Tongues in which it was first written, In Dr. Holdsworth
praelec. Theolog. p. 435.
and by dilsgent Weighing of sayings that go before, and that follow after,
withal the Circumstances, and also according to other places that are more
plain, or like or contrary, and where the Fathers, the Doctors of the Holy
Church have Interpreted the Scriptures after this manner, and have in no wise
blanched or swerved from this Rule, there we do with heart and good will
acknowledge and take them for faithful and diligent Interpreters of the
Scriptures, and honorable Instruments of the Holy Ghost, whose painful labors
and Industryes, our Lord God has used in the Church, to the Glory of his own
Name, and the profit of his flock, etc.] this was Printed 1554.

CHAP. XII. Of their hearing the Voice of God, and some other Claims.
THomas Ellwood to all these Superadds other Privileges; as first, their
hearing Gods Voice [blessed be the Lord we have heard the Voice of God, and
when the Lord has spoken in us] p. 249. Implying in a Distinct Articulate
Voice spoken within, and heard by them, a most dangerous Delusion, and contrary
to Gods manner of Proceeding, who rarely or never spoke to men without some
internuntius, or medium, his Voice being dreadful, no man can hear it and
live; Exodus 20.19. Deuteronomy. 18.16. So that either Angels or God Incarnate
signified his Pleasure: The Motions, and Whispers of the Spirit, are not an
audible Voice, the manner of Gods speaking is related thus, Univ. Grace, p. 87,
88.
[The Word of God speaks forth it self at first simply in Power, Virtue,
Light and Life, rather than in words -- and afterward words are given, and
that very Distinctly beard and apprehended.] So that the Quakers Inspirations
come rather at first by signs and Symbols than Words, and that is a darker way
of Expression. Im. Re. p. 171. and. 58.
[For the Plainest words cannot give the knowledge of the things.] and [ words
even the best cannot give the knowledge of God, etc.] that must be strange which
words cannot express, though they pretend to receive it from the Mouth of the
Lord, or viva voce from him: Q. no Christ. p. 121. and 272. New Law. 96 Parnels
shield 38. Im. Rev. 14. Q. spi. Court. p. 7.
but they may questionless hear his Voice, for they can see the Invisible [he
sees his maker and lives in the light] [some of them have had appearances of
God] [the Saints have an intuitive knowledge of God in this life] so that
though Fox in the Divine Light could never see Angels nor Spirits, yet they can
see and hear God, and they succeed several herein. Theod. Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c.
11, Dr. Cansabons Enth. p. 103.161, 163, 164.
The Messalians did behold the Trinity with their eyes, God did talk with
Ignatius Loyola, and the Holy Maid saw God, Heaven and Hell and the Soul of
Christ in its Purity. And that strange Enthusiast in Acosta talked of
conversing with God: and the Alumbrados or Spanish Quakers said, They might see
God Visibly in their Ecstacyes.

2. They receive the Gospel [ by the Gift of God, p. 245. from the Divine Power
it self p. 232.] not once naming in this regard that great Prophet, who in the
days of his flesh, taught us, but these are two general words technically to
Imply the manner of Inspiration; for every good and perfect gift comes from
God, and yet it is not handed down by Revelation.

3. Divine Revelation consists in opening, discovering or expounding [ Teaching
the true sense and meaning of Scriptures, by opening, discovering, and making
known the Will of God therein expressed: this is Revelation, for whatsoever is
discovered or made known is Revealed -- ] p. 255. a new Notion: by which the
Apocalypse must be the easiest book, and the Revelation of John must be the
Exposition of John, but he uses the word doubly; sometimes properly, as p.
238. for Gods conveying such a Message unto a man, at other times he takes it
loosly, for the understanding the Message so brought: Whereas Divine
Revelations do not depend upon our right understanding them, but upon Gods
conveying them, unless he be of the Jesuits mind, that the Scripture not being
understood is no Scripture; and if discovering be Revealing, then every Artist
or Inventer is a Revealer: So Dr. Harvey was a Revealer of the Circulation of
blood. Pecquet the Revealer of the passage of the Chyle. Vesputius or Columbus
were the Revealers of America, and the Discoverer of the Isle of Pines was such
a Revealer as Thomas Ellwood, and by this there will be plenty of books of
Revelations. Univer Gra. p. 24.
[The book of Creation being a sealed book till the Divine and Spiritual
Illumination of the Holy Spirit of God do unseal it, Reveal and open, and make
known the things that are therein contained.]

CHAP. XIII. Of the Texts of Scripture Produced by him.
TH. Ellwood representing the Holy Scriptures dark and unintelligible, attempts
to prove his Immediate Teachings from those dark texts, which he says cannot
be understood without Immediate Inspiration, and which we deny the having of,
it is a manner of proceeding that makes the Scriptures confute themselves, and
supposes men fools, who must admit that which cannot be understood. Yet so far
to be understood, as to be a proof against it self, and no further, other
proofs of Inspiration are only in this case proper; but seeing he has no
Evidences else; let us try those Expositions his Spirit gives of some places.

This Prophecy he confesses begun to be fulfilled at Pentecost, but denies
that it is yet ended, Joel. 2.28.
p. 270. but Joel foretells not the reacting of old Prophecyes only that after
its cessation for many years, there should be another more plentiful Essusion
of the Spirit, then had been before. St. Peter an Inspired Interpreter refers
it to that very thing, the Descent of the Spirit. Act. 2.16. (...), this is
that, etc. in the present tense, and dare Thomas Ellwood sense it otherwise?
Well may they control Expositions of men, when they contradict that of the
Spirit, if it belong to all, than the Papacy had it, and Thomas Ellwood will
lose his share, we being flesh and he Spirit; but the Apostle makes that very
days Wonder to be the fulfilling of it, which he uttered upon receipt of the
Gift of Tongues, before other Miracles were wrought, why is not the Spirit as
Visible now, as in that Chamber in Sion? why do Quakers deny Prophecyes,
Visions, Dreams strictly taken, and insist for Revelation not there named.

Joel has afterward, which Peter adapting to the Jewish State calls the
last days, the Scripture sense thereof will clear it, that last days refer to
some determinate period of time, reason will tell us, for that last days should
signify all time is not possible, for the now last, are before the succeeding
last, and each taking his own for the last days, nothing could be certain: thus
H. Nicholas applied the last days to his Prophecy upon an hundred and twenty
years agon. New Law, p. 11. Glory of Church. 8.
The Leveller took (latter times) to support his own fancy. Howgil in 1661.
called those the last days. So did Truth Exalted in 1658. p. 1. but latter days
is an Old Testament phrase, Genesis 49.1. Number. 24.14. Isa. 2.2. Referring often to
the last days of the Jewish Government, within which Christ was to appear, but
to enlarge last days, to all the periods of Christianity, is very improper, and
will leave nothing determinate. Thus Heb. 1.2. God has in these last days,
etc. i. e. not in our last (which may not be the last by many hundreds) but in
those last, a while before the throwing down of the Jewish enclosure. St.
Peter's last days, 2 Pet. 3.3. are followed v. 13. with looking for a new Heaven
and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, that refers not to the day of
Judgment, when we look for no new Earth, but to the state of Christianity: the
Jewish last days being out, a new Holy State of Christianity should commence,
this is that World to come, Heb. 2.5. which is not put in Subjection to Angels,
as the Jewish World was: Christ the Everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6. is the Father
(...) of this Future (...) Period, Age, World or State, which is to be
Everlasting, never antiquated by any supervening Dispensation. These two States
of Moses and Christ are conjoined, 1 Cor. 10.11. the ends of the World are come
(...), upon the Apostles the extremes of those two periods met, the ends of
those two States concentred and concurred, So Heb. 9.26. he has once in the
end of the World, not of this World, Christ is not to die again, but at the end
of the Jewish World he dyed, at the close or shutting up of that State, and St.
John surviving them all, calls it the last hour: [all flesh] refers to Gentiles
as well as Jews, some of all Ages, some of all Sexes, etc. at the return of the
Spirit of Prophecy should be so Inspired. If T. Ellwood enlarge this to all, he
must confute St. Peter's Present Tense, he must produce visible Proofs of the
Spirit, as the Apostles did: and lastly, both as to this and other Texts, show
his party to be wholly entrusted with the Revelations therein supposed.

Ephesians. 1.17. [The Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation] or the Wisdom and
Revelation of the Spirit, but Immediate, p. 227.
instant conferring is not named, or if it was, it had been suitable to that
first Plantation, or, if you have it at present, then we desire Evidences of
such before we give Credit, Dr. Ham. Grot.
but the word either implies ability of Exposition of the figures of the Old
Testament, or the foretelling Future things, which man cannot find out, but the
Spirit still reveals to us gradually in Blessing the used means, inlightning
our minds, etc.

Romans 8.9. p. 232.
All true Believers received and must receive the Spirit, but it does not
require of Immediate, instant Inspiration, but the Spirit of Sanctification and
Adoption, v. 10, 13. etc.

2 Cor. 4.6. [God has shined in our hearts] but it does not say Immediately,
p. 232.
the Gospel which is outwardly proposed is a Glorious Light, when it is
inwardly entertained, but it was by the Ministry of Paul they received that
Light, Grot.
v. 7. that Treasure being brought them in earthen vessels [in the face of
Jesus] that is by Jesus (...) signifies a Person, it is id omne quod sensibus
exterioribus percepitur, (...), Theophil.

Gal. 1.16. p. 233.
Thomas Ellwood crowds together several things which are not in that Text, but
the Apostle shows how he received the Gospel (not of man) by certain ear
Testimony as St. Luke and St. Mark did, but from Jesus Christ himself, who
called him and taught him, Act. 9. and 22. and 26. (In me) is either unto me,
or, by me, or, if in me, yet not so as to destroy Christ's outward calling and
commissionating him.

Ephesians. 3.3, 7. p. 233.
He sets this in the Margin without the Words, which concern only the
Revelation of that Mystery, viz. the taking in the Gentiles to be Fellow heirs
v. 6. which Revelation is often referred to and employed in Scripture.

2 Pet. 1.21. p. 237.
Here he makes a wide inference, because Prophecy came not by the Will of man,
etc. Therefore the Scriptures must be understood only by the Revealings of the
Spirit, the Immediate influx of Prophetic light into another Soul is of a
different nature from my sensing or understanding that Light which he received,
for if the Prophets could not conceive or write intelligibly what the Spirit
spoke, no more can Thomas Ellwood, for the Spirit was as able to speak then as
now, and if he must interpret what he before spoke, than he must be setched in
to interpret that Interpretation, and so on for ever.

Rev. 3.7. p. 238.
He brings in Christ the Lamb with the Key of David opening, etc. begging the
Question, that opening signifies Expounding; whereas it denotes Christ's power
in governing the Church, taking in and shutting out, Isa. 22: 20. Mat. 16.19.
[clavem potestatem vocat] for he who has the keys has the House committed to
him, Aretas in loc.
T. E. by this spoils his very pretensions of the Spirits opening, for this
Lamb is not the Holy Ghost, but the Lamb that takes away our Sins. p. 239.
Mat. 11.27. he must prove the Spirit to be the Son, that all Revelation is
Immediate, or that Text makes against him. Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are all
said to reveal, and yet those Works are not to be confounded.

1 Cor. 2.11. Though no man know, p. 239. and 266.
etc. yet the Spirit has communicated some part of that knowledge, v. 12. and
if those cannot be understood, we have no assurance that the next will be
clearer, but v. 13. The Apostle declares that they spoke those things which the
Spirit gave them, and in the Spirits words, that is purposely to be understood:
what those things were which the Spirit taught appears by the Coherence, v. 9.
viz. a conviction of the Infinite Joys of Heaven, Theoph. in loc.
[(...), etc. the Spirit teaches such things as belong to Christ's
Dispensation, his dying for us, making us the Sons of God, setting us at the
right hand of his Father in himself.]

Rev. 13.3, 4. p. 243.
He states the Apostasy differently both from himself and his partners and
should I refer that Text to Heathen Idolatry, and not to lapsed Christianicy, I
see not how Thomas Ellwoods Spirit could confute me.

Jude v. 9. 1 These. 4.8. These Texts he applies severely to such as look upon
the Quakers light to be Fantastical; but he should first prove that God speaks
by them, before he make us Sin in rejecting them: In Epictet. l. 1. c. 22.
Arrian gives a good Rule, That differences arise, (...), in the Application of
Rules to particular cases, Winstanley lays a Curse on such as will not come
into the Levellers Community; [the hand of the Lord shall be upon that Person
whosoever he be] and yet no rich Quaker will think himself obliged by it. New
Law, p. 75.


2 Timothy 3.16. the Scripture is profitable [for Doctrine.] i.e. to Teach true
Doctrine, [for Reproof] to discover and reprove false Doctrine, p. 251. Theop.
and Oecum. in locum.
[for Correction,] to Correct and amend our Evil manners, [for Instruction in
Righteousness] to direct and lead into good life and manners: that the man of
God may be perfect, etc. to furnish Timothy a Bishop and Pastor for his Office,
much more to instruct the People in their Duty: And therefore the Apostle
comforts Timothy, That though he Die, yet he has the Scriptures, (...), Theoph.
which can benefit thee in my absence, (...), these are thy Counselors instead
of me.

Mark 13.11. That Promise belongs to the times of Persecution, p. 256.
and should not be enlarged to all Cases: Theoph. on Mat. 10.19. gives a good
Exposition of it [ when we speak among the Faithful, we ought to premeditate,
and be ready for a defense, as St. Peter says, but when we speak before
Multitudes and Kings who rage, then God does promise his Strength that we
should not fear.]

Act. 2.4. p. 263.
The Spirits giving utterance was by his Wonderful descent, when the Apostles
opened in such Tongues and Wisdom: and Quakers have no Tongues, but what they
learn, Rhetorical and Poetical Enthusiasms have raised men above the Quakers,
by Keiths Concession: serious matters require premeditated Discourses, and
vehement Speeches more become Juglers than Wisemen, as Seneca at large
observes. In Epist. 40. p. 263.


1 Timothy 4.13, 15. The directions given to Timothy about reading are
inconsistent with Instant Iuspiration, but if Tymothy who had an Extraordinary
Gift must Meditate, etc. much more must others: Revelation is not capable of
Rules and Instructions, though ordered as for time, yet it cannot be for
matter. And of Inspirations and infusions that come instantly and unexpectedly
there can be no knowledge.

Thomas Ellwood talks much about Letter, Sense, and Spirit, p. 249. which both
reflects upon Gods manner of expressing his mind, as if it was not open, true,
and cordial; and also casts dirt upon the Scriptures: the Opposition between
the Gospel and the Law, or the Remnant, Print, and mark of Circumcision, is
wrested to the apparent sense of Sacred Writ, and a supposedly concealed sense:
and this Method both Familists, Libertines and others have formerly pursued: a
Quaker can but write words or letters, but in his sense he cannot write, i. e.
express or give the Holy Ghost, Univer. Gra. p. 29.
and Moses [besides the outward had a Ministration in the Spirit:] all these
Texts come not near his Design, much less, That Quakers are instructed with
that Dispensation, if it was real.

CHAP. XIV. That Thomas Ellwoods ways of Expounding do destroy the Scripture.
OUR Author having represented the Bible dark, to prepare the way for his
suppletory Spirit, as if this affront was not sufficient, he does dispersedly
insinuate several things, which in effect do discharge all, or most of the
written word.

1. He declines what is urged from the Law, saying, p. 134. [ that it was to
them of Old time under the Law (which was a State of weakness and Childhood,
and so of Contention and Strife,) etc.] whereas Christ proposes Childhood as
freest from Contention, Mar. 9.35. and thus the Anabastists, called
Concionatores, looked upon the Old Testament as abrogated.

2. He makes nothing of Christ's Example in Preaching upon a Text, Luc. 4.17. by
this Art, p. 200. [ that it was in the time of the Law, and suitable to that
Ministration, when reading and expounding the Law and the Prophets was a part
of the Jewish Service, but it is not a sufficient Warrant for the like practice
in the time of the Gospel.] a Rule that enervates Christ's Example and Doctrine,
because done and spoke before the Law was antiquated.

He makes nothing of what Christ spoke to the Pharisees [ that about choosing
the lowest room, Luke 14.8. was spoke to the Pharisees, who had an itch to take
place, etc. but p. 41. what was it to Christ's own Disciples? did he ever
Instruct them after this manner? no such matter.] by which he disobligeth
Christians from any Obedience to what Christ spoke to such as were not his
Attendants, and so demolishes a good part of the Gospels.

4. Being pressed from Luc. 14.8. that there ought to be distinctions of
Persons, he says, p. 41. [those words were not spoken with Relation to the
times of the Gospel, nor directed to the Disciples] by which he dispatcheth
also much that Christ spoke.

5. To do that more effectually he breaks all in pieces with this reply, p. 37.
[it was under the Law before the One offering was actually offered up] making
what Christ spoke whilst alive, and Executing his Prophetic Office to signify
nothing to us.

6. He makes the Apostles to speak by way of condescension, to take in others
and omit themselves, p. 77. which though sometimes used, yet must not be
pressed, when such terms as we All, Jam. 3.2. do include themselves as well as
others.

7. He declines the Lords Prayer, as taught, p. 81. [ when the Disciples were
young and weak, etc.] which equally destroys the whole Sermon on the Mount, at
the same time delivered. Thus David George and the Familists said, the
Scripture was given to Novices.

8. He changes Tenses, p. 137. [is should be read was] an alteration, which if
allowed, may be serviceable to strange purposes.

9. He inlargeth to his party, the particular Promises made to the Apostles, p.
228. and the Commands as Matthew. 10. about meat and drink.

10. He conceals the unkind parts of a Text, which favor not his Pretensions,
p. 230. this he conceals with an etc. [ he shall bring to your remembrance all
things, etc.] and quoting, John, 16.13. he wholly omitteth the last word [he
shall show you things to come.] and yet challenges all the other Promises.

11. He gives Christ's words a downright denial, p. 20. to that Command, Mat.
23.3. to do whatsoever they bid them, he replies [nay, hold there, we have had
too much of that already.] He fastens also a Ridiculous Command upon God,
whilst he says [ to challenge a property in man's Labor, etc. is ridiculous,]
p. 335. when as the Priests by Gods Command had a Property therein, receiving
the Tenth of that Increase obtained by sweat, care, industry, etc. And he
says, That [ Christ's Excellency lay not in Humane Learning, p. 207.] had he
said, His Commission lay not there, he had spoken like a Scholar of so All
knowing a Master: He that made the Eye shall he not see, etc.

Suppose a man be pressed to any Duty, Thomas Ellwood has furnished him with
evasions, the Law does not oblige, nor what Christ spoke before his Death, this
discards the Old Testament and the Gospel, and the Remainder may be avoided by
his Rules, as spoke to such as were weak, or under the Law, or by way of
Condescension, or if none cut the knot, yet the last breaks the Bonds insunder.
[Nay hold there, we have had enough of that already,] thus whilst he is
pleading, men may live without Sin, he enervates that Doctrine which was
designed to keep them from it, and his New Light attempts to turn true Old
Religion out of the World.

The Conclusion.
HAving Considered his Pretense to Inspirations, I think it not necessary now
to view his Notion of Humane Learning, that being in Effect yielded up, by
acknowledging that Learning must Translate; put an English Bible into his hand,
for his Spirit, if true, is as able Immediately to do the one as the other.
When Thomas Ellwood considers Sacred Geography, Historyes, Prophecyes,
Chronology, the Fabric of the Temple, the dispersion of People over the World,
Numbers, Weights, Coins, Measures, Customs, Rites, Proverbs, with many such, he
must acknowledge the usefulness of Learning in other concerns, besides bare
translating: the most convincing and beneficial Employment for him, will be to
let the World see the noble Fruits of his Interpreting Spirit, for the
Ministration of the Spirit being given to every one to profit withal, 1 Cor.
12. he is bound to acquaint the World with his Inspired Expositions, and if he
please as a Specimen to begin with the Chronicles, from what he does perform,
In Prologo.
we may be induced to change our thoughts about their Pretensions: St. Hierom
says, the Book of Chronicles is such that without it, if a man arrogate to
himself the knowledge of Scriptures, he does but abuse and delude himself; and
Dr. Lightfoot thinks that a close Comment on it, would contribute much Light to
the other Scriptures; when we see solid Interpretations, and not Allegorical
Fancves proceed from him, we may entertain better Opinions, but he must borrow
none of our Egyptians Jewels, nor go to the Philistines Forge to sharpen his
Weapons, nor with David make use of the Sword of Goliath, though wrapped in a
Cloth behind the Ephod, and that there be none like it.

For our security of his Faithful performing, when he discerns his Spirit to
seize on him, let him repair to some Justice of Peace, or his Parish Priest,
that by them he may be certifyed of the Truth; or, if his Spirit be indisposed,
like Baal, be talking, pursuing in a Journey, or in a sleep, and must be
awaked, we shall have patience a while, till he be better fitted, such a
Specimen (as above) will for a while employ us; but I suppose he need no
protracting of time, the Spirit of Truth dwelling in them, and suffering no
recess, he must be always ready, but if he will bury that his Talent in a
napkin, and think a rejoinder sufficient, I desire he will Demonstrate the
Fruits of the Spirit in his proceedure. The Jews put off difficult things till
there stood up a Priest with Vrim and Thummim, and afterward till the coming
of Elias, if Quakers speak true, better than those are now come among us, it is
but a Reasonable Request we make, viz. Apostolical Proofs, of his Apostolical
Inspirations, or convincing Evidences to remove those many Reasons drawn up
against his claims, but he must not make out his pretensions from those Sacred
Scriptures, which he denies to be the Rule, and looks upon as unintelligible
without Inspiration, and when they are produced, do conclude as fully for any
other party as for his; when he Demonstrates his Spirit some other way, it will
deserve another manner of discussion; but besides Miracles, he must produce the
Spirit of Prophecy, or certain proofs like Daniels weeks, etc. That this is the
foretold Season, when the Dispensation of Christ in the inward, or in the
Spirit, was to Commence, and withal Evidence that our English Quakers (and
Positively whether the Conforming or Nonconforming party) are the Persons
entrusted with the delivery of it; or, if he except against their being the
offspring of Winstanley, it no way can prejudice us, we having as much reason
to believe a Levellers Inspirations as a Quakers.

There having been in the Preceding Discourse Reference sometimes made to the
Quakers Testimony or Constitutions, and those being Destructive both of the
Light in each man, and of Thomas Ellwood's, Immediate Revelation in each
Believer, they are here verbatim, Presented.
A Testimony from the Brethren, who were met together at London, in the third
Month, 1666. to be Communicated to the Faithful Friends and Elders in the
Countries; by them to be Read in their several Meetings, and kept as a
Testimony among them.

We your Friends and Brethren, whom God has called to Labor and Watch for the
Eternal good of your Souls: at the time aforesaid being through the Lords good
hand, who has Preserved us at Liberty met together in his Name and Fear, were
by the Operation of the Spirit of Truth, brought into a serious Consideration
of this present State of the Church of God; Which in the day of her return out
of the Wilderness, has not only many Open, but some Covert Enemies to Conflict
against; Who are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities and despise Government;
without which we are sensible our Societies and Fellowship cannot be kept Holy
and Inviolable.

Therefore as God has put it into our hearts, we do Communicate these things
following unto you; who are turned from Darkness to Light, and Profess with us
in the Glorious Gospel throughout Nations and Countries. Wherein we have
Traveled, as well for a Testimony against the unruly, as to Stablish and
Confirm them, unto whom it is given to believe the Truth; which is unto us very
precious, as we believe it is also unto you, who in Love have received it, and
understood the Principles, and felt the Virtue and Operation of it. In which
our Spirits breath, that we all may be preserved, until we have well finished
our Course and Testimony, to the Honor and Glory of our Lord God, who is over
all blessed for ever.

1. We having a true sense of the Working of the Spirit, which, under a
Profession of Truth, leads into a Division from, and Exaltation above the Body
of Friends, who never revolted, nor degenerated from their Principles, into
marks of Separation from the Constant Practice of good and ancient Friends, who
are found in the Faith once delivered to us. And also into a slight esteem of
their Declarations or Preaching, (who have and do approve themselves as the
Ministers of Christ) and of the Meetings of the Lords People, whereby and
wherein Friends are, and often have been Preciously revived and refreshed.

And under Pretense of keeping down Man and Forms, doing down the Ministry, and
Meeting or Encourage those that do the same. We say, The Lord giving us to see,
not only the Working of that Spirit, and those that are joined to it, that
bring forth these ungrateful fruits; but also the evil Consequents and Effects
of it, which are of no less Importance, than absolutely tending to destroy the
work of God, and lay wast his Heritage. We do unanimously (being thereto
encouraged by the Lord, whose Presence is with us) declares and testify, That
neither that Spirit, nor such as are joined to it, ought to have any Dominion,
Office, or Rule in the Church of Christ Jesus, whereof the Holy Spirit that was
poured forth upon us, has made us Members, and Overseers. Neither ought they
to act, or order the affairs of the same: But are rather to be kept under with
the Power of God, till they have an Ear open to Instruction, and come into
Subjection to the Witness of God; of the increase of whose Kingdom and
Government there shall be no end.

2. We do declare and testify, That that Spirit, and those that are joined to
it, who stand not in unity with the Ministry and Body of Friends; that are
constant and steadfast to the Lord, and to his unchangeable Truth, which we have
received, and are witnesses of, and Ambassadors, have not any true Spiritual
Right; or Gospel - Authority to be Judges in the Church, and as the Ministry of
the Gospel of Christ, so as to Condemn you and their Ministry: Neither ought
their Judgment to be any more regarded by Friends than the Judgment of other
Opposers, who are without. For of Right the Elders and Members of the Church
(which keep their Habitation in the Truth) ought to Judge matters and things
that differ, and their Judgment which is so given therein ought to stand good
and valued among Friends; which though it be kicked against and disapproved by
them who have degenerated, as aforesaid. And we do further declare and
testify, That it is abominable Pride, which goes before Destruction, that so
puffs up the mind of any particular, that he Will not admit of any judgment to
take place against him: For he that is not justified by the Witness of God in
Friends, is condemn by it in himself; though being hardened, he may boast over
it in a false Confidence.

3. If any Difference arise in the Church, or amongst them that profess
themselves Members thereof; We do declare and testify, That the Church, with
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, have Power ( without the assent of such as
dissent from their Doctrine and Practices) to hear and determine the same. If
any pretend to be of us, and in case of Controversy will not admit to be tried
by the Church of Christ Jesus, nor submit to the Judgment given by the Spirit
of Truth in the Elders and Members of the same, but kick against their
judgment, as only the Judgment of Man, it being manifested according to Truth
and Consistent with the Doctrine of such good ancient Friends as have been, and
are found in the Faith, agreeable to the Witness of God in his People; then we
do testify in the Name of the Lord (if that Judgment so given be risen against
and denied by the party Condemned:) then he or she (and such as so far partake
of their Sins, as to Countenance and Encourage them therein) ought to be
rejected, and having Erred from the Truth, persisting therein presumptuously,
are joined in one with Heathens and Infidels.

4. We do declare, That if any go abroad hereafter pretending to that Weighty
Work and Service, who either in Life or Doctrine grieve good Friends, that are
steadfast in the Truth, sound in the Faith; so that they are not manifest in
their Consciences, but disagree to the Witness of God in them; Then ought they
(whatever have been their Gifts) to leave them before the Altar, and forbear
going abroad and Ministering, until they are reconciled to the Church, and have
the Approbation of the Elders and Members of the same. And if any that have
been so approved of by the Church, do afterward degenerate from the Truth, and
do that which tends to Division, and Countenance Wickedness and Faction (as
some have done) then the Church has a True Spiritual Right and Authority to
call such to Examination; and if they find sufficient cause for it, by good
testimony, may Judge them unfit for the Work of Gods Ministry, whereof they
have rendered themselves unworthy; and so put a stop to their Proceedings
therein. And if they Submit not to the Judgment of the Spirit of Christ in his
People, then ought they Publicly to be declared against; and Warning given to
the Flock of Christ in their several Meetings, to beware of them, and to have
no fellowship with them, that they may be ashamed, and Lambs and Babes in
Christ preserved.

5. And if any man or Woman, which are out of the Unity with the Body of
Friends, Print or cause to be Printed, or published in Writing, any thing which
is not of Service for the Truth; but tends to the Scandalizing and reproaching
of faithful Friends, or to beget or uphold Division and Faction; then we do
warn and Charge all Friends that do love Truth, as they desire it may prosper,
and be kept clear, to beware and take heed of having any hand in Printing,
republishing or spreading such Books or Writings. And if at any time such Books
be sent to any of you that sell Books in the Country, after that you with the
Advice of good and serious Friends, have tried them and find them faulty, to
send them back again whence they come. And we further desire, from time to
time, faithful and sound Friends may have the view of such things as are
Printed upon Truth's account (as formerly it has used to be) before they go to
the Press; that nothing but what is sound and Savory, and that will answer the
Witness of God even in our Adversaries, may be exposed to public Vieu.

6. We do advise and counsel, That such as are made Overseers of the Flock of
God by the Holy Spirit, and do Watch for the good of the Church, Meeting
together, in their Respective Places, do set and keeep the Affairs of it in
good Order; beware of Admitting or Encouraging such as are Weak and of little
Faith, to take such Trust upon them: for by hearing things disputed that are
doubtful, such may be hurt themselves, and may hurt the Truth, not being grown
into a good understanding to judge of things. Therefore We exhort, That you who
have received a true sense of things, be diligent in the Lord's Business, and
keep the Meetings as to him, that all may be kept pure and clean, according to
that of God which is just and equal.

We also advise, That not any be admitted to order Public business of the
Church, but such as have felt in a Measure of the Universal Spirit of Truth;
which seeks the Destruction of none, but the General good of all, and
especially those that love it, who are of the Household of Faith. So, Dear
Friends and Brethren, believing your Souls will be refreshed (in the Sense of
our Spirits, and Integrity toward God) at the reading of these things, as ours
were while we sat together at the opening of them; and that you will be one
with us on the behalf of the Lord, and his Precious Truth, against those who
would limit the Lord to speak without Instruments, or by what Instruments they
list, and reject the Counsel of the Wisemen, and the Testimony of the
Prophets, which God sanctified and sent among you in the day of his Love, when
you were gathered; and would not allow him liberty, in and by his Servants, to
appoint time and place, wherein to meet together to wait upon and worship him,
according as he requires in Spirit, and calling it Formal, and the Meeting of
Man.

We say, believing that you will have Fellowship with us herein, as we have
with you in the Truth, we commit you to God, and the Word of Life, which has
been Preached to you from the beginning (which is neither limited to place, nor
time, nor persons; but has Power to limit us to each as pleases him) that you
with us, and we with you, may be built up in our most holy Faith; and be
Preserved to Partake of the Inheritance which is Heavenly, amongst all them
that are Sanctified.

Richard Farnsworth. Alexander Parker. George Whitehead. Josiah Coal. John
Whitehead. Thomas Lo. Stephen Crispe. Thomas Green. John Moon. Thomas Briggs.
James Parkes.


The Sum of the Particulars handled in the preceding Treatise.
DIvisions are no argument against the Truth of Christianity. p. 1. The Holy
Scriptures are by some thought too plain, and by others too obscure. p. 2.
Quakers give better names to their own Books than to the Scriptures. p. 3.
Their beginning was in 1648. p. 4. Winstanley the Leveller was their Father. p.
5. 6. They have a great resemblance to Rome. p. 7. 8. The many disadvantages in
Treating with them. p. 9. Their unchristian temper in Controversies. page 10.
11. They misapply Scripture words, as the old Heretics did. p. 12. 13. T.
Ellwood's Ignorance and Impudence about St. Basil. p. 14. About St. Greg:
Nazianzene, and Sosiades, p. 15. And in calling the Martyrs [our Godly
Martyrs.] p. 16. 17. Quakers deny themselves to be Protestants. p. 16. Thomas
Ellwood's sauciness toward the King, p. 18, 19. Quakers have dangerous
Doctrines about Kings, and Magistrates. p. 19, 20. Their degrading of the
Nobility. p 20. And contempt of other Orders of men. p. 21. Thomas Ellwood's
manner of claiming Inspirations concludes as much for others, as for themselves
p. 22. God affords sufficient means of Conviction. p. 23. Immediate Revelation
should be attested with Evidences. p. 24. Revelation is a more easy thing than
studying. p. 25. The various Claimers of Infallibility confute each other. p.
26. Quakers Challenge the Internal work of the Spirit, but deny the External.
p. 27. Thomas Ellwood and his party's high demands. p. 28. His seeming
Concessions. p. 29. Christ was the Apostles Instructor before the Spirit. p.
31. Quakers make Christ's Prophetic office to signify nothing, p. 32. Or
confound Jesus and the Spirit. p. 33. The manner of the Apostles Instructions
recited. p. 34. Quakers differ about the Apostles knowledge. p. 35. The
Apostles were certain Witnesses of Christ, and the Writers of the N. T. wrote
upon their certain knowledge. p. 36. No new books of Scriptures can now be
written. 37. The Holy Spirit did inwardly pursue what Christ had outwardly
delivered. p. 38. Enthusiasm destroys the settled grounds of Religion p. 39.
Quakers called themselves Apostles and Prophets. p. 40. They make the Apostasy
to begin with the second Century. p. 41. They are very unlike the Apostles. p.
42. Successors cannot receive like predecessors. p. 43. The first settling a
Dispersation must not always continue. p. 44. God is not prodigal of Miracles.
p. 45. Quakers Inspirations must be as unintelligible as those of St. Paul or
others. p. 46. The Texts produced by T. Ellwood, prove against him. p. 47. What
was promised to the Apostles should not be enlarged to all. p. 48. Quakers like
Celsus and the Gnostics pretend much knowledge. p. 49 Thomas Ellwood borrows
Renewing of Revelations from George Keith. p. 51. Their damnable Essential of
Religion. p. 52. 53. Their great slighting of the Canon of Scripture. p. 54 55.
Repetition of Revelation reinforces the Law of Moses, p. 56. destroys the
Reality of History, p. 57. and the determinateness of Prophecy, p. 58. Confound
the Revelations of Men and Women. p. 60. The Spirit does not repeat, what was
spoken by himself, or by other ways before. p. 61. 62. Quakers pretend
Revelations for Wordly matters. p. 64. Gods Dispensations are Regular and
Orderly. p. 65. Quakers lose themselves in a Circle. p. 66. The light within,
and Inspirations from without, are too much for one man. p. 67. Growth is not
consistent with Immediate Revelation. p. 68. Enthusiasts have out gone Quakers.
p. 69. Satan would counter-work God with Inspirations. p. 70. Such appeared in
the Apostles days. p. 71. Several pretended to it, as the Gnostics. p. 72.
Corinthus. p. 72. Elxai. p. 73. Marcus. p. 74. The Valentinians. p. 75. The
Montanists. p. 75. The Messalians. p. 76. Aetius an Arian. p. 77. Donatus. p.
78. The Church of Rome a favourer of Revelations. p. 79. St. Hildegardis and
others spoke much like Quakers, p. 80. 81. The Council of Lateran defends them.
p. 82. The Anabaptists pretended Inspirations. p. 82. The Libertines. p. 83.
Casper Swenckfeild. p. 84. The Familists. p. 85. Jacob Behmen, p. 86. G. Fox
his Mystical Language. p. 88. The English Enthusiast, as Seekers. p. 89.
Antinomian. p. 89. Levellers. p. 90. Ranters. p. 92. Fifth Monarchy men. p. 92.
Franklyn, and the Hamp-shire Revealers. p. 94. Muggleton. p. 95. Anna Trapnel.
p. 96. The Gifted Brethren. p. 96. The Considerers. p. 97. Any of these
Competitours deserve as much regard and credit as the Quakers. p. 98. Some
English Enthusiasts from their Spirit condemn the Quakers. p. 100. The late
German Prophets do the like. p. 101. The numerousness of Quakers is no proof
for them. p. 102. They confess themselves to be not always Inspired. p. 103.
The danger in trusting them upon that account. p. 104. Their many
Contradictions in Doctrine. p. 105, 110. Their strange ways of confuting one
another in case of such differences. p. 110. 111. Their boldness in rescinding
and altering Revelations. p. 112. Inspiration is by them made Requisite to
other professions. p. 113. The Debate about the Hat considered. p. 114. Their
Constitutions inquired into. p. 115. The unreasonableness of their newest
Doctrine [that the body of ancient Friends is to be the tryer of Inspirations.]
discovered. p. 116. 118. Their Viewing and Licensing of Books before that they
be Printed. p. 119. Their differences about their Ministry. p. 120. A Pope
like decretal Epistle of George Fox. p. 121. That uninspired injunction
observed. p. 122. Their Blasphemous letters. p. 123. Divine Revelations ought
not to be altered. p. 124. Inspiration pretended for bad Designs. p. 125. Their
Unity consists in Diversities. p. 126. Thomas Ellwood makes the Spirit to be
the sole Expounder of Holy Scripture. p. 127. And that desiring and waiting are
the only requisites on our part to receive those Expositions. p. 128. The
dangerousness of that Fancy discovered. p. 129. other means requisite besides
waiting. p. 130. The style of the Scriptures is intelligible. p. 133. New
Revelations must proceed in Infinitum. p. 136. The Letter and the Spirit are
not contrary. p. 137. Christ spoke so as to be understood. p. 138. The
Scripture being a Law ought to be intelligible. p. 139. The Light and
Revelation are too much. p. 141. Vninspired men may expound rightly. p. 142.
The Quakers Circle. p. 143. T. E. receedes from his own and his Friends
Doctrine. p. 144. Some of the Quakers Expositions presented. p. 145. The
Demonstration of the Spirit and Power explained. p. 148. Quakers do undervalue
Miracles. p. 151. Miracles are necessary now to attest their Doctrine. p. 152.
The Quakers new Dispensation. p. 154. Their Forefathers therein. p. 155. Their
inward Experiences reflected on. p. 157. Religion not to be entertained upon
that account. p. 158. Others plead Experiences as much. p. 159. Some of their
Experiences instanced in p. 160 The Fathers expound Scriptures unlike the
Quakers. p. 162. The Reformers did not challenge T. E's, Revelations. p. 164.
Quakers hear Gods voice. p. 166. Receive the Gospel by Gods gift p. 167.
Confound Revelation and Exposition. p. 168. Thomas Ellwood mistakes the sense
of Joel. 2.28. p. 169. And of several other Texts. p. 171. His rules of
Expounding destroys the Scriptures. p. 176. Inspired Expositions upon the Bible
will be T. Ellwood's most convincing Employment. p. 179. But he must give
evidence of their Divine Original. p. 180. The Quakers Testimony or
constitutions. p. 182.
FINIS.

