A Continuation of M. JOHN-AMOS-COMENIVS School-Endeavours.

OR A Summary Delineation of Dr. CYPRIAN KINNER Silesian His Thoughts
concerning Education:

OR The Way and Method of Teaching. Exposed to the ingenuous and free Censure
of all Piously-learned men.

The which shall shortly be seconded with an Elucidarium or Commentary to open
the Sense of whatsoever is herein contained, chiefly of what is paradoxall and
obscure, (if any such shall appear to be.)

Together with an Advice how these Thoughts may be succesfully put in Practice.

Translated out of the Original Latin, transmitted to Sam. Hartlib: and by him
published, and in the name of many very Godly and Learned Men, recommended to
the serious Consideration, and liberal Assistance, of such, as are willing to
favor the Reformation of all Christian Churches and Commonwealths: but more
especially the Good and Happiness of these United Kingdoms.

Published by Authority.

Printed for R L. in Monks-well street.

A Brief Information concerning Doctor Kinner and his Undertakings.
WHen we look upon the ways of most men now adays we see, that although many
have a special esteem of Learning, and cry it up highly in those who have
attained thereunto: yet few there are that have any great Zeal to propagate it
unto others: and of those few whose affections may lie somewhat that way, in a
whole Age, hardly shall we find one or two, who are willing to neglect
themselves to do service unto others, or casting themselves upon Divine
Providence, to postpose wholly their private and single Interests, unto the
Public Good of many, therefore when it pleases God to raise up and put forth
such Public Spirits, as sometimes he does offer, for a blessing to the Society
of Mankind; all others, that have any true love to Virtue, and esteem of
Learning, or with Uprightness favor Public Enterprises: should appear on
their behalf, to give them that encouragement, which may bring the Works
whereunto God has fitted them, unto some perfection. For hereunto God does
call us, by the offer of such opportunities, namely, that in the Communion of
Saints we should appear for the advancement of his Kingdom, that the things,
which neither we nor any one can do by himself alone, all of us according to
our ability, should jointly promote, as members of each other; to show that we
have a love to the Body of Christ, and would gladly be helpers unto the Truth,
and the manifestation of the Glory of our God therein. Such an opportunity is
now afforded unto us in the Person of one Doctor Cyprian Kinner, a Man of
singularly eminent gracious and natural Parts, and of a very Public Spirit,
who by birth being of very honest parents, and well educated in Silesia, has
had from his youth, a special inclination to advance that part of Learning,
which is the foundation of all the rest, and without which all the other parts
will be obstructed and remain imperfect both in Church and Commonwealth; that
is, the right Education of Children, to bring their Scholasticall Studies unto
some regular course and perfection. A Work which every where to the great
prejudice of Christianity, and the whole state of Humane Felicity, is much
neglected, which for this very cause ought so much the more to be minded by
generous and noble Spirits, who seek not themselves, but the Glory of God in
all their ways. And although at first, the aforesaid Doctor Kinner, did meet
with the ordinary difficulties, which attend Public Undertakings; namely,
little encouragement from any; and no support for livelihood in following these
Studies; Yet he left not off his Design to prosecute the same; but that he
might have a subsistence with more comfort then by the way of Schooling could
be obtained: he did betake himself unto the Studies of Law and Physic, which
ordinarily in those Parts, yield a plentiful livelihood unto those that follow
them. And having soon by the eminency and vigor of his natural abilities,
made himself perfect therein, he took the Degree of Doctor in both those
Faculties, and in process of time through Gods blessing upon him in those
ways; he was in great esteem amongst all that knew him: and especially
honored by the Duke of Brieg and Lignits, who made him one of his Privy
Counselors: and by his favor and his own merits having married a Lady of
great wealth: he did reassume his Design of advancing the Reformation of
Schools, and the Education of Children, and having an Extraordinary Zeal for
that public Work: he did set apart of his Ladies estate, with her consent, the
sum of 12000 Rixdollers (which does amount to more then 2000 and 600 li.
sterling) which was dedicated to entertain a Correspondency with Learned men
on that subject, and to ripen and pub^ish his Thoughts to the World concerning
the same, but he had not been long upon that course, when it pleased God to
disappoint those purposes, by the coming in of the Imperial Army into
Silesia, by whose cruelty he being dispoiled of his whole estate, was driv^n
out of his Country into exile with his Lady, and Family where he has wrestled
many years with the difficulties incident to that state: hardly maintaining
himself, sometimes by being employed in Civil Affairs, sometimes by applying
himself unto the practice of Physic. Amongst other places he did pass
sometime of his Exile in Transylvania and Hungaria; where his acquaintance with
Master Alstedius, and Master Bisterfeld, and other Learned men of chief note,
and his constant Zeal to promote the Reformation of Schooling; did cause many
upon the report of their esteem of his thoughts and endeavors on that subject,
to take special notice of him; and amongst others M. Comenius (who was by the
liberality of a private Gentleman maintained, and set apart to further the same
Design) having gotten information of him: and what his inclinations and
abilities were to be helpful in the work, which he had in hand, did invite him
to come unto him in Prussia, that they might join their thoughts and endeavors
together for the Advancement of their Common Aims: which Doctor Kinner did
readily condescend unto, and after a year or two, when by their mutual
communications and joint labors, they had ripened several matters (which will
shortly come to light) Master Comenius was called away by the Moravian-Bohemian
Church at Lesno, where now he is, and Doctor Kinner being taken off from his
private way of subsistence, and engaged upon the Object of his public
thoughts, is left alone in Prussia at Dantzick, to depend upon Providence.
Whiles Mr. Comenius was with him he had a share in that which was allowed unto
him for his maintenance, but he now being gone, Doctor Kinner is left in a
great straight; On the one side, his zealous affection and love to so necessary
a Work, wherein he has made so great progresses, draws him to apply himself
wholly unto it; on the other side, his want of necessary means to subsist, and
to be able to publish that which he already has done, does draw him from it to
employ himself to other private employments.

Between these two extremities, not knowing what the Providence of God will
find out and ordain for him, he has cast himself upon it, and offering his
endeavors before all to the public, he has engaged himself by a Vow unto
God (which is the strongest assurance he can give of his faithfulness) to
dedicate his whole time to the prosecuting of the Design, whereof the Summary
is herewith adjoined; if God will be pleased to continue, for a year or two,
his life, and procure him assistance therein; which desire of his does deserve
so much the more encouragement from all such as love to have a hand in public
works of so great use and importance, by how much it is modest and reasonable,
for he wishes only for subsistence, so long till the Commentary or some
larger Exposition of the Heads of matters contained in the Summary can be
published, that the Godlywise who favor such Public Enterprises, may be able
to judge how serviceable his Work and Abilities may be to the ways of
Reformation, and whether or no the rest of his life should not be set apart for
the full accomplishment thereof. If this much only at first may be obtained by
the public heartedness of such which wish well to the advancement of Gods
glory, and are not unwilling to contribute some liberal help which they can
spare toward the most likely and effectual ways, which as yet have been
offered for the right framing of Childrens studies to the ready attainment of
virtue and knowledge. If (I say) this way be obtained, it will be a great
advantage unto a further propagation of Christ's Kingdom, and a special comfort
in these evil times, unto faithful souls that shall not withdraw their hands
from giving assistance thereunto, for they shall have a share in the honor of
repairing the Walls of our desolate Jerusalem, and be registered amongst those
that have laid the foundations of many Generations.

The Summary Delineation of Doctor CYPRIAN KINNER, To the Courteous READER.
HOw these Aphorisms concerning the Method of Instruction were begotten in me,
thou shall shortly know, when they shall again be exposed to thy View in a new
habit, and cleared of all strangeness, obscurity, and Impossibility by a
peculiar Commentary or Elucidarium. There (Thou Reader that love the study
of Education whosoever thou art) shall be informed of that, and many other
things besides, and shall be also entreated to give thy free Censure upon them.
The Reason why I forestall with this apart, the Edition of those other things,
is, That (forasmuch as the Commentary when perfected will be of a larger Bulk
then I hoped, and has also met with unexpected hindrances) I might in the
mean time have Copies to communicate to such Friends as desired them, and that
this, (how little soever it be) may by giving thee notice of the Design, by
little and little prepar^ thee for a more mature Censure thereupon. For having
once published the said Commentary it is not my Intention to attempt any thing
else of this Nature, till I shall be confirmed by the Votes of Piously-learned
men, that it will be worth the while to proceed. For whatsoever I have done,
must according to it is deserts either stand or full, yea perish, by the Censure
of such persons.

But be pleased to understand these few things beforehand, viz. that the drift
of my Invention for Teachiug is, That all Things Necessary to be known may be
instilled into Learners without the troublesome getting of things by heart,
without the usual confused multitude of Books, and without the ill Custom of
Dictations, by the only mere help of sensible Objects, and by Talk, and
Exercise both serious and by way of sport and pastime, with so much firmness
(as I believe) that nothing thereof shall easily be forgotten, with that
soundness and certainty, that no man shall easily refuse it, and in that
fullness and plenty that nothing either necessary or useful (especially of
Things Domestic and Useful) can be further desired, Moreover, with that
simplicity and plainnese, that all Ages, Wits, Dispositions and Sects may be
indifferently admitted unto this Method. For it propounds nothing, but what
every man may with his own Senses truly and properly conceive as an Ens or a
Thing in being; and apprehend it as true, by his own Mother knowledge, and also
by Inbred Instinct, desire it as Good. The Convenience, Possibility, and every
Process of this Method, I shall as shortly as I said before, more fully
represent in that Elucidarium or Commentary.

In the mean time these lines I hope may suffice, to the more apprehensive
Judges of things, and such as are pleased, with a succinct, complete brevity.
For those men understanding beyond what they read, will looking through the
whole Design, easily see what is behind, and without any difficulty, know the
Lion by this print of his Paw.

Farewell.
In the name of GOD.
IN my way of Teaching School, I aim at three Marks Piety, Learning, and
Civil Prudence.

2 To the hitting of each Mark (or obtaining of each end) I assign certain
steps, to every step, certain tasks, each of which task's, comprehends certain
lessons. I intend also herewithall a Directory how to order the Forms in my
Schools, how to speak to my Scholars in each lesson, and how to facilitate the
Impression or Remembrance of them.

3 For the Implantation of Piety, I make three steps. viz. The taking Men off
from the love of the World, Resignation of their own love, and exercise in the
love of God.

4 Under the love of the World are contained Pleasure, Riches and Honor, under
Self-love, Wisdom, Strength and Life: under the love of God, Faith, Hope, and
Obedience.

5 My Scholars therefore by and by after their first admittance must be taught,
led and accustomed to avoid the former, to disesteem the other, and to make
much of the latter. In the practice whereof the degrees thereof being still
observed, they are to be held and kept, not only, during the whole course of
their Instruction; but their whole life also.

6 Toward the obtaining of Learning. I appoint three steps; viz. three for the
knowledge of Things, three for the framing of Words, and three for directiou of
the Thoughts and Conceptions of the mind.

7 Having first ranked all Things into proper Classes I teach their Marks or
Signatures, their Frame or Structure, with their Virtues and Operations that
every Novice-learner may understand what every Thing is, what they contain, and
what they do, (that is whereunto they serve.)

8 Having taught to pronounce the words first in the Mother tongue signifying
each Thing, I show next how to shape the Character or Letter signifying those
words, then their setting together so as to make a complete Language, and
lastly, the use of this language toward the learning of any other. That the
Learner hereby may know, how to communicate his Thoughts to the absent, and
partake of theirs, and to draw out of both Ancient and Modern Authors,
whatsoever of humane and divine knowledge is contained in their writings.

9 Touching the Conceptions of the mind (Which are to be knowingly applied to
Things) I teach how to guide the proceedings of the Invention, Judgment upon,
and Order of them; That my Auditors may know how to find out unknown Things,
to distinguish the doubtful, and to put in order the confused and distracted.

10 In the first step or degree to learning (as I said before) I expound the
Marks or Signatures of Things, first naming them when brought to our sight in
our Mother tongue, then describing the outward habit as well total as
particular of each, and that by its threefold accidents: Lastly, teaching them
to apprehend them distinctly, by some one or more differentiall characters.

11 I show Natural Things in the living book of Nature; Things Artificial in
the Shops and Workhouses of their Makers, and both of them in the Repositories
of their figures, and representatio^s which belong to our School, where I show
them either living or carved, (yet as near the life as may be) or at least
painted. As for Things Divine (so many of them as are expedient to be known) I
fetch them, and explain there of out of Holy Scripture. Lastly, I compare the
Marks of one Thing with those of another, showing what Things do altogether,
what do more or less according to some particular respects, and what do not at
all agree in their said marks or signatures. So as their outward likeness or
unlikeness, may be more clearly known, may stick more fast in the memory, and
that the way may be laid, to look into the conformity and deformity of their
fabric or structure.

13 In the second step, I explicate the frame and structure of Things, and
first Analytically, or by taking them in pieces, wherein I divide them (first
known by their outward Marks) into their Integral parts, as also Things
natural into their parts, Essential and Accidental; So that in the former,
the Artifice of their Mechanical connection, and in the other the proportion of
Elements mixed, whereof they are made, and so the very ground and species of
their outward Marks, may be set before our Eyes and the causes of their
subsistence durability and operations, may be rightly rendered.

14 Then Synthetically or by way of Composition, where I show to the very eye
how Nature, Art and God himself, produce their works (each of them his own) by
designing them, doing and undoing them, that the Learner may know how to
imitate, make or change any thing, that is lawful, profitable or necessary.

15 At length Syncritically, or by comparing the structure of Things together,
and showing what Things do agree, either in their, Active or Passive
Principles, or in their Organicall parts, either throughout, partly, or not at
all, so that there inward likeness, or unlikeness may appear also, and the
way laid by these structures of Things to know their Virtues, as before by the
Signatures to know their Structure.

16 In the third step I teach the Virtues and operative Faculties of Things,
and first of all I teach in general, how by their signature and structure
(found out as before and considered together) to know their strength and powers
(viz: of Things Natural, as they are quickened by such or such a spirit, of
Things Artificial, as they are so or so used, by the workmen; of Things
Divine as they are thus or thus applied by men) as also the motions, arising
from their said Powers, their effects from their Motions, and lastly their Uses
and service in the world.

17 Then I expound in special what effects all things work upon their
Countercopy Man in particular, who is the Ruler, Conqueror, and Moderator of
them all, and how they conduce either to Food or Medicine, to Clothing or
Housing or to Delight or Information.

18 Then in a yet more especial manner, I show how that Man and only him,
contains within himself, the virtue of all other things in the world, and that
he is furnished with various abilities, to understand, imitate or change any of
them, so that he is a true Microcosme, and an express Image of the Macrocosme,
yea of God the Creator himself.

19 In the fourth step I teach the way of representing by Characters, the words
of our Mother tongue, and how to pronounce them, so represented, teaching my
Scholars how first to fashion lines, whereof afterward letters are made, then
the whole letters themselves, lastly, syllables arising from the composition of
letters, and then they are to pronounce, or sound those letters and syllables,
and to find them up and down, in books of several prints, always proceeding
from the more simple and easy lines, letters and syllables, by the more
compounded, to the most compound, and complexed of all.

20 Then I set my Scholars so long exercised in spelling, till they can do it
extempore, to write and pronounce whole words, still observing the former
graduall way of proceeding from the most Simple to the most Compound; and I
make them dwell so long upon this Exercise, till they can readily read and
write any word not only by copying it, but without any Copy by heart also.

21 And because Arithmeticall ciphers are numbering words I teach to write and
to pronounce them also, and to tell the value of many of them, placed in a
certain order, which we call Numeration.

22 In the fifth step I teach how to draw all these words so known a part, into
a complete language, either to be written or spoken, and that materially,
formally, or contextually, by putting all words of a kind into Classes by
themselves, then he wing those Classes til they become fit to lie in a well
ordered fabric, and lastly, by erecting an Edifice of these so prepared
materials.

23 For the material constitution I have designed an Exemplary Dictionary,
wherein are first placed all words Radical, whether declinable or not, as also
additionall particles, whether to be joined, either before or behind with any
of them. This I intend shall be done Parissyllabically, so as all the
Monosylables shall go before the by syllables, or words of two syllables
follow, and after them the trisyllables if any be. Among the declinable, the
Nounes shall lead the Van, the Verbes be in the middle and the particles
partaking of both, bring up the Rear. Moreover, of the declinables, those of
the same declension shall stand by themselves in order, according to the diverse
prerogatives of their Terminations, Genders and other relations.

24 After this I lay down Rules how almost an innumerable number of words may
be derived from and compounded out of the primitive and simple: so far as to
reach and express all Things and Conceptions, and how their Radical
signification, may be fitted to them: lastly, how these derivatives may be
disposed in Classes answerable to their primitives, for the future use of
declining them.

25 For the forming and setting together of words I intend a Gramaticall
Directory, wherein I expound by short exemplified Rules, every tribe in the
Classes of my Dictionary, and also the differences and other accidents of all
words, whether declinable or undeclinable and additionall, or under one,
showing how each tribe of declinables (whether Nouns, Verbs or Particles of
this or that Classis (each according to his kind) ought to be declined, how
they ought to be joined together, to make up a Phrase, how out of Phrases
Sentences, of Sentences periods, and of periods Sections ought to be composed,
and that either in proper aequivocall or figurative expressions, as may be most
for the embellishing of the context. For the contextual Constitution I intend
an historical Text or Discourse, wherein I present all the words, as well
primitive as derivative of an whole language, with all the ways of declining,
connecting and transnominating them, under the form of one continued History or
Discourse. That all the Real Tasks for Exercises from the beginning hitherto
scatteringly set down, may be repeated, together with a true understanding of
the co-ordination of the Things ranked in each Classis. Having always an eye to
the gradation, proportion and accurate choice of Sentences, Periods and the
style it self, so as the first part of the said Discourse may consist of short
Sentences and Periods, and be written in a low and proper style, the next part
of Sentences, etc. neither very short nor very long, but between both, and in a
mean style, but that the third may be of more full Sentences, and in a style
more sublime and flourishing.

26 In the next step I teach the use of the Mother Tongue, in order to the
obtaining of more Languages, showing how the Mother Tongue of each Nation,
(which whether we will or no, does use to obtrude it self upon us) as a
Mistress and Lawgiver in the terming of others) may be made the rule and guide
to perfect any foreign tongue, so that the emulation now among them may
thereby cease, to make them all able to express any Thing or Thought, and
lastly, to learn them all speedily, showing how easy it is to one that knows
his own tongue, the terms of Art belonging to all (as what a Radical word is,
what a Derivative or Compound, what a Termination, Declension, Syntaxis, and
what a Phrase, Sentence, Period, etc. are) to learn any other Language
whatsoever, and what devise in particular this may be done upon the Latin
tongue, and consequently upon other learned and popular Languages, in present
esteem.

27 To these purposes therefore (premising information and instructions both by
speech and writing, wheresoever they are needful) I fit the same Instruments.
viz. a Dictionary, Directory, and Discourse, the first in the course and order
of the same Classes, the second of the same kind of Rules, the third of the
same words, setting the Latin first, and those of other Languages afterward;
and if there be any Idiome, or property in any of them, them, which my Rules
will not bear, as in deriving, declining or connecting them, etc. I note them
all along by way of Exception or Observation, instilling any Language by this
way of paralleling or comparing them, even ten times more easily then otherwise.

28 In the seventh step I exercise my Auditors about Thoughts, showing how they
ought to enquire after a Thing unknown whether it be or not, To search after
it, if it lie hid, where it is, or where it is not? and if it be not as yet,
then to find out the Means, that it may eitherbe, or be in a possibility of
being.

29 For the eight step, I employ them upon Thoughts or Conceptions Judicative,
teaching them how they ought to examine a Thing of whose existence, and being
they are already satisfied, that is, how they ought to approve of it, or
disallow; Enquiring what is it, or is not; as well in it self, as in relation
to other Things. Also why or how the same is or is not, that which it seems to
be, and so whether it be true or false.

Then enquiring what that Thing contains, or whether it contains nothing, and
why and how it contains, that it does contain. Moreover whether it does or
acts or not, whether it suffers or not, and consequently whether it be
simply honest, or necessary profitable or pleasant, possible and easy, to be
desired and done. Or on the contrary whether it be dishonest or needless,
unprofitable or unpleasant, impossible or difficult, and so to be avoided or
neglected.

Then lastly, whether yea or no, and in what part and regard, a Thing,
contains any other thing more or lesser whether it so does or suffers not.
And so whether in respect to another Thing it be more or less honest,
profitable, pleasant, possible, easy, to be desired, or practiced, or the
contrary of all or any of these particulars.

30 In the ninth step I verse them in Thoughts Ordinative, for the orderly
Disposing and Methodizing of Things, Teaching what is to be first or last
thought, said, or written, of any thing. If any thing shall occur that is
confused, how it ought to be reduced into order; In special in what course
those Inventive and Judicative Thoughts, ought with discretion to be brought
into the form, either of an Epistle, Discourse or Oration, of a Disputation,
Consultation, or Systeem, or entire Body of an Art or Science, and that in such
a Method, as the nature of the thing requires; whether Analyticall,
Syntheticall, or according to the Modern Authors Syncriticall.

31 And that there may appear a notable proof or example of this tripartite
Method, and all the Exercises of Learning, Real, Verbal and Notionall, may be
viewed together at one cast of the eye, we shall represent the Concords and
disagreements, and other relations of all the Things, which we have considered
apart in their differences in three continued Columns running parallel, or side
by side from top to bottom both by first and second notions, and consequently
in their terins of Art.

Showing how all Natural Things do like a Tree concur and meet in the root,
and partake all of the same sap, and do differ from each other, only as
boughs spreading several ways, and consequently that they were all at first,
and may yet be made by one general Idea: and furthermore that Artificials, and
even Things Mystical themselves, may likewise be squared by the same Rule. And
if there appear any difference in particulars of this or that Classis; we show
that it either proceeds from the different concurrence of substantial
principles, or from a different fashion of the Organs; or from a different
intention of the Agent, and so that there is nothing seen in Things natural,
whereunto there may not be found some one or more of Things Artificial and
Mystical to answer, or if not, such as yet are found that such ought by their
track to be sought after.

32 In which harmonicall One-triple, viz. Natural, Artificial, Mystical
Systeem, or Body, all Arts and Sciences that ever were yet invented, or shall
ever be hereafter, are as (to their general Idea's) implicitly imbosomed, and
may be explicitly inserted and subordinated thereunto, that it may appear,
which are Parent, and which coozen Faculties, which of them spring from others,
and which have the same common Originals; which exceed in perfection, worth and
dignity; how many and what in quality, may yet be invented, and according to
what special Idea's, they ought to be ordered and distributed; to make the
Analogy or Correspondency of natural Operations complete and perfect.

33 Toward the acquisition of Civil Prudence, there are also three steps, a
comely carriage in outward Manners, a choice of a fit course of private life,
and the skill of duly managing a public Office or Employment, if any such
shall be offered. In all and each of which things my Scholars are to be
thoroughly instructed.

34 Their Manners or Carriage ought to be neat, comely and grave, as well in
their countenance and gestures as in their speech, which are to be diversified
according to Age, Sex, Way of life, public Charge, Deserts and Relations to
Superiors, Equals and Inferiors.

35 Their Way of life ought be accommodated and fitted to their Genius and
disposition, and sometimes to occasions of the Commonwealth, and when public
Exigence requires it, let there be heed taken in the choice of Ministers. For
Mercury is not made out of every Block.

36 The execution of a Public Office (whether it be for teaching either in the
School or Church, or in taking care of the Affairs and Health of other men, or
in defending their lives and estates in Courts of Justice, or Equity) ought to
be dextrous and expeditious, faithful and conscientious, clear of Ignorance,
Deceit, or any other faults whatsoever.

FINIS.
Doctor Cyprian Kinner's Vow to the Almighty GOD, sent from Dantzick the fifth
of Aug. 1648, to Samuel Hartlib.
Translated out of the Original Latin.
TO thee (Eternal God) that first inspired me with these Thoughts concerning
the Education of Youth, do I again most humbly resign them (imperfect though
they be) as the free gifts of thy holy Spirit. Thou that searchest the heart
and reins, know how much I desire they should be perfected, and what with
ardent zeal I endeavor the Reformation of all these School-Disorders. But it
is not hid from thee, that I want means answerable to my desires, being now a
Sojourner in a strange Land, without estate or subsistence, which the
barbarism of Soldiers by thy permission, has deprived me of, and to this
hour detain from me. Thou know also that for this whole year last past, I
have labored to obtaiu a poor subsistence, whereby I might finish but a bare
Elucidarium or Commentary. O pity Youth miserably brought up in Schools, which
the blood of thy Son has redeemed, and stir up some one that may soundly and
Christianly lead them in the ways (especially) of true Piety, good Letters, and
sober Prudence, least that innocent part of thy flock may be any further
sednc'd and led away. And eternally bless those few (whose Names are best
known unto thee) their children and childrens children, that have any way been
pleased to accept and favor my weak endeavors. But for me do as it seems
good in thine own eyes. And that I may reassume and complete my former
Thoughts, let the beams of thy Wisdom shine upon me, and by thy Power raise up
for me such Patrons, as my weakness alone could never else have procured. If
thou will not, thy will be done.

AN ADVERTISEMENT to the Noble and Generous Lovers of LEARNING.
IF any such (after the favorable perusal of this general Draught and
Information) shall be desirous to be more fully informed, concerning either
those Works of Master Comenius, which are to be published, or Doctor Kinner's
further Undertakings and continuation of them; as also how their assistance and
favors may be best conveyed unto the aforesaid Doctors hands, they may
please to send or repair to Master Hartlib's House in the great open Court in
Dukes-Place, and satisfaction shall be given to all their desires.


