MOCK POEM. Or, WHIGGS SUPPLICATION. PART I.



LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1681.

THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY To the READER.
Christian Reader,
VErses are like Ladies faces, good or bad, as they are fancied (says Don
Quixot) and Mock Poems, which bite not, are like Eggs eaten without Salt (says
another of the same Metal) that is, whose Tongue was a great deal wiser then
his Head.

In those following Lines I am more Tart to none then to my self: And therefore
I may be excused if I tell in Rhyme how some used me in Prose; I speak truth
which is expedient to be known, and therefore no Lawyer will aver I transgress
the Law.

With all the world beside, I am like a blind man, dealing blows, not knowing
whom I hit; If any shall challenge me that I touch them, I will answer, that I
knew not so much before they informed me, as answered that famous Satyrist to a
Noble Roman, who expostulated with him for smiting him in a Poem.

I am many ways wronged: And first, by Transcribers, who stealing Copies of my
Lines, have transmitted them every where, like Pictures on the wrong side of
Arras Hangings, spoiled with Thrumbs and Threeds, or like Faces disfigured by
the Pox, great or small, as ye please: Or like Sermons repeated by Children and
Serving Lasses in a Presbyterian Family-Exercise, Or like-one of Bishop Andrews
Sermons re-preached the other day by an Expectant, in his Episcopal Trial for
the Ministry.

I am, Secondly, wronged by false Copies, and that by men either malicious to
bring me to trouble, or ignorant, not apprehending my scope, who in stead of
mending my Lines, have marred then all. And who striving to pull me out of the
Mire, has thrown me into the Well, not to wash me, but to drown me: Or into
the Fire, not to dry me, but to burn me.

Thirdly, I am most of all prejudged by the late Dutch War, which occasioned
the bringing in of such superfluity of Brandie, which entering the brain of
some of the worshippers of Bacchus, has there hatched Glosses of my Lines,
like that of Orleance, destroying the Text.

Those Brandy-Interpreters may be compared to Children espying shapes and
figures in the fire; Or to those who are giddie with drink, imagining
apparitions in the Clouds; or to old Wives Commenting on Merlins or Rymers
Prophesies; Or to bad Divine expounding the Revelation, who obtrud groundless
fancies upon the ignorant multitude, for Evangelical truths.

If those Gentlemen hit my meaning, any censure is too little for me; If not,
no punishment is too great for them: And that for two reasons.

First, because they apply Passages of my Lines to men of honor, of whom (God
is my witness) I did not dream. Secondly, because they make the World believe I
am biting those whose wounds I am licking, given by the biting of other Dogs.

These things considered, it is easy to answer all which is objected against
me. And first, some of the Society of Gotham College had an intention to burn
my Lines, because I bring in Whiggs speaking too boldly in the Supplication,
and else where. But I answer, If those Gentlemen speak as they think, I commend
their zeal, but not their wisdom; And who ever shall take the pains to burn
them for Witches, will lose both Coals and labor. I demand of them, if one
should pen a Play of the Powder Plot, and bring in the Conspirators, exhorting
each other to blow up the Parliamenthouse, who will tax the Author of Treason?
or who will tax the Psalmist of Athiesm, for averring, The fool has said in
his Heart, There is not a God? All not mere ignorants know it is permitted to
Poets, good or bad, to personate a discourse, that is, to bring in Rebels
speaking Treason, and Athiests Blasphemy; And why may not I, a Poetaster, or
Poets Ape, bring in fools speaking foolishly, and wise men wisely, and yet be
neither a wise man nor a fool my self? And if I be neither, I must either be a
mixed man, or else nothing. And in effect some call me a mixed man, others
nothing: But since those who call me nothing are highly offended at me, they
mus^ of necessity confess they are offended at nothing: I am more charitable to
them, I think they are something. What sort of thing it is, all the world
knows, what ever it be it is worse then nothing.

They object, Sccondly, that without Authority I have imposed a grievous
Taxation upon the Liedges, in exacting five Dollors for every Copy, which may
be called treason.

But I answer, since I charge them not with Horning to make payment, the worst
they can call it is but begging, which it is not, but a nameless Contract, Do
ut des. And at first I did not dream of taking Money for those Lines, until
some known bitter enemies to the Presbyterians enforced each of them five
Dollors on me for a Copy: they told me, I might as well take Money for Rhyme,
as Ministers and Lawyers for Prose, and Physicians for nothing, and worse then
nothing; Some Pleading, Preaching, and Curing (it is true) deserves Money a
great deal better then my Lines: But it is as true, that some of all three
deserves it worse; If my Lines do no good, they do no hurt to the Souls,
Bodies, or Estates of any.

Secondly, I demand Money of no Man, yea, I refuse it when it is offered, not
in jest, until they make it appear they offer it in earnest, which they do many
ways; some throw Money on the ground, some on the Table; Some tell they will have
none of my Lines, except I take their Money; Some say I undervalue them, when I
refuse their Money; Some say, they are abler to give me Money, then I am to
want it; some bid Devil break their neck if I take not their Money: Some bid
God damn them if I take not their Money: yea, I can instruct, that a
Sea-Captain offered to strike off my head with a Shable, If I resus'd his
Money: but the more moderat put Money unaworse in the Pocket of my Coat, which
many think I keep unbuttoned of purpose. Mistake me not, Reader, I am not
instructing how Money should be offered, but how it should not be offered, lest
I take it.

Thirdly, that I am not avaricious, appears by my vowing to take no Money from
Ministers and Ladies, but they say I take Gold. But I answer, they cluded my
vow by equivocation, putting Gold unaworse in the neck of my Doublet, and then
run away, and I following to restore it, stumbled. They instance I stumbled of
purpose that I might not reach them: But they are still mistaken, for a Lady
having used me so, I followed her to her Chamber, and when I endeavored to
return her Gold to her pocket, her Maid (mistaking my meaning) thinking perhaps
I was searching for the wrong Pocket, taxed me of incivility; So I was
necessitate either to keep her Gold, or else be thought uncivil to a Lady: let
any indifferent man judge which was the least of the two evils. However,
Reader, tempt me not with Gold, except thou be in earnest. It dazeleth the eyes
of the wise, and therefore no marvel it blind those of a fool.

The third Objection against me is, that some affirm I am a bad Poet. But I
answer, that nothing can more offend a Poet and a Fiddler, then telling them
they want skill: If in effect they be unskilful, as I am; And therefore no
marvel if I reply in a fury that it is most true that I am a bad Poet, and yet
they are notorious liars in avering it, because they do so out of malice, not
knowing whether they speak true or false. All the world knows they never made
a greater progress in Poesy then the making of an Aie-house Roundelay, and
that a bad one. It were base in me to upbraid them with want of skill in their
own professions, in which they brag they have such insight; As to one of them,
a Physician, that he took the piss of a Ston'd-horse for that of a Woman with
Child: To another, a Mineralist, who laid a wager of ten Dollors, a piece of
Brimstone was a piece of Silver; To a third, a Palmester, to whom, when a Boy
in Girls apparel was brought in to him to have his hand viewed, superciliously
pronounced, the Girl would have three Husbands, bring forth nine Children, and
die of the tenth. It were most base in me to tell them they are fit for
nothing, except some will take them on to be Tasters of Drink: Neither are they
fit for that but in the Morning, for in the Afternoon many times they are in
the Category of Plants that is without sense and reason, having the use of no
soul but the Vegitative. I could instance other things of that nature, But I
forbear, lest the persons be discovered.

Secondly, to be a bad Poet may well be a shame, it is no sin; Neither is it a
shame for me in this first essay, withal my intention is to make men laugh, and
not to vex them: But bad Lines many times causes more mirth then good ones.
Where one laughs at the Poems of Virgil, Homer, Ariosto, Du Bartas, etc. twenty
will laugh at those of John Cockburn, or Mr. Zachary Boyd. What Hypocondriaque
would not presently be cured at the reading of those Lines.

There was a man called Job
Dwelt in the Land of Uz,
He had a good gift of the Gob,
The same case happen us.
Or of those,

Absalom hanged on a Tree,
Crying Gods mercy:
Then Joab came in, angry was he,
And put a Spear in his Arsie.
Or of those of John Cockburn.

Samuel was sent to France,
To learn to sing and dance,
And play upon a Fiddle:
Now he is a man of great esteem,
His Mother got him in a dream,
At Culross on a Girdle.
For my part, if I were a great man, I would sooner give Gold for such Lines,
then Copper for all the Heroic Oracles, of Seneca's Tragedies.

If any have more to object, let them impart it to me: And if I cannot excuse
my self in reason, I am willing to satisfy the Law, I think it very strange
that some grave and reverend men, should so wrongtheir Conscience to traduce
me, since without hurting their Conscience they may speak so much evil of me
and not lie, as I may likewise do of them.

In the end I give the Argument of a Second Part, which will prove as harmless
as a Whitred without teeth, except some shall be pleased to call Ears Horns.

One word more, Reader, and I shall trouble thee no further; when thou have
perused my Lines, and found them a cheat, it cannot but vex thee that thou have
bestowed thy money to no purpose. But I entreat thee to consider that the only
remedy is to conceal the cheat, by commending still my Lines to others, that
thou may laugh when they shall be cheated as well as they self: In doing of
which thou shall be a more Christian Liar then those who undervalue my Lines,
albeit they understand them no more then they do the Prophet Ezechiel, as
appears by their Commentaries on that Propher, ready for the Press, if they
were once dead.

Farewell.
S* C.

MOCK POEM, Or, WHIGGS SUPPLICATION.
PART I.
Argument.
ASter invocking of the Muse,
As many learned Poets use:
Next is described the time of year
When Whiggs in Armor did appear,
The Good-man's Person, and his Weed,
His Armor, Lady, Squire, and Steed,
Dog, and Pigeon, and his mind
All Allegories, where ye find
Clothed with many a senseless word,
Mysterious things, not with a turd:
As said one in a reverend Coat,
Or else he understood them not.
As lately, when he Scripture-vext,
He forced was to say off his Text:
And then ye have a supplication
Greatly misconstrued of the Nation.
At first they dispute how to mend it;
And then advise by whom to send it:
Where Knight and Squire each other thump,
As did De Ruyter and Van Trump.
Who ever thou art, Muse, who do make
By force of Brandy, Ale, and Sack,
Some who both words and matter want,
Admired of the ignorant:
In whom sagacious noses snuff;
Naught worth but Plagiary stuff,
By which they purchase praise and money,
When Bees have toiled, Drons eat the Honey.
Inspire me with Poetic surie,
That I may likewise favor Currie:
With all men to augment my Pack,
By making Lines not worth a Plack:
Some of eight Syllabs, some of ten,
Some borrowed from other men:
As Cleveland, Don, or Tass Divine,
Some ill translated from Marine;
Some Oedipus cannot not unridle,
Some sounding like a blind man's Fiddle,
Observing neither tune nor time,
Some nonsense to make up the Rhyme.
Though I speak true, or false, no matter,
If I traduce, some others flatter,
So sundry men were used of late,
As they were on or off the State.
Grant that I may curb all Backbiters,
Of Surplice, High-sleev'd Gowns, and Miters,
And Church-governing Paradoxes,
Of Calvin's followers, and Knoxes.
In mystic allegorick tone,
Scarce understood by any one.
Grant me to scold, revile and prat,
Shame fall me, if my self knows what:
When Rhyme bursts out from breast enraged,
Like turds from puddings overcharged;
Some galling, other some to laughter,
Moving like Parrat when it is taught her.
Hoping my prayer thou will hear,
O Muse! have at the time of year;
When Whiggs from lurking-holes did sally,
And in the open fields did rally.
It was about the time when Oysters
Abound so with venereous moystures,
That they are used Even and Morn
By those that do their Neighbor horn;
Which does their prices so inhance
At Englands Court, and that of France,
That Oyster-Wives have money ready
To make their Daughter sometime Lady:
As does appear by one of late
Whose Son-in-Law bore sway in State.
When snow makes dikes and mountains white,
When folks by Physic seldom shite,
Except there be some Pocky reason;
When Mutton wears out of season,
In stead of which, at every meal,
When men eat roasted Hens and Veal.
And those at Forth eat Garvie Fishes,
Then fittest to be served in dishes;
Which to the pallat pleasing proves,
Like Adriatique Gulf Anchoves.
When that the Blak bird hoarsly whistles,
When Trouts and Abercorn Mussles
Are stark naught; when that the Swallow
Lies sleeping in her own tallow,
Within some sub-terranean hole;
When under the Antarctique Pole
There is no night, under out other,
A man cannot discern his Brother,
It is so dark; when Summers heats
Scroatcheth the Magellanique straits,
And burns up the Corn and Hay
About the Caput bonae Spei:
If that be tedious to remember,
It was in Januar, or December,
When I did see the outlaw Whiggs
Ly scattered up and down the Riggs:
Some had Hoggers, some Straw Boots,
Some uncovered Legs and Coots:
Some had Halbards, some had Durks,
Some had crooked Swords like Turks:
Some had Stings, some had Flails
Knit with Eel and Oxen tails:
Some had Spears, some had Pikes,
Some had Spades which delved Dikes:
Some had Guns with rousty Ratches,
Some had fiery Peats for Mitches.
Some had Bows, but wanted Arrows,
Some had Pistols without marrows;
Some had the Coulter of a Plough:
Some Syths had, men and horse to hough:
And some with a Lochaber Ax,
Resolved to give Dalzell his paiks.
Some had Cross-Bows, some were Slingers,
Some had only Knives and Whingers.
But most of all, believe who lists,
Had naught to fight with, but their Fists:
They had no Colors to display,
They wanted Order and Array:
Their Officers and Motion-teachers
Were very few, beside their Preachers.
Without Horse. or Artilzery-pieces,
They thought to imitate the Swises;
When from Navar they sallied out.
Tremovile and brave Trivulce to rout.
For Martial Music, every day
They used often to sing and pray;
Which hearts them more when danger comes,
Then others Trumpets and their Drums.
With such provision as they had,
They were so stout, or else so mad,
As to petition once again,
And if the issue proved vain,
They were resolved with one accord
To fight the battles of the Lord.
Upon their head marched the Good Man,
Like Scanderbeg, or Tamerlane.
Dame Nature straind her outmost care,
To mould him for a man of War:
A terrible and a dreadful foe,
As does appear from top to toe.
The shape and fashion of his head,
Was like a Con, or Pyramid:
Or for to speak in terms more groff,
was just like Suggar Loaf:
Or like the head of Rob the Cripple,
Or like the spear of Magdalen Steeple:
Or like the bottom of a Tap,
Or like a furred Muscovia Cap.
They who the South-east Countries haunts,
Affirm such heads have Turkish Saints:
Which as some learned Writers notes,
Are here with us called Idiots.
Because long hair the wit dot dull,
Naught was between Heaven and his Skull:
His Ears was long, and stood upright,
Which did so well become the Knight:
That at some distance he seemed horned,
His one eye was with pearl adorned;
His other eye looked so a-squint,
That it was hard to ward his dint:
From thence down to his mouth arose
A mountain rather then a nose;
Upon which Savage beasts did feed,
As Worms, and Selkhorns, which with speed
Would eat it up, but he begins
In time to pick them out with Pins.
His lips were thick, his mouth was wide,
His teeth each other did bestride:
His tongue was big, though well he meant,
He was not very eloquent.
His beard was long, and red, and thin,
Making a Ball-green on his Chin:
As trees do sometime in a Wood,
Where Horse and Oxen gather food:
His Arms were stiff like Barrow-trams,
His Hands were hued like reisted Hams:
At Finger-ends he never fails
To have the King of Babel's Nails,
Which sooner then a Knife, by half,
Will cut the throat of Sheep or Calf.
When he, not loving to be idle,
Turns Cook to any Peny-Bridle.
They scrape up Works about his Leagure,
A great deal stronger, and far bigger
Then those made by Don Pedro Saa,
When Spinola besiedg'd Breda.
He had a Lump upon his Back,
Which some took for a Pedlers Pack:
But other some did it suppose.
A Bagg which kept his Meal for Brose.
But neither conjecture was good,
It was a lump of Flesh and Blood.
His Womb stood out an cln before,
As far behiud his Bumm, and more:
When overcharged, it made a sound,
Which did like Earthquake shake the ground.
With which, as Sentrie, when he sleeps,
His Clothes from Mice and Rats he keeps;
Which to his Pockets swarm like Bees,
Finding the smell of Bread and Cheese,
Which several times the fainting Knight
Does take for Cordials in the night.
But when the Beasts do hear the Thunder,
They Are so amazed with fear and wonder,
That to the Gate go Mice and Rats,
As fast, as if pursued by Cats.
Was never man in those Dominions.
About whose Legs were more opinions.
First, there are many who avow.
They are like an inverted V.
And other some do stiffly jangle,
That they and Thighs make a Quadrangle.
Some think, that Thighs joining, they gape,
In Circular, or Oval shape:
And other some are, who avouch
Then Semi-circles in a touch.
And other some, there are who tells,
They Are Semi-circles paralels.
But those who on them better looked,
Say one was straight, the other crooked:
Not as in touching they did make,
That famous Angle of Contact.
Which Euclids demonstration shows,
If in their Juncture ye put straws.
The truth is, they in every thing,
Resemble do a Bow and String;
The one straight to the other bending,
Is like a Chord an Arch subtending:
In which Schem, if ye draw some Lines,
Ye may have Secants, Tangents, Sines,
Which Ale-pot measuring much enables,
By help of Logarithmique Tables;
Which questions soonest do decide,
For by Substraction they Divide,
And Multiplieth by Addition,
As now does Popish superstition,
Which multiplieth every day,
Having some added to its way.
Their entry to that Church is fine,
They Re-baptize them all with Wine,
Which their Apostles think far better
To wash away men's sins, then water.
Now all is described to feet and toes,
Which I could not see for his shoes:
Some say, his toes, who saw his feet,
Resembled an Alphabet,
Greek, Syriack, or Arabic,
Or Breviations Stenographick;
Which they do counterfeit like Apes,
With great variety of shapes.
You may believe it as your Creed:
Such was his Armor and his weed;
He wore a pair of Pullion Breeches,
A Yellow Doublet with blew Steeches,
A long black Cassock over his Ars,
As he had been the fool of Mars:
He had on each Leg a Gramash,
A Top of Lint for his Panash,
Which bravely flourished in his Crest,
A folded Cloak for Back and Breast.
A Glove of Plate, which once was worn
By Black Douglas at Bannockburn.
For Headpiece, a Cowl lined with Iron,
Which did his Temples so inviron,
That it would cost a world of pains
For any to beat out his Brains.
A Blunderbush hanged at his back,
Of terrible report and crack;
As have a lower Tire of Guns,
Shot from a Ship of many Tuns.
A Horse he never does bestride,
Without a Pistol at each side:
And without other two before,
One at either Sadle Tore.
But now when he has much ado,
He has one in each Pocket too.
A Sword which wounds deep and wide,
A Target of a sevenfold Hide:
A very strange enchanted Lance,
Whose touch makes men from Sadle dance
As sometimes of old did another,
Belonging to Angeliques Brother,
And after to the English Duke,
As mentions Ariosto's Book.
And thus with more Arms he does ride,
Then other twenty had beside.
Whether he gain the day, or tine,
He never misseth to kill nine:
As does appear to all who reckons,
Justly the number of his Weapons.
Among ten thousand, all alone,
With every Weapon he kills one.
Some say, he used to take lives
With Whingers, and Kilmarnock Knives:
But he thinks that belongs to Boutchers,
And others, like Damaeta's Coutchers.
For when with any he does swagger,
He seldom uses Knife, or Dagger:
Except they come in wrestling terms,
Permitted by the Law of Arms.
The Laws of Knighthood he does keep,
Not killing Men like Calves or Sheep.
I asked at several who he was,
Some said he was Sir Hudibras,
Deceived by his boulky Paunch:
Some said Don Quixot de la Maunch,
Which was more like then was the other,
In many things he was his Brother.
First, in his head were many fancies,
Bred by the reading of Romances.
He thought before the day of Doom
The Covenanters would burn Rome,
And trample down the Man of Sin,
He thought the work he would begin,
And to the glory of his Nation,
Accomplish all the Revelation.
Prat what they please in Popish Schools,
Hammond and Grotius were but fools,
Who say, it is fulfilled already,
Must think they prayed to our Lady.
They aimed at Reconciliation,
Between the Pope and every Nation.
All other things they could pack up,
If ye take not from them the Cup:
And they had reason, for in truth,
Some think they had a burning drouth.
Next, like Don Quixot, some suppose,
He had a Lady Del to Bose,
Who never budged from his side,
Upon a pair of Sodds astride:
By whose sole industry and care,
He managed all the holy War.
We read in greatest Warriors lives,
They often were ruled by their Wives,
The Worlds Conqueror, Alexander,
Obeyed a Lady his Commander,
And Anthony that Drunkard keen
Was ruled by his lascivious Queen.
King Arthur for his Wife's sake,
Winkt at Lance lot Du Lake,
Though to his opprobry and scorn,
He cherisht one himself to horn.
They say, that now are many others
Who in that case are Arthurs brothers.
So the imperious Roxalan,
Made the great Turk John Thomsons man.
Another Warrior, all his life
Was also ruled by his Wife:
Albeit before their death arose
Some strife between them for her Pose.
Thirdly, like Quixot, he a Squire,
Had Zancho called to whet his ire,
When in a fury he did wrestle
With Giant, or Enchanted Castle.
Or like Don Quixot with Wind-Mills,
Or with Dalzel at Pentland-Hills.
Or when, like Perseus, he was ready
To fight a Monster for a Lady:
Being victorious in the strife,
He still refused the Nymph to Wife;
And that with such a modest grace
As Fames Knight did the Heir of Thrace:
To which Squire, the bounteous Knight
Promised either Man, or Wight,
Gernsey, or Jersey, or some Isle,
With a Lord Governors Style.
When he should beat his foes asunder,
And bring the Whore of Babel under.
Lastly, on Quixot's Rozinant
He rode, who took the Covenant.
As many think, none of the Nation
Could make him take the Declaration.
Some endeavored to have the Horse
Proclaimed Rebel from the Cross,
Which though they did with open throats,
The Horse eats still his Hay and Oats:
Not dreaming that in any thing
He Country did offend, or King.
The wisest Lawyers of the Nation,
Advised him to make Appellation;
Because it was against all reason
To condemn a Beast for treason;
Which reason, at a tippling Can,
Had saved his Master the Good Man:
If after his rebellious Journey,
He had met with a King's Attorney,
Who could by Law and Reason show,
He greater beast was of the two.
Or with another, who for riches
Stood for incestuous VVhoors and Witches
Or any other, whom ye list
So they did well anoint his Fist.
Beside his Horse, he had a Dog,
So used to traverse Hill and Bog,
That he became of scent so cliver,
As to miss neither Hare nor Pliver.
He turns himself in Horse or Hog,
As Monseur did Agrippa's Dog;
To find by his sagacious nose,
The counterploting of his foes.
He treads the Back-scent, brings a Glove,
And carries Letters to his Love:
He is a fierce Dog, yet most civil,
Kills Fish, whose Livers frights the Devil.
He barks at Anabaptist, Quaker,
Papist, and Declaration-taker:
But he will gently fawn, and stand
To lick a Covenanters hand.
Beside his Dog, he has a Pigeon,
Most do not know of what Religion:
She was the same, as many fear,
Which once eat Pease in Mahomets ear;
Which, when she did, the Carl did boast,
That he spoke with the Holy Ghost.
His Epilepsie for to recover,
If once employed, she does not hover;
But will make the whole worlds tour,
And come again within an hour:
Sometimes she his Orders carries
To the Azores, and Canaries:
As Quarter-mistriss, to ordain,
In which the first Meridian
Should lodged be, for Calculation
Of Longitudes in Navigation.
Sometimes he sends her in Embassage
Out through the North-East Indian passag^
To tell the great Tartarian Cham,
A piece of a West-Phabia Hamm
Is better meat, when hunger nips,
Then Collops off live-Horses Hips:
That we who here drink Sack and Brandy,
Well tempered with Suggar-Candy,
A great deal better then he fares,
Who drinks Horse Blood, or Milk of Mares
Sometime to Peru, and to Chilly
She goes, to tell our Prophet Lilly
Forefeeth neither good nor evil,
Abandoned by his Arctique Devil;
Whom the late great Frost did compel
To run and warm himself in Hell.
That she might bring from thence a Spirit
Of greater foresight, and of merit,
For to assist the great Diviner
The better for to win his Dinner.
Sometime to Turk she goes, and Sophy,
To tell their Water and their Cophy,
And their severe slighting of Wine,
Makes them so with the Colic pine;
Which torment is with them so rife,
It cost Mahomet the Great his life;
For when the Colic he did take,
And did refuse a Cup of Sack,
He worried on a windy Bubble,
And fred the World of meikle trouble.
If they'I drink Wine, they need not fear
Their Prophet, for his thousand year
Are now expired, all in vain
They expect his return again.
Thus of his Person, Armor, Weed,
His Lady, Squire, and of his Steed,
Dog, and Pigeon; for his mind,
He leaves all mortals far behind.
All things created he does know,
In Heaven above, and Earth below:
He solves the Questions every one
That Sheba's Queen asked Solomon:
Or any other knotty doubt,
That can occur the world throughout.
Neither does he prat and babble,
Like Pliny Painting out a Fable.
At first, he makes a clear Narration,
And then backs all by Demonstration.
He knows whether the great Megall
Does drink out of his Fathers Skull,
Or if he make a Chamber Pot
Of that of King of Calcecut.
If it be proved by any man
That he is come of Tamerlan;
Or if he keep Tobacco cut
In Tortois Shell, or Coco Nut.
If the Balm and Franckincense-keepers,
By rattling, drive away the Vipers,
Which with such ardor haunts those Trees,
As with us Garden-Flowres do Bees:
Or if they do those Serpents choke,
As Easterlings their Bees do smoke:
Which made two great wits, as men think,
Spend too much Paper, Pen, and Ink.
If Ichneumon and Crocodile
Do fight in Niger, as in Nile;
Or if we ought to believe them,
Who say, Melchisedec was not Sem;
Which raised once a Fisty strife
Between a Preacher and his Wife.
If any man yet ever born
Did see Phoenix or Unicorn?
If there be a Philosopher Stone?
If Men who have no Leg but one,
With broad Soles, which by Toures.
Defends their Heads from Sun and Showers?
If the Emperor Prester John
Be the Offspring of Solomon?
If those who lately conquered China,
Be the Brothers-Sons of Dina?
Who to those North-East parts were turned,
When Assur's King Samaria burned.
If Romes Founders Wolfs did suck?
If Job in Edom was a Duke?
If Captain Hynd was a good fellow?
If Wallace Beard was black or yellow?
Which raised once a great discord
Between a Western Lord and Lord.
If roasted Eggs be best, or sodden?
If James the Fourth was killed at Floden?
Which made two Schoolmen borrow Swords,
That they might fight after big words.
If Sword, or Surfeit more men kill?
Who had the better at Edgehill?
Which made two Ladies other jeer,
A Roundhead and a Cavaleer:
Both harped so on the seen ruffle,
That it turned to a scratch-eye scuffle:
At last both conclude to agree,
Both of them vowing secrecy.
Where meets the Brethren of Cross Rosy?
What sums the Spaniard in Potosie
Gains yearly by their Silver-Mines:
Since thirty eight who wins or tines.
He knows the price of Jewels and Rings,
And hidden causes of sundry things.
As of the Compass variation,
Of Nile and Nigers inundation.
Why Ireland wants Toad and Snake,
Why some men white, and some Moors black.
Why Regulus eye makes men leave breath.
Why Spiders bite, them dance to death
Why men Tarantula do not fear,
But at some seasons of the year.
Why Devils music do not please:
What sort of thing is Ambergrease,
If Iron Magnes, or it Iron
Attract? If Sea or Land inviron
That frozen great Magnetic Rock,
Under the Pole, where what a Clock
There cannot be made any trial,
The one year's half, by Phoebus Dial?
By the Seas motion he does find
A North-East passage to the Inde:
Another he finds by the North-VVest,
Where Davies freezed to his rest:
When Icy Mountains did occurr,
And stopped his course to Mar del Zurr:
But he has found a brave device,
That he may free those Seas from Ice;
He empties all the Water, syne
He fills the place with Brandy-wine,
Which hardly will congeal with Frost,
If Whales turn drunk, and Fishing lost;
Yet lose we not by that device,
For VVhale Oil we get Indian Spice.
All other ways are but a cheat,
To fetch some Money from the State.
It Is wonder they have sharkt so much.
Both from the English and the Dutch.
He proved, on peril of his Soul,
Presbyterian-rule by Paul.
He thought, none but a foolish man
Made Antichrist the son of Dan.
He thought by the Apostles meaning,
Voice Negative, and sole ordaining,
Was the very mystery
Of Antichrist's iniquity,
Which near his own time did begin
To usher in the Man of Sin.
He thought, if Bishops had not been,
A Pope of Rome had never been seen.
But now he thinks Church Government
A thing of small, or no concernment:
As ready as any ever born
For Bishops, if he had not sworn.
If Dutch and English truth report,
He knows about the Amboyna Fort,
If those two Indian Ships were sunk,
And burnt by Dutch, when they were drunk.
Who first began the War in Guinie,
Where Holms and Ruyter played at Pinie.
If groundless jealousies and fears
Yoaks Dutch and English by the cars:
Or if it be the Indian Trade
Tha does produce effects so sad.
He Will tell in Indian Pedlers faces,
We dearly buy their Cloves and Maces.
The War draws blood and money forth;
More then the Indian Trade is worth.
He thinks the War formented be
By Romish craft and policy,
Which rents the Dutch and us asunder,
To bring reformed Religion under.
When both are broken, and brought low,
Like Pitchers by a mutual blow;
Then they will force up the Pope again,
And make both serve the King of Spain:
Who in the Jesuits fantasy
The worlds Temporal Lord will be;
And meagre those who countermine them.
The Pope and he will rule between them:
The world in two Monarchies,
He with his Sword, he with his Keys.
If Dutch and English Popish were,
They would be Popish every where:
So Conclave Fathers do conclude,
But such conceits do often delude.
He finds by perfect Demonstrations
The roots of all composed Aequations.
He finds new ways to poison Cats,
Of Mudd he Serpents makes, and Rats.
He finds the Longitude of Places,
Makes Bag-pipes with Concording Bases.
He finds two means proportionals,
Which great wits sometime inthrals.
In Virtuosies Conventicles,
Excentricks, Orbs, and Epycicles
He finds to be fantastic fictions,
Forged, to palliat contradictions;
Wherewith the late Star-gazers notions
Have involved the Planets motions.
To determine he dare venture,
The Sun to be the World's Center,
To hold the Candle in the middle
Infix'd, while to Pythagora's Fiddle
Still Firmament, with twinkling eyes,
The Earth and Planets dancing sees.
He Squares, Circles, Doubles, Cubes,
Makes most admirable Tubes;
If he at Dover through them glance,
He sees what hours it is in France;
As he has proved by frequent trial,
On Steeple, Clock, and Sunny Dial:
He reads with them another while
Letters, distant twenty Mile;
Dutch, or Scots, I know not whether,
The one is as like as the other.
If he once level at the Moon,
Either at Midnight, or at Noon,
He discovers Rivers, Hills,
Steeples, Castles, and Wind-mills,
Villages, and Fenced Towns,
With Foussies, Bulwarks, and great Guns,
Cavaleers on Horseback prancing.
Maids about a May Pole dancing,
Men in Taverns Wine carousing,
Beggars by the Hie-way Lowsing,
Sojors forging Alehouse brawlings,
To be let go without their Lawings,
Sturrs in streets by Grooms and Pages,
Mountebanks playing on Stages.
Wild Boars strouting out their Bristles,
Black birds striving who best Whistles,
Throats of Larks Trumpeting day,
Falcons beating down their prey,
Hare and Deer crossing Bogs,
Followed at the heels by Dogs,
Asses braying, Lions roaring,
Owls screiching, Eagles soaring,
Foxes roused from their den,
Monkeys imitating men.
Gardens planting, Houses bigging,
States and Princes Fleets out-rigging;
Antic fashions of Apparels,
States and Princes pitching quarrels:
Wars, Rebels, Horse Races
Proclaimed at several Mercat-places.
Capers bringing in their Prizes,
Commons cursing new Excizes.
Young Wives old Husbands horning,
Judges drunk every morning;
Augmenting Lawsuits, and divisions,
By Spanish and by French decisions;
Courtiers their aims mising,
Chaiplains VVidow -- Ladys kissing;
Men to sell their Lands itching,
To pay th'expences of their Kitching.
Frequent changes, States invading,
Pulpits forcing, and persuading;
Great jarrs for Cloves and maces,
For Bishops, Lordships and their Graces:
Lords in Stews, missing Purses,
While Pages make their Ladys Nurses:
Preachers contradicting fast
This year, what they Preached the last;
Making in their Conscience room
For a change the year to come;
Some seeking Bishoprics in vain,
VVishing Presbytry again;
Lawyers counsels at such rates,
That they cost men their whole estates:
What money men puts in their Hands.
To get half back, they give their Lands:
Physicians cheating young and old,
Making both buy death with Gold:
Not versed in Aesculapius ways,
Indicative and Critic days
They make too late, or else too soon,
Not knowing the motion of the Moon:
Factions in Families and towns,
Ground manured by Country Clowns,
In Meadows, Corns, Grapes, Apples,
Outbraving Lombardie and Naples;
Priests diseased of the Riples,
Hirpling through the Streets like Criples,
Physicians spoiled with the Pox,
Hiding their Noses with their Cloaks,
Courtiers covering cankered Faisters
With curled Periwiggs and Plasters,
With Wax Noses, Golden Lips,
With Paisboard mending Legs and Hips,
Using all the Art they can,
That they may seem a pretty man,
And free of blemish, like a Priest
With Urim Thummim on his Breast:
Ladies speaking ranting words,
Attired like Men with Vests and Swords,
With Periwiggs and long Locks,
Some taxed for dancing in their Smocks:
Making frivolous excuses,
Men pretending to the Muses;
Some selling Drink, some selling Draff,
Some Buffons turned, to make men laugh;
Some Publicans, some busy medlers,
Some turned Horse-Coopers, some Pedlers;
Some challenged for dreadful things,
As stealing Silver Spoons, and Rings;
Having used many wiles before,
That they might put them to the door.
Sundry Philosophic Asses
By Dictating, Teaching Classes,
Not taking an account again,
Making Boys spend their time in vain.
Some dissipating little Muggs
Containing universal Druggs;
Physicians crying out amain,
Where they cure one, they poison ten.
Some getting Oyster-Boats to Dreg,
Some making Satyrs for to Beg,
Being reduced to those wants,
By several avaricious Saints,
Who proved on them Drinking, Whooring.
By slandring, forging, and perjuring;
At last, for all their fair pretention;
Their quarrel proved to be a Pention,
Which having got, then for refuge,
They bribe, or cheat a silly Judge,
By purloyning, and forbearing,
To stop the cause from further hearing.
There was no remedy for the evil;
All went headlong to the Devil:
That Fathers saying is most true,
Penitent Clerks are very few:
Ere any shame shall them betide,
They Will one sin with another hide.
His Tube in higher Planets Heaven,
Discovers many more then seven.
Jove has his gaurd, with thunder thumps,
To beat down Covenants and Rumps:
And Saturu has his Pages too,
When he meets Jove, there is adoo.
Its good to some, and bad to other,
Its never good to all together:
For some go up, and some go down,
Some gets, and some will lose a Crown.
They say, such things will now appear
In less then three and thirty Year.
Great change of Government will be,
As all affirm beyond the Sea:
But all their practices, and wiles
At this bout, will not reach our Isles.
All is confined to the main,
And then it will about again.
We need not break our hearts for sorrow,
What Is ours to day, is theirs to morrow.
He sees Mars sending Grooms in ire
To set the World below on fire;
Raising such fury in men's Breasts,
That Generals are made of Priests,
Which them becomes, as all avow,
As well as Sadle does a Sow.
He sees those Grooms, who Sun attends,
Blowing on their burnt finger-ends:
Among whom Mercury does stand,
Serving the Sun with Capp in hand.
He has no dwelling of his own,
But is Domestic of the Sun.
Phoebus and he has great compassion
On Arts now wearing out of fashion:
Yet some will flourish, they foresaw
Romances, and the Cannon Law.
He sees, with Venus Pages are,
Who Pimps were to the God of War:
When jealous Vulcan, sick of love,
Would needs himself a Cuckold prove,
Like several great ones here below,
Though some conceal what they do know.
His Tube once levelled at the Sky,
Sundry, yet hid lights does espy;
Some lesser ones, and some more gross,
Between the Boars and Southern Cross;
Some on Pegasus his Hoove,
And Some upon his Masters Love,
And some upon her Mothers Chair,
And some on Berenices Hair;
And some upon the Serpents Sting,
Aod some upon the Eagles VVing;
And some upon the Rams Horn,
Some on the Beard of Capricorn,
And some he sees upon the Bull,
And some upon Orion's Skull,
And some on Nessus mortal foe,
And some on Cancer's meikle toe:
Some on the Sails of Argo Ship,
And some on Antinous Hip;
And some he sees upon the Twins,
And some upon the Fishes Fins;
And some he sees on Libra's Scale,
And some upon the Dragon's Tail;
Which little Bear and Pole entangles,
And some he sees on the Triangles:
Some on the Harp, some on the Swan,
Some on the Crown, some on the Cran,
Some on the VVhale, some on the Trout,
And some upon the great Dogs Snout;
And some upon the Virgins Knees,
On Crinita, between her Thighs,
Which makes her blush, and turn her look
North-East, upon Boote's Dock:
Which the base Clown regards not,
But spurns her backward with his Foot,
And almost lames her on the Knee,
Which barbarous incivilitie
Is evident to any man,
By the Glob of Vatican.
And finally, that tract of Light
Which we see in a Frosty Night,
And caused Philosophic jarrs,
He finds to be the light of Stars;
Which just so shining, he does mark,
As Haddocks Heads do in the dark.
Solve several Questions he can,
Scarce solvable by any man:
If number of Stars be odd or even:
What Is beyond the outmost Heaven.
If substance of the Heavens be mixed,
If Stars do move, in Orbs infix'd:
Or, if they move, as others clatter,
As Fowl in Air, or Fish in Water.
Since Jewish Sabbath is begun,
And ends with setting of the Sun.
How that Sabbath observed can be
Beyond the sixty eight degree
Of Latitude: since Antipods
In Sun shining, have such odds.
How both Sabbaths observation
Jumps with the Sabbath of Creation:
The one and other Question
Sorely puzzled Solomon,
In that great Dispute, that between
Was him and that Arabian Queen;
Or Ethiopian, as some other,
Who make her Prester Johu's Mother.
Against the late Star-gazers Schism,
And Argolus Paralogism;
He finds Comets are placed no where
But in some Region of the Air.
He finds with admirable speed
Their Paralaxis by a Thread:
He finds their eyes perceive not well,
Or else Dioptriques make them reel,
And that their Brain's not worth a Turd,
Who calls them Via Lactea's Curd;
The same he thinks of many others,
Who say, they are new Stars half Brothers:
Of which last, if he espy one,
He bids let Gods secrets alone.
He finds both Comets and Eclipses,
But petty Fortune-telling Gypsies:
The like uncertainty he sees
In change of Excentricities.
But he foresees with Prophets Unction
The effects of a great Conjunction;
Before the Age begin again,
Spain shall have France, or France have Spain
The Monarchy shall spread no further,
If Dutch and English hold together.
And though they do great tribulation,
Follows a Gothish inundation,
Spreading from Pomer into Scluse,
In defense of the Flower de Luce:
Their Mutiny for want of Pay
Proves to the French a dismal day.
Then English shall say, God be thanked,
The French are like Fleas in a Blanket,
They soon skip out, as they did in,
Their Conquest ends ere it begin.
They mar all by unstable carriage,
As in their old Italian Voyage;
When quite forsaken of their helps,
They first brought Shankers over the Alps.
He does foresee another wonder,
Nations in place, and hearts asunder,
Shall straightly he conjoined in one,
Against the Whore of Babylon.
And though those Nations be but poor,
Rich Kings who fornicat the Whoor,
Shall melt before them, as the Snow,
When Rain and South Wind makes a Thaw.
What men they are, he will not clatter,
Lest some think he intends to slatter.
Then all shall be serene and clear,
And Saints shall Reign a thousand year,
If not, let it not be forgotten,
To hang him when he is dead and rotten.
All doubt much of the Jews Conversion
The manner of the Worlds Eversion.
If Fire shall burn the Heavens to Embers,
If separat Souls their Friends remembers:
If those new reasons do make good
The Circulation of the Blood:
If Webbs of Cloth be made of Stones,
If Pox can be chased from the Bones;
If Minerals nourish as Grain,
If Ratts once dead can live again:
And of such like Resurrections,
If by Attractions, and Ejections,
Men may lend, or borrow blood;
If universal Druggs be good;
If Satyr-makers ever thrive,
If any thing which they contrive;
If there be such of any Nation.
Who are not driven to desperation,
Giving to all, who them defends,
Still sorest on the finger-ends.
Though never wiser-man was born,
He knows not how to dine the morn:
No more then he sees when shall come
The moment of the day of Doom.
The VVhiggs him circled in a Ring.
And he stood like a Nine-pin King;
After a Pause and a Cough,
And sundry clawings of his Hough:
Upon his Tiptocs he arose,
And with his Fingers wiped his Nose,
And cleans'd his Fingers on his Breeches,
Delivering those following speeches.
Hear, O ye remnant of Israel,
Who have not bowed your knees to Baal,
For which ye undergo the Cross;
Ye Gold refined from the Dross;
Ye winnow'd Corn purged from the Chaff,
Ye sp'rit of Malt drawn from the Draff;
Who to the good Cause are no shame,
Ye Covenanters, Cruds and Cream;
Ere one a Pater Noster utter,
Some will turn Cheese, and others Butter,
And each will feed his hungry Brother,
If we shall chance to eat each other.
Ye who still pray for these who wrong you,
God grant there be no Rogues among you,
As Arch as any of the Nation:
I have caused Pen a Supplication,
Which must be sent unto the King,
From whom some must an answer bring:
I Will read it out, that ye may mend it,
And then advise by whom to send it.
Then answered the whole Crowd,
Bidding him read it out aloud.
Seeking his Lunets forth, he farted,
At which, they who stood nearest started;
Those further off took such Alarms,
Some cried to Legs, some cried to Arms:
What was the matter, none could think,
Till all of them did smell the stink.
Then having hushed their shouts and hollows,
He did begin to read as follows.
THE SUPPLICATION.
SIR, though there be but few among us,
Who bids at every word God damn us;
Though we come not to martial closes,
Half gelded, and without our Noses:
As not accustomed to those tricks,
Which hurts men's Noses, and their Pricks:
Although we do not rant and swagger,
Nor drink in Taverns till we stagger,
And then engage in drunken quarrels,
Where wit goes out by tooming Barrels;
Where some throw Stoops, and others Glasses,
Some struggle with the serving Lasses;
Some throw a Chandler, some a Can,
Some strive to Cuckold the Good Man.
Some mean their Elbow, some their Head,
Some cry, alace, their Shoulder Blade;
And some with spilled drink are dreeping,
And some sit on a Privy sleeping:
Some do not know at whom they are striking,
And some are busy Pockets picking:
Some have their hair with fingers freezed,
And some cry out, they are Circumcised.
Some have their Faces and their Throples
All scratched with Tobacco Stoples:
Some Coals with naked Swords are hewing,
And some ly in a Corner Spewing;
And other some get bloody Fingers,
By grasping naked Knives and VVhingers,
When they the fray intend to redd,
When it were better they were a-bed:
And some cry, ye disturb the Lord,
And some cry, fie bring Baily Baird,
A man who is obliged much
Unto the War against the Dutch.
At that they call the Wench to reckon,
She comes and counts up three for one,
But gains not much, though she so trick it,
Beside her loss of Burges Ticket:
They tell her, they will money borrow,
And come and pay their Shot to morrow:
Their Officers, the other day,
Had Dyc'd, and Drunk, and Whoor'd their pay.
Sir, though we do not play such pranks,
For which we give unto God thanks;
Yet we your loyal Subjects are,
To serve you both in Peace and War,
With our Fortunes, and our Lives;
But if our Conscience, and our Wives
By any man be meddled with,
We Will both defend with all our pith.
Sir, our conscience to compel,
Is to force our Souls to Hell.
If we do good, and think it evil,
In that we more obey the Devil,
Then doing ill, which we think good,
If holy Writ be understood.
Sir, we have been sore oppressed,
Our Wives and Serving Lasses Sessed,
Either to give beyond their reach,
Or else hear some Hirelings Preach:
Who Preach naught else, but rail and rant
Against the Holy Covenant:
And yet its known, that the Nation
Did take it, at their instigation;
For which, of late, they were so hearty,
When it was the prevailing party,
That they urged State, as they were wood,
To take some's Means, and others blood:
And others they compelled to flee,
And hide themselves beyond the Sea:
And that, Sir, for no other reason,
But Ante-Covenanting Treason.
But now, Sir, when the guise does turn,
They Preach nothing, but hang, and burn,
And harry all those of the Nation,
Who do refuse the Declaration:
Persuading us with tales and fictions
To take Oaths which are contradictions;
Having, for love of VVorldly Pelf
First taken contrair Oaths themself.
At the first, Sir, God be thanked,
We sold Covering, Sheet, and Blanket,
And Gowns, and Plaids, and Petticoats,
Meal and Pease, Barley and Oats,
Butter and Cheese, and Wool Fleeces,
For Groats and Forty Penny pieces;
Capons and Hens, and Geese and Piggs,
Oxen and Horse which Tilled our Riggs;
And which our very hearts pierces,
Mastor Zachary Boyd's Verses,
Dickson's Sermons, Guthrie's Libels,
Bessie of Lanerk, and our Bibles,
And learned Religion by tradition,
Which smells of Popish superstition:
To pay our Fines we were so willing,
Which was for each fault Twenty Shilling:
Though we alleged for our defense,
It was too much by Eighteen Pence.
At last, we had no more to give,
Neither knew we how to live;
They felled all our Hens and Cocks,
And rooted out our Kail Stocks,
And cast them over the Dikes away,
And bid us, jeering, fast and pray.
Being incensed with such harms,
We were necessitate to Arms;
And through the Country we did come,
We had far better stayed at home.
We did nothing but hunt the Glaiks,
For after we had got our paiks,
They took us every one as Prizes,
And condemned us in Assizes,
To be hanged up every where,
And fixed our Heads up here and there.
Once dreadful Heads, Sir, all did doubt them,
They had so meikle wit about them.
And we, who escaped those grievous Crosses,
Did hide our selves in Bogs and Mosses:
Where we fed on sodden Leather,
Mingled with crops of Heather;
Which, our hunger to assuage,
We thought most savoury Pottage;
For Drink, it was no small matter,
If we got clear, not muddy Water;
In which, we heartily do wish
There be none who desire to Fish;
That by the Devils instigation,
Brings on us all this tribulation.
When in that case we could not stand,
We Sally, Sir, with Sword in hand;
Let men cry, Rebels, till they grow hoarse,
VVe're Subjects never a white the worse.
Though we prefer you not to God,
Who do so, Sir, their Faith will nod.
If Government take changing tours,
They will renounce both you, and yours;
As does appear by some of late,
When that Usurper ruled the State:
They strove, Sir, to be sent apace
To abjure you in the Worlds face.
Though some, Sir, of our Duniwessles
Stood out, like Eglingtoun and Cassils,
And others, striving to sit still,
Were forced to go against their will:
Yet other some, as all men knows,
Who should be sent, were near to blows;
That is, at very boystrous words,
Putting their hands upon their Swords,
To make men think that they were stout,
When it was known the World throughout,
To fight your foes, when they were sent,
They always took the Bog a-sclent,
And running from the fight by stealth,
Would then sit down and drink your health:
And since they could not think, like Asses,
To beat your foes by drinking Glasses;
It Is evident, Sir, as we think,
They drank your Health for love of Drink.
Yet many, Sir, were disappointed,
Who so forsook the Lords Anointed;
They were not all alike regarded,
Some well, and some were ill rewarded:
They who played best with both the hands
Enriched were by their Neighbors Lands
Some from their Creditors got refuges
Some were made Clerks, and others Judges:
Some swearing their Stocks were spent,
Strove to get down their Anualrent:
Detaining, Sir, by that extortion,
The Fatherless and Widows portion,
Which Usuring Fathers Lent to Lairds,
Who played it all at Dice and Cards:
Which forced some Lasses to miscarriage,
Because they could not get a Marriage.
But among those of stricter life,
The truth-tell-colour grew so rife,
That it marred all the Charms and Graces
Of those who could not paint their Faces.
But other some got mocks and scorns,
By giving to their Landlords Horns,
And spewing Claret, mull'd with Eggs,
Between the Lord Protectors Legs,
When they did endeavor to pray
Before him, on a Fasting-day.
Some Whally's Bible did begarie,
By letting flee at it Canarie,
Taking it up, where it lay next,
That they might read on it the Text;
When Cromwell Preached with great applause
The Revelation of his Cause:
And some of them empawn'd their Cloaks,
And other some brought home the Pox:
Giving foul Linnings all the wite,
Some turned your friends for mere despite;
Vowing you never to withstand
Again, without something in hand.
And some turned Ordinance-forsakers,
Others for grief of heart turned Quakers:
Some in their Conscience took remorse,
Crying, I Am damned, till they grew hoarse,
And made the standers by admira
To see them take the fits of Spira.
To bring those troubled Souls to peace,
Some reads Alvarez helps to grace;
Some Sanctuary of a troubled Soul,
Some cited Passages of Paul:
Explaining well what he did say;
Some reads on Mr. Andrew Gray:
Some told the danger of backsliding,
Some the good of Faith abiding;
Some reads the Cases of Richard Binning,
Some Fergusson reads of Kilwinning:
And some them pressed very sore
To hear a little of Doctor More:
But others cried, Away, and Tush
With Vipers in a Balmy Bush?
With blind Pilots, guiding Ferries,
With Toads lurking in Straw-berries.
His Doctrine of Justification
Drives all the Court to Desperation.
Few there are saved, as we guess,
By their inherent righteousness.
He has some good among great evils,
He tells of Bastard getting Devils
Of their Bodies, or Vohicles,
Their Herauldry and Conventicles.
It Is sport to see his fancy wander
In their Male, and Female Gender.
He does so punctually tell
The whole economy of Hell,
That some affirm he is Puck Hary,
Some, he has walked with the Fairy.
Though Intellectuals be neat,
Though he mean well, and is no cheat,
His case is desperate and sad,
For too much Learning makes him mad.
We Will read on the True Converts Mark,
Or we will read on Bessie Clark,
Or else on Bakers Heavenly Beam,
Or on the Lady Culross Dream;
Which sundry drunken Asses flout,
Not seeing the Jewel within the Clout.
Like Combs of Cocks, who takes no heed
When they Gower, or Chaucer read.
When they had said, and read their fill,
It did not cure the Patients ill:
They still cry on, and howl, and mourn,
Their counsels would not serve the turn.
No comfort at all find they can,
Until a Grave and Reverend Man
Advise them to resist temptation,
With Spainish Wine, and Fornication.
Those Rebels also to obey,
Those Hirelings ceas*d for you to pray;
Because their Stipends, and their Living
Were at the foresaid Rebels giving.
They thought a man a venial sinner
Who left sworn duty for his dinner:
Yea, some of them were of opinion,
They might pray for that Devils Minion.
They would not stick for love of Pelf,
To pray, Sir, for the Devil himself:
But we, in the Usurpers faces,
Remembered you in Prayers and Graces;
And if we had had Guns and Swords,
Our actions would have backed our words.
Our fault, Sir, was, for which we moan,
We thought to do it all alone.
Since it was only want of wit,
Since it was a distraction-fit,
We pray you, Sir, be no despiser
Of us, whom God has made no wiser.
Royal Sir, to those our times
Applied may be a Poets Rhimes,
Who coursly sings, that a Wight
Obeying King, in wrong or right;
If that the King to wrack shall go,
Will in like manner turn his foe:
But who obey no sinful thing,
Do still prove constant to their King.
The Rhyme is barbarous and rude,
But, Sir, the saying's rich and good;
In Print yet forth it has not crept,
We have it in a Manuscript:
The Good Man keeps it, as we think,
Behind a Dish, upon the Bink:
And yet it is thought by many a man
Most worthy of the Vatican.
It Is worthy, Sir, of your Saint James
That stands upon the River Thames.
Ye'll not find saying such another,
Put all their Gilded Books together:
Tho with these two ye join in one
The Bibliotheck of Prester John.
Cause Pages cry it still before ye,
As Philip did Memento mori.
Since then we Arm for Conscience sake,
May't it please you, Sir, some pity take,
And not by Bishops instigation
Enforce on us the Declaration,
Nor make us give, beyond our reach,
To keep's from hearing Hirelings Preach;
Who last year Preached Oaths to take,
And this year Preaches them to break:
When they have forced men to take them,
Then first of all, themselves they break them.
Except God, Sir, their manners mend,
They Will oath it to the Worlds end.
Men either must foreswear themself
As often as they turn Coats for Pelf,
Or else their Conscience is so scurvie,
They will turn all things topsie turvie.
And we will give what we can reach
To keep's from hearing those men Preach,
As Achisons, Balbies and Placks,
Which is enough, Sir, for our packs.
Likewise, in any other thing
We will obey you, as our King,
If ye require it at our hands,
We Will quite to you both Lives and Lands.
Nothing to fight can us compel,
Except to keep our Souls from Hell;
What ever mischief us befall,
Or else the Devil take us all.
Ye need not, Sir, distrust, or fear,
When Out-Law-VVhiggs do Ban, or Swear;
It does unto the World appear,
Keeping our Oaths has cost us dear.
We pray God, that Your Majesty,
And then Your Royal Progeny,
May peace and truth with us defend,
As Kings, unto the Worlds end.
We with all duty and respect
Your gracious Answer do expect.
A Debate between the Knight and Squire; about the mending of the Petition, and
who should carry it to the King.
ANd thus the Supplication ended,
The Squire cried out; it should be mended:
Being desired to tell the cause,
First with all ten his Arse he claws,
And then his Elbow, and his Head,
VVinking a while, as he were dead;
And clapping both Hands on his Snout,
At last his reason tumbled out;
To wit, it did not move to grant
Renewing of the Covenant.
Knight. At which the Knight gave such a groan,
As would have rent a heart of stone:
And casting both his eyes to Heaven,
He said, not though the Earl of Levin
Were on our heads, we durst not do it,
It Is base to put the King so to it:
It is a most presumptuous thing,
To cross the Conscience of a King.
Some honest men did never take it;
Some honest also were who broke it;
But he who breaks't against his light,
Let it be wrong, let it be right,
By Prophets and Apostles leave
We dar aver his a knave.
On singulars we will not harp,
For the apply will be to sharp.
We put down Bishops, to our cost,
Yet two or three still ruled the Roast;
Some of which played such pranks at home,
As never Pope presumed at Rome.
It is the simplest of all tricks
To suffer fools have Choping Sticks.
A Sword put in a wood man's hand,
Bredd meikle trouble to the Land.

Squire. The Squire replied, they are scarce of news,
Who tells, their Mother haunted Stews.
Who on his Brother rubs disgrace,
He spits upon his Mothers face.
Each Covenanter is our Brother,
The Covenant, of all is Mother.
Their wit is dull, and very gross,
Who think where Gold is, therc's no Dross:
Where there is Corn, there may be Chaff,
Where there is Malt, there may be Draff:
Thistles with Corn grow on the Riggs,
And Rogues may lurk among the Whiggs.
And Friars in Lent may be Flesh-eaters,
And Covenanters may be Cheaters,
And Weeds grow up with fairest Flowers,
And sighing Sisters may be Whoors.
As Fruit on Trees grow, so grow Leaves,
Its certain Bishops may be Knaves;
Its known to all, the Devil may dwell
In some of fourteen, as of twell.
To blame a Cause for Persons Vices,
Is one of Satan's main devices,
By which he very often does make
VVell-meaning men the truth forsake.
But let us first the Question state,
Before we enter in debate,
Which of the two should bear the sway,
The Miters, or the Elders Lay.

Knight. The Knight did pause a pretty while,
Then answered with a scornful smile,
I tell thee, fool, I think Government
Of Church, a thing of small concernment:
The truth it is uery hard to find,
It puzzleth the learned mind.
Some do the Presbytry conceive
New forged by Clavin at Geneve;
Some say, he puts to execution
Paul the Apostles Institution,
Which suffered exile and ejection,
The time of Paul's foretold defection.
Some say, since Bishops did appear,
Its more then Fifteen hundred year;
Some say, that then they did begin
The Pope of Rome to Usher in:
That Paul's iniquities, mystery working,
Was men, then for precedence forking.
Some Presbyterians do conclude,
But Bishops say, such thoughts delude:
Which comes from brains which have a Be,
Like Urquharts Trigonometrie.
Some Bishops prove by Scripture-phrazes
As by the word (...)
How John the Angels seven did greet,
Why Paul did Titus leave in Creet.
But other some boldly asserts,
Who reason so, the Text perverts.
Some call the Bishops Weather-Cocks,
Who where their Heads were turn their Docks.
Still stout for them who gives them most,
And who will make them rule the Roast.
Some say, that Bishops have been good,
And sealed the Gospel with their blood;
As ready for the truth at call,
As any Whigg among us all.
Perhaps a railing foolish Ranter
Will tell a Bishop Covenanter
An honest Clergyman will be,
When Cable passes Needles eye:
For some of such had played a pavie,
Though all the Cables of the Navy
In one, should pass through Needles-eye,
Whiggs still would doubt their honesty.
Some say, a Bishop Covenanter,
If a penitent repenter,
Causes more joy to Spirits Divine,
Then all the other ninety nine.
Some Father Tales upon King James,
To sundry Presbyterian Dames,
That he was forced of Knaves to make them,
For Devil an honest Man would take them.
Some say, the King gave never leave
To make a Bishop of a Knave.
That those men are evil speakers,
Taxed by Jude, spiritual Quakers:
That none does hate Nobility;
For Quakers blaming Herauldry.
And some again are, who compares
Our Bishops unto Baiting Bears;
Who, if they be not kept in aw,
They will tear all with teeth and paw:
Yet tractable in every thing,
If in their Snout ye put a Ring.
And many men again there be
Who say the same of Presbytrie;
And some say this, and some say that,
And some affirm, they know not what.
Its grief to see them Scripture vex,
And wrest it, like a Nose of Wax;
And he who is deceived most
All Fathers on the Holy Ghost:
Some quiting Prophets and Apostles,
Thinks best to plead the Cause by Postills:
And some do dispute by Tradition,
Some calls that Popish Superstition;
And some affirm, that they had rather
Follow a Counsel, then a Father:
And some affirm, it buits not whether,
They are blind Leaders all together.
And since the truth is found by none,
No more then is that turn Gold Stone,
It Is best, Zancho, for ought I see,
To take a Pint, and then agree.
Let men have Bishops at their ease,
And hear what Preachers best them please;
If we be fred of Declaration,
And of that other great vexation
We mentioned in our Petition,
We'll alter it on no condition;
Then we will serve the King as much
Against the Dane, and French, and Dutch,
As any in his three Dominions
Who hates us, or our opinions:
If he command us, we will come
Like Goths, and Scale the Walls of Rome,
And bereave Babels Whore of breath,
Or die the Duke of Bourbon's death.

Squire. The Squire made many odd Grimass
Ere he could speak, like Balaams Ass;
Sometime he winked, sometime looked up,
And running backward like a Tupp,
For to return with greater force,
He snorted like a very Horse;
One thought upon another tumbled,
One while he grin'd, another grumbled.
At last, like Cant, or Trail, or Durie,
He gave a Broadside in a fury:
Looking as he would eat them all,
His words flew out like Cannon Ball.
The love of Pelf comes from the Devil,
It Is root of all mischief and evil:
It makes Lords sup without a Candle,
When none can see their Knife to handle:
While to bring Candles Servants lingers,
Ten Candles will not heal their Fingers.
It makes Foreheads and Shins to bleed,
By saving Candle, to light to Bed.
It makes them keep their Cellar Keys,
Set secret marks on Hamms and Chese;
Which, if but in the least defaced,
Wives, Servants, Bairns are all menaced.
It makes them prigg for Milk and Eggs,
Put in a Broth Cocks, halfs, and Legs:
It makes them Clout Elbows and Breasts,
Keep Rinded Butter in Charter Chests,
Till Ratts eat all their Law-defences,
And Families old Evidences:
It makes them pay their Masons Wages
By Usury, on VVedds, and Gadges
Taken from Widows, who were plundered,
By paying Forty in the Hundred.
It corrupts Hamell, Sharp, and Sweet,
It poisons all, like Aconite:
If it touch Hide, it goes to Heart,
And so affects every part.
The great ones do betray their trust,
Ladies throw Honor in the dust,
Like those who troad the Cyprian Dance
With that Financier of France.
It Puritans does make of Ranters,
And Cavaleers of Covenanters;
Of Lords and Earls it makes Drapers,
Of Priests and Levites it makes Capers.
It makes grave and reverend Cheats
In Pulpits, and Tribunal Seats:
For any Crime it finds defenses,
With Oaths, it like a Pope dispences:
It causes among Brethren strife,
It makes a Man Pimp to his Wife:
It makes yield Fortresses and Towns
Sooner then Armies with great Guns:
It sets a-fire Cities and Streets,
It raises Tragedies in Fleets;
It makes the vanquished victorious;
And foyl then victory more glorious:
It makes rebellion rise and fall,
And has such influence on all,
That whom it made rebellious Nurses,
It loyal makes, to fill their Purses:
It causes many a bloody strife,
When needy malcontent grow rife:
Then by it Church and State are mended,
And will be till the world be ended.
Master, we all observe and mark,
Since ye once doubt, ye will embarque.
Why do ye Conscience so neglect?
Or, what, Master, can ye expect?
Although among the Whiggs ye Preach,
A Bishopric ye cannot reach:
For Bishoprics are given to none
Like Presbyterian John Gillon,
Who, when he takes his Preaching-turn,
Will make more laugh then he makes mourn.
Ye have infused in us Sedition,
Ye will us leave in that condition:
And then cause Print a Book of Season,
Tax whom ye have seduced of Treason.
And when so doing, all men see,
Ye sing the Palinod of Lee.
The Cavaleers will still you call
The Archest Rebel of us all.
Thus having said, he made a halt,
And stood, like Lots Wife turned to Salt,
With Ear attentive, earnest Eye,
He did expect the Knights Reply.

Knight. Who stroak'd his Beard, and bit his Lip,
And wiped his Nose, and scratched his Hip,
He wry'd his Mouth, and knit his Brows,
He changed more then twenty hues;
His Hands did tremble, his Teeth did chatter;
His Eyes turned up, his Bumm did clatter,
His Tongue on Teeth and Gumes did hammer,
He fain would speak, but still did stammer:
His Garb was strange, dreadful, uncouth,
Till through his Epileptick Mouth
Those following speeches fierce and loud
Burst out, like Thunder through a Cloud.
Thou poisons all, my little Grex,
Thou sentence-speaking Carnifex:
Thou hardy and presumptuous are
To meddle so with Peace and War;
Rub my Horse Belly, and his Coots,
And when I get them, dight my Boots;
For they are better then Gramashes
For me, who through the Dubbs so plashes:
Yet I Will wear none, till I put on
Those of the Priest of Livingston;
Who, when they hid them in the Riggs,
Said they were plundered by the Whiggs,
Unto another Priest, his Marrow,
Who sent a Maid his Boots to borrow,
Whose Boots were plundered indeed,
As was his Salt Beef, and his Steed.
Teach what I please, thou'st not forbear
To meddle with things without thy Sphere;
Like-Taylors making Boots or Shoos,
Or like Shoo-makers making Hose.
Like some I know, as blind as Owls,
Playing at Tennice, and at Bowls,
And sometime Shooting at a Mark,
Like Passavantius playing the Clerk,
Who meddled with, he knew not what,
That he might get from Rome a Hat.
Men often by change of station tynes,
Good Lawyers may prove bad Divines:
Like Sadoleto's Dog in Satine,
Like Ignoramus speaking Latin:
Which raised most unnatural jarrs,
As between Law and Gospel Wars.
Like Bembo's Parrat singing Masses,
Like men of seventy Courting Lasses;
Like Highland Lady's knoping Speeches.
When they are scolding for the Breeches,
Like Massionella freeing Naples
From Gabells put on Roots and Apples.
Like Taylours scanning State concernments,
Or Cobblers clouting Church Governments.
Like some attempting tricks in Statiques,
Not versed in Euclids Mathematiques.
Like Pipers mending Morleys Music,
Or Gardners Paracelsus Physic.
Like Atheists pleading Law refuges;
Like Country Treisters turning Judges.
Like Preachers stirring up devotions,
By Preaching Military motions;
Proving their uses and didactiques,
By passages of Aelians tactiques.
Like Ladies making Water standing,
Like young Lairds, Horse and Foot commanding.
Like Monckeys playing on a Fiddle,
Or Eunuchs on a Ladies middle.
Like Gilliwetfoots purging States
By papers thrown in Pocks or Hats;
That they might be, when purged from dung
Secretaries for the Irish Tongue.
Great wounds, yet curable, still faister.
When fools presume to rule their Master;
As sad experience teach'd of late,
When such reformed Church and State:
Though all the Public did pretend,
All almost had a private end.
There was no place of War, or State,
But was by twenty aimed at;
Whereof ninteen were disappointed,
Which made the Body whole disjoynted;
And raised among them such divisions,
That they were to their friends derisions.
Some aimed at the Embroidered Purse,
Some the Finances to deburse,
And other some thought to be getters
By writing of the Privy Letters:
Some aimed at Privy Seal, or Rolls,
Some Customs gathered in, and Tolls:
Some did dry Quarterings enforce,
Some lodged in Pockets Foot and Horse:
Yet still Bogg-sclented, when they yoaked,
For all the Garrison in their Pocket:
And some made men Morgage their Lands,
To lend Money on public Bands,
To be paid at the Resurrection:
Some Fines paid who opposed defection;
Some sold the Soldiers Mity Meal,
And some did from the Public steal;
And some, as every body says,
Used more then other twenty ways:
Yet notwithstanding of all that,
They: were lean Kine devouring fat.
None gained by those bloody fairds,
But two three Beggars who turned Lairds;
Who stealing public Geese and Wedders,
Were fred, by rendering Skin and Feathers.
When others of this Church and Nation
Returns unto their former station:
And now, for all their stomachs stout,
Comes home more fools then they went out
Thou, like a Firebrand, do advise
Us to be fools, when all are wise:
Thy endeavors are all in vain,
Ere we shall play such pranks again,
The Patagons shall Masses mumble,
The Dons of Spain shall all be humble,
Italians shall speak as they think,
Germains, when Sun's set, shall not drink;
Swedds gaining day, shall not pile Baggage,
And English hate shall Beef and Cabbage,
The Russ and Pole shall never jarr,
Danes shall gain by a Sweddish War;
Victorious Turk shall stand to reason,
Scots shall be beat, and not blame treason;
The Dutch shall Brandie slight, and Butter,
And England Conquer by De Ruyttek:
The first burnt ardor of French hearts
Shall not turn to a rack of farts,
And they shall spell as they do speak,
And they shall sing as they do prick:
With Oaths they shall not lard their Speeches,
Nor change the fashion of their Breeches.
All shall have for assured news,
That Pope from Rome have banished Stews:
Rebellion shall return from Hell;
And do things which I will not tell.
Though it were true, as some compares
Our Bishops unto baiting Bears,
Who, if they be not keept in aw,
They will tear all with Teeth and Paw.
Yet many utterly mislikes,
That Butcher Presbyterian tycks
Should flee upon their throats and faces,
To curb their Lordships, and their Graces:
His Majesty, without all doubt,
Should only Ring them in the Snout.
If they so swell, that none can bide
Their malice, avarice, and pride;
Vices, which all the world does ken
Familiar to Clergymen;
Of which, though palliat with art,
Our own Presbytry had their part.
Our duty is, with all submission,
To press the grant of our Petition:
The King will suffer us, perchance,
As Lewis does Huggonots in France:
And in his Wars, Civil and Foreign,
Make me Command in Chief, like Turrain.
And though he grant not our demands,
Away with Covenants and Bands;
Kings must command, we must obey,
They Rebels are, who truth gainsay.
Some tell, we must the truth so love,
As of it not to quite a hoove.
As said another fool, thy marrow,
As if his Majesty were Pharo.
For my part, ere I trouble peace,
I Will Bishops call, My Lord and Grace;
And kneel at the Communion Table,
Make Christmas-Feasts, if I be able:
Private Sacraments I Will avow
Childrens confirming I Will allow;
And I will hear the Organs play,
And Amen to the Service say.
I Will Surplice wear, and High-sleev'd Gown,
And to the Altar I Will bow down.
Yea, ere his Majesty be wroth,
I Will Primat be, and Chancellor both.

Squire. The Squire replied in a chaff,
He girn'd so, that he seemed to laff:
And when ye travel in Carosses,
Ye will salute the Hie-way Crosses;
And when with danger ye are pressed,
Ye will cross, sign forehead and breast,
And ye will to our Lady pray,
And travel on the Sabbath day;
And ye will play with Lords and Lairds
All Sermon time at Dice and Cards;
And Duels fight, like those of France,
And drunk and Creeple lead a dance,
And ye will venture Ax and Rope,
By writing Letters to the Pope,
To tell him, though ye here by Haman,
Ye worship with the King, like Naman,
And then accuse us all of Treason,
When ye put out your Book of Season.

Knight. The Knight looked fiercely then about,
Thus thundering with a dreadful shout,
Constant madness thy Brains inthrals,
Thou have no Lucid Intervalls.
Thy Waspish Tongue will never fail
To prat, to scold, revile and rail:
Though men should bray thee all to Powder,
Thou still, Theristes, plays the louder.
All honest and unbiased ken
Those whom thou means't, were worthy men;
They had some faults, though not so big,
As rotten Flees, to spoil a Pigg
Of Ointment; sooner it is known,
We others faults see, then our own.
Presbyterian, never one
Faultless, at them could cast a stone.
It Is certain, it comes from the Devil,
To hide men's good, and tell their evil:
They never learned that of Paul,
Or David, when he mourned for Saul.
Thou art a Cocks-comb, void of reason,
To tell me of a Book of Season:
Thou learnd'st when thou kept Sheep and Hogs,
With one Stone for to hit two Dogs.
Though thou spue Venom like a Toad,
That Book is much esteemed abroad.

Squire. The Squire replied, many deem
Beyond Sea it is in esteem:
When once it passed Pentland Firth,
It raised among them such a mirth,
That some for laughter burst their Rheens,
And other some did split their Spleens:
They cherished it in every School,
To be their Bibliotheca's fool;
When serious reading health did spill,
That they might read and laugh their fill:
Physicians it prescribed to men
As Cure approved for the Spleen:
At Public Meetings, and at Feasts,
It was the Topics of their Jests.
Some say, since known, all his life
To have had with the Bishops strife:
Since for the Covenant none more wood,
To make three Nations swim in blood:
Since he spared none whom he could reach*
Who against the Engagement did not Preach:
Since to the Cause he stuck so fast,
Since Bishops was restored at last,
That in the Pulpit he did grant
A Bishop was the Devils plant.
Giving to all his hearers leave,
If ever he turned, to call him Knave.
And since, as every body says,
He changed in less then twenty days:
It Is very like, at others budding,
He turned his Coat for Cake and Pudding.
Some say, he is a sounding Brass,
Which signifies a prattling Ass:
He brings no reason which can bind,
But only fights against the wind.
It Is clear, that it does with him fare
As with Sampson without his Hair.
Before his change his Wit was tough,
And he could reason well enough:
But now he kytheth like a fool,
As one would whipp a Boy at School,
To vent in Print so little reason,
And call it an Advice in Season.
Some say, that he treads Bishops Path,
As David served the King of Gath.
Though men to censure him be rash,
He gives the Bishops such a dash,
They need not brag their cause is won
By the Foster of Henderson.
Some say, he Bishops does betray,
That Presbytry may gain the day,
Who fed him for their Champion hidden,
Others affirm, they are out-bidden;
Which makes him take a contrair task,
As Edward answered once Southesk.
A modest man wrote in a Letter,
He might have pleaded meikle better.
The charitable do not fear,
But for a thousand Merks a year
He would the Bishops yet withstand,
If Covenanters ruled the Land.

Knight. Then said the Knight, though in a Mortar
I bray this Fool, to no Exhorter
Thou will give ear; he will put thee to it.

Squire. To whom the Squire, what though he do it?
Both Reason there and Justice halts,
Where one's blamed for another faults.
Was never Judge did things so foul,
Except himself, once at Saint Rule:
He forged Records, and them Enacted
To bear false Witness, when Extracted.
I cannot tell, till I advise,
Whether he did it twice or thrice.
Next, I will tell that he gave leave
If ever he turned, to call him Knave,
But he can challenge no reflection
Put on him at his own direction:
He is obliged to keep his word
As well as one who wears a Sword.
But if he chance to be so wroth,
As to break Word, as well as Oath,
I Will tell him, I take frantic fits,
And am distracted of my wits,
As he, and others said of late,
When they misguided Church and State.
And I them taxed of forged Records,
As I can prove before the Lords;
If that succeed not, it effeers
That I be judged by my Peers,
That is, by fifteen Poetasters,
Half-Fools, half Beggars, half Burlesquers:
All of them proved, Drinkers, Whoorers,
By Preachers, Forgers and Perjurers.
Ere such a Jury can be gotten,
Its certain, I Will be dead and rotten;
Or if Justice so shall halt,
As to cause hang me for his fault;
Hanging to me will be less trouble,
Then worrying on a windly Bubble
At a Dike-side, or under a Stair,
If Weather be not very fair.

Knight. But then the Knight, we hear, he will quarrel,
That thou once served Albemarle.

Squire. To which the Squire, I have no fears,
He dar not challeng't for his ears,
For I can make appear to all
They tossed me to him like a Ball.
Next, ask that Duke, in any thing
If ever I did prejudge the King
I forced was to dissimulation,
To shun a Rope, and serve my Nation:
I did no evil, but meikle good,
Saving men's Money, and their Blood;
Which services I did for naught,
Which were from men far richer bought.
That Duke can tell, he did suspect it,
Albeit to try, he did neglect it:
When by their Crafty instigation;
He urged was to my accusation.
They all tell now of Albemarle,
But they told him another quarrel,
In pleading I could touch a string,
Whose sound will make their ears to ring

Knight. The Knight said, tush, they will no more sturr,
Then Moon, when bark't at by a Curr.
For all thy prat, on no condition
I mind to alter the Petition.

Squire. Then said the Squire, if ye'l not mend it,
Advise at least, by whom to send it,
Since we Petition for Religion,
Your Lady, or your Dog, or Pigeon
Were fittest to be sent, if other,
I Am sore afraid we lose a Brother;
For I dar swear upon th'Evangel,
When he has got from each his Angel,
To help his charges to defray,
The Fellow will us all betray.

Knight. When things succeed not, fools do slite,
Giving betraying all the wite,
Replied the Knight, they said of late
They were betrayed, when they were beat;
And they said true, who did not stand,
Betrayed are by heart and hand*
But to the point, as for my Wife,
I Will never send her in my life;
For fear some Courtier or other
Would make me old King Arthurs Brother*
My Dog is an unruly Curr,
And at the Court will keep a sturr,
Seeing Conformists up and down,
He barks so at a High-sleev'd Gown,
That Bishops either will cause stone him,
Or else yoke Boutcher Dogs upon him.
As for my Pigeon, it cannot be,
She has another gate to slay:
A Message she has taken in hand,
To search for that most happy Land,
Unknown to any heretofore,
But only to Sir Thomas More:
Where we intend to fix Plantation,
If forced to change our Habitation.
And since a Poet rightly hits,
That greatest fools have greatest wits,
To shun self-dealing, it is fit
To choose one not outgrown in wit;
So he can Buffonize, and Jest,
At public Meeting, and at Feast,
And catch a time to tell the truth,
Like David's great Grandmother Ruth.
The Whiggs with an applauding hollow
Cried out, his-counsel they would follow:
Which once concluded, all arose,
And set on Pans to make their Brose.
When after that some fools were named
To be employed, they all were blamed:
And none thought fit, they still enquire,
And find none fitter then the Squire:
On him then they enforced the Message,
When he went out on his Embassage,
How at the Court he did arrive,
How to affront him they did strive:
But how the Buffons all he outted;
How Hudibras his Squire he routed,
When they two yoaked by the Ears
About the baiting of the Bears:
And how he managed every thing,
And how he harrang'd to the King:
And how he cited ends of Verses,
And sayings of Philosophers;
At which some laughed, and some were vexed,
Ye'l be advertised by the next.

FINIS.
MOCK-POEM, OR, WHIGGS SUPPLICATION. PART II.



LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1681.

MOCK-POEM, OR, WHIGGS SUPPLICATION.
PART II.
WHen Bushes budded, and Trees did chip,
And Lambs by Suns approach did skip;
When Mires grew hard, like tosted Bread,
That men might through the Carses ride:
When folks drew blood of arms and legs,
When Geese and Turkies hatched Eggs:
When poor folks Pots were filled with Netles,
When Fish did domineer in Ketles;
When Lent did sore annoy the Glutton,
When Sun left Fish to lodge with Mutton:
When night and day were of like length,
Of March the eighth, or twelfth, or tenth:
When several Critics, great and small,
By mending Lines, did mar them all.
When Transcribers preposterous speed
Made them like Pictures spoiled with Thread
On Arras Hangings backside, when
The lowr'd mistakings of some men
Made several great Wits of the Land
Blame what they did not understand;
And some to hunt a Flea contrive;
The Squire near London did arrive:
To meet him old and young came forth,
As Rome did once to see Jugurth.
They knew each passage of his Journal,
Both by report, and by Diurnal:
We dread, they will him sore abuse,
But let us first invock the Muse.
Thou Muse, who never do abandon
Those who have scarce a Leg to stand on
When they ascend Parnassus Mountain,
Till in the end they taste a Fountain
Which makes an Owl then them sing sweeter;
Make me once more a fool in Meeter,
That I may be of all admired,
Confuting Presbytry, casheered;
Which I of late so much adored,
But now, when I get nothing for it,
Make me, O Muse! to change my Note,
Declare against it, turn my Coat:
Compesce me, Muse, these stout Bravado's
Of these stiff-necked Reformado's,
Who still maintain, unto this day,
They have The Office, though they want Pay;
In others Harvest putting their Sickles,
Troubling the Land with Conventicles;
Whose stubborn hearts cannot be turned
By the Dialogues of Gilbert Burnet.
Prove, Muse, that Synod-men, Churchwardens
Are Bears, and Synods are Bear-Gardens:
For both have tongues, and teeth, and nails,
But, Muse, what will thou do for tails?
But that is all one, the matter's small,
For true Bears have no tails at all:
And so the simile still jumps,
Instead of tails thou wilt find there rumps.
When thou shows how the Squire disputed,
And Ralph the Sectary confuted,
That he of wits almost bereft him;
But to the Squire now where welesthi him.
He melted all in tears for pity,
Seeing the ruins of the City:
But when he saw in other places
Houses arise with goodly faces,
And Turrets mounting up, and soaring,
And the Air's middle Region boaring;
So Phoenix, when it is burnt in Spices,
Up starts another from its ashes.
Cried out the Squire, Rome once was burned
By French, then Worlds Mistress turned,
God may the same to London grant,
If it renew the Covenant.
While this he spoke, his Horse he lights off,
And with his Handkerchief he dights off
Tears from his eyes, then on the ground
He grovelling lies meditabound,
His Horses grievous succussation
Had so excoriat his Foundation,
That till the Hide his Hips did come on,
The earth he could not set his Burn on.
Then after sad Ejaculations,
He vents these following Meditations.
Wallace, quoth he, having ado,
Still eat the quarter of a Cow,
And to the boot, ere Clothes were put on,
He would sometimes dispatch a Mutton:
For when he wanted morning fare,
He was like Sampson without hair.
A Priest, whose Teeth did Head and Legs swell
Did still eat Powdered Beef and Eggs twell
Before he Preached, else he half dumb sings,
Like to a Fiddle wanting some Strings.
Hence, by experience I gather,
He is a liar, though my Father,
Who thinks, a man can do or speak well,
Who does neglect his fast to break well.
I am engaged in a Transaction,
Quoth he, requiring Tongue and Action,
That to my Tackling I may fast stick,
Though I should lose my Ears like Bastwick:
Though they should ty me Heel and Neck fast.
It Is requisite I take my Breakfast.
This said, his Budget he unlooseth,
And all the wealth within discloseth;
Which for variety did scorn*
The wealthy Amelthea's Horn;
Or the rich Abbey of St. Lawrence,
Or Cabine of the Duke of Florence,
Ju'st like the Pocks of Graham and Guthry,
It was his Vestry and his Buttery:
His Lardner and his Bibliotheck,
There lies of Oat-meal near a Peck,
With Waters help which Girdles hot Bakes,
And turns to Bannocks, and to Oat Cakes.
There a piece Beef, there a piece Cheese lies,
And there an old Nightcap of Freez lies,
His head attire, when he the house keeps,
On which now here and there a Louse creeps.
Here lies a pair of Shoes never put on,
And there lies a Poor Man of Mutton.
There lies half dozen elnes of Pig-tail,
There his Panash, a Capons big-tail,
With white in middle, shining Star-like,
And there be Onion-heads and Garlic,
The food of Turkish Janissaries,
There Turpentine and Larie Berries:
His Medicine for passage sweer,
That for the Van, these for the Rear;
And there a piece of Poudered Fish lies;
And there some Butter in a Dish lies;
There Turnips thirty inch about lies,
And there some Pepper in a Clout lies,
There Fingram Stockins spun on Rocks lies,
And there his Sneezing Milne and Box lies:
There lies his Elson and his Lingle,
Which double-sold Shoes makes of single,
With help of old pieces of Leather;
There lies some Wool that he did gather,
Left by the Sheep, as certain pledges,
They were entangled in the Hedges:
There Clouts and Papers little Mugs stops,
As in Apothecaries Drug-shops,
With Vinegar and Oil for Sallads;
And there lys Boks, and here lies Ballads,
As Davie Lindsay, and Gray-Steel,
Squire Meldrum, Bewis, and Adam Bell,
There Bruce and Wallace, fierce-like Mars Knight:
There lies Dialogues which his Arse dights
There Last-goodnight, and Chevie Chase,
With Gendarms in the Frontispiece,
Which makes more weep, when they read on it,
Thou Curats Sermons, fie upon it!
And there lies Bands, Shirts, and Cravats,
There two three Skins of Lambs and Rabbets,
For to commence a London Trade,
And this was all the Wealth he had.
But pardon me, I had forgot,
There was some other thing I wot;
I think it Powder was, and Leed
To shoot the Bishop through the head.
He takes a Bible with Covering worn off,
And ending and beginning torn off:
He reads, and then he says the Grace,
Then to his Victuals falls apace.
When first bitt scarce down throat was sliding,
Within a days march of the midding,
Then he a multitude espies.
Approaching him with shouts and cries,
He leaves his victuals, falls a-gazing,
Just like a Tupp when he is a'grazing,
When folks comes by, he slights his food,
Stares in their face and chews his Cude.
He thought these fools came out to meet him,
That first they might salute and greet him,
That afterward they might him bring
With greater pomp unto the King.
Such honor at their entry-hours
Are due unto Ambassadors.
Both dust and sweat from face he rubs off,
A Looking-glass he makes the Dubs of:
He trims his Beard, and then his Head too,
Rights Basket-hilt on Shoulder Blade too:
His hands he washes, pairs his nails,
Takes his Panash of Capons tails,
Which he pines on before his Hat;
He put about a clean Cravat,
And then upon his hands he streeches
Two yellow Gloves, with green Silk steeches;
Leaps to his Horse, and on he went,
To take and give the Complement:
While hips excoreat, made him-swadle
Through all the corners of the Sadle.
When he the multitude approaches,
His eyes he fixed first on the Coaches,
Ranged like Wild-geese in a line;
Then cried he out, no friend of mine
If I can hinder those, shall enter.
It Is wonder people so should venture,
To break their arms, and legs, and heads,
And to disjoynt their shoulder blades:
Ladies to have their naked Breeches
Both viewed and Lanced by the Leeches;
Which made some Husbands forth a Tuck hold,
Swearing the Rogue would make them Cuck old
Those made a Lady of our Land
Upon her neck and shoulders stand
With a third of half dozen Thighs,
Naked erected to the Skies;
And ere that posture she was got off,
Many did see the thing ye wot of;
Which when they told her, readily
She answered, she wondered why
They did not kiss't, and take their leave on it,
It was the last sight they should have on it:
She vowed thereafter, well I wot,
With her Grand-dame to walk a-foot
When Coach-men drinks, and Horses stumble,
It Is hard to miss a Barla-fumble.
Then did he seriously begin
Well to consider those within;
He soon perceived by their postures
They were no Nuns brought up in Cloisters*
To show their Legs, some truss their Laps,
Some throw off Scarffs to show their Paps,
Some Masked were, the Sun to keep out,
Which lifting, now and then, they peep out.
Widows from Vails set out their Noses,
As Snails do from their Shelly Houses;
As they would say unto the Gallants,
Come, Gentlemen, behold our Talents:
Come nearer, that we may espy you,
If ye be ought worth, we will buy you:
Where, ten to one, some get a fortune,
As one did with my Lady Nortoun.
Among the rest he did espy ones,
Whom he conceived to be Hee-ones:
Those he believed were his Mates,
Ambassadors of Kings and States,
To do him honor at his entry,
With the Nobility and Gentry:
He cried to them to keep the peace,
And not to wrangle for the place,
For all of them remembered well
Of that Bowtad of Bateveile,
Which cost the lives of brave Commanders,
And well nigh lost his Master Flanders.
He bids them all take place by Lots,
No King had place, but he, of Scots,
Whose Royal Ancestors, it is clear
Has kept one Race two thousand year;
Whose Successors as yet escaped
The tricks of Pipin, and Hugh Capet.
Others are not of that condition,
They Are Kings but of a late Edition:
Though some be small, and others greater,
Yet who go first, or last, no matter;
For all their Gold, Spices, and VVines,
They come from interrupted Lines.
Being informed of his mistake,
It was to Ladies that he spoke.
What Devil they are? replied the Squire,
They Are men in Garb, and in Attire,
They Have Vests, they have Swords, they have Piriwigs
They tread the measure of the Giggs,
Just like the men, their Buttocks vaper,
They cast their Gammonds up, and Caper;
They Cajole Ladies at the Balls too,
And standing piss against the VValls too:
They Are Spurred and Booted when they ride too,
And gallop, when they Hunt, astride too,
With Swords and Pistols they fight hard too,
Some have appearance of a Beard too:
And, which of all is the greatest wonder,
They'ly above, their Gallants under.
Me's Dames, quoth he, that we may ken
Whether ye women be, or men,
It Is fit ye open keep before
About a Trencher breadth, or more.
You Are Monsters, if that do not measure
The Circuits of your Holes of pleasure.
While he was giving this advice,
They all surround him in a trice,
All wondering at his Equipage:
Some asked his Horses price, and age:
If there came sympathetick speed
From Riders heel, or heel of Steed;
If there came an enchanting force
To Masters Purse, from Skin of Horse;
Some, why no Spurrs, his sides to claw,
And for Boots, several Ropes of Straw:
Why Sodds for Sadle, and Branks for Bridle,
And Plaids for Scarff about his middle.
Some asked his Panashes price,
If It was a Bird of Paradise.
Some asked if Basket-Hilt and Dudgeon
Had ever set a work Surgeon,
Some Jeered the long Crown of his Hat,
Some at his Gloves, some his Cravat,
Asking more Questions at once
Then would have puzzled John of Dunce,
Or Bonaventure, or Soncinas,
Or Biel Ockam, or Aquinas.
When Sinan Bassa Charged a Hill,
To try his Military skill;
Though many a grievous wound it got
By Cannon, and by Musket shot,
The Hill did neither bow nor bend,
Although he charged it thrice on end,
But still abode him face to face,
Choosing to die upon the place,
Rather then turn its back and yield;
Just so the Squire did keep the Field;
And bravely did receive their Tongue-shot,
Just as the Hill did Sinan's Gunshot:
He stood as senseless as a Stock is,
Or among raging Waves, a Rock is,
When furiously they knock its Crown,
To make it break, or make it drown.
At last, he said, with sober grace,
When ye grow hoarse ye'll hold your peace.
Then fair and softly on he tripped,
For, like a Spaniard when he is whipped,
He thought it was a great disgrace
For to accelerat his pace.
When they him saw so little troubled,
Then they their Questions redoubled;
Some asked his errand, and his name,
And from what Potentat he came,
From Turk, or Sophee, or Mogull,
Who wear much Linen on their Skull,
Or from either Tartarian Cham,
Who of their Horse Hips make a Ham,
Or from Pegu, or from Chine,
Or from the Emperor Abyffine,
Or from the Muscovite, or Poll,
Or Dane, whose chiefest wealth is Toll,
Or from the Emperor, or the Swede,
Or Hogen Mogen Brotherhood;
From the Savoyard, or the Swisse,
Who Apples seeths with roosted Geese:
From Florentine, or Protugnese,
Or from Morocco, or from Fess;
Or if he came from Spain or France,
Or from some Indian Weerowance,
To barter Gold and Beaver Skins
For Glasses, Beads, and Knives and Pins;
Or from the Presbyterian Scots,
Who never yet had turned their Coats.
Did he a Supplication bring
To put ill counsel from the King;
And that his Majesty would grant
Renewing of the Covenant:
And had Commission for to tell him,
If he refused, they would compel him.
When thus they pressed him so fast,
Patience turned fury at the last:
These last words did him so inrage;
He faced about and gave a Charge;
Then with his Tongue out, thus he stutters,
With face awry, like old Cheese Cutters.
You cursed Antichristian Rabble,
Ye Mungrels of the Whore of Babel,
Ye Sectaries, and Covenant-breakers,
Half Cukold, and half Cuckold-makers,
For all your flouting, and your tanting,
When we went first a-Covenanting,
Ye did us court, ye did us bribe,
Invited us, like Juda's Tribe,
To purge your ten Tribes of Israel
From Jeroboams Calf, and Baal:
Your money moved our Concience
To arm our selves in your defense.
When your intentions you had got,
And by our means, had under foot
Trod all your foes, and them defeated,
Atlast, we found we were but cheated.
Your quarrel was, pretended bondage,
By reason of Tunage and of Poundage,
To get Militia by Law,
To keep his Majesty in aw:
To free your selves when money waxes
From Inquisitions and Taxes:
Your only end was self enriching,
Your sole^ Religion was your Kitching.
You valued Puddings sodd in Pocks
More then Religion Orthodox:
Whereas we witness God and Angels,
Prophets, Apostles, and Evangels,
For trash, or any earthly thing,
We never did oppose the King:
Yea, all of us, both great and small
Will quit him Lives, and Lands, and all
So he give way to purge the Temple,
As pleases Mr. Gabriel Semple.
He spoke so thick, he paused a little,
And having cleans'd his Beard from spittle,
Like Tindale at the Stake, he cries
Lord, open the King of Englands eyes,
And then his Majesty will grant
Renewing of the Covenant.
Thus did he perorat his fliting,
As at Tarantums Spiders biting,
They were affected thereanent,
According to their Temperament.
Sanguinians did only laff,
Choleric Melancholians chaff.
Some bade hang him, some bade stone him,
And some did Mastives hunt upon him.
Some Daple under Tail did prick,
And made him bounce, and leap, and kick:
Some aimed to tare his Straw Gramashes,
Some cries, have at Beard and Mustaches:
Some grasped him about the middle,
Till Bumm did sound like Gambo Fiddle:
Some would have Breeches down to whip him,
Some with their Nails would tare and nip him;
Some with Briars and Thorns would scratch him:
One fearing that they would dispatch him,
Who was a man more moderat,
He made a Court'sie with his Hat,
And begged leave to plead his Cause
According to the Nations Laws.
Contending with a foolish tongue,
Quoth he, is but a War with dung:
Though in the strife ye prove victorious,
Dirt makes your finger-ends inglorious,
As lately happened unto one
Who needs would quarrel Sanderson,
And prove he was a lying knave,
Of which, what credit could he have;
When he had done, he proved no more,
Then all the world knew before.
To take such pains, imports as much
As any doubted he were such.
Refuting such as he, with words,
Is like Canarie washing Turds:
The Wine in taste and hue grows meaner,
But Turds grow never a whit the cleaner.
This simile, though somewhat rude,
Yet so appeased the multitude,
That by degrees their clamor fell*
Like sound of Lute-string, or of Bell,
When Thumb or Hammer of a Clock
Gives the Epilogizing stroke.
And in the end these furious Cryers
Stood silent like observant Friars,
Or like to Dumbies making Signs,
Or like to Fidles wanting Strings,
Or like to Salmons, or to Codds,
Or Turks, when they took in the Rhodes.
Then piece and piece they dropped away,
As ripe Plumbs in a rainy day;
Till in the end, they all were gone,
And left him standing all alone.
Likeas, we do observe and see
In those who are condemned to die,
That they are sore annoyed and troubled,
At first, when they cast off their Doublet,
Truss up their hair, their eyes blindfold,
That they may not grim Death behold:
Thinking their neck the stroke is hard on,
If any tell them of a Pardon,
Although their heart be lighted somewhat,
Yet fear and hope fight still a Combat,
Till that they hear the Air to ring
With Clamours of, God save the King:
Then hope triumphs, and fear does vanish,
Like grief, when it is expelled by Spanish,
Just so the Squire, when all at once
They him oppressed with Fists and Stones,
A gelide fear his heart possessed,
His final hour approach't he guessed:
Trembling he stood, in a Quandarie,
And purged, as he had eaten Larie:
As was confirmed by the speeches
Of those who after washed his Breeches
When he perceived the retreat,
That flight, quoth he, is but a cheat.
Like that of Greeks, for to destroy
An ancient City, called Troy,
By help of that Tree Horse of Pallas;
It is some stratagem of Wallace,
Who in a Pig-mans Weed, at Bigger,
Espied all the English Leagure.
But when he found by certain trial,
The retreat was not forged, but real,
Then did he resolution show,
And like a Cock began to crow.
One man, quoth he, oft-times has stood,
And put to flight a multitude,
Like Sampson, Wallace, and Sir Bewis,
And Finmacoul beside the Lews,
Who in a Bucking time of year
Did rout and chase a Herd of Deer,
Till he behind, and they before,
Did run a hundred Miles and more,
Which questionless prejudged his Toes,
For Red-shanks then did wear no Shoes;
For to this day they wear but Calf ones,
Or, if of older Leather, half ones.
He chased them so furiously,
That they were forced to take the Sea,
And swam from Cowel into Arran,
In which Soil, though it be but barren,
As learned Antiquaries say,
Their Offspring lives unto this day.
But pardon me for such digressions,
For, were it not for such expressions
Which from the Muses we extort,
Our Poems would be very short.
Then did the Squire obtest, and pray,
And them conjured that they would stay,
For he had quarrel against none
But Ralph the Squire, and Sanderson,
Which two, as every body knows,
Are Presbyterians mortal foes:
The One calls them Bears by Allegory,
That other Fellow wrote a Story,
In which he does them scandalize so,
That all the Devils blush, he lies so;
Thinking it would be liked well,
He sent a Copy into Hell,
To be perused in a Commit,
Then said a Devil which was witty,
It serves for nothing, tell the fool;
But to be Napkins at the Stool,
When men exonerat their Tripes,
Or lighting of Tobacco Pipes;
For Hells affairs are never achieved
By railing fools, of none believed:
Hells fittest Agents, as all grants,
Are those who are reputed Saints.
And thus he made an end of praying.
Then all began to think of staying,
And one another did exhort
For to return and see the sport;
But Sanderson appeared not,
Stout Ralph amated not a jot,
Bravely and resolutely did fall up,
First at the trot, then at the gallop;
Just as the Huggonots, victorious
At Coutrus, charged the Duke of Joyeus,
And was upon him ere he wist,
Menaceing him with Tongue and Fist,
With all the Rabble in his Rear,
Who followed him to see and hear.
The Squire, who only spoke in jest,
Seeing what he expected least;
He thought they verily were gone,
And that the storm was over blown,
Surprised with the sudden danger
Of Ralph, in such a furious anger,
Whom he thought did already spurn him,
He knew not to what hand to turn him;
At last, his tongue and teeth commences
To vent Adages and Sentences.
It is a saying wise and old,
Quoth he, to make a Bridge of Gold
To fleeing enemies, it is best
To let a sleeping Mastive rest,
Lest he, awakened with our knockings,
Tare all our Breeches and our Stockings,
And to the boot, our Shin-bones hole up,
And from our Buttocks take a Collop:
And with his furious teeth our throats cut,
Down which we watered Meal of Oats put;
Which we prefer, with Loch-Broom Herring,
To all the King of Babel's fareing.
A foolish tongue, without remead,
Brings mischief on the owners head;
It is a pestilentious Clout,
Causing contagion all about;
It raises jealousies and fears,
Yokes Kings and Subjects by the ears.
What was it else, but tittle tattle,
That brought our Brethren out to Battle?
What stops them more from turning Loyal,
Then tongues of some, esteemed Royal?
With which they persecute those poor souls,
As setting Dogs do Pouts and Muirfowls;
At last, within their Netts ensnared,
And from all hope of pardon barred,
They force those poor men, under hand,
Still to rebel, to get their Land.
My tongue will bring me to that pass,
Quoth he, to which was Hudibras,
Who, when with honor he had got off,
In the adventure that ye wot off,
He not content, but seeking more,
Los'd all that he had gained before;
And was brought to a prison Tragic,
In Wooden Castle, made by Magic;
Where he too late laments his mishapes,
As Ladies, when they do not Misclaps
From Gallants, of their own procuring,
From Husbands, when they go a-whoring.
Having dispatched this Phrygian wisdom,
Like Malefactor getting his doom,
He strained what he could, to show
A tres bon mein en mau vais Jeu.
He out with Basket-hilt and Dudgeon,
(While from his eyes came a deludge on,
As from the eyes of Children whipped,
Or sore Horse-eyes, with Vitriol nipped,)
Stands at his posture, Fencer-like,
And was within an Ace to strike;
Yet on the sudden, does advise.
To take a course by far more wise.
Wise men, quoth he, as all men knows,
Try all things first, ere they try blows.
When Rome to Conquer, all was hasting,
Peace was the first, War was the last thing
They did practice to subdue Nations,
Who loved not such Innovations.
If I the truth of Story miss not,
This is the Cardo of the Dispute.
And if my reasons do no good,
I Will dye their Breeches with their Blood:
But this within himself he mutters,
And then these words to Ralph he utters.
What means this furious hurly burly?
Friend Ralph, quoth he, I tell thee surely,
I am no private man; believe,
I am a Representative:
To force me to Degladiations,
Is contrare to the Law of Nations:
Though thou me should bang back and side,
I could it (Honor safe) abide.
Brave Mansfield, challenged by Baumaru,
Refused once to fight at Paris;
Because he did Negotiat
With Public Trust Affairs of State.
The Spanish Agent Don Henriques,
Put up a great affront of Criques,
Who once at Rome, his pride to danton,
His Nose saluted with a Panton.
Do thou esteem me such a Coward,
To be afraid of one as thou art?
Thy threatenings are like Childrens Squibs,
Though they singe Clothes, they break no Ribs*
Were it not that my Sword is rusted,
Were it not that I am entrusted
With things of such a high concernment,
As Presbyterian Church Government;
For all thy frownings and thy cloudings,
I would send Sunshine through thy Puddings.
I do thee as a friend advise,
('It Is better soon then late be wise)
That thou would let alone this Sword-fight,
And graple with me in a Word-fight;
Let Us try who others best can Confute,
This is the Cardo of the Dispute,
If Synod-members, and Churchwardens
Be Bears, and Synods be Bear-Gardens.
Thou do affirm, I do deny,
Prov't if thou can, I thee defy.
One might have known by Ralpho's face,
He loved not War so well as Peace;
He only counterfeited courage,
His wrath, to teeth-forward, was not true rage*
Yet he his passion so dissembled,
That Squire at first both shak'd and trembled;
But when he heard the Squire speak big words,
That in his Belly he would dig Swords,
He looked then as if his Nose bled,
And such a Flea within his Hose had,
That in his mind was great confusion,
Till he considered the conclusion;
Where Peace was offered and the War gone,
He gave God thanks, like Praise God Bairbo^,
A good heart to himself he took then,
And these same very words he spoke then,
Which once the great Turk Solymanus
Spoke to Vilerius, Liladamus;
Having him under, such odds,
That he was forced to quit the Rhodes.
I Am glade to hear that now thy mind.
Is more to Peace then War inclined;
Then adds he, fighting is a fool thing,
What does it else but sturt and dool bring.
It Is better Tongues decide the matter,
Then other Noddles pelt and batter.
Now others beck, now others Dock hit,
As feathred Fencers do in Cockpit;
Who fights but in their own defenses,
Let them be Kings, let them be Princes,
By Law and Reason I them can bind,
That they are enemies to mankind;
As witnesses Sir Thomas Kellie,
And Grotius de Jure Belli.
What are such Warriors but oppressors;
And many times we see aggressors,
Who trouble other men's reposes,
Gain nothing else but bloody Noses:
Who quarrels pick with Neighbor Nations,
Get Halberts thrust through their Fundations,
As we may read in many a Book
Of Charles that Burgndian Duke.
Poor High-way-men, with tattred hose, are
Not Robbers half so great, as those are,
Who Diadems wear on their head,
And make so many living dead;
And so much Christian blood mispends,
Either for French or Spanish ends:
These first, poor Rogues, will pick a Pocket,
And break a Door up when it is locket;
And on the Highway will a Purse take,
When cold and hunger makes their Guts ache.
Those latter, with their Armies Legions,
Robes Kingdoms, Castles, Towns and Regions:
As said two ten Tuns Ships Commander
To Macedonian Alexander.
But now, let us come to the question,
The which was raised the Contest on,
Since thou so hard do put me to it,
I Will let thee see that I can do it:
And have both will and wit to reckon,
And beat thee at thy own tongue-weapon.
Better perhaps, then thou believes,
I Will prove these two affirmatives:
That Synod-menbers, and Churchwardens
Are Bears, and Synods are Bear-gardens.
Thus said, his fingers he dispatches
Unto his head, and winking scratches,
First from the Van, unto the Rear,
And then athwart, from ear to ear;
While like sagacious Hound, he traces,
And windeth all the Topic places:
Till in the end prepared, Satis,
He disputes thus a Comparatis.
And first, quoth he, it is clear to all;
They have the same original:
For twenty Shillings to a Bodle,
Both are the birth of humane nodle,
Both are in that degree of kin,
As other brethren uterine.
Its certain, there is never a word
Of either, in Scripture, on record:
And without question and all doubt,
Thus Bear-baiting may be made out
By holy writ, as lawful as is,
That Chain of Presbyrerian Classis.
This for their birth; now for their nature,
If with deliberation mature
The case we ponder, beasts of prey
And rapine, as are Bears are they
Who do establish Gospel order
By Rapine, Sacrilege, and Murder.
What are their Orders, Constitutions,
Church Censures, Curses, Absolutions?
But several mystic Chains they make,
To ty poor Christians to the Stake:
And then set Heathen Officers,
Instead of Dogs, about their ears.
What else are Synods, but Bear-gardens,
Where Elders, Deputies, Churchwardens,
And other members of the Court
Manage the Babylonish sport:
For Prolocutor, Scribe, and Bear-ward,
Do differ only in a mere word:
Both are but several Synagogues
Of Carnal men, and Bears, and Dogs:
Both Antichristian Assemblies,
To mischief bent, as far's in them lies:
Both strave and tail with fierce contests,
The one with men, the other Beasts:
The difference is, the one fights with
The tongue, the other with the teeth:
And that they bait but Bears in this,
In the others Souls and Consciences.
This to the Prophet did appear
Who in a Vision saw a Bear
Prefiguring the beastly rage
Of Church-rule, in this latter age;
Where every Hamlet is governed*
By's Holiness, the Churches head:
More haughty, and severe in's place,
Then Hildebrand, or Boniface.
Such Church, must surely be a Monster
With maney heads, for if we Conster
What in the Apocalypse we find,
According to the Apostles mind;
It Is, that the Whore of Babylon,
With many heads, did ride upon.
The Pastors who do rule this Kirk,
What are they, but the handiwork
Of men's Mechanic Paws, instilling
Divinity in them, by feeling.
From whence they start up chosen Vessels,
As folks, by touching, get the Meazles.
So Cardinals, they say, do grope
At the other end, the new made Pope.
Bell and the Dragon's Chaiplans, were
More moderat then them, by far:
For they, poor Knaves, were glade to cheat,
To get their Wives and Children meat;
But these will not be fob'd off so,
They must have wealth and power too;
Or else they will make their party good,
By making Nations swim in blood.
And thus I reasoned the Case,
Once with my Master Hudibras.
All that I said was too prolix,
Here to repeat, I only fix
Upon the Morrow, with a few words,
What thou has said's not worth two Cow Turds
Replied the Squire, and then he smites
Forehead with Fist, to rouse his wits;
Which straight did take th'alarm so hot,
That down to Tongue and Teeth they got:
From whence, thus worded out, they fly,
Like Bullets from Artilerie.
Ye Sectaries, quoth he, have bee-heads,
Thy prats, a Cerberus, with three-heads:
Neither of which barks any bon-sence,
But railing, blasphemy, and nonsense:
You Are ignorant in Logicks Art,
As I will show thee ere we part.
But to the point, now I will close,
And reason (...).
And first, I say, for my defense,
Thy argument wants Consequence:
Though things agree to both together,
It follows not the one's the other.
Affirmatives, in second figure,
Nothing conclude in Logicks Ligure,
Which any constant man believes,
So we may prove Financiers Thieves,
Camelions Beef and Cabbage eaters,
And Lawyers, and Physicians, cheaters.
That Horse are Men, and Owls are Ounces,
That Privy Counselors are Dunces:
That Chamber-pots are Looking Glasses,
And Senators of Justice Asses:
That Colleges, and Muses Cavernes
Are Bawdie-houses turned, and Taverns:
That Stews are places of Contrition,
And Pulpits, Trumpets of Sedition:
And Merlines Prophesies Evangels,
And Dees Spirits holy Angels:
That all new Scurvies are the Pox,
That Quakers Books are Orthodox:
That roasted Wildcat is fed Lam,
That Gresham College is a Bedlam:
Most of our first Reformers bad-men,
And all the House of Commons madmen:
That Tallow Cakes are Ambergreese,
That Sun and Moon are Cheshire Cheese
And Whiggs, as loyal in Opinions,
As any of the Kings Dominions.
This for thy form, now for thy matter,
Thou rails one some, others to flatter:
Thy Medium's seeming true, yet false are,
As Turnips growing in the Paltzar;
Or any other fertile ground,
Hollow with Worms, though skin be sound:
Like Aples in the Lake of Sodom,
Like beauties clapped in the Bodom:
Like sour Drink in Silver Tankers:
Like Golden Petticoats on Shankers:
Like bald Heads with Periwiggs:
Like sweet Powder on frisled Giggs,
With aged Ladies now in fashion,
When they would play beside the Cushion.
But who reason in generals,
Th'argument contentions and brauls,
They bring but bout-gates, and golinzies,
Like Dempster disputing with Meinzies.
Men hardly can scratch others faces,
When they are distant twenty paces:
I Will nearer come thy thrusts to Paree,
Whereas thou do Argumentaree,
That Bear-baiting may be made out,
Without all question and doubt,
By holy Writ, as lawful as is,
Lay-elder-Presbyterian Classis.
Though few be clear, how does the thing go?
I answer unto thee distinguo:
For if thou mean by Text express,
Thou speak the truth, as all confess.
This is our Orthodox Defense,
Presbytries proved by Consequence.
It is no Popish superstition,
By consequential tradition
To prove an Article of Faith,
As learned Polyander says.
What have our Doctors else to say
For Paedobaptism, or that day
Which changed was, when the Church spoke Greek
From last to first day of the Week.
If thou were put to this distress,
To prove Bishops by word express.
Then Oyster-wives might lock their Fish up,
Come to the Streets, and cry, No Bishop.
Whereas thou do affirm and say,
Presbytry-men are Beasts of Prey,
Who do establish Gospel Order
By Rapine, Sacrilege, and Murder:
Thy reason hear both but and ben halts,
It Is not the causes, but the men's faults.
Unto that Sore, I gave this Plaster,
When I did dispute with my Master:
To blame a cause, for persons vices
Is one of Satan's main devices,
Wherewith he very often does make
VVell-meaning men the truth forsake.
It Is not superfluous and vain
To tell a good Tale over again.
None can deny but these things fell out,
But the true cause thou do not smell out.
Thy fallacy consists in this,
Thou make a cause where no cause is.
Children are teached in the Schools,
Who reason so, they are but fools.
Was never yet a Reformation
Of Church, in any Age or Nation,
But still the Devil, to make it vain,
The outmost of his wits does strain:
He beats all Hell up with a Taber,
To make Reformers lose their labor*
When first he sees he does no good
By persecution and blood,
By seeming Sheep, and yet but Goats,
By Weeds appearing Wheat and Oats,
By seeming Diamonds, yet but Glass,
By seeming, Gold and yet but Brass,
By Serpents in appearance Fish,
By Silver Potles filled with Pish,
By Saints without, and Fiends within,
He strives the cause to undermine:
As is recorded in the Pages
Of Stories written in all Ages.
When Christ appeared, came a Theudas,
And with Saint Peter, came a Judas;
With Luther, Rotmans Knipperdolings,
Who troubled Munster with their foolings.
David Georges, John's of Leyden,
As is at large described by Sleyden.
When Calvin came, then came Socinians:
When Perbins came, then came Arminians:
With Hendersons, and Cants, and Trails,
Came some, who whisked Ladies Tails.
Who for such take us, are to blame, as
One would revile St. Paul for Demas.
And others also came, to wit,
These Locusts of the The Infernal Pit:
Who seemed at first all Covenant-takers,
But straight turned Anabaptists, Quakers,
Artemonits, Photinions,
Servetians, Socinians,
Manitheans, Novations,
Scepticks, and Corpocrocians,
Prochanits, Sabellians,
Setheans, Circumcellians;
Herodians, Herminians,
Somonians, Armenians,
Docitheans, Menandrians,
Eunomeans, Cassandrians,
Eutichians, Nestorians,
And Doctor Hernry Morians;
Noetians, and Martionitae,
Gnostics, and Anthropomorphit*
Gortheans, and Calphurnitans,
And Mr. Gilbert Burnetans;
Meletians, and Arrians,
And Antisabatarians;
Helvidians, Cainians,
Coluthians, Agrippinians;
Some Chiliasts, and Lampetians,
Some prove Melchizedecians,
Cleobians, Florinians,
And some prove Maximinians:
Abelians, Thebusians,
Ophitae, and Pepusrans,
Rhetorians, Quintilianists,
Circoterists, Pristilianists,
Eucratits, Hermogenians,
Marians, and Origenians,
Corintheans, and Alogians:
Some half some whole Peligians,
Some Antitactae, some Montences;
Ascitae some, some Royatenses,
Some Donatists, Volesians,
Some Archonticks, some Aetians.
And some turn Theodotians;
Tascodrongits, Nepotians,
And some Disciples turned of Brown,
Who first infected every Town;
Doritheans, and Fratricels,
Some Neilorists, with Hood and Bells;
Some Transilvanian Tritheitae,
Who once made* drunk with Aquavitae:
With Fists Alstedius did belabour,
And tore the Beard of Bethlehem Gabor:
Some Adamits, who as the speech is,
Cast off their Petticoats and Breeches:
Some other Heretics more gross,
Described by Alexander Ross;
For which, at present I want time,
And though I had, I have not Rhyme.
That thy Bear-simile may jump,
Those were our Tails, that was our Rump,
Which from our Buttocks being broke off,
Did all these horrid things you spoke of.
But if thou still insist to rail,
Saying, we did them with our Tail:
That cavel's very quickly put off,
'Twas with our Tails, when they were cut off
If with my cut off Arms and Legs
Thou Bishops Noddles Crush like Eggs;
Not I, late owner of the same,
But thou who strikes, must bear the blame.
It Is true indeed, at the beginning
We smelled those things were a-spinning;
But who leads Ladies through the streets,
Expecting favor within Sheets,
Coming to places, fie upon it,
Where none but one can pass in front,
So Barricado'd is the way,
With emptied Privies, Mire and Clay:
If they find no clean place to stand on,
Yet ere their Mistress they abandon,
Through dung they march, like a bold Fellow,
Till Shoes and Stockins grow Gold yellow.
This is our case, if I have skill,
Make the Apodosis who will,
The sum is in our ends, we mean well,
Though means we used, cannot sustain well.
Whereas thou say, our Constitutions,
Church Censures, Curses, Absolutions,
Are several Mystic Chains we make,
To ty poor Christians to the Stake,
And then set Heathen Officers
Instead of Dogs about their ears.
At all thou do not prove the question;
The which was raised the Contest on.
Madness within thy Brains has far got,
Proving them Bears, thou proves they are not
Whoever yet did see or hear,
That Bears yoak't Dogs upon a Bear?
As said thy Master, that brave man too,
Who reasoned better then I can do,
If Synod-Members, and Churchwardens
Be no Bears, Synods no Bear-gardens
Are, as to these is evident, Satis,
Who reason can a Conjugatis.
Thus worse then any man believes,
Thou proves these two affirmatives:
And after thou has Cracked so crouse,
Thy Mountains do bring forth a Mouse.
Whereas thou Presbytry do (...)
To be the Apocalyptick Monster,
Likewise to be this very Bear.
Which to the Prophet did appear;
Prefiguring the beastly rage
Of Church rule in this latter age:
Thou do interpret Scriptures odly,
That thou may (...) upon the Godly:
A Scripturest thou (...) as he was
In whose fool Bonnet-case a Be was,
Who needs would Presbytry have the Cabal
Deciphered of the Whore of Babel,
The Antichrist (...) (...) Blood spilled,
^
He was so mad, he (...) no shame:
Those very murdered (...) (...) name,
It Is sure he either was (...)
Or on a Stage the Fool he acted
I Am confident and do believe,
If these two brave men (...) alive,
They would get (...)
Who hatch such glosses in their brains.
It Is lamentable, many deem
None love the King, but who blaspheme,
And still make holy Writ the Scale, on
Which they take measures for to rail on.
Presbytrie for the King more stout, as
Those whom the very Children flout, as
Champions, who though tongue-valiant,
Yet meeting with a fierce assailant,
Though with their tongue they take his part,
Their actions are not with a fart.
They may well drink his health in Taverns,
And speak big words in Holes and Caverns,
Devising Stories, Lies, and Fables;
Call his most Loyal Subjects Rebels;
But when they come to blows and knocks,
They face about, and turn their Docks.
Runs to their Pottle, which they mind most,
Crying, the Devil take the hind-most.
Where thou say, Preachers of our Kirk,
And Pastors, are the handie-work
Of men's mechanic paws, instilling.
Divinity in them by feeling:
From whence they start up chosen Vessels,
As men by touch get Itch and Meazels.
I see not clearly what thou means here,
I think thou blasphemy sustains here:
This with our Church Monomachie
Ends with a Gigantomathie.
First, having fallen on her outworks,
Or hedge, thy fancy round about works,
Till in the end thou find occasion,
Thinking she can make no evasion:
Then thou with this blasphemous dart
Thinks for to shoot her through the heart:
Like Malefactor tied to Post,
By railing on the Holy Ghost.
The author of Manual Imposition,
By Text express, and by Tradition,
Thy own and others souls deluding,
By such profane similituding.
No Porphyre, Julian, or Celsus,
(As all the ancient Stories tells us)
The Christian Faith blasphemed, as thou does,
And others like thee, not a few does:
Who bred, out of the peccant humors
Of this our Church, like Wens and Tumors;
Like Maggots bred within a sore,
Would that which gave them life devour.
Thou Wilt say, these last four Lines were stolen.
I answer with that Red-shank sullen,
Once challenged, for stealling Beef.
I stole then from another Thief.
Now since thy Sophistrie's confuted,
I end, to have my Lungs recruited.
When Ralph intended to reply,
His voice was drowned with a cry
Of those, contending who the better
Had, of the Champions, some the latter,
Some the first, and some said neither,
And some affirmed, they knew not whether.
There was, among the rest, a fellow
Of swarthy hue, inclined to yellow;
His hide enambled with itch was,
He just splea-footed, like a Witch was:
He was both broad and tall of person,
With a long Sword behind his Arse on,
Which he said was to serve the King;
Some think he meant another thing:
However he was such a person
'Twas thought among them all was scarce one
Who better understood how things went,
What Rumps and Presbytries disigns meant,
And the Kings too, it is known he
Had sometime served all the three.
They all conjured then alone him,
That he would take the speech upon him,
And finally decide the matter,
Who had the worst, who had the better:
Which unto him would be but small pains,
Who under all had made no small gains:
At which requist the Cacodaemon
Upon him took to be Palemon.
While Advocats of both the Parties
With earnest and with piercing heart eyes
Expect his doom, like Nero praying
For justice to his Fidle playing.
It Is sport, quoth he, to be Spectators
To such a pair of Gladiators:
To see how they on other thump,
He the Lay Elders, he the Rump,
Others affront with such disgraces,
And so throw dung on others faces.
When thieves reekon, it is oft-times known
That honest people get their own.
By sad experience found it was, how
That both these parties, pari passu
Had ruin brought, and desolations
On their own, and their neighbors Nations:
When one the other had ov'rcome,
And trod all under foot at home,
Then they send out their wooden high-towers,
To trouble the repose of Neighbors:
And some times hither, some times thither,
Set Europe by the ears together:
That troubled with their mutual factions,
They might not pry into their actions:
Which were, as all the World does ken,
Abhorred both by God and men.
Naught more secureth desperate matters,
Then fishing does in troubled waters.
By such like policy and slight,
They brought their power to such a hight,
That Denmark, Holland, France, and Spain,
And Sweden did strive with might and main,
With humble and submissive speeches,
To get the first kiss of their Breeches.
They brought upon all such a terror,
All seemed to idolize their error,
But thanks to God, and Albemarle,
We now delivered are from peril.
But none to thee, replied the Squire,
(His breast so filled was with ire,
That Is eyes both sparkled and scintilled)
Like Wolf, or Wild-cat, when it is killed.
It Is known thou did what e're thou could,
(But yet not so much as thou would)
To make us still under that peril
which was removed by Albemarle.
To prospering King loyal to wonder,
Still traitor to him when at under.
When thou, at playing with both hands,
Has got Inheritance and Lands,
Thou takes upon thee now to teach,
And like a Fox, to Lambs does Preach.
That both of us did desolations
And ruin bring upon the Nations,
I answer, both did mischief bring,
We by mistake, they by design:
When all is true thou say, yet that is but
Like Monkeys Chestnuts, with a Cats foot
Pulling from Ashes, or from Embers:
Bathrons for grief of scoarched members,
Does fall a suffing, and meawing,
While Monkeys are the Chestnuts Chewing:
Yet more by policy then force,
They made our Brethren, Foot and Horse
To pull them Chestnuts from the fire,
And wealth and power to them acquire:
By which they did all Europ toss,
While we got infamy and loss.
Though I should teeth beat, like a Tabor,
With tongue, I fear I lose my labor.
We by experience do find,
That a proud stubborn froward mind
With prejudice intoxicated,
Can hardly be indoctrinated:
And yet my labor's not misspent,
If any be indifferent,
They Will find, as Sun does shine in clear day,
That we were only Rogues by hearsay,
But fools indeed, which we will mend
When we grow wiser, there is an end.
But now I straight will to the King,
Discharge the Message which I bring:
Perhaps his Majesty will grant,
If well informed, what we want.
However, I hope he will not fail
To hear till I tell out my tale.
Though others foam, and fret, and chaff,
I hope his Majesty will saff.
Having this spoke, his Horse he switches,
First on the Snowt, then on the Breeches;
Who half a sleep, at last was got
With much difficulty to trot.
Yet some times paused he in the middle,
Like Cadance keepers to a Fiddle;
With rest alternative, and motion,
The Squire rides on with great devotion,
Till he came to his journeys end,
H'alights, and does not long attend,
When some there came, who did him bring
Straight to the presence of the King;
Whom he espying, bowed his knee,
And said, if it please your Majesty.
The sun indifferently on all shines,
As well on low Shrubs, as on tall Pines:
God hears the cry's of rich and poor:
Wise Solomon, to right a Whore
Resolved a doubt, to all men's wonder,
Feigning to cleave the child asunder.
Your Majesty's wisdom inherent,
And goodness, who are Gods Vicegerent,
Will not disdain to hear complaints
Of us, though but rejectaments.
Ye'll hear me, Sir, defend our Cause,
Though it be contrare to the Laws:
That ye may solve that Gordian knot,
If we be Rebels, and if not;
If we be fools, wh'affirms we are neither,
He is a liar, though my Father.
I Will use no speech with Art besprinkled,
Like Fairding on a face that is wrinkled:
Without Rhetoricating fond shows,
While I speak, Sir, as't in the ground grows,
If ye a gracious ear afford,
Shame fall me if I lie a word.
Most men affirm, they do not see what
We Non-Conformists now would be at:
That we are more sundred in opinions,
Then are the King of Spains Dominions:
Then gazers on the late new Star were,
Then the Commanders at Dunbar were.
Then Lawyers and Physicians Counsels,
Then Wives who Kail and Herbs in Town sells;
Canvassing things in Church and State,
When drink has set aloft our Pate.
Where once w'agree, three times we squable,
As does a Bag-pipe's Base and Treble.
One fears that which another hopes for,
Like Cardinals, when they make Popes, or
Like Heirs of Line, or Heirs of Tailzies,
Or Gild, or Tradesmen making Bailzies.
Now whether these be rants and flaws,
Devised, Sir, to defame our Cause;
Or whether there be something in it,
Hear out my Tale, now I begin it:
If I conjecture not amiss,
The marrow of the matter's this.
Some while ago, Sir, I was sent
Your Majesty to complement,
To beg some Preachers which we wanted,
But ere I came, Sir, they were granted:
When all expected thanks most hearty
To you, from all the godly party;
I was informed by a Letter,
Were grown the Devil a whit the better.
Our old blind zeal within us still bides,
We haunt Conventicles on Hill-sides,
Gives to our Preachers blows and knocks,
For which we are put in Irons and Stocks.
I wondered what the matter meant,
I thought, Sir, that the Devil was in it,
At length I was informed of new,
The fault was only of a few;
Not of us all, and these we ken
Have ever been John Thomsons men,
That is still ruled by their Wives,
Who carping at some Preachers lives,
And reading their erroneous Books,
Oppugning Doctrine Orthodox:
Cried out, Prophanity and Atheism,
Gross Popery and Arminianism
Is brought upon us by the Prelates,
With such expressions, those Shee-zealots
Wrought so upon their Husbands fancy,
That they from Fever fell to Frenzy,
Threw at their Preachers Stones and Clods,
As setters up of other Gods,
As Baal, Beelzebub, and Dagon,
The Apocalyptick Whore and Dragon.
Though such proceedings be half treason,
Yet to inform you there is reason:
If any introduce the Schism
Of Popery, or Arminianisme.
That Popes, Sir, are most dangerous things
To Princes, Emperors, and Kings,
They set their feet upon their neck,
They make them, Sir, kneel down and beck,
To hold their Sirrop when they ride,
And run like Lackeys at their side:
They make them bow down mouth and nose,
To kiss, and smell, their sweaty toes:
Makes them stand barefoot at their Gates,
And buy their peace at monstrous rates.
They must have from them power all,
Both spritual and temporal,
Or they will hunt men to cut their throats,
And blow them up with Powder plots;
As both your Grandfathers can tell,
Yea, they will curse their souls to hell,
And give their Kingdoms to another,
Who pays most to their Bastards Mother,
It Is long since for the Holy Ghost
At Rome Olympias ruled the Roast:
Who think the practice far more sweeter
Of Simon Magus, then Simon Peter.
That I speak truth, Sir, within measure,
Appears by Don' Olympias Treasure,
The next Successor of St. Peter
Thought he could take a course no fitter,
Then part the Simoniack pelf,
And take the one half to himself.
Then said one, though a Conclave Brother,
It went from one Thief to another.
Strange! any Orthodox Divine
Should doubt who is the Man of Sin?
Which questionless they had not done,
If they had read on Paul and John,
Who paints him in their Prophesies,
As they had seen him with their eyes.
What e're Divine of your Dominions
Vents to the world such opinions,
Let them be Gold, let them be Glass,
A Serpent lurks within the Grass.
It Is thought the Earl of Wiltshire's Spaniel
Knew Antichrist, foretold by Daniel,
And Paul and John, better then they
Who study Scripture every day.
When that the Pope held out his foot
For to be kissed round about,
Wondering to see the Carle so vain,
He snatched it till he pissed again.
This much of those erroneous Books,
Oppugning Doctrine Orthodox.
Next, Sir, as for those Preachers lives,
So much cried out on by our Wives,
All the account that I can give on it
Is, that my Minnie has the lave on it.
I wish them keep a sober diet,
Or, if they drink, Sir, keep it quiet:
If openly they haunt the Brewers,
We'll not secure them from stone-throwers*
We cannot help it for our life,
Sir, who can rule a Lawless Wife?
To make a willful Wife her fits mend,
Would put your self, Sir, to your wits end.
Though they cause whip them through the Town,
Though they them hang, though they them drown,
Seeing Priests drunk at third Bell ringing,
They Will up with stones, and fall a slinging.
And thus, Sir, I have showed you how
The fault is only of a few,
And not of all, and their defense
Is, that they follow Conscience:
If it be so, by Bishops leaves,
They cannot well be called knaves:
What e're they be, it may be said,
Knaves never yet a Conscience had.
And that a greater slander refels,
If they be no knayes, they are no rebels:
I doubt any Logician can
A rebel prove an honest man.
What are they then? we need n'advise,
They Are poor folks, large as daft as wise.
If they be such, and wish you well,
As others of their actions tell,
When in the English Troupers faces
They you remembered in their Graces.
That there may be a solid peace,
Remove the cause, the effect will cease.
Take notice of those whimsey Books,
Which in effect are heterodox.
If once those Preachers mend their lives,
There will be no Stone-throwing Wives.
Forbid them scandalize the Leidges,
By drinking healths to Ports and Bridges,
To: Whore of Babel, and to Giggs,
And to preveen complaints of Whiggs,
To scratch their skin, cut Caps and Clothes,
And swear 'twas Whiggs, with monstrous oaths
But see misfortune and mishap,
For scratch of Skin, and cut of Cap
Examined to strictest rigours,
Had different Geometrick Figures.
Though Cap was hither moved and thither,
The wounds could never agree together.
Such scandal makes the Gospel stink,
Such Books and Priests removed, I think
We'll keep the nine and twenty May Day,
On Thursday, Saturnday, or Friday;
On Tuesday, Wednesday, and Monday,
Or any other day but Sunday.
Yea, Sir, when ye have ought ado,
To hazard lives and fortunes too.
We will be ready at your call,
Else plague of God upon us all.
Observing how they all espied him,
Chiefly how all the Ladies eyed him;
Was none among them all so coy,
Whom he had not made laugh for joy:
Believing, of them all was scarce one
That honored not his parts and person.
He ears begins to prick, and neigh too,
Just like a Stoned Horse in a Meadow:
Yet curbing, as he could, his passion,
Till he should better learn the fashion:
He made a Congee, and got him down,
To see the rar'ties of the Town.
How he did visit Bedlam fool-men,
And disputed with Gresham-School-men;
Discoursing of their Pigs and Whistles,
And strange experiments of Musscls,
Of Resurections of Ratts,
And of the Language used by Catts,
When in the night they go a Cating,
And fall a scolding and a prating:
Of their blood borrowing and lending,
And all the Ancients wisdom mending;
Perhaps ye'll hear another time,
When I want Money and get Rhyme.
I have no leisure for it now.
Let it suffice, to tell you how,
That going homewards near to High-gate,
His Muse had on her such a gay foot,
That seeing London flee his view,
He stands, and bids it thus, Adieu.
From hard Calamities of Wars,
and ruins caused by fire,
A noble work thou do arise,
like Phoenix fromit's Sire.
How stately Buildings thee adorn.
and Towers which smite the Sky,
Whose Bells do, by their melody,
Apollo's Harp out-vy.
More famous, skilful Artisans,
the world never had:
Thy Merchands worth Nobilitates,
the wealth he gets by Trade.
Thy Bishops zeal and Piety up through the Heavens do flee;
Thy Magistrates, who thee govern, might Roman Consuls be.
Immortal virtues eloquence, and deep insight of mind;
Thy Muses, those of Pallas Town are not a jot behind.
And as the Sun, unto the world communicats his light;
So by thy Kings resplendant beams, brave Town, thou shines so bright.
So Rome arose, after the Gauls had it destroyed by flame.
Till in the end, the worlds bounds and Romes, did prove the same.
London, that path by the begun, if thou insist upon,
Strange, if the Worlds Empire and thine in end prove not the same.
But now, thy buildings flee my sight, thy Towers go out of view,
Ibid thee then, with weeping eyes, most generous Town, Adieu.
The same in Latin.
Post diras belli clades, flammaeque ruinas,
e cinere ut Phoenix nobile surgis opus.
Quam dicorant Aedes, ferientes sidere turres;
pulsibus adjecta cessit Apollo lyra:
Artifices clari majore and acumine nusquam,
mercator meritis nobilitavit opes;
Praesulis insignis piet as perfregit Olympum;
Consulibus potuit Roma vetusta Regi;
Morihus eloquio, mentisque indagine musis:
attica non major docta Camaena tuis:
Ut Phoebus mundum perfundit lumine Regis
sic splendes radiis Urbs generosa tui.
Gallica sic crevit post dira incendia Roma
tandem idem limes orbis et urbis erat*
Londinum incepto sipergas tramite mirum!
imperium fuerit ni orbis and urbis idem.
Nunc Aedes visum fugiunt, subsidere turres
aspicio lacrimans; urbs generosa, Vale.
FINIS.

