A DISCOURSE ON THE OFFICES FOR The Vth of November, XXXth of January, AND
XXIXth of May.


By THOMAS COMBER, D.D. Dean of DURHAM.

LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Robert Clavell at the Peacock at the
West End of St. Paul's, 1696.

A DISCOURSE ON THE OFFICE FOR November the Fifth: The Anniversary both of the
Discovery of the Gunpowder Treason, 1605. And of King WILLIAM's Arrival for
Our Deliverance, 1688.
The Preface.
THe Jews of Old paid a double regard to that Festival which fell on their
Sabbath Day, and called it an High Day Joh. XIX. 31.
. The Athenians gained two great Victories on the same Day of the Month, at
Leuctra and at Gaerestus; wherefore they counted it always a Fortunate Day, and
made it a Great Festival Al. ab Alexand. genesis dier. lib. 4. c. 20. p. 232.
. The Romanists also have their Double Festivals: And now God has made this
Day such an one to this Reformed Church, by two eminent Deliverances thereof
from utter Ruin. On this Day, in the Reign of King James the First, the
Gunpowder Treason was wonderfully discovered, and happily, prevented; and
above 80 year after, when the same Enemies were in hopes to extirpate our
Religion and subvert our Laws, Providence caused a Deliverer to Land here on
the same Day of the Month, by whose means these Designs were blasted, and our
Church once more established: So that this is to us a Day, much to be remembered
to the LORD Exodus XII. 42.
. I need not relate either of these Histories. The former is fully described,
with all its Circumstances and Proofs, by the late Learned Bishop of Lincoln
Dr. Barlow 's Discourse of Gunpowder Treason, Printed at Land. 1679.

Exarsit importune quorundam Catholicerum in aminis saeva illa and omni a vo
damnanda Conjuratio, qua Regem Regnique Proceres misso sub aedibus Comitiorum
pulvere tormentario in altum toll^ndos duxerant, ut e rebus humanis momento
omnes tollerent. Hist. Missionis Angl. Soc. Jesu, etc. collectore Hen. Mero
ejusdem Soc. Sacerdote. Audomari 1660. In Praefat.. 9. Vid. plura hoc ipso
libro, lib. 7.. 21, 22, etc.


; to which Book I refer the Reader. The latter is fresh in all our Memories,
and exactly set down in a Journal of later date History of the Desertion,
printed at Land. 1689.
. But my bus^ness being to Explain the Offices, I would rather meddle with
Matter of Fact, nor dispute with any Party: Only I must clear the way to our
grateful Observation of this Day, by proving very briefly, the reality of the
Gunpowder Plot, which some Romanists are so hardy as to deny; and by showing
this latter Deliverance was also a mighty Blessing, which some prejudiced
Protestants seem unwilling to grant.

First, That the Papists did really design to blow up King James, with the
Prince and Parliament, by Gunpowder on this Day, is not only evident in
general, by their former Plots and practices in Queen Elizabeth's time, and
their endeavors to hinder King James his Succession to the Crown See the
Preface to Dr. Barlow's History.
: But it appears more particularly, 1st, By the Materials found in that
Infernal Vault, and the seizing a desperate Papist with the Keys in his hands,
late in the Night, before the intended Massacre. 2ly, By the Flight and open
Rebellion of the other chief Conspirators upon the Discovery. 3ly, By the
Confessions under the hands of Fawks and Winter, two principal Agents in this
horrid Plot. 4ly, By the Trials of all the Criminals, yet extant at large;
showing the legal Evidence and judicial Proofs by which they were convicted.
5ly, By Father Garnet, the Provincial of the Jesuits, his owning his knowledge
of this Design by a Declaration made before his Execution. 6ly, By the Letters
of Sir Everard Digby, a Person equally eminent for his Extraction, and his Zeal
for Rome, who acknowledges he knew of and approved this Plot. 7ly, By the
Romanists abroad, crying them all up for Martyrs, who died in this Cause, as
intending to serve their Church. Lastly, By the Laws made here in full
Parliament with mature deliberation, upon this occasion. And those who can deny
this Evidence, may outface the plainest Truth.

As to the Second Deliverance, it is too fresh, and was too public to be
downright denied as yet; but some endeavor to lessen our Sense of it, and
Gratitude for it, by privately suggesting, 1st, That we were in no danger of
Popery. 2ly, That it was only a pretense to remove one Prince and set up
another. 3ly, That we are in as ill Circumstances now, as we were before. I
would not mention these Objections, but that (how improbable soever they are)
some venture to assert them, and others are so credulous to believe them, and
thereby guard their Ingratitude for this late Mercy; which I think they ought
to praise God for, if they will impartially consider what is heartily offered
to confute these Insinuations.

For our great Danger of Popery under the late King appears,

First, By the great encouragement given to that Religion: And here we may
consider the Kings temper and zeal for it: The numbers of Priests and Jesuits,
and their eagerness to promote it: The great Army kept up in times of Peace,
and the care to model it with Officers that would support Arbitrary Power: The
liberal Rewards offered and given for turning to that Church: The open
profession of that Religion, in defiance to all Laws unrepealed that did
prohibit it: The Arts used to procure a pre-engaged Parliament, to make way for
it by repealing the Test and Penal Laws: The advancing Men unqualified, Papists
or their Friends, into all sorts of Offices and Preferments, Civil, Military
and Ecclesiastical: The Contrivance to have an Heir in a lucky Hour, to give
them another Reign to bring this about, if the first should too soon expire:
The open Boasts of the Romanists themselves, who best knew that Prince's Mind;
and finally, The vast number of Atheists, Dissenters and pretended Protestants,
who came in as Tools to carry on this Design. These Considerations show, that
Popery was intended to be set up; and it is as plain, that Protestant Religion
was intended to be pulled down, by the violent proceedings against
Corporations; the altering their Magistrates and seizing their Charters; by the
disgracing and displacing all the steady Professors of it out of their Offices
in the Court and Camp, on the Benches above, and in the Country also; by
ejecting a whole Society, and many private Persons out of their Freeholds in
the Universities, and elsewhere, without Law; by Imprisoning the Bishops for an
humble Petition; by setting up an illegal Court with an unlimited Power over
all the Clergy, and drawing all of them that were firm to the Protestant
Religion, into the danger of a Suspension. This I hope may satisfy
disinterested Men, that our peril was as great as it was real and imminent.

Secondly, That the present King did intend to put a stop to the Dangers we
were in, is confessed. But that he did not design either the Removal of the
late King, or his own Advancement to the Throne, is manifest, 1st, By the small
number he brought with him, fit only to guard him during a Treaty, not to
exclude a Prince who had treble his Forces in Arms. 2ly, By his slow
proceedings, his offering and entering on a Treaty, and desiring to refer all to
a Parliament. 3ly, By the first secret and voluntary Flight of the late King,
after his Army was Disbanded; neither of which was foreseen by the Prince. 4ly,
By his gentle Usage of the late King, when he was in his Power, and offering to
renew the Treaty. 5ly, By his Declaration, that he came with no design to take
the Crown: And his known Integrity (for which he is celebrated over Europe)
gives great weight to this. 6ly, So does also the Conformity of his Actions to
this Protestation; for he meddled not with the Government till the Archbishop,
the Nobility and some Bishops, and very Great Men pressed the Administration
upon him: Nor would he accept the Crown, till it was given him and his Queen by
a full and free Convention. Lastly, By the Consideration, that he has no
Advantage by the Change; he had no Children to succeed him; he entered upon an
expensive and hazardous Design; his Fortune had more plenty and more ease in
his former station, and (abating his satisfaction in delivering us) he gets
nothing but trouble and danger by this Title. So that if our Circumstances had
not made his Advancement to be absolutely necessary, he had no reason to desire
it.

Thirdly, If the Romanists say, Their Circumstances are no better now; we grant
it: But it is surprising that English Protestants should suggest this. For,
1st, as Englishmen, Have we no benefit by the preserving our Monarchy on its
ancient Basis, and keeping up the Laws for our Liberties and Properties? Are
not Charters restored, Parliaments brought back to their old measures of free
Elections, and regular Proceedings? Are not all Judges, Magistrates and
Officers qualified by Law, and left free to act according to Law? Are we in
danger of any stretches of the Prerogative now; and is not the mildness of our
Administration become almost a Grievance? If the Taxes be objected, we must
consider that it was those who aggrandized the French to this degree, made them
necessary: That the present King has no benefit at all by them, not so much as
a Salary for his Hazard, Toil and Care; and that if they attain the End, a
Peace will soon repay us with large Interest. 2ly, If we be Protestants of the
Church established, is it no benefit to have a King declaring himself of that
Religion? To have our Liturgy, and all God's Ordinances in the Primitive way?
To have our Bishops and Regular Clergy encouraged and protected, and Learning
and Piety as much promoted as ever? 3ly, If we be Dissenters purely for
Conscience sake, and do not aim at Dominion; is it no favor to be freed from
Penalties, and at liberty to worship in our own Way? How did these, address,
submit and comply in the late Reign, for a precarious Liberty, intended to
introduce Popery; and is a legal Freedom, designed to keep out Popery by
uniting Protestants, worth nothing? If these make our Circumstances no better,
it must be our own fault; and if they do, why should we not praise God for this
happy Change? I cannot hope to conquer obstinate Prejudice, or prevail with
such as have resolved beforehand not to yield (...). Theod. and There. Ser. 1.
. But when this is examined by calm Reason, I doubt not but most Protestants
will (and I think they all should) this Day rejoice for this Second Deliverance
also, as this lately revised Office does direct; which I now proceed to explain.

The Sentences, Psalm. CIII. 8, 9, 10.
. 1. TO prepare us for the Confession, these three Sentences are chosen; the
first describing God's infinite Compassion and Pity, his Patience and wonderful
Inclinations to do good, ver. 8. The second enlarging upon the short
continuance of his Displeasure: We are always sinning, but he is not always
correcting: We keep our course of provoking, and he might have gone on to punish
us as often and as long as we have offended, ver. 9. But we see the contrary:
Many cruel Designs are formed against us, and none of them prosper for any long
time; so that we must confess, that God is a very gentle Creditor Vid. Job XI.
6. Duplex est rationum pagina, scil. accepti and expensi. Quae collata
ostendunt Deum non exigere totum debitum. Coduic. in locum.
, who has not exacted of us so much in Judgments, as we were owing in
Transgressions: And therefore these Favors in discovering and preventing the
Mischiefs designed against us, are not owing to our Innocence, but to his
Mercy. And hence we see we have Reasons enough to Confess our sins, which is our
next Duty.

The Hymn instead of the Venite.
The First Hymn consists of Five particulars, 1st, An Exhortation to praise God
for 1. His gracious Nature, -- Psalm. CVII. 1. 2. His Providence over us, -- ib.
ver. 2.
2ly, A Reflection on our Enemies actions and success, 1. Their many Attempts,
Ps. CXXIX. 1. 2. Their constant disappointments, ibid. -- ver. 2. 3. The
Injustice designed against us, -- Psalm. XXXV. 7. 4. The Evil falling on them,
Psalm. LVII. 5.
3ly, A due acknowledgment of God's 1. Power and Wisdom, Ps. CXLVII. 5. 2.
Justice and Equity therein, -- ib. ver. 6
4ly, A Prayer for the present King's Safety, -- Psalm. LXXX. 17. 5ly, A Promise
of our fidelity to God, -- ib. ver. 18.


Brief Notes upon this Hymn.
. 2. THis is a Collection out of several Psalms. The Words are all of Divine
Inspiration; and as the Analysis shows the method, so the Notes shall set out
the pertinency of this excellent Composure, by applying it all along to the
occasion.

Psalm. CVII. 1, 2. Let us, who are Members of this Reformed Church, give humble
Praises to our God, as well for the Fountain as for the Streams; for his
gracious Nature, and never ceasing Mercy, which inclines him in all Ages to do
us good: And for the real effects of these Inclinations, his rescuing us from
Popery at first, and his frequent delivering us since, out of the hands of
those our cruel Foes.

Psalm. CXXIX. 1, 2. Our Israel may very truly say, Their Malice has been as
restless, as it was implacable; this has put them upon so many Methods for
extirpating our Religion. First, They began in the Infancy of the Reformation
with the cruel Marian Persecution (...) -- etc. Hippoc. Aphor. lib. 2. cap. 29.
, hoping to pull up the tender Plant by that force. Then, by Domestic
Rebellions, and a Spanish Armada, they attempted the destruction of the next
Queen, only for her adherence to this Faith. And since that, they have
contrived to blow up one King, and pervert another; but blessed be God still
without any advantage to their Cause, through his Mercy they could never yet
prevail against us.

Psalm. XXXV. 7. and Psalm. LVII. 5. In these two last Designs, their Plots were
carried on with great Secrecy for a long time, till our destruction was near
being effected; and not only our Lives, but that Religion by which we hope to
save our Souls, were in extreme danger. We neither knew they had dug a Pit
for the Life of our Protestant King James the First, nor drawn in the Second of
that Name to their party, while he joined with us in Communion: But Heaven
discovered both Designs time enough to prevent them; and not only hindered them
from hurting us, but the Mischief both times fell upon themselves: First, by
reviving of old severe Laws against them (which that gentle Prince had suffered
to sleep from His first coming to the Crown Ergo, Psalm. XXXV. 7. sine causa, h
e. immerito. Verse. Jun. and Trem. a me non laesi, Genebr. in loc.
): And this Second time, their Practices rendered them and their Religion more
odious, and less likely to prevail here than ever.

Psalm. CXLVII. 5, 6. How can we but own those three Attributes of God which are
so visible in these Deliverances? First, The greatness of his Power, who so
mightily dissipated their open and violent Attempts. Secondly, His infinite
Wisdom in finding out and laying open all their cruel and concealed Intreagues.
Thirdly, His eminent Justice, in turning those things by which they hoped to
pull down this peaceable and moderate Reformed Church, into the ruin of their
own proud and persecuting Babel Non est injuria pati, quod prior feceris.
Senec. de Ira, l. 2. cap. 30.
: For hereby all their Politics appeared to be folly, and they were taken in
their own craftiness.

Psalm. LXXX. 17, 18. And now, O LORD, who have done so great things for us;
what remains, but that we first pray thee to preserve our present King, a Man
exalted by thy right Hand, and one whom thou have made very strong, to deliver
us and defend thy true Religion! And, Secondly, if thou please to keep Him
safe, We do promise and engage we will all stand firmly to thy Truth; and we
may safely promise this, since during His Reign, we are in no danger of being
tempted to Apostasy or falling into Persecution.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The proper Psalms, LXIV, CXXIV, CXXV.
Psalm. LXIV. contains, 1st, A Prayer for Deliverance from his Foes, -- Verse I,
II. 2ly, A Relation of their Malice appearing, 1. By their Evil words, Ver.
III, IV. 2. By their Secret plots, Ver. V. VI.
3ly, A Prophecy of their Ill success, Noteing 1. The Author of it, God, Ver.
VII. 2. The Means, their own Tongues, Ver. VIII.
4ly, A Description of the Event, 1. To them, Derision, Ver. VIII. 2. To GOD,
Acknowledgment, -- Ver. IX. 3. To the Pious, Rejoicing, -- Ver. X.



Brief Notes upon the LXIV. Psalm.
. 3. Psalm. LXIV. Ver. I, II. My Enemies are so bloody, that they aim at nothing
less than my Life, which being in imminent danger, I cry loudly and earnestly
in my Prayer to thee, O God, to keep me not only from the danger, but even from
the fear of Death; for to be under such Terrors is a continual dying Quotidie
moritur. mortem qui assidue timet. Senec. Herc. Fur. Act. 4.
. They are a numerous Party who combine against me, and though their Malice be
open, their Methods are hid from me; therefore do thou, O LORD, hide me by thy
Providence, so that they cannot come at me to destroy me.

Ver. III, IV. In the mean time, till they can find an opportunity to strike at
my Life, they murder my Reputation, expressing their impotent Rage, by
inventing Calumnies, and spreading false Reports of me and my Religion, which
they use as they would do Swords and Arrows (...). Clem. Alex. strom. lib. 1.
, if they durst. However, this way they secretly wound my good Name, and labor
to make me hated; and never fear that thou will call them to any account for
this kind of Injustice.

Ver. V, VI. They persuade one another, it is Zeal for Holy Church to seek the
Extirpation of Heretics, and think it meritorious to Cabal and Plot our
Destruction, resolving so soon as they have contrived it cunningly, they will
execute it as suddenly. Nor do they fear any discovery, because they have bound
one another in inviolable Oaths of Secrecy, never to reveal it.

Ver. VII, VIII. But when I think of thy Omniscience and Justice, O God, I can
foretell their fall. They do not discern it Ultor a tergo Deus.
: But I see that while they are preparing to shoot at me, Thy Bow is drawn to
shoot at them, with an Arrow so swift, it shall be before theirs, and so well
aimed that it shall mortally wound them Ferox Theseus qualem Miniodi luctum
Obtulerat mente immemori talem and ipse recepit. Catullus.
: And which will eternally expose them to derision, after all their care and
secrecy, a casual Word or Paper dropped from some of the Accomplices shall
discover all, and they shall shamefully betray themselves.

Ver. IX, X. But besides their shame in suffering that which they intended
against us, the Pious will make two excellent Uses of this Providence: First,
they will discern such infinite Wisdom in the discovery of these Plots, and
such exact Justice in turning the Mischief on their heads -- nec est Lex
justior ulla
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.

, that they will own it to be the work of GOD; thy Hand in it will be very
visible. And those good Men, who are thus wonderfully delivered, Secondly,
shall heartily rejoice in thy Mercy, O LORD; yea, this will strengthen their
Faith against all future dangers; and while they bless thee for past Mercies,
they will be glad also in hopes of as many Deliverances as they shall need for
the time to come: And ever sing, Glory be to the Father, etc.

The CXXIVth Psalm has Three parts, 1st, An Acknowledgment of their Deliverer,
Verse I. 2ly, A Description, 1. Of the Malice of their Foes, Ver. II. 2. Of
their own great danger Ver. III, IV.
3ly, The Returns they make for escaping it, viz. 1. Praises to GOD, Ver. V. 2.
Joy in their present safety, Ver. VI. 3. Trust for future Mercies, Ver. VII.



Brief Notes on the CXXIVth Psalm.
. 4. Psalm. CXXIV. Ver. I, II. The wondrous Deliverances of this Church and
Nation show, that GOD most certainly takes our part: For our Israel may justly
say, If others, or less than the All-seeing and Almighty LORD himself had been
on our side, they could never have baffled such close and cruel Designs, as
this politic and powerful Party of Men have all along formed against us. It
was not our Strength or Foresight, but Gods Romans VIII. 31. Si Deus pro nobis
-- qui vult adversari, paret se, si potest, bellare adversus Deum. Aug. de ver.
Ap. Sermon. 16. pug. 74.
, that made the Advantage be still on our side: For his was a Divine, theirs
but an Human Power Noli mirari, victi sunt, homines enim erant. Aug. in Psalm.
124.
. It Is plain their Rage was so great, that they would not liesurely have
devoured us; but like some hungry Lion or Tiger, they would have swallowed us
up alive and raw Vivos, Hebr. Crudos. Vid. 1 Samuel II. 15. and Prove. I. 12.
. The Plot was laid to have given no time nor warning to those who were to be
Massacred: But King, Prince and Parliament were all to be blown up and
destroyed in one moment.

Ver. III, IV. Again, their Pride was risen to that height, that nothing less
than our utter destruction would have satisfied them. Persecution must have
taken off all that missed this Blow: So that this unavoidable Desolation would
have suddenly broke in upon us, like a deep and irresistible stood of Waters
Aqua, in S. Scriptura, ponitur pro Populo persecutore. Aug. in loc.
; We could not have waded through it without drowning; nor could we have saved
our Lives any other way, but by denying our Faith, and so damning our Souls;
which was indeed a dreadful case.

Ver. V, VI. But since we were saved both from their Rage and their Pride, by
Miracles of Providence: Oh, what reason have we to praise the LORD, who pulled
us, like helpless Lambs, out of the very mouths of those Savage Creatures, and
rescued our Soul, which like some silly Bird was suddenly caught in the Fowlers
Snare; and not being able to break it by her own strength, expected each moment
to be taken and destroyed. In this condition were we when the Almighty broke
this Snare and delivered us.

Ver. VII. Wherefore let their hopes be never so great, we will not fear any of
their Attempts hereafter. Their expectations of Success rely on false
Principles, wicked Policies, and cruel Actions; they trust in Saints Isai.
LXIII. 16. Mortus enim non norunt quid agunt patianturve mortales in hac vita.
Aug. de cura promortuis.
, Relics, and other Created things, which always fail them: But our help
comes, by calling on the Name of that Supreme Lord, the Creator of Heaven and
Earth, who can never want Power or Inclination to rescue such as depend on him;
and this is the true Reason why we are saved, and they are disappointed. For
which let us sing, Glory be to the Father, etc.

The CXXVth Psalm does consist of 1st, A Declaration of the Safety of the
Faithful, Verse I. 2ly, An Account, 1. Of the Author thereof, viz. GOD, Ver.
II. 2. Of the Reason, viz. to prevent Apostasy, Ver. III.
3ly, A Prayer for the prosperity of Good Men, Ver. IV. 4ly, A Prosspect of the
final State, 1. Of the Wicked, Ver. V. 2. Of the Righteous, Ver. V.



Brief Notes on the CXXVth Psalm.
. 5. Psalm. CXXV. Ver. I. The former Psalm ended with a resolution to trust in
God, and this shows the benefit thereof; for by this Faith good Men are safe.
All attempts to destroy them are as vain, as the endeavors to remove a
Mountain by Human strength would be Montes transfer in S. Scriptura sig. rem
supra humanam potentiam aggredi. Math XVII. 20. and 1 Cor. XIII. 2. Drus. Prove.
clas. 2. l. 3.
, especially if that Mountain be the Hill of Sion, the place in which Gods true
Worship is fixed, and over which he takes a special care: This Mount, and Gods
Church, will stand fast for ever.

Ver. II. The situation of Jerusalem was an Emblem of this; for as that was
surrounded and guarded with many Hills on every side of it, and diverse
Watch-Towers and Forts were placed on them: Even so the LORD, by his All-seeing
and Almighty Providence continually watches over his Church, to prevent all the
Mischief intended against it, and this makes it inaccessible to all its Enemies.

Ver. III. When God has given a Country, to be the Lot of such as do believe
and worship rightly, he will not without the highest Provocation suffer those
of a false Religion, to divide it among them for a possession, or let them keep
the Dominion over it for any long time Verse. Tigu^in. Pertica, i. e. virga
mensurationis. Castal. Sceptrum, i. e. virga potestatis.
: Because he fore-sees such Lords and Rulers, by force and fraud, by interest
and cruelty, will entice some and affright others into Apostasy. Wherefore in
tenderness to his weak Servants, such Scourges as these either are not sent on
a righteous Nation, or however do not long continue -- shall not rest. Now
Trans.
.

Ver. IV. On the due consideration of this thy tender Care of thy own People,
what can I pray for more properly, than that thou, O LORD, wilt continue thy
Providence over all that are upright and sincere, and let them at all times be
safe and prosperous.

Ver. V. As for those who are so set on mischief, that when one of their wicked
Plots fails, they begin to contrive another: The visible Justice of thy
defeating them will not discourage them, nor any thing else amend them Medicus
si cessaverit curare, desperate. Hieron. ad Castrut. ep. 33.
. Therefore I know, thou, O LORD, wilt lead them forth like hardened
Malefactors, to suffer some dreadful punishment in this World Puniet eos ut
mal^^^cos. Castal.
; or however, thou will condemn them to eternal punishment in the next Ducet
eos in G^^^nam. Chal. Paraphr.
. And in despite of all their policy and power, the true Church and People of
God shall enjoy peace and prosperity from age to age. So that this and the next
Generations shall continually own it, and sing, Glory be to the Father, etc.

The proper Lessons, 2 Samuel XXII. and Acts XXIII.
. 6. NOthing can be more truly called proper, than these Lessons: The first is
David's Hymn of Praise 2 Samuel XXII.
, composed upon his deliverance out of the hands of all his Enemies, especially
of King Saul his Father-in-Law, who sought to deprive him both of his promised
Succession and his Life: I need not tell the Reader to which of our two
Deliverances this belongs; but shall only observe, that the Words are so many
Acts of Faith and Hope, Love and Gratitude, Humility and Devotion, Praise and
holy Resolution, and are so pertinent that they explain themselves to an
attentive and well-disposed Hearer. The Second Lesson relates evidently to the
Gunpowder Treason; the History agrees with that Plot in some particulars, but
falls short of it in many others: There we find Acts XXIII.
a crew of desperate Zealots, enraged at Paul for persuading them to reform the
corrupt Tradiditions of their Forefathers, binding themselves in a bloody Vow,
sealed with horrid Imprecations (...) De Zelot. ap. Judaeos Philo. leg spec.
to murder S. Paul, as he went toward the Hall of Judgment; and first they
acquainted their impious Priests with it, who approved the Design, and
encouraged the Actors, promising them (no doubt,) if they were seized by the
Guards, and executed for this Heroic Zeal toward their Old Religion, that they
should merit Paradise at least, for ridding the Church of such an Enemy. Thus
far the Stories agree: But S. Paul was a private Man, and their Fellow-Subject,
and they aimed at a single Sacrifice to their Rage; Whereas these Plotters aim
at a Gracious Prince, their own Sovereign, and at a thousand more Lives besides
his; yea, as the Parliament is the Nation in Representative, our Plotters seem
inspired with the bloody Principles of Caligula Utinam Pop. Romans unam cervicem
haberet. Votum Caligul. ap. Suet. l. 4. p. 24.
, who wished he could cut off all the People of Rome at one stroke. They were
for destroying a thousand innocent Lives at once, and subverting the Religion
and the whole Government of the Nation, and cutting off all that should oppose
them. So that the Scripture affords no parallel of such cruel and
blood-thirstymen, and we must be content with a Crime like it; but in a far
lower degree.

The first Collect.
The first Collect consist of 1st, A Memorial of past Providence; observing
1st, The Author of them, Almighty God, who have in all ages, etc.
2ly, The Objects of them, 1. The Church 2. Kings, in the miraculous and
gracious deliverances, etc.
3. States,
3ly, The end of them, viz. their safety from such Plots, from the wicked
Conspiracies, etc.

2ly, An act of Praise, for a special Providence to us relating, 1st, The
Thanksgiving it self, we yield thee our unfeigned thanks, etc.
2ly, The grounds of it, 1. The persons hereby delivered, for the wonderful and
mighty, etc.
2. The Evil escaped, by Popish Treachery appointed, etc.
3. The aggravation thereof in a most barbarous, etc.


3ly, An acknowledgment whence it came, From this unnatural Conspiracy, not our
merit, etc.
4ly, A Recognition, to whom the Praise is due, And therefore not unto us, O
Lord, etc.



A Practical Discourse on this Collect.
. 7. ALmighty God who have in all Ages showed, etc.] This Collect relates to
our former deliverance, and is introduced by observing that this was not the
first time Heaven had showed its Power and Mercy upon such occasions: And it is
very fit that a new instance of the Divine Goodness to us, should revive in our
grateful minds the memory of Gods Blessings, though granted in ages long since
past: Time should never blot out their Remembranc, especially when a later Act
gives us occasion to call to mind all of the like kind. For all these
Providence aim at the same end, that is, by preserving righteous and religious
Kings and States professing his holy and eternal Truth, to preserve his Church
and true Religion throughout all ages, so that it is come down even unto our
times.

The Old Testament records many Deliverances of the Jewish Church and State,
and of their Religious Kings, David and Asa, Jehosaphat and Hezekiah: And ever
since there were Christian Princes, the Annals of the Church abound with
Examples of their being preserved from the plots and malice of Jews and Pagans,
Heretics and Infidels, yea from all sorts of Traitors: And the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth alone, of Blessed Memory, is sufficient to confirm this Truth: The
Romanists (hoping with her to destroy the Religion she professed) often
attempted her Life by poisoning and stabbing, and sought to take away her Crown
by frequent Rebellions at home, and by a formidable Invasion from abroad; but
still Heaven manifestly defeated them, and miraculously preserved Her.

We yield thee our unfeigned thanks and praise for, etc.] As their malice ended
not with her Reign, so neither did Almighty God cease his care; When there was
a fresh occasion by a new Plot against her Successor King James I. a new
Providence delivered Him, and gave us occasion with all joy and gratitude this
day to own it, by commemorating, First the Persons designed to be destoyed,
viz. A Wise and Gracious Protestant King, his Virtuous and Religigious Queen,
and their most Innocent and Hopeful Heir Prince Henry, together with the whole
Parliament, consisting of the three Estates, and all Officers and Attendants
belonging to any of these; Parliamentum, Curia apud nos suprema, magnum trium
ordinum Concilium, vel Conventus, ut cum Rege de rebus arduis consultent.
Somneri Glossar. ap. X. Script.
yea all whose business or curiosity on that solemn Day should bring them to
that fatal place, under which were privately laid such certain instruments of
death, as in one instant would have torn these poor Creatures into a thousand
pieces, and buried them all in the Ruins of that Ancient Senate House: If an
implicit Faith and a blind Zeal could not work Prodigies, it is scarce to be
imagined how any thing in human shape could be so infatuated as to believe that
God, who hates robbery for a Burnt-offering, Isa. LXI. 8.
can (like some cruel Pagan Doemon) be pleased with Murder, or delight in a
Sacrifice of Human Blood: But they who are taught to renounce their Senses --
Absit credere quae videmus. Walt. Mahop. de nugis curiae. did. 1. c. 11.
and must not believe that which they see, taste and smell, may easily be
brought to abandon their Reason also, and wretchedly imagine they oblige and
serve God, in exercising the greatest barbarity upon men. To kill one innocent
Man, wilfully is a damning sin, if the Eighth Commandment be one of Gods
Eternal Laws; but to kill so Many, One of them their Sovereign, some of them
their Friends and Relations, and all of them their Countrymen and Civil
Neighbors, and to do this in so sudden and merciless a manner, and still to
believe this barbarity to be meritorious, is (as the Collect notes) a
Wickedness that has no parallel, nor precedent in former Ages; these Monsters
sta^^ single.

From this unnatural Conspiracy, not our merit, etc.] Those who could so long
ruminate upon so unnatural a Plot, and fortified themselves for it, by
profaning the Holy Sacrament of Peace, and making that the Bond for Murder,
These would not have shrunk at the Execution: And oh what a blessing was it,
that these cruel Hands were not let loose! God ^ne could, and he did restrain
them, and this nor for our Merit, for we were then (as we are now) a sinful
nation: They were discovered, not by our foresight, since it was hatched in the
dark, and carried on closely almost to the very fatal minute. But by Heavens
never-sleeping and all-seeing Eye, while they feared no stop, and we
apprehended no danger. Then, as happily as unexpectedly, all was disclosed and
prevented. This was so certainly Gods Act, (...). Artemid. l. 1. c. 2.
that as we could no way contribute to the benefit, so we cannot pretend to any
share in the glory of it; and therefore we say with holy David, Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, etc. Psalm. CXV. 1.
To his Name let all the praise be given, because from him alone the Mercy
came; a Mercy which preserved the True Religion from extirpation, and secured
it to after Ages. So that as this and all succeeding Generations have advantage
by this deliverance, we hope in all Churches of the Saints the memorial of it
will ever be retained, by a Public Day of Joy and Thanksgiving; and that Gods
faithful people will own this mighty Blessing was obtained by the intercession
of Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost let all glory be
ascribed for it, now and for ever-more, Amen.

The Second Collect.
The Second Collect has three Parts.

1st, A new act of praise for a 2d mercy. 1st, Expressed in general, Accept
also most gracious, etc.
2ly, Set out in particular by 1. Tho me^ ^ used by bringing his Majesty, etc.
2. The effect produced for the deliverance of our Church, etc.


2ly, A special owning of 1st, The Author of this mercy we adore the wisdom,
etc.
2ly, Our Obligations unto him which so seasonably interposed, etc.

3ly, Proper Prayers on this occasion. 1st, For a grateful sense of it we
beseech thee give us such, etc.
2ly, For due returns to it. 1st, Preventing security. that we may not grow
secure, etc.
2ly, Increasing our zeal. and move us to be the more, etc.
3ly, Promoting all virtue. let truth and justice, etc.

3ly, Fit motives urged, both 1. For us to endeavor that they may be the
stability, etc.
2. For God to grant. all which we humbly, etc.



A Practical Discourse on this Collect.
. 8. ACcept also most gracious God of our unfeigned, etc.] There was by divine
appointment a Bell for every Pomgranate upon the Skirt of Aarons Robe, to show
that every new Mercy deserves a new Song of Praise; He renews his Goodness to
revive our Gratitude, Conservandum veteris officis meritum novo videbatur,
Plin. ep. 4. l. 3.
and has made the same Day twice Memorable, that we might give him a double
Tribute of Thanks. This Deliverance was a real and substantial Blessing,
therefore our Praises should be unfeigned; we were extremely dejected with a
dismal prospect of the inevitable ruin of our Liberties and Religion, and after
such a cloud, the beams of the Sun were very comfortable Sequitur post Nubila
Poebus.
. We had former Offices of Praise for the Deliverances of our Forefathers; But
now God put a new Song, another Eucharistick Form, into our mouths Psalm. XL. 3.
Pro alio Hebr. dicunt Novum. Exodus I. 8. LXX (...): Ita Marc. XVI. 17. cum Act.
II. 4. Novas and alias linguas. Drus.
for our own deliverance: And that we may offer it up with great joy and
devotion, We here recite the means God chose and the instrument he used to
deliver us: When they who designed to oppress us, had power equal to their
will, a strong Army and a well-manned Fleet, Provisions and Ammunition, the
Ports and Garrisons all at their command, and Orders were almost ready to be
given to give the Fatal Blow, to us, who were defenseless and disarmed, and not
allowed either to Petition or Complain: Then on this very Day our present King
landed to our rescue; and then Popery and Arbitrary Power soon vanished. It Is
said (I confess) that some are angry at the Providence which stopped these Evils,
and think the means to be such as cannot be justified. But give me leave to
observe, that in the Poetic Ages Hero's were Deified for freeing their
oppressed Neighbors from the Tyranny of their Natural Sovereigns; that the
Eastern and Italian Christians magnified the mercy of God, and the valor of
Constantine for preventing their lawful Emperors from persecuting them; that
the Greek Church resolved it was a just cause of War against the Persian King
for persecuting his Christian Subjects (...). Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 18. page 744.
; that the Papists highly extolled Philip of Spain for setting out an Armada to
relieve those they called injured Catholics in England; that Queen Elizabeth
was advised by her Parliament and Council to assist the Dutch and free them
from the Spanish Yoke, when that King would have altered their Constitution,
and extirpated that which he called Heresy: And finally, that the learned
Grotius proves it very lawful for a Neighboring Prince to defend Subjects from
a ruin threatened to them from their own King Grot. de jure Belli and Pacis. l.
2. c. 25.. 8. page 414.
. And all this where the assisting Prince has not an expectant Right (which no
Predecessor ought to deteriorate) as our present King had. These considerations
may convince all that are not prejudiced, that the Act was innocent at least,
if not praiseworthy in him, and happy for us: So that we lawfully may, and in
gratitude ought to be very thankful both to God and our Deliverer.

We adore the Wisdom and Justice of thy Providence, which, etc.] However let us
not be ungrateful to God, who has so visibly manifested his Wisdom and Justice
by this seasonable interposition of his Providence, that all who are not
wilfully blind may see his hand in our Enemies disappointment, and our
deliverance; to outwit and baffle so many famous Politicians as the Conclave of
Rome and the Schools of Loyola had sent hither, shows infinite Wisdom; to catch
them in their own craftiness Job. V. 13.
, and make the methods which they took to advance their Cause, prove the ruin
of it, was truly Divine Justice: This kind of judgment, the snaring the wicked
in the work of their own hands, makes the Lord to be known, as David notes
Psalm. IX. 16. The Lord is known by the judgment, etc. New Transl.
. Again, the seasonableness of this Mercy also demonstrates it came from God,
whose time to deliver his people is, when they are come to the last extremity,
and all human aid seems to disappear; when the Wicked have no fear but they
shall prosper, and the Pious scarce any hopes to escape Sic operari Deus cum
suis assuevit, ut ubi deficit humanum consilium, ibi intercedat divinum
adjutorium. Aug. de temp. Ser. 89.
, then it is most proper for Heaven to interpose: And thus it was in our case,
the greatness and nearness of the danger, their boasting hopes, and our
desponding fears, made the rescue more sweet, and more certain to come from
God, whose Wisdom and Justice therefore we must most thankfully adore.

We beseech thee give us such a lively and lasting sense, etc.] To be
ungrateful for so necessary, so seasonable, and so profitable a blessing would
be a provoking sin, and prevent Gods future Favors; therefore we pray that we
may have first a lively, and then a lasting sense of it: First, that it may
work vigorously on our Affections, and produce sprightly and hearty praises:
Secondly, That it may sink deep into our hearts, and never be forgotten by us:
We seemed, indeed, all to be much affected with this mercy at first, but Time
in too many, has shamefully effaced those Notions, so as they have almost
forgot (as Israel did) the Lord and Gideon Jud. VIII. 34, 35.
. Now this ingratitude is the more inexcusable, because the same God who
preserved our Church and our ancient Government, has since settled and secured
both, and hitherto defended that Valiant and Prudent Prince who guards us and
them, so that we have a continued succession of new Mercies ^eneficia mea tueri
nullo modo melius possem, quam ut augeam, Plin. ep. l. 2.
to keep alive in us the sense of the first Blessing; and if these will not
make us continue grateful, nothing will work on us.

That we may not grow secure and careless in, etc.] But the saving an Excellent
Church and three Nations so long, requires a better return than the Tribute of
our Lips. God justly expects from us such a sense of this, as may influence our
Lives, and make us as much better, as we are now (by his mercy) safer than we
were before. When the danger threatens, we are commonly fervent in our Prayers,
strict in our Lives, and sensible of our sins Utinam tales esse sani
perseveremus, quales nos futuros profitemur infirmi. Plin. ep. 26. l. 7.
; but when it is over, we grow secure and negligent in our obedience: We
presume the Goodness of our Religion is such, that let us live as we will, God
will ever protect it Jer. VII. 4.
; and this dangerous notion hinders our repentance. Wherefore let me desire you
to consider, Many pure Churches have been destroyed, for the sins of those who
were members of them: Gods Truth may be removed to another Land, and be safe,
whatever become of us; so that our present Quiet must not make us negligent or
presumptuous; his Goodness should not hinder us from, but lead us to
Repentance; the kinder he is to us, the greater should be our shame that we
have offended him. And though the preservation of an excellent Religion be a
mighty blessing, it is so only to those who live up to the Principles of it,
and walk by its Rules; these only are better by it in this world, and these
alone shall be saved by it in the next world: What signifies the freedom to
profess the true Faith to him that lives like an Infidel Inter Christianum and
Gentilem non fides tantum debet, sed vit^ distinguere. D. Hier. ep. 14. ad
Celant. p. 130.
; or the liberty of worshipping God aright, to him, that either comes seldom to
Gods House and Ordinances, or performs that Service slightly, and grows no
better by it? His Religion is worse by the scandal he brings on it, and he will
be no better by all the pretenses he makes to it: If Popery had prevailed, such
men could not either have lived more wickedly, or perished more certainly:
Wherefore that the preserving and establishing our Religion, may be a real
Blessing to us, here and hereafter; let us repent and carefully avoid security,
negligence and presumption; and this is the negative part: And let the
continuance of this holy Church, by such signal Providence, move us to be more
diligent and zealous; both in joining with it in that pure way of Worship it
maintains, and in adorning it with such holy lives as it directs us to lead;
and this is the affirmative part, of which the next Paragraph gives us the
particulars.

Let Truth and Justice, Brotherly Kindness and Charity, etc.] When God has
saved our Religion, he expects we should live up to it; he makes it safe, and
we should make it lovely by the practice of all those Duties and Virtues that
are of good report, especially such as have been formerly most neglected, as
particularly Sincerity and Truth in our Words, Honesty and Justice in all our
Actions, a hearty Love to all our Fellow Christians as Brethren, Bounty and
Charity to such as stand in need, Devotion and true Piety in the service of
God, Unity, Peace and Concord with one another, yea even with those of other
Parties: And to encourage us to pray for, and practice these Virtues more
heartily, it is noted, that this is the certain way both to move God to
establish us and to engage all Nations to admire and praise us; these things
would make us safe and honored, our Times may thus continue peaceable, and our
Church by this means become the praise of the whole Earth, which methinks every
wise and good Protestant should above all things desire. But alas! the contrary
to all these are too common amongst us; there is so much Deceit and Hypocrisy,
Cheating and Dishonesty; we are so unkind to all, and so obdurate and niggardly
to the Poor; so slight and remiss in the Service of God, and so full of Heats
and Animosities among our selves, that we have more reason to fear to be
unsettled again by these sins, than by our Enemies policy and power. These
crimes that are so contrary to our Religion, bring more dishonor upon it than
all the spightful calumnies of our Enemies: If we did not afford them just
matter of reproach, their known malice would hinder their censures from being
believed Prastra irascimur obtrectatoribus nostris, si eis obtrectandi materiam
ministramus. D. Hieron. ep. 14. ad Celant. p. 136.
. Wherefore I earnestly entreat all that wish the peace of this Church, and
desire its universal Honor, to endeavor the practice of these Virtues, and to
avoid falling into these mischievous and scandalous Crimes. And since we cannot
do this but by the Grace of God, let us beg that most devoutly for the sake of
our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

The Third Collect.
The Third Collect consists of four parts, 1st, A memorial of two Mercies,
describing 1. The Author of and Motives to both, Almighty God and Heavenly
Father, etc.
2ly, A more particular account 1st, Of the former Mercy, did prevent the
malice and imaginations, etc.
2ly, Of the latter, and did likewise upon this day, etc.


2ly, An Act of humble gratitude for them both, we most humbly praise, and, etc.
3ly, A confession acknowledging 1st, Gods free grace and mercy, we confess it
has been of, etc.
2ly, Our own evil deservings, for our sins have cried to heaven, etc.
3ly, His not strictly punishing us, but thou have not dealt, etc.
4ly, Our escaping by that means, but have in mercy delivered us from, etc.

4ly, A Prayer containing 1st, The several graces to be now exercised by us 1.
True Repentance. 2. Faith and Love. let the consideration of this thy repented
goodness, etc.
3. Holy obedience.
2ly, The motives urged both to move 1. Us to ask it, that thou may still
continue, etc.
2. God to grant it, and that for thy dear sons, etc.





A Practical Discourse on this Collect.
. 9. ALmighty God our Heavenly Father, who of thy, etc.] The Litany is a proper
Office for this Day, being designed to avert or remove all kinds of Evil,
especially Privy Conspiracy and Persecution; so that it is always to be used on
this Day; and after it this Collect which is chiefly Penitential. Now nothing
will lead us sooner to Repentance, than a serious comparing God's goodness with
our sinfulness; wherefore we introduce the confession of our evil deservings,
with a memorial of his great Mercy in granting us two signal Deliverances from
the Mischiefs designed against us by the same sort of men, on the same day,
though in different Ages. And we consider that herein God showed, 1. His Power
to be Infinite, and so we call him [Almighty] for he broke all their measures.
2. His wonderful goodness, and so we style him [our Heavenly Father]. Now there
are two Properties of a loving Father; First, To provide a supply of all
necessary good things for his Children. Secondly, To pity and help them when
they suffer any evil 2 Cor. XII. ver. 14. and Psalm. CIII. 13.
. And thus our Heavenly Father has employed his [gracious Providence] to
secure unto us the free Profession of his true Religion. And when these Plots
were laid to enable our Foes to persecute us for it, his [tender mercy] moved
him to pity us, and keep off the fatal blows from us.

Did prevent the Malice and Imaginations of our, etc.] From the consideration
of those lovely Attributes which excited our good God to undertake our rescue,
we go on to consider the horrid Evils which he saved us from; and First as to
the Gunpowder-Treason, the Plot sprang from pure Malice, and they imagined it
was certain to take effect; but Heaven confounded this horrid wicked
Enterprise, by an unexpected Discovery. And indeed King James the First, could
never have found out this Plot, since he had no reason to suspect it. He had
suffered those Penal Laws, which their Plots and Rebellions against Queen
Elizabeth had occasioned, to lie dormant; and used the Papists so gently, that
he hoped he had made them good Subjects: But such was their Malice to the
Religion he professed and maintained, that they imagined his good opinion of
them, and his security Isai. LIX. ver. 15. Aditum nocendi perfido praestat
fides. Senec. Oedip. Act. 3.
was their opportunity to strike him secretly and unexpected, together with
all, who with him were able by their Learning or their Interest to defend that
Protestant Government and Religion: And then they doubted not but they might
set the Crown on a Strangers Head, who was a firm Catholic; and so alter the
Government and the Laws, and extirpate that which they falsely call Heresy, out
of this Land for ever. But oh! what horrid crowds of barbarous Cruelties must
have made way for this? The first Massacre of so much Royal and Noble Blood
would not have effected it: Popery was so known, and so hated, and Protestant
Religion so settled and beloved here then, that above nineteen parts of twenty
must have been cruelly murdered, and the extremest force have been used before
so bitter a Pill would have gone down. But they valued not making their Native
Country one great Aceldema; they count us all Enemies of Christ, and damned
Wretches, and so would have gloried in the execution Judaeis ipsis acerbiores
hosts Christi, and multo magis detestandi. Maldonat. in Johan. 4.9. Costerus
optat se damnari cum Lucifero, Si Lutheranus moriens possit salvari vel ovadere
Gehennam. Resp, ad Osiandr. prop. 8.
. And was it not an infinite Mercy to be delivered out of such Merciless Hands?
Their Barbarous Cruelties against the Albigenses and Waldenses of old, against
the Lollards and Protestants in England a sew Reigns before this, and the
Inhuman Proceedings of the Duke of Alva in Holland, these taught that
Generation to rejoice exceedingly, that they did not prevail in this bloody
design, and we have reason to remember it with gratitude to this very Day.

And did likewise this Day wonderfully conduct, etc.] But if this seem too
remote, Behold God has delivered us from a Second and more probable Design to
destroy our Religion and our Laws. For now they had secretly gained the next
Heir of the Crown to their side, and dispensed with him to come to our Prayers,
Sermons and Sacraments for many years, yea allowed him to swear and solemnly
promise to defend our Church, at his entering into the Throne Nullo modo fides
servanda haereticis, etiam juramento firmata. Simanca ap. Sanders. de oblig.
juram.
. All which had so amused many unwary Protestants, that their Loyalty would not
let them see the danger their Liberties and Religion were in, till the Romish
Party, under this Zealous Prince, were grown almost strong enough to declare
the Change they intended. But blessed be God this Design was at last discerned
by almost all the Nation; and though they could not prevent it, he did, by
sending on this very Day a Generous Protestant Prince, who was deeply concerned
in our Laws and Religion to rescue both from imminent and apparent ruin: And if
the escaping Oppression and Persecution, Banishment, Prisons, Axes, Gibbets and
Stakes be a Blessing, then the present King's landing was so to us.

We most humbly praise and magnify thy most Glorious Name, etc.] Having set
out the Author of both our Deliverances, and described them severally, we next
proceed to praise him for the Mercy, and magnify him for the Power, which were
so illustrious in these wondrous Works; and they were so great Blessings to us,
that with the Royal Psalmist we declare, No tongue can express our obligations
Psalm. XL. 7. and CXXIX. ver. 17, 18.

Nemo digne gratias agit, nisi divinae gratiae magnitudinem attendit. Greg. Mor.


. Now such extraordinary Favors deserve extraordinary Praises; Mercies so
often repeated, merit reiterated and redoubled Acts of Gratitude; a Day so
signalized and singled out by Providence, ought to be for ever solemnized with
joy by all the true Sons of this Church: The ruin whereof was twice intended,
and both times almost accomplished, by Men of the same Principles and Temper,
and the same God prevented both these dreadful Mischiefs: So that he who will
not praise the Lord this Day for both, may be justly suspected not to be truly
thankful for either. I know some do lessen our danger in the latter case, by
pleading, That the late King's Promises, his Good Temper and Interest would
have hindered such severity as we apprehend. But we saw none of these could
hinder the French King, at that very time, from Ruining, Persecuting,
Destroying and Banishing Millions of his Faithful Subjects, only for sticking
to their Religion; and since that King was then the Example and Guide for our
Court, and we had the same bigoted Priests to advise here, who had pursued
those methods there; we know they would absolve our Prince from all ties, and
four his own gracious Disposition, and make his Interest stoop to theirs: So
that we had reason to expect every thing here that was done in France, so soon
as they had power enough to hope to effect it; and therefore to escape this
Evil was an unspeakable Mercy, and deserves humble and hearty Praises.

We confess it has been of thy mercy alone, that we, etc.] This is the Second
and Penitential Part of the Prayer; we have seen God's dealing with us, and now
begin to reflect on our Carriage toward him: And lest Pride or Conceit of our
Merit should abate our Gratitude, we own with the Prophet Jeremy, That it is
only his Mercy that prevented our ruin Lam. III. 22.
. We declare we are so far from Merit, that we cannot pretend to bare
Innocence: For both in that Age and this, the Nations Sins were so great, as to
cry loudly to the Divine Justice to punish us, and these our Enemies, both then
and now, stood ready to be the Executioners of his Wrath; a bare Permission had
let them loose upon us. So that we can find no reason in our selves why we were
spared; nay, why we were not given up for a Prey to our enraged Foes, who, like
hungry Wolves, were ready with open Mouths to devour us. The only reason was in
God, it was his Pity and Clemency which moved him to punish us less than our
iniquities deserved Psalm. CIII. 10. Poenam si tuto poterit donare. sin minus
temperare solet. Sen. de Clem. l. 1. c. 20.
. All things were prepared for our utter destruction; God alone (who had the
justest cause to consent to it) was unwilling, and by this mere Mercy of his we
escaped the ruin prepared for us. And it is very proper to mind us of this,
while we are praising God for our Deliverances; for the less we deserved them,
the more thankful we ought to be for them Majoris precij beneficium est quod
praestatur indignis. Salv. de gab. l. 4.
. As our unworthiness heightens and increases his kindness, so it should add to
our joy and gratitude.

Let the consideration of this thy repeated goodness, etc.] But there must be
something more returned for two such eminent favors, than bare praises;
wherefore we beg that this goodness of God may lead us to repentance Romans II. 4.
. Otherwise though we have been twice spared, and both times guilty, Iniquity
may and will be our ruin at last Ezekiel. XVIII. 30.
. He rescued us not to give us opportunity to commit more sins, but to afford
us time to gain a pardon for past Offenses by Repentance: It is the most
provoking abuse we can be guilty of, to make this impunity the encouragement to
our Vices: St. Paul calls this, Despising the riches of his forbearance and
long suffering; and in that case it is not God, (who would gladly save us) but
we that treasure up wrath to our selves against the day of wrath Romans II. 5.
(...). Aster. hom. in Psalm. 6.
. That is, we force God either to send some sad Judgment upon us in this World,
or if not, however he must condemn us in the next. And alas! it is no advantage
to be reprieved from a temporal, and reserved for eternal Death, which without
Repentance we cannot escape. But further, we must not only repent and cease to
do evil, but bring forth also good Fruits. His former care of us, must quicken
our Faith and engage us to trust in him when any future dangers threaten us; it
must increase our Love to him, who is so sure and constant a Defense to us
against all our Enemies designs. And if our Faith be lively, and our Love
sincere, they will certainly produce all holy Obedience 1 John V. 3.
. Whoever firmly believes that God alone is his Preserver in and from all
perils, and entirely loves him for it, that man will continually strive to
oblige Heaven to watch over him, by all the Duties of Piety and Charity, and by
whatever he thinks will please this his Heavenly Father; the Faith is not
sound, nor the Love sincere if it do not produce these Fruits: And if we make
this use of our Deliverances, they will be doubly beneficial to us (not only as
they are temporal Mercies, but) as they become by this means a spiritual and an
eternal Blessing to every single man, who so improves them.

That thou may still continue thy favor, with, etc.] Finally, there is a
public motive to engage us to pray heartily, and labor diligently for this
sanctified use of these Mercies, because this will oblige him to continue his
Protection over this Church and Nation in all future times. Our Enemies at
present seem to want Power, but their Malice and evil Will continues Nulla laus
est non facere, quod facere non possis. Salv. de gub. l. 6.
; they wait and wish for an opportunity to bring us again into that Popish
Darkness wherein our Fathers lay so long: But if we walk according to the Light
of the Gospel (which shines brighter here than in any other Land) Heaven will
still baffle all their Plots: And why should God keep this Light shining, if we
resolve to walk in Darkness however? What are we better for a Holy Religion, if
it do not make us holy? Let our lives therefore come up to our excellent
Profession, and let us of this pure reformed Religion resolve to lead very pure
and reformed lives, and then our Church shall never fail. This we must
endeavor, this we must pray for through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Fourth Collect.
The Fourth Collect contains 1st. An Introduction, respecting former Mercies. O
Lord, who did this day, etc.
2ly, A Petition both for 1. Our Preservation, and be thou still our mighty,
etc.
2. Our Enemies disappointment. and scatter our, etc.

3ly, A Description of the means of their failing in their designs. 1. By Gods
preventing them. infatuate and defeat, etc.
2. By the Kings punishing them. strengthen the hands of our gracious, etc.

4ly, A Prospect of the happy events of this. 1. The humiliation of our Foes.
that they may never prevail, etc.
2. The Church and Nations safety. but that our gracious, etc.
3. Our own freedom to serve God. we may all duly serve thee etc.




A Practical Discourse on this Collect.
. 10. O Lord, who did this Day discover the Snares, etc.] This is an Old
Collect, relating to the former Deliverance, and removed to this place, because
what we Hoped for in the former Collect, is directly Prayed for in this; and
the Petitions are very properly introduced by the consideration of God's
Omniscience in discovering, and of his Omnipotence in defeating that Horrid
Plot upon this Day, which had secretly laid the cruel snares of Death for our
King, our Prince and Nobles. For God's First Favors are generally given freely
without any reason in us; but his Second are added only because he had been
kind before Math. XXV. ver. 29.
. When his free Grace has made us instances of his Favor, he afterward
preserves us for his own Glory, as the Monuments of his eminent Goodness. And
whereas our Foes have but two ways to hurt us, either by secret Plots, or by
open Force; Our Lord that we trust in and pray to, is furnished with infinite
Wisdom to find out the one, and with as infinite Power to dash the other;
wherefore we go on and say,

Be thou still our mighty Protector, and scatter, etc.] We have owned his
Ability to protect us, and remembered a great instance of his willingness; and
thus encouraged, we proceed to beg of him, when our Enemies (who delight in
Blood) unite and combine against us for our destruction, that he will
effectually scatter them Psalm. LXVIII. ver. 30.
That is, in the Hebrew Phrase, subdue and conquer them Psalm. LXVIII. 1, 14.
and LXXXIX. ver. 10.
, because an Army is then only formidable when it is united in one entire Body:
For when the Union is broken, and the Ranks disordered, though the number be
whole, the force is gone, and it is easily routed and overcome Periculum enim
ab hostibus semper gravissinium sustinet divisus and inordinatus exercitus.
Veget. de re milit. l. 1. c. 9.
. This is our first request, when our Foes think themselves strong enough to
attempt our ruin by open violence, and raise Armies, or set out Fleets to
destroy us. Secondly, If they proceed by close Cabals, secret Plots, and deep
laid Counsels, to obtain the same end; we pray that God may infatuate their
Minds, so that they may mistake their Measures, and notwithstanding their
pretenses to Politics, may be so blinded Praevalebant jam fata consilijs,
omnemque animi ejus vim perstrinxerint, etc. Vellei. Paterc. de Varo.
, as to imagine those methods will end in our subversion, which prove the
direct way to their undoing. This is often the Fate of such as God hates for
their wicked designs; they become ridiculous by being taken in their own
Snares. And one would hope his confounding their Devices, in this manner,
should abate their Pride, which possessed them with a vain hope of success; and
abate their Malice, which whets them on to new Plots. But when the discovery of
their old Project by Gunpowder in our Fathers days, hindered not their making a
new Attempt in our days, We see this Prayer (that has been made for 80 years
together) was heard, and they failed and were bafled a second time.

Strengthen the Hands of our gracious Sovereign King WILLIAM, etc.] We wish the
observing how God fights against them, and for us, might be a warning to them;
and when they have bought wit by two dreadful experiments Prove. I. 17. Jumenta
cum locum ubi semel lapsa sunt, semper cavere solent. Dux Polar. ad Leg. Romans
Avent. Annal. l. 3. p 1^8.
, that they might never more think of such bloody and impracticable Projects.
But if they still go on, if visible divine disappointments will not reclaim
them, we pray that human punishments may light upon them, and that our gracious
King may cut them off, either in the field, if they use open hostility, or by
the hands of Justice, if they be convicted of new Plots: For God has put the
Sword into the Magistrates Hands for this end, that he may cut off all such
workers of iniquity Romans XIII. 5.
. He would bear it in vain, if he did not use it in such a case. The Roman
Magistrates (as Plutarch notes) had Rods and Axes born before them, the former
to correct lesser, the latter to cut off incorrigible Offenders; but both tied
up, to prevent too hasty punishment Plutarch. Quaest. Romans p. 183.
. Now such as will take no warning from God or Man, such as make their Faith a
pretense to stir up Faction in the Church, and believe their Religion warrants
them to murder Princes, and massacre whole Nations (as the bigoted Romanists
do Rom Religionis tractare sibi videtur quisquis in Henricum Imp. arma
produceret. Malms. de gest. reg. l. 3. fol. 64. Vide item Philopator.. 2. p.
144. and 146.
); these as Limbs incurably gangrened, must be cut off, or no Prince can be
secure of his Crown and Life, no People of their Liberties, Lives or Fortunes.
This Principle once imbibed, will prepare a desperate Zealot to execute the
blackest design, that Hell can invent, and he will hope to merit Heaven by it.
This Notion put the Jews upon crucifying Christ; and all the Persecutors upon
those Inhumanities they exercised on the Christian Marttyrs Joh. XVI. 2.
. And Mahomet excited his Turks to delight in Christian blood, by assuring
them, that to murder them was the way to please God (...). Sylbu^g. Satac. p.
85.
: What wonder is it that the Donatists ventured their lives to kill St.
Augustine, when their Leaders had taught them, this was certainly the way to
procure remission of all their sins Possidor. vit. D. Augustine cap 9.
? Nothing can convince men who implicitly believe in such Guides, who tell them
the high road to Hell is the certain way to Heaven, and none are to be spared,
but such as it may be hoped will amend: These therefore are ripe for Justice;
it is no cruelty to such Malefactors to cut them off; but it is Mercy to many
millions of innocent people to dispatch such out of the way; and if a Pardon
set them loose to do more mischief Non sum crudelis, sed vereor, ne quod
remiscro, patiar. Petron. Arb. Satyr.
, he that releases them, is answerable for their future crimes.

But that our gracious Sovereign, and his Realms, etc.] And now it is time to
excite our selves to put up these Petitions very heartily, by a Prospect of the
great advantages the King and we shall reap by the prevailing of these
Requests. For, First, By this Means our King will be kept in the true Religion;
and a late instance has taught us how sad a Judgment it is for a Reformed
Nation to have their King perverted to the Roman Faith. If we can remember what
we feared and felt then, we cannot but pray we may never see the like case
again in England, where that Religion is so odious, that if a King profess it,
and attempt to establish it, the fatal consequence must be his own or his
peoples ruin. Secondly. As these Kingdoms are now generally Protestant, we pray
that we may be preserved and protected in that Holy Religion, which is the same
that Christ and his Apostles, and all Orthodox Primitive Fathers taught,
agreeable to our civil Constitution, and the certain way to make us and our
Posterity happy both here and hereafter. Whereas the Roman Doctrine is Corrupt,
their Worship Idolatrous, their Government a heavy Yoke, that neither our
Fathers were Vid. Angliae Gravamina in Fascicul. rer. expetend. Tom. II. page
415.
, nor we ever can be able to bear. So that the success of these Requests will
be a mighty Blessing both to Prince and People. And Finally, We own that every
private Christian will have great advantage thereby; for then we may all duly
serve God, we may freely and without interruption come to his House, and enjoy
his Ordinances, which are Purely and Primitively administered there. Yea, and
this mighty Blessing being continued, our comfort in that Providence which
preserves this Holy Religion, will oblige us continually to render Public
Thanks and Praise to him that does preserve and continue it, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Fifth Collect.
The Fifth Collect consists of three Parts.

1st, A Preface owning 1. Gods Eeternal Power. Eternal God and our most, etc.
2. Our own unworthiness. we thy unworthy Servants.

2ly, a Double Acknowledgment. 1. Of the Old Deliverance described. 1. By the
Author of it. acknowledging thy power, etc.
2. The Persons preserved. in preserving the King, etc.
3. The praises due for it. make us we beseech thee, etc.

2. Of the latter, showing. 1. The time when. particularly for making, etc.
2. The means by which it was accompli^hed. we bless thee forgiving his
Majesty, etc.


3ly, Petitions for the King and Royal Family, begging for them 1. Deliverance
and outward safety. continue we beseech thee, etc.
2. Piety and inward Grace. preserve them in thy Faith,
3. Temporal Prosperity here. prosper his Reign with long, etc.
4. Eternal Glory hereafter. and crown them with everlasting, etc.


A Practical Discourse on this Collect.
. 11. ETernal God, and our most mighty Protector, etc.] On this Prayer we may
be the briefer, since we have enlarged on both the Deliverances here
commemorated before. We might justly be discouraged, considering how many Years
our Enemies have by restless Endeavors, and variety of Designs labored to
extirpate Our Religion and set up Theirs: But we remember our God lives for
ever, he is Eternal, he ever was, is, and will be able to defeat them, and save
us Omnia quae mutantur, desinunt esse quod erant, and incipiunt esse quod non
erant: Esse verum non habet nisi qui non mutatur. D. Aug. in Exodus III. 13.
. Let them by their Interest abroad, and Insinuations at home, draw in never so
many to assist them, our Protector is mightier than their United Force; and we
hope he will employ his Eternal and Infinite Power for our Defense, because we
are his Servants, believing as he has taught, and worshipping as he has
directed us in his Holy Word. It Is true, we are very unworthy Servants to so
good a Master, too apt to offend him by our disobedience, and to disoblige him
by our ingratitude and distrust. But since he is pleased to be favorable to us
still, in a deep sense of his goodness and our unworthiness, we do this Day
come to his House, and on our bended Knees acknowledge both our Deliverances.
We declare, that three of his glorious Attributes were very visible in the
former: His Power in breaking that horrid Design; his Wisdom in letting it run
on almost to the last Minute, till the Principal Actor was taken so prepared
for the Fact, that it could not be denied: And Finally, His Goodness in saving
so many eminent and innocent Persons from the suddenest and horridest
Destruction that ever was invented.

Make us, we beseech thee, truly thankful for this, etc.] Perhaps some may
think our Forefathers were, but we are not obliged to give Thanks for this
Mercy: But let it be considered, if this Plot had succeeded, our Nation had
been subjected to a foreign Power, and our Religion extirpated here; so that we
had sucked in Slavery and Popery with our Mothers Milk. We owe the Liberty that
we now enjoy, and the Faith we at this day profess, to the Discovery and
Prevention of this dreadful Plot; wherefore as long as this Church and
Government endures, we must be thankful throughout all Ages upon this happy
Day; especially since God has now refreshed our Memories by another
Deliverance from the same sort of Enemies, upon the very same Day: If our
Ancestors only had received evidences of his infinite Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, we might have had some excuse; but when we needed the assistance of
the same Attributes, they were exerted again for our rescue: Let us therefore
heartily praise his Holy Name.

We bless thee for giving his Majesty that now is, etc.] This is a grateful
owning the Means of our Second Deliverance, which was his present Majesty's
Arrival; he loved our Religion, pitied to see us and it like to be oppressed;
was nearly concerned (by his Title to the Succession) to keep all right here,
and therefore generously ventured his Life and Fortune to rescue us. Our
Enemies hoped the Waves would have swallowed him, and a bare rumor of that
made them cry high and violent as ever, to convince us it was not love to us,
but fear of him that made them seem to desist Quae quia non potuit, non facit
illa facit. Ovid. am. l. 3. cl. 4.
. But Heaven set him safe on shore, and then their next Resolve was to expel
him again by Force; but no considering Protestants could be found willing to
destroy their Deliverer, nor to fight against their own Religion and Liberties;
and thus all opposition fell before him, and that unhappy Prince who had
deserted the God of his Father, was deserted by his Army, and then secretly
deserted the Nation, leaving us no other Choice, but to remain in Anarchy, to
stay till he should return with foreign Force: Or to put the next undoubted
Heir with her Consort our Deliverer (a near Branch of the same Royal House)
into the Vacant Throne. And the last expedient was pitched upon as the only
means of our safety, by the unanimous consent of the far greatest part of the
Kingdom: Wherefore those who truly love their Religion and their Civil Rights,
do justly rejoice that there is so powerful and faithful a Friend to both, by
so signal a Providence now reigning over us.

Continue we beseech thee, to protect and defend him, etc.] As we believe this
Revolution was conducted by Providence, we have just cause to pray with holy
David, That God would establish the thing he has wrought for us Psalm. LXVIII.
28.
, and preserve both this King whom he advanced, and the Royal Family; those of
it especially who are Professors of the true Religion: It Is our Interest as
well as our Duty to beg of Heaven to keep all these Corner Stones in our
Building, from such Plots and Conspiracies as were this Day twice discovered
and prevented. Secondly, We pray that their Minds may be endued with internal
Graces, that they who are to defend our Faith, may constantly profess it; and
they whose Example is to be the guide of our practice Vita Principis perpetua
censura est, ad hanc dirigimur, nec tam imperio nobis opus est quam exemplo.
Plin. paneg. ad Trajan.
may be constant in the Fear and fervent in the Love of God; under such Princes
true Religion will be maintained, Piety and Virtue rewarded, Vice every where
punished and discovered. To such Princes, for our own sakes, we ought to wish
all temporal Prosperity; and we may rationally hope, as well as earnestly
desire, that they shall and may after a long and happy Reign, exchange their
earthly fading Crown, for a never fading Crown of Glory and Immortality, All
which may God grant through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle, Romans XIII. ver. 1, -- 7.
. 12. THE two Designs this Day prevented, the one of Subjects against a
gracious King, the other of a King against his peaceable Subjects, show this
Epistle to be very fitly chosen; for herein the Peoples Duty to their Prince is
strictly enjoined, especially to so gentle a Prince as King James the 1st was
to his Popish Subjects; but so as the Princes Duty to his People is plainly
supposed, and made a Foundation for the arguments to obey. Wherefore whatever
subjection may be due to an evil Ruler, other places of Scripture must show us:
For that case is not so much as hinted here. He who had the Supreme Power then
when this was writ, was Gods Minister to the Christians for good; One that did
not persecute them, but only punished evil Doers, and rewarded such as did
well. Dr. Hammond thinks it was writ about the death of Claudius Ham. Annot.
on. Ep. Romans Praef. p. 438.
. Dr. Lightfoot says it was writ in the beginning of Nero's Reign Lightfoots
Works, Tom. 2. p. 1051.
, within that first five years, wherein he ruled well to a Proverb, whereas his
Persecution began not till the eleventh year of his Reign; for want of which
observation, many do run out into very improper Characters of Nero's cruelty,
and make such inferences from thence, as contradict the Apostles reasoning
here, or at least quite mistake it.

This Epistle consists of Two Parts, 1st, An Exhortation to two special Duties.
1. To be subject to Magistrates. 1. The latitude of this Duty. Ver. I. 2. The
reasons for it. 1. The Origi- of their Authority. Ver. I. 2. The sanction of
it. Ver. II. 3. The end of it. 1. To good men. Ver. III. 2. To evil men. Ver.
IV.

3. A conclusion from the premises. Ver. V.
2. To pay Tribute for their Care. Ver. VI.
2ly, A general direction concerning all Superiors. Ver. VII.


A Paraphrase on this Epistle.
THAT none may pretend, Christianity discharges them from their Allegiance, I
charge you [Let every soul] of whatever order or quality they be, Romans XIII. 1.
that live under any Government [be subject to,] the Persons who are invested
with [the higher Powers,] that is, in your case, the Emperor: Nor does his
being a Pagan, excuse you; For there is no] man can attain to the Supreme
[power, but] he must have it from and [of God,] who being the most High Lord of
the whole World, exalts Princes by his Providence, and furnishes them with his
Authority: Wherefore you must not look at the Persons, but at the original of
their Authority, and believe always, that [the Powers that be] now, or
hereafter shall be, supreme [are ordained of God] they are his Delegates and
Vicegerents.

Ver. II. Whosoever therefore] being a Subject [resisteth] those who have [the
Power] and supreme Authority lodged in them by God, He [resisteth the
Ordinance] and declared Will Nos judicium Dei suspicimus in Imperatoribus, qui
Gentibus illos praefecit. Tert. Apol. cap. 32.
[of God] and sins not only against the earthly Authority of Man, but also
against the Law and Command of God; [And] therefore [they that resist] not only
incur the penalty of human Laws here, but they also [shall receive to
themselves damnation] hereafter, unless they repent in time.

Ver. III. You may perhaps object, That these Supreme Rulers may be Oppressors
of the Innocent, and cherish only evil Men who are the instruments of their
Tyranny. I reply, This is contrary to their Commission, and the end of their
Institution: [For Rulers are not] empowred or allowed by God, to be [a terror
to] them that are peaceable and do [good works] that is, to such as you
innocent Christians; nor do they at this time persecute you for your Religion:
It Is not to you therefore [but to the Evil] Doers, who rebel and openly break
their just Laws, to whom they are appointed by God to be a Terror. [Wilt thou
then] who art a Christian, live so as thou need [not to be afraid of the
Power] vested in the chief Magistrate? live peaceably, and [do that which is
good] as the Laws require, [and thou shall have] not only Protection, but also
Rewards and [praise of the same] Ruler, from whom the Turbulent justly fear
Punishment, especially if he Act according to Gods direction from whom all his
Power came.

Ver. IV For God certainly aimed at the good of the People Adrianus Aug.
Promisit -- Se ita imperium administraturum, ut sciret, populi rem esse, non
propriam. Spart. in vit. page 36.
in settling a King over them, his Power could not be given him to oppress, [For
he is] by his Institution designed to be [the Minister of God] and appointed in
his stead [to thee] who live innocently, [for good] and he then only
exercises the Authority given him by his great Master, when he rewards Virtue
and punishes Vice (...). Theoph. in loc. p. 129.
. So that this Power derived from God, cannot hurt thee while thou art good,
[But if thou do that which is evil] and breakest the Laws, thou have reason to
[be affraid] he should punish thee; For he bears not the Sword] he has not
the Power of punishing given him [in vain.] Doubtless he has a just right to
cut off Evil Doers: [For he is] in this case also [the Minister of God] armed
with his Power, and appointed to be [a revenger to execute] the sentence
dictated by just [Wrath upon him that does evil,] therefore let none of you be
Malefactors

Ver. V. To conclude, You are taught the Magistrates Power both of rewarding
and punishing, is from God. [Wherefore ye] Christians [must needs be subject]
to their lawful Commands, [not only for] fear of provoking them to [wrath] and
to avoid human punishments [but for Conscience sake] and in obedience to the
holy Law of God, who has advanced them for excellent ends, even to keep off
great evils, and do much good (...). Theoph.
to thee, and many others.

Ver. VI. Upon the same Principles of Conscience and Gratitude is your
submitting to public payments grounded; [For, for this cause pay you Tribute
also] as an acknowledgment of their Supreme Authority, and a just reward for
their care in defending your Persons and Properties from public and private
Injuries Nec quies gentium sine armis, neque arma sine stipendijs, neque
stipendia sine tributis haberi queunt. Tacit. An. lib. 4.
. The Gospel enjoins you to pay these to Princes [For they are Gods Ministers]
in this part of their Office also: And as their time and pains are employed in
[attending continually on this very thing:] So Subjects are bound in justice to
requite them for it; and as they cannot govern and defend us without Tribute,
it would be wicked and ungrateful in us to deny it.

Ver. VII. In a word, you Christians are obliged in Conscience, to give all
sorts of Superiors, that which is due to them by the Law of Nature, or the
Constitutions of your own Country, [Render therefore to all] that are above and
over you, what is thus made [their Due,] and particularly you must pay
[Tribute] for your Persons and Lands to them [to whom Tribute is due] by Law;
and [Custom] for Wares and Merchandise, to them [to whom Custom is due] by the
Constitutions of the State. To the Magistrates who have power to punish, show
reverence and [Fear,] for these are they [to whom Fear] is due: And to all that
are in any Dignity; yea to all your betters give [honour] and respect, these
being they [to whom honor.] justly belongs.

The Gospel, St. Luke XI. 51, -- 56.
. 13. THE design of this Gospel is to correct the unruly effects of mistaken
zeal for Religion, showing that our Faith, if it be never so true, cannot
warrant us to destroy all those that differ from us. For Jesus who was the
Truth it self, when he was inhumanly used by the Samaritans (out of mere Spite
and Malice to the Jewish Religion then professed by our Savior) would not
allow his Disciples so much as to wish Fire might come from Heaven upon these
unnatural Miscreants: Much less will he allow Popish Subjects, unprovoked, to
plot the fetching Fire (as it were) from Hell, to destroy their Sovereign, and
many hundred Innocents more, only for being of a different Faith. And by the
same Rule it appears that Christ would not permit a Prince, who had sworn to
protect his Subjects, to oppress, ruin and persecute them purely for being of
another Religion. Whoever gives Subjects or Kings such counsel, and calls it
zeal for holy Church, to rebel or persecute Non est Religionis cogere
Religionem, Tert. ad Scap.
, they are led by the evil Spirit, who was a Murderer from the beginning, not
by the Spirit of Christ; they are false Teachers and Corrupters of the Rules of
Christianity.

This Gospel gives the History of 1st, Our Saviors 1. Intent to keep an holy
Feast. Ver. LI. 2. Care to be accommodated. Ver. LII.
2ly, The Affront put on him by the Samaritans. Ver. LIII. 3ly, His Disciples
deep resentment thereof. Ver. LIVE. 4ly, His own 1. Dislike of their mistaken
Zeal. Ver. LV. 2. His reason for that dislike. Ver. LVI. 3. His practice on
that Occasion. Ibid.



A Paraphrase on this Gospel.
St. Luke IX. 51. AND it came to pass] A little before our Lords Passion [when
the time was] drawing nigh, and almost [come, that he should] leave this World,
and [be received up] again with glory into Heaven. Being then in Galilee [he
stedfastly] resolved to keep the Passover, and so [set his face 2 Kings XII.
17. Phras. signif. Omnia fecit quo crederetur se iturum.
] toward, and was on his Journey [to go to Ierusalem] though he knew what he
was to suffer there.

Ver. LII. Now in his way from Galilee to Jerusalem, he must pass through the
Country of the Samaritans John LV. 4.
, whose bitter aversion to the Jews he knew Justinus M. olim Samaritan. de
sci^^s;o. (...). Apol. 2. page 61.
; intending therefore to give them no trouble but for one Nights Lodging: He
chose out [and sent Messengers] probably James and John [before his face] that
they might not be surprised: [and they went and entered into a village]
belonging to the Country [of the Samaritans], intending [to make ready] the
Provisions they had brought [for him,] and procure him a Bed for one Night.

Ver. LIII. But so hot was their blind Zeal for a false Religion Quibus nec
Pontifex, nec Templum. Tert. de Samarit.
that his Disciples were denied the use of an House, [And they did not receive
him] so much as into their Town; but though it was late, and our Savior weary,
they most inhumanly turned him out, without any other reason for it, but
[because he set his face, as though he would go to Ierusalem] to keep there the
Passover. For perceiving by this he was of the Jewish Religion, (which they
hated) they thought they were bound in Conscience to refuse him the most common
favor.

Ver. LIVE. [And when] two of [his Disciples, James and Iohn] who entirely loved
their Master, [saw this] barbarous rudeness in the Samaritans, [they said] out
of indignation against them, and (as they imagined) true zeal for Jesus, [Lord
wilt thou] suffer such inhuman wretches to go unpunished! We know thy Power,
and crave thy Leave [that we] in thy Name, may [command fire to come down from
Heaven] where thy Father dwells, to destroy [and consume them] this moment, and
warn others that they may not dare to injure and affront thee; for why may not
we do [as Elias did 2 Kings I. 10. RR -- dicunt Deum sustulisse Eliam ob
iracundiam, dicendo, Non expedit hominbus ille, cui tantum zeli inest, perderet
enim cos. Maimon. praef. ad Pirk. Ab. c. 7.
] upon a less provocation, since a greater than Elias is here?

Ver. LV. For which zealous Design, tending so evidently to Christ's Honor, and
the confusion of a false Religion, they expected such commendation and
encouragement, as the Romish Priests gave their People in the former, and their
Prince in the later Plot. [But He turned] back, looked angrily on them [and
rebuked them] sharply for their folly and dangerous mistake; [And said] Do you
take this for a motion of my Spirit, and think it a just Zeal for me and your
Religion, to wish such dreadful Vengeance on those who are of a different
Persuasion? I tell you it is Bloody Rage, not Piety, and a Motion not of the
Holy, but the Evil Spirit. I find [you know not what manner] of Guide you
follow, nor what kind of [spirit you are of], it is the Devil who blows you up
into this fury.

Ver. LVI. You hear my Preaching, and see my Example, both which tend only to
Patience, and Meekness; forbearing and forgiving, and winning all that differ
from me by Love and Gentleness; so that Cruelty and Force cannot suit the end
of my coming now; [For the son of man] in this dispensation of the Gospel, [is
not come to destroy men's lives] by his Power and Justice, that is the business
of his last coming to Judgment on the finally Impenitent; your Motion therefore
is very incongruous now, since I am not come to send men quick to Hell, [but to
save them] and bring them by Mercy to Heaven. Being thus checked, Christ passed
by the Affront [and they] with him (late though it was) [went to another
village] inhabited by the Jews.

The Sentence at the Offertory.
S. Mat. VII. 12. WHatsoever ye would, etc.] As this Sentence relates to giving
in Charity at the Collection, (which should always be made this Day, in
acknowledgment of Gods Mercy) I have considered it before Comp. to the Altar,.
6. p. 30.
. But I must note it is very proper for this Day, and contains a Method to
prevent such evil Designs as we have been twice, on this Day, rescued from: For
if those Pries^ who encouraged the Gunpowder Traitors, had been asked, Whether
it were lawful for Protestant Subjects, out of a zeal for their Religion, to
plot the Death of a Popish King, his Heirs, and his Nobles; and to contrive
afterward to set up their Faith by a violent Persecution of the far greatest
part of their fellow Subjects, doubtless they had answered, No. Had it been
enquired of the late Kings Confessors, Whether it were lawful for a Protestant
King, reigning over a Country of the Roman Communion, to break his Oath and
Promises to his Catholic Subjects, imprison their Bishops for an humble
Petition, turn men out of their Freeholds only for their Conscience; and
finally to resolve to impose the Reformed Religion, by force, on a Nation which
generally hated it? This had been certainly answered also in the Negative:
Wherefore since other men love their Religion, Liberties and Lives as well as
Roman Catholics, they should not have advised their Votaries to do that
against a Protestant Prince or Nation, which they would not have these do
against them Quod quis in se approbat, id in alio reprobare non possit. L. in
arenam. Cap. de inoffic. testum.
. So that this single Rule impartially weighed, had prevented both these wicked
Projects, and if duly followed, will keep all Parties from Cruelty and
Oppression.

The Sixth and Last Collect.
The Last Collect has four Parts.
1st, A Preface setting out the Glory of God. O God whose name is excellent in
all, etc.
2ly, A Memorial of two great deliverances. 1. From secret Mischief. who on
this Day did miraculously, etc.
2. From open Violence. and on this Day also did begin to give, etc.

3ly, A return of hearty Praises for both. we bless and adore thy glorious
Majesty, etc.
4ly. A Prayer that they may produce in us, 1. Love and Gratitude to God. and
we humbly pray that the devout, etc.
2. Submission to the King. a Spirit of peaceable submission and, etc.
3. Zeal for the true Religion. a Spirit of fervent zeal for our holy, etc.


A Practical Discourse on this Collect.
. 14. O God whose name is excellent in all the Earth, etc.] This Collect begins
with the words of one of David's laudatory Hymns Psalm. VIII. 1.
. And they seasonably mind us that such eminent Deliverances of so famous a
Church and Nation, by so visible a Hand of Providence, are not only famous
among us, but God is glorified for them in all foreign Lands; they that live in
the farthest ends of the Earth, see and hear of this Salvation of God Psalm.
XCVIII. ver. 4.
. His Praise on so great an Occasion, is so far from being confined to the
narrow compass of our Island, that this lower World cannot contain it Tanta
enim est gloria tua, ut in hoc Orb centin^ri nequit. Vid. Gejer. in Psalm. 8.
. He sets his Glory above these visible Heavens; For no doubt the holy Angels
do sing Hallelujahs to his Honor, when he so remarkably delivers and protects
innocent and holy Men, (who are their special charge) and discovers and
punishes the wicked. And methinks the prospect of the Joy and Gratitude of all
other Reformed Churches, and the Praises of Angels, who are only engaged by
their Charity to rejoice with and for us, should excite us (whose Ancestors and
our selves have been the Objects of these Divine Favors, and who still enjoy
the happy Effects of them) to give Thanks most sincerely and fervently.

Who on this Day did most miraculously preserve, etc.] These being distinct
parts of the Office, we ought in every of them to remember these two
Deliverances, and in variety of Expressions to repeat our Gratitude. We may
here consider, that the first time our Preservation was wrought miraculously;
for the Plot was laid so secretly, and discovered so strangely, that nothing
les^ than a Miracle of Divine Omniscience could have brought it to light. The
Ruin also was intended against both Church and State; our Religion and
Government were resolved to be altered by the most violent methods, after the
fatal Blow was given. The Plot was contrived by those of the Romish Church, the
implacable Enemies of the whole Reformation, and especially of this Regular and
Flourishing Part of it; the Malice that inspired the Conspirators was so
Diabolical, that nothing but Hell could be the Original of it. Now for so many
Millions, so excellent a Church, so happy a Nation to escape from the merciless
rage of such Foes, doubtless is a great Mercy. As to the second, the danger was
equally great, but only it was more open; the Enemies had the same Principles,
and Final Design; but having drawn in a zealous King to abet their Interest
against his own, and his Peoples both, they put him (who would otherwise have
been Gracious, and might have been happy) upon trampling on Right and Law, and
persuaded him by the terror of a standing Army Male terrere veneratio
acquiritur, lenge valentior amor, ad obtinendum quod velis, quam timer. Plin.
lib. 8. cp. 24.
to affright his Subjects into parting with their Laws and Religion: it was
easy to foresee the dismal consequences of such Proceedings. But alas! we were
Subjects, and defenseless; so that we had been for ever ruined, if God on this
same Day had not sent a foreign Prince to rescue us; and from His landing we
justly date our Safety.

We bless and adore thy glorious Majesty, as for, etc.] Upon these just Grounds
we proceed to give most humble and hearty Praises to the Divine Majesty for his
repeated Kindness to this Church and Nation, which have been the special Care
of Heaven for many Ages. No People ever were in greater Danger, or more
illustriously Delivered than we. We have the greatest Liberties of any
Subjects, and the best Religion of any Christians in the World; and by these
continued wonders of Providence, we now enjoy them both. Had either of these
Designs taken, in the Church we should have had Error for Truth, Idolatry
instead of the true Worship, Darkness in the room of Light, innumerable Holy
Cheats in the place of Gospel Sincerity, Inquisitions, Fire and Faggot, instead
of Freedom and Peace. In the State, Force would have usurped the privilege of
Law, Slavery had banished our ancient Freedom, Absolute Power would have
excluded Property, and Arbitrary Punishments have discouraged Industry and
Trade, and in a short time Penury and all Calamities would have irresistibly
broke in upon us. The very consideration of the dreadful Evils we have escaped,
and of the Happiness we now enjoy, will certainly engage us to rejoice
exceedingly, and return our most unfeigned Thanks to him who has done all this
for us.

And we humbly pray, that the devout sense, etc.] If we have a deep and devout
sense of our Obligations, our Returns will be more than bare Acknowledgments
from our Lips, and therefore we return our Praises into Petitions, that he who
only can move our Hearts, will give us such just apprehensions of his Infinite
Goodness, as may produce these three blessed Effects: First, Of true Piety,
which will express it self in Love and Gratitude to God, the sole Author of
these Deliverances: Even Heathens and Publicans love those that love them Mat.
V. 46.
; and shall we not love our Heavenly Father, who has given us so many
Instances and clear Demonstrations of the greatest Love that ever was showed to
any People? Secondly, And since Heaven in this later Case, chose a Wise and
Valiant, a Just and Religious Prince to be the Instrument of this Mercy; First
to procure it by his coming, and then to secure it by his being advanced to the
Throne: We are bound to pay our Gratitude also to this King; all that are
protected by him are obliged, at least, to a peaceable Submission to his
Government Rex Jacobus I. asserit, Subditos demigrare debuisse -- ex ejus
Principis ditionibus, cui nullum obsequium aut fidelitatem debent. Apolog. pro
juram. fidel.. 53. p. 31.
. And such as count the Religion and Liberties which he has restored, to be
mighty Blessings, these are bound to Obey and Serve him, to Vindicate and
Support him against all his Enmies, because they are not his Foes only, but
theirs also. Lastly, We pray that we may have a Spirit of fervent Zeal for our
holy Religion, which has been so wonderfully preserved, to be a Blessing to us
and our Posterity. To be indifferent as to the Success of it, and unconcerned
for its Danger or safety, argues us to be mere Hypocrites; it shows we have no
Religion at all, and only profess this for some mean Interest -- Possis
animadvertere, quod servet istam pro Consuetudine magis quam pro Religione
reverentiam. Sidon. de Theod. ep. 2. l. 1.
: Such would easily turn to any Party to serve their secular Ends. But we who
are sincere in our Affection to this Church, seeing the Gates of Hell cannot
prevail against it, should heartily pray for its Peace, vigorously promote its
prosperity, adhere steddily to it, and zealously strive to win others to come
over to these Tents, which Heaven does so Guard and Bless, that all Attacks
have ever ended in its Enemies Confusion, and its own greater Glory. These
indeed are desirable Fruits, and yet right uses to be made of these Mercies.
And therefore that they may inspire us with Piety to God, with Loyalty to the
King, and Love to this Reformed Church, we humbly beg for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

The end of the Office for the Vth of November.
A DISCOURSE ON THE OFFICE FOR THE XXXth of January; BEING The Day of the
Martyrdom of the Blessed King Charles the First.
The Preface.
THe History of this Days Tragedy need not be repeated here, because many yet
alive remember it, and others may read it in our Annals, where it stands to the
perpetual Infamy of all that Acted therein. It is sufficient to my purpose to
give this brief Account of it:

When Peace and Plenty for Three Reigns had made this Nation wanton and
ungovernable (...). Aristot pol. lib. 4. cap. 11.
; some Demagogues foured with evil Principles, both as to Monarchy and the
Church, drew in all that were Discontented, either because their Ambition was
not gratified, or their Wants not supplied; together with those who feared the
Government might be at leisure to look into their Crimes. And these first
quarrelled with the Administrations, Impeached the King's Legal Ministers, and
without any color of Truth, pretended, That Encroachments were made upon the
Liberties of the People, and a Change designed in the Religion. Of both which
they professed themselves the Patrons, merely to get Power into their hands, to
enslave the People and destroy the Church Libertas ac speciosa nomina
praetexuntur, nec quisquam alienum servitrum ac dominationem sibi concupivit,
ut non eadem ista vocabula usurparet. Tacit. hist. l. 4. p. 532.
. However, by these Arts they became Popular, and by the help of the Rabble
procured some of the Kings best and ablest Counselors to be removed; and then
boldly demanded one branch of his Prerogative after another, till at last when
this Gracious Princes Concessions only enflamed their Arrogance in asking; they
required such things, as he either must deny, and so give them some color for
a War; or if he granted them, he must be in their power even without fighting
Postulabant non ut assequerentur, sed causam seditioni -- ^e Flaccus multa
concedendo nihil aliud effecerat, quam ut acrius exposcerent, quae sciebant
negaturum. Id. ibid. p. 462.
. Finally, when they had made themselves strong enough to appear Barefaced, and
weakened the King so far that they hoped to conquer him, they turned Open
Rebels, seize his Towns and Forts, banish him from his House, bring an Army
into the Field, pursue his Loyal Subjects with Fire and Sword, and in many
bloody Battles (in which he was present) sought his destruction; yet still gave
it out, they fought for the Kings preservation. But as soon as our Sins and
some of his Treacherous Subjects had put him into their hands, they would not
spare him, nor let him escape; (as his Son did since, though he had really
attempted that which was but pretended against the Father:) But they injustly
Imprisoned him, and falsely charging him with the Murders and Oppression which
they had caused, they Condemned him without Law, and executed him without
Mercy: And then altered the Government, which they had sworn to defend, changed
the Laws which they had promised to guard, and utterly destroyed the Church
which they had Covenanted to reform. And having made themselves our Rulers,
impiously and sacrilegiously invaded the Revenues of the Crown and Miter;
plundered and oppressed, imprisoned and murdered all that had opposed this
New-invented Usurpation: And, finally, they left the People no shadow of
Liberty, and broke Religion into so many petty and ridiculous Sects, that we
were the scorn of Atheists and Papists, and a scandal to all the Christian
World; till these ambitious and bloody Oppressors fell out at last among
themselves, and nothing could make up that Breach, but the Recalling the King
to set up Monarchy and restore the Church.

. 1. This Office is introduced with some of the usual Sentences, which are
explained before. The Minister has the choice of Three, all very proper. The
first is Daniel's Confession Dan. ix. 9, 10.
, describing God's Mercy and our Sinfulness: The other two are Jeremy's Prayer
Jerem. x. 24.
, for a mitigation of Judgment: And David's Request Psalm. cxliii. 2. See
Companion to the Temple, par. 1.
, for a total Sparing.

Instead of the Venite, we have a very proper Hymn collected out of diverse
places of Holy Scripture; so that the words are Divine, and their pertinency to
this Occasion will appear by the following Scheme.

This Hymn contains these Five particulars, 1st, A Preface, owning 1. God's
Righteousness, Psalm. CXIX 137. Nehem. IX. 33.
2. Our wonder at the Methods of it, Psalm LXXIII. 2, 3.

2ly. A Description of the matter of Fact, setting out 1. His Enemies Plots,
[Psal. II. 2. and LXXXIII. 5. 2. Their Calumnies, [Psal. XXXI. 15. and CIX. 2.
3. Their Ingratitude, [Psal. XLI. 9. and XXXV. 12. 4. Their Injustice, 1. To
him, [Psalm LXXI. 9. 2. To his, [Lament IV. 20.
5. Their Cruelty, 1. In wishing his death, Lament. IV. 12. and Psalm. XLI. 5,
and 8.
2. In condemning him falsely Psalm. XXXV. 11.
3. In Executing him barbarously Lament IV. 13.


3ly, A Reflection upon it, 1. With detestation as to our selves, Genesis XLIX. 6.
and Psalm LXXX. 17.
2. With contempt, as to his mistaken Enemies, Wisd. III. 2. and V. 4. and III.
3.
3. With assurance of his felicity, Wisd. III. 4. and V. 5.

4ly, A Consideration of the Judgment due for it, and thereon 1. The Prayer to
spare the Innocent, 1. The Nation, Psalm. XCIV. 1. and LI. 18. and Deuteronomy. XXI. 8.
2. Our selves, Psalm XXVI 9. and LI. 14.

2ly, The Reason why the Guilty may fear punishment, 1. From God's hatred of
such Psalm. V. 4, and ver. 6.
2. From his dealings with others Ps. LXXIII, ver. 18, 19.


5ly, A Conclusion, owning again God's Righteousness, Apocal. XV. 3. Psalm.
CXIX. 137.



Brief Notes upon this Hymn.
Psalm. CXIX. 137. Even when we cannot discern the particular Reasons of thy
Providence, thy Nature assures us thou art ever Righteous, and in time thy
Judgments appear equitable.

Nehem. IX. 33. It was a great Calamity to us to be so soon deprived of so
excellent a Prince; but we cannot censure thy Providence, because we must own
that though he were innocent, yet we of this Nation at that time were grievous
Sinners.

Psalm. LXXIII. 2, 3. But while so innocent and eminent a Saint, a professor, a
practicer and defender of the true Religion, suffers so unjustly and severely,
and the Hypocrites, Atheists, persidious and cruel Men who oppressed him,
prospered and flourished: It startled many good Men See Job XXI. 6. Jer. XII.
1. Flagitiosi vero in quantavis prosperitate sunt calamitosi. Apollon. in
Stobae.
, who could not apprehend why God should seem to desert his Friends, and abet
the Cause which he hated.

Psalm. II. 2. and LXXIII. 5. The whole proceeding was indeed very strange; the
rabble and drags of the People mutinyed, and the Great Men (whom he had
advanced) met in Cabals, and consulted how to pull down the true Religion,
which the Lord had planted here Acts IX. 4. -- me (inquit Christus) non meos.
Aug. de sanct Sermon. 14.
, and to destroy Gods Anointed, who they know would not permit them (while he
lived) to overthrow the Church. Therefore they plotted his destruction, and
entered into an illegal and wicked Covenant against him.

Psalm. XXXI. 15. While he stayed in his Palace, thousands of the vile Populace
came in droves and railed at him, crying out for Justice, that is, for Innocent
Blood. And He knew that those who stirred up these Tumults, were then
conspiring his Death.

Psalm. CIX. 2. For the compassing of which bloody Design, they represented all
his Actions most falsely and maliciously in their Libels, Speeches and
Remonstrances, and then raised open War against Him without any just Cause: For
he had not attempted either to alter Religion, or invade Property, as they
falsely suggested.

Psalm. XLI. 9. On the contrary He would have preserved both, and was kind to
all his Subjects, but more particularly to some of these Traitors, who had been
raised to great honor and wealth by him, enjoyed high and profitable Places
under him, and ate at his very Table This is applied to Judas, Mark XIV. 18.
; yet like Judas these betrayed their Master.

Psalm. XXXV. 12. These were very Monsters of Ingratitude; like the young Ram,
which dashes with his horns the paps he sucks (as the Greek Proverb is (...)
Prove. ap. Suid.
): They had received good from him, but requited him with all the mischief they
could do him. This baseness touched him very nearly.

Psalm. LXXI. 9. So did also the spiteful Reflections they made on his
Sufferings, as if they were a demonstration of Gods having rejected and
deserted him. His losses and their success, like David's Enemies, encouraged
them to persecute and seize him, fancying Heaven would never call them to
account for it: But they were deceived both in their censures and their hopes;
for a little time showed that God corrected Him in love Hebr. XII. 6. Prove.
III. 2.
, and destroyed them in his anger.

Lament. IV. 20. However they did prevail then; but it was our loss more than
the Martyred Kings, for our welfare depended on his; He was as necessary to our
Safety, as the Breath of our Nostrils is to our Life Animus Rei Pub. es tu,
illa Corpus tuum -- Tu ille spiritus vitalis quem tot millia trahunt. Senec. de
Clem. l. 1. c. 4, 5.
. And we hoped, when God had Anointed over us so wise, so pious and so gracious
a King, we might long have lived under him in peace and plenty, and have been
more happy than any Nation: But God punished us, in letting him fall into their
Pits.

Lam. IV. 12. Psalm. XLI. 5, and ver. 8. Who could have imagined, that such
Miscreants should have been let loose upon a rightly reformed Christian Church,
who should thirst so vehemently for the Blood of its Supreme Governor: And
should be permitted to proceed to so high a degree of wickedness, as to Try him
without Law, and pass Sentence on him that was entirely Innocent, as if he had
been really guilty; yea, and at last to bring him to that cruel Death which
they all along designed?

Psalm. XXXV. 11. It Is true, they could not do this without perverting his
Actions, and hiring false Witnesses -- cum sint proemia salsi Nulla ratam debet
testis habere fidem. Ovid.
: But these prosligate Wretches, after repeated Murders and Perjuries, stuck at
nothing, though never so false, unjust and impious.

Lam. IV. 13. Without doubt the People of this Land had highly provoked Heaven
by their Sins, and the very Priests had grievously offended God, or he would
not have laid such a Judgment on Church and State both -- adsit Regula peccatis
quae poenas irroget aequas. Nec scutica dignum horribili sectere flagello.
Horat. Sat. 3.
, nor permitted Religion and the Government to be both ruined by the Murder of
this just Prince, whose Blood was openly shed in the greatest of our Cities,
and none appeared to rescue him.

Genesis XLIX. 6. But as old Jacob hearing of the Massacre of the Shechemites,
showed at once his innocence and indignation by detesting the Fact: So we abhor
their Plots, abominate their Counsels and bloody Judicatures Consilium eorum
non placuit animae meae. Targ. Hieros. in loc.
. We desire our Life may never come before such Judges, nor our Honor be
stained with such Associates Eorum nolim ut in fidem vita mea veniat, aut in
Societatem honos committatur. Verse. Castal.
, who make nothing of killing a man, [ Psalm. LXXX. ver. 17.] No, nor of
murdering a King, who was set up by Gods own right Hand, singularly beloved by
him, and advanced to live and dye for Gods true Religion.

Wisd. V. 4. and III. 3, and 4. and V. 5. They foolishly imagined he was
brought to the last degree of misery, and thought they had with his Life
deprived him of all good. And as the Pagans thought the Christians mad -- (...)
-- Eurip. Iphigen.
, who for fear of dying after they were dead, feared not to dye for their
Faith: So these Atheists thought his holy Life madness, and his fatal Stroke
infamous: Not considering that this outward punishment sitted him better for,
and sent him sooner to Eternal peace: His death made him immortal Si tamen fas
est -- omnino mertem vocare, qua tanti viri mortalitas magis est finita quam
vita. Plin. lib. 2. ep. 1.
. And he whom they falsely numbered among Transgressors, is numbered among the
Saints in glory.

Psalm. XCIV. 1. and LI. 18. However, this was a grievous Sin, and when we
remember that thou, O God, art the supreme Judge, to whom it originally alone
belongs to punish Vindicta, pro Poena. Mich. V. 15. and Romans III. 5.
; we cannot but humbly beg of thee, Not to judge and condemn this Nation for
this horrid Crime: Since we are thy peculiar People, be so kind for thy Truth's
sake, which is professed here, to spare this Land.

Deuteronomy. XXI. 8. Thou did command Israel, when a man was found murdered, to
pray to thee in these words; Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy People, whom thou
have redeemed, and lay not innocent Blood to our charge; and by this means they
were to remove that guilt: We therefore use the same Prayer, and hope it shall
have the same effect in this deplorable case.

Psalm. XXVI. 9. and LI. 14. The Vengeance due to those Sinners and
blood-thirsty Wretches, who committed this execrable Murder is so dreadful,
that we beseech thee to keep off that Death from us here, and that Damnation
hereafter, which they deserve. Blood is a crying Sin, O Lord, deliver us, for
thou only can save us from it; and if thou will pardon and acquit us, we
shall have great reason to sing the praises of thy infinite Mercy.

Psalm. V. 4, and ver. 6. As for the Actors in this wicked Tragedy, they cannot
hope to escape; for God is so Holy in his Nature that he cannot be pleased with
Wickedness, nor have Any agreement with the workers of Evil 2 Cor. VI. 14, 15.
. His Truth and Justice bind him to destroy false Witnesses and false Accusers;
and he abhors utterly such bloody Hypocrites, as under color of Religion
Simulata aequitas -- est duplex iniquitas. Aug. in Psalm. 63.
shed innocent Blood.

Psalm. LXXIII. 18, 19. They were indeed advanced by this Impiety to very great
wealth and honor; but they enjoyed not very long what they got so basely. When
Heaven began with these Regicides, Oh, how deplorable and how very suddenly did
they consume away? They perished without pity, and such as did not dye of Grief
and odious Diseases, came to fearful ends, either executing themselves
Percussorum autem fere neque triennio, quisquam amplius supervixit, neque sua
morte defunctus est. Sueton. de percus. Jul. Caesar. p. 112.
, or being cut off by the Law as Traitors. So that their usurped Power and
Grandeur vanished like a Dream when one awaketh, and like the Images we behold
in sleep, so God made them all to vanish; and now nothing is left of them in
this Kingdom, but an indelible Infamy upon their Memory.

Apocalyp. XV. 3. and Psalm. CXIX. 137. Now how can we consider this Mercy of
God to the Royal Martyr, and the Vengeance he took on his Murderers, and not
sing the Song of Moses and of the Lamb; Owning, that our Almighty Lord God is
Great and wonderful in his Works, his Methods at last appear to be Just and
True: He proves himself King of his Saints by avenging their Blood. Wherefore
we end as we began, with declaring that He is righteous in his Nature, and all
his Judgments are just.

Glory therefore be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The proper Psalms, IX, X, XI.
. II. THere are also very pertinent Psalms chosen for this Occasion, which I
shall first explain by a brief Analysis, and then apply by short Notes.

Psalm. IX. was writ on Goliah's death, and it contains 1st Praise, 1st, With
respect to himself, and so 1st, He solemnly performs it, ver. I, II. 2ly, He
gives the Reasons of it, 1. Gods Justice on his Enemies ver. III, IV, V, and
VI. 2. His continual Authority, ver. VII, and VIII. 3. His care of the Injured,
ver. IX, and X.

2ly, With respect to others, and so 1st, He exhorts others to it, ver. XI.
2ly, Gives the Reason why he does so, ver. XII.
2ly, Prayer, 1st, The Petition for Mercy in his Distress, ver. XIII. 2ly, The
Motive for God to hear it, viz. his Gratitude, ver. XIV.
3ly, A Declaration, 1st, Of the Divine Judgments on the wicked, v. XV, XVI,
and v. XVII. 2ly, Of his Mercy to the patient and oppressed, v. XVIII.
4ly, A Conclusion, by way of desiring God to exert his Power still, ver. XIX.
and ver. XX.



Brief Notes upon the IXth Psalm.
VEr. I, II. We who have seen the Justice of God executed on those Enemies of
our David, may fitly (with him) own this was a Mavelous work of God; and not
only give him Thanks for it most heartily in private; but set apart a solemn
Day, to remember it in public: We ought upon so eminent an instance of God's
Superiority over the Greatest and highest Sinners, to be inwardly glad and to
rejoice openly with Psalms of Praise, offered up to his glorious Name.

Ver. III, IV. Those Foes of this Church and Nation, who had murdered our King
and oppressed us, were suddenly routed, without our striking one stroke: One
angry Look of thine dissipated and destroyed them Veni, vidi, vici; dictum
Julii Caes. Suet.
. The King's Right was undoubted, and his Cause very good, so soon as it was
removed from their partial and unjust Bar, and came before thy Tribunal, which
always judges right.

Ver. V, VI. As thou did check the Pride of the Philistines of old, by
destroying their impious Champion Goliath, so that they never after that
recovered their reputation in Arms. So thou have now Increpatio pro poena.
Zech. III. ver. 2. and alibi.
punished the whole Party, by taking off the Grand Usurper; their Policy is
baffled, their Forces routed, and their Name extinct, or mentioned with
detestation. We may now insult over them, who boasted they would not leave
either Root or Branch Nomine Christianorum deleto: nummus Pagani Persecutoris.
Ap. Eusebius.
: And tell them, their Power to destroy is at an end, it is extinct and almost
forgot, like the Names of those Forts they burnt and razed, hardly any Scars
are left of the dreadful Wounds they made.

Ver. VII, VIII. Wherefore we will never fear such short-lived Tyranny. Our
comfort is, The Lord lives and reigns for ever; He always sits on his Judgment
Seat: And when wicked Princes for our sins are in power who will not right us,
we can appeal to him who is above them Appellatio fit semper a minori ad
majorem. Gloss. ad Great. c. 2. qu. 1.
, and who will certainly judge all the World righteously and truly.

Ver. IX, X. But especially the oppressed, and those who are unjustly troubled
and vexed, as the best men were under that Usurpation Non potest esse salvus,
qui non vult esse malus. Salv. de Gub. lib. 5. Vid. Isai. LIX. 15.
. They have a sure defense, a never failing refuge in God: So that if any of
them do faint and despair, it is a sign they do not know or not consider, how
Famous the Lord is, for relieving and delivering all that in their distress
apply to him, and firmly trust in him.

Ver. XI, XII. There was at the Restoration an eminent Example of this here,
and therefore I must exhort all the Members of this our Zion to praise the
Lord, and to publish with joy what he did for us. After a little time he began
to examine into the guilt of this Sacred Blood, and then by his Judgments on
the Criminals, he made it appear he neither forgot the wickedness of the
Oppressors, nor the complaints of the Oppressed.

Ver. XIII, XIV. When God gives so illustrious an instance of his Mercy Tim. l.
16. -- (...). Ut dicant omnes si Paulus sanatus est, Ego quare despero? Aug.
verb. ap. sec. 9.
, all the Pious in after-Ages, who are afflicted, will be encouraged to pray to
him to pity them, and to consider how vexatious and malicious their Enemies
are. And when he delivers them, as he has done us, they will publish the
Divine Praises, as far as ever they can extend the glory of them; they will on
solemn Days in the Churches of the Saints commemorate these Mercies with Joy.

Ver. XV, XVI. When they who laid Snares for their Masters life, were justly
seized by his Son, and when they who had so cruelly used the Sword and Ax, were
cut off by them Quod quisque fecit patitur. Autorem scelus repetit. Senec.
Hesc. fur. 3. 2.
: This was a demonstration that the Judgment came immediately from God. There
is so much Wisdom, such overruling Power, and entire Equity showed in trapping
the wicked, but crafty Hebr. In cavitate Manus eorum; viz. dolor agunt, They
deal underhand.
Politicians, in their own Nets, that God appears most evidently in it, and all
that see it may say it is his work, Psalm. LXIV. 9.

Ver, XVII, XVIII. Wherefore let neither the Guilty triumph, nor the Innocent
despair, for the Wicked shall return to the Earth and come to the Grave
Revertantur in Sepulchrum -- e terra enim orti sunt: at adhuc in Inferno non
erant. Gloss. and interlin.
by a violent and untimely Death; they forget God, and that makes them go on
presumptuosly for a while, but they may see that such as their Cruelty and
Oppression has ruined, though they sit never so quietly and meekly under the
Burden, and will not avenge themselves, these shall not be always forgotten by
God, and he will right them most certainly at the last.

Ver. XIX, XX. Finally whenever we are evil entreated through Tyrants and
Persecutors, we may and ought to pray Ita fecerunt Antiochenenses and Didymus
sub Juliano. Sozom. hist. lib. 5. cap. 18. in fine, and lib. 6. cap. 2. page
366.
That the Lord would arise to rescue his People, and not permit his Enemies
(who are but frail men) to domineer over his Friends; their presumption
increases by his patience Eccles. VIII. 11.
; they forget both God and themselves, while their cruel Designs prosper; but
as soon as ever thou take upon thee to punish them, they are as timorous as
they are conscious of their Evil Deeds. So that, Lord, thy appearing for us
will both humble our Foes, and secure us; and give us reason to sing Glory be
to the Father, etc.
As it was in the Beginning, etc.


The Xth Psalm.
. 3. THIS Psalm, wanting a Title, was by the Ancient Hebrews, and is by, the
Vulgar Latin made a part of the former: But though it be on a like Subject, yet
two plain differences are between them; those were Pagan Enemies, and that
represents their Cruelty as ended some time before, and so it is fuller of
Praises. This speaks of Domestic Foes, who still acted unjustly, and so it
abounds more with Prayers and Complaints; so that this relates to the time,
while the Tyranny continued, if we apply it to our case.

The Xth Psalm contains 1st, An heavy Complaint of 1. Gods withdrawing himself,
Ver. I. 2. His Enemies prevailing, Ver. II.
2ly. A particular description of his Foes, setting out 1. Their Boasting and
Pride, Ver. III, IV. 2. Their Contempt of Divine Judgments. Ver. V, VI. 3. The
wickedness of their Words, Ver. VII. 4. The Hypocrisy and Cruelty of their
Deeds, Ver. VIII, IX, X, XI. 5. The Presumption of their Thoughts, Ver. XII.
3ly, An Application to Almighty God, consisting of 1. A Petition to God, Ver.
XIII. 2. An Expostulation with him, Ver. XIV. 3. A Vindication of his Honor,
Ver. XV, XVI. 4. A Prayer for his Assistance, Ver. XVII.
4ly, An Act of Praise by way of Prophecy. 1. Supposing the thing already done,
Ver. XVIII. 2. Owning it as the Answer of their Prayers, Ver. XIX. 3. Reciting
the blessed effect of it, Ver. XX.



Brief Notes upon the Xth Psalm.
Ver. I, II. O Lord we have reckoned thee our best Friend; of thy Presence and
Favor we have most need in our misery Prove. XVII. 17.
. So that we cannot but complain of thy seeming to withdraw, and not regarding
us when we are in such distress. They who have renounced thee, persecute thy
people at their pleasure, and make a sport of ensnaring them Libido, pro id
quod animis nostris gratum est. Exodus XV. 9. Erras homo, non sunt haec ludicia,
sed crimina, Petr. Chrysol. in Sermon.
; whereas if there were any justice to be obtained, these daring Wretches must
fall into those pits they made for the Innocent.

Ver. III, IV. Thou have spared them so long, that now they become so insolent
as to boast they have gotten their hearts desire in the ruin of our Church and
Monarchy, and magnify those as the greatest Patriots whom God abhors for their
sacrilegious robbing both the Crown and Miter Qui Christi and Ecclesiae
Pecunias auferunt, homicidae apud Deum deputantur, Capitul. 430. lib. 6.
; From despising us, their Pride is now come to that height as not to value
thee, nor once to think of thy Justice.

Ver. V, VI. For all their show of Religion, they are real Atheists, and that
makes them so fearless, in their continued oppressions (...). Plut. de
Superstit. p. 165.
. Thy Judgments have been withheld so long, and they are so intent on their
wickedness upon Earth, that till they actually fall on them, they never
apprehend any danger; and therefore when we complain to them, or pray to thee,
they defy and puff at us Nov. Versio. vide Malach. l. 3. Putat se posse vel
flatu eos dissipare. Vid. Plauti miles Glor. Act. I. Scen. 1. ver. 17.
. They think their prosperity shall ever continue; they do not fear any
alteration, making themselves sure that there is no danger of their being ever
called to account, or punished for their Crimes.

Ver. VII. Their words are all extremely wicked, they commonly revile and curse
us; or if they ever speak us fair, it is only to deceive and betray us; their
reflections upon thee, and the falsehoods they say of us are so many, that
surely there is a spring of Blasphemy and Lying Non ineptos -- sed mendaces and
infidos proprie dici -- Vonos. notat. Anli. Gel. l. 18. c. 4.
under their Tongues.

Ver. VIII, IX. And their Actions are as false and cruel as their Discourse;
they are like savage Lyions couching down, looking and listening when any poor
Creature comes within their reach Mitius inveni quam te genus omne ^erarum,
Ovid. Epist. vid. p. 26.
, and then seizing and murdering it without any Mercy. Thus these
blood-thirsty Men, if by Spies and prostigate Informers they can lay hold of a
helpless Man, though never so innocent, they swear him out of his Life,
Liberty, or Estate at least.

Ver. X, XI. For if by feigned Plots or false Evidence they can seize upon any,
he is sure to be Rifled, if not Murdered: They spare none they begin with, for
fear they should remember the injury Si timidus est, homicida est. Dierum
Mauritij de Phoca.
. Whether they be fallen into their hands by Craft, or taken Prisoners in War,
these guilty Cowards are extremely Cruel, glad when they can catch an Honest
Man, and barbarous always to him.

Ver. XII. Which practices they durst not use, if their thoughts Loquitur in
Cord, i. e. Cogitat. Vid. Psalm. XIV. 1.
were not so impious, that thou, O God, have utterly forgot their Murdering of
their King, and that thou will never look into, or examine after any of their
Cruelties to their Fellow Subjects; thy long forbearance has brought them to
this degree of Presumption.

Ver. XIII, XIV. Thy Patience makes thy Enemies imagine thou art as asleep, bu^
our importunate Prayers shall awaken thee: O Lord arise, and prepare to strike
these bold Offenders, so that the poor disconsolate Sufferers may perceive thou
have not forgot them. It daunts them to hear the daring blasphemy of their
Oppressors, who impudently declare Blasphemia, est mala verba de Deo dicere,
qui sine Controv^rsia bonus est. Aug. de Morib. Manich. l. 2. Tom. 1.
that thou neither regardest nor punishest any wrongs done to thine own People:
Which if it were true, would be an indelible reproach to thy Justice.

Ver. XV, XVI. But we know it is utterly false, we are sure thou have seen all
their Deeds, for thou see all that is done upon Earth by thy Omniscience, and
look more strictly upon Ungodliness and Wrong, as thou art the Judge of all.
The punishing such Transgressions of thy Laws, Affronts to thy Authority, and
Injuries to thy Friends, thou take into thine own hands Exodus XVIII 22. Ita
apud Romanos, A Praesidibus appellatur ad Proconsules, ab ^is ad Imperatorem,
Grot. in loc.
, especially when the Criminals are so great, that no Right can be had of them
on Earth; so that the helpless oppressed innocent Man is forced to appeal to
Thee for justice, who do continue a Friend when all others fail him.

Ver. XVII. Such an Appeal, O Lord, were we forced to make under that great
Oppression, and to beg of thee to Break that Power to pieces which ungodly and
malicious Men used only to dishonor Thee, and hurt their Neighbor. For if
thou make these an Example, Proverb. XXI. 11.
it will be such a warning Chi ne castiga uno, cento n^ minoccia, Proverb.
Italic.
that we hope none will afterward dare to be so wicked.

Ver. XVIII, XIX, XX. We even then hoped for success to these Prayers, and now
we see, That thou art a King who reignest in all times; their Rule was but
short, and now They and their Authority are vanished together: Now it appears
thou heardest all the Prayers of oppressed and persecuted Loyalty. Thou put
those Desires into their Hearts to long for Deliverance, and no wonder that
thou should hear and answer the Wishes thou had inspired, even before they
broke forth into words Cur clamas ad me, Exodus XIV. 15. Desiderium viri sancti
clamorem appellat, qui lingua profecto tacebat, D. Bern. de passion. Dom. p.
1179. Animarum igitur verba, sunt ipsa desideria, Greg. in Job. l. 2. c. 6.
for thou understandest the language of the Heart. And the effect of thy
granting those just Desires was very happy. For by this means the Son of the
Martyr was restored to his Crown, and the Posterity of such who were slain,
banished or undone in his Quarrel, recovered their Estates, and all things were
so well settled again both in Church and State, that such as sprang from
Dunghils, the Dregs of the People (who are commonly the worst Oppressors
Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum.
,) we hope shall never more prevail at that rate in this Nation: But that the
Monarchy and Religion shall be established among us from henceforth for ever.
Amen.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The XI. Psalm.
. 4. THIS Psalm was composed by David when he was threatened, and his Life
attempted by Saul or Absolon, expressing what it was that supported him, and is
very applicable to our Royal Martyr under his Troubles.

Psalm XI. contains a description 1st. Of a good man under great afflictions,
viz. 1. His own steady Faith, part of Ver. I. 2. His Enemies practices. 1.
Their Insults, part of Ver. I. 2. Their Attempts, Ver. II. 3. Their Success,
Ver. III.

2ly, Of Gods dealing in such a case, viz. 1. He is easy of access, Ver. IV.
2. He knows all things done here, Ver. V. 3. He always judges right, Ver. VI.
4. He severely punishes the wicked, Ver. VII. 5. He is inclined to favor the
just, Ver. VIII.



Brief Notes upon this Psalm.
Ver. I, II, III. SINCE I firmly trust in the Lord who is a sure refuge, it is
not all your insulting threats can terrify me (...). Greg. Nazian.
: You advise me to desert my Station and fly to some remote place of Strength
to save my Life; you count me like a poor helpless Bird, that the Fowler is
just ready to shoot and kill: I know they hate me for my Integrity: I see they
are raising Forces, and preparing to fight against me to destroy me, because I
cannot renounce my Religion, my Own and my Peoples Rights. Some would persuade
me to yield up my Honor and my Conscience, telling me, otherwise the
Foundations of Church and State will be razed by this Cruel War. Well, if that
be the sad event, I must rather suffer than sin Telerabilior est qui ^eri
jubet, quam qui male vivere, Pub. Min. Frustra hominem terr^^^s, nihil ille
nisi peccatum timet, Dict de Chrysostom.
. If I can say safely I am innocent, and have done no wickedness to contribute
toward it, I shall have the testimony of a good Conscience, and the will of the
Lord be done.

Ver. IV, V, VI. So long as my Conscience is clear God will hear my Prayer John
IX. 31.
; I can cheerfully go to the Church while I have liberty; or to Heaven, where
God dwells, if I were consined to a Prison; and doubt not but I shall be
accepted: But if I do a Sin to get present ease, God who sees, and tries all
men's Actions, would soon discover it; whereas now while I keep my integrity,
God will consider me though I be broug^^ into never so low a condition. No man
therefore shall prevail with me to p^rchase Peace with betraying my Trust Pax
sine Veritate preditio est. Tert. Vid. (...). Pa^^m.
, since I know, and firmly believe, that God does approve and allow the Deeds
of just Men, even while he correct, them. And abhors the unjust and wicked from
his very Soul, even while he spares them, and seems for a while to let them
prosper.

Ver. VII, VIII. However it may go with good and bad Men here for a time, it is
certain God will punish the Wicked and reward the Righteous at last. He will
either bring a sudden, dreadful and irresistible judgment upon them in this
World, as he did upon Sodom in that Lightning and Thunder, as driven with a
violent Storm and Tempest (...). Luc. XVII. 25. i. e. Fulgur and Tenu^ru. Vid.
Grot. in locum.
which caught them all as in a Snare, so that not one of them escaped; or if by
Gods forbearance some few of them escape a sudden and horrible Punishment here,
they shall suffer that Fire and Brimstone of Hell (whereof this was but an
Emblem) for ever and ever Quanto enim diutius expe^t^r, (...) gravius vindicat.
Aug. de temp. So^. 1^2.
. But as for holy Men, God is holy in his Nature, he therefore doubtless ever
loves, and will reward them: He may hide his Face for a time, but he will
finally cast a gracious and favorable Look upon righteous Actions: In which
small Belief I will now sing, Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


The Lessons, 2 Samuel I. St. Math. XXVII.
. 5. THere is no parallel for this Inhuman Murder of a Holy and Innocent King,
by his own Subjects, in all the Old Testament; and therefore the Church is
content to read the History of David's Justice upon the Infidel who murdered
Saul, and his mourning for him who had been his Sovereign, though he was his
Mortal Enemy, and had Apostatized from God, and was forsaken by Heaven, yet he
was Master of so much Charity as to lament his Fate. How much more Reason then
had our State to punish those Barbarous Rebels who murdered a Righteous King,
beloved by God, and who was Martyred for firmly adhering to the True Religion;
and also to set apart a Day of Humiliation for Fasting and Prayer, and to draw
up a mournful Office 2 Samuel I. 11, 12, and Ver. 18.
after the Example in the Lesson on this occasion?

As for the Second Lesson, it is the ordinary Chapter, appointed in course by
the Calendar, to be read for January XXX. But by a signal Providence, the
Bloody Rebels chose that Day for the Executing their King, on which, at the
Church, (which they seldom came to) this History of our Saviors Crucifixion
was appointed to be read. His Majesty had actually forgot this was the proper
Lesson, and therefore when Bishop Juxon (who said the Morning Office
immediately before his Martyrdom) named this Chapter: The Blessed Prince asked
him if he had chosen it as fit on this Occasion? But when he knew it was
established of old, he noted and admired the suteableness of it to his present
Circumstances: Who was Betrayed by some, Denied by others, and Deserted by the
rest of his seeming Friends, and left to the Bloody and Implacable Malice of
his Barbarous Enemies, who used him with the same Contempt and Ingratitude,
Outrage and Cruelty, that the Jews used their King and our Savior, while he
imitated his Great Master (animated by this Chapter) in Meekness and Patience;
Piety to God, and Charity to all, even to his Murderers. So that there is so
exact a similitude between the Sufferings of Christ and our Martyr, that there
needs nothing to apply so exact a Copy to its Original.

The First Collect.
The First Collect consists of 1st, A Proper Introduction. O most mighty God,
terrible in thy judgments, etc.
2ly, The Fact commemorated. 1. God permitting it. who in thy heavy displeasure
did, etc.
2. The wicked doing it. the Life of our late gracious Sovereign, etc.

3ly, The Cause owned by, 1. A general Confession. we thy sinful creatures here
assembled, etc.
2. A special Indication That they were the crying sins, etc.

4ly. The Effects deprecated. 1. Gods inquiry after it. But O gracious God,
when thou make, etc.
2. His punishing of it. lay it not to the charge of the people, etc.

5. A fit conclusion. 1. By earnest Prayers for Mercy and Pardon. Be merciful O
Lord, be merciful, etc.
2. By urging Christ's Merits. through the merits of thy Son, etc.




A Practical Discourse on this Collect.
. 6. O Most mighty God, etc.] The words of these Prayers are taken generally
out of Holy Scripture, and this Introduction is found in the Psalms Psalm. LXVI.
2, and 4.
. The loss of a good King was a Judgment terrible to the whole Nation; and the
manner of his Fall by the implacable Malice of a few of his own Subjects, was
truly Wonderful, to pious Men, who knew Heaven permitted it, and yet could not
discern the reason why the Righteous Judge of all should punish so Religious
and Innocent a Prince, for so Wicked a People, and by such vile hands. And
there is no fitter preparative for our Prospect of so amazing a Providence,
than Fear and Wonder. Fear at the dreadfulness of the Judgment; Admiration at
the strange Methods by which it was brought about: An awful apprehension of the
Terrors of Gods wrath, and the incomprehensibleness of his Conduct are apt to
persuade 2 Cor. V. 11.
even the most Obdurate to humble themselves before him.

Who in thy heavy displeasure did suffer, c.] He must be more Atheistical
than the Pagans (...). -- Homer.
who can imagine so great an Evil could happen without Gods permission. It was
a sight which staggered the Faith of all the Disciples, to see their dear
Master given up to the Malice of bloody Men; but Jesus himself declared, They
could have no power against him, except it were given them from on high Joh.
XIX. 11.
; yet that did not lessen, but aggravate the Crime of Judas and the Jews, who
were led only by their several lusts. And therefore we call the Hands which
shed this Royal blood, as St. Peter does those which spilt our Saviors, wicked
hands Acts II. 23.
. Nor do we think God, who permitted this, did approve it Quod permittitur
bonum non est. Tertul. ad Ux. lib. 1. page 163.
, and therefore we say he suffered it: But note, it was because he was very
angry, it was the effect of his heavy displeasure Psalm. XXXVIII.
against this Nation for being so stubborn and seditious under, so cruel and
ungrateful to so gentle a Prince. He had given him to us in Mercy to make us
Happy; but since we despised his Love, as well as our own Felicity, he took him
away in his anger Hos. XIII. 11.
leaving us no other way to guess at the Blessings we might have had in such a
Reign, than by the sad Confusions we were in while it lasted, and our dismal
Sufferings afterward.

We thy sinful creatures here assembled, etc.] Though the principal Instruments
in this Cruelty were few, yet the rest of the Nations silence, and not hindering
so execrable a Murder Non prohibendo quod oportuerat prohiberi, cessatione
crimen fecerat proprium. Arnob. lib. 2. page 74.
spread the Guilt over the whole Land. For which reason all are to assemble,
and the Confession is to be as general as that of Ezra was, in whose words
almost, we acknowledge it is for our iniquities, that we and our King have been
delivered to the Sword, to Captivity and to be a Spoil Ezra. IX. 7.
. The Judgment was very heavy, but our Sins crying brought it down upon us.
Pride, fullness of Bread and Idleness, Faction, Schism and notorious Hypocrisy,
Ambition, Avarice and Revenge, veiled under pretenses of Piety, and the names
of Conscience and Religion, made a cover for Rebellion, Sacrilege and Murder.
Now if we would find Mercy, it is not enough to confess these Sins of the last
Age, but we must forsake them in this Prove. XXVIII. 13.
, and beware we do not by imitating our Forefathers Sins, make our selves
liable to the Punishments they deserved Definit esse Filius Iniquorum qui non
imitatur mores illorum. Aug. in Psalm. 108.

Illorum poenas luunt, quorum opera secuti sunt. Greg. Mor. l. 5. c. 21.


. We have now a Religious, Just and Gracious Prince on the Throne, let us not
be Factious and Ungovernable under him, nor by pretenses of reforming, seek the
subversion of Church and State; for if we still do wickedly, God has told us
We shall be destroyed, we and our Kings 1 Samuel XII. 25.
: Let us beware of this for our own sakes, for the loss of Him, in our
Circumstances, would be a great step toward our Ruin.

But, O Gracious God, when thou make, etc.] But suppose we give none of the
like fresh Provocations, Murder is a crying Sin, and killing the Lords
Anointed, the worst kind of Murder 1 Samuel XXVI. 9.
. And God makes so narrow a search after Blood Psalm. IX. 12.
that he discovers and punishes such as are guilty of it, commonly in this
World; yea, if the Actors escape, their Posterity often suffer for it some Ages
after St. Mat. XXIII. 35. Non est argumentum truculentiae -- Sed signum
misericordiae poenam differ peccati. Hieron in Ezekiel. XVIII.
. So that we have just reason to fear lest we or our Posterity should yet fall
under the Divine Vengeance, for so heinous a Crime: Wherefore we aggravate the
Sin, and deprecate the Punishment; freely owning that nothing less than a
special application of the Blood of Christ, which speaks better things than
that of Abel Heb. XII. 24. Sanguis enim ille vindictam clamat, hic
indulgentiam. Ambros. de fuga Seculi. c. 5. Tom. I.
. The Kings innocent Blood naturally calls for Vengeance, but the powerful
oratory of our Saviors Bleeding Wounds, will drown that Cry, and we hope
prevail for Mercy, especially since Grace did so far prevail over Nature in our
Royal Martyr, that after the Example of Jesus and St. Stephen Luke XXIII. 34.
and Acts VII. 60.
he begged at his Death, that his Blood might never be laid to his Peoples
Charge. This was the fervent Prayer of a Righteous Man, and we hope it will be
effectual and prevail James V. 16.
, since God will scarce deny the last request of so Dear a Servant of his, who
laid down his Life for the True Religion.

Be merciful, O Lord, be merciful, etc.] Encouraged with these hopes, we make
an earnest application for Mercy and Pardon, and the greatness of so pressing
an Occasion makes us redouble our Cry, to intimate our sense of the Danger, and
express our Importunity. The Form is indicted by Gods Spirit, and prescribed in
a less case, viz. that of a Murder where the Author was unknown Deuteronomy. XXI. 8.
. Alas! we cannot say (some of us, at least, who then lived) our Eyes did not
see this Blood: We will not therefore deny our Guilt, but will apply to him for
Mercy, who only can forgive Mark. II. 7. (...). Chrysostom. hom. 40. in 1 Cor. XV.
. We are Gods peculiar People, redeemed from Idolatry and Superstition, and
therefore we fly to his Mercy, and the Merits of his Dear Son, to turn away the
continuance of his Anger; and we doubt not (since we have a merciful God to
pray to, a Prayer of his own Enditing, and a Meritorious Advocate to interceed
for us), but we shall obtain a Pardon for our selves, and our Posterity,
through his Mercies, and the Merits of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Second Collect.
The Second Collect consists of three Parts.

1st, A Thanksgiving to God for 1. His Love to his dying Saints. Blessed Lord,
in whose sight the death, etc.
2. His Grace to our Royal Martyr. we magnify thy name for thine abundant, etc.
3. The happy Effects thereof appearing by his, 1. Imitation of Christ. by
which he was enabled, etc.
2. Patience. in a constant, meek, etc.
3. Charity And even then according, etc.


2ly, Petitions for our selves, that we may, 1. Highly value his Memory. Let
his memory, O Lord. etc.
2. Follow his Example. that we may follow the Example, etc.
3. Escape the Punishment due for his Blood. And grant that this our Land, etc.
4. Be forgiven all our Sins. and the mercy glorified, etc.

3ly, A Conclusion in the Name of Christ. And all for Jesus Christ, etc.

A Practical Discourse on this Collect.
. 7. BLessed Lord, in whose sight, etc.] This address is taken out of the
Psalms Psalm. CXVI. 13.
, and seems to give a reason why we do so strictly observe the carriage of our
Royal Martyr at his Death. Since God himself (the great Judge of the Combat)
takes special notice of their Agonies who die for his Truth Ecce pan Deo
dignum, vir fortis cum mala fortuna compositus. Senec.
, and gives them miraculous assistances then, which often appeared of old by
the wondrous Faith and Patience of the ancient Martyrs, and was as evident in
the Suffering of our Royal Martyr, who as justly deserves the Title of a Saint,
as any that ever bore that Name: Yea, one of the Roman Communion does him that
right, to say, abating (that which he miscalls) his blot of heresy, there was
never a juster or holier Man; and since he was so good, he wishes he had been
theirs Talis cum s^s, utinam noster esses -- nemo dempto heres^os la^e, aut
justior aut sanctior. Nunt. a Mortuis. page 7.
. And certainly those were but falsely called Protestants, who had any hand in
cutting off tho greatest Saint that ever was in this Reformed Church. It Is said
indeed of the barbarous Albanians, that they seek out the holiest Man in all
their Country, and offer him up for a Sacrifice Grot. de satisf. Christi. c.
10. p. 335.
. But who would imagine, that our Christened Albion should breed such Salvages?

We magnify thy Name for thine abundant Grace, etc.] The Saints themselves did
ever own that all their strength was from God; they were Humble and Just, as
well as Holy, and while others admired them, they magnified the Lord Luke I. 46.
, they cast their Crowns at Jesus Seet Rev. IV. 10.
, crying, Not unto us, O Lord, but unto thy Name be Glory Psalm. CXV. 1.
: Wherefore we learn from them not to worship them (as those of Rome do) they
forbid that Rev. XIX. 10.
. But we ascribe all the Praise to him, whose Grace made them so illustrious.
And this was the first Design of dedicating solemn Days to the memories of Gods
most eminent Saints and Servants Honoramus servorum, ut honor servorum redundet
ad Dominum. Hieron. ep. 53.
; that the Glory might redound to their Master, and that he who gave them power
to do and suffer so much beyond human ability, might have his due praises for
it.

By which he was enabled so cheerfully, etc.] Synosius calls a day on which
some great Cruelties were used toward pious Men, The second day of Crucifying
Christ (...). Synes. ep. 57.
. But we may well say of our King, that he was conformable to the Sufferings of
Christ Phil. III. 10.
, that he imitated his Example and followed his Steps 1 Pet. II. 21.
more nearly than any other Martyr did. Our Lord was born King of the Jews, and
spent his Life in doing them good, laboring to the last to make them happy.
But they renounced his Government Luke XIX. 14.
, mortally hated him, persecuted him continually, and thirsted for his Blood,
which at last they cruelly shed, under pretense of Zeal for their Nation, and
their Laws. The parallel is clear, it needs no illustration.

In a constant and meek suffering, etc.] The sufferings of our holy Martyr
(like those of his Master) were of two sorts; First, Most barbarous Indignities
in his Lifetime. Secondly, Great Cruelty at his Death; but he bore both with
the Courage of a Lion, and yet with the Meekness of a Lamb Isai. LIII. 7.
. The Rabble affronted him in his own Palace, the Rebels falsely accused him in
their Declarations, and pursued him and his with Fire and Sword: They
represented him as a Tyrant and a Papist, though none ever was a milder Prince,
or a firmer Protestant Furens populus Mauricium Aug. ut Marcionistam and
Tyrannum convitijs lacerat. Hist. Mauric. l 8. c. 9. p. 400.
. And when they had him in their Power, they confined him to a loathsome Prison,
and set the worst of their Myrmidons to Abuse as well as Guard him; for they
disturbed his Devotions, derided his Misfortune, and committed all sorts of
Rudeness before his Face. Finally, They closed all with a Mock-trial, where he
was falsely Arraigned, Insulted over, unjustly Condemned, and insolently Spit
upon, (as his Savior was) and then Executed like the vilest of Slaves, and
worst of Malefactors: But his Courage was as admirable, as the Impudence of his
Enemies. For first, he was never observed to be daunted or discomposed Nullius
tam vehemens nequitia est, ut metu meo digna sit. Symmach. ep. 9.
. Secondly, Nor did the Hero prevail over the Christian; he was as Meek as he
was Courageous, patiently bearing all without Threatening or Murmuring,
Complaining or Reviling: Yea, Thirdly, his Charity was so great, (that after
our Saviors pattern) he forgave his Enemies, yea his Murderers, and prayed
also to Heaven to forgive them.

Let his memory (O Lord) be ever blessed, etc.] We have seen the Great Example,
and now pray we may make a twofold use of it. First, To value his Memory;
Solomon says, The memory of the just is blessed Prove. X. 7.
; and God promises The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance Psalm.
CXII. 6.
. A lasting and honorable Name being one of the rewards of a deceased Saint
Psalm. LXXII. 17.
. So that we should be unjust to this excellent Prince, and to God himself, if
his Memory be not ever Blessed among us: This Day and this Office will preserve
the remembrance of his bright Example, so long as Illustrious Virtue has any
price among Men. And Secondly, We Pray we may imitate that which we so justly
admire, which is another end of celebrating the Memory of Hero's made immortal
-- (...)

(...).

Lucian. in Toxar.


that others may be excited to follow their Steps. And if any great Evils do
ever befall us, where (our Lord excepted) can we find so great a Pattern of
Magnanimity mixed with Meekness, of Patience joined with Charity, of Constancy
in Faith, and Fervency in Devotion? It Is not enough to commend and admire these
in him; for then only they do us real good, when we our selves practice them.
And thus tho, alas! we want the Presence of so Perfect a Guide to Virtue, we
may so profit by his Example M^gnerum virorum non manus quam praesentia utilis
est me^oria. Sen. ep 102. in fine.
, as to have our portion with him in that glory which he now enjoys.

And grant that this our Land, etc.] But while we admire his Graces, we cannot
forget, they aggravate the Sin of this Land where he was cut off, and that puts
us a second time upon begging Pardon for so horrid a Crime done against so
great a Saint, God's Vice gerent, and our Lawful Sovereign; and no importunity
is too great to avert so Dreadful Vengeance as this deserves, or to procure
Pardon for so Heinous a Sin. These Favors we dare not ask in any other Name,
but that of Jesus Christ our only Mediator 1 Timothy II. 5. Heb. VII. 25.
. We honor the Memory of our Royal Martyr, but do not adore him; we propose
him for an Example, but do not use Him or any Creature for an Advocate,
reserving that Glory (as we ought) only to the Blessed Jesus, who is alone
sufficient to make this and all our Prayers acceptable to his Father. Amen.

Note. The three Penitential Prayers are explained in the Comminution.

The Epistle 1 Ep. St. Peter II. 13, and 22.
This Epistle shows the Duty which Christians owe 1st. To Magistrates alone. 1.
The Duty declared, Ver. XIII. 2. The motives urged. 1. The end of Government,
Ver. XIV. 2. The Command of God, Ver. XV. 3. The honor of Religion. Ver. XV.
3. An Objection answered, Ver. XVI.
2. To all them with others, 1. To all -- Honor, V. XVII. 2. To Christians --
Love, V. XVII. 3. To God -- Piety, V. XVII. 4. To the King -- Loyalty. V. XVII.
3ly, To Masters. 1. The Duty enjoined, Subjection. V. XVIII. 2. The Extent of
it, even to the bad. V. XVIII. 3. The reasons of this latitude. 1. It pleases
God, Ver. XIX. 2. It is creditable among Men, Ver. XX. 3. It Is agreeable to
Christ's example. V. XXI, XXII.




A Paraphrase on this Epistle.
. 8. Ver. XIII. YOU Dispersed Jews, who are Christian-Proselytes, must [Submit
to every] Governor appointed by the [Ordinance of Man] to Rule that Country
where you live. And this Obedience must be paid [for the Lords sake,] who has
enjoined you to be subject, wherever you dwell and are protected, [whether it
be] at Rome, and then your subjection is due [to the King] or Emperor himself,
[as supream] and ruling there immediately.

Ver. XIV. If you live in the Provinces, you must be subject to Proconsuls,
Praefects [Or unto] any other subordinate [Governors, as unto those who are]
commissionated under the Emperor, and [sent by him] with Power and Authority,
both [for the punishment of evil doers] especially the Seditious, [and the
praise] yea, and rewarding [of them that do well] especially the Quiet and
Obedient.

Ver. XV. In which number you Believers should always be, [For so is the will
of God,] he commands it, and so ye are bound to it in Conscience. And it is for
the Credit of your Religion, [that with well-doing,] particularly this sort of
it, Peaceableness and Subjection, [ye may put to silence] the Accusations of
Malicious and inform [the ignorance of foolish men;] the former representing,
and the latter believing, you to be Turbulent and movers of Sedition.

Ver. XVI. I know, as Jews, you use to think you ought not to obey any Heathen;
and I own, that as Christians, you are set at liberty from the Ceremonial Law,
but not from the Moral: Therefore you may live [As free] Men, and such as
cannot be compelled to do evil; [But] the Gospel allows [not] the [using your]
Christian [liberty for a cloke] to, and pretense [of maliciousness,] so as to
permit you, under color of these Spiritual Privileges, to be Seditious, or
Rebel.

Ver. XVII. You are still bound to all sorts of Moral Duties, as much as you
were before your Conversion, that is, to respect and [Honour all men] of what
Religion soever they be. To [Love the brotherhood] of Christians more
especially: To [Fear God] in the first place, (so as not to sin against him,
though your Governor command you) and in the next place to [Honour the King] by
submission and obedience to his Lawful Commands.

Ver. XVIII. Christianity cancels no preceding Relations or Duties; And
therefore you [Servants] who are Christians, [be subject to your own Masters]
who have bought or hired you; carry your selves toward them [with all fear]
Observance and Respect. And I must tell you, this Obedience and Reverence is
due, [not only to the good and gentle] Masters, who use you kindly, [but also
to the froward] Masters, who deal strictly, severely and hardly with you.

Ver. XIX. It is no Virtue, and deserves no praise to be subject to a good
Master, you may do that for his sake and your own: [But this is thankworthy, if
a man] who is a Christian, have an ill Master, and yet purely [for conscience
toward God] and for fear of sinning, He obeys hard Commands, yea, [endures
grief] and ill usage, and is content with [suffering wrougfully] rather than
disgrace the Gospel, by Mutiny and Revenge.

Ver. XX. You will say we are innocent, and deserve no such usage: I reply,
It Is your Innocence gives the great value to your Patience; [For what glory is
it] for you Christians especially, [if when you he buffeted] only [for your
faults] by a good Master, [ye shall take it patiently?] A Heathen Slave would
do as much as this and more Indigna digna habenda sunt, heru^ quae facit.
Plaut. cap. IV. Act. 2. Se. 1.
. [But if when ye do well, and] for all this under an unjust and cruel Master
[suffer for it] yet still [ye take it patiently] and submit, [this is
acceptable with God] because this cannot be done for such a Masters sake, but
purely in respect to Gods Command, which you dare not disobey.

Ver. XXI. And to encourage you to so hard a Duty, consider this is suitable to
your Christian Profession; [For even hereunto were ye called] when you were
converted, to follow our Saviors Example; and we may well bear some evils for
his sake [because Christ also suffered] all sorts of Injuries, Ill-usage and
Death it self [for us,] not only thereby satisfying Gods Justice for our Sins,
but [leaving us an example] also [that ye] and all Christians, when you suffer
unjustly [should follow his steps] and take even that patiently, as he did.

Ver. XXII. It Is certain he suffered for no fault of his own, [who did no evil]
deed to any Man in his whole Life, [neither was] any one evil Word of Falsehood,
Malice or [guile found in his mouth]: Wherefore if we would imitate him, we
must first be so innocent as to deserve no Sufferings; yet if they, who have
Power over us, will for all that afflict us, our next care must be, to bear it
patiently, till God find out a way to deliver us.

The Gospel, St. Mat. XXI. 33, -- 41.
. 9. THis Parable directly points at the Scribes and Pharisees, who had
rejected and slain diverse of the Prophets, and were designing to murder Christ
himself; but by way of accommodation it taxes our vile Regicides. For their
Lord had taken all due care of this Land, and trusted diverse of these his
Subjects, in the Administration of his Government, expecting nothing but the
just Rights and Prerogatives of his Crown. But these they deny him, and reject
his Commissioners who came to treat with them: Yea, slew many of his faithful
Servants in open War, and at last seize his Crown, murder him, and banish his
Heir, making themselves Lords of his Kingdoms. Now if these be ever recovered
again, we may appeal to all mankind, whether they deserve not both to be
deprived of their usurped Power for their Injustice, and of their Lives for the
Innocent Blood they spilt? All but the Guilty will own this to be Just.

This Gospel sets out Inferiors highly injuring their Lord, and shows 1st, The
nature of their Sin aggravated by 1. The equity of the Lord. 1. His care of the
Vineyard. Ver. 33. 2. His compact with them. Ver. 33. 3. His fair demands, Ver.
34.
2. The iniquity of the Servants 1. Beating and killing their Lords Messengers,
Ver. 35, and 36. 2. Killing the Heir, and Ver. 37, and 38, 39. 3. Seizing the
Vineyard, Ver. 37, and 38, 39.

2ly, The measure of their Punishment. 1. Enquired of by appeal to the Guilty,
Ver. 40. 2. Determined by the very Criminals, Ver. 41.



A Paraphrase on this Gospel.
Ver. XXXIII. THE Injustice and Cruelty of Inferiors wronging and seeking to
destroy their Superiors, may appear by this Parable; [There was a certain
housholder] o^ Chief Lord, that is, God the Father, [who planted a vineyard,]
the Land of Canaan, [and hedged it round about] by Laws of his own appointing,
whereby the Jews were distinguished from all other People, [and dug a
wine-pres^^] that is, founded a Temple for his True Worship [in it, and built a
Tower,] that is, he took it into his special^ Protection, [and let it out to
husbandmen,] to the Jews to cultivate, on condition they should pay an
Obedience unto his Laws, [and went into a far Country] that is, seemed to
retire to Heaven.

XXXIV. [And when the time] of gathering and pressing the fruit [drew near] at
the Vintage, according to the Covenant, [he sent his servants] the first and
eldest Prophets [to the husbandmen,] pressing them (for the Benefits they had
by the Vineyard, and the Protection their Lord gave them) to make good their
promised Obedience, [that they might receive] the Portion due to their Lord,
out of [the fruits of it] and give their Master an account.

Ver. XXXV. [And the husbandmen] were so wicked, that instead of paying their
Lord, the homage and services due to him, they [took his servants] by violence,
[and beat one] cruelly, even Jeremiah, [and killed another] that is, Isaiah, by
sawing him asunder, [and stoned another] Zechariah the Son of Barachiah.

Ver. XXXVI. Yet their Lord was so Gentle and Patient, that he resolved to try,
[Again;] and therefore [he sent] on the same Errand [other servants,] raised up
other Prophets [mo then the first] in number, to have more witnesses of their
Repentance, or evidence of their Crimes, [and they did unto them] in the same
manner, killing and beating [likewise] as they had done to the former
Messengers.

Ver. XXXVII. However the Lord was not yet wholly discouraged, [But last of
all] as the only means left to prevail on them, and the final Experiment that
could be made, [he sent unto them his Son] even Jesus Christ, to press them to
Repent, and keep his Laws, and their own Engagements; rationally concluding,
and [saying] within himself, surely [they will reverence my Son,] and he will
persuade them to do me right.

Ver. XXXVIII. [But] it proved otherwise, for [when the husbandmen saw the
Son,] instead of believing his Miracles, reverencing his Person, and obeying
his Message, [They said among themselves] in their secret and bloody Consults,
[This is the heir] who claims a right to this Vineyard, which we intend to make
our selves Masters of, [come, let us kill him] by a violent Death, [and let us]
then declare our selves free from all subjection, and [seize on his
inheritance] which we cannot be quiet in so long as he lives.

Ver. XXXIX. Nor did they only plot, but execute this Cruelty; for they hired
one of his Servants to betray him, [and they caught him] first by Craft, [and
cast him out of the vineyard] by open force, renouncing him and his Authority,
and at last they most unjustly condemned him, [and slew him] barbarously.

Ver. XL. But such flagrant Crimes cannot be long unpunished: [When therefore
the Lord of the vineyard] who is Immortal and very Just, [cometh] by his
special Providence to enquire into these horrid Practices, I appeal even to you
Jews, your selves, and ask you, [what will he do] think you, and what ought he
to do [unto those husbandmen] who had been so obstinate in their Injustice, and
so daring in their Cruelty?

Ver. XLI. [They say unto him,] convinced by the notoriousness of the
Provocation, but not perceiving themselves to be the Criminals, Doubtless [he
will], as in justice and honor he is bound, condemn, cut off, and [miserably
destroy those wicked men] who had been guilty of so much Blood, Robbery and
Oppression, [and will let out his vineyard] for the future, [to other
husbandmen] which will be just to him, and respective to his Messengers, and
[which shall render him the fruits in their season] according to the Condition
of the Covenant made with him. And this was the Event in this Case, for God
soon after the Death of Christ, cut off, and miserably destroyed the
unbelieving Jews, and finally rejecting them, chose the Christians for his own
People. And in our Case Heaven brought our Regicides to condign Punishment, and
set up rightful and just Governors both in Church and State.

The Last Morning Collect.
This Collect relates to the happy End of that great Rebellion, and contains,
1st, An humble Confession, 1. In general, of Gods Mildness. O Lord our Heavenly
Father, etc.
2. In particular, of 1. Our great loss by the Fathers Death. that though for
our many, etc.
2. Our own deliverance from Anarchy. Yet thou did not leave us, etc.
3. The preservation and restoring of the Son. But by thy gracious providence
did, etc.

2ly, A hearty Thanksgiving for these Mercies. For these thy great and
unspeakable mercies, etc.
3ly, An earnest Prayer for 1. The whole Royal Family. Beseeching thee still to
continue, etc.
2. His Majesty now reigning. and to grant to our Gracious, etc.

4ly, A Vow of Gratitude on the Answer of it. So we that are thy people, etc.




A Practical Discourse on this Collect.
. 10. O Lord our Heavenly Father, who did not punish, etc.] The late Gospel
puts us in mind, that our Sin was so like that of the Jews, as may give us just
cause to fear our Punishment also should have been the same; that is, to have
our Name and Nation rooted out. But since the Mercy of Heaven reversed that
severe Doom, we begin this Prayer with the words of Ezra and Job's Friend Exodus
IX. 13. and Job XI. 6.
, and confess that our Heavenly Father, exacted of us and punished us less,
than our Iniquity deserved. The Debt of our Sins was so great, that if God had
exacted the utmost Farthing for an Impiety so transcendent, we had been no more
a People: But while he was punishing us under the Regicides usurpation,
according to the Prophets Prayer, in the midst of wrath he remembered mercy Hab.
III. 2.
, and even while he was correcting us, he was contriving a way for our escape 1
Cor. X. 13.
; which shows Mercy is his Nature and Delight always; it proves he does not
either afflict willingly or long, because while our Sins force him to punish,
his Heart inclines him to pity us, and his Power is at work to deliver us; and
our grief for a past, and now helpless Calamity, must not proceed so far as to
make us ungrateful for the Event which Gods goodness gave to those Dismal Times.

We acknowledge it thine especial Favor, that though, etc.] This Period begins
to apply Gods correcting Mercy to our Case; and to render our Deliverance more
illustrious, we here place the Midnight of our sad Distress before the Light of
our thrice happy Deliverance, commemorating how far our Sins had forced the
Divine Permission to give way to the very worst of all Judgments to befall us;
that is, to give up one so dear to himself, so like to be a Blessing to us, and
so perfectly Innocent, as to his own Actions, into the hands of the worst and
most wicked of all Human Race. Our Sins must be very provoking to move our
Heavenly Father, to suffer such an injury to be done to us; and his Mercy must
be as stupendous to pity us, then when we were groaning under the Iron Rods of
their Tyranny, whose lashes we had made our selves liable to, by suffering the
best of all our Princes that ever adorned the English Throne, to be cut off so
unjustly. And therefore the Judgment it self, though very severe, must not
hinder us from owning the truly admirable concern of Divine Mercy for so just
sufferers; which we therefore own to be his especial Favor.

Yet did thou not leave us for ever as Sheep, etc.] Kings are often compared
to Shepherds in Sacred, Ecclesiastical and Civil Authors Isai. XLIV. 28.
Sorores sunt arts pascendi. D. Basil. Conc. 24. (...). Homer.
. And the comparison is verified by woeful experience, when the sheepherd is
smitten and the sheep scattered Mat. XXVI. 31.
: For then, alas! a People becomes like sheep having no shepherd 1 King XXII.
17.
: And if this were Isreal's case, when Ahab was cut off, it must be more sadly
ours upon the Death of our good Josiah. The Wolves and Foxes who seized his
Power, fleeced us and tore us, scattered and devoured us without Restraint or
Mercy, during their twelve years Tyranny. But God did not leave us for ever in
this estate; but by a singular Providence, very gracious to us, and miraculous
in it self, did first preserve the Martyrs Son, King Charles the 2d. though
Bloody Peter's (a name twice fatal to us) after the Fathers Murder,
blasphemously applied that of Isaiah Isai. XIV. 21.
, (Prepare the slaughter for his Children,) to encourage the Regicides to cut
off the Son. Yet after they had routed this Innocent Prince in Battle, and not
only sought him here with all the diligence of implacable Malice, but hired
Assassins, and offered Money to Foreign Nations (whither he fled for refuge) to
dispatch him, still he was by Heaven preserved; and (as David in Saul's
Persecution) hid as it were under the shadow of Gods wings, until their Tyranny
was overpast Psalm. LVII. 1.
. This was the first step of Divine Mercy.

And did bring him back in thy good appointed time, etc.] The second step was
the Restoration. The Storm was long and violent, but when we had smarted
severely under variety of precarious Forms of Government, then Gods appointed,
and the fit time came for our Deliverance. Then the Martyrs Son was restored,
not by Blood and Foreign Arms, (which that good Prince would never use against
his own Subjects) but by Gods turning all men's hearts 2 Samuel XIX. 14.
; the thing was effected to the satisfaction of all but the surviving
Criminals. But this was a Blessing which reached farther than that Kings
Person, and lasted longer than his Life; for with him that Family was restored
which had before afforded us Two Religious and Righteous Kings, and (which was
more) with him came in the True Protestant Religion, and the Primitive
Doctrine, Discipline and Government of the Church; as also the ancient
hereditary Monarchy, evenly poised between the Princes Prerogative, and the
Peoples Rights, was recalled with him: And these consequences of his Return,
made his Return to be so great a Blessing in it self, and so Just a Subject of
our Praises.

For these thy great and unspeakable Mercies, we render, etc.] The preserving
that Prince abroad, and bringing him back to Rule over us, was therefore an
unspeakable Mercy to us, because with him our ancient Government and true
Religion was so restored and settled, that neither the Force nor Fraud used in
the next Reign, could deprive us of them. Had the Martyr given up our Church,
or our Liberties to be for ever destroyed by consenting to any wicked Law Psalm.
XCIV. 20.
, or his Son made our Religion and Rights the Condition of his Restoration,
probably we had been eternally deprived of both. But God prevented both these
dismal Evils. Wherefore the most sincere Gratitude from the bottom of our
hearts Ex initimis cordis penetralibus.
; is due to his holy Name; which therefore every good Protestant and true
Englishman is bound this day to pay.

Beseeching thee still to continue thy gracious, etc.] That which makes a Royal
Family dear to the Nation is, not barely their own Right, but their being, what
God intends them, the Ministers of God to them for good Romans XIII. 4. Meque non
solum officio publico, debitas pendere precas, sed officio privato. D. Ambros.
ep ad Great.
. The Martyrs first Son was beloved by all, because he restored their Liberties
and their Religion. But we have seen an Experiment since, that when one of that
Family attempted on these two dear things, nothing could make his People
believe him to be a Blessing. However, (blessed be God) we have now the Martyrs
Grandchild, one of the same Royal Family, on the Throne, who keeps up and
defends our True Religion and Old Monarchy. Wherefore it is fit we should now
turn our Praises into Prayers for the Prosperity of all the Branches of this
Royal House, but especially for him who has reduced our Religion and Rights to
that very state to which his Grandfather (of Blessed Memory) did (though in
vain, alas!) attempt to bring them. He ventured his Life and Fortune to rescue
us, and has Power and Courage to keep off Foreign Foes; Prudence and Conduct
to suppress Domestic Designs. Why should we not therefore pray that his Reign
may be long, which will lengthen our Felicity; and happy, since we are sure to
share in the Felicities of it? He is a Father to his People and a true Friend
(...). Xen. Cyropaed. lib. 6.
, and therefore we are bound in interest as well as Duty, to wish him long Life
and Victory, Prosperity and Peace.

So we that are thy People will give thanks, etc.] Gods People and the Sheep of
his Pasture, can never be more obliged, than by his giving them a King, who
professes, practices and defends the True Religion; So that since this is our
case, we may well conclude with a Vow of Gratitude. So that we promise him to
praise him for our times, if he will continue this King to reign over us while
we live; and we doubt not but our Posterity, so long as they have any sense of
the Value of True Religion, and Legal Right, will count it an inestimable
Blessing to have such a King as secures both; and therefore we promise and
engage for their Gratitude, (who will receive the advantage (...). Plutar. de
educ. Principis.
) we make no question but their Duty and Interest both, will engage them (as
David on a like occasion speaks Psalm. LXXIX. 14.
to continue to show forth the Praises of God in all succeeding Generations,
through Jesus Christ our Lord (by whose intercession we and they obtain this
mighty Favor of a good King) And may God accept his Intercession, and our
Prayers for so great and so lasting a Blessing. Amen.

There is nothing more in this part of the Office, but the old Collect upon the
fifth Sunday after Trinity, which desires that the Changes in Government may
make none in Religion, and that there may be Peace in the State to give the
Church more freedom to Pray and serve God devoutly. But it is so apparently
proper, I need not to apply it. Only I shall note, that by a special Providence
this very Collect happened to be used, and was answered a little before the late
Revolution, when we were in the dubious expectations of an almost hopeless
Deliverance, Anno 1688.

THE Evening Prayer FOR THE XXXth of January.
. 1. NOthing is new in this Part but the Psalms, the Lessons and three
Collects. The Proper Psalms are three; the two former relating to the Miseries
of the Civil War Psalm. LXXIX. Psalm. XCIV.
: The third (which is therefore out of its usual order set last) respecting the
happy Change at the Restoration Psalm. LXXXV.
.

Psalm. LXXIX. contains Five Particulars, 1st, A relation how Gods People
suffered in 1. Their Religion, Ver. I. 2. Their Persons, Ver. II, III. 3. In
their good Name, Ver. IV.
2ly, An Expostulation with God on this Occasion, Ver. V. 3ly, Prayers. 1. For
Justice on the Evildoers. Ver. VI, VII. 2. For Pardon and Help to the
Sufferers, Vr. VIII, IX.
4ly, Motives to both requests, 1. The former. 1. Their Insolence, Ver. X. 2.
Gods Vindication, Ver. XI.
2. The latter. 1. Pity to the Pious who yet remained alive, Ver. XIII. 2.
Justice to the Evil, who presumed by Impunity, Ver. XIII.

5ly, A Vow of lasting and constant returns of Praise, Ver. XIV.


Brief Notes upon the LXXIXth Psalm.
Ver. I, II, III, IV. THis Psalm begins with a lively description of the
Miseries of Jerusalem, upon the sacking thereof by the King of Babylon; and if
David writ it, he did it by the Spirit of Prophecy: However it is very
applicable to our sad Condition during the Civil War; only the Jews suffered by
Heathens, we by such whose deeds were worse than Pagan, while they called
themselves Christians Quid verba audiam cum facta video. Cicero de Graccho.
Tusc. qu. lib. 3. p. 376.
. Unbelievers and Hypocrites have the same Portion in the next World Mat. XXIV.
51. compared with Luke XII. 42.
, and we may join them here. For our pretended Saints, but real Infidels,
outdid the Assyrian Heathens, defiled our Churches, making them Stables for
Horses, and Guard-houses for worse Brutes; destroyed many Towns and fair
Palaces, reducing goodly Castles to be heaps of Ruins. They murdered vast
numbers of the Kings faithful Subjects, stripped them, and left them in the field
unburied. But in this they exceeded those Heathens, for these seized upon their
own lawful Prince, and under pretense of zeal murdered him; a Fact forbid by
all civilized Nations, to kill a King of another Country, though taken in a
just War Been mojores nostri hoc compara verunt, ut nullum regem quem armis
cepissent vita privarent. Cicer. ad Her^nn. l. 4. Quis unquam Princeps captum
Principem trucidavit? Petr. de Vineis. ep. 39. p. 233.
; but never done in any reformed Country before. This made our Nation therefore
very infamous to all foreign Lands, and a derision to Papists more especially,
who charged this falsely upon the Reformation. This revived the old Scandal upon
the Barbarous Britains, that they were only valiant for Civil War -- And if any
of their Princes were more Pious and Gracious than the rest, they all combined
against him as the subverter of their Country Fortes ad Bella civelia -- Si
quis principum mitior -- in hunc quasi Britanniae subversorem, omnium odia,
telaque -- torquebantur. Gildas de excid. Britan.
. This verified that Reproach which a Foreigner in the last Age said of the
English, That we were a stubborn and unruly People, whose custom it was often
to kill our Kings Textor. Officin. Tit. Siti and Fame Mortui. p. 156. h.
. And in a word, this horrid Cruelty and impudent Hypocrisy made our
Countrymen hated and abused all over Christendom.

Ver. V, VI, VII. But the whole Nations Fame ought not to be blasted, for the
faults of a few: We had very many good Men who expostulated with God for
correcting his best Servants so severely, and begged he would turn his
Indignation against his Enemies, who had committed blacker Crimes than were to
be found among the most savage Heathens, who did not so much as know nor
pretend to worship God; for these had Mitius inveni quam te genus omne ferarum.
Ovid. Parcit cognatis maculis fera. --
murdered their rightful Sovereign, and their Fellow Subjects, yea and laid
waste their own native Country.

Ver. VIII, IX, X. These holy men, in those sad times, bewailed both their Sins
and their Misery; They confessed their old Offenses in the days of Peace and
Plenty, and earnestly begged pardon for them; They most importunately prayed
for speedy help and deliverance from the Iron Rods of these Insolent Tyrants,
whose success in Wickedness had made them despise the Righteous Cause of the
King, and the Church, and they insulted over both as if God had forsaken them
Theodosius in praelio contra barbaros, recitat hunc versum, (viz.) Psalm. LXXIX.
10.) Et Deus dat ei insperatam victoriam. Ruffin. hist. lib. XI. cap. 33.
; and this reflection upon Gods Honor pierced their hearts deeper than all
their other sorrows and sufferings.

Ver. XI, XII, XIII. These righteous Souls, vexed at the open and barefaced
Violence and Cruelty of those Atheistical Hypocrites, and troubled at the
Righteous Blood they had spilt, Prayed for speedy Judgments upon the Guilty,
which might (for the Honor of God) be as Public as their Crimes. And for such
as they had unjustly shut up in Prisons, the Confessors in our Martyrs Cause,
whose Blood was designed a Sacrifice, but they were yet alive: They interceded
with God to rescue them out of their Persecutors hands. Finally, As to those of
the Roman Communion who reproach and blaspheme thy True Religion, as if that or
its Professors were guilty of this Murder The Royal Martyr affirms, that none
was active in th s War, that was a true Lover of the Protestant Religion
established in England, (...). Letter to the Prince, p. 235.
. Thou who know the fashood of this Charge, and their treasonable Doctrines
and Practices, they wished they might be severely punished Genesis IV. 15.
Septies, pro poena gravissima.
as so foul a Calumny justly deserves.

Ver. XIV. And upon Gods gracious hearing, and answering these Prayers, they
promise, that they and their Posterity (who were Gods peculiar People, and
under his special Care) would Praise his Name, and Publish his Glory from Age
to Age. Which Promise of our Innocent Ancestors, We who have seen their Desires
fulfilled, are bound this day to keep; and so we close this Psalm with our
Glory be to the Father, etc.

Psalm. XCIV. is upon the same Subject, and consists of Seven Parts, 1st, A
Prayer to God to exert his Justice. Ver. I, II. 2ly, A Complaint for his
seeming to defer it. Ver. III, IV. 3ly, A Description, 1. Of his Enemies evil
Deeds. Ver. V, VI. 2. Of their vain Hopes to escape. Ver. VII.
4ly, A Confutation of those hopes. 1. From Gods Omniscience. Ver. VIII* IX. 2.
From his Justice on others. Ver. X, XI.
5ly, An Exhortation to Patience, from 1. The Comfort of that Grace. Ver. XII,
XIII. 2. The Certainty of Deliverance. Ver. XIV, XV. 3. The Assurance of Aid.
Ver. XVI.
6ly, A Declaration of his Faith, by 1. Remembering former Mercy to him, Ver.
XVII, XVIII, XIX. 2. Considering the Reason why it was unlikely God should help
them. Ver. XX. XXI.
7ly, A Conclusion full of hope, both that 1. God would support him. Ver. XXII.
2. And also punish them. Ver. XXIII



Brief Notes upon the XCIVth Psalm.
. 2. Ver. I, II, III, IV. WHen the Pious Mourners for our Royal Martyr saw
those who had shed his Blood, and seized his Dominions, were grown so proud
with long impunity, they called to mind that, Vengeance belonged to God Romans
XII. 19.
, and that he was the Supreme Judge of the World Genesis XVIII. 25.
, wherefore they justly appealed to him, (who seemed to sleep while he spared
these bold Sinners) and labored to awaken his Justice by their importunate
Cries. They joined with their Martyred Friends in Heaven and said, Rev. VI. 10.
How long, O Lord, holy and true, etc. Their Triumphs over oppressed Innocence,
and proud boasting of their prosperous Crimes, were so provoking, that they
could not but expostulate with Heaven for a seeming delay of Justice Luke
XVIII. 3. Importunus vinc^t ^^lum, quanto magis b^^tatem mundi, Li^r San. hedr.
in Talm. ^ol. 105.
; and the Calamity being so intolerable, excused the Importunity, and the
Complaint also. For they bragged God was on their side, and impiously appointed
days of public Thanksgiving Quotiens fagas and caedes ^ussit Princess, tetiens
grates Dijs acta^, quaeque rerum secundarum ol^^, tam publicae cladis insigma
fuisse. Tacit. Annal. l. 14. p. 1007.
as often as they had success in their wicked Cruelties; being so far from
repenting, or pitying the innocent Sufferers, that they despised the Righteous,
but Afflicted Cause.

Ver. V, VI, VII. Who can blame them in this Case, for setting out the matter
of Fact before the supreme Judge? Wherefore they declare, that these wicked Men
had slain and cut off many good Christians by the Sword and the Ax, and had
disquieted this Land where the true Religion was professed, with an Unnatural
Civil War: And when they had made many Widows and Fatherless, without any
regard to Heaven, which is wont to avenge their Cause Exodus XXII. 22. Duo ista
nomina in quantum dest^tuta humano auxilio, in tantum divinae misericordiae
exposita suscipit tu^ri Pater on^mum, Tert. ad Ux. l. 1. p. 166.
; they starve them by plunder and Sequestrations. Yet after all, they are so
miserably blinded and hardened, as to boast that they shall never be accountable
to God for this Cruelty and Injustice; and because thy Sentence, O Lord, is not
yet executed, they think they shall finally escape.

Ver. VIII, IX, X, XI. But this is an imagination as foolish as it is impious;
and let them take heed it do not provoke God to convince them of his Justice,
by a speedy Vengeance, for then the knowledge of their danger will come too
late to prevent it. It was a sign that Adams understanding was weakened by his
Fall (as St. Chrysostom notes Chrysostom. in G^n. hom. 17. p. 10^.
,) otherwise he would not have been so weak to imagine the Trees of the Garden
could hide him from his Maker. And it is evident they must be infatuated to a
high degree, who can persuade themselves, that he who made all men's Eyes and
Ear^, does not hear the Cry of the Oppressed, and see the Cruelty of their
Oppressors O^^dum (...) te non intendit suum qui fecit tuum. Aug. V. D. Ser. 10.
. If Reason would not, Examples might have taught them, that God by his
Judgments brings the proudest Atheistical Heathens, such as Pharaoh and
Nebuchadnezzar to own his Power and Equity Exodus IX. 28. Dan. IV. 37.
; and by sharp Punishments he teaches the most obstinate Wretches to know there
is a God who judges in the Earth, and under his Rod they confess it Oculos
quos cluserat culpa, aperit pana, Greg. Mag. Vid. Genesis XLII. 21.
. Wherefore all the while Men are encouraging themselves in Sin by hopes of
impunity, the Lord knows these are vain thoughts, and will in a little time
woefully confute them.

Ver. XII, XIII, XIV, XV. So that an evil Man is miserable while he seems to be
spared, but the Pious are Blessed when they are afflicted Psalm. CXIX. 7^. Quod
s^vitiam existimas, gratia est. Tert. Scorp cap. 5. Qui corrumpuntur prosperis,
corriguntur adversis. Salv. de Prove. l. 6.
, because this makes them more holy and devout; and while the Calamity endures,
they are supported by Patience, till they find themselves delivered, and their
Enemies punished for injuring them. And if this Justice seem to be slow, yet it
is very sure, for God never did fail at last to rescue the Good, and punish
evil Men. He is ever righteous in his Nature, and at length his Righteousness
breaks forth into Act, and he executes Judgment even in this World. Wherefore
men that truly love God, may firmly trust in him, and follow after Virtue
still, for their Hope shall not be ashamed, nor their Expectations finally
disappointed.

Ver. XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX. And God has taught us, of this Land, that there
is more reason for innocent Suffe^^^ to be Pati^nt, than for unjust Oppressors
to Presume. It Is true, we looked long under that Tyranny for human ^^id, hoping
some good Patriots, or generous Foreign Prince, would take our part against
^^ese Regicides: But at last when we were just sinking into Anarchy, and a new
Civil War, by the divided Parties striving for the Mastery, God himself
miraculously pulled them all down Dum imperare singuli cupiunt, imperium omnes
perdid^runt. Justin. hist. l. 8.
. This indeed was long deferred, so that many good men's hearts almost failed
them; they began to fear God had forsaken them, and given them over to their
Enemies. But the Lord in the midst of these despairing though^, did support
them with secret comfortable hopes of a gracious Deliverance.

Ver. XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII. For it could never enter into their hearts, that
God should approve of their cruel Judgment-seats and Bloody Tribunals Shall the
Throne of Iniquity have fellowship with thee which frames mischief by a Law.
New Transtat.

Qui s^dit crimina vindicaturus, admittit. Cypr. ep. ad Donat.


, where they first made most wicked Laws to justify Murder, and all sorts of
Cruelty and Injustice Ex Senatus -- consultis plebisque scitis scelera
exercentur and public jubentur vetitae privatim. Sen. ep. 95. p. 366.
, and then pretended legally to kill and ruin Men; to make an offensive War
against their Sovereign, and to imbrue their hands in his and his Friends most
innocent Blood. It were Blasphemy to imagine God should be on their side.
Wherefore while these dismal Times continued, good Men were supported by hoping
and believing that Heaven (to which they fled for refuge) would at last rescue
them, and punish their Malicious Enemies, with utter Destruction; which was no
more than requiting them according to their own Doings, and destroying the
Destroyers. And after some years this Hope was verified, Anarchy vanished, the
Authors of it were justly punished, and the Church and the Monarchy were
restored, for which let us now sing, Glory be to the Father, etc.

Psalm. LXXXV. consists of these Three Parts, 1st, An acknowledgment of Gods
former favor. 1. Removing an old Calamity. Ver. I. 2. Pardoning the Sin which
caused it. Ver. II. 3. Ceasing from his Anger then. Ver. III.
2ly, A Prayer for the like favor now. 1. Deprecating his present Anger. Ver.
IV. 2. Expostulating for its Continuance. Ver. V. VI. 3. Petitioning for Mercy
earnestly. Ver. VII.
3ly, An exercise of their Faith and Hope, in 1. Waiting for a gracious Answer.
V. VIII. 2. Believing it will come shortly. Ver. IX. 3. Rejoicing in hope as if
it were come Ver. X, XI. 4. Expecting better Times after. Ver. XII, XIII.



Brief Notes on this Psalm.
3. THis Psalm supposes one Evil had been removed from Gods People, and another
was like to fall on them, showing how they comforted themselves with hopes of a
second Deliverance, by remembering the former.

Ver. I, II, III. This Psalm respects both our deliverances, from Faction
first, and then from Popery; and so I shall apply it. When the King and his
Loyal Subjects were restored to their Rights, and the Church once more settled
in Peace, we blessed God for his Favor to our Land, which he had then so
happily freed from its Oppressors, that we hoped our Sins had been all
forgiven; and the effects of them, even Gods displeasure, totally ceased; for
Peace and Plenty, Truth and Justice, Religion and Piety then flourished here.

Ver. IV, V, VI. But we, alas! fell back into our old Sins at last, and forgot
the God who had saved us from Anarchy, which renewed his Anger, and then a new
Storm arose, which threatened both our Religion and our Liberties, from him who
had solemnly promised to defend both. This renewed our former Prayers to the
Lord to make us better; and to avert this impending Judgment, we expostulated
with Heaven, and set out how severely we had been chastised in the last
Generation, by the tyrannizing Murderers of our Royal Martyr; and if he should
now again give us up into the hands of Persecutors, armed with Arbitrary Power,
this would look like keeping his Anger for ever, and extending his Wrath from
one Generation to another. We could indeed scarce believe that a God of so much
Patience and Compassion would so soon take away the Comfort we had in the true
Religion, and our Native Liberties. We hoped he would avert these fears which
made our lives grievous Das poenas quicunque expectat. Sen. Vid. Heb II. 15.
Quotidie moritur mortem qui assidue timet. Sense. Herc. fur. Act. 4.
, and once more give us cause to rejoice.

Ver. VII, VIII, IX. As we needed Mercy and Deliverance a second time, so we
again earnestly prayed for them -- iteratae valetudinis, iteranda est medicina.
Tert. de poenit. c. 8. p. 126.
. We saw none but God was like to pity us, or able to deliver us; of him we
therefore begged Mercy, and a gracious Rescue. And we waited in hopes of a kind
Answer; believing, that since we were Professors of Gods True Religion, he
would not let those of a very false one, have power to tempt us too far, left
some weak, though otherwise good Men, should turn Apostates, either for hope of
Gain, or fear of Punishment Securius est perire non p^sse, quam juxta periculum
non peria^^c. Hieron. ep. 4^. p. 296.
. Which expectation was not frustrated: For when our Enemies attempts ran to
the greatest height, and they imagined our Church would soon fall, then was
Gods Salvation very near us, and he contrived a wonderful Deliverance for us;
so that the True Religion (the Glory of this Land) remained firm and unshaken.

Ver. X, XI, XII, XIII. The Faithful Members of this established Church, who
were true to their God, had their Prayers heard, and met with Mercy. He pitied
them under these threatening Dangers, and sent them a happy Deliverer, who
restored the Professors and Practicers of this Holy Religion to a perfect
Peace: He dispelled all their fears of Oppression and Persecution. And then the
Church again flourished among us, and the Righteous God has a second time
taken it into his special care, and looks upon it with a favorable Eye from
Heaven, whence this great and happy Change came: Which great instance of his
Kindness to our holy Religion and native Country, encourages us to hope he will
continue his gracious Protection over us, and give us times of Plenty and
Prosperity. For if we live up to our Principles, and walk before him in
Righteousness and true Holiness, we see God will so guide us in all
Revolutions, that we shall walk Safely, and stand Firmly. Now for this special
care of our Church, and these Kingdoms, let us, who have seen these Promises
verified, give hearty Praises to him, and say, Glory be to the Father, etc.

The Proper Lessons.
. 4. THese are so well chosen, that there needs little discourse to direct us
to apply them to the Occasion. The first Lessons are two for variety; one of
which is the Prophet Jeremy's Jer. XII.
complaint to God of great mischiefs done both in Church and State by False
Prophets and Tyrannical Rulers, with the Lords Answer; wherein he gives the
Reason of his permitting this, threatening to punish the Authors of these
Miseries, and to deliver the Righteous. The other Lesson is out of Daniel Dan.
IX. to ver. 22.
, being that excellent Prayer which this holy Man used on his solemn Fast Day;
wherein he so efctually bewailed the Sins and Sufferings of Gods People, that
he prevailed with Heaven to restore them to their Liberty, and to the exercise
of their Religion; and justly minds us of the Prayers and Penitence of devout
Men under those Usurpers, which at last had the same effect here.

The Second Lesson Heb. XI. 32. and Chap. XII. to ver. 7.
sets before us the Faith and Patience of the Martyrs; and in the old Gallican
Liturgy it was the proper Lesson for the Festival of any Martyr Vide Mabillon.
Liturg. Gallic. l. 2. p. 160.
; so that it is very proper as a commemoration of our Royal Mayters sufferings,
and his Faith; and as an Exhortation for us to imitate him and them, whenever
it pleases God to correct us.

The Evening Collects.
. 5. WE have three peculiar Prayers for the Evening, differing in Words, but
agreeing in Sense with those in the Morning, and therefore our Notes on them
shall be shorter. The first is Penitential and Deprecatory; the Second is
Commemorative and Laudatory; the Third Didactical and Instructive, what uses
may be made of so sad a Providence.

The First Collect.
The First Evening Collect contains, 1st, A Preface setting out, 1. The Wisdom
of Gods Providence. O Blessed Lord God, who, etc.
2. The Equity thereof. but also performest, etc.

2ly, The Applying it to our Case. 1. Owning Gods Justice. we thy sinful people
do, etc.
2. Reciting the Fact. in permitting cruel men, etc.
3. Confessing the Cause, even our Sins. we having drawn down, etc.

3ly, The Petitions grounded on these Premises, 1. For pardon of all Sins. For
which we do therefore, etc.
2. Especially this Murder. and that thou would deliver this Nation, etc.
3. For averting Judgments. and turn from us and our, etc.

4ly, The Conclusion in the Name of Christ. Grant this for the, etc. Amen.



Brief Notes upon this Collect.
. 6. O Blessed Lord God, who by thy Wisdom, etc.] It may settle our Minds, on
so surprising an Occasion, to contemplate the infinite Wisdom of divine
Providence, which overrules and baffles the Policies of wicked Men, who
willingly act their Crimes for the ends of Covetousness, Malice or Ambition,
and unwillingly bring about the ends of Gods Justice, ignorantly fulfilling his
Counsels, while they knowingly break his Laws Consiliis ejus militant etiam qui
ejus Consiliis repugnant. Greg. Mor. l. 6. c. 14.

Agunt quod vult Deus, sed non volunt quod vult Deus. Bern. de great. and lib.
arb.


. God intended to glorify our Martyr by unparalled Sufferings, to punish an
ungrateful Nation, by taking him from them, and setting the worst of Rulers
over them; and such was his wondrous Wisdom, that he brought all this about, by
a Crew of bloody Hypocrites, whose Deeds were odious to God, and no less
Criminal Vide Origin. in Cells. l. 2. p. 72, 73.
, because Heaven (unknown to them) had ordered this to his Glory. This was hard
to be discerned then, while Guilt was triumphant. But we clearly perceive it
now; wherefore with holy David Psalm. CXLV. 17.
we confess that the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works.

We thy sinful people, do here fall down, etc.] Even our Royal Martyr, with
respect only to his private failings, confessed (with the innocent Emperor
Mauricius (...). Histor. Mauric. lib. 8. cap. 11.
) Gods Judgments were right; but how much more ought we (who are really a
sinful people) humbly to own this as long as any of the Regicides live, or any
of those who saw this inhuman Violence, and did not venture their own Lives to
prevent it? God is so very Righteous, that if we saw no reason why he did
permit a thing to be done, we ought to believe there was a just reason, since
he did it, who can do nothing wrong Psalm. CXIX. 175. (...) Marc. Antonin. l.
4.. 10.
. It was very strange indeed that he should suffer his own anointed and
faithful Martyr to fall into the hands of Sons of Belial Viri Filij Pelial,
sunt Filij qui excusserunt jugum Coeli de collo suo. Talm. Tract. Sanhedr.
; Atheistical and Impious Wretches, who had first renounced their Allegiance to
Heaven, and then to their Sovereign; hardened Miscreants who dipped their hands
literally in his Blood, and gloried in it: Some horrid provocation had caused
God to suffer this, and the next Paragraph declares what it was.

We having drawn down the same, etc.] Having removed all blame from God, we do
most justly lay it upon our Forefathers and our selves Dan. IX. 7.
Some of us perhaps were then living, and all that Age had sinned very
grievously, and very long persisted in such Crimes as Peace and Prosperity are
wont to cherish Adeo ex rerum prosperitate luxuria, ex lxuria vero (ut vitia
omnia, ita) impietas adversus Deum nascitur. Lact. inst. l. 2.. 1.
. They were ungrateful and ungovernable under one excellent Queen, and two most
gracious Kings, which provoked God to take away the last and best of them, of
whom this Nation was not worthy. Since therefore this great Judgment declares
our Sins have been very great, it is very fit we should fall down this day
before our Heavenly Father, and to our Confession, add an earnest Petition for
the pardon of all the Sins that then and since we have been guilty of; but of
this and the averting the punishment due to them (which is mentioned in the
last Paragraph) I have spoken before.

And that thou would deliver this Nation, etc.] All Sin makes us liable to
divine Vengeance, but none like that of shedding innocent Blood, which defiles
a whole Land Numb. XXXV. 33.
; and when Repentance obtains its Pardon as to the next World, it is often
sharply punished here: So that after David had repented of the Murder of Uriah,
and God had promised (by Nathan) to forgive him 2 Samuel XII. 13.
. He still prays, Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God Psalm. LI. 14.
: Since the Prophet had told him the sword should never depart from his house:
And the violent Deaths of Ammon, Absalon and Adonijah, were the sad
accomplishment of that heavy Doom. But our Fears and Importunities should be
greater; for behold a greater than Uriah is here; the Blood of this Day was
Sacred and Royal, Innocent and Precious, and the manner of shedding it so
Wilful, Malicious and Cruel, that we cannot too often, nor too earnestly repent
of the Crime, nor deprecate the Punishment thereof. We have no Sacrifice indeed
to expiate our Land as Israel had Deuteronomy. XXI. 13.
, But we come in the Name of Jesus Christ, whose Merits are all-sufficient to
procure Pardon for the greatest Sins, and to remove from a penitent People the
justest and heaviest Judgments; so that we hope having such a Propitiation, and
such an Advocate, we shall prevail. Amen.

The Second Collect.
The Second Evening Collect has Four Parts.

1st, A Description of the Evil then committed, in these particulars, 1. God
permitting. Blessed Lord, just and powerful, who, etc.
2. The King Suffering thy dear Servant, our, etc.
3. The Wicked Acting. to be despightfully used, etc.

2ly, Our solemn Detestation of the Fact. though we cannot reflect upon, etc.
3ly, A grateful remembrance of Gods Goodness, 1. In his Grace given to the
Royal Martyr. Yet do we most gratefully, etc.
2. In his Mercy to his Son. yet did thou in great mercy preserve, etc.
3. In the happy Consequences thereof to us. to restore thy true Religion, and,
etc.

4ly, Our Return of Praise for the same. For which we glorify, etc.

Brief Notes on this Collect.
. 7. BLessed God, Just and Powerful, who did permit, etc.] We are commanded
in every thing to give thanks 1 These. V. 18.
; and a strict Observer may find matter of Praise in the saddest dispensations
of Providence, so that the Lord is to be praised, even for his Justice and
Power Psalm. CL. 1.
, though in themselves terrible Attributes; and David sings of Judgment as well
as Mercy Psalm. CI. 1.
. There is always some Mercy mixed with his Justice; and to make that appear the
brighter, we introduce our Praises, with a prospect of the black side of this
dreadful Tragedy, which was made up of so many horrid Crimes and deplorable
Miseries, that one would scarce imagine such a Lion could yield any sweetness.
But it was just, so far as God permitted it; and his Power also did bring good
out of that, which in it self was so very evil.

Though we cannot reflect upon so foul an Act, etc.] The innocent Jew was
obliged to rent his Clothes, if he heard any blaspheme Gods Name, or was told
of the Murder of his King Isai. XXXVI. 22. 2 Samuel I. 11.
to show his detestation of such impious Crimes. The Ceremony ceases, but the
abhorrence must be declared, or we cannot be innocent; to look on such a Sin
without horror, is a tacit intimation we are, or would have been guilty of it
our selves. Had not Lot been vexed to the Soul, at the Sins of Sodom, in all
probality he had both sinned and suffered with them Magnus bonorum labor est
toleror^ mores contrario, quibus qui non offenditur parum proficit. D. Aug.
. Wherefore the entering this Protestation against the Murder this Day
committed, will go a great way in clearing of our Innocence, and securing us
against suffering for it, if we make it with old Jacobs sincerity Genesis XLIX. 6,
7.
, and heartily detest so foul an Act.

Yet do we most gratefully commemorate, etc.] Our indignation against the
wickedness of Men, must not make us forget the goodness of God, to the Martyr,
to his Son, and to us. First, For that abundance of Grace granted to the
Father, the shining Rays whereof were so conspicuous and so dazzling, as to
convert some of his Persecutors, and to strike others with a horror that never
left them to their Death. His being Betrayed and Sold, Imprisoned and Rudely
used, his Mock-trial and Infamous Sentence he bore with stupendous Meekness,
yet with a great and even Mind. But the greatest glories of the Divine Grace
shone forth at the time of his Death, when he expressed so much Piety to God,
Patience under his Sufferings, Love to all his Subjects, and Charity to his
Enemies (whom he forgave and prayed for as Jesus did) that it was apparent to
all, this was beyond the power of human Nature; nothing but the most exalted
degrees of Grace could reach these Heights. It may be said of him, as it was of
the greatest Ancient Martyrs, that he suffered Death so courageously and so
calmly, as if the Wounds were to be given to another Body, not his own (...)
Nazianz. de Martyr. in Jul.
. For he seemed more composed than any of the Spectators; and while they were
struck with Horror, and drowned in Tears, he looked calmly on the fatal Ax and
Block, forgave his disguised Executioner, and expired at last in silent and
rapturous Devotions.

And albeit thou did suffer them to proceed, etc.] From the Graces shining in
the Father, we pass to a second ground of Praise, viz. the Preservation and
Restoration of the Son. And this we introduce also by all the sad
Circumstances that rendered it next to impossible, and set it almost beyond the
bounds of hope, and probability, to double the Mercy as well as the Gratitude
(...). Eurip.
. Like Ahab they resolved to seize the Vineyard, and when they had by
False-witnesses murdered the Father, and banished the Heir; their Malice
pursued him into Foreign Lands, where wanting both Friends and Money, his
escaping their Snares was all miracle, since they earnestly wished his Head as
well as his Fathers, and would not have scrupled to add a second Sin for the
covering of the first Isai. XXX. 1. Quisquam hominum est quem tu contentum
videris uno Flagitio -- Juvenal.
, because they were not secure in their Usurpation while he lived (as Phocas
considered of old Histor. Maurician. page 405.
). Yet it pleased God not only to preserve this Prince, but also to restore him
to his Throne, without Force or Blood: This certainly was so wonderful, that it
merits hearty Praises. But we have treated of this before.

To restore thy true Religion, and to settle, etc.] With this Gracious King
Charles the Seconds Restoration, the true Reformed Religion of the Church of
England was restored, and so was Peace also, to both which we had long been
strangers. Religion was quite lost in the number and noise of the various
Pretenders to it; and we had so many new Churches in name, that we had not one
Real or True One. And they who first quarrelled with a peaceable King,
afterward contended and strove with one another, till nothing but Confusion
was left. And a Calm after such a Storm both in Church and State, must be in it
self a just cause of joy, and is more particularly so to us, because our holy
Religion and ancient Government were so settled then, that such as have since
attempted to shake them, have only hurt and unsettled themselves (...). Prove.
apud Chry in Genesis hom. 4.
, and we hope no Earthly Foes shall be able to ruin this Monarchy, nor the
Gates of Hell prevail against this Church for ever: We pray no Weapon formed
against them may prosper Isai. LIVE. 17.
; but of this more upon May XXIX.

The Last Evening Collect.
The Last Collect contains, 1st, A fit Preface, instructing us concerning, 1.
Gods wondrous Judgments. Almighty and everlasting God, etc,
2. Man's miserable Frailty. And who by the barbarous murder. etc.

2ly, Suitable Requests that we may, 1. Prepare for our Death. Teach us so to
number, etc.
2. Avoid Pride and Vainglory. And grant that neither the splendour, etc.
3. Imitate the Martyr. but that according to the Example, etc.

3ly, A Proper Conclusion, 1. Petitionary. And all this for thy Son, etc.
2. Laudatory. To whom with thee and, etc.




Brief Notes upon this Collect.
. 8. Almighty and everlasting God, whose, etc.] This Collect being designed to
direct us what good use may be made of this strange Providence, begins with
admiring the wonders of the Divine Judgments, which are compared by David to
the strong and inaccessible Mountains, and to the unfathomable parts of the
Ocean Psalm: XXXVI. ver. 6.
; that is, their Equity is certain and unshaken; but yet the reasons of them
are to us mysterious and incomprehensible: We cannot question but God was
righteous in permitting this, but we dare not dive into his secret Reasons for
it.

And who by the barbarous Murder, as, etc.] While we admire in silence the
Mysteries of Divine Providence, and leave these secret things to him Deuteronomy.
XXIX. 29.
: There is one plain and profitable Lesson to be learned from the barbarous
Murder of so great and good a Prince, viz. Not to trust in Prince, nor in any
other man Psalm. CXLVI. ver. 2.
. The greatest and the best (we see) are not only liable to natural Death, but
are not secure from such Violence as may cut them off before their natural
Time; wherefore if we rely only upon them, they may suddenly and sadly
disappoint us. Solomon well observes, that all things come alike to all Eccles.
IX. 2. Moveret hoc me? Si esset cuique pro meribus sertuna nunquam mala bonos
sequerentur, nunc video, exempto discrimine, and eodem modo, malos bonosque
jactari. Sen. Consol. ad Marc. c. 17.
: If all men had their deserts in this World (as they shall have in the next)
good Men would flourish long in all prosperity, and might be depended on. But
this Earth is not the proper place for Rewards and Punishments: Who would not
have imagined this Nation might have exceeded all other Lands in happiness,
under so Wise, so Righteous, so Just and so Mild a King? but God permitted, and
wicked Men contrived, that his whole Reign was one Scene of Trouble, and he was
at last deplorably taken away in the midst of his days, and then our hopes
vanished. So that we see there is nothing in this World can be depended on.

Teach us also hereby so to number our days, etc.] From the consideration of
the frailty of others, even of the best and greatest, we pass to the
remembrance of our own Mortality. For the Shrubs may justly tremble when the
lofty Cedar falls Quid faciet virgulta deserti cum concutietur cedrus paradisi.
Greg. Moral.
. We are too apt to flatter our selves, that we have many days to live, and
this makes us neglect the necessary preparation for Death, till it be too late;
wherefore we use Moses his Prayer, even That God would teach us a better way of
reckoning Psalm. XC. 12.
, that is, to number not how many days we vainly expect (because that makes us
foolish and presuming) but how few we may possibly have remaining: For this
consideration of the nearness of our Death, and the greatness of our Work, puts
us upon that wise course, to prepare for our last and great Account with all
application of Mind; and then as Death could not surprise us, so Judgment need
not terrify us.

And grant that neither the splendour of any, etc.] A third Lesson we desire to
learn is, that we may be humble throughout the whole course of our Lives. A
great Fortune is apt to dazzle us, and make us think it will never alter Psalm.
XXX. ver. 6.
, and then we grow very high and vain. And if we barely conceit we are (though
but in one instance) better than others Prove. III. 7.
, this puffs us up with Pride, till we forget the frailty and meanness of our
Nature; which, though it be outwardly clothed with never so gay a fortune, or
inwardly adorned with never so excellent Gifts, still we are in our Nature but
like Dust, out of which Man was made Genesis III. 19. Pulvis non modo, eris, sed
es. D. Bern.

Quid superbis pulvis and ciuis, cujus conceptus culpa, nasci miseria, vivere
poena, mori angustia. id. Medit, c. 3.


, or the Ashes he shall be reduced to; that is, we are as soon and as easily
scattered and blown away; and being also very sinful, alas! we may provoke
Heaven to cut us off sooner, than our usual term of Life. Why then should we be
proud of any thing within us or without us, when the Vessel it self is so
brittle which contains it? Why should we be exalted at these things, which we
have so slender hold of? If Greatness or good Qualities had been preservatives
against Death and Violence, our Royal Martyr had been secure, because both of
them met in perfection in him; but he thus falling, methinks we should never
presume.

But that according to the Example of this, etc.] This excellent King may
justly be styled a Blessed Martyr, since his Life was so holy, and his Death
was a Witness and Seal to his Faith; for he chose a cruel Execution, rather
than he would violate his Conscience, by deserting the Church and his Peoples
Rights Non poena, sed causa facit Martyrem. Aug. ep. 61.
. And none of the noble Army of Martyrs have left us a better Example: We may
learn all the former Lessons from him: He long expected and strictly prepared
for Death; he despised all the Glories of this World; and while all but his
blinded Enemies admired him, he had low thoughts of himself. The Crown he alone
desired was that of Immortality, and therefore both in prosperity and adversity
(with St. Paul) he still pressed forward toward this mark Phil. III. 14.
, even that Prize of Eternal Life, which God the Master of the Race has
promised to all that love and fear him. And in order to obtain this Crown, he
exercised all those Graces, practiced all those Virtues that lead to it: His
Faith was active and steady, his Patience singular and extraordinary, his
Humility most conspicuous and truly lovely, his Meekness under the highest
provocations was stupendous and admirable, his Mortification in the plenty and
pleasures of a Court was unparalleld, his Charity in pitying, praying for and
forgiving his Enemies was scarce ever equalled by any mortal Man; finally he
persevered in all these Graces to the end, he was faithful to the Death, and so
no doubt he is now Blessed, and has obtained what he ever wished for, even the
Crown of Eternal Life Rev. II. 10.
. Now if we-desire a part in the Glories he enjoys, we must follow his Steps,
practice these Virtues in which he spent his Life Nescio qua front, cum
omnibus sanctis partem habere in aeterna beatitudine desideramus, quorum
exempla sequi -- non acquiescimus. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 61.
, and hold fast that Faith which he sealed with his Blood at his Death; and
then though we be not called to the Crown of Martyrdom, yet we shall ever live
with him and all the holy Martyrs, and our Lot shall be among the Saints.

And all this for thy Son our Lord Jesus, etc.] These Petitions are all of so
high importance to us, that, though as Sinners, we are unworthy to ask them,
yet since we cannot be sanctified and saved, unless we obtain them; We come to
the Throne of Grace and beg them in his Name, whose Intercession can prevail
for every thing that we can need, or Heaven grant; and if for Jesus sake these
our Prayers be heard, we do promise to make returns of Praise; yea, in hopes of
success through this our most powerful Advocate, we do now actually give to the
Father (to whom our Prayer is directed) to the Son (in whose Name our Prayers
are heard) and to the Holy Ghost (by whose aid we pray fervently) all Honor
and Glory, and resolve to do so for ever and ever. Amen.

The end of the Office for Jan. XXX.
A DISCOURSE ON THE OFFICE FOR THE XXIXth of May. BEING A Thanksgiving for the
Restoration of the King, and Royal Family, An. 1660.
THAT which was premised to the preceding Office, may serve for a Preface to
this, because the Miseries of that Day made way for the Joy of this Solemnity.
The Royal Martyrs Cruel Tragedy, and all the Woeful Consequences of it in Church
and State for twelve tedious years, made this Day to be celebrated with such
extraordinary and universal rejoicing, as if the Nation had got a New Soul, and
every Man had that day been first made Free. To see our Oppressors suddenly
vanish, our Ancient Government, and our Lawful King, our Native Liberties and
Gods True Religion restored without Blood, or the least Opposition, was the
wonder of all the Christian World; and so great a Blessing to this Land, that
so long as the Church of England, and that Royal Family then restored, continue
(which I hope will be till Time be swallowed up by Eternity;) so long this Day
must be registered in our Kalenders, as a day of Praise and Thanksgiving. And
since we and the Ages after us, have and will receive the benefit of the
establishments then made, we and our Posterity are bound to keep up the
Memorial of this great Mercy.

The Sentences and the Hymn instead of the Venite.
. 1. THis Office is introduced with Proper Sentences: The First, Dan. IX. 9,
10. being Daniels Confession of his Peoples Transgression, and of Gods Mercy;
and this is to be used also upon Jan. XXX. and is explained in the Companion to
the Temple, Part I. The second Sentence, Lament. III. 22. ascribes our
preservation from utter Ruin, solely and entirely to the Divine Mercy, and
Never-failing Compassion.

The Hymn instead of the Venite has seven Particulars, 1st, A Resolution to
praise God for ever. Ps. LXXXIX. 1. 2ly, The Grounds of it. 1. For the
greatness of his Works. Psalm. CXI. 4. and CVI. 2. and CXI. 2.
2. The Equity of his Providence. Psalm. CXLVII. 6. and CIII. 6.
3. The Wonders of his Mercy. Psalm. CIII. 9, 10, 11, 13.

3ly, A Commemoration of 1. Our great Troubles. Psalm. LXVI. 9.11. and LXXI. 18.
2. Our happy Deliverance out of them. Psalm. CXXXVI. 23, 24. Psalm LXXXV. 1. and
LIX. 10.
3. Our Enemies just fall. Psalm. XX. 8. and XXXVI. 12.

4ly, A Prophecy of future Success. Psalm. CXV. 12, 13.
5ly, A Prayer, 1. For our own Gratitude. Psalm. CVII. 21.22.
2. For our Childrens remembering it after us. Psalm. LXXVIII. 4, 6, 9.

6ly, An Exhortation to all to praise God. Psalm. LXVIII. 26, 19.
7ly, A Pious Wish, that 1. Sinners may be punished. Psalm. VII. 9.
2. Good Men may rejoice. Psalm. XL. 19.




Brief Notes on this Hymn.
Psalm. LXXXIX. 1. THE restoring our Monarchy and reestablishing our Church,
were such a demonstration of Gods loving kindness to us, and of the certain
Truth of all those Promises which we relied on in our Trouble, That his
Goodness and Truth ought both to be the constant Subjects of the Praises of
this Age, and of the next Generation also.

Psalm. CXI. 4. It Is pity any of his Works should be forgotten: But there was so
much Free Grace and Mercy in his delivering us from our Oppressors, and such
Miracles of Wisdom and Power in restoring our ancient Government and Religion,
that we should be hateful to God and Man, and the most ungrateful Wretches in
the World Omnes enim immemorem beneficij oderunt. Cicer. de Offic. lib. 2.
if we do not keep a Memorial of this for ever.

Psalm. CVI. 2. It Is true, this and the rest of Gods Noble Acts, are such
complications of Infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness, and all of them so
perfectly excellent, that no man can sufficiently describe them, nor express
all the Praises due to their Divine Author Ecclus XLIII. 30. (...). Hermes
Egypt
. So that being overwhelmed with Admiration at their astonishing Glories, we
must at first wonder in silence, and Adore.

Psalm. CXI. 2. However good Men delight in nothing more than in studying and
meditating upon the Mercy which Contrives, the Wisdom which Conducts, and the
Power which Accomplishes these stupendous Works; it is pleasant above all
things to them to search into the Causes and happy Effects of them Non patior
me quicquam nescire de eo quem amem. Plin. Epist.
; they could with great satisfaction (if it were possible) spend their whole
time in these Contemplations.

Psalm. CXLVII. 6. If we turn our thoughts from hence to the most righteous
administrations of his Providence, thence will arise new matter for our
Praises. How often does he pity the Humble and Meek, who though extremely
injured, are perhaps not able, however not willing to avenge themselves? And
does he not at the same time cast down their impious and proud Oppressors from
their usurped Power and Authority?

Psalm. CIII. 6. They may be so strong and so secured, that Men dare not accuse,
or cannot punish them; but the Lord the supreme Judge of all, will at last take
the innocent Man's case into his hand, and will not only pass a righteous
Sentence, but also execute it effectually, by showing Mercy to the Oppressed,
and sending his Judgments on the Oppressors.

Ver. 9. As to his own Children, though they often offend him, and sometimes go
on a long time in their folly, yet such is his gracious Nature, that he bears
with them a great while before his anger begin; and then also it is soon over
Irasci quidem rebus indignus, sed flecti cito. Aurel. Victor. de Theodos.
, he does not keep it for ever.

Ver. 10. When our Sins compel him to correct us for the vindication of his
Laws, he punishes us less than our iniquities deserve; the Correction begins
not so soon, rises not so high, nor endures so long, as it justly might.

Ver. 11. His Mercy is as much higher and greater than ours, as his Glorious
Habitation of Heaven is higher and larger than this Earth on which we dwell;
this is but a small point compared to that vast Circumference; yet such are all
human Compassions in comparison of his infinite Pity toward us.

Ver. 13. We may help our weak Apprehensions by likening his Affection and
Kindness to those that fear him, when they are in distress; to the tender pity
that a loving Parent has to his dearest Child, when it is in extreme Torment:
But this will fall far short of Gods Infinite Compassion.

Psalm. LXVI. 9, 11. Yet as the kindest Father is sometimes forced to correct
his beloved, but offending Child: so our Sins and Corruptions do often compel
our Heavenly Father to afflict us: He is necessitated to put us into the Fire
of Calamity, and try us as Silver is tried Omnia adversa caercita^iones putat,
Sen. de Prove. cap. 2.
; but his design is not to consume, but purify us; and therefore if we bear
them patiently, they ever end well. Thus in our Case, while our Oppressors had
Power, they used us with as much contempt, as if they had trampled us under
their Horses Feet; we escaped as narrowly, as if we had been to run through a
raging Fire 1 Cor. III. 15.
, or wade over a deep Water. But the happy Restoration brought us into a
condition of Safety, Peace and Plenty again.

Psalm. LXXI. 18. Lord! how many Miseries did then beset us? Our Religion, our
Liberty, our Estates and Lives were all at Stake; yea, we and our Hopes also
seemed to be buried in the Earth: Yet according to thy wonted Compassion, thou
did turn and refresh us with an unexpected Deliverance. So that our Church,
and Monarchy, with all the true Friends of both, seemed to have a new
Resurrection from that Grave, in which our Foes hoped they would have slept for
ever.

Psalm. CXXXVI. 23, 24. Our Estate before was very low; Plundering and
Sequestration, Fines and Imprisonment, Banishment and the Sword, had made our
Condition seem helpless, and our Ruin unavoidable. But when thou, O Lord, did
undertake our Rescue, moved by thy never-failing Pity, we were suddenly and
strangely set free. Therefore we will sing that triumphant Psalm Solet iste
Psalmus rebus laetis au^iberi. G^ot. in Psalm. 136.
which celebrates the eternal duration of thy Mercy, and was wont to be used on
the most joyful occasions.

Psalm. LXXXV. 1. and LIX. 10. Never was so Blessed a Change, in so short a
space, brought about in any Land; and Heaven was eminently gracious to ours, in
so wonderfully putting an end to our miserable Bondage. We had a most
convincing Evidence of Gods abundant Goodness, in his letting our Eyes see,
what our Hearts had so long wished, even the Cessation of that Tyranny under
which we had groaned.

Psalm. XX. 18. and XXXVI. 12. By thy Providence we saw them fall from their
usurped Authority, and our selves raised up to our ancient Freedom under our
Rightful Prince. They were exalted by Injustice, and we had been depressed by
Violence; therefore their Ruin is most just, and we hope their Recovery
impossible, so long as thou, O Righteous Lord, do govern the World.

Psalm. CXV. 12, 13. We thought our Misery very tedious, and our Burden very
heavy, but found at last that God had us in his Mind all those sad times;
therefore why should we not hope he will go on to Bless both his People and his
Priests after this Deliverance? We cannot doubt the continuance of his Favor,
if we continue to fear him in our Prosperity as we did in our Adversity; if our
better Fortune make us not worse men Raro simul hominibus bonam fortunam
bonamque mentem dari. Asdrubal. ap. Live.
, our Happiness shall be as durable as it is universal.

Psalm. CVII. 21, 22. Considering then the greatness of our Obligations, God
grant we may none of us prove ungrateful for this mighty Instance of his
Goodness. Oh that the whole Nation may publish the Wonders he has done for
them, and on this solemn Day offer up their Sacrifices of hearty Praise; may it
be their Delight, as it is their Duty, to spread abroad the Glory of his Works.

Psalm. LXXVIII. 4 6, 9. May it be our endeavor to make the Memory of this
Deliverance to endure longer than our Lives, by acquainting our Children what
Honor God acquired by his Justice on our Foes, and his Mercy on us and our
injured Prince, on this Occasion. This will eternize his Praise, and bring the
Children yet unborn, to see the grounds of it as well as we, and may probably
prevent their engaging in so Unnatural a War against so Gracious a King, when
they see how severely it was punished in the Ages before them.

Psalm. LXVIII. 26, 19. Let the Priests excite the People, and let them stir up
one another this Day to go to the Public Assembly, and there to rejoice and
give Thanks, not only outwardly and with their Lips, but inwardly and sincerely
from the bottom of the Heart. Nor is one Day sufficient for this Duty, the Lord
deserves daily Praises, for there is not a day when we are in Trouble, that he
does not help us, not an hour wherein he does not pour his Benefits on us so
liberally, as to load us with his kindness Who daily loadeth us with Benefits
New Translation, ver. 19.
.

Psalm. VII. 9. and XL. 19. And that our Joy and Praises may receive no check,
let us pray, that wicked Men may never again go on so prosperously in their
Sin, as they did here in those Times; and that He who did assert our righteous
Cause, will secure it. So shall thy true Worshippers, O God, (who daily call on
thee and Bless thy Name) continually rejoice under thy Constant Protection. And
all that delight in observing how thou savest thy own People, by this means,
will have fresh Testimonies of thy gracious Providence, and frequent Occasions
to say, The Lord be praised.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Proper Psalms CXXIV, CXXVI, CXXIX, and CXVIII.
. 2. THE first of these Psalms, viz. CXXIV, has been explained in the Office
for November. 5.. 4. And our Church may properly repeat it again this Day; for
the Papists and Sectaries, though (like Sampson's Foxes) they look contrary
ways, do both join in supporting Fire to destroy us Licet diversa tractantes --
ad unius veritatis expugnationem conspirant. Tert. de praescript. adhaeret.
cap. 41.
; their end is the same, though their Methods have been different.

The next Psalm is the CXXVIth.

The CXXIV Psalm has Four Parts.

1st, The consequence of Isreal's Deliverance, which was, 1. As to them, 1. Very
surprising. Ver. I. 2. Very joyful. Ver. II.
2. As to others very remarkable. Ver. III.
2ly, An acknowledgment of what God had then done. Ver. IV. 3ly, A Prayer that
he would perfect this Work. Ver. V. 4ly, A General Observation, that Adversity
does commonly precede the Prosperity of the Pious. Ver. VI, VII.
Brief Notes on the CXXVI Psalm.
Psalm. CXXVI. 1. WHen the Cities of Judah had been destroyed, their Temple
burn, true Religion banished, and the Professors of it had long been made
Slaves and Captives; God was pleased so suddenly to turn their Affairs, and
restore their Government, Liberties and Religion, that those Pious, but long
oppressed Jews, who lived to see that joyful Day, could scarce be persuaded the
thing was real; the Happiness was too big for their Faith Gaudium tam
insperatum, ut vix credibilo erat. Ab. Ezr. in loc.
. And like the conquered Corinthians, who expected nothing less than Slavery,
(hearing the Roman Praetor proclaim their Freedom) they were apt to fancy it
was only some pleasant Dream, or waking Delusion of their Imagination -- illi
vero mirabundi somni speciem arbitrabantur. Livius.
, and feared their Senses did deceive them, such was the surprise of their Joy
and Wonder. Now this was also our Case at the Restoration.

Ver. II. But so soon as they and we recovered our Selves, and found our
Deliverance was real, the restoring of our Religion and Liberties was
celebrated with all imaginable demonstrations of Joy; our Looks were sprightly
and cheerful, and we universally expressed our inward satisfaction, by just and
loud Praises to our Deliverer.

Ver. III. Whose kindness to us in this auspicious Change was so remarkable,
that all our Neighbor Nations took notice how suddenly and wonderfully our God
had changed the Face of our Affairs; so that from Exiles and Bondmen, we were
become perfectly Free.

Ver. IV. But while they only wondered at this, it becomes us to own that it was
the hand of God alone that brought it about for our good, and to rejoice
exceedingly for the mighty Favors we have already received, so far beyond our
Deserts.

Ver. V. And because there still remains some bitter Roots of those old
seditious Principles and factious Opinions then sowed among us, We will pray,
that this Example may root them out, and make us all truly Loyal to our King,
and unanimously Conformable to the Church established. O that the evil success
of open Rebellion, and endless Schisms, might bring in a Flood of Converts,
from among our deceived Brethren; this would make both Church and State quiet
and fruitful, and like Egypt (when the Sun has melted the Snow and Ice in the
Head of Nilus Nilus erat eo tempore omnium Fluviorum maxim Australis.
, and made it overflow its Banks) to abound in all Plenty. This would be indeed
a complete turning our Captivity, a perfect removal of all its ill Effects.

Ver. VI. Then we should be like the Egyptian Husbandmen, who sow on a wet and
slimy Soil, but reap so plentiful a Crop as makes them wondrous glad. We
bewailed our sufferings and Sins for many Years, and with Tears lamented the
Hypocrisy of some, and the Delusion of others of our Adversaries; but if God
would open their Eyes and turn their Hearts, our former Trouble would make our
Joy for their Conversion Quam utile est ad usum secundorum per adversa venisse.
Plin. Paneg. p. 36.
more sweet and satisfactory.

Ver. VII. But whatever effect it have on others we must own that we are
abundantly rewardded for all our Penitence and Sorrow, for our Prayers and
Tears in those suffering Times: And as the Countryman never has a better
Harvest than when he bears his good Seed to the Field in a showry day, and
Heaven seems to steep it in Tears: So Gods People never lose by their Patience
and Piety under his afflicting Hand Negotiatio est aliquid amittere, ut majora
lucrerit. Tert. adv. Marc.
, for he in a short time takes off their Burden, and commonly restores them to
a far better Condition than they were in before. Thus he dealt with us,
wherefore we may justly sing, Glory be to the Father, etc.

. 3. Psalm CXXIX consists of Three Particulars, 1st, Our Enemies endeavors for
our ruin. 1. Early begun. Ver. I. 2. Often repeated. Ver. II. 3. Very near
successful. Ver. III.
2ly, The Means of our Deliverance by Gods help. Ver. IV. 3ly, A Prayer against
them, and their success in Evil. Ver. V, VI, VII.


Brief Notes on the CXXIXth Psalm.
Psalm. CXXIX.I. THis Church may truly say of the Sectaries (as David said of
his Enemies) that many a time since its Reformation and first Establishment,
they have been opposing its Doctrine, Discipline and Government, in contempt of
both Law and Authority.

Ver. II. Many methods have they used to disturb and grieve our Governors, both
Civil and Ecclesiastical, by false Representations abroad, and seditious
Practices at home; by virulent Pamphlets and invective Sermons; yea, by
Petitions, Remonstrances and Clamours; but none of these prevailed, till they
had put off their Mask, and excited the People to an Offensive War against
their Gracious Sovereign.

Ver. III. Our Sins indeed made them successful in this for some time, and then
they who complained so much of Persecution, did most cruelly persecute; they
who pretended to stand only for Liberty, denied it to all good Men Ut imperium
evertant, libertatem pratendunt; si perverterent, ipsam aggrederentur. Tacit.
; and this was not all, for they inflicted all sorts of Punishments on such as
they falsely called Delinquents, plowing some of their Fellow Subjects Backs
with Scourges like long Furrows, and depriving others of their Liberty and
Estates, so that they bore marks of their Cruelty for a long time after.

Ver. IV. They had employed Informers, and hoped to ensnare all that were firm
to the Crown or the Church; but their Methods were so unjust, and their Designs
so cruel, that the Righteous Judge of the World in a little time cut their
Snares to pieces, and delivered these Nations from their Power and Malice.

Ver. V. And we will pray to the same God, who has set up the True Religion
and Regal Government in our Sion, that such as are implacable Enemies to both,
and seek to subvert either of them, may have all their Plots confounded, and
their Forces (if they proceed that way) always vanquished, as these Men's
Policies and Power were.

Ver. VI. We wish they and their Adherents may be like the Grain scattered in
stony places Mat. XIII. 5, 6.
, or those Tufts of Grass which do suddenly grow on the Housetop Quasi
solstitialis herba paulisper fui, repent exortus sum, repentino occidi. Plaut.
Pscud. Act. I. Scen. 1.
, which indeed look fresh and fair for a while, but wanting Root and Moisture
never come to perfection, withering away in as little time as they sprang up in.

Ver. VII, VIII. These never come to a regular Mowing, nor to a complete
Harvest; none takes any pains about them, nor is there occasion to say those
Prayers, which are usually made when Men are gathering in good Corn Ruth II. 4.
, because this Kind is never like to turn to any Profit. So we believe it will,
and wish it may happen to this sort of Men; that they may live Despised, Wither
of themselves, and Fall unpitied, so that not One may put up any Prayer on
their behalf, because they see they are Blasted by Gods Judgment on them for
their Impiety. On the contrary, so many innocent Persons do escape by their
perishing, that all good Men have reason to sing Prove. XI. 10.
, Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


. 4. THis CXVIII. Psalm was composed originally for David's Coronation, after
God had brought him from his Exile through many Troubles to sit on his Throne
in Peace; it is set last, because it peculiarly relates to the last Scene of
our Revolution, and may with little variation be applied to the Restoring and
Crowning of our late King Charles II.

Psalm. CXVIII. is David's Coronation Hymn, in Six Parts.

1st, An Exhortation to all sorts of Men to praise God, 1. In General. Ver. I.
2. In particular, Israel. Ver. II. The Priests. Ver. III. The Proselytes. Ver.
IV.

2ly, The Grounds of it urged by David, from 1. Gods hearing his Prayers. Ver.
V. 2. His Espousing his Interest. Ver. VI, VII. 3. The Benefit of Relying on
him. Ver. VIII, IX. 4. The Dangers he had escaped thereby. Ver. X, XI, XII,
XIII.
3ly, Comfortatable Reflections upon. 1. His present Happiness in Gods help.
Ver. XIV, XV, XVI. 2. His Hope it would continue. Ver. XVII. 3. His past
Sufferings. Ver. XVIII.
4ly, Resolutions to return God public Praises. Ver. XIX, XX, XXI. 5ly, His
peculiar Reasons for it. 1. Men's rejecting him. Ver. XXII. 2. Gods choosing
him. Ver. XXIII, XXIV.
6ly, Acts of Devotion on this Occasion. 1. Fervent Prayer. Ver. XXV. 2. Joyful
Gratulation. Ver. XXVI. 3. Sacrifices of Righteousness. Ve. XXVII. 4. Hearty
and repeated praises. V. XXVIII, XXIX.

Brief Notes on Psalm CXVIII.
Psalm. CXVIII. Ver. I, II, III, IV. O That all Men would give hearty Thanks
unto the Lord, as well for the greatness, as the duration of his Mercy, which
was so visible in his long preserving, and at last restoring our David. But the
People of this Land, the Priests of this Church, and all pious Strangers that
have found refuge here Proselytae dicuntur, (...). Act. X. 2. and 22. and XIII.
16.
, these are more particularly obliged to own, that the Mercy of our God (which
brought this about) is Infinite and Everlasting.

Ver. V, VI, VII. The restored King had also peculiar reason to own this; for
God mercifully heard his Prayers in his Banishment, and brought him home in
Peace. There were strong confederacies made to exclude him for ever, but his
Cause was good; and since God took his part Romans VIII. 31. Quis est qui vincit
omnipotentem? Aug. V. Ap. Ser. 16.
he needed not to have feared his own final Advancement, nor his Enemies being
pulled down at last.

Ver. VIII, IX. He might have expected that some of his own Loyal Subjects
should have attempted to shake off their heavy Yoke, or that some Foreign
Princes, related to him, should have assisted him in the recovery of his Right.
But alas! they all failed him, and then God alone restored him, and taught him
that it was better to trust in the Lord, than in any Man, or in the greatest
Princes; for he does more than we can expect, or he directly promises; but they
commonly do less.

Ver. X, XI, XII, XIII. Considering the Number and Malice of his Foes, and with
what Heat and Fury they set upon him in Battle, like a swarm of enraged Bees --
ira modum supra est laesaeque venenum

Morsibus inspirant and spicula caeca relinquunt. Virg. Georg. l. 4.


; and how violently afterward they sought his Ruin, it was a mighty wonder how
he could escape them. But he still trusted in Gods help, when all human aid
failed him, and he did miraculously preserve him, till their vehement Fury was
extinguished, like a sudden blaze of Fire among dry Thorns.

Ver. XIV, XV, XVI. No Prince in the World could upon more just grounds than he
declare, the Lord to be his Defense; none had more reason to praise him, or own
him for his Deliverer. Who could have thought the Voice of Joy and Praise
should ever more be heard in that oppressed, scattered Royal Family? This was
so unexpected and surprising an event, that nothing but the right hand of God
(which has the pre-eminence above all for bringing mighty things to pass)
could have effected it.

Ver. XVII.XVIII. When his Danger was greatest, and his Case at the lowest ebb,
he still hoped he should weather out the Storm, and Live; not only to see
better Times, but to declare his Goodness, who then indeed corrected him, for
his amendment, as a loving Father Non erudit Pater nisi quem amat. Hieron. ad
Celant. ep. 33.
, but never intended he should be destroyed; his Foes had no Commission to
touch his Life, though they seized upon all that was his besides.

Ver. XIX, XX, XXI. Wherefore as David, after his troubles were over, being
advanced to the Throne, on his Coronation Day, went up to Mount Sion, and made
them open those Gates which just Men frequented, for him to go into Gods House
and Praise the Lord. So did our restored King, go to the Church and offer up
his Praises unto God who had heard his Prayers, saved him from his Enemies, and
brought him in Peace to Reign over his own People.

Ver. XXII, XXIII, XXIV. And truly it was very strange that this Prince, which
our Great Men had before Despised, Excluded and Banished, as unworthy and unfit
to Govern, should come to the Crown with such general Acclamations, and
extraordinary expressions of an Universal Joy Putrum despexerunt aedificatores
qui fuit inter Filios Jesse, at meruit constitui Rex. Chald. Parap.
. No man could have devised or brought about so wondrous a Change; it was the
Lords doing, and our admiration: Oh what a joyful Day did God make that to us!
after so many years of Tyranny and Anarchy, Faction and Impiety, Misery and
Confusion, to see our rightful King, the Defender of the True Faith happily
restored? So great was that Mercy, that it is appointed to be a Festival Day in
all succeeding Generations.

Ver. XXV, XXVI. And it ought now (as it was then) principally to be celebrated
with Religious Exercises; the King, People and Priests mutually joined in
Prayers, Hymns and Praises. The King Prayed, and said, O Lord, now thou have
set me over thy People, help me to rule them justly. The People answered, O
Lord, send us Pease and Prosperity under so good a Prince. The Priests welcomed
Gods Anointed to his House, and said, Blessed and happy be our King that
professes the True Religion, and comes to us by so special a Providence. The
King replied, He wished, and would endeavor the Church should flourish, whose
Prayers, he believed, would bring a Blessing on Him and his People.

Ver. XXVII, XXVIII, XXIX. Then the Priests again broke forth into Praises, and
said, God has restored us the Light of his Gospel, and brought us out of our
late Miserable Darkness; let us offer a multitude of Oblations of Praise on his
Altars. And while the Sacrifices were offering, the King said, Thou art my God,
who have set me up, to thee therefore and to thy Name let all the Praise and
Thanks be given. Finally, all of them, King, Priests and People exhorted one
another to Bless the Lord, as well for the Greatness, as for the Continuance of
his Mercy. Of which, since we have many assurances also in our Times, let us
join with them, and say, Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.


The Lessons 1st, 2 Samuel XIX. from Ver. 9. or Numb. XVI. 2d, The Epistle of St.
Jude.

. 5. GReat care has been showed in the choice of proper Lessons for this
Occasion.

The First Lesson being part of 2 Samuel XIX. is almost an exact Parallel to our
Case, and describes how after Absoloms Rebellion (happily ended by his death)
the People universally resolved to bring back their Lawful King David, and sent
an honorable Message to him in his Exile, to invite him back; and he returned
not only without any Opposition, but by general Consent, and to the great
satisfaction of all his Subjects, his Enemies begging his Pardon, and his Loyal
People only contending which part of them should show themselves most forward
in bringing their beloved Prince back, or express the most Joy at his Return.

But if any new Practices, make it necessary to reflect upon that Faction and
Sedition which began the Rebellion, the XVIth of Numbers is aded; where the
Example of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, does very clearly set out the greatness of
their Sin, and the severity of their Punishment, who oppose righteous and
religious Governors.

The Second Lesson being the Epistle of St. Jude, foretells the coming of false
Teachers in the last days, and describes their Hypocrisy in pretending to
Piety, while their Lives are notoriously Evil; remarking particularly their
railing at those in Authority, and prophesying falsely for Reward: But withal
containing a Prophecy of their Fall; and as the Character was exactly answered
by some in those sad Times, so the Prophecy was soon after fulfilled in their
Ruin, to warn all others not to be deceived by such Pretenders.

The Collects.
. 6. THe first of these, is the very Form of Thanksgiving, for restoring
public Peace at home, which is fully explained before Companion to the Temple,
Part II.. 16. p. 408.
. And if we do but apply that (which is there suited to all Occasions) to this
most eminent restoring of Public Peace: we cannot but make this Prayer with
Understanding. So that I shall only note, that the Composers of these Offices,
did not affect needless Novelties; but when the Old Liturgy had any Form
suitable to a new Occasion, they chose to retain it, being ready to declare as
David did of Goliahs Sword 1 Samuel XXI. 9.
, That there was none like it.

The Second Collect has Three Parts.

1st, A Description of our Deliverance, setting out 1. The Author of it. O Lord
God of our Salvation, etc.
2. The Evils from which we were delivered. did deliver us out of our
miserable, etc.
3. The Means by which. by restoring to us, and to his, etc.
4. The Blessed Effects of it. thereby restoring also, etc.

2ly, The Return we make for it, by 1. Thankful Acknowledgments. we are here
before thee with all, etc.
2. Sacrifices of Praise. and to offer up our Sacrifice, etc.
3. Promises. 1. Of New Obedience to God. Humbly beseeching thee to accept, etc.
2. Duty and Loyalty to the King. And promising in thee and for thee, etc.


3ly, A Prayer for the Royal Family, that they may be 1. Prosperous here. Whom
we beseech thee to bless, etc.
2. Eternally happy hereafter. and to crown them with immortality, etc.


A Practical Discourse on this Collect.
. 7. O Lord God of our Salvation, who have been, etc.] After so great and happy
a Change, our first Duty is to look up to the Glorious Author of it, even to
the Lord, who shows himself to be our God, not only by preparing Eternal
Salvation for us in the next World, but by saving us out of many Troubles in
this; for which Cause David seems much delighted in giving him often the Title
of the God of our Salvation Psalm. LXV. 5. and LXXIX. 9. and LXXXVIII. 1.
. And as no Land ever had a more illustrious Testimony of Gods gracious Favor
than we Psalm. LXXXV. 1.
: So no Nation has more reason to use this Title than ours: Let us consider
what miserable Confusions we were reduced to both in Church and State, when our
Ancient Governments in both were subverted. We had undergon variety of Changes,
and tried every way but the right to settle us again, Lords and Commons,
Commons alone, Keepers of our Liberties, a Lord General, a Protector, a
Committee of Safety, and a Supreme Military Government, which ended in plain
Anarchy. In the Church variety of Sects and Factions, but nothing established;
the Order of the Clergy laid in Common, the Articles of Faith, Rites of
Worship, and Rules of Discipline utterly broken to pieces, and all Religion
left Arbitrary to every puisny Party, yea to every whimsical Man, till there
was not so much as the Face of Unity or Order left among us. Now to rescue us
out of this Chaos, and restore both Church and State of a sudden to their
pristine Splendour, was really a most miraculous Providence.

By restoring to us, and to his own just and undoubted, etc.] From the
consideration of the Author of our Deliverance, and the Evils we were freed
from, we regularly pass to observe the means by which this was effected, which
was the restoring our late gracious King, Charles II. to his People, and to his
rightful Throne: They had Murdered his Father upon false Pretenses, but his Son
and undoubted Heir had done nothing that seemed to forfeit his Title; nothing
but open Violence and unjust Force excluded him Vis colitur jurisque locum sibi
vendicat ensis. Sil. Ital. de Bell. Punic. l. 2.
: Ambition and Covetousness, backed with usurped Power, did first banish him,
and then kept him out of possession, and persecuted him who had done them no
injury, nor had he any Crime, but his undoubted Right. Which at last of it self
overcame the Hearts of the whole Nation; so that without any opposition, his
Enemies fell before him, and he was restored again, to the joy of the whole
Nation, who had been so long oppressed by the very Dregs of their own
Fellow Subjects, that they expressed an universal satisfaction, to see their
own King, the Defender of the True Faith, once more set over Gods Inheritance.

Restoring also unto us the public and free profession, etc.] As much as
Eternity exceeds Time, and the Soul excels the Body; so much (if possible)
should our Joy for Spiritual Good Things surpass that which respects our
Temporal Advantages; and doubtless that was the greatest Cause of all Pious
Men's rejoicing at the Restoration; that together with the rightful King, the
public and free Profession of the right Religion was also restored. 'Twas
Julian's policy to permit the Jews, and all sorts of Heretics to profess their
several Religions, and prohibit only the Orthodox Christians; and our
Oppressors imitated him, for they Tolerated the vilest Sects, the falsest
Opinions, and the absurdest ways of Worship; nothing was Penal, nothing Forbid
and Persecuted, but the old established Religion of this Church: So that, for
many years, some thousands of the best Christians could not join in the Public
Worship of God, nor had they any regular Offices or Sacraments, but what they
could enjoy in private, from Persons silenced and deprived of all means of
subsistence. Now it was so happy and so comfortable a Change to these, to have
the true Articles of Faith, and Ancient ways of Worship restored, with the
Bishops, the Liturgy, and the holy Sacraments, that nothing was so pleasing to
their Souls as this. The end for which Kings are advanced is, to be Ministers
of God to their People for good Romans XIII. 4.
. Now the chiefest good that Christian People can have from a Prince is, his
protecting the True Religion, his being a Nursing Father to the Church Isai.
XLIX. 23.
, and Custos utriusque Tabulae, a Keeper of both Tables, that is, not only to
see that every Man does right to his Neighbor, as the Second Table directs,
but that the True God alone is Owned, Worshipped Rightly, Reverenced and served
by all, as the First Table requires. A just King is a great Blessing, but if he
profess and defend the True Religion also, that makes him a double Blessing;
for then he fully answers the end of his Advancement to God, and comes up to
whatever good Subjects can desire. Now this being our Case at the Restoration,
there was great reason for pious Men to express an extraordinary satisfaction;
yea, those who had no concern for Religion (or however for that established)
had temporal grounds to rejoice, because the State as well as the Church was
restored to its former Peace and Prosperity: Every private Man regained his
just Rights; the Prince was content to govern by Law, and the Subjects were
protected from Injuries at home and abroad; Trade flourished, Plenty every
where abounded, and there was a happy Peace given us to improve and enjoy all
these Blessings Dulce nomen est Pacis, res vero ipsa jucunda tum salutaris.
Cicer. Philip. 2.
. Now all this, after a long War and all the Miseries attending it, after
Arbitrary and Illegal, Uncertain and Violent Methods of Government; and
finally, after such cruel Invasions of Liberty and Property, as we had long
smarted under; must be very sweet and very grateful to all considering Men,

We are here now before thee with all due thankfulness, etc.] Upon this
prospect of our Deliverance, and all its blessed effects, we must ask David's
Question, What shall we return unto the Lord Psalm. CXVI. 11.
? And the Collect leads us to a threefold Return, which all of us ought to make
for so general a Blessing. First to make a public acknowledgment before
Almighty God of his unspeakble Goodness herein; and if we forget or neglect
this, our Ingratitude may provoke him once more to throw us into the like sad
Confusions (l); Quae contulit gratis, tollit ingratis. Aughom. 14.
and when ever we fall into them, to refuse us a second Rescue. And this reason
affects us in this Generation, and will be of force to make this Day observed
as long as this Church and the Monarchy stand. Secondly, We are to offer up the
Praises of our Lips unto him in Hymns and Psalms, that we may declare the glory
of his great Name, and let all men see his Mercy endures for ever; he is the
same gracious God, who in all Ages did deliver and preserve his Church and
People; and our joyful praising him for this new instance of his Favor, will
invite others to love and trust in him; yea, it will engage many to join with
us in admiring and glorifying his holy Name: But, Thirdly, There is another
offering required, viz. the sincere oblation of our selves to the service of
our Deliverer Romans XII. 1. Scipsum offerre Deo proprie Christianorum est.
Hioron. ep. 28.
. Some think the Original of Servants among Men, who were at first all born and
equally free, was that some forfeited their Lives, and lost their Liberty by
being taken captive in War. Now he that saved them, or bought them by paying
the Price of their Ransom, had a just Title to the service of their whole Lives
Servi dicti sunt -- quod imperatores captivos vendere and per hoc servare, nec
occidere solent. F. l. 1. Tit. 5. de statu hominum. L. 4.
. Now if we apply this to God, he did thus save and deliver us in these
Nations, and we can no other way own our Lives and Liberties to be his Gifts,
but by entirely giving up our selves to do his holy Will all the days of our
Lives: And though, considering our vileness, and the imperfect Services which
we do him, when we do our best, this is but a mean and unworthy Offering,
tendered by unprofitable Servants Luke XVII. 10. At nos non omnia servamus,
multorum rei sumus, ideo non inutiles tantum, sed minus quam inutiles. Cajet.
in loc.
: Yet St. Paul encourages us to it, by assuring us, if it be unfeigned, it is
an acceptable service to God, he will be pleased, yea delighted with it.

Vowing all holy Obedience in thought, word and work, etc.] That which was
Metaphorically expressed in the last Paragraph, is put into plain words in
this: For Obedience is the Characteristick of a Servant, who is not his own
Romans VI. 16. (...). Philo.
; his Masters Will, and not his must be done; he must go and come, work or rest
by another Order Mat. VIII. 9.
; if it be a mortal Master, our Deeds must be whatever he enjoins, and our
Words must be submissive, though he command us in harsh language, or chide us
wrongfully Titus II. 9. (...). Plato in Crit. p. 61.
. It Is true, there our thoughts are free, because no Man can know them; but
since we choose God for our Master, who sees our very Hearts; we must vow all
holy Obedience to him in thought also. And since we make this Vow in a solemn
Prayer, and upon a just conviction that we promise nothing but what is Gods
right and due, and that to which we were engaged before in our Baptism; we must
not make it a Sacrifice of Fools Eccles. V. 3, 4.
, who promise and take no care to perform. But seriously set our selves to
consider our great Obligations to pay this Holy Obedience, and our great
advantage by making good this Vow, and then we shall endeavor to conform our
Thoughts, Words and Works entirely to his holy Laws, which will secure his
Favor and Protection here, and his Endless Rewards prepared for his Faithful
Servants hereafter. Oh how happy had it been if those of the Loyal Party had
considered this at the Restoration, then they had been all as good Christians
as they were good Subjects; had they made this use of their so much Desired and
Blessed a Change, it had been a double, yea, an infinite Blessing to them, and
made their Lives as Holy as their Condition was Happy. But alas! as if their
Loyalty to the King had freed them from the fear of God 1 Pet. II. 17.
, and dispensed with their Obedience to the King of Kings, who delivered both
them and their beloved Master; too many of them fell into all those excesses of
Vice, which Prosperity betrays weak Minds into, and thereby occasioned many
Calamities to fall on these Nations in the Reign of that gentle Prince; yea,
probably by this they provoked Heaven, to take him so soon away from us

And promising in thee, and sor thee, all Loyal, etc.] If we are sincerely Gods
Servants, one of his Commands is, to be subject to the higher Powers for the
Lords sake. And this Precept is rightly singled out here, because in that great
Rebellion, so many of those who styled themselves Gods peculiar Children and
Servants, had broken this holy Law, by raising an offensive War against their
own Sovereign, Murdering him, and Excluding his unquestionable Heir. After
which high violation of the Divine Laws, in vain were all their Hypocritical
Pretenses, in calling God, Lord, Lord Luke VI. 46.
! The Cheat was so visible, that it could not deceive wise Men, much less could
it impose on the All-seeing Judge of the World, whose Judgments were so severe
on these manifest Dissemblers, that I hope it will be a warning to this
Generation, to be Loyal, and pay a dutiful Allegiance to our present King, who
is as Pious and Just, as Wise and Valiant, as any of his Predecessors, and not
only governs us by Law at home, but signalizes himself also abroad as the
Champion of the true Reformed Religion. So that if there be any who hate the
Faith he defends, or fear his Justice for their Crimes, or whose only hope to
mend their broken Fortunes, is by the public Ruin Privatim degeneres, in
publicum exitiosi nihil spci nisi per discordias habent. Tacit. An. lib. 2.
page 655.
; we must resolve they shall never draw us either into secret Plots, nor open
Rebellion against so gracious a Prince: No malicious Representations of his
Designs or Actions, no little scruples concerning what the Law has made his
Right, no revenge for missing or losing some private Advantage, must make us
deny our Allegiance to him, who so well deserves it; especially since as
Englishmen and Protestants we have no prospect of a Change, but what (if it be
brought about by force) will make us ten times more miserable than ever we were
before the Restoration Amos V. 19. (...). Lucian. Nec.
: Wherefore we do wisely, justly and Christianly in this Prayer promise
Allegiance to his present Majesty and his Successors.

Whom we beseech thee to bless with all increase, etc.] Lastly, As an
assurance, that our Loyalty is grounded on our Affection, and from our Heart,
we do according to Gods Command devoutly pray for him and them 1 Timothy II. 1, 2.
. First, as to this World, we pray that neither He nor his Successors may want
Grace to persevere in the profession and practice of the true Religion. The
want of which now we know by sad experience, to be as woeful a Judgment as can
befall us. Secondly, That they may rule so uprightly, and act so wisely and
justly, as not owe all their Honor to their Royal Extraction and Supreme
Dignity, but to their Virtues Magna est Christi gratia, nobilitatem moribus
superasse. Foelix. 4. Pap. ep. 2.
, wherein we pray they may as much excel others as they do in Degree and
Fortune. And Thirdly, That they may live long in Health and Wealth, Peace and
Plenty, being ever Successful and Victorious, and abounding in Power and
Friends; which will be their Subjects happiness as well as theirs, who flourish
in Prosperity, under Pious, Wise and Happy Governors, and therefore we ask
Blessings for our selves while we beg these Mercies for them. But Finally,
Since all these are but the appendages of a fading Earthly Crown, and we know
the greatest of Princes as well as the best of Men are mortal, our good wishes
reach further; and we pray, that after we have enjoyed them long to our Comfort
and Advantage here, they may (after many years -- Serus in coelum redeas,
diuque Laetus intersis populo Quirini -- Horat. Od. 2.
) be translated to a higher, better and never-fading Crown of Glory, to reign
with him in Heaven, whose Honor they have asserted, and whose Truth they have
maintained in this World, to which Prayers may Almighty God, for Jesus sake,
say, Amen.

The Third Collect.
. 8. THis Prayer being the same, for the main, with that which is the first in
the Office for November 5. needs not any Analysis or Explication here, except
only as to the recital of the Deliverance this Day completed by the
Restoration. The Actors in the Popish Treason and this, pretended to be as
different in their Principles as they were in their Methods, but their Ends
were one and the same, which was to ruin the Established Government and
Religion; and though their success was different for a while, yet the same
Gracious God, who had prevented the first, blasted also the later Design. So
that it is proper enough in general to make the same Acknowledgments on both
Occasions. But as to that which relates to this Day, we may note, 1. The
Efficient Cause of this singnal and wonderful Deliverance, which was, the
allwise and good Providence of God, whose Wisdom baffled their Policies, and
whose Goodness moved him to Pity the injured King, and the oppressed People of
this Land; and as on this Day he rescued both in so strange a manner, as
exceeded any thing that the Usurpers could fear, or the Sufferers hope for. For
so great, so sudden and so peaceable a Change never was wrought in any Nation
in the World before; it was the visible hand of God that did effect it.
Secondly, The Objects of this Favor were, our late Gracious Sovereign King
Charles II. with the whole Royal Family, who returned this Day from that
tedious twelve Years Exile, into which their Enemies Malice had driven them,
and in which their Power had till then detained them: But the Mercy was not
confined to them, all Orders and Degrees of Men in Church and State shared with
them in this Blessing: The Nobility and Gentry had been trampled on and
impoverished; the Orthodox Clergy sequestered and silenced; the Commons
overburdned with Taxes and Freequarter, and all but the Usurpers and their
Myrmidons ruined and undone; but with the King and his Family, all these were
restored to their Privileges, Honors, Offices and Estates. And Thirdly, it
should add to our joy, to consider what the Nation was delivered from, that is,
from an unnatural Rebellion, wherein Subjects were engaged against a most
religious King, the Father of his Country, and Natural Fathers against their
Sons, Brother against Brother, and Relations obliged to kill their nearest
Friends Non victoria est ista, quae a Civibus reportatur, ferro quo ipsos
necas, teipsum confodis. Job Ludolf. histor. Aethiop. l. 3. c. 12.
. So that which side soever gained, the Nation was sure to lose. Again, We were
delivered from that Usurpation and Tyranny, which the pretended Saints, but
really impious Conquerors, had got by Force, and exercised with Cruelty over
their Fellow Subjects. Finally, We were delivered from all sorts of Confusions
in Church and State, and the woeful Ruin to private Families and Persons
consequent thereupon. For all this to end in Peace and Tranquillity, and every
ones regaining his own Rights, was a stupendous Mercy, deserving all those
Acknowledgments and Praises with which this excellent Collect ends. Note, The
4th and 5th Collect are repeated here, and were explained before.


The Gospel.
. 9. THis Epistle is the same with that for January the 30th, excepting the two
first Verses, which we will paraphrase here, and refer the Reader for the rest
to the Office for that Day.

1 Pet. I. Ver. XI. Though I have called you Christians, a Royal Priesthood, a
chosen generation, etc. Ver. 9, 10. you must not think your selves exempted
from subjection to Governors, or imagine that Dominion is founded in Grace. No
my [Dearly Beloved] Countrymen and Converts, [I beseech you] for all these
spiritual Privileges, to consider your selves [as strangers,] not only far
removed from Canaan, but from Heaven also, your proper and most desirable
Country; [and] as [pilgrims] in this World traveling toward your Fathers
House. Now such use not to concern themselves with the Government, Fashions, or
Interests they find in those Lands they sojourn in, or are to pass through Vid.
D. Bern. Sermon. in loc. p. 118.
. In like manner you must [abstain from fleshly lusts,] especially those which
will make you uneasy to the Government of the Countries where you are, viz.
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings,
Murders, and the like Gal. V. 10, 11.
. For it is not only contrary to the Character of Strangers and Pilgrims to be
thus mischievous and troublesome; But it will be hurtful to our selves, to
nourish such unruly Lusts, [which war] not only against the Rulers of this
World, but [against your] own [souls] also; increasing your Guilt, hindering
your Devotion, devesting you of Humility and Meekness, Patience and Peace, and
extinguishing your Prudence as well as your Charity.

Ver. XII. And besides, abstaining from these Lusts will be much for the Honor
of Christianity; for your [having your conversation honest] and living quietly
[among the Gentiles,] will alter their Opinion of you. So [that whereas]
ranking you with the unconverted Jews [they speak against you, as] being
seditious, stubborn, mutinous Adversus omnes alios hostile edium. Tacit. hist.
lib. 5. page 557. -- Obstinatio viris, foeminisque par. Id. page 571.
and [evil Doers] toward all. [They may by your good works,] especially by
that submission to the Government and Peaceableness [which they shall behold]
in you Christian Converts, take occasion to [glorifie God] and admire the
Principles of your Religion, which make you so gentle and patient. And by this
means also, you may be spared [in the day of visitation] when the Roman
Emperors shall come to destroy the rest of the Jews, for their frequent
Seditions and Rebellions. So that as it is honorable in it self, it will by
Divine Providence be safe for you, to [submit,] etc. see Ver. 13. [and the
rest] in the Office for Jan. 30.

The Gospel.
. 10. THis portion of Scripture is fitly chosen, to represent the Hyprocrisie
of our pretended Saints, who made a very great show of Religion, and yet took
away the Fathers Crown and Life, and did their utmost to deprive an undoubted
and innocent Heir of his Right; the wickedness whereof (in our Saviors
Opinion) this Parable will represent.

This Gospel contains Four Particulars.

1st, The Persons asking, and manner of proposing it. Ver. XVI. 2ly, The
Question which was proposed. Ver. XVII. 3ly, His Answer, showing 1. He knew
their design. Ver. XVIII. 2. He clearly baffled it. Ver. XIX, XX, XXI.
4ly, The Effect it had upon the Enquirers. Ver. XXII.
A Paraphrase on this Gospel.
S. Mat. XXII. Ver. XVI.
THE Pharisees had contrived either to expose Jesus to the Peoples rage, or make
him obnoxious to the Roman Laws. [And they sent out unto him] two different
sorts of Men; First [their Disciples] popular Zealots, who from Scripture
misinterpreted Deuteronomy. XVII. 15. compared with Acts V. 37.
, believed Gods People owed neither Subjection nor Tribute to any Prince, that
was not an Israelite. Secondly, These went [with the Herodians] who were high
for Loyalty to the Roman Emperor, that set up and supported their Master Herod,
who was an Alien. But how d^^ferent soever these were in their Principles, they
both pretended to choose him Umpire of the Dispute, and submissively spoke to
him [saying, Master we know that thou art true] and just in all thou say and
do [and teach the way of God in truth,] despising the World so much, as
that thou art not to be biased by fear nor favor, [neither carest thou for
any man] of any Party or Sect, [for thou regardest not the persons of men] be
they never so great or honorable. Thou ever declarest the entire Truth to
them, so that thou will never flatter the Emperors party, nor crouch to the
fierce popular Men.

Ver. XVII. Tell us therefore] O thou whose Wisdom and Integrity is so
conspicuous; [what think thou,] as to this famous and much disputed
Question, [Is it lawful] for us Jews, who are Gods peculiar People, [to give
tribute] in token of our Subjection [unto Cesar] the Roman Emperor, who is an
Heathen, and gained his Dominion over us by Force; declare to us freely, is it
lawful [or not] in this Case?

Ver. XVIII. [But Jesus,] being God as well as Man, [perceived their
wickedness] in speaking so fair to him, while their Intentions were Bloody and
Malicious; [And said] unto them, [why tempt ye me] by pretending to admire my
Doctrine, and offering to submit to my Judgment, while you only design to
ensnare me; you are discovered, O [ye hypocrites,] I am not to be imposed on by
your flattery.

Ver. XIX Yet I will not be afraid to tell you the Truth, without any regard to
your Persons, Parties or Interests, or any fear of your Malice; therefore [shew
me the tribute money,] that is, a piece of that Coin in which you pay Taxes to
the Romans, [and they brought unto him] the fourth part of a Shekel, called by
them [a penny] (being about seven pence half penny of our money) and was the
usual rate for every man's Poll Denarium est tributum Capitis. Ulpian. lib. 3.
de cens.
by the Roman Laws.

Ver. XX. He then takes this Coin into his hands, [And] pointing to it [he
says to them] tell me [whose is this Image] in the midst of this piece of
Money, what are these Letters [and superscription] round about it? For he that
coyns Money, and gives it its Value, has certainly a Sovereign Power, and it is
he that protects your Persons, and secures your Estates.

Ver. XXI. [They say unto him] both the Image and the Superscription declare
the Coin is [Cesars] the Emperor of Rome. [Then says he to them] you have
decided your own Question, for your trading with his Coin, owns his Sovereignty
over you, and declares he protects you, for which you owe him Tribute, because
he cannot send Governors to do you justice, nor keep Armies to defend you
without it. To withhold it is a manifest wrong, [Render therefore] every one of
you, though you be Gods People, [unto Cesar] who is now your Supreme Ruler, and
protects you, [the things that] by Reason and Law both [are Cesars,] that is,
Honor, Allegiance, Submission to his Lawful Commands, and to Public Taxes.
[And] this need not hinder you from giving [unto God] your Hearts and Souls,
and presenting Tithes and Offerings for his Service, which are [the things that
are Gods] upon a spiritual Account. That is, you may be Gods Servants and good
Subjects both, because the things that are required are different, and grounded
on different Reasons; and if the one Authority contradict the other, there the
Prince is subordinate. So that you Herodians must not dote so much on your
Master and Caesar, as to deny your Religion to please them: Nor may you
Zealots, under pretense of Conscience, refuse to own the present Powers that
protect you.

Ver. XXII. [When they heard these words] how Wisely, Justly and Impartially he
had answered them, [they marvelled] at his Prudence and Integrity; and having
nothing to reply, nor hopes of taking any advantage, they were ashamed [and
left him] in great haste, [and went their way.] They troubled him no more, and
(after so plain a declaration of our Saviors Mind) we might have hoped no
Christians would either have quitted their Religion, under pretense of Loyalty,
(with the Herodians) or denied Tribute and Allegiance to the Government, which
does protect them, under pretense of Conscience (as the Zealots;) yet we have
seen many instances of both sorts among us.

The Sentence at the Offertory.
. 11. THE Gospel is well followed by a proper Sentence, taken out of our Lords
Sermon on the Mount, against such Hypocrites, as make great shows of Religion,
but do very wicked Deeds.

S. Mat. VII. Ver. XXI. There are many great Professors, (as the Pharisees were
of old, and the Precise Party in our times) who seem very zealous in Praying,
Hearing and keeping the Sabbath, and yet scruple not to break other plain Laws
of God, declared by me, especially this of Submission to Governors. Now these
think themselves sure of Heaven; But I say, who am to judge all Men, [Not every
one that says unto me] I am his Master, and by an outward Profession, seems to
be my Disciple, though he does call me [Lord, Lord,] frequently, and with a
seeming Zeal in his long Prayers, [shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,] if
that be all his Religion Apud me certum est, quod qui Christo credunt, ista non
faciunt. Moses Confess. de Lucio ap. Eusebius. l. 9. c. 8.
; such Hypocrites will be found out and condemned at the last Day. And no Man
shall be justified and rewarded then [but he that] in all things, in the duties
of the Second Table, as well as the First, [doth the will of my Father which is
in Heaven,] and particularly in this point of Obedience to the present Powers,
which I have so clearly declared to be Gods Holy Will.

The Last Collect.
The Last Collect contains, 1st, Acknowledgments of, 1. The Author of this
Mercy. O Almighty God, and, etc.
2. The Motive to it. who of thine infinite, etc.
3. The Manner of doing it. did in a most extraordinary, etc.
4. The greatness of it, as to, 1. The Persons engaged in it of those
traitorous, etc.
2. Their Methods. who under pretense, etc.
3. Their Progress. contrived and well nigh, etc.


2ly A Public Return of Praise therefore. As we do this Day, most, etc.
3ly, Petitions to God, 1. To Prevent the like Calamity. So we most humbly, etc.
2. To Discover such Designs. To this end send out, etc.
3. To Baffle the Actors. Infatuate and defeat, etc.
4. To enable the King to punish them. Strengthen the hands, etc.
5. To Keep him from such Plots. Protect and Defend our Sovereign, etc.
6. To send Divine Judgments on the Implacable. As for these that are, etc.
7. To Prosper and Preserve our happy Monarchy. But upon Him, and his
Successors* etc.

4ly, Vows of lasting Thanksgivings. So we that are thy People, etc.



A Practical Discourse on this Collect.
. 12. ALmighty God, and Heavenly Father, who of, etc.] This Regular Collect (as
the Analysis shows) contains all that is proper on this Occasion, and rightly
begins with a Confession, that the Author of this great Work was Almighty God
our Heavenly Father. Nothing less than Omnipotence could, and none but a
Celestial Father would bring such mighty things to pass -- Deus nobis haec
otia fecit. Virg.
. Considering our Enemies Power, and our inability to resist, it was Infinite
Mercy to Pity, and required an Almighty Arm to rescue us: And the way by which
it was effected was so wonderful and extraordinary, that it scarce can be
paralleled in History. That such as had seized the supreme Power, and were
guarded with a mighty Fleet, and a strong Army, secured by all the Forts and
Magazines, by Friends, and by all the Wealth in the Nation, should of a sudden,
without one stroke, either fly from, or submit to a poor Prince, whom they had
stripped of all but his Innocence, and his Right; and that alone Sunk them, and
Exalted him. Again, The Collect calls to our Minds the Temper of those we were
then delivered from, being such as St. Paul describes should come in the last
and worst of Times 2 Timothy III. 4.
, Traitors to the best of Kings, Heady and Obstinate in their evil Designs,
High-minded and Impatient of any Superior. Now nothing but the Ruin of their
Native Country can satisfy such Men's Avarice and Ambition; and since that is
too odious to be declared, they covered the Bloody Hook with a pretended Zeal
for a pure Religion, and a through Reformation both in Church and State, and a
feigned Reverence for God's Name; which were such taking Baits to the Populace,
who thought them all Saints Duplicis peccati reatus est, non habere quod
creditur, and quod non habeo simulare. Sulpic. Sever. ep. ad Soror.
, that thereby they pulled down the Monarchy, and broke the Church to pieces,
enriching themselves with all the ill-gotten Spoils of both Crown and Miter.
Yea, they had by this holy Cheat proceeded so far toward the Nations utter
Ruin, that some People thought we were more likely to fall a miserable Prey to
some Foreign Tyrant, than ever to be restored to our own King, our Religion and
our Laws.

And we do this Day most heartily and devoutly adore, etc.] The goodness of our
God in preventing so dreadful and so near a Mischief, deserves more Praises
than we can possibly give. We should be the most ungrateful of all Men, if we
did not upon this Remarkable Day of our Stupendous Deliverance, annually pay
this just Tribute of Thanksgiving, with sincere Gratitude and servent Devotion.
Our God magnified his Name by this Miracle of Mercy to a sinking People; and
it is our Duty to make this Blessing known all the World over (if possible) for
the advancing his Glory. To say this Deliverance is past long since, is no
excuse for our not remembering it, since no Time must obliterate the Memory of
so universal a Benefit, especially when those of this Age, owe all the Comforts
they have under Monarchy and the established Church, to this happy
Restoration. I am sure if we be not very thankful for this Mercy, we deserve
never more to have our Prayers heard, if we fall into the like distress; nor
can I see how we can, with any tolerable Modesty, presume to make the following
Requests for future Safety, till we have owned what we have already received:
Our Gratitude makes way for the succeeding Requests.

So we most humbly beseech thee to continue, etc.] As we derive not our
Prosperity from our own Policy or Power, so we cannot hope to secure it without
the continuance of his favorable Providence. A flourishing Church will not
fail of many Enemies, nor can a happy Government want many Fees. Envy and
Malice, Pride and Faction, Covetousness and Ambition, will blow up many, and
make them restless and impatient for a Change, although it be extremely for the
worse. Wherefore when such Birds of Prey hover about us, we had need pray
heartily to God to cover us under the shadow of his Wings Psalm. XCI. 4. Quales
accipitr^s minas fugit

Et sparses metu colligit foetus avis. Sen. Herc. fur.


. And then we are sure our Enemies cannot hurt us. It Is evident that no such
dire Calamity can befall us again, till our Sins have provoked our Defense to
depart from us; in that case alone we are naked and exposed: Wherefore while we
pray for this constant Defense of his Providence, while our Horror at that
which we and our Fathers suffered under that Tyranny makes us zealous in
supplicating the like may never befall us, let us take particular care, that
our grievous Sins do not give our mighty Protector just occasion to desert us,
for then alas! none knows what Miseries we may fall into.

To this end send forth thy Light and thy Truth, etc.] Plotters are Men who
hate the Light, their Designs are hatched in Darkness, and covered over with
Falsehood and Deceit; so that if new Projects be set on foot, we fear human
Discovery may be prevented, or at least come too late: Wherefore we pray in
David's words Psalm. XLIII. 3.
, that God will please by his Divine Light to discover them, and by his sacred
Truth to manifest the Treachery of their Principles and Practices. The fatal
and cruel Schemes they are so closely forming, which they pretend come from the
Spirit of God, and a mighty Zeal for Justice and Piety, are (in St. John's
phrase) Depths of Satan Rev. II. 24.
who was the first Rebel, a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning; it is he
that inspires them with Malice against their Governors, and helps them to
invent Lies to conceal their cruel Designs. They keep it secret like some
wondrous Mystery, but it is only a Mystery of Wickedness and Iniquity (p); 2
These. II. 7. (...).
so foul and horrid, and so contrary to Law and Reason, as well as the Mystery
of Godliness 1 Timothy III. 7.
, and the whole Design of Christianity; that they are forced to hide it from
all good Men, by private Oaths and vile Confederacies: But when Heaven did at
last discover these holy Cheats, no Mortals could be more odious or more
contemptible.

Insatuate and defeat all the secret Counsels, etc.] This long Paragraph comes
in very properly here, but need not to be explained again, having been
discoursed of before Office for the 5th of November, Collect. 4.. 10.
in the Gunpowder-treason Office, to which I refer my Reader.

Protect and defend our Sovereign Lord the King, etc.] Having seen the dismal
Effects of Murdering the best of our Princes, and of Banishing the Son and
Heir, with all the Royal Family, we are convinced no such wickedness can be
done again, but it will be as fatal to the Church and State, as to our
Governors. Wherefore we not only resolve to be Loyal our selves, but for our
own sakes we pray, that if any Sons of Belial shall hereafter enter into any
treasonable Conspiracies against the present King and Royal Family they may not
prosper. None but the worst of Men will join in such Bloody and Barbarous Plots
and Designs Pessimus quisque asperrime rectorem patitur. Salust. Orat. 1. de
rep. ord.
; and if God have any kindness for a Nation, he will never suffer those he
hates, to prevail; if they do, and can change the Government from a Monarchy to
a Commonwealth, it is a sign the Land, where this is permitted, has committed
many and great Transgressions Prove. XXVIII. 2. Non parcit populis regnum breve.
Stat. Thebaid. l. 2.

Vae terrae sepelienti Principes suos. Rab. Salom. in Hose. I.


; and this is the Judgment by which God resolves to chastise it. As for a
Republic, necessity only makes it tolerable wherever it is established. But
it is so contrary to the Constitution and Genius of this Nation, where our
Nobility and Gentry are so numerous, and our People are so averse to be ruled
by their Fellow Subjects, that nothing can be more odious to our English Minds,
nor could the most refined Politics ever force it long upon us, or settle it
among us: Wherefore to prevent such ruining Contests for the future, we pray
Almighty God long to preserve the whole Royal Family, and that we may both long
enjoy the present King, and never want a Successor of that illustrious House,
which has already furnished us with so many good Princes.

As for those that are implacable, clothe them, etc.] We can wish and pray for
the conversion of our worst Foes, so long as there is any hopes. But after the
experience of twelve woeful Years, and as many new Projects of various forms of
Government, if there be still any Republicans, who resolve to make new
Attempts, to get the Power into their Hands, among which their own are intended
to be the principal; these we look upon as desperate and incurable, their
Malice like that of the bloody Cassius, is so implacable to Kings, that they
mortally hate the very Name Oderat tacit Principatum, nec far poterat
imperatorium nomen. Vulcat. vit. Avid. Cassij. p. 241.
, and could wish to see their Native Country overrun with Fire and Sword, to
make themselves some of the Heads of a confused Democracy. Such Men we utterly
despair of, and therefore deliver them up to Heaven to punish them, with the
like shame and confusion that overtook their Party at this happy Restoration.
And if ever they do attempt to follow their Steps, probably they will come to
the same Infamous End. None pretended to greater Politics than they, yet none
were more generally hated and despised when they were caught in their own
Snares; no Men ever fell with less Pity, even with the Populace which they had
ever courted and cajoled. For the ill success of all their Attempts has given
this Nation reason to wish, that the Monarchy may last in this Royal Family as
long as the World endures.

So we that are thy People, and the Sheep of thy Pasture, etc.] The Prayer ends
with a Vow of lasting Praises Psalm. LXXIX. ver. 14.
, and a Doxology; the former being made in hopes God will hear these Prayers
for the future: The later because he has hitherto heard them. When God sets a
Righteous Shepherd over us to rule us in his Name; and by his Authority he owns
us his peculiar Flock, for that obliges us to Praise him for our ever, that is,
so long as we live and enjoy the benefit of a most Wise and Gracious
Government. And in hopes the Blessing may reach to our Posterity, we resolve to
teach our Children what a mighty Blessing a good King is to them and all that
proceed from them. So that when we are removed to Heaven, they may continue
these acts of Praise on Earth, from one Generation to another. Finally, Because
this great Deliverance, like all other Mercies, was obtained only by the
Intercession of Christ Jesus, therefore we now bless Almighty God through him
who is our only Mediator; and to the Son for interceding; to the Father, for
granting; to the Holy Spirit for assisting us in this Request; we do ascribe
all Glory our selves, and doubt not but the true Church will continue these
Acts of Praise from Age to Age, even to the Worlds end. Amen.

The End of the Office for May XXIX.
ERRATA.
Page 3. l. 1. read then dispute. p. 31. l. 34. r. Prince had not. p. 39. l.
22. r. unexpectedly. p. 75. l. 5. r. we turn our praises. p. 103. l. 22. r.
that was driven. p. 111. marg. at l. 11. r. truculentiae. Ib. l. 22. after Abel
-- add can pardon it. p. 128. l. 15. r. beating them.

Books Printed for, and Sold by R. Clavell, at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THE Church History cleared from the Roman Forgeries and Corruptions found in
the Councils and Baronius: In Four Parts. From the Beginning of Christianity,
to the end of the Fifth General Council. 553. By Thomas Comber, D. D. Dean of
Durham.

Aristophanis Comaediae Duae Plutus, and Nubes, Cum Scholiis Graecis Antiquis.
Quibus adjiciuntur Noctae quaedam simul cum Gemino Indice. In usum Studiosae
Juventutis.

The Reasons of Praying for the Peace of Jerusalem: In a Sermon Preached before
the Queen at White Hall, on the Fast Day; being Wednesduy August 29. 1694. By
Thomas Comber, D. D. Dean of Durham, and Chaplain in Ordinary to their
Majesty's. Printed by their Majesty's Special Command.

A Daily Office for the Sick; Compiled out of the Holy Scriptures, and the
Liturgy of our Church; with occasional Prayers, Meditations and Directions.

The Catechisms of the Church, with Proofs from the New Testament, and some
additional Questions and Answers, divided into twelve Sections by Z. J. D. D.
Author of the Book lately published, Entitled a Daily Office for the sick,
with Directions, etc.

A Church Catechism with a brief and easy Explanation thereof, for the help of
the Meanest Capacities and Weakest Memories, in order to the Establishing them
in the Religion of the Church of England, by T. C. Dean of D.

The Pantheon, Representing the Fabulous Histories of the Heathen Gods, and
most Illustrious Heroes; in a short, plain and familiar Method, by the way of
Dialogue, for the Use of Schools. Written by Fra. Pomey, of the Society of
Jesus; Author of the French and Latin Dictionary, for the Use of the Dauphin.

Bedae Venerabilis opera Quaedam Theologica, nunc primum edita, necnon
Historica, antea semel edita. Accesserunt Egberti Archiepiscopi Ebroracensis
Dialogus de Ecclesiastia Institutione, and Aldhelmi Episcopi Scireburnensis
Liber de Virginitate, ex Codice antiquissimo emendatus.

Disquisitio in Hypothesin Baxterianam de Foedere Gratiae, Ab initio and
deinceps, semper and ubique omnibus indulto, and adhuc apud Ethnicos and
extra-evangelicos vigente ac valente ad salutem. Authore Carolo Robothamo,
Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbytero Norfolciensi, S. Th. B.

Q. Horatii Flacci Opera: Interpretatione and Notis Illustravit Ludovicus
Desprez Cardinalitius Socius ac Rhetor Emeritus, Jussu Christianissimi Regis,
in usum Sereniffimi Delphini, ac Serenissimorum Principum Burgundiae, Andium,
Biturigum. Huic Editioni accessere Vita Horatii, cum Dacerii Notis ejusdem
Chronologia Horatiana, and Praefatio de Satira Romana.

L. Annaei Flori rerum Romanarum Epitome; Interpretatione and Notis Illustravit
Anna Tanaquilla Fabri Tilia, Jussu Christianissimi Regis in usum Serenissimi
Delphini.

Compendium Graecum Novi Testamenti, Continens ex 7959. Versiculis totius N.
Testamenti tantum Versiculos 1900. (non tamen integros) in quibus omnes
universi Novi Test. Voces una cum Versione Latina, Inveniuntur: Auctore,
Johanne Lusden. Philos. Doctore, and Linguae Sanctae in Academia Ultrajectina
Professore Ordinario. Editio Quinta.

FINIS.

