Imprimatur,

G. Jane R. P. D. HEN. Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom.
March 20. 1676/7.
Friendly and Seasonable ADVICE TO THE Roman Catholics OF ENGLAND.

The Third Edition enlarged: with an addition of the most convincing Instances
and Authorities; and the Testimony of their own Authors for the same.

BY A Charitable Hand.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's, 1677.

TO HIS Honored and Worthy Friend Mr. S. B. Concerning the former Edition.
SIR,
I Cannot answer your Inquiry, till I have not only commended but encouraged
your charity to your Country men of the Roman Communion; it being an excellent
piety to endeavor to reduce them into the right way, who are so confident in
the wrong. The zeal of most men expresses it self by fury and clamor against
Dissenters, whilst you show your esteem for the rational principles of the
Church of England by your diligence to propagate them, and your desires to
reconcile its misinformed Adversaries to them. It is one of the great
properties of Goodness to be communicative, and a copy of S. Paul's most
obliging charity, Act. 26. 29. to wish that all whom you converse with, were as
happy in the choice of their Faith, as you know your self to be: wherefore that
I may as well quicken your generous design, as invite some others to imitate so
good an example, I will propound these few considerations.

1. The relation in which the English Romanists stand to us should excite our
care; for they are all Natives of the same Country, Subjects of the same
Government, and are called by the same general name of Christians: many of them
our kind Neighbors, familiar Acquaintance, or near Kindred, and some of them
(where their Prejudice does not blind them) persons of great reason, and of so
good inclinations, that they are not made vicious by the evil liberties which
their principles do allow: and shall we for want of affection or courage suffer
them to be kept in ignorance and imposed on at present, and to be led blindfold
in such a way as will extremely hazard the Salvation of their precious Souls
hereafter? If all the relations they bear to us do possess us with any real
affection for them, we cannot but do our utmost to undeceive them. The frauds
indeed of the Guides of that Church are daily more and more laid open, but for
want of such a charity as yours is, they who are chiefly concerned, seldom come
to the knowledge of them: I am sure those excellent pens which discovered them,
did not design we should make their delusions the subject of our mirth, but the
means to convert the Souls of those who are linked to us in so many bonds, that
it is a shame we should suffer them to be so deceived.

2. But we usually excuse our remisness, under the pretense that it is
impossible to convert them: Had our Ancestors so esteemed it, the World had
wanted the blessing of the Reformation: I grant it is difficult, because of
their rooted prejudice, and the policy of their Leaders, yet not impossible
because many have undertaken it, and prevailed. So that as Seneca says in
another case, it is not because of the difficulty that we do not attempt it,
but because we do not attempt it, therefore it seems difficult, Ep. 104. The
Philosopher tells us where there is no difficulty, there is no opportunity to
exercise either art or virtue: and if we were once willing to take some pains
for so noble an end, it would much allay the trouble thereof, to consider the
advantages which it may bring not only to the party which is the object of our
charity, but to the Church, yea and to our own Souls also: for He that
converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a Soul from death,
and shall hide a multitude of sins, Jam. 5. 20. and they who turn many to
righteousness shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12. 3. Nay
moreover if such Pious endeavors should want success on Earth, they shall not
fail of a reward in Heaven.

3. And finally, if we consider the unwearied industry of our Adversaries in
seducing, methinks it should awaken our diligence, in strengthening the weak,
and reducing such as are out of the way. It had been very strange if the
Apostles should have been unwilling to travel for the propagation of the right
faith, and the winning Souls of Heaven, when the Pharisees compassed Sea and
Land to reconcile a Proselyte to their particular Sect; and yet alas it is too
often seen, that the children of this world are wiser in their generation than
the children of light, S. Luke 16. 18. The Hermit Pambo accidentally beholding
a theatrick woman dance exquisitely before a loose assembly at Alexandria, is
said to have wept abundantly, to consider how much more pains she took to serve
evil ends, than he himself did to serve God. Had we as much tenderness as that
holy man, doubtless we have as great occasion for our shame and sorrow, when we
see others more active to advance the Mystery of iniquity, than we are to
promote the glory of God, and the salvation of your brethrens immortal Souls.

These Considerations, worthy Sir, I know have excited your charitable
resolutions, and I hope will prevail with many others to endeavor the
reformation of their deceived friends: wherefore that I may answer your
desires, and contribute my poor assistance to so pious and generous a design* I
have sent you the following papers, wherein the delusions of that party are
discovered as plainly, yet as modestly as may be, that they may see in a little
room how much it is their interest and advantage to embrace the true Catholic
Religion of the English Church. I know all these particulars have been more
fully handled by better pens, but most of these writings have been by way of
dispute, and intended rather to convince than persuade. So that they may be
very proper to give fuller satisfaction in any particulars doubted of, when
their great Prejudices are first a little removed: besides there are many
through unavoidable business, company, or other divertisements, who either have
no leisure or no inclination to read a larger volume, being of Callimachus's
mind, that A great book is a great evil (...)* apud Athenaeum.
, who yet may be prevailed with to spare one hour for so small an abstract as
this. The Jewish Talmud tells us of a noble Heathen, who came to Rabbi Hillet,
and offered to become a Proselyte, if he could teach him the whole Law at one
lesson, Tract. Sab. fol. 31. and if you meet with any of his mind, they may
perhaps be gratified with this little Abridgment, wherein the mistakes of the
Roman Persuasion are put into as narrow a compass as they can well be reduced
to; so that even those who are yet resolved to be of that Church may perhaps
not be unwilling to peruse it, that they may at one view see, what their
Religion is charged with. And if it do not gain such persons, yet it will teach
them to censure mildly, and to dissent from us with more moderation: and as the
volume is small, and so may invite those to its perusal who are delighted with
brevity, so the style is as mild as the matter would allow, and can give no
just offense to any: the particulars are so plain, and so fully proved more at
large by others, that the Author resolves not to dispute, but in pure charity
to advise the Romanists not to resist apparent truth and reason, having no
worse intentions toward them than to set them into the best way to Heaven; and
if any be angry at him or you for this, they are the greatest enemies to
themselves, and more concerned for their present Opinions, than for their
everlasting Salvation; but it is to be hoped the sincerity of your intention to
do good may oblige some kindly to accept this Manual, at least as a testimony
of your love; to whom, if you have the liberty of discourse, you shall do well
to clear those exceptions which Prejudice may suggest, and at least to obtain
from them a resolution, impartially to enquire into the truth of that which
they so confidently do believe: and sure, it is infinite pity that persons of
excellent reason should be so much enslaved, as not to dare to ask the right
way to bliss of any, but those who have an absolute dominion over them, nor
once to go about to judge for themselves in a case of so great Concernment.

I would be loath to think so hardly of their Superiors, as to suppose they
interdicted their Adherents from all converse with us; for this were the exact
parallel of the Muscovian policy, where it is death for any to travel out of
their own Kingdom without especial license, for fear they should never endure
their former bondage, when once they have seen the freedom of other Nations:
and if once you can prevail so far, that they will impartially compare their
own Opinions with ours, it is probable they may become our friends. I shall add
no more but to wish this Token may be as kindly accepted as it will be
charitably offered by you, and to assure you, you shall never want his prayers
for your success, who is,

Sir, Yours to serve you,

TO His esteemed Friend Mr. W. R. Concerning this present Edition.
SIR,
YOUR account of the speedy dispersing of this Little Tract, encourages me to
hope, it has not only been acceptable to the World, but also blessed by God to
the reducing some from the Roman Opinions, and the establishing others in the
Protestant Faith; And that it may more effectually serve to these desirable
Ends, I have been content to obey your Request, in reviewing it in order to
another Impression, which (You tell me) is now desired. In which Review, I have
rectified the Method of the whole, and illustrated and strengthened every part,
with the Addition of so many of the most convincing Instances and Authorities
as could be put in without too much swelling the Bulk. I confess I did suppose
the things to be so evident, and so plainly proved in larger Discourses, that I
was not curious before, always to bring Proofs for my Assertions: But now your
Letter acquaints me both that some Romanists (who resolve boldly to deny, what
they cannot otherwise evade) have questioned the Truth of some parts of this
charge; And also that those Protestants whose Charity has invited them to seek
their Friends Conversion, have desired I should add my Authors to confirm these
Allegations: Therefore for the full satisfaction of both Parties I have proved
all the particulars by the Testimony of such Authors whose Evidence is
unquestionable, choosing usually the plain Confessions of Popes and Cardinals,
or other approved Writers of the Roman Church, that so those of that Party may
believe these Matters from the mouth of those whom they esteem their best
Friends, which they would suspect, if we related upon our own Credit, whom they
unjustly account their Enemies; And though their present Romish Priests should
deny those things, which the most Eminent Writers of their own Church have
formerly acknowledged, they are not to be doubted of upon that account, since
the Confession of former Writers against their own Party is better Evidence,
than the denial of the later can be for it; for No man will lie (says
Tertullian) to his own disgrace, but rather for his credit: And it is more fit
to believe such as confess against themselves, than such as deny for themselves
Tertul. Apol. cap. 32.
. So that none can justly doubt of these Truths thus attested: And he that once
believes them, and yet retains the Religion of Rome, must be of a humor
differing from the rest of Mankind, who cannot choose a known delusion, nor
delight in sitting under apparent abuses. I must expect the Admirers of that
once famous Church will entertain these just and necessary Accusations thereof
with some little heats of Passion; but I hope it will calm those hasty motions
when they deliberately consider, that since I say no more than Truth I do no
injury to Rome, and the Charity which I have for them obliges me to say so
much. And why (says the Philosopher) art thou displeased at me, who have done
no more than a Looking-glass does to the deformed, having only showed thee to
thy self as thou art? Shall the Physician be said to reproach him whose disease
he discovers to him Arrian. in Epict. l. 2. c. 14.
? They will remember I hope that I have undertaken the office of a Friendly
Counselor, whose duty (according to the Grecian Sage) is, Not to advise that
which is most pleasing, but that which is most profitable Diog. Laert. in Vit.
Solon.
. And if in compliance with this Rule I shall somewhat displease them to their
Advantage, I shall not only obtain a Pardon, but merit their Thanks also in the
end: However, I ask no more, than that laying aside their Prejudices, they will
put on so much affection to their own real interest as to weigh the Reasons and
Arguments upon which my Advice is grounded, and if they be convincing and
persuasive, I desire them not to resist their own Freedom, nor despise him that
sincerely seeks their good; but if they absolutely resolve the most rational
and just Motives shall not persuade them to alter their Old Opinions, I shall
pity and pray for them, but can use no other Methods in this case; for it is
Counsel and not Command which I give, since men should be reasoned and not
forced into a right Faith, and would God the Roman Church had never obtruded
her Opinions upon the world by any other means, but these gentle and rational
persuasions, her Neighbors then would not have had so just cause to complain
of her. And now, Sir, since I write, and you and other zealous Protestants act
by these fair Methods, if our endeavors for our Countrymens Conversion be not
maliciously misconstrued, they cannot be censured to tend to the harm of any,
but must be confessed to aim at the present and future happiness of all that we
shall address our selves to in this Matter: And I shall rejoice if my pains
herein may attain these blessed ends, and let you particularly understand how
gladly I would encourage your Love to the Church of England, and comply with
all your Pious desires, since I am,

Sir, Your affectionate and faithful Friend.

Friendly and Seasonable ADVICE TO THE Roman Catholics OF ENGLAND.
The Introduction.
My Friends and Countrymen,
IT is observed by others, and complained of by your selves, That you lie under
many inconveniences, by reason of your stiff adherence to those Opinions which
Rome calls Religion: the charges you are at to maintain a foreign
Jurisdiction, and your want of the Communion of those Christians among whom you
live, the uneasy Rites imposed on you here, and the great hazard of your
Salvation hereafter, are reckoned by others to be evils appendant to your
professing the Faith of that Church. But if you your selves do not feel or not
fear these things, and so account them no grievance, yet you are sensible of
other pressures, and frequently complain, that your Estates are obnoxious to
the penalties of the Law, and your Persons exposed to the general hatred of the
People. You tell us, you want many Privileges of other Subjects, and lie under
many burdens from which others are free: You perceive, that your actions are
observed, your designs suspected, and your Party accused to be the cause of all
Public evils. How far some of your own Persuasion have contributed hereunto I
shall not take upon me to judge; esteeming it a more charitable employment to
offer some expedient to free you from those sad effects, which you complain of,
than either to enquire after the cause of the Nations general Antipathy to your
Religion, or dispute about the Occasion thereof* Wherefore, whilst some accuse
your practices, and others deride your worship, I have so much affection for
your Persons (as my Countrymen) and so much charity for your Souls (since you
bear the name of Christian) as to present you with some useful Advice. It Is
true, the common apprehension concerning you might almost discourage such an
Attempt, it being generally believed, that a Roman Catholics prejudice is like
theirs in St. Augustine, who (being descended of misbelieving Ancestors)
preferred their Extraction before the Truth: and like the resolution of Cotta
in Cicero, who says, That no discourse of either learned or unlearned men,
should ever remove him from the Opinion received from his Forefathers,
concerning the worship of the Immortal gods Cicer. de nature. Deor. lib. 2.
. But I know many of you are masters of more reason than to ground your Faith
upon so uncertain a Foundation: It is not the part of wise men (says a learned
Father) to be enslaved to a received Opinion, nor rashly to give up themselves
to their Fathers customs; but to endeavor to find out the Truth Theodoret. de
Curand. Graec. affect. Sermon. 1.
. And it is the advice of the great Apostle, to prove all things, and hold fast
that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. because it is a zeal without knowledge, and
a foolish obstinacy to be confident of that which we never did examine. I can
easily believe your Spiritual Guides will esteem no sin more mortal, than to
enquire into those Principles which you receive from them, and they will scarce
allow you the liberty to peruse a few lines presented by so charitable a hand:
But their Prohibitions (methinks) should make you more suspicious and
inquisitive, and cause you to resolve to try that Coin which shuns the
Touchstone, knowing that Truth seeks no Corners, and that which is Real fears
no Test. The Church of England puts no such Restraints upon her adherents, nor
is she unwilling to have her Doctrines tried by Scripture and the best
Antiquity; because she finds those are her best Sons that have enquired most
narrowly. Evil needs a mask and a disguise (said the brave Agesilaus) but Light
makes true goodness to be more illustrious and more lovely. And a greater than
he says, Every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved: but he that does turth comes to the
light. S. John iii. 20. 21. If therefore you have but so much consideration as
to suspect, and so much courage as to examine, I should not be without hope,
that my Advice might take place, since (as Plato notes) Every soul is
unwillingly deprived of Truth, which men cannot resist when once it appears
unto them: I shall ask no more of you than to search impartially, whether the
Doctrines wherein you differ from the Church of England, deserve so firm an
assent as you give them; and he that dares not do this, is not a Disciple, but
a Slave. It may be those Counselors may please the heady Bigots of your
Persuasion better, who advise them to ease their mind by reproaching the Laws
and the Government, or to attempt the shaking off their Grievances by more
desperate courses: But I do not believe the wiser and more sober Romanists can
approve such cursed motions, there are many of them too noble to admit such
thoughts. It is the Stoics character in Galen, That they would rather betray
their Country, than renounce their Maxims: But I take those of your Party to be
generally of a better temper, and therefore I hope you will account it to be
far more Friendly and Seasonable Advice, to try these your Principles strictly,
before you expose your Country or your Selves to suffer all the
ill-consequences of your rigid maintaining of them, and if you once rightly
understand them, I hope you will discern they do not deserve to be retained at
so dear a rate: so that it is possible you may resolve to quit your mistaken
Opinions and your real Sufferings together. However, though your Enquiry shall
not have this effect, yet this Trial of your Principles ought not to be wholly
declined; for I would advise you to examine the Roman Doctrines, if it were but
only to declare, that your Religion is not a blind and accidental choice, and
to vindicate your selves from the charge of the Old Samaritans, who worshipped
they knew not what.

SECTION 1.
Whether the Roman Opinions, which differ from the Church of England, be the
Old Religion?
I doubt not, but these who have been educated in the Romish Religion, as well
as those who have inconsiderately turned to it, do please themselves in
fancying they are of the Old Religion; and hence they assume and appropriate to
themselves the Name of Catholics, upon this presumption, that they do
entirely, and in all things, agree with the Ancient and Universal Church: But (
my Friends) if you have the patience to enquire, you will find there is no good
ground for this persuasion; it being evident the Roman is not the Old Religion,
in any other Articles, but only in those which are found in the Apostles Creed,
or founded upon the plain words of Holy Scripture; for that is the Old Religion
which God revealed at first, and which Christ and his Apostles taught. That is
truest which was the first (says Tertullian) and that was first, which was
from the beginning Tertul. in Marcio^. lib. 4.
. So S. Cyprian; We ought not to regard so much, what some others before us
have thought fit, as what Christ himself, who was before all, has done
Cyprian. ad Caecilian. Ep. 63.
. Now, if that be the Old Religion, which is taught in the Holy Scripture and
the Creed, herein the Religion of Rome cannot pretend to be Older than the
Religion of this Church, because we hold all these Articles as well as they;
yea, if the case be rightly stated, the Church of Englands Faith is the Old
Religion, and not that of Rome; for she professes, To believe nothing as an
Article of Faith, but what is read in Holy Scripture, or may be proved thereby:
Artic. vi. But the Roman Church declares, They receive Traditions with the same
veneration that they do the Scriptures. Council. Trident. Sess. 4. So that we
hold all the Principles of the Old Religion, and no other; but they (under the
pretense of Traditions) have invented and added many points to the Old
Religion, which are not mentioned in the Bible, and Decreed other Articles
contrary to the Old Religion recorded in Scripture, and all these are a New
Religion; and yet these are the Doctrines in which we differ. In all the
Principles which are truly the Old Religion we and they generally do agree; but
if you take the Religion of the Roman Church for the Doctrines in which they
differ from us, it may be justly said, they are of the New Religion, and we of
the Old, since our Religion was recorded in Scripture sixteen hundred years
ago* (as our Adversaries seem to confess, when they call us, Scriptuarii,
Scripture-men: Prateol.) whereas all that which is properly their Religion, is
of much later Date. And that I may not be thought to invent this Charge, or to
accuse the Roman* Church wrongfully, I will instance in the most principal of
the Doctrines wherein we differ, and bring in your own Doctors as Witnesses of
this Truth.

1. That Prayers to the Saints are not mentioned by Christ nor his Apostles, is
confessed by Salmeron, Lindan, and Bannes Salmeron in 1 Timothy cap. 2. Lindan.
Panop. l. 3. c. 5. Bannes 2. 2 ae qu. 1. Art. 10. conclus. 2.
. Etherianus says as much of Prayers for the Dead Hugo Etherian. de regressu
animae.
. Indulgences are not to be found in Scripture, nor in the Ancient Doctors, say
Durandus, Major, Cajetan, and Antoninus Durand. 4. Sent. did. 20. qu. 3.
Major. 4. d. 2. qu. 2. Cajetan. Opusc. 15. cap. 1. Antonin. part. 1. sum. tit.
10. cap. 3.
. Transubstantiation it self cannot be proved by Scripture, if you will take
three Cardinals words for it Fisher de Captiv. Babyl. c. 10. De Alliaco in 4.
Sent. qu. 6. art. 1. Cajetan. ap. Suarez. Tom. 3. disp. 46.
. And if our designed brevity would allow it, the like might be proved of all
the rest.

But we must proceed to show, there are some New things in the Romish Religion,
directly contrary to the Scripture. The taking the Cup from the Laity is
contrary to our Saviors Institution, as that very Council of Constance
confesses which first enjoined it; for they say, the Sacrament shall be given
in one kind only to the people, Non obstante, etc. notwithstanding our Lord did
appoint it in both: Council. Constant. Sess. 13. And your own Authentic Vulgar
Translation (as if this Innovation had been foreseen) where the Greek only
has, We are all partakers of one bread, adds [and de uno Calice] and of one
Cup: 1 Cor. 10. 17. The Veneration which you give to Images, seems to all
impartial eyes directly contrary to the Second Commandment; and though your
Priests will not directly confess it, yet their general leaving out the Second
Commandment in your Catechisms, and cutting the Tenth in Two, to keep up the
number, and conceal the omission from the Vulgar, is a fair Evidence, they
themselves suspected that this Commandment made against them, and feared
others would apprehend it so. To these you may add, Praying in an unknown
Tongue which S. Paul condemns in one whole Chapter, 1 Corinthians. xiv. as some of
your own Commentators on the place confess: As also the making Saints and
Angels your Mediators to God, when the same Apostle positively says, There is
but one Mediator, viz. Christ Jesus: 1 Timothy ii. 5. All these therefore cannot
rightly be accounted any part of the Old Religion, properly so called: But if
we shall descend lower, these, and many other Points of your Religion are so
far from being the Old Religion, that the Writers of the Roman Church do
acknowledge, they were not known to the Primitive Fathers; yea, they record the
very time when most of them were imposed. The Doctrine of Purgatory was first
built upon the Credit of those fabulous Dialogues attributed to Gregory the
First; or if they were his (which many doubt) this was six hundred years after
Christ, and it was not generally believed in the Church five hundred years
after, as we learn from an Old Historian, Otto Frising. Chronic. An. 1146. And
as for the Prayers made to deliver Souls from thence (that gainful Article of
your Church) we are told by your own Authors, that the first who caused them to
be appointed by your Church, was Odilo Abbot of Clugny, An. 1000. Ranul. Higden
Polychron, l. 6. c. 15. Petrus Damian. Vit. Odilon.
. The worshipping of God by Images, was not allowed by the Ancient Fathers, say
your own Authors, Clemangis, Polyd. Virgil, and Peresius Aiala Clemangis de
nov. Celebr. II. Polydor. Virgil de Invent. rer. l. 6. Aiala de Tradit. p. 2.
c. de Imag.
. And all men know, this kind of use of Images can be derived no higher (as to
its being Decreed) than that despicable Council Council. secundum Nicaen. An.
787.
in the Eighth Century; but both the Doctrine and the Council also was rejected
for many years after by the French, English, and German Churches Hoveden Annal.
Par. 1* p. 405. Matthew. Westmon. Anno. 793.
. Indulgences are not Ancient, as Bishop Fisher confesses Fish. in 18. Artic.
Luther.
: Nor is there any good proof in your own Authors for them before the time of
Pope Alexander 3. A. 1160, or the Council of Clermont however, An. 1096
Scioppius de Indulg. cap. 12.
. And the first who made Money of them was Boniface 9 th. An. 1390. as Platina
and Polydore Virgil tell us Platin. in Vit. Polyd. Virgil. de Invent. l. 8.
cap. 1.
. And the first Jubilee (the great Market for them) was not an hundred years
before Temp. Bonifac. 8. An. 1300. Polyd. Virg. ut supra, l. 8. c. 1.
. The forcing all Priests to vow Single Life, and renounce their Wives, was
first obtruded upon the Church by Pope Hildebrand An. 1074. Matthew. Westmon.
eod. An. Vincent. Spec. hist. l. 24. c. 45. Antonin. lib. 16. cap. 1.. 21.
: Without any Precedent (says an Old Historian) and (as many thought) of an
indiscreet Zeal, contrary to the Holy Fathers Opinion Sigebert. Chron. ad A.
1074.
. And yet he was not obeyed here in England in this for above a hundred years
after; for our Ancient Records say, All these Decrees availed nothing, for the
Priests by the Kings consent still had their Wives, as formerly Histor.
Petroburg. Anno 1127. ap. Spelm. T. 2. p. 36.
. Auricular Confession to a Priest was never imposed as necessary until the
Lateran Council Council. Later. Can. 21. An. 1215.
: It being little above fifty years before, that we are informed by the famous
Master of the Sentences, and by Gratian your great compiler of the Decrees,
that it was in our choice whether we would confess to God only, or to the
Priest also Peter Lomb. l. 4. sentent. did. 77. Gratian. de Poenit. did. 1.
c. 89. circ. An. 1150
; and T. Aquinas confesses this was the Opinion then Tho. Aqu. in 4. Sent.
did. 17.
. Transubstantiation (the discriminating Doctrine of your present Church) was
not held by the Fathers, as your own Doctors acknowledge Gregor. de Valent. de
Transub. lib. 2. cap. 7. Cardin. Cusan. Exercit. l. 6.
; and one of the Infallible Heads of your Church affirms, That the Elements
cease not to be of the substance and nature of Bread and Wine Gelasius Pap. de
secundis Naturis contra Eutych.
. The Schoolmen confess Transubstantiation is not Ancient Ap. Suarez. Tom. 1.
in Euch. disp. 7.
: And two of the most famous of them plainly deny it Scotus in 4. Sent. cap.
II. qu. 3. Durand. in 4. Sent. did. 10. qu. 1. n. 13.
. The Administering the Sacrament in One kind, is no older than the Council of
Constance (as was noted before) An. 1415.
; the practice of the whole Church, and of Rome it self being otherwise till
then T. Aquin. in Johan. 6. Alphons. a Castro adv. haeres. lib. 6.
: Finally, many things were never decreed and imposed as necessary to be
believed till the late Council of Trent; such as the equalling Apocryphal books
and Traditions to the undoubted Canon of Scripture, Justification by the merit
of Good works, etc. Which Council of Trent was never fully owned by the
Catholics of France Bochell. de Decr. Eccles. Gallic. l. 5. tit. 20.
: Nor was it ever received as a lawful Council by this English Nation.

It would be too tedious to run over all the rest of those Points wherein the
Roman differs from the English Church, or else it might be showed, that the
Appeals to Rome, and the Pope's Universal claim, Veneration of Relics,
Invocation of the Blessed Virgin, Pilgrimages, etc. were wholly unknown to the
three first Centuries, as the ingenuous Romanists will confess, and our Writers
have largely proved. By all which it appears, that the Old Religion of Rome for
the first three hundred years, had no formal Invocation of Saints nor Angels;
no Purgatory, nor Prayers to be delivered thence; no Images, no
Transubstantiation, no half Communion, no Jubilees, no Indulgences' no
constrained Coelibate, no Prayers in an unknown Tongue, no customary Auricular
Confession, no Apocrypha in her Canon of Scripture, nor the rest: Now if you
strip your Church of these Doctrines, she retains scarce any thing, but the
Protestant Articles of the Church of England; But if you take Rome with these
Additions, her Religion is not so Old by far as the Religion of this Church.
Perhaps it will be pretended, Though these Decrees were made in later Ages, yet
the Determinations were made by virtue of Apostolical Traditions preserved in
the Roman Church from the very beginning; and upon this Pretense your Late
Writers of Controversy have generally laid aside all Arguments from Scripture
and Ancient Fathers, and resolve all into Oral Tradition and the Infallibility
of the Roman Church: But what is this but to confess, that the Scriptures, the
Ancient Fathers, and all written Records (which are Impartial witnesses) do
make against them? only these unknown Traditions, which are only in their own
keeping (and may be of their own devising) these, they say, bear witness for
them, which is to make themselves Judges in their own Cause; and may justly
occasion your enquiry, whether the former Popes knew of these Traditions or no?
if not, how then came the later Popes to the knowledge of them? If they knew of
them of old, why did they let them sleep so long, and suffer the Church to err
for so many years for want of them? Did they discharge their Universal Headship
well in this Concealment? But in very truth it is Evident, the first Popes knew
of no such Traditions, and the later Popes have invented them to support their
New designs; which appears by the Ancient Popes declaring directly contrary to
these pretended Apostolical Traditions, of which take a few Examples. Pope
Gaius writes, That the Righteousness of the Saints avails nothing to our Pardon
or Justification Gaii Epist. Decret. ad Felicem, ap. Binium T. 1. p. 173.
. Pope Gelasius denies Transubstantiation, as was noted just now Gelas. de
secundis Not. contr. Eutych.
. The famous Gregory the Great says, He himself was the Emperors Servant, and
owed him obedience Grego. Mag. Epist. ad Maurit. lib. 2. Ep. 62.
; and declares, That God had given the Emperor power over Priests as well as
others Idem ad Theod. lib. 2. Ep. 65.
. The same Pope disowns the Title of Universal Bishop, as unfit for him or any
other Idem. ad Eulog. lib. 7. Epist. 30.
. He also determines, that it is lawful for Priests who cannot contain to marry
Respons. ad Interrog. secundam Aug. Cantuariens.
: And he allows Images for History and Memory only Ad Seren. lib. 7. Epist. 109.
. A later than he also in the Canon Law Decrees, that in such Diocese where
there be people of Diverse Languages, The Bishop shall provide fit men to
celebrate Divine offices, and Minister the Sacraments of the Church according
to the diversity of Rites and variety of their Languages: Decretal. Greg. l. 1.
Tit. 31. cap. 14. The aforesaid Pope Gregory the First affirms, that the Book
of Maccabees is not Canonical Greg. Mag. Expos. in Job. l. 19. c. 17.
. And as well the Ordinary Gloss, as the Old Editions of the Bibles which were
allowed by the Roman Bishops, and used in that Church before the Council of
Trent, do all distinguish between the Canonical Books, and those which the
Protestant Church now call Apocrypha Gloss. Ordin. An. 1200. in Praefat. de
libris Canon. and non Canon.

Biblia Complu tens. in Praef a Card. Ximenio approb. a Leone x. An. 1502.

Biblia Vulg. Edit. Basil. cum Gloss. Ord. An. 1506.

Biblia S. Pagnini and Birkmanni, and Vatabli per Rob. Stephan. A. 1541.


Yet the contrary to all these has been afterward decreed upon pretense of
being Apostolical Traditions: By which account you may see (if your Prejudices
hinder not) that the present Roman Church (as it differs from the Church of
England) retains neither the Old Religion of the Scriptures, nor that of the
Primitive Church in general, nay, nor that of the Ancient Church of Rome; for
they have omitted some Points, added others, and altered so many, that though
Rome keep the Old Name, it does not keep the Old Faith. We may now seek Rome in
the midst of Rome (as Juvencus Vitalis said): Nor can it be denied (says
Another) but the Roman Church is not a little different from its Ancient beauty
and splendour Cassander de Officio boni Viri.
. There is not the Faith, the Manners, nor the Worship of the Primitive Roman
Church; and therefore according to S. Ambrose, They that have not Peter' s
Faith cannot succeed to Peter' s Inheritance Ambros. de Poenitent. lib. 1. cap.
6.
; and as S. Hierome observes, They are not the Sons of the Saints who possess
their places, but they which follow their Works: And, That only (says
Lactantius) is the Catholic Church which retains the true Worship of God
Lactant. Instit. lib. 4. cap. ult.
. You might have seen and heard in Rome of Old, a Bishop without a Triple Crown
or the Title of Universal, Churches without Images, Priests under no Vows of
Single life, Litanies without any names of Saints or Ora pro nobis, the Mass
celebrated in a known Tongue, Bibles calling diverse books Apocrypha, which are
now reckoned Canonical Scripture; People not enslaved by Auricular Confession,
not debarred of the Cup, not frighted with Purgatory, nor impoverished with
purchasing Prayers and Indulgences to save them from thence, etc.

To conclude therefore, Why may you not justly desert them, who have in so many
things departed from the Old Religion, taught by Christ and his Apostles,
believed by the Ancient Fathers, and received by the first and best Bishops of
that same Church? If you desire to be really of the Old Religion, nay, if you
would hold the Faith of the Primitive Roman Church, you may come much nearer to
it, by embracing the Religion of your own Country, than by retaining the
Opinions of the Modern Church of Rome, which are most of them mere Innovations:
And though you have reverenced them while you supposed them Ancient and
Apostolical, yet we hope you will now renounce them when they are evidently
discovered to be Gibeonites disguised on purpose to deceive, and
(notwithstanding their moldy Pretenses, as if they had come from far, and were
descended from Ancient Times) their true Original is much later and nearer to
this present Age.

And now, Secondly, it will be easy to determine, That as the Roman is not the
Old Religion, so neither ought the Professors of it to appropriate to
themselves the Name of Catholic. For whether we take it in the Primary and
Grammatical sense for [Vniversal], or in its common acceptance for [True
Believers,] The Romanist has no peculiar Right to this Venerable Title: First,
because their Faith in those Points wherein it differs from the Church of
England is not Universal; for as the judicious Mr. Brerewood computes, the
Christians holding the Faith of Rome, are not above a fourth part of those who
believe in Christ Brerewoods Enquir. of Langu. and Rel.
: And the excellent Author of Europae Speculum Sir Edwyn Sands Europ. Spec. p.
268, 269, etc.
thus makes out the Account: The Greek Church (says he) in number exceeds any
other --, and the Protestants in number and circuit of Territory are very near
equal to the Papal part, these are two fourth parts: to which if we add the
Oriental Christians, which are not of the Roman Communion, and those under
Prester John or the Abassine Christians, we have another fourth part of the
Christian people; and then the Romanists, are but one fourth part of Christians
only. And it is very odd to say, that the fourth part is the whole: And surely
( my Friends) you cannot seriously think the Roman Church to be the Universal
(or Catholic) Church in this sense, when you remember that the Pope's
Authority is not acknowledged by the Generality of those Christians living in
England, Scotland and Ireland, with the Plantations thereunto belonging, nor by
those of Denmark and Sweden, nor by those of Transylvania, Walachia and
Moldavia, nor by the large Church of Russia, nor by the populous States and
Provinces of the Dutch, with their many Plantations abroad, nor by at least
five parts of six of the vast Country of Upper Germany, nor by two parts of
three of the Switzers, nor by those of Geneva and Piedmont, nor by very many in
France, Hungary, Poland, etc. How many Millions of Christians are there in the
Eastern World who have no dependence on the Roman Church? The Christians of the
Greek Church (properly so called) under the three Patriarchs of Constantinople,
Alexandria and Antioch, those of Armenia (who are professed Enemies of Rome,
and yearly Excommunicate the Pope). The Georgian Christians, with many other
lesser Names in Asia, the Abassine Christians in Africa; all these are not of
the Communion of the Roman Church, and therefore, how can that Church pretend
to the Title of Universal, or Catholic in this sense? But secondly, if you say
you are Catholics, that is, true Believers in all Points; I desire you to
consider, that none say so but your Selves, and it is suspicious their Witness
is not true, who bear witness to themselves, S. John v. 31. And where so many
Articles of Faith are New, it is probable some are False; since the Oldest
things in Religion are the truest and the best: So that upon the whole Enquiry,
the Church of England may more justly claim the Title of Catholic, because the
Principles thereof are few and clearly deduced from Scripture, believed in the
Primitive Church, and universally received by all sorts of Christians, who
differ in some Ceremonies; but for the Points, which this Church accounts
necessary to Salvation, the whole Christian World generally agrees in them. And
since the Religion of the Church of England is the most Ancient and most
Universal, you will be more truly of the Old Religion, and more properly styled
Catholics by embracing the Faith professed in your own Country, and disowning
those who damn all Christians but them of their own Party, although it be
Evident there are in the World, Christians far more in number than they, and
among those many equal in Learning and superior in Piety to the best of the
Roman Church, who are reprobated and sentenced to Eternal Flames by their
uncharitable Anathema's.

SECTION II.
Whether the said Opinions were not introduced for evil Ends?
ALthough all this be matter of Fact, and acknowledged by your own Writers, yet
I must expect, the venerable Esteem you have so long had for the Roman Church,
will make you slow to believe this deserved Charge of Innovation; and perhaps
you will wonder how so pure, so Celebrated, and so Orthodox a Church, as Rome
Primitive was, should vary so much from her first Faith, yet since the Change
is so Evident, and so well attested, I hope at least your Curiosity will tempt
you to Enquire: First, For what ends she should bring in these New Doctrines.
Secondly, By what means they became so generally believed. Thirdly, Of what
nature the things themselves are. Fourthly, Whether there be Authority
sufficient in the Roman Church to Impose them on the whole Christian World.
Fifthly, Whether the Catholics of England ought to be swayed by that Authority
to embrace them: And if in examining these Particulars any thing shall be
spoken which sounds harshly to your ears, (accustomed to hear nothing but
Encomiums of Rome) I shall desire you to consider, that Truth is seldom
grateful to Offenders; and I must say with one of the Writers of the Popes
Lives, We relate these things because they were done, and if the Popes would
not have base or evil things reported of them, they must do no such things, or
if they do them, not fancy they can be so concealed, as that they shall not be
known nor related to Posterity: Papyrius Masson. de Vit. Pont. For my own part,
I profess, I take no delight in Accusations; nor shall I say any thing out of
malice to that Church, but out of pity to the Souls of those who without reason
dote upon it: If you enquire, What ends the Roman Church could have to bring in
these New Doctrines? I Reply, The first decay of that Church began in her
Manners. For after there were Christian Magistrates (says S. Hierome) the
Church became fuller of Riches and emptier of Virtue Hieronym. Vita Malach.
. And for the Roman Bishops, they began very early to affect a Dominion beyond
the bounds of Priesthood, as Socrates notes Socrat. hist. lib. 7. c. 11.
; which made S. Basil say thirteen hundred years ago, I hate the Pride of that
Church Basil. Epist* 10. and Baronius Tom. 4. An. 327.. 32.
, and caused a Heathen Historian of that Age to say, The Roman Bishops were
richly clad, carried in Litters, and profuse in their feastings Ammian.
Marcellin. hist. lib. 27.
; But the faults of that Age were small in respect of Aftertimes, for as their
wealth and power increased, their manners grew still worse and worse, as we
find by the complaints of Salvian, and many others, till at length about the
ninth Age your own Baronius says, The face of the Roman Church was become most
filthy, when lewd and potent Curtezans swayed all there: At whose pleasure Sees
were changed, Bishops placed, and which is horrid to Pious ears, their Paramors
were thrust into S. Peter' s Chair, false Popes which only serve to fill up so
great a space of Time in the Catalogue of Roman Bishops Baron. Annal. Tom. 10.
An. 912.. 8.
. And a Writer who lived in those Times tells us. The World was amazed at the
Manners of the Romans Gerbert. Epist. 40. ad Stephanum Romans Eccl. Diacon.
. It is strange (says another Historian) how far in that Age they were
degenerated from the Piety of the Old Popes Sabellicus, Enne ad. 9. l. 2.
. This Age (as Another speaks) was especially unhappy in this, that for about
an hundred and fifty years, there were fifty Popes wholly fallen from the
Virtue of their Predecessors, being disorderly and Apostatical rather than
Apostolical Genebrard. Chronolog. lib. 4. 10. Secul. init.
. And if our brevity would permit it, we could show out of Platina, Onuphrius,
and Others of your own Writers, that there was no Reformation in all the Ages,
while these New Doctrines were in coining: Now it is the Great Philosopher's
observation, That Wickedness is destructive of good Principles Aristot. Ethic.
lib. 6.
. So that it is no wonder, if in such Decays of Piety, and such a flood of
Iniquity, the Roman Church did bring in many New Articles suitable to her
Manners; and I think when Pride, Luxury and Covetousness possess the Chair, we
can hardly expect any other Laws, but such as shall gratify these affections:
And the Practices as well as the Decrees of Rome for diverse of the latter
Centuries have so apparently tended this way, that it has been taken notice of
by all those of her own Communion, whose affection has not robbed them of their
discerning Powers; yea, even in Catholic Countries it has abated much of the
Reverence formerly paid to that See, by reason the designs thereof are so
apparently Secular, tending not to the Salvation of Souls, but the support of
their own Grandeur: Which makes me admire our English Romanists should hug
their Chains, and adore those who abuse their well-meaning Devotion with
Articles of Faith serving rather to carry on the Designs of the Imposers, than
the Salvation of their over credulous Believers: Methinks an easy apprehension
might discover, that the Roman Guides govern you by Principles that have more
of Machiavel in them, than of Conscience or Gospel-simplicity, and a little
consideration will inform you, that those things which they teach you to call
Religion, are Arts to enslave and impoverish you, and Engines to advance
themselves to the highest pitch of honor and abundance: S. Bernard (though a
great friend to the Roman Church) saw this, when he said, At Rome all regard is
given to Honor, but to Holiness none at all Bernard. de Consid. l. 4. c. 2.
. Were this the fault of particular men's Evil management (from which no Society
is free) it were more excusable, but there are Doctrines added to the Old
Catholic Faith (even most of the Tenets wherein they differ from the Church of
England) which are plain Artifices to increase the power and wealth of Rome.
Doctrines for which they dispute with us upon Demetrius's Principle, because
thereby they have their gain, Act. xix. 25. And many think the Guides of your
Church contend for some of these Principles, not because they believe them, but
because it is their Interest the people should be persuaded of them; which
makes them secretly laugh at their Credulity who will be imposed on by them, as
that great Cardinal did, when he gave the People (who flocked about him) his
Benediction in these words, Qui vult decipi decipiatur: And it is a vile
suspicion of this which we may gather from that observation of Hospinian, That
in Italy the name [Christian] is used for an Idiot or Fool Hosp. de orig.
Monach. l. 6. c. 66.
. But to be more particular, let us look over some Instances of such New
Doctrines as are taught in the Roman Church for Secular ends.

We begin with the Doctrine of Implicit Faith or believing as the Church
believes, a Doctrine unknown in S. Cyrils time, who speaking to his young
Christians, Bids them not merely believe the things he spoke because he
affirmed them, unless he did demonstrate them to be so out of the Divine
Scripture Cyril. Cateches. 4. p. 84.
. And truly this Novel Doctrine may agree with Pythagoras's Ipse dixit, and is
a good shelter for Paganism, the best Argument for which, Balbus says, is
this, That he had received it from his Forefathers Cicero de Nature. Deorum. l.
3.
. The Jewish Rabbis told their Disciples, They must believe whatever they
taught them, though they should say that their right hand was their left: and
it was becoming enough in Apel^es the Heretic to charge his seduced Scholars,
not to examine his Principles by Reason Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. c. 13.
: But it is below the Honor of true Religion to desire to be taken upon Trust;
so that this Doctrine is a policy of your Priests to secure their evil
Principles from being enquired into, and a device to make you depend on them as
Infallible Oracles, who can by this means lead you blindfold whither they
will, and impose any thing on you which serves their Interest, under the
pretense of true Religion. 2. Auricular Confession to a Priest was voluntary of
Old, and only used in case of a troubled Conscience, or a strong Temptation:
But it is now made necessary at stated times, in all probability to make the
Priest master of every man's Secrets, to discover the least inclination of their
Proselytes to leave them, to keep the Laity in awe, and make them venerate and
depend upon their Spiritual Guide, who hereby has them at his Mercy: And their
Doctors do affirm, that in some cases it is lawful to discover what is revealed
to them in Confession, especially if it concern the Roman Church Al. Hal. Par.
4. q 28. mem. 2. art. 2. Panorm. c. Omnis de poen. and rem. n. 24. D Soto de
rat. deteg. Secr. mem. 3. q 4*
. And thus they have an Intelligencer in the breast of every Great man of their
Communion. The Exempting the Regular Clergy from their Lawful Bishops
Jurisdiction (which S. Bernard complains of as an unjust thing Bernard. de
Consid. lib. 3. c. 4.
: And the freeing Ecclesiastics from their Natural Princes Authority is, that
the Pope may have Subjects numerous and potent to give Intelligence and abet
his Interest in the bowels of all Kingdoms. The Popes Supremacy, Appeals to
Rome, the Collation of Benefices and other Preferments, the Creating their
Maker in the Mass, with many others, do all aim at the Honor of the Church of
Rome, and the making its most inferior Priests revered: But because the Honor
of the Church of Rome cannot be maintained without vast riches, it is obvious
to all, that many of their New Doctrines and Practices have been introduced
with design to fill the Churches Treasuries: or if Ignorance and Superstition
were the Mother of these gainful Devices, it is certain Covetousness has been
an officious Nurse unto them. As in the case of Purgatory, and Prayers to
deliver Souls from thence, a Novel fancy, feared and suspected at first by
some, but countenanced and Decreed by that Church, thereby to oblige the people
to give liberally for themselves or their deceased Friends, to those who sell
their Prayers so commonly that they occasioned that Proverb, No penny no Pater
Noster. It is impossible to reckon the vast sums that this Opinion brings in,
for so many Masses, Dirige's, Requiems, for those Trentals, Obits, and
Anniversaries, which the deluded Romanists purchase, with Oblations of Houses
and Lands, Plate, Vestments, Jewels, Images and Ready money. And it is very
remarkable, that the fear of losing this Income was one main Impediment to
restrain the Pope from yielding to a Reformation. To these may be added the
Doctrines of Images and Invocation of Saints, with the reports of Miracles done
at certain places, and the Device of Canonization by the Pope (an Honor that
none of the Saints for the first five or six Centuries ever had) but certain it
is, that people being persuaded of Miracles wrought on Earth and Intercession
made in Heaven by these Saints, do undertake Pilgrimages to these places and
make Oblations there, or else send their Offerings if they cannot go: And this
in so excessive degrees, that there have been, and are some Shrines which cu^vy
the Treasuries of the greatest Princes of Europe; we may instance in Tho.
Beckets at Canterbury Antiq. Canterb. fol. 247.
, and the still famous Lady of Loretto Lassel's Vovage to Italy.
. The Relics also of all other Saints, yea, such as are said to belong to
Jesus himself, have been formerly carried about to collect Money, yea, sold for
great sums, and are accounted Marketable ware, and very gainful Commodities in
the Roman Church. The Year of Jubilee and distribution of Indulgences are used
as devices to get money, as your own Writers complain Polydor. Virgil. de
Invent. l. 8. c. 1.
. The Pope's pretenses to a power of Dispensing with Vows and Oaths, Leagues
and Contracts, Marriages in prohibited degrees, etc. fill his Coffers with
Silver and his Court with Suitors. The taking money for Penances and granting
Absolution upon it for Notorious sins, is so known an Infamy, that we have the
very book in our hands, copyed out of the Original in the Apostolic Chamber,
setting down the rates and sums to be paid for Absolution from the most horrid
wickednesses: And to convince us that Money is the only thing sought by the
Church in these Absolutions, the said book tells us, that These acts of Grace
cannot be granted to the Poor who have nothing, and therefore cannot be
comforted Vide, Taxam Camerae Apostol. Impress. Parisiis.
. And though the Priests and Friars have these and many more ways to draw Money
from the people, yet the Pope uses them but as Spunges, to suck in wealth from
others, that he may squeez it into his own Coffers afterward: For it is scarce
within the reach of Arithmetic what sums the Roman Church receives from the
Inferior Clergy and Bishops for Institutions, Confirmations, Investitures,
Palls, First Fruits, Tenths, etc. The very Tenths and First Fruits formerly
enjoyed by the Pope, amounting in this Nation, as we now compute them, to above
20000 l. per An. And in the time of the Roman Jurisdiction here, the Clergy
paid him a fifth part of their Livings, sometimes for two or three years
beside; and for the English Bishops, their subjection to Rome cost them dear,
Walter le Gray Archbish. of York paying Ten thousand pound sterling for his
Pall Matthew. Paris. page 274.
. And it was complained in the 23 d of Henry 8 th that the Papacy had received
out of England in about forty years past, for Investitures of Bishops only
Threescore thousand pounds L. Herbert. hist. Hen. 8th. p. 230.
. And the Doctrine of sorcing all Priests to renounce Marriage, is maintained
by the Policy of the Roman Court, that they may not only profit by them living,
but be their Heirs when they die, there being no other good Reason to be given
for this rigid Imposition; for sure they will not say it is simply unlawful for
Priests to marry, since two Popes, S. Gregory the Great and Pius the Second,
affirm They may be allowed to marry Gregor, Magn. Respons. ad. Interrog. August
Cant. 2. Pius 2. in G^stis Council. Basil.
; and their great Canonist says, There is as great reason to allow Priests
marriage now, as ever there was to restrain it Panormitan. de Clericis conjug.
Can. Cum Olim.
. What then! do they forbid it that Priests may be more pure? that cannot be
the Reason, because S. Paul says, Marriage defiles not, Heb. xiii. 4. And
Fornication which certainly does defile, is tolerated, if not allowed Deoret.
P. Alex. l. 3. tit. 2. c. 3.
, and called a Venial sin Gloss. ad Gratian. did. 82. c. 5.
: However reputed by their Casuists a lesser sin in the Priest, than Marriage
Ibid did. 34. Can. 7. Costerus enchirid. de Coelibat. cap. 17.
. And how pure this Doctrine makes your Clergy let Experience and your own
Writers teach you. There are many (says S. Bernard) who cannot be hid for
their multitude, nor do they seek to be concealed through their Impudence, who
being kept from Nuptial Remedies run into all filthiness Bern. de Convers. ad
Cleric. cap. 29.
. There are few free (says Another) in these days from the crime of
Fornication Gloss. ad Gratian. did. 82 c. 5.
. The Pope thinking it almost a Miracle some Ages since to hear a Candidate for
a Bishopric attested to be a pure Virgin Matthew. Paris. hist. An. 1234.
. The true Reason therefore of this Doctrine, which occasions so much
wickedness, we may learn from the Canon. Law: which allows not Regular Bishops
to dispose of their Estates by Will, nor others of the Clergy to be too free of
their Alms in their sickness Decretal. Gregor. lib. 3. de Testam. tit. 26. cap.
7, 9.
, (how earnestly soever they exhort the Laity thereunto:) And thus the Church
becomes their Heir, And these Spoils of the Clergy (as they very significantly
term them) which fall to the Church at their deaths amount to a good round sum,
as a judicious Author observes Europ. Specul. page 197.
. I cannot express one half of those Arts which the Roman Church has to drein
both Clergy and Laity: But certain it is, they do draw a Mass of Treasure
Annually from the Countries under their yoke, insomuch that it was complained
of to the Council of Spain, that Pope Pius 5th had got fourteen Millions out of
that Kingdom in a short space Europ. Specul. page 198.
. And in the time of Henry 3 d of England it was computed, that the Popes
Revenue out of this Nation exceeded the Kings Antiquitat. Brittan p. 178.
. And another time complaint was made by the English, that there went
Threescore thousand Marks yearly out of this Land to Rome Matthew. Paris. page
667. and Epist. Anglor. ad Innocent.
. I shall not mention the Frauds and Cruelties used in Collecting this Money,
only noting that Johan. Sarisburiensis, a great Bigot of the Popes (and a hot
stickler in Beckets Cause) assures us, That the Legates of the Apostolical
Seat, did Tyrannize over the Provinces, as if the Devil (says he) were gone
out from the presence of the Lord to scourge the Church Sarish. Polycraticon.
lib. 5. qap. 16.
; yet to oppose these Officers of the Pope, is reckoned at Rome the most mortal
sin: No wonder then can it be, that Pope Sixtus 5 th, in five years time got
together Five Millions of Crowns (as Ciracella informs us) Four Millions of
which his Successor Gregory 14 th wasted in Pomp and Riot in less than Ten
months time: Europ. Spec. p. 263. And indeed they spend these Sacred Treasures
as badly as they get them; the very Popes themselves of late designing only to
swallow all the little neighboring Principalities, and to make themselves
Temporal Princes, to raise their Nephews and Neeces (if not Sons and Daughters)
and advance their Families to the highest Dignities and Fortunes. So that there
is little of Holiness left in them but in an empty Title, it being a little
above a hundred years since one said, No man at this day looks for Holiness in
the Popes, they are accounted excellent, if they be tolerably good, or less
wicked than other men are: Papyr. Masson. in Vit. Julii 31 An. 1550: and the
rest of his Clergy and People are suitable; for, It cannot be dissembled (says
a late exact Observer) that the whole Country is strangely overflowd with
Wickedness, with filthiness of Speech, with beastliness of Actions; both
Governors and Subjects, both Priests and Friars, each striving as it were with
other in an Impudentness therein: Europ. Spec. p. 27. But I will not pursue
this most ungrateful Subject, which I profess I do not relate out of any envy,
or delight in telling such sad stories: but I am forced to say these unpleasing
Truths to rescue your Souls from those who serve the ends of their Ambition and
Covetousness out of your Devotion; from those who persuade you to call that
Religion which maintains them in the highest plenty and luxury: from those who
Decree, that Good works merit Salvation; not because they believe this Doctrine
(for if they did, they would do more Goodworks themselves) but because this
Persuasion among the people fills the Churches Treasures, and has made the Old
Pious and poor Priests and Deacons of Rome, Illustrious Cardinals, who in
Magnificence, and Pomp dare vye with the greatest Estates of Christendom; and
their Great Master scorns to have Kings and Emperors thought his Equals:
Wherefore, when you have duly weighed all this, and considered the Pride and
insatiable Avarice of the Roman Church, and withal observed, how all the
Doctrines in which they differ from us, tend merely to advance these ends, you
cannot think it unlikely, that such men with such designs should alter and add
to their Old Faith, especially when you hear S. Paul say, The love of Money is
the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the
Faith: 1 Timothy vi. 10. It is nothing that is truly Ancient or really good, that
we persuade you to renounce; but Novel Policies and Devices which minister to
Secular designs, and you ought to account him your Friend who would rescue you
from this abuse, and persuade you into that Church, whose Principles are
Primitive, plain and honest, whose Clergy are content with the Revenues which
the Laws of the Land allow them, having none of these Unchristian Artifices of
extraordinary gains, nor no design to teach you any Doctrines, but such as will
make you good, and direct you in the way to Heaven.

SECTION III.
Whether the said Opinions were not established by evil means?
THe next Enquiry is, By what means these New Doctrines became so generally
believed? And here first we may note, your Church has good reason to use this
Proverb, Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion; because the wretched blindness of
those Ages wherein these Opinions were propagated, did hugely contribute to
their Reception: for it is not to be denied, that from the time of the decay of
the Western Empire, and the Irruptions of the Goths and Vandals into Europe,
there began to be a great decay of Learning, and Barbarism crept in by degrees,
which is evident by the different style and way of writing which the later
Fathers use, in comparison of those who lived in the first four or five
Centuries, and at length this Ignorance became so universal, That the study of
the liberal Arts was generally laid aside; as an Old Historian complains
Sabellic. Enne. 9. lib. 1. ^*
: and that Age which bred many of these Errors is commonly by your own Writers
called, The Obscure Age Baron. Annal. Tom. x. An. 900.. 1.
, being wholly without any persons eminent for Wit or Learning Genebrard.
Chron. lib. 4.
, (n) Praefatio R. Aluredi ad Pastoral. Gregorii.
the very inferior Priests being not able to translate an Epistle into Latin
Claud. Espen. Com. ad 2 Timothy 3.
; which Egyptian darkness continued in all the Western world till a few years
before the Reformation, as your own Espencaeus confesses Claud. Espen. Com. ad
2 Timothy 3.
. Now this gross stupidity must needs make the World apt and easy to be abused
with the most absurd and monstrous Doctrines; for Ignorance is the Mother of
all Errors (as an Old Council affirms Council. Toletan. 4. c. 24. A. 633.
, and not of true Devotion (as you now pretend.) This made way for the Politic
Guides of Rome to impose such Opinions on the Church as might best serve their
own ends; These Tares were sowed while men slept, Matthew. xiii. 25. and there
were many Circumstances concurring in those unlucky Ages which contributed to
the furthering the Roman designs, the withdrawing of the Emperors into the
East, and first the Decay of the Western Empire; then the destruction of the
Eastern, and the desolation of all the famous Oriental Churches by the
spreading Inundation of Turks and Saracens; so that the Pope had neither
Emperor nor Patriarch (for a long time) that could oppose him, the Miseries of
all Christendom giving him opportunity to make himself the sole Governor of
these Parts of the World, and none were able to contend with him, though many
complained of his Usurpation; Johan. Sarisburiensis telling Adrian 4 th (who
asked him what men thought of the Roman Church) That they esteemed it a
Stepmother, not a Mother --, and the Pope of Rome himself was grievous to all,
and almost intolerable Sarisbur. Polycraticon. lib. 6. cap. 24.
. I shall not now be so tedious to you as to relate, how this Church by force,
and by taking all advantages did attempt to suppress all that did oppose her
Impositions and Grandeur; what wars the Popes raised against the German
Emperors, what occasions they took to enslave the Greek Church, when they
petitioned for relief against the conquering and cruel Turks; what Persecutions
they raised against the Albigenses, Bohemians and Wicklevists, and how they
destroyed all that resisted their Innovations with Fire and Sword; only
desiring you to remark, That the Roman Church was the first Author of putting
men to death for that which they call Heresy: A practice wholly differing from
the Rules of Christianity 2 Timothy ii. 24, 25.
, from the Opinion and Practice of the Ancient Church Tertul. ad Scap. c. 2.
Council. Toletan. 4. cap. 56.
: It being a New and unheard of way of Preaching (says your S. Gregory) to
force men by stripes to believe Gregorius M. Epist. ad Episc. Constantinop.
; yet by Fire and Faggot the modern Church of Rome affrights the World into the
Embracing these Articles, or by Inquisitions and Racks, awes them into silence,
not daring to question them: Her Greatness, Riches, Interest and Severity to
Opposers, has been one means to obtrude the belief of her gainful Articles
upon men; and her Policies and Frauds have been another, for you cannot think
it unlikely that they (who have so little Piety, as to turn Religion into
Policy) should have so little honesty as to equivocate for the defense of their
Politic Religion; and verily, the Ignorance and Credulity of those blind Ages
were such, that your Church never sought for solid Arguments to confirm their
New Decrees, but built them usually upon Fictions, and proved them by notorious
Forgeries, and accounted this way of proceeding not only lawful but Pious, so
that whosoever reads those Discourses of your Jesuits in defense of these
Deceits, called by them Piae frauds, will conclude the Highpriests of
Rome-Christian as well as Rome-Heathen to have been of Opinion, That it was
expedient the people should be deceived in their Religion, as Scaevola the
Pagan, Pontifex M. in S. Augustine says August. de Civit. Dei. l. 4. c. 27.
; and no doubt your Church agrees with the Heathen Varro in the same Author
Idem, ibid. cap. 31.
, where he says, There are many Truths in Religion which it is not expedient
for the people to know, and though diverse things therein be false, yet the
people ought to think them true: The instances of some particulars will make
this more evident; 1. Miracles were the foundation, and most authentic proofs
for Invocation of Saints, Veneration of Images and Relics, Pilgrimages,
Purgatory, Monastical Vows, and most of the gainful Articles of the Roman
Church; and yet S. Chrysostom says, that there were no footsteps of the power
of Miracles left in the Church in his time Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio, l. 4.
. And your S. Gregory thinks them unnecessary among Believers Gregor. Mag. hom.
4.
, and so do many others Augustine. de ver. Relig. cap. 24. Ferus Commentar. in
lib. Judic.
: Yet in the dark Ages nothing was more frequently pretended than Miracles
wrought by Saints living and dead, as appears by the stories of their Lives,
and the Legends of your Church, which Relations are so senseless and so
ridiculous, so impossible and unlikely, so little agreeing with Chronology,
History, or Geography, that the Modern Writers of the Roman Party are ashamed
of them. Hence your own Canus complains, that these Authors of Saints Lives
with false and counterfeit Fables have blemished the Lives of Saints Canus,
Loc. Commun. lib. II cap. 6.
. And the same Writer says there Idem ibid.
, that the Author of your so famed Golden Legend was a man of an Iron forehead
and a Leaden soul: Harding also affirms Harding against Jewels Apol.
, That there be many vain Fables in it: Simeon Metaphrastes, is another of
these Miracle-Writers, and is so eminent that he is read in the Modern Roman
Breviaries Breviar. Romans Fest. Nicol. 6. Dec. Fest. S. Blasii, Feb. 13.
, and yet Cardinal Bellarmine blames him for incredible stories, Fest. S.
Alexii, Julii 17.
and relations not agreeing to Ancient Writers, He adds (says he) many things
out of his own wit, not as they were really done, but as they might have been
done Bellarmin. de Scriptor. Eccles.
. And is not this notorious forgery? Yea, the Popes themselves in the latest
sort of Breviaries have left many of these fabulous Miracles out, since they
have done the work now for which they were invented; the Doctrines supported by
these lies are now generally embraced, and when the Arch is completed, the
Props on which it was raised, may be laid aside; yet still you ought to ask, If
these stories were false, how came the Infallible Church to put them into her
Offices? if they were true, why does she now reject them? And it is observable,
that the Roman Church at present pretends but to very few Miracles, and the
Doctors thereof (in this knowing Age) are very shy of believing any at all, as
one of your own Priests proves at large Rog. Wid^ingt. de Jaram. Fidelitatis,
c. x. p. 402.
. The Reason of which must needs be, because they fear this Inquisitive and
learned Generation should discover the fraud of them. For since Miracles are
especially necessary to convince unbelievers, there is far more need of them
since the Reformation (when so many disbelieve the Religion of your Church)
than was before (when all the Nations of the West were at the Devotion
thereof.) Yet then many Miracles are recorded and now few or none, an Argument
sufficient to make a wary man believe, there were few real Miracles at any time
since the settlement of Christianity; only the superstitious and ignorant
credulity of the former Ages was fit to be abused with such Pretenses: And now,
why are you so stiff in maintaining those Opinions which were believed at first
upon so slight and false inducements, as these Legends and Miracles are
confessed to be? But this Argument is of late so fully handled by two excellent
Pens Dr. Stillingfleet of Miracles. Author of the Reflections on the Romish
Devotions.
, that I may dismiss it, with my hearty wish you would read those Tracts
without Prejudice, being not written to abuse real Religion (as some tell you)
but to undeceive you, and unmask that hypocrisy which has long walked in the
venerable Mantle of Truth: Nor ought you to be angry at the Relators, but at
the Inventors of such falsehoods, who have got many fair Houses and Lands, vast
sums of Money and innumerable costly Oblations by these Fictions, to the scandal
of Christianity it self. My second instance shall be of the Artifice of Forging
Records for to attest their Novel Doctrines (especially that of the Pope's
Supremacy) they put out diverse spurious Tracts under illustrious names, which
served to wheedle an illiterate Age into a Reverence for the Roman Church and
her Opinions; whereas now the cheat is so palpable, that your modern Doctors
(though they keep the Conclusions) disown those feigned books that were the
Premises from whence they were inferred: Of this nature are the Decretal
Epistles of all the Popes from Clemens down to Pope Syricius An. 385. formerly
cited as good Authorities, and transcribed some parts of them into your Canon
Law, but now the most learned Romanists confess a great part of them to be mere
forgeries Jo. de Turrecrem* de Eccl. l. 2. c. 101.
: Baronius styles diverse of them Apocryphal Baron. Annal. T. 2. An. 102.. 6, 7.
Jo. Driedo de dogm. and Scrip. Ecc. l. 1. c. 2.
: And Cardinal Cusanus says; That being applied to the times of those Holy men
they do betray themselves Cusanus de Concord. Cathol. l. 2. c. 34. Cl.
Espencaeus de contin. l. 1. c. 2. Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. l. 2. c. 14.
And indeed these Epistles were never cited by any good old Author, and were
first brought into France by one Riculfus Arch. B. of Ments five hundred years
after those Popes were dead, as Hincmarus Arch. B. of Rhemes a Writer of that
Age affirms Hincm. Rhem. lib. Contr. Hincm. Laudunens.
, and Baronius also confesses Baron. Annal. T. 9. An. 865.. 5, 6, 7.
. Nor did the Roman See blush some Centuries ago to allege for its Supremacy
the most fabulous Donation of Constantine the Great, wherein he is pretended to
make the Pope head over the whole Church, and superior to all the four
Patriarchs of the East (naming Constantinople for one, which City was not yet
built) giving him in fee the City of Rome, and all Italy, with all the
Provinces of the Western Empire (though he gave all these to one of his Sons
afterward). This senseless Edict was pleaded by several of the Popes in former
times to countenance their ambitious pretenses Adrian. Ep. ad Constant. and
Iren. Act. Council. Nicen. 2. An. 794. Leo. 9. Epist. ad Michael. Constable. An.
1054.
, and of Old was received without suspicion by the gravest and learned
Doctors, says Binius Not. in Edict. Constant. Council. Tom. 1. p. 154.
, who yet confesses there, it was a mere forgery devised (he thinks) by the
Greeks, and now adays all Romanists generally disown it, and indeed it is as
ridiculous a forgery as ever the world saw. My Brevity will not allow me to
enlarge upon this Subject, otherwise I could add innumerable Examples of like
dealing. The absurd Council of Sinuessa, The monstrous Recognitions of Clement,
The threescore new Canons fathered by Turrian and others, upon the famous
General Council of Nice, The Pontifical ascribed to Pope Damasus; with
innumerable other Tracts of the same Metal, being all apparent Forgeries, and
yet were long countenanced by Rome to support her unjust Supremacy and other
Innovations. My third Instance shall be of Suppressing or corrupting true
Records, of which take a few Examples: The Legates of Rome, within less than a
hundred years after the general Council of Nice did produce two Canons (to
prove the Popes Right to receive Appeals) in a famous Council of Carthage, An.
419. which Canons they pretended were made in the aforesaid Nicene Council; but
these Canons wholly differed from all the best Manuscripts of that Council then
extant, particularly from two eminent ones, which the African Fathers sent for
from Constantinople and Alexandria; nor do they agree with those genuine
Editions of the Nicene Council now extant; and indeed the Council of Carthage
received not these pretended Canons of Nice, but esteemed them to have been
corrupted, as we do at this day: Not long after (to abet the Roman Supremacy)
Pope Leo writing to Theodosius the Emperor, cites a Canon of a particular and
dubious Council at Sardi^a of later Date and less Authority, affirming it to be
a Canon of the general Council at Nice Leo. Pap. Epist. ad Theodof. Council.
Tom. 2.
: The Edition of the Councils put out by Dionysius Exiguus about An. 520. being
for a long time the sole approved Copy extant in these parts of the World, does
in favor of the Popes Supremacy, leave out diverse Canons even of General
Councils which seem to make against it Exempli gr. Tres Canon. Council. 1.
Constantinop. Omnes* Can. Council. Ephesians. Oecum. 3. Canon. 28. Council.
Chalcedon. Oecum. 4.
, though the said Canons are recorded in Zonaras and Balsamon, and in this Age
confessed to have been made in those Councils by the Romanists themselves; but
in the Time when the Supremacy was in hatching, it was not thought expedient
those Canons should be known: It were endless to reckon up all the Additions,
Diminutions, and Alterations, which all the Roman Editions of the Councils
since, are guilty of; and because an ingenious Essay has been made that way by
a late Author, I shall refer my Reader thither Roman Forgeries print. Land.
1673.
, and out of infinite Examples conclude with one Evident piece of
Falsification: The xxxv. Canon of the Council of Laodicea, Forbids the faithful
to call on the name of Angels, which being a condemnation of the Doctrine and
Practice of Rome in Praying to Angels, The Later Editions of this Council have
impudently put in, Angulos [Angles or Corners] instead of Angelos [Angels
Angulos, legunt. Merlin. Tom. 1. Council. Edit. An. 1530 Colon.

Crabbe p. 226. ed. A. 1538. Colon. Carranza sum. Council. page 82. Lugd. 1568.


]; though all the Greek Copies ap. Zonar. Balsam. and Harmenopulum.
and Fathers read (...) Theodor. in Colos. 3.

Photius. Nomo-Canon. Tit. 12. c. 9.


, and all the old Latin Exemplars have, Angelos Dionys. Exig. Cod. Can. n. 138.

Crescon. breviar. Can.. 90.

Fulgent. Ferrand. Bre^. Can.. 184.


. Yea, Pope Adrian himself (before this worship of Angels came up) read it
[Angelos] in that Epitome of Canons which he sent to Charles the Great, An.
773. Thus they corrupt the Councils to suit them to their own Opinions, Nor
have single Fathers and Ancient Authors fared better: S. Cyprian put out by
Pamelius is altered in many places contrary to the Ancient Copies; for Example
where the Father says, the Church is founded Super Petram Cyprian. Ep. 40.
Edit.

Gryphii. p. 52.

Morellii 124.


, Pamelius changes it into Super Petrum, upon Peter, instead of upon a Rock
Editio Pamel. Ep. 40. p. 7.
. And Ludovicus Vives (a Romanist) assures us that there are Ten or Twelve
lines positively asserting Purgatory, put into the Printed Copies of S. Aug. de
Civitate Dei lib. 21. cap. 24. contrary to the Ancient Manuscripts Ludov. Vives
Comment. in Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 21. c. 24.
. Fulbertus Carnotensis quotes S. August. saying of the Sacramental bread, This
then is a figure (the Roman Editions put in) As a Heretic will say; when
indeed S. Augustine says so, and speaks his own sense Fulbertus Carnot. edit.
An. 1608. page 168.
. Aimonius speaking of the Eighth Council says, They determined about Images
otherwise than the Orthodox Fathers had Decreed: and so Baronius reads Baron.
Annal. Tom. x. an. 869.
: But the Modern Printed Copies quite contrary put in, -- according as the
Orthodox Fathers had Decreed Aimonius de Gestis Franc. l. 5. c. 8.
. But why do I stand upon particular Instances, This wickedness which all other
men account the same Villainy with suborning false Witnesses, stopping the
mouths of the True, and counterfeiting Hands and Seals, is owned by the present
Church of Rome: And Sixtus Senensis does highly extol Pope Pius 5 th. for his
most holy Decree, to burn all Books which were (accounted) Heretical, To purge
and cleanse all Catholic Authors, and especially the Writings of the Fathers
Epistol. Nuncup. ante Bibliothecam Sixti Senens.
. Now in what manner they effect this most holy work, the Bel^ick Inquisitors
(appointed by the Roman See*) shall tell you, We strike out (say) they) many
Errors, in other of the Ancients, we extenuate and excuse them, or by feigning
a Commentitious gloss, either deny, or fix a commodious sense to their words
Censores Belg. de libro Bertrami.
. Thus they served S. Ambrose his works, cancelling and altering whole pages
together, contrary to all the Old Manuscripts, as appeared by the Original
Papers which Savarius the Stationer showed to Francis Junius, according to
which the Inquisitors had ordered him to Print that Edition: Lugdun. An. 1559.
Junii Prae^. ad Indicem Expurg. Cens. Belg.
. Thus they left the story of Pope Joan out of the Copies of Anastasius
Biblioth. though the Manuscripts had the said story in them as Marquar.
Freherus testified, who lent them the said Manuscripts Blondel Epist. ante
librum de Joan. Papis c. 3.
. And I might fill a Volume with Instances of like unjust dealings; but I will
only add the memorable account which Boxhornius one of your Divinity Professors
at Lovain gives of himself, viz. That he having been employed by the
Inquisitors to strike out at least six hundred places of the Ancients, which
seemed to make against the Roman Doctrines, was so troubled in mind upon it,
that it was an occasion of his turning Protestant, and made him resolve to quit
that Religion which could not defend it self without such manifest Impostures
Henr. Boxhorn. de Eucharistia l. 3. initio.
. And I wish the consideration thereof might have the same effect upon you; for
the matter of Fact is so evident, that the Index Expurgatorius, the Book which
directs these Falsifications, is now come into Protestant hands to the eternal
Infamy of the Roman Church; whose people cannot rationally trust to any Author
which comes through their Priests dishonest hands; And since false Books are
invented, true and genuine Writers altered and corrupted, or else wholly
prohibited, if they seem to make against them (for which cause Clement 8 th.
puts the Bible into his Index of prohibited Books) and all Editions but their
own condemned and burnt by the Roman Church; the people must needs be deluded
into a persuasion, that all these New Doctrines are Primitive Truths, when
indeed this abominable Forging evidently shows, that the Pope and his Conclave
think that both Scripture and Antiquity do make against these Innovations, and
would discover the Imposture, if they were suffered to speak out; to whom I may
justly apply the words of Arnobius, To intercept what is written, and to design
to smother published Records, is not to defend the Gods, but to fear the
Testimony of the Truth bArno. advers. Gent. lib. 1.
: And because Good men (as S. Augustine says) will not deceive; but neither
good nor evil men would willingly be deceived Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 32.
, I may suppose that the most Devoted Romanists cannot but discern how unsafe
he is in believing, as those men teach him, who make no Conscience to invent,
impose, and pretend things never so false, provided they may thereby advance
their Churches Interest, or their own private ends: They who dare write Lies,
will not be afraid to speak them, and they who corrupt the Remains of the Holy
Saints deceased, are not to be trusted with the Souls of the living; And
whoever gives himself up to such Guides, unnaturally chooses his own delusion,
and desperately hazards his own salvation: S. Ambrose advises us if we choose
a Guide, to be careful he be endued with two properties, Honesty and Prudence:
for his Honesty will be a security that he will not deceive us, and his
Prudence will prevent our suspicion of his being deceived himself Ambros. de
Offic. l. 2. c. 8.
; which wise Counsel if you follow, you must no longer adhere to these
unfaithful Leaders: Nor ought you to fear to forsake them, either because your
Forefathers fathers relied on them, or because the Doctrines that they teach
were once so generally received here; since your Forefathers lived in an Age
wherein there was little means to detect these Forgeries, whereas you are by
Providence fallen into those times* wherein all the Dishonest Arts of that
Church are discovered so plainly, that if your Forefathers had seen as much as
you may see, they would have forsaken Rome long since, and not have left you
this Objection to make: Nor are the Doctrines ever the better for being
generally received, when as they were imposed on the World by such evil means
as Force and Fraud; which being thus made evident, you can no longer wonder how
these Innovations came to be so generally believed, being propagated by as
wicked means as they were invented for evil ends: So that now what the Roman
Church thought would secure her Opinions (if it could have been kept close)
must needs make them odious (being once laid open) and the Impostures* which
they designed should tie men to their Church, will (as some of their own
Doctors have prophesied) be an Occasion to make all Discerning men turn from
it; for Religion is to be defended (says Lactantius) not with wickedness but
fidelity, for if you attempt to defend Religion by Evil Arts, you do not
defend, but pollute and violate it Lactant. Instit. lib. 6. c. 19.
.

SECTION IV.
Whether the said Opinions tend to advance the Ends of true Religion?
NOw though it be altogether unlikely those Principles should be either true or
good, which stand in need of such Arts to propagate and defend them, yet
because you have been so long accustomed to call these things Religion, and it
is not easy to lay aside our rooted Prepossessions, we will pass to the Third
Enquiry, viz. Whether the things themselves be good in their own nature, and
Parts of true Religion? Now we may try this by considering what are the ends of
True Religion, and whether these Principles serve to advance those ends? True
Religion therefore has three Principal Ends: 1. To advance the honor of God.
2. To assist us in the Devout worshipping of him. 3. To teach us to imitate him
by a holy life and conversation. Let us here therefore examine, whether the
peculiar Articles of the Roman Church do not hinder rather than promote these
Ends: For if it appear these Principles are dishonorable to God, impediments
to Devotion, and hindrances to a holy life; then those Doctrines are also Evil
in their own nature, and they can be no real parts of a good or True Religion:
Nor must you retain them because you have once judged them good, if upon Trial
they prove to be otherwise. We must be firm to our Principles (says Epictetus)
yet not to all of them, but only to those which are right; we must begin at the
right end, and first lay the foundation by considering whether our Principles
be good or evil, and after build upon that by constancy and firmness of
Resolution Arrianus in Epictet. lib. 2. cap. 15.
. Wherefore let me desire you patiently and impartially to enquire.

First, If there be not some of your Principles and Practices which tend not to
the honor of God; if it be a dishonor to the Divine Majesty for a mortal man
to contradict his Laws by contrary Constitutions, I fear your Church will
hardly be found innocent: For do they not command things which God has
forbidden in as plain words as can be spoken, as in the case of Images, Exodus
xx. 4? and Prayer in an unknown Tongue, 1 Con. xiv. 28. Do they not forbid
things which God has allowed, as in the case of Priests Marriage? Heb. xiii.
4. 1 Cor. vii. 2 Chap. ix. 5. 1 Timothy iii. 2. 12? and taking the Cup from the
People? which they have decreed with a Non obstante, that is, notwithstanding
our Lord Jesus appointed the contrary. Do they not presume to dispense with the
very Laws of God, in many cases of Matrimony and Divorce, of Vows, Oaths,
Leagues and Contracts? So that laying aside the Commandment of God, ye hold the
Tradition of men, as our Savior speaks, Mark vii. 8. Your Holy Father who does
all this may think himself the greatest upon Earth, but if our Lord Jesus tell
us the Truth, He shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. v. 19.

Secondly, Is it not a great derogation to an Infinite and Invisible Being, to
be represented by an Image, and worshipped under such Representations?
Agreeable to the worship which Heathens gave to their false gods Lactant.
Instit. lib, 2. cap. 2.
, and some Heretics to our Savior Irenaeus adv. haeres. l. 1. c. 24.
, but contrary to the Decrees and Practice of the Primitive Christians Council.
Eliber. can. 36.
, and to the great scandal of Modern Jews, Origin in Cells. lib. 7.
who call your Churches Houses of Idols, Tertul. Apol. c. 30.
upon this account Cornel. Agrip. de Vanit. Scien. cap. 57.
. Thirdly, Does not the Doctrine of Merits cast a palpable dishonor upon the
glorious Redemption wrought by Jesus Christ? Sure I am, Bern. de Annun. sermon.
1. p. 123.
diverse of the Ancients, as well as of your later Writers, Durand. in Sent.
lib. 2. did. 8. qu. 1.
think so August. de Verb. Apos, Ser. 15.
. Nor can we think it to be less than Blasphemy, Walden de Sacr. Rit. Tom. 3.
Tit. 1. cap. 7.
which Bellarmine affirms, viz. That a man may be said to be his own Redeemer
without any injury to Christ Bellarm. de Purgat. l. 1. c. 14.
. Doubtless those who fancy they can redeem themselves, and satisfy for their
own sins, cannot but have a mean esteem of Christ's Merits and Satisfaction.
Fourthly, Your praying to Angels and Saints, especially the blessed Virgin,
making them your Mediators and Patrons, and asking the greatest things of them,
has made Prayers to God by Jesus Christ to be generally neglected by the
vulgar people, who say ten times as many Ave Mary's as Pater Noster's, and
wickedly fancy the Blessed Virgin and Holy Saints are more compassionate than
our Lord Jesus. This Doctrine (says a very wise man) has wrought that general
effect in all Countries subject to the Papacy; that men have more affiance, and
assume to themselves a greater conceit of comfort in the Patronage of the
creatures and servants of God, than of God himself, the Prince and the Creator
Sand. Europae Spec. page 5, 6, 7.
. A fault which St. Paul lays to the Heathens charge, Romans i. 25. How
dishonorable must it needs be, to leave Jesus that one Mediator: 1 Timothy ii. 5.
(who always does certainly hear us, and is most apt to pity us, and best able
to help us) to pray to God by those, concerning whom your own Doctors doubt
whether they know any thing done here Gratian. cause. 13. qu. 2. c. 19. 2
Decret. Gloss. Interlin. in Isa. 63.
? and the Scripture plainly says they do not Job xiv. 21, 22.
. Reason shows it is impossible they should hear many Prayers in diverse places
at once. Eccles. ix. 5.
To have the worship paid to the Master and the Servants, Isa. lxiii. 13.
the same in all outward expressions, only differing in a nice
Schooldistinction, must needs be an affront to the King of Saints. If you have
any tenderness or zeal for the honor of Jesus, it cannot but be offensive to
you, to observe how your Legends tell of greater miracles wrought by some of
their fabulous Saints, than ever Jesus wrought. To hear one of your Church say,
That Christ did nothing which S. Francis did not do, yea, that he did more than
Christ himself Lib. Conform. fol. 1149.
. What is more injurious to the honor of the Divine Majesty, than your S.
Bonaventure's putting in the name of the Virgin Mary into David's Psalms instead
of the name of God? To have her adored by the Heathenish Title of the Queen of
Heaven Jer. vii. 18. ubi videtur esse nomen Junonis olympiae.
, and invocated by the impious name of Mother of the whole Trinity Missal.
Polon. fol. 237.
! These things are rather Blasphemy than Devotion, and as dishonorable to God
as they are Dissonant from Antiquity. Let none (says Epiphanius) adore Mary;
but why do I mention a Woman? nay, not any Man: this Reverence is due only to
God, nor are the Angels capable of such glorification Epiphan. adv.
collyridianos Panar. haer. 79.
Fifthly, The supposing a necessity of superadding the Saints Merits and the
daily Sacrifice of the Mass, to the Merit of that one Offering for sin which
Jesus made on the Cross: Heb. ix. 28. is an evident lessening the value and
sufficiency of the Death of Christ, Sixthly, The calling of the Holy Scripture
a Nose of Wax, a Leaden Rule, and an Inky Gospel Pighius Hierarch. lib. 3.
. The putting in the Apocryphal books, Canus lib. 3. c. 2.
wherein are some things wicked 2 Maccab. xiv. 42.
, Turrian. in Sadeel, page 99.
and others notoriously false Eccles. xivi. 20.
, into an equal rank with the Word of God indicted by the Spirit; 2 Esdras vi.
40.
own Traditions to be equal in value to it Council. Trident. Sess. 4.
, are palpable dishonours to God who writ the Holy Scripture. These things ( my
Friends) can hardly be reckoned matters tending to the honor of God, unless
you can suppose the cancelling his Laws, disparaging his Nature, undervaluing
the Merits, the Mercies and the Miracles of Jesus by cheap and odious
Comparisons, the diminution of his worship, and making him sharer with his
Servants therein, and the vilifying of his Divine word, be no dishonor to him
you pretend to serve.

Secondly, Let us examine whether these Doctrines do assist you in the Devout
worshipping of God? It is very suspicious that Church does not teach a right
way of serving God, which deceives you in the first Principle of Religion, viz.
That God alone is to be worshipped: a Sentence so odious to the Roman Doctors,
that the Index Expurgatorius blots it out of the indices of S. Athanasius and
S. Augustines Works Adorari solius Dei est: Del^atur ex Ind. operum Athanasii.
Indice libr. prohib. and Expurg. p. 52.
, and if they could do it* undiscovered, they would blot it out of the Bible
also, Matthew. Madrit. Anno 1627. item ex Ind. Op. S. Aug. bd. p. 56.
iv. 10. But there it shall stand for ever to reprove those, who divide
Religious worship between God and his Creatures, thereby diminishing that
Devotion which entirely belongs to the Divine Majesty, since affections are
most vigorous when placed upon one Object, and if they be dispersed among many,
grow weak and trifling; whence we may conclude, the Protestant who worships
none but God, is the greater lover of him, and worships with a more united and
servent Devotion. As for your Public worship, it is attended with so many
Ceremonies as must needs disturb the Devotion as well of the Priests as the
People, there is such frequent bowing, crossing, prostration, sprinkling with
Holy water, beating the breast, smoking with Incense, etc. that the mind is
taken off from a steady intention upon the inward and main part of the Duty,
while it is entertained with such variety of outward Rites. For our mind (says
Quintilian) cannot sincerely intend its whole self upon many things at once,
whatever new object it looks upon, it gives over the thoughts of that which it
first propounded to it self: And this is most evident where the Objects are so
different as sensible and intellectual things are. For where the Senses and
their perceptions are vigorously employed, there the Intellectual Powers cease
to act (as a great Philosopher observes Porphyr. de Abstin. lib. 1.. 41.
). So that it is your Passions and your Fancies that are wrought upon, not your
Mind nor the higher faculties of your Soul, by these numerous Ceremonies; and
therefore that which you think Devotion, I doubt is but a fantastical and false
fire, not kindled by the love of God, nor warming your nobler Powers at all,
and those steady, rational and spiritual desires, which flow from an
undisturbed contemplation of the Divine Goodness and are the very life of
Prayer, I fear you are strangers to, being so often taken off and diverted by
variety of sensible Representations. Again, the making all your Public prayers
in an Unknown Tongue, destroys all true Devotion in the People; S. Clemens of
Alex. tells us of some Heathens who thought those Prayers most effectual which
were uttered in a barbarous Language Clem. Alex. Stromat. 1.
. But Christians know, that Prayer is the desiring something of God, and if the
Mind be not exercised in this desire, it avails nothing; but where the words
are not understood, the mind cannot desire the things mentioned, so that none
can properly pray in an Unknown Tongue, nor so much as rationally say Amen, 1
Cor. xiv. 16. By this absurd Practice therefore you (who are unlearned) spend
the time of the Public offices in admiring and gazing, not in joining with the
Priest or Praying. And because the people have no employment while the Mass
lasts, they spend the whole time usually in talking and laughing privately,
as those who Travel in Catholic Countries do inform us Europ. Spec* page 10.
. And it may occasion your wonder, why the Roman Church should so obstinately
refuse to reform so irrational a Custom, which S. Paul has written a whole
Chapter to condemn, 1 Cor. xiv. The force of whose Arguments and Authority,
has made your wisest Doctors declare against it. By S. Paul' s Doctrine (says
Card. Cajetan) it is better for the edifying of the Church, that Public
prayers were made in the Vulgar Tongue than in Latin Cajet. com. in 1. Corinthians.
14. 17.
. To the same purpose Lyra Lyr. in Loc.
. And your Rhemish Annotators say, When a man prays in a strange Tongue which
himself understands not, it is not so fruitful for Instruction to him, as if
he knew particularly what he prayed Rhem. Test. Annot. on 1 Cor. 14.
. Gabriel Biel also gives several Reasons why Prayers should be in a known
Tongue, saying, It is better 1. For stirring up Devotion, 2. for enlightening
the Mind, 3. for retaining the things in memory, 4. for keeping the thoughts
from wandering Gab. Biel in Can. Miss. Lect. 62.
. Yet your admired Church will oppose Reason and Scripture, and deprive all the
Common people that are of her Communion, of the exercise of their Devotion in
her Offices, rather than so far seem to confess a fault, as to amend it;
choosing rather to let you lose the benefit of worshipping God, than to reform
the most unjust Customs which she has once espoused; but (if you be wise) if
that Church will not pray in such a Language as you can join in, you will go
over to the Church of England, where you may Pray with the Spirit and with
understanding also. In the next place your Private Prayers are not so good a
way of worshipping God as other Christians have; The Images and Pictures, which
the Heathens first taught your Doctors to call, The books of the unlearned
Porphyr. ap. Eusebius. Praepar. Evang. lib. 3.
, and which are placed before you in time of Prayer, are no help, but an
hindrance to all true Devotion; for while your lips are repeating your
Oraisons, your mind is taken up with the beauty, color, lineaments and
workmanship of the Image: so that your own Conscience will tell you, by these
diversions you often draw near to God with your lips, when your hearts are far
from him, which is a vain worship: Matthew. xv. 8. And the Casuists of your
Church, foreseeing that Images would take off the attention, have determined
most impiously, That it is not necessary to Prayer that the person praying
should think of what he speaks Suarez. de Orat. lib. 3. cap. 14. and Salmeron.
. A Doctrine suitable enough to that slight and formal worship which your
Church appoints; and the Ordinary people among you, think they have prayed
sufficiently, when they have pattered over so many little Oraisons as agree to
the number of their Beads; A new Invention, which came not into the Church till
all serious Devotion was ceased An. Dom. 1090.
, it being a sign he minds his Prayers but little, that needs a string of Beads
to reckon them by; yet these Beads (says one of your own Authors) are now the
chief Instruments of the hypocrites counterfeit Devotion Polyd. Virgil. de
invent. rer. l. 5. c. 9.
. I shall not ravel into the body of your Prayers, since the Author of the
Reflections on the Romish Devotions has sufficiently done this; but I cannot
but remark, that the repeating Ave Maria, and the name of Jesus so many times
over, as in those fifteen little Prayers in the Psalter of Jesus, where the
name of Jesus is thrice mentioned in each Prayer, and each Prayer is ordered to
be said Ten times over; and those numerous names of Saints repeated in your
Litanies with no petition annexed but Ora pro nobis: This way of Praying is so
far from agreeing with the Primitive worship of God among the Christians, that
it is evidently derived from that Heathenish superstition of praying by
repeating a hundred names of their Deities together, interposing nothing but O
hear us Seldom de Diis Syris, page 52. Saubertus de Sacrific. cap. 13. page 296.
; and in this manner Baals Priests are supposed to pray, 1 Kings xviii. 26. But
to Christians Jesus says, When ye pray use not vain repetitions as the
Heathens do, for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking:
Matthew. vi. 7. Wherefore though you have admired this trifling way of worship,
when you knew no better, yet if you would acquaint your selves with the solid
and rational way of praying prescribed in the Church of England (wherein Great
things, in an exact method, in plain and proper phrases, and in a known
Language, are asked of God alone in the name of Jesus Christ) you would easily
leave off those formal, vain and superficial Devotions, which can neither be
acceptable to God, nor profitable unto your selves.

Thirdly, Let us pass to the last of these particulars and enquire, If the
Doctrines of Rome, differing from those of England, do tend to promote our
imitating God by a holy life and conversation; without which all our worship is
in vain; For it is a folly and miserable error (says S. Augustine) to humble
your self before him in adoration, to whom you choose to be unlike in
conversation, and to give him religious worship, whose Example you will not
follow; since the sum of all Religion is to imitate him you worship Aug. de
Civ. Dei, lib. 8. c. 17.
. Now there are several Principles of the Roman Church which seem to hinder an
holy life, as first, The custom of Confessing to a Priest weekly or monthly,
together with the Absolution following of course upon this Confession, this is
(I fear) a great hindrance to amendment of life, at which it pretends to aim,
for while men rely on this remedy, they go on without fear in those sins for
which they have so easy a cure at hand, like those who venture without scruple
on dangerous Meats, because they have their Physicians beside them: It Is true
there is a Penance enjoined sometimes, but it is such a one as the rich may buy
off and the poor may undergo, and yet both retain the sin, because the Penance
is not its proper cure; the going in Pilgrimages, giving money, saying or
reading over such proportions of Legends or little chiming prayers, with others
far more impertinent, tend not to rectify a vicious habit, and a plaster on
the Toe may as soon cure the Headache, as these Penances effect a Reformation,
or obtain a pardon at Gods hands. And yet all men see, when the day of
Confession is over, and the Penance past, that you are generally confident of a
Pardon, and fancy you begin upon a new score. It is not easy to enumerate all
the devices which your Church has invented to convey pardon of Sins, Holy
water, Relics of Saints, visiting some certain Churches, saying some certain
Prayers, making Oblations of money to such and such uses, Indulgences, and other
such things, so that he that has money need never want Pardon from Rome; but
alas, these things can never really take away the guilt of one sin, and yet
they embolden men to commit many; For the multitude of Sinners increases, when
hope is given that sin may be bought off, and men easily fall into those sins
for which Money will purchase their pardon: as Arnobius said to the Heathens,
who relied on such like fantastical means of Remission Arnob. adv. Gentes, lib.
7. page 216.
: and we may say of the Guides of your Church, as Seneca in a like case, They
sin more in such Absolutions, than the Offender does in the Crime Senec. Ep. 97.
. For by persuading men they can have Remission on so easy Terms, they make
them secure before they are safe, because Almighty God, who only finally can
Remit, never promised Pardon on these Terms, and it is only those who forsake
as well as confess their sins to whom he will show Mercy, Prove. xxviii. 13. And
if either the Pope or any of his Substitutes, pretend to have power to forgive
sins on any other Terms, they abuse those who are so weak to believe them, and
make them forfeit their Souls (I doubt) for the sad price of this Credulity: S.
Basil says truly, The power of Absolving was not absolutely given, but upon
condition of the Penitents Reformation Basil. reg. brev. qu. 15.
. And we tell our People more sincerely, that if a Priest Absolve them a
thousand times over, and if they give ever so much money, without amendment of
life they can have no pardon, according as Scripture it self teaches Mich. vi.
7.
, and the Holy Fathers also; If thou give all that thou have, and do not
forsake thy sins, thou art twice deceived, both in losing thy Money and thy
Pardon also Augustine. homil. 2. ex 50. hom.
. Again, as if the Roman Church designed to make men think their own actual
Holiness were never necessary, they have other devices to persuade you into a
belief of coming off well at the end of your life, howsoever ill you have spent
it: The Heretics in Tertullians time said, It was a meritorious thing to be of
their Party Tertul. de Praescrip. adv. haret. c. 41.
. And you are told it is a ready way of Salvation to die in the Communion of
the Roman Church, and if you can but receive the Sacraments of that Church, and
be Absolved by one of their Priests, you scarce doubt of obtaining Heaven at
last; and if you have no good works of your own, they persuade you the Church
can sell you the Merits of the Saints; or if you should drop into Purgatory by
the way, the pains of that (they say) are not endless, and if you give
liberally on your Deathbeds, or if any others afterward give for you, to
purchase so many Masses and other Prayers for your Soul, you will ere long be
delivered from thence. All which notorious delusions do miserably deceive poor
men, and most mischievously encourage them to put off their Repentance, and to
resolve not to be troubled with holiness in the way, since they fancy they
shall come off so easily in the end; and alas they are as false as they are
mischievous* for the Ancient Fathers unanimously affirm no man's estate can be
altered after this life, But as the last day of a man's life finds him, so the
last day of the World finds him Augustine. Epist. 80.
. Nor will any thing help thee (says S. Augustine) but what is done while thou
art here Idem de Verb. Apost. Ser. 21.
. Out of innumerable such Testimonies, that of S. Salvian may serve: Although a
man should have so pious a Son who for alleviating his Fathers punishment,
would desire to give all the goods he left behind him, it would do him no good,
for the Piety of the Son can do nothing to procure that Rest to a man after
Death, which his own Impiety and Infidelity has denied him Salvian. ad Eccles.
Cath. lib. 3.
. Finally, these and the like Principles make so many infamous men and women,
so many Thieves and Murderers, debauched and profane persons to take
Sanctuary in the Roman Church, because the Tenets thereof seem not to oblige
them to forsake their evil ways, but reconcile wickedness and Salvation
together: so that this Religion tends not to persuade men to Holiness of life,
and therefore is no good Religion: I grant there are some Persons in that
Church who live better than these Opinions engage them to do, and do not draw
those Conclusions into their practice which naturally follow from these
Principles; but that is only an evidence of the excellent virtue of such
Persons, but no proof of the goodness of these Doctrines; and if these men be
Holy in a Religion which gives such encouragement to evil, doubtless they would
be more holy by far, if they were taught better things: I shall only add, that
as the Roman Church is too loose in matters pertaining to Gods Laws, so she is
too strict in matters pertaining to her own Constitutions, like the Old
Pharisees who Tithed Mint and Annise, and neglected the weightier matters of
the Law: Matthew. xxiii. which is a great obstruction to real Holiness, when men
place Religion in Ceremonies and slight things, for while they are curious in
these matters, they neglect greater, and think by observing the Rules of the
Church, they compensate for passing by the Laws of God, your own Ordinary Gloss
says, That is Superstition, when Religion is placed in observing the
Ordinances of men Gloss. Ordin. ad Colos. 2.
. And if so, then your wonderful strictness in Crossing, Bowing, using Holy
Water, Abstinence on certain days, wearing Crosses, etc. in which you have
placed so much Religion, are no better than Superstition. It cannot be denied,
that most Roman Catholics are more afraid to eat flesh on a Fasting-day than
to curse or swear; they will be drunk on a Holy Day which God forbids, but not
work on it because the Church forbids it; many of them dare fornicate and
debauch, who dare not neglect Confession, nor read a book written by a supposed
Heretic: And generally, they are punctual in crossing, sprinkling, bowing and
observing all Orders of the Church, even such as live in the open breach of
Gods Commandments, and yet fancy themselves more sure of Heaven than the most
pious and holy Protestant: Thus this Religion is too strict where God gives us
more liberty, and too remiss where his Holy Law has bound us with Eternal and
Indispensable bonds; and it is designed to promote Obedience to the Roman
Church, rather than Inward holiness toward God: The effect of all which
Considerations is this, That whosoever sincerely desires to glorify God and
worship him with a rational Devotion, and whoever would imitate him by a Holy
Life, ought not to choose or retain such a Religion whose Principles tend so
evidently to the dishonor of Gods Name, the hindrance of true Devotion, and to
the rendering a Holy life unnecessary: And as it was proved before, that the
appropriated Articles of the Roman Faith were not Ancient, nor induced for
pious ends, nor propagated by honest means: so now it is evidenced, the
Articles are not good in their own nature, and therefore there is no reason why
you should not renounce them, unless you retain them in mere Reverence to the
Authority of the Pope who does impose them, which Matter is the Subject of our
last Enquiries.

SECTION V.
Whether the Roman Bishop have sufficient Authority to impose the said Opinions
upon all Christian Churches?
THe Last, and almost the only shelter that your Doctors fly to at this day
for the defense of your Principles is, That the Bishop of Rome is the sole
Vicar of Christ, the Infallible and only Judge of Controversies, and the
Supreme Head of the Universal Church; and hereby their Adherents are awed into
the retaining all his Decrees of what nature soever they be: But let me beg
leave to advise you not to lay so much stress upon these Titles and Authority,
till you have seriously examined by what Right the Pope lays claim to them;
for his Power had need be very great and his Proofs very good, upon the Credit
whereof you receive so many new and suspicious Articles of Religion, some of
which we ought not to receive though preached by an Angel: Gal. 1. 8, 9. And
first, though we stand not much upon Titles, you may note that the name of
Vicar of Christ is never given to the Pope in the first Ages, and when this
Title came into use, it was not appropriated to the Bishop of Rome, but other
Bishops and Priests are styled Vicars of Christ also, even by a Pope of Rome
Eusebius. Pap. Decret. Ep. 3.
, as also by the Old French Emperors Capitol. Carol. and Lud. l. 5. c. 163.
, and by our own Saxon Law Legibus Hydens. ap. Spelm. Tom. 1. page 440.
: So that there is no reason for the Roman Bishop to challenge any propriety in
this Title, or any special Privilege by virtue thereof. Secondly, As to his
being an Infallible Judge and the Supreme Head of the Catholic Church
throughout the World, you may remember we have proved, there are more
Christians in the World who deny this Supremacy of Rome, than there are who do
acknowledge it: And if the belief of this Infallible Headship be the reason why
you receive other Articles of Faith, this then is the most fundamental Article
of all others, and ought to be the best attested: And if our Lord Jesus had
designed to make S. Peter and his Successors at Rome (not at Antioch) such
Supreme Infallible Judges, we may expect he would have set down this Article
plainly in Holy Scripture, and not have left his sole visible Vicegerent to
the suspicion of bearing witness to himself. As for that place Matthew. xvi. Thou
art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church: it is indeed by the Popes
in their Forged Decretals expounded as a confirmation of their pretenses to
Supremacy; but the Fathers take this Rock, not for S. Peter's Person, but for
his Faith which he confessed, and for Christ himself the Object thereof: So S.
Augustine Aug. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 13.
, Nazianzen Nazianz. Test. de Vet. Testam.
, S. Cyril Cyril. de Trin. lib. 4.
, S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 55. in Matthew.
, S. Ambrose Ambros. Com. in Ephesians. 2.
, and Hilary Hilar. de Trin. lib. 2. cap. 6.
, expound the place; and if so, this belongs no more to S. Peter, than to the
rest of the Apostles who confessed the same Faith, and belongs no otherwise to
the Pope, than as he varies not from S. Peter's Faith, and so far it belongs to
all Orthodox Bishops with respect to their several Churches: And for the Keys
of the kingdom of Heaven, ver. 19. they were given as much to the other
Apostles as to S. Peter, Matthew. xviii. 18. (as also the aforesaid Fathers do
observe) being all equally sharers in the Power of the Keys, Ambros. in Esal.
38.
and all Foundations as well as S. Peter Aug* in Johan. Tract. 118.
, Origin. in Matt. Tract. 1.
so that S. Cyprian plainly tells us, Hilarious de Trinit. l. 6.
The rest of the Apostles were as great as Peter, Hieron. in Jovin* lib. 1.
endowed with an equal share of Honor and Power Cypr. de Unit. Eccles.
; Nor do we find that ever S. Peter pretended to any Power over the other
Apostles. Peter, James and John, though preferred by Christ (says Eusebius)
before the rest, challenged not to themselves the glory of Primacy, but chose
James the Just, Bishop of the Apostles Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 2. c. 1.
: And if any were greatest it was S. James, who was President in that first
Council at Jerusalem, and did determine the Question there, though S. Peter was
present Acts xv. 13.
. Yea, Clemens Bishop of Rome in the first Decretal Epistle (a good evidence
against the Inventors thereof) styles this very S. James, Bishop of Bishops,
governing the Holy Church of the Hebrews at Jerusalem, and also all the
Churches, which were every where founded by the Providence of God Decret.
Epist. Clement. 1. in Titul. Epist.
. And an Ancient Council calls Jerusalem the Mother of all Churches Council.
Constant. I. Ep. ad Dam.
; but as for the Primacy of Rome, there is no genuine Author for the first
Three Centuries takes any notice of it, and Aeneas Sylvius Aene. Sylv. Ep. 288.
afterward Pope confesses, There was little respect paid to Rome before the
Nicene Council: If Polycrates and the Asian Bishops had known of this
Infallibility and Supremacy, they would not have opposed Pope Victor's Opinion,
nor despised his Excommunication so boldly as they did; neither would Irenaeus
(who calls the Bishops of Rome no more but Presbyters) have presumed to reprove
the same Victor for his arrogance and indiscretion, as we find he did Eusebius.
Eccles. hist. l. 5. c. 24.
. S. Cyprian* surely never heard of this Power of the Roman Bishop, who calls
Cornelius Bishop of that See, no more but Brother and Colleague, and gives to
Pope Stephen his Successor at Rome, the Titles of False Apostle, Schismatic,
friend to Heretics, and enemy to Christians: utterly despising his Judgment,
and not regarding his Determinations Cyprian ad Pompei. Ep. 74.
. Besides, if this Supremacy had been believed in the first Ages of the Church,
the Roman Bishops sense would have been enquired of concerning all controverted
places of Scripture, his Decrees cited to silence Heretics, and all Appeals
must have been made finally to him: He also should have called and presided in
all eminent Councils, whereas Cardinal Cusanus affirms, That the Emperors or
their Deputies were Presidents in Eight General Councils Cusan. de Concor.
Cath. lib. 3. c. 6.
Nor did the Fourth General Council at Chalcedon suppose that the Roman Bishop
had any Supremacy given him from Christ, when that Council says, Rome has
justly had the Privileges given unto it by the Fathers, because it was the
Seat of the Empire; and for the same Reason* they grant equal Privileges to
the Bishop of Constantinople Council. Chal. Can. 28. An. 451.
. Yea, S. Gregory Bishop of Rome says, The Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon
were they who offered his Predecessors the Title of Universal Bishop, which yet
they accepted not Gregor. Epist. lib. 7. Ep. 30.
: And to convince us that this Universal Supremacy is a late Device, it is
evident, that it was not only unknown to others in the first Age, but to the
very Popes themselves, as these few Instances will show: Liberius Bishop of
Rome An. 350. sending the Confession of his Faith to Athanasius desires his
Approbation thereof, That I may know (says he) whether I am of the same
Judgment with you in matters of Faith, and that I may be more certain, and
readily obey your commands Athanas. Ep. ad Epictet.
. And when the Bishop of Constantinople began to call himself Universal Bishop,
Pope Gregory in his Epistle to Mauritius the Emperor says, He admires at the
Arrogance of assuming this New Title, which none of the Bishops of Rome had
ever accepted of, a Title blasphemous to Christian Ears; and with many other
words he inveighs against this Title, as unfit for any Christian Bishop, as may
be seen at large in his Epistles Gregor. Epist. lib. 2. ad Maurit. Epist. 32,
36, 38.
. And in his Epistle to Eulogius Patriarch of Alexandria he is displeased that
Eulogius writes to him by the proud Title of Universal Bishop, desiring him
wholly to forbear that language, for (says he) That is a diminution to you,
which is afforded to another beyond what reason does require: And he there
tells Eulegius, That the Council of Chalcedon had offered this Title to the Old
Bishops of Rome, but they would not accept it Gregor. Epist. lib. 7. Ep. 30.
: Of which he gives this Reason in another Epistle, -- Because if one Patriarch
be called Universal, the name of Patriarch is taken from the rest Idem lib. 7.
Epist. 36.
. And so little did Pope Boniface think of deriving his Supremacy from Christ,
that with entreaty he obtained of the intruding Emperor Phocas to decree, That
the Roman Church should be Head of all Churches Beda de 6. aetat. Mundi.
, as the Ancient Historians witness Paul. Diacon. rer. Romans lib. 18. Histor.
Longob. lib. 4. c. 11.
. But this Imperial Constitution will scarce justify the Supremacy and
Jurisdiction which the Pope now claims over all the World, Anastas. Bibl.
Vit. Bonif. Tertii,
and it utterly destroys the pretenses of a Divine Right to it. Ado aetat.
Sext. Reg. Chron. l. 1.
It would be too tedious to relate at large all the steps by which the Bishops
of Rome attained to their present Grandeur; Aimon. de gest. Franc. l. 4. c. 4.
I shall therefore only note, that the first Ages began early to complain of
his Encroachments and Ambition Firmilianus ad Cypr. Ep. 75.
; and all succeeding Times frequently opposed the Pope's Pretenses herein; The
Sixth Council of Carthage allowed not his claim of Appeals Council. 6. Carthag.
An. 419.
. The Bishops of France complain of his sending a Legate to Dedicate a Church
there, as an undue Act, contrary to the Ancient Canons and all Primitive
Constitutions, For though (says the Historian) the Bishop of Rome for the
dignity of his Apostolical Seat, be more venerable than other Bishops, yet it
is not lawful for him in any thing to transgress the Tenor of Canonical rules;
and as every Bishop of the Orthodox Church is the Spouse of his own See, and
represents the person of our Savior, so it cannot agree to any Bishop, boldly
to act any thing in the Diocese of another Glaber Rodulph. hist. lib. 2. c. 4.
; the like checks the Popes frequently received for meddling in France, from the
Princes of that Nation Vita Ludov. Pii a P. Pithaeo edit. An. 863.
. About that Time also the Bishops of Italy complained of the Roman Usurpation
to the Patriarch of Constantinople, Annal. Franc. d P. Pithaeo eod. An.
as appears by Photius's Letter, in answer to that complaint, extant in Cardin.
Baronius Photius Constant. Ep. Encycl. ap. Baron An. 863.. 42.
. And there are many like Examples in the Historians of those Ages, wherein
this bold Jurisdiction began first to be exercisedin this Western part of
Europe Constit. Imper. a Godalsto Tom. 1. page 24, 25.
. And to this very day the Churches of France do little value the Pope's
Supremacy, Luitprand. Ticin. histor. lib. 6. cap. 9, and 10.
though in other Opinions they agree with the Roman Church, as may be seen in
the French Writers Bochellus l. 5. de Decret. Eccles. Gallic. tit. 20.
. And it is not long since the King of France was about to take away his
Nations dependence from Rome, Pithaeus de lib. Eccles. Gallican, c. 3., 3. n.
13.
by erecting the Archbishopric of Burges into a Patriarchate. And now, why
should you be awed into the belief of Evil and inconvenient Doctrines by a
pretended Supremacy, not given by Christ, not challenged by the best Popes, not
acknowledged by the first Christians, not much regarded by some Catholic
Countries? Why should you be enslaved by an Authority gained by fraud and
policy, confirmed by force and cruelty, enlarged by dividing Christian Princes,
by the undermining the Empire and oppressing many Ecclesiastical and Temporal
persons in their just Rights? Why should you fear to renounce an Usurped
Jurisdiction, since what is unjustly seized on at first, can never be legally
enjoyed, nor is it confirmed by the longest prescription of Time LL. Basilic.
l. 10. tit. 1. and Balsamon not. in Council. Ancyran. p. 378.
, as the Civil Law speaks? I must confess I cannot see that any Christians
without the Pale of his own Diocese, are obliged to own him further than by the
respect due to a Bishop of an Ancient Patriarchal See, nor so far neither if he
be not content with his own, and keep not close to the Primitive Faith.

SECTION VI.
Whether the Pope has any Right to exercise a Jurisdiction over England.
BUt since my Discourse is directed particularly to the Catholics of England,
it will be most considerable to enquire, Whether the Roman Bishop can justly
claim any Authority over them? and (if Prejudices were laid aside) I doubt not
but to make it evident, that the Pope neither has nor ought to have any
Authority over this Nation. For first, let it be considered that Britain was
the first of the Provinces which did publicly profess the Faith of Christ,
says Sabellicus Sabellic. Enn. 7. lib. 5.
, which is also attested by other more Ancient Writers Tertul. adv. Jud. c. 7.
. So that it is agreed on all hands, Theodoret. de Cur. Graec. aff. Ser. 9.
here was a true and perfect Church of Christ near five hundred years before
they had any Communication with the Bishop of Rome, or knew one syllable of
this foundation-Article of the Modern Faith of that Church, viz. of the Pope' s
Universal Supremacy: It is also certain the Church of Britain was not subject
to Rome at the time of the First General Council at Nice; And in the Sixth
Canon of that Council it is decreed concerning the three Patriarchs
Jurisdictions, That the Ancient custom should be established, that Egypt,
Lybia and Pentapolis should be subject to the Bishop of Alexandria, because the
Bishop of Rome had the like Custom, and likewise so it was at Antioch, and in
other Provinces the Privileges should be preserved to their Churches, etc.
Can. 6. Council. Nicaen. juxt. Dionys. Exig.
. Now the Ancient Custom and Privilege of this Church of Britain then was to
govern it self without subjection to any Foreign Patriarch, and the Pope could
not usurp any Dominion here afterward without transgressing this Canon of the
most famous General Council; especially if we consider how this Canon was
expounded in Ruffinus's days, viz. That Rome should have the Government of the
Suburbicarian Churches Histor. Ecclese. lib. 1. c. 6.
. And the Ancient Survey of the Imperial Provinces will tell you what the
Suburbicarian Region was, viz. Three Islands, Sicily, Sardinia and Corsica, and
part of Italy, from the East end to the border of Tuscany Westward: And this
was all the Ancient extent of the Roman Bishops Jurisdiction, the rest of Italy
being under the Metropolis of Millain, which Church of Old paid no Subjection
to Rome; much less could any be due to him from Britain. Again, in the Third
General Council of Ephesus An. 431. it was decreed, That in all Dioceses and
Provinces it should hereafter be observed, That no Bishop should henceforward
lay hold of another Province, which had not formerly and from the beginning
been under the power of their Predecessors Council. Ephesians. Can. 8.
, which Canon the Pope must break also, before he can assume a power over the
Church of Britain, which, with the Island of Cyprus and some other places, was
its own head (as those Times phrased it) and subject to no Patriarch: So that
when Augustine the Monk (coming over to convert the Pagan Saxons) required the
British Bishops to profess Subjection to the Sea of Rome; They did by virtue of
these Canons refuse it, telling him, They had a Patriarch of their own, to whom
alone they were subject in Spiritual things under God, and Dionothus Abbot of
Bangor by diverse Arguments showed, they owed no Subjection to the Roman Bishop:
as an Old Historian informs us Ge^^^ Monm. de Aug. verse. fin.
. And accordingly the British Bishops retained their Old Rites different from
Rome, and kept their Old Privileges, being consecrated by the Archbishop of S.
David's, and he by his own Suffragans, making no Profession of Subjection to any
other Church (says their Historian Gyrald. Camb. It in. l. 2. c. 1.
, which continued till the day of King Henry the First. The Saxons indeed
showed more Respect to Rome, because it had assisted in their Conversion, hence
they sometimes asked Advice of the Pope, as of an Eminent neighbor Patriarch,
but their Bishops never professed Subjection to Rome, nor did they own his
Supremacy, or look on him as an Infallible Judge, as appears by their not
obeying the Pope's Decree made in a Roman Council, about restoring Wilfrid to
his Archbishopric of York An. 680. And though the Pope had confirmed and
recommended the Canons of the Second Nicene Council about Images, the English
Church rejected and despised them, writing a Book to condemn Image Worship, in
the name of all the Princes and Bishops of England, and sending it to Charles
the Great of France, by the learned Alcuinus, as our Histories do attest Hoved.
Annal part. 1. p. 405.
And moreover it is evident that all Ecclesiastical Laws were then made by the
Saxon Kings and Bishops, Matthew. Westminster. An. 793.
. in their Provincial Councils, by their own Authority, without ever so much as
acquainting the Pope therewith, or desiring his consent thereto, or
confirmation thereof: The Popes indeed about the latter end of the Saxon times
began to degenerate in Manners, and aim at high things in all the Western
world; but his Pride was checked here, even as (as we showed before) it was in
other places: for when that Insolent Pope Hildebrand (who first presumed to
depose an Emperor Onuphri^s in Vit. Greg. 7.
) took the boldness to require Fealty of King William the Conqueror, he
answered him in this manner, Fealty I neither have acknowledged, nor will I do
it, because neither did I promise it, nor do I find that my Predecessors ever
did it to your Predecessors, as appears by the Conqueror's Letter still extant
Baron. Annal. An. 1076.. 25.
. And when by Policy and evil Arts he had made some encroachments here, yet
still his Power was esteemed no other than a Temporal Power, permitted by the
favor of our Kings, not due by any Original Right: Hence the Historian says,
That King Henry the First having subdued all his Enemies, feared none but the
Pope, and that not for his Spiritual, but his Temporal Power Matthew. Paris. An.
1107.
. And an Old Record affirms that King Henry the Second smartly asked the Bishop
of Chichester, How he durst argue for the Pope' s Authority which was granted
by Men, against his Royal Power derived from God Record. An. tertio Hen. 2.
? The turbulent and seditious Attempts of T. Becket and his faction about that
time, to subject the English Clergy to the Pope's Universal Supremacy, are
sufficiently known; but if our Ancestors (whom you call Roman Catholics) had
been of your Opinion in this great Article of Faith, they would not have made
so stout an Opposition against the Pope's Supremacy as they did: It being
apparent that the whole body of the Nation then looked on it as an Encroachment
and an Usurpation; for in the famous Statutes of Clarendon they condemn it,
Decreeing* among other things, That all the Clergy should bona fide, swear to
the King; and none should Appeal, but unto the Archbishop, or from him finally
to the King, without particular License Matthew. Paris. An. 1164.
. And to restrain his meddling here, the Kings of England declared, they had a
Right to forbid the Pope's Legates from entering into this Land, and often did
prohibit them (even Qu. Mary her self exercising this Power) yea, it was
adjudged in a Parliament 25 Ed. 3. To be Treason to bring in the Pope's Bulls
here without the Kings consent, Stat. de Provisor. though the sending these be
an Act of Spiritual Jurisdiction; but it is plain they would not allow the Pope
in those days to exercise Spiritual Jurisdiction here without the King's leave,
for his very Excommunicating certain English Bishops in a Parliament 16 of
Rich. 2. is declared to tend To the open disherison of the Crown, and the
destruction of the King, his Law, and all his Realms, and a little after it is
affirmed there, that the Popes attempts be clearly against the Kings Crown and
Regality, used and approved in the time of all his Progenitors Stat. 16. Ric. 2
di Statute Book page 238.
, finally therefore they all promise to stand with the King against all such
Encroachments with their very lives: And if you be well versed (as becomes
Englishmen) in the Histories and Statutes of your own Country; you must needs
know that the Authority which the Pope once exercised here, was gotten by
taking advantages of the necessities of our Kings, and the divisions among the
People. And in those Times which are accounted most Popish, it was checked by
Laws, complained of in Parliament, and thought an Oppression by the wisest and
greatest Subjects, so that the most Noble Hen. de Lacy Earl of Lincoln, in his
dying Speech (to his Son in Law Thomas Earl of Lancaster) said among other
things, That the Church of England heretofore Honorable and Free, was now
enslaved by Romish Oppressions: charging him, to stand up like a man for the
Honor of God and the Church, and the Redemption of his Country Tho. of
Walsing. An. 1312. page 74. number. 20.
. And the same Author tells us, that it was debated in a Council at London An.
1408. Whether all Payments and Obedience to the Pope should not be taken away
Tho. Walsing. An. 1408. p. 420.
? Which shows, they thought it in the power of this Nation to take away his
Authority here when they pleased: And they retained it, not as being
necessarily or originally due to him, but only in respect of his being a Bishop
of an Ancient Apostolical Seat, as is evident from those Instructions which
King Henry the Fifth gave to his Ambassadors, sent to Pope Martin the Fifth,
bidding them (if they perceived any delay in their affair) to tell the Pope,
That their Master the King, if he yielded not to his Demands, would use his own
power in these Particulars, for he did not apply himself to Rome out of
necessity, but for Respect sake Vita Henr. Chicely, p. 56, and 57.
. And therefore when this permissive Authority grew uneasy to those who had
endured it for some time, it was rejected much more Legally than ever it was
introduced, viz. by the Regal Power with the advice and consent of the Lords
and Commons in Parliament An. 26. Hen. 8.
. And this is to be noted, the Clergy and Laity of this Parliament did hold
most of the Opinions of the Roman Church in other things, and yet consented to
the abolishing the Pope's Usurped Power over England, as believing it to be an
unjust Encroachment: And Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester (a great
Persecutor of the Protestants) did then make a learned Oration De vera
obedientia, showing that the King was by Right and by God's Law the Supreme
Head of this Church of England.

And now, that I may not only confute a false Opinion* but establish the true,
let me entreat you impartially to consider, that as it appears the Pope is not
Dejure supreme Head of this Church of England, so it is as evident, that the
King of England is the Supreme Head of the Churches in his own Dominions: For
indeed all Christian Princes are, or ought to be so in their own Dominions;
whence it was that Constantine the Great did retain the Title of Pontifex
Maximus without any blot to his Christianity, says Baronius Annal. Tom. 3. An.
312.
. And the highest Appeals in all Controversies Ecclesiastical, even in matters
of Faith, were made to him, though he used the assistance and Counsel of his
Bishops, for determining them. And it is evident that he and his Successors (as
Cusanus before confesses) did call and Preside in all General Councils, and
ratified their Decrees, which were no Laws till they were stamped with the
Imperial Authority: yea, the Imperial Code sufficiently witnesses, that the
Emperor's made Laws concerning Religion, the whole Third book of Justinian's
Basilicks being nothing else but Imperial Constitutions, de Episcopis, Clericis
and Sacris: They also erected Patriarchates, and gave them supreme
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over such Provinces as they pleased, as at
Justinianopolis in Daeia Imperial. Constable. Novel* II. and Nov. 131. c. 3.
, and at Ravenna in Italy it self Rescript. Valent. 31 An. 432.
, which had no dependence on Rome till the time of Constantinus Pogon: And all
Ecclesiastical affairs depended on the Emperors, says Socrates Socrat. hist.
Prooem. ad lib. 5.
, so that Pope Anastasius calls the Emperor Anastasius, The Vicar of God by the
Divine command presiding over the Earth Anastas. Pap. Epist ad Anastas. Imp.
ap. Binium T. 2. par. 1. p. 507.
. An Authority like this also was exercised by the Western Emperors of the
French Line, being stayled, The Rulers of the True Religion, a Title given to
Charles the Great and to Ludovicus by two several Councils which they had
called Council. 1. Mogun. An. 813. and Council. II. Mogun. An. 847. ap. Bin. T.
3. p. 1. Sect. 2.
; and the present French Kings do claim the Supremacy over the French Churches,
as may be seen in ^^ohellus and P. Pith^us cited before, Sect. 5. One of the
French Writers telling us it is the Opinion of his Nation, that Le Royiassiste
de son Conseil d'estate est ^^^es Di^^ Chief Terrie^ de l'Eglise de son Royanme
and (...) Pape Claud. Fau^^et en les Libertes de l'Eglis. Gallican. p. 234.
. And it may be proved concerning other Christian Princes, that they allow not
the Pope to impose his Decrees on their Kingdoms, nor to exercise any
Jurisdiction among them but by their special License and consent, and prohibit
his exercising any power over their Subjects when they please: And why may not
the King of England, being a free and absolute Monarch, be allowed as great a
Privilege in his own Dominions? Do you not tell us; that Pope Eleutherius
called King Lucius by the Title of Vicar of Christ Epist. Eleuth. ad R. Lucium
ap. Spelm^*
; and does not King Edgar call himself Christ's Vicar Leg. Hydens. cap. 8.
Spelm^ Tom. ^. p. 438.
, and none taxed this Title then? Did not the Saxon Kings preside in all
National Councils, and make Laws for Religion by the advice of their own
Bishops, by their own Authority? Did they not erect new Sees for Bishops, and
change them as they saw fit? Did they not invest all Bishops by delivering the
Ring and Pastoral Staff Ingulph. hist. p. 902.
? And the same power was still exercised by K. William the Conqueror, for all
things both Divine and Humane depended on his Order, says an Old Historian
Eadmer. histor. p. 6.
. And when the Pope began to encroach upon the King's Supremacy here in
England, he was generally opposed as we noted before. And in the aforesaid
Parliament of Richard the Second, the Nation declared, That they would not
endure that the Crown of England should be submitted to the Pope, and the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm by him defeated and avoided at his pleasure Stat. 16
Ric. 2. c. 5.
: for Bracton our most famous Lawyer affirms, that The Kings of England have no
Supreme on earth but God: And accordingly the Kings and Parliaments of this
Nation made Laws in reference to Religion as they saw expedient, and among the
rest they enacted many Laws in a direct opposition to the Pope's Spiritual as
well as Temporal Jurisdiction, declaring thereby, that they esteemed him no
Head of this Church, but an ambitious and dangerous Encroacher upon the Rights
of the Crown, as you will find by perusal of those several Statutes cited in
the Margin Stat. 25 Ed. 3. de Provisor.
. By which Laws long since enacted, Stat. 27, 28 Ed. 3. cap. 1, 2.
it is declared to be Treason to receive or harbor any Agents or Emissaries
from Rome against the King's Proclamations, Stat. 28 Ed. 3. cap. 3.
and without his special License: Stat. 2 Hen. 4. cap. 3. Stat. 6 Henr. 4. cap.
1.
Upon all which Considerations the Judges have declared, Stat. 7 Henr. 4. cap.
6. Stat. 3 Henr. 5. cap 4.
that the Act of Parliament for Restoring the Supremacy over the Church unto
the Crown, was not the introducing a New Law, but a declaration of the Old Coke
5. Rep. Cawdry's Case, fol. 8.
: For it was many hundred years before, that King Henry the Second did declare,
That be would account it high Treason in any man, that should affirm the Pope's
Authority was above his Spelm. Council. T. 2. p. 58.
. And before that, Anselm was told, That it was impossible for him to keep the
Faith which he owed to the King; and to pay Obedience to the Pope contrary to
his Royal Pleasure Rex ad Anselm. ap Eadmerum page 62.
. Which (methinks) may fitly admonish you who do own the Pope's Supremacy over
England, and yet glory much in your Loyalty to the King; to enquire how these
two can stand together? Our Savior says, No mancan serve two Masters, Matthew.
vi. 24. however not two Supreme Lords, neither can there be two highest Powers
in one Kingdom, nor can any Subjects obey both, since they will sometimes
command contrary things: It Is true, if the Roman Bishop would profess to our
King, as his Predecessor Leo the Fourth did to Lotharius of France, Concerning
your Capitulars or Imperial Precepts, we through the assistance of Christ
promise as much as we are able, to keep and conserve the same for ever Leon.
Epist. ad Lothar. and Lud. Aug. ap. Great. did. 10. c. 9.
. If he would acknowledge himself subject to our King in his Dominions, as his
Predecessors were to the Emperors of Old; if he behaved himself toward his
Majesty, as S. Gregory did to Mauritius, who calls that Emperor, his Lord, and
himself, his Servant; declaring, that He was subject to the Emperors Commands,
and accordingly had done his duty in publishing a Law (which the Emperor
ordered him to promulge) though for his own part he thought it not agreeable to
the Laws of God Gregor. Epist. lib. 2. ad Maurit. Ep. 62.
. If the present Popes claimed no more than a Primacy of order and precedence
among other Bishops, then the case might easily be determined: But you know of
later times the pretenses of Rome are much higher, for she challenges a
Supremacy over all Christian Princes, a power to depose them, an Authority to
abrogate or dispense with their Laws, and absolve their Subjects from their
Allegiance, a Privilege to be appealed unto as to the last and highest
Tribunal on Earth* so that Clement the Fifth is recorded in the Acts of the
Council of Vienna to have said, That all the Right of Kings depended on him
alone Council. Vienn. sub Clem. 5.
; and Boniface the Eighth owned himself not only Lord of France, but of all the
World Papyr. Masson. Vit. Bonis. 8.
, for So great was the Impudence of this Boniface (says the French
Chronologer) that he presumed to affirm the Kingdom of France was a Fee of the
Papal Majesty Tilius Episs. Meld. Chronic. de Reg. Fran. An. 1302.
. And as to this Kingdom, Pope Innocent the Fourth says, That the King of
England was his Vassal and his Slave Matthew. Paris. ad An. 1253.
, and they esteem England also a Fee of the Papacy, and so is Ireland too it
seems. Whereupon the Pope has dared to nominate a King of Ireland, and has
given away the Kingdom of England to those who attempted to conquer it; he has
condemned our Laws, and* absolved the Subjects of England from their
Allegiance, upon which many of your Party have entered into Conspiracies and
Rebellion: So that now it appears, the Pope claims an Absolute Supremacy over
our King and his Realms, and how he can be a good Subject of the King of
England, who professes Obedience to this Foreign Princely Prelate, is very
hard to be understood: if you believe this claim, and own the Pope to be above
the King, you must then obey him, even when his Orders contradict those of your
lawful Sovereign, and so you are the Pope's Subjects, not the King's; nor can
his Majesty have any security of your Allegiance, any longer than he pleases
the Roman Bishop, so that he Reigns over you at the Pope's mercy. I know many
of you English Catholics have so Loyal an affection for the King, that your
Churchmen are forced to invent many plausible pretenses to persuade you, that
the Supremacy claimed by the Pope does not entrench upon the King's Supremacy,
telling you, that you need not obey the Pope if he commanded you to fight
against your King; wherein they put a fallacy upon you, for they know the Pope
can Excommunicate and depose him (even for a very small matter, say your
Canonists Gloss. in Decret. did. 40. cap. 6. St* Papa.
), and then he is no longer Your King: They pretend further this Supremacy over
Kings in Temporals is not the Doctrine of your Church, but only of some
Jesuits, upon whom they lay all those foul. Doctrines of Deposing and
murdering Kings, Suarez. defens. Fidei, and lib. contr. Regem Magn. Brittan.
so wickedly maintained by diverse eminent Writers of your Church Mariana, lib.
de Rege.
. But this is a delusion also, for when or where did the Pope, or the Heads of
the Roman Church, condemn these Opinions, or suppress these Seditious Books,
nay, on the contrary, the Books are approved and the Authors preferred at Rome,
even when France condemns them Answer to Philanax Anglicus, 125.
: And those honest and loyal secular English Priests that have ventured to
write against this usurped Power of the Popes over Kings in Temporals (though
they held his Supremacy here in Spirituals) have been persecuted almost to
death by the Roman Bishop; they have been suspended, and their Books condemned,
and their persons so odiously represented that no English Catholics durst
harbor them; witness the learned F. Preston under the name of Roger Widrington
in King James's days, with his fellow-Priests, and Peter Walsh Author of the
Letter to the Catholics, who is at this day a great Sufferer by the Pope's
means, merely for writing, that you of the Roman Church ought to be Loyal to
the King in all matters of Temporal cognizance; a clear evidence, that
(whatever your Church may pretend) they will not endure that any of you
Catholics shall hold the King's power to be above the Pope's in any thing; and
consequently they will not allow you to be good Subjects. Now to sum up all
these particulars, how grievous an abuse is it* for a Foreign Prelate, whose
Predecessors had no Authority here at all, to usurp such a power over you as to
impose New and inexpedient Articles upon you? Why should you enslave your
selves to him that cannot have so much as a Spiritual Jurisdiction here without
breaking the Canons of the most famous General Councils? Why may* you not take
the same liberty to oppose his Decrees, that your Ancestors in all Ages have
done? they whom you account good Catholics rejected his Doctrines sometimes,
despised his Bulls and Excommunications frequently, and always opposed his
pretended claim of a Supremacy over this Nation; why should you call that an
Article of Faith, and account it the Principal point of Religion, viz. That
England ought to be subject to Rome; which even in those you call Catholic
Times was declared to be no less than Treason, and no other than an Opinion
that did destroy the Prerogative of the King, the Privileges and Liberties of
this Church, the freedom and quiet of all English Subjects? They were Romanists
in other Points who condemned Appeals to Rome, and maintained, that the Crown
of England was in no Earthly subjection, and that the King had no Supreme but
God only; who counted all the Power which the Pope ever had here, merely
permissive, tolerated by this Nation so long as they pleased, and such as might
be curbed, lessened, hindered or taken away by the Supreme Authority of this
Nation when ever they saw expedient: It was a King and Parliament of your
Religion in most points, that restored the King to his just Supremacy, and took
away the precarious or usurped and much abused Power of the Roman Bishop here;
they thought a Supremacy in Spirituals, as to this Kingdom, was more than he
had any Right to, but he and his Agents expect to be allowed to overruled the
Temporal Laws also; methinks, if you have the Nobleness and Gallantry of true
English spirits, your affections for the Roman Church should not rob you of
your love to your Native Country, nor suffer you to endure those pretenses
which dishonor the King, and despoil him of his Ancient Rights, and enslave
this free Church and Nation to one that only seeks his own ends in claiming
this Subjection; for though the holding the Pope's Supremacy does contribute to
the support of his own Grandeur, yet it does not further any man's Salvation,
and it is so far from doing any good in those Nations where it is allowed him,
that it might be made appear, the setting up and abetting this Supremacy has
occasioned the murder of many Princes, stirred up the complaints of all sorts
of people, and filled Christendom for many Ages, with Massacres, Treasons, War
and Bloodshed See the Answer to Philanax Angl. chap. 4. p. 72.
; which was so notorious in the German Empire, that it came to be a Proverb
says Guiccardine, It is the property of the Church to hate the Caesar's: And
the mischief it has done in England (by rifling the Nations wealth before the
Reformation, and disturbing its Quiet since) is so well remembered and so deeply
resented, by the generality of the people, that they will never endure that
heavy Yoke any more, nor can they be persuaded scarce ever to esteem them Loyal
Subjects or true to their Countries Interest, who do not renounce this unjust
and odious Jurisdiction. Why therefore ( O my Friends) will you be so
imprudent, to oppose the Rights and Prerogative of your Lawful Sovereign, the
Privileges of that Church wherein you were born, the Freedom and Interest of
your beloved Country, the desire of your Fellow Subjects and best Friends, yea,
and your own liberty also? Why will you oppose (I say) all these, merely to
support an unjust and groundless Power, which no Ecclesiastic ought to have
any where, much less in so remote and so free a Monarchy? to support a Power
which is inconsistent with the Security of the Crown, the Peace of the Kingdom,
and the welfare of Private persons? S. Peter never bid any to honor his
Successor the Pope thus, but his Opinion was, that you must submit to the King
as Supreme, 1 Pet. ii. 13. and his Counsel follows thereupon, viz. that you
should Fear God and Honor the King, ver. 17. S. Paul commands Every Soul to be
subject to the Higher Powers, Romans xiii. 1. Neither Bishops nor Apostles
themselves are excepted, says S. Chrysostom. And S. Bernard tells Pope
Eugenius, that the Apostles were forbid to exercise Dominion, Luke xxii. 25,
26. and therefore he adds, If you would have Apostolical and Royal Power
together you lose both Bern. ad Eugen. Pap. de consid. l. 2.
. Finally therefore, it is unreasonable for the Roman Bishop to challenge such
Authority here, and the Laws of God and Man forbid it, so that I may expect you
shall be so far from receiving any Articles for the sake of this Authority,
that you shall not scruple to renounce the Authority it self, which was so
ill-gotten at first, so wretchedly abused while it did obtain, and so legally
taken away at last; and in so doing you will demonstrate your selves to be
Loyal to your King, Faithful to your Country, Friends to your own Liberty, and
men of an un-inslaved Understanding.

SECTION VII.
Advice to the English Catholics to forsake the Opinions of Rome and embrace
the Religion of the Church of England.
TO Conclude, as my pity to see you so miserably imposed on, has moved me to
endeavor by these plain and Cogent Arguments to rescue you from that yoke,
which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear; So my desire of your
perfect Freedom, and my unfeigned wishes for your Temporal, Spiritual and
Eternal welfare, do prompt me to advise you to comply with the Religion of the
Church of England, and this Advice is not only grounded upon the foregoing
considerations, but may be further pressed upon these motives:

1. If you consider the excellent method of our Reformation which was so
necessary at that time, that for some Ages before, the wisest and best men of
the Roman Church had not only confessed there was great need of it, but had
complained for want thereof, and pressed the Pope earnestly thereunto, witness
the Judicious Epistle of Rob. Grosthead that pious Bish. of Lincoln, to Pope
Innocent the Fourth, yet to be seen in our Historians Matthew. Paris. An. 1253.
; the public complaint of the English Church in the Council of Lions ap.
Binium Council. Tom. 3. p 2. sol. 729. etc.
; the private Writings of John Gerson, Nich. Clemangis, Aeneas Sylvius
(afterward Pope) and many others: And at least One Hundred Years before
Luthers time a Reformation was urged for, in the Pisane Council Council. Pisanum
An. 1411.
and that so strongly, that before the Election of a Pope, the Cardinals
solemnly promised, Who ever of them should be chosen Pope, that he would before
the dissolution of that Council Reform the Catholic Church as well in the Head
as the Members Council. Pisan. Sess. 16.
. And when Alexander the Fifth was chosen, He promised to take Care of a
General Reformation, and that pious and Learned Men should be chosen in every
Nation to treat with the Cardinals about it Et Sess. 20. ap. Binium Tom. 3. p.
2. p. 836.
: But after all, neither he nor his Successors would ever Reform either their
Doctrines or Practices, being more intent upon their private advantage, than
the general good, and more moved with Cardinal Scombergs Counsel, than by all
the former complaints, who told the Pope, That by the Reformation it would be
confessed that the things provided against, were deservedly reproved by the
Lutherans, which would be a great abetting to their whole Doctrine, Hist.
Counc. Trent. l. 1. p. 83. which is to resolve to Err always, rather than to be
thought to have once erred; and herein the Roman Church is of the same humor
with those Gentiles to whom Arnobius speaks, What you have once done without
reason, ye defend lest you should seem formerly to have been ignorant, and you
account it better not to be overcome, than to yield to plain and confessed
Truth Arnob. adv. gentes, l. 6. p. 197.
. Wherefore since Rome resolved not to Reform, England (having first restored
her King to his Ancient and just Supremacy) resolved to reform it self, without
the Popes leave or consent, knowing full well they had Authority sufficient
among themselves to order the Affairs of Religion, which had been Regulated
many Hundred years in this Land by the King and his own Bishops, without any
dependence on the Pope at all: Thus the Kings of Judah reformed their Kingdoms
of Old, Thus the King of Spain with Leander Bishop of Sevil reformed that
Kingdom from Arianism without the Pope Council. Tolet. 3. An. 589.
and thus King Edgar intended to proceed in the Reformation of the English
Church of Old when he told his own Clergy, I have Constantines Sword in my
hands, and you have Peter's in yours Edgar Ap. Ailred. Col. 361.
That is, we need no further Authority or power to reform, Than what we have
within our selves: The Kings of this Nation, with the advice and consent of
their Bishops, Barons and Commons had been always wont to order Ecclesiastical
affairs as they thought meet, not heeding whether the Pope were pleased or
displeased thereat; And accordingly this happy Reformation was made by the
Supreme Power of this Kingdom, upon mature deliberation, in a Regular, Orderly,
and Legal way; and it was managed with so much moderation and prudence, that
the Romanists of England said little against it, but Communicated with this
Church (after the Reformation) till the Pope for his own ends forbid them so to
do; but I hope his Prohibition without any just reason, shall not outweigh the
Supreme Authority of your own Nation, with you, who profess your selves to be
Loyal Subjects, and for the interest of England; and since there was such need
of Reformation, such obstinacy in Rome, such Authority here, and so orderly
proceedings in this Reformation, I think all Good Christians and sober men,
being Natives of this Land, ought to submit unto it.

II. You will be further persuaded hereunto, by considering the Doctrine of
this Church, which agrees with Primitive Christianity, in that it obliges you
to believe nothing as of necessity to Salvation, but what may be plainly proved
our of Holy Scripture, and for this reason you must still hold the three Creeds
of the Apostles, of Nice, and of Saint Athanasius, all which the Church of
England entirely believes. And he only is a Heretic which follows not this
Holy Rule (say the Constitutions of Theodosius and Gratian) but they are
Catholics that embrace it: In this Church we give as much honor to, and obey
more Canons of, the first Four General Councils, than they of Rome do; we
approve of that Exposition of Scripture which has the consent of the Fathers
of the first three or four Centuries, yea we hold all that the Church of Rome
it self held as necessary to Salvation for Five or Six hundred Years together,
and it is very remarkable that a Romanist may turn Protestant without adding
any one Article to his Faith, but a Protestant cannot turn to Rome unless he
embrace many new Articles* for our Doctrines are generally confessed by both
sides to be true, but those of the Roman Church are rejected by our Reformers,
as Novel Additions, and such as have no good foundation in Scripture, nor
Genuine Antiquity* And therefore the Protestant Doctrines are the surer and
safer, as in which both sides agree; For Example, we and they both hold there
are two States after this life, Heaven and Hell, but they add a third which is
Purgatory, and this we deny: We and they both say, that sins are to be remitted
by the merits of Christ's death, but they add the merits of the Saints, and
their own satisfactions with the merit of their own good works, which we deny
to be Expiatory, or such as can merit Remission for us: We hold there be two
Sacraments Baptism and the Eucharist, these they confess are the Chief, but add
Five more, to which we affirm the name of Sacraments does not properly belong:
We say that God alone is to be worshipped, they confess he is chiefly to be
worshipped; but then they say the Blessed Virgin Mary, Angels, and Saints are
to be worshipped also, which Additions we deny: We say Christ is our only
Mediator and Advocate, they confess he is principally so, but add, that Saints
and Angels are so in an inferior manner, which we utterly deny: We say Christ
is really present in the Sacrament of the Altar, this they confess, but add, he
is corporally there by the Transsubstantiation of the Bread, etc. and this we
deny: We say the Scriptures are the Rule of Faith, and they will not absolutely
deny it, but add their own Traditions, which we reject: We say there are XXII.
Books of the Old Testament Canonical, and they confess these all to be so, but
they add diverse, and call them Canonical, which we affirm to be Apocryphal; I
could give more instances, but these may suffice to show that the Protestant
Doctrines look most like the Ancientest, as being received by both Parties, but
the Roman Opinions are Novel Enlargements of Old Catholic Truths, so that a
Protestant becoming a Romanist must take up many Articles barely upon the
credit of that Church, and begin to believe many things anew, questioned by the
bigger part of Christendom; but a Romanist turning Protestant retains all the
Old Essentials of his former Faith; and does only become a Primitive Roman
Catholic.

III. The Discipline and Government of the Church of England are more agreeable
to Primitive patterns than those of the present Roman Church are: Our King has
the same Power that the Religious Kings of Judah had, the same which the great
Constantine, and the succeeding Emperors for many years enjoyed, the same power
which the Ancient Kings of this Nation exercised, viz. A power to convene his
Clergy and advise with them about affairs of the Church: A power to ratify
that which the Bishops and Clergy agree upon, and give it the force of a Law: A
power to choose fit persons to Govern the Church, A power to correct all
Offenders against Faith or Manners, be they Clergy, or Laymen: And finally, A
power to determine all Causes and Controversies Ecclesiastical and Civil, among
his own Subjects (by the advice of fit Counselors) so as there lies no Appeal
from his Determination; and this is that we mean when we call him Supreme
Governor of this Church, which our King must needs be, or else he cannot keep
his Kingdoms in peace; Besides for Spiritual Jurisdiction, and sacred
Administrations, we have a Patriarch of our own, The Archbishop of Canterbury
Primate of all England, whom Urban the Second called the Pope of the other
World Malmsbury de Pontif. L. 1. de Anselmo.
And his See was usually styled, The Chair of the English Patriarch Eadmer.
Cant. page 113.
and is reckoned among the Patriarchates by a Foreign Writer Duaren. de benef.
lib. 1. c. 9.
. And now his Privileges and Liberties are restored by Law, and his Title and
Authority confirmed; so that there lies no Appeal from him but to the King; we
have also Right Reverend Bishops, together with other inferior Priests and
Deacons (the only Primitive and proper Orders of the Clergy) who can prove
their Ordination to be as goodas any of the Romish Priests can do Mason de
Ministerio Anglicano.
, And are now. Consecrated and Ordained by a more excellent Form, and more
agreeing to the eldest times, than Rome it self can show; and if you will Judge
impartially, it must be confessed that the Clergy of England are altogether as
Learned, and generally more painful and pious than in any Catholic Country
whatsoever: Our Canons for Ecclesiastical Government are all founded on the
Canons of Ancient Councils (as I could show by particular induction, if time
would permit) and for the Exercise of our Discipline it is managed with more
moderation, and ease to the People than that of the Roman Church is:

IIII. You may consider our Divine Service and Sacred Administrations, which
(as far as ever God made necessary to Salvation) may be had in this Church: We
have the Holy Scriptures plainly translated, Learnedly interpreted, and
practically Preached; We have daily Prayers, by a Form so Grave and so Agreeable
to the undoubted parts of Ancient Liturgies, that it may challenge all
Christendom to produce any thing so consonant to the purest Primitive
Devotions; A Form which has all those parts of the Roman Offices which were
known and used in the first three Centuries, but wants all the Innovations and
Corruptions of the present Mass; And is used in English for the benefit of the
meanest Christian in our Assemblies: We have also those two Sacraments which
Christ ordained (and many of the Elder and Later Doctors own no more Ambros.
lib. de Sacram.
). As for the other five Rites falsely called Sacraments, Aug. Doctrine. Christ.
l. 3. c. 9.
viz. Confirmation, Matrimony, Paschusius de Caen. Dom.
Holy Orders, Bessarion. de Sacram. Euchar.
visiting of the Sick, Repentance and Satisfaction for wrongs done, we retain
these, but not by the name of Sacraments, keeping the Primitive and main part
of them, only attended with fewer Ceremonies: We press and practice also
Charity and good works, as much as the Roman Church does, and it may be
demonstrated that more and greater gifts have been given in England to pious
uses, by private persons since the Reformation, than in two Centuries before:
And though we dare not say we shall merit Eternal life by them (because that is
the gift of God) yet we believe none can come to Heaven without good works: In
a word, the Church of England worships God as he has prescribed in Holy
Scripture, She commands all that he enjoins, and forbids all that he prohibits,
and therefore wants nothing that is necessary to Salvation.

V. You may look upon our Ceremonies which are few and easy, Ancient and
Significant, and though we do not place so much Religion in Externals as the
Church of Rome does, yet here is prescribed all that is needful for decency and
order, viz. That the Clergy always wear Grave and distinct habits, and have
peculiar Garments in Divine Administrations, that Churches be adorned and neat,
that the People be Reverent in Gods House, that the memory of our Saviors
chief Acts, and the Festivals of the Holy Apostles be religiously observed;
That Lent, with the Vigils of great Feasts, the Ember weeks, and all the
Fridays in the Year, be kept as days of Fasting or Abstinence, and if some
Protestants do not observe them, yet others do, and are commended for it, and
you may follow the best, not the most: you will have more liberty (by turning
to the English Church) as to Circumstantials, and greater helps as to the
Essentials of Religion: So that it is upon all accounts your wisest and safest
course to embrace this so true, so Primitive, so Pious, and so rational a
Religion. Let me therefore shut up my Charitable and Friendly Advice by
Requesting you to consider all these things without prejudice or passion, and
then I hope you will perceive how much the Religion of this Church excells that
of Rome, in Antiquity, Integrity, and Usefulness, and no longer suffer your
selves to be so sadly imposed on, and so miserably made to serve the ends of
Avarice and Ambition: And if you have taken such prudent and pious Resolutions,
you shall not only be freed from the inconveniences you complain of here, but
also have better assurances of your Salvation hereafter, than the Roman Church
can give you; For there you have only the words of their Priests for it, whose
interest and whose practice it has been to deceive you; But here you shall
have all the assurances which the word of God can give you, provided you become
reformed in your lives as well as in your Religion, and will leave off your old
Vices, as well as your old Opinions; For unless we can persuade you to become
Proselytes of Righteousness, we shall not much value the gaining you over to
our Profession; because we know it is neither the being Papist nor Protestant
will save those that live in their sins; But this Religion is the better
chiefly in this, that it is most likely to bring you to unfeigned Repentance,
and the practice of real Holiness. And if you desire further information in
these particulars, let me advise you to consult the late Eminent Protestant
Writers, together with some of the most able and ingenuous of the English
Clergy, whom you will find very willing and ready to give you more full
satisfaction, and to be men that have no designs upon you, but to direct you in
the best way to Heaven: And doubtless, if you would but try the difference a
while, a little experience would teach you how happy and advantageous a change
he makes, who forsakes the Religion of Rome, and embraces the Communion of the
Church of England.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and sold by H. Brom, since the
dreadful Fire of London, 1666. to 1677.
Divinity.
DR. Hammond on the New Testament, fol. -- his Practical Tracts, fol. Mr.
Farindons 130 Sermons, fol. Newman's Concordance, fol. Bishop Sanderson's
Sermons, fol. Dr. Heylin on the Creed, fol. Bishop Taylor's Cases of
Conscience, fol. -- His Polemical Discourses, fol. Mr. Cumber's Companion to
the Temple, being a Paraphrase on the Common Prayer. Bishop Wilkins Principles
and Duties of Natural Religion. Bishop Cosen's Devotions. Bishop Taylor's Holy
Living and Dying. Mr. Fowler's Design of Christianity. Dr. Patrick's Witnesses
to Christianity. -- His Advice to a Friend in Two Vol. -- His Christian
Sacrifice. -- His Devout Christian. Holy Anthems of the Church. The Saints
Legacies. The Reformed Monastery, or the Love of Jesus. Bona's Guide to
Eternity.
Sermons.
Dean Lloyd's Two Sermons at Court. Dr. Sprat's Sermon at Court. Bishop Lany's
Sermon at Court. Mr. Sayer's Assize Sermon. Mr. Naylor's Con. Sermon for Col.
Cavendish. Mr. Standish's Sermon at Court. Dr. Dupor^'s Three Sermons on May
29th. November. 5th. Jan. 30th. Dr. Du Monlin's Two Sermons on November. 5 th. --
His Sermon at the Funeral of Dr. Turner.
Histories.
The Life of the great Duke of Espernon being the History of the Civil Wars of
France, beginning 1598. where D'Avila leaves off, and ending in 1642. by
Charles Cotton Esquire; The Commentary of M. Elaiz de Mon^^uc the great Favorite
of France, in which are contained all the Sieges, Battails, Skirmishes, in
Three King's Reigns by Charles Cotton Esquire; Mr. Rycants History of Turkey. The
History of the Three last Grand Seigniors, their Sultana's and Chief
Favorites, Englisht by John Evelin Esquire; The History of Don Quixot, fol. Bishop
Wilkin's Real Character fol. Bishop Cosens against Transubstantiation. Dr.
Guidots History of Bathe, and of the Hot Waters there. The Fair one of Tunis,
or a New piece of Gallantry, by Charles Cotton Esquire; Domus Carthusiana, ^or the
History of the most Noble Foundation of the Coarter House in London, with the
Life and Death of Thomas Su ton Esquire; The History of the Sevarites, a Nation
inhabiting part of the third Continent.
Physic.
Dr. Glissonde Ventriculo and Intestinis. De Vita Naturae. Dr. Barber's
Practice, with Dr. Decker's Notes. Sir Ken. Digby's Excellent Receipts in
Physic, Surgery and Cockery. The Anatomy of the Elder Tree, with its
approved Virtue.
Miscellanies.
Dr. Skinner's Lexicon. History of the Irish Remonstrance. Lord Bacon's
Advancement of Learning. The Planters Manual. Treatise of Human Reason. The
Complete Gamester. Toleration discussed by R. L' Estrange Esquire; England' s
Improvement by R. Coke Esquire; Leyburn's Arith. Recreations. Geographical Cards
describing all parts of the World.
School Books.
S^revelius Lexicon in Quarto. Centum Fabulae, in Octavo. Nolens Volens, or you
shall make Latin. Radyns Rudimenta Artis Oratoriae. Pools Parnassus. The
Scholars Guide from the Accedence to the University. Erasmus Coll. English.
Lipsius of Constancy, English.
Controversies.
Considerations touching the true way to suppress Popery, to which is added an
Historical account of the Reformation here in England. Lex Talionis, being an
Answer to Naked Truth. The Papists Apology answered. A Seasonable Discourse
against Popery. -- The Defense of it. The difference between the Church and
Court of Rome. Take heed of both extremes, Popery and Presbytery, by Mr.
Bolein. Dr. Du Moulin against the Lord Castlemain. -- Against Papal Tyranny.
Fourteen Controversial Letters against Popery. Papists no Catholics. Popery no
Christianity. Mr. Gataker against the Papists. -- A Calm Answer to a Violent
Discourse of M. N. for the Invocation of Saints. Origo Protestanti^m: Or an
Answer to a Popish Manuscript (of N. N's.) by John Shaw Rector of Whalton.
Law Books.
Lord Cokes Reports in Four Vol. Sir James Dyer's Reports. The Clerks Guide.
The Exact Constable, with large Additions.
FINIS.

