To the Honnorable: The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in Parliament,
assembled. The humble Petition of George Carew, esquire Administrator of the
goods and Chattles of Sr. William Courten Knight deteased, (with his will
annexed) John White, and James Boeve, of London Merchants, on the behalf of
themselves, and diverse others, his Majesty's good subjects of England.
Shows:
THat the due Administrations of Justice, and Equity, have been delayed, and
denied, in the ordinary Courts of Judicature in Holland, and Zeland, upon
civil actions at Law, for these twenty six years, last past, to the great
Damages and oppression of your Petitioners, and many Orphans, and Widows,
clayming under them. As by the several cases, in the 36. Articles, hereunto
annexed appears.

That the Lives, Liberties, and Estates, of other Englishmen abroad, are
liable to the like Prejudice, and Dangers, if it be not made a national
concern, to protect the subjects of England, in foreign parts, and
particularly to require Satisfaction, and reparations, in the respective cases
of your Petitioners, according to the Circumstances of their Greviances,
mentioned in the said Articles following.

And forasmuch, as there is noe other remedy left for your Petitioners releife,
but by complaynt in Parliament, after so many Intercessions of his Majesty,
and his Ministers at the Hague, to the States General in vain. The People of
Holland, and Zeland taking advantage of their popular Interest in England, to
expose the Honor, and Reputation of the King, and Kingdom, to scorn, and
contempt, by their open, and manifest denialls of Common Justice, to
Englishmen.

YOur Petitioners do therefore most humbly pray, that your Honors, would take
their Complaints into your most serious considerations, to the end, that some
effectual means, may be used, upon your Recommendation to his Majesty, that
right may be done according to the merrits of their respective causes.

And that hereafter a summary way may be had, in the unied Netherlands for
Justice, as is used to strangers in England by neutrall, and unconcerned
Persons.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
April 15' th, 1675.

Whereas the preservation of all men's rights, and property, consists in the
Execution of Law, and Due administration of Justice; which on the contrary,
being obstructed or denied. All civell Society and Commerce must necessarily
determine and be distroyed. And least any thing in these 5. cases, might be
drawn into consequence, or made Presidents to the disadvantage of others, for
want of appealing to the Parliament for redress. The matters of fact are
briefly and faithfully recollected, out of the original writings, papers, and
records, for public View.

1. THat Sr. William Courten of London, Sr. Peter Courten of Midleburgh in
Zeland, his Brother, and John Moncy of London Merchant, their Brother in Law,
traded together with a joint stock of fifty thousand pounds sterling, to
several parts of the World, for the space of 25. years.

2. That a moiety or half part of the Stock belonged to Sr. William Courten,
and to Each of the other, a fourth part. The general Books of Trade being kept
by Sr. Peter Courten, who died at Midleburgh, in the year 1630. before the
accounts of the Company were settled, and left Peter Boudaen of Midleburgh
Merchant, his Nephew, his sole Executor.

3. That John Moncy, at the Request of Sr. William Courten, in the year 1631.
went from London to Midleburgh, to setle the accounts of Trade, which had not
been Liquidated in 14. years before, wherein rested a very considerable part of
Sr. William Courtens Estate, both in money and goods.

4. That before the accounts were perfectly finshed, John Moncy fell sick of a
Lethergie, whereof he died on the 17.th of October 1631* at the House of Peter
Boudaen, who framed Mr. Moncys will, when he was not Compos Mentis, wherein the
said Peter Boudaen, nomminated himself Executor, and incerted a provisoe, in
the will, not to be liable to discover Mr. Moncys Estate to any Person in the
World.

5. That afterward, Sr. William Courten, entered upon an other Commerce, for
trading Voyages to the East Indies, but could not during his life, obtain any
balance of the accounts, of his former Trade, from Peter Boudaen, or any
moneys out of his hands, and left William Courten his son and heir, his sole
executor, and died in the year 1636.

6. That William Courten the Executor, having sustained several Losses, by the
Hollanders, and others in Asia and America, contracted many great debts, and
assigned his Ships and Stock in the Indies, to Sr. Edward Littleton, and Sr.
Paul Pyndar. Toward payment of his debts, and then absented himself, upon
news that the East India Company of the Netherlands, had violently seized and
taken into their possession his two Ships Bona Esperanza and Henery Bona
Adventura of London, with their fraights and lading, for trading with the
Portugalls, that were then in Common Ammity, both with England, and Holland.

7. That the said William Courten transported himself for Itally in the year
1648. where he died intestate, leaving his Fathers Estate unadministred, and
the said accounts unsettled, through the iniquity of the times, whereof Mr.
Boudaen took advantage.

8. That John White, and James Boeve, having married Susanna, and Hester de
VVyer, the daughters of the only sister of John Moncy, (who had promised to
make them his heirs, having noe children of his own) caused the said Peter
Boudaen, to be cited into the Prerogative Court of England, in the year 1651.
to prove Mr. Moncys will by witnesses, which he had sent to be exhibited
there, in Common form, and consequently drawn 30000 p. sterling of Mr. Moncys
Estate out of London.

9. That Peter Boudaen refused to be conformable, to the said citation,
pretending he was not subject to any foreign Judicature, although the proper
Court to take Cognizance of the will, where it was exhibited. Then after
several other Admonitions, and Letters Requisitory from the judge. Letters of
Administration of the goods, and chattelles of John Moncy, was granted to
Hester White, the surviving Neice of John Moncy.

10. That Hester White in the year 1652. summoned the said Peter Boudaen,
before the Magistrates of Midleburgh (to have an account of John Moncys Estate
as dyeing intestate) who excepted against her quality, as Administratrix,
pretending that there was a will, although the probate was denied. Nevertheless
the said Magistrates in regard Mr. Boudaen, was an Elder of the English
Congregation, in Midleburgh, they declared that Mrs. White was not receiuable
in her quallity as yet. Which was a manifest denial of Justice in Zeland, and
a wrong to the Judicature of England.

11. That Mrs. White appealed from the Sentence of Midleburgh, to the supreme
Court of Judicature at the Hague, where after 4. years attendance and great
expense, a Sentence was there pronounced, on the 19 of May. 1657. That Provided
Peter Boudaen obliged himself to satisfy all Pretenders, Creditors, and
others, that might pretend, to the Estate of John Moncy, that then the
Administratrix, was not greived, by the Sentence of Midleburgh; but in case of
refusal, they condemned him, to account with Mrs. White, for Mr. John Moncys
Estate, reserving such right, as any person might pretend to the validity or
invalidity of Mr. Moncys will. Which was nihil ad rem. but very impertinent,
and a possitive denial of Justice, in the supreme Court of Judicature of
Holland, to set up a false Executor in Zeland, against a legal Administratrix
in England.

12. That after Peter Boudaen had obliged himself, by a notoriall Act, in
persuance of the Sentence of the High Court. Mr. Boeve summoned him before the
Magistrates of Midleburgh, for the payment of a Legacy of 2000, p. (with
interest and damages,) given to his Wife by Mr. John Moncy, where he obtained a
Sentence on the 11.th of February 1660. that Mr. Peter Boudaen should pay the
said Legacy with damages, provided the Interest should not exceed the Capital.

13. That Peter Boudaen appealed from the said Sentence, to the supreme Court
of Judicature at the Hague, where the suite has depended these 15 years,
contrary to all reason and equity, upon Countercharges, and vexatious pretenses
of Boudaen, to the damage of Mr. Boeve, ten thousand pound sterling, besides
the loss of his employment, in trade and Merchandise, whereby he has
impoverished himself, and his Family.

14. That Letters of Administration, of the goods and chattells of Sr. William
Courten with his will annexed being granted to the said G^^rge Carew (after the
death of William Courten the Executor) he gave a general Procuration in the
year 1662. unto James Boeve who summoned the said Peter Boudaen before the
Magistrates of Midleburgh in the same year, and prayed by his bill that Peter
Boudaen, should be enjoined to account with Mr. Carew concerning the
Partnershipp in his quallity as Administratour of Sr William Courten, or be
ordered to deposite the general Books of Trade, and other papers into the
Secretary Office of the said City, or any neutrall place, that an account
might be settled* at a joint charge, in the presence of Mr. Boeve, who was a
servant to Mr. John Moncy, and knew how to setle the same.

15. That Peter Boudaen, being a Director of the East India Company, and one of
the Common Council of the City, was admitted by the Magistrates to demand
caution of Mr Boeve for Costs, before they would proceed, which was never
demanded in any such cases before. And after Mr. Boeve had given sufficient
caution accordingly, the Magistrates took Exeption against it, and would have
other caution, purposely to delay Justice, which continued so, during the
Dutch war, until the death of Peter Boudaen.

16. That Sr. Jacob Catts late Pensionaris of Holland, became bound on the 29.
of July 1631. at London to Sr. William Courten for 3000 p. sterling which money
continued at interest, after the death of Sr. William Courten, then his Son
and Executor delivered the said bond, with a Letter of Attorney to Jacob
Pergens of Amsterdam, who putt the same in suite against Catts at the Hague, in
the Provintiall Court, who removed it to the supreme Court, where Mr. Carew
intervened by his Process in the year 1662. for the said debt and damages as
administrator of Sr. William Courten, according to the Law of England, the
Executor being dead, during the prosecutiou of Pergens.

17. That the Advocates of horh sides agreed the case by consent, and
transmitted it to England, for the judges opinion, who subscribed their
judgment, in the presence of Major Wright, a public Notary to this Effect;
That by the Law of England, the money due upon the bond from Sr. Jacob Catts,
was vested in Mr. Carew the administrator, after the death of William Courten
the Executor, who could not assign a bond, by the Law of England, being a
thing in action.

18. That Advocate Sass, and the rest of Mr. Carews Council at the Hague,
delivered an authentic Copy of the judges Opinion, in Latin, to the Lords
of the supreme Court of Judicature, and pleaded further: That by the
instructions of their own Court, a stranger being to be admitted, at his first
instance, they were possitively obliged to give Sentence, according to the Laws
of England, where the money was lent and the bond given. The Parliaments in
France, and all Nations, governing themselves, in cases of Contracts, according
to the Law of the place, where they are made.

19. That notwithstanding all the Arguments, and Results of the Judges, and
Lawyers, John de Wit being a Kinsman of Pergens his wife, he prevailed with
the Lords of the supreme Court of Judicature, to give Sentence in the year
1663. that the Debt, Interest, and Damages, should be paid to Pergens he
giveing caution, to save hermeless, and indempnisied, the said Catts, and his
Heirs against Carew, which was a vyolation of the Law, to the prejudice of Mr.
Carew, and other Creditors of Sr. William Courten, the sum of 5000 p. and
upwards, that ought to be refunded, upon a national demand.

20. That upon the Addresses, and earnest Solicitations of the Creditors, and
Adventurers with Sr. William Courten. The King and Council insisted upon
Satisfaction, and Reparation, from the Hollanders in the year 1662. for the
two Ships Bona Esperanza, and Henery Bona Adventura of London, his Majesty
signifieng by Letters, under his sign manual, to the States General. That he
was obliged in Justice and honor, to see it effected accordingly.

21. That upon Consideration, Polleron should be restored, and satisfaction
given for the two Ships Bona Esperanza, and Henery Bona Adventura. All other
damages, and injuries done in the East Indies, to his Majestys subjects before
his Restoration, were to be mortified and extinguished, by the 15'th Article
of the Treaty concluded at Whithall 4'th of September 1662.

22. That the Kings Commissioners; The Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Manchester,
Lord Holles, Lord Berkeley, Sr. George Carteret, Sr. Edward Nicholas, and Sr.
William Morice; And the Dutch Ambassadors Mr. Simon van Hoorn, and Mr. Michiel
van Gogh, agreed in particular Terms before the Conclusion of that Treaty
(that the damages concerning those two Ships, should be adjusted at the Hague,
and satisfaction given there, where the Controversy depended between Sr.
George Downing, and the deputies of the States General) As appears by
certificate under their hands and seals.

23. That in persuance of the said Treaty, and Agreement, two years time was
afterward spent at the Hague, and Amsterdam, in Applications, to the States
General, and the East India Company, for satisfaction and reparation, of the
debt and damages (which amounted unto 150000 p. sterling and upwards) that
could not he acquired, unless a fifth part might be accepted for the whole,
including 85000. gilders to be refunded by Mr. Pergens, or his caution toward
it.

24. That the Creditors, Adventurers, and Partners with Sr. William Courten,
finding themselves agreived, and the Kings honor so publicly exposed, by
the Hollanders, they addressed themselves, with the State of their cases, unto
the House of Commons, in the year 1664. who voted to assist his Majesty, with
their lives and fortunes, in recovering Satisfaction, and Reparation, for the
said Losses, and Damages, sustained by the Hollanders and Zelanders.

25. That upon fresh applications, made to his Majesty, by Francis Late, Earl
of Shrewsbury, William Loyd, Charles Whitaker, Esquires and several other
Creditors of Courten, Littleton, and Pindar, with the surviving partners of Sr.
William Courten, after several References to the Judges, and Kings Council
at Law, who reported that it consisted with Justice, and the Laws of Nations,
for his Majesty in that singular case of the ships attended with so many
Circumstances, to grant letters of Reprisall, against the States General and
their subjects to continue in force, in all times of peace and war, until the
sum of 151612. p. sterling with all incident costs and charges should be
reprised. Which was granted unto Sr. Edmond Turnor, and George Carew, their
Executors, Administrators, and assigns accordingly, as by the letters Patents,
under the great Seal of England, dated the 19.th of May, 1665. enrolled in
Chancery, may appear.

26. That the Hollanders neuertheless, pretend to be released and discharged,
of the said debt by the Treaty at Breda, concluded in the year 1667. without
any paymant, or compensation made, to the interessed, and would seem to
charge, the same upon the Crown, if any thing should be taken, from them, by
force of the said pattent.

27. That upon new addresses, made to the King, and Council, by George Porter,
and Thomas Coppin, Esquires, Thomas Kynaston, George Townesend, Merchants, and
others, joining with them, imploring his Majesty's further aid, and
protection, in the premises. It was by order of the Council Table, dated 22.
of March 1671/2. referred to the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, and the
two principal Secretaries of State, whose report was drawn up, by Sr. Robert
Howard, dated 29. of June 1672 signifying to the King, that the States General
having cancelled the obligations of all past Treaties, and Agreements by breach
of their articles, his Majesty and his subjects, in that case of the Ships
Bona Esperanza, and Henery Bona Adventura, were as free both in Justice, and
Equity, to require satisfaction and reparations, (according to the debt already
stated under the great Seal of England) as if those Treaties had never been
made.

28. That in persuance of the said report, the King sent his Letter dated the
7.th of July 1672. to the Duke of Buckingham, and the Earl of Arlington, (when
they were treating with the French King, and the States General at Utrecht)
requiring them to demand satisfaction, according to the said report, his
Majesty further intimating, his care to protect his subjects, in their just
rights, as well as to assist them in recovery thereof.

29. That the Commissioners from the States General, then Resident at Hampton
Court, gave a pasport dated the 5. of July 1672. to Mr. Carew to travel into
Holland with his Servants, who took with him the Kings letters, orders of
Council, report, and several other papers, and writtings, relating to the
premises. Yet notwithstanding the States of Holland committed Mr. Carew, and
Mr. John Sherland, close prisoners, took away all their writings, and bagage,
and detained them as criminalls, without access, during the war, where they
were jubject, to many affronts, and abuses, both from the States of Holland,
and the tumultuous inhabitants there.

30. That James Boeve, was by the contrivance of old Boudaens Sonns, and their
confederates, kept in Prison, at the Hague (upon a feigned action of Mr. vander
Helm, and Mr. Rymsdike, in the Admiralty of Zeland) for the space of 4. years,
purposely to obstruct him in the prosecution, of his own, and Mr. Carews
affairs, and afterward in the month of December 1672. pretending he was a
confederate of Mr. Carews, who (they said) had obstructed the good intelligence
between England and Holland, by prosecuting the actions, and demands, against
the East India Company, and others, they withdrew their action upon Mr. Boeve
and caused him to be charged, as a criminal also, and took away his books
papers and writings, relating to the said actions, and kept them during the
war, so that they could not be made use of at Cologne, pursuant to an order
of the Council Table 10.th of May, 1673.

31. That Don Pedro Fernandez de Iovar and Valasco, Marquis del Frenza, the
Spanish Ambassador at London, by procuration from the States General concluded
a peace with his Majesty, in the month of February 1673/4. whereby is confirmed
and renewed (in the 7.th Article) the Treaty of Breda, as also, all other
former Treaties in their full force and virtue, but noe further notice taken of
the Bona Esperanza, and Henery Bona Adventura. The States of Holland pretending
that the King is to give Satisfaction to the claymours, out of the moneys, to
be paid by the States.

32. That after the Conclusion, of the peace, Pensionaris Fagell proposed to
Sr. Gabriell Silvius at the Hague. That if the King would discharge the Dutch
Prisoners in the Tower, and set them free of all costs, and expenses. That
then the States General would do the like by Mr. Carew, Mr. Boeve, and Mr.
Sherland, where-upon Mr. Secretary Coventry did write, unto Sr. Gabriell
Sylvius, that the King was contented so to do, provided that his subjects
should be first discharged, and have their writings, papers and bagage
delivered, being committed, and detained contrary to the Laws of Nations, and
Common right.

33. That after three weeks debate, Pensionaris Fagell proposed, that Sr.
Gabriell Silvius, or Mr. Carew should give security, that the King should
perform on his part, or that one of the three, should remain prisoner,
until the King had performed, or that the charges and disbursments of the
Dutch Prisoners, should be deducted out of the 200000. p. the King was to
receive, by the Treaty, which was looked upon, by the English Prisoners, to be
very dishonorable demands.

34. That then the States of Holland, finding by computation that the cost and
charges of the Dutch Prisoners, would anmount unto 1500. p. or there-abouts,
consented at last to discharge Mr. Boeve, Mr. Carew, and Mr. Sherland,
computing their cost, and incident charges of imprisonment, to amount unto the
like sum which they promised to pay, accordingly.

35. That notwithstanding the King did bona fide pay 1540. p. sterling for the
costs and incident charges of Advocate Sass, Mr. Wacktendonke, Mr. Pain, and
Mr. Overscheld, who were really guilty of high crimes and misdemeanors; yet
the States General to this day have only paid 150. p. and left unpayd 1230. p.
upon the account of Mr. Carew, Mr. Boeve, and Mr. Sherland (that died sone
after hls releasment of Melancholy humors, contracted in prison, for want of
good company, air and exercise) where the Hollanders, will not be punctual,
in littlr matters, there is small hopes of their performance in greater, who
never kept a Treaty with any.

56. That Mr. Carew, after his releasment, knowing that Mr. Boudaen, had left
his Sonns and Daughters vast sums of money at his death, beyond expectation of
the World, besides several of the best plantations, and possessions in Surinam,
he went to Midleburgh, and sent a public Notary on the 8.th of June 1674.
unto John, Peter, and Henery Boudaen, and the rest of the Sonns, and Daughters,
of old Boudaen, to require an account of Sr. William Courtens Estate, resting
in their hands, and in case of denial, to protest, for all costs and damages,
already sustained, or that should be sustained, by their further obstinacy, and
delays, who still refused to come to any account. Whereupon Mr. Carew revived,
the former action against the children, that was brought by Mr. Boeue against
the Father, upon M. Carews account, and gave other caution by a sufficient
Merchant of the place to the liking of the Magistrates. Yet neuertheless they
have admitted the said Boudaens (being directors of the East and West India
Companies) to make frivolous exceptions, against the Judicature of England,
only for delay, contrary to the very ordinance of their own Court, expressly
contained in the 45'th Article of Instructions, for their proceeding at Law in
Midleburgh. Where Mr. Carew has ever since, to his great costs, and damages,
daily solicited the Magistrates, Burgermasters, and Schepens for Justice; in
regard of Mr. Boeves age, who knows the accounts; And also complained unto Sr.
William Temple, the King Ambassador at the Hague, who is not regarded there,
upon any judicial Complaynts whatsoever.

IT is not unknown to several Members of Parliament, how many Families have
suffered, in th^se cases, by the frauds and rapines of the Hollanders, and
Zelanders, wherein the cries of many Fatherless and Widows, calls aloud at
the Parliament doors, for a grand Inquiry to be made (for their releise)
against the indirect practices and insolences of those people. Wherefore the
Petitioners do ( openly) appeal to the Parliament against the States of
Holland, and Zeland, for all the Capital sums of Money, Losses, Damages, and
incident Charges whatsoever; (sustained by the Petitioners, and other persons
clayming the same) amounting unto the sum of two hundred and fifty thousand
pound Sterling and upwards.


