NATURAL PHILOSOPHY REFORMED BY DIVINE LIGHT: OR, A SYNOPSIS of Physics: BY
J. A. COMENIUS:

Exposed To the censure of those that are lovers of LEARNING, and desire to be
taught of GOD.

Being a view of the WORLD in general, and of the particular Creatures therein
contained; grounded upon Scripture Principles.

With a brief APPENDIX touching the Diseases of the Body, Mind, and Soul; with
their general Remedies.

By the same AUTHOR.

LONDON: Printed by Robert and William Leybourn, for Thomas Pierrepont, at the
Sun in Paul's Churchyard, MDCLI.

To the truly studious of wisdom, from Christ the fountain of wisdom,
greeting.
JAcobus Acontius, a most excellent man, offended at the evil disposition of
our scribbling age wished that it might be provided, that none should write and
publish any thing, unless it were some new thing; which should both be of his
own observation, and might make for the glory of God, and the aedification of
the Church, and from whence so much fruit might be hoped, that what time is
bestowed on the reading of it, the readers could not bestow it better elsewhere:
that so nothing might be done which was already done, but what was yet to be
done. For few Writers (says he) bring any thing of their own: but only steal,
things and words, of which they make Books, etc. Which they know to be most
truly spoken, who are to peruse that farrago of Books, wherewith we are yearly
little less then overwhelmed. For if you look on the titles, you shall have
them always new and very specious: if on the thing, it is always the same
boiled over and over above a thousand times, and Coleworts crammed in, even to
nauseating. And though something of new observation be offered, yet to what
purpose is it, that whole Books should therefore be written, and those new
things found out so buried in things ordinary, that either a man has no mind
to enquire, what of new observation is in them, or cannot do it without
tediousness of spirit and loss of time. But it is not my business to inveigh
against this disorder in many words. I come now to declare why I my self come
out in public. And I will lay it open in a word I bring something new, and
different from the common way of Philosophy: And I bring it so, as that I
hope, it will be without any ones hinderance or molestation, as containing in a
very few leaves, matters of very great moment. And I bring it to satisfy the
desires of others this way. For whereas I had the year last past, given a proof
of my Philologicall endeavors, Janua Linguarum reserata, (or a seminary of
Arts and Languages) which was courteously received, and that with applause, and
approved almost by all men's verdict, (as several letters, dated either to my
self or my friends, touching that matter do testify,) some (of the number of
those, who at this time bend their desires, thoughts and dedevours, to rectify
the method of studies) began to solicit me, to put out my philosophical
Works, or at least to desire a communication of my conceptions, especially in
Physics. Having no other mind therefore, but to bring something for mine own
part that may be profitable, if it may be: or else that others may have
occasion by me, to bring better matters; I purposed with my self to expose to
the light, this same Synopsis of Physics, lately dictated in this School,
that public censure might be made of this also, as well as of my former Work.
Which that it might be, it seemed meet to give some further intimation of the
occasion and scope of our undertaking, to those that will offer themselves to be
our censors.

After that the calamitous lot of exile had thrust me, who was by calling a
Divine, back to the services of the School, wherein I was desirous to bear my
self, not slightly, but so as that I might discharg the trust committed to me;
it chanced that I happened, among other things, upon Ludovicus Vives his Books,
detradendis disciplinis. In these when I had found most wholesome counsels, for
the repairing of Philosophy, and the whole course of studies, I began
extremely to grieve, that a man of so piercing a wit, after he noted so many
most evident errors, had not put to his hand to make those rough things
smooth, but the judgment of one touching this excellent Writer, that Vives saw
better what was not then what was, made me to consider, that it is usual with
the wisdom of God to communicate things by degrees. Yet I thought with my self
that others should take this as an occasion to labor to design one certain
and infallible way among so many deviations discovered unto them: which I
wondered that men were so backward to essay for full a hundred years. (For I
knew not whether any one had gone about it.) But it happened, that a certain
learned man, to whom I communicated these complaints of mine in a more familiar
manner, showed me a Book called, Prodromus philosophiae instaurandae by Thomas
Campanella an Italian: which I read over with incredible joy, and being
inflamed with an exceeding great hope of new Light, I greedily turned through
his Realis philosophia epilogistica (for so he calls it) set forth in four
Books, as also the Books de rerum sensu, where ever I could get them. Whereby I
found my desires in some sort satisfied, but not throughout. For his very
foundation, that all things were made up of two contrary principles only,
offended me (For I was already most fully persuaded of the number of three
principles out of the divine Book of Genesis: and and I remember out of Hugo
Grotius, disputing against the Manichees, That of two things fighting one with
the other, destruction might follow, but an ordinate construction could never
follow.) And besides I observed that Campanella himself was not very certain
of his own hypotheses: as one that began to waver in his assertions toward the
positions of Galilaeus touching the earths mobility, and yet to call them in
doubt himself: as it is evident ^enough in his Apology for Galilaeus.

But when I chanced afterward upon a piece of Sir Francis Bacon Baron of
Verulam, Chancellor of England, entitled inst aur atio magna (an admirable
work, and which I look upon no otherwise, then as a most bright beam of a new
age of Philosophers now arising) I understood that in some particulars also of
Campanella, such solid Demonstrations, as the truth of things requires, were
wanting. Yet it grieved me again, that I saw most noble Verulam present us
indeed with a true key of Nature, but not open the secrets of Nature, only
showing us by a few examples, how they were to be opened; and leave the rest to
depend on observations and inductions continued for several ages. Yet I saw
nevertheless, that my hopes were not quite left in suspense: in as much as I
perceived my mind so enlightened by the light which it received from those
several sparks, now grown welnigh to a torch, that some great secrets of
Nature, and very obscure places of Scripture, (the reason of which I knew not
before) were now plain, as it were of their own accord, to the exceeding great
content of my mind. For now with those, that have lighted upon a more sound way
of Philosophy in this age, I saw and rested in it;

I That the only true, genuine and plain way of Philosophy is to fetch all
things from sense, reason and Scripture.

II That the Peripatetick philosophy is not only defective in many parts, and
many ways intricate, full of turnings and windings, and partly also erroneous,
so that it is not only unprofitable for Christians, but also (without
correction and perfection hurtful.

III That philosophy may be reformed and perfected, by an harmonicall
reduction of all things that are and are made, to sense reason and Scripture,
with so much evidence and certainty (in all such things as are of most
concernment, and have any necessity) that any mortal man seeing may see, and
feeling may feel, the truth scattered every where.

Of all and every of which observations, least we should seem to have dreamed
somewhat, there will be some thing to be said more at large.

And for the first we make three principles of Philosophy, with Campanella, and
his happy Interpreter Tobie Adams, Sense, Reason and Scripture: But so jointly,
that whosoever would not be left in ignorance or doubt, should rest on no one
of these without the others, otherwise it will be a most ready precipice into
errors. For Sense, though it make an immediate impression upon us of the truth
imprinted upon things: yet because it is very often confounded, either by
reason of the multitude of things in a manner infinite, and the strange
complications of forms: or else wearied and tired, sometimes with the distance
of the objects, and so consequently dazeled and deceived. Reason must of
necessity be employed, which may conclude alike of like things, and contrarily
of contrary things, by observing their proportion, and so supply the defect of
sense, and correct its errors.

But then because many things are remote both from sense and reason (which we
cannot in any sort attein unto by sense, nor yet by reason firmly enough) we
are indepted to the grace of God, that he has by his Word revealed unto us
even some secrets which concern us to know. Therefore if any one desire the
true knowledge of things, these three principl^s of knowing must of force be
conjoined. Otherwise, he that will follow the guidance of sense only, will
never be wiser then the common sort; nor be able to imagine the Moon less then
a star; the Sun greater then the earth; and that again sphaericall, and every
way habitable. On the contrary if a man contemplate on abstract things and
consult only with reason without the testimony of sense, he will be rapt away
with mere phantasines, and create himself a new world: like the Platonicall and
Aristotelicall, etc. Lastly, they that heed the Scripture only, and hearken
neither to sense nor reason are either carried away beyond the world (by the
sublimity of their conceptions;) or else involve things they understand not
with the Colliers faith; or following the letter, propound unto themselves
things, though never so absurd and superstitious, to be believed; as Papists do
in that most absurd transubstantion of theirs, etc. So then the principles of
knowing, must be conjoined, that divine Revelation may afford us belief;
Reason, Understanding, Sense, Certainty. And they must be used in this order
(in natural things I say) as that we begin with sense, and end in revelation
(as it were the setting to the seal of God:) for by this order every subsequent
degree will receive receive from the antecedent, both Evidence and also
Certainty, and Emendation. For as there is nothing in the understanding which
was not first in the sense: so there is nothing in the belief, which not first
in the understanding. For he that believes, must know what is fit to be
believed. Hence the Scripture frequently invites us to hear, see, taste,
consider; And affirms that faith too comes by hearing. I said Certainty too.
For by how much the nearer Reason is to sense (that is by how many the more
experiments of the senses it may be demonstrated) it is so much the more real:
and on the contrary again, the further it recedes from sense, by so much the
more vain speculation and naked imagination it has. But by how much the nearer
divine Revelation may be reduced to understanding, and the testimonies of
experience, so much the more strength it finds.

I said further, that the precedent degrees were corrected by the subsequent:
and so it is. For where sense fails or mistakes, it is supplied and corrected
by reason: And Reason by Revelation. For example, when the sense judges the
Moon to be bigger then Saturn, or an Oar to be broken under the water, etc.
Reason rectifies it by certain documents of experience. So when Reason has
gathered any thing falsely of things invisible, it is amended by divine
Revelation. Yet that emendation is not violent, and with the destruction of the
precedent principle: but gentle, so that that very thing which is corrected,
acknowledges, and admits it of its own accord, and with joy, and soon brings
something of its own, whereby the same corrected truth may become more
apparent. For example, Reason brings nothing to correct sense, whereof it is
not soon ascertained by sundry experiments, and affirms it self, that so it
is, (as that an Oar is not broken under water, the Touch teaches: as also the
sight it self, looking on it after it is drawn out.) Faith holds out nothing,
which is contrary and repugnant to Reason, (though it bring that which is
beyond and above Reason:) But all things such as Reason not only yields being
overcome by authority, but also finds of a truth to be in things, and so seeks
and finds out some thing of its own, which may serve to confirm and illustrate
the same truth. Therefore let it be taken for true, That Sense is not only the
fountain of knowledge, but also of certainty, in natural things: But that the
understanding is the Organ not only of knowledge, but also of certainty in
revealed things.

Let us come then to the purpose. Some deny, that holy Scripture is to be drawn
to Philosophy, because it teaches not the speculation of outward things, but
the way of eternal life, I confess, that the Scripture was given by
inspiration of God, to teach, reprove, correct, and instruct in righteousness:
That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. (2 Timothy 3.) I confess, I say, that this is the ultimate end of the Scripture. Yet
who knows not, that there are for the most part more ends of one thing? even in
humane things, much more in divine, where the wisdom of our adored God has
wholly wound up it self, with an artifice scarce to be found out of us. Truly,
if we find that artifice all over nature, (and so it is) that every creature,
and part of a creature, and part of a part, serves for several uses: I see no
reason why we should deprive the Book of God of this character of the highest
Wisdom. But I see reason why we ought to determine, that most sufficient
complements of all things, whereunto Sense and Reason were insufficient (and
yet we were concerned to know them) are extant in that most holy Book. For did
not God bring man into the School of the World, to contemplate his manifold
Wisdom? Did not he command him to behold his invisible things by these things
that are seen? ( Romans 1. v. 20.) Surely this must be acknowledged to be the end
both of making the World and placeing man therein. Now it is clear through all
Nature, that, to whatsoever end God has ordained any thing, he has conferred
means upon it to be tein it. He has therefore conferred means upon man to
contemplate his wondrous things: Which as we must acknowledge that they are
sense and reason, so we must needs acknowledge that they are not every where
sufficicient. For our senses leave us in the knowledge of eternal things, and
those things which are placed quite out of sight, and done when we are not
present. But where Sense fails, Reason fails also: Being that this is nothing
but an universal knowledge of things, gathered from particulars acts of sense;
that this or that is, or is done, either so or so. When as therefore both Sense
and Reason do very ordinarily fail us, shall we believe, that the most
gracious Father of Lights, would not supply this defect some other way? His
most liberal and in every respect approved bounty toward us, will not permit
us to suspect that. But if God have some way or other provided for us, let it
be shown what it is, or where it is to be sought for, if not in that sacred
volume of Oracles? And I pray, was it in vain, or only in respect of our
eternal salvation, that God said of his Law. This is your wisdom and
understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear all these statutes
and say. Surely this is a wise and understanding people. (Deuteronomy. 4. 6.) Or did
David boast in vain? I have more under standing then all my teachers; because
thy testimonies are my meditations (Psalm. 119. 99.) Or the son of Sirach say
in vain: The Word of God most High is the fountain of wisdom? (Eccles. 1. 5. Or
was it in vain that Solomon called God, the guide unto wisdom, and the
corrector of the wise? Wisd. 7. 15.) see here a correctour! But how does he
correct, but by dashing over our vain cogitation with his word? And to what
purpose, I pray is all that is frequently me^tion'd concerning the beginning of
the World and the order of the Creation, and properties of the creatures, If
the parent of nature, who is also the Dictatour of the Scriptures, meant to
teach us nothing of nature? They say it is to this end, that we may learn to
know and admire, love and fear the Maker of all things. Right: But how the
Maker without his work? Does not any one so much the more admire and praise the
ingenuity of the Painter, if he be excellent, by how much the better he
understands the art of painting? Surely yes. A superficial knowledge will
never raise either love or admiration. And then I demand, those things, which
we meet with in the Scriptures concerning the creatures (by similitudes also
drawn thence) are they true or false? If true (for who can determine otherwise
without blasphemy) why may we not confer them with those things that are
manifest by sense and reason? that so we may find out that harmony of truth,
which is in things, and in the mouth of the Author of things? Truly, if the
words of the wise are as goades and nails fastened: (as Solomon testifies,
Eccles. 12. 11.) What shall we think of the words of the all-wise God? But
this, that though they raise us up with another end, and by the by, yet they
contein nothing but most solid truth and all manner of-wisedome. In vain
therefore may some one say: I find no mention in the Scriptures, much less
precepts of Grammar, Logic, Mathematics, Physics, etc. For there is as much
distance betwixt divine writings and humane, as betwixt God himself and man.
Man that is limited with time, place and objects, at one time and in one place
can do but one thing: but God that is aeternall, omnipresent, and omniscient,
at once sees, rules and governs all things, always and every where. And the
same Character do their writings retein on either part. Humane writings do some
one thing with express endeavor, handling one object in one place, and that
in such a way as is most pleasing to man's understanding: but divine writings
like an universal treasury of wisdom stay not upon one particular matter,
(unless it be in things pertaining to Theology) but contein variety of matter
under several sayings. Whence a Divine, a Moralist, a Politician, a
Householder, a Philosopher, a Philologer, etc. may take out every of them, what
each has use of. And this breadth and depth of the Scripture is its
prerogative before humane writings, that so it may be in truth an inexhaustible
fountain of all wisdom. For whatsoever matter is to be handled, the Scripture
affords always, either a rule, or some sayings or examples: as John Henry
Alsted (sometimes my honored Master) shows in his Triumphus Biblicus, and much
more might be discovered by a very accurate diligence: which that so it is, for
a good part of it, shall appear also in these our Physical meditations.
Rightly therefore said Cassiodorus: the Scripture is an heavenly school,
wherein we learn whatsoever we are either to learn or to be ignorant of. And
piously T. Lydiat: It is most absurd, that heathen Philosophers should seek for
the principles of all arts in one Homers posie, and that we Christians should
not do the same in the Oracles of God, which are a most plentiful and most
clear fountain of wisdom. (About the end of his Physiological disquisition.)
Those most Christian Philosophers are therefore deservedly to be praised, who
have endeavored to render unto God the Parent of things that praise that is
due unto him, Franc. Valesius, Lambert Danaeus, Levinus Lemnius, Thomas Lydiat,
Conradus As^acus, Otto Casmannus; who have not doubted to asseverate, that the
seeds of true Philosophy are contained in the holy Book of the Bible, and to
derive their maxims of Philosophy from thence (though with different success.)

Let it stand therefore, that Philososophy is lame without divine Revelation.
Whence we have this consequence, that Aristotle is not to be tolerated in
Christian schools, as the only Master of Philosophy: But that we should be
free Philosophers, to follow that which our senses, Reason, and Scripture
dictate. For what? Are not we placed as well as they in Natures garden? Why then
do we not cast about our eyes, nosthrils and ears as well as they? Why should
we learn the works of nature of any other Master, rather then of these? Why do
we not, I say, turn over the living book of the world instead of dead papers?
wherein we may contemplate more things, and with greater delight and profit
then any one can tell us. If we have any where need of an Interpretour the
maker of nature, as we have said, is the best Interpretour of himself. If a
Monitour or Suggestour, we have more and better then Aristotle, experience (of
the various and occult Maeanders of nature) being multiplied in the process of
so many ages. For as all humane things get up to perfection from rude
beginnings, so Philosophy has had its grouths too. In Aristotle's age it was
scarce out of its infancy: In the ages that followed after, (especially in
ours) it was so increased still with new observations, that the Aristotelick
tenets savor of obscurity and uncertainty in comparison of these, nay, they
hold out open falsities. Be it then (writes Rod. Goclenius to Nic. Taurellus)
that nature has showed all the acuteness of humane ingenuity in Aristotle;
let Aristotle be a man that has deserved well of all humane wisdom beyond and
above all other mortal men besides; let him be the Father and Captain of our
wisdom; let him be the supreme Dictatour of wisdom, the Generalissimo of
Philosophers, the eagle of the Philosophical Kingdom, wisdom and praise of
literature; let him be the Hercules, the Prince, the Tribunal of truth; let
him be the deity of Philosophers; let him be lastly a man greater then all
praise, and above all calumny; which titles Julius Scaliger sets him out with:
yet this miracle of Nature is not the RULE OF TRUTH, seeing that he has not
every where traced Truths footsteps. Thus Goclenius. Now he that will may see
Campanella and Verulamius, (for it may suffice, to have showed these Hercules,
who have happily put to their hands to the subduing of Monsters, and cleansing
Augias stables; and to have opposed them to those, whom the authority of
Aristotle's vainly swelling Philosophy holds bewitched:) and feel how far
Aristotle's assertions are often from the truth, and this is the cause why it
seems convenient, that Aristotle with all his heathenish train should be
excluded from the sacred Philosophy of Christians; least they should any more
entangle the truth in errors, and involve and obscure those things with
intricate disputations, which are of themselves plain by the lamp of the Word
of God, and of sound reason. For is it not very absurd, that Christians, who
are trained up in the true knowledge of the true God, and taught by his holy
voice, concerning the original causes, end, and manne of subsistence of all
things visible and invisible; to whom also the very mysteries of aeternity are
revealed; whom the anointing of God teaches al^ things; to whom Christ has
imparted his mind (1 John 2. v. 27. 1 Cor 2. 16.) that they, I say, should see
for the truth of things amongst the heathen, that are destitute of all the^e
and have no other helps, but those of reason, and of the senses, which are
common to us with them? Is it so indeed that there is not a God in Israel, that
we go to enquire of the gods of Ekron? Is the light of Jerusalem so put out,
that we must needs borrow lamps at Athens? It is well known that Origin was the
man that first of all joined heathen Philosophy with Christian Religion: with
no ill intent perhaps, but sure it is with very bad event. The good man's
purpose without doubt was to put some external splendor upon Christian
Religion, as then contemned by reason of its simplicity, that so Christians
might be well appointed to buckle with the Gentile Philosophers at their own
weapons. But whither or no came this persuasion from him, that has called us
out of darkness into his mavelous light, and commanded us to beware of vain
Philosophy after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the World, and
not after Christ. (Gal. 5. 8. 1 Pet, 2. 9. Colos. 2. 8.) And indeed the most
sad estate of the Church a little after shows what fruit we had in coupling
Aristotle what Christ; when all was full of the noise of disputations, (for
slippery quaestions, and an itching desire of controversy is the very soul of
Peripateticisme) and haeresie sprung out of haeresie, till at length the fumes
of humane opinions had so quite darkened the brightness of the divine wisdom,
that all things degenerated into Antichristianisme. Where in forging articles
of faith, and ordaining rules of life, Aristotle had an aequall share with
Christ, that I may not say he had the sole dictatourship: of which thing our
School divinity will give us a very clear sight. If Origin then a man of so
sublime a wit, in vain attempted to piece out Christian religion with that same
heathen Philosophy; and Thomas Scotus nor no man else had any better success,
why then do we tolerate it? Why do we not slip our wits out of those snares?
why do we not throw away those spectacles which present us with fancies instead
of things?

Some are afraid, least, if they should let go Peripatetick Philosophy, they
should have none at all. As if when Hagar were cast out, there would have been
none to bless Abraham with issue! Or that the Israelites would have been
sterved with hunger, when they. had left the Egyptian flesh pots; or that
Moses must needs have grown blockish, when he was out of the company of the
wise men of Memphis! Nay rather, that promised Grace will come at length, at
length that heavenly Manna will rain down, at length we shall be truly (...)
taught of God, when turning away our ears from humane Opinions, we shall
hearken to God alone speaking by Nature, and by his Word. And then how solid,
easy, and delightful will all things be! when as the whole course of
Philosophy will not consist in opinions but in truth.

But greater care was to be had of method: that all things should be delivered
to the learners in such a way, that they may find knowledge to flow into them,
not to be stuffed in; always beginning with those things that are best known, and
ending in things no less known then they. For why should we think that
impossible in Physics, which is so excellently achieved in Mathematics?
whereall Demonstrations (N. W.) are brought to the very sight: and all is so
contrived together of things that go before and are better known (always
beginning with such common things that it is taedious to the unskilful to
hear them) in such an order, as that which is in the midst is never skipt
over, nor place, given to that which is more unknown, whence it comes to pass,
that you must of necessity assent as well to that which is last, as to that
which is first. And truly there is reason to wonder why the like has not been
yet assayed in Metaphysics, Physics, and Theology, (for Ethics and
Politics concern more contingent things.) I am not ignorant that there is more
evidence in Numbers, Measures and Weights, then in Qualities, by which Nature
puts forth its strength after a hidden manner: yet I will not say that there is
greater certainty in them, seeing that all things are done alike not without
highest reason, in a continued order, and as it were by an aeternall law. And
yet in Mathematics all things are not alike plain, yet they are assayed sundry
ways till they can be reduced to (...), or very sight, as I said before, and
delivered scientifically. For he says nothing in Philosophical matters that
proves nothing: and he proves nothing that does not so demonstrate it, that you
cannot contradict it. And now I beseech you let this be our business, that the
schools may cease to persuade, and begin to demonstrate: cease to dispute and
begin to speculate: cease lastly, to believe, and begin to know. For that
Aristotellicall maxim, Discentem oportet credere, A learner must believe is as
tyrannical as dangerous; and that same Pythagorean (...) ipse dixit. Let no
man be compelled to swear to his Masters words, but let the things themselves
constrain the intellect: Nor let a Master have any more credit given him, then
he can demonstrate in very deed, that he is to have. For in a free
Commonwealth there ought to be no Kings, but Dukes or Generals; no Dictators,
but Consuls. And those that profess the art of instructing men, are the Fathers
of men, not the carvers of Statues. O when shall we see that day! that all
things which ought to be known shall offer themselves so to a man's
understanding, that there will be nothing but what may be understood for the
very cleerness of it, nothing called in doubt for certainty: the truth of
things making such an impression upon the senses with its light. For he does
not see truly, who must yet be persuaded by arguments to make him believe that
he sees: as we have been hither to dealt with for the best part.

I could not choose, because I seemed to see light in the light of God, but
assay calling God to my aid, to reduce these new hypotheses of natural things
into a new method, and dictate them to the scholars of this school. And thence
sprang this, which I now offer, representing a draught of the lineaments of
some new, (and as I hope truly Christian) Philosophy. Not that I would cross
the design of great Verulam (who thought it the best way to abstein from
Axioms and method, till full inductions could be made, of all and every thing
throughout all nature:) but to make an experiment in the mean time, whether
more light might be let into our minds by this means to observe the secrets of
nature the more easily, that so praise might be perfected to God out of the
very mouth of infants, and confusion prepared for the gain saying enemy; as
David having comprised the sum of Physics in a short hymn for the use of
the unlearned) speaks. (Psalm. 8.) I have entitled it a Synopsis of Physics
reformed by divine light: because Philosophy is here guided by the lamp of
divine Scripture, and all our assertions are brought to the attestation of the
senses and reason, with as much evidence as could be possible. Now both those
come under the name of divine light. For as David said, THY WORD is ALANTHORNE
unto my feet: so said Solomon THE SPIRIT or mind OF A MAN is THE CANDLE of the
Lord searching all things. (Psalm 119. 105. and Proverbs 20. 27.

If any one object: That these things here delivered, are not yet of that
certainty or evidence, as to be preferred before Aristotle's so long received
doctrine; I will answer, that is not my drift at present: but only I propound
this as an example, that a truer way of Philosophy may be set out, by the
Guidance of God, the Light of Reason, and the Testimony of Sense, if
Philosophers would labor more after God and the Truth, then after Aristotle
and Opinion. In the mean time, these should be the more acceptable, and had in
more reverent esteem of us, if it were for nothing but this, that they are
taken from the Oracles of God, and aim at a more abundant knowledge of God. For
my part truly I had rather (in that mind I now am: and that it may so continue,
strengthen me, o God) I had rather I say err, having God for my guide, then
having Aristotle: that is, I had rather follow the voice of God, though not
thoroughly understood yet, so I follow it, then be carried away from the sacred
testimonies of my God, to the devices of the brain of man.

I confess my self, that something more were to be desired here yet, to that
rule of certainty and evidence which I spoke of before: yet because I trust
that these things may be brought to a fuller (...) [exactnesse] by reiterated
meditations, (of mine own or some others,) I doubted not to follow the counsel
of great Acontius: If thou have made any rare observation, says he, which
never any one before made (whither the thing be a new invention, or some new
way of former inventions) although much be wanting as yet, which is above thy
strength, nevertheless if thou should not make it public, it would argue
either too much cowardice, or too much haughtiness of thy mind, and however
that thou art no lover of the Common Wealth. And why should not these things be
accounted as new inventions; That ternarie of principles so clearly
demonstrated from Scripture, Reason, and Sense? Why not that admirable scale of
substances, by a septenarie gradation? Why not the doctrine of spirits (as well
separate as incorporate:) of motions also and qualities, laid down more
accurately and plainly then ever before, and letting in a quite new light into
the knowledge of nature all things? To say nothing of smaller matters scattered
all over the book. Every of which in particular though I dare not defend tooth
and nail, for some things perhaps are still the relics of common tradition:
and others it may be, not yet sufficiently established upon the foundations which
we have laid down) yet I am persuaded that they are the groundworks of unmoved
truth, and avail much to the more exact observation of particular things. And
that I may speak in a word, I hope there is so much light in this method of
Physics here delivered, that very little place is left to doubts and
disputations: so that it makes something toward the taking away the
controversies of Authors, the opinions of all (whatsoever of truth either
Aristotle has; or Galen, the Chymicks, Campanella and Verulamius do reasonably
allege against him) being reduced to an harmony; which may be made plain by
the example of the principles of which they make bodies to consist, (which
Aristotle would have to be the four Elements; the Syagyricks Salt, Sulfur and.
Nay more, that by this means a gate is opened in a new kind of way, not only
to the understanding of Arts and humane inventions, but also to multiply them:
which could never be, unless the foundations of truth were found. Perhaps I
speak more, then the Reader will think he finds in my Writings. But if he saw
but the streams (the delineation of that Pansophia Christiana, which we have
in hand) that are derived, from this fountain, as also from that of our
Didacticks and Metaphysics, he would not hold it vainly spoken. But because
those are not yet brought to light, I set down this as a law for these that
are: If any thing be not sufficiently deduced from Sense, Reason, and
Scripture; If any thing cohere not harmoniously enough with the rest; If any
thing be not evident enough with its own perspicuity, let it be taken as not
said at all. Which law standing in force it may be lawful for my self and all
others, both to doubt always, and every where whether every thing be so as it
is delivered to be: and also to enquire why it is, as it is found to be; by
which two courses, that the lowest foundations of truth, will in time be
discovered no body needs to doubt.

Therefore let none of us seek after any thing else, but how the truth may
best be maintained on all hands which if it happen not to be on our side, and
that we are deceived with appearances of truth, (as it is very usual in humane
affairs,) I beseech all those that are more sharp-sighted, for the love of
truth courteously to show us our way, which we have lost, and where our
demonstrations come not together. But if these savor of truth something near,
that then they would not disdain to join their endeavors with ours for the
illustration thereof: that all of us being the children of truth may compose
and sing Hymns of praise together to God the Father of Truth. Thou therefore

O Christ the Fathers glory bright,
Of this great World the only light;
On us some beams of light bestow,
That are thy servants, thee to know.
Amen, Lord make me to see! here indeed thy external light shining upon, and
internal informing thy creatures, but there in [in heaven] aeternall and
uncreated! Amen, Amen. And so Christian Readers farewell.

J. A. C.

March the 12th. 1650.

Imprimatur John Downame.

A Table of the Heads of this BOOK.
Prolegomena, of the nature and use of Physic.
I AN Idea of the World to be created and created. page 9 II Of the principles
of the World, Matter, Spirit and Light. 20 III Of the motion of things. 38 IV
Of the qualities of things. 49 V Of the mutation of things. 69 VI Of the
Elements. 78 VII Of Vapors. 96 VIII Of Concretes 114 IX Of Plants. 148 X Of
living creatures. 159 XI Of Man. 210 XII Of Angels. 228 An Appendix to
Physics, of the diseases of the Body, Mind and Soul, aad their remedies. 243
Errata.
Page 53. for softness read saltness, p. 63. for softness r. saltness, p. 247.
line 12. for run r. noisome, p. 250. l. 4. for veins r. reins, ibid. l. 28 dele
by.

PROLEGOMENA.
Touching the nature, foundation and use of Physic.
I Physic is the Scientiall Knowledge of natural* things.

II That thing is natural, which is by Nature, not by Art

FOr whatsoever this visible World has, comes all, either from Nature or from
Art those things are from Nature which God brought forth in the beginning, or
which are to this very time begotten: by a virtue implanted in things, as, the
Heavens, the Earth, the Sea, Rivers, Mountains, Stones, Metals, Herbs, living
Creatures, etc. those things are from art which men have shaped, by putting a
new form upon natural things; as, Cities, Houses, Ponds, Channels, Statues,
Coins, Garments, Books, etc. that is by the work of man's ingenuity and hands.
Physics have nothing to do with these things; these are put over to the arts.

Now seeing that nature is before art: ye that art imitates nothing but nature,
for as much as it does nothing but by the strength of nature: it necessarily
follows, that nature is to be laid for a foundation to arts, and that nature
must first be known by those that are studious of arts, what things, and by
what virtue it operates every where* for when this is known, the secrets of all
arts open of their own accord, without this in arts and prudentials all will be
blind, dumb, and maimed: therefore Physic is so necessary to be premised
before the Mathematical, and Logical, and also the prudentiall Arts, that they
who do otherwise, may be thought to build castles in the air.

III The nature of things is, the law of being born and of dying, of operating
and of ceasing, which God the Workmaster has laid upon all things that are.

For all things are born and die: all things operate somewhat, and all things
cease again: in an order and manner proper to every creature* which order and
manner being that it is with most excellent reason, could not be disposed, but
by the supreme wisdom, inasmuch as it is found constantly to be imposed by way
of a law upon things* now it took the name of nature from the first degree of
mutation of every thing, which is, to be borne.

IV The knowledge of nature is to be obtein'd by searching into Nature it self.

By searching I say. For no one should spend his time in Physics, to that end,
that he might have his mind taken up with another conceits; but that he may
put forward himself to the through and intimate knowledge of things, otherwise
the intellect will not be illustrated with the nature of things, but obumbrated
with the speculation of phantasms in natural things, therefore we are to seek
for guides who may make us scholars, not of themselves, but of nature, and
exhibit unto us not their own fond reasons, but nature.

V To search Nature, is to contemplate, how, and wherefore, every thing in
nature is done.

To contemplate I say. For as we do not see the Sun, but by looking on the Sun:
so we do not learn nature, but by looking into nature; which is that the
Scripture counsels us. Ask the beasts, and they shall teach thee, and the fouls
of the air, and they shall tell thee, or talk with the earth, and it shall
answer thee, and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee. (Job 12. 7.)
therefore the learners of natural Philosophy, cannot be more happily and
easily instructed, then if they be taught by ocular demonstration, wheresoever
it is to be had: I say to contemplate every thing, that so we may sift out the
reasons and causes of all things every where. For it is certain that nature
does nothing in vain, even in things of least moment, yea sometimes in the very
least things much wisdom lies stored up. And which is more, we cannot attain
to the knowledge of great things, but by the knowledge of lesser things, which
the following Aphorism will teach us.

VI Nature unfolds her self in the least things, and wraps up her self in the
greatest things.

That is, in the more excellent creatures many things are wound up and woven
together with such an occult artifice, that neither the beginning nor the
endings of actions and accidents can easily be discerned, but in all courser
creatures, all things are clearly manifest, which is the cause why the nature
of compounds cannot be known, unless the nature of simples be first known: so
consequently we are to begin with these speculations, and to proceed by degrees
from simpler things to the more compound: which very order we shall see that
the Creator himself observed, in producing and twisting together the nature of
things.

VII We are to study natural Phylosophie by the guide of sense, and light of
the Scripture.

For sense is the beginning not only of knowledge, but of certainty and
wisdom; for as there is nothing in the intellect which was not first in the
sense, so if there be any thing obscurely or doubtfully in the intellect, we
are to have recourse to the sense for evidence and certainty. but wheresoever
sense or reason fails, (as in things remote either in place or time) we are
indebted to the grace of God, that he has deigned to reveal many things unto
us exceeding sense and reason. For example, the first production of the world,
and the constitution of things invisible.

He that neglects either of these principles is easily entangled in errors:
for by how much the more of imagination any thing has, by so much the more
vanity it has, and is the more remote from the truth: again, by how much the
less any thing participates of revealed wisdom, by so much the less it
partakes of the truth. and such for the most part is the Philosophy of the
Gentiles, and therefore vain and barren, we will follow the guidance of Moses,
(who described the generation of the world by the command of God:) yet always
heedfully observing the attestation of the senses, and of reason. For wisely
does Lud. Vives (as we have set down under the title of this book) recall
Christians from the lamp of the Gentiles, which yields an obscure and malign
light, to that torch of the Sun, which Christ the light of the World brought
into the world, attributing much wit indeed, but little profit to the
inventions of Aristotle. nay further Campanella and Verulamius most Christian
Philosophers (that are acquainted with that way of Philosophy from sense and
Scripture) have demonstrated, that all Aristotle's doctrines are nothing but a
nurserie of disputations, (that is, of obscurities, haesitancies,
contradictions, strifes, and wranglings) and fighting hood-winckt, and that
they hinder rather then advance our meditation of things, and withal have
afforded us a light, whereat we may kindle more clear torches of inquiring out
the truth. following whose footsteps (yet laying strong foundations from the
Scripture) we will dress out a little Theater of nature, not for
disputation, but for speculation; and we will go through nature silently, yet
not without our eyes, and that again according to the counsel of great Vives:
Here is no need of disputations, (says he) but of a silent contemplation of
nature: the Scholars shall enquire and ask rather then contend: If any be more
slow they will need more full commonstration not disputation, and a little after,
again I say, here is no need of wrangling but of looking on, so this study will
be the delight of the rich, and a refreshing of the mind to those that deal
either in public or in private affairs: for when shall we easily find any other
delight of the senses, to be compared with this, either in the greatness or in
the variety, or in the continuance of it; for when we bestow our labor upon
this contemplation, we need not seek for any other recreation, nor desire
sauce for this meat, the walk it self, and the quiet contemplation is both a
School and a Master, as that which always affords something, which thou may
admire, wherein thou may delight, which may increase thy knowledge.

Therefore let us resolve upon this, we that view natural things, to rest
upon no other authority besides that of the Work-master of nature, and of
nature her self (as she holds forth her self to be touched and felt) the
Scriptures, sense and reason, shall be our Guides, Witnesses and Dictators, to
the Testimonies of which he that assents not, shows himself very foolish and
vain.

CHAP. I.
An Idea of the World to be created and created.
THE eternal Deity, our God that is to be adored, after the infinite glories
which he enjoyes in his immense eternity, was of his exceeding goodness
propense to communicate himself out of himself; and by his exceeding Wisdom
saw that his invisible things might be expressed by certain visible images; and
to execute that, had his Omnipotency at hand, he decreed not to envy entitie
to those things, wherein he might be expressed, and wherein his Power, Wisdom
and Goodness might be revealed: therefore he produced intelligent creatures, by
whom he might be known and praised Angels and men: both after his own image:
but the first pure minds, the other clothed with bodies for whom he built a
dwelling place, and as it were a school of wisdom, this universal World with
other creatures of inferior degree almost infinite: all and every of which,
cry out after their manner, he made us, and not we our selves. Now then we go
about to unfold in what order so great a work proceeded, and with what art all
things were contrived, and with what strength they are held together, yet by
his guiding who alone is able to testify of himself and of his works; for
thus, says he, by his Secretary Moses. Genesis 1.

I In the beginning God created the heaven, (v. 1.) That is, the heaven of
heavens with the Angels: whom as morning stars first produced, he made
spectatours of the rest of his works. ( Joh. 38. v. 7.)

II And the earth) that is this visible world, which notwithstanding he did not
finish in the same moment, therefore it is said.

III And the earth was void, and without form, and darkness was upon the face
of the deep. v. 2. that is, the matter of this world was first produced, a
certain Chaos without form and dark, like a black smoke arising out of the
bottomless pit of nihilitie, by the beck of the Almighty, and this was matter,
the first principle of this visible Wo^ld.

IV And the Spirit of God moved upon the water,) that is a certain strength
was introduced by the spirit or breath of God into that same dark, and of it
self confused matter, whereby it began to stir. hereby then is understood
the second principle of the World, that is, the spirit of life diffused
throughout, whereof the Universal World is hitherto full; which insinuating it
self every where through all the parts of the matter, cherishes and rules it,
and produces every creature, introducing into every one its own form, but being
that this work-master had need of fire to soften and to prepare the matter,
variously for various uses, God produced it. For,

V God said let there be light and there was light, ver. 3.) this is described,
as the third principle of the World, merely active, whereby the matter was made
visible and divisible into forms, the light, I say, perfecting all things which
are, and are made in the World, therefore it is added.

VI And God saw the light that it was good, ver. 4) that is, he saw that all
things would now proceed in order. for that light being produced in a great
mass, began presently to display its threefold virtue (of illuminating, moving
it self, and heating,) and by turning about the World, to heat and rarifie the
matter, and so to divide it. for hence followed first of all from the
brightness of that light the difference of nights and days.

VII He divided the light from darkness, and called the light day, and the
darkness he called night, and the evening and morning were the first day, ver.
^.) that is, that light when it had turned it self round, and compassed the
World, with that motion made day and night.

The second effect of light was from heat, namely, that which way soever it
passed, it rarefied and purified the matter, but it condensed it on both sides,
upward and downward. whence came the division of the Elements, this Moses
expresses in these words.

VIII And God said, let there be a Firmament, that it may divide betwixt the
wa^er above and the waters below, ver. 6.) God said, that is, he ordained how
it should be. let there be a Firmament, that is, let that light stretch forth
the matter, and let the thicker part of the matter melting and flying from the
light thereof, make waters on this side and on that. above, as they are the
term of the visible World; but below, as they are a matter apt to produce other
creatures, under which the earth as thick dregs came together. that was done
the second day.

XI Therefore God said, let the waters be gathered together under heaven into
one place, and let the dry land appear. and it was so; and God called the dry
land, earth, and the gathering together of the waters he called seas, and he
saw that it was good. ver. 9, 10.) and so on the third day, there came the
four greatest bodies of the World out of the matter already produced, Ether,
(that is, the Firmament or Heaven) Air, Water and Earth; all as yet void of
lesser creatures. therefore said God.

X Let the earth bud forth the green herb, and trees bearing seed or fruit
every one according to his kind ver. 11.) this was done the same third day,
when as now the heat of Celestial light having wrought more effectually began
to beget fat vapors on the earth, whereinto that living spirit of the World
insinuating it self, began to cause plants to grow up in various forms,
according as it pleased the Creator. this is the truest original and manner of
generation of plants hitherto, that they are formed by the spirit with the help
of heat. but as the heavens did not always equally effuse the same heat, but
according to the various form of the World, one while more midly, another while
more strongly; the fourth day God disposed that same light of heaven, otherwise
then hitherto it had been, namely, forming from that one great mass thereof
diverse lucid Globes, greater and lesser, which (being called stars) he placed
here and there in the Firmament higher and lower, with an unequal motion, to
distinguish the times, and this Moses describes v. 14, 15, etc. thus.

XI And God said, let there be light made in the Firmament of heaven, that they
may divide the day and the night, and may be for signs, and for seasons, and
for days, and for years, that they may shine in the Firmament, and enlighten
the earth, therefore God made two great lights, and the stars, etc.) This
done, then after, all the face of the World began to appear beautiful, and the
heat of heaven more temperate, began to temper the matter of inferior things
together, after a new manner; so that the spirit of life now began to form more
perfect creatures, namely moving plants, which we call animals, of which Moses
thus.

XII God said also, let the waters bring forth creeping things, having a soul
of life, and flying things upon the earth, etc. v. 20.) the waters were first
commanded to produce living creatures, because it is a softer Element then
earth: first reptiles, as earth-wormes, and other worms, etc.) because they are
as it were the rudiment of nature, also swiming things, and flying things, that
is, fishes and birds, animals of a more light compaction; that was done on the
fifth day with a most goodly spectacle to the Angels; but on the sixth day, God
commanded earthly animals to come forth, namely of a more solid structure,
which was presently done, when the spirit of the World distributed it self
variously through the matter of the clay: for thus Moses.

XIII God said, let the earth produce creatures, having life according to their
kind, beasts, and serpents, and beasts of the field, and it was s^. v. 24.) so
now the heaven of heavens had for inhabitants, the Angels; the visible heaven,
the stars, the air birds, the water fishes, the earth beasts, there was yet a
ruler wanting for these inferior things, namely, a rational creature, or an
Angel visibly clothed, for whose sake those visible things were produced.
Therefore at the last when God was to produce him, he is said by Moses to have
taken counsel; in these words.

XIV Then God said, let us make man after our own image, and likeness, who may
rule over the fishes of the sea, and the fouls of the air, and beasts, and all
the earth, etc. Therefore he created man out of the dust of the earth, and
breathed in his face the breath of life, etc. v. 26. and cap. 2. v. 7.) so man
was made, like to the other living creatures by a contemperation of matter,
spirit and light; and to God and the Angels, through the inspiration of the
mind, a most exquisite summarie of the world, and thus the structure of the
Universe ought to proceed, so as to begin with the most simple creature, and
end in that which is most compound but both of them rational; that it might
appear, that God created these only for himself, but all the intermediate for
these. Lastly, that all things are from God, and for God, flow out from him,
and reflow to him. But that all these things might continue in their essence,
as they were disposed by the wisdom of God, he put into every thing a virtue,
which they call Nature, to conserve themselves, in their effence, yea, and to
multiply, whence the continuation of the creatures unto this very day, and this
Moses intimated, adding touching animals.

XV And God said, increase and multiply, v. 22.) by the virtue of which command
and words, let there be made, let it produce, let it put forth, etc. Things are
made and endure hitherto, and would remain (if God would) without end unto
aeternity. Gods omnipotency concurring no longer immediately unto particular
things, (as before) but nature it self, always spreading forth her virtue
through all things. which thing derogates nothing from the Providence of God,
nay rather it renders his great power, wisdom, and goodness, more illustrate.
for it comes from his great goodness, that the greatest and the least things
are so disposed to their ends, that nothing can be, or be made in vain; from
his wisdom, that such an industry is put into nature to dispose all things to
their e^ds, so that it never happens to err, unless it be hindered: lastly,
from his power, that such an immutable durability can be put into the universe,
through such a changeable mutabilitie of particulars, so that the World is as
it were aeternall.

Therefore the veins of the strength, artifice and order of this nature must be
more thoroughly searched; that those things which we have here in few words
hinted out of Moses, may be more illustrated by the constant test^mony of
Scripture, reason and senses, and a way made to observe one thing out of
another.

An Appendix to the first Chapter.

We have said that it may be gathered out of those words of Moses. In the
beginning God created the heaven: that the invisible World was the beginning of
the works of God, that is the heaven of heavens with the Angels. Now that by
this heaven is to be understood the heaven of heavens, and the Invisible, or
Angelical World appears plain.

I. Out of Scripture, which 1 mentions the heaven of heavens every where; but
their production no where, unless it be here. 2 Moses testifies that the
invisible heavens were stretched out the second day, and the fourth day adorned
with stars, therefore another heaven must necessarily be understood in this
place; namely a heaven that was finished in the same moment, for that the
particle autem inferres, he created the heavens and the earth; terra autem,
but the earth was without form, etc.

III This reason evinces the same, those things which are made by God are made
in order, now an orderly process in operation, is this, that a progress be
made from more simple things, to compound things, therefore as the most
compound creature man was last produced; so the most simple and immateriall
creatures, (Heaven and the Angels) first of all.

III And what would we have more? God himself testifies expressly; that when he
made the earth, the Angels stood by him as spectators, for so says he to Job;
Where wast thou when I founded the earth, when the morning stars sang
together, and all the sons of God shouted. ( Job. 38. 4, 7.) calling the
Angels morning stars, because they were a spiritual beam, and that newly
risen: sons of God, because they were made after the image of God. therefore
when we hear, that the earth was founded the first day, it must needs be that
the Angels were produced before the earth: And if the Angels, then certainly
the dwellings of the Angels, the heaven of heavens; and that in full
perfection, with all their hosts, as it were in one moment, and this is the
cause why Moses speaks no more of that heaven, but descends to the forming of
the earth, that is the visible World: (how the Creator took unto himself six
days to digest it) as we will also now descend.

CHAP. II.
Of the visible Principles of the World, matter, spirit and light.
WE have seen, God showing us, how the World arose out of the Abyss of
nihilitie; let us now see how it stands, that so by seeing we may learn to
see, and by feeling to feel, the very truth of things.

And here are three principles of visible things held out unto us, matter,
spirit, and light, that they were produced the first day, as three great but
rude Masses, and out of those variously wrought, came forth various kinds of
creatures, therefore we must enquire further, whether these three principles of
all bodies, have a true being, and be yet existent. least any error be perhaps
committed at the very entrance, by any negligence whatsoever, but now seeing
that no more doubts of matter, and light, this only comes to be prooved, that
by that spirit which hovered upon the face of the waters, a certain universal
spirit of the world, is to be understood, which puts life and vigor into all
things created, for the newness of this opinion in physics, and the
interpretation of that place by Divines with one consent of the person of the
holy spirit, give occasion of doubting. But Chry^ostome, (as Aslacus cites him)
and Danaeus acknowledges, that in this place a created spirit, which is as it
were the soul of the world, is more rightly to be understood; and it is proved
strongly.

I By Scripture, which testifies that a certain virtue was infused by God
through the whole world, susteining and quickening all things, and operating
all things in all things; which he calls both a spirit and a soul, and
sometimes the spirit of God, sometimes the spirit of the creatures.

For example ( Psalm. 104. v. 29. 30.) David says thus; when thou receivest
their spirit, (that is the spirit of living creatures, and of plants) they die,
and return to their dust: but when thou sendest forth thy spirit (that is the
Spirit of God,) again, they are recreated, and the face of the earth is
renewed, but Job (27. 3.) says thus; as long as my soul shall be in me, and the
spirit of God in my nostrils; see the soul of man, and the spirit of God are
put for the same! which place compared with the saying of Elihu, the spirit of
God has made me, and the breath of the Omnipotent has put life into me. (c.
33. v. 4.) opens the true meaning of Moses; namely that the spirit of God
stirring upon the waters, produced the spirit or soul of the world, which puts
life into all living things. Now that this is disposed through all things,
appears out of Ezechiel: where God promising the spirit of life unto the dry
bones, ( Ezech. 17. v. 5, 14.) which he calls his Spirit, bids it to come from
the four Winds ( v. 9) therefore Augustine, (lib. imperf. sup. Genesis ad lit.)
and Basil (in Hexamero) call this spirit, the soul of the world. And Aristotle
(as Sennertus testifies) says that the spirit of life is a living and genitall
essence diffused through all things but the testimony of Elihu, is most
observable, who speaks thus. Who has placed the whole World? If he (namely
God) should set his heart upon it, and should gather unto himself the spirit
thereof, and the breath thereof (or: his spirit and his breath: For the Hebrew
affix is rendered both ways) all flesh would die together, and man would return
unto dust. Job 34. v. 13, 14. So, if God should take his spirit out of the
World, every living thing would die.

2 By reason and sense, it is certainly evident, that herbs and animals spring
out of a humide matter, even without seed. But whence had these life, I pray
you, but from that diffused soul of the World? we find by experience, that
bread, wine and water, yea air, are vital to those that feed upon them, but
whence have they that vital force, I pray you, if not from this diffused soul?
but now if a certain spirit be diffused in that manner through all things, it
follows necessarily, that it was created in the beginning in its whole mass,
even as the matter and the light were first produced, in that its great and
undigested mass: so that there was no need that any thing should be created
afterward, but be compounded of those three, and distinguished with forms.
which God intimated, in Esaias 42. v. 5. where declaring himself the Creator of
all things, he divides them into three parts, namely, into the heavens, (that
is light the earth, (that is matter) and a quickening spirit, and just so in
Zachary 12. v. 1. let us therefore hereafter beware so great an absurdity,
(that I may not say blasphemy) as to put the person of the Holy Ghost amongst
the creatures.

Now there may three reasons of this thing be given, why Moses called that
quickening spirit, produced in the beginning, the Spirit of God. Namely, that it
is taken in that sense, wherein els-where it is spoken of ^he mountains of God,
(Psalm. 36. v. 7.) and trees of God (Psalm. 104. v. 16.) and Ninive was called a
city of God: that is, by reason of their greatness and dignity.

2. Because it was produced immediately by God; not as now it is, when that
spirit passes from one subject to another.

3 Because it was a peculiar act of the holy Ghost.

For the Analogy of our Faith teaches us to believe, that the production of
the matter out of nothing, is a work of Gods Omnipotency, and is attributed to
the Father; that the production of light (by which the World received splendor
and order) is a work of wisdom attributed to the Son, (John 1. v. 3, 4.) and
lastly, that the virtue infused into the creatures is a work of his goodness,
which is attributed to the Holy Ghost. (Psalm. 143. v 10.) and so must that
place ( Psalm. 33. v. 9 and 6.) be altogether understood, (for it will not bear
any other sense) he spoke and they were made; he commanded, and they came
forth: the heavens were established by the Word of God, and all the virtue of
them by the spirit of his mouth Also we must note, ( Genesis 1. v. 1, 2, 3.) that
three words are added to the three principles, he created, he said, and he
moved himself; that they may be signs of his absolute Power, of his Word, and
of his spirit. Also we must note this, that in both those places the Holy Ghost
with his work is placed in the midst; (as also in Esaias 40. v. 13.) because he
is the spirit, the love, and the mutual bond of both, but this we speak after
the manner of men

Let it stand therefore for certain, that all the principles were created the
first day, every one in its mass; and that all things were afterward composed
out of them, which may be declared to children (for their more full
understanding) by a similitude thus: an Apothecary or Confectioner being to
make odoriferous Balls, takes Sugar in stead of matter; Rose Water, or Syrrup,
or some other sweet liquour for tincture or conditure; last of all taking some
of this lump thus made, he imprints certain shapes upon his work. So also God
first prepared his matter: then tempered it with a living spirit; then brought
light into it, which by its heat and motion might mix and temper both together
and bring it to certain forms. also even as a Mechanic must have matter, and
two hands to work withal; the one hand, to hold; and the other to work with:
so in the framing of the world, there was need, first of matter, then of a
spirit to frame the matter, and lastly of light, or heat to inactuate the
matter under the hand of the spirit. and what need many words? we see in every
stone, herb, and living creature: first a certain quantity of matter;
secondly, a certain inward virtue, whereby it is generated, it grows, it
spreads abroad its savor, and its odor and its healing virtue; thirdly, a
form or a certain disposition of parts with diverse changes, which come from the
heat working within. For, Matter is a principle merely passive, Light merely
active, Spirit indifferent, for in respect of the matter it is active; in
respect of the light, passive.

The difinitions of the principles.

Matter, is a corpulent substance, of it self rude and dark, constituting
bodies.

Spirit, is a subtle substance, of it self living, invisible and insensible,
dwelling and growing in bodies.

Light, is a substance of it self visible, and moveable, lucid, penetrating the
matter, and preparing it to receive the spirits, and so forming out the bodies.

Therefore by how much the more Matter, any thing has it has so much ye more
Dulnes, obscurity and immobility: as the earth. Vigor and durability: as an
Angel. Form, and mobility: as the Sun. Spirit, Light,

Note also; that matter, is the first entitie in the World'; Spirit, the first
living thing; Light, the first moving thing; so that every body in the World is
of the matter, by the light, in the spirit: which he would have to be his
image, from whom, by whom, in whom are all things, blessed for evermore, Amen.
Romans 11. v. 36.

Of the nature of matter.
TRuly said one; No diligence can be too much in searchingout the beginning of
things. for when the principles are rightly set down; an infinite number of
conclusions will follow of their own accord, and the science will increase it
self in infinitum; which the creation of things does also show. For God having
produced the principles the first day, and wrought them together with most
excellent skill, made afterward so great variety of things to proceed from them,
that both men and Angels may be astonished. Therefore let us not think over
much, to frame our thoughts yet of all the principles of the World apart.

Let the following Aphorisms be of the matter.

I The first matter of the World, was a vapor or a fume.

For what means that description of Moses else? when he calls it earth, waters,
the deep, darkness, a thing void, and without form? and it appears also by
reason. for seeing that the lesser bodies of the World, Clouds, Water, Stones,
Metals, and all things growing on the earth are made of vapors coagulated (as
shall appear most evidently hereafter:) why not the whole World also?
certainly the matter of the whole can be nothing else, but that which is found
to be the matter of the parts.

II The first matter of the World, was a Chaos of dispersed Atoms, cohering in
no part thereof.

This is proved 1 by reason, for if they had cohered in any sort, they had had
form: but they had not; for it was Tohu vabohu, a thing without form and void.
2 by sense, which satisfies, that the Elements are turned unto Atoms. for what
is dust, but earth reduced into Atoms? what is vapor, but water resolved into
more subtle parts? the air it self, what is it but a most small comminution of
drops of water, and unperceiveable by sense? yea, all bodies are found to
consist of most extreme small parts, as trees, bark, flesh, skins, and
membranes, of most slender strings or threads; but bones, stones, metals, of
small dust made up together, into which they may be resolved again. And this
shows also, that those threads or hairs, are of Atoms, as it were glued
together, that when they are dried they may be pouldred. wherefore the whole
World is nothing but dust, coagulated with various glutinous matters into such
or such a form. 3 by Scripture for the aeternall Wisdom it self testifies, that
the beginning of the World was dust. (Prove. 8. v. 26.) out of which foundation
many places of Scripture will be better understood: (as Genesis 3. v. 14.) dust
thou art, and into dust thou shall return. For, behold, man was made of the mud
of the earth! yet God being angry for sin, threatens something more, then
returning to dust, namely utmost resolution, into the very utmost dust, of
which the mud of the earth it self was made: and we see it to be truly so,
that a man is dissolved not only into earth, but into all the elements,
(especially those that perish by fire) and is at last scattered into very
Atoms. Read and understand, what is said (Job 4. v. 19.) Item 19. v. 9. Esaias
26. v. 19. Psalm. 104. v. 29.) therefore, Democritus erred not altogether, in
making Atoms the matter of the World: but he erred in that he believed, 1
that they were aeternall, 2 that they went together into forms by adventure, 3
that they cohere of themselves: by reason that he was ignorant of that which
the Wisdom of God has revealed unto us, that the Atoms were conglutinated
into a mass, by the infusion of the Spirit of life, and began to be
distinguished into forms, by the coming in of the light.

III God produced so great a mass of this matter, as might sussice to fill the
created Abyss.

For with the beginning of the heaven and the earth, that vast space was
presently produced, wherein the heaven and the earth were to be placed, which
place Moses calls the Abyss, which no creature can pass through by reason of
its depth and vastness. Now the Aphorism tells us, that all this was filled up
with that confused fume, lest we should imagine any vacuum.

IV The matter is of it self invisible, and therefore dark,

For darkness is seen after the same manner when the eyes are shut, as when
they are open; that is, they are not seen at all. and this is it, which Moses
says: and darkness was upon the face of the Abyss.

V The matter is of it self without form yet it is apt to be extended,
contracted, divided, united, and to receive every form and figure, as wax is to
receive every seal.

For we have showed that all the bodies of the World are made of these Atoms,
and are resolved into them, therefore they are nothing else but the matter
clothed with several forms. which the Chymicks demonstrate to the eye,
reducing some dust one while into liquour, another while into a vapor, another
while into a stone, etc.

VI The matter is aeternall in its duration through all forms, so that nothing
of it can perish.

For in very deed, from the making of the World until now, not so much as one
crum of matter has perished, nor one increased. for in that bodies are
generated, and do perish that is nothing else, but a transmutation of forms in
the same matter, as when vapor is made of water, of that vapor a cloud, of
the cloud rain, and of the rain drunk in by the roots of plants an herb, etc.

VII The principal virtue of the matter of the world is, are indissoluble
cohaerence every where, so that it can endure to be discontinued in no part,
and a vacant space to be left.

Notwithstanding perhaps this virtue is not from the matter, but from the
spirit affused: of which in the Chapter following.

VII From this matter, the whole World is material and corporeal, and is so
called.

For all the bodies of the World, even the most subtle, and the most lightsome,
are nothing but form, partly coagulated, partly refined. Now after what manner
it is coagulated or refined, shall appear in that which follows.

Of the nature of the Spirit, or soul of the World.
THe spirit of the World, is life it self infused into the World, to operate
all things in all. for whatsoever any treature does or suffers, it does or
suffers it by virtue of this spirit. for it is given to it.

I To inhabit the matter.

For as in the beginning it moved it self upon the waters, so yet it is not
extant, but in the matter; especially in a liquid and subtle matter. Whence in
the body of a living creature, those most subtle, sanguine vapors, and as it
were flames, which are the chariot of life, are called spirits. And Chymicks,
extracting a spirit out of herbs, metals, stones like a little water, call it
the Quintessence, because it is a more subtle substance than all the four
elements. But not water it self, as it is water, but that living virtue of the
creature, out of which it is extracted, inhabiting in it. which being that it
cannot be altogether separated from the matter, is preserved in that subtle
form of matter. For how fast the spirit inhaeres in the matter, shall be taught
about the end. (hap. 9. 10.

II To move or agitate it self through the whole matter to preserve it.

Hence it is, 1 that no vacuum can be in the world. For all bodies, even the
most subtle, (as water, air, the sky) being endued with this spirit, delight
in contiguity and continuity. For as a living creature will not be cut, so also
water, air, yea the world it self; by reason of that universal spirit, uniting
all things in it, which also when a separation is made (as in the wounds of
living creatures, in the cutting of the water, in the parting of the air may be
seen) makes the matter close again. 2. that every creature putrifies, when that
spirit is taken away, (as if you extract the spirit of wine out of wine, or
suffer the spirit to evaporate out of an herb, etc.) but is preserved, yea
made better, if the spirit be preserved. For example; wine kept in any solid
vessel under the earth, or water, though it be an 100 years; grows still the
richer: the spirit stirring and moving it self in it, and by that means, still
moulding the matter more and more, and more and more purifying it from
crudities.

III To keep the particular Ideas or forms of things.

For one and the same spirit of the universe, is afterward diduced into many
particularities, by the command of God; so that there is one spirit of water,
another spirit of earth, another of metals, another of plants, another of
living creatures, etc. and then in every kind again several species. Now then
that of the seed of wheat, there springs not a bean, much less, a walnut, or a
bird, etc. is from the spirit of the wheat, which being included in the seed,
forms it self (...) body according to its nature. From the sam^ spirit is the
custody of the bounds of nature for example; that a horse grows not to the
bigness of a mountain, nor stays at the smalnesse of a cat.

IV To form it self bodies, for the use of future operations.

For example, the spirit of a dog being included in its seed, when it begins to
form the young, does not form it wings, or (...) or hands, etc. because it
needs not those members: but four feet, and other members, in such sort, as
they are fit for that use, to which they are intended. Because some dogs are
for pleasure, others to keep the house, or flocks, others for hunting; and that
either for hares, or wild bores, or water foul, etc. (namely, according as the
Creator mingled the spirit of living creatures, that they should have Sympathy
or Antipathy one with another) Every ones own spirit does form it a body fit
for its end. whence from the sight of the creatures only, the use of every one
may be gathered, as the learned think; because every creature hears its
signature about it.

Of the nature of light.
I THe first light was nothing else but brightness, or a great flame, sent
into the dark matter to make it visible and divisible into form.

For in the primitive language, light and fire are of the same name (...) and
(...), whence also comes the Latin word VRO. and verily the light of heaven,
does really both shine and burn, or heat.

II God put into the light a threefold virtue: 1 of spreading it self every
way, and illuminating all things. 2 of moving the matter with it being taken
hold of, by burning and inflaming. 3. of heating, and thereby rarifying and
attenuating the matter.

All these things our fire does also: because it is nothing else, but light,
kindled in the inferior matter.

III. But when as that light could not extend his motion upwards and downwards,
(for it would have found a term forthwith) it moved it self, and does still
move in a round: whence came the beginning of days.

IV And because the matter rarefied above heat being raised by the motion of
the light, the grosser par^s of the matter were compelled to fall downward, and
to conglobate themselves in the midst of the Universe: which was the
beginning of the earth and water.

V The light therefore by this its threefold virtue, light, motion, and heat)
introduced contrariety into the World.

For darkness was opposite to light; rest, to motion; cold, to heat: whence
came other contraries besides, moist and dry, thin and thick, heavy and light,
etc. of which c. 4.

VI From the light therefore is the disposition and adorning of the whole World.

For the light is the only fountain both of visibility, and of motion, and of
heat* take light out of the World, and all things will return into a Chaos. For
if all things lose their colors and their forms, in the night when the Sun is
absent; and living creatures and plants die in winter, by reason of the Suns
operation being not strong enough, and the earth and the water do nothing but
freeze: what do you think would be, if the luminaries of heaven, were quite
extinguished? Therefore all things in the visible World throughout, are, and
are made, of the matter, in the spirit, but by the fire or light.

CHAP. III.
Of the motion of things.
THe principles of things being constituted, we are to see the common accidents
of things: which are Motion, Quality, and Mutation.

For our of the congresse of the principles if the World, came first motion;
out of motion, came quality: and out of quality again, came various mutations
of things: which three are hitherto in all created things, as it shall appear.

I Motion is an accident of a body, whereby it is transferred from place to
place.

The doctrine of natural motions, how many they are, and how they are made, is
the key to the understanding of all natural actions: and therefore most
diligently to be observed.

II Motion was given to things, for generation, action, and time.

For generation: for nothing could be ^gotten without composition: nor composed
without coming together: nor come together without motion.

For actions: because there could be none without motion

For time: that it might be the measure of the duration of things. For take the
Sun and the Stars out of the World, nothing can be known, what, where, when:
all things will be blind, dumb, deaf.

III Motion is either simple or compound.

IV Simple motion is either of spirit, or of light, or of matter.

V The motion of the spirit is called agitation, whereby the spirit agitates if
self in the matter seeking to inform it.

For the living spirit would not be living, if it should cease to agitate it
self, and strive to subdue the matter in any sort whatsoever. This motion is
the beginning of the generation, and corruption of things. For the spirit in
every thing (in flesh, an apple, a grain, wood, etc.) does by agitating it
self, soften the parts, that it may either receive new life, or it may fly out,
and the thing purrifie.

VI The motion of the light is called diffusion, whereby the light and the heat
diffuse themselves into all the parts.

For fire, were not fire, nor heat, hear, if it should cease to diffuse it
self, and liquifie the matter And from this motion of the fire, all the motion
of the matter draws its original. as the experience of the senses testifies.
For gross and cold things, as wood, a stone, ice, etc. want motion of
themselves, which notwithstanding when fire is put to them, they forthwith
obtein, as it may be demonstrated to the eye. let there be a kettle full of
water, put wood underneath it; behold all is quiet! but kindle the wood, you
shall presently see motion: first in the wood, flame, smoke, and starting
asunder the coals: by and by in the water, first evaporating, afterward
turning it self round, at length, boiling and galloping. but remove away the
fire again, all the motion will cease again by little and little. so in a
living body (an animal) take away heat, forthwith not only motion, but also
mobility will cease, the members waxing stiff. Furthermore, although there be
diverse motions in things, yet the Original is every where the same, heat or
fire: which being included in the world is moved circularly: being kindled in
the air, as it darts it self forth, this way or that way, as the matter is
disposed, or the wind sits; included in a living creature, as the strength of
the fantasy forces it this way or that way.

VII The motion of the matter is eightfold of expansion, contraction,
aggregation, sympathy, continuitie, impulsion, libration and liberty.

Whereof the first two are immediately from the fire, the four following from
some other bodies; the two last from it self, but by the mediation of the
spirit of the universe. which if it seems harsh, will soon appear plain by
examples.

VIII The motion of expansion is, that whereby the matter, being rarefied with
heat, dilate sits self of its own accord, seeking larger room.

For it is not possible that the matter being rarefied, should be contained in
the same space: but one part thrusts another, that they may stretch forth
themselves, and gather themselves into a greater sphere. you shall see an
example, if you drop a few drops of water into a hogs bladder, and having tied
the neck thereof, lay it over a furnace, for the bladder will be stretched out,
and will swell: because the water being turned into vapor, by the heat seeks
more room.

IX The motion of contraction is, that whereby the matter is contracted,
betaking it self into a narrower space by condensation.

For example; if you lay the foresaid bladder from the furnace into a cold
place; for the vapor will return to water, and the swelling of the bladder
will fall. or if you put a thong into the fire, you shall see it will be
wrinkled and contracted because the softer parts being extracted by the fire;
the rest must needs be contracted: from the same reason also, the chinks and
gapings of timber and of the earth come.

X The motion of aggregation i^, when a body is carried to its connaturals.

For example, our flame goes upward, a stone goes downward: for the flame
perceives, that its connaturals (that is subtle bodies) are above; a stone
that its (that is heavy things) are here below. Note well, that they commonly
call this motion natural, who are ignorant of the rest. But though it appear
most in sight, and seem to be most strong and immutable, yet indeed it is weak
enough; because it gives place to all the rest that follow, and puts not forth
it self, but when they cease: which will of it self appear, to one that
meditates these things diligently yet I will add this. A drop of ink fallen
upon paper, defends it self by its roundnesse; yet put a moist pen to it, you
^^ll see the drop run up into into it. See, it ^^es not downward, (as it should
by rea^^^ of its heaviness) but upwards, that it ^^y join it self to a greater
quantity there^^.

XI The motion of sympathy, and antipathy, that, whereby a like body is drawn
to its like, (...) driven away by its contrary.

Now this similitude is of the spirit that habits in it. this motion is very
evident in ^^ne bodies, (as in the loadstone, which ^^aws iron to it, or else
leaps it self to the (...)) in others weak, and scarce sensible, as (...)
example in milk, the cream whereof se^rates it self by little and little, from
the hevie parts, and gathers it self to the top) some things, it is as it were
bound; un^^sse it be losed some way or other, that ap^ears in melted brass:
wherein metals are ^^parated one from another, by the force of (...) fire, and
by the virtue of sympathy eve^^ thing gathers it self to its like, (lead to
^^ad, silver to silver,) and flows together in (...) peculiar place.

XII Motion of continuity is, that whereby ^atter follows matter, shunning
discontinuity.

As when you suck up the air with a pipe, ^^tting one end thereof into the
water, the water will follow the air, though it be up^ward. For we said before,
that the world* a living creature would not be cut, the livin^ spirit uniting
all things.

XIII The motion of impulsion (or cession^ is that whereby matter yields to
matter, the presses upon it.

So water yields to a stone that com^ down into it, that it may sink; so a
ston^ to the hand that thrusts it, etc. for a bod^ will not endure to be
penetrated, it had rather yield, if it can. If it cannot all, the pa^^ yield,
as we may see it happen in eve^ Break, Bruise, Rent, Wearing, Cutting for the
weaker yields every where to the stronger.

XIV The motion of libration is, that where in the parts wave themselves too
and fro, th^^ they may be rightly placed in the whole.

As when a balance moves it self, now this, now that way.

XV The motion of liberty is, that whereby a body or a part thereof, being
violently move^ out of its place, and yet not plucked away, returns thither
again.

As when a branch of a tree bent forcibly and let go again, betakes it self to
its positure.

A SCHEAME Of Motions.
Motion therefore is of Spirit Light which is called the motion of agitation.
diffusion.

Matter which is caused by the fire and is called the motion of expansion.
contraction.

some body drawing by connaturalitie, as of aggregation. a secret virtue, as of
sympathy. connection, as of continuitie.
thrusting or enforcing, as of impulsion
it self, (that it may be well with it self) as the motion of libration.
liberty.



An example of all these motions in the f^^tion of the Macrocosme or great
World.

First, the spirit moved it self upon the^ters with the motion of Agitation.
then light being sent into the matter, penetra^ it every way with the motion of
Diffusion and by the matter above, where the li^^ passed through, being heated
and rarif^^ dilated it self with the motion of Dispa^^ but below, it coagulated
it self with the^^tion of Contraction. And all the more su^^ parts gathered
themselves upwards, the (...) downwards, with the motions of Agregation and
Sympathy: (for a more o^^ Sympathy and Antipathy was put in things afterward.)
and whither soever o^ part of the matter went, others followed (...) the motion
of Continuity: or if one rush^ against others, they gave way by the motion of
Impulsion. but the grosser parts did poi^^ themselves, (flying from the heat
which came upon them from above) about the Center, to an exact Globosity, with
the motion of Libration. there was no motion o^ Liberty, because there was no
external violence, to put any thing out of order.

An example of the same motions in the Microcosme, or little World.

In man, (and in every living creature) the food that is put into the belly,
grows hot with incalescency; here you have the motion of Expansion, then by the
motion of Sympathy every member attracts to it self, that which is good for
it: but by the motion of Antipathy superfluous things are driven forth, as
unprofitable and hurtful to them. then the blood is distributed equally to the
whole body upwards and downwards by the motion of Libration. and being
assimilated to the members, it is condensed, that it may become flesh, a
membrane, a bone, etc. by the motion of Contraction, lastly, the air in
breathing drawn in and let forth, shows the motion of Continuity, and
Contiguity. (For when the lungs are distended, the air enters in, (least their
should be a vacuum;) but when the lungs contract themselves, the air gives
way.) the motion of Liberty will appear, if you either press down, or draw up
your skin: for as soon as you take away your hand, it will return to its
situation. lastly, if you fall from any place, there will be the motion of
Aggregation, for you will make toward the earth, as being weight and earth your
self.

XVI If motions be infolded, they either increase or hinder one another force.

You have an example of the first, if you cast a stone toward the earth, for
here the motion of Aggregation and Impulsion, are joined together. Of the
latter, if you cast a stone toward heaven: for here the motion of Impulsion
striveth against the motion of Aggregation, in which strife, the stronger at
length, overcomes the weaker; the natural that which is but accessory.

XVII Compound motion is in living creatures, when they do of their own
accord, move themselves from place to place.

Namely, birds by flying, fishes by swimming, beasts by running: of which we
shall see Chap. 10. how every one is performed.

Also, natural Philosophers call that a compound motion, when a thing is
wholly changed, either to being or not being, or to another kind of being,
though it continue in the same place, but we call these mutations, and they are
to be handled in a pecuculiar Chapter, the third from this.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Qualities of things.
THe matter is variously mingled with the spirit, and light, by these various
motions, and from this various mixture, come various qualities, so that this
thing is called, and is such a thing, that such a thing, again, another such,
or such a thing: which we must now consider; and these talities, or qualities,
are some of them general, common to all bodies; others special, proper to
some creatures only. the first are to be laid open here together for all once,
the other hereafter in their places.

I A quality is an accident of a body, in regard of which every thing is said
to be such or such.

II There are qualities in every body, as well intangible, spiritual, and
volatile, as gross, tangible, and fixed.

For a body is (as we saw cap. 2. in the description of matter, Aphor. 8. and
of the spirit Aphor. 1.

either Intangible, or Nolatile, which they also call spiritual, as breath,
air. Tangible namely, water, and all fluid things. earth, and all consistent
things.


The qualities therefore, which we will treat of, shall be common to all these.
For it may be said, both of a stone, and of water, and of air, and of the
spirit that is enclosed in a body, that it is fat or raw, hot or cold, moist,
or dry, thick or thin, etc.

III The qualities are the grounds of all forms in bodies.

For the former causes a living creature to differ from a stone, a stone from
wood, wood from ice, and the form consists of qualities. Therefore the
doctrine of qualities is exceeding profitable, and as it were the basis of
natural science; which because it has been hitherto miserably handled, the
light of physics has been maimed, and by that means obscure.

IV A quality is either intrinsecall, and substantial, or extrinsecall and
accidental.

Of the substantial qualities, Sulphur, Salt, and Mercury.
V A substantial quality arising from the first mixture of the principles is
threefold.

Aquosity which the Chymicks call Mercury Oleosity Sulphur Consistency Salt.

N. 1 These flow immediately from the combination of the first principles.

Fire Sulphur Salt Spirit Matter Mercury.
For as in the beginning the spirit conjoined with the matter, produced the
moving of the waters; so Mercury is nothing but motion, the first fluid thing,
which cannot be fixed, nor contained within alimit; and salt is dry and hot,
and uncorruptible, just as spirit and fire; it is preserved by fire, it is
dissolved with water, or Mercury, but turns neither to flame, nor smoke, though
it is a most spiritual creature, and every way incorruptible.

And Sulphur, what is it but matter mixed with fire? for why does it delight in
flame, but that it is of a like nature? and in compound things, it is the first
thing combustible, or apt to be inflamed.

N. 2. But beware that you understand not our vulgar mineral Salt, Sulphur,
and Mercury, (or quicksilver.)

For these are mixed bodies: salt earth, sulphurie earth, Mercurial water: (that
is, matter wherein Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, are predominant, yet with other
things adjoined; for Salt has parts apt to be inflamed, and Sulphur some salt,
and some Mercury, but the denomination is from the chiefest.)

Those qualities cannot be seen as they are in themselves, but by imagination;
but they are in all things, as Chymicks demonstrate to the eye: who extract
crude and watery parts out of every wood, stone, etc. and other fat and oily
parts; and that which remains, is salt, that is ashes; so the thing it self
speaks, that some liquor is mercurious; (as vulgar water and phlegm) other
sulphury; (as oil and spirit of wine) other salt and tart (as aqua fortis) also
we find by experience, in the benummings and aches of the members; that some
vapors are crude, others sharp.

VI God produced the qualities intrinsecally, that the substance of every body
might be formed. For

Sulphur salt gives unto things fluidity, coition, crudity. (...), cleaving
together, fatness. consistency, hardness. aptness to break. and from thence
inco^bustibility, inflammability incorruptibility.
That Mercury gives fluidity, and easy coition of the matter, appears out of
quicksilver, which by reason of the predominancy of Mercury, is most fluid: so
that it will not endure to be stoped or fixed. It is also most crude, so that
it can neither be kindled nor burned: but if you put fire to it, flees away
into air.

Now that the coagulation of bodies is from sulphur, as it were glue, appears
from hence that there is more oil, in dry, solid, and close, bodies, then in
moist bodies; also because ashes (after that the Sulphur is cousumed, with five
(if you power water on them clear not together in a lump, but with oil or fat,
they cleave together. Now Chymicks extract oil out of every stone, leaving
nothing but ashes, no part cleaving one to another any longer.

And that salt gives consistency, appears by the bones of living creatures, out
of which Chymicks extract mere salt, also all dense things leave behind them
much ashes (that is salt.)

God therefore with great counsel tempered these three qualities together in
bodies. for if Mercury were away, the matter would not flow together to the
generation of things: if salt, nothing would consist together, or be fixed; if
sulphur, the consistency would be forced, and yet apt to be dissipated. Lastly,
if there were not sulphur in wood, and some other matters, we could have no
fire, but Solar, on the earth (for nothing would be kindled) and then what
great defects would the life of man endure?

Of the accidentary or extrinsecall qualities of bodies.

So much of the substantial qualities: the accidentary follow.

VII An accidental quality is, either manifest, or occult.

VIII A manifest quality is, that which may be perceived by sense, and is
therefore to be called sensible.

As heat, cold, softness, roughness.

IX An occult quality is, that which is known only by experience, that is by
its effect, (as the love of iron in the loadstone, etc.) therefore it is called
insensible.

N. The manifest qualities proceed from the diverse temperatures of the
elements, and substantificall qualities; the occult immeditely from the
peculiar spirit of every thing.

X The sensible quality is five fold, according to the number of the senses,
visible, audible, olfactile, gustatile, tangible: that is color, sound, odor,
savor, tangour.

Let not the unusual word tangor, offend any; it is feigned for doctrines
sake; and analogy admits it, for if we say from Caleo, Calor; from Colo, Color;
from sapio, sapor; from amo, amor; from fluo, fluor; from liquo, liquor; from
clango, clangor; from ango, angor? why not also from tango, tangor?

Of the tangible quality.
XI The tangible quality (or tangor) is such, or such a positure of the parts
of the matter in a body.

XII The copulations thereof are twelve; for every body in respect of touch,
is, 1 rare or dense, 2 moist or dry. 3 soft or hard. 4 flexible or stiff. 5
smooth or rough. 6 light or heavy. 7 hot or cold.

Of every of which, we are to consider accurately, what and how they are.

XIII Rarity, is an extension of the attenuated matter through greater spaces:
density on the contrary, is a straighter pressing together of the matter into
one.

For all earth, water, air, and spirit, is sometime more rare, sometime more
dense; and we must note that there is not any body so dense, but that it has
pores nevertheless, though insensible. That appears in vessels of wood and
earth, which let forth liquors in manner of sweat; also in a bottle of lead
filled with water, which if it be crushed together with hammers, or with a
press, sweats forth a water like a most delicate dew.

XIV Humidity (or humor) is the liquidnesse of the parts of the body, and
aptness to be penetrated by one another; siccity on the contrary is a
consistency, and an impenetrability of the parts of the body.

So a clot hardened together either with heat or cold, is dry earth, but mire is
moist earth, water is a humid liquour, but ice is dry water, etc.

XV Softness is a constitution of the matter somewhat moist, easily yiedling
to the touch: hardness is a dryness of the matter not yielding to the touch.

So a stone is either hard or soft, also water, spirit, air, etc.

XVI Flexibility, is a compaction of the matter with a moist glue, so that it
will suffer it self to be bent: stiffness is a coagulation of the matter with
dry glue, that it will not bend but break.

So iron is stiff, steel flexible. so some wood is flexible, other stiff, but
note that the flexible is also called tough, the stiff brittle.

XVII Smooth is that which with the aequality of its parts does pleasantly
affect the touch: rough is that which with the inequality of its parts does
distract and draw asunder the touch.

Note, in liquid things, the smooth is called mild, the rough tart; so marble
unpolished is rough; polished it is smooth. Water is rough, oil is mild; a
vehement and cold wind is rough and sharp; a warm air is mild. So in our body,
humors, vapors, spirits, are said to be mild or sharp.

XVIII Lightness is the hasting upwards of a body by reason of its rarity and
spirituosity: heaviness is the pronenesse of a dense body downwards: as that
appears in flame, and every exhalation, this in water and earth.

N. W. I how this motion is made upwards and downwards by a love of fellowship,
or of things of the same nature, has been said cap. 3.

2 The inaequality of heaviness or ponderosity, is from the unequal
condensation of the matter. For look, how much the more matter there is in a
body, so much the more ponderous it is: as a stone more then wood, metals more
then stones, and amongst these gold, quicksilver and lead most of al, because
they are the most compacted bodies.

3 Amongst all heavy things, gold is found to be of greatest weight: spirit of
wine, or sublimated wine of least. and the proportion of quantity betwixt these
two, is found not to exceed the proportion of 21 parts: so that one drop of
gold is not heavier than one and twenty drops of spirit of wine.

XIX Heat is a motion of the most minute parts of the matter reverberated
against it self, penetrating and rending the touch like a thousand sharp
points: but cold is a motion of the parts contracting themselves.

N. W. 1 It appears that heat and cold, are motions and fixed qualities: 1
because there is no body found amongst us perpetually hot or cold, as there is
rare and dense, moist and dry, etc. but as a thing heats or cools; the which
is done by motion. 2 because sense it self testifies, that in scorching the
skin and members are penetrated and drawn asunder, but in cold they are stopped
and bound, therefore it is a motion. 3 because whatsoever is often heated,
(though it be metal) is diminished both in bigness and in weight, till it be
even consumed, and whence is that, but that the heat casting forth a thousand
atoms does wear and consume away the matter?

Now it is called a motion of parts, and that reverberated against it self: for
that which is moved in whole, and directly (not reflexedly) does not heat; as
wind, a bird flying, etc. but that which is moved with reverberation, or a
quick alteration, as it is is in the repercussion of light; in the iterated
collision of bodies, in rubbing together friction, etc.

3 But we must distinguish betwixt Calidum, Calefactivum, and Calefactile,
Calidum or Calefactum, is that which is actually hot, and scorcheth the touch,
as flame, red hot iron, seething water, or air (which also receives amost
violent heat,) etc.

N. W. among all things that are known to us, fire is most hot; we have
nothing that is most cold but ice; which notwithstanding is far off from
being opposed in its degree of cold to the degree of heat in fire.

Calefactivum is that which may stir up heat; as motion, and whatsoever may
procure motion; namely fire; and pepper, and all sharp and bitter things, taken
within the body: for motion is from fire, and fire from motion, and heat from
them both. For as fire cannot but be moved (else it presently goes out,) so
motion cannot but take fire; as it appears by striking a flint, and rubbing
wood something long. Therefore both are calefactive, but fire is further said
to be actually hot, calefactive things are commonly called hot in potentia.

Calefactile is that which may easily be heated as air, and after air fat
things (oil, butter,) then wood, then water. For in these because the parts
are somewhat rare, they are the more easily moved to agitation. stones and
metals because they have their matter compacted, do not easily admit of heat;
but retain it the longer after it is admitted, because it cannot easily exhale
by reason of the straight pores. and this is the cause, why all things
consisting of small particles, as feathers, hairy skins, and all rough things,
(yea, and all sorts of dust) do either always retein heat, (by a certain
agitation of the air enclosed) or at least easily receive it, by some
transpiration raised only from a living body.

4 We must also note, that all these tactile qualities, may be said of the same
body in a diverse manner; namely, in respect of another body, as water in
respect of air, is a dense and heavy body; in respect of earth, or a stone,
rare and light; yea and by reason of the touch thus and thus disposed, it seems
to be on this, or that manner; for example, warm water seems cold to a hot
hand, hot to a cold hand.

5 The diverse effects of heat, are to be considered also according to the
diversity of the object.

The perpetual effect of heat is attenuatio^: but after different manners in a
matter that is Liquid Sulphury, which it kindles, turns to flame, and
snatcheth upward. Mercuriall, which it rarifies, and stretches forth, as may
be seen in the evaporation of water: also in the desiccation or drying up of
earth, wood, etc. in which all the humor and moisture that is, turns and
evaporates into air.
Consistent which if it have parts that are Glutineus or Sulphury, it forces
them to melt, as may be seen in suet, wax, metals. Ashy or salt, it forces them
to be condensed, by the drying up of the moisture: and also to break if you
force them the more; as wood, a clot, a tile, etc. (and so hardening is an
effect of heat by accident.)


Of tastes.
XX The gustatile quality is called savor or taste; which is a tempering of
the first qualities by heat and cold.

Temperate Sulphur gives Sweetness. Adult. Bitterness. For Salt Of its own
nature. gives Softness. For the Mordaity of all these, argues Salt. Combust.
Sharpness. Indifferently Sowernesse. cooled. Bitterness. Extremely cooled.
and Austerity.

It appears therefore, whence herbs, fruits, parts of living creatures, and
minerals have their savours; namely, from salt and sulphur, diffused every
where, whereof every creature sucketh in more or less according to its nature.
Mercury is of it self without taste; (as we note in phlegm) but the others are
soaked thereby, as* also by the several degrees of cold or heat, so that they
are more or less sweet, bitter, salt, etc.

Of smells.
XXI The olfactile quality is called odor; which is a most thin exhalation of
the taste.

Yet sulphury things yield more smell then salt things and hot things more then
others; because heat attenuates, and spreads into the air. Hence gardens and
ointment boxes, are so much the sweeter, by how much the hotter the air is; yet
by how much the sweeter they are, so much the sooner they lose their smell,
that odiferous sulphurous quality being exhaled by little and little.

Of sounds.
XXII The audible quality is called sound; which is a cleaving of the air
sharply stricken, flowing every way.

Every motion of the air does not give a sound, but that motion whereby the air
is suddenly divided and parted. Now a sound is either acute or obtuse; pleasing
or displeasing; according as the body, that smites the air, is acute or
obtuse, smooth or rough.

The natural kinds of sound are: tinkling, when the air blows through some
sharp thing. Murmur of running water: rattling of thunder: rustling of leaves:
bellowing or lowing of Oxen: roaring of lions; hissing of serpents: and the
voices of other living creatures.

Of colors.
XXIII The visible quality is called color; which is light diversely received
in the superficies of bodies, and tempered with the opposite darkness, as
whiteness, blackness, greenness, etc.

Obser. 1. That color is nothing in it self, but light diversely reflected from
things, appears; 1 because as it is not seen without light, so it is not found
to be any thing by any other sense, or by reason: neither is it therefore. 2
because colors as well as light diffuse themselves through the air, and are
in the eyes of all beholders. Now we saw before, that the diffusive motion was
proper to the light, therefore color is indeed nothing, but light diversely
tinct with the diverse superficies of things. 3 because light being reflected
after several manners in the same matter, produces several colors. We see
that, for example sake, in a cloud, which is in it self like it self, yet it
appears to us sometimes whitish, sometimes blackish, sometimes ruddy, according
as it is opposed to the light. In like manner we see in the Rainbow (which is
nothing else but the resolution of a cloud into most small drops of water)
yellow, green, flame and sky-colour, as it appears also in Crystal dust
turned toward the light; which show plainly, that color is nothing else but a
different tincture of light from the different incidencie thereof. But there
(in the Rainbow and glass) the colors pass through; because the matter it
self is fluid and transparent: in fixed bodies, colors are also fixed; but
after a way known to God, rather then to us.

Obser, 2. That from the receptibility of colors, a body is called Pellucid,
or Opacous. Pellucid (Transparent and Diaphanous) is that which gives the light
a passage through it, and is therefore neither colored nor seen, as air: and
in part water, glass, crystal, a diamond, etc. (that air is not colored,
that is tinct with light, appears in a room close shut up on every side, if you
let in a beam of the sun at a hole, for that will pass through the whole room,
and yet will appear no where, but on the opposite wall or pavement: or unless
you interpose your hand or some other dense thing: or the dust be raised, and
the atoms of it fly in that quantity as to reflect the light.) Opacous is
that which does not give the light a passage, but reflects it, and therefore it
is colored and seen: as earth, wood, a stone, gemme, and waters colored: and
this light reflected from an Opacous body, is properly called color: of which
there are six kinds, white, yellow, green, red, skie-colour, black.

White, is light reflected with its own proper face.

Yellow is light tinct with a little darkness.

Green, is light in a middle, and most pleasing temperature of light and
darkness.

Red, is light more inclining to darkness.

Skie-colour, is light more then half dark.

Black, last of all, is the non-repercussion of the light, by reason of a dark
superficies.

Every of these colors has under it diverse degrees and species, according to
the various temperature thereof with the others; which we leave to the
speculation of Optics and Painters.

XXIV There remains a quality which is perceived by two senses, touch and
sight, namely FIGURE; whereby one body is round, another long, another square,
etc. but the consideration of this is resigned to the Mathematics.

Of an occult quality.
XXV An occult quality is a force of operating upon any otber body, which
notwithstanding is not ^iscovered, but by its effect.

For examp. that the loadstone draws iron: that poisons assail, and go about
to extinguish nothing but the spirit in bodies: that antidotes again resist
poison, and fortify the spirit against them; that some herbs are peculiarly
good for the brain, others for the heart, others for the liver, and such like.
Such kind of occult qualities as these God has dispersed throughout all
nature, and they yet lie hid for the better part of them, but they come
immediately from the peculiar spirit infused into every creature. For even as
one and the same matter of the world, by reason of its diverse texture, has
gotten as it were infinite figures in stones, metals, plants, and living
creatures; so one and the same spirit of the world, is drawn out as it were
into infinite forms, by various and special virtues, known to God, and from
these occult qualities sympathies and antipathies of things do properly arise.

CHAP. V.
Of the mutations of things, generation, corruption, etc.
FRom the contrarieties of the qualities, especially of cold and heat, (For
these two qualities are most active) those mutations have their rise, to which
all things in the world are subject: which we shall now see.

I Mutation is an accident of a body, whereby its essence is changed.

Namely, whither a thing pass from not being to being; or from being to not
being; or from being thus to being otherwise.

II All bodies are liable to mutations.

The reason, because they are all compounded of matter, spirit and fire: which
three are variously mixed among themselves perpetually. For both the matter is
a fluid and a slipperie thing, and the spirit restless, always agitating it
self; and (heat raised every where by light and motion) does eat into, rent,
and pluck asunder the matter of things. From thence it is, I say, that nothing
can long be permanent in the same state. All things grow up, increase,
decrease, and perish again. Hence also the Scriptures affirm, that the heavens
wax old, as does a garment, Psalm. 10^. v. 27.

III The mutation of a thing, is either essential or accident all.

IV Essential mutation, is when a thing begins to be or ceases to be: the
first is called generation, the other corruption.

For example; snow, when it is formed of water, is said to be generated, when
it is resolved again into water, to be corrupted.

V An accident all mutation of a thing is, when it increases or decreases, or
is changed in its qualities: the first is called augmentation, the next
diminution, the last alteration (which we are now to view severally how they
are done.)

Of the generation of things.
VI Generation is the production of a thing, so that what was not, begins to be.

Thus every year, yea every day infinite things are generated through all
nature.

VII To generation, three things are required, Seed, a Matrix, and Moderate
Heat.

These three things are necessary in the generation of living creatures,
plants, metals, stones, and lastly of meteors, as shall be seen in their place.

VIII Seed is a small portion of the matter, having the spirit of life included
in it.

For seed is corporal and visible; therefore materiate, and it is no seed,
except it contein in it the spirit of the species, whose seed it should be: For
what should it be formed by? therefore seeds out of which the spirit is
exhaled, are unprofitable to generation.

IX The Matrix is a convenient place to lay the seed, that it may put forth its
virtue.

Nothing is without a place, neither is any thing generated without a
convenient place* because the actions of nature are hindered. Now that place is
convenient for generation, which affords the seed. 1 a soft site. 2
circumclusion, least the spirit should evaporate out of the seed being
attenuated. 3 veins of matter to flow from elsewhere. N. W. And there are as
many matrixes or laps, as there are generations, the air is the matrix of
meteors; the earth of stones, metals, and plants; the womb of living creatures.

X Heat is a motion raised in the seed, which attenuating its matter, makes it
able to spread it self by swelling. For the spirit beng stirred up by that
occasion agitateth it self, and as it were blowing asunder the attenuated parts
of the matter, disposes them to the form of its nature.

This is the perpetual process of all generation, and none other. From whence
hereafter (under the doctrine of minerals, living creatures, plants) many
things will appear plainly of their own accord. yet we must observe that some
things grow without seed, as grass out of the earth, and worms out of slime,
wood, and flesh putrified: yet that is done by the virtue of the spirit
diffused through things; which wheresoever it finds fit matter, as a matrix,
and is assisted by heat, presently it attempts some new generation, (as it were
the constitution of a new Kingdom). But without heat (whither it be of the
sun, or of fire, or the inward heatof a living creature it matters not, so it
be temperate) there can be no generation, because the matter cannot be
prepared, softened, or dilated, without heat.

Of the augmentation of things.
XI Everything that is generated, increases and augmenteth it self, as much as
may be: and that by attraction of matter, and ^ssimilation of it to it self.

For wheresoever there is generation, there is heat: and where there is heat,
there is fire; and where there is fire, there is need and attraction of fuel.
For heat, because it always attenuateth the parts of the matter which exhale,
seeks and attracts others wherewith it may sustein it self: (as we see it in a
burning candle) and a portion of matter being attracted and applied to a body,
takes its form by little and little, and becomes like unto it, and is made the
same. For by the force of heat, of heterogeneous, things become homogeneous:
the spirit of that body, in the mean time, attracting also to it self somewhat
of the spirit of the universe, and so multiplying it self also. So stones
minerals, plants, living creatures, etc. grow.

Of diminution
XII Whatsoever has increased, does at some time or other cease to increase,
and begin to decrease and that for and through the arefaction of the matter.

Namely, for because the heat increased with the body, increasing, does by
little and little and little consume the thin and fat parts thereof, and dry up
the solid parts, so that at last, they are not able to give assimulation to the
matter flowing in, and that for want of gluten, and therefore the body fades,
and withers and at length perishes.

Of the alteration of things.
XIII No body does always retein the same qualities, but changes them
variously.

For example, wood when it grows, is thin and soft, afterward it is condensed
and hardened, especially being dried: fruit on the contrary, as it ripens grows
rare and soft, changing its color, savor and smell For it is the law of the
universe to be subject to vicissitudes: as also to corruption, of which it here
follows.

Of the corruption of things.
XIV Every body is liable to corruption. Because compounded of a decaying
matter, and an agitable spirit; which may be disposed according to the mutation
of the heat. Therefore seeing that alterations cannot be hindered, neither can
perishing. And hence perhaps every material thing is called CORPUS, as it were
corrupus, because it is subject to corruption.

XV All corruption is done, either by arefaction or putrefaction.

For we speak not here of violent corruption, which is done by the solution of
some continued thing, (as when any thing is broken, rent, bruised, burnt, etc.)
but of natural corruption, which brings destruction to things from within, i^
it is manifest that this can be done no way, but by arefaction or putrefaction.

XVI Arefaction is when afflux of matter is denied to a body, and the heat
included, having consumed its proper humor, dries and hardens the rest of the
parts, and at length forsakes them.

So Herbs, Trees and living creatures, etc. wither.

XVII Putrefaction is when the spirit is exhaled from a body, and the parts of
the matter are dissolved, and return into their het^rog^neous parts.

For then the watery parts are gathered to themselves (therefore putrefied
things give an evil sent) the oily parts to themselves, whence putrefied
things have always some unctuosity) the dregs to themselves (whence that
confusion in putrified things and unpleasant taste, etc.) and hence it is easy
to find the reason, why cold, salt and drying hinder putrefaction? namely,
because cold stops the pores of a body, that the spiritual parts cannot go out
and exhale: but dried things are exhausted of th^se thin parts, which might be
putrefied: salt last of all binds the parts of the matter within, and as it
were holds them with bands, that they cannot gape, and let forth the spirit.
Again, it may easily be gathered from hence, why hard and oily things are
durable? namely, because hard things have much salt, which hinders
putrefaction; but they are destitute of humidity (the provocation of
putrefaction.) And oily things, because they do not easily let go their spirit,
by reason of their well nourishing and gentle usage of it: ( suet and fat
putrify, because they have loose pores, and some aquosity.)

N. W. We must nevertheless observe, that not only soft things (herbs,
fruits, flesh) putrify, but also the hardest bodies, namely, stones and
metals. For the rust of these is nothing else but the rottenness of the inward
parts, spreading it self abroad through the pores,

XVIII Out of that which has been said, it may be gathered, that the world is
eternal potentially.

For seeing that not any one crum of matter can perish, nor the spirit be
suffocated, nor the light be extinguished, nor any of them fly forth out of the
world, and must of necessity be together, and pass through one another
mutually, and act upon one another, it is impossible but that one thing should
be born of another, even without end. For that old Axiom of Philosophers is
most true; the corruption of one is the generation of another. the Architect of
the World in that manner expressing his aeternity.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Elements; Sky, Air, Water, Earth.
WE have hitherto contemplated the general parts of the world, namely, the
principles with the common accidents thereof: now follow the species of things,
which are derived from the said principles by diverse degrees. Where first
elements come to be considered, as which being framed of the first congresse of
the principles, are as it were the bases and hinges, of the whole order of the
world.

I An element is the first and greatest body in the world of a simple nature.

A body, or a substance, for though we called matter, spirit, and light
substances also, ( cap. 2.) because they are not accidents; yet because none of
them existeth of it self, and apart, but do jointly make up other substances,
the elements and the creatures that follow may with better right be so called.
Now an element is said to be of a simple nature, in respect of the substances
following, which have compound natures, as it shall appear.

II The constitution of the elements is made by light.

For light being sent into the world, by its motion and heat began to rouse up
the Chaos of the matter of the world; and when it turned it self round, (as
yet it turns) it purified part of the matter, and made it more subtle, the
rest of the matter of necessity settling and gathering it self into density
elsewhere.

III There are four Elements, Sky, Air, Water, Earth.

That is, there are four faces of the matter of the world reduced into forms,
(for at the first it was without form) differing especially in the degree of
rarity and density. Note. The Peripateticks put the sublunary fire, for sky,
and call the sky a Quintessence. But that same sublunary fire is a mere
figment; the heaven it self, furnished with fiery light, is the highest
element of the world; as after the Scripture the senses themselves demonstrate.
He that is not satisfied with these of ours, but seeks more subtle
demonstrations, let him see Campanella, Verulamius, and Thomas Lydiat of the
nature of heaven, etc. and he will acknowledge the vanity of this
Aristotelicall figment.

IV The sky is the most pure part of the matter of the world, spread over the
highest spaces of the world.

It is vulgarly called the visible and starry heaven, and by an error of the
Greeks (who, thinking that it was of a solid substance, like Crystal, called
it (...) the Firmament: but little agreeably to the truth. More conveniently
(...) from the Hebrew (...) and (...) that is, light and fire, Quasi (...)
(that is fire above) and so from burning: as (...) is derived of (...) to burn.
For it burns with an inextinguable light of the stars, whereby it is also
purified. The notation of the Hebrew word favors this, (...) of (...) and
(...) fire and water. The nature of the heaven is to be liquid in the highest
degree volatile and hot.

V Air is a part of the matter indifferently pure, spread over the lower spaces
of the world.

The nature of it is to be breathable and passable every way.

VI Water is a grosser part of the matter of the world reduced into fluidity.

The nature of it is to be fluid and moistning.

VII The earth is the most gross part of the matter, as it were the dregs and
settling gathered together at the bottom.

The nature of it is to be dry and immovable.

VIII The elements therefore are all one matter of the world, distinguished by
degrees of density and rarity.

For where the light is wheeled about, there the matter is most rarefied and
pure: below that more gross, then gross and fluid, at length in the bottom
dregs and a thick settling. Therefore this is a mere gradation. For earth is
nothing else but thickened and hardened water: water, nothing but thickened air:
air, subtilized water: water, liquified earth.

But from this difference of density and rarity there arises another
difference of the same elements, namely, in regard of motion and rest, heat and
cold. The water is moveable. (For it flows) the air more yet (for it
transfuseth it self here and there;) the sky does nothing but whirle about
most swiftly, and that perpetually. Also the heaven by reason of its perpetual
motion is hot, (yea burns) perpetually; the earth by reason of its perpetual
rest is cold perpetually: except where it is warmed by the fire of heaven
coming upon it, or enclosed in it.

IX The elements are transmutable into one another.

That is, because the heat raised in the matter may extend and condense it. In
the water and air we see that come daily to pass. For who knows not, that
water does evaporate, and is turned into air? that water is made again of
vapor, the rain teaches us. But we may also procure the same mutation in our
hand: or in vulgar Alembicks in which waters or wines are distilled. Let theie
be an Alembicks void of all matter, filled only with air. To the long pipe of
this that hangs out apply some narrow mouthed glass, and stop the pipes
mouth carefully, that no air may any way get forth: you shall see that when it
cannot dilate it selse locally, it will be coagulated into water in the utmost
and coldest corner of it; (that is in the glass.) You shall see (I say) that
glass sweat and distill drops, into which the air heated and rarefied in the
Alembick contracted it self. But remove away the fire, you shall see those
drops vanish by little and little, and return into air.

X Aristotle thought that the Elements were in a tenfold proportion to one
another; but later men have found them near an hundredfold

That is, that of one drop of earth is made by rarifaction ten drops of water;
and of one of water ten of air. The truth of the latter assertion is easy to
be demonstrated, thus. Let one take a bladder (of an ox or an hog) and having
cleansed it, anoint it with oil to stop the pores, that the air may not get
out. To the neck of this (but having first crushed out all the air) let him tie
the neck of some little glass, with about an hundredth part of the water which
the bladder might contein. Let this instrument be set in the hot sun, or in a
very hot stove, where the water is by the heat turned into air, it will appear
that the bladder will be full. But bring the same bladder swelled with air into
the cold, you shall see it (the vapor turning again into water) fall again.
Note. The same hundredth proportion, or near upon, is also observed among
colors, for one drop of ink or red will color an hundred drops of water, not
on the contrary; and that because blackness represents the earth in density;
whiteness the heaven in rarity. But this very proportion varies, because the
air is in it self sometimes thicker and grosser, sometimes more rare and thin.

XI The matter of all the elements, as it is made up of Atoms, so it is turned
again into Atoms: by so much the more subtlely as it is the more subtle in its
mass.

For example, the earth and every dry and hard thing, is brought into a dust
almost indivisible, which may be sifted through a sieve, but cannot penetrate.
The water may both be strained and penetrate. For example, through vessels of
earth and wood, yea, and of lead as chap. 4. aphorism 13. We have set down an
example. Air and fire penetrate also through thicker bodies: as heat through
furnaces.

XII The elements are the four greatest bodies of the world, of which others
are generated.

That the lesser bodies of the world, which are infinite in number, and in
forms, are really compounded of the elements, resolution shows. For when they
are corrupted, they return into the elements. And sense teaches. For all
things have some grossness, from the earth; some liquour from the water; some
spirituosity from the air: some heat from heaven; and because all things that
live, are nourished by these, they are thence called Elementa quasi Alimenta,
as if you should say nourishment, as in Bohemian ziwel or ziwent.

XIII The Elementary matter occupies a place in the world according to its
degree of density and rarity.

For the earth rests at the bottom: the water swims upon that: the air
fleets above the water: and lastly the sky is in the highest place: you shall
see the like spectacle if you pour clay, water, wine, (especially sublimated)
and oil into a glass: for every one of these, will occupy a place accotding
to its nature.

XIV Therefore the Elements make the four visible regions or spears of the
world.

For the earth is a globe; which the water naturally encompasseth round; the
air it: the sky the air: after the same manner as in an egg the yelk is
encompassed with the white; and that with the skin and shell.

XV Of the Elements there are two extremes, the sky and earth; as many (...)
air and water.

They are called extreme aad mean both in regard of their sites, and of their
accidents. For the sky is in the highest place, most thin and hot: the earth
in the lowest, most thick and cold: Sky the first moveable; earth the first
resting. The air and water as they partake of the extremes, so of their
accidents: being sometimes either less thick or thin, moving or still, hot or
cold.

XVI But because the Elements were prepared not for an idle spectacle, but for
strong operation upon one another; the Creator did somewhat change that order,
and commanded two sorts of water to be made, and two sorts of fire.

XVII For part of the water is placed above the highest part of the sky: and
on the contrary, part of the fire is taken from the sky, and shut up into the
bowels of the earth.

Both these may seem paradoxes: and therefore need demonstration. And as
touching the waters it is manifest by the testimony of Moses, That God made
(the second day) the Expansum of the heaven, which might divide betwixt the
waters which are under the Expansum, and the waters above the Expansum, Genesis 1.
6, 7, 8. What can be more clear? now whereas some modern Divines interpret it
of the waters of the clouds, that is too cold. They say that Jer. 10. 13. The
rain waters are signified by the name of the water in heaven; and therefore
here also. But I answer. 1 That the waters in heaven are one thing, and the
waters above heaven another: Rain might be called water in heaven: because the
air was by the Hebrews called the first heaven: but it cannot be called the
waters above heaven, as these of which Moses speaks. 2 That the waters of the
clouds are not waters in act, but vapors: but Moses speaks of waters. For he
says expressly, that in the first seven days there was no rain. (cap. 2. ver.
5.) but he says that those waters above the Expansum were presently made the
second day; therefore they are some thing else then rain water. 3 He says,
that the waters were separated from the waters, but the waters of the clouds
are not separated from the waters of the sea, and of rivers. For they are
perpetually mingled: vapors ascending, rain descending. 4 He says, that the
Expansum was in the midst betwixt the waters and the waters: but how can that
be said of the clouds, which are below the Expansum, and reach not to the
thousandth part of its altitude? Lastly, Psalm. 148 places the waters above
the heaven, next of all to the Heaven of Heavens, v. 4. but reckons up clouds
and rain afterward, among the creatures of the earth, ver. 8. what need we any
other interpretation?

Reason persuades the same thing most strongly. For setting down the principles
of the world in that order, wherein we see them set down by Moses; it was
necessary, that the matter being scattered by the light rolling about; should
fly hither and thither, and coagulate it self at the terms of the world on
both fides, that in the middle where the light went, (and goes yet) there
should be pure sky; but that on both sides above and below, the mathardning it
self, should grow thick. We see it done here below: why not above also?
especially God himself intimating it. Let it be so, because naturally it cannot
be otherwise.

But that there is fire included in the earth 1 the eructations of fire in
Aetra, Vesuvius, Hecla, etc. do show. 2 the springs of hot waters every where,
3 the progeneration of metals, even in cold countries: and other things which
can come from nothing else but from fire, which shall be looked into in that
which follows. 4 lastly there is a testimony extant in the book of Job chap.
28. v. 5. Bread comes out of the earth, and under it is turned up as it were
fire. Let the Reader see Thomas Lydiats disquisition concerning the original
of Fountains, and there he shall see it disputed at large, and very soundly.

XVIII The waters above the heaven are there placed for ends known to God, but
the use of fire under ground, is well enough known to us also.

Yet we may say something of these waters by conjecture. As namely, that it was
meet, that there should be visible terms of the visible World: and that the
heat of the frame ever rolling, had need of cooling on the other side also: and
the like. But that of the fire under ground, mountains and valleys, and caves
of the earth are produced, and also stones, metals, and juyces generated, and
many other things we shall see in that which follows: for without heat, there
is no generation, because there is no motion.

Of the Sky in specie.
XIX The Sky is the highest Region of the most vast world, the dwelling place
of the stars.

XX The Sky is the most liquid part of the whole world, and therefore
transparent, and most moveable.

For by the motion and heat of the Sun always present, it is perpetually
attenuated to an exceeding subtlety.

XXI The whole sky is moved about, because that burning and ever flying light
of the stars, hurries it about with it.

That appears, 1 by reason: for if the stars were moved in the heaven
immovable (after that manner that birds are carried in the air, and fishes in
the water) that penetration of the heaven would not be without violence;
neither could it be performed with so great celerity, nor with so aequable a
course, by reason of the resistance. Therefore the stars are carried in
heaven in all respects, as clouds in the air, that is, with their chariot. 2
by sense, for we see that our fire carries away with it the matter which it
has caught and attenuated, namely, vapors, smoaks, flames: why not the
heavenly fire also? which comets also show to the eye, of which we shall see
more: chap. 8. 3. The same is to be gathered out of Moses words accurately
considered. ( Genesis 1. v. 14. and 17.

Of the air.
XXII The air is the lowest Region of the Expansum, the abode of the clouds and
birds.

In Scripture, it is signified by the name of the first heaven. Yet it
penetrates water and earth, to fill up their cavities because there is no
vacuum.

XXIII The air is of a middle nature betwixt the heaven and the water, in
respect of site and qualities.

Yet it is thicker where it joins to the earth and water; and thinner toward
heaven. Therefore in the highest tops of some mountains, neither men can live,
nor trees grow, because of the thinness of the air, by reason of which it is
neither sufficient for the breathing of living creatures, nor for the growth of
plants.

XXIV The air near the earth in summer is hot, (by the vehement repercussion of
the Suns vertical beams:) in winter, (by reason of the obliquity and obtuse
reflection of the beams) it cannot be heated: above it is always cold, yet most
in summer, when it is pend in on both sides with the heat of the heaven, and of
the earth.

Of the water.
XXV Water is thickened air. Washing and and moistning the earth; the abode of
fishes.

XXVI Water of its own nature is only moist and fluid: to the rest of the
qualities indifferent.

Obs. 1. The fluidity of the water is such, that if you give it never so little
declivity, it runs. But the humidity is unequal according to the degree of
rarity and density. For a ship sinks not so deep in the sea, as in a river:
because the sea water is thicker and drier.

Obs. 2 They add commonly, that water is naturally cold, by a twofold argument
1 because it cools. 2 because it extinguisheth fire, but I answer it cools
not by its coolness, but by its crudity. But it quenches fire after the same
manner, as hot water and wine, do, though they be hot, not because they are
contrary to fire, but because fire is nourished with the thinner parts of the
wood, but if abundance of water be cast on (or any fluid thing, even oil) the
pores are stopped, and the fire is quenched. Otherwise fires are made of
Bitumen, (which is not a porous matter) that burn in the very water, which we
see done also in lime. Lastly, great fires are nourished with water. We see
also that there is sometime hot, sometime cold water, not only in rivers, but
also breaking out of fountains, according as it is affected; yet it may not be
dissembled in the mean time, that air is more prone to heat, by reason of its
rarity; water to coldness by reason of its thickness.

XXVII The water at first covered the earth round about; but (on the third day
of the creation, it was gathered into certain channels, (which are called Seas,
Lakes, Pooles, Rivers, etc.)

That this was done at the command of of God. Moses testifies in these words.
Let the waters be gathered together into one place, that the dry land may
appear Genesis 1. v. 9. but David (relating the process of the creation)
describes the manner also. Ps. 1^4 v 6, 7, 8, 9. That thunders were raised, by
which the Mountains ascended, the valleys descended, but the waters were
carried steep down into their channels: and that in this sort, a bound was set
them, that they might not return to cover the earth. Whence it is very likely,
that that discovery of the surface of the earth, was made by an earthquake: but
that the earthquake was produced by the fire sunk into the earth; which giving
battle to the cold there conglobated, shook the earth, and either caused it to
swell variously, or rent it asunder. Whence those risings a^^ fallings in the
surface of the earth (that is mountains and valleys) were made: but within
caves and many hollow places. This done, the waters of their own accord betook
themselves, from those swelling eminencies to thc low and hollow places. This
pious conjecture will stand so long, as no more probable sense can be given of
this Scripture. And what need many words? common sense testifies, that
mountains are certainly elevated, valleys and plains depressed. therefore of
necessity that was sometime so ordered; but not in the first foundation of the
earth the second day; for then the grosser parts of the matter flowing about
poised themselves equally about the center, therefore it was about the third
day, when the face of the earth appeared, and the waters flowed into their
channels. But besides perhaps God does therefore permit earthquakes yet to be
sometimes, and by them mountatains and valleys and rivers to be changed, that
we may not be without a pattern, how it was done at the first.

XXVIII The water then is divided into Seas, Lakes, Rivers and Fountains.

XXIX The sea is an universal receptacle o^^^aters, into which all the rivers
of the earth unburthen themselves.

Which uery thing is an argument that the sea is lower then the earth: for
rivers run down, not up again.

XXX The sea is one in it self; because it insinuates it self into the
Continent here and there, as it were with strong arms, it has gotten several
names in several places.

That great Sea encompassing the earth is called the Ocean, those arms
dividing the Continent, Bays, or Gulfs. For all those gulfes are joined to the
Ocean, except the Caspian or Hyrcanian Sea in Asia: yet that is thought to have
channells within the earth, whereby it joined to the Ocean.

XXXI The Sea is cf unequal depth commonly srom an hundred, to a thousand
paces: yet in some places they say, that the bottom cannot be found. Hence the
sea is called an Abyss.

It is probable that the superficies of the earth covered with the water, is as
unequal as this of ours standing out of the water, namely, that in some places
are most spacious plains, in other places valleys and depths, and in other
places mountains and hills, which if they stand above the water are called
Islands, but if they be hidden under the water shelves.

XXXII The water of the Ocean fails not, because huge rivers and showers
continually flow into it; neither does it, cverflow becruse it does always
evaporrte upwards in so many parts of it.

Of the earth.
XXXIII The earth is the most dense bedy of the world, as it were the dregs and
settling of the whole matter.

And therefore gross, opacous, cold, heavy.

XXXIV It hangs in the middle of the universe, encompassed with air on
every-side.

For being that it is on every side encompassed with the heaven, and is forced
by the heat thereof on every side, it has not whither to go, or where to rest,
but in the aequilibrium of the universe.

XXXV The earth is every way round.

For the form which at the first it received from the light of heaven wheeling
about it, it yet retains: except that in some places it is elevated into
mountains and hills, by the thunder which was sent into its bowels the third
day, in other places again it is pressed down into valleys and plains, for the
running down of the rivers: but that does not notably hinder the globosity
thereof.

XXXVI The better part of the superficies of the earth is yet covered with
water: the lesser part stands out of the water, where it is called dry land, or
continent: or if it be a small portion, an Island.

There are seven Continents of the earth; Europe, Asia, Africa, America
Peruviana, America Mexicana, Magellanica, (or Terra Australis) and Terra
Borealis: but there are Islands innumerable.

XXXVII The earth is in its outward face in some places plain, in others
mountainous: but within in some places solid; in others hollow.

That appears in Mountains and Mines of metal, where is to be seen here stones
or clay very close compact, there dens and most deep caves, and endless
passages, which must needs be thought to have been the work of the thunder,
sent into the earth the third day of the creation, (which penetrating and
piercing its bowels so tore them.) Now there are in the earth not only spacious
caves and holes, but an infinite number of straighter veins, and as it were
pores, which is plain enough by experience.

XXXVIII The cavities of the earth are full of water, air, fire.

For being that there are cavernes, passages and pores, they must needs be
filled; and that with a thin matter. Of air no man will doubt. But that there
are waters in the cavernes under ground, appears in the mines of metal; and
is proved by the testimony of the Scripture, which in the history of the
deluge, says that all the fountains of the great deep were broken up; ( Genesis
7. v. 11.) Lastly, that there is fire under the earth, we have already seen
Aphorism 16. which it is credible, is the relics of the lightning raised
within the bowels of the earth the third day of the Creation, ( Psalm. 1^4. v.
7.) left there for the working of minerals; but nourished with sulphurous and
bituminous matter, spread through the bowels of the earth.

CHAP. VII.
Of Vapors.
IF the Light of Heaven had wrought nothing else upon the matter, but melt it
together into the forms of the Elements, as it was variously rarefied or
densified, the world had remained void of other living creatures. But it
cease not passing through the Elements themselves to scorch them, and
scorching them to attenuate them, and attenuating them, to resolve them into
vapors: of which condensed again, many several species of things are
progenerated. Now then the nature of vapors shall be laid open in the
following Aphorisms.

I Vapor is an Element rarefied, mixed with another Element.

For example; the vapor of water, what is it but water rarefied and scattered
in the air? smoke, what is it, but an exhalation of wood or other matter
resolved?

II Vapor is generated of the grosser Elements, earth, water, air; as of all
mixed bodies.

Of water the matter is evident. For being set to the fire it evaporates
visibly; set in the sun it evaporates sensibly, because even whole Pools,
Rivers, Lakes are dried up by little and little, by the heat of the sun. That
the earth exhales, you may know by sense, if you put a clot into a dish, (of
earth or pewter) and pour in water so often upon it, and let it evapourate with
the heat, till there is nothing left, neither of the water, nor of the clay.
For what is become of the clot? it is sure enough turned into air, with the
parts of the water.

The vapor of air is invisible; yet it appears, that there is some. 1 In a
living body, where all acknowledge that there are evaporations through the skin
and the hair. For then the vapors that go out, what are they but the vapors
of the inward vapors, far more subtle then the vapors of water? 2 Fruits,
herbs, spices, etc. dried, yea very dry, spread from them an odor, now an
odor what is it but an exhalation! But not (in this place) a watery exhalation
(being that there is not any thing watery left in them:) therefore airy.

That mixed bodies do vapor is without doubt: forasmuch as the Elements of
which they do consist do vapor. Understand not only soft bodies (sulphur,
salt, herbs, flesh, etc.) but the very hardest. For how could a thunderbolt be
generated in the clouds, if stony vapors did not ascend into the cloud? and it
is certain that stones exposed to the air for some ages, (as in high towers)
grow porous: how, but by evaporation? and what is the melting of metals, but a
kind of vaporation? for though the metal return to its consistency, yet not in
the same quantity, because something is evaporated by putting to the heat.

III Heat is the efficient cause of vapor; which withersoever it diffuseth it
self, attenuating the matter of bodies, turns it into vapor.

For this is the perpetual virtue of heat, to rarifie, attenuate, and diffuse.

IV All is full of vapor throughout the world.

For heat, the begetter of vapors, is no where wanting: so that the World is
nothing else but a great Vaporarie, or Stove. For the earth does always
nourish infinite store of vapors in its bowels: and the sea boiles daily with
inward vapors, and the air is stuffed full of them every where. And we shall
see hereafter, that the sky is not altogether free from them. But living
bodies of Animals and Plants, are nothing but shops of vapors, and as it were
a kind of Alembecks perpetually vaporing, as long as they have life or heat.

V Vapors are generated for the progenerating of other things.

For all things are made of the Elements, as it is well known, Stones, Herbs,
Animals, etc. but because they cannot be made unless the Elements themselves
be first founded, they must of necessity be melted; which is done when they
are resolved into vapors, and variously instilled into things, to put on
several forms. And hence it is that Moses testifies, that the first seven
days of the world, when there was yet no rain, a vapor went up from the earth,
to water the whole earth: that is all things growing out of the earth. Read
with attention, Genesis 2. ver. 4, 5, 6.

VI Vapors are the matter of all bodies.

For who knows not, that waters and oiles are gathered out of the vapors
of Alembicks? who sees not also, that smoke in a chimney turns into soot,
that is black dust? yea that soot gets into the walls of chimneys, and turns
into a stony hardness? After the same manner therefore that clouds, rain,
hail, stones, herbs, are made of the condensed vapors of the Elements, and
living creatures themselves, (and in them blood, flesh, bones, hairs) are
nothing but vapors concrete, will appear more clear then the light at noon
day.

VII Vapors then are coagulated, some into liquid matter, (as water, spittle,
flesh or pulp) some into consistent matter, (as stones, bones, wood, etc.)

That appears, because those liquid things may be turned into vapors, and
consistent things into smoke* which they could not, if they were not made of
them, for every thing may be resolved into that only, of which it is made.

VIII The motion of vapors with us is upwards, because among the thicker
elements, they obtein the nature of thinner.

For certainly the vapor of water is thinner then water, it self, yea, thinner
then the very air: which though it consist of smaller parts, yet they are
compacted. And therefore vapor suffers it self to be pressed neither by water nor
air, but frees it self, still getting upwards, and hence it is, that plants
grow upwards, because the vapor included spreading it self, tends upwards.

IX One vapor is moist, another dry; one thin, another thick; one mild,
another sharp, etc.

For those qualities which are afterward in bodies, are initially in their
rudiments, that is vapors; which we may know by experience. For dry smoke
pains the eyes: which a humid vapor does not: there you have sharpness: smells
also, (which are nothing but exhalations of things) do not they sufficiently
manifest sharpness, sweetness, etc? and Chymicks gather Sulphur, salt, and
Mercury out of smoke. Therefore all qualities are in vapors more or less:
whence the bodies afterward made of them, get such or such an habit or figure.

X Vapors gathered together, and not coagulated, cause wind in the air,
trouble in the sea, earthquake in the earth.

Of winds.
XI Wind is a flux of the air, ordained in nature for most profitable ends

For winds are 1 the besomes of the world; cleansing the elements, and keeping
them from putrefying. 2 the fan of the spirit of life, causing it to vegetate
in plants and all growing things. 3 the charriots of clouds rains, smells, yea,
and of heat and cold, whether soever there is need that they should be
conveyed. 4 Lastly, they bestow strong motions for the uses of men (as
grinding, sailing)

XII The ordinary cause of wind is store of exhalations one where, enforcing
the air to flow elsewhere.

We may in our hand raise a kind of wind four manner of ways; namely by forcing
or compressing, rarifying and densifying air, (which shall be showed by
examples by and by) and so many ways are winds raised in the world, yet they
are all referred to that first cause, vapors, as shall be seen by and by. I
said that wind may be raised by us by forcing, compressing, rarifying, or
densifying; that may be shown to children by ocular experiments, for if you
drive the air with a fan, does it not give a blast? if you press it when it is
drawn into the bellows, does it not breath through the pipe? if you lay an
apple or an egg into the fire, does not the rarefied humor break forth with a
blast? but this last will be better seen in a bowl of brass (which has but
one hole) put to the fire: especially if you drop in some drops of water. For
the air shut in with the water, when they feel the heat, will presently
evaporate, and thrust themselves out with a violent blast. Which may be also
seen, if you put a burning wax candle into a pot well stopped (having a small
hole left at the side) etc. The fourth way is by condensation of air: if for
example, you lay the foresaid bowl of brass very hot upon ice, and force the
thin air included to be condensed again with cold, you shall perceive it to
draw it again from without, to fill up the hollownesse of the bowl. Therefore
so many ways winds are made under heaven; either because the air is rarefied
with the heat of the Sun, and spreads it self; or because it contracts it self
with being cold, and attracts from elsewhere to fill up the spaces; or because
a cloud scattered, or falling downward; or else blasts somewhere breaking out
of the earth compresse the air, and make it diffuse: or lastly, because one
part of the air being moved, drives others before it, (for here you must
remember what was said before. 1 that a drop of water turned into air, requires
an hundred times more space. 2 that the air is a very liquid and moveable
element: and therefore being but lightly pushed, gives back a long way*) but
yet it is plain that all those motions of the air take their first rise from
vapors. Now because the world is a great globe, it affords great store of
blasts also, both the heat of the sun above, and the parching of the fire under
ground, begetting various vapors.

Hence it is understood, why after a great fire there arises a wind presently,
(even in the still air?) namely, because much solid matter, (wood and stone,
etc.) is resolved into vapors, and the air round about is attenuated by the
heat of the fire, that it must of necessity spread it self, and seek a larger
room.

XIII Winds in some countries are certain, coming at a certain time of the
year, and from a certain coast; others are free, coming from any place.

Note they call these (...), which is as much to say as annual: which are
caused either by the mountainousnesse of the tract near adjoining, wherein the
snows are then dissolved; or to be sure some other causes, by reason of which
vapors are then progenerated there in great abundance. But you must note, that
those etesian winds are for the most part weak and gentle, and yield to the
free winds.

Note 2 There is also another kind of set wind, common to the whole world;
namely a perpetual flux of the whole air, from the east to the west. For that
there is such a wind. 1 they that sail about the equator testify. 2 in the
seas of Europe, when a particular wind cease; they say also that a certain
gentle gale is perceived from the east 3 and therefore Mariners are constantly
of opinion, that the navigation from east to west is speediliest performed. 4
lastly, with us in a clear and still sky, the highest clouds are seen for the
most part to be carried from East to West. therefore we need not doubt of this
general wind, if so be any one will call it a wind. For it proceeds not from
exhalations, but from the heaven, which by its wheeling round, carries the air
perpetually about, swiftly above, here nigh the earth (where the clouds are)
almost insensibly, yet under the equator (as being in a greater Circle) very
notably. Whence this Problem may be profitably noted, why the East wind dries,
but the West moistens? namely, because that being carried along with the air
attenuates it the more; but this striving against the air condenseth it.

XIV A gentle wind is called aura, a gale; a vehement wind overthrowing all it
meets with procella, a tempest; if winded into it self turbo a whirlewind.

It is plain that sundry winds may arise in sundry places together, according
as matter of exhalations is afforded here and there, and occasion to turn it
self hither or thither. Therefore if they flow both one way, the wind doubled
is the stronger; if sideways, or obliquely, the stronger carries away the
weaker with it, and there is a change of the wind which we see done often, yea
daily, but when they come opposite to one another, and fall one against
another, they make a storm or tempest; which is a fight of the winds till
the strongest overcome, and is carried with a horrible violence bearing down
all before it. But contrary winds of aequall strength make a vvhirlvvind,
when neither will give sidevvay, but both vvhirl upvvards, with a violent
gyration.

Of the sea-tide.
XV The sea-tide is the daily flux of the sea to the shore, and refluxe back
again.

The sea has its fluxes less unconstant then the air, for it flows only to
the shores, and back again the same way: and twice a a day it flows up, and
twice it ebbs again. The end thereof without doubt is, to keep the waters of
the Sea from putrefying by that continual motion. But the efficient cause
thereof heretofore accounted amongst the secrets of nature comes now to be
searched out of the truest grounds of natural Philosophy, and more accurate
observations.

XVI The cause of the sea-tide, are vapors within, wherewith the sea swelling
diffuseth it self, and falling settles down again.

For this tide is like to the boiling of water, seething at the fire; which
is nothing but the stirring of the vapors raised in the waters by the force
of the heat. For it is impossible that the water should not be resolved into
vapors by the heat: impossible that the vapors should not seek a passage
(upvvards) to their connaturals. yet impossible that they should have an easy
passage out of the water, (being that the superficies of the water, yea the
whole mass thereof, being a diffused liquor like liquid glass, has fewer
pores than the earth or wood, or a stone:) therefore it is impossible that the
water should not swel rise up, dash it self against the sides of the kettle,
and at length break in a thousand openings, and give the heat dancing and
evapourating a passage out, by reason of the vapor raised and multiplied
within, and striving upvvard: all which we see in a boiling pot. ^n the same
manner the sea svvels, by reason of the vapor that is multiplied in the
bottom of its gulfes, and lifts up it self into a tumor, and of necessity
spreads it self to the side, neither does it make any thing against this, that
the water of the sea boiling is not so hot as the water of a boiling pot. For
here the vast quantity does not admit of so great heat over such deep gulfes.
For the water of a kettle heats at the bottom, bu the superficies begin to
swell and turn about before they heat.

XVII Vapors within the sea, are chiefly generated by by the fire under ground.

They refer it commonly to the caelestiall fire, the Sun, and the Moon. But
that is likely to be as true, as that we see a pot of water to boil, set in
the sun, though never so hot. For who ever saw that? the Sun may lick the
superficies of the water, and so consume it by little and little, and turn it
into vapor: but nothing can make it boil at the bottom, but fire put under
it. Therefore the cause of the vapors within the sea, must of necessity be
placed underneath: namely that fire under ground, which the whole nature of
inferior things, demonstrate to be shut up there.

XVIII The vapors and tides of the sea are provoked by the heat of heaven,
(the Sun.)

A laboring man, or a traveller, sweats easily enough by his inward heat,
(stirred up by the motion of his body) but a great deal more easily in the heat
of Summer, then in Winter; and all of us sooner in a bath then elsewhere: the
outward heat provoking the inward. In like manner the sea vapors and boiles
within, but yet after the harmony of the superior fire which is from the
stars. Which harmony is seen also in yielding us water from the clouds and
fountains. For in rainy vveather fountains flow more abundantly; in dry
vveather they dry something, both which God intimated, Genesis 7. v. 11. and Deuteronomy.
28. v. 23. Now the cause is, the harmony of fire to fire; of the caelestiall to
the subterraneous, etc. as it shall elsewhere appear.

XIX The Sea flows twice a day, according as the Sun comes and goes,

For the Sun ascending to the Meridian, attracts the vapors of the sea, and
causes the waters to be elevated and diffused: descending to the West, it
suffers them to fall again. Now that the waters swell again at the Sun setting,
and fall as he hastens to the East; the cause is the same which in boiling
pots: where the hot water is seen to boil, and to be elevated, not only in
that part which is toward the fire, but also on the contrary; but to fall again
on the sides both ways. So the Sea is a caldron, which the Sun (the worlds
fire) encompassing, makes to swell up on both the opposite parts, but to fall
in the intermediate parts; so that this sea-tide following the Sun, goes
circularly after a perpetual law.

XX The flux and refluxe of the sea is varied according to the motion of the
Sun and Moon, and the site of places.

For 1 in Winter it is almost insensible, the Sun but weakly raising the
subterrane vapors. 2 When the Moon is in conjunction or opposition to the Sun,
the seas swell extraordinarily; the force of both luminaries being joined
together to affect the inferior things (either jointly or else oppositely.)
Also the Moon increasing the flowings are something retarded, decreasing they
are anticipated: which gave occasion to the ancients to think that it was
caused by the Moon alone. 3 Those sea fluxes and refluxes vary also according
to the diverse turnings and windings of Countries and Promontories, and the
shorter or longer coherence of inlets with the Ocean; which causes them to be
perceived in some places sooner, in others later. But enough of the sea tide,
the earthquake follows.

XXI An earthquake is the shaking of the superficies of the earth in any
country; arising from subterrane exhalations, gathered together in great
abundance, and seeking a passage out.

Therefore it cease not till the said exhalations are either scattered
through the cavities of the earth, or else break forth.

XXII Earthquakes are sometimes so horrible that they subvert Cities,
Mountains, Islands, with an hideous bellowing howling, and crashing.

Which formidable effects cause us to suspect, that those vapors are then
mixed, like to those by which thunders are caused in a cloud: and that not
simply by the blast of the exhalations, but by their burning, so that they are
a kind of subterrane lightnings: yet I thought good to make mention of it here
together.

CHAP. VIII.
Of concrete substances: namely, Stars, Meteors, and Minerals.
I A Concrete thing is a vapor coagulated, endued with some form.

For example, soot, clouds, snow, etc. Note that this name of concrete, and
concreture is new, yet fit to express this degree of creatures, which confers
nothing but coagulation and figure.

II The primary cause of concretion of vapors is cold, which wheresoever it
finds a vapor, condenseth and coagulateth it.

That appears in Alembicks, where the vapor raised by heat, and carried into
the highest region of it where it is cold, resolves it self again into water:
and to that end Distillours now and then wash the uppermost cap of the Alembick
with cold water, and make the pipes, through which the concrete liquour
distills, to pass through a vessel of water. Yet heat helps the concretion of
things, consuming the thinner part of the concrete, and compelling the rest to
harden, which we see done in the generation of metals.

III Some concretes are Aethereall, others aereall, others watery, others
earthly.

Namely, because some are made in the sky, as stars: others in the air, as
clouds, etc. others in water, as a bubble, etc. others in the earth, as stones,
etc. every one of which come to be considered apart.

IV Ethereal concretes, are stars and comets.

V Stars are fiery globes, full of light and heat, with which the sky glitters
on every side.

Both the ornament of the world required this, that hanging lamps should not be
wanting in so lofty a palace: as also the necessity of the inferior world,
concerning which is the following Aphorism. Now we reckon stars in the rank of
concretes, because it is certain that they are made of matter and light.

Stars were produced in so great number upon very great necessity.

Namely, 1 To heat the earth with a various temperature. 2 To make the various
harmony of times. 3 To inspire a various form into the creatures. For so great
variety could not be induced into the lower world, without such variety in
celestial things.

VII God placed the greatest number of stars in the highest heaven round about,
that they might irradiate the earth on every side, and carry about their sphere
with a rapid motion of heat.

On which starry sphere take these following Aphorisms.

1 That the motion of this sphere is finished in the space of twenty four hours.

2 And because that motion is circular, it is said to be made upon two hinges,
or immovable points (in Greek poles) of which the one is called the Northern
or Artick pole; the other the Southern or Antartick. Betwixt these two poles
the heaven is turned: with its exact globosity, describing a circle (in the
midst betwixt the two poles) which they call the Equator. Now that tract,
where the stars arise above the earth, is called the East, or the Sunrising:
the opposite to it where they set, is called the West or Sunsetting; and
these four angles of the World, are called the four quarters of the World, and
the four Cardinal Points.

3 That the stars of the highest sphere, (commonly called the fixed stars) are
globes of vvondrous greatness in themselves: the greatest of them exceeding
the globe of the earth an hundred and seven times: and the least of them
exceeding the same globe eighteen times.

4 That the numerable stars are found by us one thousand, twenty two: but God
knovves the number of the innumerable. For the Galaxias or milky way (it is the
whitest tract of heaven) is found by accurate perspectives to be a company of
very sma^ stars; and there are some other like tracts observed in heaven,
though less, and of these the words of God, Genesis 15. v. 5. are to be
understood.

5 That the visible stars reduced into certain figures, which they call
celestial signs in number 69, 12 whereof about the Equator, are by a
peculiar name called the Zodiaque. But this Zodiaque declines with one half of
it toward the North, with the other part toward the south. the signs are
comprehended in this distick.

1 2 3 4 5 Sunt Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, 6 Virgo: 7 8 9 10 11
Libraque, Scorpius, Arcitenens, Caper, Hydria, 12 Pisces. 1 2 3 The Ram, the
Bull and Twins to the Spring belong; 4 6 5 To Summer Crab and Maid and Lion
strong. 7 8 9 Autumn has Scales and Scorpion and the Bow: 10 11 12 Goat,
Water-tanckard, Fishes Winter show

6 That the distance of this starry sphere from the earth is found above two
hundred thousand semidiameters of the earth, and a semidiameter of the earth
contains 3600 of our miles.

VIII A very great portion of most ardent light is conglobated in the sun, so
that it may seem the only fountain of light and heat.

For were it not for the sun we should have perpetual night, for all the rest
of the stars: forasmuch as at high noon, we are in darkness presently, if the
sun be but covered.

Now touching the sun these following Axioms are to be noted.
1 That it was made so great as might suffice, both to illustrate the whole
world, and to heat and vaporate the whole earth: that is 160 times greater than
the earth.

2 That it is such a distance elevated from the earth, as might serve, so as
neither to burn it, nor leave it destitute. Psalm. 19. v. 7 for it is placed
almost in the middle space betwixt the starry sphere and the earth.

3 That it is carried with a flower motion then the stars in their highest
sphere. For whereas it seems to be turned about equally, as the starrie sphere
is, yet it is every day left behind almost a degree, (of which the whole
circuit of the sphere has 360) whence it comes to pass, that in 365 days, it
compasses the whole spear as it were going back, and after so many days
returns to the same star again. And this we call the time of an year, or a
solar year.

4 And that it may serve all sides of the earth with its light and heat, (to
wit by turns) that retardation is not made simply though the midst of the
world under the Equator: But under the Zodiac, bending to the North on this
side: to the South on that side Whence comes the division of the year into four
parts; ( Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter) and the inequality of days to
those that inhabit without the equinoctial. For when it declines to those on
the North it makes summer with them, and the longest days, and so on the
contrary. And by how much it is the more vertical to any part of the earth, it
heats it so much the more, by reason of the direct incidence and repercussion
of the rays.

IX And because it was not convenient that the sun and stars should always
operate after one and the same manner ( for variety is both pleasing and
profitable to all nature) there were six other wandering stars added over and
besides, which running under the same Zodiaque and by certain turns entering
into conjunction one with another, and with the sun might variously temper
his operation upon inferior things.

These wandering stars are called Planets, of which there are seven, reckoning
the sun for one.

X The Planets therefore are the suns coadjutors in governing the world: which
differ in site, course, magnitude and light.

XI Three of the Planets Saturn () Jupiter () Mars () are above the sun: Venus
() Mercury () and the Moon () below: so in a most decent manner, as it were
compassing about the sides of their King.

It is probable, that the stars are carried higher or lower in heaven, for the
same reason as clouds in the air, or wood in water, that is, according to their
different degrees of density or rarity. For as thick wood swims under the water
either with all or with half of its body covered, but light wood swims on the
top: and watery clouds ascend not far from the earth, but dry and barren clouds
very high: so the globes of the stars are carried some higher than others
according to the thickness of their matter and light.

XII The upper Plane^s are bigger then the earth, but the lower are lesser.

For it is found that (...) does equal 91 Globes of the earth. 95 2 160 does
co^tein the 28 part of the earth. 105 39

XIII By how much the higher any Planet is, and nearer to the highest sphere,
so much the swifter it moves; by how much the lower and nearer to the earth,
so much the flower.

For Saturn, because he is next to the eighth sphere, is rolled about almost
equally with it, yet he also falls back by little and little: so that he runs
through the Zodiaque moving backward in the space of almost thirty years:
Jupiter in twelve years: Mars in almost two: the Sun (as was said) in a year:
Venus encompasseth the Sun in five hundred eighty three days: Mercury in one
hundred and fifteen days: the Moon because she is slowest of all, remaining
behind every day 13 degrees. measures the Zodiaque in 27 days.

XIV The higher Planets do so observe the sun, that approaching nigh unto him,
they betake themselves into the highest place; going from the sun, they sink
lower toward the earth.

And for this cause both their magnitude and their motion vary in our eyes. for
when they are nearer to the earth, they seem greater; but more remote lesser.
Again, the higher they are, the slower they move, and then they are called
direct; the lower they descend the swifter, so that they seem either
stationary, (keeping pace for some weeks with the same fixed stars) or else
retrograde, sometimes outstripping them in their course.

XV Venus and Mercury depart not from the sun, unless it be to the sides both
ways: Venus 47 degrees, Mercury 23 degrees. So that sometimes they go before
the sun, sometimes they follow him, sometimes they lie hid under his rays.

Note, Venus when she is the morning star and goes before the Sun is called
(...), or Lucifer: when she is the evening star she is called Hesperus.

XVI As for their light, Mars is very fiery and calefactive: is pale and very
frigifactive: and are of a benign light: changeably sparckling: shines with a
borrowed light only: of which more by and by.

Note. That the stars and planets do not sparkle by reason of their greater
distance, (for then should sparkle more then Mercury: whereas we find the
contrary) but by reason of their flaming. For fire or light cannot rest,
therefore the polar stars, because they are least stirred with the common
motion, twinckle most.

XVII Because the Moon is near to the earth, and placed in a gross air, she
moves most slowly; and also her body is gross and obscure, like a globous
cloud.

For it is not distant from the earth above 60 semidiameters of the earth.

The Moon by reason of her opacity does not shine of her self, or else very
weakly: but on that side that she is illuminated by the Sun, on that side she
shines like a looking glass, the other half being obscure.

Note. Because the Moon was to rule the night, a weak light, and that but
borrowed was given her, and because she was appointed to show lesser times
(Months) a motion different from the Sun was given her, that by her departure
from the Sun, and by her returning, she might design the progress of the
months: and that it might be done more evidently, she was placed below the
sun, that she might appear to us with her face enlightened after diverse manners.
For when she runs with the Sun in the same sign of the Zodiac, she does not
appear to us; because her enlightened face is turned toward the Sun, but her
obscure face to us. But when she is opposite to the Sun, we beholding her on
the same side which looks toward the Sun, see all her luminous face. Lastly,
in the intermediate places we see her increasing or decreasing in light;
according as she turns her enlightened face to us, or turns it from us, by
reason of the diversity of her position in respect of the Sun, and us.

XIX When the Moon, at the change, comes directly under the Sun, she obscures
him as to us; when at the full, she is directly opposite to the Sun, she enters
into the shadow of the earth, and is her self obscured: and this they call the
Eclipses of the Luminaries.

Hence it appears that the Sun is not obscured after the same manner that the
Moon is. For the Moon is really obscured, that is deprived of light, as being
fallen into the shadow; but the Sun is not deprived of light, but is only
covered from us, that it cannot as then enlighten the earth with his rays;
therefore the earth is then more truly eclipsed then the Sun.

Now God ordained Eclipses 1 That we might understand, that all our light is
from the Sun. 2 That the magnitude of the Luminaries, and of the earth might be
found out. 3 To find the true longitude of countries; but that belongs to
Astronomers, this last to Geographers.

Of Comets.
XX Comets are accessory stars, which sometimes shine, and go out again: for the
most part with tails, or busbes of hair.

We reckon them to the heaven and stars, not to the air and meteors: because
they are not generated in sublunary places, (as Aristotle thought) but in the
highest Heaven, even above the Sun: which 1 Their motion, swifter always then
the Moon it self. 2 Their parallax, less then the Moons, sometimes none at
all, do show.

XXI Comets are not vapors kindled; but a reflection of the Suns light, in
vapors so far elevated.

The first is easily proved. For if a Comet were a vapor kindled, it could not
last half an hour. (For nothing can be kindled but a sulphury matter, but that
is consumed in a moment, as it appears in Gunpowder, Lightning, a Chasme, a
falling star, etc.) but histories relate that comets have lasted three years.
The second is showed, because comets 1 Cast a tail from the Sun, as the Moon
does a shadow; (for those dry vapors are not an opacous body, like to the
Moon, but semidiaphanous.) 2 They are eclipsed (as Campanella testifies) by the
shadow of the earth, as well as the Moon: which would not be, if they burned
with their own fire.

N. W. That which is reported of a fulphureous matter, or stone, which fell
from a burning comet, if it be true, it is to be thought, that it was made of
some fiery meteors, not of a comet.

XXII The ends of comets are, that it may appear; 1 That the whole heaven
moves, not the stars only. 2 That it is liquid and transmeable, not hard like
Crystal. 3 That vapors ascend so high, and that there are mutations every
where in this visible world.

Vapors, I say, whether exhaling from this our inferior world, or from the
supercelestiall waters. For there is nothing to the contrary, why we should not
hold, that they also exhale, and are spread abroad into the thinner region of
the stars.

Of aeriall Concrets, that is, Meteors.
XXIII By reason of the perpetual confluxe of exhalations in the air from all
the Elements, many things are daily there concreted, but of small continuance.

For the air is full of exhalations, even when it seems clear. For it cannot
be so pure here near the earth, but it will have something watery, oily or salt
always admixt with it. Things concrete of these were anciently called Meteors,
because they are made on high: for (...) signifies high.

XXIV Of humid exhalations are made watery meteors: fiery of dry.

XXV Watery meteors are, mists, clouds, rain, hail, snow, dew, frost.

We must see them every one apart, how they are made.

XXVI A mist is a watery exhalation half concrete, which being that by reason
of its density it cannot elevate it self, creeps on the ground.

XXVII A cloud is a gathering together of thin vapors, and elevated upward, in
the highest of the air.

They are gathered together most of all over the sea, and standing waters,
because there most exhalations are made, and from thence they are driven
through diverse parts of the world by the winds, and increased with exhalations
arising elsewhere. Hence in every region, rain comes, most often from that
part, which lies nearest to the sea; as with us from the West.

XXVIII Rain is the resolution of a cloud into water, and the falling of it by
drops.

N. 1 That resolution is always made by the condensation of the vapor, but
there is not always the same efficient cause of its condensation. For
sometimes cold condenseth a vapor, as in the head and pipe of an Alembick
(which must needs be cooled) we see: sometimes the very compression it self,
or conspissation, as it is plain in the roof of baths, and the cover of a
boiling pot. But neither of these causes is wanting to beget rain: being that
the middle region of the air is cold, and the cloud being pressed together by
the vapors always ascending, must of necessity be dissolved. And this is the
cause, why the burning heat of the air is a fore-teller of rain: because then
it is certain that the air is thickened.

N. 2. That rain is better for fields and gardens then river water, because it
has a kind of a fatness mixed with it, from the evaporations of the earth,
minerals, plants, and Animals, wherewith it gives the earth a most profitable
tincture.

N. 3 Sometimes worms, small fishes, frogs, etc. fall with the rain, which, as
it is very likely, are suddenly generated within the cloud, of vapors gathered
together of the same nature, by virtue of a living spirit admixt therewith; as
in the beginning, at the Command of God, the waters brought forth creeping
things and fishes in a moment.

XXIX Hail is rain congealed.

For when the Sun beams in the greatest heat of Summer, have driven away all
cold from the earth into the middle region of the air, it comes to pass that
that vehement cold does violently harden the drops of rain passing through
them, and forces them to turn to ice: and therefore hail cannot be procreated
in Winter, the cold abiding then near the earth, not on high.

XXX Snow, is a resolution of a cloud into most small drops, and withal a
thickning of them with a gentle cold.

N. 1 It falls only in Winter: because the vapors are not elevated by the weak
rays of the Sun, so far as the middle (that is the cold) region; here then
near the earth, the resolution is made in a milder cold, and withal the
congelation is very mild. 2 The whiteness of the snow is from the conjunction
of the parts of the water: the same comes to pass in broken ice, and in the
froth of water.

XXXI Dew is a thin vapor (or else the air it self) attracted by the leaves
of plants, and with their coldness condensed into water.

For it is no where, but upon plants; and that in the heat of summer, when the
plants are colder then the air it self. Now this turns to the great benefit
of the plants; for by that means they are moistened, at the very driest time of
the year. And therefore they are produced also in those countries which know no
rain.

XXXII Frost is congealed dew.

Therefore there is none, but in winter, when cold reigns by reason of the suns
absence.

Of fiery Meteors.
Fiery meteors are those, which arise from fat fumes, kindled in the air: the
principal kinds of which are seven; a falling star: a flying dragon: lightning:
flying sparks: ignis fatuus: a torch: and ignis lambens.

XXXIII A falling star is a fat and viscous fume, kindled ( by an
antiperistasis, that is an obsistency of the cold round about) at the upper end
of it, the flame whereof following its fuel is carried downward, till it fail
also and be extinguished.

For they are to be seen every clear night, in winter more then in summer: and
you may see the like spectacle, if you kindle the fat fume of a candle put out
with another candle put to it above. This falling star is made of a gross
vapor; and by reason of its grossness hanging together like a cord.
Therefore it burns so violently, that falling upon a man it burns through his
garment. Look which way it tends with its motion, it foretells wind from that
part.

XXXIV A flying dragon, is a long, thick, fat fume, elevated in all its parts:
for which cause being kindled, it does not dart it self downward, bnt
side-wayes like a dragon, or sparkling beam.

This meteors is not so often seen: and therefore they that are ignorant of the
natural causes, think that the Devil flies.

XXXV Lightning is fire kindled within a cloud, which flying from the contrary
cold, breaks out with an horrible noise, and for the most part casts the flame
as far as the earth.

The World is the Alembick of nature, the air the cap of this Alembick: the sun
is the fire: the earth, the water, minerals, plants, etc. are the things which
being softened with this fire, exhale vapors upward perpetually. So there
ascend, salt, sulphury, nitrous, etc. vapors, which being wrapped up in
clouds, put forth various effects, for example, When sulphury exhalations are
mixed with nitrous, (the first of a most hot nature, the second most cold) they
endure one another so long, as till the sulphur takes fire. But as soon as that
is done, presently their follows the same effect as in gunpowder, (whose
composition is the same of Sulphur and Nitre) a fight, a rapture, a noise, a
violent casting forth of the matter. For thence it is that a viscous flaming
matter is cast forth, which presently inflames whatsoever it touches that is
apt to flame, and smiting into the earth, it turns to a stone, and being taken
out after a time, is called a thunderbolt.

XXXVI Flying sparks are a sulphury fume scattered into many small parts and
kindled.

It is seldom seen as likewise those that follow.

XXXVII Ignis fatuus, is a fat and viscous fume, which by reason of its
grossness, does not elevate it self far from the earth, and being kindled,
straggles here and there, leading travelers sometimes out of their way, and
into danger.

XXXVIII A torch is a fume like it, but thin, and therefore elevated upwards:
which being kindled. burns a while like a candle or lamp.

XXXIX Ignis lambens, is a fat exhalation coming from a living body, heated
with motion, and kindled at its head, or near about.

It sometimes befalls men and horses, vehemently breathing after running, that
the ardent vapors sent forth, are turned into flames.

Of appearing Meteors.
Appearing Meteors, are the images of things in clouds, variously expressed by
the incident light: of which sort there are observed seven: Chasma, Halo,
Parelius, Paraselene, Rods, Colors, the Rainbow.

XL Chasma (a pit) is the hollowness of a cloud, making show of a great hole.

It it by reason of a shadow in the midst of a cloud, the extremities whereof
are enlightened. You may see the like almost in the night by a candle, on a
wall, which has any hollownesse in it, though it be whitish.

XLI Halo (a floor) is a luminous circle, when the vapors underneath the sun,
or moon, are illustrated with the rays of the luminary.

You may see the same by night in a bath, or any other vaporous place, about a
burning candle. It is oftest seen under the moon, because the sun with his
stronger rays either penetrates or dissipates the cloud.

XLII Parelius (a false sun) is the representation of the sun upon a bright
cloud placed by its side.

After the same manner, if you stand upon the opposite bank of a river, you
shall see two suns; the one, the true one in heaven, the other reflected in the
water. There are sometimes three suns seen, if two of those clouds are at once
opposed to the sun; and our sight.

XLIII Paraselene ( a false moon) is the image of the moon expressed after the
same manner, upon a collateral cloud.

XLIV Rods, are beams of the sun covered with a cloud, yet shining through the
thin cloud, stretched toward the earth like rods.

XLV Colors are they that appear diverse in a cloud, according as it is after
several manners turned toward the sun and us; so that the cloud seems sometimes
yellow, sometimes red and fiery.

XLVI Lastly, the Rainbow is an Halo opsite to the sun or moon, in a dewy
cloud, reprepresenting a bow of diverse colors.

For there are Lunar rainbows also. Now that the Rainbow is an appearing
Meteor, is plain, if it be but from hence, that it comes and goes backwards and
forwards with the eye of the beholder; and so it appears to be in several
places, to those that behold it from several places, even as the image or
brightness of the sun, to those that walk up and down on the shore. I say that
it is a Meteor like to an Halo, because it is alike circular. And as in the
Halo, the center of the luminary, the center of the lightsome circle, and the
center of our eye are in one right line, so in a Rainbow: only that in the
first the luminary and the eye are the extremes, the Halo in the midst: here
the luminary and the bow are the extremes, and the eye in the midst. Now
there does not appear a whole circle in the rainbow, because the center of it
to us falls upon the earth, and so the upper half of the circle only appears.
If any one could elevate himself into the cloud, or above the cloud, without
doubt he would see the whole circle of the Rainbow. Hence also the reason is
evident, why at the suns rising or setting there appears a whole semicircle
elevated right up toward heaven; but when the sun is high, it appears low.
Lastly, why there can be none at all when the sun is vertical. The Lunar
Rainbowes are only pale, as an Halo: the Solar shows forth most fair clouds,
from a stronger light diversely reflected from a thousand thousand drops, (of
the melting cloud:) the colors being coordinate, as is to be seen in a
Chrystalline Prisme: and certainly the Rainbow was given even for this, that we
might learn to contemplate the nature of colors. There is also a contrairis,
namely when the rainbow reflects again upon another cloud underneath; and
therefore it is less and of a weaker color, and the order of the colors
inverted; so that the highest is lowest, as in a glass the right side answers
to the left side, etc. but of Meteors enough.

Of watery (oncretes.
XLVII Watery concretes are: a bubble, foame, ice, and several appearances in
the water: also the saltness of the sea, spring waters, and medicinal waters.

XLVIII A bubble is a thin watery skin, filled with air.

It is made when a small portion of air thrust down below the water is carried
upwards: which the water, being somewhat fatter in its superficies, suffers not
presently to fly out, but covers it with a thin skin, like a little bladder.
By how much the more oily the water is, by so much the longer the bubbles hold:
as it is to be seen in those ludicrous round bubbles, which boys are wont to
blow out of water and soap, (which fly a great while through the air
unbroken.) From the bubble we learn, to what a subtilty water may be brought.
For the skin of a bubble is a thousand times thinner then the thinnest paper.

XLIX Foame is a company of very small bubbles, raised by the sudden falling of
water into water.

The beating of the water into small parts causes whiteness in the foam; even
as ice, wax, pitch, and other things are whitish when they are beaten. The
durability also of the foam is more in an oily liquour, as in beer, etc.

L Ice is water hardened together with cold.

LI Watery impressions are images of clouds, of birds flying over, of men, of
trees, and of any things objected.

It is known, that water is the first mirror, receiving the images of all
things: which is by reason of the evennesse of its superficies. For light
colored with things falling upon the water, cannot (as it comes to pass in
another body of a rough superficies) be dispersed, but by reason of its
exceeding evennesse is entirely reflected, and presents it self whole with
that image to the eye of the beholder. This is the ground of all mirrours. But
let us come to real concretions in the water.

LII The saltness of the sea, is from the subterrane fire, which heating a
bituminous matter, spreads salt exhalations through the sea.

Saltness something bitter, with a kind of oleosity was given to the sea. 1
That the waters might not putrify. 2 For the more convenient nutriment of
fishes. 3 For strength to bear the burdens of ships. Now the sea is salt, not
(as Aristotle thought) by reason of the sun beams, extracting the thinner parts
of the waters, and scorching the rest. (For our fire would do the same, and the
sun in lakes and pooles, neither of which is done: yea, by how much the more,
salt water is heated with our fire, the salter it is; but fresh water is so
much the fresher) but by reason of the heat included within the bowels of the
earth, and of the deep; which when it cannot exhale, it scorcheth sharply the
humor that there is, so that it turns to urine: The very same we see done in
our own body (and all living creatures) For urine and sweat are alike salt.

LIII Spring waters are made of vapors condensed in the cavernes of the earth;
after the same manner, as drops are gathered together upon the covers of pots.

It is certain that under the earth there lies a great deep, Genesis 7. 11. That
is a mighty mass of waters, diffused through the hollows of the earth; which
that it joins with certain gulfes of the Ocean, this is an argument that the
depth of the sea in some places is altogether insearchable. Therefore as
vapors ascend out of the open sea into the air, which being resolved into
drops distill rain: so the subterrane waters, being attenuated by the
subterrane heat, send forth vapors, which being gathered together in the
hollowes of the earth, and collected into drops, flow out which way [passage]
is given them. And this is it which the Scripture says, All rivers enter into
the sea, and the sea runs not over: unto the place from whence the rivers
come they return, that they may flow again. Eccles. 1. v. 7. Whence it is
understood why springs yield fresh water, though they come from those bitter,
and salt waters of the sea? namely, because they come by distillation to the
spring head. For they say, that the sea water being distilled (that is resolved
first into vapors, then into drops in an Alembick) loses its saltness: by
the same reason then the deep under ground, evaporating salt waters sends
them fresh out of fountains nevertheless. And what need words? For clouds
gathered of the vapors of the sea: send down fresh showers. S^ how excellently
the truth of things agree with it self still.

LIVE Medicinal waters are made of the various tinctures of the metals and
juices of the earth, (from which they receive the virtue (...) healing and
savor.)

For example, hot waters or baths, a^ made of bitumen burning within: Therefore
they exhale sulphur manifestly; b^^ sharpish waters relish of iron, coper,
vitrio^allom, etc. of which earthly concretes it will be now time to speak.

Of earthly concretes, which are called Minerals.
LV Minerals are earthly concretes begotten of subterrane vapors; as clods,
concret juicesi metals, and stones.

These are called minerals from the Hebrew (...) and (...) as if you shonld say
from the earth. They call them also Fossiles, because they are dug: that all
these are begotten of subterrane vapors, and subterrane fire, appears by the
example of our body: wherein blood, choler, phlegm, melanlancholy, urine,
spittle, fat, flesh, veins, nerves, membranes, gristles, bone, etc. yea, the
stone and gravel, are made of the vapors of food concocted and digested as:
shall be seen hereafter. Now as these parts of ours are formed within the body
by the heat included; so minerals are generated in the bowels of the earth, not
elsewhere. For the earth with its most deep passages and veins winding every
way, where infinite vapors are generated, and perpetually distilled in a
thousand fashions, is that great workhouse of God, wherein, for the space of
so many ages, such things are wrought, as neither art can imitate, nor wit well
find out.

LVI Clods are dug earths, infected only with fatness, or some color, and
apt to be soaked, as 1 Clay. 2 Marle. 3 Chalk. 4 Red earth. 5 Paintings, or
painters colors, ( as lake, vermilion, oker, azure, or blew, verdigrease.) 6
Fullers earth in Greek, (...). 7 Medicinal earth, as sealed earth, Lemnian,
Armenian, Samian, etc.

These colors seem to be nothing else, but the soot of the subterrane fumes,
variously distilled; and those earths, nothing else but a various mixture of
liquors distilled also variously, and brought to such or such a quality.

LVII Concrete juices, are fossiles endued with a savor, or some sharp virtue,
apt to be dissolved, or kindled; as sulphur, niter, salt, allome, vitriol,
arsenick, (which painters call orpiment) antimonie or stibium, and such like.

N. Those juices seem to be nothing else but the cream of subterrane liquors
variously distilled.

LVIII Metals are watery fossiles, apt to be melted, cast, and hammered: as
gold, silver, brass, (or copper) iron, tin, lead, quicksilver.

N. 1. That they are progenerated of fire, this is enough to testify, that
they are often times taken hot out of the veins, so that the touch will not
endure them. For in winter when all herbs are white with frost, those which
grow over the veins, admit of no frost, because of the hot exhalation within
hindering concretion, so also trees, by the blewnesse of their leaves, show the
veins of metals.

2 Now that metals are made of vapors, this is an argument that they are wont
also to be procreated in the very clouds. For examples are not unknown, even in
our age of bodies of brass, or iron, of no small weight falling from heaven.

3 That metals are made of watery vapors their liquabilitie shows; now they
are coagulated by virtue of salt. Therefore the dross of iron is salt and
bitter.

4 Quicksilver alone is always liquid, never consistent; as a perpetual
witness of the watery nature of metals. Other metals swim upon it, because it
has the most compacted substance of all, gold only excepted: which therefore
it receives only into it self.

5 Whether metals differ in their species, or only in degree of purity and
hardness, and in heat, we leave now in suspense.

LIX Stones are earthly fossiles, hardly compacted, apt only to be broken in
pieces.

That stones are earth coagulated with water and fire, bricks and pots teach
us; for here art imitates nature. Yet the several forms of stones show, that
they are not earth simply concrete, but a mass concrete of diverse most gross
earthly vapors, with a various temperature of humors.

LX Stones are either vulgar, or precious.

LXI A vulgar stone is earth most hardly compacted: the principal kinds of
which are seven. The gravel stone, the millstone, the pumice-stone, the flint,
(to which I refer the Smiris wherewith glass is cut, and iron polished the
whetstone, and the touch stone, (or Lapis lydius) the marble and the loadstone.

N. Every kind have their differences again.

2 A great stone is called saxum or a rock, a little one, gravel and sand.

3 Most mountains are stony, (and yield metals;) because the subterrane fire
(on the third day of the creation) swelling the earth here made it self many
channels and passages, breathing through which, it does variously exhale, melt,
mix and boil the matter: which is not done so copiously under plains.

LXII Precious stones are are called gems, because they are the gums of stones
sweating in the bowels of the earth.

Hence comes their clearness and brightness, that is to say, from their most
thin^ and accurate straining, even more then in the gums of trees; for wood
has loose^ pores then stones.

LXIII All gems are transparent, and pellucid: but some only transparant, as
these three; the Diamond, the Crystal, the Beryll^ Others colored with all,
and those^ (according to the diversity of their colors) of sve^^ sorts.

1 Bright and burning; the Carbuncle the Chalcedon, the Chrysolite.

2 Yellow; the Jacinth and Topaze.

3 Green; the Emerald, and the Turquois.

4 Red or purple: the Rubie and the Granate: but the Carnelous and the Onyx are
more pale.

5 Skie-coloured; the Saphir, and the Amethyst,

6 Black; the Morion

7 Changeable; as the Jasper, the Agat, the Chrysoprase.

N. 1. That Crystal is never found unless it be Hexagonall, which is the
miracle of nature. And that it is grows in arched cells under ground, dry and
closed, where the wind enters not for some years, has been experienced at
Kings Itradeck in Bohemia, Anno 1618. For elegant chrystals were found hanging
from the stones of the arches, like Isicles of an exact Hexagonall form, but
in the silver mines of Catteberge, there are found far more. Of other gems we
have nothing to say in particular.

N. 2. Stones that are wont to grow in some living creatures, are usually
reckoned amongst precious stones: as the pearl, in sea shell fishes: the
Bezoar. the Chelidonius, the Alectorius, the Bufonites, etc. also Coral, and
Amber. But these two, are to be referred rather to the following chapter.

LXIV The virtue which is in minerals, is called their natural spirit: of
which there are so many forms, as there are species of minerals.

For there is one spirit of salt, another, of vitrioll, loadstone, and iron,
etc. which distillers know how to extract.

CHAP. IX.
Of Plants.
THus much of Concretes: here follow Plants which beside their figure have life.

1 A plant is a vital concrete, growing out of the earth: as a tree and an
herb.

Some concretes (stars, meteors, minerals,) want life, and lie or tarry where
they were concrete: but plants endued with an inward vigor, break out of the
earth, and spread themselves in plano: whence also they were called plants.

II Plants are generated, both to be an ornament to the earth, and to yield
nourishment, medicine, and other uses to living creatures.

For what a sad face the earth would have if it were not clothed every year
with those diverse colored tapistries of herbs, we have sufficient experience
in Winter, and whence should living creatures have food, medicines, and
pleasures, if we were destitute of the roots, leaves, seeds and fruits of
plants? not to speak of the commodity of shade, and of the infinite uses of
wood.

III The essential parts of a plant are, the root, the trunk ( or stalk) and
the branches or leaves.

N. W. The Elements, vapors, concrete things, consisted only of similar parts:
for every part and particle of water, earth, vapor, a cloud, iron, etc. is
called, and is water, earth, vapor, a cloud, iron, etc. But more perfect
bodies, (of plants and living creatures) do consist of dissimular parts that is
members) every one of which has both its office, and its name, differing from
the rest. For example. In a plant, the root is the part sticking in the ground,
and sucking in the juice of the earth: the truk, (or stalks) attracting the
juice, concocting it: and sending it to the upper parts: the boughs and
branches, are twigs, distributing the juice yet better concocted, to make seed
and fruit: the leaves are the coverings of the fruits and boughs.

IV The Spirit of a plant is called a vegetable, or vital spirit; which puts
forth its virtue three manner of ways; in nutrition, augmentation, and
generation.

For here that universal spirit, (the spirit of life,) begins more manifestly
to put forth its virtue, preparing a portion of matter so softly to its turn,
that it may have it tractable to perform the offices of life: and is therefore
called vital in plants, namely, because of its more manifest tokens and
effects of life. They call it also the vegetative soul

V Nutrition is an inbred virtue in a plant, whereby sucking in juice fit for
it, changes it into its own substance.

For because the encompassing air dries up every body, and the heat included in
a living body does also feed upon the inward moisture; it were impossible that
a plant should not presently fade away, unless new matter and vigor were
continually supplied with fresh nourishment, to make up that which is lost. and
to this end every plant has a body, either hollow, or else pithy, and porous,
that the nourishing vapor may pass through and irrigate all the parts; yea
whatsoever is in a plant, even the very hair or down, is hollow and porous.
Therefore in a man, the head is eased, when the hair is cut; because the
fuliginous vapors of the brain, or the superfluities under the skin, do the
more easily evaporate. For the same cause every plant rests upon its root, that
sucking the moisture of the earth through the strings thereof it may be
nourished: therefore it perishes when it is plucked up. the humor then, or fat
juice of the earth, is a fit nourishment for plants: not dry earth, because it
cannot pass through the strings and pores of a plant; nor water alone, because
it cannot be concrete into a solid body. Therefore the moisture of the earth
which is a mixture of Mercury, sulphur and salt nourishes plants

VI Augmentation is a virtue of a plant, whereby it increases also by
nourishing it self, which we call by a common term growing.

It is pleasant to contemplate what it is to grow, and how it is done Now it is
easily found out by the doctrine of motions already delivered. For first, when
the spirit included in the seed, begins to diffuse it self, and to swell by
reason of the heat that is raised, the thin shell of the seed must of necessity
break: by the motion of cession. and because every body is moved toward a
greater company of its connaturals, that vapor coming forth when the seed is
warmed, tends toward heaven; but because the matter of the seed is fat and
glutinous, the vapor being infolded therein carries it upwards with it, and
brings it forth out of the earth, and this is the original of the stump and
boughs now because that the outside of the plant hinders the vapors
ascending, there is a strife, and heat is raised, whereby the superficies of
the small body is by little and little mollified, that it may yield and rise
up. and this is done every day when the Sun is hot: but the tender parts which
grow up are condensed and made solid with the cold of the night: by which
successions of day and night the plants take increase, all spring and summer
long. Now look how much moisture is every day elevated upward by the stump, so
much again succeeds it by the motion of continuitie. least there should be a
vacuum. but because every body loves an aquilibrium, and plants own their
center in the joint of the stump and root, it comes to pass by the motion of
libration, that as much as the boughs spread themselves upwards, so much the
roots spread downwards or sidewayes.

Now there is a question, why when a leaf or a bough is plucked off, yea when
the stock is cut asunder, the spirit does not exhal^, but contains it self,
und grows stills? Answer 1 Because the spirit has its proper seat fixed in
the root, which it does not forsake, though a passage be open through a wound
received: nay more, fearing discontinuity, it gathers and conglobates it self,
when it perceives an opening and danger of dissipation. 2 Because the wound is
presently overspread with the moisture of the plant, which being hardened with
the outward cold, covers the wound as it were with a crust, and prohibits a
total expiration.

VII. Generation is a virtue of a plant, whereby it gathers together and
conglobates its spirit into a certain place of it; and makes a seed or kernel,
(from which the like plant may afterward grow.)

The spirit of the plant foreseeing as it were, that it shall not always have
matter at command, which it may vegetate, turns but a part of it self into the
nourishment of the plant, and gathers together the rest into a certain place
(usually in the tops of plants) and makes a seed or kernel. Now the seed
(kernel or grain) is nothing else, but the image of the whole plant, gathered
together into a very small part of the matter; from whence, if need be, the
same plant may be produced again: as we see done. N. W. That herbs are bread
nevertheless without seed, by virtue of the spirit infused into the elements.
1 The command of God proves, Genesis 1. v. 11. Let the earth bring forth, etc.
which is yet in force. 2 Experience. For if you uncover the earth beneath all
roots and seeds, yet in the years following when it has been somewhat often
watered with rain water, you shall see it bud forth. which is a notable
argument of the spirits being diffused every where, but especially descending
with the Sun and rain.

VIII. The outer, and inner bark, leaves, shells, down, flowers, prickles,
etc. are integrating parts of plants: serving to defend them, and preserve
their seeds from the injury of heat and cold.

IX. The kernels are for the most part encompassed with a pulp for their
thinner nourishment, and to defend them from injury, but yet this pulp when it
is come to ripeness, serves for food to living creatures; as it is to be seen
in Apples, Pears, Cherries, Plummes, etc.

X. The proprieties of plants are, variety, heat, and tenacity of their spirit.

XI. The variety of plants is so great, that the number can scarce be counted
by any means.

The natural spirit in meteors and minerals makes certain species, and those
easy to be counted, (as we see;) but the vital spirit does so diffuse it
self, that the industry of no man is yet sufficient, to collect the the
species of herbs, and trees.

XII. The chief kinds of plants are herbs, trees, shrubs.

XIII. An herb is, that which grows and dies every year

XIV. A tree is, that which rising up on high, grows to wood, and continues
many years.

XV. A shrub is of a middle nature; as the alder, the vine.

N. W. 1. Some trees live for many ages: to wit, such as have a compacted and
glutinous substance, as the oak, the pine, etc. vvatery and thin plants, do
soon grow and soon wither; as the sallow, etc. 2 Some lose their leaves every
year, namely, those that have a vvatery juice: others keep them as trees of a
rozenous nature. 3 Trees are either fruitful or barren: the first bear either
Apples or Nuts, or fruit like unto Pine Apples, or Berries. 4 Porositie and
airynesse is given to the vvood of trees, by reason of which they do not sink,
and that. 1 That they might take fire. 2 That they might the more easily be
transported any vvhither through rivers. 3 That ships might be made of them.
Also clamminesse or indissipability was given them, that they might serve for
the building of houses: for which end also their tallness serves.

Other differences of plants may be seen else where.

XVI. All plants are hot by nature; but in proportion to our heat, some are
called cold.

For generation is not done but by heat; but that which is below the degree of
our heat, seems cold to us. As for Hemlock, Opium, etc. they do not kill with
cold, but with the viscosity of their vapors, which fill up the cavities of
the brains, stop the Nerves, and so suffocate the spirit: the same may be said
of all poisonous things.

XVII Vital spirit (as also natural) holds so fast to its matter, that it
scarce ever forsakes it.

This is demonstrated (besides that we see the spirit every year to be driven
by the cold of winter out of the stocks, and to be hidden in the root: and to
put forth it self again at the beginning of the spring) by four examples.

1 That how ever the matter of fruits or herbs be vexed, yet the spirit
conteins it self: as it is to be seen in things, smoaked, tosted, roasted,
soaked, pulverized, etc. which retein their virtue.

2 That being driven out of the better part of the matter, by the force of
fire, yet it sticks in the portion that is left, and there it is congregated,
and inspissated; so that it suffers it self to be thrust together into a drop,
or a little poulder, rather then forsake the matter: as it appears in distilled
waters, which therefore they call spirits.

3 That when its matter is somewhat often distilled and transfused into diverse
forms through diverse Alembicks, yet it does uot fly away. For example, when a
goat or a cow eats a purging herb, and the nurse drinks her milk (or the whey
of her milk) it comes so to pass, that the infant that sucks her will be purged.

4 And which is more, it does not only retein a virtue of operating: but also
of augmenting it self, and forming a creature of its kind: which may be shown
by two examples. Sennertus relates, that Hieremy Cornarius caused a water to be
distilled in June, Anno 1608. and that in the month of November a little plant
of that kind was found at the bottom of the glass, in all points perfect. But
Quercetanus writes that he knew, A Polonian Physician, that knew how to
pulverise plants so artificially that the poulder as often as he listed would
produce the plant. For if any one desired to have a rose or a poppy showed him,
he held the poulder of a rose or a poppy enclosed in a glass over the candle
that it might grow hot at the bottom; which done, the poulder by little and
little raised it self up into the shape of that plant, and grew, and
represented the shape of the plant, so that one would have thought that it had
been corporeal: but when the vessel was cold sunk again into poulder. Who
sees not here that the spirits are the formers of plants? who sees not that
they inhere so fast in their matter, that they can as it were raise it again
after it is dead? who sees not that the spirit of a mineral or a plant is
really preserved in the form of a little water, oil, or poulder? Thus the
eternal truth of that saying is maintained. And the Spirit of God moved it
self upon the waters. As for the spirit of a living creature, whither it may
be preserved after that manner, and raised up to inform a new body, we leave it
to be thought of: purposing nevertheless to speak something of it toward the
end of the next Chapter.

CHAP. X.
Of living creatures.
THus much of plants; here follow living creatures.

I A living creature is a moving plant, endued with sense: as a worm, a fish, a
bird, a beast.

For if a stone or an oak could move it self freely, or had sense, it would be
a living creature also.

II The principal difference betwixt a living creature and a plant, is (...),
that is a free moving of it self to and fro.

For the better to express the power of the spirit of life, Gods Vicar in
creatures, it was needful that such bodies should be produced, which that
spirit inhabiting, might have obedient unto all actions. Now seeing that the
ground of action is motion, bodies were to be framed, which might perform a
free motion, and these are called Animalia or Animantia, living creatures, from
the soul which powerfully evidences life in them. 2 Therefore mobility is in
all living creatures, but after diverse manners. For some move only by opening
and shutting, not stirring out of their place; as oisters and cockles. Others
creep by little and little, as snailes, earth-wormes, and other worms: some
have a long body which creeps with winding it self about, as snakes: some have
feet given them, as lizards, beasts, birds: but these last have wings also to
fly through the air. Which fishes do imitate in the water, performing their
motion by swimming.

III The moving principle in a living creature is the vital soul: which is
nothing else but the spirit of life, thick and strong, mightily filling, and
powerfully governing the bodies which it inhabiteth.

IV Now because a voluntary and a light motion cannot be performed, but in a
subtle matter, living creatures have bodies given them far more tender then
plants, but far more compound. For they consist of spirit, flesh, blood,
membranes, veins, nerves, gristles, and lastly bones, as it were props and
pillars, lest the frame should fall.

Understand this in perfect living creatures. For more imperfect living
creatures in which we contemplate only the rudiments of nature, have neither
bones, nor flesh, nor blood, nor veins: but only a white humor, covered with
a skin or crust, as it were with a sheath, which the spirit included does stir
or move; as it appears in worms, snails, oisters, etc. But to perfect living
creatures. 1 That they might have a more subtle spirit, blood and brains were
given. 2 And that these might not be dissipated, they had vessels and channels
given them, veins, arteries, nerves, 3 That a living creature might be
erected, bones were given him. 4 And left the bones, as also the veins,
arteries, nerves, should easily be hurt, all was covered either with fat or
flesh. 5 And that the members might move, tendons and muscles were interwoven
throughout. 6 And least in moving the bone, the bones should wear one against
another, and cause pain in the living creature; a gristle which is a softer
substance, being as it were half flesh, was put between the joints. 7 And
lastly; that the frame might hang firmly together in its composure, it was
compassed with a hide, or skin, as also all the members with their membranes.
Therefore a living creature consists of more similar parts then a plant: but of
far more dissimular parts or members: of which it follows.

V The bodies of living creatures were furnished with many members: as with
diverse organs for diverse actions. The head indeed is the principal member of
a living creature, wherein the whole spirit has its residence, and shows all
its force: but because a living creature was intended for diverse actions, it
had need of besides.

1 Vivifying organs, supplying the living creature with heat, life, and motion:
that is, brains and heart.

2 Moving organs, that is, feet, wings, feathers, etc.

3 And left one thing should run against another, or fall into precipices, it
was necessary to furnish them with sight; also with a quick hearing and touch.

Lastly, because the earth was not to supply nutriment immediately to a living
creature, (as to a plant fixed in the earth) but it was left them to seek:
there was need of smelling and tasting, that they might know what was
convenient to their nature. Hence eyes, ears, nostrils, etc.

4 Now because a living creature, was not to be fixed in the ground with a
root, because of his free motion, more perfect organs of nutrition were
requisite: for that cause there was given him a mouth, teeth, a stomach, a
liver, a heart, veins, etc.

5 And because they were not to spring out of the earth as plants, by reason of
the same motion to and fro. Diverse Sexes were given them to multiply
themselves, and distinct genitall members.

6 And because living creatures were to be always conversant with others of
their own, or of a diverse kind, they had need of some mutual token, even in
the dark: they had a tongue given them to form sounds.

7 Lastly, because it could not be, but that a living creature should sometimes
meet with contraries, they had as it were shields and arms given them. Hares,
bristles, scales, shells, feathers: likewise horns, claws, teeth, hoofs, etc.

VI Therefore the whole treatise concerning a living creature, is finished in
the explication I Of the nutritive faculty. II Of the vital. III Of the
sensitive. IV Of the loco-motive. V Of the enuntiative. VI Of the defensive.
VII And lastly, of the generative.

For he that knows these seven, knows the whole mystery of nature in living
creatnres. For whatsoever is in the body of a living creature, serves those
faculties: if it do not serve them, it is in vain, and makes a monster. It is
to be observed also that the first three faculties are governed by so many
spirits. The nutritive faculty by the natural spirit, the vital by the spirit
of life, the sensitive by the animal spirit: the other four by those three
spirits jointly.

Of the nutritive Faculty.
VII Every living creature stands in need of daily food, to repair that which
perishes of the substance every day.

For life consists in heat. And heat, being that it is fire, wants fuel: which
is moist, spirituous, and fat matter. Heat in a living creature being destitute
of this, sets upon the solid parts, and feeds on them. And hence it is that a
living creature, as well as a plant, without nourishment pines away, and dies.
But if it be sparingly fed, it therefore falls away, because the heat feeds
upon the very substance of the flesh.

VIII That nourishment is convenient for a living creature, which supplies it
with a spirit like its own spirit.

For seeing that life is from the spirit, the matter of it self does not
nourish life, but a spirituous matter. And indeed the spirit of the nourishment
must needs be like the spirit of the living creature. Therefore we are not
nourished with the elements, as plants are; for as much as they have only a
natural, not a vital spirit; but we are nourished with plants, or with the
flesh of other ^iving creatures, because those afford a vital spirit. Nay
further, there is a particular proportion of spirits, by reason of which a
^orse chooses oats, a swine barley, a wolf flesh, etc. Nay, an hog has an
appetite to man's excrements also, because it yet finds parts convenient for
it.

IX Nourishment turns into the substance ^f that which is nourished.

That appears 1 because he that feeds on dry meats, is dry of complexion: he
that feeds on moist, is phlegmatic, etc. 2 because, for the most part a man
reteins the qualities of those living creatures on whose flesh he feeds, as he
that feeds on beef is strong; he that feeds on venison, is nimble, etc. If any
one have the brains of a cat o^ a wolf given him to eat, he partakes the
fantasies of those living creatures, etc.

X Nutriment must needs be assimilated that it may turn into the substance of a
living creature.

For a thing is neither applied well, no cohereth commodiously with that which
is unlike to it; much less that one should turn it into the other. Therefore
flesh (...) bone is not immediately made of meat (...) drink: but by many
gradations, as it sha^ appear.

XI Assimulation is made by the transmitation of the nourishment taken so often
iterat^ till it come to the liknesse of the substance no^^rished.

It is well known out of the Metaphysick^ that all action tends to this, that
the Pa^^^ent may become like to the Agent, which is every where evident in
natural things but especially in the nourishment of bodies. For whatsoever is
taken in, of whatsoever color or quality, is wrought so^^ length, that it
becomes like to that which is nourished, and is applied to its substance: which
should be diligently marked in that which follows.

XII The principal transmutation of the nourishment, is by progeneration of
the four vital humors, blood, phlegm, yellow choler, and black.

For the nourishment received, being that it is tempered together (as all the
bodies of the world are) of the four elements, is resolved in the body of a
living creature into four again; the fattest part of it is turned into blood: a
part into spittle, or phlegm, a part into yellow choler, or choler; a part into
black choler, or melancholy: melancholy by its grossness represents the
earth: phlegm, water: blood, air: choler, fire. But they differ in color and
in savor; for melancholy is black and bitter; phlegm, white and without taste:
blood, red and sweet: choler, yellow and bitter. Now it is to be noted, that
amongst these four, blood is most copiously generated, because it conteins the
very substance of the nourishment: to which yellow choler adds only a more
easy penetrating through all: but black choler fixes it again, and applies
it to the members: Lastly, phlegm tempers the acrimony of them both, lest they
should corrode with penetrating and fixing, and gently agglutinates the blood
to the members: And hence it is that Physicians also with the vulgar speak often
of the blood, as if it were the only food of life.

XIII The progeneration of vital humors is done by concoction.

For concoction does alter the matter by the force of heat.

XIV Concoction in a living creature is done after the same manner as
distillation in Alembicks: namely, by heating of the matter, and resolution of
it into vapors, and mixing the said vapors together, and by a new coagulation
of them again.

For every living body is a very alembick, full of perpetual heat and vapors.
For life is heat: and heat cannot but boil the matter that is put in, and by
attenuation, turn it into vapors.

XV Now in every concoction, there is a separation of the profitable parts from
the unprofitable: the first are digested and assimilated, the other are voided
and streined forth.

So in Alembicks, the more subtle and profitable parts, (that is the more fat
and spirituous) being resolved into vapor are gathered again into drops: and
into a thick substance: but the more gross and impure parts, called the dregs
and excrements, sink down, and are afterward cast out.

XVI Every concoction leaves behind it unprofitable dregs; which are called
excrements and dross.

Thus we see it come to pass in the decoction of metals. Now we must note that
plants make little or no excrement: because they are nourished with a simple
and uniform juice, which goes all of it into their nature: or if any thing
remain, it sweats forth in gum. But living creatures; because they consist of
very dissimular parts, have need of a compound nutriment, that is solid and
soft, dry and moist, hot and cold, etc. that so the more solid parts may have
nutriment also whence by assimulation evey part draws that which will profit
its self, the rest must of necessity be streined out. Another reason is
because plants are sustained with a little spirit, and that which does not
evaporate: but living creatures are full of spirit, (for otherwise so gross a
frame could not be sustained and weilded) and that is continually attenuated
and spent. Therefore they have need of more spirit then matter for their
nutriment: and when that is extracted out of the spirituous parts, they void
forth the rest.

XVII The principal concoction in a living creature is threefold,
Chylification, Sanguification, and Membrification.

The first is made in the stomach: the second in the liver: and the last in all
the members.

XVIII Every one of these concoctions has three sorts of vessels. 1 of
ingestion. 2 of digestion. 3 of egestion.

XIX The vessels of Chylification; were 1 the mouth, and the throat. 2 the
stomach or ventricle. 3 the guts and the arse-hole.

For the food being received at the mouth, is chewed with the teeth, or jaws,
and passed through the throat. It is boiled in the stomach as it were in a
close Alembick for some hours. And from thence by evaporation it passes into
the entrals (for the mouth of the ventricle toward the throat is shut up) and
becomes Chylus, that is, a certain ferment like pap, or white broth. For it
takes a white color from the stomach by assimilation. The more subtle parts of
this Chyle are attracted to the liver, as a matter fit for blood: but the
excrements of this first concoction, are thick dregs, which are driven out by
the guts and the back part, not by the simple motion of Cession, but by the
motion of Antipathy, for the natural spirits placed in the fibers of the guts,
sucking forth that which is profitable, but turning themselves away from that
which is unprofitable, and hateful to them, contract the nerves of the guts,
and thrust forward those burdens toward the passage.

XX The vessels of Sanguification, are 1 the Mesenterie. 2 the Liver. 3 the
Vreteres, the spleen, and the gall.

For the Mesenterie encompassing the entrals with its strings (which they call
the Mesaraicall veins) sucks the best part of the Chylus out of the entrals;
and carries them to the liver by the Vena Porta. Now the liver concocts and
separates that liquour again, for it assimilates the sweeter parts in color to
it self, and turns them to blood, swelling with natural spirit: with which
nevertheless there is phlegm and yellow choler, and black mixed. The excrement
of this second concoction is urine: namely, a wheaie and salt humor which
flows from the liver by the ureteres to the bladder; whence by the channel
of the genitall member it is sent forth.

But because the 2d. concoction ought to be far more subtle then the first, it
is not sufficient that the blood is purged from its serosity. But both kinds of
choler and phlegm must of necessity also be purged from redundancy: the spleen
therefore by sympathy attracts to it self whatsoever it perceives, that is
too gross and earthy in the blood, and by little veins sends it again into the
entrals, and by that means disburdens it self of that dreggy humor; and last
of all the gall attracteth those parts of the blood that are too sharp and
fiery, (whose little bag hangs at the liver) and by strings sends them again
mixed into the entrals; whence the bitterness and ill sent of dung.

XXI The vessels of membrification, are 1 veins. 2 every particular member. 3
pores.

For the veins proceeding from the liver spread themselves over all the parts
of the body like boughs, and sending forth little branches, every way end in
strings that are most tenacious; from which every member apart sucketh, and by
a slow agglutination assimilates it to it self, so that the blood flowing into
the flesh, becomes flesh, that in the bones turns into bone; in a gristle, to a
gristle; in the brain, to brains; just after the same manner as the juice of a
tree is changed into wood, bark, pith, leaves, fruits, by mere assimilation.
The excrements of this third most subtle concoction are subtle also, namely
sweat and vapor, which always breaths out through the pores. If any more
gross humor remains (especially after the first and second concoction not
well made) it breeds scabs; or ulcers, or the dropsy.

XXII For the furthering of nourishment there is a spur added, that is
appetite, or hunger, and thirst: which are nothing but a vellication of the
fibers of the stomach, arising from the sharp sucking of the Chylus.

For the members being destitute of the juice, wherewith they are watered,
solicit the veins of blood: and the veins (by the motion of continuity)
solicit the liver; the liver, the Mesenterie; that the entrals; the entrals
the stomach: which, if it have nothing to afford, contracts and wrinkles it
self: and the strings of it are sucked dry, from whence proceeds first a
certain titillation, (and that we call appetite simply) and afterward pain (and
this we call hunger) and if solid meat be taken, but dry, because coction, or
vaporation, cannot be made by reason of dryness, there is a desire that
moisture should be poured on, and this we call thirst. It appears then why
motion provokes appetite? and why the idle have but little appetite, etc.

XXIII The whole body is nourished at once together, by the motion of libration.

To wit, after the same manner, as the root in a plant does equally nourish
both it self, and the stock, and all the boughs. Therefore no member
nourishes it self alone, but others with it self, and so all preserved.
Otherwise, if any member rob the rest of their nourishment; or again refuses
it, there follows a distemperature of the whole body, and by and by
corruption, at length death.

XXIV A living creature being (...) nourished, is not only vegetuted, but also
(as long as his members are soft and extensive,) augmented, the superficies of
the members, yielding by little and little, and extending it self; but as soon
as the members are hardened (after youth;) the living creature cease to grow:
yet goes forward in solidity and strength, so long as the three concoctions are
rightly made. But when the vessels of the concoctions begin to dry up also; the
living creatures begins to wither away, and life grows feeble, till it fail,
and be extinguished

Of the vital faculty.
XXV Life in a living creature, is such a mixture of the spirits with the blood
and members, that they are all warm, have sense, and move themselves.

Therefore the life of living creatures consists in heat, sense, and motion;
and it is plain: for if any creature has neither motion, nor sense, nor heat,
it lives not.

XXVI Therefore every living creature is full of heat, sometimes stronger, and
sometimes weaker.

For every living creature is nourished How it appears out of that which went
before, the nourishment is not made but by concoction: but reason teaches that
concoction is not made but by heat and fire. It comes therefore to be
explained, whence a living creature has heat and fire? and by what means it is
kindled, kept alive, and extinguished? which the two following Aphorisms shall
teach.

XXVII The heart is the forge of heat in a living creature, burning with a
perpetual fire, and begetting a little flame called the spirit of life; which
it communicates also to the whole body.

Hence the heart is said commonly, to be the first that lives, the last that
dies.

XXVIII The vital spirit in the heart, has for its matter blood; for
bellows, the lungs: for channels, by which it communicates it self to the
whole body, the arteries.

Our hearth fire has need of three things, 1 matter or fuel, and that fat. 2
of blowing or fanning, whereby the force of it is stirred up. 3 free
transpiration whereby it may diffuse it self; the same three the maker of all
things, has ordained to be in every living creature. For the heart seated a
little above the liver, drinks in a most pure portion of blood, by a branch
of the veins: which being that it is spirituous and oily, conceives a most soft
flame; and left this should be extinguished, there lies near to the heart the
lungs, which like bellows dilating and contracting it self, blows upon and
fans that fire of the heart perpetually, to prevent suffocation: Now being that
that inflammation of the heart, is not without fume or vapor (though very thin
the said lungs by the same continual inspiration exhaleth those vapors
through the throat; and drawing in cooler air instead thereof, does so
temperate the flame of the heat, whence the necessity of breathing appears, and
why a living creature is presently suffocated if respiration be denied it. And
that flame, or attenuated, and most hot blood, is called the spirit of life;
which diffusing it self through the arteries, (that accompany the veins every
way) cherishes the heat both of the blood (that is in the veins) and all the
members throughout the whole body. Now because it were dangerous to have this
vital spirit destroyed, the arteries are hid below the veins, only in two or
three places, they stand forth a little: that, so the beating of that spirit,
(as well as of the heart it self, when the hand is laid upon the breast) may
be noted, and thence the state of the heart may be known.

Of the sensitive faculty.
XXIX Sense in a living creature is the perception of those things that are
done within and without the living creature,

XXX That perception is done by virtue of a living spirit; which, being that it
is most subtle in a living creature, is called the Animal spirit.

XXXI That perceptive virtue consists in the tenderness of the animal spirit:
for because it is presently affected, with whatsoever thing it be wherewith it
is touched.

For all sensation is by passion; as shall appear hereafter.

XXXII The seat and shop of the animal spirits is the brain.

For in the brain, there is not only greatest store of that spirit residing,
but also the whole animal spirit is there progenerated.

XXXIII The animal spirits are begotten in the brain, that is in blood and
vital spirit. 2 purified with the fanning of respiration. 3 communicated to
the whole body by Nerves. The excrements of the brain are cast forth by the
nostrils ears, and eyes (that is by phlegm and ^ears.)

For the strings of the veins and arteries, running forth into the brains,
instill blood and vital spirit into them. And the blood, that turns into the
substance of the brains by assimilation: but the vital spirit, being condensed
by the coldness of the brain, is turned into the Animal spirit: which the
air, drawn in by inspiration, and getting into the brain through the
hollownesse of the nostrils, and of the palate, does so purify with fanning
every moment, that though it be something cold, yet it is most moveable, and
runs through the nerves with inexplicable celerity. Now the Nerves are,
branches or channels, descending from the brain through the body. For the
marrow of the back bone, is extended from the brain all along the back of every
living creature: and from thence diverse little branches run forth, conveying
the animal spirit, the architect of sense and motion, to all the members in
the whole body.

XXXIV To know the nature of the senses three things are pertinent, 1 the
things requisite. 2 the manner. 3 the effect.

XXXV The things requisite are 1 an object. 2 an organ. 3 a medium to conjoyn
them. Or Sensile, Sensorium, and the Copula.

XXXVI Objects are sensible qualities inhering in bodies; Color, Sound,
Savor, Tangor.

For nothing is seen, touched, etc. of it self, but by accidents wherewith it
is clothed. And if we would be accurate Philosophers, N. W. of the three
principles of things, only light or fire is preceptible. For matter and spirit
are of themselves insensible: the light then tempered with darkness, makes the
matter visible. Motion, (which is from light) makes a sound; but heat (which is
from motion) stirs up and temperates the rest of the qualities, odours,
savours, tangors.

XXXVII The organs of the senses are parts of the body in which the animal
spirit receives the objects that present themselves; namely, the eye, the ear,
the nostrils, the tongue, and all that is nervie.

Nothing in all nature acts without organs: therefore the animal spirit cannot
do it neither.

XXXVIII The medium of conjoyning them, is that which brings the object into
the organ: in sight, the light; in hearing, the air moved with breaking: in
smells, the air vapouring: in taste, the water melting: in touch, the quality it
self inhering in the matter.

XXXIX The manner of sensation is the contact of the Organ with the object,
passion, and action.

There is but one sense to speak generally, and that is the Touch. For nothing
can be perceived, but what touches us either at hand, or at a distance. There
is no sense at all of things absent.

XL Therefore in every sensation the Animal spirit suffers by the thing
sensible.

That there is no sensation but by passion is too evident. For we do not
perceive heat or cold, unless we be hot or cold; nor sweet and bitter, unless
we become sweet or bitter; nor color, unless we be colored therewith. Our
spirit, I say, residing in the organs, is touched and affected. Therefore those
things which are like us, are not perceived: as heat like our heat, does not
affect us. But we must observe that the Organs, that they may perceive any
qualities of the objects, want qualities of themselves; as the apple of the
eye, color; the tongue, savor; etc.

XLI Yet in every sensation the animal spirit does reach upon the thing
sensible: namely, in receiving, speculating, and laying up its species.

For the Animal spirit resident in the brain, what ever sensorie it perceives
to be affected, conveys it self thither in a moment to know what it is: and
having perceived it, returns forth with, and carries back the image of that
thing with it; to the center of its workhouse, and there contemplates it, what
it is, and of what sort: and afterward lays it up for future uses, hence the
Ancients made three inward senses.

1 The common sense, or attention.

2 The Fantasy, or imagination.

3 The memory, or recordation. But these are not really distinct: but only
three distinct internal operations of the same spirit. Now that those inward
senses are in brutes, it appears, 1 Because if they do not give heed, many
things may and do usually slip by their ears, eyes, and nostrils. 2 Because
they are endued with the faculty of imagining or judging. For does not a dog
barking at a stranger, distinguish betwixt those whom he knows, and strangers?
yea sometimes a dog or a horse, etc. starts also out of his sleep: which cannot
be but by reason of some dream. And what is a dream but an imagination? 3
Because they remember also, for a dog that has been once beaten with a
cudgel, fears the like at the sight of every staff, or gesture, etc. And
therefore it is certain, that every living creature, even flies and worms, do
imagine. But of the inward senses, more at large, and more distinctly in the
Chapter following.

XLII The effect of sensation is pleasure, or grief.

Pleasure, if the sense be affected gently and easily with a thing agreeable
thereto, with titillation; grief, if with a thing that is contrary to it, or
suddenly with hurt to the Organ.

XLIII And that the Animal spirit always occupied in the actions of sense,
may sometimes rest, and be refresbed, sleep was given to a living creature;
which is a gathering together of the animal spirits to the center of the
brain, and a stopping of the Organs in the mean time, with the vapors
ascending out of the ventricle.

Hence it appears. 1 Why sleep most usually comes upon a man after meat? or
else after weariness, when the members being chafed do exhale vapors? 2 Why
careful thoughts disturb sleep? that is, because that when the spirit is
stirred to and fro, it cannot be gathered together, and sit still. 3 What it is
to watch, and how it is done? namely, when the spirit being strengthened in it
self, scatters the little cloud of vapors already attenuated, and betakes it
self to its Organs. 4 Why too much watching is hurtful? because the sprits
are too much wearied, weakened, consumed, etc.

Thus much of the Senses in general, something is to be said also of every one
in particular.

XLIV The touch has for its instrument the nervous skin: as also all the
nervous, and membr anaceous parts of the body.

Therefore hairs, nails, bones, do not feel, etc. though you cut or burn
them: because they have no nerves running through them. Yet they feel in that
part, where they adjoyn to the flesh, because they have a nervie substance for
their gluten. Hence the pain under the nails, and membranes of the bones, is
most acute. Now being that the skin of the body is most glutinous, and
altogether nervie, lest it should put the living creature to continual pain
and trouble, by being too sensitive, it is encompassed with a thin skin, called
in Latin, Cuticula (which we see come of sometimes in members that are scorched
and bruised) and void of sense, to restrain the violence of the sense.

XLV The taste has the tongue for its Organ, a porous member, and always
moist, that so dry things also that touch it, may m^lt and give forth a savor,
which penetrating the tongue by the nerves placed at the roots thereof, is by
and by communicated to the brain.

When the tongue is dry (as in great thirst) the taste perceives nothing; and
therefore God has in his wise counsel provided, that in every perfect living
creature, the vapors exhaling out of the ventricle, should be gathered
together into spittle within the concavity of the mouth, and should water the
tongue perpetually: for which purpose the porositie of the tongue serves very
well. Yet there were added over and above two little kernels, called Tonsillae,
spongious too, always preserving spittle for the use of the tongue.

XLVI The nostrils are the Organs of smelling, and that cribrous bone placed
over them; by which as through a sponge, the smell coming from things may enter
the brain.

Therefore when the Catarrhe flows and fills the nostrils, smelling is hindered.
This is the most open way to the brain, and therefore most powerful to affect
the animal spirit, either immediately pleasing, or recreating or strengthening
it, or molesting and suffocating it. For hence it is, that gross, fuliginous,
impure vapors kill: but sharp smells raise a man, even out of a deep swoone.

XLVII. Hearing has the ear for its Organ; which contains the hole to the
brain, together with a gristly border winding about like the shell of a snaile,
adjoined without to receive the motion of the air when in is stricken, and
turn it inward: but within at the center of the windings is a little drum,
with a little bit of flesh standing by it, like a hammer; which being beaten
with the air that enters, beats the drum also, which the spirit perceiving,
judges of the greatness or smalnesse, nearness or distance of the thing
beaten with the air: and by multiplied experience, knows what it is that moves
the air, and of what sort.

This wonderful Organ is easily corrupted within and without. Within, if the
passages be stopped with phlegm: and much more if the hammer or the drum be
hurt with rottenness. But without, if the ear, (that is that gristly border)
be cut off: for then the sound slips by the ear, or being received in
ordinately, makes only an inordinate noise. To help which the Creator gave
living creatures two ears apiece.

Now it appears hence, 1 Why too sharp or too dull sounds offend, the
temperate please us? because they agree better with our spirit.

2. Why a sound penetrates obliquely also? because the air moved, moves that
which is next it round about by the motion of diffusion.

3. Why a sound spread round about, fails by little and little? because it is
just as when the water of a poole is moved with a stone falling into it.
Excepting that the water quivers a good while in that whole circle: but the
circle of the rain moved, passes away together and at once: for the sound of a
bell, does not stick in the air, but is wheeled about in the sounding bell.

4. Why when one hears all hear the same? because a sound is a real commotion
of the air, which arrives at the ears of all those that are within that circle.

5. What the Echo is? namely a sound reflected from hollow places: after the
same manner as the circulations of the water made in a vessel, after they have
been at the sides, return again toward the center.

XLVIII. The sight has the eye for its Organ; which is nothing else but a
living looking glass, receiving into it self the images of such things as
present themselves, and transmitting them to the brain to be judged of.

The fabric of the eyes is admirable. For beneath the forehead of every
living creature, God has hollowed out in the skull two windows, into which the
outmost membrane of the brain, sends two things like bags, filled with the
humorus that come from the brain. In the midst of which there is a pipe woven
together of an opacous thin membrane, yet full of a most pure chrystalline
humor: they call it the apple of the eye, in which vision is properly made,
this is encompassed with a network, full of a watery or glassie humor: And
last of all, that membrane which the common sort call the white of the eye; but
Philosophers (because it is hard and polished over like a horn) call cornea,
and this is transparent over against the apple and the network, elsewhere it
retains its witness. Now under the root of the apple lies the optic nerve,
by which the image of the thing perceived, passes straight to the center of
the brain,

XLIX. No vision is without the ministry of light; for that reflecting from
things and colored with their aspect diffuseth it self every way, and
wheresoever it falls upon a glass, it impresseth the image of the said things.

Whence it appears: 1. Why only things that are colored are seen? because the
light must of necessity rebound to the eye, but that which has no color is
transparent as the air, etc.

2. Why those things that are to be seen must of necessity be enlightened?
because sight is the resiliencie of the light from the object to the eye.

3. Why the eye placed in the shade or in the dark sees the stronger? because
it receives the light reflected without any impediment. For if the eye it self
be enlightened also the light reflected from it, meets with the other light
(coming from things) and so there is a collision and a dissipation of them both.

4. Why we see nothing, if there be any thing betwixt the eye and the object?
because the reflection of the light is not made but in a right line.

5. Why some living creatures see best in a strong light, others in an obsure
light? because the lucidity of the animal spirit is diverslly proportionated.
So Spiders and Flies see the smallest things, which pass our sight,; (and much
more the sight of an horse or an elephant, etc.) because there are more subtle
spirits in a more subtle body.

6. Why whiteness disgregates the sight, and if it be overmuch, dissipates
and corrupts it? because it is the very light it self reflecting, whose nature
is to penetrate, attenuate, part asunder and diffuse the object. For to that
end it was sent into the world.

L. Viston is threefold, straight, reflected, and refracted

Right or direct vision is that whereby the light is seen, suppose the Sun or
fire: For here the light offers it self to the eye by a single line.

Reflected is, that whereby other things are seen in a free air: for there the
light reflected from things, comes to the eye by a second line (for by the
first line the light falls upon the object, by the second from thence upon the
eye.)

Refracted is that whereby things are seen through a double medium, and so by
refracted lines: as when an oar or pole seems broken in the water. Also when a
piece of money in the bottom of a vessel full of water, seems bigger and
nearer the superficies, so that one may go back and see it.

Of the motive faculty.
LI. Motion was given to a living creature.

1. To seek his food.

2. For those actions to which every one is destinated.

3. To preserve the vigor of life.

For a living creature being of a more tender constitution then a plant, would
more easily putrify and perish, if it were not quickened by most frequent
motion. Therefore the Creator has most wisely provided for our good, that we
cannot so much as take our meat without labor and motion.

LII. The moving principle is the animal spirit.

Therefore a body without life, though never so well furnished with Organs,
moves not: and when the brain, the feat of the animal spirits is ill affected
(for example either with giddiness or a surfeit) the members presently fall, or
at least stumble and totter. And when the nerve of any member is stopped, it is
presently deprived both of motion and sense; as may be seen in the palsy and
apoplexy.

LIII. Now the animal spirit moves either it self only, or the vital spirit
with it: or lastly the members of the body also.

LIVE. The animal spirit moves it self perpetually, sometimes more, sometime
less: namely, running out and into the Organs of the senses: or howsoever
stirriug it self in its workhouse.

For from this inward motion of it, are perpetual fantasies or imaginations
even in sleep; which then we call dreams.

LV. It carries the vital spirit along with it, when at the sense of
something, either pleasing or displeasing it conveyes it self to and fro
through the body, taking that with it as it were to aid it; as it is in joy
and sorrow; hope and fear; gratulation and repentance; and last of all in
anger.

For joy is a motion, wherein the spirit pours forth it self at the sense of
a pleasant object, as though it would couple it self with the thing that it
desires. Thence that lively color in the face of a joyful man from the vital
spirit, flowing thither with a most pure portion of the blood. And this is the
cause why moderate joy purifies the blood, and is helpful to prolong life. See
Prove. 15. v. 13. and 17. v. 22.

Sorrow is a motion, whereby the vital spirit at the sense of an object that
displeases it, runs to its center; the heart as it were feeling a hurtful
thing, thence palenesse in the face of those that are affrighted, and
stiffnesse of the skin and hairs; hence also danger of death, if any one be
often and greatly affected with sorrow: the like motions are in hope and fear,
joy and sorrow; that is, in the sense of good or bad, either present or past.

But anger, is a mixed motion, whereby the spirit for fear of injury flies to
the center, and thence poures forth it self again as it were in revenge. Hence
they that are angry, are first pale, and afterward red, etc.

N. W. All these motions commonly called affections, or passions of the mind,
are common to all living creatures: But according to more and less, for
Sanguine creatures are merry; Melancholy, sad; Phlegmatic, faint; Choleric,
furious, etc.

LVI. The said Animal spirit moves the members, but with the use of
instruments; Tendons and Muscles, and the joints of the bones.

The puppets wherewith Juglers (a pleasant sight to children) show plays, that
they may turn themselves about, as though they were alive, must of necessity
have: 1 Joints of the members, that they may bow. 2 Nerves or strings with
which drawn to and fro they are bowed. 3 Some living strength which may draw
the nerves forward and backward; which the neurospasta that is hid under the
covering supplies. Just so to the motion of a living creature, there are
requisite: 1 Joints or knuckles of bones. For bones were given to a living
creature, that he might stand upright: But that he might bend also, his bones
were not given him continued, but divided with joints of limbs.

2. Certain ligaments fastened about the bones, wherewith attraction and
relaxation might be made; therefore certain tendons were given them as it were
cords, being of a nervy and half gristly substance, which growing out of the
head of one bone, and running along the side of another bone, grow to the lower
head thereof; and when the tendon is drawn, the following bone is drawn, so
as to bend it self. Now it is to be noted, that these tendons about the joints
of the bones are bare on both sides; but about the middle of them they are
extended into a kind of a membranceous purse stuffed up with flesh: Which
flesh or fleshy purse they call a muscle, of which every member has many: not
only least that the tendons when they are drawn should depart out of their
place; or the bones or tendons be hurt with often rubbing against one another; or
for the shape of a living creature only (for what a body would that be which
consisted of mere bones, veins, nerves, and tendons? a Sceleton) but because
there can be no motion at all without muscles: as it shall forthwith appear.

3. The neurospasta or invisible mover, is the animal sqirit; which as it can
at the pleasure of the fantasy, convey it self into the belly of this or that
muscle, so it stretches or dilates it as it were a pair of bellows, and
draws in that which is opposite, from whence nothing can follow but the
bending of that member.

Thence it appears: 1. That the animal spirit can move nothing without an
Organ: For why does no man bend his knees before? because there wants a knuckle
above. Why does no man move his ear? because that member wants muscles, etc.

2. It appears also, That by how many the more muscles are given to any
member, by so much the nimbler it is unto motion: by how much the bigger, so
much the stronger; For example, in the hands and feet, that they might be
sufficiently able to undergo the variety of labors and going. It appears also
why they that are musculy or brawnie, are strong, but those that are thin, are
weak?

3. It appears also that the animal spirit is most busy in motion, running to
and fro at the command of the fantasy, most speedily through the nerves and
arteries.

4. That the motion of a living creature is compounded of an agitative,
expansive and contractive, impulsive and continuative motion. For the animal
spirit coveys it self at the pleasure of the fantasy, into this or that
muscle: and the muscle giving place to the spirit flowing in, stretches forth
it self: then when the muscle is stretched forth in breadth, the length of it
must be contracted of necessity: and the tendon follows the muscle contracting
it self, and draws with it the head of the next bone by the motion of
continuity; all with inexplicable quickness.

5. It appears also that this local motion (either of the whole living
creature, or of some member) is made about something immovable with various
enforcings.

6. And because it is with enforcing, it cannot be without weariness.

7. And because it is with weariness, there is sometimes needs of rest;
which is given in three kinds. 1 Standing. 2 Sitting. 3. Lying. Standing is a
resting of the feet, but with an inclination of the body to motion: therefore
it is done by libration. Sitting is rest in the midst of the body: whereby
the other parts are the more easily preserved in Aequilibrio. Lying is a total
rest. That is, a prostrating of the body all along: But as too much motion
brings weariness, so too much rest causes tediousness: because the spirit
loves to stir it self. And the same position of the members a long while
together by rest, is alike troublesome: both for that the lower members are
pressed with the weight of the upper, and also for that the spirit desires to
move it self any way. Hence it is in that we turn us often in our sleep.

Of the enuntiative faculty.
That a living creature might give knowledge of it self by a voice, the animal
spirit does that, at the direction of the fantasy: but it has these Organs,
the Lungs, the rough Artery, and the Mouth.

LVII. To every living creature (fishes excepted) there was given lungs, to
cool the heart, with a gristly pipe called the rough arteterie. Which
notwithstanding serves withal to send forth a voice: because that in the upper
part of it, it has the form of a pipe, wherewith the air being stricken may
be divided and sent sounding forth.

LVIII. And that the voice might be both raised, and let fall, that pipe is
composed of gristly rings; the lowest of which, if it oppose it self to the
air as it passes by, there is a deep repercussion, that is a grave voice; but
if the highest, there is an high repercussion, that is a shrill voice, every
one may make trial of that in himself.

LIX. And that the sound may be articulate, (as in speech and the singing of
some birds) that the tongue, beating the sound too and fro, also the lips, the
teeth and nostrils, and the throat perform.

Of the defensive faculty.
LX. The animal spirit if it perceive any hostile thing approach unto it, has
presently recourse to its weapons, whereby either to defend it self (setting up
its hairs, bristles, scales, prickles) or to offend and hurt its enemies
(using its horns, nails, wings, beak, hands, etc.)

Which by virtue of what strength it is done, may already be known out of what
has been said before.

Of the generative faculty.
Seeing that living creatures as well as plants, are mortal entities: they must
of necessity be multiplied, for the conservation of their species; touching
which mark the Axioms following.

LXI. Because that the generation of living creatures, by reason of the
multitude and tenderness of their members, could not commodiously be performed
in the bowels of the earth: they had a different sex given them. And it was
ordained that the new living creature should be formed in the very body of the
living creature it self.

As the sun by its heat does beget plants in the womb of the earth, so it may
also those living things, whose formation is finished with in some few days,
as worms, mice, and diverse insects, (which is done either by the seed of the
same living creatures falling into an apt matter scattered, or by the spirit of
the universe, falling into an apt matter. But more perfect living creatures,
which consist of many and solid members, and want much time for their
formation (as a man, an horse, an elephant) it cannot beget. For being that the
Sun cannot stay so long in the same coast of heaven, the young one would be
spoiled before it could come to perfection. I herefore the most wise Creator
of things, appointed the place of formation to be, not in the earth, but in the
living creature it self; having formed two sexes, that one might do the part of
the plant bearing the seed, the other of the earth, cherishing, and as it were
hatching the seed. This alone and none other is the end of different sexes in
all living creatures. Woe be to the rashness and madness of men, which abuse
them! as no beast does. The members, whereby the sexes differ, are the same in
number, site and form, and differ in nothing almost unless it be in regard of
exterius and interius: to wit the greater force of heat in the male thrusting
the genitals outward, but in the female by reason of the weaker heat the said
members containing themselves within: which Anatomists know.

LXII The spirit is the directour of all generation, like as in plants; which
being heated in the seed, first forms it self a place of abode, that is the
brains and head: and thence making excursions, forms the rest of the members
by little and little, and gently: and again retiring to its seat, rests and
operates by turns: whence the original of waking and fleeping.

Therefore the formation of a living creature does not begin from the heart, as
Aristotle thought, but from the head, for the head is as it were the whole
living creature; the rest of the body is nothing but a structure of organs for
diverse operations. And that appears plain, for some living creatures (as
fishes) have no heart, but none are without a head and brains.

Of the kinds of living creatures.
Thus much of a living creature in general; the kinds follow.

LXIII A living creature according to the difference of its motion is 1
Reptile. 2 Gressile. 3 Natatile. 4 Volatile.

LXIV Reptile, or a creeping thing is a living creature with a long body,
wanting feet, yet compunded of joints (or gristly rings) by the contraction and
extension of which it winds up and reaches out it self: as are worms and
serpents.

LXV Gressile is, that which has feet (two or more) and goes; as a lizard, a
mouse, a dog, etc.

LXVI Natatile is, that which passes through the water by the help of finnes:
it is called a fish: amongst which crabs also, and diverse sea monsters are
reckoned.

LXVII Volatile is, that which moves it self through the air, by the shaking
of its wings; and is called a bird.

The lightness of birds to fly, is from their plumosity. For every plume or
feather, not only in the stalk, but through all its parts, and particles of its
parts, is hollow and full of spirit and vapor. And for this cause no birds
piss: because all their moisture perpetually evaporates into feathers. It is
impossible therefore for a man to fly, though he fit himself with wings,
because he wants feathers to raise him: and those which he takes to him, are
dead, and void of heat and spirit.

LXVIII Small living things are by a special name called insects; as flies,
worms, etc.

They are called insects, from the incisions whereby their bodies are cut off
round as it were. These may be divided after the same manner. For worms are
Reptile, Lice, Fleas, Punies, Spiders, etc. Gressile, the water-spider, and the
horse-leech, etc. Natatile, Flies and Gnats, etc. Volatile, and all those with
infinite differences, so that here also there is not wanting a most clear
glass of the admirable wisdom of the Creator; and a school to man, to learn
virtues, and forget vices (of both which there are an express image in living
creatures, which the Scripture often inculcates.)

An Apendix.
Of the tenacious inherencie of the animal spirits in its matter.
WE showed toward the end of the ninth Chap, how fast the natural and vital
spirit inhereth in its matter: we are now to give notice of the like in the
animal spirit, how firmly it also abides in its matter, that is the blood,
the understanding of which thing, will also add much light to those places of
Scripture, where it is said that the soul of every living creature is in the
blood thereof; yea, that the blood of all flesh, is the life thereof, as Genesis
9. v. 4. Levit. 17. v. 11. and 14. Deuteronomy. 12. v. 23.) And to certain secrets of
nature, which they are astonished at, who are ignorant of the manner and reason
of them.

I First, then it is certain that the animal, as well as the vital spirit,
may be bound into its seed with the cold, so as that for a time it cannot
exercise its operation. For as grains of corn kept all winter (either in a
garner, or in the earth) do bud nevertheless: so the eggs of fishes, frogs,
pismires, beetles, scattered either upon the earth or waters, do bring forth
young the year following.

II In bodies already formed the same spirit, compelled sometimes by some
force, forsakes the members, and cease from all operation: yet conglobates it
self to the center of the body, and coucheth so close, that for many days,
months, years, it lies as it were asleep, yet at length it awakens again, and
diffuseth it self through the members, and proceeds to execute vital
operations as it did before. We find it so to be in Flies, Spiders, Frogs,
Swallows, etc. which in winter lie as though they were dead in the chinks of
walls, or chaps of the earth, or under the water, yet when the Spring comes in,
they are alive again So flies choked in water, come to life again in warm
cinders: like as it is certain, that men strangled have been brought to life
again after some hours, And besides there is an example commonly known of a boy
killed with cold, and found four days after, and raised again with foments.
Trances continued for some days are ordinarily known hence: some ready to be
buried, as though they had been dead indeed, yea, and buried too, yet have
lived again* Some Geographers have written, how that in the farthest parts of
Moscovia, men are frozen every year with extreme cold, and yet live again like
swallows: which notwithstanding as a thing uncertain, we leave to its place.

III The third and the most strange is this, that the spirit flows out with
the blood that is shed, and yet gives not over to maintain its consent with the
spirit remaining within the body: (whither the greater part thereof remain or
only the relics:) which is most evidently gathered from diverse sympathies and
antipathies, I will illustrate it with five examples.

1 Whence is it; I pray you that an ox quakes, and is madded, and runs away at
the presence of the butcher? is it not because he smells the garments, the hand,
the very breath of the butcher stained with the blood and spirit of cattle of
his own kind? which is also most clear from the irreconcilable antipathy, which
is found to be betwixt dogs, and dog-killers.

2 Whence is it that the body of a slain man bleeds at the presence of the
murderer, and that after some days, or months, yea, and years? (For it is
manifest by a thousand trialls that it is so: and at Itzenhow in Denmark,
Simeon Gulartius relates that the hand of a dead man cut off, and hung up, and
dried in prison, discovered the murderer full ten years after by bleeding, as a
thing confirmed by great witnesses, and those of the Kings Counsel) and
certainly we are not to fly to miracles where nature it self by constant
observation shows her laws. It is very likely that the spirit of the man
ready to be slain, provoked with the injury when it is shed forth with the
blood, pouring out it self as it were in revenge, leaps upon the murderer: and
that after the same sort as we see a dog, a wild beast, or ox, when he is
killed, run furiously upon him that strikes him. For if the spirit do so yet
abiding in the body, why not parted from it? Therefore it is to be supposed
that it leaps upon the murderer, and seises on him. Whence it comes to pass,
that when he comes near the body (especially if he be commanded to touch it, or
look upon it) look how much spirit is left in the body, it hastes to meet with
its spirit, with its chariot the blood, namely by sympathy. Hence that
Antipathie which more subtle natures find in themselves against murderers
though unknown. For they tremble at the very presence of murderers, and nauseat
if they do but eat or drink with them, etc.

3. The cunning of a most excellent Surgeon in Italy is [well] known, who
helped one that had lost his nose, carving him another out of his arm, cut and
bound to his face for the space of a month: and the ridiculous chance [that
happened thereupon] a little after is also known. A certain Noble man having
also had his nose cut off in a duel, desired his help; but being delicate and
not willing to have his arm cut, hired a poor country fellow, who suffered
himself to be bound to him, and his arm to be made use of to repair his nose.
The cure succeeded: but when as about some six years after, (or thereabouts)
the country man died, the Noble man's nose rotted too, and fell off. What could
be the cause of it, I pray you, but that the spirit, and that locally
separated, does maintain its spiritual unity? Therefore when the spirit went
out of the country man's carcass, as it rotted, part of it also went out that
the Noble man's nose, and his nose (by reason of the Noble man's spirit,
succeeded not [into the place of it] as being into the lump of another
[flesh]) rotted also, and fell off.

4 It is accounted amongst the secrets of nature, that if friends about to
part, drink part one of another blood, (and so adds a part of his spirit to
his own) it will come to pass, that when one is sick, or ill at ease, though
very far asunder, the other also will find himself sad: which if it be true,
(as it is most likely) the reason is easy to be known.

5 The Magneticall Medicine is very famous amongst Authors: with which they do
not cure the wound it self, but the instrument wherewith he wound was given,
or the garment, wood, or earth besprinkled with the blood of the wound, is
only anointed: and the wound closes and heals kindly. Some deny that this is
done naturally, who do not sufficiently consider the secret strength of nature.
Yet examples show that this kind of cure, with an ointment made with most
natural things, (yea with nothing but the grease of the axeltree, scraped off
from a cart) has certain success, without using any superstition. Wherefore
it is credible, that the spirit poured out of the body with the blood that is
shed, adheres partly in the blood, partly to the instrument it self: (for it
cannot abide without matter) and being forced thence with the fat that is
applied returns to its whole, and supplies that, and hereto perhaps that
observation appertains concerning the venom of a snake, viper, or scorpion
conveyed into a man with a bite. For if the same beast, or but the blood or fat
thereof, be forthwith applied to the wound, it sucks out the venom again,
because it returns to its own connaturall. More of this kind might be observed
by approved experiments.

6 Last of all, it is not unworthy of our observation, that the animal spirit
does form living creatures of another kind, rather then quite forsake the
putrefying matter: namely, worms, and such like. Now it is certain by
experience, that of living creatures that are dead, and putrified those living
creatures are especially bred on which they were wont to feed when they were
alive. For example, of the flesh of storks, serpents are bred, of hens spiders,
of ducks frogs, etc. which that it will so come to pass, if they be buried in
dung, John Poppus a distiller of Coburg, has taught after others. It appears
then that the animal spirit is every where, and that very diligently busied,
about the animating of bodies.

CHAP. XI.
Of Man.
I A Man is a living creature, endued with an immortal soul.

For the Creator inspired a soul into him, out of himself, Genesis ^. v. 7.
which soul is called also the mind and reason, in which the image of God
shines.

II Therefore he is compounded of three things, a body, a spirit, and a soul.

So the Apostle testifies. 1 These. 5. 13. Let your whole spirit, and soul, and
body be kept blameless. And so 1 Cor: 14. verse. 14. He distinguishes betwixt
the spirit and the mind. And indeed so it is: we have a body compounded of
the Elements as well as bruits; we have a spirit from the spirit of the
world, as well as they: but the soul or mind is from God. The first we bear
about us mortal: the second dissipable: but the last enduring ever without the
body; as we are assured by faith. Therefore when thou see a man, think that
thou see a King, royally clothed, and sitting in his royal throne. For the
mind is a King, his robe is the spirit, his throne the body.

III The body is the Organ and habitation of the spirit: but the spirit is the
habitation and mansion of the soul.

For as the spirit dwells in the body, and guides it, as the Pilot does the
ship; so the soul dwells in the spirit, and rules it. And as body without a
spirit, neither moves it ^f, nor has any sense of any thing (as it to be seen
in a dead carcass:) so the spirit without the mind, has no reason, nor
understands any thing; as we see in bruit beasts. Therefore the soul uses the
spirit for its chariot and instrument; the spirit, the body; and the body, the
foresaid instruments.

IV As the spirit is affected by the body; so is the mind by the spirit.

For as when the body is diseased, the spirit is presently sad, or hindered
from its action: so when the spirit is ill disposed, the mind cannot perform
its functions dexterously: as we may see in drunken, melancholy, madmen, etc.
Hence it is, that the gifts of the mind follow the temperature of the body;
that one is more ingenious, courteous, chaste, courageous, etc, then another.
Hence that fight within us, which the Scripture so often mentions, and we our
selves feel. For the body and the soul, being that they are extremes (the one
earthly, the other heavenly; the one bruit, the other rational; the one
mortal, the other immortal; are always contrary to one another in their
inclinations. Now the spirit which is placed betwixt them, ought indeed to obey
the superior part, and keep the lower part in order as its beck. Yet
nevertheless it comes often so to pass, that is carried away of the flesh, and
becomes brutish.

V. Such a body was given to man as might fitly serve all the uses of his
reasonable soul, And therefore: 1 Furnished with many Organs. 2 Erect. 3 Naked
and unarmed, that it might be free of it self, and yet might be clothed and
armed any way as occasion required.

For the hand, the instrument of instruments, the most painful doer of all
works, was given to man only. He only has obtained an erect stature, least he
should live unmindful of his country, Heaven. Again, he only was made naked
and unarmed; but both by the singular favors of God. For living creatures
whilst they always bear about them their garment, (hairs, feathers, shells)
and their arms (sharp prickles, horns) what do they bear about them but
burdens, and hindrances of diverse actions? The liberty granted to man, and
industry in providing, fitting and laying up all things for his use and
pleasure, is something more divine.

VI. A more copious and pure spirit was given to man, and therefore his inward
operations are more excellent, namely a quicker attention, a stronger
imagination, a surer memory, more vehement affections.

The first appears from the brain, which is given in greater plenty to man
then to any living creature, (considering the proportion of every ones body.)
For all that round head, and of so great capacity, is filled up with brain; to
what end? but that the spirit might have a more spacious vvorkhouse and palace.
The rest are known by experience as follows.

VII Attention is a considerate receiving of the objects, brought into the
sensorie instruments.

We said in the former Chapter, that it is commonly called the common sense.
This was given to man so much the quicker, as it is destinated to more
objects, and more distinctly to be perceived.

VIII Imagination, is the moving of things perceived by the sense within, and
an efformation of the like.

For the image of the thing seen, heard, or touched with attention; presently
gets into the brain, which the spirit by contemplation judges of, what it is,
and how it differs from this or that thing? therefore it may well be called (in
this sense) the judgment. This imagination is stronger in a man, then in any
living creature: so that it feignes new forms of things, namely by dividing or
variously compounding things conceived. And this is done with such quickness,
that upon every occasion we imagine any thing to our selves, as we find
dreaming and waking: and by how much the purer spirit any one has, he is so
much the more prompt to think or imagine; but dullness proceeds from a gross
spirit.

Observe this also: That the animal spirit when it speculates forward, and
draws new images of things from the senses, is said to learn, when backward,
resuming images from the memory, it is said to remember: When it is moved too
and fro within it self it is said to feign somewhat. Note also, that from the
evidence of sensation grows the degree of knowledge, for if the sense perceive
any thing a far off, or weakly and obscurely, it is a general conception: If
nearer, distinctly, and perspicuously, it is a particular conception: for
example, when I see something move a great way off, I gather it to be a living
creature: when I come near, I know it to be a man, and at length this or that
man, etc.

IX. Memory (remembrance) is the imagination of a thing past, arising from the
sense of a thing present, by reason of some likeness.

For we do not remember any thing otherwise, then by a like object: For
example, if I see a man, that resembles my father in his face, presently the
memory of my father comes into my mind. So by occasion of diverse accidents, as
place, time, figure, color, found, etc. diverse things may come to mind, where
the like was seen, heard, etc. which occasion sometimes is so slight and
sudden, that it can scarce be marked, for what is quicker then the spirit?

N. Now it may be demanded: seeing that the animal spirit moves it self so
variously in the brain, yea, and other new spirit always succeeding by
nutrition; how is it that the images of things do not perish, but readily offer
themselves to our remembrance? Answ: Look down from a bridge into the water
gently gliding, you shall see your face unvaried though the water pass away.
And when you see any thing tossed with the vvind in a free air, the wind
does not carry away the image of the thing from thine eye: What is the cause?
But that the impression of the image is not in the water, nor in the air: but
in the eye, from the light reflected indeed from the water and penetrating the
air. So then in like manner, an inward impression is not really made in the
brain, but by a certain resplendency in the spirit: Which resplendency may be
kindled again by any like object. Otherwise if images were really imprinted in
the brain, we could not see any thing otherwise in our sleep, then it had once
imprinted it self in the brain being seen. But being that they are variously
changed, it appears that notions are made not by real impressions, but by the
bare motion of the spirit, and the imagination of like by like.

X An affection is a motion of the mind, com^ng from imaginations desiring
good, and shunning evil.

There are more affections and more vehement in a man. For bruits scarce know
shame, envy and jealousy, and are not so violently hurried into fury and
despair, or again into excessive joyfulnesse; thence laughter and weeping
still belong to man only.

XI The mind of man is immediately from God.

For the Scripture says, That it was inspired by God, Genesis 2. v. 7. and that
after the death of the body it returns to God; that gave it, Eccles. 2. v. 7.
For it returns to be judged for those things which it did in the body, whether
good or evil: 2 C^r. 5. v. 10. But we are not to think that the soul is
inspired out of the essence of God, as though it were any part of the deity:
(For God is not divisible into parts, neither can he enter into one essence
with the creature.) And Moses words sound thus: And God breathed into the face
of Adam the breath of life, and man became a living soul. See he does not say
that that breath (or inspiration) became a living soul, but man became a
living soul) Nor yet are we to think, that the soul was created out of nothing,
as though it were a new entitie; but only that a new perfection is put into the
animal spirit in a man: so that it becomes one degree superior, to the soul
of a beast, that appears out of Zach. 1^. v. 1. Where God testifies that he
forms the spirit of man in the midst of him. Behold, he forms, and not creates
it! It is the same word ((...) Jatzar) which is used of the body also; Genesis
2. v. 7. As therefore the body is formed of the prae-existent matter, so is the
soul of the prae-existent spirit of the world. And by cousequent even as the
earth, water, air, and sky, are all one matter of the world, differing only
in the degree of their density: so the natural, vital, animal, and this
mental spirit, are all one spirit of the world, differing only in the degree
of their purity and perfection. Therefore it is credible, that the divine
inspiration conferred no more upon man, but this, that he 1 refined the inmost
part of his spirit, that in subtility of actions he might come nearest to God
of all visible creatures. 2 Fixed it, that it might subsist both in the body
and out of the body. Therefore the Scripture makes no other difference betwixt
the spirit of a man and of a beast, then that the one ascends upwards, the
other goes downwards, (that is the one flees out of the matter, the other
slides back into the matter) Eccles. 3. v. 21. Hence also that question,
Whether the soul be propagated by generation? may be determined. The root of
the soul which is the vital and animal spirit, is certainly by generation:
but the formation thereof (that the inmost parts thereof should become the
mental spirit, or the mind) God attributes to himself, Zach. 12. 1. Yet not
concurring extraordinarily, or miraculously, but because he has ordained that
it shall be so in the nature of man. It appears also, why man is commonly said
to consist of a body and a soul only? namely, because, the rational soul is
of the spirit, and in the spirit. For as our body is made of a fourfold
matter, that is, of the four Elements: so our soul (to speak generally, and
contradistinguish it from the body) consists of a fourfold spirit, Natural,
Vital, Animal, and Mental.

XII There are three faculties of the mind of man, the Understanding, the Will,
and the Conscience.

These answer to the three functions of the animal spirit, or to the inward
senses; out of which also they result. For we have said, that as the spirit
uses the body for its Organ, so the soul uses the spirit. Therefore the
three inward Senses, Attention, Judgment, and Memory, are instruments by which
the soul uses the Understanding, Will, and Conscience. For by diligent
attention it begets understanding of things: by imagination or judging, choice,
that is, to will or nill: by remembrance, conscience.

XIII The understanding is a faculty of the reasonable soul, gathering things
unknown out of things known, and out of things uncertain compared together,
drawing things certain, by reasoning.

XIV To reason is to enquire the reasons and causes why any thing is, or is
not, by thinking thereon.

For the mind or reason does from the experiments of the senses gathered
together, first form to it self certain general notions: as, when it sees
that the fire scorcheth all things, it forms to it self this rule as it were:
All fire burns, etc. Such kind of experimental notions they call principles,
from which the understanding, as occasion is offered, frames discourse. For
example, if gold melt with fire, then it is hot also, and burns when it is
melted. Whence follows this conclusion: therefore if the Workman pour gold into
his hand, he is burnt therewith. See here is understanding, and that of a thing
never seen! to which a brute cannot attain. For they do not reason but stay
simply upon experiments. As if a dog be beaten with a staff, he runs away
afterward at the sight of a staff, because his late suffering comes into his
memory: but that he should reason, (for example, a staff is hard; and pain was
caused me with a staff: therefore every hard thing struck against the body
causes pain:) this he cannot do, therefore intelligere, to understand, is
inter legere, that is, amongst many things to choose and determine what is
truly, and what is not.

XV When ratiocination does cohere with it self every way, it begets verity:
if it gape any where, error.

XVI Promptness of reasoning is called Ingenuity; solidity, Judgment; defect,
Dullness

For he is Ingenious, who perceives and discourses readily: he Judicious that
with a certain natural celerity gives heed whether the reasoning cohere
sufficiently every way. He is dull that has neither of them. The two first are
from the temperature of blood and melancholy; the last comes from abundance of
phlegm. For melancholy (understand not gross and full of dregs, but pure)
tempered with much blood, gives a nimble wit; but moistened with less, a
piercing and constant judgment: which is made plain by this similitude. A
glass receiving and rendering shapes excellently, is compounded of three
exceedings: exceeding hardness, exceeding smoothness, exceeding blackness:
for the smoothness receives shapes: hardness reteins them: the blackness
underneath clears them. (Hence the best sort of glasses are of steel, those of
silver worse, and of glass better: by reason of their greater smoothness and
hardness under which some black thing is put, or cast, that it may adhere
immediately: For instance, lead. If it could be iron or steel, it is certain,
that the images would be the brighter for blackness.) So the animal spirits,
receiving agility from pure blood, strength and constancy from Melancholy, make
men ingenious: and when the prevailing melancholy clarifies the imagination;
Judicious, too much phlegm overflowing both, makes men stupid. Yellow choler
conferreth nothing but mobility to the affections: whence it is not without
cause, called the whetstone of wits.

XVII The understanding begins with universals, but ends in singulars.

We have observed the same touching the senses, upon the eighth Aphorism. For
there is a like reason for both, in as much as the intellect considering any
object, first knows that it is something; and afterward enquires by
discoursing what it is, and how it differs from other things, and that always
more and more subtilely. For universals are confused, singulars distinct.
Therefore the understanding of God is most perfect, because he knows all
singularities, by most special differences: Therefore he alone truly knows
all things. But a man by how many the more particulars he knows, and sees how
they depend upon their generals, by so much the wiser he is. Therefore
Aristotle said not rightly, That sense is of singulars, but understanding of
universals.

XVIII The will is a faculty of the reasonable soul, inclining it to good
fore-known, and turning it away from evil foreseen.

For the soul works, that whereunto the will enclines; and the will enclines,
whither the understanding leads it. It follows this for its guides every where:
and erres not unless it err. As, when a Christian chooses drunkenness rather
then sobriety, (though he be taught otherwise) he does it, because the
intellect deceived by the sense, judges it better to please the palate, then
to be tormented with thirst, (though perverse.) Therefore we must have a
special care, least the intellect should err, or be carried away with the
inferior appetite. It appears also from thence, that if all men understood
alike, they would also will and nill alike: but the diversity of wills, argues a
diversity of understanding.

XIX If the will prudently follow things that are truly good, and prudently
avoid things that are truly bad, it begets virtue; if it do the contrary, vice.

For virtue is nothing else, but a prudent, and constant, and ardent shunning
of evil, and embracing of good: vice, on the contrary, is nothing but a
neglecting of good, and embracing of evil.

XX The conscience of man, is an intellectual memory of those things which
reason dictates either to be done, or avoided; and what the will has done or
not done according to this rule; and what God has denounced to those that do
them, or do them not.

Therefore the function of it in the soul is threefold: to warn, testify,
and judge of all things that are done, or to be done See by the Wisdom of God
an inward. Monitor, Witness, and Judge, and always standing by, given to man!
woe be to him that neglects this Monitor, contemnes this Witness, throws off
the reverence of this Judge!

XXI It appears out of that which has been said, that man is well termed
(...), a little world. Because

1 He is compounded of the same that (...), or the great World is: matter,
spirit, light.

2 He resembles the universe in the site of his members: for as that is divided
into three parts, the Elementary, the Celestial, and the Supercoelestiall: so
a man has three ventres or bellies; the lowest which serves for nutrition: the
middle-most (or the breast) wherein is the workhouse of life, and the fountain
of heat: the highest (or the head) in which the animal spirits, and in them
reason, the image of God, inhabits.

3 There is an analogy betwixt the parts of the world, and the parts of the
body. For example; Flesh represents the Earth; Bones the Stones; Blood and
other humors, Waters; Vapors, of which the body is full, the air; the vital
spirit, the Heaven, and Stars; the Hairs, Plants; but the seven Planets are
the seven vital Members in our body: for the Heart is in the place of the Sun;
the Brain, of the Moon; the Spleen, of Saturn; the Liver, of Jupiter; the Bag
of Gall; Mars; the Reins; Venus; the Lungs, Mercury, etc. Lastly, certain
creatures show forth their virtues in certain parts of the body. For example,
some herbs cure the Lungs, some the Liver, etc. which shows a certain analogy
of the Microcosme to the Macrocosme, though not well known to us.

XXII Also Man is not absurdly called (...), or the all; because;

1 He has his body from the Elements; his spirit from Heaven, his mind from
God: and so in himself alone he represents the visible and the invisible world.

2 Man is all, because he is apt to be all; that is, either most excellent, or
very base. For if he give himself to earthly things, he becomes brutish, and
falls back again to nothing: if to heavenly things, he is in a manner deified,
and gets above all creatures.

CHAP. XII.
Of Angels.
WE join the treatise concerning Angels with the Physics; because they also
are a part of the created World, and in the scale of creatures next to man; by
whose nature, the nature of Angels is the easier to be explained. Therefore we
will conclude it in some few Aphorisms.

I There are Angels.

Divine testimonies, and apparitions testify that: and also a threefold
reason. 1 Vapors, concretes, plants, living creatures are mixed of water and
spirit. Now there is matter without spirit (the pure Element;) therefore there
is spirit also without matter. 2 As the matter of the world is divided into
four kinds, (the four Elements) so we see already the spirit of the world to be
distinguished into the natural, vital, animal, and mental spirit. Now the
lowest degree is to be found alone (as in concretes.) Therefore the highest may
be found alone, to wit, in the Angels. 3 Every creature is compounded of
Entitie, and Nihility. (For they were nothing before the creation: but now they
are something; because the Cretour has bestowed on them of his Entitie, more
or less by degrees. By how much the more entitie any thing has, so much the
further it is from nihility: and on the contrary.) Seeing then then that there
is the first degree from nihility, (that is a Chaos, the rudiment of an
Entitie:) without doubt there is the last also, which comes nearest to a pure
Entitie. But man is not such: because having matter admixt, he partakes much of
nihility. Therefore of necessity there is a creature, with which, materiality
being taken away, all other perfections remain. And that is an Angel.

II An Angel is an incorporeall man.

An Angel may be called a man, in the same sense that man himself is called
an animal, and an animal, a plant; and a plant, a concrete, etc. (as we have
set down in their definitions:) that is, by reason of the form of the
precedent included, with a new perfection only super-added. For a man is a
rational creature made after the Image of God, immortal: so is an Angel, but
for more perfections sake free from a body. Therefore an Angel is nothing but a
man without a body: A man is nothing but an Angel clothed with a body.

But that Angels are incorporous, appears 1 Because although they be present,
they are not discerned neither by the sight, or any other sense. 2 Because they
assume to themselves earthly, watery, aerie, fiery, or mixed bodies, as need
requires; and put them off again; which they could not do, if they had bodies
of their own as we have. Yet ordinarily they appear in an humane form, by
reason of the likeness of their natures, as we have said.

III Angels were created before all visible things.

That was showed in the Apendix of the first Chapter: you may see it again, if
need be. And Moses words are clear: In the beginning God created the heaven and
the earth: and the earth was void. See the earth was (in that first production)
empty and void! Therefore heaven was not void: then it was filled with its
host, the Angels.

IV The Angels were created out of the Spirit of the world.

As Moses seems to comprehend the production of Angels under the name of
Heaven, so also the universal Spirit. For he ^oth not say, that this was
created with the earth: but he pronounces abruptly after the creation of the
earth, that the Spirit of God moved it self upon the waters: intimating thus
much that it was in being before. We conclude, therefore that the Angels were
formed out of that Spirit; so that part of that spirit was left in the
invisible heaven, and shaped into mere spiritual substances, [ Angels;] and
part sent down into the material world below. After the same manner, as the
fire was afterward partly left in the Sky, and fashioned into shining Globes:
and partly sunk into the bowels of the earth, for the working of minerals, and
other uses. That which follows makes this opinion probable, (if not
demonstrable.)

1 Principles should not be multiplied without cause. Seeing therefore that the
Scripture does not say, that they were created out of nothing, nor yet names
any other principle, why should we not be satisfied with those principles that
Moses has set down?

2 Angels govern the bodies which they assume, like as our spirit inhabiting
the matter does: Therefore they are like to it.

3 There is in Angels a sense of things, as well as in our spirits. (For they
see, hear, touch, etc. though they themselves be invisible, and intangible.
Also they have a sense of pleasure and grief: for as much as joys are said to
be prepared for the Angels, and fire for the devils, (into which wicked men
are also to be cast.) Although therefore they perceive without Organs, yet we
must needs hold that they are not unlike to our spirit which perceives by
organs.

V The Angels were created perfect.

That is finished in the same moment, so that nothing is added to their essence
by adventitious increase. For being that they are immateriall, they are also
free from the law of materiality: that is (when a thing tends to perfection) to
be condensed, fixed, to increase, and so to be augmented, and become solid by
certain accessions.

VI Angels are not begotten.

Men, Animals and Plants, are generated, because the spirit included in the
matter, diffuseth it self with the matter, and essays to make new Entities.
But an Angel being that it is without matter, and its essence cannot be
dissipated, has not whether to transfuse it self. Hence Christ says, that in
Heaven we shall be as the Angels, without generation, or desire of generation,
Mat. 22. 30.

VII Angels die not.

The spirit of Animals and of Plants perishes, because when the matter (that
is, its chariot) is dissipated, it also is dissipated. But an Angel having his
essence compacted by it self, without matter, cannot be dissipated: and
therefore endures.

VIII The number of Angels is in a manner infinite.

See Job 25. v. 2, 3. yet Daniel names thousands of thousands, and myriads of
myriads, Dan. 7. 10. as also John, Apoc. 5. 11.

IX The habitation of the Angels is the Heaven of Heavens, Mat. 18. v. 10. and
6. v. 10.

Therefore they are called the Angels of Heaven, ( Gal. 1. v. 8.) and the Host
of Heaven, (1 King. 22. v. 19.) for it was meet, that as the earth, sea, air,
and sky, have their inhabitants, so also that the Heaven of Heavens should not
be left empty. Yet they are sent forth from thence for these following
Ministeries.

X God created the Angels, that they might be,

1 The delight of their Creator.

2 The supreme spectatours of his glory.

3 His assistent Ministers in governing the World.

The Scripture teaches this every where: but they also point at names given
them. The first appellation of Angels is in Genesis 3. v. 24. Cherubim, that is,
Images: wherein is intimated that they were made after the image of God, as
well as men But note what it is to be made after the image of God. The
essential image of God, or the character of his substance, is the Son, his
eternal Wisdom, Heb. 1. v. 3. after the likeness of him therefore, men and
Angels are said to be created: that is, made understanding creatures: in which
respect also they are called the Sons of God, Job. 1. v. 2. seeing then that an
Image delights him, whose Image it is, it is intimated that God made the Angels
primarily for himself, that he might have some, who being cohabitants with
him, might behold his glorious Majesty face to face, and be partakers of
eternal beatitude. Now the most common name of Angels in the Old Testament is
(...) Malachim that is, Ambassadors: in the New Testament (...), that is,
messengers; because God created these to be rulers and governors of the World.
For whenever the course of nature is to be hindered, or any thing is to be
wrought beyond the ordinary order of nature, God uses their assistence. For
example, When the fire was to be cooled, that it should not burn, ( Dan. 3. v.
25, 28.)

Or the mouths of lions to be stopped, that they should not tear Daniel, (
Dan. 6. v. 22.)

Or the enterprises of the wicked to be hindered, ( Numb. 22. v. 22.)

Or any to be killed by a sudden death, ( Exodus 12. v. 23. and 1 Chronicles. 22. v.
15. and 2 Chronicles. 32. v. 21. and Acts 12. v. 23.)

Or the godly to be delivered from danger, ( Genesis 19. v. 1.)

Or travelers to be guided in their way, ( Psalm. 91. v. 11.)

Or to be preserved in any chance, lest they should be dangerously hurt, Psalm.
91. 12.

Or to be warned any thing in a dream, or otherwise, Mat. 1. 20. etc.

Hence they are thought also to be added to certain persons peculiarly, ( Heb.
1. 1^ Mat. 18. 10. Acts 12. 15.) that they may accompany them every where, (
Psalm. 91. 11.) and be witnesses of all our actions, (1 Cor. 11. 9. 1 Timothy 5.
21.) but especially that they are sent to defend Kings and Kingdoms, ( Dan. 10.
12. etc.) Hence also they are called, watchers or keepers, ( Dan. 4. 10. 20.)

XI Angels can act upon bodies, but they cannot suffer from bodies.

Both these appear by the effect. For Angels bear about, move and govern the
bodies which they assume: but those that are separated, they overthrow, stay
and move from place to place with external violence, at their pleasure; yet
they themselves in the mean time can be hindered or stayed by no body.

XII The powerr of Angels exceeds the strength of any corporal creature.

For it operates 1 without resistance of the objects by penetrating. 2 without
endeavor or enforcing, being that they are not detained or hindered by their
own body, as our spirit is: which being tied to the body, must of necessity
draw it along with it laboriously, as the snail does her shell. Hence the
Angels are called Mighty in power, ( Psalm. 103. 20.) and Powers,
Principalities, Dominions, ( Col. 1. 16.)

XIII The agility of the Angels is greater then of any corporeal substance.

Hence they are compared to Wind and to Fire, and to Lightning, Psalm. 104. 4.
Ezech. 1. 13. Luke 10. 18. and they are called Seraphim, that is, flamy, Isai.
6. 2. yet it is certain that they move swifter then wind or lightning, when
they pass any whither. For the wind and lightning penetrate the air, not
without resistance, but an Angel, being a mere spirit, does it without any
resistance. It appears then, that though an Angel be not in many places at
once, ( Dan. 10. 13. 20.) yet they can in a moment pass themselves whither
they will. Hence it is that one Angel was able to slay a whole army in a
night; and also to smite the first born of the Egyptians, throughout all the
Kingdom, Isai. 37. 36. Exodus 12. 23. and 2 Samuel 24. 6.

XIV The knowledge of Angels is far more sublime then man's.

And that 1 because of the clearness of their understanding, which nothing
obumbrates. 2 by reason of their power to penetrate any whither, and see things
plainly. 3 because of their long experience for so many ages. (Whereas we are
but of yesterday, Job 8. 9.) and yet they are not omniscious. For they know not
the decrees of God, before they be revealed. 2 future contingents. 3 the
thoughts of man's heart. ( Jer. 17. 9. 10.) that is, so long as they are
concealed in the heart. For when they are discovered by gestures and effects,
they discern them. For if we by the effects, are not altogether ignorant of
their thoughts (2 Cor. 2. 11.) wherefore should not they be a thousand times
more quick sighted upon us.

N. W. How that part of the Angels falling into evil, exercise perpetual
hostility with mankind: and God makes use of them to be as it were executioners
to wicked men: but hereafter he will condemn them both; in like manner, as
good men are to enjoy the association of good Angels: and lastly, how the
frauds of those are to be avoided, but the presence of these to be procured, to
teaach that belongs to sacred Divinity.

THE EPILOUGE.
THus we have seen that the created World is a mere harmony. All things by one,
all things to one; the highest and the lowest, the first and the last, most
straightly cleaving together, being concatenated by the intermediate things,
and perpetual ties, and mutual actions and passions inevitable, so that the
world being made up of a thousand thousand parts, and particles of parts, is
nevertheless one, and undivided in it self; even as God the Creator thereof,
is one from eternity to eternity, nor ever was there, is there, or shall there
be any other God, ( Isai. 43. 10. etc.)

And we have seen that all these visible things are made out of three
principles, Matter, Spirit, and Light: because he who is the beginning and the
end of all things, (...) and (...), that thrice blessed and omnipotent God
three in one, is he of whom, and through whom, and in whom are all things, Romans
11. 36.

We have seen also that admirable scale of creatures, arising out of the
principles, and ascending by a septenary gradation. For we have understood,
that whatsoever there is besides God, it is either an Element, or a Vapor, or
a Concrete, or a Plant, or an An^^all, or a Man, or an Angel; and that the
whole multitude of creatures, is ranked into these seven Classes, or great
Tribes. In every of which there is some eminent virtue flowing from the essence
of the Creator (yet every latter including the former.) For In Elements, Being
is eminent. Vapors, Motion Concretes, Figure, or Quality Plants, Life. Living
creatures, Sense. Men, Reason. Angels, Understanding.

See the house which Wisdom has built her, having hewn out her seven pillars!
(Prove. 9. 1.) See the seven Stairs which the King of Heaven has placed in the
entry of his inner house! Ezekiel. 40. 22. The six first degrees are of visible
creatures, the seventh of invisible Angels: After the same manner, as there
were nine days wherein God wrought, and rested the seventh; six Planets in
heaven of inferior light, the seventh of extraordinary brightness, the Sun;
six baser metals on earth. The seventh exceeding all in perfection, gold, etc.
And as Salomons Throne had six inferior steps to every of which there were six
inferior Leoncels adjoined: after all in the seventh place stood the Throne,
and by it two Lions (1 King. 10. 19, 20.) So the King of eternity, when he
built him a visible throne of glory, erected six visible degrees of corporeous
creatures, to every of which he added their Leoncels, that is, their virtues,
and their powers, and last of all, about the throne on high, he placed the
strongest of the creatures, the Angels mighty in power, ( Psalm. 103. 19, 20.)

But now what mean the seven planets in heaven? what mean the seven continents
on earth? the seven kinds of meteors, seven kinds of metalls, seven kinds of
stones, etc? the seven combinations of tangible qualities? the seven
differences of taste? the seven vital members in man? the seven tones in
music? and other things which we meet with throughout all nature? yea, and in
the Scripture the number of seven is every where very much celebrated, and
sacred: For what do the seven days of the week point at? what are the seven
weeks betwixt the Passover and Pentecost? what the seventh year of rest? what
the seven times seventh of Jubilee? what do all these portend I say, but that
it is, the express Image of that God whose seven eyes pass through the whole
earth? ( Zach. 4. 10.) and whose seven spirits are before his Throne, (Apoc. 1.
4.) yea, who does himself make a mystical eighth with every degree of his
creatures. For in him all things live, and move, and have their being; which
live and move, and have a being ( Acts 17. 28.) and he works all in all, (1
Cor. 12. 6.) and all these are as it were him himself, ( Eccles. 43. 27.) and
yet none of them is he himself, ( Job 12. 9. 10.) but because all these have
some effigies of the divine essence, and operate that which they operate by
virtue thereof; hence it is, that he being above all, without all, and beneath
all, is the true mystical eighth of all. Of whom (that Syracides may conclude
our meditation, though we say much, we shall not yet attain thereto. The sum of
the doctrine is that he is all. For what ability have we to praise him? For he
is greater then all his works. The Lord is terrible and very great, and
mavelous is his power. Extol the Lord in praise as much as you can: For yet
he will be greater then all praise, (Eecl 43. 30. etc.) Therefore let every
spirit praise the Lord, Hallelujah. (Psalm. 150.) And thou my soul praise the
Lord (Psalm. 103. 1.) Holy, holy, holy, Lord of Hosts! Heaven and earth are full
of his glory, (Isai. 6. 3) Hallelujah.

A Short APPENDIX TO PHYSICS. Touching the Diseases of the Body, Mind, and
Soul, and their general Remedies.
I.
A Disease is the corruption of an Entity in some part thereof, and a
disposition of it to total perishing ( that is death.)

Therefore both the Body, Mind, and Soul, has its diseases.

II The diseases of the body are various, scarce to be numbered; and oft-times
m^^t.

A disease added to a disease is called a ymptome of a disease.

III A disease of the body is either by solution of that which is continued, or
by distemper of humors.

IV Solution of that which is continued, is either by a rupture, or a wound. A
rupture is prevented by bewaring falls, and violent motion. A wound is avoided
by shunning of those things, which can cleave, cut, prick, rent, tear or
bruise, or hurt anyway: and both are to be cured by the Surgeon.

N. W. The cure of a Wound, is desperate, if any vital member be hurt: as the
heart, the brain, the liver, the entrals, etc. For then the vital actions are
hindered, and soon after cease. 2 If any member be quite lost, it cannot be set
on again: because the spirit has not wherewithal to pass into the part that
is severed.

V The distempers of the humors and the diseases that come from thence, always
proceed from some of these 6 causes: namely, either from 1 Crudity 2 Inflation
3 Distillation 4 Obstruction 5 Putrefaction 6 Inflammation


VI Crudity in the body is nutriment not sufficiently concocted: namely either
Chyle, or blood, which comes I from the quality of meat and drink; when they
are taken too raw, phlegmatic, unwholesome, which the concoctive faculty cannot
well subdue. 2 from the quantity: when more meat and drink is put in, then it
is able to alter and assimilate unto the body. For hence undigested and not
assimilated humors, burden the body, like strangers, and not pertaining
thereunto. 3 For want of exercise: when the natural heat is not stirred up,
nor strengthened to perform its office lustily in the concoction of meats.

From such like crudities diverse inconveniences follow. For 1 if the crudity
be in the stomach, it causes loathing of food: for so long as the first food is
not digested, there can be no appetite to any other. Again, children have an
appetite to eat earth, chalk, coals, etc. according as the crudities are
turned into the likeness of any matter. For like desires like. 2 If there be
a viscous crudity adhering in the ventricle or in the guts, being warmed it
takes spirit, and is turned into worms; which gnawing the bowels stir up evil
vapors by their motion: whence also come phartasies, very hurtful to the
head. Lastly, ctudity under the skin, (in the blood and flesh) begets
palenesse: and when it is collected and putrified; scabs, ulcers, etc.

Crudity is prevented by a temperate diet. as to Food, Sleep, and daily
exercises: and cured 1 by violent expurgation. 2 by strong exercises. 3 by the
use of tart meats and drinks. 4 by comforting the stomach with such things, as
heat, both within and without.

VII Inflation is much and gross vapor, exhaling from the crudities that are
gathered together, and stretching the members. And that either without pain as
when it causes yexing or belching in the ventricle; panting in the heart;
giddiness in the head (when being prohibited to go any further it is carried
in a round) laziness and stretching in the whole body; or else with pain, as
when it causes aches in the bowels (straightning the spirits that lie between
in the Fibers) and shurp or else blunt prickings in the muscles, according as
it is more gross or subtle

It is cured 1 by strong exercise, that the vapor being attenuated, may go out
at the pores opened. 2 by expurgation of the humors by which they are
generated.

VIII Distillation is the condensation of crude vapors into rheum, which is
the cause of many evils.

For crude vapors gettting up to the head, when as by reason of the abundance
and grossness of them, they cannot be expurgated by the ordinary passage,
they become rheum flowing several ways, and rausing diverse diseases. For 1
If they run abundantly, and (...) at the nose, they cause the Murre or Pose, 2
If the distillation fall into the jaws, it causes the Catarrhe. 3 If into the
kernels of the jaws, the Quinsie. 4 If into the lungs difficulty of breathing,
and the Asthma. 5 If the distillation be salt and sharp, ulcerating the lungs,
it causes the Cough. 6 Which if it be done often, and the lungs be filled with
apostemes, it causes the consumption. For when the ulcerous lungs cannot with
dexterity enough perform their office of cooling the heart, the vital spirit
is generated more hot then it should be, which does not cherish, but feed upon
the flesh and blood, and at length burns out the very workhouse it self of the
blood, which is, the liver: whence for want of blood, which is as it were the
food, follows the consumption of the whole body. 7 If the distillation flow in
abundance, and gross down the marrow of the back, it causes the Palsy, (by
hindering the animal spirit, that it cannot be distributed by the nerves
springing from the back bone.) 8 If it fill the nerves of the muscles only, it
becomes the Spasma, or Convulsions (that is when the nerve is contracted, like
as a chord being wet and dried again, is wont to be contracted, and become
shorter.) 9 If it flow subtle, and penetrating the nerves, it is at length
gathered together in the extremities of the members, and there raises sharp
pains; which in the feet are called the Gout; in the hands, Chiragra, or the
Hand-gout; in any of the joints of the bones Erthritica, the running gout; in
the hip, it is called Ischias, or the Hip-gout, commonly the Sciatica 10
Lastly, if those kind of runnings stay in the head, they procure diverse
diseases: as when they are subtle, the Headache. 11 Too raw and phlegmatic, the
Lethargy. 12 Salt, and choleric, the Frenzy. 13 Gross and mixed with a
melancholy humor, the Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness, (when as the spirits
diffused through the whole body, making haste to relieve the spirits befieged
in the brain, make most vehement stirs, and fight, till they either overcome
and repel the disease, or else faint and are extinguished. 14 But if the
gross phlegmatic humors have occupied all the vessels of the brain at once,
it becomes the apoplexy, that is, a privation of all sense and motion: whence
also the vital fire in the heart is soon after extinguished.

All these diseases are both prevented, and also (if they go not too far)
cured 1 by exercise. 2 by rectification of the brain by good smells. 3 by a
thin, hot, and sulphury air. 4 by thin, light meat and drink. But the peculiar
cure of every disease is committo the physiciaus.

IX Obstruction is a stopping of the bowels by thickened phlegm, whence it comes
to pass that they cannot execute their office. For example, when the entrals
are stopped, that they cannot void, it is the Volvuls, or wringing of the guts:
when the liver is stopped, the dropsy; (For the Chylus being not turned into
blood, flows through the veins and members, and is not turned into members.)
When the bladder of gall is stopped, the Yellow Jaundise; when the Spleen, the
Black Jaundise; (For in the first the choler, in the other the melancholy, when
it cannot be voided, diffuseth it self through the blood. But when the urine
pipes, or the (...), or the bladder are stopped, that is by reason of the
breeding of Tartar, which they call the Stone: which stopping the passages, by
its sharpness pains the Veins and Nerves.

The cure is 1 by purgations. 2 by medicines attenuating, or breaking, cutting,
and driving out the gross humors which Physicians know.

X Putrefaction is the corruption of some humor in the body: namely, either of
phlegm, or of choler, or of melancholy; which putrefying either in or out of
their vessels, produce fevers or ulcers.

The cure is 1 Expurgation of the place affected. 2 A good diet. 3 Motion.

XI Inflammation is a burning of the vital spirit (N. vital) or of the blood
caused by too much motion (either of the body by wearying it, or of the mind,
by musing and anger,) or else by putrefaction, or else by obstruction.

For it is known out of the physics, that motion does heat even unto firing,
and that by obstruction does (...) an Antiperistasis exasperate the heat
included (even in these things that are watery and p^trid) so that at length it
breaks out violently, hay laid up wet, (when it cannot get transpiration) does
show. When the blood is kindled within, it becomes a fever: when under the
skin, S. Anthonies fire.

The general cure is the opening of a vein, and cooling. But of fevers (being
that it is a most common disease, and of diverse kinds) something more is to be
said.

XII The fever so called, from its fervency or heat, is of three kinds. 1 The
Ephemera. 2 The Putrid. 3 The Hectic. The first burns the spirits; the second
the humors; the third the solid parts. The first like a raging hot wind
scorching all it meets with: the second like boiling water poured into a
vessel, which it heats with it self. The third like unto a hot vessel,
heating the water poured into it with it self.

For the Hectic occupies the bones and membranes, and eats and consumes them
with an unnatural heat, by degrees almost insensibly, till at length it
causes death. It is very like the Consumption. But the putrid or rotten fever
occupies the blood and humors; by which the whole body grows hot. The Ephemera
is a more subtle flame, feeding upon the spirits only: and therefore it scarce
endures one or two days, til the peccant cause be consumed by the spirit it
self. Hence either health or death usually follows within two or three days;
and therefore it is called the Ephemera or diary Fever: also the Malign
fever. Of which sort also is the pestilentiall infection: for it comes after
the same manner.

Putrid fevers are most usual, but with very much difference: for when the
humors putrify within their vessels, (or workhouses) especially near the
heart, (in the liver or the gall,) the spirit rises against them, and kindles
them: and ceases not to assault them, till it either expel the rottenness
being turned into soot, or be extinguished it self; and therefore this fever
is often deadly, it is called the Continual Fever.

But if the humors rot out of their vessels, that is, in the veins or members,
it is an Intermitting Fever. For the spirit rises up at certain times, and
opposes that rottenness with heat: but because this battle is made further
off from its Castle, the heart, when the fight is ended, it returns home. And
if the putrefying humor be phlegm, it still returns to oppose it the next day:
hence the Quotidian Fever. If it be yellow, choler; then every third day.
Hence the Tertian. If black choler, the fourth day. Hence the Quartan: the
cause of the inequality, is because the phlegm recollects it self soonest, and
makes new business for the spirits: but is withal sooner dissipated: Hence
the Quotidian lasts not long. Melancholy being that it is a dreggy humor, does
not so soon recruit it self: but because it is soft and viscous, it is not so
easily overcome: hence the long continuance of Quartans, In the Tertian,
because the spirit opposes yellow choler, which is hot of it self, is made
the hottest fight: hence Tertians are called burning fevers. They are
sometimes changed one into another, or one joined with another, according as
one while one putrified humor, another while another is to be opposed.

Hence it appears 1 why a fever begins with cold? because the vital spirit
being to oppose the rottenness, gathers heat as it were its aid from every
part, the outward members in the mean time being benu(...) and quaking with
cold. (For even in too much fear, when the spirit gathers it self into the
inward parts, there is wont to follow a chillness of the outward members, and a
quaking with cold.) 2 Whence afterward heat? because the spirits, after they
are hotter with fight and motion, return again to the members; which, being
cold before, do so much the worse endure the heat, returning now hotter then
ordinary. 3 Why the fever leaves faintness behind it? because the spirit
wearied with fight, betakes it self to rest, leaving the members destitute. 4
Why food is hurtful at the beginning of a fever? because when the spirit is
preparing it self for the battle, it has another business put upon it, (to
concoct the food:) But seeing that it is not able to do both, it either
assaults the disease more weakly, or else leaves the food unconcocted: or at
least, if it do both, it weakens and tires out it self too much. 5 Why it is
dangerous to expel the fever over soon? because the fever is of it self a
benefit to nature, driving away the rottenness in time, left it should at
length prevail and oppress the heart. Therefore that is no good cure of
fevers which stays the fits, but that which ripens the rottenness for
expulsion: And strengthens nature to oppose them, which I leave to Physicians.

Let this be the sum of that which has been said, Crudity is the seed of all
diseases. For thence gross vapors arising, cause Inflation, the same condensed
in the head, cause, Distillation: in the other members, Obstruction: whence
flows either Rottenness or Inflammation. Therefore let him that prevents
crudities, believe this; that he takes the best course that may be for his whole
body. Now the way to prevent them is a temperate diet and daily exercises. O
the strange virtue of labor, whereby we get both our bread and health! which
mystery if the slothful understood, they would not waste their lives with
idleness.

Of the Diseases of the Mind.
I The Diseases of the mind are vices, procuring either disquiet, or grief
thereto.

II Diseases disquieting the mind, are evil desires; that is, too much
ardency. 1 Of Living. 2 Of Eating and Drinking. 3 Of Multiplying it self. 4 Of
Knowing. 5 Of Having. 6 Of Excelling.

N. W. These are thus expressed by their proper names, 1 Self-love. 2
Intemperancy. 3 Salacity. 4 Curiosity. 5 Covetousness. 6 Ambition. For they
that are given to these, itch and are disquieted continually.

III The diseases that cause grief to the mind, are immoderate affections;
that is violent alterations for those things which befall us according to our
desires, or contrary thereto: but especially Sadness, Angor, and at
I^ksomnesse of life.

IV The remedies of the mind are held forth in the Ethics. The Sum where of
comes to this. Love the Golden Mean, shun extremes like unto precipices. Never
desire to do more then thou can: Remember that thou art a man. For that may
befall every one that befalls any one. There is a vicissitude of all things, an
unconquered mind overcomes all things, etc.

Of the Diseases of the Soul.
I The Diseases of the Soul are, Forgetfulness of God, Torment of Conscience,
and Despair of Mercy.

II Forgetfulness of God is cured by the Fear of God. Of, I say, that God, who
sees all, judges all, rewards all, to every one according to his works: to
avoid whose hand, it is impossible. (For in him, we move, live, and have our
being,) but to endure it is intolerable. (For he is a consuming fire, etc.)

III Torment of conscience is healed by prayers, and and study of innocence,
Psalm. 26. 6. Eccl. 12. 13, 14. For if our heart condemn us not, we have full
assurance, etc. 1 John 3. 21.

IV Despair is healed by the blood of that only Lamb of God, which purges us
from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. and reconciles us to his Father, Romans 3. 25. and
saves us, Romans 5. 9. and gives us eternal life, Joh. 6. 54

In body sound, amind as sound, O God we pray thee give,

That here in peace, in after bliss; for ever we may live.

FINIS.

