EXCELLENT HELPS Really found out, tried and had, (Whereof the Parties
hereafter mentioned are true and sufficient Witnesses, by a Warming-Stone In
his Case, which not costing much, will save much cost in fire, and withal
avoid the danger of fire. And likewise is very useful and comfortable for the
colds of Aged and sick People, and for women with child or in childbed, and
for sucking and young children, and such as have their hearing and seeing
decaying, and for the Toothache, sore Throats, and the cold fits of Agues.

As also For Fluxes, Rheumes, Collicks, Ruptures, and many other infirmities,
or any cold diseases; and for those that in Beds, Studies, Shops, Ships,
Churches or elsewhere have need of heat, yet cannot conveniently make use of
fire.

And likewise For the poor, when having no fire of their own, they may borrow
the heating of this stone at a Neighbors fire, if his Charity be not
altogether cold.

Published by Sir RICHARD CAREW Barronet, for the Honor of God from whom every
good gift comes, and for the good of all People, from the Newborn Babe to the
decrepit and decaying old man.

The third Edition with some Experiments newly added.

LONDON: Printed for John Bartlet Bookseller, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Gilt Cup, near St. Austins gate in Paul's Churchyard, over

The Warming Stone.
THe decay of the natural heat of mine own person by sickness and many ill
accidents has info^ced me many times to seek help of artificial warmth, and by
the blessing of God I have so often received ease of my grief, and I verily
believe the preservation of my life in many grievous extremities; and I thank
God daily do, and neither my self, or any other ever had any harm thereby; that
it has made me not only willing, but also very desirous to communicate the
knowledge thereof to as many as conveniently I may. For I hold it the greatest
earthly happiness that any man can possibly have, to do good; and I fear many
have perished for want of the knowledge hereof, and I hope many Millions
hereafter may be saved hereby, and with this advantage also, that abundance of
fuel may be saved every where. ( To help grievous vomiting and purging. To
help vomits and pur^ing.
)

Once when I was dangerously oppressed with often and very strong vomiting, and
much purging, and did rise out of my bed, and go into the cold so many times,
and so speedily one after another, that I could neither give heat to my Bed nor
receive any from it. ( To maintain heat when it cannot be done by any other
means.)

To maintain (...).
Another time also when by an hurt in my foot, my grief was so exceedingly
increased, that both my foot and leg were grown full of black spots, and white
between, from the sole of the foot to the knee; and most which saw it took it
to be a Gangrene, which they thought to be incurable without cutting off my
leg, which also was so mortified with cold that I could give it no heat from my
body. I then by the blessing of God, (as I have many other times done)
maintained heat in it by the help of a kind of stone which I find to be apt to
receive heat much sooner, and likewise to retain it much longer then any other
thing, which I could find upon any reason or trial. For I found clothes heated
by the fire would quickly lose their warmth; and likewise boards could not
retain their heat long; and that Brick and Free stone required much time to
heat them, and held it but a little while; and that other stones were not able
to endure strong heating, but would suddenly fly in pieces, whereas this stone
being well seasoned at the first, with a moderate heat will both receive it
quickly and keep it very long, To heat the ^^et.
and impart it very kindly and agreeable unto Nature. ( To heat the feet.)

When my feet have been cold, i warming the stone by the fire, and putting the
soles of my feet thereon, it has in one quarter of an hour recovered me more
heat unto them, then scorching them by a violent fire could have done in an
whole hour. (...)
( To help the Colic.)

When I have likewise been grievously pained and tortured with the Colic, the
strength of the heat of this stone, has by applying it unto my Belly, suddenly
eased and cured me, and many others likewise have found the like remedy for the
same grief. To procure ^weat in child-(...).
( To procure sweat in childbed.)

A Gentlewoman in the Parish where I lived being put to sweat after a dangerous
childbirth, and there being some difficulty to procure it, yet the heat of a
Warming-stone caused her to sweat and she withal recovered her strength, and
was afterward the mother of many children. This Warming-stone also has
likewise helped a woman great with child who had a great ach in her thigh, and
thought she could not be cured, till she were freed of her burden by
childbirth; yet by the help of the warmth of this stone found perfect remedy
above two months before the time of her delivery came. Ach helped,
An ach is helped hereby of Arthur Reeps wife of Antony in Cornwall.)

Another having by long sitting up and writing by night gotten a great cold and
pain in the Elbow and flesh of his left Arm; Numbness and Aches.
which both continued and increased with much numbness and deadness feared the
utter decay of that hand and Arm, applying this Warming-stone unto his sad
grief, is now by the blessing of God so well recovered thereof that he feels
the same no more then if he had never had any infirmity therein, without using
the help of any other thing, as likewise many others since have recovered their
Aches and other griefs by the same means. ( of Mr. Christopher Ough of St. Ive
in Cornwall.)

( To help any cold in Childbed.) And it is a thing certainly known, that the
least cold in childbed which cannot be recovered by the sole strength of their
(then weakened) natural heat brings certain death, so I know no other remedy so
likely to recover her sweat and strength in any such accident, as by the help
of these Warming-stones in their cases, either one or more of them, as need
shall require, to have them applied unto any part of the body that wants them.
This has been tried by (...) and recovered her health and strength again (
Help given hereby to free the after-burth^n of Elizabeth Cruse of Brixam in
Devon. To free the ^^ter-burthen


( Strength given in the exceeding great weakness in Travail of M. Mounts wife
of Liskerd in Cornwall) Another also who was grown so pale and cold after long
travail that the Midwife who was sent for to help her, finding and feeling her
feet and her face to be cold, supposed she had been dead, and said unto those
who had sent for her, she marvelled why they had sent for her to come to a dead
body: they answered she was not dead, though very weak; whereupon rubbing her
face and finding some warmth therein, she caused them presently to send to her
house with all speed for a couple of these Warming-stones, by the help of the
heat whereof applied to her feet, and her belly, God blessed her endeavors so
well, that both the woman and the child were preserved. ( Help given in great
weakness after child, Weakness (...) childbir^^
birth, to John Pits wife of St. Germans in Cornwall.)

One also being grown so weak after childbirth that both her self and friends,
daily and hourly expected her death, a neighbor of hers who had one of these
stones hearing thereof persuaded her to make use of it; whereupon she did it,
and found much ease thereby; To procure speedy deliv^ry.
and yielded her continual (...) for a month or more, and at last drew her
grief into her Back, and there made it break away by an Impostume; and now God
be praised by little and little, she has recovered her strength again, and
verily believes it has saved her life. ( Procurement of a more speedy delivery
then heretofore to Wil^iam Skins wife of St. Srephens by Saltash in Cornwall.)

Another woman likewise who has born six sons, and for the first five could
not be delivered of any one of them in less then two days pain, was never so
weak with breeding any of the former, as she was with the last, yet sooner
delivered then any of the rest, which she supposes to have been performed by
the help and comfort she receives from these Warming stones in her Travail with
this last child, because she made use of them now, and did never before, for
that their use was not then made known ( ease and sleep procured, and a
grievous pain in the back helped of Mr. Thomas Furlongs wife of Antony in
Cornwall, Sleep procured and pain of the back helped.
)

One of my neighbors who had been long weak and sickly; and newly had her old
grief and weakness much increased by the loss of her eldest son, when with all
the help that she could get by Physic, in a long night she could take little
rest; by the warmth of these stones, the one being applied to her feet, and the
other to the bottom of her Belly, she found more ease and sounder sleep, then
she could do at any time in a quarter of a year before. And she told me that
when her maid had forgotten (after an eight or ten days using thereof) to
provide this help for her, she slept as ill, as she was wont to do before; but
now (God be praised) is very well amended in health and strength. The same
party also being extremely weakened with such a grievous pain in her back, as
she was neither able to go nor stand, and told her husband that if it should
continue with her but three days she thought verily it would cost her life; by
applying these Warming-stones to the place grieved, with in three hours was
able to walk about her chamber, at which her Husband told me he marvelled much
how so great an alteration should be wrought in so short a time. ( of Robert
Sloget of Antony in Cornwall.)

Another likewise having so grievous a pain in his back, as that it forced him
to keep his bed, was by the help of this stone cured thereof. ( And of Arthur
Masters of the same Parish.

And another also though his pain therein was so great, as it so much weakened
his body, as he was not able to turn in his bed, was by the same means speedily
cured; and very many others whom for brevity sake I forbear to mention. Rupture.
( Help to bring in again the Rupture of Mr. Simon Row and another of Antony
aforesaid.)

The help hereof also has recovered those who were endangered by taking cold
in their Ruptures, that both themselves and their friends despaired of their
lives; because the fat of their guts being fallen down into their Cods, and
there grown hard and stiff by the cold, could not possibly be re-placed, till
strong heat had resolved it into softness again; and so there was means found
to return them into their due place, by which God be praised some who (in
regard of their great weakness) desired to be prayed for publicly in the
Church, being out of hope of life, have recovered h^alth and strength again,
though one of them was near threescore and ten when by this means he was
helped. ( The same for the Fundament of Alexander Gornard of the same Parish.

Another who with violent labor had made his Fundament to issue out of his
Body, so as it grieved him exceedingly, by the warmth of these stones made it
return to his place, and so God be praised continues, unless by too much labor
it be forced out again, which when he at any time feels by the same means he
still helps himself; for when griefs are renewed, so must their Remedies be. (
The fluxes helped of diverse of Richard Rundles house of Antony aforesaid, and
others in other places.)

It has likewise done exceeding much good to many who have had very violent
fluxes (whereof (...) The same Remedy likewise helps much to abate the violent
cold fits of Agues; several ones being applied to every place where the cold is
felt, by means whereof they will soon give heat to the w^ole body, and being
applied to the stomach strengthens the weakness thereof very much against the
Cough, (...) help dige^^^on.
ill d^gestion or any disease which comes of a cold cause. ( To help digestion,
and cold in the stom^ch.)

For it exceedingly helps the weakness of the stomach, because all good
digestion being made by heat, as extreme outward colds weaken it by abating
that heat; so this outward heat strengthens it much by adding more warmth
unto it: ^old in the ^^omach
and one having been for diverse years so overcome with cold in her stomach, as
she could hardly take any rest by night; by the help of the heat of this stone
is so freed thereof, as she has not since felt it a great while. (Thomas
Edwards wife of Plymouth in Devon.

And we find that boiled, bak^d and roasted meats being eaten hot, that helps us
much to concoct the same meat. And whereas we seek help by artificial liquours
that have an extraordinary heat to help the cold weakness of Nature by their
strength; if too little be taken, it does little good; if too much, much harm,
^o supply the (...) of a war^ing-Pan.
whereas the heat of these stones may be duly tempered to our use, being
continued, increased, abated, or removed suddenly, as the diseased party shall
think good. (To supply the need of a Warming-pan.)

The same stones also put into the Bed, do not only supply the need of a
Warming-Pan, but being put into a Case will retain a comfortable heat in the
Bed for above ten hours together; and a sensible h^at for fourteen if he be
thoroughly warmed; which must be done as hot as may be without burning the Case.
This is tried by spitting on the stone or sprinkling water thereon; for if it
hiss not overmuch it is never too hot; ^irect^ons for ^eating the ^^one.
and if it be too hot being removed from the fire, or sprinkled with water the
burning heat will be gone from the outside. And a stone in a Case well made
may be applied to the head, feet, belly, or any other part of the Body that
has need of it; and may be as soon put away from it, if the heat be too great.
( The use of this stone at the Church.)

^he use of the ^^one at ^^urch.
My house being a mile and a quarter from the Church, upon a Christmas day when
the Wind blew cold, and there was a hard frost, I caused two of these stones to
be heated for me at home, and so carried them to the Church, where putting the
one under my feet, and my hands on the other, they kept-me so warm in my Seat
from the beginning of Prayer, during the time of the Service, Sermon, and a
long Communion, as I think I could not have been by a great fire in my house;
and when they were brought home, the Case being opened they remained so hot, as
one could hardly endure to keep his hand on them; yet now I find that keeping
one sometimes under; sometimes on my feet, and the other on my Thighs, and
laying mine hands thereon, they keep the whole Body more warm then the other
way. ^ost in wood ^^ved.
In extreme cold weather, I find also that making use of them in my Bed, they
heat me both far longer and better then any Warming-Pan could do. ( The cost in
wood saved thereby.)

And one of these stones has yielded me so much heat, as the heat by fire
would have cost me above forty pound, (though wood be not so dear with us, as
it is in many other places) for I have made use of him these three or four
Winters continually by night, To give heat ^n such place^ ^here it cannot be
had by ^th^r means.
and many times by day and night in Summer when I have been ill at ease ( To
give heat in such places, where it cannot be had by any other means)

Besides, it has continued heat so long and so often in my bed, as I could by
no other means have gotten the like heat there, if I would have given an 100 l.
for it. Yet the stone by his often heating is not grown worse, but rather
better then when I first used him; so as he who gets one of these stones does
purchase the inheritance of a costless fire; except he forfeit it by his own
fault. It gives also not only a greater, but also a sweeter heat then the
Warming-Pan does, unless the Case be laid on some b^ard or stone where some
Kitcin-stuff has been spilt; therefore that must be carefully avoided. (
Inconveniences to be avoided he^ein) And likewise if the Case be left in the
open air in moist weather, though it be within doors, Inconvenienc^s to be
avoided herein.
it will drink up so much insensible moisture, as when the hot stone comes to
be put into it next again, it will make the Freez sweat, so as a man may wash
his hands thereon, which they will not do, if they be kept from the air. These
stones are likewise very useful for all Scholars to heat their hands and
feet, when they must attend their studies in cold weather; and for all persons
which by their Trades in such seasons must keep their shops, Useful for all
Scholars.
or for the service of God continue in the Church, and such as travel by sea,
who may have these stones warmed by the fi^e, though they cannot warm
themselves in that place where the fire is. The small cost which belongs to it,
is mostly in providing the stone, and Case at first; for they will be heated by
the same fire which is made for any other purpose, either to bake, boil, brew
or roast, or by any other fire either laid upon it, or set against it by
convenient turnings, that all parts of the stone may be heated alike, which may
be done, without any hindrance of any of the aforesaid uses. And by often trial
I find that two of eight inches long and four inches broad, will do more
serv^ce then a single one of double the length and bre^dth; because they ^^ll
be less subject to breaking with falling* and are the more easily ^ut to and
likewise at one time be applied to several places. And such poor people as have
no fire of their own, they may heat it at their Neighbors fire, which will
damnifie them no more then lighting one candle by another. And whereas no fire
can be contained without consuming the fuel which makes it, and that cannot be
provided without continual charge according to the wasting thereof; this stone
being so heated, will keep his heat without cost for diverse hours in other
places; but in the Bed for a whole night, and that without renewing the heat,
or troubling the rest of the party who needs the warmth thereof. These uses
and experiments will be verified by the witness of all the persons herein
mentioned, and many others who have very often, and do daily make use thereof,
some of which have not been more averse from being persuaded to try it in the
beginning, For deafne^ and sight ^^^pen.
then afterward they have been loath to leave the benefit they found thereby.
And as I was very confid^nt at the first publication hereof that many other
uses of them would be found out, besides those then mentioned: so I thank God
with all my heart, it has since that time recovered the hearing of one of
sixty six years of age; who was grown so deaf, as for two years together he
could hardly understand any thing that was spoken unto him, unless the speaker
did cry aloud into his ear, the use hereof by laying it hot under his head when
he went to bed, caused a hard thing as big as a pease to fall out of his ear,
and has so well recovered his hearing, as that he can unde^stand ordinary
talking; and likew^se acknowledges that his sight is much thereby amended
also, so that he can read b^tter now then he could do at any time in 3 years
before. (The sight and hearing of John Cowling of Antony in Cornwall helped.)

Another also of the age of sixty six years, using this stone to help the
deafnes of one of his ears, was soon helped thereby, and perceives a great
amendment in his sight thereby likewise. ( The hearing helped, and a grievous
pain in the back eased of John Jackman of St. Stepens by Saltash in Cornwall.)

The same party also being so tortured with the pain in his belly that he much
feared the loss of his life therewith, and therefore made his Will; by applying
this stone to his belly recovered so well that the next day he was able to go
to his daily labor. Another of the age of ninety four years, by using the help
of this stone has been freed of a grief which continually pained him in his
knees for two years before; and by sleeping on this stone has so recovered his
hearing, Pain in (...) and knees
as he can undestand any thing that is spoken unto him, better now then he
could do in above thirty years before, as my self know certainly: for he was a
servant of this house then, and has dwelt near to me ever since, and he
likewise says, that his decaying sight is much amended hereby. ( The hearing
and sight helped, and a pain in the knees eased of John Michel of Crafthole in
Cornwall.)

Another likewise who was subject to much pain in her head, and grown so
dim-sighted, that she could hardly go well about the house; by sleeping on this
stone has found much ease, and such a recovery of her sight that now she can
see to spin thread. ( The sight helped of William Bylands wife of St. Stephens
aforesaid.) Sight ho^^^^


Another who was grievously pained with the toothache, being advised to use one
of these stones, and to lay her head thereon; by the use thereof she not only
got ease of her pain (as many others have likewise done) but also being hard of
hearing, was at the same time, by the same means so much helped of that
infirmity, as all those who knew her before wondered at the alteration;
Tooth-(...)
and it has been often observed, that the heat which this stone gives to the
head, does not only give ease to the griefs, but also much refreshes the
complexion. ( The toothach eased of one Mr. Kneebones servant of Linkinhorn in
Cornwall.)

Another that was troubled with such a noise in her head, as she could very
hardly rest, by sleeping on this stone was by Gods blessing cured of this
infirmity, ( Another helped of a great noise in her head)

A neighbor of mine being so extremely grieved with pain in his head that he
feared the extremity thereof would have made him lose his wits and his life,
laying his head on one of these Warming-stones well heated, began to feel ease
within half an hour, Pain in t^^ head.
and within three hours after felt filthy trash fleet out of his ear, and has
by the blessing of God been perfectly cured thereof ever since. ( A grievous
pain in the head helped of William Dwean of Antony aforesaid.)

Likewise one that was so grievously pained in her head and ear, as they were
forced to watch with her all night, and much feared her life; and though she
were eight years of age, were fain to lay her in a cradle, where by laying this
stone hot under her head, within 24 hours it made her perfectly well, Pain in
t^^ ear.
by causing something which offended her to issue forth of her ears ( A pain in
the head and ear hol^en of Theophila the daughter of Mr. Samuel Deeble of
Antony aforesaid.)

One also who was grieved with much pain in his side, applying this stone to
the grief, it soon ripened his Impostume, and made it break outward. Impost^^^
Another likewise who was taken with grief in his right side, though it were
very hot, was persuaded by the forenamed party to use this stone as he had
done* which by the blessing of God wrought the same effect with him, and drew
it to an Impostumat^^ (...) of his body tha^ it made him soluble, which he
before. (...).
( A great pain in the side helped of Roger Buckland, of St. Stephens
aforesaid. The like of Lodowick Wyat of Antony aforesaid)

One likewise that had a grievous sore breast so that one might turn an eg in
the hole thereof, for which she could find no remedy by any other medicine
which she used, until she added the help of this Warming-stone, was within a
little while by the blessing of God thereby cured. ( A sore breast cured of
James Rundl^s wife of Drewstainton in Devon. (...) breast.
)

And another also who had a great pain in her breast; and was very hard swollen,
she applying this stone thereunto eased it, and drove it into her shoulder; and
so following it with the stone drove it into her arm, and by applying the stone
unto it there, put it clean away, and so saved it from breaking. ( The sore
breast kept from breaking of Arthur Reeps wife of Antony aforesaid.)

(...) give by (...) in curing (...).
And I am persuaded that many Women's breasts by this means may be kept from
breaking; and many have their lives saved who die in childbirth by taking cold
in their breasts (as Florence Reed one of this Parish did) and that many
Chirurgions may oftentimes make very good use of this stone in curing some
hurts, when for want of heat in the Patient, nature alone cannot work so
effectually, as it will do by this help. ( To give help by heat in curing of
wounds, and ease the belly in purging; and strength of retention to the stomach
after vomiting. (...) strengthen (...) stomach.
)

It may likewise be very useful for Physicians to ease their Patients of much
of the pain in their Bellies when they are purged; and to strengthen their
stomachs to give them better retention when they have been weakened by vomiting.
For so it did unto one who was taken so extreme ill, as she fell into a
grievous vomiting; and was scarce able to fetch her breath; she applying the
stone to the place where she felt her greatest grief, within one hour found a
great deal of ease thereby; and now (God be p^aised) is reasonable well again.
(Thomas Harsdons wife of St. Germans in Cornwall.)

It may lik^wise yield much comfort to such persons, as have had much blood
drawn from them to preserve their lives by supply^ng their defect of heat t^ll
their blood be renewed again, as it did unto one of my Parish. recover (...).

(...) ach cu^ed.


( To supply the want of heat in such as have been let blood, as of John
Popleston.)

One also that had a great ach in her leg, which made her very often keep
house, by applying this stone thereunto, removed it from thence into her knee;
and following it there drove it into her pin-bone, and lastly into her stomach;
which made her very sick for a time, but at last it brake away in exce^d^ng
great b^lchings, and so was freed thereof that she felt it not in a long time
after. ( An ach cured of Mistress Anne Southmead of Morton Hamsted in Devon.

Another likewise going to a place half a mile from home, when he was gone two
or three But-lengths from his house was so taken in his Thigh and the outside
of his left leg, as it made him return to his house again, being not able to go
any farther; and when he came home, he went presently to Bed, and caused a
couple of these stones to be heated for him; and so applying the one to his
thigh, and the other to his leg, within three hours it took away all his pain,
insomuch as he never felt it since, (...) given in (...) at (...).
being now a year past. ( The like of Richard Rundle of Antony aforesaid.)

One also having been extreme sick of a long and violent Fever, and grown
speechless, was so mortified in her flesh, that both her feet and legs to the
knee, and hands and arms to the elbow, appeared right like a dead person; and
she had no sense of feeling left in either of them; Whereupon her friends
having some of these Warming-stones did heat a couple very hot, and applied the
one to the soles of her feet, and laid another on her Belly, and her hands
thereon, which continuing in that manner near about three hours, at the three
hours end she tumbled them out of the Bed, at which they much marvell^d. But
one that was present guessed that her patting them away was out of a desire to
have their heat renewed; as by Gods disposing it appeared plainly afterward;
for the stones being heated she did not move them, till she found the abatement
of their heat again; and then she used continually to thrust them out of the
Bed, as she did at first, and so lay three hours before she could recover her
speed; which when she did, the first thing she called for was to have the
stones heated for her again. And thus by the mercy of God beyond all their
expectations, she recovered her health and strength fully again, and continues
it so God be praised at this time, it being above a year past when she was so
dangerously sick. ( Help given in exceeding great weakness after a fever to
John Seawards wife of Drewstainton in Devon.)

(...) weak^^s by fev^r.
And many others which have been so weakened with fevers, as their friends
doubted their lives, have by the application of these stones recovered health
and strength. (John Rawlings wife and son of Antony aforesaid, and Grace my
Brother John Carews daughter)

(...) throat.
One also that was so overcome with a sore throat, as that she was neither able
to eat nor drink, nor to let down one drop of milk through her throat which she
sucked in by a Reed, so as she doubted her life, having one of these
Wa^ming-stones, she did heat him very hot, and held him so against her neck and
th^oat, so long till both her arms grew extreme weary, (for finding ease* she
was (...) to put him away) and by the favor of God (...)

One likewise which was taken with a great deadness in his hand, which
afterward possessed his arm, and increased farther into his shoulder, and then
into his back, and at last seized soon all his body, as he was not able to turn
in his bed, nor to put his meat to his mouth; having three of these
Warming-stones, which he applied unto those places where he felt most grief, by
their heat within four hours they brought him to a great heat and sweat, and in
the morning acknowledged he found great ease of his former grief, A great
numnesse.
and being likewise taken at the same time with a great pain in his side and a
short cough, by applying one of these stones thereunto was freed thereof, and
was able to walk about his chamber within two or three days, which grief he
has been subject unto for these 5 or six years, and did usually heretofore
hold him three weeks or a month at a time, and was now cured in three or four
days ( A great benumbing helped of Mr. Pethin of St. Stephens by Saltash in
Cornwall)

One also going to visit a friend of his, was suddenly taken with a very great
pain in the bottom of his belly, and his thigh. which afterward descended
into his leg, and made his leg and foot so cold, as he had no sense therein.
Then by the help of one of these Warming stones, Grievous pain the belly and
thigh (...).
he was preserved for two days, though in much pain; but after two days, (by
continuing the same help) ^e began to feel some ease, whereas his pain before
was so great, tha^ it made him light, and to say he knew not what; but in four
days after he gathered so much strength, as he was able to walk up and down by
a staff, and at eight days end was able to go a fl^ght-shot to take boat, and
so to got home to his own house at Plymouth, carrying the stone hot with him
all the way, which using continually for a month, afterward he recovered
strength to go to his ordinary labor again. (The grievous pain in the belly
and thigh eased of John Johnson of Plymouth in Devon.

One also that had been long sick and was much weakened therewith, Strength
given in great weakness.

Pain in the legs.


found so much help by the warmth of these stones, as he verily beli^ves they
have been a great means to preserve his life. ( Strength given in very great
weakness to John Comer of St. Clether in Cornwall,)

His wife also having been a long time pained so in her legs, that she could
hardly rest two hours in a Winters night, and was forced by her grief to cry
out so many times, as her husband could scarce take his rest by her; by the
help of these stones, now (God be praised) she scarce awakes two hours in a
night, and rests much more quietly. ( A great pain eased, and sleep procured to
his wife.)

One likewise being at a friends house, and having drank some honeyed drink,
Torture in t^^ belly cured.
was so tortured with pain in his belly and guts, as both himself and those of
the house much feared it would have cost him his life, but by the help of the
heat of these stones, was made perfectly well again within twenty four hours. (
A grievous torture in the belly eased of John Rawling of Antony aforesaid.)

One also that was so much weakened with a continual scouring, as in the end it
drew much blood from him; and made him look so pale and earthy, as most of his
friends despaired of his life; for he was grown so weak, and his natural heat
so much abated, Looseness.
as he could find but a little warmth in these stones when they were so hot
that they did scorch his skin* yet by Gods mercy maintained it so long by this
help, as he has fully recovered this desperate disease; and likewise a
grievous pain in his back which the same brought with it; and has now renewed
his former complexion and strength again. ( The great help given in exceeding
great weakness and coldness to Philip Collin of Antony aforesaid.)

The help of these stones has been found likewise to be very useful for the
diseases of young children, and one of my neighbors having a nursed child
extreme sick with breeding of teeth, Wind.
and his belly very hard swollen; by applying this hot stone thereunto, gave such
strength to the weak child through the heat thereof, that it enabled him within
a little while to break much wind, and so to avoid his grief. ( The help given
to young children hereby. John Gondles wife of Antony aforesaid.)

Another likewise having a sucking child laid in the Cradle, Cold in (...) head.
so overcome with cold and the Pose that it could hardly draw its breath,
laying this stone in the beginning of the night under the child's head, found it
the next morning perfectly cured of this disease. And another time when he knew
not how otherwise to get heat to the same child's feet, procured it by the
warmth of the same stone. And I verily believe many both women and children
perish, for lack of the knowledge of the help they might receive by these
stones. (Robert Trewhar^es wife of Antony aforesaid.

One also whose child had a rupture at the Navel, which came upon it within
three weeks after it was born, and continued almost a quarter of a year, so
that it could hardly rest by night; Rupture.
by applying this stone thereunto, began to rest better within a little while,
and by keeping it continually in, and the stone thereunto, is now become
perfectly well. (Thomas Hoskins child of Antony aforesaid.)

My self also had a young Civet Cat so extremely overcome with wet and cold,
Stiffness in the Limbs.
as that all his limbs were stiff, and there was scarce any show of life lest
in him, yet by applying the heat of this stone, he is so well recovered as if
he had never been ill. And I believe both children and other young things may
have their lives preserved by this means when it can be done by n^thing else,
For clothes (...) and increase it unto living creatures when they find heat
there before, but cannot the preservation of life, as mankind has. And some of
these parts have much lamented, that they ^^ver thoughgt on using this help for
the prese^vation of their children; (...)
which they think by the grace of God, by thi^ means they might have saved. For
they said, cold was the cause of their death; and they had of the stones, (...).
but did not think they might do good to children, until I told it them. And
as the Scripture mentions how King David's heat decayed so with his age, that
his servants were ^ain to seek extraordinary helps to preserve it; so the
decaying old people of these times have found much need, and withal much help
and comfort, when they have been B^d-rid for diverse years before their death,
by the warmth of the^e stones, not being ab^e to get it by any other means, and
therefore have been as careful to call for them as for their food.

Mistress Susanna Durdan in London being in great extremity with the toothache,
is cured by applying this Warming-stone to her cheek. (...)-ache.
At the Mairmaid in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Laurence Jemmet the son of Master William Jemmet, now Preacher of Redding,
having lost his voice six months, (...).
so as he was not understood when he spoke, unless he laid his mouth to ones
ear, and having a cough of the lungs, and spitting blood frequently, having
used all other means of cure, and there being in the eye of reason no hope of
recovery, by the use of this Warming-stone when he went to Bed, applying it to
his throat and stomach, in six weeks time (by Gods blessing) was restored
perfectly, and is now as heal^hy as ever in his life. He was then servant to
Master Blackberry Leather-seller in London.

Colonel Clark of London, who had an extreme pain in his knee; cured by
applying this and also was pained with the toothache to extremity, (...)
and was freed by the use of this stone.

At Westminster, a Gentlewoman affirmed, that great experience had been had to
her knowledge of such who were in extreme torture wi^h the stone in the
bladder, and by the use of this stone applied to the flanck, (...).
it did facilitate the making of water.

Thomas Bourn Student in Astrology, and Physician at Marlborough in Wil^shire,
it cured him of the stone in the kidney.

I^ has cured the bloody flux when Physicians have given them over, as one of
Warwick affi^med, by applying one stone in the case to the fundament, (...)
Flux.
and another to the belly.

John Bartlet that sells these stones, and prints this Pape^, affi^ms that
himself being very lame with the Sciatica to extremity, by applying this stone
but two hours was cured of his lameness, and by following of it two nights
afterward when he went to Bed, laying of it to that part of his hip where his
pain had been, hops he is perfectly cured.

Master Humphrey Tompkins living in Hereford shire near Monnigton, and had long
had and used this stone, (...).
affirmed that one might have it and use i^ six years, be^o^e he shall know all
the good that might be reaped by it, in regard of several diseases.

Mr. Winslow sometimes of New England, afterward one of the Committee at
Habberdashers-Hall, London, being at Dr. Willsons the Physicians house then in
Thames Street, was taken with so great a pain in his Thighs that he was not
able to get home, the Dr. sent for two Warming-Stones and applied them to him a
few days after John Bartlet going thither about business, Mr. Winslow thanked
God by his bl^ssing on the use of these Stones he was as well as ^ver he was.

A Child of twelve years of age at Salysbury, that had lost its speech, and was
lame, and went on C^utches by means of the numbd palsy, by use of these Stones,
through mercy, is thoroughly recovered.

(...) cu^ed (...).
H^re are also sold the right Pectoralls or Lozenges which are excellent for
curing Coughs or Hoarsn^sse. Shortness of breath, Consumption.

Here is sold the best black Ink that will not change color also a sepetiall
Powder made of choice ingredient^ that cures the Green sickness and Scurvy.
(...) Pecto. (...) should here


This stone gives ease to such who are troubled with the Gour that comes of a
could cause.

Doctor OXENBRIDGE, a learned, and ancient Physician in London, ten years since
bad me John Bartlet to publish it; that this stone has given more ease to
Patients of his troubled with the Seatica, (...) powder.
then any outward medicine he could apply.

FINIS.

