THE Complete Office OF THE Holy Week. WITH NOTES and EXPLICATIONS.

Translated out of Latin and French.

Published with Allowance.

IHS
woodcut

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Turner, at the Lamb in High-Holborn. 1687.

TO THE QUEEN.
MADAM,
WITH all possible Respect, and some Hopes it will not prove absolutely
unwelcom, I Humbly lay at Your Majesty's Feet a very good Book, but a very
ill-suited Present: For Devout Ink and Paper to Your Majesty, whose Life is it
self a Book of Devotion, is but a Link of Silver to a Chain of Gold. And then a
Translation is such a kind of Present to Your Majesty, as a bad Copy to one who
has an excellent Original. It Is true, you are an absolute Mistress of our
Language, as well as Hearts; but you would never Pray in an Unknown Tongue,
though there were neither English nor Italian in the World; and Translating is
but telling you a Story for News, which you know already, and hear when you
please much better told. But since what is useless to Your Majesty, may be
beneficial to your Subjects; and a Queen is neither the Greatest, nor the most
Glorious of your Titles, I promise my self that your Charity will condescend to
make an Alms of your Name and Patronage; and by your countenance to Devotion,
allure a People fond of making their Court to you, to make it in the way most
pleasing to Your Majesty, straining to follow afar off, and be as Devout as
they can, since few can hope to be as Devout as you.

It Is to be hoped this will be the Courtship in fashion, now the Times are
returned in which the Queens of England are Saints again; and the Fruit
infinitely great, when People find the way to Heaven, is the way to be well at
Court. I was Ambitious to make my Court this way, but to my shame, so poor a
Courtier, that I was forced to borrow a Present, and to make it mine, dressed
in a new Language, as we alter the property of Plate by a new Fashion. I know I
have exposed my unskilfulness in this Trade to the Eye in all England, which
will the soonest discern it. But Your Majesty will have the goodness to
reflect, that no Translation can express the beauty and force of the Original;
to suffer the Argument to atone for all Faults, and to have some Indulgence
for the Passionate Zeal and Profound Respect, with which I shall always be,

MADAM, Your MAJESTY'S Most Humble, most Faithful, and most Dutiful Subject,
Walter Kirkham Blount.

engraving: Christ's Entry into Jerusalem, Palm Sunday
THE OFFICE UPON Palm Sunday.
Of Holy Water.
IT has been an Ancient Practice in the Church, even among the Primitive
Christians, for the Priest before Mass, at Easter, and Whitsontide, to sprinkle
the People with Water out of the Font, blessed with the Prayers and Exorcisms the
Eve of those Holy Days, and there reserved till Holy Oil was poured therein.

And to the end the Faithful should not esteem this sprinkling a second
Baptism, the Church has instituted particular Blessings, and Exorcisms of Water
and Salt for each Sunday through the Year, to instruct us, That by this
sprinkling she gives us no second Baptism, but that she applies her Prayers to
obtain of God, through the Merits of JESUS CHRIST, (if we our selves are not
the obstacle) the grace of true repentance for our sins, and a guard from the
assaults of the Devil, that so we may preserve our selves in that state of
innocence we received by Baptism.

By the Water the Church tells us, she prays to God, and that we are therein to
concur with her, to beseech him to purify our Souls by his Grace, as the Water
cleanses our Bodies. And by the Salt she represents her Prayer to God, wherein
we ought also to join for obtaining his Grace, to preserve our Souls from
spiritual corruption, as Salt preserves the Body from corporal. And as Salt
gives an agreeable taste to our Meat, so his Grace renders our actions
acceptable to his Majesty, preserving us from falling into those sins wherewith
the Devil might otherwise infect us, whereby we may more worthily be assistant
at the Holy Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, and reap the benefit
thereof.

The Exorcism and Benediction of the Salt.

OUr help is in the Name of the Lord.

R. Who made Heaven and Earth.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

Adam, I Exorcise thee, O creature Salt, by the living God, the true God, by
the holy God, by that God who commanded thee to be cast into the Water by the
Prophet Elizaeus, to cure its barrenness, that by this Exorcism thou may be
made beneficial to the Faithful, healthful both to the Bodies and Souls of all
that shall use thee, and where ever thou art sprinkled thou may chase away
all Illusions, Malice, Crafts and Surprises of the Devil, and that all unclean
Spirits be cast out of him, who will come to judge the living and the dead, and
the World by fire. Amen.

The PRAYER.

Let us Pray.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, we humbly implore thy infinite clemency, that
thou will vouchsafe out of thy Piety to bless and sanctify this thy creature,
Salt, to the end, that all such as make use of it, may be sensible of health in
Soul and Body, and that, what shall be either touched or sprinkled with it, may
be preserved from all uncleanness and assaults of the Devil. Through our Lord,
etc.

The Exorcism and Benediction of the Water.

I Exorcise thee, O creature Water, in the Name of God the Father Almighty, in
the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord his Son, and in the Virtue of the Holy Ghost,
That by this Exorcism, thou may dissipate all the Assaults of the Enemy, and
put the Enemy himself to flight, with all his apostate Angels, by the power of
the same our Lord Jesus Christ, who will come to judge the living and the dead,
and the World by fire. Amen.

The PRAYER.

Let us Pray.

O God, who for the health of Mankind have made use of the Element of Water in
the greatest Mysteries, hear favorably our humble Prayers, and pour forth thy
Blessings upon this Element prepared for several Purifications, to the end that
thy Creature, made use of in thy Mysteries, may receive the effect of thy
Divine Grace, to drive away Devils, and cure Infirmities, to the end all thy
Faithful, which shall be sprinkled within or without doors, may be thereby
preserved from all impurity and evil; and that no pestilential spirit or
corruption remain in them, let all snares of our secret Enemy depart thence,
and whatever is obnoxious to the health and repose of any that inhabit there,
may be expelled by the sprinkling of this Water, that the health implored by
the invocation of thy holy Name, may be preserved from all sorts of assaults;
Through our Lord, etc.

LEt this commixtion of Salt and Water be made in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

Let us Pray.

O God, the Author of invincible Power, King of irresistible Empire, and for
ever magnificently triumphant, who dissipatest the strength of the adverse
party, who suppressest the fury of the raging Enemy, and powerfully vanquishest
his Malice; We, O Lord, trembling, humbly beseech and pray thee, to regard
favorably this creature, Salt and Water, to enlighten it with thy Grace, and
to sanctify it with the Dew of thy Bounty, that wherever it shall be
sprinkled, through the invocation of thy Holy Name, it may chase away all
suggestions of the unclean Spirit, that there be no fear of the venomous
Serpent, and that the presence of the Holy Spirit will vouchsafe every where to
accompany us, imploring thy Mercy. Through our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives
and reigns with thee, in the unity of the Holy Ghost one God World without
end. Amen.

Thou shall sprinkle me, O Lord, with Hyssop, and I shall be cleansed, thou
shall wash me, and I shall be made whiter than snow. HAve mercy on me, O God,
according to thy great mercy.

And according to the multitude of thy commiserations blot out my iniquities.

Wash me more amply from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

Because I do know my iniquity, and my sin is before me always.

To thee only have I sinned, and have done evil before thee, that thou may
be justified in thy words, and when thou art judged.

For behold I was conceived in iniquities, and my mother conceived me in sins.

For behold thou have loved truth, the uncertain, and hidden things of thy
wisdom thou have made manifest to me.

Thou shall sprinkle me with Hysop, and I shall be cleansed: thou shall wash
me, and I shall be made whiter than snow.

To my hearing thou shall give joy and gladness; and the bones humbled shall
rejoice.

Turn away thy face from my sins, and wipe away all my iniquities.

Create a clean heart in me, O God, and renew a right spirit in my bowels.

Cast me not away from thy face, and thy holy spirit take not from me.

Render unto me the joy of thy salvation, and confirm me with thy principal
spirit.

I will teach the unjust thy ways, and the impious shall be converted unto thee.

Deliver me from Blood, O God the God of my salvation, and my tongue shall
exalt thy justice.

Lord, thou will open my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Because if thou would have had sacrifice, I had verily given it, with
holocausts thou will not be delighted.

A sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit: a contrite and humble heart, O God,
thou will not despise.

Deal favorably, O Lord, in thy good will with Sion, that the walls of
Jerusalem may be built up.

Then shall thou accept Sacrifice of Justice, Oblations, and Holocausts, then
shall they lay calves upon thine altar.

Gloria Patri and Filio, etc. Jews Thou shall sprinkle me, Let us Pray.

V. Show us, O Lord, Mercy.

R. And give us thy Salvation.

V. O Lord, hear my Prayer.

R. And let my cry come unto thee.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

Let us Pray.

O Holy Lord, Omnipotent Father, Eternal God, graciously hear us, and vouchsafe
to send thy Holy Angel from Heaven, to keep, protect, cherish, visit and defend
all that dwell in this habitation. Through Christ our Lord, etc. Amen.

THE BENEDICTION OF THE PALMS.
After sprinkling Holy Water in the usual manner, the Priest, accompanied with
his Ministers in their Ornaments, goes to bless the Palms. Roman Alcuinus
Adelmus Maximus, Turin, Ambros, Jerusalem, Hebrew HOsanna to the Son of David,
(or save us, we beseech thee, O Son of David) blessed is he who comes in the
Name of our Lord, O King of Israel, Hosanna in the highest.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

Let us Pray.

Hebrew Jerusalem O God, whom it is justice to love, multiply in us the Gists
of thy ineffable Grace, and as through the Death of thy Son thou have made us
hope for what we believe, grant that we may arrive to Eternal Glory, according
to our desires, through the resurrection of thy only Son, who lives and
reigns one God with thee, in unity of the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Lesson taken out of the 15th and 16th Chapter of Exodus.

Israelites Moses Jews, IN those days the Children of Israel came into Elim,
where there were twelve Fountains of Water, and seventy Palm Trees, and they
camped beside the Waters. And they set forward from Elim, and all the multitude
of the Children of Israel came into the desert Sin, which is between Elim and
Sinai, the fifteenth day of the second Month, after they came forth out of the
land of Egypt. And all the Assembly of the Children of Israel murmured against
Moses and Aaron in the Wilderness; and the Children of Israel said to them,
Would to God we had died by the hand of our Lord in the land of Egypt, when we
sat over the Fleshpots, and did eat Bread our fill? Why have you brought us
into this desert, that you may kill all the multitude with famine? And our Lord
said to Moses, Behold I will rain you Bread from Heaven, let the People go
forth and gather that suffices for every day, that I may prove them, whether
they will walk in my Law, or no. But the sixth day let them provide for to
bring in, and let it be double to that they were wont to gather every day. And
Moses and Aaron said to all the Children of Israel, At Even you shall know that
our Lord has brought you forth out of the land of Egypt; and in the Morning
you shall see the glory of our Lord.

John. THe chief Priests therefore and Pharisees gathered a Council, and said,
What do we, for this Man does many signs? If we let him alone so, all will
believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away our Place and Nation.

Vr. But one of them, named Caiphas, being the high Priest of that year, said
to them, It is expedient for us, that one man die for the people, and the whole
Nation perish not. Therefore from that day they devised to kill him, saying,
And the Romans, etc.

Another Responsory taken out of the second Chaper of St. Matthew.

JEsus prayed unto his Father on Mount Olivet; My Father, if it be possible,
let this Chalice pass from me. The spirit indeed is prompt, but the flesh weak;
thy will be done.

Watch ye and pray, that ye enter not tentation. The spirit indeed is, etc.

Reverend Father, bless this Incense.

Be thou blessed by him, to whose honor thou shall be burnt.

CLeanse, O Almighty God, my heart, and lips, who did purify with a fiery
coal the lips of the Prophet Isaiah, and vouchsafe so to purify me, for thy
mercies sake, that I may worthily declare thy holy Gospel. Through our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. Amen.

Reverend Father, bless me.

OUr Lord be in thy heart and lips, that thou may worthily publish his
Gospel, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Isaiah Our Lord be with you.

Sequentia sancti Evangelii, etc. The sequence of the Gospel, etc. Jewish Judea
The sequence of the Holy Gospel according to St. Matthew, Chap. 21.

Jerusalem, Zacharias, Eve Gentiles Gentiles AT that time when Jesus drew nigh to
Jerusalem, and was come to Bethphage, at the foot of Mount Olivet, then he sent
two of his Disciples, saying to them, Go ye into the Town that is against you,
and immediately you shall find an Ass tied, and a Colt with her, loose them,
and bring them to me: and if any man shall say ought unto you, say ye, that our
Lord has need of them; and forthwith he will let them go. And this was done
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet saying, Say ye to
the Daughter of Sion, Behold thy King comes to thee, meek, and sitting upon an
Ass, and a Colt, the Foal of her that is used to the Yoke. And the Disciples
going, did as Jesus commanded them; And they brought the Ass and the Colt, and
laid their Garments upon them, and made him to sit thereon; and a very great
multitude spread their Garments in the way: and others did cut their Boughs
from the Trees, and strewed them in the way; and the multitudes that went
before, and that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David; Blessed
is he that comes in the Name of our Lord. Hosanna in the highest.

May our Sins be forgiven by the virtue of the Holy Gospel.

Our Lord be with you

R. And with thy Spirit.

Let us Pray.

O God increase the Faith of those that hope in thee, and clemently hear the
Prayers of thy Supplicants: Let thy manifold Mercies come upon us: bless these
Boughs of Palms, or Olives, and, as in the figure of the Church, thou did
multiply Noah going forth of the Ark, and Moses going out of Egypt with the
Children of Israel, so grant that we, carrying these Branches of Palm and
Olive, may, with the Fruits of our Good Works, appear before Jesus Christ, and,
by his Merits, enjoy the Delights of Eternal Happiness, who, one God, lives
and reigns with thee, in the Unity of the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen.

The PREFACE.

Our Lord be with you.

And with thy Spirit.

Lift up your hearts.

R. We raise them up to our Lord.

Let us give thanks to our Lord God.

It is Just, and becoming our Duty.

Jerusalem, IT is truly meet and just, right and necessary, that we always, and
in all places, give thanks to thee, Holy Lord, Omnipotent Father, and Eternal
God, who art glorified in the Council of thy Saints. For thy Creatures serve
thee, acknowledging thee their sole Author and God, and all thy handy-works
jointly praise, and thy holy ones bless thee, freely confessing the Sacred Name
of thy Son, before the Kings and Princes of this World. The Angels Archangels,
Thrones, and Dominations, observe thee with a Profound Reverence, and, with the
whole Celestial Host, sing a Hymn of thy Glory for ever, saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy is the Lord God of Hosts, the Heavens and Earth are filled with thy Glory,
Hosanna in the Highest. Blessed is he that comes in the Name of our Lord,
Hosanna in the Highest.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

Let us Pray.

WE beseech thee, O Lord, Holy Father, Almighty and Everlasting God, to bless
and sanctify this Olive, thy creature, which thou have commanded to spring
from Wood, and which the Dove brought in his mouth, returning to the Ark, that
whoever shall take of it, may receive protection both for Soul and Body, thou,
O Lord, making it a Remedy for Health, and a Sacrament of thy Grace. Through
our Lord, etc. Amen.

Let us Pray.

O God, who gatherest together such things as are dispersed, and preservest what
is so gathered together, who did bless the People going forth with Boughs to
meet Jesus, bless also these Palms and Olive-branches, which thy People take in
honor of thy Name, that wherever they shall be brought, the Inhabitants may
be sensible of thy Blessing, and freed from all Adversity, and thy Right Hand
protect those whom Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord redeemed. Who lives and
reigns with thee, in the Unity of the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen.

Let us Pray.

Adam, O God, who through the wonderful order of thy Providence, art pleased to
make use of insensible creatures to instruct us in the way of our salvation;
Grant, we beseech thee, that the devout hearts of thy Faithful, may healthfully
understand what is mystically designed in the action of this day, in which the
multitude of Jews, being illustrated with a heavenly light, went to meet our
Redeemer with Boughs of Palms and Olives, which they cast under his feet. The
Palm-branches put us in mind of the Victory he gained over the Prince of Death,
and the Olive-boughs do in a sort proclaim, that the Spiritual Unction is come
to us. For all that blessed Company understood that Ceremony to signify, that
our Redeemer, taking compassion of man's misery, was to encounter the Prince of
Death for the Life of the World, and that he was to triumph by dying. Therefore
he, fulfilling the Will of God, performed all those things, that we might
thereby arrive to the knowledge of his Triumphs, and unctuous plenitude of
Mercy. We also firmly believe, Lord, Holy Father, Omnipotent and Eternal God,
that all has been fulfilled, that was signified. And therefore most humbly
beseech thee, through the same, our Lord Jesus Christ, that, in and by him, we,
whom thou have vouchsafed to become his members, having obtained the victory
over Death, may also partake in his glorious Resurrection. Who lives and
reigns, etc.

Let us Pray.

O God, who, by an Olive Branch, did command a Dove to publish Peace to the
Earth, vouchsafe, we beseech thee, to sanctify, with thy Celestial
Benediction, the salvation of all. Through Christ our Lord, etc.

Let us Pray.

BLess, we beseech thee, O Lord, these Boughs of Palms or Olives, and grant
that thy People may testify the zeal of their Piety, by a pious performance of
what this day they outwardly profess, and triumphing over their Enemies, may
apply themselves zealously to the Works of Mercy. Through our Lord, etc.

Thou shall sprinkle me with Hyssop, and I shall be cleansed: thou shall wash
me, and I shall be made whiter than snow. The PRAYER.

Whereby we ask God's Grace to prepare our Ways to our Savior by a lively
Faith and good Works.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

Let us pray.

O God, who, for our salvation, did send into this World thy only begotten
Son, that he, humbling himself for us, might regain us unto thee, before whom,
at his entry into Jerusalem, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, a
multitude of People spread their Garments, with a pious zeal, and cast Palms in
the way. Grant, we beseech thee, that we may so prepare the way of Faith to
him, that the stone of offense and rock of scandal being removed, our good
works may flourish, as the branches of a beautiful tree, and therein imitate
him. Who, with thee, lives and reigns, etc.

Jerusalem. ANTIPHON

THE Hebrew Children spread their Garments in the way, and cried out, saying,
Hosanna, to the Son of David. Blessed is he who comes in the Name of our Lord.

ANOTHER.

THE Hebrew Children spread their Garments in the way, and cried out, saying,
Hosanna, to the Son of David. Blessed is he who comes in the Name of our Lord.

Jerusalem, V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

Let us Pray.

ALmighty Everlasting God, who wast pleased, that our Lord Jesus Christ should
sit upon an Asses Colt, and directedst the multitude to spread their Garments
and Boughs in the way, singing Hosanna in his honor: Grant us the grace to
imitate their Innocence, and to partake of their Merit. Through the same, our
Lord, etc.

Then they go in Procession, to represent triumphant entry into Jerusalem, and
the Priest says, Let us go on in peace.

The Quire answers, In the Name of Christ. Amen.

The Antiphon taken out of the 21st Chapter of St. Matthew.

WHen Jesus drew nigh unto Jerusalem, he sent two of his Disciples, saying, Go
ye into the Town that is against you, and immediately you shall find an Ass
tied, and a Colt with her; loose them, and bring them to me: and if any man
shall say ought unto you, say ye, that our Lord has need of them. And they
brought the Ass and the Colt, and laid their Garments upon them, and made him
to sit thereon. Others spread their Garments in the way: others cut Boughs from
the Trees, and strewed them in the way, and those that followed cried Hosanna;
blessed is he who comes in the Name of our Lord, and blessed be the Kingdom of
David our Father; Hosanna in the highest: O Son of David, have mercy on us.

Another ANTIPHON.

THE People hearing that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, they took
Palm-branches, and went forth to meet him, the Children crying aloud, This is
he who comes to save his People. This is our Salvation and Redemption of
Israel. How great is he whom the Thrones and Dominations meet? Fear not,
Daughter of Sion; behold, thy King comes unto thee, sitting upon an Ass-Colt,
as it is written, Hail King, Maker of the World, who art come to redeem us.

ANOTHER.

SIX Days before the Solemn Pasch, our Lord coming to Jerusalem, the Children
went forth to meet him, carrying Boughs of Palms, and crying with a loud voice,
Hosanna in the highest: Blessed art thou that come in the multitude of thy
Mercies, Hosanna in the highest.

ANOTHER.

THE Multitude went with Flowers and Palms to meet the Redeemer, and render him
triumphant and victorious, due honor. The Gentiles publish the greatness of the
Son of God; their voices thundering through the clouds, the praise of Christ.
Hosanna in the highest.

ANOTHER.

GRant that we may be found faithful with the Angels and Children, singing to
the triumpher over death. Hosanna in the highest.

ANOTHER.

A Great Multitude assembled to the Festival, cried out to our Lord, saying,
Blessed is he that comes in the Name of our Lord. Hosanna in the highest.

Jerusalem. GLory to thee, Eternal King,
On this great triumphant day;
Lo we a loud Hosanna sing,
And with our Garments strew the way.
Thou art the King of Israel,
Sprung from the Royal David 's stem;
Thou came from Heaven with us to dwell,
Thy captive Subjects to redeem.
Glory to thee, etc.
The holy Quires of Angels bow,
And in their Hymns thy Praise proclaim,
While we, and all our world below,
Kneel and adore the same blessed Name.
Glory to thee, etc.
Thy Sion once with holy Palms
Thee, their Messiah, went to meet:
Behold, we now, with Prayers and Psalms,
Prostrate our glad hearts at thy feet.
Glory to thee, etc.
They by their Songs prepared the way
Up to thy humble Throne the Cross,
While we a happier Ditty pray,
And in thy Victory rejoice.
Glory to thee, etc.
Great King, of sweetest clemency,
Whom all sincere endeavors please,
As they accepted were, may we
Thy Favor gain, thy Wrath appease.
Glory to thee, etc.
LIft up your Gates, ye Princes, and be ye lifted up, O Eternal Gates, and the
King of glory shall enter in.

Who is this King of glory?

It Is our strong and mighty Lord; it is our Lord mighty in Battle: Lift up your
Gates, ye Princes, and be you lifted up, O Eternal Gates, and the King of glory
shall enter in.

Who is this King of glory?

The Lord of Powers, he is the King of Glory, lift up your Gates, etc.

Who is this King of glory?

Jerusalem, OUr Lord entering into the Holy City, the Hebrew Children,
foretelling the Resurrection unto Life, with Olive-boughs cried out, Hosanna in
the highest. When the People heard that Christ was coming into Jerusalem, they
went to meet him with Palms.

THE MASS FOR Palm Sunday.
Introibo ad altar Dei, etc. Adam In the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

I Will enter unto the Altar of God.

Judica me Deus, etc. Our help is in the Name of our Lord.

R. Who made Heaven and Earth.

I Confess unto Almighty God, to the blessed Virgin S. Mary, to the blessed S.
Michael the Archangel, to the blessed S. John Baptist, to the Holy Apostles,
Peter and Paul, to all the Saints, and you my Brethren, that I have very much
sinned, in Thought, Word, and Deed, through my Fault, through my Fault, through
my most grievous Fault. Therefore I beseech the blessed Virgin S. Mary, the
blessed S. Michael the Archangel, the blessed S. John Baptist, the Holy
Apostles, Peter and Paul, all the Saints, and you my Brethren, to Pray to God
for me.

R. ALmighty God have mercy upon thee, and forgive thy sins, and bring thee to
life everlasting. P. Amen.

I Confess unto Almighty God, to the blessed Virgin S. Mary, to the blessed S.
Michael the Archangel, to S. John Baptist, to the Apostles, Peter and Paul, to
all the Saints, and to thee my Father, that I have very much sinned, in
Thought, Word, and Deed, through my Fault, through my Fault, through my most
grievous Fault. Therefore I beseech thee blessed Virgin S. Mary, the blessed S.
Michael the Archangel, the blessed S. John Baptist, Peter and Paul, all the
Saints, and thee my Father, to Pray to God for me.

P. ALmighty God have mercy on you, forgive you your sins, and bring you to
life everlasting. R. Amen.

P. ALmighty and merciful Lord, grant us pardon, absolution, and remission of
all our sins. Amen.

P. Thou being turned shall quicken us, O Lord.

R. And thy people shall rejoice in thee.

P. Show us, O Lord, thy Mercy.

R. And give us thy Salvation.

P. O Lord, hear my Prayer.

R. And let my cry come unto thee.

P. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

TAke away, O Lord, our Iniquities, that so with a pure heart we may enter into
the Holy of Holies. Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

WE pray thee, O Lord, through the Merits of thy Saints, whose Relics are
here, and of all Saints, that thou will please to pardon all my sins. Amen.

Introit THE MASS FOR Palm Sunday.
The station in the Church of S. John Lateran.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem Rome, John Baptist, The Introit, taken out of the 21st
Psalm.

Jews O Lord, prolong not thy help from me; look toward my defense. Save me
out of the Lions mouth, and my humility from horns of Unicorns.

PSALM XXI.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Psalm, GOd my God, have respect
unto me, why have thou forsaken me? far from my salvation are words of my sins.

O Lord, prolong not thy help from me, etc.

Gloria Patri, etc. Jews; Gloria in excelsis Lord, have mercy on us.

R. Lord, have mercy on us.

Lord, have mercy on us.

R. Christ, have mercy on us.

Christ, have mercy on us.

R. Christ, have mercy on us.

Lord, have mercy on us.

R. Lord, have mercy on us.

Lord, have mercy on us.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

The Collect.

ALlmighty, Everlasting God, who have caused our Savior to take flesh, and to
be crucified for Mankind, as an example of Humility to be imitated; Grant
propitiously, that we may deserve to have both the Instruction of his Patience,
and Fellowship of his Resurrection. Through the same our Lord, etc.

The Lesson out of the Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Philippians,
Chap. 2.

BRethren, for this think in your selves, which also in Christ Jesus, who, when
he was in the form of God, thought it not robbery, himself to be equal to God:
but he exinanited himself, taking the form of a servant, made into the
similitude of men, and in shape found as man; he humbled himself, made obedient
unto death, even the death of the Cross. For the which God also has exalted
him, and has given him a Name which is above all Names; That in the Name of
Jesus every knee bow of the celestials, terrestrials, and infernals; and every
tongue confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of God the Father.

The GRADUAL, taken out of 71st Psalm.

Psalm, THou have held thy right hand, and in thy will thou have conducted me,
and with glory thou have received me.

V. How good is God to Israel, to them that are of a right heart: but my feet
were almost moved; my feet almost slipped, because I have had zeal upon the
wicked, seeing the peace of sinners.

The TRACT, taken out of the 21st Psalm.

Psalm, Psalm GOd my God, have respect unto me: why have thou forsaken me?

V. Far from my salvation are the words of my sins.

V. My God, I shall cry by day, and thou will not hear, and by night, and not
for folly unto me.

V. But thou dwell in the Holy Place, the praise of Israel.

V. In thee our Fathers have hoped, they hoped, and thou did deliver them.

V. They cried unto thee, and were saved; they hoped in thee, and were not
confounded.

V. But I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and outcast of the people.

V. All that saw me have scorned me, they have spoken with the lips and wagged
the head.

V. He hoped in the Lord, let him deliver him; let him save him, because he
afflicts him.

V. But themselves have considered and beheld me, they have divided my garments
amongst them, and upon my vesture they have cast lots.

V. Save me from the Lions mouth, and my humility from the horns of the
Unicorns.

V. Ye that fear our Lord praise him, all the seed of Jacob glorify ye him.

V. The generation to come shall be showed to our Lord, and the heavens shall
show forth his justice to the people that shall be born, whom our Lord has
made.

V. And the justice by which he shall render them just, shall be showed to the
people.

Paris, CLeanse my heart and lips, O Almighty God, who did cleanse the lips
of the Prophet Isaiah with a burning coal, and vouchsafe, through thy gracious
mercy, to purify me, that I may worthily pronounce thy Holy Gospel. Through
our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

V. Reverend Father bless me.

OUr Lord be in thy heart and in thy lips, that thou may worthily and
competently publish his Gospel. Amen.

Roman Munda cor meum, etc: Dominus vobiseum, etc. Judas, Gloria tibi Domine,
etc. The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ according to St. Matthew, Chap. 26,
27.

AT that time Jesus said to his Disciples, You know that after two days shall
be Pasche, and the Son of man shall be delivered to be crucified. Then were
gathered together the Chief Priests and Ancients of the People into the Court
of the High Priest, who was called Caiaphas: And they consulted how they might
by some guile apprehend Jesus, and kill him; But they said, Not on the
Festival-day, lest perhaps there might be a tumult among the people. And when
Jesus was in Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper, there came to him a
Woman, having an Alabaster Box of Precious Ointment, and poured it out upon his
Head, as he sat at the Table. And the Disciples seeing it, had indignation,
saying, Whereto is this waste? for this might have been sold for much, and
given to the poor. And Jesus knowing it, said to them, Why do you molest this
Woman? for she has wrought a good work upon me; for the poor you have always
with you, but me you have not always, for she, in pouring this Ointment upon my
Body, has done it to bury me. Amen, I say to you; wheresoever this Gospel
shall be preached in the whole World, that also she has done, shall be
reported for a memory of her. Then went one of the twelve, which was called
Judas Iscariot, to the Chief Priests, and said to them, what will you give me,
and I will deliver him unto you? But they appointed unto him Thirty Pieces of
Silver. And from thenceforth he sought opportunity to betray him. And the first
day of the Azymes the Disciples cames to Jesus, saying, Where will thou that we
prepare the Pasche? But Jesus said, Go into the City to a certain man, and say
to him, the Master says, My time is at hand, with thee do I make the Pasche
with my Disciples. And the Disciples did as Jesus appointed them, and they
prepared the Pasche. But when it was even, he sat down with his twelve
Disciples; And while they were eating, he said, Amen, I say unto you, That one
of you shall betray me. And they being very sad, began every one to say, Is it
I, Lord? but he answering, said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the Dish,
he shall betray me. The Son of man indeed goes as it is written of him; but woe
be to that man by whom the Son of man shall be betrayed; it were good for him
if that man had not been born. And Judas, that betrayed him, said, Is it I,
Rabbi? he says to him, Thou have said. And whiles they were at Supper, Jesus
took Bread, and blessed, and brake; and he gave to his Disciples, and said,
Take ye, and eat; this is my Body. And taking the Chalice, he gave thanks, and
gave to them, saying, drink ye all of this; for this is my Blood of the New
Testament, which shall be shed for many unto remission of sins. And I say unto
you, I will not drink from henceforth of this fruit of the Wine, until that day
when I shall drink it with you new in the Kingdom of my Father. And an Hymn
being said, they went forth unto Mount Olivet. Then Jesus said to them, All you
shall be scandalized in me this night: For it is written, I will strike the
Pastor, and the sheep of the flock shall be dispersed; but after I shall be
risen again, I will go before you into Galilee. And Peter, answering, said to
him, Although all shall be scandalized in thee, I will never be scandalized.
Jesus said to him, Amen, I say to thee, that in this night, before the Cock
crow, thou shall deny me thrice. Peter said to him, Yea, though I should die
with thee, I will not deny thee. Likewise also said all the Disciples. Then
Jesus comes with them into a Village called Gethsemani; and he said to his
Disciples, Sit you here, while I go yonder, and pray. And taking to him Peter,
and the two Sons of Zebedee, he began to wax sorrowful, even unto death; stay
here and watch with me. And, being gone forward a little, he fell upon his
face, praying, and saying, My Father, if it be possible, let this Chalice pass
from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou. And he comes to his
Disciples, and finds them sleeping; and he says to Peter, Even so? could you
not watch one hour with me? Watch ye, and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation. The spirit indeed is prompt, but the flesh weak. Again, the second
time he went, and prayed, saying, My Father, if this Chalice may not pass, but
I must drink it, thy will be done. And he comes again, and finds them
sleeping; for their eyes were become heavy. And leaving them, he went again,
and he prayed the third time, saying, the self-same word. Then he comes to his
Disciples, and says to them, Sleep ye now, and take rest; behold, the hour
approaches, and the Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Rise, let us go; behold, he approaches, that shall betray me. As he yet spoke,
behold Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with
Swords and Clubs, sent from the Chief Priests and the Ancients of the People.
And he that betrayed him, gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss,
that is he, hold him. And forthwith, coming to Jesus, he said, Hail, Rabbi, and
he kissed him. And Jesus said to him, Friend, whereto art thou come? Then they
drew near, and laid hands on Jesus, and held him, and behold, one of them that
were with Jesus, stretching forth his hand, drew out his sword, and striking
the servant of the High Priest, cut off his ear. Then Jesus said to him, Return
thy sword into his place; for all that take the sword, shall perish with the
sword. Think thou that I cannot ask my Father, and he will give me presently
more than twelve legions of Angels? How then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled,
that so it must be done? In that hour Jesus said to the multitudes, You are
come out as it were to a thief, with Swords and Clubs to apprehend me: I sat
daily with you teaching in the Temple, and you laid no hands on me. And this
was done, that the Scriptures of the Prophets might be fulfilled. Then the
Disciples all leaving him, fled. But they, taking hold of Jesus, led him to
Caiphas the High Priest, where the Scribes and Ancients were assembled: And
Peter followed him afar off, even to the Court of the High Priest; and going
in, he sat with the servants, that he might see the end. And the Chief Priests
and whole Council sought false witness against Jesus, that they might put him
to death; and they found not, whereas many false witnesses had come in. And
last of all, there came two false witnesses, and they said, This man said, I am
able to destroy the Temple of God, and, after three days, to re-edifie it. And
the High Priest, rising up, said to him, Answerest thou nothing to the things
which these do testify against thee? But Jesus held his peace. And the High
Priest said to him, I adjure thee, by the living God, that thou tell us, if
thou be Christ, the Son of God. Jesus said to him, Thou have said. Nevertheless
I say to you, Hereafter you shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand
of the power of God, and coming in the clouds of Heaven. Then the High Priest
rent his garments, saying, He has blasphemed, what need we witnesses any
further? Behold, now ye have heard the blasphemy; how think you? But they
answering, said, He is guilty of death. Then did they spit on his face, and
buffeted him, and others smote his face with the palms of their hands, saying,
Prophecy unto us, O Christ, who is he that struck thee? But Peter sat without
the court, and there came to him one wench, saying. Thou also wast with Jesus
the Galilean: but he denied before them all, saying, I wot not what thou
say. And, as he went out of the gate, another wench saw him, and she said to
them that were there, And this fellow also was with Jesus the Nazarite; and
again he denied, with an Oath, that he knew not the man. And, after a while,
they came that stood by, and said to Peter, Surely thou also art of them, for
even thy speech does betray thee. Then he began to curse and to swear, that he
knew not the man. And incontinent the Cock crew. And Peter remembered the word
of Jesus which he had said, Before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice;
And going forth, he wept bitterly. And when morning was come, all the Chief
Priests and Ancients of the people consulted together against Jesus, that they
might put him to death. And they brought him bound, and delivered him to
Pontius Pilate the president. Then Judas, that betrayed him, seeing that he was
condemned, repenting him, returned the thirty silver pieces to the Chief
Priests and Ancients, saying, I have sinned, betraying just blood. But they
said, What is that to us? Look thou to it. And casting down the silver pieces
in the Temple, he departed, and went and hanged himself with an halter. And the
Chief Priests, having taken the silver pieces, said, It is not lawful to cast
them into the Corbana; because it is the price of blood. And after they had
consulted together, they bought with them the potters field, to be a burying
place for strangers. For this cause that field was called Haceldama; that is,
the field of blood, even to this present day. Then was filled that which was
spoken by Jeremy the Prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of
silver, the price of the prized, whom they did prize of the Children of Israel;
and they gave them into the potters field, as the Lord did appoint to me. And
Jesus stood before the President, and the President asked him, saying, Art thou
the King of the Jews? Jesus says to him, Thou say. And when he was accused
of the Chief Priests and Ancients, he answered nothing. Then Pilate says to
him, Do thou not hear how great testimonies they allege against thee? And
he answered him not to any word, so that the President did marvel exceedingly.
And upon the solemn day the President had accustomed to release unto the people
one prisoner, whom they would. And he had then a notorious prisoner, that was
called Barabbas; they therefore being gathered together, Pilate said, Whom will
you that I release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus, that is called Christ? For he
knew that for envy they had delivered him. And as he was sitting in place of
judgment, his wife sent unto him, saying. Have thou nothing to do with that
just man, for I have suffered many things this day in my sleep for him. But the
Chief Priests and Ancients persuaded the people, that they should ask Barabbas,
and make Jesus away. And the President, answering, said, to them, Whether will
you of the two to be released unto you? But they said Barabbas. Pilate said to
them, What shall I do then with Jesus, that is called Christ. They said all,
Let him be crucified. The President said to them, Why, what evil has he done?
But they cried the more, saying, Let him be crucified. And Pilate, seeing that
he nothing prevailed, but rather a tumult was toward, taking water, he washed
his hands before the people, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just
man; look you to it. And the whole people, answering, said, His blood be upon
us and upon our children. Then he released to them Barabbas, and having
scourged Jesus, delivered him unto them to be crucified. Then the President's
soldiers, taking Jesus into the palace, gathered together unto him the whole
band; and stripping him, put a scarlet cloak about him, and platting a crown of
thorns, put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand; and bowing the knee
before him, they mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews; and spitting upon
him, they took the reed and smote his head. And after they had mocked him, they
took off the cloak from him, and put on him his own garments, and led him away
to crucify him. And in going they found a man of Cyrene, named Simon, whom
they forced to take up his Cross. And they came into the place which is called
Golgotha, which is the place of Calvari. And they gave him Wine to drink,
mingled with Gall. And when he tasted, he would not drink. And after they had
crucified him, they divided his garments, casting lots, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken to the Prophet, saying, They divided my garments
among them, and upon my vesture they did cast lots. And they sat and watched
him. And they put over his head his cause written, This is Jesus the King of
the Jews. Then were crucified with him two thieves; one on the right hand, and
one of the left; And they passed by, blaspheming him, wagging their heads, and
saying, Vah, Thou that destroyest the Temple of God, and in three days do
re-edifie it, save thine own self: if thou be the Son of God, come down from
the Cross. In like manner also the Chief Priests, with the Scribes and Ancients
mocking, said, He saved others, himself he cannot save: if he be King of
Israel, let him now come down from the Cross, and we will believe him. He
trusted in God, let him now deliver him, if he will: for he said, That I am the
Son of God. And the self-same thing the thieves also that were crucified with
him, reproached him withal. And from the sixth hour there was darkness made
upon the whole earth, until the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a mighty voice
saying, Eli, Eli Lamasabacthani? that is, my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?

[These words are spoken as out of humane frailty, wherewith Christ was pleased
to cloth himself, to teach us, that we must be deprived of the goods and
comforts of this world, whereby to elevate us to desire and hope of Eternal.]
And certain that stood there and heard, said, He calls Elias. And incontinent
one of them running, took a spung and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a
reed, and gave him to drink. And others said, Let be, let us see whether Elias
come to deliver him. And Jesus again crying with a mighty voice, yielded up the
ghost.

[Here the Faithful kneel or prostrate themselves a while upon the ground.] And
behold, the Veil of the Temple was rent in two pieces, from the top even to the
bottom;

[It was a great piece of Hanging, or Tapistry, before the Sanctuary; and this
was done to signify, that the Old Law was taken away in Christ.] and the earth
did quake, and the rocks were rent, and the graves were opened: and many bodies
of the Saints, that had slept, rose; and they going forth out of the graves
after his resurrection, came into the holy city, and appeared to many. And the
Centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, having seen the
Earthquake, and the things that were done, were sore afraid, saying, Indeed
this was the Son of God. And there were many women afar off, which had followed
Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him: among whom was Mary Magdalene, and
Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of the Sons of Zebedee. And
when it was evening, there came a certain rich man of Aramithoea, named Joseph,
who also himself was Disciple to Jesus. He went to Pilate, and asked the body
of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded, that the body should be delivered. And Joseph,
taking the body, wrapped it in clean Syndon, and laid it in his own new Monument,
which he had hewed in a rock. And he rolled a great stone to the door of the
Monument, and went his way. And there was there Mary Magdalene, and the other
Mary sitting over against the Sepulcher.

ANd the next day, which is after the Parasceue, the Chief Priests and the
Pharisees came together to Pilate, saying, Sir, we have remembered that the
seducer said, yet living, After three days I will rise again. Command therefore
the Sepulcher to be kept until the third day, lest perhaps his Disciples come
and steal him, and say to the people, He is risen from the dead: and the last
error shall be worse than the first. Pilate said to them, You have a guard;
go, guard it, as you know. And they departing, made the Sepulcher sure, sealing
up the stone with watchmen.

Creed I Believe in one God Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of
all things visible and invisible. And in our Lord Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of God and born of the Father before all Ages, God of God, light
of light, true God of the true God, who was begotten, not made, consubstantial
to the Father, by whom all things were made. Who descended from Heaven for us
men, and for our salvation, and taking flesh of the Virgin Mary, by the
operation of the Holy Ghost, became man. He was also crucified for us, under
Pontius Pilate, suffered, and was buried, and rose again the third day,
according to the Scriptures. He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right
hand of the Father, and will come again in glory to judge the living and the
dead, whose Kingdom will have no end. I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and
giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, who spoke by the
Prophets. I believe one Holy Catholic Church, I confess one Baptism for the
remission of sins. I expect the resurrection of the dead, and life in the world
to come. Amen.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

The OFFERTORY, taken out of the 68th Psalm.

MY heart has looked for reproach and misery, and I expected somebody that
would be sorrowful with me, and there was none. I sought for a comforter, and I
found him not, and they gave gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me
vinegar to drink.

REceive, O Holy Father Almighty and Eternal God, this immaculate Host, which
I, thy unworthy servant, offer to thee my living and true God, for my
innumerable sins, offenses and negligences; for all here present, and for all
faithful Christians, living and dead, that it may avail me and them to life
everlasting. Amen.

O God, who, as a wonderful effect of thy power, have created humane nature,
and restored it by a greater Miracle; Grant us, by the Mystery of this Wine and
Water, to partake of his Divinity, who did vouchsafe upon him our humanity;
namely, Jesus Christ our Lord thy Son, who, being God, lives and reigns with
thee, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen.

WE offer unto thee, O Lord, this Chalice of salvation, beseeching thy
clemency, that it may ascend before thy Divine Majesty as a sweet perfume for
our souls health, and for the whole worlds. Amen.

WE present our selves before thee with an humble and contrite spirit; O Lord,
accept of us, and grant that this sacrifice may be made agreeable this day unto
thee, O Lord God.

COme, Omnipotent Sanctifier and Eternal God, and bless this sacrifice prepared
for the glory of thy Holy Name.

Psalm. I Will wash my hands amongst Innocents.

And I will compass thy Altar, O Lord.

That I may hear the voice of praise, and show forth all thy mavelous works.

Lord, I have loved the beauty of thy house, and the place of the habitation of
thy glory.

Destroy not, O God, my soul with the impious, and my life with bloody men.

In whose hands are iniquities, their right hand is replenished with gifts.

But I have walked in my innocence, redeem me and have mercy on me.

My foot has stood in the direct way. In the Churches I will bless thee, O
Lord.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

REceive, O Holy Trinity, this Oblation which we make unto thee, in memory of
the Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ; And in the
honor of the ever blessed Virgin Mary, St. John Baptist, the holy Apostles
Peter and Paul, and of all Saints, to their honor and our benefit, that they,
whom we commemorate on earth, will vouchsafe to make intercession for us in
Heaven. Through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

Pray, Brethren, that mine and your Sacrifice may be acceptable to God the
Father Almighty.

O Lord, receive this Sacrifice from thy hands, to the honor and glory of his
Name, to our particular benefit, and for the good of the whole Church.

Amen. The SECRET.

GRant, we beseech thee, O Lord, that this Oblation, made before thy Divine
Majesty, may obtain us the Grace of Piety, and procure us Eternal Happiness.
Through our Lord, etc.

THE PREFACE.
That is to say, The Beginning of the Canon of the Mass, and the General
Preparation for the Sacrifice.
V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

V. Lift up your hearts.

R. We have them lifted up to our Lord.

Let us give thanks to our Lord God.

It is meet and just.

Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Jerusalem, Benedictus qui venit, etc. etc. IT is
truly meet and just, right and healthful, that we always, and in all places,
give thanks to thee, O holy Lord, Father Almighty, Everlasting God, who did
ordain the Salvation of Mankind in the Wood of the Cross, that Life might be
there restored, whence Death arose, and that he might be conquered by a Tree,
who had been conquered thereby, through Christ our Lord. By whom the Angels
praise thy Majesty, the Dominations adore thee, the Powers tremble, the Heavens
and the Heavenly Virtues, and the blessed Seraphins, in one common joy,
celebrate thy Name; amongst whom, we beseech thee, that our humble Addresses
may be admitted, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath. The Heavens and
Earth are full of thy glory, Hosanna in the highest. Blessed is he that comes
in the Name of our Lord, Hosanna in the highest.

C. Stella ^^^ (...) s^^^^
engraving:Christ at the Cross
THE CANON OF THE MASS: OR, The RULE and ORDER which the CHURCH observes in
celebrating the Sacrifice.
WE therefore, most merciful Father, humbly beseech thee, through thy Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, to accept and bless these Gifts, these Presents, these
Immaculate Sacrifices, which in the first we offer unto thee for thy Holy
Catholic Church, to which thou will please to grant peace and preserve and
maintain in unity through the whole World with the Pope N. thy servant, and our
Prelate N. and our King N. with all Orthodox Believers of the Catholic
Apostolic Faith.

REmember, O Lord, all thy servants, Men and Women.

And all such especially as are here present, whose Faith and Devotion is known
unto thee, for whom we offer, and who offer to thee, for themselves or friends,
this Sacrifice of Praise, for the Benefit of their Souls, in hope of health and
salvation, and pay their vows unto thee, the Eternal, Living and True God.

PArticipating in the same Communion and Commemorating chiefly the ever
glorious Virgin Mary, Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ; the blessed Apostles and
Martyrs, Peter and Paul, Andrew, James, John, Thomas, James, Philip,
Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon and Thadeus, Linus, Cletus, Clement, Xistus,
Cornelius, Cyprian, Laurence, Chrysoganus, John and Paul, Cosmas and Damianus,
and of all Saints, by whose Merits and Prayers be pleased to grant, that in all
things we may be protected by thee. Through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

WE beseech thee, O Lord, therefore graciously to accept this oblation of our
servitude, as likewise of thy whole Family, granting us Peace in our days, and
preserving us from Eternal Death, place among thy Elect. Through Christ our
Lord. Amen.

WE beseech thee, O God, that thou will be pleased to make this Oblation
blessed, approved, effectual, reasonable and acceptable, that it may be made
unto us the Body and Blood of thy most beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Consecration.

WHo, the day before his Passion, took the Bread into his holy and venerable
hands, and, lifting his eyes toward heaven, to thee his God and omnipotent
Father, to thee giving thanks, he blessed, broke, and gave to his Disciples,
saying, Take and eat ye all of this, FOR THIS IS MY BODY.

The Elevation of the Host.

The Consecration of the Blood of Jesus Christ.

IN like manner, after he had supt, taking this excellent Chalice into his holy
and venerable hands, giving thee also thanks, he blessed it and gave it to his
Disciples, saying, Take and drink ye all of this, FOR THIS IS THE CHALICE OF MY
BLOOD OF THE NEW AND EVERLASTING TESTAMENT, (a Mystery of Faith) WHICH SHALL BE
SHED FOR YOU AND FOR MANY, FOR THE REMISSION OF SINS. This as often as you
shall do, you shall do in memory of me.

The Elevation of the Chalice.

viz. WHerefore, O Lord, we thy servants, and the sanctified people also being
mindful both of the blessed Passion of the same Christ thy Son our Lord, and of
his Resurrection, as also of his glorious Ascension into Heaven, we offer unto
thy most excellent Majesty, of thy Gifts bestowed upon us, A pure Host, a holy
Host, an immaculate Host, the Holy Bread of Eternal Life and Chalice of
Perpetual Salvation.

Abel Abraham Melchisedeck WHich we beseech thee propitiously to regard and to
receive this Holy Sacrifice and Immaculate Host, as thou were pleased to
receive the Gifts of thy just Child Abel, and the Sacrifice of our Patriarch
Abraham, as likewise that which thy High Priest Melchisedeck offered unto thee.

Supplices te rogamus.

WE therefore, Almighty God, most humbly beseech thee to command these things
to be represented to thy High Altar, in presence of thy Divine Majesty, by the
hands of thy Holy Angel, that all, who participating of this Altar, shall
receive the Body and Blood of Christ, may be replenished with thy Heavenly
Grace and Blessing. Through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Commemoration for the Dead.

Memento, etc.

REmember also, O Lord, thy servants, Men and Women, N. and N. who have gone
before us with the sign of Faith, and now rest in Peace.

WE humbly beseech, O Lord, to grant to these, and to all those who rest in
Christ, a Place of Refreshment, Light and Peace. Through the same Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Nobis quoque peccatoribus.

VOuchsafe also to grant unto us sinners, thy servants, hoping, from the
multitude of thy mercies, a part and society with thy Apostles and Martyrs,
John, Stephen, Matthias, Barnaby, Ignatius, Alexander, Marcellinus, Peter,
Felicitas, Perpetua, Agatha, Lucy, Agnes, Cecily, Anastasia, and with all
Saints; among whom we humbly beseech thee to admit us, not esteeming our merit,
but mercifully granting thy pardon. Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Per quem haec omnia, etc.

BY whom, O Lord, thou do always create all these goods, thou do sanctify,
quicken, bless, and bestow them on us, by him, and with him, and in him, O God
the Father Almighty, all Honor and Glory is due to thee in the Unity of the
Holy Ghost.

Per omnia saecula, etc.

World without end.

Amen. Let us Pray.

Praeceptis, etc.

BEing taught by our Savior's Commands, and lead by Divine Institution, we are
bold to say,

Our Father, which art in Heaven, (where thy glory appears in more splendor,
and whether thou would have us raise up our thoughts.)

Hallowed be thy Name. (Acknowledged and adored.)

Thy Kingdom come. (The Empire of thy Grace in this world, and of thy Bliss in
the other.)

Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.

Give us this day our daily bread. (The precious Body and Blood of thy Son,
which is to day consecrated, thy holy Grace and all things necessary unto us
for the sustentation of this life.)

And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

And lead us not into Temptation.

R. But deliver us from Evil.

Amen.

Libera, etc.

DEliver us from all Evil past, present and to come, and by the Intercession of
the blessed and ever glorious Virgin Mary, Mother of God, of thy holy Apostles,
Peter and Paul, St. Andrew, and all Saints: Grant propitiously unto us Peace in
our days, that, through the assistance of thy mercy, we may both be freed from
sin, and secured from all trouble. Through the same our Lord Jesus Christ thy
Son, who lives and reigns with thee, in the Unity of the Holy Ghost, world
without end.

Amen.

Pax Domini, etc.

THe Peace of our Lord abide always with you.

And with thy Spirit.

Haec Commixtio, etc.

LEt this Commixtion and Consecration of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ be unto me, and to all that receive, effectual to life everlasting. Amen.

Agnus Dei, etc.

John, Behold, the Lamb of God takes away the sins of the world. LAmb of God,
who take away the sins of the World, have mercy on us.

Lamb of God, who take away the sins of the World, have mercy on us.

Lamb of God, who take away the sins of the World, grant us peace.

Have Mercy on us. Or, Grant us Peace.

Grant them Rest. Grant them Eternal Rest.

Domine Jesu Christ qui dixisti, etc.

O Lord Jesus Christ, who did say unto thy Apostles, Peace I leave unto you,
regard not my Sins, but look upon the Faith of thy Church, and, according to
thy pleasure, give us Peace and Union: Who live and reignest God for ever and
ever. Amen.

Peace be with you.

And with thy Spirit.

O Lord, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, who, according to thy Father's
will, the Holy Ghost cooperating, by thy death, did give life to the World,
deliver me, by this thy most holy Body and Blood, from all my sins, and from
all evil, and making me always obedient to thy commands, grant that I be never
separated from thee. Who, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, live, etc.

GRant, O Lord Jesus Christ, that this participation of thy Body, which I now
however unworthy presume to receive, be not to my Judgment and Condemnation,
but, through thy mercy, may avail to the safeguard of my Soul and Body, and
likewise as a wholesome remedy. Who live and reignest with God the Father, etc.

I Will take this Heavenly Bread, and call upon the Name of our Lord.

Centurians LOrd, I am not worthy, that thou should enter into my house; say
but the word, and my soul shall be healed.

Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should enter into my house; say but the
word, and my soul shall be healed.

Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should enter into my house; say but the
word, and my soul shall be healed.

THe Body of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve my soul to life everlasting. Amen.

Psalm. WHat shall I render to our Lord, for all things that he has given to
me? I will take the Chalice of Salvation, and will Invocate the Name of our
Lord. Praising, I will Invocate our Lord, and I shall be saved from my enemies.

THe Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve my soul to life everlasting. Amen.

GRant, O Lord, what we have taken with our mouth, we may receive with a pure
mind, and that of a temporal gift it may become to us an everlasting remedy.

LEt thy Body which I have received, O Lord, and thy Blood which I have drank,
cleave unto my bowels, and grant that no stain of sin may remain in me, whom
thy pure and holy Sacrament has satiated. Who live and reignest for ever and
ever. Amen.

The COMMUNION, taken out of the 26th Chapter of St. Matthew.

FAther, if this Cup cannot pass, but that I must drink it, thy will be done.

The POST-COMMUNION.

GRant, O Lord, by the operation of this Mystery, that we may be cleansed from
our sins, and obtain an accomplishment of our just desires. Through our Lord,
etc.

Our Lord be with you.

And with thy Spirit.

Ita missa est, You may depart, Benedicamus Domino, Let us bless our Lord,
Gloria in excelsis Let us bless our Lord.

Thanks be to God.

ACcept, O Holy Trinity, this Oblation of my servitude, and grant, that though
this Sacrifice be presented thy Divine Majesty, by my unworthy hands, yet that,
through thy mercy, it may be acceptable to thee, and propitiatory for me and
all other, for whom I have offered it. Through Christ our Lord.

Almighty God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, bless you. Amen.

Our Lord be with you.

And with thy Spirit.

John The beginning of the Holy Gospel according to St. John.

Glory be to thee, O Lord.

IN the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the
Word; This was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him, and
without him was made nothing, which was made. In him was life; and the life was
the light of men; and the light shined in darkness, and the darkness did not
comprehend it. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John; This man
came for testimony, to give testimony of the light. It was the true light,
which lightneth every man that comes into this world. He was in the world, and
the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came into his own,
and his own received him not; because as many as received him, he gave them
power to be made the sons of God, to those that believe in his Name; who, not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God are
born. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt in us, (and we saw the glory as it
were of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and verity.

R. Thanks be to God.

John Feria, John THE MASS FOR MONDAY IN Holy Week.
Praxede Praxede, Mary Magdalene, The INTROIT, taken out of the 34th Psalm.

JUdge, O Lord, them that hurt me, overthrow them that impugn me, take Armor
and Shield, and rise up to help me, O Lord, who art the strength of my
salvation.

PSALM XXXIV.

BRing forth the sword and shut up against them that persecute me; Say to my
soul, I am thy salvation.

Judge, O Lord, etc.

etc. page COLLECT.

ALmighty God, who know us unable to subsist through our own infirmity among
so many evils, grant that we may respire by the Merits of thy Son's Passion.
Who lives and reigns one God in the unity of the Holy Ghost, for ever and
ever. Amen.

Against the Persecutors of the Church.

WE beseech thee, O Lord, admit, being appeased, the Prayers of thy Church,
that all Adversities and Errors being destroyed, it may serve thee in secure
liberty. Through our Lord, etc.

For the Pope.

O God, the Pastor and Governor of all Faithful, thou being merciful,
favorably respect thy Servant, N. whom thou have raised to the dignity of
Chief Pastor of thy Church; Grant him, we beseech thee, in Word and Example to
profit those whom he has charge over, to the end that, together with the Flock
committed to him, he may come unto life everlasting. Through our Lord, etc.

The Lesson taken out of the Prophet Isay, Chap. 50.

IN those days said Isaias, The Lord God has opened my ear, and I do not
gainsay: I am not gone backward. I have given my body to the strikers, and my
cheeks to the pluckers. I have not turned away my face from the rebukers and
spitters. The Lord God is my helper, therefore am I not confounded. Therefore
have I set my face as a most hard rock, and I know that I shall not be
confounded. He is near that justifies me, who shall gainsay me? Let us stand
together, who is my adversary? let him come to me. Behold, the Lord God, my
helper, who is he that shall contemn me? lo, they shall all be destroyed as a
garment; the moth shall eat them. Which of you fears our Lord, hears the voice
of his servant. Who has walked in darkness and has no light, let him hope in
the Name of our Lord, and lean upon his God.

The GRADUAL, taken out of 34th Psalm.

Isay, ARise, O Lord, and attend to my judgment: my God my Lord, unto my cause.

Bring forth the Word, and shut up against them that persecute me.

The TRACT out of the 102 and 78 Psalm.

O Lord, do not unto us, according to our sins, nor according to our iniquities
reward us.

V. Remember not, O Lord, our old iniquities, let thy mercies quickly prevent
us, because we are become exceeding poor.

V. Help us, O God, our Savior, and for the glory of thy Name, O Lord, deliver
us, and be propitious to our sins, for thy Namesake.

etc. page The sequence of the Holy Gospel according to St. John, Chap. 12.

Judas Mary Magdalene, JEsus, six days before the Pasche, came to Bethania,
where Lazarus was, that had been dead whom Jesus raised, and they made him a
supper there, and Martha ministered, but Lazarus was one of them that sat at
the table with him, Mary therefore took a pound of precious Ointment, and
anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair, and the house was
filled with the odor of the Ointment. One therefore of his Disciples, Judas
Iscariot, he that was to betray him, said, Why was not this Ointment sold for
three hundred pence, and given to the poor? And he said this, not because he
cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and, having the purse, carried
the things that were put in. Jesus therefore said, Let her alone, that she may
keep it for the day of my burial; for the poor you have always with you, but me
you shall not have always. A great multitude therefore of the Jews knew that he
was there, and they came not for Jesus only, but to see Lazarus, whom he
raised from the dead.

The OFFERTORY out of the 142 Psalm.

Judas DEliver me from my enemies, to thee I have fled: teach me to do thy
will, because thou art my God.

etc. page The SECRET.

Judas Mary Magdalene GRant, omnipotent God, that, being purified by the virtue
of these Sacrifices, we may arrive with the greater purity to their fountain.
Through our Lord, etc.

The SECRET.

Against the Persecutors of the Church.

PRotect, O Lord, those that assist at these Mysteries, that, intending holy
things, they may serve thee both in soul and body. Through our Lord.

Or for the Pope.

REceive, O Lord, graciously these our offerings, and guide, by thy continual
grace, thy Servant N. whom thou have advanced to be Chief Pastor of thy Church.
Through our.

etc. page page The COMMUNION, taken out of the 34th Psalm.

Jews Jews Calvary. LEt them blush and be ashamed together, that rejoice at my
evils; let them be clothed with confusion and shame, that speak malicious
things against me.

The POST-COMMUNION.

GRant, O Lord, that thy holy Mysteries may inspire us with a divine fervor,
that, in celebrating them, we may also be delighted with the fruit of them.
Through our Lord, etc.

POST-COMMUNION.

Against the Persecutors of the Church.

O Lord our God, we beseech thee to preserve those from falling, through humane
frailties, whom thou have vouchsafed to a participation in this Holy Communion.
Through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

Or for the Pope.

PRotect us, O Lord, we beseech thee by the participation of this Divine
Sacrament, and strengthen thy Servant N. whom thou have advanced to be Chief
Pastor of thy Church, that he, and the Flock committed to his charge, may
attain Eternal Life. Through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

A Prayer over the People.

Humble your selves, and bow down your heads to God.

O God, who art our salvation, afford us thy succor, and grant that we may
solemnize the approaching Feasts in memory of those Benefits wherewith thou
have been pleased to refresh us. Through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, etc.

page THE MASS FOR TUESDAY IN Holy Week.
The station at St. Priscas-Church.
Gentiles Hercules Rome, Priscas The INTROIT, taken out of the 6th Chapter of
the Apostle St. Paul to the Galathians, and out of the 66th Psalm.

Paul, BUT it behooves us to glory in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
whom is our salvation, life, and resurrection, by whom we are saved and
delivered.

PSALM LXVI.

GOD have mercy on us, and bless us, illuminate his countenance upon us, and
have mercy on us.

Nos autem, etc.

Kyrie eleison, etc. page The COLLECT.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, grant us thy grace so to celebrate the Mysteries
of the Passion of our Savior, that, through thy mercies, we may reap the
benefit. Through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

Against the Persecutors of the Church.

Ecclesiae tuae quaesumus, etc. page Or for the Pope.

Deus omnium, page The Lesson out of the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 11.

Jews Jeremy, IN those days says Jeremias, O Lord, thou have showed me, and I
have known; thou have showed me their studies. And I, as a mild lamb, that is
carried to a victim: And I knew not that they devised councels against me;
saying, Let us cast wood on his bread, and raze him out of the land of the
living, and let his name be mentioned no more. But thou, O Lord of Sabbath,
which judge justly, and provest the reins and the hearts, let me see thy
revenge of them: for to thee I have revealed my cause, O Lord my God.

The GRADUAL, taken out of the 34th Psalm.

BUT I, when they were troublesome unto me, did put on haircloth, and humbled
my soul in fasting, and my prayer shall be turned into my bosom.

V. Judge, O Lord, them that hurt me, overthrow them that impugn me, take arms
and shield and rise up to help me.

The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ according to St. Mark, Chap. 14, 15.

AT that time the Pasche was, and Azymes after two days, and the Chief Priests
and the Scribes sought how they might by some guile lay hands on Jesus, and
kill him. But they said, Not on the festival-day, lest there might be a tumult
of the people. And when he was at Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper,
and sat at meat, there came a woman, having an alabaster box of Ointment of
precious Spiknard, and breaking the alabaster box, she poured it upon his head.
But there were certain that had indignation within themselves, and said,
Whereto is this waste of Ointment made? for this Ointment might have been sold
for more than three hundred pence, and given to the poor. And they murmured
against her. But Jesus said, Let her alone, why do you molest her? she has
wrought a good work upon me; for the poor you have always with you; and when
you will you may do them good: but me you have not always. That which she had
she has done: she has prevented to anoint my body to the burial. Amen, I say
to you, Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, that also
which she has done, shall be told for the memory of her. And Judas Iscariot,
one of the twelve, went his way to the Chief Priests, for to betray him to
them. Who hearing it, were glad: and they promised him, that they would give
him money. And he sought how he might betray him conveniently. And the first
day of the Azymes, when they sacrificed the Pasche, the Disciples say to him,
Whither will thou that we go, and prepare for thee to eat the Pasche? And he
sends two of his Disciples, and says to them, Go ye into the City, and there
shall meet you a man carrying a pitcher of water; follow him: and whithersoever
he enters, say to the master of the house, the master says, Where is my
Refectory, where I may eat the Pasche with my Disciples? And he will show you a
great chamber adorned: and there prepare for us. And his Disciples went their
ways, and came into the city: and they found as he had told them, and they
prepared the Pasche. And when evening was come, he comes with the twelve And
when they were sitting at the table, and eating, Jesus said, Amen, I say to
you, that one of you shall betray me, he that eats with me. But they began to
be sad, and to say to him severally, Is it I? Who said to them, One of the
twelve, he dippeth with me his hand in the dish. And the Son of man indeed
goes, as it is written of him; but woe to that man, by whom the Son of man
shall be betrayed; it were good for him, if that man had not been born. And
while they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessing, brake, and gave to
them, and said, Take, this is my body. And taking the chalice, giving thanks,
he gave to them, and they all drank of it. And he said to them, This is my
blood of the New Testament, that shall be shed for many. Amen, I say to you,
that now I will not drink of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I shall
drink it new in the kingdom of God. And, an hymn being said, they went forth
into Mount Olivet. And Jesus said to them, You shall all be scandalized in me
this night: for it is written, I will strike the Pastor, and the sheep shall be
dispersed. But after that I shall be risen again, I will go before you into
Galilee. And Peter said to him, Although all shall be scandalized, yet not I.
And Jesus said to him, Amen, I say to thee, That thou this day, in this night,
before the cock crow twice, shall thrice deny me. But he spoke more vehemently,
Although I should die together with thee, I will not deny thee. And in like
manner also said they all. And they came into a farm-place, called Gethsemani.
And he said to his Disciples, Sit you here, until I pray. And he takes Peter,
and James, and John with him, and he began to fear, and to be heavy. And he
said to them, My soul is sorrowful even unto death: stay here, and watch. And
when he was gone forward a little, he fell flat upon the ground: and he prayed,
that, if it might be, the hour might pass from him. And he said, Abba. Father,
all things are possible to thee, transfer this Chalice from me: but not that
which I will, but that which thou. And he comes, and finds them sleeping.
And he says to Peter, Simon, sleep thou? Could thou not watch one hour?
Watch ye and pray, that you enter not into tentation. The spirit indeed is
prompt, but the flesh infirm. And going away again, he prayed, saying the
self-same word. And returning again, he found them asleep, for their eyes were
heavy: and they wist not what they should answer him. And he comes the third
time, and says to them, Sleep ye now, and take rest; it suffices, the hour is
come, behold the Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners. Arise,
let us go; behold, he that shall betray me, is at hand. And, as he was yet
speaking, comes Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, and with him a great
multitude, with swords and clubs, from the Chief Priests, and the Scribes, and
the Ancients. And the betrayer of him had given them a sign, saying, Whomsoever
I shall kiss, it is he, lay hold on him, and lead him warily. And when he was
come, immediately going to him, he says, Rabbi, and he kissed him: but they
laid hands upon him, and held him. And one certain man of the standers about,
drawing out a sword, smote the servant of the Chief Priests, and cut off his
ear. And Jesus answering, said to them, As to a thief, are you come out with
swords and clubs, to apprehend me? I was daily with you in the Temple teaching,
and you did not lay hands on me. But that the Scriptures may be fulfilled. Then
his Disciples leaving him, all fled. And a certain young man followed him,
clothed with a sindon upon the bare; and they took him. But he, casting off
the sindon, fled from them naked. And they brought Jesus to the Chief Priest,
and all the Priests, and the Scribes, and the Ancients assembled together. And
Peter followed him afar off, even in unto the Court of the High Priest, and he
sat with the servants at the fire, and warmed himself. And the Chief Priests
and all the Council sought testimony against Jesus, that they might put him to
death; neither found they, for many spoke false witness against him, and the
testimonies were not convenient. And certain rising up, bare false witness
against him, saying, That we heard him say, I will dissolve this Temple made
with hand, and in three days will I build another not made with hand. And their
testimony was not convenient. And the High Priest rising up into the mids,
asked Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing to these things that are objected
against thee by these? But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the
High Priest asked him, and said to him, Art thou Christ, the Son of the blessed
God? And Jesus says to him, I am. And you shall see the Son of man sitting on
the right hand of power, and coming with the clouds of heaven. And the High
Priest, renting his garment, says, What need we witnesses any further? You
have heard blasphemy, how think you? Who all condemned him to be guilty of
death. And certain began to spit upon him, and to cover his face, and to beat
him with buffets, and to say unto him, Prophecy. And the servants gave him
blows. And when Peter was in the Court beneath, there comes one of the
woman-servants of the High Priest; And when she had seen Peter warming himself,
beholding him, she says, And thou wast with Jesus of Nazareth. But he denied,
saying. Neither know I, neither wot I what thou say. And he went forth
before the Court, and the Cock crew. And again, a wench seeing him, began to
say to the standers about, that this fellow is of them. But he denied again.
And, after a while again, they that stood by, said to Peter, Verily thou art of
them, for thou art a Galilean. But he began to curse and to swear, that I know
not this man whom you speak of. And immediately the Cock crew again. And Peter
remembered the word that Jesus said unto him, Before the Cock crow twice, thou
shall thrice deny me; and he began to weep. And forthwith, in the morning, the
Chief Priests, with the Ancients and the Scribes, and the whole Council,
consulting together, binding Jesus, led him and delivered him to Pilate. And
Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? But he answering, said to him,
Thou say. And the Chief Priests accused him in many things. And Pilate again
asked him, saying, Answerest thou nothing? See in how many things they accuse
thee. But Jesus answered nothing more; so that Pilate marvelled. And upon the
festival-day he was wont to release unto them one of the prisoners, whomsoever
they had demanded. And there was one called Barabbas, who was put in prison
with seditious persons, who in a sedition had committed murder. And when the
multitude was come up, they began to require according as always he did unto
them. And Pilate answered them, and said, Will you, that I release to you the
King of the Jews? for he knew that the Chief Priests for envy had delivered
him. But the Chief Priests moved the people, that he should release Barabbas
rather to them. And Pilate again answering, said to them, What will you then
that I do to the King of the Jews? But they again cried, Crucify him. And
Pilate said to them, Why, what evil has he done? But they cried the more,
Crucify him. And Pilate, willing to satisfy the people, released to them
Barabbas, and having whipped Jesus, delivered him to be crucified. And the
soldiers led him into the court of the Palace, and they call together the
whole band: and they cloth him in purple, and platting a crown of thorns, they
put it upon him. And they began to salute him, Hail, King of the Jews. And they
smote his head with a reed; and they did spit on him, and bowing the knees,
they adored him. And after they had mocked him, they stripped him of the
purple, and put on him his own garments, and they led him forth to crucify
him. And they forced a certain man that passed by, Simon a Cyrenean coming from
the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to take up his cross. And they
bring him into the place Golgotha, which, being interpreted, is, The place of
Calvari. And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh; and he took it
not. And, crucifying him, they divided his garments, casting lots upon them,
who should take which. And it was the third hour, and they crucified him. And
the title of his cause was superscribed, King of the Jews. And with him they
crucified two thieves, one on the right hand, another on the lest. And the
Scripture was fulfilled that says, And with the wicked he was reputed. And
they that passed by, blasphemed him, wagging their heads, and saying, Vah, he
that destroys the Temple, and in three days builds it, save thy self,
coming down from the cross. In like manner also the Chief Priests mocking, said
with the Scribes one to another. He saved others, himself he cannot save. Let
Christ, the King of Israel, come now down from the cross, that we may see and
believe. And they that were crucified with him, railed at him. And when it was
the sixth hour, there was made darkness upon the whole earth until the ninth
hour. And at the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a mighty voice, saying, Eloi,
Eloi, lamasabacthani? Which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? And certain of the standers about hearing, said, Behold he
calls Elias. And one running and filling a sponge with vinegar, and putting
it about a reed, gave him drink, saying, Let be; let us see if Elias come to
take him down. And Jesus, putting forth a mighty voice, gave up the ghost.

Here the Faithful kneel, or prostrate themselves, for a while upon the ground.
And the veil of the Temple was rent in two, from the top to the bottom. And the
Centurion, that stood over against him, seeing that so, crying he had given up
the Ghost, said, Indeed this Man was the Son of God. And there were also women
looking on afar off: among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of
James the less, and of Joseph, and Salome: and when he was in Galilee, they
followed him, and ministered to him, and many other women, that came up together
with him to Jerusalem.

ANd when evening was come, (because it was the Parasceve, which is the
Sabboth-eve) came Joseph of Arimathea, a noble Senator, who himself also was
expecting the Kingdom of God: And he went in boldly to Pilate, and asked the
body of Jesus. But Pilate marvelled if he were now dead. And sending for the
Centurion, asked him, If he were now dead? And when he understood by the
Centurion, he gave the body to Joseph. And Joseph buying sindon, and taking him
down, wrapped him in the sindon, and laid him in a monument that was hewed out
of a rock. And he rolled a stone to the door of the monument.

The OFFERTORY, taken out of the 139th Psalm.

KEep me, O Lord, from the hand of a sinner, and from unjust men deliver me.

page The SECRET.

Watch and Pray, GRant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that these Sacrifices, which
we celebrate with wholesome Fasting, by an holy Institution, may repair our
nature. Through our Lord, etc.

Against the Persecutors of the Church.

Protege nos, page Or for the Pope.

Oblatis, etc. page page The COMMUNION, taken out of the 68th Psalm.

Jews, THey spoke against me, that sat in the gate, and they made songs
against me who drank wine; but I made my Prayer to thee, O Lord, it is a time
of thy good pleasure; O God, in the multitude of thy mercy.

The POST-COMMUNION.

Sanctify us, Almighty God, by thy Sacraments, that we may receive a cure for
our sins, and life everlasting. Through our Lord, etc.

Against the Persecutors of the Church.

O Lord, our God, we beseech thee, to preserve those from falling, through
humane frailties, whom thou have vouchsafed to a participation in this Holy
Communion. Through our Lord, etc.

Or for the Pope.

PRotect, O Lord, we beseech thee, by the participation of this Divine
Sacrament, and strengthen thy Servant N. whom thou have advanced to be Chief
Pastor of thy Church, that he and the flock committed to his charge may attain
Eternal Life. Through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

A Prayer over the People.

Let us Pray.

Humble your selves, and bow down your heads to God.

LEt thy Mercy, O Lord, cleanse us from the corruption of the old man, and give
us a new spirit. Through our Lord, etc.

page engraving: Christ
THE MASS FOR WEDNESDAY IN Holy Week.
The Station to St. Mary Major.
Mary. The INROITT, taken out of the 2d Chapter of the Epistle of St. Paul to
the Philippians, and out of the 101st Psalm.

IN the Name of Jesus let every knee bow, of things in Heaven, of things in
earth, and of things under the earth, because our Lord became obedient unto
death; even the death of the cross. Therefore our Lord Jesus Christ is in the
glory of God the Father.

PSALM CI.

O Lord, hear my Prayer; and let my cry come unto thee.

etc. page Let us Pray.

V. Let us bend our knees.

R. Raise up your selves.

COLLECT.

GRant, we beseech thee, O Almighty God, that we, who are incessantly
afflicted, through our excesses, may be delivered by the Passion of thy only
begotten Son, who lives and reigns one God with thee, in the unity of the
Holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

The Lesson out of the 62d and 63d Chapter of the Prophet Isay.

Jerusalem, Judea, Bosra Idumen Idumeans Israel, THis says our Lord: Tell ye
the Daughters of Sion, Behold thy Savior comes; behold, his reward is with
him, and his work before him. Who is this that comes from Edom with died
garments, from Bosra, this beautiful one in his Robe, going in the multitude of
his strength? I that speak justice, and am a desender to save. Why then is thy
clothing red? and thy garments as theirs that tread in the Wine Press? I have
trodden the Press alone, and of the Gentiles there is not a man with me. I have
trodden them in my fury, and have trodden them down in my wrath; and their
blood is sprinkled on my garments, and I have stained all my raiment: For the
day of revenge is in my heart; the year of my redemption is come. I looked
about, and there was no helper: I sought, and there was none to aid: and my arm
has saved, and my indignation it self has helped me. And I have trodden down
the people in my fury, and have inebriated them in my indignation, and have
drawn their strength down to ground. I will remember the mercies of our Lord,
the praise of our Lord for all things that our Lord has rendered to us.

The GRADUAL, out of the 68th Psalm.

TUrn not away thy face from thy Servant: Because I am in tribulation, hear me
speedily.

V. Save me, O God, because waters of affliction are entered into my Soul, I
stuck fast in the mire of the depth, and there is no sure standing.

Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

Let us pray.

O God, who were pleased that thy Son should suffer death for us upon the
Cross, that so the power of the enemy of mankind might be abated; grant unto us
thy servants, that we may partake of his glorious Resurrection. Through the
same our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

Against the Persecutors of the Church.

Ecclesiae tuae, etc. page Or for the Pope.

Deus omnium, etc. page The Lesson out of the Prophet Isay, chapter 63.

Isay IN those days said Isaias, Who has believed our hearing? and the arm of
our Lord, to whom is it revealed? And he shall come up as a young Spring before
him, and as a Root from a thirsty ground. There is no beauty in him, nor
comeliness; and we have seen him, and there was no sightliness, and we were
desirous of him. Despised and most abject of men; a man of sorrows, and knowing
infirmity: and his look as it were hid and despised, whereupon neither have we
esteemed him. He surely has born our infirmities, and our sorrows he has
carried: and we thought him as it were a Leper and stricken of God, and
humbled. But he was wounded for our iniquities, he was broken for our sins, the
discipline of our peace was upon him, and with the wait of his stripes we are
healed. All we have strayed as Sheep; every one has declined into his own way:
and our Lord has put upon him the iniquity of all us. He was offered, because
himself would, and opened not his mouth: As a Sheep to slaughter was he led,
and as a Lamb before his Shearer, he shall be dumb, and shall not open his
mouth. From distress and from judgment, he was taken up: Who shall declare his
Generation? because he is cut out of the Land of the living. For the wickedness
of my people have I stricken him. And he shall give the impious for his burial,
and the rich for his death: Because he has not done iniquity, neither was
their guile in his mouth. And our Lord would break him in infirmity. If he
shall put away his Soul for sin, he shall see seed of long age; and the will of
our Lord shall be directed in his hand: for that his Soul has labored, he
shall see and be filled. In his knowledge the same my just servant shall
justify many, and he shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I distribute
unto him very many, and he shall divide the spoils of the strong: for that he
has delivered his Soul unto death, and was reputed with the wicked; and he
has born the sin of many, and has prayed for the transgressiors.

The TRACT, taken out of the 101st Psalm.

O Lord, hear my Prayer, and let my cry come unto thee.

V. Turn not away thy face from me, in what day soever I am in tribulation,
incline thy ear unto me.

V. In what day soever I shall invocate thee, hear me speedily.

V. Because my days have vanished as smoke, and my bones are withered as a dry
burnt firebrand.

V. I am stricked as grass, and my heart is withered, because I have forgotten
to eat my bread.

V. Thou rising up shall have mercy on Sion, because it is time to have mercy
on it.

The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, according to St. Luke, chap. 22, and 23.

AT that time the festival day of the Azymes approached, which is called
Pasche: and the chief Priests and the Scribes sought how they might kill Jesus,
but they feared the people. And Satan entered into Judas that was surnamed
Iscariot, one of the twelve: And he went and talked with the chief Priests and
the Magistrates, how he might betray him to them. And they were glad, and
bargained to give him money. And he promised. And he sought opportunity to
betray him apart from the multitudes. And the day of the Azymes came, wherein
it was necessary that the Pasche should be killed. And he sent Peter and John,
saying, Go and prepare us the Pasche, that we may eat. But they said, Where
will thou that we prepare it? And he said to them, Behold, as you enter into
the City, there shall meet you a man carrying a Pitcher of water, follow him
into the house into which he enters; and you shall say to the good man of the
house, The Master says to thee, Where is the Inn where I may eat the Pasche
with my Disciples? And he will show you a great Refectory adorned, and there
prepare. And they going, found as he said to them, and prepared the Pasche. And
when the hour was come, he sat down, and the twelve Apostles with him, and he
said to them, With desire I have desired to eat this Pasche with you, before I
suffer. For I say to you, That from this time I will not eat it, till it be
fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. And taking the Chalice, he gave thanks, and
said, Take and divide among you; for I say to you, That I will not drink of the
generation of the Vine, till the Kingdom of God do come. And taking Bread, he
gave thanks, and brake, and gave to them, saying, This is my Body which is
given for you. Do this for a commemoration of me. In like manner the Chalice
also, after he had supped, saying, This is the Chalice of the New Testament in
my Blood, which shall be shed for you. But yet behold the hand of him that
betrayeth me, is with me on the Table. And the Son of man indeed goes
according to that which is determined: but yet woe to that man by whom he shall
be betrayed. And they began to question among themselves, which of them it
should be that should do this. And there fell also a contention between them,
which of them seemed to be greater. And he said unto them, The Kings of the
Gentiles overruled them; and they that have power upon them, are called
beneficial. But you not so, but he that is the greater among you, let him
become as the younger; and he that is the leader, as the waiter. For which is
greater, he that sits at Table, or he that ministers? Is not he that
sits? But I am in the midst of you, as he that ministers, and you are they
that have remained with me in my temptation. And I dispose to you, as my Father
disposed to me, a Kingdom; that you may eat and drink upon my Table in my
Kingdom, and may sit upon Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. And our
Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold Satan required to have you for to sift as
Wheat: but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not; and thou once
converted, confirm thy Brethren. Who said to him, Lord, with thee I am ready to
go both into prison, and unto death. And he said, I say unto thee, Peter, the
Cock shall not crow to day, till thou deny thrice thou know me. And he said
to them, When I sent you without purse, and skrip, and shoes, did you lack any
thing? But said, Nothing. He said therefore unto them, But now he that has a
purse, let him take it, likewise also a skrip; and he that has not, let him
sell his coat and buy a sword. For I say to you, That yet this that is written,
must be fulfilled in me. And with the wicked was he reputed: For those things
that are concerning me, have an end. But they said, Lord, lo two swords here.
But he said to them, It is enough. And going forth, he went according to his
custom into Mount Olivet; and his Disciples also followed him. And when he was
come to the place, he said to them, Pray, lest ye enter into temptation. And he
was pulled away from them a stones cast; and kneeling, he prayed, saying,
Father, if thou will, transfer this Chalice from me. But yet not my will, but
thine be done. And there appeared to him an Angel from Heaven strengthening
him, and being in an agony, he prayed the longer. And his sweat became as drops
of blood trickling down upon the Earth. And when he was risen up from prayer,
and was come to his Disciples, he found them sleeping for pensiveness. And he
said to them, Why sleep you? Arise, pray, lest you enter into temptation. As he
was yet speaking, behold a multitude, and he that was called Judas, one of the
twelve, went before them, and approached to Jesus, for to kiss him. And Jesus
said to him, Judas, with a kiss, do thou betray the Son of man? And they that
were about him, seeing what would be, said to him, Lord, shall we strike with
the sword? And one of them smote the servant of the High Priest, and cut off
his right ear. But Jesus answering, said, Suffer ye thus far. And when he had
touched his ear, he healed him. And Jesus said to them, that were come unto
him, the Chief Priests and Magistrates of the Temple, and Ancients, As it were
to a thief, are you come forth with swords and clubs? when I was daily with you
in the Temple, you did not lay hands upon me, but this is your hour, and the
power of darkness. And, apprehending him, they led him to the High Priests
house; but Peter followed afar off. And, a fire being kindled in the mids of
the court, and they sitting about it, Peter was in the mids of them. Whom, when
a certain wench saw, sitting at the light, and had beheld him, she said, This
fellow was also with him. But he denied him, saying, Woman, I know him not.
And, after a while, another man seeing him, said, And thou art of them. But
Peter said, O man I am not. And after the space as it were of one hour, a
certain other man affirmed, saying, Verily, this fellow also was with him, for
he is also a Galilean. And Peter said, Man, I know not what thou say. And
incontinent as he was yet speaking, the Cock crew. And our Lord turning, looked
on Peter. And Peter remembered the word of our Lord, as he had said, That before
the Cock crow, thou shall thrice deny me. And Peter, going forth adoors, wept
bitterly. And the men that held him, mocked him, beating him. And they did
blindfold him, and smote his face. And they asked him, saying, Prophecy, who
is he that smote thee? And, blaspheming, many other things they said against
him. And when it was day, there assembled the Ancients of the people, and Chief
Priests, and Scribes, and they brought him into their council, saying, If thou
be Christ, tell us. And he said to them, If I tell you, you will not believe
me: If also I ask, you will not answer me. But from henceforth the Son of man
shall be sitting on the right hand of the power of God. And they all said, Art
thou then the Son of God? Who says, You say that I am. But they said, What
need we testimony any further? for your selves have heard of his own mouth. And
all the multitude of them rising up, led him to Pilate. And they began to
accuse him, saying, We have found this man subverting our nation, and
prohibiting to give tributes to Caesar, and saying, That he is Christ the King.
And Pilate asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? But he answering,
said, Thou say. And Pilate said to the Chief Priests and Multitudes, I find
no cause in this man. But they were the more earnest, saying, He stirs the
people, teaching throughout all Jewry, beginning from Galilee, even hither. But
Pilate hearing Galilee, Asked if the man were of Galilee? And when he
understood, that he was of Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him back to Herod, who
was also himself at Jerusalem in those days. And Herod, seeing Jesus, was very
glad, for he was desirous a long time to see him, for because he heard many
things of him, and he hoped to see some sign wrought by him. And he asked him
in many words; but he answered him nothing. And there stood the Chief Priests
and the Scribes constantly accusing him. And Herod, with his army, set him at
naught; and he mocked him, putting on him a white garment, and sent him back to
Pilate. And Herod and Pilate were made friends that day, for before they were
enemies one to another. And Pilate, calling together the Chief Priests and
Magistrates and the People, said to them, you have presented to me this man, as
averting the people, and behold, I, examining before you, have found no cause
in this man, of those things wherein you accuse him; no, nor Herod neither, for
I sent you to him, and behold, nothing worthy of death is done to him. I will
chasten him therefore and dismiss him. And of necessity had to release unto
them, upon the feast day, one. But the whole multitude together cried out,
saying, Dispatch him, and release to us Barabbas; who was, for a certain
sedition, made in the city, and murder, cast in prison. And Pilate again spoke
to them, desirous to release Jesus. But they cried again, saying, Crucify,
crucify him. And he the third time said to them, Why, what evil has he done?
I find no cause of death in him; I will correct him therefore, and let him go.
But they were instant with loud voices, requiring, that he might be crucified.
And their voices prevailed. And Pilate adjudged their petition to be done. And
he released unto them, him that for murder and sedition had been cast into
prison, whom they demanded; but Jesus he delivered to their pleasure. And when
they led him, they took one Simon of Cyrene, coming from the country, and they
laid the cross upon him to carry after Jesus. And there followed him a great
multitude of people, and of women, which bewailed and lamented him. But Jesus
turning to them, said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not upon me, but weep upon
your selves, and upon your children; For behold the days shall come, wherein
they will say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that have not born, and
the paps that have not given suck. Then shall they begin to say to the
mountains, Fall upon us, and to the hills, Cover us. For if in the green wood
they do these things, in the dry what shall be done? And there were led also
other two malefactors with him to be executed. And after they came to the
place, which is called Calvari, there they crucified him; and the thieves, one
on the right hand, and the other on the left. And Jesus said, Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do. But they, dividing his garments, did cast
lots. And the people stood expecting, and the Princes with them derided him,
saying, Others he has saved, let him him save himself, if this be Christ, the
Elect of God. And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and offering
him vinegar, saying, If thou be the King of the Jews, save thy self. And there
was also a superscription written over him in Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew
Letters, This is the King of the Jews. And one of those thieves that were
hanged, blasphemed him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thy self, and us. But
the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Neither do thou fear God, whereas
thou art in the same damnation? And we indeed justly, for we receive worthy of
our doings; but this Man has done no evil. And he said to Jesus, Lord,
remember me when thou shall come into thy Kingdom. And Jesus said to him, Amen
I say to thee; This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. And it was almost
the sixth hour; and there was made darkness upon the whole earth until the
ninth hour. And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the Temple was rent in the
midst. And Jesus, crying with a loud voice, said, Father, into thy hands I
commend my spirit. And saying this, he gave up the Ghost.

Here the Faithful kneel, or prostrate themselves, for a while upon the ground.
And the Centurion seeing that which was done, glorified God, saying, Indeed
this man was just. And all the multitude of them, that were present together at
that sight, and saw the things that were done, returned knocking their breasts.
And all his acquaintance stood afar off; and the women that had followed him
from Galilee, seeing these things.

ANd behold, a man named Joseph, (who was a Senator, a good man and a just, he
had not consented to their council and doings) of Arimathea, a city of Jewry,
who also himself expected the Kingdom of God. This man came to Pilate, and
asked the body of Jesus. And, taking it down, wrapped it in sindon, and laid
him in a monument hewed of stone, wherein never yet any man had been laid.

The OFFERTORY, taken out of the 101st Psalm.

Father, if it be possible, let this cup of sufferings pass from me, that I
taste it not; but let thy will be done, not mine. O Lord, hear my prayer, and
let my cry come unto thee: turn not thy face from me, etc.

page The SECRET.

ACcept, O Lord, we beseech thee this Offering: and grant, that we may receive,
with pious affections and resentments, that which we celebrate in memory of the
Passion of our Lord thy Son. Through the same Jesus Christ, etc.

Against the Persecutors of the Church.

Protege nos, etc. page Or for the Pope.

Oblatus, etc. page etc. The COMMUNION, out of the 101st Psalm.

I Mingled my drink with tears, because, lifting me up, thou have thrown me
down, and I withered away, like grass; but thou, O Lord, endurest for ever:
Thou, rising up, shall have mercy on Sion, because it is time to have mercy on
it.

The POST-COMMUNION.

GRant, O Almighty God, we beseech thee, that we may, with a holy confidence,
believe, that thou have opened a passage for us to Eternal Life, by the
Temporal Death of thy Son, represented in these Adorable Mysteries. Through the
same our Lord Jesus Christ.

Against the Persecutors of the Church.

Quaesumus Domine, etc. page Or for the Pope.

Haec nos quaesumus, page Let us Pray.

Humble your selves, and bow down your heads to God.

LOok down, O Lord, we beseech thee, upon this thy Family, for which our Lord
Jesus Christ doubted not to be betrayed into the hands of the wicked, and so
undergo the torments of the Cross. Who lives and reigns with thee, etc.

page (...) Hollar focit
engraving: last supper
UPON THURSDAY IN Holy Week.
AT PRIME.
Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc. Credo, etc.

Deus in adjutorium is not here said, to mind us, that Jesus Christ was
abandoned by God the Father, to sufferings and death.

Nor is any Hymn used, to instruct us, that the Jews had dishonored God, by
putting his Son to death.

PSALM LIII.

O God, save me in thy Name, and in thy strength judge me.

O God, hear my prayer with thine ears, receive the words of my mouth.

Because strangers have risen up against me, and the strong have sought my
soul, and they have not set God before their eyes.

For behold God helped me, and our Lord is the receiver of my soul.

Turn away the evils to mine enemies, and in thy truth destroy them.

I will voluntarily sacrifice to thee, and will confess to thy Name, O Lord,
because it is good.

Because thou have delivered me out of all tribulation: and mine eye has
looked down upon mine enemies.

PSALM 118, or 119.

Psalm, BLessed are the immaculate in the way: which walk in the law of our
Lord.

Blessed are they, that search his testimonies, that seek after him with all
their heart.

For they that work iniquity, have not walked in his ways.

Thou have very much commanded thy commandments to be kept.

Would God my ways might be directed to keep thy justifications.

Then shall I not be confounded, when I shall look thoroughly in all thy
commandments.

I will confess to the indirection of heart, in that I have learned the
judgments of thy justice.

I will keep thy justifications: forsake me not wholly.

Wherein does a young man correct his way? in keeping thy words.

With my whole heart, I have sought after thee: repel me not from thy
commandments.

In my heart I have hid thy words: that I may not sin to thee.

Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me thy justifications.

In my lips I have pronounced all the judgments of thy mouth.

I am delighted in the way of thy testimonies, as in all riches.

I will be exercised in thy commandments: and I will consider thy ways.

I will meditate in thy justifications: I will not forget thy words.

Psalm, David REnder to thy servant, quicken me: and I shall keep thy words.

Reveal mine eyes: and I shall consider the mavelous things of thy law.

I am a sojourner in the land, hide not thy commandments from me.

My soul has coveted to desire thy justifications at all time.

Thou have rebuked the proud: cursed are they that decline from thy
commandments.

Take from me reproach and contempt: because I have sought after thy
testimonies.

For princes sat and they spoke against me: but thy servant was exercised in
thy justifications.

For both thy testimonies are my meditation, and thy justifications my counsel.

My soul has cleaved to the pavement: quicken me according to thy word.

I have uttered my ways, and thou have heard me; teach me thy justifications.

Instruct me the way of thy justifications, and I shall be exercised in thy
mavelous works.

My soul has slumbered for tediousness: confirm me in thy words.

Remove from me the way of iniquity: and according to thy law have mercy on me.

I have chosen the way of truth: I have not forgotten thy judgments.

I have cleaved to thy testimonies, O Lord: do not confound me.

I ran the way of thy commandments: when thou did dilate my heart.

CHrist became obedient unto death for us.

Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc. Miserere mei Deus, etc. page At the Third
Hour.
Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc.
Psalm, SEt me a law, O Lord, the way of thy justifications: and I will seek
after it always.

Give me understanding, and I will search thy law: and I will keep it with my
whole heart.

Conduct me into the path of thy Commandments: because I would it.

Incline my heart into thy testimonies: and not into avarice.

Turn away mine eyes, that they may see not vanity: in thy way quicken me.

Establish thy Word to thy servant, in thy fear.

Take away reproach which I have feared: because thy judgments are pleasant.

Behold I have coveted thy Commandments: in thy equity quicken me.

And let thy mercy come upon me, Lord: thy salvation according to thy Word.

And I shall answer a word to them that upbraid me: because I have hoped in thy
words.

And take not away out of my mouth the word of truth utterly: because I have
much hoped in thy judgments.

And I will keep thy law always: for ever, and for ever and ever.

And I walked in largeness: because I have sought after thy Commandments.

And I spoke of thy testimonies in the fight of Kings, and was not confounded.

And I meditated in thy commandments which I loved.

And I have lifted up my hands to thy Commandments, which I loved: and I was
exercised in thy justifications.

BE mindful of thy word to thy servant, wherein thou have given me hope.

This has comforted me in my humiliation, because thy word has quickened me.

The proud did unjustly exceedingly, but I declined not from thy Law.

I have been mindful of thy judgments from everlasting, O Lord: and was
comforted.

Fainting possessed me, because of sinners forsaking thy Law.

Thy justifications were song by me, in the place of thy peregrination.

I have been mindful in the night of thy name, O Lord, and have kept thy Law.

This was done to me, because I sought after thy justifications.

My portion, O Lord, I say to keep thy Law.

I besought thy face, with all my heart: have mercy on me, according to thy
word.

I thought upon my ways, and converted my feet unto thy testimonies.

I am prepared, and am not troubled: to keep thy Commandments.

The cords of sinners have wrapped me round about: and I have not forgotten thy
Law.

At midnight I rose to confess to thee, for the judgments of thy justification.

I am partaker of all that fear thee: and that keep thy Commandments.

The Earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: teach me thy justifications.

THou have done bounty with thy servant, O Lord, according to thy Word.

Teach me goodness, and discipline, and knowledge: because I have believed thy
Commandments.

Before I was humbled I offended: therefore I have kept thy Word.

Thou art good; and in thy goodness teach me thy justifications.

The iniquity of the proud is multiplied upon me: but I in all my heart will
search thy Commandments.

Their heart is curded together as milk: but I have meditated thy Law.

It is good for me that thou have humbled me: that I may learn thy
justifications.

The Law of thy mouth is good unto me, above thousands of gold and silver.

Thy hands have made me, and formed me: give me understanding, and I will learn
thy Commandments.

They that fear thee shall see me, and shall rejoice: because I have much hoped
in thy words.

I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are equity: and in thy truth thou have
humbled me.

Let thy mercy be done to comfort me, according to thy word unto thy servant.

Let thy commiserations come to me, and I shall live: because thy Law is my
meditation.

Let the proud be confounded, because they have done unjustly toward me: but I
will be exercised in thy Commandments.

Let them be converted to me that fear thee: and that know thy testimonies.

Let my heart be made immaculate in thy justifications, that I be not
confounded.

V. Christ became obedient unto death for us.

Pater noster, etc. Miserere mei Deus, etc. page THE PRAYER.

Respice quaesumus, etc. page At the Sixth Hour.
Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc.
PSALM 118, or 119.

David MY Soul has fainted for thy salvation: I have much hoped in thy Word.

My eyes have failed for thy word, saying, When will thou comfort me?

Because I am made as a bottle in the hoar frost: I have not forgotten thy
justifications.

How many are the days of thy servant? when will thou do judgment on them that
persecute me?

The unjust have told me fables: but not as thy Law.

All thy Commandments are truth: they have unjustly persecuted me, help me.

They have well near made an end of me in the Earth: but I have not forsaken
thy Commandments.

According to thy mercy quicken me, and I shall keep the testimonies of thy
mouth.

For ever, Lord, thy Word is permanent in Heaven.

Thy truth in generation and generation: thou have founded the Earth, and it is
permanent.

By thy ordinance the day continues: because all things serve thee.

But that thy Law is my meditation: I had then perhaps perished in my
humiliation.

I will not forget thy justifications for ever: because in them thou have
quickened me.

I am thine, save me: because I have sought out thy justifications.

Sinners have expected me to destroy me: I understood thy testimonies.

Of all consummation I have seen the end: thy Commandment is exceeding large.

HOw have I loved thy law, O Lord! all the day it is my meditation.

Above my enemies thou have made me wise by thy Commandment: because it is to
me for ever.

Above all that taught me have I understood: because thy testimonies are my
meditation.

Above Ancients have I understood: because I have sought thy Commandments.

I have stayed my feet from all evil way: that I may keep thy words.

I have not declined from thy judgments, because thou have set me a law.

How sweet are thy words to my jaws, more than honey to my mouth!

By thy Commandments I have understood: therefore have I hated all the way of
iniquity.

Thy Word is a lamp to my feet, and a light to my paths.

I swear, and I have determined to keep the judgments of thy justice.

I am humbled exceedingly, O Lord: quicken me according to thy Word.

The voluntaries of my mouth make acceptable, O Lord: and teach me thy
judgments.

My soul is in my hands always: and I have not forgotten thy law.

Sinners laid a snare for me: and I have not erred from thy commandments.

For inheritance I have purchased thy testimonies for ever: because they are
the joy of my heart.

I have inclined my heart to do thy justifications for reward.

Psalm I Have hated the unjust: and I have loved thy law.

Thou art my helper and protector: and upon thy word I have much hoped.

Depart from me ye malignant: and I will search the Commandments of my God.

Receive me according to thy word, and I shall live: and confound me not of my
expectation.

Help me, and I shall be saved: and I will always meditate in thy
justifications.

Thou have despised all that revolt from thy judgments: because their
cogitation is unjust.

All the sinners of the earth I have reputed prevaricaterers: therefore have I
loved thy testimonies.

Pierce my flesh with thy fear: for I am afraid of thy judgments.

I have done judgment and justice: deliver me not to them that calumniate me.

Receive thy servant unto good: let not the proud calumniate me.

Mine eyes have failed after salvation: and for the word of thy justice.

Do with thy servant according to thy mercy: and teach me thy justifications.

I am thy servant: give me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.

It is time to do, O Lord: they have dissipated thy law.

Therefore have I loved thy Commandments: above Gold and Topazius.

Therefore was I directed to all thy Commandments: all wicked way have I hated.

V. Christ was made obedient for us even unto death.

Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc. Miserere mei Deus, etc. page The PRAYER.

Respice quaesumus, etc. page At the Ninth Hour.
Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc.
PSALM 118, or 119.
Psalm, THy testimonies are mavelous: therefore has my soul searched them.

The declaration of thy words does illuminate: and gives understanding to
little ones.

I opened my mouth and drew breath: because I desired thy Commandments.

Look upon, and have mercy on me, according to the judgment of them that love
thy Name.

Direct my steps according to thy Word: and let not any injustice have
domination over me.

Redeem me from the calumnies of men: that I may keep thy Commandments.

Illuminate thy face upon thy servant: and teach me thy justifications.

Mine eyes have gushed forth issues of waters: because they have not kept thy
law.

Thou art just, O Lord: and thy judgment is right.

Thou have commanded justice thy testimonies: and thy verity exceedingly.

My zeal has made me to pine away: because my enemies have forgotten thy words.

Thy word is fired exceedingly: and thy servant has loved it.

I am a young man, and contemned: I have not forgotten thy justifications.

Thy justice is justice for ever: and thy law is verity.

Tribulation and distress have found me: thy Commandments are my meditation.

Psalm, I Have cried in my whole heart, hear me, O Lord: I will seek after thy
justifications.

I have cried to thee, save me: that I may keep thy Commandments.

I have prevented in maturity, and have cried: because I hoped much in thy
words.

Mine eyes have prevented early unto thee: that I might meditate thy words.

Hear my voice, according to thy mercy, O Lord: and according to thy judgment
quicken me.

They that persecute me, have approached to iniquity: but from thy law they are
made far off.

Thou art nigh, O Lord: and all thy ways are truth.

From the beginning I knew of thy testimonies: that thou have founded them for
ever.

See my humiliation, and deliver me: because I have not forgotten thy law.

Judge my judgment, and redeem me: for thy word quicken thou me.

Salvation is far from sinners: because they have not sought after thy
justifications.

Thy mercies are many, O Lord: according to thy judgment quicken me.

There are many that persecute me, and afflict me: I have not declined from thy
testimonies.

I saw the prevaricators, and pined away: because they kept not thy words.

See that I have loved thy Commandments: O Lord: in thy mercy quicken me.

The beginning of thy words is truth: all the judgments of thy justice are for
ever.

Psalm, PRinces have persecuted me without cause: and my heart has been afraid
of thy words.

I will rejoice at thy words: as he that finds many spoils.

I have hated iniquity, and abhorred it: but thy law I have loved.

Seven times in the day I have said praise to thee: for the judgments of thy
justice.

There is much peace to them that love thy law: and there is no scandal to them.

I expected thy salvation, O Lord: and have loved thy Commandments.

My soul has kept thy testimonies: and has loved them exceedingly.

I have kept thy Commandments and thy Testimonies: because all thy ways are in
thy sight.

Let my petition approach in thy sight, O Lord: according to thy word give me
understanding.

Let my request enter in thy sight: according to thy word deliver me.

My lips shall utter an hymn, when thou shall teach me thy justifications.

My tongue shall pronounce thy word: because all thy Commandments are equity.

Let thy hand be to save me: because I have chosen thy Commandments.

I have coveted thy salvation, O Lord: and thy law is my meditation.

My soul shall live, and shall praise thee: and thy judgments shall help me.

I have strayed, as a sheep that is lost: seek thy servant, because I have not
forgotten thy Commandments.

V. Christ become obedient for us, even unto death.

Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc. Miserere mei Deus, etc. p. THE PRAYER.

Respice quaesumus, etc. page The General Absolution.
France, Miserere mei Deus, LOrd, have mercy on us.

Christ, have mercy on us.

Lord, have mercy on us.

Pater noster, etc.

And lead us not into temptation.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

V. O Lord, deal not with us according to our sins.

R. Nor yet reward us according to our iniquities.

V. O Lord, remember not our past offenses.

R. But let thy mercies soon prevent us.

V. Turn thy face toward us, though a little.

R. And graciously hear thy servants.

V. O Lord, save thy servants, and thy handmaids.

R. Trusting in thee, O my God.

V. Be unto them, O Lord, a Tower of strength.

R. Against the assaults of the enemy.

V. Send them, O Lord, thy help from thy holy place.

R. And out of Sion protect them.

V. O Lord, hear my Prayer.

R. And let my cry come unto thee.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

Let us Pray.

HEar, O Lord, our Supplications, and graciously regard me, who in the first
place have need of thy mercy: and as thou have been pleased to choose me by thy
grace, not for my merit, to be thy Minister in this action; Grant, that I may
faithfully acquit my self of the Charge committed to me, and cooperate, by our
ministering, the effect of thy bounty: Through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son,
who lives and reigns with God the Father, in the unity of the Holy Ghost,
one God for ever. Amen.

Let us Pray.

WE beseech thee, O Lord, grant thy servants grace, to do fruits worthy of
penance, that, having obtained pardon for their sins, they may be resetled pure
and clean in thy Church, from the integrity of which they have gone astray:
Through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Amen.

Let us Pray.

O Lord, I beseech thy Majesty, that, out of thy bounty, thou will be pleased
to give thy pardon to these thy servants, confessing their sins and offenses,
and to loosen the bonds of their past crimes; who did carry upon thy
shoulders the strayed sheep back to thy fold, and have graciously heard the
prayers of the publican, look down also favorably upon these penitents, and
incline unto their petitions, that, by their perseverance in confessing and
tears, they may obtain what they desire, and being readmitted to a
participation of thy holy Altar, they may have fresh hopes of Eternal Glory:
Who live and reignest, etc.

Let us Pray.

O God, who of thy goodness have created, and of thy mercy repaired mankind,
and by the blood of thine only Son have redeemed man, deprived of eternal
life, through the malice of the Devil; Grant a new life to these penitents, thy
servants, whose death thou desire not: And as thou forsakest not even those
who go astray, receive those who return to repentance. O Lord, mercifully
regard the tears and sighs of thy servants; heal their wounds, stretch forth
thy helping hand to them cast down before thee; to the end thy Church may not
lose any part of its body; lest thy flock be lessened, lest the enemy insult
over the loss of thy family; lest those who have been regenerated by the
wholesome water of baptism, fall into a second death. We therefore, O Lord,
offer up unto thee our most humble Prayers; we shed the tears of our hearts
before thee, in testimony of our regret. Pardon those that confess unto thee,
to the end, that through thy mercy they may escape condemnation at the last
judgment. Let them be ignorant of that which terrifies in darkness of torments
in flames; and grant, that, returning from their errors, to the path of
justice, they may not hereafter receive new wounds, but that they may remain
entire and perpetual, in that which thy Grace has conferred, and thy Mercy
restored. By the same our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Amen.

Let us Pray.

OUr Lord Jesus Christ, who, by giving up himself, and shedding his immaculate
blood, did vouchsafe to take away the sins of the whole world, and who said to
his Disciples, and, in them, to their successors, (among whom thou art pleased
to make me one, though unworthy) Whatsoever you shall bind on Earth, shall be
bound in Heaven, and whatsoever you loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven;
may he vouchsafe, through this my Ministry, by the intercession of the blessed
Virgin Mary, his Mother, of St. Michael the Archangel, of the Apostle St.
Peter, to whom the power of binding and loosing was given, and of all Saints,
by virtue of his sacred blood, shed for the remission of sins, to grant you
absolution of all your offenses, negligently committed, in thought, word, or
deed; and that, after you are quit from the bonds of sin, he will please to
restore you to the Kingdom of Heaven. Who, with God the Father and the Holy
Ghost, lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.

ALmighty God, grant unto you absolution and remission of all your sins, space
of true penance and amendment of life. Amen.

V. Blessed be the Name of our Lord.

R. Now and for evermore.

V. Our help is in the Name of our Lord.

R. Who made Heaven and Earth.

Almighty God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, bless you all. Amen.

Ante diem festum, etc. Paul. Paris For the Washing of the Feet.
Moses, Augustine, Toledo, Eligius, Noyon, Sir, Vouchsafe to Bless me; Our Lord
be with you.

Ante diem Festum, I Give you a New Commandment, that you love one another, as
I loved you, says our Lord.

PSALM 118.

BLessed are the immaculate in the way: which walk in the law of our Lord.

Mandatum novum, etc. Ant. After our Lord was risen from Supper, he put Water
into a Basin: and began to wash his Disciples feet, to whom he left this
example.

Psalm 47. Great is our Lord, and to be praised exceedingly: in the city of our
God, in his holy mount.

Ant. After our Lord Jesus had supt with his Disciples, he washed their feet,
and said unto them, Do you see what I, your Lord and Master, have done unto
you? I have given you an example, that you also may do the like.

Psalm 84. O Lord, thou have blessed thy land: thou have turned away the
captivity of Jacob.

Ant. Will thou, O Lord, wash my feet? Jesus answered and said unto him, If I
wash not thy feet, thou shall have no part with me.

V. Jesus came unto Simon Peter, and Peter said to him,

Here the Antiphon is repeated. Will thou, O Lord, wash my feet? Jesus answered
and said unto him, If I wash not thy feet, thou shall have no part with me.

V. What I do, thou know not now; but shall know hereafter.

Then is repeated this Antiphon the third time. O Lord, do thou wash my feet?
Jesus answered and said unto him, If I wash not thy feet, thou shall have no
part with me.

V. If I, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet: how much more ought you
to wash one another feet.

Psalm 116. All nations hear these things: and all people understand them.

Ant. All men shall know you to be my disciples, in that you love one another.

V. Said Jesus to his disciples.

Ant. Let faith, hope and charity abide in you; these three: but the greatest
of them is charity.

V. But now remain faith, hope and charity; these three: but the greatest of
them is charity.

Ant. Blessed be the Holy Trinity, and Undivided Unity, we will confess unto
him: because he has dealt with us according to his mercy.

V. Let us bless the Father, and Son, with the Holy Ghost.

Psalm. 83. How beloved are thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! my soul coveteth
and faints unto the courts of our Lord.

Ant. Where charity and love is, there is God.

V. The love of Jesus Christ has united us.

V. Let us rejoice, and praise him.

V. Let us fear and love the living God.

V. And love one another with a sincere heart.

Then the Antiphon is repeated. Where charity and love is, there is God.

V. When therefore we are assembled,

V. Let us beware, we are not divided in mind.

V. Let all quarrels and contentions cease.

V. And let Christ be among us.

Then the Antiphon is repeated the third time. Where charity and love is, there
is God.

V. Grant that we may see with the blessed,

V. Thy face in glory, O Christ our Lord.

V. There to enjoy a happy and immense joy.

V. For ever and ever. Amen.

Then the Superior, or he that washes the feet of others, washes his hands,
wipes them, and, putting on his Coap, he stands upright, with his head bare,
says, V. And lead us not into temptation.

R. But deliver us from evil.

V. Thou have enjoined, O Lord,

R. That thy Laws be exactly observed.

V. Thou have washed thy Disciples feet.

R. Despise not the work of thy hands.

V. O Lord, hear my Prayer.

R. And let my cry come unto thee.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

Let us Pray.

GRant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that we may worthily discharge this our duty;
and since thou vouchsafest to wash thy Disciples feet, despise not the work of
thy hands, which thou have commanded us to retain and imitate, that as we here
cleanse all filth from our Bodies, so thou will be pleased to free our Souls
from all sins. Which we beseech thee to grant us; who live and reignest God,
for ever and ever. Amen.

THE MASS FOR THURSDAY IN Holy Week.
The station in the Church of St. John of Lateran.
Rome, The INTROIT.

Paul, BUt we ought to glory in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom is
our Salvation, Life, and Resurrection, and by whom we are redeemed and saved.

PSALM LXVI.

GOd have mercy upon us, and bless us: illuminate his countenance upon us, and
have mercy upon us.

But we ought to glory, etc.

KYRIE ELEISON.

LOrd, have mercy on us.

Lord, have mercy on us.

Lord, have mercy on us.

page GLory be to God in the Highest, and on Earth peace to men of good will:
We praise thee; we bless thee; we adore thee; we glorify thee; we give thanks
to thee for thy great glory. O Lord God, Heavenly King; God, the Father
Almighty; O Lord, the only begotten Son, Jesus Christ; O Lord God, Lamb of
God; Son of the Father, who take away the Sins of the World, have mercy on
us: Thou that take away the Sins of the World, receive our Prayers; Thou that
sit at the right hand of the Father, have mercy on us: For thou only art
Holy; Thou only art the Lord; Thou only, O Jesus Christ, with the Holy Ghost,
art most high in the Glory of God the Father. Amen.

Gloria in excelsis, The COLLECT

Judas, Jews, Judas O God, who have punished the sin of Judas, and rewarded the
confession of the repenting thief, grant unto us the effect of thy mercy, to
the end, that as our Lord Jesus Christ has dispensed to each of them at his
Passion, according to their merit, so, having destroyed the old man in us, he
will grant us grace, to have part with him in his glorious Resurrection: Who
lives and reigns one God, world without end.

The Lesson out of the first Epistle of the Apostle St. Paul to the
Corinthians, Chap. 11.

Agapae, BRethren, when you come therefore together in one, it is not now to
eat our Lord's Supper. For every one takes his own Supper before to eat. And
one certes is an hungered, and another is drunk. Why have you not houses to eat
and drink in? or contemn ye the Church of God, and confound them that have not?
What shall I say to you? Praise I you in this? I do not praise you. For I
received of the Lord that which also I have delivered unto you, that our Lord
Jesus, in the night he was betrayed, took bread, and, giving thanks, brake, and
said, Take ye, and eat, this is my body which shall be delivered for you: This
do ye for the commemoration of me. In like manner the chalice also, after he
had supped, saying, This chalice is the New Testament in my blood: This do ye
as often as ye shall drink, for the commemoration of me. For as often as ye
shall eat this bread, and drink this chalice, you shall show the death of our
Lord until he come. Therefore whosoever shall eat this bread, or drink this
chalice of our Lord unworthily, he shall be guilty of the body and blood of our
Lord. But let a man prove himself; and so let him eat of that bread, and drink
of the chalice; For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
judgment to himself, not discerning the body of our Lord: Therefore are there
among you many weak and feeble, and many sleep. But if we did judge our selves,
we should not be judged. But whiles we are judged of our Lord, we are
chastised; that with this world we be not damned.

The GRADUAL, taken out of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Philippians, Chap. 2.

CHrist was made for us obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.

V. For which thing God also has exalted him, and given him a name, which is
above all names.

etc. page The sequence of the Holy Gospel according to St. John, Chap. 13.

ANd before the festival-day of Pasche, Jesus knowing that his hour was come,
that he should pass out of this world to his Father: whereas he had loved his
that were in the world, unto the end he loved them. And when supper was done,
whereas the devil now had put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, the son of
Simon to betray him, knowing that his Father gave him all things into his
hands, and that he came from God, and goes to God, he rises from supper, and
lays aside his garments, and, having taken a towel, girded himself. After
that, he put water into a basin, and began to wash the feet of the disciples,
and to wipe them with the towel, wherewith he was girded. He comes therefore
to Simon Peter. And Peter faith to him, Lord, do thou wash my feet? Jesus
answered, and said to him, That which I do, thou know not now, hereafter
thou shall know. Peter says to him, Thou shall not wash my feet for ever.
Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou shall not have part with me. Simon
Peter says to him, Lord, not only my feet, but also hands and head. Jesus
says to him, He that is washed, needs not but to wash his feet, but is clean
wholly: And you are clean, but not all. For he knew who he was that would
betray him, therefore he said, You are not clean all. Therefore, after he had
washed their feet, and taken his garments, being set down again, he said to
them, Know you what I have done to you? You call me Master, and Lord; and you
say well, for I am so; if then I have washed your feet: Lord and Master, you
also ought to wash one another feet. For I have given you an example, that as
I have done to you, so you do also. Laus tibi Christ.

page The OFFERTORY, taken out of the 117th Psalm.

THe right hand of the Lord has done valiantly; the right hand of the Lord
has exalted me: I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord.

etc. page The SECRET.

GRant, we beseech thee, O Lord, Holy Father, Almighty, Everlasting God, that
he may make this Sacrifice acceptable unto thee, who commanded his disciples at
this day to celebrate it in memory of him: Who lives and reigns, etc.

page Communicantes, page etc. COMMVNICANTES.

Jews, PArticipating in the same Communion, and Celebrating the Solemnity of
this Blessed Day, wherein our Savior Jesus Christ was betrayed for us; and in
the first place honoring the memory of the ever glorious Virgin, Mother of our
Lord Jesus Christ, of the Apostles and Martyrs, Peter and Paul, Andrew, James,
John, Thomas, James, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon and Thaddaeus, Linus,
Cletus, Clement, Xistus, Cornelius, Cyprian, Laurence, Chrysogonus, John and
Paul, Cosme and Damian, and all the other Saints; Through whose Prayers and
Merits, vouchsafe to grant us, in all things, the help of thy protection, by
the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

WE beseech thee therefore graciously to accept this Oblation of our, and of
thy whole families, Duty, which we present unto thee, in solemnizing this
present day, whereon our Lord Jesus Christ ordained his Disciples to celebrate
the Mysteries of his Body and Blood: beseeching thee to grant us Peace in these
our days, and, preserving us from Eternal Damnation, to seat us among thy
Elect: Through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

WHich Oblation, O God, we beseech thee to make in all things, blessed,
allowed, approved, reasonable, and acceptable, that it may be made to us the
Body and Blood of thy beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ.

The CONSECRATION.

WHo the day before his Passion for us, and for the whole world, that is, this
day took bread into his holy and venerable hands, and, lifting up his eyes
toward heaven, to the God his Father Almighty, giving thee thanks, he blessed,
brake, and gave it unto his disciples, saying, Take, eat ye all of this: FOR
THIS IS MY BODY.

page Judas. The COMMUNION, taken out of the 13th Chapter of St. John.

OUr Lord Jesus, after he had supped with his Disciples, washed their feet, and
said unto them, Know ye what I have done unto you, bring your Lord and Master?
I have given you an example, That you should do as I have done unto you.

The POST-COMMUNION.

GRant, we beseech thee, O Lord our God, that, being refresht with thee
life-giving food, we may receive by thy grace in Everlasting Bliss, that which
we celebrate in this mortal life: Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

page etc. Ita Missa est Benedicamus Domino, Gloria in Excelsis page SIng, O my
Tongue, devoutly sing,
The glorious Bodies mystery,
And of that precious Blood, the King
Of Nations poured forth, to free
The World from a disastrous doom:
O blessed fruit of noblest womb,
On us bestowed! for us thy birth,
He from a Virgin did proceed,
And be conversant on earth,
Till he had sowed the Gospel-seed:
The time of his prolonged stay,
He closed in an admirable way.
He on the final supper night,
Among his brethren taking seat,
And well observing the ancient rite,
Touching the laws prescribed mete,
Gave to the twelve (his chosen band)
Himself for food, with his proper hand.
The Incarnate Word, by words he said,
Turned into flesh substantial bread,
And wine the blood of Christ was made,
Though sense found nothing altered:
This to confirm, in hearts sincere,
There needs no more, if faith be there.
To this great Sacrament therefore.
Let Us give the prostrate Worship due:
And may the ancient Rite no more
Take place, but yield it to the new.
Let faith in Jesus Christ supply
The senses insufficiency.
To Father and the Son let us bring
Triumphant praises; let us aspire
Their honor, power and bliss to sing,
While benedictions fill the Quire:
To him that from both is sprung,
Let equal praise come from our tongue.
Amen.
Gregory ON THURSDAY IN Holy Week, At EVEN-SONG.
Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc.
PSALM CXV.

Ant. I will drink the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

I Believed, for which I spoke: but I was humbled exceedingly.

I said in my excess: every man is a lier.

What shall I render to our Lord, for all things that he has rendered to me?

I will take the chalice of salvation: and will invocate the Name of our Lord.

I will render my vows to our Lord before all people: precious in the fight of
our Lord is the death of his saints.

O Lord, because I am thy servant: I am thy servant, and the son of thy
handmaid.

Thou have broken my bonds: I will sacrifice to thee the host of praise, and I
will invocate the Name of our Lord.

I will render my vows to our Lord in the sight of all his people: in the
courts of the house of our Lord, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem.

Ant. I will drink the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of our Lord.

PSALM CXIX.

Ant. With those who did hate peace, I was peaceable: when I speak to them,
they impugned me without cause.

WHen I was in tribulation, I cried to our Lord: and he heard me.

Our Lord deliver my soul from unjust lips: and from a deceitful tongue.

What may be given thee: or what may be added unto thee to a deceitful tongue?

The sharp arrows of the mighty: with coals of desolation.

Woe is to me, that my sojourning is prolonged: I have dwelt with the
inhabitants of Cedar: My soul has been long a sojourner.

With them that hated peace, I was peaceable: when I spoke to them, they
impugned me without cause.

Ant. With those who did hate peace, I was peaceable: when I spoke to them,
they impugned me without cause.

PSALM CXXXIX.

Ant. Deliver me, our Lord, from evil men.

DEliver me, our Lord, from the evil man: from the unjust man rescue me.

Which have devised iniquity in their heart: all the day they did appoint
battles.

They have whet their tongues, as that of a serpent: the venom of asps is
under their lips.

Keep me, O Lord, from the hand of the sinner: and from unjust men deliver me.

Who have devised to supplant my steps: the proud have had a snare for me.

And they have stretched out ropes for a snare: they have laid a stumbling
block for me near the way.

Our Lord, Lord, the strength of my salvation: thou have overshadowed my head
in the day of battle.

Yield me not, our Lord, from my desire, to the sinner: they have devised
against me; forsake me not, lest they perhaps be proud.

The head of their compass: the labor of their lips shall cover them.

Coals shall fall upon them; thou shall cast them down into fire: the miseries
they shall not stand up.

A man full of tongue shall not be directed in the earth: evils shall take the
unjust man into destruction.

I have known, that the Lord will do the judgments of the needy: and the
revenge of the poor.

But as for the just, they shall confess unto thy Name: and the righteous shall
dwell with thy countenance.

Ant. Deliver me, our Lord, from evil men.

PSALM CXL.

Ant. Keep me from the snare, which they have set for me; and from the scandals
of those that work iniquity.

LOrd, I have cried to thee, hear me: attend to my voice, when I shall cry to
thee.

Let my prayer be directed as incense in thy sight: the elevation of my hands
as evening sacrifice.

Set, our Lord, a watch to my mouth: and a door round about my lips.

Decline not my heart into words of malice: to make excuse in sins.

With men that work iniquity: and I will not communicate with the chief of them.

The just shall rebuke me in mercy, and shall reprehend me: but let not the oil
of a sinner fat my head.

Because yet also my prayer is in their good pleasures: their judges are
swallowed up, joined to the rock.

They shall hear my words, because they have prevailed: as the grosness of the
earth is broken out upon the earth.

Our bones are dissipated near to hell, for to thee, our Lord, Lord, are mine
eyes, in thee have I hoped, take not away my soul.

Keep me from the snare which they have set for me: and from the scandals of
them that work iniquity.

Sinners fall in his net: I am alone until I pass.

Ant. Keep me from the snare which they have set for me: and from the scandals
of them than work iniquity.

PSALM CXLI.

Ant. I looked toward the right hand, and saw; and there was none that knew me.

WIth my voice I have cried to our Lord: with my voice I have prayed to our
Lord.

I pour out my prayer in his sight: and I pronounce my tribulation before him.

When my spirit fails of my self: and thou have known my paths.

In this way which I walked: they hid a snare for me.

I looked toward the right hand, and saw: and there was none that would know
me.

Flight has failed me: and there is none to require my soul.

I have cried to thee, O Lord: I have said thou art my hope; my portion in the
land of the living.

Attend to my petition: because I am humbled exceedingly.

Deliver me from them that persecute me: because they are made strong over me.

Bring forth my soul out of prison, to confess unto thy Name: the just expect
me, till thou rewardest me.

Ant. I looked toward the right hand, and saw; and there was none that would
know me.

page Jews The Antiphon before Magnificat.

Ant. And Jesus, after he had supt with his Disciples, took bread and blessed
it, and breaking it, gave it to his Disciples.

The Song of the blessed Virgin.

MY soul does magnify our Lord.

And my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

Because he has regarded the humility of his handmaid: for behold from
henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

Because he that is mighty has done great things to me: and holy is his Name.

And his mercy from generation unto generations: to them that fear him.

He has showed might in his arm: he has dispersed the proud in the conceit of
their heart.

He has deposed the mighty from their seat: and has exalted the humble.

The hungry he has filled with good things: and the rich he has sent away
empty.

He has received Israel his child: being mindful of his mercy.

As he spoke to our fathers: to Abraham and his seed for ever.

Ant. And Jesus, after he had supt with his Disciples, took bread and blessed
it: and, breaking it, gave it to his Disciples.

V. Christ was made for us obedient, even unto death.

Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc. Miserere mei Deus, etc. page The PRAYER.

Respice quaesumus, etc. page At the Vncloathing of the Altars.

Ant. And they divided my garments among them: and upon my vesture they have
cast lots.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Jews, Noah Lot Isaac Joseph Moses
Egyptians, Raab Jericho, Susanna Daniel Hebrew PSALM XXI.

O God, my God, have respect unto me: why have thou forsaken me? far from my
salvation are the words of my sins.

My God, I shall cry by day, and thou will not hear: and by night, and not for
folly unto me.

But thou dwell in the holy place: the praise of Israel.

In thee our fathers have hoped: they hoped, and thou did deliver them.

They cried to thee, and were saved: they hoped in thee, and were not
confounded.

But I am a worm, and no man: a reproach of men, and outcast of the people.

All that see me, have scorned me: they have spoken with lips, and wagged the
head.

He hoped in the Lord, let him deliver him: save him, because he wills him.

Because thou art he, that have drawn me out of the womb: my hope from the
breasts of my mother.

Upon thee I have been cast from the matrice: from my mothers womb thou art my
God, depart not from me.

Because tribulation is very nigh: because there is not that will help.

Many calves have compassed me: fat bulls have besieged me.

They have opened their mouths upon me: as a lion, ravening and roaring.

As water I am poured out: and my bones are dispersed.

My heart is made as wax melting in the midst of my body.

My strength is withered as a potsherd, and my tongue cleaves to my jaws: and
thou have brought me down into the dust of death.

Because many dogs have compassed me: the counsel of the maglignant has
besieged me.

They have dug my hands and my feet: they have numbered all my bones.

But themselves have considered, and beheld me: they have divided my garments
among them, and upon my vesture they have cast lots.

But thou, Lord, prolong not thy help from me: look toward my defense.

Deliver, O God, my soul from the sword: and mine only one from the hand of
the dog.

Save me out of the lyon's mouth: and my humility from the horns of unicorns.

I will declare thy Name to my brethren: in the midst of the Church I will
praise thee.

Ye, that fear our Lord, praise him: all the seed of Jacob glorify ye him.

Let all the seed of Israel fear him: because he has not contemned nor
despised the petition of the poor.

Neither has he turned away his face from me: and when I cried to him he heard
me.

With thee is my praise in the great Church: I will render my vows in the sight
of them that fear him.

The poor shall eat, and shall be filled; and they shall praise our Lord, that
seek after him: their hearts shall live for ever and ever.

All the ends of the earth shall remember: and be converted to our Lord.

And all the families of the Gentiles shall adore in his sight.

Because the kingdom is our Lords: and he shall have dominion over the Gentiles.

All the fat ones of the earth have eaten and adored: in his sight shall all
fall, that descended into the earth.

And my soul shall live to him: and my seed shall serve him.

The generation to come shall be showed to our Lord: and the heavens shall show
forth his justice to the people that shall be born, whom our Lord has made.

Ant. They have divided my garments among them: and upon my vesture they have
cast lots.

Gregory de Sacramentis, Toledo, Eligius, Noyon, ON Good Friday.

At Prime, As before, Page 131.

At the Third Hour, As before, Page 136.

At the Sixth Hour, As before, Page 142.

At the Ninth Hour, As before, Page 147.


I.N.R.I
engraving: Christ on the cross with the three Marys
MASS FOR Good Friday.
The station in the Church of the Holy Cross of Jerusalem.
Jerusalem. Joseph Arimathea, Nichodemus. Jews, The LESSON taken out of the
sixth Chapter of the Prophet Osee.

THus said our Lord; In their tribulation early they will rise up to me: come,
and let us return to our Lord, because he has wounded, and he will heal us: he
will strike, and will cure us. He will revive us after two days: in the third
day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. We shall know and we
shall follow, that we may know our Lord. As the morning light, is his coming
forth prepared; and he will come to us as a shower timely and late to the
earth. What shall I do to thee, Ephraim? What shall I do to thee, Juda? Your
mercy as a morning cloud, and as the dew, passing away in the morning. For this
have I hewed in the Prophets. I have killed them in the words of my mouth: and
thy judgments shall come forth as the light. Because I would mercy, and not
sacrifice: and the knowledge of God more than Holocausts.

The TRACT taken out of the third Chapter of the Prophet Abacuc.

O Lord, I have heard thy speech, and was afraid: I considered thy works, and
trembled.

V. Thou will appear between two beasts: and when thy years shall be
accomplished, thou will make thy self known: when the time shall come, thou will be manifested.

V. And when my soul shall be troubled, thou will remember thy mercy, even in
thy wrath.

V. God will come from Libanus, and the Holy One from the shady and dark
mountain.

V. His glory overspread the heavens: and the earth was filled with his praise.

Let us Pray.

Let us bow our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

The PRAYER.

Judas Jews, Judas O God, who have punished the sin of Judas, and rewarded the
confession of the repenting thief, grant unto us the effect of thy mercy, to
the end, that as our Lord Jesus Christ has dispensed to each of them at his
Passion, according to their merit; so having destroyed the old man in us, the
grace to have part with him in his glorious resurrection. Who lives and
reigns one God world without end.

The LESSON taken out of the twelfth Chapter of Exodus.

Jewish Israel Egyptian Israelites Egypt, Israelites Egypt; Jews, Egypt
Palestine; viz. Jews Jews Jews Jews IN those days our Lord said to Moses and
Aaron in the land of Egypt; This month shall be to you the beginning of months:
it shall be the first in the months of the year. Speak ye to the whole assembly
of the children of Israel, and say to them, The tenth day of this month let
every man eat a lamb by their families and houses: But if their number be less,
then may suffice to eat the lamb, he shall take unto him his neighbor, that
joyneth to his house, according to the number of souls which may suffice to the
eating of the lamb. And it shall be a lamb without spot, a male of a year old;
according also unto which rite you shall take a kid. And you shall keep him
until the fourteenth day of this month: and the whole multitude of the children
of Israel shall sacrifice him at even. And they shall take of the blood
thereof, and put upon both the posts, and on the upper door-posts of the houses
wherein they shall eat him. And they shall eat the flesh that night roasted at
the fire, and unleavened bread with wild lettice. You shall not eat thereof any
thing raw, nor boiled in water, but only roasted at the fire: the head, with
the feet and entrails thereof, you shall devour. Neither shall there remain any
of him till morning: if there be any thing left, you shall burn it with fire:
And thus you shall eat him: You shall gird your reins, and you shall have
shoes on your feet, holding staves in your hands, and you shall eat speedily;
for it is the phase (that is, the passage) of our Lord.

The TRACT, taken out of the 139th Psalm.

Israel Egyptian DEliver me, our Lord, from the evil man: from the unjust man
rescue me.

V. Which have devised iniquity in their heart: all the day they did appoint
battles.

V. They have whet their tongues, as that of a serpent: the venom of asps is
under their lips.

V. Keep me, our Lord, from the hand of the sinner: and from unjust men deliver
me.

V. Who have devised to supplant my steps: the proud have hid a snare for me.

V. And they have stretched out ropes for a snare: they have laid a
stumbling block for me near the way.

V. I say to our Lord, thou art my God: hear, our Lord, the voice of my
petition.

V. Our Lord, Lord, the strength of my salvation: thou have overshadowed my
head in the day of battle.

V. Yield me not, our Lord, from my desire to the sinner: they have devised
against me: forsake me not, lest they perhaps be proud.

V. The head of their compass: the labor of their lips shall cover them.

V. Coals shall fall upon them; thou shall cast them down into the fire: in
miseries they shall not stand up.

V. A man full of tongue shall not be directed in the earth: evils shall take
the unjust man into destruction.

V. I have known, that the Lord will do the judgments of the needy: and the
revenge of the poor.

V. But as for the just, they shall confess unto thy Name: and the righteous
shall dwell with thy countenance.

The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, according to St. John, Chap. 18.

AT that time Jesus went forth with his disciples beyond the torrent Cedron,
where was a garden, into which he entered and his disciples. And Judas also,
that betrayed him, knew the place, because Jesus had often resorted thither,
together with his disciples. Judas therefore having received the band of men,
and of the chief priests and the pharisees, ministers comes thither with
lanthorns, and torches, and weapons. Jesus therefore, knowing all things that
should come upon him, went forth, and said to them, Whom seek ye? They answered
him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus said to them, I am he. And Judas also, that
betrayed him, stood with them. As soon therefore as he said to them, I am he,
they went backward, and fell to the ground. Again therefore he asked them, Whom
seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus answered, I have told you,
that I am he: if therefore you seek me, let these go their ways, that the word
might be fulfilled which he said, That of them, whom thou have given me, I have
not lost any. Simon Peter therefore, having a sword, drew it out, and smote the
servant of the high priest, and cut off his right ear. And the name of the
servant was Malchus. Jesus therefore said to Peter, put up thy sword into thy
scabbard: The chalice which my father has given me, shall not I drink it? The
band therefore, and the tribune, and the ministers of the Jews, apprehended
Jesus, and bound him: and they brought him to Annas first, for he was
father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was the high priest of that year. And Caiaphas
was he that had given counsel to the Jews, that it is expedient that one man
die for the people. Simon Peter followed Jesus, and another disciple. And that
disciple was known to the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the court of
the high priest. But Peter stood at the door without. The other disciple
therefore, that was known to the high priest, went forth, and spoke to the
porters, and brought in Peter. The wench therefore, that was portress, said to
Peter, Art not thou also of this man's disciples? He said to her, I am not. And
the servants and ministers stood at a fire of coals, because it was cold, and
warmed themselves. And with them was Peter also standing, and warming himself.
The high priest therefore asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine.
Jesus answered him, I have openly spoken to the world: I have always taught in
the synagogue, and in the temple, whither all the Jews resort together: and in
secret I have spoken nothing. Why ask thou me? Ask them that have heard me,
when I have spoken unto them: Behold, they know what things I have said. When
he had said these words, one of the ministers, standing by, gave Jesus a blow,
saying, Answerest thou the high priest so? Jesus answered him, If I have spoken
ill, give testimony of the evil; but if well, why strikes thou me? And Annas
sent him bound to Caiaphas, the high priest. And Simon Peter was standing, and
warming himself, they said therefore to him, Art not thou also of his
disciples? He denied, and said, I am not. One of the servants of the high
priest, (cousin to him whose ear Peter did cut off) says to him, Did not I see
thee in the garden with him? Again therefore Peter denied. And forthwith the
cock crew. They therefore bring Jesus from Caiaphas, into the palace. And it
was morning, and they went not into the palace, that they might not be
contaminated, but that they might eat the Pasche. Pilate therefore went forth
to them without, and said, What accusation bring you against this man? They
answered and said to him, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have
delivered him up to thee. Pilate therefore said to them, take him you, and,
according to your law, judge him. The Jews therefore said to him, It is not
lawful for us to kill any man. That the word of Jesus might be fulfilled which
he said, signifying what death he should die. Pilate therefore went into the
palace again, and called Jesus, and said to him, Art thou the king of the Jews?
Jesus answered, Say thou this of thy self, or have others told it thee of
me. Pilate answered, Why, Am I not a Jew? Thy nation and the chief priests have
delivered thee up to me: What have thou done? Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not
of this world: if my Kingdom were of this world, my ministers verily would
strive, that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now my Kingdom is not
from hence. Pilate therefore said to him, Art thou a King then? Jesus answered,
Thou say, that I am a King. For this was I born, and for this came I into
the world, that I should give testimony to the truth. Every one that is of the
truth, hears my voice. Pilate says to him, What is truth? And when he had
said this, he went forth again to the Jews, and said to them, I find no cause
in him. But you have a custom, that I should release one to you in the Pasche:
Will you therefore, that I release unto you the King of the Jews? They all
therefore cried again, saying, Not him, but Barabbas. And Barabbas was a thief.
Then therefore Pilate took Jesus, and scourged him. And the soldiers platting
a crown of thorns, put it upon his head: And they put about him a purple
garment. And they came to him, and said, Hail, King of the Jews; and they gave
him blows. Pilate went forth again, and said to them, Behold, I bring him forth
unto you, that you may know, that I find no cause in him. Jesus therefore went
forth, carrying the crown of thorns, and the purple vestment. And he said to
them, Lo the man. When the chief priests therefore and the ministers had seen
him, they cried, saying, Crucify, crucify him. Pilate said to them, Take him
you, and crucify him, for I find no cause in him. The Jews answered him, We
have a law, and, according to that law, he ought to die, because he has made
himself the Son of God. When Pilate therefore had heard this saying, he feared
more. And he entered into the palace again: and he says to Jesus, Whence art
thou? But Jesus gave him no answer. Pilate therefore says to him, Speak
thou not to me? Know thou not, that I have power to crucify thee, and I
have power to release thee? Jesus answered, Thou should not have any power
against me, unless it were given thee from above. Therefore he that has
betrayed me to thee, has the greater sin. From thenceforth Pilate sought to
release him. But the Jews cried, saying, If thou release this man, thou art not
Cesar's friend. Every one that makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar.
But Pilate, when he had heard these words, brought forth Jesus, and he sat in
the judgment seat, in the place that is called Lithostrotos, and in the Hebrew
Gabbatha. And it was the Parasceve of the Pasche, about the sixth hour. And he
said to the Jews, Lo your King. But they cried, Away with him, away with him;
Crucify him. Pilate said to them, Shall I crucify your King? The chief
priests answered, We have no King, but Caesar. Then therefore he delivered him
unto them for to be crucified., And they took Jesus, and led him forth. And,
bearing his own cross, he went forth into that which is called the place of
Calvari, in Hebrew Golgotha; where they crucified him, and with him two others,
on the one side, and on the other, and in the midst Jesus. And Pilate wrote a
title also, and he put it upon the cross. And it was written, Jesus of
Nazareth, the King of the Jews. This title therefore many of the Jews did read,
because the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city, and it was
written in Hebrew, in Greek, and in Latin. The chief priests therefore of the
Jews said to Pilate, Write not the King of the Jews, but that he said, I am the
King of the Jews. Pilate answered, That which I have written, I have written.
The soldiers therefore, when they had crucified him, took his garments (and
they made four parts, to every soldier a part) and his coat. And his coat was
without seam, wrought from the top throughout. They said therefore one to
another, Let us not cut it, but let us cast lots for it, whose it shall be.
That the Scripture might be fulfilled, saying, They have parted my garments
among them, and upon my vesture they have cast lots. And the soldiers did
these things. And there stood beside the cross of Jesus, his mother, and his
mother's sister, Mary of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus therefore had
seen his mother and the disciple standing, whom he loved, he says to his
mother, Woman, behold thy son. After that, he says to the disciple, Behold thy
mother. And from that hour the disciple took her to his own. Afterward Jesus
knowing that all things were now consummate, that the scripture might be
fulfilled, he says, I thirst. A vessel therefore stood there full of vinegar,
and they putting a sponge full of vinegar about hysop, offered it to his mouth.
Jesus therefore, when he had taken the vinegar, said, It is consummate, and,
bowing his head, he gave up the ghost.

Here the Faithful kneel, or prostrate themselves, for a while upon the ground.
THe Jews therefore (because it was the Parasceve) that the bodies might not
remain upon the cross on the sabbath, (for that was a great sabboth-day) they
desired Pilate, that their legs might be broken, and they might be taken away.
The soldiers therefore came: and of the first indeed they brake the legs, and
of the other that was crucified with him. But after they were come to Jesus,
when they saw that he was dead, they did not break his legs, but one of the
soldiers, with a spear, opened his side, and incontinent there came forth
blood and water. And he that saw it, has given testimony: and his testimony is
true. And he knows, that he says true, that you also may believe. For these
things were done, that the scripture might be fulfilled; You shall not break
any bone of him. And again, another scripture says, They shall look on him
whom they pierced.

Munda cor meum, ANd, after these things, Joseph of Arimathea (because he was a
disciple of Jesus, but secret for fear of the the Jews) desired Pilate, that he
might take away the body of Jesus. And Pilate permitted; He came therefore, and
took away the body of Jesus. Nicodemus also came, he that at the first came to
Jesus by night, bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pounds.
They took therefore the body of Jesus, and bound it in linen clothes, with
spices, as the manner is with the Jews to bury. And there was in the place,
where he was crucified, a garden, and in the garden a new monument, wherein no
man yet had been laid. There therefore, because of the Parasceve of the Jews,
they laid Jesus, because the monument was hard by.

For the whole Church.

LEt us pray, my beloved Brethren, for the whole Church of God, that our Lord
God will vouchsafe to give it Peace, maintain it in Union, and preserve it
through the whole Earth, subjecting the Princes and Powers of this World unto
it; and that, granting us the grace to lead this life in peace and
tranquillity, we may glorisie God the Father Almighty.

Let us Pray.

Let us bow our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, who have revealed thy glory in Jesus Christ to
all Nations, preserve the works of thy mercy, that thy Church, spread through
the whole world, may firmly persevere in the confession of thy Name. Through
the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or for the Pope.

LEt us pray also for our Holy Father, the Pope; that our Lord God, who has
elected and seated him in the Order of Episcopacy, will give him health, for
the good of his Church and the benefit of his People.

Let us Pray.

Let us bow our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, upon whose judgment all things are founded, hear
graciously our Prayers; and, in thy goodness, preserve our Bishop, whom thou
have appointed to guide us, that the Christian people be governed by thy
Authority, may more and more increase in faith, under so great a Prelate:
Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

For the Orders of the Church.

LEt us pray also for Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolyts,
Exorcists, Readers, Porters, Confessors, Virgins, Widows, and for all God's
holy people.

Let us Pray.

Let us bow our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, whose Spirit sanctifies and governs the whole
Church, hear the Prayers we address unto thee for all Orders; that, by the
assistance of thy grace, they may all serve thee faithfully. Through our Lord
Jesus Christ. Amen.

For the King.

LEt us pray also for our King, Defender of the Faith, that God will please to
reduce all barbarous Nations to his command, and grant us perpetual peace.

Let us Pray.

Let us bend our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, in whose hands all Powers and Rights of Kingdoms
are, graciously look upon this Kingdom, that those Nations, who put confidence
in their brutish fierceness, may be suppressed by the power of thy right hand.
Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

For the Catechumens.

LEt us pray also for the Catechumens; that our Lord God will open the ears of
their hearts, and the gate of his mercy, that having received remission of all
their sins, and being regenerated by Baptism, they may be incorporated with us
in our Lord Jesus Christ.

Let us Pray.

Let us bend our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, who daily encreasest thy Church with new
children, increase in our Catechumens faith and understanding, that, being
regenerated in the waters of Baptism, they may be entered into the society of
thy adopted children. Through, etc. Amen.

For all sorts of Necessities.

LEt us pray, my beloved, unto God the Father Almighty, that he will please to
cleanse the world from all sorts of Errors, cure our Diseases, divert Famine,
open Prisons, dissolve the bonds of Captives, grant a safe return to Pilgrims,
restore health to the sick, and to seafaring men a secure arrival to their
haven.

Let us Pray.

Let us bend our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, who art a comfort to the afflicted, and a
strength to those that labor, grant, that the Prayers of all those, who shall
call upon thee in affliction, may be heard by thee, that they may be sensible,
with gladness, of the assistance of thy mercy, in their necessities. Through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

For Heretics and Schismatics.

LEt us pray also for Heretics and Schismatics, that our Lord God will
deliver them from all error, and vouchsafe to recall them into the bosom of our
Holy Mother, the Catholic Apostolic Church.

Let us pray.

Let us bend our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, who savest the whole world, and desire not the
death of a sinner, regard those souls in mercy, seduced by the deceit of the
devil, that all Heretics, and others going astray, quitting all malice, may
rectify their hearts, and return to the unity of the truth. Through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Jews.

LEt us pray also for the perfidious Jews, that our Lord God will withdraw the
vail from their hearts, that they also may acknowledge our Lord Jesus Christ.

Flectamus genua, Let us Pray.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, who refusest not thy mercy, even to the
perfidious Jews, hear the Prayers we pour forth for the blindness of this
people, that they, arriving to the light of thy truth, which is Jesus Christ,
may be cleared from their darkness: Through the same our Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.

For the Pagans.

LEt us pray also for the Pagans; that Almighty God will take away all
wickedness from their hearts, that, quitting their Idolatry, they may convert
themselves to the true living God, and to his only Son, our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

Let us Pray.

Let us bend our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, who willest not the death of sinners, but rather
that they should be converted and live, graciously hear our Prayers, and,
freeing them from their Idolatry, admit them into thy holy Church, for the
honor and glory of thy Name: Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Adoration of the Cross.

Roman Gregory Paulinus, Nola, Bourdeaux Severus Sulpicius. Judea; BEhold the
Wood of the Cross.

R. Come let us adore.

Jews, Behold the Wood of the Cross:

R. Come let us adore.

Behold the Wood of the Cross, whereon the Savior of the World is fastened.

R. Come let us adore.

Roman Trisagion Latin Greek; Grecians, Chalcedon, Nicephorus, Michaeas, Jews
MY people, what have I done to thee? or in what have I molested thee? Answer me.

V. Because I brought thee out of the land of Egypt, thou have prepared a Cross
for thy Savior.

V. Agios O Theos: Sanctus Deus: O Holy God.

V. Agios Ischyros: Sanctus fortis: Holy and strong God.

V. Agios Athanatos Eleison imas: Sanctus and immortalis, miserere nobis: Holy
and immortal God, have mercy on us.

V. Because I led thee through the desert forty years, and fed thee there with
Manna, and brought thee into a good soil, thou have prepared a Cross for thy
Savior.

Agios O Theos, etc. as before.

V. What ought I to do more, and have not done? I have planted thee, my most
beautiful vine, and thou art become very bitter unto me in my thirst; thou
gave me vinegar to drink, and with a launcet thou have pierced thy Savior's
side.

Agios O Theos, as before.

V. My people, what have I done to thee? or in what have I molested thee?
Answer me.

V. For thy sake I struck Egypt in their firstborn, and thou have delivered me
to be scourged.

My people, etc.

I brought thee forth of Egypt, having drowned Pharaoh in the Red Sea: and thou
have delivered me over to the princes of the priests.

My people, etc.

V. For thee I opened the sea; and with a lance thou have pierced my side.

My people, etc.

V. I went before thee in a pillar of the cloud, and thou have brought me to
the palace of Pilate.

My people, etc.

V. I nourished thee with Manna in the desert; and thou have struck me with
bussets and whips.

My people, etc.

V. I gave thee wholesome water to drink from the rock: and thou have given me to
drink vinegar and gall.

My people, etc.

V. For thy sake I have struck the kings of the Chananites; and thou have
struck my head with a reed.

My people, etc.

V. I gave thee a royal scepter; and thou have set upon my head a crown of
thorns.

My people, etc.

V. I have raised thee with great strength, and thou fastened me on the cross.

The ANTIPHON.

Jews O Lord, we adore thy Cross; we praise and glorify thy Holy Resurrection:
for by the Wood of the Crofs the whole World is filled with joy.

PSALM LXVI.

GOd, have mercy upon us, and bless us: Illuminate his countenance upon us, and
have mercy on us.

Ant. O Lord, we adore thy Cross, etc.

Crux fidelis, Pange lingua HAil, Holy Cross, to thee we bow;
To whose blessed fruit our lives we ow:
Our earth bears no such tree.
Dear are the nails, and dear the wood,
On which our dear Lord shed his blood:
'Twas Heaven that planted thee.
Come then, my soul, and gladly sing,
The happy combat of our King,
Which on this Cross he sought:
Where he (the all-victorious Lamb)
Sin, Death and Hell it self o'recame;
And our full safely wrought.
V. Hail, Holy Cross, to thee we bow;
To whose blessed fruit our lives we ow:
Our earth bears no such tree.
V. He saw, with pity, our sad fate,
When our first-parents rashly ate
Of that unhappy tree.
He saw, and marked the deadly wound;
And soon this sovereign Balsam found,
To save our souls by thee.
V. Dear are the nails, and dear the wood,
On which our dear Lord shed his blood:
'Twas Heaven that planted thee.
V. This way our cure required, as fit,
That Heaven's high wisdom should out-wit
The dire black art of hell:
And from the source of all our bane,
A powerful Antidote should be taken,
The poison to expel.
Hail, Holy Cross, etc.
V. When the blessed time was fully come,
The Father, from his glorious home,
Sent his Eternal Son:
He that created Heaven and Earth,
Of a poor Virgin took his Birth,
And our frail flesh put on.
V. Dear are the nails, etc.
V. The tender Infant, as he lies
In the cold manger shrinks and cries,
As little children use:
While his chaste Mother binds his hands,
His feet, his legs in swathing bands.
Nor does he worse refuse.
V. Hail, Holy Cross, etc.
V. He does not only not refuse,
But out of pure love freely choose,
Death on this bitter Cross:
Where he (the innocent Lamb) was slain,
Eternal Life for us to gain;
And so repair our Loss.
V. Dear are the nails, etc.
V. Behold the gall and vinegar,
The mocking reed and cruel spear:
Their hate, his love display.
Behold the body cold and wan,
Whence streams of blood and water ran,
To wash our stains away.
V. Hail, Holy Cross, etc.
V. Bend, gentle tree, O quickly bend
Thy softened branches, and suspend
Thy native stubborn heart:
O give at least this small relief
To the God of Heaven, but man of grief
At least abate his smart.
V. Dear are the nails, etc.
V. 'Twas thou alone were worthy thought
To bear him, who our ransom brought,
And on thee paid it down.
'Twas he alone, and his dear blood,
That saved us from the common flood;
Which else the world would drown.
V. Hail, Holy Cross, etc.
V. All glory to the sacred Three,
One individed Deity,
All honor, bliss and praise:
O may we still adore thy Name,
Thy Power and Goodness still proclaim,
Beyond the end of days. Amen.
V. Dear are the nails, etc.
A Broad the Regal Banners fly;
Now shines the Crosses mystery:
Upon it life did death endure,
And yet by death did life procure.
Who, wounded with a direful spear,
Did purposely, to wash us clear,
From stain of sin, pour out a flood
Of precious water, mixed blood.
Fully accomplished are the things,
David, in faithful Meeter, sings:
Where he to nations does attest,
God on a tree his reign possessed.
O lovely and refulgent tree,
Adorned with purpled majesty;
Culled from a worthy stock, to bear
Those limbs which sanctified were.
Blessed tree, whose happy branches bore
The wealth, that the World restore:
The beam, that did that body weigh,
Which raised up Hell's expected prey.
Hail, Cross of hopes, the most sublime
Now in this Morning Passion-time;
Improve religious souls in grace;
The sins of criminals efface.
Blessed Trinity, Salvation's spring;
May every soul thy praises sing;
To those thou grantest conquest by,
The Cross-Rewards apply. Amen.
LEt this Incense, O Lord, blessed by thee, ascend unto thee; and let thy mercy
descend upon us.

LEt my Prayer, O Lord, be directed as Incense in thy sight; the elevation of
my hands as Evening Sacrifice. Set, O Lord, a watch to my mouth, and a door
round about my lips, that my heart decline not into the words of malice, to
make excuses for sins.

MAy our Lord kindle in us the fire of his love, and the flame of his eternal
charity. Amen.

WE present our selves, O Lord, before thee, in the spirit of humility and
repentance: and therefore we beseech thee, that this Sacrifice may be agreeably
accomplished by us this day.

PRay, Brethren, that this, my Sacrifice, (which is also yours) may be
acceptable to God the Father Almighty.

Suscipiat Dominus Let us Pray.

PRAECEPTIS, etc.

BEing taught by our Savior's Commands, and led by Divine Institution, we are
bold to say,

Our Father, which art in Heaven, (where you shine in greater glory, and
whereunto thou art pleased, that we should raise our thoughts.)

Hallowed be thy Name. (Acknowledged and Adored.)

Thy Kingdom come. (The Empire of thy Grace in this World, and of the next.)

Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.

Give us this day our daily bread: (The precious Body and Blood of thy Son,
which is daily consecrated; thy Grace and all things necessary for us in the
course of this life.)

And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

And lead us not into temptation:

But deliver us from evil. (From sin, from the snares of this world, the flesh,
and the devil.

Amen.

LIBERA, etc.

DEliver us, O Lord, we beseech thee, from all evils, past, present, and to
come; and grant us peace in these our Duties, by the intercession of the
ever-glorious Virgin Mary, Mother of God, of thy Apostles, St. Peter and St.
Paul, of St. Andrew, and all the Saints: that, being assisted by thy gracious
mercy, we may be free from all sin, and secure from all dangers: Through the
same, our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns God with thee, in the
unity of the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever.

Amen.

Pax Domini, etc. Haec commixtio, etc. Agnus Dei, etc. Domine Jesu Christ, qui
dixisti, etc. Domine Jesu Christ Pili Dei vivi, etc. Judas GRant, O Lord Jesus
Christ, that this participation of thy body, which now, though unworthy, I
intend to receive, may not turn to my judgment and condemnation; but, through
thy mercy, may be a protection, and and a wholesome medicine to my soul and body:
Who live and reignest with God the Father, in the unity of the Holy Ghost,
world without end. Amen.

I Will take the Celestial Bread, and will call upon the Name of our Lord.

LOrd, I am not worthy, that thou should enter under my roof; only say the
word, and my soul shall be healed.

Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should enter under my roof; only say the
word, and my soul shall be healed.

Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should enter under my roof; only say the
word, and my soul shall be healed.

THe Body of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve my Soul to Life Everlasting. Amen.

GRant, O Lord, that what we have taken with our mouth, we may receive with a
clean heart; and that, of a Temporal Gift, it may become unto us an Eternal
Remedy.

ON FRIDAY IN Holy Week.
The same Even-song is said as before, till you come to Magnificat.
At MAGNIFICAT.

Antiphon.

WHen Jesus had taken vinegar, he said, It is finished; and, bowing down his
head, he gave up his ghost.

V. Christ was made obedient for us unto death; even the death of the Cross.

Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc. Miserere mei I eus, etc. page The PRAYER.

Respice quaesumus, etc. page FOR SATURDAY IN Holy Week.
At Prime, As before, Page 131.

At the Third Hour, As before, Page 136.

At the Sixth Hour, As before, Page 142.

At the Ninth Hour, As before, Page 147.


engraving: guards outside the tomb of Christ
AT MASS.
The station in the Church of St. John Lateran.
Rome S. John Lateran Jerusalem, Luke. V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Let us Pray.

O God, who by thy Son, the cornerstone of thy Church, has bestowed upon thy
faithful the fire of thy splendor, sanctify, for our use, this new fire,
drawn out of the flint stone; and grant us thy grace, during this Paschal
Feast, to be so inflamed with celestial desires, that we may arrive with pure
hearts to the solemnity of thy Eternal Glory: Through the same Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Israel Egyptian Moses, Let us Pray.

O Almighty Father, never-failing Light, Creator of all light, bless this light
which is sanctified and blessed by thee, who enlightenest the whole World, that
we may be thereby enlightened and inflamed. And as thou did carry a light
before Moses, going out of Egypt, so also be pleased to illuminate our hearts
and senses, that we may at length arrive to Life and Light Everlasting: Through
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Let us Pray.

O Lord, Holy Father, Omnipotent Eternal God, vouchsafe to cooperate with us,
who bless this fire in thy Name, and in the Name of thy Son our Lord, and of
the Holy Ghost, and assist us against the fiery darts of the enemy,
enlightening us with thy heavenly grace. Who live and reignest with the same,
thy only begotten Son, and the Holy Ghost, God, for ever and ever. Amen.

O God Almighty, pour forth we beseech thee, thy abundant blessings upon this
Incense, and renewing the world by an invisible regeneration, enlighten this
night, that not only the Sacrifice, which is offered this night, may shine by
a secret mixture of thy splendor, but also, that, in whatever place any part
of the Mystery of this sanctification shall be brought, all surprise and malice
of the Devil being chased away, the virtue of thy Majesty may be assisted.
Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

BE thou blessed by him, in whose honor thou shall be burnt.

THou shall sprinkle me, O Lord, with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed; thou
shall wash me, and I shall be made whiter than snow.

Behold the light of Christ.

R. Thanks be to God.

Jewish Vouchsafe, Father, to bless.

OUr Lord be in thy lips, that thou may worthily and competently declare the
praises of his Pasch. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Amen.

Lucifer MAy the angelical troops now rejoice; may the divine mysteries be
celebrated with a holy joy; may the sound of a comfortable trumpet publish the
victory of so great a King; and may the whole earth be sensible of the blessing
it had, by the splendor of the the Eternal King, who freed it from that
darkness which overspread the whole World. May our Mother, the Church, rejoice
also at the glympse of so resplendent light; and may this place resound with
the voices of this Congregation: And therefore I beseech ye, my beloved
Brethren, here present, who, enlightened with the admirable splendor of this
holy light, join with me, and call upon our Merciful and Almighty God, to the
end, that as he has been pleased, not through my merits, to advance me to the
number of his Levites, so shedding the beams of his light upon me, he will give
me grace to perfect the praise of this Paschal Candle. Through, etc. Amen.

Prudentius Gregory Nazianzenus, Ambrose. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

R. Lift up your hearts.

We have raised them toward our Lord.

Let us give thanks to our Lord.

R. It is meet and just.

Israelites Egypt, IT is truly meet and just, that with all affections of our
heart and soul, and with the ministry of our voice, we glorify the invisible
God, Father Almighty, and his only Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who has paid
Adam's death for us to his Eternal Father; and, by shedding his innocent blood,
has blotted out the handwriting of our old sins, whereby we are subjected to
death: For these are the Paschal Feasts wherein the true Lamb is immolated, and
the gates of the Faithful consecrated by his blood. This is that night wherein
first thou made our forefathers, the Children of Israel, to pass the Red Sea
dry-foot. This is that night which dissipated the darkness of sins, by the
light of a pillar of fire. This is that night, which separating through the
whole World those that believe in Jesus Christ, from the vices of this age, and
from the darkness, wherein sinners are engaged, restores them to grace, and
associates them to sanctity. This is that night, wherein the chains of death
being broken, Christ ascended Conqueror from Hell. For it would not have
availed us to have been born, unless Christ had been pleased to redeem us. O
God, how admirable is thy bounty toward us! how inestimable thy charity! who
did deliver up thy Son to redeem thy slave. O certain necessary sin of Adam,
to make us sensible of the excess of God's love toward us! since it has been
effaced by the death of Jesus Christ. O happy fault, that merited to have such
and so great a Redeemer! O truly happy night, which alone deserved'st to
observe the time and moment of Christ his rising from the dead! This is that
night of which it is written in the 178th Psalm, The night shall shine as the
day, and the night is my illumination in my delights, therefore the
sanctification of this night banisheth all crimes, washes away all offenses,
restores to innocence those that had been lost, makes glad the afflicted,
reconciles hatred and enmities, restores peace and union, and humbles empires.

REceive then, O Holy Father, from us, on this happy night, the
Evening-Sacrifice of this Incense, which thy Holy Church, by its Ministers,
renders unto thee in the Solemn Oblation of this Wax Candle, made of the work
of Bees. And now we acknowledge the praiseworthy Benefits of this Pillar,
lighted from the sparkling fire, to the honor of God.

WHich (fire) though it be divided, yet loses it not any thing in the
communication of its light, feeding it self from the melted Wax, which the Be
has produced, to make the substance of this precious touch.

Egyptian Israel, Egypt, O Night, truly blessed, wherein the Egyptians were
pillaged, the Hebrews enricht with their spoils. The night wherein celestial
and terrestial, divine and humane things were conjoined. We beseech thee
therefore, O Lord, that this Candle, consecrated to the honor of thy Name,
may, without ceasing, dissipate the darkness of this night, and that its light,
ascending as an acceptable perfume, may mix with the celestial lights. Let the
morning star receive its flames; that star, I say, which never sets, and who,
being risen again, and returned from Hell, shined afresh upon mankind. We
beseech thee therefore, O Lord, that, granting us peace in our days, thou will
vouchsafe, amidst these Paschal-Feasts, to lead us as thy servants, to govern
and protect us continually, with thy whole Clergy, and all thy Faithful, our
Holy Father, the Pope, and our Bishop. Regard likewise our King, N. and,
knowing the desires of his heart, grant, O God, by the ineffable grace of thy
bounty and mercy, that he may enjoy a tranquillity of perpetual peace, and,
together with his people, a heavenly victory: By the same our Lord Jesus Christ
thy Son, who live and reignest with thee, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, one
God, world without end. Amen.

Catechumens Catechumens The FIRST PROPHECY, taken out of the 1st Chapter of
Genesis.
Catechumens IN the beginning God created heaven and earth. And the earth was
void and vacant, and darkness was upon the face of the depth. And the spirit of
God moved over the waters. And God said, Be light made. And light was made. And
God saw the light, that it was good; and he divided the light from darkness.
And there was evening and morning, that made one day. God also said, Be a
firmament made amidst the waters: And let it divide between waters and waters.
And God made a firmament, and divided the waters, that were under the
firmament, from those that were above the firmament. And it was done so. And
God called the firmament, heaven: And there was evening and morning, that made
the second day. God also said, Let the waters, that are under the heaven, be
gathered together in one place: And let the dry land appear. And it was so
done. And God called the dry land, earth; and the gathering of waters together,
he called seas. And God saw that it was good. And said, Let the earth shout
forth green herbs, and such as may seed; and fruit trees, yielding fruit after
his kind, such as may have seed in it self upon the earth. And it was done so.
And the earth brought forth green herb, such as seeds according to his kind;
and tree that bears fruit, having seed each one according to his kind. And
God saw that it was good. And there was evening and morning, that made the
third day. Again, God said. Be there lights made in the firmament of heaven, to
divide the day and night, and let them be for signs and seasons, and days and
years; to shine in the firmament of heaven, and to give light upon the earth.
And it was done so. And God made two great lights; A greater light to govern
the day, and a lesser light to govern the night; and stars. And he set them in
the firmament of heaven, to shine upon the earth, and to govern the day and the
night, and to divide the light and the darkness. And God saw that it was good.
And there was evening and morning, that made the fourth day. God also said, Let
the waters bring forth creeping creature, having life, and flying foul, over
the earth, under the firmament of heaven. And God created huge whales, and all
living and moving creature, that the waters brought forth according to each
sort, and all foul, according to their kind. And God saw that it was good. And
he blessed them, saying, Increase and multiply, and replenish the waters of the
sea: and let the birds be multiplied upon the earth. And there was evening and
morning, that made the fifth day. God said moreover, Let the earth bring forth
living creature in his kind, cattle, and such that creep, and beasts of the
earth, according to their kinds. And it was so done. And God made the beasts of
the earth, according to their kinds; and cattle, and all that creeps on the
earth, in his kind. And God saw that it was good: And he said, Let us make man
to our own image and likeness: let him have dominion over the fishes of the
sea, and the fouls of the air, and the beasts, and the whole earth, and all
creeping creature that moves upon the earth. And God created man to his own
image; to the image of God he created him: male and female he created them. And
God blessed them, and says, Increase and multiply, and replenish the earth,
and subdue it; and rule over the fishes of the sea, and fouls of the air, and
all living creatures that move upon the earth. And God said, Behold, I have
given you all manner of herb that seedeth upon the earth, and all trees that
have in themselves seed of their own kind, to be your meat; and to all beasts
of the earth, and to every foul of the air, and to all that move upon the
earth, and wherein there is life, that they may have to feed upon. And it was
so done. And God saw all things that he had made; and they were very good. And
there was evening and morning, that made the sixth day. The heavens therefore
and the earth were fully finished, and all the furniture of them. And the
seventh day God ended his work, which he had made; and rested the seventh day
from all the work that he had done.

Let us Pray.

Let us bend our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

Eve Adam O God, who, by an admirable effect of thy power, have created man,
and yet more powerfully have redeemed him, grant, we beseech thee, strength of
our reason, we may overcome all allurements to sin, and, at length, enjoy
eternal happiness: Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The SECOND PROPHECY, out of the 5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th Chapters of Genesis.
Noe: NOE, when he was five hundred years old, begat, Sem, Cham, and Japhet.
And after that men began to be multiplied upon the earth, and procreation of
daughters, the sons of God, seeing the daughters of men, that they were fair,
took to themselves wives out of all which they had chosen. And God said, My
spirit shall not remain with man for ever, because he is flesh; and his days
shall be an hundred and twenty years. And giants were upon the earth in those
days. For after the sons of God did company with the daughters of men, and they
brought forth children: these be the mighty of the old world, famous men. And
God, seeing the malice of men was much upon the earth, and that all the
cogitation of their hearts was bent to evil at all times, it repented him, that
he had made man upon earth. And touched inwardly with sorrow of heart, I will
(says he) clean take away man, whom I have created, from the face of the
earth, from man, even to beasts; from that which creeps, even unto the fouls
of the air: For it repents me, that I have made them. But Noe found grace
before our Lord. These are the generations of Noe. Noe was a a just and perfect
man in his generations: He did walk with God. And he begat three sons, Sem,
Cham, and Japhet. And the earth was corrupted before God, and was replenished
with iniquity. And when God had perceived that the earth was corrupted, (for
all flesh had corrupted his way upon earth) he said to Noe, The end of all
flesh is come before me: the earth is replenished with iniquity from the face
of them: and I will destroy them with the earth. Make thee an ark of
timber-plank: cabinets shall thou make in the earth, and shall pitch it within
and without with Bitume. And thus shall thou make it. The length of the ark
shall be three hundred cubits, fifty cubits the breadth, and thirty cubits the
height of it. Thou shall make a window in the ark; and in a cubit finish the
top of it: and the door of the ark shall thou set at the side below; middle
chambers, and third losts shall thou make in it. Behold, I will bring the
waters of a great flood upon the earth, that I may destroy all flesh, wherein
there is breath of life under heaven. All things that are in the earth shall be
consumed. And I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shall enter into
the ark, thou and thy sons, and thy wife, and the wives of thy sons, with thee.
And of all living creatures, of all flesh, thou shall bring pairs into the ark,
that they may live with thee, of the male sex and the female. Of fouls
according to their kind, and of beasts in their kind, and of all that creeps
on the earth, according to their kind: pairs of all sorts shall enter in with
thee, that they may live. Thou shall take therefore with thee of all meats,
that may be eaten, and thou shall lay them up with thee; and they shall be meat
for thee and them. Noe therefore did all things which God commanded him. And he
was six hundred years old, when the waters of the flood overflowed the earth.
Then all the fountains of the great depth were broken up, and the floodgates
of heaven were opened; and the rain fell upon the earth forty days and forty
nights. In the very point of that day entered Noe, and Sem, Cham, and Japhet,
his sons, and his wife, and the three wives of his sons, with them into the
ark, they and every beast, according to their kind; and all cattle in their
kind, and all that moves upon the earth, according to their kind; and all
foul, according to their kind. Moreover, the ark floted upon the waters. And
the waters prevailed out of measure upon the earth: and all the high mountains
under the whole heaven were covered. Fifteen cubits higher was the water above
the mountains which it covered. And all the flesh was consumed, that moved upon
the earth, of fowl, of cattle, of beasts, and of all creepers, that creep upon
the earth. But only Noe remained, and they that were with him in the ark. And
the waters held on above the earth an hundred and fifty days. And God remembered
Noe, and all the beasts, and all the cattle, which were with him in the ark;
and brought a wind upon the earth, and the waters decreased. And the fountains
of the depth, and the floodgates of heaven were shut up, and the rain from
heaven was staid. And the waters returned from the earth, going and coming: and
they began to decrease after an hundred and fifty days. And after that forty
days were passed, Noe opened the window of the ark, which he had made, let
forth a crow; which went forth, and did not return, till the waters were dried
upon the earth. He sent forth also a dove after him, to see if the waters were
ceased yet upon the face of the earth; which finding not where her foot might
rest, returned to him into the ark; for the waters were upon the whole earth,
and stretched forth his hand, and caught her, and brought her into the ark. And
having expected yet seven more days, again he let forth a dove out of the ark:
but she came to him at eventide, carrying a bough of an olive tree, that had
green leaves in her mouth. Noe therefore understood, that the waters were
ceased upon the earth. And he expected nevertheless other seven days; and he
sent forth a dove, which returned not any more to him. And God spoke to Noe,
saying, Go forth of the ark, thou and thy wife, thy sons and the wives of thy
sons with thee. All cattle which are with thee of all flesh, as well in fowls
as in beasts; and all creepers, that creep upon earth, bring out with thee, and
go ye upon the earth, increase and multiply upon it. Noe therefore went forth,
and his sons, his wife, and the wives of his sons with him. Yea, and all
cattle, beasts, and creepers, that creep upon the earth, according to their
kind, went forth out of the ark. And Noe built an altar to our Lord; and taking
of all cattle, and fowls that were clean, offered holocausts upon the altar.
And our Lord smelled a sweet savor.

Let us Pray.

Let us kneel.

R. Lift up your selves.

O God, whose power is unchangeable, and light eternal, look favorably upon
the mystical and wonderful body of thy whole Church, and, by the effect of thy
continual conduct, complete tranquillity, the salvation of mankind, that all
the world may experimentally see, that thou have raised what was fallen, and
renewed what was decayed; and that all things are re-established by him, from
whom they had their beginning; our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who lives and
reigns with thee, and the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end. Amen.

The THIRD PROPHECY, taken out of the 22d Chapter of Genesis.
Catechumens, Catechumens, Abraham Isaac; IN those days God tempted Abraham,
and said to him, Abraham, Abraham. But he answered, Here I am. He said to him,
Take thy only begotten Son, whom thou love, Isaac, and go into the land of
vision, and there thou shall offer him for an holocaust, upon one of the
mountains, which I will show thee. Therefore Abraham, rising up in the night,
sadled his ass, taking with him two young men, and Isaac his son; and when he
had cut wood for the holocaust, he went his way to the place, which God had
commanded him. And the third day, lifting up his eyes, he saw the place afar
off. And he said to his young men, Tarry you here with the ass: I and the boy,
going with speed as far as yonder, after we have adored, will return to you. He
took also the wood of the holocaust, and laid it upon Isaac his son; and
himself carried in his hand fire and a sword. And as they went together, Isaac
said to his Father, My father: And he answered, What will thou, son? Behold,
says he, fire and wood: Where is the victim of the holocaust? And Abraham
said, God will provide unto himself the victim of the holocaust, my son. They
went therefore together, and they came to the place, which God had showed him,
wherein he builded an altar, and laid the wood in order upon it. And when he
had bound Isaac, his son, he laid him on the altar, upon the pile of wood: And
stretched forth his hand, and caught the sword for to sacrifice his son. And
behold, an angel of our Lord, from heaven, cried, saying. Abraham, Abraham, who
answered, Here I am. And he said to him, Stretch not forth thy hand upon the
boy; neither do thou any thing to him: Now I have known, that thou fear God,
and have not spared thy only begotten son, for my sake. Abraham lifted up his
eyes, and saw behind his back, a ram amongst the briers, sticking fast by the
horns; which he took, and offered an holocaust, instead of his son. And he
called the name of that place, Our Lord sees: whereupon, even to this day, it
is said in the mountain, Our Lord will see. And the angel of our Lord called
Abraham the second time from heaven, saying, By my own self have I sworn, says
our Lord, because thou have done this thing, and have not spared thy only
begotten son for my sake; I will bless thee, and I will multiply thy seed as
the stars of heaven, and as the sand that is by the seashore: thy seed shall
posses the gates of his enemies. And in this seed shall be blessed all the
nations of the earth, because thou have obeyed my voice. Abraham returned to
his young men, and they went to Bersabee together, and he dwelt there.

Abraham Israelites, Gentiles, Let us Pray.

Let us bow our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

O God, the sovereign Father of the Faithful, who by the grace of adoption,
through the whole world, multipliest the children of thy promise, and by this
Paschal Sacrament, ( viz. by the sacrifice of thy Son, whereof the Paschal Lamb
and the sacrifice of Isaac was a figure) make thy servant Abraham in his
stead, the Father of all Nations, according to thy promise, grant, that thy
people may worthily enter into the grace of their vocation. Through our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc.

The FOURTH PROPHECY, out of the 14th Chapter of Exodus.
Israelites: Moses Pharao Egyptians, Egyptians, Israel Egyptians, IN those
days, when the morning-watch was come, behold, our Lord, looking upon the
Egyptians camp, through the pillar of the fire and the cloud, slew their army,
and overthrew the wheels of their chariots; and they were born in the depth.
The Egyptians therefore said, Let us fly from Israel, for the Lord fights for
them, against us. And our Lord said to Moses, Stretch forth thy hand upon the
sea, that the waters may return to the Egyptians, upon their chariots and
horsemen. And when Moses had stretched forth his hand against the sea, it
returned, in the first break of day, to the former place, and the Egyptians
flying away, the waters came upon them, and our Lord enwrapt them in the midst
of the waves. And the waters returned and overwhelmed the chariots and the
horsemen of all Pharo's army, who following were entered into the sea: neither
did there so much as one of them remain. But the children of Israel marched
through the midst of the dry sea: and the waters were unto them as instead of a
wall, on the right hand and on the left. And our Lord delivered Israel in that
day out of the hand of the Egyptians. And they saw the Egyptians dead upon the
seashore; and the mighty hand, that our Lord had exercised against them. And
the people feared our Lord, and they believed our Lord, and Moses his servant.
Then sang Moses, and the children of Israel, this song to our Lord, and said,

The TRACT, taken out of the Eighteenth Chapter of Exodus.

Catechumens, Israelites Egyptian LEt us sing unto the Lord, for he triumphed
gloriously: The horse and his rider has he cast into the sea. He is made a
helper and protector to me for salvation.

V. He is my God, and I will honor him: my fathers God, and I will exalt him.

V. The Lord is a destroyer of war: the Lord is his Name.

Let us Pray.

Israel Egyptians Abraham, Israelites, Let us bow our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

O God, who make us see, even in our days, the miracles wrought by thee in
past ages; that what thou did in the delivery of one people from the power of
Egypt, thou wroughtest for the salvation of the Gentiles, through the water of
regeneration; grant, that all the nations of this world may become true
children of Abraham, and enter into the dignity of being children of Israel.
Through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

The FIFTH PROPHECY, taken out of the 54th and 55th Chapter of Isay.
Gentiles, THis is the inheritance of the servants of our Lord, and their
justice with me, says our Lord. All ye that thirst, come to the waters; and
you that have no silver, make have; buy and eat; come, buy without silver, and
without any exchange, wine and milk. Why bestow your silver, not for bread; and
your labor, not for satiety? Hearing, hear ye me, and eat that which is good,
and your soul shall be delighted in fatness. Incline your ear, and come to me;
hear, and your soul shall live: and I will make an everlasting covenant with
you, the faithful mercies of David. Behold, I have given him for a witness unto
the people; for a prince and master to the Gentiles. Behold, thou shall call
the nation, which thou know not, and the nations, that knew not thee, shall
return to thee, because of the Lord thy God, and the holy one of Israel,
because he has glorified thee. Seek ye the Lord, whiles he may be found:
invocate him, whiles he is near. Let the impious forsake his way, and the
unjust man his cognitations, and return to our Lord, and he will have mercy on
him. And to our God, because he is bountiful to forgive; for my cogitations are
not your cogitations, nor your ways my ways, says our Lord. For as the heavens
are exalted above the earth, so are my ways exalted above your ways, and my
cogitations above your cogitations. And as the shower comes down, and the snow
from heaven, and returns no more thither, but inebriateth the earth, and
waters it, and makes it to spring, and gives seed to the sower, and bread
to him that eats: so shall my word be, which shall proceed from my mouth. It
shall not return to me void; but it shall do what things soever I would, and
shall prosper in these things, for which I sent it, says our Lord God.

Let us Pray.

Let us bow our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

ALmighty and Eternal God, multiply, for the honor of thy Name, that which
thou have promised to the faith of our forefathers, and increase by an holy
adoption, thy Church with new children, to receive the effects of thy promises:
that so they may see, that almost accomplished, which the Saints formerly
doubted not but would come to pass: Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The SIXTH PROPHECY, taken out of the 3d Chapter of Baruch
HEar, Israel, the commandments of life: hearken with your ears, that you may
know prudence. What is the matter, Israel, that thou art in the land of the
enemies? Thou art waxed old in strange land; thou art defiled with the dead;
thou art reputed with them, that go into hell. Thou have forsaken the fountain
of wisdom. For if thou had walked in the way of God, thou had verily dwelt
in peace everlasting. Learn where wisdom is, where understanding is, that thou
may know withal, where is the long continuance of life and living; where the
light of the eyes and peace is, who has found the place thereof? and who has
entered into the treasures thereof? where are the princes of the Gentiles, and
they that rule over the beasts, that are upon the earth, that play with the
birds of heaven; that treasure up silver and gold, wherein men have confidence,
and there is no end of their getting? which fashion silver, and are careful;
neither is there invention of their works. They are destroyed, and are gone
down to hell, and others are risen up in their place. Young men saw the light,
and dwelt upon the earth, but the way of discipline they knew not, neither
understood they the paths thereof; neither have their children received it. It
is made far from their face. It has not been heard in the land of Canaan;
neither has it been seen in Theman. The children of Agar also, that seek out
the prudence that is of the earth; merchants of Myrrh, and of Theman, and
fablers, and searchers of prudence and understanding. But the way of wisdom
they have not known; neither have they remembered the paths thereof. O Israel,
how great is the house of God, and how great is the place of his possession! It
is great, and has no end; high and unmeasurable. There were the giants, those
renowned that were from the beginning of big stature, expert in war. These did
not our Lord choose, neither found they the way of discipline, therefore did
they perish. And because they had not wisdom, they perished through their
folly. Who has ascended into heaven, and taken her, and brought her down from
the clouds? Who has passed over the sea, and found her, and brought her above
chosen gold? There is none that can know her ways, nor that can search out her
paths; but he that knows all things, knows her, and has found her out by
his prudence; he that prepares the earth in time everlasting, and replenished
it with cattle, and four-footed beasts: he that sends forth light, and it
goes, and has called it, and it obeys him with trembling. And the stars
have given light in their watches, and rejoiced: they were called, and they
said, Here we are: and they have shined to him with cheerfulness, that made
them. This is our God, and there shall none other be esteemed against him. He
found out all the way of discipline, and delivered it to Jacob his servant, and
to Israel his beloved. After these things he was seen upon the earth, and was
conversant with men.

Let us Pray.

Let us bend our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

O God, who do always multiply thy Church in the call of the Gentiles,
vouchsafe graciously thy continual protection, to all those who shall be
cleansed with the waters of baptism: Through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

The SEVENTH PROPHECY, out of the 37th Chapter of Ezechiel.
Ezekiel Israelites, Messiah, IN those days the hand of the Lord was made upon
me, and brought me forth in the spirit of our Lord, and left me in the mids of
a field, that was full of bones. And he led me about through them on every
side, and there were very many upon the face of the field, and exceeding dry.
And he said to me, Son of man, think thou these bones shall live? And I
said, Lord God, thou know. And he said to me, Prophecy of these bones; and
thou shall say to them, Dry bones, hear ye the word of our Lord. Thus says our
Lord God to these bones, Behold, I will put spirit into you, and you shall
live. And I will give sinews unto you, and will make flesh to grow up over you,
and will stretch a skin on you: And I will give you spirit, and you shall live:
And you shall know, that I am the Lord. And I prophesied as he had commanded
me. And there was made a sound when I prophesied; and behold a commotion, and
bones came to bones, every one to his juncture. And I saw, and behold, upon
them sinews, and flesh was grown up, and a skin was stretched out in them
above; and they had no spirit. And he said to me, Prophecy, son of man, and
thou shall say to the spirit, Thus says our Lord God, Come, spirit, from the
four winds, and blow upon these slain, and let them be revived. And I
prophesied as he had commanded me; and the spirit entered into them; and they
lived, and they stood upon their feet, an army passing great. And he said to
me, Son of man, all these bones are the house of Israel. They say our bones are
withered, our hope is perished, and we are cut off. Therefore prophecy, and
thou shall say to them, Thus says our Lord God, Behold, I will open your
graves, and bring you out of your Sepulchers, O my people; and will bring you
into the land of Israel. And you shall know, that I am the Lord, when I shall
have opened your Sepulchers, and shall have brought you out of your graves, O
my people: And shall have given my spirit in you; and you shall live: And I
shall make you rest upon your ground, says our Lord God.

Let us pray.

Let us bow our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

O God, who by Holy Scriptures, Old and New, instructest us to celebrate the
Paschal Mysteries, grant us to know the grandeur of thy mercy, that, receiving
the gifts in this life, we may be raised to a firm hope of thy future
blessings: Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The EIGHTH PROPHECY, taken out of the 4th. Chapter of Isay.
Jerusalem, Jews: AND seven women shall take hold of one man in that day,
saying, we will eat our own bread, and be covered with our garments; only let
thy Name be called upon us; take away our reproach. In that day the bud of our
Lord shall be in magnificence and glory, and the fruit of the Earth high; and
exultation to them that shall be saved of Israel. And it shall be, every one
that shall be left in Sion, and shall remain in Jerusalem, shall be called
Holy: every one that is written in life in Jerusalem. If our Lord shall cleanse
the filth of the Daughters of Sion, and shall wash the blood of Jerusalem out
of the midst thereof in the spirit of judgment, and the spirit of heat: And our
Lord shall create upon every place of mount Sion, and where he is invocated, a
cloud by the day, and smoke, and the brightness of flaming fire by night: for
upon all glory, protection. And there shall be a Tabernacle for a place of
shadow in the day, from the heat, and for security, and covert from the
whirlwind, and from rain.

The TRACT, out of the 5th. Chapter of Isay.

Isay Jews Israel. MY well-beloved has a Vineyard in a very fruitful Hill.

V. And he fenced it, and planted it with the choicest Vine, and built a Tower
in the midst of it.

V. And made a Wine Press in it: for the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the
House of Israel.

Catechumens, Egypt, Let us pray.

Let us bend our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

O God, who by the mouth of thy Holy Prophets have declared, that for the
benefit of all the Children of thy Church, thou sowest good Seed through the
whole extent of thy Empire, and improvest thy chosen Plants; grant of thy
bounty, that having rooted up all the Briars and Thistles from among thy
People, whom thou art pleased shall be called Vines, they may bring forth good
Fruit in abundance, through our Jesus Christ.

The NINTH PROPHECY, taken out of the 12th. Chapter of Exodus.
Jewish page Israel Egyptian Israel Egyptian IN those days our Lord said unto
Moses and Aaron in the Land of Egypt, this month shall be to you the beginning
of months; it shall be the first in the months of the year. Speak ye to the
whole assembly of the Children of Israel, and say to them; the tenth day of
this month let every man take a Lamb by their Families and Houses. But if the
number be less than may suffice to eat the Lamb, he shall take unto him his
Neighbor that joyneth to his House, according to the number of souls which may
suffice to the eating of the Lamb. And it shall be a Lamb without spot, a Male,
of a year old: according also to which rite you shall take a Kid. And you shall
keep him till the fourteenth day of this month; and the whole multitude of the
Children of Israel shall Sacrifice him at even. And they shall take of the
blood thereof, and put upon both the Posts of the Houses wherein they shall eat
him. And they shall eat the flesh that night roasted at the fire, and unleavened
bread with wild lettice. You shall not eat thereof any thing raw, nor boiled in
water; but only roasted at the fire: the head with the feet, and entrails
thereof, you shall devour: and you shall not break one bone of him. Neither
shall there remain any thing of him until morning. If there be any thing left,
you shall burn it with fire. And thus you shall eat him. You shall gird your
reins; and you shall have shoes on your feet, holding staves in your hands;
and you shall eat speedily. For it is the Phase (that is, the passage) of our
Lord.

Let us Pray.

Let us bow our knees.

R. Lift up your selves.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, who ar^ wonderful in the dispensation of all thy
Works, grant, that those whom thou have Redeemed, may be sensible, that the
Creation of the World in the beginning of time, was not a greater marvel, than
that which happened of later days in the immolation of Jesus Christ, our true
Pasch: who being God, lives and reigns for ever. Amen.

The TENTH PROPHECY, taken out of the 3d. Chapter of Jonas.
Ninivites, Catechumens Catechumens, AND the word of the Lord was made to Jonas
the Prophet the second time, saying, Arise, and go to Ninive, that I shall
speak to thee. And Jonas arose, and went into Ninive, according to the word of
our Lord: And Ninive was a great City of three days journey. And Jonas began to
enter into the City one days journey; and he cried, and said, as yet forty
days, and Ninive shall be subverted. And the men of Ninive believed in God, and
they proclaimed a Fast, and were clothed with sackcloth from the greater to the
lesser. And the word came to the King of Ninive, and he rose up out of his
Throne, and cast away his garment from him, and was clothed with sackcloth, and
sat in ashes. And he cried, and said in Ninive, from the mouth of the King,
and of his Princes, saying, Men, and Beasts, and Oxen, and Cattle, let them not
taste any thing, nor feed, and let them not drink water. And let Men and Beasts
be covered with sackclothes, and cry to our Lord in strength; and let every man
convert from his evil way, and from the iniquity that is in their hands. Who
knows, if God will convert, and forgive, and will return from the fury of his
wrath; and we shall not perish. And God saw their works, that they were
converted from their evil way; and our Lord had mercy on his people.

Let us Pray.

Let us kneel.

R. Lift up your selves.

O God, who have united several Nations in confession of thy Name; give us both
the will and power to do what thou command; that thy People, who are called
to partake of thy Eternity, may have the same faith of Spirit and Piety in
their actions: Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The ELEVENTH PROPHECY, taken out of the 13th. Chapter of Deuteronomy.
IN those days Moses wrote the Canticle, and taught it the Children of Israel.
And our Lord commanded Josue, the son of Nun, and said, take courage, and be
strong; for thou shall bring the Children of Israel into the land which I have
promised: and I will be with thee. Therefore after that Moses wrote the words
of this law in a volume, and finished it, he commanded the Levites that carried
the ark of the covenant of our Lord, saying, take this book, and put it in the
side of the ark of the covenant of our Lord your God; that it may be for a
testimony against thee. For I know thy contention, and thy most stiff neck.
Whiles I yet live, and go in with you, you have done always contentiously
against our Lord: how much more, when I shall be dead. Gather to me all your
ancients by your tribes, and your doctors; and I will speak these words in
their hearing, and will invocate against them heaven and earth. For I know,
that after my death you will do wickedly, and will decline quickly from the way
which I have commanded you; and evils shall come upon you in the latter times,
when you shall do evil in the sight of our Lord, to provoke him by the works of
your hands. Moses therefore spoke in the hearing of the whole assembly of
Israel the words of this song, and finished even to the end.

The TRACT, taken out of the 32th. Chapter of Deuteronomy.

HEar, you heavens, what things I speak: the earth hear the words of my mouth.

V. My doctrine grow together as rain: my speech flow as the dew.

V. As it were a shower upon the grass: because I will invocate the Name of our
Lord.

V. Give magnificence to our God: the works of God be perfect, and all his ways
judgments.

V. God is faithful, and without iniquity; just and right.

Let us Pray.

Let us kneel.

R. Lift up your selves.

O God, who raisest the humble, and give courage to the just, who would by
thy servant Moses teach this people, by singing thy holy Canticle, that the
repetition of thy Law might be our instruction, make thy power appear, to all
nations justified by thee; and, allaying their terror by an holy joy, grant,
that all their sins being effaced, through thy mercy, the terror of those
pains, menaced by thee, may turn to their good and salvation: Through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

The TWELFTH PROPHECY, taken out of the 3d Chapter of Daniel.
Catechumens, Hebrews, IN those days Nabuchodonosor, the king, made a statue of
gold, in height of sixty cubits, in breadth of six cubits; and he set it in the
field of Dura of the province of Babylon. Therefore Nabuchodonosor, the king,
sent to call together the nobles, the magistrates and judges, dukes and
tyrants, and rulers, and all the princes of the countries, that they should
come together to the dedication of the statue, which Nabuchodonosor, the king,
had erected. Then were the nobles gathered together, the magistrates and
judges, the dukes and tyrants, and the great men that were placed in the
regiments, and all the princes of the country, to come together to the
dedication of the statue, which Nabuchodonosor, the king, had set up. And the
crier cried mightily, to you people, and tribes, and tongues, it is said in the
hour, that you shall hear the sound of the trumpet, and pipe and harp, of the
dulcimer, psaltery and and symphony, and all kind of musical instruments;
falling, adore ye the golden statue, which Nabuchodonosor, the king, has set
up. But if any man shall not adore, prostrate, he shall the self-same hour be
cast into a furnace of burning fire. After this therefore forthwith, as all the
people heard the sound of the trumpet, the pipe and harp, of the dulcimer and
psaltery, of the symphony, and of all kind of musical instruments, all the
people, tribes, and tongues, falling, adored the golden statue, which
Nabuchodonosor had set up. And forthwith, in the very same time, men of Chaldee
coming, accused the Jews, and said to Nabuchodonosor, the king, King, live for
ever. Thou, O king, have made a decree, that every man, which shall hear the
sound of the trumpet, pipe and harp, of the dulcimer and psaltery, of the
symphony, and of all kind of musical instruments, prostrate himself, and adore
the golden statue. And if any man do not prostrate on the ground and adore,
that he be cast into a furnace of burning fire. There are therefore men of
Jewry, whom thou did appoint over the works of the province of Babylon,
Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago: these men, O King, have condemned thy decree;
thy God's they worship not, and the golden statue, which thou have erected,
they adore not. Then Nabuchodonosor, in fury and in wrath commanded, that
Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, should be brought, who immediately were brought
before the king. And Nabuchodonosor, the king, pronouncing, said unto them,
Indeed Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, do not you worship my gods? and the
golden statue, that I have set up, do not you adore? Now therefore, if you be
ready, in what hour soever you shall hear the sound of the trumpet, the pipe,
the harp, of the dulcimer, and psaltery, and symphony, and of all kind of
musical instruments, prostrate your selves, and adore the statue which I have
made. But if you adore not, the self-same hour ye shall be cast into the
furnace of burning fire: and what God is there, that shall deliver you out of
my hand? Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, answering, said to king Nabuchodonosor,
We must not answer thee concerning this thing. For, behold, our God, whom we
worship, can save us from the furnace of burning fire, and out of thy hands, O
King, deliver us. But if he will not, be it known to thee, O king, that we
worship not thy gods; and the golden statue, which thou have erected, we adore
not. Then was Nabuchodonosor replenished with fury, and the look of his face
was altered upon Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago; and he commanded, that the
furnace should be heated seven times more than it had been accustomed to be
heated. And commanded the strongest men of his hosts, to bind the feet of
Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, and to cast them into the furnace of burning
fire. And forthwith those men, being bound with their breeches, and
head-attire, and shoes, and garments, were cast into the furnace of burning
fire. For the commandment of the king did urge; and the furnace was heated
exceedingly. Moreover, the flame of the fire slew those men that had cast in
Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago. But these three men, Sidrach, Misach, and
Abdenago, fell in the mids of the furnace of burning fire, bound together. And
they walked in the mids of the flame, praising God, and blessing our Lord.

Flectamus genua Hebrews Nabuchodonosor, Let us Pray.

Hebrews, ALmighty and Everlasting God, the only hope of the world, who, by
the mouths of thy Prophets, have manifested the mysteries of these times,
increase, through thy goodness, the fervor of the Vows and Prayers of thy
people, that they may obtain that perfection in Faith and Piety which they beg,
since none can advance in virtue, but by thy holy inspirations: Through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Catechumens, AS the heart pants after the waterbrooks: so pants my soul
after thee, O God.

V. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear
before God.

V. My tears have been my meat, day and night: while continually they say unto
me, Where is thy God?

Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Let us Pray.

Catechumens, ALmighty and Everlasting God, look graciously upon the devotion
of thy people, now to be regenerate, who, as the Heart, thirst after the waters
of thy fountain; and grant, that the faith, which they thirst, may sanctify
their Soul and Body, by the Sacrament of Baptism: Through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Calvary. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Let us Pray.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, bless these great Mysteries and Sacraments of
thine infinite bounty; and to regenerate this new people, which this water of
Baptism brings thee, pour forth upon them the Spirit of Adoption, so that what
is to be done by the ministry of our weakness, may be accomplished by the
effect of thy power. Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

For ever and ever. Amen.

Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Raise up your hearts.

R. We have them to our Lord.

Let us give thanks to our Lord God.

R. It is meet and just.

IT is truly meet and just, right and wholesome, that we always, and in all
places, give thee thanks, O Lord, Holy Father, Almighty and Everlasting God:
who, by thy invisible power, do wonderfully bring to pass the effect of thy
Sacraments; and though we are unworthy to administer so great Mysteries; yet
thou not withdrawing the gifts of thy grace, art graciously pleased to hear our
Prayers. God, whose spirit, in the world beginning, was carried upon the
waters, that then its nature might conceive the virtue of sanctification; God,
who, by the waters, washing away the sins of the guilty world, did note the
figure of regeneration, by the overflowing of the deluge, to the end, that the
same element, by a prodigious mystery, should be both the destruction of vices,
and the source of virtues, cast down thine eyes upon the face of thy Church,
and multiply in her thy regenerations. Thou, who satiatest thy holy city with
joy, by the abundant affluence of thy graces, and openest the Fonts of Baptism
to the whole world, to renew the nations inhabiting it, that, under the Empire
of thy Majesty, she may receive the grace of thy only Son, by the virtue of the
Holy Ghost.

Adam WHom we beseech, by a secret mixture of his Divine Grace, to make this
water fruitful, designed for the regeneration of men, to the end, that those,
who are conceived and sanctified in the immaculate womb of this Font, may
become a heavenly progeny, being regenerated to a new creature; and that all
who are distinguished either by sex in the body, or age in time, may be brought
forth to the same in fancy, by grace, which is their spiritual mother. Command
therefore, O Lord, that all unclean spirits may withdraw hence; that all
malice, and deceit of the devil, be banished; that no power of the enemy may
lurk here, to prepare his ambushes, to surprise by secret artifices, to corrupt
with his infection.

MAY this holy and innocent creature, O Lord, be free from enterprises of the
devil; and, all malice being set apart, may be preserved in its purity. May it
be a fountain of life, a regenerating water, a purifying stream, that all those
who shall be washed in this wholesome bath, may obtain the grace, to be perfectly
purified, by operation and assistance of the Holy Ghost.

ANd therefore I bless thee, O creature, water, by the living God, by the true
God, by the holy God, by that God, who, at the beginning of the world,
separated thee from the dry land, by his word, and whose spirit was carried
upon thee.

GOD, who made thee spring in Paradise, and, dividing thee into four rivers,
commanded thee to water the whole earth; who changed thy bitterness in the
desert, and made the potable, by an imprinted suavity; and to issue out of a
rock, to quench his peoples thirst. I bless thee also, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, his only Son, who, in Cana Galilee, changed thee into wine, by a
singular miracle of his omnipotency; who walked dry-foot upon thee, and was
baptized in thee by St. John in Jordan; who caused thee, together with blood,
to issue out of his side; and who commanded his disciples to baptize all those
in thee, who should believe in him, saying, Go ye, and teach all nations, and
baptize them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

OMnipotent God, mercifully assist us, observing thy commandments; and, of thy
goodness, infuse thy spirit into us.

BLess these simple waters with thy mouth, that, besides their natural quality
of cleansing the body, they may receive yet further virtue to purify our souls.

Jordan; MAy the virtue of the Holy Ghost descend upon this water.

ANd make the whole substance of this water fruitful, and capable to regenerate.

MAy here all the stains of sin be blotted out; may here nature, created unto
thy image, being restored to its original dignity, to the honor of its
Author, be purified from all filth of the old man; that all, who receive this
Sacrament of Regeneration, may be born in true innocence of a new birth:
Through our Lord Jesus Christ, thy Son, who shall come to judge the living and
the dead, and world by fire.

Catechumens MAy this Font be sanctified, and made fruitful by this
health-giving oil, for those who shall be regenerated therein, unto life
everlasting. Amen.

MAy this infusion of the Chrism of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the Holy
Ghost, the comforter, be done in the Name of the Holy Trinity. Amen.

MAy this commixture of the Chrism of Sanctification, and the Oil of Unction,
and of the Water of Baptism, be made in the Name of the Father,, and of the
Son,, and of the Holy Ghost,. Amen.

LOrd, have mercy on us.

Christ, have mercy on us.

Lord, have mercy on us.

Christ, hear us.

Christ, graciously hear us.

God, the Father of heaven, have mercy on us.

God, the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy on us.

God, the Holy Ghost, have mercy on us.

Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy on us.

Holy Mary, pray for us.

Holy Mother of God, pray for us.

Holy Virgin of Virgins, pray for us.

St. Michael, pray.

St. Gabriel, pray.

St. Raphael, pray.

All ye Holy Angels and Archangels, pray for us.

All ye Holy Orders of blessed Spirits, pray for us.

St. John Baptist, pray for us.

All ye Holy Patriarchs, pray for us.

St. Peter, pray for us.

St. Paul, pray for us.

St. Andrew, pray for us.

St. John, pray for us.

All ye Holy Apostles and Evangelists, pray for us.

All ye Holy Disciples of our Lord, pray for us.

St. Stephen, pray for us.

St. Laurence, pray for us.

St. Vincent, pray for us.

All ye Holy Martyrs, pray for us.

St. Sylvester, pray for us.

St. Gregory, pray for us.

St. Augustine, pray for us.

All ye Holy Bishops and Confessors, pray for us.

All ye Holy Doctors, pray for us.

St. Anthony, pray for us.

St. Bennet, pray for us.

St. Dominick, pray for us.

St. Francis, pray for us.

All ye Holy Priests and Levites, pray for us.

All ye Holy Monks and Hermits, pray for us.

St. Mary Magdalene, pray for us.

St. Agnes, pray for us.

St. Cecily, pray for us.

St. Catherine, pray for us.

St. Agatha, pray for us.

St. Anastasia, pray for us.

All ye Holy Virgins and Widows, pray for us.

All ye Men and Women, Saints of God, make intercession for us.

Be merciful unto us, spare us, O Lord.

Be merciful unto us, graciously hear us, O Lord.

From all evil, O Lord, deliver us.

From all sin, O Lord, deliver us.

From everlasting death, O Lord, deliver us.

Through the mystery of thy holy Incarnation, O Lord, deliver us.

Through thy coming, O Lord, deliver us.

Through thy Nativity, O Lord, deliver us.

Through thy Baptism and Holy Fasting, O Lord, deliver us.

Through thy Cross and Passion, O Lord, deliver us.

Through thy Death and Burial, O Lord, deliver us.

Through thy Holy Resurrection, O Lord, deliver us.

Through thy admirable Ascension, O Lord, deliver us.

Through the coming of the Holy Ghost, the comforter, O Lord, deliver us.

In the Day of Judgment, O Lord, deliver us.

We sinners, do beseech thee to hear us.

That thou spare us, we beseech thee, hear us.

That thou vouchsafe to govern and preserve thy Holy Church, we beseech thee to
hear us.

That thou vouchsafe to preserve our Apostolic Prelate, and all Ecclesiastical
Orders in Holy Religion, we beseech thee to hear us.

That thou vouchsafe to humble the enemies of thy Holy Church, we beseech thee,
hear us.

That thou vouchsafe to give Peace and true Concord to Christian Kings and
Princes, we beseech thee, hear us.

That thou vouchsafe to comfort, and keep us in thy Holy Service, we beseech
thee, hear us.

That thou render eternal good things to our benefactors, we beseech thee, hear
us.

That thou vouchsafe to give and preserve the fruits of the earth, we beseech
thee, hear us.

That thou vouchsafe to give eternal rest to all Faithful departed, we beseech
thee, hear us.

That thou vouchsafe graciously to hear us, we beseech thee, hear us.

Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, spare us, O Lord.

Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, hear us, O Lord.

Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, have mercy on us, O Lord.

Christ, hear us.

Christ, graciously hear us.

Kyrie-Eleison page Gloria in Excelsis, etc. page Gloria in Excelsis The
COLLECT.

Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Let us Pray.

O God, who have illustrated this Night by the glorious Resurrection of our
Lord, conserve the Spirit of Adoption, given unto those new Children of thy
Church; that being renewed both in mind and body, they may serve thee with a
pure heart, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Lesson of the Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Colossians, Chap. 3.

BRethren, if you be risen with Christ, seek the things that are above; where
Christ is sitting on the right hand of God. Mind the things that are above, not
the things that are upon the Earth. For you are dead, and your life is with
Christ in God when Christ shall appear your life, then you also shall appear
with him in Glory.

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

V. COnfess ye to our Lord, because he is good; because his Mercy continues
for ever.

Then the Tract is said out of the 116 Psalm.

Psalm: Paul, PRaise our Lord, all ye Gentiles: praise him, all ye People.

V. Because his Mercy is confirmed unto us; and his Truth remains for ever.

Munda cor meum, etc. page Mary's, The sequence of the Holy Gospel according to
St. Matthew, Chap. 28.

IN the evening of Sabbath, which dawneth upon the first of the Sabbath, came
Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary, to see the Sepulcher. And behold, there was
made a great earthquake. For the Angel of our Lord descended from Heaven, and
coming, rolled back the stone, and sat upon it. And his countenance was as
Lightning, and his garment as Snow. And for fear of him, the watchmen were
frighted, and became as dead. And the Angel answering, said to the Women, fear
not you. For I know that you seek Jesus, that was crucified. He is not here,
for he is risen, as he said: Come, and see the place where our Lord was sat.
And going quickly, tell ye his Disciples, that he is risen: and behold, he
goes before you into Galilee: there you shall see him. Lo, I have foretold
you.

Neophytes Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

Let us Pray.

Neophytes etc. p. The SECRET.

REceive, O Lord, we beseech thee, the Prayers of thy People, with the
Oblations of these Hoasts; that the Paschal Mysteries, which we celebrate,
being wholesome unto us, may by thine assistance, obtain us life everlasting:
Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Benedictus, qui venit, Jerusalem; IT is truly meet
and just, right and wholesome, O Lord, that at all times we set forth thy
praises: But more especially in this Night, wherein Jesus Christ, our Paschal
Lamb, was immola^^d. For he is the true Lamb, who has taken away the sins of
the World: who by dying has destroyed our death; and by rising again, has
restored life. And therefore with Angels and Archangels, with the Thrones and
Dominations, together with the Celestial Host, we sing this Hymn of thy Glory
without end, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord God of Sabbath. The Heavens
and Earth are full of thy Glory. Hosanna in the highest. Blessed is he that
comes in the name of our Lord: Hosanna in the highest.

Communicantes, page etc. Mary, PArtaking of the same Communion, and
celebrating the Solemnity of this blessed Night, wherein our Savior rose again
according to the flesh: and in the first place, honoring the memory of the
ever glorious Virgin Mary, Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ; of the blessed
Apostles, and Martyrs, Peter and Paul, Andrew, James, John, Thomas, James,
Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon and Thaddeus, Linus, Cletus, Clement,
Xystus, Cornelius, Cyprian, Lawrence, Chrysogonus, John and Paul, Cosme and
Damian, and of all thy Saints; by whose Merits and Prayers grant that in all
things we may be guarded with thy Holy Protection, through the same our Lord
Jesus Christ. Amen.

HANC IGITVR OBLATIONEM.

WE therefore beseech thee, O Lord, to receive graciously this Offering of our
Servitude, and of thy whole Family; which we present unto thee also for those
whom thou have vouchsafed to regenerate by Water and the Holy Ghost; granting
them remission of all their sins, giving us Peace in these our days; and
preserving us from Eternal Damnation, to command us to be reckoned among thy
Elect; Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Agnus Dei. Agnus Dei Neophytes, O Lord Jesus Christ, who did say to thy
Apostles, Peace I leave unto you, my Peace I give unto you, regard not my sins;
but rather look upon the Faith of thy Church, and grant it that Peace and
Union, which may be according to thy will; who live and reignest God for ever
and ever. Amen.

O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, who by thy Fathers Will, and by
the cooperation of the Holy Ghost, by thy death have given life to the whole
World, deliver me, by this thy Holy Body and Blood, from all my sins, and from
all evil; make me a true observer of thy Commandments; and that I be never
separated from thee: who, being God, live and reignest for ever. Amen.

O Lord Jesus Christ, let not this participation of thy Body, which I, though
unworthy, now presume to receive, be to my Judgment and Damnation; but through
thy Mercy, a wholesome Medicine to my Infirmities: who, being God, live and
reignest with God the Father, in the Unity of the Holy Ghost, for ever and
ever. Amen.

I Will take the Bread of Heaven; and will call upon the name of our Lord.

LOrd, I am not worthy, that thou should enter under my roof: only say the
word, and my Soul shall be healed.

Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should enter under my roof: only say the
word, and my Soul shall be healed.

Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should enter under my roof: only say the
word, and my Soul shall be healed.

THE Body of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve my Soul to Life Everlasting. Amen.

WHat shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits to me? I will take the
Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of our Lord.

In singing his praises, I will call upon our Lord, and I shall be safe from
mine enemies.

THe Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve my Soul to Life Everlasting. Amen.

GRant, O Lord, that we may receive that with a pure heart, which we have taken
by our mouths, and that, of a Temporal Gift, it may become an Eternal Remedy
unto us.

LEt thy Body, O Lord, which I have received, and thy Blood, which I have
drunk, cleave unto my bowels; and grant, that the least spot of sin may not
remain in me, who have been satiated with thy pure and holy Sacraments: who
live and reignest, world without end. Amen.

Neophytes Mary, Matthew. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

PSALM CXVI.

PRaise our Lord, all ye Gentiles: praise him all ye people:

Because his mercy is confirmed on us: and his truth remains for ever.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and now, and ever, and world without end.

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

Another ANTIPHON out of the 28th Chapter of St. Matthew.

IN the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn, in the first day of the week,
came Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, to the Sepulcher. Alleluia.

The Canticle of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Luke 2.

Adam MY soul does magnify our Lord.

And my spirit has rejoiced in God my savior.

Because he has regarded the humility of his handmaid: for behold, from
henceforth, all generations shall call me blessed.

Because he that is mighty, has done great things to me: and holy is his Name.

And his mercy from generation unto generations: to them that fear him.

He has showed might in his arm: he has dispersed the proud in the conceit of
their heart.

He has deposed the mighty from their seat: and has exalted the humble.

The hungry he has filled with good things: and the rich he has sent empty
away.

He has received Israel his child: being mindful of his mercy.

As he spoke to our fathers: to Abraham and his seed for ever.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, and now, and ever, world without end.

ANTIPHON.

In the end of the Sabbath, page Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Let us Pray.

POur forth upon us, O Lord, the Spirit of thy Charity, that those who are
satiated with thy Paschal Sacraments, through thy goodness, may have but one
heart, and one will: Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

You may withdraw: Mass is ended.

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

Thanks be to God.

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

All the rest, page At EVEN-SONG.

Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

The Antiphon, as before, page 304. out of the 28th Chapter of St. Matthew.

The Canticle of the blessed Virgin, out of the 2d Chapter of St. Luke.

As also the Antiphon in the end of the Sabbath, etc.

Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Let us Pray.

Spiritum nobis Domine, etc. as before. p. 305.

Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Let us bless our Lord.

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

Thanks be to God.

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

Pray for the Writer.

engraving: the resurrection of Christ
UPON THE SUNDAY OF THE RESURRECTION OF OUR Lord Jesus Christ.
AT PRIME.
Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, Credo, etc. INcline unto my aid, O God.

R. O Lord, make have to help me.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, be now and ever, world without end. Amen. Alleluia.

Deus in Nomine tuo, as before, 132.

Beati immaculi, etc. as before, 133.

Retribue te, as before, 135.

This is the day which our Lord has made; let us rejoice and be glad in it.

Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Let us Pray.

O Lord God Almighty, who has caused us to come to the beginning of this day,
save us this day, by thy power, to the end, that this day we fall into no sin,
but that our words may ever proceed, and our thoughts and works may be directed
to execute thy justice. Through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who lives and
reigns with thee, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

R. Let us bless our Lord.

R. Thanks be to God.

V. Precious in the sight of our Lord.

R. Is the death of his Saints.

The blessed Virgin Mary, and all Saints, make intercssion for us, to our Lord,
that we may obtain to be assisted and saved by him: who lives and reigns for
ever and ever. Amen.

V. Incline unto my aid, O God.

R. O Lord, make have to help me.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.

V. Lord, have mercy on us.

R. Christ, have mercy on us.

Lord, have mercy on us.

V. Pater noster, etc. In a low voice, until,

V. And lead us not into tempation.

R. But deliver us from evil.

V. O Lord, look upon thy servants, and upon thy works, and guide their
children.

R. And let the splendor of the Lord our God shine upon us, and direct the
works of our hands upon us, and direct the work of our hands.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.

Let us Pray.

VOuchsafe, O Lord God, King of Heaven and Earth, this day to direct and
sanctify, rule and govern our hearts and bodies, our senses, speeches and
deeds in thy Law, and in the works of thy Commandments, that here, and ever, we
may deserve to be safe and free, by thy assistance, O Savior of the world: Who
live and reignest, world without end. Amen.

V. Vouchsafe, Father, to bless.

R. Almighty God, dispose our days and actions in thy holy peace.

This short Lesson is taken out of the Third Chapter of the Epistle of St. Paul
to the Colossians.

IF then ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits on the right hand of God: set your affections on things above, not
in things on earth.

But, O Lord, have mercy on us.

R. Thanks be to God.

V. Our help is in the Name of our Lord.

R. Who made Heaven and Earth.

V. God bless us.

R. God bless us.

The BENEDICTION.

O Lord, bless and defend us from all evil, and bring us to Life Everlasting:
and make the Souls of the Faithful departed rest in peace.

At the Third Hour.
Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc.
Deus in adjutorium, as before, page 348. Alleluia.

Legem pone, etc. as before, page 136.

Memor esto, etc. as before, p. 138.

Bonitatem fecisti, etc. as before, p. 140.

Ant. This day which our Lord has made; let us rejoice and be glad in it.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Let us Pray.

O God, who this day opened unto us, by thy only begotten Son, the entrance to
Eternity, through his victory over death, vouchsafe, by thy mercy, to grant
those Petitions, which thy prevenient grace inspires. Through the same, our
Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who, with thee, live and reignest, in the unity of
the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end. Amen.

At sprinkling Holy Water.

Catechumens Easter Whit-Sunday. Asperges me, Miserere, Asperges me, Vidi
Aquam, John, Ezechiel. I Saw waters issuing forth of the temple on the right
side: Praise to God.

And all, who were sprinkled with this water, were saved, and they shall say,
Praise to God, praise to God.

V. O Lord, show unto us thy mercy.

Praise be to God.

R. And give us thy salvation.

R. O Lord, hear my Prayer.

And let my cry come unto thee.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Let us Pray.

VOuchsafe, O Lord, Holy Father, Almighty and Everlasting God, to hear us, and
send us from Heaven thy Holy Angel, to defend, sustain, protect, visit and
guard us all, that here inhabit. Through Christ, etc. Amen.

ON EASTER DAY At MASS.
The station in the Church of St. Mary Major.
Rome The INTROIT, taken out of the 138th Psalm.

I Am risen, and yet I am with thee: Praise God. Thou have put thy hand upon
me: Praise God. Thy knowledge is wonderful: Praise God, praise God.

PSALM CXXXVIII.

Psalm LOrd, thou have proved me, and have known me: thou have known my sitting
down, and my rising up.

Kyrie eleison, etc. page Gloria in Excelsis Deo, etc. page The COLLECT.

Let us Pray.

O God, who this day have opened to us, by thy only begotten Son, the entrance
to Eternity, through his victory over death, vouchsafe, by thy mercy, to grant
those Petitions which thy preventing grace inspires. Through the same, our Lord
Jesus Christ, who, with thee, lives and reigns, in the unity of the Holy
Ghost, one God, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Lesson out of the First Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, and Fifth
Chapter.

Jewish Jews BRethren, purge the old leven, that you may be a new paste, as you
are azyms, for our Pasch Christ is immolated, therefore let us feast not in old
leven, nor in the leven of malice and wickedness, but in the azym of sincerity
and truth.

The GRADUAL, taken out of the 117th Psalm.

Chrysostom THis is the day which our Lord has made: let us rejoice and be
glad in it.

V. Confess ye unto the Lord, for he is good: because his mercy endures for
ever.

Alleluia, Alleluia.

V. Jesus Christ, who was our Pasch, has been immolated.

Israelites, Egyptians The PROSE.

BRing all, ye dear-bought Nations, bring
Your richest Praises to your King;
That spotless Lamb, who, more than due,
Paid for his Sheep, and those Sheep, you;
That Innocent Son, who wrought your peace,
And made his Father's anger cease.
Life and Death together fought;
Each to a strange extreme were brought;
Life died, but soon revived again,
And even by death's self has slain.
Say, happy Magdalen, O say,
What did thou see these by the way?
I saw the Tomb of my dear Lord;
I saw himself, and him adored;
I saw the Napkin, and the Sheet,
That bound his Head, and wrapped his Feet;
I heard the Angels witness bear,
Jesus is risen, he is not here.
Go, tell his followers, they shall see.
Thine and their hope in Galilee.
They, Lord, with faithful heart and cheerful voice,
We on thy glorious rising day rejoice.
O thou, whose conquering power o'recame the grave,
By thy victorious grace, us sinners save. Amen.
Alleluia.
Munda cor meum, as before, page 14.

The Sequence of the Holy Gospel, according to St. Mark, Chap. 16.

etc. page Mary's Peter, AT that time Mary Magdalene, and Mary of James and
Salome, brought spices, that coming they might anoint Jesus: And very early,
the first of the Sabboths, they came to the monument, the sun being now risen.
And they said one to another, Who shall roll us back the stone from the door of
the monument? And looking, they saw the stone rouled back; for it was very
great. And, entering into the monument, they saw a young man sitting on the
right hand, covered with a white robe. And they were astonished, who said to
them, Be not dismayed: You seek Jesus of Nazareth, that was crucified; he is
risen, he is not here; behold the place where they laid him. But go tell his
disciples and Peter, that he goes before you into Galilee; there you shall see
him, as he told you.

page The OFFERTORY, taken out of the 75th Psalm.

THe earth trembled, and was still, when God arose in judgment. Alleluia.

Suscipe Sancte Pater, etc. page The SECRET.

ACcept, O Lord, we beseech thee. the Prayers of thy People, with the Oblation
of these Hosts; that these Paschal Mysteries, which we celebrate, may be
wholesome; and, by thy assistance, availing us to obtain Life Everlasting.
Through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

Vere dignum and justum est, etc. page Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Jerusalem,
Benedictus qui venit, etc. IT is truly meet and just, right and wholesome, O
Lord, that at all times we set forth thy praises: But more especially in this
Night, wherein Jesus Christ, our Paschal Lamb, was immolated, who has taken
away the sins of the World: who, by dying, has destroyed our death; and by
rising again, has restored life. And therefore with Angels and Archangels,
with the Thrones and Dominations, together, with the Celestial Host, we sing
this Hymn of thy Glory, without end, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord God
of Sabbath. The Heavens and Earth are full of thy Glory. Hosanna in the
highest. Blessed is he that comes in the Name of our Lord: Hosanna in the
highest.

Communicants, page COMMVNICANTES.

PArtaking in the same Communion, and celebrating the Solemnity of this blessed
Day, wherein our Lord Jesus Christ, rose again according to the flesh: and in
the first place, honoring the memory of the ever blessed Virgin, Mother of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and of the blessed Apostles, and Martyrs, Peter and Paul,
Andrew, James, John, Thomas, James, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon and
Thaddeus, Linus, Cletus, Clement, Xystus, Cornelius, Cyprian, Lawrence,
Chrysogonus, John and Paul, Cosme and Damian, and all the other Saints; by
whose Merits and Prayers vouchsafe to grant us the assistance of thy
protection. Through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

HANC IGITVR OBLATIONEM, etc.

WE beseech thee therefore, O Lord, to accept this Oblation of our Duty, and of
thy whole Family; which we offer up unto thee also, for those whom thou have
vouchsafed to regenerate by Water, and the Holy Ghost; granting them pardon of
all their sins, and graciously to give Peace in our days; and, preserving us
from Eternal Damnation, to bring us among thy Elect; Through the same Christ
our Lord. Amen.

page The COMMUNION, taken out of the First Epistle of St. Paul to the
Corinthians, Chapter 5.

Jewish CHrist, our Passover, is sacrificed for us, therefore let us keep the
Feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. Alleluia, Alleluia,
Alleluia.

The POST-COMMUNION.

INfuse, O Lord, into us the spirit of thy love, that whom thou have satiated
with thy Paschal Sacraments, thou, of thy goodness, unite in heart and will.
Through our Lord, etc.

page At the Sixth Hour.
Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc. O God, incline unto my aid.
O Lord, make have to help me.
etc. Alleluia. Defecit in salutare, etc. page Quomodo dilexi, etc. page
Iniquos odio habui, etc. page Haec dies, etc. page Let us Pray.

Deus qui hodierna die, etc. as before, page 312.

At the Ninth Hour.
Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc. O Lord, incline unto my aid.
O Lord, make have to help me.
Glory be to the Father, etc. Alleluia.

Mirabilia testimonia tua, etc. page Clamavi in toto cord meo, etc. page
Principes persecuti sunt me gratis, etc. page Haec dies, etc. page Let us Pray.

Deus qui hodierna die, etc. page Thanks be to God.

ON Palm Sunday AT EVEN-SONG.
Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc. INcline unto my aid, O God.

Resp. O Lord make haste to help me.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

R. As it was in the beginning, now is, and ever shall be, world without end.
Amen.

The ANTHYMN.

Our Lord said, etc.

PSALM 109.

Jesus Christ Jerusalem Melchisedeck, Lucifer OUr Lord said to my Lord, Sit on
my right hand;

Until I make thine enemies thy footstool.

Our Lord will send forth the rod of thy strength from Sion, rule thou in the
midst of thine enemies.

The beginning with thee in the day of thy strength, in the brightness of the
Saints from the womb before the day star I begat thee.

Our Lord swear, and it shall not repent him; Thou art a Priest for ever
according to the Order of Melchisedeck.

Our Lord on thy right hand, has broken Kings in the day of his wrath.

He shall judge in nations, he shall fill ruins, he shall crush the heads in
the land of many.

Of the torrent in the way he shall drink, therefore shall he exalt the head.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

ANTHYMN.

Our Lord said to my Lord: Sit on my right hand.

Ant. All his commandments are faithful.

PSALM 110. or 111.

Egypt, Moses I Will confess to thee, O Lord, with all my heart: in the
council of the just and the congregation.

The works of our Lord are great: exquisite according to all his wills.

Confession and magnificence his work: and his justice continues for ever and
ever.

He has made a memory of his merveilous works; a merciful and pitiful Lord: he
has given Meat to them that fear him.

He will be mindful for ever of his testament: the force of his works he will
show forth to his people.

To give them the inheritance of the Gentiles: the works of his hands truth and
judgment.

All his commandments are faithful: confirmed for ever and ever, made in truth
and equity.

He sent redemption to his people: he commanded his testament for ever.

Holy and terrible is his name: The fear of our Lord is the beginning of wisdom.

Understanding is good to all that do it: his praise remains for ever and
ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Ant. All his commandments are faithful: confirmed for ever and ever, made in
truth and equity.

Ant. He shall have great delight in his commandments, etc.

PSALM 111. or 112.

David BLessed is the man that fears our Lord: he shall have great delight in
his commandments.

His seed shall be mighty in earth: the generation of the righteous shall be
blessed.

Glory and riches in his house: and his justice abides for ever and ever.

Light is risen up in darkness to the righteous: he is merciful, and pitiful,
and just.

Acceptable is the man that is merciful and lends, that shall dispose his
words in judgment: because he shall not be moved for ever.

The just shall be in eternal memory: he shall not fear at the hearing of evil.

His heart is ready to hope in our Lord, his heart is confirmed: he shall not
be moved till he look over his enemies.

He distributed, he gave to the poor: his justice remains for ever and ever,
his horn shall be exalted in glory.

The sinner shall see, and will be angry, he shall gnash his teeth and pine
away: the desire of sinners shall perish.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Ant. He shall have great delight in his commandments.

Ant. The name of our Lord, etc.

PSALM 112. or 113.

PRaise our Lord, ye children: praise ye the name of our Lord.

Be the name of our Lord blessed: from henceforth now and for ever.

From the rising of the Sun unto the going down the name of our Lord is
laudable.

Our Lord is high, above all nations: and his glory above the heavens.

Who is as the Lord our God: that dwells on high, and beholds the low
things in heaven and in earth?

Raising up the needy from the Earth: and lifting up the poor out of the dung;

To place him with princes: with the princes of his people.

Who makes the barren woman to dwell in a house: a joyful mother of children.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Ant. Be the name of our Lord blessed for ever.

Ant. But we that live, etc.

PSALM 113. or 114.

Israelites, Egypt, IN the coming forth of Israel out of Egypt: of the house of
Jacob from the barbarous people,

Jewry was made his sanctification: Israel his dominion.

The sea saw and fled: Jordan was turned backward.

The mountains leaped as rams: and the little hills as the lambs of sheep.

What aileth thee, O sea, that thou did fly: and thou, O Jordan, that thou
wast turned backward?

Ye mountains leaped as rams: and ye little hills as lambs of sheep.

At the face of our Lord the earth was moved: at the face of the God of Jacob.

Who turned the rock into pools of waters: and stony hills into fountains of
waters.

Not to us, Lord, not to us: but to thy Name give the glory.

For thy mercy, and thy truth: lest at any time the Gentiles say, Where is
their God?

But our Lord is in heaven: he has done all things whatsoever he would.

The Idols of the Gentiles are silver and gold: the works of men's hands.

They have mouths, and shall not speak: they have eyes, and shall not see.

They have ears, and shall not hear: they have nostrils, and shall not smell.

They have hands, and shall not handle: they have feet, and shall not walk:
they shall not cry in their throat.

Let them that make them become like to them: and all that have confidence in
them.

The house of Israel has hoped in our Lord: he is their helper, and their
protector.

The house of Aaron has hoped in our Lord: he is their helper, and their
protector.

They that fear our Lord have hoped in our Lord: he is their helper, and their
protector.

Our Lord has been mindful of us: and has blessed us.

He has blessed the house of Israel: he has blessed the House of Aaron.

He has blessed all that fear our Lord: the little with the great.

Our Lord add upon you: upon you, and upon your children.

Blessed be you of our Lord: which made heaven and earth.

The heaven of heavens is to our Lord: but the earth he has given to the
children of men.

The dead shall not praise thee, O Lord: nor all they that go down into hell.

But we that live do bless our Lord: from this time, and for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Ant. We that live do bless our Lord.

Paris Occurrunt turbae, etc. A Great number of people, carrying flowers and
olive-branches, went before the Redeemer of the world, victoriously and
triumphing, rendering him all due honor. The Nations publish the Greatness of
the Son of God, crying out, Hosanna in the highest.

The LITTLE CHAPTER, taken out of the Epistle to the Philippians, chap. 2.

BRethren, for this think in your selves, which also in CHRIST JESUS; who when
he was in the form of God, thought it no robbery himself to be equal to God:
but he exinanited himself, taking the form of a servant, made into the
similitude of men, and in shape found as a man.

R. Thanks be to God.

HYMN.

A Broad the Regal Banners fly,
Now shines the Crosses Mystery:
Upon it Life did Death endure,
And yet by Death did Life procure.
Who wounded with a direful Spear,
Did, purposely to wash us clear
From stain of Sin, pour out a Flood
Of precious Water, mixed with Blood.
Fully accomplished are the things
David in faithful Meeter sings,
Where he to Nations does attest,
God on a Tree his Reign possessed.
O lovely and refulgent Tree,
Adorned with purple Majesty,
Culled from a worthy Stock, to bear
Those Limbs which sanctified were.
Blessed Tree, whose happy Branches bore
The Wealth that did the World restore;
The Beam that did that Body weigh,
Which raised up Hells expected Prey.
Hail Cross, of Hopes the most sublime,
Now, in this mournful Passion-time,
Improve Religious Souls in Grace,
The Sins of Criminals efface.
Blessed Trinity, Salvations Spring,
May every Soul thy Praises sing:
To those thou grantest Conquest by
The Holy Cross, Rewards apply. Amen.
THE SONG OF THE HOLY VIRGIN MARY, Luke. 1.

MY Soul does magnify our Lord.

And my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

Because he has regarded the humility of his handmaid; for behold from
henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

Because he that is mighty has done great things to me, and holy is his Name.

And his mercy from generations unto generations to them that fear him.

He has showed might in his arm, he has dispersed the proud in the conceit of
their heart.

He has deposed the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble.

The hungry he has filled with good things, and the rich he has sent away
empty.

He has received Israel his child, being mindful of his mercy.

As he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham and his seed for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Ant. For it is written, I will strike the Pastor, and the sheep of the flock
shall be dispersed; but after I shall be risen again, I will go before you into
Galilee, and there ye shall see me, says our Lord.

Paris ALl the people which descended, rejoiced and began to praise God
exceedingly, for the wonders they had seen, saying, Blessed is the King that
comes in the name of our Lord: Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest.

THE PRAYER.

O Almighty, Eternal God, who have caused our Savior to take Flesh, and be
crucified for Mankind, as an Example of Humility to be imitated: Grant
propitiously, that we may partake both of the Instructions of his Patience, and
the Fellowship of his Resurrection: Through the same our Lord, etc.

AT COMPLINE.
Verse. REverend Father, bless me.

THE BLESSING.

GRant us, Omnipotent Lord, a quiet Night, and a happy End. Resp. Amen.

THE LESSON, taken out of the First Epistle of the Apostle St. Peter, chap. 5.

BRethren, be sober, and watch, because your adversary the Devil as a roaring
Lion goes about seeking whom he may devour: Whom resist ye, strong in faith.
But thou, O Lord, have mercy on us.

R. Thanks be to God.

V. Our help is in the name of our Lord.

R. Who made Heaven and Earth.

OUr Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name; Thy Kingdom come; Thy
Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily bread;
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from all evil. Amen.

HAil Mary, full of Grace, our Lord is with thee: Blessed art thou amongst
Women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy Womb, JESUS. Holy Mary, Mother of God,
pray for us Sinners, now, and in the hour of our death. Amen.

I Confess unto Almighty God, to Blessed Mary ever Virgin, to Blessed Michael
the Archangel, to Blessed John Baptist, to the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, to
all Saints, and to Thee Father, That I have sinned exceedingly, in Thought,
Word, and Deed, by my fault, by my fault, by my most grievous fault: Therefore
I beseech the Blessed Mary ever Virgin, Blessed Michael the Archangel, Blessed
John Baptist, the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, all Saints, and Thee O Father,
to pray for me to our Lord God.

Almighty God, have mercy on us, and all our Sins being forgiven, bring us unto
everlasting Life. R. Amen.

The Almighty and merciful Lord give unto us Pardon, Absolution, and Remission
of all our Sins. R. Amen.

Convert us, O God our Savior.

R. And avert thine Anger from us.

V. Incline unto my aid, O God.

R. O Lord, make haste to help me.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Ant. Have mercy on me.

PSALM 4.

WHen I invocated, the God of my justice heard me: in tribulation thou have
enlarged to me: Have mercy on me, and hear my prayer.

Ye sons of men, how long are you of heavy heart? why love you vanity, and seek
lying?

And know ye that our Lord has made his Holy One marveilous: our Lord will
hear me, when I shall cry to him.

Be ye angry and sin not: the things that you say in your hearts, in your
chambers be ye sorry for.

Sacrifice ye the sacrifice of justice, and hope in our Lord: Many say, Who
shows us good things?

The light of thy countenance, O Lord, is signed upon us: thou have given
gladness in my heart.

By the fruit of their corn, and wine, and oil, they are multiplied.

In peace in the self same I will sleep and rest.

Because thou, Lord, have singularly settled me in hope.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

PSALM 30.

IN thee, O Lord, have I hoped, let me not be confounded for ever: in thy
justice deliver me.

Incline thine ear to me, make haste to deliver me. Be unto me for a God
protector: and for a house of refuge, that thou may save me.

Because thou art my strength and my refuge: and for thy name thou will conduct
me, and wilt nourish me.

Thou will bring me out of the snare which they have hid for me: because thou
art my protector.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit: thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

PSALM 90. or 91.

HE that dwells in the help of the Highest: shall abide in the protection of
the God of heaven.

He shall say to our Lord, Thou art my Protector, and my refuge: my God, I will
hope in him.

Because he has delivered me from the snare of the hunters: and from the sharp
word.

With his shoulders shall he overshadow thee: and under his wings thou shall
hope.

With shield shall his truth compass thee: thou shall not be afraid of the fear
in the night.

Of the Arrow flying in the day, of business walking in darkness: of invasion,
and the midday devil.

A thousand shall fall on thy side, and ten thousand on thy right hand: but to
thee it shall not approach.

But thou shall consider with thine eyes: and shall see the retribution of
sinners.

Because thou, O Lord, art my hope: thou have made the Highest thy refuge.

There shall no evil come to thee: and scourge shall not approach to thy
tabernacle.

Because he has given his Angels charge of thee: that they keep thee in all
thy ways.

In their hands they shall bear thee: lest perhaps thou knock thy foot against
a stone.

Upon the Asp and the Basilisk thou shall walk: and thou shall tread upon the
Lion and the Dragon.

Because he has hoped in me, I will deliver him: I will protect him, because
he has known my name.

He shall cry to me, and I will hear him: with him I am in tribulation, I will
deliver him, and I will glorify him.

With length of days I will replenish him: and I will show him my salvation.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

PSALM 132. or 133.

BEhold now, bless our Lord: all ye servants of our Lord.

Which stand in the house of our Lord: in the courts of the house of our God.

In the nights lift up your hands unto the holy places: and bless ye our Lord.

Our Lord out of Sion bless thee: who made Heaven and earth.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Ant. Have mercy on me, O Lord, and hear my Prayer.

The HYMN for EVENING.

BEfore the closing of the Day,
Creator, thee we humbly pray,
That, for thy wonted Mercies sake,
Thou us into protection take.
May nothing in our Minds excite
Vain Dreams, and Fantomes of the Night:
Our Enemy repress, that so
Our Bodies no Uncleanness know.
To JESUS, from a Virgin sprung,
Be Glory given, and Praises sung:
The like to God the Father be,
And Holy Ghost eternally. Amen.
CHAPTER, taken out of the Fourteenth Chapter of the Prophet Jeremy.

BUt thou, O Lord, art in us, and thy holy name is invocated upon us, forsake
us not, O Lord our God.

R. Thanks be to God.

Pettit. R. Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit. Into thy hands, O
Lord, I commend my Spirit.

V. Thou have redeemed us, O Lord God of truth.

R. Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit.

V. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

R. Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit.

V. Keep us, O Lord, as the apple of thy eye.

R. Protect us under the shadow of thy wings.

Ant. Save us.

THE SONG OF SIMEON, Luke 1.

NOw thou do dismiss thy servant, O Lord, according to thy word, in peace.

Because my eyes have seen thy Salvation.

Which thou have prepared before the face of all people

A light to the revelation of the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.

Ant. Save us, O Lord, waking, and keep us sleeping; that we may watch in
Christ, and rest in peace.

THE PRAYERS.

LOrd, have mercy on us. Christ have mercy on us. Lord, have mercy on us.

Pater noster, etc.

V. And lead us not into temptation.

R. But deliver us from evil.

I believe in God, etc.

V. The Resurrection of the Flesh.

R. And Life everlasting. Amen.

V. Thou art blessed, Lord God of our Fathers.

R. And laudable and glorious for ever.

V. Let us bless the Father, and the Son, with the Holy Ghost.

R. Let us praise and super-exalt him for ever.

V. Blessed art thou Lord, in the Firmament of Heaven.

R. And laudable, and glorious, and superexalted for ever.

V. The Almighty and Merciful Lord bless and keep us. R. Amen.

V. Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us.

R. This night without Sin.

V. Have mercy on us, Lord.

R. Have mercy on us.

V. Let thy mercy, O Lord, come on us.

R. Even as we have trusted in thee.

V. O Lord, hear my Prayer.

R. And let my Cry come unto thee.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

Let us Pray.

VIsit, we beseech thee, O Lord, this Habitation, and repel far from it all
Snares of the Enemy; Let thy holy Angels dwell therein, to preserve us in
peace, and thy Blessing be upon us for ever, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy
Son, who with thee lives and Reigns in the Unity of the Holy Ghost, One God
for ever and ever. Amen.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy Spirit.

V. Let us bless our Lord.

R. Thanks be to God.

THE BLESSING.

V. The Almighty and Merciful Lord, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
bless and keep us. R. Amen.

THE ANTHYMN OF THE HOLY VIRGIN.

HAil Queen, advanced to heavenly Reign;
Hail Lady of the Angelick Train;
Hail Root, hail Gate, that did disclose
The Light which to the World arose.
Virgin, rejoice, whose Form divine
All others Beauty does outshine;
Be ever blessed, thrice-beauteous Maid,
By thee let Christ be for us prayed.
V. Vouchsafe that I praise thee, O sacred Virgin.

R. Give me force against my Enemies.

Let us Pray.

GRant, O merciful God, defense unto our Frailty; that we, who make
Commemoration of the Holy Mother of God, may by the help of her Intercession
arise from our Iniquities; Through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. R. Amen.

V. Let the Divine Help always remain with us. R. Amen.

THE NIGHT-OFFICE ON WEDNESDAY IN Holy-Week, FOR THVRSDAY at MATTINS.
ON this Day the Church represents unto us, That Jesus Christ supped with his
Apostles, washed their Feet, prayed in the Olive-Garden; and that he was
betrayed by Judas into the hands of the Jews.

These three following Days, after having said, Pater noster, Ave Maria, and
Credo, at Mattins and Prime, without farther Ceremony they begin Mattins and
Vespers with an Anthymn of the First Psalm; and every Anthymn is repeated as on
double Feasts.

Domine labia mea, etc. and Deus in Adjutorium, are omitted, to signify, that
Jesus Christ was then abandoned by his Father to Torments and Death. The
Invitatory is likewise omitted.

Neither the Hymn nor Gloria Patri are said, to show us, that the Honor due to
the Blessed Trinity was violated by the excessive Wickedness and Infidelity of
the Jews.

Mattins Lauds, Anthymn. Zachary John Baptist John Baptist AT THE FIRST
NOCTVRN.
PSALM 68.

My Father, if it be possible, let the Chalice of my Sufferances pass without
my drinking it; however, thy will be done, not mine. Paul, Romans, Luke, Acts
of the Apostles; Paul, Romans, Judas, Jerusalem, Ant. The zeal of thy house
has eaten me: and the reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell upon me.

SAve me, O God: because waters are entered into my Soul.

I stick fast in the mire of the depth: and there is no sure standing.

I am come into the depth of the sea: and a tempest has overwhelmed me.

I have labored crying, my jaws are made hoarse: my eyes have failed, whilst I
hope in my God.

They are multiplied above the hairs of my head: that hate me without cause.

Mine enemies are made strong, that have persecuted me unjustly: then did I pay
the things that I took not.

O God, thou know my foolishness: and mine offenses are not hid from thee.

Let them not be ashamed upon me: which expect thee, O Lord, Lord of hosts.

Let them not be confounded upon me: that seek thee, O God of Israel.

Because for thee have I sustained reproach: confusion has covered my face.

I am become a foreigner to my brethren: and a stranger to the sons of my
mother.

Because the zeal of thy house has eaten me: and the reproaches of them that
reproached thee, fell upon me.

And I covered my soul in fasting: and it was made a reproach to me.

And I put hair-cloth upon my garment: and I became a parable to them.

They spoke against me that sat in the gate: and they sung against me that
drank wine.

But I my prayer to thee, O Lord: a time of thy good pleasure, O God.

In the multitude of thy mercy hear me: in the truth of thy salvation.

Deliver me out of the mire, that I stick not fast: deliver me from them that
hate me, and from the depths of waters.

Let not the tempest of water drown me, nor the depth swallow me: neither let
the pit shut his mouth upon me.

Hear me, O Lord, because thy mercy is benign: according to the multitude of
thy commiserations have respect to me.

And turn not away thy face from thy servant: because I am in tribulation, hear
me speedily.

Attend to my soul, and deliver it: because of mine enemies deliver me.

Thou know my reproach: and my confusion, and my shame.

In thy sight are all they that afflict me: my heart has looked for reproach
and misery.

And I expected somebody that would be sorry together with me, and there was
none: and that would comfort me, and I found not.

And they gave me gall for my meat: and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to
drink.

Let their table be made a snare before them: and for retributions, and for a
scandal.

Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not: and make their back crooked
always.

Pour out thy wrath upon them: and let the fury of thy wrath overtake them.

Let their habitation be made desert: and in their tabernacles let there be
none to dwell.

Because whom thou have stricken, they have persecuted: and upon the sorrow of
my wounds they have added.

Add thou iniquity upon their iniquity: and let them not enter into thy justice.

Let them be put out of the book of the living: and with the just let them not
be written.

I am poor and sorrowful: thy salvation, O God, has received me.

I will praise the name of God with canticle: and will magnify him in praise.

And it shall please God more than a young calf: that brings forth horns and
hoofs.

Let the poor see and rejoice: seek ye God, and your soul shall live.

Because our Lord has heard the poor: and he has not despised his prisoners.

Let the heavens and earth praise him: the sea, and all the creeping beasts in
them.

Because God will save Sion: and the cities of Judah shall be built up.

And they shall inhabit there: and by inheritance they shall get it.

And the seed of his servants shall possess it: and they that love his name
shall dwell in it.

Ant. The zeal of thy house has eaten me: and the reproaches of them that
reproached thee, fell upon me.

PSALM 69.

Ant. Let them be turned away backward, and blush for shame: that will me evils.

INcline unto my aid, O God: O Lord, make haste to help me.

Let them be confounded and ashamed: that seek my soul.

Let them be turned away backward, and blush for shame: that will me evils.

Let them be turned away forthwith ashamed: that say to me, Well, well.

Let all that seek thee rejoice, and be glad in thee: and let them say always,
Our Lord be magnified, who love thy salvation.

But I am needy and poor: O God, help me.

Thou art my helper and deliverer: O Lord, be not slack.

Ant. Let them be turned away backward, and blush for shame: that will me evils.

PSALM 70.

Ant. My God, deliver me out of the hand of the sinner.

IN thee, O Lord, I have hoped, let me not be confounded for ever: in thy
justice deliver me, and receive me.

Incline thy ear to me: and save me.

Be unto me for a God protector, and for a fenced place: that thou may save
me.

Because thou art my firmament: and my refuge.

My God, deliver me out of the hand of a sinner: and out of the hand of him
that does against the law, and of the unjust.

Because thou art my patience, O Lord: O Lord, my hope from my youth.

Upon thee have I been confirmed from the womb: from my mothers belly thou art
my protector.

In thee is my singing always: I was made to many as a wonder, and thou art a
strong helper.

Let my mouth be filled with praise: that I may sing thy glory, all the day thy
greatness.

Reject me not in the time of old age: when my strength shall fail, forsake me
not.

Because mine enemies have said to me: and they that watched my soul consulted
together,

Saying, God has forsaken him, pursue and take him: because there is none to
deliver.

O God, be not far from me: my God, have respect to mine aid.

Let them be confounded and fail that detract from my soul: let them be covered
with confusion and shame, that seek evils to me.

But I will always hope: and will add upon all thy praise.

My mouth shall show forth thy justice, all the day thy salvation: because I
have not known learning, I will enter into the powers of our Lord: O Lord, I
will be mindful of thy justice only.

O God, thou have taught me from my youth: and until now I will pronounce thy
mavelous works.

And unto ancient age, and old age, O Lord, forsake me not: until I show forth
thy arm to all the generation that is to come.

Thy might and thy justice, O God, even to the highest, great marvels, which
thou have done: O God, who may be like to thee?

How great tribulations have thou showed me, many and evil: and turning thou
have quickened me, and from the depths of the earth thou have brought me back
again.

Thou have multiplied my magnificence: and being turned, thou have comforted me.

For I also will confess to thee in the instruments of Psalm thy truth: O God,
I will sing to thee on the Harp, holy One of Israel.

My Lips shall rejoice when I shall sing to thee: and my soul which thou have
redeemed.

Yea and my tongue all the day shall meditate thy justice: when they shall be
confounded and ashamed that seek evils to me.

Ant. My God, deliver me out of the hand of the sinner.

V. Let them be turned away backward, and blush for shame: that will me evils.

Pater noster, etc.

THE BEGINNING OF THE LAMENTATIONS OF THE PROPHET JEREMY.
Jube Domine, etc. is omitted; nor is the Blessing given before the reading of
these Lamentations, to show that the Author of all Blessing is dead.

Jeremy, Jerusalem, Israelites Babylon I. LESSON, taken out of the First
Chapter.
ALEPH.

Lamentations Jeremy HOw does the city full of people, sit solitary? how is the
lady of the Gentiles become as a widow? the princess of provinces is made
tributary.

BETH.

Weeping she has wept in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks: there is
none to comfort her of all her dear ones: all her friends have despised her,
and are become her enemies.

GHIMEL.

Judas is gone into transmigration, because of affliction and the multitude of
bondage: she has dwelt among the Gentiles, neither has she found rest: all
her persecutors have apprehended her within the straits.

DALETH.

The ways of Sion mourn, because there are none that come to the solemnity: all
her gates are destroyed, her priests sighing, her virgins loathsome, and her
self is oppressed with bitterness.

HE.

Her adversaries are made in the head, her enemies are enriched: because our
Lord has spoken upon her for the multitude of her iniquities: her little ones
are led into captivity before the face of the afflicter.

Tu autem Domine, etc. is omitted, to show, that the Jews through their own
presumption are very far from the way of truth, and that their cruel obstinacy
has debarred them the way of Mercy, because they killed him by whom Mankind was
to obtain it; but the following words are said.

Jerusalem Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Convert unto the Lord thy God.

Jeremy ON mount Olivet Jesus prayed unto his Father (saying) Father, if it may
be, let this Chalice pass from me: for the spirit is quick, but the flesh
infirm. Thy Will be done.

V. Watch ye, and pray, that you enter not into tentation. The spirit indeed is
prompt, but the flesh is weak. Thy Will be done.

II. LESSON.
VAU.

ANd from the daughter of Sion all her beauty is departed* her princes are
become rams not finding pastures; and they are gone without strength before the
face of the pursuer.

ZAIN.

Jerusalem has remembered the days of her affliction, and prevarication of all
her things worthy to be desired, which she had from the days of old, when her
people fell in the enemies hand, and there was no helper: the enemies have seen
her, and have scorned her sabbaths.

HECH.

Jerusalem has sinned a sin, therefore is she made unstable: all that did
glorify her, have despised her, because they have seen her ignominy: but she
sighing is turned backward.

TETH.

Her filthiness is on her feet, neither has she remembered her end: she is
pulled down exceedingly, not having a comforter. See, O Lord, mine affliction,
because the enemy is exalted.

Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Convert unto the Lord thy God.

R. My soul is sorrowful even unto death: stay here and watch with me; ye shall
now behold a multitude that will environ me. Ye shall fly, and I will go to be
immolated for you.

V. Behold, the hour approaches, and the Son of man shall be delivered into
the hands of sinners: Ye shall fly away, and I will go to be immolated for ye.

III. LESSON.
JOD.

THe enemy has thrust his hand to all her things worthy to be desired: because
she has seen the Gentiles enter into her sanctuary, of whom thou gave
commandment that they should not enter into thy church.

CAPH.

All her people sighing, and seeking bread: they have given all precious things
for meat to refresh the soul. See, O Lord, and consider, because I am become
vile.

LAMED.

O all ye that pass by the way, attend and see if there be sorrow like to my
sorrow: because he has made vintage of me, as our Lord has spoken in the day
of the wrath of his fury.

MEM.

From on high he has cast a sire into my bones, and has taught me: he has
spread a net for my feet, he has turned me backward: he has made me desolate,
all the day consumed with sorrow.

NUN.

The yoke of mine iniquities has watched, they are folded together in his
hand, and put upon my neck: my strength is weakened: our Lord has given me into
the hand from which I cannot rise.

Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Convert unto the Lord thy God.

Jeremy, R. Behold we have seen him, and there was no sightliness, and we were
desirous of him: he has born our infirmities, and our sorrows he has carried:
But he was wounded for our iniquities, and with the weight of his stripe we are
healed. He surely has born our infirmities, and our sorrows he has carried;
with the weight of whose stripe we are healed.

V. Behold we have seen him, and there was no sightliness, and we were desirous
of him: he has born our infirmities and our sorrows he has carried: But he
was wounded for our iniquities, and with the weight of his stripe we are healed.

THE SECOND NOCTVRN.
PSALM 71.

Solomon, Ant. Our Lord shall deliver the poor from the mighty: and the poor
which had no helper.

O God, give thy judgment to the king: and thy justice to the son of the king.
To judge thy people in justice: and thy poor in judgment.

Let the mountains receive peace for the people: and the little hills justice.

He shall judge the poor of the people, and shall save the children of the
poor: and he shall humble the calumniator.

And he shall continue with the sun, and before the moon: in generation and
generation.

He shall descend as rain upon a fleece: and as drops distilling upon the earth.

There shall rise in his days justice, and abundance of peace: until the moon
be taken away.

And he shall rule from sea unto sea: and from the river even to the ends of
the round world.

Before him shall the Ethiopians fall down: and his enemies shall lick the
earth.

The kings of Tharsis, and the Islands shall offer presents: the kings of the
Arabians, and of Saba shall bring gifts.

And all kings of the earth shall adore him: all nations shall serve him.

Because he shall deliver the poor from the mighty: and the poor which had no
helper.

He shall spare the poor and needy: and he shall save the souls of the poor.

From usuries and iniquities he shall redeem their souls: and their name shall
be honorable before him.

And he shall live, and there shall be given him of the gold of Arabia, and
they shall adore it always: all the day they shall bless him.

And there shall be a firmament in the earth in the tops of the mountains, the
fruit thereof shall be extolled far above Libanus: and they shall flourish of
the city, as the grass of the earth.

Be his name blessed for ever: before the sun his name is permanent.

And all the tribes of the earth shall be blessed in him: all nations shall
magnify him.

Blessed be our Lord, the God of Israel: who does only merveilous things.

And blessed be the name of his Majesty for ever: and all the earth shall be
filled with his Majesty. Be it, Be it.

Ant. Our Lord shall deliver the poor from the mighty: and the poor which had
no helper.

PSALM 72.

Ant. The wicked have thought, and have spoken wickedness: they have spoken
iniquity on high.

HOw good is God to Israel: to them that are of a right heart.

But my feet were almost moved: my steps almost slipped.

Because I have had zeal upon the wicked: seeing the peace of sinners.

Because there is no respect to their death: and stability in their plague.

In the labors of men they are not: and with men they shall not be scourged.

Therefore has pride held them: they are covered with their iniquity and
impiety.

Their iniquity has proceeded as it were of far: they have passed into the
affection of the heart.

They have thought and have spoken wickedness: they have spoken iniquity on
high.

They have set their mouth unto heaven: and their tongue has passed in the
earth.

Therefore will my people return here: and full days shall be found in them.

And they have said, How does God know: and is there knowledge in the Highest?

Lo, the sinners themselves, and they that abound in the world, have obtained
riches.

And I said, Then have I justified my heart without cause: and have washed my
hands amongst innocents.

And have been scourged all the day: and my chastisings in the mornings.

If I said, I shall speak this: behold, I reproved the nation of thy children.

I thought to know this thing: it is labor before me.

Until I may enter into the sanctuary of God: and may understand concerning
their latter end.

But yet for guiles thou have put it to them: thou have cast them down whilst
they were elevated.

How are they brought into desolation? they have failed suddenly: they have
perished for their iniquity.

As the dream of them that rise, O Lord: in thy city thou shall bring their
image to nothing.

Because my heart is inflamed: and my reins are changed.

And I am brought to nothing: and know not.

As a beast am I become with thee: and I always with thee.

Thou have held my right hand: and in thy will thou have conducted me, and with
glory thou have received me.

For what is to me in heaven: and besides thee, what would I upon earth?

My flesh has fainted, and my heart: God of my heart, and God my portion for
ever.

For behold, they that make themselves far from thee shall perish: thou have
destroyed all that fornicate from thee.

But it is good for me to cleave to God: to put my hope in our Lord God.

That I may show forth all thy praises: in the gates of the daughter of Sion.

Ant. The wicked have thought and have spoken wickedness: they have spoken
iniquity on high.

PSALM 73.

David Jerusalem, Ant. Arise, O Lord, and judge my cause.

WHy have thou, O God, repelled for ever: is thy fury wrath upon the sheep of
thy pasture?

Be mindful of thy congregation: which thou have possessed from the beginning.

Thou have redeemed the rod of thine inheritance: mount Sion, in which thou
have dwelt.

List up thy hands upon their prides for ever: how great things has the enemy
done malignantly in the holy place?

And they that hate thee have gloried: in the midst of their solemnity.

They have set their signs for signs: and have not known as in the issue on
high.

As in a wood of trees they have with axes cut out the gates thereof together:
in hatchet and chip-ax they have cast it down.

They have burnt thy sanctuary with fire: they have polluted the tabernacle of
thy name in the earth.

Their kindred together have said in their heart: Let us make all the festival
days of God to cease from the earth.

Our signs we have not seen, there is now no prophet: and he will know us no
more.

How long, O God, shall the enemy upbraid: the adversary provoke thy name for
ever?

Why do thou turn away thy hand: and thy right hand, out of the midst of thy
bosom for ever?

But God our king before the worlds: he has wrought salvation in the midst of
the earth.

Thou in thy strength have confirmed the sea: thou have crushed the head of
dragons in the waters.

Thou have broken the heads of the dragon: thou have given him for meat to the
people of the Ethiopians.

Thou have broken up fountains and torrents: thou have dried the rivers of
Ethan.

The day is thine, and the night is thine: thou have made the morning and the
sun.

Thou have made all the coasts of the earth: the summer and the spring, thou
have formed them.

Be mindful of this, the enemy has upbraided our Lord: and a foolish people
has provoked thy name.

Deliver not to beasts the souls that confess to thee: and the souls of thy
poor forget not for ever.

Have respect unto thy testament: because they that are obscure of the earth,
are filled with houses of iniquities.

Let not the humble be turned away being confounded: the poor and needy shall
praise thy name.

Arise, God, judge thy cause: be mindful of those thy reproaches, that are from
the foolish man all the day.

Forget not the voices of thy enemies: the pride of them that hate thee has
ascended always.

Ant. Arise, Lord, and judge my cause.

V. My God, deliver me from the hand of the sinner.

R. And from the hand of the wicked, doing against thy law.

IV. LESSON, Taken out of St. Augustine on the Fifty fourth Psalm.
Judas, Achitophel Augustine Why God permits the Wicked to be? HEar my Prayer, O
God, despise not my Petition; Attend to me, and hear me. These are the words of
one in tribulation, who asks in the height of his Sufferings to be freed from
Evil. Let us hear the Evil he complains of, and when he shall have told it, let
us acknowledge our selves in the same Affliction; that partaking of his
Sufferings, we may also join with him in Prayer. I am made sorrowful in my
exercise, and am troubled: Wherein was he troubled? wherein was he made
sorrowful? In my Exercises, says he, speaking of the Mischiefs the Wicked did
him, and calling them his Exercises. Do not think the Wicked inhabit the earth
to no purpose, or that God works not some Good by them; for he permits them to
live, either to amend their Lives, or to exercise the Virtues of the Good.

Judas Achitophel David. R. My friend betrayed me with the sign of a Kiss
(saying) Whomsoever I shall kiss, the same is he, hold him fast: he did this
wicked Sign to complete a Murder with a Kiss. This unhappy returned the Price
of Blood, and in the end hanged himself.

V. It had been good for him if that Man had never been born. This unhappy
returned the Price of Blood, and in the end hanged himself.

V. LESSON.
Augustine WOuld to God those who now tried our Patience were converted, and
that with us theirs might be exercised: yet as long as they do exercise us, let
us not hate them; for we know not whether they will persevere in their Wickedness
to the end. And it often happens, that when thou think thou hate thine
Enemy, thou hate thy Brother, though thou know it not. It Is only of the
Devil and his bad Angels Conversion we may despair of; for Holy Writ shows us,
that they are destined to eternal Torments and Flames; and against whom we
sustain an invisible Conflict, to which the Apostle encourages us, and arms
us, saying, Our Combat is not against Flesh and Blood, that is, against Men
whom we see; but against the Princes, Potentates, and Rulers of the Darkness of
this World; lest when he had said, of the World, we should think that the
Devils were the Rulers of Heaven and Earth. He says not simply against the
Princes and Powers of this World, but adds, which reign in Darkness. By the
World, he means those that love the World; by the World, he means the Impious
and Wicked: He means by the World, that World of which the Gospel speaks, The
World knew him not.

Judas, R. Judas, a most wicked Merchant, kissed our Lord; and he, as an
innocent Lamb, refused not the Kiss to Judas. He delivered Christ unto the Jews
for a few Pence.

V. It had been better he had never been born; for some Pence he delivered
Christ unto the Jews.

VI. LESSON.
FOr I have seen Iniquity and Strife in the City: Behold the Glory of his
Cross. That Cross which was the Object of his Enemies Scorn, is now placed on
the Foreheads of Kings. His Power appeared by the Effects; for he governed the
World not with Steel, but Wood. The Wood of the Cross, which seemed to his
Enemies only to be worthy of their Scorn, when before it they wagg'd their
Heads, saying, If he be the Son of God, let him come down from the Cross: And
he stretched forth his Hands to an unbelieving and factious People. If
therefore he be just that lives by Faith, he that wants it is wicked. Wherefore
by Iniquity, is understood Infidelity. Our Lord therefore seeing the Iniquity
and Disobedience which then reigned in the City, stretched forth his Hands to
the faithless and mutinous People, and expecting them, he said, Father, forgive
them; for they know not what they do

Judas Judas R. One of my Disciples shall this day betray me; but woe unto him
by whom I shall be betrayed. It were better for him he had not been born.

V. He that dippeth his hand with me in the Dish, he shall deliver me up into
the hands of sinners. It were better for him he had not been born.

R. One of my Disciples, etc.

THIRD NOCTVRN.
PSALM 74.

Ant. I said to the wicked, Speak not iniquity against God.

WE will confess to thee, G God: we will confess, and will invocate thy name.

We will tell thy marveilous works: when I shall take a time, I will judge
justices.

The earth is melted, and all that dwell in it: I have confirmed the pillars
thereof.

I said to the wicked, Do not wickedly: and to them that offend, Exalt not the
horn.

Exalt not your horn on high: speak not iniquity against God.

For neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the desert mountains:
because God is judge.

This man he humbles, and him he exalts: because there is a cup in the hand
of our Lord of mere wine full of mixture.

And he has poured it out of this into that; but yet the dregs thereof are not
emptied: all the sinners of the earth shall drink.

But I will show forth for ever: I will sing to the God of Jacob.

And I will break all the horns of sinners: and the horns of the just shall be
exalted.

Ant. I said to the wicked, Speak not iniquity against God.

PSALM 75.

Israel Ant. The earth trembled and was quiet: when God arose unto judgment.

GOd is known in Jewry: in Israel his name is great.

And his place is made in peace: and his habitation in Sion.

There he brake the powers of bows: the shield, the sword, and the battle.

Thou do illuminate merveilously from the eternal mountains: all the foolish
of heart were troubled.

They slept their sleep: and all the men of riches found nothing in their hands.

At thy reprehension, O God of Jacob: they have slumbred that mounted on horses.

Thou art terrible, and who shall resist thee? from that time thy wrath.

From heaven thou have made thy judgment heard: the earth trembled and was
quiet.

When God arose unto judgment: that he might save all the meek of the earth.

Because the cogitation of man shall confess to thee: and the remains of the
cogitation shall keep festival-day to thee.

Vow ye, and render to our Lord your God: all ye that round about him bring
gifts.

To the terrible, and him that takes away the spirit of princes: terrible to
the kings of the earth.

Ant. The earth trembled, and was quiet: when God arose unto judgment.

PSALM 76.

Ant. In the day of my tribulation I sought God with my hands.

WIth my voice I have cried to our Lord: with my voice to God, and he attended
to me.

In the day of my tribulation I sought God, with my hands in the night before
him: and I was not deceived.

My soul refused to be comforted, I was mindful of God, and was delighted, and
was exercised: and my spirit fainted.

Mine eyes prevented the watch: I was troubled, and spoke not.

I thought upon old days: and the eternal years I had in my mind.

And I meditated in the night with my heart: and I was exercised, and I swept
my spirit.

Why, will God reject for ever: or will he not add to be better pleased as yet?

Or will he cut off his mercy for ever: from generation unto generation?

Or will God forget to have mercy: or will he in his wrath keep in his mercies?

And I said, Now have I begun: this is the change of the right hand of the
Highest.

I have been mindful of the works of our Lord: because I will be mindful from
the beginning of thy merveilous works.

And I will meditate in all thy works: and in thy inventions I will be
exercised.

O God, in the holy is thy way: What God is great as our God? thou art the God
that do merveilous things.

Thou have made thy power known amongst peoples: thou have with thine arm
redeemed thy people, the children of Jacob and Joseph.

The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee: and they were afraid, and the
depths were troubled.

A multitude of the sounding of waters: the clouds give a voice.

For indeed arrows do pass: the voice of thy thunder in a wheel.

Thy lightnings shined to the round world: the earth was moved and troubled.

Thy way in the sea, and thy paths in many waters: and thy steps shall not be
known.

Thou have conducted thy people as sheep: in the hand of Moses of Aaron.

Ant. In the day of tribulation I sought God with my hands.

V. Arise, O Lord.

R. And judge my cause.

VII. LESSON. Out of the First Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, chap. 2.
Paul, Agapes Laodice, Agapes, Tertullian ANd this I command; not praising it,
that you come together not to better, but to worse. First indeed when you come
together into the Church, I hear that there are schisms among you, and in part
I believe it: For there must be heresies also, that they also which are
approved may be made manifest among you. When you come therefore together in
one, it is not now to eat our Lords supper: For every one takes his own supper
before to eat; And one certes is an hungered, and another is drunk. Why have you
not houses to eat and drink in? or contemn you the church of God, and confound
them that have not? What shall I say to you? praise I you in this? I do not
praise you.

R. I was like an innocent Lamb: I was led to be immolated, and I did not know
it. My enemies made counsel against me, saying, Come, let us put wood on his
bread, and let us root him out from the land of the living.

V. All my enemies thought evil against me; they have spoken ill against me,
saying, Come ye, etc.

VIII. LESSON.
FOr I received of our Lord, that which also I have delivered unto you; That
our Lord Jesus, in the night that he was betrayed, took bread: and giving
thanks, b^rake, and said, Take ye, and eat; THIS IS MY BODY, which shall be
delivered for you: This do ye for the commemoration of me. In like manner also
the chalice after he had supped, saying, THIS CHALICE IS THE NEW TESTAMENT IN
MY BLOOD: This do ye, as often as you shall drink, for the commemoration of me.
For as often as you shall eat this bread, and drink the chalice, you shall show
the death of our Lord until he come.

Judas Judas; R. Could you not watch one hour with me, who were so resolved to
die for me? But Judas sleeps not; behold how he is coming to betray me into the
hands of the Jews.

V. Why do ye sleep? Arise and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: But
Judas sleeps not, etc.

IX. LESSON.
Augustine Januarius, For the other Rules, I shall establish them when I shall
be amongst you, THerefore whosoever shall eat this bread, or drink the chalice
of our Lord unworthily, he shall be guilty of the body and of the blood of our
Lord. But let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink
of that chalice: For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks judgment to himself, not discerning the body of our Lord. Therefore
are there among you many weak and feeble, and many sleep. But if we did judge
our selves, we should not be judged. But whiles we are judged, of our Lord we
are chastised, that with this world we be not damned. Therefore, my brethren,
when you come together to eat, expect one another. If any man be an hungered,
let him eat at home, that you come not together unto judgment. And the rest I
will dispose when I come.

R. The Elders of the People consulted together how they might by some wile
apprehend Jesus, and kill him: with swords and clubs they came out, as it were
to a thief.

V. The Priests and Pharisees consulted together how they might by some wile
apprehend Jesus.

R. The Elders of the People, etc.

AT LAUDS.
PSALM 50.

Ant. Be justified, O Lord, in thy words: and may overcome when thou art
judged.

David, David David David, David Deal favorably, Lord, in thy good will with
Sion, and let the walls of Jerusalem be built up. Then shall thou accept
sacrifice of justice, oblations and holocausts; then shall they lay calves upon
thy altar. HAve mercy on me, O God, according to thy great mercy.

And according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out mine iniquity.

Wash me henceforth from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

Because I know my iniquity, and my sin is always against me.

To thee only have I sinned, and have done evil before thee, that thou may be
justified in thy words, and may overcome when thou art judged,

For, behold, I was conceived in iniquities: and my mother conceived me in sins.

For, behold, thou have loved truth: the uncertain and hidden things of thy
wisdom, thou have made manifest to me.

Thou shall sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed: thou shall wash
me, and I shall be made whiter than snow.

To my hearing thou shall give joy and gladness: and the bones humbled shall
rejoice.

Turn away thy face from my sins, and blot out my iniquities.

Create a clean heart in me, O God: and renew a right spirit in my bowels.

Cast me not away from thy face: and thy holy Spirit take not from me.

Render unto me the joy of thy salvation: and confirm with a principal spirit.

I will teach the unjust thy ways: and the impious shall be converted to thee.

Deliver me from blood, O God, the God of my salvation: and my tongue shall
exalt thy justice.

Lord, thou will open my lips: and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Because if thou would have had sacrifice, I had verily given it: with whole
burnt offerings thou will not be delighted.

A sacrifice to God, is a troubled spirit: a contrite and humble heart, O God,
thou will not despise.

Deal favorably, O Lord, in thy good will with Sion: and let the walls of
Jerusalem be built up.

Then thou shall accept sacrifice of justice, oblations, and holocausts: then
shall they lay calves upon thy altar.

Ant. Be justified, O Lord, in thy words: and may overcome when thou art
judged.

PSALM 89.

ANTHYMN.

Ant. Our Lord was led like an innocent lamb to the slaughter: and he opened
not his mouth.

LOrd, thou art made a refuge for us: from generation unto generation.

Before the mountains were made, or the earth and the world formed: from
everlasting even unto everlasting, thou art God.

Turn not away man into humiliation: thou said, Be converted, ye children of
men.

Because a thousand years before thy eyes, are as yesterday that is past;

And as a watch in the night: things that are counted nothing shall their years
be.

In the morning as an herb he shall pass, in the morning he shall flourish and
pass: in the evening he shall fall, be hardened, and withered.

Because we have fainted in thy wrath: and in thy fury we are troubled.

Thou have put our iniquities in thy sight: our age in the light of thy
countenance.

Because all our days have failed: and in thy wrath we have failed.

Our years shall be considered as a spider: the days of our years in them are
seventy years.

And if in strong ones eighty years: and the more of them labor and sorrow.

Because mildness is come upon us, and we shall be chastised.

Who knows the power of thy wrath: and for fear to number thy wrath?

So make thy right hand known: and men learned in heart, in wisdom.

Turn, O Lord, how long? and be entreated for thy servants.

We are replenished in the morning with thy mercy: and we have rejoiced and are
delighted all our days.

We have rejoiced for the days wherein thou have humbled us: the years wherein
we have seen evils.

Look upon thy servants, and upon thy works: and direct their children.

And let the brightness of our Lord God be upon us, and direct thou the works
of our hands over us: and the work of our hands do thou direct.

Ant. Our Lord was led like an innocent lamb to the slaughter: and he opened
not his mouth.

^^ALM 62.

David, ANTHYMN.

Antiphon, Jeremy, Ant. My heart is broken in the midst of me, all my bones
have trembled.

O God, my God, to thee I watch from the morning light.

My soul has thirsted to thee: my flesh to thee very many ways.

In a desert land, and inaccessible, and without water: so in the holy have I
appeared to thee, that I might see thy strength and thy glory.

Because thy mercy is better than lives: my lips shall praise thee.

So will I bless thee in my life: and in thy name I will lift up my hands.

As with marrow and fatness let my soul be filled: and my mouth shall praise
with lips of exultation.

I have been mindful of thee upon my bed: in the morning I will meditate on
thee, because thou have been my helper.

And in the covert of thy wings I will rejoice, my soul has cleaved after
thee: thy right hand has received me.

But they in vain have sought my soul, they shall enter into the interior parts
of the earth: they shall be delivered into the hands of the sword, they shall
be the portion of foxes.

But the king shall rejoice in God: all shall be praised that swear by him,
because the mouth is stopped of them that speak wicked things.

PSALM 66.

O God have mercy upon us, and bless us: illuminate his countenance upon us,
and have mercy on us.

That we may know thy way on earth: in all nations thy salvation.

Let peoples, O God, confess to thee: let all peoples confess to thee.

Let nations be glad and rejoice: because thou judge peoples in equity, and
the nations in the earth thou do direct.

Let peoples, O God, confess to thee, let all peoples confess to thee: the
earth has yielded her fruit.

God our God bless us, God bless us: and let all the ends of the earth fear him.

Ant. My heart is broken in the midst of me, all my bones have trembled.

THE CANTICLE OF MOSES, Taken out of the Fifteenth Chapter of Exodus.

Israel Egypt, Israelites Pharao, ANTIPHON, taken out of the Fourth Chapter of
the Prophet Barach.

Lord, thou have exhorted thy people to put their trust in thee; and thou have
comforted them with thy holy grace.

LEt us sing to our Lord; for he is glorious, gloriously magnified: the horse
and the rider he has thrown into the sea.

My strength and my praise is our Lord: and he is made unto me a salvation.

This is my God, and I will glorify him: the God of my father, and I will
exalt him.

Our Lord is a man of war, Omnipotent is his name: Pharaos chariots and his
army he has cast into the sea.

His chosen princes are drowned in the red sea; the depths have overwhelmed
them, they are sunk into the bottom like a stone.

Thy right hand, O Lord, is magnified in strength; thy right hand, O Lord, has
stricken the enemy: and in the multitude of thy glory thou have put down thy
adversaries.

Thou have sent thy wrath, which has devoured them like stubble: and in the
spirit of thy fury were the waters gathered together.

The flowing water stood: the depths were gathered together in the midst of the
sea.

The enemy said, I will pursue and overtake: I will divide the spoils, my soul
shall have his fill.

I will draw forth my sword: my hand shall kill them.

The Spirit blew, and the sea overwhelmed them: they sank as lead in the
vehement waters.

Who is like to thee among the strong, O Lord? who is like to thee?

Glorious in sanctity: terrible and laudable, doing merveils?

Thou did stretch forth thy hand, and the earth devoured them: thou have in
thy mercy been a guide to the people, which thou have redeemed.

And in thy strength thou have carried them unto thy holy habitation.

Nations rose up and were angry: sorrows possessed the inhabiters of
Philisthiim.

Then were the princes of Edom troubled, trembling seized on the sturdy of
Moab: all the inhabiters of Canaam were confounded.

Let fear and dread fall upon them: in the greatness of thy arm.

Let them become unmovable as a stone, until thy people, O Lord, shall pass:
until thy people shall pass this which thou have possessed.

Thou shall bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thy inheritance:
in thy most firm habitation, which thou have wrought, O Lord.

Thy sanctuary, Lord, which thy hands have confirmed: our Lord shall reign for
ever and ever more.

For Pharao on horseback entered in with his chariots and horsemen into the sea:
and our Lord brought back upon them the waters of the sea.

But the children of Israel walked on dry ground in the midst thereof.

Ant. Lord, thou have exhorted thy people to put their trust in thee; and thou
have comforted them with thy holy grace.

ANTIPHON, taken out of the Fifty third Chapter of the Prophet Isaie.

Israelites Egypt, Antiphon, Ant. He was offered because himself would, and he
carried our sins.

PSALM 148.

PRaise ye our Lord from the heavens: praise ye him in the high places.

Praise ye him all his angels: praise ye him all his hosts.

Praise ye him sun and moon: praise him all ye stars and lights.

Praise him ye heavens of heavens: and the waters that are above the heavens,
let them praise the name of our Lord.

Because he said, and they were made: he commanded and they were created.

He established them for ever, and for ever and ever: he put a precept, and it
shall not pass.

Praise our Lord from the earth: ye dragons, and all the depths.

Fire, hail, snow, ice, spirit of storms: which do his word.

Mountains, and all little hills: trees that bear fruit, and all cedars.

Beasts and all cattle: serpents and feathered fowls.

Kings of the earth, and all peoples: princes, and all judges of the earth.

Young men and virgins, old with young, let them praise the name of our Lord:
because the name of him alone is exalted.

The confession of him above heaven and earth: and he has exalted the horn of
his people.

An hymn to all his saints: to the children of Israel, a people approaching
unto him.

PSALM 149.

SIng ye to our Lord a new song: let his prai^^ be in the church of saints.

Lord ^^^el be joyful in him that made him: and let the children of Sion
rejoice in their king.

Let them praise his name in quire: on timbrel and psalter let them sing to him.

Because our Lord is well pleased in his people: and he will exalt the meek
unto salvation.

The saints shall rejoice in glory: they shall be joyful in their beds.

The exaltations of God in their throat: and two-edged swords in their hands.

To do revenge in the nations: chastisements among their peoples.

To bind their kings in fetters: and their nobles in iron manacles.

That they may do in them the judgment that is written: This glory is to all
his saints.

PSALM 150.

PRaise ye our Lord in his holies: praife him in the firmament of his strength.

Praise ye him in his powers: praise ye him according to the multitude of his
greatness.

Praise ye him in the sound of trumpet: praise ye him on psalter and harp.

Praise ye him on timbrel and quire: praise ye him on strings and organ.

Praise ye him on well-sounded cymbals: praise ye him on cymbals of jubilation.
Let every spirit praise our Lord.

Ant. He was offered because himself would, and he carried our sins.

The Chapter and Hymn are here omitted.

Judas; Achitophel. V. The man whom I loved, and in whom I confided;

R. Who did eat my bread, betrayed me through great perfidiousness.

ANTHYMN, taken out of the Twenty sixth Chapter of St. Matthew.

Ant. But the Traitor gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that
is he, hold him.

Canticle of Zachary, taken out of the First Chapter of St. Luke.

John Baptist BLessed be our Lord God of Israel, because he has visited and
wrought the redemption of his people.

And he has erected the horn of salvation to us, in the house of David his
servant.

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, that are from the beginning.

Salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us.

To work mercy with our fathers, and to remember his holy testament.

The oath which he swear to Abraham our father, that he would give to us.

That without fear being delivered from the hand of our enemies, we may serve
him.

In holiness and Justice before him all our days.

And thou child shall be called the prophet of the Highest: for thou shall go
before the face of our Lord, to prepare his ways.

To give knowledge of salvation to his people, unto remission of their sins.

Through the bowels of the mercy of our God, in which the Orient from on high
has visited us.

To illuminate them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death; to direct
our feet in the way of peace.

Church JESUS CHRIST, John Ant. And the Traitor gave them a sign, saying,
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he, hold him.

CHRIST V. Christ was made for us obedient unto death.

Our Father, etc.

Miserere mei Deus, as before, p. 65.

A PRAYER, To beg God's Mercy toward us, for the Sufferings and Death of his
Son Jesus Christ.

LOok down, O Lord, we beseech thee, upon this thy Family, for which our Lord
Jesus Christ doubted not to be betrayed into the hands of the Wicked, and so
undergo the Torments of the Cross; who lives and reigns with thee in the
Unity of the Holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

JESUS CHRIST. JESUS CHRIST. Paris, Benedictus JESUS CHRIST Versicles, JESUS
CHRIST JESUS CHRIST. The Clerks. Lord, have mercy on us.


The Quire. Lord, have mercy on us.


The Cl. Lord, have mercy on us, spare thy servants: Christ our Lord became
obedient unto death for us.


The Qu. Lord, have mercy on us.


The Cl. Who came into the world to suffer for us.


The Qu. Christ, have mercy on us.


The Cl. Who have said by the mouth of the prophet, ( Osee, chap. 13.) I will
be thy death, O Death.


The Qu. Christ, have mercy on us.


The Cl. Whose Hands being stretched on the Cross, did draw all the world
unto thee.


The Qu. Christ, have mercy on us.


The Cl. Meek Lamb, to whom the Wolf gave a mortal Kiss.


The Qu. Lord, have mercy on us.


The Cl. And thou would thy self be bound, to free us from the Bonds of Death.


The Qu. Jesus Christ, have mercy on us.


The Cl. Life died on the Wood of the Cross, and triumphed over Hell and Death.


The Qu. Lord, have mercy on us. Lord, have mercy on us. Spare thy servants.
Christ our Lord became obedient unto death for us.


The Cl. Even to the death of the Cross.


Miserere mei, etc. as before, p. 65.

THE PRAYER.

Respice Quaesumus, etc. as before, p. 80.

AT COMPLINE.
Jube Domne Benedicere, JESUS CHRIST, Cum invocarem, etc. p. Nunc dimittis,
etc. p. Versicle. V. Christ became obedient unto death for us.

Versicle, Pater noster, etc. Miserere mei Deus, as before, p. 65.

Respice Quaesumus, as before, p. 80.

THE NIGHT-OFFICE ON Holy-Thursday, FOR THE FRIDAY AT MATTINS.
FIRST NOCTVRN.
PSALM 2.

Peter Acts of the Apostles. Ant. The kings of the earth stood up, and the
princes came together in one: against our Lord, and against his Christ.

WHy did the Gentiles rage, and peoples meditate vain things?

The kings of the earth stood up, and the princes came together in one, against
our Lord, and against his Christ,

Let us break their bonds asunder: and let us cast away their yoke from us.

He that dwells in the heavens shall laugh at them: and our Lord shall scorn
them.

Then shall he speak to them in his wrath: and in his fury he shall trouble
them.

But I am appointed king by him over Sion his holy hill, preaching his precept.

The Lord said to me, Thou art my Son, I this day have begotten thee.

Ask of me, and I will give thee the Gentiles for thy inheritance, and thy
possession the ends of the earth.

Thou shall rule them in a rod of iron, and as a potters vessel thou shall
break them in pieces.

And now ye kings understand: take instruction, you that judge the earth.

Serve our Lord in fear: and rejoice to him with trembling.

Apprehend discipline, lest sometimes our Lord be wrath, and you perish out of
the just way.

When his wrath shall burn in short time, blessed are all that trust in him.

Ant. The kings of the earth stood up, and the princes came together in one:
against our Lord, and his Christ.

PSALM 21.

My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? Noe Lot Isaac Joseph Moses
Egyptians, Rahab Jericho, Susanna Daniel Hebrew Ant. They have divided my
garments amongst them, and upon my vesture have cast lot.

GOd, my God, have respect to me: why have thou forsaken me? far from my
salvation are the words of my sins.

My God, I shall cry by day, and thou will not hear: and by night, and not for
folly unto me.

But thou dwell in the holy place, the praise of Israel.

In thee our fathers have hoped: they hoped, and thou did deliver them.

They cried to thee, and were saved: they hoped in thee, and were not
confounded.

But I am a worm, and no man: a reproach of men, and outcast of the people.

All that see me have scorned me: they have spoken with the lips, and wagged
the head.

He hoped in the Lord, let him deliver him: let him save him because he will
him.

Because thou art he that have drawn me out of the womb: my hope from the
breasts of my mother.

Upon thee I have been cast from the matrice: from my mothers womb thou art my
God, depart not from me.

Because tribulation is very nigh: because there is not that will help.

Many calves have compassed me: fat bulls have besieged me.

They have opened their mouth upon me, as a lion raving and roaring.

As water I am poured out: and all my bones are dispersed.

My heart is made as wax, melting in the midst of my belly.

My strength is withered as a potsheard, and my tongue cleaved to my jaws: and
thou have brought me down into the dust of death.

Because many dogs have compassed me: the counsel of the malignant has
besieged me.

They have dug my hands and my feet: they have numbered all my bones.

But themselves have considered and beheld me: They have divided my garments
among them, and upon my vesture have cast lot.

But thou, O Lord, prolong not thy help from me: look tward my defense.

Deliver, O God, my soul from the sword: and mine only one from the hand of the
dog.

Save me out of the lions mouth: and my humility from the horns of unicorns.

I will declare thy name to my brethren: in the midst of the church I will
praise thee.

Ye that fear our Lord, praise him: all the seed of Jacob, glorify ye him.

Let all the seed of Israel fear him: because he has not contemned nor
despised the petition of the poor.

Neither has he turned away his face from me: and when I cried to him, he
heard me.

With thee is my praise in the great church: I will render my vows in the sight
of them that fear him.

The poor shall eat, and shall be filled, and they shall praise our Lord that
seek after him: their hearts shall live for ever and ever.

All the ends of the earth shall remember, and be converted to our Lord.

All the families of the Gentiles shall adore in his sight.

Because the kingdom is our Lords: and he shall have dominion over the Gentiles.

All the fat ones of the earth have eaten, and adored: in his sight shall all
fall, that descend into the earth.

And my soul shall live to him: and my seed shall serve him.

The generation to come shall be showed to our Lord: and the heavens shall show
forth his justice to the people that shall be born, whom our Lord has made.

Ant. They have divided my garments amonst them, and upon my vesture they have
cast lot.

PSALM 26.

Ant. False witnesses have risen up against me, and iniquity has lied to it
self.

OUr Lord is my illumination, and my salvation: whom shall I fear?

Our Lord is the protector of my life: of whom shall I be afraid?

Whilst the harmful approach me, to eat my flesh.

Mine enemies that trouble me, themselves are weakened and are fallen.

If camps stand together against me, my heart shall not fear.

If battle rise up against me, in this will I hope.

One thing I have asked of our Lord, this will I seek for: That I may dwell in
the house of our Lord all the days of my life.

That I may see the pleasantness of our Lord, and visit his temple.

Because he has hid me in his tabernacle: in the day of evils he has
protected me in the secret of his tabernacle.

In a rock he has exalted me: and now he has exalted my head over mine
enemies.

I have gone round about, and have immolated in his tabernacle an host of
jubilation: I will sing and say a psalm unto our Lord.

Hear, O Lord, my voice, wherewith I have cried to thee: have mercy on me, and
hear me.

My heart has said to thee, my face has sought thee out: thy face, O Lord, I
will seek.

Turn not away thy face from me: decline not in wrath from thy servant.

Be thou my helper, forsake me not; neither despise me, O God my Savior.

Because my father and my mother have forsaken me: but our Lord has taken me.

Guide me, O Lord, in thy way: and direct me in the right path, because of mine
enemies.

Deliver me not into the souls of them that trouble me: because unjust
witnesses have risen up against me, and iniquity has lied to it self.

I believe to see the good things of our Lord, in the land of the living.

Expect our Lord, do manfully: and let thy heart take courage, and expect thou
our Lord,

Ant. Unjust witnesses have risen up against me, and iniquity has lied to it
self.

VERSICLE, taken out of the One and twentieth Psalm.

V. They have divided my garments among them.

R. And upon my vesture they have cast lot.

THE FIRST LESSON, Taken out of the Second Chapter of the Lamentations of the
Prophet Jeremy.
HETH.

OUr Lord has meant to destroy the wall of the daughter of Sion: he has
stretched out his cord, and has not turned away his hand from the destruction:
and the fore-wall has mourned, and the wall is destroyed together.

TETH.

Her gates are fastened in the ground: he has destroyed and broken her bars:
her king and her princes in the Gentiles: there is no law, and her prophets
have not found vision from our Lord.

JOD.

The ancients of the daughter of Sion have sitten on the ground, they have held
their peace: they have sprinkled their heads with dust, they are girded with
hair-cloth: the virgins of Jerusalem have cast down their heads to the ground.

CAPH.

Mine eyes have failed for tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is poured
out on the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people, when the
little one and the sucking fainted in the streets of the town.

Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Convert unto the Lord thy God.

RESP.

Jeremy, All my friends have forsaken me, and those that laid snares for me
have prevailed against me; and looking furiously upon me, gave me most cruel
stripes, and gave me vinegar to drink. He whom I loved has betrayed me.

V. They threw me among the wicked, and they spared not my soul: And looking
furiously on me, etc.

II. LESSON.
LAMED.

THey said to their Mothers, ^here is the wheat and wine? (...) they fainted as
the wounded in the (...) of the city, when they yielded up the ghosts in the
bosom of their mothers.

MEM.

Whereto shall I compare thee, or whereto shall I liken thee, O daughter of
Jerusalem? Whereto shall I make thee equal, and comfort thee, O virgin daughter
of Sion? For great is thy destruction as the sea; who shall heal thee?

NUN.

Thy prophets have seen false and foolish things for thee: neither have they
opened thy iniquity, to provoke thee to penance; but they have seen false
burdens and banishments for thee.

SAMECH.

All that passed by the way have clapped their hands upon thee: they have
hissed and moved their head upon the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the
city of perfect beauty, the joy of all the earth?

Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Convert unto the Lord thy God.

RESP.

Jeremy, R. The vail of the temple was rent, and all the earth trembled. The
thief cried from the cross, saying, Be mindful of me, O Lord, when thou shall
come into thy kingdom.

V. The rocks were rent, and the graves were opened, and many bodies of the
saints that slept, rose.

And all the earth trembled.

III. LESSON. Taken out of the Third Chapter.
ALEPH.

I The man that see my poverty in the rod of his indignation.

ALEPH.

He has led me, and brought me into darkness, and not into light.

ALEPH.

Only against me he has turned, and has converted his hand all the day.

BETH.

He has made my skin old, and my flesh, he has broken my bones.

BETH.

He has built round about me, and he has compassed me with gall and labor.

BETH.

In dark places he has placed, as the everlasting dead.

GHIMEL.

He has built round about against me, that I go not forth: he has aggravated
my fetters.

GHIMEL.

Yea, and when I shall cry, and ask, he has excluded my prayer.

GHIMEL.

He has shut up my ways with square stones, he has subverted my paths.

Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Convert unto the Lord thy God.

RESP.

R. My chosen vine, I have planted thee: how art thou converted into
bitterness, that thou should crucify me, and deliver Barabbas?

V. I have hedged thee, and have picked the stones from thee; and I have built
a tower: How art thou converted, etc.

R. My vine, etc.

SECOND NOCTVRN.
PSALM 37.

Ant. And they did violence which sought my soul.

LOrd, rebuke me not in thy fury: nor chastise me in thy wrath.

Because thy arrows are fast sticked in me: and thou have fastened thy hand upon
me.

There is no health in my flesh at the face of my wrath: my bones have no peace
at the face of my sins.

Because mine iniquities are gone over my head: and as a heavy burden are
become heavy upon me.

My scars are putrified and corrupted, because of my foolishness.

I am become miserable, and am made crooked, even to the end: I went sorrowful
all the day.

Because my loins are filled with illusions: and there is no health in my flesh.

I am afflicted, and am humbled exceedingly: I roared for the groaning of my
heart.

Lord, before thee is all my desire: and my groaning is not hid from thee.

My heart is troubled, my strength has forsaken me, and the light of mine
eyes, and the same is not with me.

My friends and my neighbors have approached, and stood against me.

And they that were near me, stood far off: and they did violence which sought
my soul.

And they that sought me evils, spoke vanities, and meditated guiles all the
day.

But I as one deaf, did not hear: and as one dumb, not opening his mouth.

And I became as a man not hearing, and not having reproofs in his mouth.

Because in thee, O Lord, have I hoped: thou will hear me, O Lord my God.

Because I said, Lest sometimes my enemies rejoice over me: and whilst my feet
are moved, they speak great things upon me.

Because I am ready for scourges, and my sorrow is in my sight always.

Because I will declare my iniquity, and I will think for my sin.

But mine enemies live, and are confirmed over me: and they are multiplied that
hate me unjustly.

They that repay evil things for good, detracted from me, because I followed
goodness.

Forsake me not, O Lord my God: depart not from me.

Attend unto my help, O Lord, the God of my salvation.

Ant. And they did violence which sought my soul.

PSALM 39.

Paul, Hebrews, chap. Ant. Let them be confounded and ashamed, that seek my
soul, to take it away.

Expecting, I expected our Lord: and he has attended to me.

And he heard my prayers, and brought me out of the lake of misery, and from
the mire of drags.

And has set my feet upon a rock, and has directed my steps.

And he has put a new canticle into my mouth, a song to our God.

Many shall see, and shall fear: and they shall hope in our Lord.

Blessed is the man whose hope is the name of our Lord; and has not had regard
to vanities, and false madness.

Thou have done many merveilous things, O Lord, my God: and in thy cogitations
there is none that may be like to thee.

I have declared, and have spoken: they multiplied above number.

Sacrifice and oblation thou would not: but ears thou have perfected to me.

Holocaust, and for sin thou did not require: then said I, Behold, I come.

In the head of the book it is written of me, that I should do thy will: my
God, I would, and thy law in the midst of my heart.

I have declared thy justice in the great church: lo, I will not stay my lips,
Lord, thou have known it.

Thy justice I have not hid in my heart: thy truth and thy salvation I have
spoken.

I have not hid thy mercy and thy truth from the great council.

But thou, O Lord, make not thy commiserations far from me: thy mercy and thy
truth have always received me.

Because evils have compassed me, which have no number: mine iniquities have
overtaken me, and I was not able to see.

They are multiplied above the hairs of my head: and my heart has forsaken me.

It may please thee, O Lord, to deliver me: Lord, have respect to help me.

Let them be confounded and ashamed together, that seek my soul, to take it
away.

Let them be turned backward, and be ashamed, that will me evils.

Let them forthwith receive their confusion, that say to me, Well, well.

Let all that seek thee rejoice, and be glad upon thee: and let them that love
thy salvation, say always, Our Lord be magnified.

But I am a beggar, and poor: our Lord is careful of me.

Thou art my helper, and my protector: my God, be not slack.

Ant. Let them be confounded and ashamed, that seek my soul, to take it away.

PSALM 53.

Ant. Strangers have risen up against me, and the strong have sought my soul.

O God, save me in thy name, and in thy strength judge me.

O God, hear my prayer with thine ears, receive the words of my mouth.

Because strangers have risen up against me, and the strong have sought my
soul: and they have not set God before their eyes.

For behold, God helps me: and our Lord is the receiver of my soul.

Turn away the evils to mine enemies, and in thy truth destroy them.

I will voluntarily sacrifice to thee, and will confess to thy name, O Lord,
because it is good.

Because thou have delivered me out of all tribulation, and mine eye has
looked down upon mine enemies.

Ant. Strangers have risen up against me, and the strong have sought my soul.

V. False witnesses have risen up against me.

R. And iniquity has lied to it self.

IV. LESSON. Taken out of the Treatise of St. Augustine on the Sixty third Psalm.
JESUS CHRIST CHRIST JESUS CHRIST MY God, thou have protected me from the
assembly of the malignant, from the multitude of them that work iniquity. Let
us now consider our Chief. Many Martyrs have suffered such Torments, but none
with so much splendour as the Chief of Martyrs; for their Sufferings received
Luster from his. He was defended from the Fury of the Wicked, both by God's and
his own protection: 'Twas he defended his own Flesh, and this Human Nature
wherewith he was clad; for he was the Son of Man, and the Son of God. The Son
of God, because of his Form God (being of the same Essence with his Eternal
Father): The Son of Man, because he took on him the Form of a Slave; having
power to separate his Soul from his Body, and to resume it again, what could
his Enemies then do against him? They killed his Body, but his Soul they could
not touch. Be attentive: Our Lord was not contented to exhort the Martyrs only
with his Words, but would also fortify by his Example.

RESP.

Augustine R. As to a thief are you come out with swords and clubs to apprehend
me: I was daily with you in the temple teaching, and you did not lay hands on
me.

V. And when they had laid hands on JESUS, he said to them, I was daily, etc.

V. LESSON.
YOu know what was the Assembly of the wicked Jews, and what the Multitude of
them that work Iniquity. But what was that Iniquity? 'Twas that they would kill
our Lord Jesus Christ. I have showed you, said he, so many good works; and for
which of them will you kill me? He comforted the Sick amongst them, he cured
their Infirmities, he preached unto them the Kingdom of Heaven, he showed them
the Enormities of their Crimes, that they might hate them, but not the Doctor
that cured them. But in stead of acknowledging the good he did them by these
wholesome Remedies, so great was their Ingratitude, that (as if tormented with a
burning Fever) they were so transported against this charitable Doctor, who
came only to cure them, that they studied how to destroy him, as if thereby
they would try whether he were true Man, and could die; or whether he were any
thing above Man, and would not permit his own Death. We find their Discourse on
this Subject in the Book of Wisdom: To a most shameful Death (say they) let us
condemn him, for there shall be respect had unto him by his words; for if he be
the true Son of God, he will deliver him.

RESP.

R. Whilst the Jews crucified Jesus, darkness covered the earth: and about the
ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, My God, why have thou forsaken me?
And bowing his head, gave up the ghost.

V. And Jesus crying with a loud voice, said, Father, into thy hands I commend
my spirit. And bowing down his head, etc.

VI. LESSON.
THey have sharpened their Tongues as a Sword. Let not the Jews say, We have not
killed Christ; for certainly 'twas therefore they delivered him into the Hands
of Pilate the Judge, that so they might seem guiltless of his Death: For when
Pilate said unto them, Do ye your selves put him to death; they answered, It Is
not lawful for us to kill any one. Thus they would retort on the Judge the
Injustice of their own Crime. But how could they deceive God, who is the true
Judge? It Is certain, that what Pilate did, made him partake of their Guilt; but
in comparison of the Jews, he is far more innocent: for he did what he could to
deliver him out of their Hands: And therefore having first caused him to be
scourged, he showed him unto them; not that he scourged our Lord out of design
to persecute him, but thereby a little to appease their Rage, that by their
beholding him so cruelly whipped, they might be satisfied, and desist from
demanding his Death. And this he did. But when they still persisted, ye all
know, he washed his Hands before them, and said, That he had nothing to do with
it, and was cleansed from the guilt of his Death: yet he put him to death; and
if he be guilty for having condemned him against his will, are they innocent
who forced him to it? By no means. Because Pilate pronounced Sentence against
him, and commanded him to be crucified, he is guilty of his Death. And ye, O
Jews, have put him to death; and how have ye put him to death? With the Sword
of your Tongues: For ye have sharpened your Tongues, and soaked them in his
Blood, when ye exclaimed against him, saying, Crucify, Crucify.

RESP.

Jeremy, R. I have delivered my beloved Soul into the Hands of the Wicked, and
my Inheritance became unto me as a Lion in the Wood: The Enemy cried out
against me, saying, Let us assemble and make haste to devour him. They have set
me in the remotest of the Wilderness, and all the earth wailed over me; because
he was not found that would acknowledge me, or do me good.

V. Men without mercy have risen up against me, and they have not spared my
Soul: Because he was not found that would acknowledge me, or do me good.

R. I have delivered my beloved Soul, etc.

THIRD NOCTVRN.
PSALM 58. or 59.

David Ant. From them that rise up against me, defend me, O Lord: because they
have taken my soul.

DEliver me from mine enemies, O my God: and from them that rise up against me,
defend me.

Deliver me from them that work iniquity: and from bloody men save me.

Because lo they have taken my soul: the strong have fallen violently upon me.

Neither is it mine iniquity, nor my sin, O Lord: without inquity have I run,
and gone directly.

Rise up to meet me, and see: and thou O Lord, the God of powers, God of
Israel, attend to visit all nations: have no mercy on all that work iniquity.

They will return at evening: and they shall suffer famine as dogs, and shall
compass the city.

Behold, they will speak in their mouth, and a sword in their lips: because who
has heard?

And thou, O Lord, wilt scorn them: thou will bring to naught all nations.

I will keep my strength to thee, because thou art my receiver: my God, thy
mercy shall prevent.

God will show unto me concerning mine enemies: kill them not, lest sometimes
my peoples forget.

Disperse them in thy strength: and depose them, my protector, O Lord.

The sin of their mouth, the word of their lips: and let them be taken in their
pride.

And for cursing and lying they shall be talked of in consummation: in wrath of
consummation, and they shall not be.

And they shall know, that God will rule over Jacob: and over the ends of the
earth.

They shall be turned at evening, and shall suffer famine as dogs: and shall
compass the city.

They shall be dispersed to eat: and if they be not filled, they will murmur
also.

But I will sing thy strength: and will exalt thy mercy in the morning.

Because thou art become my receiver, and my refuge in the day of my
tribulation.

My helper, I will sing to thee, because thou art God my receiver, my God, my
mercy.

Ant. From them that rise up against me, defend me, O Lord: because they have
taken my soul.

PSALM 87.

JESUS CHRIST; Ant. Thou have made my familiars far from me: I was delivered,
and came not forth.

O Lord, the God of my salvation: in the day have I cried, and in the night
before thee.

Let my prayer enter in thy sight: incline thine ear to my petition.

Because my soul is replenished with evils: and my life has approached to hell.

I am accounted with them that descend into the lake: I am become as a man
without help, free among the dead.

As the wounded sleeping in the sepulchers, of whom thou art mindful no more:
and they are cast off from thy hand.

They have put me in the lower lake: in the dark places, and in the shadow of
death.

Thy fury is confirmed upon me: and all thy waves thou have brought in upon me.

Thou have made my familiars far from me: they have put me abomination to
themselves.

I was delivered, and came not forth: mine eyes languished for poverty.

I cried to thee, O Lord, all the day: I stretched out my hands to thee.

Will thou do merveils to the dead: or shall physicians raise to life, and they
confess to thee?

Shall any in the sepulcher declare thy mercy: and thy truth in perdition?

Shall thy merveilous works be known in darkness: and thy justice in the land
of oblivion?

And I, O Lord, have cried to thee: and in the morning shall my prayer prevent
thee.

Why do thou, O Lord, reject my prayer: turnest away thy face from me?

I am poor, and in labors from my youth: and being exalted, humbled and
troubled.

Thy wraths have passed upon me: and thy terrors have troubled me.

They have compassed me as water all the day: they compassed me together.

Thou have made friend and neighbor far from me: and my familiars, because of
misery.

Ant. Thou have made my familiars far from me: I was delivered, and came not
forth.

PSALM 93.

Ant. They will hunt after the soul of the just: and will condemn innocent
blood.

OUr Lord God of revenges: the God of revenges has done freely.

Be exalted, thou that judge the earth: render retribution to the proud.

How long shall sinners, O Lord: how long shall sinners glory?

Shall they utter and speak iniquity: shall all they speak, that work injustice?

Thy people, O Lord, they have humbled: and thine inheritance they have vexed.

The widow and the stranger they have slain: and the pupils they have killed.

And they have said, The Lord shall not see: neither shall the God of Jacob
understand.

Understand ye foolish in the people: and ye fools be wise at sometime.

He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? or he that made the eye, does he
not consider?

He that chastises nations, shall he not rebuke: he that teaches man
knowledge?

Our Lord knows the cogitations of men: that they be vain.

Blessed is the man whom thou shall instruct, O Lord: and shall teach out of
thy law.

That thou may give him quietness from the evil days: till a pit be dug
for the sinner.

Because our Lord will not reject his people: and his inheritance he will not
forsake.

Until justice be turned into judgment: and they who are near it, are all that
are right of heart.

Who shall rise for me against the malignant? or who shall stand with me
against them that work iniquity?

But that our Lord has helped me: within very little my soul had dwelt in hell.

If I said, My foot is moved: thy mercy, O Lord, did help me.

According to the multitude of my sorrows in my heart, thy consolations have
made my soul joyful.

Does the seat of iniquity cleave to thee: which make labor in precept?

They will hunt after the soul of the just: and will condemn innocent blood.

And our Lord became my refuge: and my God the help of my hope.

And he will repay them their iniquity, and in their malice he will destroy
them: the Lord our God will destroy them.

Ant. They will hunt after the soul of the just: and will condemn innocent
blood.

VERSICLE, taken out of Psalm 108.

Versicles V. They have spoken against me with deceitful tongue.

R. And with words of hatred they have compassed me: and they have impugned me
without cause.

VII. LESSON. Out of the Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews, chap.
4.
LEt us hasten therefore to enter into that rest; that no man fall into the
same example of incredulity. For the word of God is lively and forcible, and
more piercing than any two-edged sword; reaching unto the division of the soul
and the spirit, of the joints also and the marrows, and a discerner of the
cogitations and intents of the heart. And there is no creature invisible in his
sight; but all things are naked and open to his eyes. To whom our speech is.
Having therefore a great high priest that has entered the heaven, Jesus the Son
of God, let us hold the confession. For we have not a high priest that cannot
have compassion on our infirmities: but tempted in all things by similitude,
except sin.

RESP.

R. They have delivered me into the hands of the wicked, and have cast me among
the impious, and have not spared my soul. The strong are gathered together
against me, and like giants have stood against me.

V. Strangers have rose up against me, and the strong have sought my soul. And
like giants, etc.

VIII. LESSON.
JESUS CHRIST. LEt us go therefore with confidence to the throne of grace, that
we may obtain mercy, and find grace in seasonable aid. For every high priest
taken from among men, is appointed for men in those things that pertain to God,
that he may offer gifts and sacrifices for sins: that can have compassion on
them that be ignorant and do err, because himself also is compassed with
infirmity: and therefore he ought, as for the people, so also for himself to
offer for sins.

RESP.

Caiphas, R. The wicked delivered Jesus to the chief princes of the priests,
and to the elders of the people: But Peter followed him afar off, that he might
see the end.

V. But they led him to Caiphas the prince of the priests, where the Scribes
and Pharisees were met together.

But Peter followed, etc.

IX. LESSON.
JESUS CHRIST JESUS CHRIST CHRIST Aaron NEither does any man take the honor to
himself, but he that is called of God, as Aaron. So Christ also did not
glorify himself, that he might be made a high priest: But he that spoke to
him, My Son art thou, I this day have begotten thee. As also in another place
he says, Thou art a priest for ever, according to the order of Melchisedeck.
Who in the days of his flesh, with a strong cry and tears, offering prayers and
supplications to him that could save him from death, was heard for his
reverence. And truly, whereas he was the Son, he learned, by those things which
he suffered, obedience: And being consummate, was made to all that obey him,
cause of eternal salvation: called of God a high priest according to the order
of Melchisedeck.

RESP.

R. My eyes are darkened with my tears; for he is far from me, that did comfort
me. See all people, if there be any sorrow like to my grief.

V. O all ye that pass by this way, behold and see, if there be any grief like
to my grief. My eyes are darkened with my tears, because he is far from me, who
did comfort me. See all ye people, if there be any grief like mine.

AT LAUDS.
Ant. GOod spared not his own Son, but delivered him for us.

Miserere mei Deus, etc. as before, p. 65.

PSALM 142.

Ant. My spirit is in anguish upon me: within me my heart is troubled.

LOrd, hear my prayer; with thine ears receive my petition in thy truth: hear
me in thy justice.

And enter not into judgment with thy servant: because no man living shall be
justified in thy sight.

Because the enemy has persecuted my soul: he has humbled my life in the
earth.

He has set me in obscure places, as the dead of the world: and my spirit is
in anguish upon me, within me my heart is troubled.

I was mindful of old days, I have meditated in all thy works: in the facts of
thy hands did I meditate.

I have stretched forth my hands to thee: my soul is as earth without water
unto thee.

Hear me quickly, O Lord: my spirit has fainted.

Turn not away thy face from me: and I shall be like to them that descend into
the lake.

Make me hear thy mercy in the morning: because I have hoped in thee.

Make the way known to me, wherein I may walk: because I have lifted up my soul
to thee.

Deliver me from mine enemies, O Lord, to thee I have fled: teach me to do thy
will, because thou art my God.

Thy good spirit will conduct me into the right way: for thy name sake, O Lord,
thou will quicken me in thine equity.

Thou will bring forth my soul out of tribulation: and in thy mercy thou will
destroy mine enemies.

And thou will destroy all that afflict my soul: because I am thy servant.

Ant. My spirit is in anguish upon me: within me my heart is troubled.

ANOTHER ANTHYMN.

Ant. The one thief said to the other, We indeed justly receive worthy of our
doings; but what has this man done? Lord, remember me when thou shall come
into thy kingdom.

The Psalm, Deus, Deus meus, ad te de luce vigilo, etc. as before, p. 69.

CANTICLE OF HABACCUC, Chap. 3.

Habaccuc Israelites Babylon Egypt, Ant. When my soul shall be troubled, O
Lord, thou shall be mindful of mercy.

LOrd, I heard thy hearing, and was afraid.

Lord, thy work in the midst of years, quicken it.

In the midst of years shall thou make it known: when thou art angry, thou will
remember mercy.

God will come from the south, and the holy One from mount Paran.

His glory shall cover the heavens, and the earth is full of his praise.

His brightness shall be as the light, horns in his hands: there is his
strength hid.

Before his face shall death go: and the devil shall go forth before his feet.

He stood and measured the earth, he beheld and dissolved the Gentiles: and the
mountains of the world were broken.

The hills of the world were bowed, by the ways of his eternity.

For iniquity I saw the tents of Ethiopia, and the skins of the land of Median
shall be troubled.

Why wast thou angry with the rivers, O Lord? or was thy fury in the rivers, or
thine indignation in the sea?

Who wilt mount upon thy horses, and thy chariots salvation.

Raising thou will raise up thy bow: the oath to the tribes which thou have
spoken.

Thou will cut the rivers of the earth.

The mountains saw thee, and were sorry, the gulf of water passed: the depth
gave his voice, the height lifted up his hands.

The sun and the moon stood in their habitation: in the light of thine arrows,
they shall go in the brightness of thy glittering spear.

In fretting thou will tread down the earth: in fury thou will astonish the
Gentiles.

Thou wentest forth the salvation of thy people: salvation with thy Christ.

Thou struckest the head out of the house of the impious: thou have discovered
the foundation even to the neck.

Thou have cursed his scepters, the head of his warriors, them that came as a
whirlwind to disperse me.

Their exultation, as his that devoureth the poor in secret.

Thou made a way in the sea for thy horses, in the midst of many waters.

I heard, and my belly was troubled: at the voice my lips trembled.

Let rottenness enter in my bones, and swarm under me.

That I may rest in the day of tribulation: that I may ascend to our girded
people.

For the fig tree shall not flourish: and there shall be no spring in the vines.

The work of the olive tree shall deceive: and the fields shall not yield meat.

The cattle shall be cut off from the fold: and there shall be no herd in the
stalls.

But I will joy in our Lord: and will rejoice in God my Jesus.

God our Lord is my strength: and he will make my feet as of the hearts.

And upon my high places he the conqueror will lead me, singing in psalms.

Ant. When my soul shall be troubled, O Lord: thou shall be mindful of mercy.

ANOTHER ANTHYMN.

Lord, remember me when thou shall come into thy kingdom.

PSALM.

Laudate Dominum de coelis, etc. as before, p. 74.

VERSICLE, taken out of Psalm 142.

He has set me in obscure places.

R. As the dead of the world.

AT BENEDICTUS.
ANTHYMN.

They put over his head his cause written: This is JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING
OF THE JEWS.

The Canticle of Zachary, Benedictus, etc. as before, p. 78.

V. Christ made himself for us obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.

Pater noster, etc. Miserere, etc. as before, p. 13. and 65.

THE PRAYER.

Respice Quoesumus, as before, p. 80.

AT COMPLINE.
As before, p. 82.

V. Jesus Christ made himself for us obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross.

Pater noster, etc. Miserere mei Deus, etc. as before, p. 13. and 65.

THE PRAYER,

Respice Quoesumus, etc. as before, p. 80.

THE NIGHT-OFFICE ON Holy-Friday, FOR SATURDAY AT MATTINS.
FIRST NOCTVRN.
PSALM 4.

Ant. In peace, in the self-same I will sleep and rest.

WHen I invocated, the God of my justice heard me: in tribulation thou have
enlarged to me.

Have mercy on me, and hear my prayer.

Ye sons of men, how long are you of heavy heart? why love you vanity, and seek
lying?

And know ye that our Lord has made his holy one merveilous: our Lord will
hear me when I shall cry to him.

Be ye angry, and sin not: the things that you say in your hearts, in your
chambers be you sorry for.

Sacrifice ye the sacrifice of justice, and hope in our Lord. Many say, Who
shows us good things?

The light of thy countenance, O Lord, is signed upon us: thou have given
gladness in my heart.

By the fruit of their corn, and wine, and oil they are multiplied.

In peace, in the self-same I will sleep and rest.

Because thou, Lord, have singularly settled my hope.

Ant. In peace, in the self-same I will sleep and rest.

PSALM 14.

Ant. He shall dwell in thy tabernacle, and shall rest in thy holy hill.

LOrd, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? who shall rest in thy holy hill?

He that walks without spot, and works justice.

He that speaks truth in his heart, that has not done guile in his tongue.

Nor has done evil to his neighbor: and has not taken reproach against his
neighbor.

The malignant is brought to nothing in his sight: but them that fear our Lord,
he glorifieth.

He that swears to his neighbor, and deceives not: that has not given his
money to usury, and has not taken gifts upon the innocent.

He that does these things, shall not be moved for ever.

Ant. He shall dwell in thy tabernacle, and shall rest in thy holy hill.

PSALM 15.

Ant. My flesh shall rest in hope.

PReserve me, O Lord, because I have hoped in thee: I have said to our Lord,
Thou art my God, because thou need not my goods.

To the saints, that are in his land, he has made all my wills merveilous in
them.

Their infirmities were multiplied: afterward they made haste.

I will not assemble their conventicles of blood: neither will I be mindful of
their names by my lips.

Our Lord the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou art he that will
restore mine inheritance unto me.

Cords are fallen to me in goodly places: for mine inheritance is goodly unto
me.

I will bless our Lord, who has given me understanding: moreover also even
till night, my veins have rebuked me.

I soresaw our Lord in my sight always: because he is at my right hand, that I
be not moved.

For this thing my heart has been glad, and my tongue has rejoiced: moreover
also my flesh shall rest in hope.

Because thou will not leave my soul in hell: neither will thou give thy holy
One to see corruption.

Tho have made the ways of life known to me, thou shall make me full of joy
with thy countenance: delectations on thy right hand, even to the end.

Ant. My flesh shall rest in hope.

V. In peace, in the self-same,

R. I will sleep and rest.

LESSON I. Out of the Lamentations of the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 3.
Jeremy TETH.

THe mercies of our Lord that we are not consumed: because his commiserations
have not failed.

HETH.

New in the morning, great is thy fidelity.

HETH.

Our Lord is my portion, said my soul: therefore will I expect him.

HETH.

Our Lord is good to them that hope in him, to the soul that seeks him.

TETH.

It is good to wait with silence for the salvation of God.

TETH.

It is good for a man, when he bears the yoke from his youth.

JOD.

He shall sit solitary, and hold his peace: because he has lifted himself
above himself.

JOD.

He shall put his mouth in the dust, if perhaps there be hope.

JOD.

He shall give the cheek to him that strikes him: he shall be filled with
reproaches.

Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Convert unto the Lord thy God.

RESP.

As a sheep he was led to slaughter; and whilst they ill treated him, he opened
not his mouth: he was delivered to death, that he might give life to his people.

V. He delivered up his soul to death, and was reputed among the wicked, that
he might give life to his people.

LESSON II. Taken out of the Fourth Chapter.
Jerusalem, ALEPH.

HOw is the gold darkened, the best color changed, the stones of the Sanctuary
dispersed in the head of all streets?

BETH.

The noble children of Sion, and they that were clothed with the principal
gold: how are they reputed as earthen vessels, the work of the potters hands?

GHIMEL.

Yea, even the Lamiaes have opened their breast they have given suck to their
young: the daughter of my people is cruel, as the Ostrich in the desert.

DALETH.

The tongue of the suckling has cloven to the roof of his mouth for thirst:
the little ones have asked bread, and there was none that brake it unto them.

HE.

They that fed voluptuously, have died in the ways: they that were brought up
in scarlet, have embraced the dung.

VAU.

And the iniquity of the daughter of my people is become greater than the sin
of Sodom: which was overthrown in a moment, and hands took nothing in her.

Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Convert unto the Lord thy God.

RESP.

Jerusalem, arise, and put off thy garments of mirth; cover thy self with ashes
and haircloth: For in thee is slain the Savior of Israel.

V. Draw forth tears as a torrent day and night, and let not the apple of thine
eye besilent: Because in thee was slain the Savior of Israel.

LESSON III. Taken out of the Fifth Chapter.
The beginning of the Prayer of the Prophet JEREMY.
REmember, O Lord, what is fallen to us: behold, and regard our reproach. Our
inheritance is turned to aliens; our houses to strangers. We are made pupils
without father: our mothers are as it were widows. Our water we have drunk for
money: our wood we have bought for a price. We were led by our necks; no rest
was given to the weary. We have given our hand to Egypt, and to the Assyrians,
that we might be filled with bread. Our fathers have sinned, and they are not,
and we have born their iniquities. Servants have ruled over us: there was none
that would redeem us out of their hand. In peril of our lives did we fetch us
bread, at the face of the sword in the desert. Our skin was burnt as an oven,
by reason of the tempests of famine. They humbled the women in Sion, and the
Virgins in the cities of Juda.

Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Convert unto the Lord thy God.

VERSICLE, taken out of the First Chapter of the Prophet Joel.

Jeremy Jerusalem; Joel, Mourn as a virgin, my people, girded with sackcloth
upon the husband of her youth: Because the day of our Lord is at hand, a very
great and bitter day.

V. Gird your selves and mourn, ye priests; howl ye ministers of the altar, lie
ye in sackcloth: Because the great day of our Lord is at hand.

Mourn as a virgin, etc.

SECOND NOCTVRN.
PSALM 23.

Ant. Be ye lifted up, O eternal gates: and the king of glory shall enter in.

THe earth is our Lords, and the fulnest thereof: the round world, and all that
dwell therein.

Because he has founded it upon the seas, and upon the rivers has prepared it.

Who shall ascend into the mount of our Lord? or who shall stand in his holy
place?

The innocent of hands, and of clean heart, that has not taken his soul in
vain, nor sworn to his neighbor in guile.

He shall receive blessing of our Lord, and mercy of God his Savior.

This is the generation of them that seek him, of them that seek the face of
the God of Jacob.

Lift up your gates, ye princes; and be ye lifted up, O eternal gates: and the
king of glory shall enter in.

Who is this king of glory? Our Lord strong and mighty, our Lord mighty in
battle.

Lift up your gates, ye princes; and be ye lifted up, O eternal gates: and the
king of glory shall enter in.

Who is this king of glory? The Lord of powers he is the king of glory.

Ant. Be ye lifted up, O eternal gates: and the king of glory shall enter in.

PSALM 26.

Ant. I believe to see the good things of our Lord, in the land of the living.

OUr Lord is my illumination, and my salvation: whom shall I fear?

Our Lord is the protector of my life: of whom shall I he afraid?

Whilst the shameful approach upon me, to eat my flesh.

Mine enemies that trouble me, themselves are weakened and are fallen.

If camps stand together against me, my heart shall not fear.

If battle rise up against me, in this will I hope.

One thing I have asked of our Lord, this will I seek for: that I may dwell in
the house of our Lord all the days of my life.

That I may see the pleasantness of our Lord, and visit his temple.

Because he has hid me in his tabernacle: in the day of evils he has
protected me in the secret of his tabernacle.

In a rock he has exalted me: and now he has exalted my head over mine
enemies.

I have gone round about, and have immolated in his tabernacle an host of
jubilation: I will sing and say a psalm to our Lord.

Hear, O Lord, my voice, wherewith I have cried to thee: have mercy on me, and
hear me.

My heart has said to thee, my face has sought thee out: thy face, O Lord, I
will seek.

Turn not away thy face from me: decline not in wrath from thy servant.

Be thou my helper: forsake me not, neither despise me, O God, my Savior.

Because my father and my mother have forsaken me: but our Lord has taken me.

Give me a law, O Lord, in thy way: and direct me in the right path, because of
mine enemies.

Deliver me not into the souls of them that trouble me: because unjust
witnesses have risen up against me, and iniquity has lied to it self.

I believe to see the good things of our Lord, in the land of the living.

Expect our Lord, do manfully: and let thy heart take courage, and expect thou
our Lord.

Ant. I believe to see the good things of our Lord, in the land of the living.

PSALM 29.

Ant. Lord, thou have brought forth my soul out of hell.

I Will exalt thee, O Lord, because thou have received me: neither have
delighted mine enemies over me.

O Lord my God, I have cried to thee, and thou have healed me.

Lord, thou have brought forth my soul out of hell: thou have saved me from
them that go down into the lake.

Sing to our Lord, ye his saints: and confess to the memory of his holiness.

Because wrath is in his indignation: and life in his will.

At evening shall weeping abide: and in the morning gladness.

And I said in my abundance, I will not be moved for ever.

O Lord, in thy will thou have given strength to my beauty.

Thou have turned away thy face from me, and I became troubled:

To thee, O Lord, I will cry: and I will pray to my God.

What profit is in my blood, whilst I descend into corruption?

Shall dust confess to thee, or declare thy truth?

Our Lord has heard, and had mercy on me: our Lord is become my helper.

Thou have turned my mourning into joy unto me: thou have cut my sackcloth, and
have compassed me with gladness.

That my glory may sing to thee: and I be not compunct: Lord my God, for ever
will I confess to thee.

Ant. Lord, thou have brought forth my soul out of hell.

VERSICLE, taken out of Psalm 63.

V. But thou, O Lord, have mercy on me.

R. And raise me, that I may be thankful for them.

LESSON IV. Taken out of the Treatise of St. Augustine upon the Sixty third
Psalm.
Augustine Jesus MAn shall penetrate into the depth of his heart; and God shall
be exalted. They have said, Who shall see us? They are wearied in searching
after wicked Councils. Man has penetrated into the wicked Councils, and has
suffered himself to be taken like a Man; for unless he had been a Man, he could
not have been taken, seen, whipped, crucified, or died: Therefore it was a Man
that underwent all these Passions; which unless he had been Man, could have had
no effect upon him. For had he not been Man, Man had never been delivered. Man
then penetrated into the depth of the heart, that is to say, into the Secret of
the Heart, presenting his Humanity to their sight; but concealing his Divinity
from them, and hiding from them his form of God, wherein he was equal to his
Father; and only permitting to their sight the form of a Servant, wherein he
was less than his Father.

RESP.

R. Our Pastor is retired; the Fountain of living Water is vanished, and the
Sun lost its Light at his passage: For he is now taken, who led the First Man
Captive. To day our Savior has broke both the Locks and Gates of Hell.

V. He has destroyed the prisons of Hell, and overthrown the Powers of the
Devil.

For he himself was taken, who led Captive the First Man.

LESSON V.
Augustine TO what excess did their Search and Care transport them? and how they
fainted in their Searchings! That our Lord being dead and buried, they should
set a Guard over his Sepulcher; for they said unto Pilate, That Seducer. By
that name they called our Lord Jesus Christ, to the comfort of his Servants,
when they are called Seducers. Therefore they said to Pilate, That Seducer
said, yet living, After three days I will rise again. Command therefore the
Sepulcher to be kept till the third day, lest perhaps his Disciples come and
steal him, and say to the People, He is risen from the dead: And the last error
shall be worse than the first. Pilate said to them, You have a Guard; go, guard
it, as you know. And they departing, made the Sepulcher sure, sealing up the
Stone with Watchmen.

RESP.

O all ye that pass by this way, behold, and see, if there be any grief like
mine.

V. All ye people, behold, and see my grief; if there be any grief like mine.

LESSON VI.
Augustine THey set a Guard of Soldiers to keep the Sepulcher. In the mean time
the Earth trembled, and our Lord arose, signalizing his Resurrection by so many
Miracles, that the very Soldiers who guarded his Body became Witnesses, and
could have declared it, if they had willed to have spoken truth. But Avarice,
which had possessed that Companion-Disciple of Christ, had likewise entered the
Hearts of those Soldiers who kept the Sepulcher. We will give you Money, said
they, and say, That whilst ye were asleep, his Disciples came and stole him
away. Truly they failed in their vain Searches. Unhappy as ye are, What have ye
said? Where is your Subtleness and Cunning? Are ye so blind? Have ye so little
Sense? Are ye so wicked and malicious, to utter such Words? O unhappy Craft!
What have thou said? Do thou forsake so much the Light of Counsel and Piety?
And art thou so much drowned in Cunning and Wickedness, as to say this? Do ye
say, That whilst ye slept, his Disciples came and stole him away? You produce
sleeping Witnesses; but rather you have slept your self, since you are lost in
your vain Search.

RESP.

Isay; Behold, how the Just perishes, and there is none that considers in
his heart; and men of mercy are gathered away, because there is none that
understands: for at the face of malice is the Just gathered away.

V. As a Lamb before his shearer, he shall be dumb, and shall not open his
mouth. From distress and from judgment he was taken up: And his memory shall be
in peace.

Behold, how the just perishes, etc.

THIRD NOCTVRN.
PSALM 53.

Ant. God helps me, and our Lord is the receiver of my soul.

O God, save me in thy name: and in thy strength judge me.

O God, hear my prayers with thine ears: receive the words of my mouth.

Because strangers have risen up against me, and the strong have sought my
soul: and they have not set God before their eyes.

For behold, God helps me: and our Lord is the receiver of my soul.

Turn away the evils to mine enemies: and in thy truth destroy them.

I will voluntarily sacrifice to thee: and will confess to thy name, O Lord,
because it is good.

Because thou have delivered me out of all tribulation: and mine eye has
looked down upon mine enemies.

Ant. God helps me: and our Lord is the receiver of my soul.

PSALM 75.

Israel Jerusalem, Ant. And his place is made in peace: and his habitation in
Sion.

GOd is known in Jewry: in Israel his name is great.

And his place is made in peace: and his habitation in Sion.

There he brake the powers of bows: the shield, the sword, and the battle.

Thou do illuminate merveilously from the eternal mountains: all the foolish
of heart were troubled.

They slept their sleep: and all the men of riches found nothing in their hands.

At thy reprehension, O God of Jacob, they have slumbred that mounted on horses.

Thou art terrible, and who shall resist thee? from that time thy wrath.

From heaven thou have made thy judgment heard: the earth trembled, and was
quiet.

When God arose unto judgment, that he might save all the meek of the earth.

Because the cogitation of man shall confess to thee: and the remains of the
cogitation shall keep festival day to thee.

Vow ye, and tender to our Lord your God: all ye that round about him bring
gifts.

To the terrible, and him that takes away the spirit of princes, terrible to
the kings of the earth.

Ant. His place is made in peace: and his habitation in Sion.

PSALM 87.

Ant. I am become as a man without help: free among the dead.

O Lord, the God of my salvation: in the day have I cried, and in the night
before thee.

Let my prayer enter in thy sight: incline thine ear to my petition.

Because my soul is replenished with evils: and my life has approached to hell.

I am accounted with them that descend into the lake: I am become as a man
without help, free among the dead.

As the wounded sleeping in the sepulchers, of whom thou art mindful no more:
and they are cast off from thy hand.

They have put me in the lower lake: in the dark places, and in the shadow of
death.

Thy fury is confirmed upon me: and all thy waves thou have brought in upon me.

Thou have made my familiars far from me: they have put me abomination to
themselves.

I was delivered, and came not forth: mine eyes languished for poverty.

I cried to thee, O Lord, all the day: I stretched out my hands to thee.

Will thou do merveils to the dead: or shall physicians raise to life, and they
confess to thee?

Shall any in the sepulcher d^^^e thy mercy: and thy truth in perdition?

Shall thy merveilous works be known in darkness: and thy justice in the land
of oblivion?

And I, O Lord, have cried to thee: and in the morning shall my prayer prevent
thee.

Why do thou, O Lord, reject my prayer: turnest away thy face from me?

I am poor, and in labors from my youth: and being exalted, humbled and
troubled.

Thy wraths have passed upon me: and thy terrors have troubled me.

They have compassed me as water all the day: they compassed me together.

Thou have made friend and neighbor far from me: and my familiar, because of
misery.

Ant. I am become as a man without help: free among the dead.

V. His place is made in peace,

R. And his habitation in Sion.

LESSON VII. Taken out of the Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews,
Chap. 9.
CHrist assisting an high priest of the good things to come, by a more ample
and more perfect tabernacle not made with hand, that is, not of this creation:
neither by the blood of goats or of calves, but by his own blood, entered in
once into the holies, eternal redemption being found. For if the blood of goats
and of oxen, and the ashes of an heifer being sprinkled, sanctifies the
polluted to the cleansing of the flesh: How much more has the blood of Christ,
who by the Holy Ghost offered himself unspotted unto God, cleansed our
conscience from dead works, to serve the living God?

RESP.

R. The kings of the earth have risen up, and the princes are assembled
together, against the Lord, and against his Christ.

V. Why have the nations raged, and the people meditated vain things?

Against the Lord, and against his Christ.

LESSON VIII.
Exodus chap. ANd therefore he is the mediator of the new testament: that death
being a mean unto the redemption of these prevarications which were under the
former testament, they that are called may receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. For where there is a testament, the death of the testator must of
necessity come between: for a testament is confirmed in the dead: otherwise it
is yet of no value whilst the testator lives. Whereupon neither was the first
certes dedicated without blood.

RESP.

R. I am accounted with them that descend into the lake. I am become as a man
without help, free among the dead.

V. They have put me in the lower lake: in the dark places, and in the shadow
of death.

I am become as, etc.

LESSON IX.
FOr all the commandment of the law being read of Moses to all the people, he
taking the blood of calves and goats, with water and scarlet-wooll and hyssop,
sprinkled the very book also it self, and all the people, saying, This is the
blood of the testament, which God has commanded unto you. The tabernacle also,
and all the vessel of the ministry, he in like manner sprinkled with blood.
And all things almost according to the law are cleansed with blood: and without
shedding of blood there is not remission.

RESP.

Leviticus; JESUS CHRIST; R. Our Lord being buried, his monument was sealed,
rolling a stone against the mouth of the monument, setting soldiers who might
guard it.

V. The chief priests came unto Pilate, and asked of him, setting soldiers who
might keep him.

R. Our Lord being buried.

AT LAUDS.
CHRIST's ANTHYMN, taken out of the Thirteenth Chapter of the Prophet Osee.

Ant. I Will be thy death, O death: thy bit will I be, O hell.

PSALM 50.

Miserere mei Deus, etc. as before, p. 65.

ANTHYMN, taken out of the Twelfth Chapter of the Prophet Zachary.

They shall lament him with lamentation as it were upon an only begotten,
because our innocent Lord is slain.

PSALM 42.

JESUS CHRIST, Jerusalem, JUdge me, O God, and discern my cause from the nation
not holy, from the unjust and deceitful man deliver me.

Because thou art God my strength: why have thou repelled me? and why go I
sorrowful, whilst the enemy afflicts me?

Send forth thy light and thy truth: they have conducted me, and brought me
into thy holy hill, and into thy tabernacles.

And I will go into the altar of God: to God, which makes my youth joyful.

I will confess to thee on the harp, O God, my God: Why art thou sorrowful, O
my soul? and do thou trouble me?

Hope in God, because yet I will confess to him: the salvation of my
countenance, and my God.

Ant. They shall lament him with lamentation, as it were upon an only begotten:
because our innocent Lord is slain.

Ant. Behold, all ye people, and see my grief.

The Psalm Deus, De^^^eus, as before, p. 69.

Ant. From the gate of hell deliver my soul, O Lord.

The Canticle of Ezechias, Isa. 38.

Ezekias Isay, JESUS CHRIST. I Have said, In the midst of my days shall I go to
the gates of hell.

I have sought the residue of my years: I have said, I shall not see our Lord
God in the land of the living.

I shall behold man no more, and the inhabiter of rest.

My generation is taken away, and is wrapped together from me, as the tent of
shepherds.

My life is cut off as by a weaver: whilst I yet began, he cut me off: from
morning until night thou will make an end of me.

I hoped until morning: as a lion so has he broken all my bones.

From morning until evening thou will make an end of me. As a young swallow, so
will I cry, I will meditate as a dove.

Mine eyes are weakened, looking on high.

Lord, I suffer violence, answer for me. What shall I say, or what shall he
answer me? whereas himself has done it.

I will recount to thee all my years, in the bitterness of my soul.

Lord, if man's life be such, and the life of my spirit in such things, thou
shall chastise me, and shall quicken me. Behold, in peace is my bitterness most
bitter.

But thou have delivered my soul that it should not perish: thou have cast all
my sins behind my back.

Because hell shall not confess to thee, neither shall death praise thee: they
that go down into the lake, shall not expect thy truth.

The living, the living, he shall confess to thee, as I also this day: the
father shall make the truth known to the children.

O Lord, save me, and we shall sing our psalms all the days of our life in the
house of our Lord.

Ant. From the gate of hell deliver my soul, O Lord.

Ant. O all ye that pass by this way, behold and see, if there be any grief
like unto mine.

Psalm, Laudate Dominum de coelis, etc. as before, p. 74.

V. My flesh shall rest in hope.

R. And thou shall not give thy holy One to see corruption.

AT BENEDICTUS.
ANTHYMN.

THe women sitting at the monument, lamented, weeping for our Lord.

THE CANTICLE OF ZACHARY.

Benedictus, etc. as before, p. 78.

V. Christ was made obedient for us unto death, even the death of the cross.

R. Wherefore God has exalted him, and given him a name above all names.

Pater noster, etc. Miserere mei Deus, etc. as before, p. 13. and 65.

THE PRAYER.

Respice Quoesumus, etc. as before, p. 80.

FOR SATURDAY IN Holy-Week. AT COMPLINE.
Jube Domine, etc. as before, p. 12. to p. 19.

The Chapter and Hymn are omitted. The Chapter is not said, to signify, That
after the Resurrection the Blessed will need no farther Instructions in their
Estate of eternal Blessedness, which is represented by the Chapters of Divine
Offices.

The Hymn is also omitted, to show, That after the Resurrection, they praise
not God in Heaven with such Hymns as they sang unto him in this World; but that
they will praise him after another manner.

Ant. And in the evening of the Sabbath.

THE CANTICLE OF SIMEON, Luke 2.

NOw thou do dismiss thy servant, O Lord, according to thy word, in peace.

Because mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

Which thou have prepared before the face of all peoples.

A light to the revelation of the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

Even as it was in the beginning, and now, and ever, and world without end.
Amen.

Ant. And in the evening of the Sabbath, which dawneth on the first of the
Sabbath, came Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary, to see the Sepulcher.
Alleluiah.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

Let us pray.

VIsit, we beseech thee, O Lord, this Habitation, and repel far from it all
Snares of the Enemy: Let thy Holy Angel dwell therein, to preserve us in Peace,
and thy Blessing be upon us for ever: Through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son,
who lives and reigns with thee, in the Unity of the Holy Ghost, one God,
world without end. Amen.

V. Our Lord be with you.

R. And with thy spirit.

V. Let us bless our Lord. Alleluiah, Alleluiah.

R. Thanks be to God. Alleluiah, Alleluiah.

THE BLESSING.

V. THe Almighty and Merciful Lord, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
Bless and keep us. Amen.

THE ANTHYMN OF THE HOLY VIRGIN.

O Queen of Heaven, rejoice. Alleluiah. For he whom thou deservest to bear,
Alleluiah, has risen, as he said. Alleluiah.

Pray unto God for us. Alleluiah.

V. Rejoice and be glad, O Virgin Mary. Alleluiah.

R. Because our Lord has truly risen. Alleluiah.

Let us pray.

O God, who by the Resurrection of thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ have
vouchsafed to make glad the world: Grant, we beseech thee, that by his Mother
the Virgin Mary we may receive the Joys of Life eternal: Through the same
Christ our Lord.

R. Amen.

V. The Divine Help always remain with us. R. Amen.

Pater noster, etc. Ave Maria, etc. Credo in Deum, etc.

FINIS.

