THE COMMONWEALTHS GREAT SHIP Commonly called the SOVEREIGN of the SEAS,
built in the year, 1637. With a true and exact Dimension of her Bulk and
Burden, and those Decorements which beautify and adorn her, with the Carving
work, Figures, and Mottoes upon them. She is besides her Tunnage 1637. Tuns in
burden: She bears five Lamhorns, the biggest of which will hold ten persons
to stand upright, without shouldring or pressing one another. With the names of
all the Ropes, Masts, Sails, and Cordage that helong unto a SHIP. As also the
names of all our Commanders at Sea, the number of Men and Gunnes which every
Ship carries both in their Admiral, Vice Admiral, and Reare-Admirall. With
all the Fights we have had with the Hollander, since the Engagement of
Lieutenant-Admirall Trompe near DOVER, against the English Fleet under the
Command of General Blake, at the same time that three of their Ambassadors
were here treating of PEACE. With a perfect rehearsal of an Act for increase
of Shipping, and Encouragement of the Navigation of this Nation, which so much
displeases the HOLLANDER.

Go not forth hastily to strive, least thou know not what to do in the end
thereof, when thy neighbor has put thee to shame. LONDON, Printed by M.
Simmons, for Tho: Jenner, and are to be sold at the South Entrance of the
Royal Exchange, 1653.

numbered diagram of a ship or galleon with rigging, flying the flag or ensign
of Cromwell's commonwealth THE SOVEREIGN OF THE SEAS BVILTE IN THE YEAR 1637


The Commonwealths Ship, commonly called the Sovereign of the Seas, with her
bulk, and burden.
BEFORE I come to give you a true and exact Dimension of her bulk, burden,
etc. it is necessary that I make some satisfaction to the world concerning
those Decorements which beautify and adorn her, and to render a fair account
of mine own invention concerning the carving work, the Figures, and Mottoes
upon them, which some perhaps have too liberally taxed: Thus therefore to any
who have formerly either doubted of their propriety, or are at this present
desirous to understand their imagined obscurity, I thus freely deliver my self.

Upon the Beak-head sits royal King Edgar on horseback, trampling upon
seven Kings.

Concerning those Kings whom you may perceive to lie prostrate under his Horses
hoofes, they were Kynadus, King of the Scots, Malcolme, King of Cumberland; and
of the petty Kings of Wales, Dufnall, Grifith, Huvall, Jacob, Judithil. He
moreover surprised by Sea a Prince of the Romans, whose name was Maxentius, who
had done many outrages upon the Ocean, and was the greatest Arch-pirate that
those times afforded. He also compelled Ludwallus, prime Prince and King of
Cambria, which is Wales, (because he would have all the ravenous and dammageous
Beasts to be destroyed through the Land) to pay unto him yearly by way of
Tribute, three hundred Wolves skins: by reason whereof, within the space of
forty years after, in England, or Wales, both which (but especially Wales) who
before were miserably infested with that kind of beast, there was scarcely to
be fouud one Wolf alive: and so much for the Princes over which he had sole
dominion.

His Navy Royal consisted of three thousand and six hundred Ships, (such as
they used in those days) yet not any of them but serviceable either for Fight,
or bearing Victual, and munition, to furnish the Navy, which he divided into
three parts, appointing to every of them a several squadron: and this he did
to secure Navigators from Enemies, and Sea-Rovers, as also from all other
neighbor Princes, who might challenge any interest in these our four Seas.
And therefore every Spring and Summer, he in person sailed with those in the
East parts, to them that lay hovering in the West. And sending them back
again with their Charge, would with the West squadrant, sail into the North,
and after with the Northern Fleet compass into the East, by which the Maine
Ocean rounding those Islands, of which he was sole Prince and Monarch, being at
his only charge, both quieted and secured, he did (as justly he might) write
himself Lord of the four Seas.

I began at the Beak-head, where I desire you to take notice, that upon the
stemme-head there is Cupid, or a Child resembling him, bestriding and bridling
a Lion, which imports, That sufferance may curb Insolence, and Innocence
restrain violence.

On the Bulk-head right forward, stand six several Statues in sundry postures,
their Figures representing Consilium, that is, Counsel: Cura, that is, Care:
Conamen, that is, Industry, and unanimous endeavor in one compartment:
Counsel holding in her hand a closed or folded Scrole; Care, a Sea-compasse;
Conamen, or Industry, a Lint stock fixed. Upon the other, to correspond with
the former, Vis, which implies force, or strength; handing a Sword. Virtus, or
Virtue, a sphearicall Globe: and Victoria, or Victory, a wreath of Laurel. The
Moral is, that in all high Enterprises there ought to be first Counsel, to
undertake; then Care, to manage; and Industry, to perform; and in the next
place, where there is ability and strength to oppose, and Virtue to direct,
Victory consequently is always at hand, ready to crown the undertaking.

Upon the Hances of the waste are four Figures, with their several
properties: Jupiter riding upon his Eagle, with his Trisulke (from which he
darteth Thunder) in his hand: Mars with his Sword and Target, a Fox being his
Emblem: Neptune with his Seahorse, Dolphin, and Trident: and lastly, Aeolus
upon a Camelion (a Beast that lives only by the Air) with the four Winds,
his Ministers or Agents, the East, called Eurus, Subsolanus, and Apeliotes: the
North-winde, Septentrio, Aquilo, or Boreas: the West, Zephyrus, Favonius, Lybs,
and Africus: the South, Auster, or Notus.

I come now to the Stearn, where you may perceive upon the upright of the upper
Counter, stands Victory in the middle of a Frontispiece, with this general
motto, Validis incumbite remus: It is so plain, that I shall not need to give
it an English interpretation: Her wings are equally displayed; on one Arm she
wears a Crown, on the other a Laurel, which imply Riches and Honor: in her
two hands she holds two Mottoes; her right hand, which points to Jason,
bears this Inscription, Nava. Jason being figured with his Oar in his hand, as
being the prime Argonant, and say Nava, or more plainly, Operam nava; for in
those Emblematicall Mottoes, quod subintelligitur, non deest. She points to
Hercules on the finister side, with his Club in his hand, with this motto, O
Hercules, be thou as valiant with thy Club upon the Land, as Jason is
industrious with his Oar upon the Water. Hercules again pointing to Aeolus,
the god of Winds, says Flato: who answers him again, Flo: Jason pointing
to Neptune, the god of the Seas (riding upon a Sea horse) says Favelo; to whom
Neptune answers, No; These words Flo, and No, were also much excepted at, as
if there had been no such Latin words, till some better examining their Gramar
Rules, found out Flo, flas, flavi, proper to Aeolus, and No, nas, navi, to
Neptune, etc.

In the lower Counter of the Stern, on either side of the Helm is this
Inscription, He who Seas, Winds, and Navies does protect,
The Sovereign, the great Ship in her course direct.


There are other things in this Vessel worthy remarkable, at least, if not
admiration; namely, that one Tree, or Oak, made four of the principal beams
of this great Ship, which was 44. foot of strong and serviceable Timber in
length, three foot Diametre at the top, and ten foot Diametre at the stubb or
bottom.

Another (as worthy of especial observation is) that one piece of Timber which
made the Kel-son, was so great and weighty, that 28. Oxen, and four Horses,
with much difficulty drew it from the place where it grew, and from whence it
was cut down, unto the waterside.

There is one thing above all these for the world to take especial notice of,
that she is, besides her Tunnage, just so many Tuns in burden, as there have
been years since our Blessed Saviors Incarnation, namely, 1637. and not one
under, or over: A most happy Omen, which though it was not at the first
projected or intended, is now by true computation found so to happen.

It would be too tedious to insist upon every Ornament belonging to this
incomparable Vessel, yet thus much concerning Her outward appearance; She has
two Galleries of a side, and all of most curious carved Work, and all the
sides of the shipp are carved also with Trophies of Artyllerie and Types of
honor, as well belonging to Land as Sea, with Symboles, Emblemes, and
Impresses appertaining to the Art of Navigation: and thus much in a succinct
way. I have delivered unto you concerning her inward and outward Decorements; I
come now to describe her in her exect Dimension.

Her length by the Keele is 128. foot, or thereabout, within some few inches.
Her main breadth or wideness from side to side 48. foot. Her utmost length
from the fore-end of the Beake-head, unto the after end of the Stern, a prora
ad puppim, 232. foot; She is in height from the bottom of her Keele to the
top of her Lantern, seventy six foot, she bears five Lanthorns, the
biggest of which will hold ten persons to stand upright, and without shouldring
or pressing one the other.

She has three flush Deckes, and a Fore-Castle, an half Deck, a quarter
Deck, and a round-house. Her lower Tire has thirty ports, which are to be
furnished with Demy-Conon and whole Canon throughout, being able to bear them.
Her middle Tire has also thirty ports for Demi-Culverin, and whole Culverin.
Her third Tire has 26. ports for other Ordnance; her Fore-Castle has twelve
ports, and her half Deck has fourteen ports; She has thirteen or
fourteen ports more within board for murdering pieces, besides a great many
Loop holes out of the Cabins for Musket Shot. She carries moreover ten
pieces of chase Ordnance in her, right forward, and ten right off, that is
according to Land-service in the front and the rear. She carries eleven
Anchors, one of them weighing four thousand four hundred, etc. and according
to these are her Cables, Masts, Sails, and Cordage.

I come now to give you a particular Denomination of the prime Workmen
employed in this inimitable Fabric; as first Captain Phines Pett, Over-seer
of the Work, and one of the Principal Officers; of whose knowledge,
experience, and judgment, I cannot render a merited Character.

The Master Builder is young Mr. Peter Pett, the most ingenuous son of so
much improved a Father, who before he was full 25. years of age, made the
Model, and since has perfected the work, which has won not only the
approbation, but admiration of all men, of whom I may truly say, as Horace did
of Argus, that famous Ship-master, (Who built the great Argo in which the
Grecian Princels Rowed through the Hell spont to fetch the goleen Fleece from
Colchos.

Pallas her self flew into his bosom, and not only enjoined him to the
undertaking, but inspired him in the managing of so exquisite anabsolute an
Architecture.

The names of all the Roapes, Masts, Sails, and Cordage that belong unto a Ship.
1. ANchor. Anchorstocke. An Awning. Axell-tree. Ballast. 3. The Beak or
Beakhead. Beam. Bedds. 4 A Bend. A Berth. 5 Blocks. 6 A Boalt roape. 7 Bolt
sprit. 8 A Bonnet. A Boome. 9 The Bow. A Bower. Brackets. 10 Brases. 11
Brayles. Breech and breeching. Brest-Roapes. A Buoy. 12 A Buttocke, A Cabell.
Caburne. 13 The Cap. The Cap-staine. Cap stainebars. Carlings. A Carriage.
Carnels. A Case. Caskets. Catharpings. 14 Catt. 15 Cat-holes or houcks.
Cheeks. Cheteres. Clamps. A Cleate. Clew. 16 Clew-garnet. 17 Clew-line. A
Clincher. Cocks. 18 The Collar. The Comb. Cooke-Room. Cordage. 19 Counter. A
Crabb. A Cradle. Cringles. 20 Cros-Jack. 21 Cros-tree. 22 Crow-feet. Cubbridg
head. The Davit. 23 Deadmen-eys. 24 Deck. Deep-see-lead. Deep-see-line. Dock. A
Drabler. Draggs. A Drift-saile. Duck up. 25 Earing. Entring-ladder.
Entring-roape. Eyes. Eylet-holes. 26 A Facke. 27 The Farthell. Fartheling
lines. Fidd. Fammer. The Fish. 26 Flaggs. 27 The Flook. The Flowr. Flush. The
Fly. 28 Foremast. 29 Fore-sail. 30 Fore-top-mast. 31 Fore-top-yard. 32
Fore-yard. Futtocks. The Garboord. 33 The Garnet. Girt. Goose-wing. Grapnell. A
Gripe. Gromets. A Guge. Hallyards. 34 The Hawses. A Hawses. Head-lines. 35 Head
sails. Head-sea. The Helm. Honeycomb. The Hooks. A Horse. A Hullock. The
Jeere. The Jeere-Capstaine. A Juncke. A Jury-mast. A Kedger. The Keele. The
Keel-Roap. Keeleson. The Knave-line. Knees. Kneetles. The Knights. Knots.
Ladder. 36. A land-Turne. A Langrell. Lasking. Latchets. Ledges. The lec-fauge.
The Leetch. Leetch-lines. 36 Legs. Lines pins. Lockers. A Logg-line. The
Loofe. A loofe-hooke. A Lust. The Manger. Marling. Marling-speeke. Martnets.
Masts. 37 The misen. 38 The misen-mast. 37 The misen-saile 39 The
missen-topmast. 40 The missen-yard Munck-seame. The Needle. Nettings.
Netting-sailes. Nippers. Out Licker. Oze, or Ozie. A Pantch. A Bardude.
Parrells. The Partners. A Passaredo. The Paul. A Peeke. 41 Pendants. The
Pillow. A Pintell. 42 The Poope. A Port. Powches. The Prowe. Priming. Puddings.
Pullies. Pumps. The Pumb-break. The Pump-Can. The Pump Dale. 43 Puttocks. 44
Quarter Deck. A Quoyle. Quoyns. Ram-head. Ranges. Ribbs. To Ride. Riders.
Rigging. Ring-bolts. The Risings. Rising-timbers. A Road. A Roader. 45 Roaps.
Roap-yarnes. Robbins. Roofe-trees. 46 The Round-house The Roll. 47 The Rudder.
The rudder-roap. Rudder-irons. The Run. Rung-heads. The Rungs. The Runner. 48
Sails. A Sacrfe. A Scuttle. A Seele. Shackles. The Shancke. Shanck-painter.
Shearing. 49 Sheats. Shoars. Shore. Shot. Showle. 50 Shrowds. The Sillinder.
Sinnet. The Skeg. The Skiff. Skupper, or skupper-holes. Skupper-leathers.
Skupper-nailes. A Selatch. Sleepers. Slings. A smitting-line. A snatch-block.
Sockets. Sounding-line. A spindle. Spit. 51 Sprit-saile. 52
Sprit-saile-topsaile. 53 Sprit-saile-topmast. 54 Sprit-saile-yard. Spung-yarn.
55 Stays, and backstayes. 56 The stern. Stern-shevts. The steeridg. 57 The
stem. A stepp. Stoaked. A stake. A strap. A stream-anchor. Stream Cable. A
stretch. Studding-sailes. A sturrop. Swisters. 58 Tackes. To tack a ship. 59
Tackles. Talle. Tamkin. Tapering. Thight. Thwart-ships. Ties. Top-armors.
Top-Gallants. Topmast. Top-Roaps. To Tow. The Tuck. A Violl. A Warp.
Wast-Board. Wast clothes. Whoodings. A Worm. Wormings. A Yard. A Yawe. A
Yoke. 60 A Jacke.
A Narrative of the late Engagement between the English Fleet under the Command
of General Blake, and the Holland Fleet under the Command of Lieuteiant
Admiral Trump near Dover.
portrait of Maartin Tromp, probably by Wenceslaus Hollar (per the National
Portrait Gallery, London) Martin Tromp, Admiral of Holland and West-friesland.


UPON Tuesday the 18. of May, 1652. in the morning, General Blake being gone to
the Westward, as far as Rye Bay eight days before, with twelve or thirteen
Ships, leaving Major Bourn in the Downs with eight Ships only, there appeared
upon the back side of the Goodwin, a Holland Fleet of Men of War, consisting of
two and forty Ships, one whereof had a Flagg on the main-top-Mast head, the
rest Jacks and Ancients; and being come unto the South-sands head, two of them
bore up toward the English Ships in the Downs, whereupon Major Bourn sent out
the Greyhound to examine them, and to know the reason of their so near
approach; who answering, That they had a Message to the Commander in Chief in
the Downs, were permitted to come in; and having saluted the Flag, the two
Captains, named Tyson and Aldred came aboard the said Major Bourn, and
acquanted him that they were sent by Van Trump, to let him know that he had
been Riding about Dunkirke with His Fleet, where by reason of foul Weather
they had lost many of their Cables and Anchors, and the wind being Northerly,
were driven more to the Southward then they intended, which Van Trump thought
fit to signify, to prevent any mis-apprehensions or Jealousies. And having
said this, and received for answer, That the Reality of what they said would
best appear by their speedy drawing off from this Coast, they departed to their
Fleet; and immediately upon their arrival with them, the whole Fleet stood up
to Dover, and came to an Anchor within little more then shot of the Castle the
same day in the afternoon. Upon their coming before Dover Castle, and Riding
there with Flag in the Main-top, without saluting the Castle, the Castle made
three shot at them; notwithstanding which, the Dutch Admiral kept up his
Flagg, and rode there at Anchor until the next day noon, and exercised his
Musketeers, by discharging volleys of small shot many hours together. Upon
Wednesday about twelve a clock the Dutch Fleet weighed Anchor, and stood off
toward Calice some four Leagues into the South-east; about the same time the
English Fleet under General Blake coming from the West toward the Downs,
discovered them, and supposed by their course they had been going back; Major
Bourn likewise was in sight, coming from the Downs to join with General Blake.
About an hour or two after, the Holland Fleet altered their course, came back
again, made all the Sail they could, and bore directly with General Blake,
Van Trump the headmost with his Flag in the Main-top; and being come within
shot, the General shot a Gun at his Main-top, and then two single shot more:
whereupon Trump shot a single shot through the Generals Flag, and then
immediately gave the first Broad side, and took in his Pendants, and hung out
his Red Flagg under the Holland Colors, which was the Signal on their part for
their whole Fleet to engage, and so the Fight began, which happened between
four and five a clock in the afternoon, and continued until nine of the clock.
In the Fight the English took two of the Holland Fleet, one whereof having six
foot water in the Hold they left, taking the Captain and Officers aboard, the
other being a Ship of thirty Guns. General Blake lay all night where the Fight
began, or near thereabouts, and the Holland Fleet was espied about four
Leagues distant toward the Coast of France next morning.

The truth of this Relation appears in the Letters of General Blake, Major
Bourn, and others in the Action, by the Examinations of the Dutch Captains, and
other Officers taken in the Fight:

And whereas Van Trump in the account he gives of this Action, makes the
occasion of his coming back upon the English Fleet, the guarding of some
Merchant men richly laden from the Streights, which had been in fight with some
of our Frigots: That action is set down in a letter written by Captain Young,
whereby the occasion, beginning and ending thereof is declared: And besides,
these very ships which he pretends to come to protect or rescue, upon Saturday
before had passed by General Blake, and were gone to the Eastward.

General Blake's Letter.
Right Honorable,
I Have dispatched away this Express to your Honors, to give you an account of
what past yesterday between us and the Dutch Fleet being in Rye Bay; I received
Intelligence from Major Bourne, that Van Trump with forty Sail was off the
South-sand head, whereupon I made all possible speed to ply up toward them,
and yesterday in the morning we saw them at Anchor in and near Dover-Road;
being come within three leagues of them, they weighed and stood away by a wind
to the Eastward: We supposing their intention was to leave us to avoid the
dispute of the Flag; about two hours after they altered their course, and bore
directly with us, Van Trump the headmost, whereupon we lay by, and put our
selves into a fighting posture, judging they had a resolution to engage being
come within Musket shot, I gave order to fire at his flag, which was done
thrice, after the third shot he let fly a Broad side at us; Major Bourn, with
those Ships that came from the Downs, being eight, was then makingtowards us,
we continued fighting till night, then our Ship being unable to sail, by
reason that all our Rigging and Sails were extremely shattered, our
Mizen-Mast shot off, we came with advice of the Captains to an Anchor about 3.
or 4. Leagues of the Ness to refit our Ship, at which we labored all the
night; this morning we espied the Dutch Fleet about four Leagues distance from
ours toward the Coast of France, and by advice of a Council of War, it was
resolved to ply to windward to keep the weather gage, and we are now ready to
let fall our Anchor this Tide; what course the Dutch Fleet steers we do not
well know, nor can we tell what harm we have done them, but we suppose one of
them to be sunk, and another of 30. Guns we have taken, with the Captains of
both, his Mainmast of the first being shot by the Board, and much water in the
Hold, made Captain Lawsons men to forsake her. We have six men of ours slain,
and nine or ten desperately wounded, and 25. more not without danger, amongst
them our Master and one of his Mates, and other Officers. We have received
about 70. great Shot in our Hull and Masts, in our Sails and Rigging without
number, being engaged with the whole Body of the Fleet for the space of four
hours: And the mark at which they aimed, we must needs acknowledge a great
Mercy that we had no more harm, and our hope the righteous God will continue
the same unto us, if there do arise a War between us; they being first in the
Breach, and seeking an Occasion to Quarrel, and watching as it seems, an
Advantage to brave us upon our own Coast, etc.

Your most humble Servant, Robert Blake.

The several Fights and Victories obtained (by GODS blessing) over the Dutch,
by the Fleet of the Commonwealth of England, since the late Engagement of the
Admiral Trump near Dover (contrary to the Law of Nature, and custom of
Nations) at the same time that three of their Ambassadors were here treating of
Peace.
JUNE 30. 1652. Sir George Aseue had advice 1 Victory after the Hollanders
breach of Peace.
of thirty or forty Dutchmen, homewards bound, with four men of War for
their Convoy, hearing they were very near the narrow, he presently weighed
Anchor with nine Sail, and stood over the Coast of France; some of his
headmost ships came up with the Dutch Fleet, twenty six of them ran directly
ashore upon Callis sands, five we took, two more we got off from the sands, and
burnt three. This Fleet of the Dutch came from Tardadoes in Portugal, most of
them laden with Salt and Oil.

The Names of the Dutch men of War, taken by General Blake 2 Victory.
in the North, being the Guard of the Fishing Busses.

Ball of Rotterdam, 24. Guns. Waterhound, Vice Admiral, 29. Guns. 3 Victory.
Sampson of Anchiusens, 28. Guns. Arms of Holland, 30. Guns. Noah's ark, 24.
Guns. Swan of Amsterdam, 28. Guns. Adam and Eve, 24. Guns. John Baptist, 22.
Guns. Land of Promise, 24. Guns. Sampson, 24. Guns. Two of which were sunk.

Sept. 25. 1652. The Holland Fleet appeared on the backside of the Goodwin, but
were that night driven back by a storm; the twenty sixth day they appeared, and
were forced away by another storm, twenty seven were forced away the third time
that General Blake got under Sail, and discovered the Dutch, they had two
Admirals, De Wit, and Ruiter, with about 54. sail of men of War, and some small
Vessels; our number was pretty equal with them. The event of the fight. Rear
Admiral of the Dutch, 36. Guns sanke, a great Vessel of thirty Guns taken,
their Reer-Admirall himself taken Prisoner, and one Captain more, 300.
Prisoners taken, one great Frigot of the Hollanders seen to sink; two Dutch
vessels sunk in the night after the fight. One hundred and odd of the Dutch
slain and drowned in the Reer-Admirall; all the Dutch Fleet generally much
torn and shattered, one of their Masts, and three of their ships being shot
off by the great Ship called the Commonwealth.

A Letter from Lieutenant Admiral Trump, to the High and mighty Lords, the
States General of the United Provinces, written in the Ship Brederode, before
Calais, March 4. 1653.
High and Mighty Lords,
THe fights begun the last of February, and did end the 2. of 4 Victory.
March, after Sunset, about the length of Portland, we being above 70. Ships
of War, and about 150. Merchantmen, Commander Ruiter, and those that were
with him, did fight the Enemy in the Rear; the Rear Admiral Peter Florize
fought in the Front of the Enemy, where Admiral Blake with the best ships was,
and the Vice Admiral Jan Everse in the midst. In the afternoon we went away
from the Enemy, we took Counsel, what hereafter we should do to fight with
the Enemy again, and leave the Merchantmen; and that we should not discharge
any Ordnance in vain, because our ammunition begun to be wanting; We did see a
great way by the East of us, only with his great sail floating, the ship called
the Vogolstruis, I did send ihe Commander Wild with three ships after him to
help him, and if unserviceable, to hale him if possible: After which, we did
gather our Body together, as well our Men of War, as Merchantmen, and went our
way.

March 1. in the morning we saw the ship, the Vrgelstrugs among the English
Fleet, then began the Enemy very furiously to assault us, five or six of his
best sailed Frigots keeping at each side of our Fleet. This day were cut off
from our Fleet Cap. Jan la Sage of Zealand, and Bruyin van Seelst of Amsterdam,
and some few Merchantmen, diverse ships came to us, complaining they had little
or no Powder nor Bullets left at all, every one did mend as much as they could
of what was shot in pieces.

March 2. the Enemy began again to assault us with a great fury; about two
hours in the afternoon, Blake being joined with the most part of his body, made
a sign to fall on again. The Vice Admiral Jan Everse, and others came to
speak with me, and called, they had neither powder nor shot, being dark, we put
our Lights up, Blake did likewise put his Lights up, being by the wind of us,
and after midnight we lost the Enemies Lights.

The third Ditto in the morning at breaking of the day we saw Calice S. W.
from us two miles.

Taken by the English from Van Trump 47. ships in this Conflict.

Gentlemen,
YEsterday morning being at Anchor some ten miles without the South-head of the
Gober, early in the morning we discryed the 5 Victory.
Dutch Fleet about two Leagues to the Leeward. We made sail toward them, and
between 11. and 12. at Noon we were engaged, and for three hours the dispute
was very sharp on both sides, which continued from 3. till 6. in the evening;
at which time the Enemy bore away right before the wind, and little more was
done, only the Frigots gave chase so long as there was any light to
distinguish one from another. One of the Dutch Admirals was blown up, and 3. or
4. sunk. We cannot hear that any of our own ships was lost in this Engagement,
blessed be the Lord. We are at this time very fair again by them, and shall
still endeavor our utmost to engage them as soon as we can. It has pleased
the Lord to take away General Dean in the fight, an honest and faithful
servant of the Commonwealth. He was slain by a great shot. In this Engagement
we have spent the greatest part of our powder and shot; and therefore I
earnestly desire you will take care that a considerable proportion may be
suddenly provided us and sent, with such Victuals and Waterships as are yet
behind. What ships are making ready in the River, may as soon as can be sent.
This is the best account can be given at present.

Your most affectionate friend and servant, GEO: MONK.
From aboard the Resolution, 14 Leagues from the North-foreland bearing west of
us, June 3. 1653. at 6 in the morning.
Another Letter from the Fleet subscribed by Genesis Blake, and Ceneral Monk,
directed to the Lord Ceneral Cromwell, as follows.
May it please your Excellency, Your Lordships of the second instant, with the
enclosed Intelligence, we this day received, and according to your Excellencies
apprehensions thereon, we have engaged with the Dutch Fleet, a brief account
of the first days action we have already sent unto your Lordship. The next day
being the third instant, we did what we could to reingage them, and having
the Wind (which was but little) about Noone we came within shot. After four
hours dispute with them, or thereabouts, they endeavored what they could to
get away from us; but having then a pretty fresh gale of wind, we pressed so
hard upon them, that we sunk and took many of them, as appears by the
enclosed List, and do suppose we should have destroyed most of them but that it
grew dark, and being off of Ostend among the sands, we durst not be too bold,
especially with the great ships, so that it was thought fit we should Anchor
all night, which we accordingly did about ten of the Clock. This morning some
of our ships descried the Enemy again afar off, steering toward the Weillings,
so far as with safety we might, and to range along the Coast till we came to
the Texel (the better to improve the present Victory God has given unto us)
unless we see cause to divert our course. We shall not further trouble your
Lordship, but subscribe our selves

Your Excellencies most humble Servants, Robert Blake. George Monk.

A List of the Dutch ships taken and sunk, with the number of Prisoners,
likewise the number of men slain and wounded on our part, viz.
On Thursday, 5. Dutch ships sunck. 2 blown up, 7. Taken. On Friday, Dutch
Prisoners 1350. whereof six Captains. 11. ships taken. 6 sunk. 2 Water-hoyes
taken. 2 ships blown up amongst their own Fleet. Sunk by that disaster, one.
Slain in our Fleet 126. whereof one Captain. Wounded 236. Not one ship lost on
our part.

full-length profile portrait of General Richard Deane holding a sword, set in
a view outward from inside a ship or galleon, bearing many flags, blazons and
penants; beyond this two other ships or galleons surrounded by smoke General
Deane (...), as he was flourishing his Sword at the head of the Ship, June 3.
1653.
Aetatio suae 42.



A Letter from General Monk.
Right Honorable,
SInce mine to you yesterday (wherein I gave you an account 6 Victory.
of the goodness of God toward us, and appearance for us in the Engagement with
our Enemy the day before, and that we were then in the pursuit of them) there
has little more been done, night drawing on, and the Dutch making directly to
the Texel with what sail they could, so that it was not fit to be bold on that
shore, not knowing how the wind may take us, many of our ships being much
disabled, but gave order to a small vessel or two to keep sight of them till
the morning, and observe what course they steered, who returning, gave an
account that the Enemy steered the same night into the Texel Harbor, and had
Boats with lights to guide them in; whereupon yesterday at a Council of War it
was resolved that the whole Fleet should presently set Sail for Southold Bay,
there to dispose of such ships as are disabled, and to send away our wounded
men and Prisoners, of which a certain account cannot be given at present, but
hope to do it very shortly. But I do present your Lordships here enclosed with
a general account, referring the condition of the wives and families of those
who are slain, to your Honors tender care, wherein I doubt not but you will
have respect to their necessities. I remain

Your Lordships most humble servant, George Monk.

The names of the Officers that were slain and wounded on our side.
In the Andrew, Cap. Tho: Graves. Golden Cock, Cap. Edmund Chapman. William,
Cap. John Tailor. May Flower, Cap. Will: Newman. Prosperous, Cap. Crisp.
Phoenix, Cap. Owen Cox. Wounded. In the Triumph, Cap. Peacock. The Laurel, Cap.
John Stokes. Dragon, Cap. John Seaman. Portland, Cap. William Rous. Assurance,
Cap. P. Holland. Tulip, Captain Joseph Cubit.

A list of the Dutch Captains taken Presoners
Admiral Trump slain by a Musket shot on his left breast.

1. Cor. John Evertson, Vice Admiral of Zealand, Captain of the Eyon. 2. Claus
Johnson Zanger. 3. Andrew Ferteene, Captain of the Concord. 4. Gebron Scotter,
Captaiu of the Golden-fleece. 5. Frederick Shellingworth. 6. John de Hea, Cap.
of the Garland, the ship burnt. 7. Captain Gotherick of the Joy of Flushing.

An Act for increase of Shipping, and encouragement of Navigation, and Fisherie
of this Nation, by catching of God, Ling, Herring, Pilchard, and that after the
first day of February, 1653. no fish shall be imported or exported in any other
ships or Vessels, save only in such as do truly and properly appertain unto
the people of this Commonwealth.
depiction of two boats or fishing-boats at sea; one in the distance has a man
pulling a rope tied to the topmast; one has three men pulling on a rope or line
from which hang several large fish

FOR the Increase Shipping, and the Encouragement of the Navigation of this
Nation, which under the good Providence of God, is so great a means of the
Welfare and Safety of this Commonwealth; Be it Enacted, That from and after
the first day of December, One thousand six hundred fifty and one, and from
thence forwards, No Goods or Commodities whatsoever, of the Growth, Production,
or Manufacture of Asia, Africa, or America, or of any part thereof; or of any
Islands belonging to them, or any of them, or which are described or laid down
in the usual Maps or Cards of those places, as well of the English
Plantations, as others, shall be Imported or brought into this Commonwealth of
England, or into Ireland, or any other Lands, Islands, Plantations or
Territories to this Commonwealth belonging, or in their Possession, in any
other Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels whatsoever, but only in such as do
truly and without fraud belong only to the People of this Commonwealth, or the
Plantations thereof, as the Proprietors or right Owners thereof: And whereof the
Master and Mariners are also for the most part of them, of the People of this
Commonwealth under the penalty of the forfeiture and loss of all the Goods
that shall be Imported contrary to this Act; as also of the Ship (with all her
Tackle, Guns and Apparel) in which the said Goods or Commodities shall be so
brought in and Imported, The one moiety to the use of the Commonwealth, and
the other moiety to the use and behoof of any person or persons who shall seize
the said Goods or Commodities, and shall prosecute the same in any Court of
Record within this Commonwealth, and in no other, except only such Foreign
Ships and Vessels as do truly and properly belong to people of that Country
or place, of which the said Goods are the Growth, Production, or Manufacture:
or to such Ports where the said Goods can only be, or most usually are first
shipped for Transportation. That no sort of Cod fish, Ling, Herring, Pilchard,
or any other kind of salted Fish, usually fished for, and caught by the people
of this Nation; nor any Oil made, or that shall be made of any kind of fish,
whatsoever, nor any Whole fins, or Whale bones, shall from hence forth be
imported in to this Commonwealth, or into Ireland, or any other Lands,
Islands, Plantations, or Territories thereto belonging, or in their possession,
but only such as shall be caught in Vessels that do, or shall truly and
properly belong to the people of this Nation, as Proprietors and Right Owners
thereof: And the said Fish to be cured, and the Oil aforesaid made by the
people of this said Commonwealth, That no sort of Cod, Ling, Herring, Pilchard,
or any other kind of salted Fish whatsoever, which shall be caught and cured by
the people of this Commonwealth, shall be from and after the first day of Feb.
one thousand six hundred fifty three, Exported from any place or places
belonging to this Commonwealth, in any other Ship or Ships, Vessel or
Vessels, save only in such as do truly and properly appertain to the people of
this Commonwealth, That this Act extend not to restrain the Importation of any
of the Commodities of the Streights or Levant Seas, laden in the Shipping of
this Nation, though the said Commodities be not of the very Growth of the said
places, nor be meant to restrain the Importing of any East India Commodities
laden in the Shipping of this Nation, at the usual Port or places for Lading
of them heretofore in any part of those Seas, to the Southward and Eastward of
Cabo Bona Esperanza, although the said Ports be not the very places of their
Growth. That this extend not to Bullion, nor yet to any Goods taken, or that
shall be taken by way of Reprizall by any Ship or Ships, having Commission from
this Commonwealth. Provided, that this Act, or any thing therein contained,
shall not extend, nor be construed to extend to any Silk or Silke-wares which
shall be brought by Land from any parts of Italy, and there bought with the
proceed of English Commodities, sold either for Money, or in Barter; but that
it shall and may be lawful for any of the people of this Commonwealth, to
ship the same in English Vessels from Ostend, Newport, Roterdam, Middleburgh,
Amsterdam, or any Ports thereabouts; The Owners and Proprietors first making
Oath by themselves, or other credible Witness, before the Commissioners of the
Customs for the time being, or their Deputies, or one of the Barons of the
Exchequer, that the Goods aforesaid were so bought for his or their own proper
account in Italy.

A true Relation of a most bloody, treacherous, cruel Design of the Dutch in
the New-Netherlands in America, in supplying the Indians with Arms and
Ammunition, to burn and slay the English on a Sabbath day when they were at
meeting.
depiction of four male figures emerging in a line from a doorway; one carries
several muskets or guns; one carries several staffs or pikes; one carries a
basket; on the ground are barrels, helmets and armor

THE Colonies of New England consisting of several Governments, have the Dutch
settled to the Southwest of them, at the Manatha's or New-Netherlands, and the
French to the North-East, along the Grand River of Canada; between which
Nations there has ever been (till now of late) a friendly correspondence, and
a mutual assistance against the common Enemy, the barbarous Indians.

About six years since, the Dutch being reduced to a great exigence and strait
by the Indians, implored the English aid and assistance, which immediately was
sent them, under the command of Captain Underhill, a Gentleman of spirit,
experience, and conduct, who prizing Christian blood beyond Indian Wealth and
Treasure (being proffered a hogshead of their Wampampege to withdraw the
English Forces) fell on these Heathens in vindication of the Dutch, and in one
night cut off fourteen hundred of them, and so gallantly, with the hazard and
some loss of English Blood (through the assistance of the Omnipotent) resetled
the Hollandar in peace and safety,

But Ingratitude over-clouding those Heroic Actions, and Amboyna's treacherous
cruelty extending it self from the East to the West Indies, running in its
proper channel of Dutch blood, quickly sought their Neighbors, their Friends
their Noble Defenders, the English, Destruction; and by their unworthy
inequality of retribution, have chronicled themselves Ungrateful, Perfidious,
Bloody, and Cruel.

For about March last, 1653. with gifts and large promises they instigated and
hired four of the Grand Princes of those Territories, some of them most
fierce, barbarous, and bloody people, fit Instruments for so horrid a design,
on a Sabbath day, when all Families were at Meeting, unexpectedly to fall on
the English, and to burn and slay what possibly they could: and for the better
perfecting of this Diabolical plot, they supplied the Indians with Arms and
Ammunition, which were dispersed in all their Habitations, they having a Ship
sent them on purpose from Holland, the Fountain of Treacheries, with all
necessary tools for the acting of a second Amboyna Tragedy.

But the Omnipotent God (who has ever been a most merciful protector of the
English in those parts, as in the Pequet War, etc.) did through his infinite
goodness, most timely before the bloody day of acting, cause an Indian, that
should have been an Executioner, to be a revealing Deliverer of our Nation, who
informed the Magistrates of Boston of the Dutch and Indians bloody intentions;
whereupon they requested several Merchants of that Town with all expedition to
march forth toward the Indian Habitations, to see what they could discover. At
whose desire, Mr. Gardner, Mr. Hutchinson, Mr. Hooper, and Mr. Seavern rid
forth, and the first Wigwambs, or Indian houses they came to searching, they
found them full of Arms and Ammunition, (which have been ever prohibited the
Indians by the English) all their Muskets were charged with powder and ball,
which they brought with them to Boston: the Country was immediately put in a
posture of Defense, and two Gentlemen sent from Boston, viz. Captain John
Leveret, and Mr. Davis, to the New Netherlands with some Indians that
confessed, that they were hired by the Dutch for to be instruments in this
unheard of and unparalleld Inhumanity.

Some Letters affirm, that the French are confederate with the Dutch and
Indians, so that the English are environed with their Enemies But that out of
the hands of all their Enemies the Lord may deliver them, Let all good
Christians implore a blssing from the Almighty, that is most powerful to save,
that he may crown their Enterprises with successful Victories. Amen.

If any desire to be better informed of what here is inserted, let them repair
to any Merchant that holds correspondence with New England, whose Letters can
evidence the certainty hereof.

Wonderful and strange presages both in the Heavens, and by the water, and on
on the earth in Holland, fresh yet in memory, before any acts of hostility
betwixt them and the English, 1652. depiction of four men standing at the
seashore, gesturing toward four other men in a small boat or fishing-boat,
pulling a rope or line from which hang several large fish Ships and Nauall
fights with the English collers and Belgike Lion seen at the mouth of the Mase
by the fishermen at noonday and affermed upon oath 1655

Amsterdam, 1652.
We have many judicious men who have observed the signs of Heaven against
us, and the Prodigies on earth, and signs in the Air, and are afraid of them.
They remember a prophecy, that when the State-house of Amsterdam shall be
built, the glory of that City shall be pulled down; they say the beleagering
of that City by the Prince of Orange, showed the ruin of their liberty by
that Family; that the inundation of waters upon that City, a little after
Oranges death presaged a deluge of miseries breaking in upon them. The
dreadful apparition at the mouth of the Mase, of Ships and Navall fights, in
which were English colors, and the Dutch, with the belgic Lion, and this
seen by the Fishermen of Mazeland at noonday, and affirmed by oath was that
draught in the air, of the tragedy which is now acting upon the water; the
burning of the old Statehouse at Amsterdam, in which was great loss of papers
and money. The narrow escape of our fire ships by burning of the Lubeck ship,
and the burning up of our Magazens at Dorte, and the mutinous carriage of our
Schuterdy. The pest. in our ships, and Trumps coming to the Downs with above
100. sail, and not able to touch Sir George Ascue, who then had but 15. Ships
with him, though came up close, and endeavoring it, because the wind in our
Fleets teeth, as was in 88. The Spanish begin to improve and fortify his
Frontiers upon us, and are jealous of the Spanish nation at this time, knowing
he spares no oil to cast into this flame.

A letter from France of the rising of 13000. Protestans against the Papists.
depiction of the inside of a church, in which four men are setting fire to the
pulpit, benches or seats, etc.; at the four corners of this image are small
sketches of armies, military companies or groups of soldiers with flags or
ensigns and weapons The Papists at Vals in France burned the pulpit and
benches turned out the Minister upon which the Nobility and Gentrey arose in a
bodey about 10000

Honored Sir,
COunt de Rieux, and Madam de Ornana, and others, rose upon the Protestants at
Vals, when they were at Church, turned out the Minister, abused diverse, and
burnt the Pulpit, and Benches: Upon which the Protestant Nobility and Gentry
all about Lan guedock are risen in arms for their defense, and in a short time
got together above ten thousand men in a body, which so frighted the Papists in
Niesms, and other places thereabouts, that they are withdrawn as fast as they
can for fear of them. News hereof coming to the Court, the Kings Council
have passed a Declaration for the Protestants to enjoy the benefit formerly
granted at Nants, and of other Edicts in their behalf, and that Count de Rieux
and his Confederates shall repair all the damages the said Protestants have
sustained, and that the Protestants do lay down their Arms; and Count De
Rieux is sent for to Paris, to answer a Charge exhibited against him. Monsieur
De Ville France of the Protestant family of Manthurst, is come out of the
Daulphin to Niesms with 3000. men to send with the Protestants.

From Paris, September. 14. Stilo novo.
THings are here statu quo, as in my last, the Protestants being up in the
Province of Languedock grow very numerous, and appear to be in very good
earnest, having set out a public Manifesto, wherein they do declare the
ground of their taking Arms; and they have chosen themselves a General, not of
the rank of Nobility, because they are so apt upon all occasions to close with
the Court; but a a Gentleman, one Monsieur Cassagne an old Soldier, and an
able follower of that famous Prince, an able Politician, and a gallant
Sword-man to the Quondam Duke of Rhoane: So that the Court here are in extreme
agonies about it, and offer all the lenatives in the world to allay their
resolution, but by all signs and tokens there will as yet be no accommodation.

October 26, 1653. A Tumultuous rising of a company of Seamen at the Prize
Office.
depiction of a crowd, many holding pikes, and of a man on a horse; also two
gallows, from one of which hangs a body or corpse; a man supported by a ladder
at the other gollows is having a rope or noose put around his neck

THis day there was a Tumultuous rising of a company of Seamen, who demanding
at the Prize-Office their shares in some Prizes that had been taken, were so
rude in their demands, that the Commissioners were forced to send for some
Soldiers to appease the Tumult, which was not don without the loss of some
blood, one being slain on the place, and diverse hurt and wounded on both sides.
Afterward, the Seamen repaired to White Hall, and being more civil in their
Demands there, were promised to have what in reason was just: And some of the
chief of them being made sensible of the sad effects that would follow such
unadvised and desperate proceedings, they were content for that time to depart
in peace

October 27. The Seamen in a Tumultuous manner, in greater numbers than before,
rose again, many of them being armed with Swords and Pistols, and other
weapons: And coming down toward White Hall, they were met withal by the Lord
Generals Lifeguard at Charing-crosse, and soon dispersed, some cut and wounded.

By the Council of State appointed by Authority of Parliament.
WHereas for the encouragement of Seamen, a considerable augmentation has been
made of their Wages, and seasonable provision for such of them as have been
sick or wounded, and due consideration had of the wives, Children, and impotent
Parents of all Officers and Seamen that have been slain in the present Service,
as also their Months Gratuity and wages fully paid them upon coming in of the
said respective Ships, in which they have served; Notwithstanding all which,
and the extraordinary care that has been taken by the State from time to time
for their encouragement, diverse Seamen and others did on the 26 and 27 days of
this instant October, in a mutinous and seditious manner, assemble themselves
together in numerous companies, with Pistols, Swords, and other weapons, on the
Tower hill, at Charing-crosse, and other places in and about the Cities of
London and Westminster, to the disturbance of the public Peace: Now to the
end that such practices for the future may be prevented, which we have too much
cause to believe have been animated and fomented by discontented and
il-affected persons; and that others in time to come may not be seduced to
their own ruin, we do hereby Declare that exemplary Justice shall be inflicted
upon the chief Actors or Ringleaders of this Mutiny and Sedition, some of which
are now under custody: And do streitly charge and command, That no Mariner,
Seaman, or other persons whatsoever, upon pain of death, do presume to assemble
together in a mutinous or seditious mannner, or any ways countenance or abet
such Mutiny or Sedition. And we do further Declare, That a speedy course shall
be taken for the adjusting and payment of the money due to the Seamen for their
shares of Prizes; and that all due encouragement (which shall hereafter be
particularly expressed) shall be given to such as shall voluntarily engage
themselves in this present Service.

Dated at Whitehall, this 27 day of October. 1653.
An Additionall Article to the Laws of War, and Ordinances of the Sea.
THat all Mariners and others employed, or which have been employed in the
service of this Common-welath in their Fleets, or otherwise at Sea, shall after
the time of their respective discharges, demean themselves with all duty and
respect to the public Peace: And if any person who has been, is or shall be
so employed, has committed or abetted, or shall commit or abet any Mutinous or
Seditious act, whereby the Peace of this Commonwealth may be, or has been
endangered; Every such person shall be proceeded against, and suffer pains of
death, or otherwise, in the same sort and manner, as by the Laws of war and
Ordinances of the Sea already established, he might have been proceeded against
for any act of that nature, in case of being in actual Service.

Provided, That every person comprised within this Article, be proceeded
against within three Months after the Offense committed, and not otherwise.

Nov: 4. 1653. A Soldier hanged at Tower Hill.

Oct: 31. One of the chief mutinous Seamen was hanged, he having stirred up
the rest by making proclamation, etc. And another was whipped under the Gallows.

Sixteen Men of War were swept away, and 2000 Men drowned, with 500 piece of
Ordnance. The Sea broke in through their Banks in above dozen places, into the
Merchants Cellars and Warehouses, having been beaten on through the extreme
violence of the wind.
depiction of five ships or galleons on a stormy sea Amsterdam, November: 14.
1653.


DEwitte being come home with his Merchant men from Denmark, they began to
grow high with a design upon England, the Merchantmen being got in, Orders
were sent that they should by all means keep at Sea, fearing if the Fleet of
war had come in, they should not gather them together again, and determined to
supply them with Victuals, and other necessaries at a distance, that so they
might convey their last Vintage from France, through the Channel, and then
brave it upon the English Coasts, and endeavor to block up the Thames. In the
interim, it pleased God, that by a violent storm of a weeks continuance, no
less then sixteen men of war of De wits Fleet, were swept away, 2000 men
drowned, and 500 piece of Ordnance, whereof a good number Brass, and great
store of provision in a particular Vessel. The new Frigots lost their masts,
but saved themselves with much ado. As a further addition to their miseries,
the Sea brake into the Cellars and Warehouses, to the exceeding loss of their
Merchants, by making several breaches in their Banks in above a dozen places;
and generally over all the Low Countries, the Sea having been beaten on the
Coasts, through the extreme violence of winds and weather. And the Duke of
Lorraine is come once again on their Borders, to add to their troubles.

Harlem in Holland, December. 30. 1653. On Tuesday last there rose a very great
storm, which continued all night, there being between fifty and sixty Merchants
riding at Anchor at the Texel, many of them are sunk and cast away, but 17
saved between 30 and 40 are at best spoiled, sunk. and run a ground, and of
them no lost, amongst the rest there was one East India ship called the Lilly
lost, that was going out, and the Marigold is much hurt and shattered. One tore
and sunk another Diverse of them have been driven ashore and some upon Shelves
and Rocks, and many are lost in several parts. What the particular losses have
been cannot yet be collected. But the East India Fleet at Sea, being 150 ships,
are much feared. At Amsterdam also some hurt was done by this storm, for
without the gate of the City, by the (...) Bole. a Malt-Mill of Stephen Paters,
fell on fire with the violence of the motion, whereby not only the Mill but
four Houses that stood by it were burnt, to the great loss of Stephen Pater,
who had much Malt lay there. Also within the City, the iron Cross (that is
about 20 foot long, and weighed 14 or 1600 l.) that stood upon the West Church
lately built, the Weathercock above it, and the great Copper gilded Bowl under
it, which held near a Hogstead of Beer, were all blown down through the body of
the Church, falling on the Grave stones brake them, and tore the dead bodies in
their Graves. But the greatest loss I hear of was at Ripe in North Holland,
where an Oyl-Mill by the storm, in a violent motion by its own heat set fire,
and that burning set diverse Houses on fire, some 5 or 6 hundred Houses were
destroyed, and many persons burnt alive, and abundance of Goods, many being
taken in their Beds, and others burnt before they could get out of doors. And
not only the private Houses, but the two Churches, Townhouse, and the Way
house also as is said, are all laid in ashes. And the fire staid not in this
Town, but flew over the River sixty foot broad, that goes about the Bemster,
and upon the inside of the bank of the Bemster, burnt diverse Houses also; and
burnt the very ships (though small ones) and Boats that lay in the Haven;
besides what harm it has done in other parts not herein mentioned.

A LIST of the Commonwealth of Englands Navy at Sea, in their Expedition in
May, 1653. Under the Command of the Right Honorable Col: Richard Deane, and
Col: George Monk, Esquires, Generals and Admirals. Together with the Names of
all the Commanders of the said Fleet, and the number of Men and Guns which
every Ship carried, at that memorable Fight on the 2 and 3 of June, 1653. in
which through Gods blessing on the said Fleet, they took and destroyed between
20 and 30 Dutch Ships of War, and also took 1350 Prisoners, with very little
loss on our part; and pursued the Dutch to their own Harbors. Also a
distinction of part of those Ships (by the letter P in the Margent) which have
been taken Prizes, and are now in the Service of the Commonwealth.
THE FIRST SQUADRON. The Red Standard and Flagge, under the Squadronall Command
of the Generals above expressed.
Ships Names. Commanders. Men. Guns. The Resolution The Generals 550 88
Worcester Frigot George Dakins, Capt. 220 50 Advise Frigot Jer: Smith, Capt.
180 42 Diamond Frigot William Hill 180 42 Sapphire Frigot Nicholas Heaton. 140
38 Marmaduke Edward Blagg 460 42 Pelican Peter Motham 180 40 Mearmaid John King
100 26 P Goulden Fleece Nic: Foster 180 44 Loyalty John Limbry 150 34 Society
Nic: Lucas 140 44 Malaga Merchant Henry Collins 140 36 Martin John Vessy 90 14
P Fireships Fox -- Cornelius 30 10 P Fireships Fortune Humphry Morris 30 10 P
Fireships Renown. James Salmon 30 10

The Vice-Admirals Division of the Generals Squadron.
Triumph James Pecock, Vice Adm: 350 62 Laurel Frigot John Stoake, Capt. 200
48 Adventure Frigot Robert Nickson 160 40 Providence Frigot John Pearce 140 33
P Bear Francis Kerby 200 46 P Hearts ease Thomas Weight 150 36 P Hound Jonah
Hide 120 36 P Anne and Joyce William Pile 119 34 London Arthur Brown 200 40 P
Hanniball William Hadduck 180 44 P Mary Prize Henry Maddison 120 37 Thomas and
Will: John Jefferson 140 36

The Rear-Admirals Division of the Generals Squadron.
Speaker Frigot Samuel Hewet, Rear Adm. 300 56 Suffex Frigot Roger Cuttaine,
Capt. 180 46 Guiney Frigot Edmond Curtice 150 34 Tiger Gabriel Sanders 170 40
Violet Henry Southwood 180 40 P Sophia Robert Kerby 160 38 Falmouth Frigot John
Jeffreys 100 26 P 4 Sisters Robert Beck 120 30 Hambr: Merchant William Jessell
110 34 Phanix Henry Eaden 120 34 The Generals Squadron consisting of 38 Ships.
Managed by 6169 Men. Mounted with 1440 Guns.


THE SECOND SQUADRON. The English Colors, and White Flaggs, committed to the
Conduct of William Penn, Esquire; Vice Admiral of England, and Admiral of the
White Flagg.
Ships. Commanders. Men Guns. James William Pen, Esquire; Admi: 360 66 Lion John
Lambert, Capt. 220 50 Ruby Frigot Robert Sanders 180 42 Assistance Frigot
William Crispin 180 40 Foresight Frigot Richard Stayner 180 42 Portsmouth Frig:
Robert Doenford 170 38 P Anne Piercy Thomas Hare 120 33 P Peter John Littleton
100 32 Exchange Henry Tidman 100 30 P Merlin George Crapnell 090 12 Rich: and
Martha Evestace Smith 180 46 Sara Francis Steward 140 34 Lixa Merchant Simon
Baily 160 38 P Fireship, Falcion 030 10

The Vice-Amirals Division of the Vice-Admirals Squadron.
Victory Lionell Lane, Vice Adm: 300 60 Centurion Frigot Walter Vood, Capt. 200
42 Expedition Frigot Tho: Vodis 140 32 P Gilt flower John Hayward 120 32 P
Middle borow Tho: Wishing 120 32 P Raven Robert Tailor 140 38 Exchange Jeafrey
Dare 120 32 Giobe Robert Coleman 110 30 Prudent Mary John Tailor 100 28 Tho:
and Lucie Andrew Rand 125 34

The Reare-Admirals Division of the Vice-Admirals Squadron.
Andrew Tho: Graves, Rear Adm: 360 56 Assurance Frigot Phillip Holland, Capt.
160 36 P Crown -- Thomson, Capt. 140 36 P Duchess Richard Seafeild 090 24 P
Princes Maria Saite Hanly 170 38 P Waterhound Gyles Shelly 120 30 P Pearl
James Cadman 100 26 Reformation Anthony Erning 160 40 Industry Ben: Salmon 100
30 The Vice-Admirals Squadron consisting of 33 Ships. Managed by 5085 Men.
Mounted with 1189 Guns.


THE THIRD SQUADRON. The Blew Flaggs, Commanded by John Lawson, Esquire;
Rear-Admirall of England, and Admiral of the Blew Flagge.
Ships. Commanders. Men. Guns. George John Lawson, Esquire; Adm. 350 58 Kentish
Frigot Jac: Renolds, Capt. 180 50 Great President Francis Park 180 40 Nonesuch
Frigot Tho: Penrose 170 40 Success William Kendall 150 38 Welcome Tho: Harman
200 40 P Oak John Edwin 120 32 Brazill Friggot Tho: Heath 120 30 Eastl:
Merchant John Woulters 110 32 Adventure Edward Green 160 38 Samaritan Shadrach
Blake 120 30 P Hunter, Fireship, 30 10

The Vice-Admirals Division of the Rear-Admirals Squadron.
Vant Guard Joseph Jorden, Vice Ad. 390 56 Entrance Richard Nubery, Capt. 200
43 Dragon John Seaman 260 38 P Convert Phillip Githings 120 32 P Paul Anthony
Spatchurt 120 38 P Gift Tho: Salmon 130 34 Cressent Frigot Tho: Thorowood 115
30 Samuel Taboat Joseph Ames 110 30 Benjamin Robert Sparks 120 32 P King
Fardinando Richard Pain 140 36 P Roebuck Henry Fenn 100 30

The Rear-Admirals Division of the Rear-Admirals Squadron.
Rainbow William Godson, Rear Ad. 300 58 Convertine Frigot Anthony Join, Capt.
210 44 Amity Frigot Henry Pack 150 36 Dolphin Robert Davis 120 30 P Arms of
Holland Francis Mardrig 120 34 P Tulip Joseph Cubbit 120 32 Jonathan Robert
Graves 110 30 P Dragoneare Edward Smith 110 32 William and John Nath: Jesson
120 36 Nichodemus Frig. William Ledgant 40 12 P Blossom Nath: Cock 110 30 The
Rear-Admirals Squadron consisting of 34 Ships. Managed by 5015 Men. Mounted
with 1189 Guns.


The Total of Ships in the Fleet 105 The Total of Men 16269 The Total of
Guns 3840 Besides these, there have come to the Fleet, and with General Blake,
and other Ships, above twenty, since the draft of this Lift, whose names, and
number of Guns and Men, cannot be given at present.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold at his house in
Aldersgate Street, and by Tho: Jenner at the South-entrance of the Royal
EXCHANGE. 1653.


