A Compendious Discourse, PROVING EPISCOPACY TO BE OF APOSTOLICAL, AND
CONSEQVENTLY OF DIVINE INSTITUTION: BY A clear and weighty testimony of St.
Irenaeus a glorious Martyr, and renowned Bishop of Lions in France, upon the
year of our Lord, 184. The said Testimony being so declared, pressed, and
vindicated from all exceptions, that thereby an intelligent, and conscionable
Reader may receive abundant satisfaction in this behalf.

ISAIAH 39. 8. Let there be peace and truth in my days. BY Peloni Almoni,
Cosmopolites.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Richard Whitaker at the Kings Arms in Paul's
Churchyard, 1641.

To the Christian and Judicious Reader.
IT is true in this particular case of Episcopacy, which Solomon speaks in
the general: How good is a word spoken in due season? It is like apples of gold
in pictures of silver. If ever there were a season to write, or speak, in
defense of Episcopacy, it is now, or never; wherein men travail in birth to
bring forth their several conceits: some doubting whether it be of divine, or
humane institution: some affirming the one, some the other: some desiring to
preserve it, some to destroy it. In such a time silence is dangerous, wherein
liberty is ill given to, or ill taken by the adversaries of Gods ordinance to
publish their raw and undigested discourses; fraught with more malice then
truth. But cantabunt cygni, cum graculi tacuerint.

As for my self, I hope that I may make use of this public liberty, without
offense (which I seek not) or danger (which I regard not) to speak a word for
my Reverend Mother, the Church of England, and my Venerable Fathers, the
Bishops thereof: for I may say with S. Hierome, in a cause Ecclesiastical;
Mori possum, tacere non possum. I pass a while under an unknown name; as some
adversaries of Episcopacy do: the person is little to the matter: Res cum re,
causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet, as S. Augustine writes.

Mean while know thus much of me unknown; that I have no dependence upon any
Bishop; though there be one, singularly learned and truly religious, in that
sacred Order, Cui debeo quicquid possum, and non possum (to use S. Hieromes
words) from whom yet, as from the rest, I expect nothing; being rich in my
contentment, and private course of life; wherein though I enjoy little, yet I
seek nothing more; but that the truth may have victory, the Church peace, and
God the glory; Amen.

Land. May 31. 1641. Thy friend in Christ Peloni Almoni.

A Compendious Discourse proving Episcopacy to be of Apostolical and
consequently of Divine Institution.
It is a vanity to speak much of a little, and a difficulty to speak little
of much; as in this copious argument of Episcopacy, which pleads descent from
the blessed Apostles: to which purpose I might produce many proofs from
Scripture, Antiquity, (Fathers, and Histories) from the most famous Divines of
foreign Churches and our own; and finally from Reasons, depending upon the
sacred oracles of God.

But now, in this latitude of matter, to avoid longitude of discourse, I have
confined my self especially to one important Testimony; one in stead of many,
or of all: in pursuit, explication, and defense whereof, I shall have occasion,
fairly presented unto me, to reflect a little upon those other grounds: and so
out of all, to give as plentiful satisfaction upon this point as it does
require, or so compendious a discourse can permit.

Understand then, you that are ignorant, or remember you that are learned, that
S. Irenaus confuteth the Marcionites, and Valentinians (leaden heretics in
that golden age) by a double probation: first out of the holy Scriptures, and
then by Apostolical Tradition; not in the Popish sense of an unwritten word,
but in an orthodoxall sense of the doctrine preached by the Apostles, and by
them, planted in the Churches which is also in the written word: the same
descending from the time of the Apostles unto the time of Irenaeus himself.

To this end and purpose, he first Lib. 3. cap. 3.
produces the Church of Rome; then most famous in the world, as instructed by
S. Peter and S. Paul, who as he conceives governed it jointly, and taught it
fully in all the mysteries of Christian doctrine; which finally they watered
with their own blood: from, and after whom (says he) in a lineall succession
Eleutherius, now the twelfth in order, possesses the Episcopacy of the same.

If any man doubt whether this Roman Episcopacy were of Apostolical
institution, or not, the substance of Irenaeus his discourse in that place will
bear it well; to which I now remit the ingenuous Reader, because I make have
unto his subsequent discourse, which takes away all doubt for first plantation
of Episcopacy in the Church. For thus he writes; Polycarp was not only taught
by the Apostles, and conversed with many of them, who saw the Lord, but was
also constituted, by the Apostles, BISHOP in Asia, and in the Church of Smyrna
there; whom we also saw in our first age; being his Disciple, as S. Hierom [de
viris illustr.] does record.

This testimony is so clear and ponderous, that it may sufficiently determine
the whole cause; if you consider the Person (who it is that speaks) and the
Matter, which he speaks. But since nothing is so clear, which may not seem
obscure, and nothing so ponderous, which may not seem light to a mind
possessed with unreasonable prejudice, I will now further declare, and press
this testimony of Irenaeus; fencing it also against all objections, which may
be framed against it; or against our cause, which does depend upon it.

First, then, consider with me the Author, or Relator rather, himself. Note
his antiquity: he lived in the time of Eleutherius, the twelfth Bishop of Rome;
upon the year of our Lord Functius in Chronolog.
185. We have few Authors (grave and certain) now extant, who lived before his
time; except Ignatius (whose 7. Epistles as they are his own, and aproved for
his by Vedelius, and are some of them lately cited by the adversaries of
Episcopacy under his name; so they fully express the clear distinction of
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, in the first age of the Christian Church)
and, after him, of Justinus Martyr, who, under the name of (...) (governor, or
prefect) does well discover what Episcopacy was in the second age of the Church.

Note then his quality. He was an holy man, a learned man, a peaceable man (as
it may appear by his Epistles addressed unto Uictor, Bishop of the Church of
Rome) a constant defendour of the truth, and finally a patient sufferer for the
same. What is your exception against him? The late unworthy Author of a book
entitled, Of Reformation, etc. has found some quarrel against him: but
Fevardentius, in his apologeticall preface (in the defense of Irenaeus) has
well answered such exceptions.

Howbeit, whatsoever errors, (more, or fewer; greater, or lesser) Irenaeus
had, or had not; it is nothing to the point now in question: for if he erred,
it was in a point dogmaticall: we are now upon a point historical, viz.
Whether this relation of Irenaeus, concerning the Episcopacy of Polycarpus,
which he received from the Apostles, be true, or not? Wherein he had
information immediately from Polycarp himself and the whole Church of Smyrna,
wherein he lived. Who will, who can who dares say that Irenaeus has lied in
this report? He knew Polycarp very well, and knew undoubtedly that his
Episcopal office was derived from the Apostles: why should this relation seem
incredible unto you?

The Scriptures themselves inform us so much: For, when S. John writes to the
Angel of the Church of Smyrna; who is this Angel? Polycarp: So the
concordance of Scriptures, and histories; so the judgment of many learned men
(and some protestants) do inform us. And why is Polycarp here an Angel?
because he is praepositus Ecclesiae, the Governor or Bishop of the Church:
many Presbyters being therein, but he, in title distinct from them, and in
power, superior to them; as we may clearly collect out of S. Augustine;
epist. 162. where first he shows and proves, that under the name of Angels,
are not understood celestial Angels in these 7. Churches (as Origin, and some
others following him, did conceive) and then, particularly for the Angel of
Ephesus, he says afterward, that he is praepositus Ecclesiae, the governor of
the Church; Now since we read of many Presbyters in Ephesus, Act. 20. 28. and
here of one Angel in it, he must needs be a person, in place, and office, as
well as name, distinguished from the common Presbyters of the Church: as
Epiphanius (more ancient then Aug.) does hence collect and constantly affirm,
Haeres. 25.

This explication is confirmed by our best Divines; as namely by venerable
Bullinger, conc. 9. in Apocal. saying, An heavenly Epistle is destinated to the
Angel of the Church of Smyrna. Now histories do testify, that the Angel, or
pastor of this Church was Polycarp; ordained a Bishop by the Apostles, even by
John himself. To him I conjoyne worthy Marlorat, saying that in Apoc. 2. 1,
John does not set upon the people, but upon principem Cleri, utique Episcopum:
the Bishop, Prince, or chief of the Clergy (Presbyters and Deacons) in that
Church. To both them I add the famous Clerk, David Pareus; who dares not say
(though some do) that Timothy was then the Angel, but denies not that we was
sometimes the Angel, or Bishop there: and therefore he puts there this
question in the margin; Was Timothy Bishop of the Ephesine Church at that
time? He says tunc, then: he says not unquam, at any time: which is a plain
concession, that, in his judgment, Timothy was sometimes (as indeed he was)
the Bishop of that Church. Also in Apocal. 3. 1. he confesses ingenuously
(upon evidence of the text) that, under the name of Angel there, is to be
understood ANTISTES, the Chief, the Prelate, the Bishop of the Church.

Which resolution of ancient and modern Divines (to which I add the judgment
of the great Divine D. Rainolds; Confer. with Heart. cap. 8. divis. 3:) is
confirmed by the perspicuous evidence of undeniable reason: for, in the Church
of Ephesus (and so in the rest) why is one man (where many Presbyters were)
called an Angel specially, but for his special eminency above the rest? And
why was the succession of one man to one observed in Histories, and registered
in the Diptycha of the Church, rather then of many to many? As here, in the
Church of Ephesus, of Smyrna and the rest, one man singularly is remembered: and
why one, if this one man did not, in dignity of his place and office therein,
excel the 'common Presbyters, as their Governor and Prefect, placed over
these Presbyters by the holy Apostles?

To this effect speaks Leontius, B. of Magnesia in the Council of Chalcedon,
Act. 11. amongst 630. Bishops, that Memnon, then B. of Ephesus was the 27.
Bishop in succession from and after Timothy, as being the first Bishop of that
Church. For as the subscription of the second Epistle of S. Paul to Timothy
does directly bear it; so we have a clear attestation to it from Eusebius, l.
3. c. 4. Epiphanius, har^s. 75. Chrysostom; praf^. in 1. ad Timoth, and homil.
1. in Epist. id Philip Hierome, de viris illustr. Anno D. 540.
Primasius, paefrat. in 1 ep. ad Timoth. To all which (and others) I may add
Oecumenius, who lived in the year 1080. as also Tertullian, who intimates
this truth sufficiently in his book of Prescriptions, cap. 36, and finally S.
Ambrose, praefat. in 1. epist. ad Timoth. but that I esteem the author to be
a counterfeit, whom yet I conceive to be very ancient.

Finally then, to end this point; Irenaeus has now related no more touching
Polycarps Episcopacy, then is warrantable by Scriptures, Fathers, Historians,
and our own Divines. I end therefore with Hierome, ep. 85. affirming that the
Apostles, by their tradition did institute Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons in
the new Testament, looking unto the answerable degrees of the High priest, the
inferior Priests and Levites in the old; and telling us, in his exposition of
Psalm 45. 16. that Bishops are there foretold; as Aug. also does himself
conceive.

To that ancient Hierome, I add a latter, viz. the most learned Zanchius,
confessing fairly and truly [Miscellan. t. 2. d^ primatu papae, p. 193.
impres. Neostad^i in 4. Anno D. 1608.] that, in the Church, FIRST Presbyters
only were. SECONDLY, says he, additi Episcopi, idque Apostolorum temporibus;
Bishops were added [as being in degree, place and office distinct from
Presbyters] and that also was done in the Apostles times. If in their times,
then by their means, as any rational man may thereupon conclude. For, who
durst institute Bishops in their times, without their direction? where, in
Scripture, or history, do they impugn this institution? And if they made not
this institution; who made it? What Council; general, or provincial? when?
where? produce any evidence of probable truth (I say not certain) in this
behalf.

And thus having justified the relation of Irenaeus, concerning the Episcopacy
of Polycarp, to which the Apostles (and particularly S. John did advance him) I
proceed to some other poor exceptions against the aforesaid testimony, which
need not so large a discussion, as the former; that being the very substance
and center of our whole discourse.

A second exception is, that, perhaps this place has Irenaeus, so it stood,
word for word, in the time of Eusebius, upon the year 330. who has thence
transcribed it into his Ecclesiastical history, lib. 9. c. 14. This is an old
device of heretics to say that the place is corrupted, when they cannot
^nswer it; as S. Augustine observes, Confess. lib. 5. c. 11.

A third exception is, that Irenaeus was himself a Bishop, and so not a
competent witness in such a case. Tertullian and Hierome were Presbyters only
(and not Bishops) whose judgment and testimony I will not decline in this
cause. Thus our English Divines are rejected, as being Bishops, or affecting
Episcopacy, and so their own Judges. Say what you please; yet I will conclude
this passage with the public protestation of that learned and holy man, D.
John White, in his Sermon at Paul's Cross, March 24. 1615. I protest before God
and man; it amazeth me to see such, as can read either SCRIPTVRE, or Antiquity
to carpe at it [Episcopacy] when the Christian world, for 1400. years after
Christ, never saw any other government, etc.

A fourth exception is, that Polycarp was no Lord

Truly said, but to little or no purpose. The Christian Church and temporal
State were then divided; and the first was persecuted by the second, till
glorious Constantine obtained the Imperial diadem, upon the year 316.
Afterward by favor of the Emperor, and other Princes, civil dignity, and
temporal power were annexed to Episcopal places, the Church and State being
now united together.

I say therefore, FIRST, that Bishops, for three centuries, had no such dignity
and power: they were Bishops without it then, and may be Bishops without it.
now. SECONDLY, that, as the State, for good reasons gave it so, for good
reasons (such as may be, not such as are) may take it away; but Episcopacy it
self, which God gave, no man may take away. Solomon might exclude Abiathar from
his Priesthood, but the Priesthood he could not dissolve. I speak not now of
absolute power, but lawful power in the State; for id possumus, quod jure
possumus, and no more. THIRDLY, that temporal power, annexed to Episcopal
function, may not only adorn it, but strengthen it, for the benefit of
Church, and Common wealth. FOURTHLY, that Bishops are capeable of this dignity,
and power; as Zanchius observes well, Epist. tom. 1. ad Ioh. Stuckium; saying,
that, since in the old Testament, one man [the High priest] exercised both
powers (spiritual and temporal) Non ergo per se pugnant; these two therefore
[to be a Bishop and a civil Potentate] do not, of themselves, the one oppugn
the other, but may both concur in one person: and then adds, that, in
writing the Confession of his Faith (upon occasion whereof this question did
arise) he was to have a regard of those Reformed Churches, wherein many [as
Bishops in England] have a temporal power conjoined with their spiritual
office. FIFTHLY, and lastly, I demand of the adversaries of Episcopacy: If
Bishops shall be excluded from civil dignity temporal power, etc. will you
rest so content? and shall our Bishops yet retain their spiritual office of
superiority over Presbyters, with such authority in the Church, as Christian
Bishops did obtain, and exercise therein, from and in the Apostolical times,
and in the succeeding ages of the primitive Church? No, but you would cast them
wholly out of the Church, or leave them an empty title without a real office;
which, in the perpetual discourse of all ages, they have enjoyed in the
universal Church.

To conclude: if malice in some did not envy their honor, and avarice in
others their estates, this exception were easily answered: but howsoever it be,
Bishops they are lawfully with both, and Bishops they may be truly without
either.

A fifth exception is, that Polycarp (as also Ignatius and a priority of place
before Presbyters, but not a superiority of power above them.

A weak pretense against the known testimony, and certain experience of all
ages, for proof whereof, I remit you unto S. Hierome (the supposed adversary
of Bishops) who in the very place, so often produced against Episcopacy, [viz,
in Tit. 1. 5.] says that the Bishop was suprapositus, placed above the
Presbyters of his Church. This is more, then he said, Epist. 85. that he was
praepositus, which perhaps you will render in English; placed before them)
though, in truth, it be no less.

And to make all clear in this point, he says yet further, Contra
Luciferianos, cap. 4. The safety of the Church depends upon the dignity of
the Bishop. Unless an eminent, and peerless power be given to him by all
men, there will be as many schisms as Priests, in the Church. Whereupon it is,
that in his instructions to Nepotianus, he says very well; What Aaron and his
sons once were, that we must know Bishops and Presbyters now are: viz. in
distinction, office, and degree, and whence it is that, as in S. Ignatius
first, so in other Authors afterward, through all ages of the Christian Church
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons are three distinct kinds in office, and
degree; the first above the second, and the second above the third: and not
weekly, monthly, yearly Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons; but perpetually,
during the time of their lives.

The SIXTH and last exception is yet more important, Bishops by Irenaeus, are in
the second chapter called Presbyters; and so Polycarp, though called here a
Bishop, is but a Presbyter; since Presbyters also are so called, Act. 20. 28.
Phil. 1. 1. etc.

I answer. It is true; these Bishops here are called Presbyters before: but
how? with an evident distinction from common Presbyters: for when Irenaeus,
from Peter and Paul, reckons a succession of 12. Bishops in the Church of
Rome; I demand: had these Bishops no certain distinction from other Presbyters
in that Church? I showed before that their personal and lineall succession is
observed by Irenaeus, and others: why? because they had a real difference from
all the Presbyters therein.

This point is cleared by many evidences; amongst which, for brevity sake, I
produce the Cyprian ep. 31. e. lit. 1. Pam^lii.
Epistle of the Presbyters and Deacons of the Roman Church, written to S.
Cyprian (upon the year 252.) wherein they say, that FABIAN their late Bishop
[the 19. in that place] was lately put to death; and that for the difficulty of
the times, another Bishop was not yet constituted; who might moderate the
affairs of the Church, and by his authority and counsel, might take care of
such as were fallen in the time of persecution.

I argue then, As Fabian lately was, and his successor shortly must be, in a
distinct place of government above the Presbyters of Rome, so was Eleutharius
(and so were his predecessors before) a BISHOP in higher place, of greater
power, above other Presbyters in the Roman Church.

For conclusion therefore of this point; I pray you, in all candor and
ingenuity, to consider with me, that, though Presbyters, in the beginning (when
as yet they had no Bishop over them) were called, and might be truly called
Bishops (that is to say, overseers; for they did, then under the Apostles,
oversec the Church, for a little time) yet, when the care of the whole Church
came peculiarly to the Bishop (as Hierome salth in Tit. 1. 5.) this name was
peculiarly attributed unto him, and not communicated unto them: witness the
same S. Hierom et. 85. where by particular instance, he makes the election of
Bishops in the Church of Alexandria, and says; that from Mark the Evangelist
unto Heraclas and Dionysius, the Presbyters electing one of their company and
placing him in a higher degree [note that by the way] called him their BISHOP.
So that here the name of a Bishop (by good authority, and for good reason) once
common to all the Presbyters, is now proper unto that Presbyter, who was placed
in an higher degree above the rest; which Calvin also has well observed; Inst.
l. 4. c. 4. sect. 1. and 2. saying that in the old Church, the title of Bishop
was specially given to one Presbyter: chosen out of the number of many.

To conclude then; you shall find sometimes in Antiquity, that a Bishop is
called a Presbyter: but can you find that any where a Presbyter is called a
Bishop? I am no stranger in the Councels, Fathers, and Histories, (in which
course of studies being now 62. years old, I have spent a moiety of my age)
and yet I can remember no such thing: and were a Presbyter so called, it were
rather by force of the word, (which imports overseeing) then by propriety of
speech; since, in Ecclesiastical use, the name of Bishop is appropriated to
him, who has a general overfight (for the Clergy and Laity) in his own
Diocese or precinct.

Finally then, as the High priest in the law is sometimes styled simply by the
name of the Priest, but yet was above other Priests in the old Testament, so a
Bishop is sometimes styled by the name of a Presbyter, but yet is above other
Presbyters in the new.

A Conclusion.
Thus, at the length, having cleared the testimony of Irenaeus, touching the
Episcopacy of Polycarp (committed unto him by the holy Apostles, and
particularly by S. John) from all exceptions (as I conceive) which some
adversaries of Episcopacy have taken, and some may take against it, I thus
conclude my whole discourse, and bring it to the present purpose; viz. A
Bishop, in the Church of England, does not unjustly usurp an office therein by
humane institution, but does justly possess it by The exercise and execution
of his office, in this or that place, a Bishop has by the favor of the Prince.
divine right; notwithstanding all malicious scoffs, and unlearned cavils,
against so ancient, so venerable, so necessary an Office in the Church of God.

Now if any man shall except against this discourse, as prejudicial to some
Reformed Churches, I answer, that my care has been to justify ours, but my
desire was not to impugn theirs: and that I am as tenderly affected to retain
communion with the ancient and Universal Church, as with any later, and
particular Church: though in the truth, and for the truth, I love and embrace
all Reformed Churches, for which I have a more copious defense, which may ensue
hereafter; this discourse being only the prodromus, or forerunner of a more
ample Treatise, which I have composed to maintain Episcopacy; under which I
live in peace, and without which I cannot live with comfort.

FINIS.

