THE Original Papers AND LETTERS, Relating to the Scots COMPANY, Trading to
Africa and the Indies:

From the Memorial given in against their taking Subscriptions at Hamburgh, by
Sir Paul Ricaut, His Majesty's Resident there, to Their last Address sent up to
His Majesty in December, 1699.

Faithfully extracted from the Companies-Books.

Printed Anno 1700.

The Original PAPERS and LETTERS, etc.
THere having been a great deal printed and said of late concerning the Company
of Scotland, trading to Africa and the Indies, and their Colony of Darien. In
order to obviate all Misrepresentations that may happen on either side in the
Heat of Debate, it is thought sit to publish the following Originals without
any Reflection, which will set that Matter in a true Light, give the Public
full Information as to the Principal Matters of Fact, and cannot justly be
taken ill by any Person or Party whatever.

A MEMORIAL Given in to the Senate of the City of Hamburg, in French.
Faithfully translated into English.
To their Magnificences the Burgo-Masters, and to the Gentlemen Counselors of
this City of Hamburg.
WE the Under-Subscribers, Ministers of His Majesty the King of Great Britain
have, upon the arrival of Commissioners from an Indian Company in Scotland,
represented at two several times to Your Magnificences and Lordships, from the
King our Master, That His Majesty understanding that the said Commissioners
endeavored to open to themselves a Commerce and Trade in these Parts, by
making some Convention or Treaty with this City, had commanded us most expressly
to notify to Your Magnificences and Lordships, That if you enter into such
Conventions with private Men, his Subjects, who have neither Credential
Letters, nor are any otherwise authorized by His Majesty, That His Majesty
would regard such Proceedings as an Affront to his Royal Authority, and that he
would not fail to resent it. Your Magnificences and Lordships had the Goodness
to Answer us thereto by Your Deputy, That you would no way enter into Commerce
with the before mentioned Commissioners, nor encourage them in any Sort.
Notwithstanding whereof we the Subscribers do see with Displeasure, That
without any regard to the Remonstrances made by us in the Name of His Majesty,
the Inhabitants of this City forbear not to make Conventions and Treaties with
the said Commissioners, who dare even erect a Public Office to receive
Subscribers, as appears by the annexed Print. And it is not very credible, That
Strangers could so openly enterprise Matters of such Importance, without being
supported by this Government. Wherefore we make our just Complaints thereof to
Your Magnificences and Lordships, beseeching You, in the Name of the King our
Master, to remedy in time, that which is begun, and to do it so effectually as
to prevent any Consequences it may have, capable to disturb the Friendship and
good Correspondence which we would cultivate between England and the City of
Hamburg. We wait Your Magnificences and Lordships Answer in Writing to be
transmitted to His Majesty our Master, and we are,

Your Magnificences and Lordships most Humble Servants, Paul Rycaut, Resident
for His Majesty the King of Great Britain, in the City of Hamburg. Cressett,
His Britannick Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary, at the Courts of Lunnenburgh, and
Plenipotentiary at the Treaty of Pinenberg.
Done at Hamburg, April 7. 1697.
To the King's Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Address of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland, Trading
to Africa and the Indies.
May it please Your Majesty,
WHereas, by the XXXII. Act of the Fourth Session, and by the VIII. Act of the
Fifth Session of Your Majesty's Current Parliament, as well as by Your
Majesty's Patent under the Great Seal of this Kingdom, This Company is
established with such Ample Privileges as were thought most proper for
encouraging both Natives and Foreigners to join in the Carrying on, Supporting
and Advancement of our Trade: The most Considerable of the Nobility, Gentry,
Merchants, and whole Body of the Royal Borroughs, have (upon the Inducement and
Public Faith of Your Majesty's said Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent)
contributed as Adventurers in raising a far more Considerable Joint Stock, than
any was ever before raised in this Kingdom, for any Public Undertaking or
Project of Trade what soever, which makes it now of so much the more Universal
a Concern to the Nation.

And for the better enabling us to accomplish the Ends of Your Majesty's said
Acts of Parliament and Letters Patents, we have, in pursuance thereunto,
appointed certain Deputies of our own Number to transact and negotiate our
necessary Affairs beyound Sea; And at the same time to treat with such
Foreigners of any Nation, in amity with Your Majesty, as may be inclinable to
join with us for the Purposes aforesaid.

In the Prosecution of which Commission to our said Deputies (vested with full
Power and Authority, according to Law) we are a little surpised to find, to
the great Hinderance and Obstruction of our Affairs, that Your Majesty's Envoy
to the Courts of Lunenburg, and Resident at Hamburg, have under Pretense of
special Warrant from Your Majesty, given in a Joint-subscrib'd Memorial to the
Senate of Humburg, expressly invading the Privileges granted to our Company by
Your Majesty's said Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent, as by the herewith
transmitted Copy may appear.

By the which Memorial we sustain great and manifest Prejudices, since both the
Senate and Inhabitants of the said City of Hamburg, are thereby (contrary to
the Law of Nations) expressly threatened with Your Majesty's high Displeasure, if
they, or either of them, should countenance or join with us in any Treaty of
Trade or Commerce whatsoever; which deprives us of the Assistance which we had
reason to expect from several Inhabitants of that City.

For Redress whereof, we do in all Duty and Humility apply to Your Majesty, not
only for the Protection and Maintenance of our Privileges and Freedom of Trade,
but also for Reparation of Damages, conform to Your Majesty's said Acts of
Parliament and Letters Patent: And do further beg Leave humbly to represent to
Your Majesty, that though by the said Act of Parliament and Letters Patent, we
conceive our selves legally and sufficiently authorized to treat even with any
Sovereign Potentate or Estate in Unity with Your Majesty, for the Support and
Advancement of our Trade, yet we by our said Deputies have only treated with
particular and private Merchants of the said City of Hamburg, without ever
making any the least Proposal to the Senate thereof. And this we humbly
conceive to be the natural Right and Privilege of all Merchants whatsoever,
even though we had wanted the Sanction of so solemn Laws. And without some speedy
Redress be had therein, not only this Company, but also all other individual
Merchants of this Kingdom, must from henceforward conclude, that all our Rights
and Freedom of Trade are, and may be, further, by our Neighbors, violently
wrested out of our Hands.

We therefore, to prevent the further evil Consequences of the said Memorial to
our Company in particular, do make our most humble and earnest Request to Your
Majesty, That You would be graciously pleased to grant us such a Declaration,
as in Your Royal Wisdom You shall think fit to render the Senate and
Inhabitants of the said City of Hamburg, and all others that are or may be
concerned, secure from the Treatnings and other Suggestions contained in the
said Memorial, as well as to render us secure under Your Majesty's Protection
in the full prosecution of our Trade, and free enjoyment of our Lawful Rights,
Privileges and Immunities, contained in Your Majesty's said Acts of Parliament
and Letters Patent abovementioned.

Signed at Edinburgh, the 28th Day of June 1697, in Name, Presence, and by
Order of the said Council General, by, May it please Your Majesty, Your
Majesty's most Faithful, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subject
and Servant, Sic subscribitur, Yester. P.

His Majesty's Answer to the said Address.
By the Right Honorable John Earl of Tullibardin, etc. and Sir James Ogilvie,
Knight, Secretaries of State.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WE are empowered by the King to signify unto you, That as soon as His Majesty
shall return to England, he will take into Consideration what you have
presented unto him: And that in the mean time His Majesty will give Orders to
the Envoy at the Courts of Lunenburg, and his Resident at Hamburg, not to make
use of His Majesty's Name or Authority, for obstructing your Company in the
Prosecution of your Trade with the Inhabitants of that City.

Signed at Edinburgh, the Second Day of August, 1697. Sic subscribitur,
Tullibardine. Ja. Ogilvie.

To the Council-General of the Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the
Indies.
THE Company's Letter TO THE Right Honorable the Earl of Tullibardin,
Secretary of State.
Edinburgh, Sept. 28. 1697. May it please your Lordship,
IT is not unknown to Your Lordship in what Humor the Council General of our
Company and most Part of the Nation were in, with Relation to the Memorial
given in to the Senate of Hamburg, against our Company by the English Ministers
there, upon which ensued the CouncilGenerals late Address, transmitted to His
Majesty by your Lordship. And your Lordship very well knows, that at your
Request and Desire, only upon Premises of using your best Endeavors to procure
a speedy and satisfactory Answer from his Majesty, the said Council-General was
prevailed upon to suspend representing that Matter further to the Government
till the second Day of August last past. On which Day your Lordship did
signify his Majesty's Answer to the said Address. Upon Receipt whereof the
said Council General did resolve to supersede any further Proceeding therein,
till His Majesty's arrival in England, as not in the least doubting but His
Majesty would have in the mean time, pursuant to his Answer, given Orders to
His Resident at Hamburg, with Relation to the Subject Matter of the said
Memorial: But we are extremely surprised to find by Letters of the 31st ultimo,
from our Company's Agent in that City, that he had, according to our Order,
been to wait on the English Resident there, and with all the Respect due to his
Character, intimated to him the Contents of the said Address and Answer. Upon
which the Resident declared, That he was ready and willing to obey His Master's
Orders, but that as yet, he had got none in that Matter. We cannot imagine what
should be the Occasion of this new Disappointment, since we cannot suffer our
selves to believe, but that His Majesty has, according to his Letter to your
Lordship, given Orders as aforesaid, which makes us admire the more where the
Neglect of that Matter does now stand: Yet we must needs say, We are in some
Measure afraid to acquaint the said Council-General with it, lest they be more
uneasy thereupon, than we would wish, till first we have your Lordship's
Answer: For which Cause we, the several under-subscribing Directors of the said
Company (who are now in Town) have thought fit, in as quiet a Manner as
possible, to give your Lordship an Account thereof, to the end you may in your
Wisdom and Prudence, advise His Majesty with Relation thereunto; and doubt not
but your Lordship will take such Care herein, as may prevent our Calling
another Council-General, with Relation to the Premises, which we are bound un
avoidably to do, if we have not your Lordship's timely Answer. We are,

May it please Your Lordship, Your Lordships most Obedient, Humble Servants,
Sic Subscribitur, Ad. Cockburn, Fran. Montgomery, Archb. Mure, Geo. Clark,
Robert Blackwood, James Balfour, William Paterson.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Tullibardin, Principal Secretary of State
for the Kingdom of Scotland.
Memorandum.
The Duplicate hereof was likewise sent at the same time to the Right
Honourrable Sir James Ogilvie, Knight, etc.

To the King's Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Address of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland, Trading
to Africa and the Indies.
May it please Your Majesty,
BY a former Address of the 28th of June last, we have humbly represented to
Your Majesty, how that Your Majesty's Envoy to the Courts of Lunenburg, and
Resident at Hamburgh, did under Pretense of Special Warrant from Your Majesty,
give in a Memorial to the Senate of the said City of Humburgh, contrary to the
Law of Nations, and expressly invading the Privileges contained in the Acts of
Parliament and Letters Patent, by which our Company is established: Copies of
which Address and Memorial we have, for Your Majesty's better Information,
hereto annexed. In answer to which, Your MAJESTY was then graciously pleased to
signify by Your Royal Letter, That upon Your MAJESTY's arrival in England, You
would take the Contents of our said Address into Consideration. And that in the
mean time, You would give Orders to Your said Ministers not to make use of your
Majesty's Name or Authority for obstructing our Company in the Prosecution of
our Trade, with the InhaDitants of the said City of Humburg. In the full
Assurance of which we rested secure, and took our Measures accordingly, till to
our further Surprise and great Disappointment, we find, by repeated Advices
from Hamburg, That Your Majesty's said Resident continues still Contumacious,
and is so far from giving due Obedience to Your Majesty's said Order, that upon
Application made to him for that Effect, with all the Respect due to his
Character, he pretended that he had never as yet got any such Order on our
Behalf, which we thought fit in all Duty and Humility, to lay before Your
Majesty, renewing withal our most humble and earnest Request, That Your Majesty
would be now graciously pleased to take the Contents of This, and our said
former Address, into Consideration, and in your Royal Wisdom order some speedy
and effectual Redress of our Grievances therein mentioned, and a just
Reparation of the manifest Damages, which our Company has already sustained, by
reason of the said Memorial. And grant us a Declaration under Your Royal Hand,
to render the Senate and Inhabitants of the said City of Hamburg, and all
others with whom we have occasion to enter in Commerce, secure from the
Threatenings and other false Suggestions, mentioned in the said Memorial, as
well as to render us secure under Your Majesty's Protection in the free
Enjoyment of our Lawful Rights and Privileges contained in Your Majesty's Acts
of Parliament and Letters Patent above mentioned.

Signed at Edinburgh, the 22d Day of December. 1697, in Name, Presence, and by
Order of the said Council General, by, May it please Your Majesty, Your
Majesty's most Faithful, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subject
and Servant, Sic subscribitur, Fran. Scott. Pr.

To the Right Houourable the Lord High Chancellor, and remanent Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
The humble Representation of the CouncilGeneral of the Company of Scotland,
Trading to Africa and the Indies.
May it please your Lordships,
It Is not unknown to your Lordships, how that in several successive Sessions of
this current Parliament, His Majesty's Instructions to His respective High
Commissioners, and their several Speeches pursuant thereunto, have been full of
repeated Assurances of His Majesty's good Inclinations for encouraging the
Trade and Manufactures of this Nation. And whereas accordingly, by the 32d Act
of the 4th Session, and the 8th Act of the 5th Session of the said Parliament,
together with His Majesty's Letters Patent under the great Seal of this
Kingdom, our Company is established with such ample Privileges and Immunities
as were thought most proper for encouraging both Natives and Foreigners to join
in the carrying on, supporting and advancement of our Trade. We have in
pursuance and upon public Faith thereof, not only contributed at home a far
more considerable Joint Stock than ever was raised before in this Nation, for
any public Undertaking or Project of Trade whatsoever; but have also had all
the promising Hopes and Prospect of Foreign Aid that our Hearts could wish,
till, to our great surprise, the English Ministers at Hamburgh have, under
pretense of Special Warrant from His Majesty, put a stop thereto, by giving in
a Memorial to the Senate of that City, threatening both Senate and Inhabitants
with the King's utmost Displeasure, if they should countenance or join with us
in any Treaty of Trade and Commerce: As by the annexed Copy thereof may appear.

Upon due Consideration whereof, we have, in all Duty and Humility, addressed
His Majesty in June last for redress thereof. In answer to which Address His
Majesty was then graciously pleased to signify by His Royal Letter, That upon
His return into England, He would take into Consideration the Contents of our
said Address. And that in the mean time He would give Orders to His said
Ministers at Hamburgh, not to make use of His Royal Name or Authority for
obstructing the Trade of our Company with the Inhabitants of that City. In the
full assurance of which we rested secure, and took our Measures accordingly,
till, to our further Surprise and unspeakable Prejudice, we found by repeated
Advices from Hamburgh, that the said Resident continues still Contumacious, and
is so far from due Obedience to His Majesty's said Order, that upon Application
made to him by our Agent in that City, with all the Respect due to his
Character, he declared, That as yet he had got no such Order on our behalf:
Which, by a further Address we are now to lay before His Majesty.

But whereas we humbly concelve your Lordships to be more immediately under His
Majejesty the Guardians of the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, we think it
our Duty to represent to Your Lordships the Consequences of the said Memorial,
both with relation to our Company in particular, and the Privileges, Interest,
Honor, Dignity and Reputation of the Nation in general.

Your Lordships very well know of what Concern the Success of this Company is
to the whole Kingdom, and that scarce any particular Society or Corporation
within the same can justly boast of so unanimous a Suffrage or Sanction, as the
Acts of Parliament, by which this Company is established: So that if effectual
means be not taken for putting an early stop to such an open and violent
Infringement of, and Encroachment upon the Privileges of so solemn a
Constitution, it is hard to guess how far it may in after Ages, be made use of
as a Precedent for invading and overturning, even the very Fundamental Rights,
Natural Liberties and indisputable Independency of this Kingdom; which, by the
now open and frequent Practices of our unkind Neighbors, seem to be too
shreudly pointed at. And should this Company (wherein the most considerable of
the Nobility, Gentry, Merchants, and whole Body of the Royal Boroughs are
concerned) be so unhappy (which God forbid) as to have its Designs rendered
unsuccessful, through the unaccountable evil Treatments of our said Neighbors;
most certain it is, that no Consideration whatever, can thereafter induce this
Nation to join in any such other Public, though never so advantageous
Undertaking, as not doubting but to meet with the like or greater
Discouragements from those who give such frequent and manifest Indications of
their Designs, to wrest our Right and Freedom of Trade out of our Hands.

For which cause we humbly offer tbe Premises to your Lordship's Consideration,
not doubting but you will (in your profound Wisdom and Prudence) take such
effectual Measures for redress thereof at present, and to prevent the like
Encroachments for the future, as may be capable to remove those Apprehensions
and Jealousies which the barefaced and avowed Methods of the English do now
suggest, not only to our Company in particular, but even to the whole Body of
this Nation in general.

Signed at Edinburgh, the 22d Day of December 1697, in Name, Presence, and by
Order of the said Council-General, by, May it please Your Lordships, Your
Lordship's most Obedient, and most humble Servant,Sic Subscribitur, Fran.
Scott, Pr.

The Answer by the two Secretaries of State, to the President of the Company.
Kensington, Jan. 17. 1697/8. SIR,
WE presented this Day to the King, the Address of the African Company: We
could not have Opportunity to do it sooner, His Majesty being so much taken up
at this time. The King said, That he had already given Orders to his Resident
at Hamburg in that Matter, conform to his Letter he wrote from Flanders in July
last, which was Communicated to the Company. We are,

SIR, Your Humble Servants, Sic subscribitur, Tullibardin, Ja. Ogilvie.

To Sir FRANCIS SCOTT, of Thirlestane.
To his Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the
States of Parliament.
The Humble Petition of the Council-General of the Company of Scotland, Trading
to Africa and the Indies,
Shows,
THat whereas the Wisdom of the King, and this present Parliament, has thought
fit by two several solemn Acts and Letters Patent under the Great Seal of this
Kingdom, to establish our Company with such Powers, Privileges and Immunities,
as were thought needful, to encourage any such new Undertaking in this Nation,
particularly to raise a Joint Stock in such manner as we should think fit. And
for that end to enfranchise such Foreigners as would become Partners with us,
and to enter into Treaties of Commerce with any in Amity with His Majesty for
that effect, etc. Those of our Number who were then entrusted with the
Management thereof, did think it most Natural to make the first Offer of
sharing our said Privileges, with our Country men, and other Neighbors in
England, as living under the same Monarchy. And they not only readily embraced
the Offer, but in nine Days time subcribed 300000 /. Sterling, as the one half
of the Capital Stock then proposed, and actually paid in the first fourth Part
thereof, part in Specie, part in Bank-Notes, and the rest in Notes payable upon
demand.

That both Houses of the Parliament of England, taking umbrage at those
Proceedings, did not only jointly Address His Majesty, for frustraring the Ends
of the said Act; but the House of Commons did also appoint a Committee to
examine, What Methods were taken, for obtaining the said Act of Parliament
here, for establishing our Company, who were the Subscribers thereto, and who
were the Promoters and Advisers thereof, with Power to send for Persons, Papers
and Records; pursuant to which, the said Committee gave Orders to summon not
only the English Subscribers, but even some Persons then residing in Scotland,
as by the said Address, Votes of the House of Commons, and Copy of the said
Summons, may appear; by all which, together with some other Measures then
taken. Our Friends in England were, to our great Loss, Disappointment, and
Retardment, forced to relinquish, etc.

That notwithsranding of that Discouragement, not only most of the Nobility,
Gentry, Merchants, and the whole Body of the Royal Boroughs, have upon the
Inducement, and Public Faith of the said Acts of Parliament and Letters
Patent, contributed as Adventurers, in raising a far more Considerable
Joint Stock, than any was ever before raised in this Kingdom for any Public
Undertaking or Project of Trade whatsoever (which makes it now of so much the
more universal a Concern to the Nation) but we have also had all the promising
Hopes of Foreign Aid that our Hearts could wish, especially at Hamburgh, where
the Merchants of that City entered into Contract with our Deputees, to join at
least 200000 /. Sterling with us, till, to our great Surprise and Loss, the
English Ministers there, did, under Pretense of Special Warrant from His
Majesty, put a Stop thereto, by giving in a Memorial to the Senate of that
City, not only disowning the Authority of the said Acts of Parliament and
Letters Patents, but also threatening both Senate and Inhabitants, with the
Kings outmost Displeasure, if they should countenance or join with us in any
Treaty of Trade or Commerce, as by the annexed Copies thereof, in French and
English may appear; which Memorial, We humbly pray, may for the better
Information of your Grace, and Right Honorable Estates, be also read in
Parliament.

That after the said Memorial was by the Senate transmitted to the Commercij or
Body of Merchants of that City, they to assert their own Freedom, did advise
and prevail upon our Deputees and Agents, who were there for the time, to open
Books in the said Merchants Hall, where for some Days they signed
considerableSumms pursuant to their said Contract, though under Condition to be
void, if we should not procure some Declaration from the King, that might
render them secure from the Threatenings and other Insinuations contained in the
said Memorial: And to our great Disappointment, thus the Case stands in
suspense, between them and us to this Day.

That as the reasonable (nay, and unquestionable) Prospect which we had of a
powerful Assistance from Hamburg, and several other Places (if not obstructed
as aforesaid) induced us to propose a far greater Equipage at first than
otherwise we would have done; so the rendering of those Measures abortive, has
not only weakened our Stock, lessened our Credit, retarded our first
Expedition, and dishheartned many of our Partners at Home, but even also
shackled our Resolutions and Power from prosecuting at present several other
Branches of Foreign and Domestic Trades and Improvements, which we had in
view, if we had not met with such Obstructions and Discouragements from time to
time.

That though our Company is more immediately and sensibly touched in many
Respects by such Proceedings than any other; yet we humbly conceiving also,
that the Honor and Independency of the Nation, as well as the Authority and
Credit of the Parliament is struck at through our sides, we could not as
Countrymen; and in Duty to that collective Power, which gave our Company first
a Being; but inform his Grace, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right
Honorable the Estates of Parliament of the Premises, to the end that the great
Council of the Nation, now assembled (whom God Almighty direct) may do therein
as they in their profound Wisdom and Discretion shall think fit.

That as to what thereof concerns our Company in particular, we shall humbly.
beg leave to suggest further, that our Ships being now at Sea, on their
intended Voyage, the former Treatment which our Company met with in England and
elsewhere, may give us too just Grounds to suspect, that if either through
multiplicity of Public Affairs, or otherwise howsoever: Your Grace and Right
Honorable Estates of Parliament, should neglect the taking present Notice of
such Usage the Enemies of our Company, would be thereby encouraged, either
directly or indirectly to pursue their former Designs of ruining (if possible)
all our Measures.

May it therefore please your Grace, and the Right Honorable the Estates of
Parliament, to take the Premises into your most serious Consideration, to
vindicate our Company's Reputation Abroad, by supporting the Credit of the said
Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent, by which the same is established, and
wherein the Honor of the Nation is so much concerned, to take effectual
Measures (as the said Act provides) for repairing, the great Loss and Damages,
which we have already sustained, through the unawarrantable Treatment above
mentioned, as well as for, preventing the like for the future; and withal to
continue us the Privileges and Exemptions mentioned in the said Acts of
Parliament and Letters Patent sor some longer time, in Consideration of the
time already elapsed without Execution, and our Stock lying dead without
Improvement, by Reason of the Obstructions aforesaid.

Signed at Edinburgh, the 22d Day of July, School. in Name and Presence of the
said CouncilGeneral, by, Sic subscribitur, Basil Hamilton, J. P. C. G.

An Address to his Majesty by the Parliament thereupon.
WE your Majesty's most loyal and faithful Subjects, The Noblemen, Barons, and
Burgesses conveened in Parliament, humbly represent to your Majesty, That
having considered a Representation made to us by the CouncilGeneral of the
Company Trading to Africa and the Indies: making mention of several
Obstructions they have met with in the Prosecution of their Trade. particularly
by a Memorial presented to the Senate of Hamburgh, by your Majesty's Residents
in that City, tending to lessen the Credit of the Rights and Privileges granted
to the said Company, by an Act of this present Parliament.

We therefore in all humble Duty lay before your Majesty, the whole Nation's
Concern in this Matter, and we do most earnestly entreat, and most assuredly
expect, That your Majesty will in your Royal Wisdom take such Measures as may
effectually vindicate the undoubted Rights and Privileges of the said Company,
and suppor the Credit and Interest thereof.

And as we are in Duty bound to return your Majesty most hearty Thanks, for the
gracious Assurances your Majesty has been pleased to give us of all due
Encouragement for promoting the Trade of this Kingdom: So we are thereby
encouraged at present, humbly to recommend to more special Marks of your Royal
Favor, the Concerns of the said Company, as that Branch of our Trade, in which
we, and the Nation we represent have a more peculiar Interest.

Subscribed at Edinburgh, the 5th of August School. in Name, Presence, and by
Warrant of the Estates of Parliament. Sic-Subscribitur, Seafield, I.P.D.P.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Court of Directors of the Company of Scotland,
trading to Africa and the Indies.
Shows,
THAT whereas the Estates of Parliament have by their Address of the 5th of
August instant, been pleased to recommend the Concerns of the said Company to
some Marks of your Royal Favor for supporting the Credit and Interest thereof,
which has already suffered in a great measure, by reason of the several
Obstructions which they have met with in the prosecution of their Trade;
particularly by a Memorial given in to the Senate of Hamburgh, by your
Majesty's Ministers there. We are thereby encouraged in all humility to lay
before your Majesty,

That as the said Memorial was given in to the Senate of Humburgh, in a most
solemn and public manner: So your Petioners humbly conceive that the Effects
thereof cannot be taken away, but by some Intimation made to the said Senate
that they may enter into Commerce with your Petitioners, as freely and securely
in all respects as they might have done before the giving in of the said
Memorial.

That in consideration of the Damages sustained by the Company as aforesaid,
Your Majesty would be pleased for their Encouragement at present as a gracious
Mark of your Royal Favor to bestow upon them the two smallest of the Frigots
now lying useless in Brunti-land Harbor.

That in regard of the time already lost by reason of the Obstructions
aforesaid, Your Majesty would be graciously pleased to continue the Privileges
granted by Act of Parliament to the said Company, of being Custom-free, for
such longer time as your Majesty shall in your Royal Wisdom think sit.

In respect of all which, may it please your Majesty to take the whole Premises
into your Royal Consideration, and give such Orders and Directions with
relation thereunto, as to your Majesty in your Royal Wisdom shall seem meet and
expedient.

Signed at Edinburgh the 16th day of August School. in Name, Presence, and by
Warrant of the said Court of Directors, by, May it please your Majesty, Your
Majesty's most loyal, most dutiful, most humble, and, most obedient Subject and
Servant,Sic-Subscribiur, Geo. Clark, I. P. C. D.

Letters from Mr. Stevenson the Companys Agent at Hamburgh, to the Company.
Hamburgh the 4th of October.
Much honored Lords and Gentlemen;
I Wrote to you on the 26th past, advising you of my going post to Hamburgh, in
pursuance of your Orders, where I arrived the 2d Instant. And the Day following
I waited upon the English Resident, and in the Company's Name desired to know
if he had yet received his Master's Pleasure, ordering him no more to oppose
the Transactions of the Indian and African Company of Scotland in this City;
which I pressing hard, answered by his Character and Honor, he never received
any Orders from his Master that mentions the said Company, since his giving in
the Memorial against them: So I have no further to add but that I am,

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your most most faithful Servant to power,
Sic-Subscribitur, Alexander Stevenson.

This was under Cover which contains what follows.
Much honored Lords and Gentlemen;
BY this within-closed, you have a full Answer as to what may be expected here
for ever. Since my parture from this, I am informed that the English here did
constantly assert that the Company would never be redressed, and the Delay of
the same, after all your means has made an Impression upon the Minds of People,
that it will never be at least such as they might trust to.

Hamburgh the 18th of October.
Much honored Lords and Gentlemen;
I Wrote to you of the 4 th current, wherein I advised you of Sir Paul Rycaut
English Resident at Hamburgh's Answer given me anent your Affairs, to which
refers Mr. Cresset Envoy at the Courts of Lunenburgh, being returned from
waiting upon his Majesty there; I thought it my Duty to wait upon him, and
demanded in your Names to know if his Majesty had signified his Royal Pleasure,
anent removing off the stop put to the Company's Affairs in this City through
the Memorial given in to the Senate against them: To which Answer he received
no such Orders and was of the Judgment, If the Memorial were yet to be given in
it would be done. I shall not enlarge what farther past, but assure you he
seems to insinuate that his private Orders from the Government of England, was
to act quite contrary to your Expectations. This is all from,

To the Right Honorable the Court of Directors, etc.

My Lords and Gentlemen; Your obedient Servant, Sic-Subscribitur Alex.
Stevenson.

This was under Cover, which contained what follows.
Much honored Lords and Gentlemen,
BY the within-closed you have an account what relates to your Affairs with
respect to have the Merchants in this City concerned: I cannot offer to speak
to the Commercij about the same, but those Merchants here that are Signers in
the Books of Subscriptions, are as cordial as ever were the Stop removed, they
doubt not things here would take the desired effect.

Letter from the President of the Committee of the Company, to the Lord
Seafield Secretary of State, upon receipt of Mr. Stevenson's Letters.
Edinburgh, November. 29. School. My Lord,
THis is by order of the Council-General of the Indian and African Company of
Scotland, to cover the enclosed Copies of two Letters lately received from our
Company's Agent at Hamburgh. Upon reading whereof yesterday at a meeting of the
said Council-General, they were not a little surpised at the Contents thereof,
considering the many repeated Assurances given them formerly by Letters, word
of Mouth, and even in Parliament, that the King had already given Orders to his
Ministers at Hamburgh, with relation to the Memorial given in to the Senate of
that City against our Company. But after some reasoning thereupon, and
considering how far your Lordship's frank Undertaking, when last in Scotland,
as well as the Station you are in, does engage your best Endeavors to procure
the Company Justice, and vindicate the Kingdom's Rights in this matter. They
have ordered us, the Court of Directors, to transmit the said Copies to your
Lordship, and expect your Lordship's Answer to this our late Petition to his
Majesty. before they remonstrate any further with relation thereunto. This is
in presence, and by Warrant of the said Court of Directors, from,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant, Sic Subscribitur, John Shaw, P.

To the Right Honorable the Viscount of Seafield Secretary of State for the
Kingdom of Scotland.
The Secretary's Answer.
Whitehall, December. 13. School. SIR,
I Received a Letter from you as President of a Committee of the East India
Company, which relates to Accounts they have had from their Correspondent at
Hamburgh, with the Copys of two Letters they have received: I shall take the
first convenient Opportunity I can have to represent this Matter to the King.
But I cannot as yet expect to have it, for his Majesty is very much employed in
the Affairs of his Parliament here. This is all the Answer I can give at
present, and which you may signify to those concerned. I am,

SIR, Your most faithful and humble Servant, Sic Subscribitur, SEAFIELD.

To Sir John Shaw of Greenock, etc.
A Letter from the President of the Court of Directors, in answer to the
Secretary.
Edinburgh, Jan. 13. 1699. My Lord,
SIR John Shaw of Greenock, having some time ago signified to the Court of
Directors of our Company, the Contents of a Letter which he received from your
Lordship, bearing date at Whitehall the 13th of December last, intimating that
your Lordship would take the first convenient opportunity of representing to
his Majesty the Company's Petition, with relation to the Parliament's Address;
as also the Contents of the Company's Letter to your Lordship, bearing date the
24th of November last. But in respect we have not all this time heard any
further from your Lordship concerning that Matter, this is by order of the said
Court of Directors to put your Lordship in mind of the Premises, not doubting
but you have had before this time a convenient opportunity to represent the
same to his Majesty; and in expectation of your Lordship's speedy and
satisfactory Answer, I remain,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant, Sic Subscribitur, Archibald Mure.

To the Right Honorable the Viscount of Seafield Secretary of State.
The Secretary's Answer.
Whitehall, Febr. 7. 1699. SIR,
I Have presented to his Majesty the Petition of the African Company; and I am
commanded by him to let you know, That there being accounts that the Ships
belonging to the Company are arrived upon the Coast of America; And the
particular Design not being communicated to his Majesty, he therefore does
delay to give any Answer until he receive certain Information of their
Settlement. This you may signify to the Council or Directors of the Company, as
being by his Majesty's Command: I am,

To Sir Archibald Mure of Thornton, etc.

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Sic subscribitur, Seafield.

A Letter from the Company to his Majesty, giving an Account of their Colony's
arrival at Darien:
May it please Your Majesty;
WE your Majesty's most loyal and dutiful Subjects, the Council General of the
Company of Scotland trading to Africa and the Indies, having, by express,
received an Account from the Council of our Company's Colony in America, that
they arrived safe at their intended Port within a League of Golden Island on
the Coast of Darien; and after having treated on board of our Ships with the
Natives, who were always owned to be the only Proprietors of that part of the
Coast, our Men did, at the request, and with the consent of the said Natives,
land on the 4th of November last, and take possession of an uninhabited Place,
never before possessed by any European whatsoever; and that, in pursuance of
the said Treaty, the chief Men and Leaders of the said Natives have joined
with, and taken Commission from the said Council. We thought it our Duty at our
very first Meeting to give your Majesty an account thereof; and likewise that
by Letters from our said Council bearing date at New Edinburgh in Caledonia
(being the Name given to our present Settlement) the 28th day of December last,
we are positively informed that the French have a Design upon all that Coast,
or at least to make a Settlement somewhere thereabouts. And we humbly conceive,
that the firm Settlement of our Colony in those Parts, may be the means of
preventing, or at least, lessening the evil Consequences that may arise to your
Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions every where, by the Settlement of any powerful
foreign Neighbor in, upon, or near any part of that Coast. And we are always
bound thankfully to acknowledge your Majesty's Goodness for granting us these
Privileges mentioned in the Acts of Parliament, and your Majesty's Letters
Patent, by which our said Company is established: So we do now in all humility
confidently expect your Majesty's Royal Favor and Protection, as having in all
the Steps of our Conduct through the whole Course of this Affair, strictly
observed the Conditions required by the said Acts of Parliament and Letters
Patent: And referring this together with the Contents of our last Petition to
your Majesty's Royal Consideration, to give such Directions therein as to your
Royal Wisdom shall seem meet and expedient. This is in Name, Presence, and by
Warrant of the said Council-General: Signed by,

May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesty's most faithful, most dutiful, most
humble, and most obedient Subject and Servant,Sic-Subscribitur, Tweeddale.
Edinburgh the 31st day of March, 1699.
The Company's Letter to the Lord Carmichael Secretary of State.
My Lord;
THIS being the first Opportunity that we have had to address your Lordship,
since your Advancement to that eminent Station and Place of Trust wherein you
are: We must account it a Happiness that upon Receipt of the late welcome News
from our Colony's Company in America, we can transmit an Account thereof to his
Majesty by the hands of one so much devoted to the Honor and Interest of our
Country and Company, as your Lordship has upon all Occasions shown your self;
and who being often Witness to our Company's Proceedings from time to time, can
give a juster Account thereof than any other that has no Interest in our Stock,
nor has ever been amongst us. Enclosed you have our Council-General's sealed
Letter to his Majesty, which we doubt not your Lordship will carefully deliver,
together with an exact Copy thereof for your Lordship's better Information, to
which we refer, but shall for your further Information enlarge a little upon
the several Heads therein mentioned. As to our place of Settlement it is so far
from having ever been possessed by any European whatsoever, that by all the
Accounts that we could ever yet get, not only at this time from the Council of
our Colony, but even by such Letters as we have seen and heard of from Curacao,
and other American Islands, no European did before our Settlement so much as
once set a foot upon that Plot of Ground wherein our Colony is now fixed: And
tho the same was altogether uninhabited, when our People came there, the chief
Men and Leaders of the said Natives of that part of the Coast nearest adjoining
to Golden Island, Eastward and Westward, have not only treated with the Council
of our Colony before Landing, but have also in pursuance of that Treaty in a
most kind and friendly manner admitted our said Colony into such Places of
their Neighborhood as are not yet possessed, and taken Commissions from the
said Council in a very solemn manner, and joined with our People; and that in
consideration of our Colony's admitting them and their Followers to participate
of the Liberties and Privileges granted to our Company by his Majesty of Great
Britain, OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of his Parliament of
Scotland, entreating to be protected accordingly: We repeat these Words, as
being the express Words of the first Commission which the said Council granted.
As to the French Designs of settling thereabouts, it is a Point not to be
doubted of: For in order thereunto they have already been tampering with
several of the Natives, some of whom they endeavored to have carried into
France; and we have very good reason to believe that a further Progress had
been made in that matter before now, were it not the daily Expectaions which
that Court had of the King of Spain's Death, which we humbly conceive is a
Matter worthy of his Majesty's Consideration, and of no small Concern to the
Interest of his whole Dominions, tho this Nation and our Company may seem to be
more immediately interested at present.

Your Lordship sees we have in the enclosed Letter to the King, made mention of
our last Petition, and hope your Lordship will take a convenient Opportunity to
back the same: For as your Lordship knows, we have already suffered
considerably by encroaching upon our Privileges, so we ought to be very
careful, as much as in us lies, not to admit of any dangerous Precedents. And
really we must say, We were very much surpised the other day, when we
understood by Letters from the Council of our Colony, that Capt. Long Commander
of the Rupert Prize, who carries his Majesty's Commission for sinding out and
fishing of Wrecks, should, under the color of that Commission, wherever he
went, traduce our Undertaking and Colony to all sorts of People upon that
Coast, whether Natives or others, declaring that our said Colony was no other
than a pack of Rogues, Vagabonds, Robbers, and broken Officers, without any
Commission, and that the King would not own them: nay further, he himself came
into our Harbor, wherehe was very courteously and respecfully treated by all
our People there; in recompense of which he very ingratefully made it his study
all the while to seduce our Men, and did carry off one of our chief carpenters,
which is a very considerable Loss in that part of the World, and in the Infancy
of our Settlement, considering how necessary a Man he was, and the Difficulty
of supplying his place so quickly as they may have occasion for him. This kind
of Usage is really so provoking, that we cannot suppose but that the King may
be graciously pleased to interpose his Royal Authority for preventing the like
usage in time to come, if his Majesty were duly informed thereof. So in the
confidence of his Majesty's gracious Countenance and Protection, and your
Lordship's hearty endeavors to procure the same; this is by Order of the
Council-General, and in Name, Presence, and by Warrant of the Court of
Directors of our Company, Signed by,

My Lord, Your Lorship's most obedient and most humble Servant,
Sic-Subscribitur, J. Haldane, P.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Carmichael Secretary of State, etc.
Memorandum,
There was another Letter to the same purpose, written to the Viscount of
Seafield, with an enclosed Copy of the said Letter to the King.

The Colonies Address. To the King's most Excellent Majesty.
Most Gracious Sovereign;
WE your Loyal and obedient Subjects, the Council of your Colony of Caledonia,
being here settled pursuant to the Powers and Immunities proceeding from your
Royal Favor and Goodness; where, upon our arrival, the Natives on all hands,
in compliance with former Agreements, received and entertained us with all
possible demonstrations of joy and satisfaction, there being no possession, nor
so much as pretended possession, for any Prince or State in Europe upon this
whole Coast, extending it self considerably more than one hundred Leagues
together. We found the Indians on all sides in open War with the Spaniards,
their nearest Neighbors: against whom they besought our Assistance which we
could by no means comply with, by reason of the present Peace and good
Understanding between your Majesty and the King of Spain.

Yet notwithstanding this our just and peaceable deportment and inclination,
and our certifying the same by Letters to the two neighboring Governors of
Panama and Carthagena; We have, to our no small surprise, received certain
Information, that several great and warlike Designs and Preparations are on
foot, and carrying on by the Spaniards against this Colony; and that contrary
to all Justice and Humanity, as well as the Treaties of Peace between your
Majesty and the Catholic King, they now unjustly detain, and refuse to deliver
up the Persons and Goods, that were saved of a Ship belonging to this Colony,
called the Dolphin; which by misfortune of springing a Leak, was not long since
obliged to run ashore and suffer Shipwreck near the City of Carthagena. All
which have been no small inducement for us to have improved the frequent
Opportunities we have had of taking Measures greatly disadvantagious to the
Crown of Spain: Yet in order to avoid, as much as possible, any thing that
might look like a public Breach, until the same were laid before your Majesty,
and your Royal Pleasure known therein: We have hitherto proceeded no further,
than of granting of Letters of Reprisals for the People and Effects unjustly
detained from us.

Great Sir, The Indies, as well as Europe, do at this time implore your
Protection, and as the effectual opening the Door of Commerce to the trading
World, and of more easy access to, and correspondence with the ends of the
Earth, has been hitherto hidden and reserved by the Divine Hand, for one of
the singular Glories of your Majesty's Reign. So it is with no small
fatisfaction to be any way concerned in so hopeful an Accession to the
Dominions and Greatness of your Majesty, and Wealth of your People; That we
presume to lay our selves, our Case, and this valuable Opportunity at your
Royal Feet, most humbly beseeching, that as it had its beginning, so it may
continue to have its Being and Support from the happy Influences of your
peculiar Bounty and Grace.

So with our earnest Prayers to Almighty God for the long and happy
preservation of your Royal Person, and continuance of your Glorious Reign, and
most humble tender of our Lives and Fortunes to your Majesty's Service and
Disposition. We beg leave to subscribe our selves,

Most Gracious Sovereign, Your Majesty's most Loyal, most Dutiful, and most
Obedient Subjects and Servants, Sic subscribitur, Daniel Mackay, Robert
Pennecook. William Paterson, Colin Campboll, Samuel Vetch, Charles Forbes,
Thomas Drummond.

This Address was delivered to the Secretaries of State about the middle of
September, together with a Memorial concerning the French Ship commanded by
Capt. Duvivier Thomas, which was Shipwrack'd near Caledonia Harbor on the 24th
of December School.

By the Honorable Sir William Beston Knight. His Majesty's Lieutenant Governor and
Commander in Chief, in, and over this his Island of Jamaica, and other the
Territories depending thereon in America, and Vice Admiral of the same.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHereas I have received Commands from his Majesty, by the Right Honorable
James Vernon Esquire one of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State,
signifying to me, that his Majesty is uuacquainted with the Intentions and
Designs of the Scots fettling at Darien: And that it is contrary to the Peace
entered into with his Majesty's Allies; and therefore has commanded me, that no
Assistance be given them. These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, and by
Command, strictly to command his Majesty's Subjects whatsoever, that they do
not presume, on any prtence whatsoever, to hold any Correspondence with the
said Scots, nor nor to give them any assistance of Arms, Ammunition,
Provisions, or any other Necessaries whatsoever, either by themselves or any
other for them; or by any of their Vessels, or of the English Nation, as they
will answer the Contenpt of his Majesty's Command to the contrary, at their
utmost peril.

Given under my Hand and Seal of Arms this 8th day of April 1699. and in the
11th Year of our Sovereign Lord William the Third, of England, Scotland, France
and Ireland King, and of Jamaica Lord, Defender of the Faith, etc. WILLIAM
BEESTON.

Barbados. By his ECCELLENCY,
A PROCLAMATION.
WHereas his Majesty has been pleased to signify his Pleasure to me by Mr.
Secretary Vernon, that he has been advertised, that several Ships of Force,
fitted out of Scotland, were arrived at the Island of St. Thomas, with an
Intention (as they declared) to settle themselves in some part of America:
Their Design being unknown to his Majesty, and least the same should derogate
from the Treaties his Majesty has entered into with the Crown of Spain, or be
otherwise prejudicial to any of his Majesty's Colonies in the WestIndies.

These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, by, and with the Advice and Consent
of the Council, strictly to command all his Majesty's Subjects, inhabiting
within this Island, that they forbear holding any Correspondence with, or
giving any Assistance to any of said Persons: And that no Provisions, Arms, or
other Necessaries whatsoever be carried to them, as they shall answer the same
at their peril.

Given under my Hand this 13th of April 1699, and in the Eleventh Year of his
Majesty's Reign. R. GRAY.

By his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governor in
chief of his Majesty's Province of New York, and Territories depending thereon
in America, and Vice Admiral of the same, A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS his most excellent Majesty has received Advice, That several Ships of
Force fitted out of Scotland, were designed to settle themselves in some parts
of America; and lest the same should derogate from the Treaties his Majesty
has entered into with the Crown of Spain, or be otherwise prejudicial to any
of his Majesty's Colonics in America, his Majesty has been pleased to signisy
his Royal Pleasure to me, That I should strictly forbid all his Majesty's
Subjects, or others, inhabiting within the Districts of my Government, that
they forbear holding any Correspondence with, or giving any Assistance to any
of the said Persons, while they are engaged in the aforesaid Enterprise; and
that no Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other necessaries whatsoever, be
carried from hence to them, nor be permitted to be carried, either in their own
Vessels, or any other Ship or Vessel for their Use. In pursuance of his
Majesty's said Royal Will and Pleasure, I have thought fit, by and with the
Advice of his Majesty's Council of this Province, to publish and declare his
Majesty's Pleasure, and by these Presents do strictly charge and command all
and every of his Majesty's Subjects, and others within this Province and
Territories depending thereon in America, That they for bear holding any
Correspondence with, or giving any assistance to such Person or Persons, who
have been sitted out of Scotland in manner aforesaid, and are said to have
settled in a certain place, which they have called Caledonia, That no
Provision, Arms, Ammunition, or other necessaries whatsoever, be carried either
in their own Vessels, or in any other Ship or Vessel for their use, from this
Province, or any part thereof. And his Majesty's Collector and Receiver
General, and all other Officers of Majesty's Custom-House, are hereby required
to take notice hereof accordingly.

And I do futher strictly charge, command, and forbid (by and with the Consent
of his Majesty's Council, as aforesaid (all his Majesty's said Subjects, and
others within this Province, That they neither by themselves, nor by any other
Persons authorized by them, contrary to his Majesty's Royal Pleasure as
aforesaid, hold any Correspondence, or give any Assistance, or enter into any
Traffic or Commerce with such Persons as are said to be settled in Caledonia
aforesaid. And if any Person of Persons within this Province, by themselves,
their Factors, or Agents, shall contrary to, and against the true intent and
meaning of this his Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure singnisied unto me, as
aforesaid, hold any Correspondence, or give any Assistance, or enter into any
Traffic or Commerce, in manner aforesaid, then all such Person or Persons so
acting, as aforesaid, shall incur such Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures, as by
Law in such Cases are provided. And all his Majesty's Subjects, and others
within this Province, are hereby required to take due notice hereof, and to
observe his Majesty's said Royal Will and Pleassure in all and every of the
Premises as they will answer the contrary at their peril.

Given at Fort William Henry in New York, the 15th day of May, 1699. and in the
eleventh year of his Majesty's Regin. Bellomont.
By Order, B. Cose. Cl. Concilii. God save the King.
Printed by W. Bradford Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty in
New York. 1699.
By his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General, and Governor in
chief of his Majesty's Provinces of the MassachusettsBay, New York, etc. in
America, and of the Territories thereon depending, and ViceAdmiral of the same,
A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS his most Excellent Majesty having received Advice, that several Ships
of Force fitted out in Scotland, were arrived at the Island of St. Thomas, with
an Intention (as they declared) to settle themselves in some parts of America:
Least the same should derogate from the Treaties his Majesty has entered into
with the Crown of Spain, or be otherwise prejudicial to any of his Majesty's
Colonies in the West Indies, his Majesty has been pleased to signify his Royal
Pleasure to me, That I should strictly forbid all his Majesty's Subjects, or
others inhabiting within the Districts of my Government, holding any
Corespondence with, or giving any Assistance to any of the said Persons, while
they are engaged in the foresaid Enterprise; and that no Provision, Arms,
Ammunition, or other Necessaries whatsoever, be carried to them from thence,
nor be carried either in their own Vessels, or any other Ships or Vessels for
their use.

In observance therefore of his Majesty's said Royal Will and Pleasure, I have
thought fit, by and with the Advice of his Majesty's Council of this Province,
to charge and command, and do hereby charge and command all and every of his
Majesty's Subjects, and others within this Province and Territories thereon
depending, that they forbear holding any Corespondence with, or giving any
Assistance to any Person or Persons, who have been fitted out of Scotland in
manner aforesaid, and are said to have settled in a certain place in the
West Indies, by 'em called Caledonia, or to enter into any Trafsick or Commerce
with them, or any of them. And that no Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other
necessaries whatsoever be transported or carried unto them from this Province,
or any part thereof, either in their own Vessels, or any other Ship or Vessel
for their Use. Of which all his Majesty's Subjects, and others within this
Province, are hereby required to take due notice, and conform themselves
accordingly, as they will answer their acting hereunto, under the utmost Pains,
Penalties, and Forfeitures, as are by Law in such cases provided. And the
Officers of his Majesty's Customs, and all other his Majesty's Officers, are
hereby also required to take effectual care that his Majesty's said Royal Will
and Pleasure in all and every of the Premises be duly observed and kept, as
they will answer the contrary at their Peril.

Given at the Council Chamber in Boston, the third day of June 1699. in the
eleventh year of his Majesty's Reign. By Order of his Excellency and Council,
I. Addington Secr. BELLONONT.
God save the King.
Boston, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to his
Excellency the Governor and Council. Edinburgh, Reprinted exactly according to
the Originals, Anno 1699.
A second Proclamation published in Barbados against the Scots Company and
Colony. Barbados. By his EXCELLENCY.
WHEREAS his Majesty has been pleased to signify his Pleasure to me by Mr.
Secretary Vernon, That he has been advised, that several Ships of Force are
arrived at the Island of Cairat near Darien from Scotland, with an intentention
to settle themselves, their Design being unknown to his Majesty; and least the
same should derogate from the Treaties his Majesty has entered into with the
Crown of Spain, or be otherwise prejudicial to any of his Majesty's Colonies in
the West Indies.

These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, by and with the Advice and Consent
of the Council, strictly to command all his Majesty's Subjects inhabiting
within this Island, that they forbear holding any Correspondence with, or
giving any Assistance to the said Persons; and that no Provision, Arms,
Ammunition, or other Necessaries whatsoever, be carried to them, as they shall
answer the same at their peril.

Given under my hand the 5th day of September, 1699. and in the eleventh year
of his Majesty's Reign. R. Gray.

Reprinted at Edinburgh exactly according to the Originals. 1699.

The Council-General of the Indian and African Company's Petition to his
Majesty,
May it please Your Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most dutiful Subjects, The Council General of the Company of
Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies, do in all humble duty beg leave to
lay before your Majesty the present Condition of your our Affairs.

Your Majesty from an earnest desire of the flourishing of your Ancient
Kingdom, having been graciously pleased by the 32d Act of the 4th Session, and
by the 8th Act of the 5th Session of this current Parliament, and your
Majesty's Letters Patent under the Great Seal of this Kingdom following
thereupon, to authorize the settling of Plantations and Colonies in Asia,
Africa, or America by the Natives of this Kingdom; and such others as should
join with them; as in the said Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent is more
part cularly expressed

We and our Constituents, Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects did, upon the
faith and encouragement of the said Acts, and Letters Patent, enter into a
Society, erect a Company of Trade, and with great Charge, and after many
Difficulties settled a Plantation on the Northside of the Isthmus of Darien, a
place precisely in the terms of the said Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent.

And being sensible, That as our Company had its Birth from your Majestys most
Gracious Favor, so it could not subsist but by your Royal Protection; We did
therefore in all humble manner petition your Majesty's High Commissioner and
the Estates of Parliament assembled the 19th of July School.

Upon which the Estates of Parliament did with great unanimity Address Your
Majesty, That you would in your Royal Wisdom be pleased to take such Measures
as might effectually vindicate the undoubted Rights and Privileges of the said
Company, and support the Credit and Interest thereof.

That Session of Parliament ending before any Return could be had from your
Majesty, Reports have been spread by the Enemies of our Settlement, as if our
Company had not your Majesty's Protection: And as an evidence thereof; That
Proclamations have been issued out in your Majesty's Name by your Governors in
all the American Plantations, not only to deprive our said Company and Colony
of the friendly Assistance, that might reasonably have been expected from our
Neighbor Nation, but also strictly forbiding all your Majesty's Subjects or
others within these Plantations to enter into any Traffic or Commerce with the
said Colony; and that no Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other Necessaries
whatsoever should be transported, or carried to them either in their own
Vessels or any other Ship or Vessel for their use, and that under the utmost
Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures mentioned in the said Proclamations.

Which Proceedings we have but too much reason to believe have been of fatal
consequence to our Company and Colony, and consequently to the Interest of all
your Majesty's good Subjects in this Kingdom. And we being fully persuaded,
that nothing could be so conducible for the support of our said Company and
Colony in our present Circumstances, as some special Testimonies and Evidences
of your Royal Protection.

We do therefore in all humility and earnestness beg of your Majesty's
fartherly Care of our said Company in particular, and of the Nation in general,
That your Majesty would be graciously pleased to take off the force and effect
of these Proclamations which have been so prejudicial to us, and to signify
your Royal Pleasure to the Governors of these your Plantations, that we may be
supplied in the common and ordinary way of Commerce. As also, That your Majesty
may allow your Parliament to meet at the day appointed in November next, or as
soon as possibly can be, that your Majesty may have the Advice and Assistance
of the Great Council of this Nation in such a weighty and general Concern,
which we hope God will bless with an happy issue to his Glory, the Honor of
your Majesty, the Credit of your Parliament, the Interest of the Nation, and
the Good of our Company and Colony.

Signed at Edinburgh the 19th day of October 1699. in Name, Presence, and by
Order of the said Council General by, May it please your Majesty, Your
Majesty's most Faithful, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subject
and Servant, Sic Subscribitur, Belhaven, I. P. C. G.

To which his Majesty was pleased to give the following Answer,

WILLIAM R.
RIght Trusty and Well-beloved,
We greet you well: Your Petition has been presented to us by our Secretaries,
and we do very much regret the Loss which that our ancient Kingdom and the
Company has lately sustained: We will upon all Occasions protect and encourage
the Trade of the Nation: And we will also take care, that the Subjects of our
Kingdom shall have the same freedom of Trade and Commerce with our English
Plantations as ever they had formerly.

Our current Parliament is adjourned to the 5th day of March next, and we will
order that the Parliament shall meet when we judge that the Good of the Nation
does require it. And so we bid you heartily farewell. Given at our Court at
Kensington the 2d day of November 1699. and of our Reign the 11th Year.

By his Majesty's Command, Sic Subscribitur, Seafield.

To our Right Trusty and well-beloved, The Council General of the Company of
our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies.

To the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor, and remanent Lords of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
The humble Address of the Conncil-General of the Company of Scotland Trading
to Africa and the Indies.
May it please your Lordships;
WE think it needless to trouble your Lordships with a repetition of the many
Steps, Difficulties and Discouragements that we met with all along both abroad
and at home, since the beginning of this Undertaking, the most considerable of
them being already particularly known to your Lordships. But maugre all those
Difficulties, we have with a great deal of Trouble and vast Expenses settled a
Plantation in one of the most valuable and impregnable Places in all America,
situated on the North-side of the Isthmus of Darien, called by us Caledonia.

As no Nation in Europe ever begun any such Settlement with so considerable a
Strength of Men, Ships, and other Necessaries, as we did: so no instance can be
given of any Settlement ever heretofore made, that had so hopeful an Aspect in
so short a time as our Plantation aforesaid.

But to our and the Nation's inestimable Loss, we have very surprising Advices
of our Peoples having deserted the said Settlement by reason of Proclamations
issued forth in all his Majesty's Plantations of America, strictly forbidding
all his Majesty's Subjects to hold any manner of Correspondence with our said
Colony, and that no manner of Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other
necessaries whatsoever, should be transported or carried to them, either in
their own Vessels, or any other Ship or Vessel for their use; and that under
the utmost Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures mentioned in the said
Proclamations. The certain Nature whereof could not but have put them in a
desperate Condition, especially none of our Advices having come to their hands,
tho we wrote to them at several times, by the several ways of Jamaica,
Barbados, Antegoa, New England, etc. And sent them likewise an illimited
Credit for buying of Provisions, till our own Ships and Recruits should come up
to them.

We have taken such further measures, as seemed most reasonable to us upon this
unexpected Emergency, but have too good ground to fear, that not only what we
have already done, but even all that we are able to do, must prove ineffectual,
if the King and his Parliament of this Kingdom, do not give some encouraging
Mark of their Favor and Protection, to our said Company and Colony: Wherefore
we have in all humble Duty petitioned his Majesty that he would be graciously
pleased to take off the Force of the said Proclamations, and allow his said
Parliament to meet at the day appointed in November next, or as soon as
possibly may be, to give their Advice and Assistance in such a weighty and
general Concern.

Your Lordships very well know the great Losses, both of Men and Treasure, that
we have already suffered by the unaccountable Proceedings of the Enemies of our
Company and Colony: Nor can against us, unless his Majesty and the Great Council
of the Nation fall upon proper and effectual Measures for supporting so
valuable an Undertaking.

May it therefore please your Lordships to take the whole Premises into your
most serious consideration, and do us all the good Offices with his Majesty,
that in your profound Wisdoms you shall think most expedient for supporting our
Company and Colony's Interest, and give him an account of our present hard
Circumstances, and how much the Honor and Interest of Nation stands concerned.

Signed at Edinburgh the 20th day of October 1699, in Name, Presence, and by
Order of the said Council-General. By, >May it please your Lordships, Your
Lordships most humble Servant, Sic subscribitur, Basil Hamilton, J. P. C. G.

FINIS.

