Thomas Carew, Gentleman of the Bed chamber to King Charles the First. From a
Medal by Varin.


POEMS, With a MASK, BY THOMAS CAREW Esquire

One of the Gent. of the Privy-Chamber, and Sewer in Ordinary to his late
Majesty.

The Songs were set in Music by Mr. HENRY LAWS Gent. of the Kings Chapel,
and one of his late Majesty's Private-Musick.

The third Edition revised and enlarged.

LONDON Printed for H. M. and are to be sold by J: Martin, at the sign of the
Bell in St. Pauls-Church-Yard. 1651.



POEMS
The Spring.
NOw that the winter's gone, the earth has lost
Her snow-white robes, and now no more the frost
Candies the grass, or casts an ycie cream
Upon the Silver Lake, or Crystal stream:
But the warm Sun thawes the benumbed Earth,
And makes it tender, gives a sacred birth
To the dead Swallow, wakes in hollow tree
The drowsy Cuckoo, and the Humble-Bee.
Now do a quire of chirping Minstrels bring
In triumph to the world, the youthful Spring.
The valleys, hills, and woods, in rich array,
Welcome the coming of the longed for May.
Now all things smile; only my Love does lowre:
Nor has the scalding Noon-day-Sun the power,
To melt that marble ice, which still does hold
Her heart congeald, and makes her pity cold.
The Ox which lately did for shelter fly
Into the stall, does now securely ly
In open fields; and love no more is made
By the fire side; but in the cooler shade
Amyntas now does with his Cloris sleep
Under a Sycamore, and all things keep
Time with the season, only she does carry
June in her eyes, in her heart January.
To A. L. Persuasions to love.
Think not, 'cause men flattering say
You Are fresh as April, Sweet as May,
Bright as is the Morning starr,
That you are so; or though you are,
Be not therefore proud, and doem
All men unworthy your esteem:
For being so, you lose the pleasure
Of being fair, since that rich treasure
Of rare beauty, and sweet feature,
Was bestowed on you by Nature
To be enjoyed, and 'twere a sin
There to be scarce, where she has been
So prodigal of her best graces;
Thus common beauties, and mean faces
Shall have more pastime, and enjoy
The sport you lose by being coy,
Did the thing for which I sue
Only concern my self, not you;
Were men so framed as they alone
Reaped all the pleasure, women none,
Then had you reason to be scant;
But 'twere a madness not to grant
That which affords (if you consent)
To you the giver, more content,
Than me the beggar; Oh then be
Kind to your self, if not to me;
Starve not your self, because you may
Thereby make me pine away;
Nor let brittle beauty make
You your wiser thoughts forsake:
For that lovely face will fail;
Beautie's sweet, but beautie's frail;
It Is sooner past, it is sooner done
Than Summers rain, or Winters Sun;
Most fleeting when it is most dear;
It Is gone while we but say it is here.
These curious locks so aptly twined,
Whose every hair a soul does bind,
Will change their abroun hue, and grow
White, and cold as winters snow.
That eye which now is Cupid's nest
Will prove his grave, and all the rest
Will follow; in the cheek; chin, nose,
Nor Lilly shall be found, nor Rose;
And what will then become of all
Those, whom now you servants call?
Like Swallows when your summers done,
They Will fly, and seek some warmer Sun.
Then wisely choose one to your friend,
Whose love may (when your beauties end)
Remain still firm: be provident
And think before the summer's spent
Of following winter; like the Ant
In plenty hoord for time of scant.
Cull out amongst the multitude
Of Lovers, that seek to intrude
Into your favor, one that may
Love for an age, not for a day;
One that will quench your youthful fires,
And feed in age your hot desires.
For when the storms of time have moved
Waves on that check which was beloved,
When a fair Ladies face is pined,
And yellow spread where red once shined,
When beauty, youth, and all sweets leave her,
Love may return, but Lover never:
And old folks say there are no pains
Like itch of love in aged veins.
Oh love me then, and now begin it,
Let us not lose this present minute:
For time and age will work that wrack
Which time or age shall never call back.
The snake each year fresh skin resumes,
And Eagles change their aged plumes;
The faded Rose each spring receives
A fresh red tincture on her leaves:
But if your beauties once decay,
You never know a second May.
Oh, then be wise, and whilst your season
Affords you days for sport, do reason;
Spend not in vain your lives short hour,
But crop in time your beauties flower:
Which will away, and does together
Both bud and fade, both blow and wither.
Lips and Eyes.
IN Celia's face a question did arise
Which were more beautiful, her Lips or Eyes:
We (said the Eyes) send forth those poynted darts
Which pierce the hardest adamantine hearts.
From us (replied the Lips) proceed those blisses,
Which Lovers reap by kind words, and sweet kisses.
Then wept the Eyes, and from their springs did power
Of liquid oriental pearl a shower.
Whereat the Lips moved with delight and pleasure,
Through a sweet smile unlocked their pearlie treasure;
And bade Love judge, whether did add more grace,
Weeping, or smiling, pearls in Celia's face.
A Divine Mistress.
IN Natures pieces still I see
Some error, that might mended be;
Something my wish could still remove,
Alter or add; but my fair Love
Was framed by hands far more divine;
For she has every beauteous line:
Yet I had been far happier
Had Nature that made me, made her;
Then likeness might (that love creates)
Have made her love what now she hates:
Yet I confess I cannot spare,
From her just shape the smallest hair;
Nor need I beg from all the store
Of heaven, for her one beauty more:
She has too much divinity for me,
You gods teach her some more humanity.
SONG. A Beautiful Mistress.
IF when the sun at noone displayes
His brighter rays,
Thou but appear,
He then all pale with shame and fear,
Quenches his light.
Hides his dark brow, flies from thy sight,
And grows more dim
Compared to thee, than stars to him.
If thou but show thy face again,
When darkness does at midnight reign,
The darkness flies, and light is hurled,
Round about the silent world:
So as alike thou driv'st away,
Both light and darkness, night and day.
A Cruel Mistress.
WE read of Kings, and Gods, that kindly took
A pitcher filled with water from the Brook:
But I have daily tendered without thanks
Rivers of tears that overflow their banks.
A slaughtered Bull will appease angry love.
A Horse the Sun, a Lamb the God of love:
But she disdaines the spotless sacrifice
Of a pure heart, that at her altar lies.
Vesta is not displeased if her chaste urn
Do with repaired fuel ever burn;
But my Saint frowns, though to her honored name
I consecrate a never-dying flame.
The Assyrian King did none in the furnace throw,
But those that to his Image did not bow;
With bended knees I daily worship her,
Yet she consumes her own Idolater.
Of such a Goddess no times leave record,
That burnt the Temple, where she was adored.
SONG. Murdring Beauty.
I WILL gaze no more on her bewitching face,
Since ruin harbors there in every place:
For my enchanted soul alike she drowns
With calmes and tempests of her smiles and frowns
I Will love no more those cruel eyes of hers,
Which pleased, or angered, still are Murderers:
For if she dart (like lightning) through the air
Her beams of wrath, she kills me with despair;
If she behold nice with a pleasing eye,
I surfeit with excess of joy, and dye.
My Mistress commanding me to return her letters.
SO grives th'adventrous Merchant, when he throws
All the long-toyld-for treasure his ship stows,
Into the angry main, to save from wrack
Himself and men; as I grieve to give back
These letters: yet so powerful is your sway,
As if you bid me die, I must obey.
Go then blessed papers, you shall kiss those-hands
That gave you freedom, but hold me in bands;
Which with a touch did give you life, but I,
Because I may not touch those hands, must die.
Me thinks, as if they knew they should be sent
Home to their native soil from banishment,
I see them smile, like dying Saints, that know
They are to leave the earth, and towered heaven go.
When you return, pray tell your Sovereign,
And mine, I gave you courteous entertain;
Each line received a tear, and then a kiss,
First bathed in that, it escaped unscorch'd from this:
I kissed it, because your hand had been there,
But' cause it was not now, I shed a tear.
Tell her no length of time, nor change of air,
No cruelty, disdain, absence, despair,
No nor her steadfast constancy can deterr
My vassal heart from ever hon'ring her.
Though these be powerful arguments to prove
I love in vain; yet I must ever love.
Say if she frown when you that word rehearse,
Service in prose, is often called love in verse:
Then pray her, since I send back on my part
Her papers, she will send me back my heart.
If she refuse, warn her to come before
The God of Love, whom thus I will implore.
Trav'ling thy Countries road ( great God) I spied
By chance this Lady, and walked by her side
From place to place, fearing no violence,
For I was well armed, and had made defense
In former fights, against fiercer foes, than she
Did at our first encounter seem to be:
But going farther, every step revealed
Some hidden weapon, till that time concealed.
Seeing those outward arms, I did begin
To fear, some greater strength was lodged within.
Looking unto her mind, I might survay
An host of beauties that in ambush lay;
And won the day before they fought the field:
For I unable to resist, did yield.
But the insulting tyrant so destroys
My conquered mind, my ease, my peace, my joys;
Breaks my sweet sleeps, invades my harmless rest,
Robs me of all the treasure of my breast;
Spares not my heart, nor yet a greater wrong;
For having stolen my heart, she binds my tongue.
But at the last her melting eyes unsealed
My lips, enlarged my tongue, then I revealed
To her own ears the story of my harms
Wrought by her virtues, and her beauties charms.
Now hear (Just Judge) an act of savagenesse,
When I complain in hope to find redress,
She bends her angry brow, and from her eye
Shoots thousand darts, I then well hoped to die;
But in such sovereign balm, Love dips his shot,
That though they wound a heart, they kill it not;
She saw the blood gush forth from many a wound,
Yet fled, and left me bleeding on the ground,
Nor sought my cure, nor saw me since; it is true,
Absence, and time, (two cunning Leeches) drew
The flesh together, yet sure though the skin
Be closed without, the wound festers within.
Thus has this cruel Lady used a true
Servant, and subject to her self, and you.
Nor know I (great Love) if my life be lent
To show thy mercy, or my punishment;
If this enditement fright her, so as she
Seem willing to return my heart to me,
But cannot find it, (for perhaps it may,
Amongst other trifling hearts, be out of the way)
If she repent, and would make me amends,
Bid her but send me hers, and we are friends.
Secrecy protested.
FEar not (dear Love) that I Will reveal
Those hours of pleasure we two steal;
No eye shall see, nor yet the Sun
Descry, what thou and I have done;
No ear shall hear our love, but we
Silent as the night will be;
The God of love himself (whose dart
Did first wound mine, and then thy heart)
Shall never know, that we can tell,
What sweets in stolen embraces dwell:
This only means may find it out,
If when I die, Physicians doubt
What caused my death, and there to view
Of all their judgments which was true'
Rip up my heart, O then I fear
The world will see thy picture there.
A prayer to the Wind.
Go thou gentle whispering Wind,
Bear this sigh; and if thou find
Where my cruel fair does rest
Cast it in her snowie breast,
So, enflamed by my desire,
It may set her heart a-fire:
Those sweet kisses thou shall gain,
Will reward thee for thy pain.
Boldly light upon her lip,
There suck odours, and thence skip
To her bosom, lastly fall
Down, and wander over all;
Range about those Ivorie hills
From whose every part distills
Amber dew; there spices grow,
There pure streams of Nectar flow;
There perfume thy self, and bring
All those sweets upon thy wing:
As thou return'st, change by thy power
Every weed into a flower,
Turn each Thistle to a Vine,
Make the Bramble Eglantine.
For so rich a booty made,
Do but this, and I am paid.
Thou can with thy powerful blast,
Heat apace, and cool as fast:
Thou can kindle hidden flame,
And again destroy the same:
Then for pity, either stir
Up the fire of love in her,
That alike both flames may shine,
Or else quite extinguish mine.
Mediocrity in love rejected. SONG.
GIve me more Love, or more Disdain,
The Torrid, or the Frozen Zone
Bring equal ease unto my pain;
The Temperate affords me none:
Either extreme, of Love, or Hate,
Is sweeter than a calm estate.
Give me a storm; is it be Love,
Like Danae in that golden shower
I swim in pleasure; if it prove
Disdain, that Torrent will devour
My Vulture-hopes; and he is possessed
Of Heaven, that is but from Hell releast:
Then crown my joys, or cure my pain;
Give me more Love, or more -- Disdain.
SONG. Good counsel to a young Maid:
GAze not on thy beauties pride,
Tender Maid; in the false side
That from Lovers eyes does slide.
Let thy faithful Crystal show,
How thy colors come, and go,
Beauty takes a foil from woe.
Love, that in those smooth streams lies;
Under pities fair disguise,
Will thy melting heart suprize.
Nets, of passions sinest thread,
Snaring Poems, will be spread,
All, to catch thy maidenhead.
Then beware, for those that cure
Loves disease, themselves endure
For reward a Calenture.
Rather let the Lover pine,
Than his pale cheek should assign
A perpetual blush to thine.
TO my Mistress sitting by a Rivers side. AN EDDY.
MArk how yond Eddy steals away,
From the rude stream into the Bay,
There locked up safe, she does divorce
Her waters from the channels course,
And scorns the Torrent, that did bring
Her head long from her native spring.
Now does she with her new love play,
Whilst he runs murmuring away.
Mark how she courts the banks, whilst they
As amorously their arms display,
To Embrace, and clip her silver waves:
See how she strokes their sides, and craves
An entrance there, which they deny;
Whereat she frowns, threatening to fly
Home to her stream, and 'gins to swim
Backward, but from the channels brim,
Smiling, returns into the creek,
With thousand dimples on her cheek.
Be thou this Eddy, and I Will make
My breast thy shore, where thou shall take
Secure repose, and never dream
Of the quite forsaken stream:
Let him to the wide Ocean haste,
There lose his color, name, and taste;
Thou shall save all, and safe from him,
Within these arms for ever swim.
SONG. Conquest by flight.
LAdies, fly from Love's smooth tale,
Oaths steeped in tears do often prevail;
Grief is infectious, and the air
Enflamed with sighs, will blast the fair:
Then stop your cares, when Lovers cry,
Lest your self weep, when no soft eye
Shall with a sorrowing tear repay
That pity which you cast away.
Young men fly, when beauty darts
Amorous glances at your hearts:
The fixed mark gives the shooter aim;
And Ladies looks have power to maym.
Now'twixt their lips, now in their eyes,
Wrapped in a smile, or kiss, Love lies;
Then fly betimes, for only they
Conquer love that run away.
SONG. To my inconstant Mistress.
WHen thou, poor excommunicate
From all the joys of love, shall so
The full reward, and glorious fate,
Which my strong faith shall purchase me,
Then curse thine own inconstancy.
A fayrer band than thine, shall cure
That heart, which thy false oaths did wound;
And to my soul, a soul more pure
Than thine, shall by Loves hand be bound,
And both with equal glory crowned.
Then shall thou weep, entreat, complain
To Love, as I did once to thee;
When all thy tears shall be as vain
As mine were then, for thou shall be
Damned for thy false Apostasy,
SONG Persuasions to enjoy.
IF the quick spirits in your eye
Now languish, and anon must dye;
If every sweet, and every grace,
Must fly from that forsaken face:
Then (Celia) let us reap our joys,
Ever time such goodly fruit destroys.
Or, if that golden fleece must grow
For ever, free from aged snow;
If those bright Suns must know no shade,
Nor your fresh beauties ever fade;
Then fear not (Celia) to bestow,
What still being gathered still must grow.
Thus, either Time his Sickle brings
In vain, or else in vain his wings.
A deposition from love.
I Was foretold, your rebel sex,
Nor love, nor pity knew;
And with what scorn you use to vex
Poor hearts that humbly sue;
Yet I believed, to crown our pain,
Could we the fortress win,
The happy Lover sure should gain
A Paradise within:
I thought Loves plagues, like Dragons sat,
Only to fright us at the gate.
But I did enter, and enjoy
What happy Lovers prove;
For I could kiss, and sport, and toy,
And taste those sweets of love;
Which had they but a lasting state,
Or if in Celia's breast
The force of love might not abate,
love were too mean a guest.
But now her breach of faith, far more
Afflicts, than did her scorn before.
Hard fate! to have been once possessed,
As victor, of aheart
Achieved with labor, and unrest,
And then forced to depart.
If the stout Foe will not resign
When I besiege a Town,
I lose, but what was never mine;
But he that is cast down
From enjoyed beauty, feels a woe,
Only deposed Kings can know.
Ungrateful beauty threatened,
KNow Celia, (since thou art so proud,)
'Twas I that gave thee thy renown:
Thou had, in the forgotten crowd
Of common beauties, lived unknown,
Had not my verse exhaled thy name,
And with it ympt the wings of fame.
That killing power is none of thine,
I gave it to thy voice, and eyes:
Thy sweets, thy graces, all are mine;
Thou art my star, shin'st in my skies;
Then dart not from thy borrowed sphere
Lightning on him that fixed thee there.
Tempt me with such affrights no more,
Left what I made, I uncreate:
Let fools thy mystique forms adore,
I Will know thee in thy mortal state;
Wise Poets that wrapped Truth in tales,
Knew her themselves through all her vailes.
Disdain returned.
He that loves a Rosy cheek,
Or a Coral lip admires,
Or from Star-like eyes does seek
Fuel to maintain his fires;
As old Time makes these decay,
So his flames must waste away.
But a smooth and steadfast mind
Gentle thoughts, and calm desires,
Hearts with equal love combind,
Kindle never dying fires.
Where these are not, I despise
Lovely cheeks, or lips, or eyes.
No tears, Celia, now shall win,
My resolved heart, to return;
I have searched thy soul within,
And find naught, but pride, and-scorn;
I have learned thy arts, and now
Can disdain as much as thou.
Some power, in my revenge convey
That love to her, I cast away.
A Looking-glass.
THat flattring Glass, whose smooth face wears
Your shadow, which a Sun appears,
Was once a river of my tears.
About your cold heart they did make
A circle, where the brinie lake
Congealed into a crystal cake.
Gaze no more on that killing eye,
For fear the native cruelty
Doom you, as it does all, to dye.
For fear lest the fair object move
Your froward heart to fall in love,
Then you your self my rival prove.
Look rather on my pale cheeks pined,
There view your beauties, there you will find
A fair face, but a cruel mind.
Be not for ever frozen, coy,
One beam of love will soon destroy,
And melt that ice, to floods of joy.
An Elegy on the La: PEN: sent to my Mistress out of France.
LEt him, who from his tyrant Mistress did
This day receive his cruel doom, forbid
His eyes to weep that loss, and let him here
Open those floud-gates, to bedeaw this beer;
So shall those drops, which else would be but brine,
Be turned to Manna, falling on her shrine.
Let him, who banished far from her dear sight
Whom his soul loves, does in that absence write,
Or lines of passion, or some powerful charms,
To vent his own grief, or unlock her arms,
Take off his pen, and in sad verse bemone
This general sorrow, and forget his own;
So many those Verses live, which else mustdye:
For though the Muses give eternity,
When they embalm with verse, yet she could give
Life unto that Muse, by which others live.
Oh pardon me (fair soul) that boldly have
Dropped though but one tear, on thy silent grave;
And writ on that earth, which such honor had,
To cloth that flesh wherein thy self was clad.
And pardon me (sweet Saint) whom I adore,
That I this tribute pay out of the store
Of lines, and tears, that's only due to thee;
Oh, do not think it new Idolatry;
Though you are only sovereign of this Land,
Yet universal losses may command
A subsidy from every private eye,
And press each pen to write, so to supply,
And feed the common grief; if this excuse
Prevail not, take these tears to your own use,
As shed for you; for when I saw her dye,
I then did think on your mortality;
For since nor virtue, wit, nor beauty, could
Preserve from Death's hand, this their heavenly mould,
Where they were framed all, and where they dwelt,
I then knew you must dye too, and did melt
Into these tears: but thinking on that day,
And when the gods resolved to take away
A Saint from us, I that did know what dearth
There was of such good souls upon the earth,
Began to fear lest Death, their Officer,
Might have mistook, and taken thee for her;
So had thou robbed us of that happiness
Which she in heaven, and I in thee possess.
But what can heaven to her glory add?
The praises she has dead, living she had.
To say she is now an Angel, is no more
Praise than she had, for she was one before;
Which of the Saints can show more votaries
Than she had here? even those that did despise
The Angels, and may her now she is one,
Did, whilst she lived, with pure devotion
Adore, and worship her; her virtues had
All honor here, for this world was too bad
To hate, or envy her; these cannot rise
So high, as to repine at Deities:
But now she is amongst her fellow Saints, they may
Be good enough to envy her, this way
There Is loss in the change 'twixt heaven and earth, if she
Should leave her servants here below, to be
Hated of her competitors above;
But sure her matchless goodness needs must move
Those blessed souls to admire her excellence;
By this means only can her journey hence
To heaven prove gain, if as she was but here,
Worshipped by men, she be by Angels there.
But I must weep no more over this urn
My tears to their own channel must return;
And having ended these sad obsequies,
My Muse must back to her old exercise,
To tell the story of my martyrdom.
But oh thou Idol of my soul, become
Once pitiful, that she may change her style,
Dry up her blubbred eyes, and learn to smile.
Rest then blessed soul; for as ghosts fly away,
When the shrill Cock proclames the infant-day;
So must I hence, for lo I see from far,
The minions of the Muses coming are,
Each of them bringing to thy sacred Hearse,
In either eye a tear, each hand a Verse.
To my Mistress in absence.
THough I must live here, and by force
Of your command suffer divorce;
Though I am parted, yet my mind,
(That Is more my self) still stays behind;
I breath in you, you keep my heart;
'Twas but a carcass that did part.
Then though our bodies are dis-joynd,
As things that are to place confined;
Yet let our boundless spirits meet,
And in loves sphere each other greet;
There let us work a mystique wreath,
Unknown unto the world beneath;
There let our claspt loves sweetly twine;
There let our secret thoughts unseen,
Like nets be weaved, and inter-twin'd,
Wherewith we catch each others mind:
There whilst our souls do sit and kiss,
Tasting a sweet, and subtle bliss,
(Such as gross lovers cannot know,
Whose hands, and lips, meet here below;)
Let us look down, and mark what pain
Our absent bodies here sustain,
And smile to see how far away
The one does from the other stray;
Yet burn, and languish with desire
To join, and quench their mutual fire
There let us joy to see from far,
Our emulous flames at loving war,
Whilst both with equal luster shine,
Mine bright as yours, yours bright as mine.
There seated in those heavenly bowers,
We Will cheat the lag, and lingering hours,
Making our bitter absence sweet,
Till souls, and bodies both, may meet,
To her in absence. A SHIP.
Tossed in a troubled sea of griefs, I float
Far from the shore, in a storm-beaten boat,
Where my sad thoughts do (like the compass) show
The several points from which cross winds do blow.
My heart does like the needle touched with love,
Still fixed on you, point which way I would move.
You are the bright Pole Star, which in the dark
Of this long absence, guides my wandering bark.
Love is the Pilot, but o'r-come with fear
Of your displeasure, dares not homewards stear;
My fearful hope hangs on my trembling sail;
Nothing is wanting but a gentle gale,
Which pleasant breath must blow from your sweet lip.
Bid it but move, and quick as thought, this Ship
Into your arms, which are my port, will fly,
Where it for ever shall at Anchor lie.
SONG. Eternity of Love protested.
HOw ill does be deserve a Lovers name,
Whose pale weak flame
Cannot retain
His heat in spite of absence or disdain;
But does at once, like paper set on fire,
Burn and expire;
True love can never change his seat,
Nor did he ever love, that could retreat.
That noble Flame, which my breast keeps alive
Shall still survive,
When my soul's fled;
Nor shall my love dye, when my hodye's dead,
That shall wait on me to the lower shade,
And never fade
My very ashes in their urn,
Shall, like a hallowed Lamp, for ever burn.
Upon some alterations in my Mistress, after my departure into France.
OH gentle Love, do not forsake the guide
Of my frail Bark, on which the swelling tide
Of ruthlesse pride
Does beat, and threaten wrack from every side.
Gulfes of disdain do gape to overwhelm
This boat, nigh sunk with grief, whilst at the helm
Despair commands;
And round about, the shifting sands
Of faithless love, and false inconstancy,
With rocks of cruelty,
Stop up my passage to the neighbor Lands.
My sighs have raised those winds, whose fury bears
My sayls o'r-boord, and in their place spreads tears,
And from my tears
This sea is sprung, where naught but Death appears;
A mystie cloud of anger hides the light
Of my fair star, and every where black night
Usurps the place
Of those bright rays, which once did grace
My forth bound Ship, but when it could no more
Behold the vanished shore,
In the deep flood she drowned her beamy face.
Good counsel to a young Maid.
WHen you the Sunburned Pilgrim see,
Fainting with thirst, haste to the springs;
Mark how at first with bended knee
He courts the crystal Nymphs, and fling,
His body to the earth, where He
Prostrate, adores the flowing Deity.
But when this sweaty face is drencht
In her cool waves, when from her sweet
Bosom his burning thirst is quenched;
Then mark how with disdainful feet
He kicks her banks, and from the place
That thus refresht him, moves with sullen pace.
So shall thou be despised, fair Maid,
When by the sated lover tasted;
What first he did with tears invade,
Shall afterward with scorn be wasted;
When all thy Virgin- springs grow dry,
When no streams shall be left, but in thine eye.
Celia bleeding, to the Surgeon
FOnd man, that can believe her blood
Will from those purple channels flow;
Or that the pure untainted flood,
Can any foul distemper know;
Or that thy weak steel can incize
The Crystal case, wherein it lies.
Know; her quick blood, proud of his seat,
Runs dancing through her azure veins;
Whose harmony no cold, nor heat
Disturbs, whose hue no tincture stains;
And the hard rock wherein it dwells,
The keenest darts of Love repels.
But thou reply'st, behold she bleeds;
Fool, you are deceived, and do not know
The mystique knot whence this proceeds,
How Lovers in each other grow;
Thou struckst her arm, but 'twas my heart
Shed all the blood, felt all the smart.
To T. H. a Lady resembling my Mistress.
Fair copy of my Celia's face,
Twin of my soul, thy perfect grace
Clayms in my love an equal place.
Disdain not a divided heart,
Though all be hers, you shall have part;
Love is not tied to rules of art.
For as my soul first to her flew,
Yet stayed with me; so now it is true
It dwells with her, though fled to you.
Then entertain this wandering guest,
And if not love, allow it rest;
It left not, but mistook the nest.
Nor think my love, or your fair eyes
Cheaper, 'cause from the sympathize
You hold with her, these flames arise.
To Lead, or Brass, or some such bad
Metal, a Princes stamp may add
That value, which it never had.
But to the pure refined Ore,
The stamp of Kings imparts no more
Worth, than the metal held before.
Only the Image gives the rate
To Subjects, in a foreign State
It Is prized as much for its own weight.
So though all other hearts resign
To your pure worth, yet you have mine
Only because you are her coin.
To Saxham
THough frost, and snow, locked from mine eyes
That beauty which without door lies,
The gardens, orchards, walks, that so
I might not all thy pleasures know;
Yet ( Saxham) thou within thy gate,
Art of thy self so delicate,
So full of native sweets, that bless
Thy roof with inward happiness;
As neither from, nor to thy store,
Winter takes ought, or Spring adds more.
The cold and frozen air had sterv'd
Much poor, if not by thee preferv'd;
Whose prayers have made thy Table blessed
With plenty, far above the rest.
The season hardly did afford
Corse cates unto thy neighbors board,
Yet thou had dainties, as the sky
Had only been thy Vokirie;
Or else the birds, fearing the snow
Might to another deluge grow,
The Pheasant, Partridge, and the Lark,
Flew to thy house, as to the Ark.
The willing Ox, of himself came
Home to the slaughter, with the Lamb,
And every beast did thither bring
Himself, to be an offering.
The scaly herd, more pleasure took
Bathed in thy dish, than in the brook.
Water, Earth, Air, did all conspire,
To pay their tributes to thy fire,
Whose cherishing flames themselves divide
Through every room, where they deride
The night, and cold abroad; whilst they
Like Suns within, keep endless day.
Those cheerful beams send forth their light,
To all that wander in the night,
And seem to be cken from aloof,
The weary Pilgrim to thy roof;
Where it refresh't, he will away,
He Is fairly welcome, or if stay
Far more, which he shall hearty find,
Both from the master, and the Hind.
The stranger's welcome, each man there
Stamped on his cheerful brow, does wear;
Nor does this welcome, or his cheer
Grow less, cause he stays longer here
There Is none observes (much less repines)
How often this man sups or dines.
Thou have no Porter at the door
T'examin, or keep back the poor;
Nor locks, nor bolts; thy gates have been
Made only to let strangers in;
Untaught to shut, they do not fear
To stand wide open all the year;
Careless who enters, for they know,
Thou never did deserve a foe;
And as for thieves, thy bounti's such,
They cannot steal, thou giv'st so much.
Upon a Ribband.
THis silken wreath, which circles in mine arm,
Is but an Emblem of that mistique charm,
Wherewith the magique of your beauties binds
My captive soul, and round about it winds
Fetters of lasting love; This has intwin'd
My flesh alone, that has empal'd my mind:
Time may wear out These soft weak bands; but Those
Strong cheins of brass, Fate shall not discompose.
This only relic may preserve my wrist,
But my whole frame does by That power subsist:
To That my prayers and sacrifice, to This
I only pay a superstitious kiss:
This but the I doll, That Is the Deity;
Religion There is due, Here ceremony.
That I receive by faith, This but in trust;
Here I may tender duty, There I must:
This order as a Layman I may bear,
But I become Loves Priest when That I wear.
This moves like air,; That as the Center stands;
That knot your virtue tide, This but your hands;
That Nature framed, but This was made by Art;
This makes my arm your prisoner, That my heart.
To the King at his entrance into Saxham, by Master Io: Crofts.
SIR
Ere you pass this threshold, stay,
And give your Creature leave to pay
Those pious rites, which unto you,
As to our household Gods, are due.
In stead of sacrifice, each breast
Is like a flaming Altar dressed
With zealous fires, which from pure hearts
Love mixed with Loyalty imparts.
Incense, nor gold have we, yet bring
As rich, and sweet an offering;
And such as does both these express,
Which is our humble thankfulness;
By which is paid the All we owe
To gods above, or men below.
The slaughtered beast, whose flesh should feed
The hungry flames, we, for pure need,
Dress for your supper, and the gore
Which should be dashed on every door,
We change into the lusty blood
Of youthful Vines, of which a flood
Shall sprightly run through all your veins,
First to your health, then your fair trains.
We shall want nothing but good fare,
To show your welcome, and our care;
Such rarities that come from far,
From poor men's houses banished are;
Yet we will express in homely cheer,
How glad we are to see you here.
We Will have what ever the season yields,
Out of the neighboring woods, and fields;
For all the dainties of your board,
Will only be what those afford;
And having supt, we may perchance
Present you with a country dance.
Thus much your servants, that bear sway
Here in your absence, bade me say,
And beg besides, you would hither bring
Only the Mercy of a King,
And not the Greatness; since they have
A thousand faults must pardon crave;
But nothing that is fit to wait
Upon the glory of your state.
Yet your gracious favor will,
They hope, as heretofore, shine still
'On their endeavors, for they swore
Should love defcend, they could no more.
Upon the sickness of (E. S.)
MUst she then languish, and we sorrow thus
And no kind God help her, nor pity us?
Is justice fled from heaven? can that permit
A foul deformed ravisher to sit
Upon her Virgin cheek, and pull from thence
The Rose-buds in their maiden excellence?
To spread cold paleness on her lips, and chase
The frighted Rubies from their native place?
To lick up with his searching flames, a flood
Of dissolved Coral, flowing in her blood;
And with the damps of his infectious breath,
Print on her-brow moist characters of death?
Must the clear light, against course of nature cease
In her fair eyes, and yet the flames increase?
Must fevers shake this goodly tree, and all
That ripened fruit from the fair branches fall,
Which Prince's have desired to taste? must she
Who has preserved her spotlest chastity
From all solicitation, now at last
By Agues, and diseases be embraced?
Forbid it holy Dian; else who shall
Pay vows, or let one grain of Incense fall
On thy neglected Altars, if thou bless
No better this thy zealous Votaress?
Haste then, O maiden Goddess, to her aid,
Let on thy quiver her pale cheek be laid;
And rock her fainting body in thine arms;
Then let the God of Music, with still charms
Her restless eyes in peaceful slumbers close,
And with soft strains sweeten her calm repose.
Cupid descend; and whilst Apollo sings,
Fanning the cool air with thy panting wings
Ever supply her with refreshing wind;
Let thy fair mother, with her tresses bind
Her laboring temples, with whose balmy sweat,
She shall prefume her hairie Coronet,
Whose precious drops, shall upon every fold
Hang, like rich Pearls about a wreath of gold;
Her looser locks, as they unbraded lie,
Shall spread themselves into a Canopie,
Under whose shadow let her rest secure
From chilling cold, or burning Calenture;
Unless she freeze withyce of chaste desires,
Only holy Hymen kindle nuptial fires.
And when at last Death comes to pierce her heart,
Convey into his hand thy golden dart.
A New-yeares sacrifice. To Lucinda.
THose that can give, open their hands this day,
Those that cannot, yet hold them up to pray;
That health may crown the seasons of this year,
And mirth dance round the circle, that no tear
(Unless of Joy) may with its briny dew,
Discolor on your cheek the rosy hue;
That no access of years presume to abate,
Your beauties ever-flourishing estate:
Such cheap and vulgar wishes, I could lay,
As trivial offerings at your feet this day;
But that it were Apostasy in me,
To send a prayer to any Deity
But your divine self, who have power to give
Those blessings unto others, such as live
Like me, by the sole influence of your eyes,
Whose fair aspects govern our destinies.
Such Incense, vows, and holy rites, as were
To the involved Serpent of the year,
Paid by Egyptian Priests, lay I before
Lucinda'S sacred shrine, whilst I adore
Her beauteous eyes, and her pure Altars dress;
With gums and spice of humble Thankfulness;
So may my Goddess from her heaven inspire
My frozen bosom with a Delphique fire,
And then the world shall by that glorious flame,
Behold the blaze of thy immortal name.
SONG. To one, who when I praised my Mistress beauty, said I was blind.
VVOnder not though I am blind,
For you must be
Dark in your eyes, or in your mind,
If when you see
Her face, you prove not blind like me;
If the powerful beams that fly
From her eye
And those amorous sweets that lie
Scattered in each neighboring part,
Find a passage to your heart,
Then you will confess your mortal sight
Too weak for such a glorious light:
For if her graces you discover,
You grow like me a dazel'd Lover;
But if those beauties you not spy,
Then are you blinder far than I.
SONG. To my Mistress, I burning in love.
I Burn, and cruel you, in vain
Hope to quench me with disdain;
If from your eyes, those sparkles came,
That have kindled all this flame,
What boots it me, though now you shroud
Those fierce Comets in a cloud?
Since all the flames that I have felt,
Could your snow yet never melt,
Nor, can your snow (though you should take
Alps into your bosom) slake
The heat of my enamored heart;
But with wonder learn Loves art
No seas of ice can cool desire,
Equal flames must quench Loves fire;
Then think not that my heat can dye
Till you burn as well as I.
SONG. To her again, she burning in a Fever.
NOw she burns as well as I,
Yet my heat can never dye;
She burns that never knew desire,
She that was ice, she that was fire.
She whose cold heart, chaste thoughts did arm
So, as Loves flames could never warm
The frozen bosom where it dwelt,
She burns, and all her beauties mild:
She burns, and cries, Loves fires are melt,
Fevers are Gods, He Is a child.
Love; let her know the difference
Twixt the heat of soul and sense,
Touch her with thy flames divine,
So shall thou quench her fire, and mine.
Upon the Kings sickness.
Sickness, the minister of death, does lay
So strong a siege against our brittle clay,
As whilst it does our weak forts singly win,
It hopes at length to take all mankind in.
First, it begins upon the womb to wait,
And does the unborn child there uncreate;
Then rocks the cradle where the infant lies,
Where ere it fully be alive, it dies.
It never leaves fond youth, until it have
Found, or an early, or a later grave.
By thousand subtle sleights from heedless man
It cuts the short allowance of a span;
And where both sober life, and art combine
To keep it out, Age makes them both resign.
Thus by degrees it only gained of late,
The weak, the aged, or intemperate;
But now the Tyrant has found out a way
By which the sober, strong, and young, decay,
Entering his royal limbs that is our head,
Through us his mystique limbs the pain is spread.
That man that does not feel his part, has none
In any part of his dominion,
If he hold land, that earth is forfeited,
And he unfit on any ground to tread.
This grief is felt at Court, where it does move
Through every joint, like the true soul of love.
All those fair stars that do attend on Him,
Whence they derived their light, wax pale and dim.
That ruddy morning beam of Majesty,
Which should the Sun's ecclipsed light supply,
Is over-cast with mysts, and in the lieu
Of cheerful rays sends us down drops of dew.
That curious form made of an earth refined,
At whose blessed birth, the gentle Planets shined
With fair aspects, and sent a glorious flame
To animate so beautiful a frame;
That Darling of the Gods and men, does wear
A cloud on's brow, and in his eye a tear:
And all the rest (save when his dread command
Does bid them move) like liveless statues stand.
So full a grief, so generally worn,
Shows a good King is sick, and good men mourn.
SONG. To a Lady not yet enjoyed by her Husband.
COme Celia, fix thine eyes on mine,
And through those Crystals our souls flitting,
Shall a pure wreath of eye-beams twine,
Our loving hearts together knitting.
Let Eaglets the bright Sun survey,
Though the blind Mole discern not day.
When clear Aurora leaves her mate,
The light of her gray eyes despising,
Yet all the world does celebrate,
with sacrifice, her fair up-rising.
Let Eaglets, etc.
A Dragon kept the golden fruit,
Yet he those dainties never tasted,
As others pined in the pursuit
So he himself with plenty wasted.
Let Eaglets, etc.
SONG. The willing Prisoner to his Mistress.
LEt fools great Cupids yoke disdain,
Loving their own wild freedom better;
Whilst proud of my triumphant chain
I sit, and court my beauteous fetter.
Her murdring glances, snaring hairs,
And her bewitching smiles, so please me,
As he brings ruin, that repairs
The sweet afflictions that disease me.
Hide not those panting bals of snow
with envious veyls from my beholding;
Unlock those lips, their pearly row
In a sweet smile of love unfolding.
And let those eyes, whose motion wheels
The restless Fate of every Lover,
Survey the pains my sick heart feels,
And wounds themselves have made, discover.
A Fly that flew into my Mistress her eye.
When this Fly lived, she used to play
In the Sunshine all the day;
Till coming near my Celia's fight,
She found a new, and unknown light,
So full of glory, as it made
The noonday Sun a gloomy shade;
Then this amorous Fly became
My rival, and did court my flame.
She did from hand to bosom skip,
And from her breath, her cheek and lip,
Sucked all the incense, and the spice,
And grew a bird of Paradise:
At last into her eye she flew,
There scorched in flames, and drowned in dew,
Like Phaeton from the Sun's sphere
She fell, and with her dropped a tear,
Of which a pearl was straight composed,
Wherein her ashes lie enclosed.
Thus she received from Celia's eye,
Funereall flame, tomb Obsequie.
SONG. Celia singing
Hark how my Celia, with the choice
Music of her hand and voice
Stils the loud wind; and makes the wild
Insenced Bore, and Panther mild:
Mark how those statues like men move,
Whilst men with wonder statues prove!
This stiff rock bends to worship her,
That Idol turns Idolater.
Now see how all the new inspired
Images, with love are fired;
Hark how the tender Marble groans,
And all the late-transformed stones,
Court the fair Nymph with many a tear,
Which she (more stony than they were)
Beholds with unrelenting mind;
Whilst they amazed to see combined
Such matchless beauty with disdain,
Are all turned into stones again.
SONG. Celia singing.
YOu that think Love can convey,
No other way,
But through the eyes, into the heart,
His fatal Dart,
Close up those casements, and but hear
This Syrensing,
And on the wing
Of her sweet voice, it shall appear
That Love can enter at the ear:
Then unveil your eyes, behold
The curious mould
where that voice dwells, and as we know,
when the Cocks crow,
We freely may
Gaze on the day:
So may you, when the Mufick's done,
Awake and see the rising sun.
SONG. To one that desired to know my Mistress.
SEck not to know my love, for she
Has vowed her constant faith to me;
Her mild aspects are mine, and thou
Shall only find a stormy brow:
For if her beauty stir desire
In me, her kisses quench the fire;
Or, I can to Love's fountain go,
Or dwell upon her hills of snow;
But 'when thou burn'st, she shall not spare
One gentle breath to cool the air;
Thou shall not climb those Alps, nor spy
Where the sweet springs of Venus lie.
Search hidden nature, and there find
A treasure to enrich thy mind;
Discover Arts not yet revel'd,
But let my Mistress live concealed
Though men by knowledge wiser grow,
Yet here'tis wisdom not to know.
In the person of a Lady to her inconstant servant.
WHen on the Altar of my hand,
(Bedewed with many a kiss, and tear,)
Thy now revolted heart did stand
An humble Martyr, thou did swear
Thus, (and the God of love did hear,)
By those bright glances of thine eye,
Unless thou pity me, I dye.
When first those perjured lips of thine,
Bepal'd with blasting sighs, did seal
Their violated faith on mine,
From the soft bosom that did heal
Thee, thou my melting heart did steal;
My soul enflamed with thy false breath,
Poisoned with kisses, sucked in death.
Yet I nor hand, nor lip will move,
Revenge, or mercy, to procure
From the offended God of love;
My curse is fatal, and my pure
Love shall beyond thy scorn endure:
If I implore the Gods, they will find
Thee too ungrateful, me too kind.
Truce in Love entreated.
NO more, blind God, for see my heart
Is made thy Quiver, where remains
No void place for another Dart;
And alas that conquest gains
Small praise, that only brings away
A tame and unresisting prey.
Behold a nobler foe, all armed,
Defies thy weak Artillery,
That has thy Bow and Quiver charmed,
A rebel beauty, conquering Thee:
If thou dare equal combat try,
Wound her, for it is for her I dye.
To my Rival.
HEnce vain Intruder, haste away,
Wash not with thy unhallowed brine
The foor-steps of my Celia's shrine;
Nor on her purer Altars lay
Thy empty words, accents that may
Some looser Dame to love incline;
She must have offerings more divine;
Such pearly drops, as youthful May
Scatters before the rising day;
Such smooth soft language, as each line
Might stroke an angry God, or stay
Jove's thunder, make the hearers pine
With envy; do this, thou shall be
Servant to her, Rival with me.
Boldness in love.
MArk how the bashful Morn in vain
Courts the amorous Marigold,
With sighing blasts, and weeping rain;
Yet she refuses to unfold:
But when the Planet of the day,
Approaches with his powerful ray,
Then she spreads, then she receives
His warmer beams into her virgin leaves.
So shall thou thrive in love, fond Boy;
If thy tears and sighs discover
Thy grief, thou never shall enjoy
The just reward of a bold Lover:
But when with moving accents thou
Shall constant faith, and service vow,
Thy Celia shall receive those charms
With open ears, and with unfolded arms.
A Pastoral Dialogue. Celia. Cleon.
AS Celia rested in the shade
With Cleon by her side,
The Swain thus courted the young Maid,
And thus the Nymph replied
CL. Sweet! let thy Captive fetrers wear
Made of thine arms, and hands;
Till such as thraldom scorn, of fear,
Envy those happy bands.

CE. Then thus my willing arms I wind
About thee, and am so
Thy prisoner; for my self I bind,
Until I let thee go.

CL. Happy that slave, whom the fair foe
Ties in so soft a chain,

CE. Far happier I, but that I know
Thou will break loose again,

CL. By thy immortal beauties never,

CE. Frail as thy love's thine oath.

CL. Though beauty fade, my faith lasts ever.

CE. Time will destroy them both.

CL. I dote not on thy snow-white skin.

CE. What then?

CL. Thy purer mind.

CE. It loved too soon.

CL. Thou had not been
So fair, if not so kind.

CE. Oh strange vain fancy!

CL. But yet true.

CE. Prove it,

CL. Then make brade
Of those loose flames that circle you,
My sun, and yet your shade.

CE. It Is done.

CL. Now give it me.

CE. Thus thou
Shall thine own error find,
If these were beauties, I am now
Less fair, because more kind.

CL. You shall confess you err; that hair
Shall it not change the hue,
Or leave the golden mountain bare?

CE. Ay me! it is too true

CL. But this small wreath, shall ever stay
In its first native prime,
And smiling when the rest decay,
The triumphs sing of time.

CE Then let me cut from thy fair grove,
One branch, and let that be
An emblem of eternal love;
For such is mine to thee.

CL Thus are we both redeemed from time,
I by thy grace.

CE. And I
Shall live in thy immortal rhyme,
Until the Muses dye.

CL By heaven!

CE. Swear not; if I must weep,
Jove shall not smile at me.
This kiss, my heart, and thy faith keep.

CL. This breathes my soul to thee.

Then forth the thicket Thirsis rushed,
Where he saw all their play:
The swain stood still, and smiled, and blushed,
The Nymph fled fast away.
Grief ingrost.
Wherefore do thy sad numbers flow
So full of woe?
Why do thou melt in such soft strains,
Whilst she disdains
If She must still deny,
Weep not, but dye,
And in thy Funeral fire,
Shall all her fame expire:
Thus both shall perish, and as thou on thy Heause
Shall want her tears, so she shall want thy Verse.
Repine not then at thy blessed state,
Thou art above thy fate;
But my fair Celia will not give
Love enough to make me live;
Nor yet dart from her eye
Scorn enough to make me dye.
Then let me weep alone, till her kind breath,
Or blow my tears away, or speak my death,
A Pastoral Dialogue. Shepherd, Nymph, Chorus.
SHep. This mossie bank they pressed.

Ny. That aged oak
Did canopie the happy payr
All night from the damp air.

Cho. Here let us sit and sing the words they spoke,
Till the day breaking their embraces broke.

Shep See love, the blushes of the morn appear
And now she hangs her pearly store
(Robbed from the Eastern shore)
In The Couslips bell, and Roses rare:
Sweet, I must stay no longer here.

Nymph. Those streaks of doubtful light usher not day,
But show my sun must set; no Morn
Shall shine till thou return;
The yellow Planets, and the gray
Dawn, shall attend thee on thy way

Shep If thine eyes gild my paths, they may for bear
Their useless shine.

Nymph. My tears will quite
Extinguish their faint light.

She. Those drops will make their beams more clear,
Love's flames will shine in every tear.

Cho They kissed, and wept, and from their lips, and eyes,
In a mixed dew of briny sweet,
Their joys, and sorrows meet;
But she cries out.

Nymph. Shepherd arise,
The Sun betrays us else to spies.

Shep. The winged hours fly fast, whilst we embrace,
But when we want their help to meet,
They move with leaden feet.

Nym. Then let us pinion Time, and chase
The day for ever from this place.

Shep Hark:

Ny. Aye me stay!

She. For ever.

Ny. No, arise,
We must be gone.

Shep. My nest of spice.

Nym my soul.

Shep My Paradise.

cho. Neither could say farewell, but through their eyes
Grief interrupted speech with tears supplies.

Red and white Roses
REad in these Roses, the sad story
Of my hard fate, and your own glory:
In the White you may discover
The paleness of a fainting Lover;
In the Red, the flames still feeding
On my heart with fresh wounds bleeding.
The White will tell you how I languish,
And the Red express my anguish.
The White my innocence displaying,
The Red my marty'rdome betraying.
The frowns that on your brow resided,
Have those Roses thus divided.
Oh let your smiles but clear the weather,
And then they both shall grow together.
To my Cousin (C. R.) marrying my Lady (A.)
HAppy Youth, that shall possess
Such a spring-tyde of delight,
As the sated Appetite
Shall enjoying such excess
With the flood of pleasure less.
When the Hymeneall Rite
Is performed, invoke the night,
That it may in shadows dress
Thy too real happiness;
Else (as Semele) the bright,
Deity in her full hight
May thy feeble soul oppress.
Strong perfumes, and glaring light,
Often destroy both smell, and sight.
A Lover upon an Accident necessitating his departure, Consults with reason.
LOVER. WEep not, nor backward turn your beams
Fond eyes; sad sighs lock in your breath;
Lest on this wind, or in those streams,
My grieved soul fly, or sail to death.
Fortune destroys me if I stay,
Love kills me if I go away:
Since Love, and Fortune, both are blind,
Come Reason, and resolve my doubtful mind.

REASON. Fly, and blind Fortune be thy guide,
And against the blinder God rebel,
Thy lovesick heart shall not reside
Where scorn, and selfe-will'd error dwell;
Where entrance unto Truth is bar'rd;
Where Love and Faith find no reward;
For, my just hand may sometime move
The wheel of Fortune, not the sphere of Love.

Parting, Celia weeps.
WEep not (my dear) for I shall go
Laden enough with mine own woe;
Add not thy heaviness to mine:
Since Fate our pleasures must dis-joyn,
Why should our sorrows meet? if I
Must go, and lose thy company,
I wish not theirs; it shall relieve
My grief, to think thou do not grieve.
Yet grieve, and weep, that I may bear
Every sigh, and every tear,
Away with me, so shall thy breast
And eyes discharged, enjoy their rest.
And it will glad my heart to see,
Thou were thus loath to part with me.
A Rapture.
I Will enjoy thee nosy my Celia, come
And fly with me to Love's Elysium:
The Giant, Honor, that keeps cowards out,
Is but a Masquer, and the servile rout
Of baser subjects only bend in vain
To the vast Idol, whilst the nobler train
Of valiant Lovers daily sail between
The huge Colosses legs, and pass unseen
Unto the blissfull shore; be bold, and wise,
And we shall enter, the grim Swisse denies
Only to tame sools a passage, that not know
He is but form, and only frights in show
The duller eyes that looked from far; draw near,
And thou shall scorn, what we were wont to fear;
We shall see how the stalking Pageant goes
With borrowed legs, a heavy load to those
That made, and bear him; not as we once thought
The seed of Gods, but a weak model wrought
By greedy men, that seek to enclose the common,
And within private arms empale free woman.
Come then, and mounted on the wings of love
We Will cut the flitting air, and sore above
The Monsters head, and in the noblest seats
Of those blessed shades quench and renew our heats.
There, shall the Queen of Love, and Innocence,
Beauty and Nature, banish all offense
From our close Ivy Ewines; there I Will behold
Thy bared snow, and thy unbraded gold;
There, my enfranchised hand on every side,
Shall o'r thy naked polished Ivory slide.
No curtain there, though of transparent Iawn,
Shall be before thy virgin treasure drawn;
But the rich Mine, to the enquiring eye
Exposed, shall ready still for mintage Iye,
And we will coin young Cupids. There, a bed
Of Roses, and fresh Myrtles, shall be spread
Under the cooler shade of Cypress groves;
Our pillowes, of the down of Venus Doves,
Whereon our panting limbs we will gently lay
In the faint respites of our active play;
That so our slumbers may in dreams have leisure
To tell the nimble fancy our past pleasure;
And so our souls that cannot be embraced,
Shall the embraces of our bodies taste.
Mean while the bubling stream shall court the shore,
Th'enamour'd chirping Wood quire shall adore
In varied tunes the Deity of Love;
The gentle blasts of Western winds shall move
The trembling leaves, and through their close bows
Still Mufick, whilst we rest our selves beneath (breath
Their dancing shade, till a soft murmur, sent
From souls entranced in amorous languishment,
Rowze us, and shoot into our veins fresh fire,
Till we, in their sweet ecstasy expire.
Then, as the empty Be, that lately bore,
Into the common treasure, all her store,
Flies 'bout the painted field with nimble wing,
Deflowring the fresh virgins of the Spring;
So will I rifle all the sweets that dwell
In my delicious Paradise, and swell
My bag with honey, drawn forth by the power
Of fervent kisses, from each spicie flower.
I Will seize the Rose-buds in their perfumed bed,
The Violet knots, like curious Mazes spread
O'r all the Garden, taste the ripened Cherry,
The warm, firm Apple, tipped with coral berry;
Then will I visit, with a wandering kiss,
The vale of Lillies, and the Bower of bliss;
And where the beauteous Region does divide
Into two milky ways, my lips shall slide
Down those smooth Allies, wearing as I go
A tract for Lovers on the printed snow;
Thence climbing o'r the swelling Appenine,
Retire into thy grove of Eglantine;
Where I will all those ravished sweets distill
Though Loves Alimbique, and with Chimique skill
From the mixtmass one sovereign Balm derive,
Then bring that great Elixar to thy hive.
Now in more subtle wreaths I will entwine,
My snowie thighs, my legs and arms with thine.
Thou like a sea of milk shall lie displayed,
Whilst I the smooth, calm Ocean, invade
With such a tempest, as when Jove of old
Fell down on Danae in a storm of gold:
Yet my tall Pine, shall in the Cyprian straight
Ride safe at Anchor, and unlade her freight;
My Rudder, with thy bold hand, like a tried,
And skillful Pilot, thou shall steer and guide
My Bark into Loves channel, where it shall
Dance, as the bounding waves do rise or fall;
Then shall thy circling arms, embrace and clip
My willing body, and thy halmie lip
Bathe me in juice of kisses, whose perfume
Like a religious incense shall consume,
And send up holy vapors, to those powers
That bless our loves, and crown our sportfull hours,
That with such Halcion caelmeness fix our souls
In steadfast peace, as no astright controules.
There, no rude sounds shake us with sudden starts,
No jealous ears, when we unrip our hearts,
Suck our discourse in; no observing spies
This blush, that glance traduce; no envious eyes
Watch our close meetings, nor are we betrayed
To Rivals, by the bribed chambermaid.
No wedlock bonds unwreath our twisted loves;
We suck no midnight Arbor, no dark groves
To hide our kisses: there, the hated name
Of husband, wife, lust, modest, chaste, or shame,
Are vain and empty words, whose very sound
Was never heard in the Blizian ground.
All things are lawful shore, that may delight
Nature, or unrestrained Appetite:
Like, and enjoy, to will, and act, is one,
We only sin when Loves rites are not done.
The Roman Lucrece there, reads the divine
Lectures of Loves great master, Aretine,
And knows as well as Lais, how to move
Her plyant body in the act of love.
To quench the burning Ravisher, she hurles
Her limbs into a thousand winding curles;
And studies art-full postures, such as be
Carved on the Bark of every neighboring tree
By learned hands, that so adorned the rind
Of those fair Plants, which as they lay enwinde,
Have fanned their glowing fires. The Grecian Dame,
That in her endless webb toiled for a name
As fruitless as her work, does there display
Her self before the Youth of Ithaca,
And th'amorous sport of gamesome nights prefer,
Before dull dreams of the lost Traveller.
Daphne has broke her bark, and that swist foot
Which the angry Gods had fastened with a root
To the fixed earth, does now unfetrer'd run,
To meet th'embraces of the youthful Sun:
She hangs upon him, like his Delphique Lyre,
Her kisses blow the old, and breath new fire;
Full of her God, she sings inspired Lays,
Sweet Odes of love, such as deserve the Bays,
Which she her self was. Next her, Laura lies
In Petrarch's learned arms, drying those eyes
That did in such sweet smooth-pac'd numbers flow,
As made the world enamored of his woe.
These, and ten thousand Beauties more, that died
Slave to the Tyrant, now enlarged, deride
His cancelled laws, and for their time misspent,
Pay into Loves Exchequer double rent.
Come then my Celia, we will no more forbear
To taste our joys, struck with a Pannique fear,
But will depose from his imperious sway
This proud Usurper, and walk free, as they
With necks unyoak'd; nor is it just that He
Should fetter your soft sex with Chastity,
Which Nature made unapt for abstinence;
When yet this false Impostor can dispense
With humane lustice, and with sacred right,
And maugre both their laws command me fight
With Rivals, or with emulous Loves, that dare
Equal with thine, their Mistress eyes, or hair:
If thou complain of wrong, and call my sword
To carve out thy revenge, upon that word
He bids me fight and kill, or else he brands
With marks of infamy my coward hands,
And yet Religion bids from bloodshed fly,
And damns me for that act. Then tell me why
This Goblin Honor which the world adores,
Should make men Atheists, and not women Whores?
Epitaph on the Lady Mary Villers.
The Lady Mary Villers lies
Under this stone; with weeping eyes
The Parents that first gave her breath,
And their sad friends, laid her in earth:
If any of them (Reader) were
Known unto thee, shed a tear:
Or if thy self possess a gem,
As dear to thee, as this to them,
Though a stranger to this place,
Bewayl in theirs, thine own hard case;
For thou perhaps at thy return
May find thy Darling in a Vrn.
An other.
THe purest Soul that ever was sent
Into a clayie tenement
Informed this dust, but the weak mold
Could the great guest no longer hold,
The substance was too pure, the flame
Too glorious that thither came;
Ten thousand Cupids brought along
A Grace on each wing that did throng
For place there, till they all oppressed
The seat in which they sought to rest,
So the fair Model broke for want
Of room to lodge th'Inhabitant.
An Other
THis little Vault, this narrow room,
Of Love and Beauty is the tomb;
The dawning beam that began to clear
Our clouded sky, lies darkened here,
For ever set to us, by death
Sent to inflame the world beneath.
'Twas but a bud, yet did contain
More sweetness than shall spring again,
A budding star that might have grown
Into a Sun, when it had blown.
This hopeful beauty did create
New life in Love's declining state;
But now his Empire ends, and we
From fire, and wounding darts are free;
His brand, his bow, let no man fear,
The flames, the arrows all lie here.
Epitaph on the Lady S. Wife to Sir W.S.
THe harmony of colors, features, grace,
Resulting Airs (the magique of a face)
Of musical sweet tunes, all which combined
To crown one Sovereign beauty, lies confined
To this dark Vault. She was a Cabinet
Where all the choysest stones of price were set;
Whose native colors, and purest luster, lent
Her eye, cheek, lip, a dazzling ornament;
Whose rare and hidden virtues did express
Her inward beauties, and minds fairer dress;
The constant Diamond, the wise Chrysolite,
The devout Saphyre, Emrauld apt to write
Records of memory, cheerful Agat, grave
And serious Onyx, Topaz that does save
The brains calm temper, witty Amathist;
This precious Quarrie, or what else the lift
On Aarons Ephod planted, had, she wore
One only Pearl was wanting to her store;
Which in her Saviors book she found expressed,
To purchase that, she sold Death all the rest.
Maria Went worth, Thomae Comitis Cleveland, filia praemortua prima virginiam
animam exhaluit. An Dom. AEt.suae.
ANd here the precious dust is laid;
Whose purely-tempered Clay was made
So fine, that it the guest betrayed.
Else the soul grew so fast within,
It broke the outward shell of sin,
And so was hatched a Cherubin.
In height, it soared to God above;
In depth, it did to knowledge move,
And spread in breadth to general love.
Before, a pious duty shined
To Parents, courtesy behind,
On either side an equal mind.
Good to the Poor, to kindred dear,
To servants kind, to friendship clear,
To nothing but her self, severe.
^^ though a Virgin, yet a Bride
^o every Grace, the justified
^^ chaste Polygamie, and died.
Learn from hence (Reader) what small trust
We ow this world, where virtue must
Frail as our flesh crumble to dust,
On the Duke of Buckingham
Beatissimis Manibus charissimi Viri Illma Conjunx sic Parent a vit.
WHen in the brazen leaves of Fame,
The life, the death, of Buckingham
Shall be recorded, if Truth's hand
^^cize the story of our Land,
Posterity shall see a fair
Structure, by the studious care
Of two Kings raised that no less
Their wisdom, than their power express;
By blinded zeal (whose doubtful light
Made murders scarlet robe seem white,
Whose vain-deluding phantasmes charmed
A clouded sullen soul, and armed
A desperate hand, thirsty of blood)
Torn from the fair earth where it stood;
So the majestique fabrique fell.
His Actions let our Annals tell:
We write no Chronicle, this Pile
Wears only sorrows face and style,
Which, even the envy that did wait
Upon his flourishing estate,
Turned to soft pity of his death,
Now pays his Hearse; but that cheap breath
Shall not blow here, nor th'unpure brine
Puddle those streams that bathe this shrine.
These are the pious Obsequies
Dropped from his chaste Wifes pregnant eyes
In frequent showers, and were alone
By her congealing sighs made stone,
On which the Carver did bestow
These forms and Characters of woe;
So he the fashion only lent,
Whilst she wept all this Monument.
Another
Siste Hospes, sive Indigena, sive Advena vicessitudinis rerum memor, pauca per
lege.
REader, when these dumb stones have told
In borrowed Speech what Guest they hold;
Thou shalts confess, the vain pursure
Of humane Glory yields no fruit,
But an untimely Grave. If Fare
Could constant happiness create,
Her Ministers, Fortune and Worth,
Had here that miracle brought forth;
They fixed this child of Honor, where
No room was left for Hope, or Fear,
Of more, of less: so high, so great
His growth was, yet so safe his seat.
Safe in the circle of his Friends;
Safe in his Loyal heart, and ends;
Safe in his native valiant spirit;
By favor safe, and safe by merit;
Safe by the stamp of Nature, which
Did strength, with shape and Grace enrich;
Safe in the cheerful Courtesies
Of flowing gestures, speech, and eyes;
Safe in his Bounties, which were more
Proportioned to his mind than store;
Yet, though for virtue he becomes
Involved Himself in borrowed sums,
Safe in his care, he leaves betrayed
No friend engaged, not debt unpay'd.
But though the stars conspire to shower
Upon one Head the united power
Of all their Graces, if their dire
Aspects, must other breasts inspire
With vicious thoughts, a Murderers knife
May cut (as here) their Darlings life.
Who can be happy then, if Nature must
To make one Happy man, make all men just.
Four Songs by way of Chorus to a Play, at an entertainment of the King and
Queen, by my Lord Chamberlain.
The first of Jealousy. Dialogue.
Question. FRom whence was first this fury hurld,
This Jealousy into the world?
Came she from Hell?

Ans. No there does reign
Eternal Hatred with Disdain,
But she the Daughter is of Love,
Sister of Beauty.

Reply. Then above
She must derive from the third Sphere
Her heavenly Offspring.

Ans. Neither there
From those immortal flames could she
Draw her cold frozen Pedigree.

Quest. If nor from heaven nor hell, where then
Had she her birth?

An. In The hearts of men,
Beauty, and Fear did her create,
Younger than Love, Elder than Hate.
Sister to both, by Beauties side
To Love, by Fear to Hate allied:
Despayr her issue is, whose race
Of fruitful mischiefs drowns the space
Of the wide earth, in a swollen flood
Of wrath, revenge, spite, rage, and blood.

Quest. Oh how can such a spurious line
Proceed from Parents so divine?

Ans. As streams, which from their Crystal spring
Do sweet and clear their waters bring,
Yet mingling with the brackish Main,
Nor taste, nor color they retain.

Qu. Yet Rivers' twixt their own banks flaw
Still fresh, can jealouse do so,

An. Yes, whilst she keeps the steadfast ground
Of Hope, and Fear, her equal bound;
Hope sprung from favor, worth, or chance,
Toward the fair object does advance;
Whilst Fear, as watchful Scentinell,
Does the invading Foe repel;
And Jealousy thus mixed, does prove
The season, and the salt of live:
But when Fear takes a larger scope,
Stifling the child of Reason, Hope
Then sitting on th'usurped throne,
She like a Tyrant rules alone,
As the wild Ocean unconfined,
And raging as the Northren-wind.

2. Feminine Honor.
IN what esteem did the Gods hold
Fair Innocence, and the chaste bed,
When scandall'd virtue might be bold,
Bare foot, upon sharp Cultures spread
O'r burning coals to march, yet feel
Nor scorching fire, nor piercing steel?
Why, when the hard edged Iron did turn
Soft as a bed of Roses blown,
When cruel flames forgot to burn
Their chaste pure limbs, should man alone
Against female Innocence conspire,
Harder than steel, fiercer than fire?
Oh hapless sex! Unequal sway
Of partial Honor! who may know
Rebels from subjects that obey,
When malice can on Vestals throw
Disgrace, and Fame fix high repute
On the close shameless Prostitute?
Vain Honor! thou art but disguise,
A cheating voice, a juggling art,
No judge of virtue, whose pure eyes
Court her own Image in the heart,
More pleased with her true figure there,
Than her false Echo in the ear.
3. Separation of Lovers.
STop the chafed Bore, or play
With the Lions paw, yet fear
From the Lovers side to tear
Th'Idoll of his soul away.
Though Love cries by the sight
To the heart, it does not fly
From the mind, when from the eye
The fair objects take their flight.
But since want provokes desire,
When we lose what we before
Have enjoyed, as we want more,
So is Love more set on fire.
Love does with an hungry eye
Glut on Beauty, and you may
Safer snatch the Tigers pray
Than his vital food deny.
Yet though absence for a space,
Sharpen the keen Appetite,
Long continuance does quite
All Loves characters efface.
For the sense not fed, denies
Nourishment unto the mind,
Which with expectation pined
Love of a consumption dyers.
4 Incommunicability of Love.
QVest. By what power was Love confined
To one object? who can bind,
Or fix a limit to the freeborn mind?

An. Nature; for as bodies may
Move at once but in one way,
So nor can minds to more than one love stray.

Reply. Yet I feel double smart
Loves twinn'd flame, his forked dart,

An. Then has wild Lust, not Love-possest thy heart.

Qu. Whence springs love'

An. From beauty.

Qu. why
Should the effect not multiply
As fast i'th'heart, as does the cause in the eye?

An. When two Beauties equal are,
Sense preferring neither fair,
Desire stands still, distracted 'twixt the pair.

So in equal distance lay
Two far Lambs in the Wolfe's way,
The hungry beast will sterve ere choose his prey.
But where one is chief, the rest
Cease, and that is alone possessed
Without a Rival Monarch of the breast.
Songs in the Play.
A Lover in the disguise of an Amazon, is dearly beloved of his Mistress.
Cease thou afflicted soul to mourn,
Whose love and faith are paid with scorn;
For I am starved that feet the blissrs
Of dear embraces, smiles, and kisses
From my soul's Idol, yet complain
Of equal love more than disdain.
Cease, Beauties exile to lament
The frozen shades of hanishment,
For I in that fair bosom dwell
That is my Paradise, and Hell;
Banished at home, at once at ease
In the safe Port, and lost on Seas.
Cease in cold jealous seares to pine
Sad wretch, whom Rivals undermine:
For though I hold locked in mine arms
My life's sole joy, a Traitors Charms
Prevail, whilst I may only blame
My self, that mine own Rival am.
Another. A Lady rescued from death by a Knight, who in the instant leaves her,
complains thus.
OH whither is my says Sun fled,
Bearing his light, not beat away?
If thou repose in the moist bed
Of the Sea-Queen, bring back the day
To our dark clime, and thou shall lie
Bathed in the sea flows from mine eye.
Upon what whirlewind did thou ride
Hence, yet remain fixed in my heart,
From me, and to me; fled, and tied?
Dark riddles of the amorous art;
Love lent thee wings to fly, so He
Vnfeather'd now must rest with me.
Helph, help, brave Youth, I burn, I bleed,
The cruel God with Bow and Brand
Pursues the life thy valor freed,
Disarm him with thy conquering hand;
And that thou may the wild boy tame,
Give me his dart, keep thou his flame.
TO BEN. JOHNSON. Upon occasion of his Ode of defiance annexed to his Play of
the New Inn.
It Is true (dear Ben:) thy just chastizing hand
Has fixed upon the somed Age a brand
To their swollen pride, and empty scribbling due,
It can nor judge, nor Write, and yet it is true
Thy comique Muse from the exalted line
Touched by the Alchymist, does since decline
From that her Zenith, and foretells a red
And blushing evening, when she goes to bed,
Yet such, as shall outshine the glimmering light
With which all stars shall gild the following night.
Nor think it much (since all thy Eaglets may
Endure the Sunnie trial) if we say
This has the stronger wing, or that does shine
Tricked up in fairer plumes, since all are thine;
Who has his flock of cackling Geese compared
With thy tuned quire of Swans? or else who dared
To call thy births desorm'd? but if thou bind
By City custom, or by Gavell-kind,
In equal shares thy love on all thy race,
We may distinguish of their sex, and place;
Though one hand form them, and through one brain strike
Souls into all, they are not all alike.
Why should the follies then of this dull age
Draw from thy pen such an immodest rage
As seems to blast thy (else-immortall) Bays,
When thine own tongue proclames thy itch of praise
Such thirst will argue drougth. No, let be hurld
Upon thy works by the detracting world,
What malice can suggest; let the Rout say,
The running sands, that (ere thou make a play)
Count the slow minutes, might a Goodwin frame
To swallow when thou have done thy ship- wracked name
Let them the dear expense of oil upbraid
Sucked by thy watchful Lamp, that has betrayed
To theft the blood of martyred Authors, spilt
Into thy ink, whilst thou grow'st pale with guilt;
Repine not at the Tapers thrifty waste,
That sleeks thy terser Poem; nor is haste
Praise, but excuse; and if thou overcome
A knotty writer, bring the booty home;
Nor think it theft, if the rich spoils so torn
From conquered Authors, be as Trophies worn.
Let others glut on the extorted praise
Of vulgar breath, trust thou to after days:
Thy labored works shall live, when Time devours
Th'abortive off spring of their hasty hours.
Thou art not of their rank, the quarrel lies
Within thine own Virge, then let this suffice,
The wiser world does greater Thee confess
Than all men else, than Thy self only less.
An Hymeneall Dialogue. Bride and Groom
GRoom. Tell me (my Love) since Hymen tied
The holy knot, have thou not felt
A new infused spirit slide
Into thy breast, whilst thine did melt?

Bride. First tell me (Sweet) whose words were those?
For though the voice your air did break,
Yet did my soul the sense compose,
And through your lips my heart did speak.

Groo. Then I preceive, when from the flame
Of love, my scorched soul did retire,
Your frozen heart in her place came,
And sweetly melted in that fire.

Bride. It Is true, for when that mutual change
Of souls, was made with equal gain,
I straight might feel diffused a strange,
But gentle heat through every vein.

Chorus. Oh blessed disunion, that does so
Our bodies from our souls divide,
As two do one, and one four grow,
Each by contraction multiplied.

Bride. Thy bosom then I Will make my nest,
Since there my willing soul does perch.

Groom. And for my heart in thy chaste breast,
I Will make an everlasting search.

Chorus. Oh blessed disunion, etc.

Obsequies to the Lady ANNE HAY
I Heard the Virgins sigh, I saw the sleek
And polished Courtier channel his fresh cheek
With real tears; the new betrothed Maid
Smiled not that day, the graver Senate laid
Their business by; of all the Courtly throng,
Grief sealed the heart, and silence bound the tongue;
I that never more of private sorrow knew
Than from my Pen some froward Mistress drew,
And for the public woe, had my dull sense
So feared with ever adverse influence,
As the invaders sword might have unfelt,
Pierced my dead bosom, yet began to melt:
Griefe's strong instinct, did to my blood suggest
In the unknown loss peculiar Interest.
But when I heard, the noble Carlit's Gem,
The fairest branch of Denny's ancient stem,
Was from that Casket stolen, from this Trunk torn,
I found just cause, why they, why I should mourn.
But who shall guide my artless Pen, to draw
Those blooming beauties, which I never saw?
How shall posterity believe my story,
If I, her crowded graces, and the glory
Due to her riper virtues, shall relate
Without the knowledge of her mortal state?
Shall I, as once Apelles, here a feature,
There steal a Grace, and rifling so whole Nature
Of all the sweets a learned eye can see,
Figure one Venus, and say such was she?
Shall I her legend fill, with what of old
Has of the Worthies of her sex been told,
And what all pens, and times, to all dispense,
Restrain to her, by a prophetique sense?
Or shall I, to the Moral, and Divine
Exactest laws, shape by an even line,
A life so straight, as it should shame the square
Left in the rules of Katherine, or Clare,
And call it hers, say, so did she begin,
And had she lived, such had her progress been?
These are dull ways by which base pens, for hire,
Dawb glorious vice, and from Apollo's quire
Steal holy Ditties, which profanely they
Upon the Hearse of every strumpet lay.
We will not bathe thy corpse with a forced tear,
Nor shall thy train borrow the blacks they were;
Such vulgar spice, and gums, embalm not thee,
Thou art the theme of Truth, not Poetry.
Thou shall endure a trial by thy Peers;
Virgins of equal birth, of equal years,
Whose virtues held with thine an emulous strife,
Shall draw thy picture, and record thy life;
One shall ensphere thine eyes, another shall
Impearl thy teeth; a third thy white and small
Hand shall besnow, a fourth, incarnadine
Thy rosy cheek, until each beauteous line,
Drawn by her hand, in whom that part excels,
Meet in one Center, where all beauty dwells.
Others, in task shall thy choice virtues share,
Some shall their birth, some their ripe growth declare,
Though niggard Time left much unhatch'd by deeds,
They shall relate how thou had all the seeds
Of every virtue, which in the pursuit
Of time, must have brought forth admired fruit.
Thus shall thou, from the mouth of envy, raise
A glorious journall of thy thrifty days,
Like a bright star shot from his sphere, whose race,
In a continued line of flames, we trace;
This, if survay'd, shall to thy view impart
How little more than lore, thou were, thou art;
This shall gain credit with succeeding times,
When nor by bribed pens, nor partial rimes
Of engaged kindred, but the sacred truth
Is storied by the partners of thy youth;
Their breath shall Saint thee, and be this thy pride,
Thus even by Rivals to be Deifi'd
To the Countess of Anglesea upon the immoderatly by her lamented death of her
Husband.
MAdam, men say you keep with dropping eyes
Your sorrows fresh, wat'ring the Rose that lie
Fallen from your cheeks upon your dear Lords Hearse.
Alas! those odours now no more can pierce
His cold pale nostrill, nor the crimson dye
Present a graceful blush to his dark eye.
Think you that flood of pearly moisture has
The virtue fabled of old Esom's bath;
You may your beauties, and your youth consume
Over his Vin, and with your sighs perfume
The solitary Vaule, which as you groan
In hollow Echoes shall repeat your moan;
There you may wither, and an Autumn bring
Upon your self, but not call back his spring.
Forbear your fruitless grief then, and let those
Whose love was doubted, gain belief with shows
To their suspected faith; you, whose whole life
In every act crowned you a constant Wife,
May spare the practice of that vulgar trade,
Which superstitious custom only made;
Rather a Widow now of wisdom prove
The pattern, as a Wife you were of love:
Yet since you surfeit on your grief, it is fit
I tell the world, upon what cates you fit
Glutting your sorrows, and at once include
His story, your excuse, my gratitude.
You, that behold how yon'd sad Lady blends
Those ashes with her tears, lest, as she spends
Her tributary sighs, the frequent gust
Might scarter up and down che noble dust,
Know when that heap of Atoms was with blood
Kneaded to solid flesh, and firmly stood
On starely Pillars, the rare form might move
The froward Inne's, or chaste Cynthia's love.
In motion, active grace, in rest, a calm,
Attractive sweetness, brought both wound and balm
To every heart, He was composed of all
The wishes of ripe Virgins, when they call
For Hymm's rites, and in their fancies wed
A shape of studied beauties to their bed.
Within this curious Palace dwelt a soul
Gave luster to each part, and to the whole.
This dressed his face in courteous smiles; and so
From comely gestures, sweeter manners flow.
This courage joined to strength, so the hand, bent,
Was Valors, opened, Bounties instrument,
Which did the scale, and sword of Justice hold,
Knew how to brandish steel, and scatter gold.
This taught him, not to engage his modest tongue
In suits of private gain, though public wrong;
Nor mis-employ (As is the great man's use)
His credit with his Master, to traduce,
Deprave, malign, and ruin Innocence
In proud revenge of some mis-judg'd offense:
But all his actions had the noble end
To Advance delert, or grace some worthy friend.
He chose not in the active stream to swim,
Nor hunted Honor, which, yet hunted him;
But like a quiet Eddy, that has found
Some hollow creek, there turns his waters round,
And in continual circles, dances free
From the impetuous Torrent; so did he
Give others leave to turn the wheel of State,
(Whose sterless motions spins the subjects fate)
Whilst he retired from the tumultuous noise
Of Court, and suitors press, apart, enjoyes
Freedom, and mirth, himself, his time, and friends,
And with sweet relish tastes each hour he spends.
I could remember how his noble heart
First kindled at your beauties, with what Art
He chased his game through all opposing fears,
When I his sighs to you, and back your tears
Convay'd to him, how loyal then, and how
Constant he proved since to his marriage vow,
So as his wandering eyes never drew in
One lustful thought to tempt his soul to sin,
But that I fear such mention rather may
Kindle new grief, than blow the old away.
Then let him rest joined to great Buckingham,
And with his brothers, mingle his bright flame,
Look up, and meet their beams, and you from thence
May chance derive a cheerful influence.
Seek him no more in dust, but call again
Your scatterd beauties home, and so the Pen
Which now I take from this sad Elegy
Shall sing the Trophies of your conquering eye.
An Elegy upon the death of Doctor Done, Deane of Paul's.
CAn we not force from widowed Poetry
Now thou art dead (Great Done) one Elegy,
To crown thy Hearse? Why yet did we not trust,
Though with unkneaded dow-bak'd prose, thy dust,
Such as th'uncizard Lect'rer from the flower
Of fading Rhetorique, short lived as his hour,
Dry as the sand that measures it, might lay
Upon the ashes, on the Funeral day?
Have we not tune, nor voice? did thou dispense
Through all our language both the words and sense?
It Is a sad truth. The Pulpit may her plain,
And sober Christian precepts still retain;
Doctrines it may, and wholesome uses, frame,
Grave Homilies, and Lectures, but the flame
Of thy brave soul, that shot such heat, and light,
As burnt our Earth, and made our darkeness bright,
Committed holy rapes upon the will,
Did through the eye the melting hearts distill,
And the deep knowledge, of dark truths, so teach,
As sense might judge, what fancy could not reach,
Must be desired for ever. So the fire
That fills with spirit and heat the Delphique Quire,
Which kindled first by thy Promethean breath
Glowed here a while, lies quenched now in thy death
The Muses garden with Pedantique weeds.
O'r-spread, was purged by thee, the lazy seeds
Of servile imitation thrown away,
And fresh invention planted; thou did pay
The debts of our penurious banquerout Age:
Licentious thefts, that make poetique rage.
A mimique fury, when our souls must be
Possessed, or with Anacreon's ecstasy,
Or Pindar's, not their own, the subtle cheat
Of sly exchanges, and the juggling seat
Of two-edged swords, or whatsoever wrong
By ours was done the Greek or Latin tongue,
Thou have redeemed, and opened us a Mine
Of rich and pregnant fancy, drawn a line
Of Masculine expression, which had good
Old Orpheus seen, or all the ancient brood
Our superstitious fools admire, and hold
Their Lead more precious than thy burnish Gold?
Thou had been their Exchequer, and no more,
They each in others dung had searched for Ore.
Thou shall yield no precedence, but of Time,
And the blind fate of Langage, whose tuned chime
More charms the outward sense; yet thou may claim
From so great disadvantage, greater fame,
Since to the awe of thy imperious wit
Our troublesome language bends, made only fit
With her tough thick-rib'd hoops, to gird about
Thy Giant fancy, which had proved to stout
For their soft melting phrases. As in time
They had the start, so did they cull the prime
Buds of invention many a hundred year,
And left the rifled fields, besides the fear
To touch their harvest, yet from those bare lands
Of what was only thine, thy only hands
(And that their smallest work) have gleaned more
Than all those times, and Tongues, could reap before
But thou art gone, and thy strickt laws will be
Too hard for Libertines in Poetry,
They will recall the goodly exiled train
Of gods, and goddesses, which in thy just reign
Was banished nobler Poems; now, with these,
The silenced tales in the Metamorphoses
Shall stuff their lines, and swell the windy page,
Till verse refined by thee, in this last Age
Turn Ballad-rime, or those old Idols be
Adored again with new Apostasy.
Oh! pardon me that break with untuned Verse
The reverend silence, that attends thy Hearse;
Whose solemn, awful Murmurs, were to thee
More than these rude lines, a loud Elegy,
That did proclaim in a dumb Eloquence
The'death of all the Arts, whose influence
Grown feeble, in these panting numbers lies
Gasping short-winded accents, and so dies.
So does the swiftly-turning wheel, not stand
In the instant we withdraw the moving hand,
But some short time retains a faint weak course,
By virtue of the first impulsive force;
And so, whilst I cast on thy funeral Pile
Thy crown of Bays, oh let it crack a while,
And spit disdain, till the devouring flashes
Suck all the moisture up, then turn to ashes.
I will not draw the envy, to engross
All thy perfections, or weep all the loss,
Those are too numerous for one Elegy,
And it is too great to be expressed by me:
Let others carve the rest; it shall suffice,
I on thy Grave this Epitaph incize.
Here lies a king, that ruled as he thought fit
The Universal Monarchy of wit;
Here lies two Flamens, and both those the best,
Apollo's first, at last the true God's Priest.
In answer to an Elegiacall Letter upon the death of the King of Sweden from
Aurelan Townsend, inviting me to write on that subject.
WHy do thou sound my dear Aurelian,
In so shrill accents, from thy Barbican,
A loud allarum to my drowsic eyes,
Bidding them wake in tears and Elegies
For might Sweden's fall? Alas! how may
My Lyrique feet, that of the smooth soft way
Of love, and Beauty, only know the tread,
In dancing paces celebrate the dead
Victorious King, or his Majestic Hearse
Profane with the humble touch of their low verse?
Virgill, nor Lucan, no nor Tasso move
Than both, not Done, worth all that went before,
With the united labor of their wit
Could a just Poem to this subject fit;
His actions were too mighty to be raised
Higher by Verse, let him in prose be praised,
In modest faithful story, which his deeds
Shall turn to Poems: when the next Age reads
Of Frankfort, Leipsigh, Worsburgh, of the Rhyne,
The Leek, the Danube, Tilly, Wallestein,
Bavaria, Dapenbeim, Lutzenfield, where He
Gained after death a posthume Victory,
They Will think his Acts things rather feigned than don
Like our Romances of the Knight o'th'Sun.
Leave we him then to the grave Chronicler,
Who though to Annals he can not refer
His too-briefe story, yet his Iournals may
Stand by the Caesar's years, and every day
Cut into minutes, each shall more contain
Of great designement than an Emperors reign;
And (since 'twas but his Churchyard) let him have
For his own ashes now no narrower Grave
Than the whole German Continents vast womb,
Whilst all her Cities do but make his Tomb.
Let us to supreme providence commit
The fate of Monarchs, which first thought it fit
To rend the Empire from the Austrian grasp
And next from Swedens, even when he did clasp
Within his dying arms the Sovereignty
Of all those Provinces, that men might see
The Divine wisdom would not leave that Land
Subject to any one Kings sole command.
Then let the Germans fear, if Caesar shall,
Or the United Princes, rise, and fall,
But let us that in myrtle bowers sit
Under secure shades use the benefit
Of peace and plenty, which the blessed hand
Of our good King gives this obdurate Land,
Let us of Revels sing, and let thy breath
(Which filled Fames trumpet with Gustavus death,
Blowing his name to heaven) gently inspire
Thy past'rall pipe, till all our swains admire
Thy song and subject, whilst they both comprise
The beauties of the SHEPHERDS PARADISE;
For who like thee (whose loose discourse is far
Moreneat and polisht than our Poems are,
Whose very gate's more graceful than our dance)
In sweetly flowing numbers may advance
The glorious night; When not to act foul rapes,
Like birds, or beasts, but in their Angel-shapes
A troop of Deities came down to guide
Our steerless barks in passions swelling tide
By vetrues Card, and brought us from above
A pattern of their own celestial love,
Nor lay it in dark sullen precepts drowned,
But with rich fancy, and clear Action crowned
Through a mysterious fable (that was drawn
Like a transparant veyl of purest Lawn
Before their dazelling beauties) the divine
Venus, did with her heavenly Cupid shine.
The stories curious web, the Masculine style,
The subt le sense, did Time and sleep beguile,
Pinnion'd and charmed they stood to gaze upon
The Angellike forms, gestures, and motion.
To hear those ravishing sounds that did dispense
Knowledge and pleasure, to the soul and sense,
It filled us with amazement to behold
Love made all spirit, his corporeal mold
Dissected into Atoms melt away
To empty air, and from the gross allay
Of mixtures, and and compounding Accidents
Refind to immateriall Elements.
But when the Queen of Beauty did inspire
The air with perfumes, and our hearts with fire,
Breathing from her celestial Organ sweet
Harmonious notes, our souls fell at her feet,
And did with humble reverend duty, more
Her rare perfections, than high state adore.
These harmeless pastimes let my Townesend sing
To rural times; not that thy Muse wants wing
To soar a loftier pitch, for she has made
A noble flight, and placed th'Heroique shade
Above the reach of our faint flagging ryme;
But these are subjects proper to our clyme.
Torueyes, Masks, Theaters better become
Our Halcyon days; what though the German Drum
Bellow for freedom and revenge? the noise
Concerns not us, nor should divert our joys;
Nor ought the thunder of their Carabins
Drown the sweet Airs of our tuned Violins;
Believe me friend, if their prevailing powers
Gain them a calm security like ours,
They Will hang their Arms upon the Olive bough.
And dance, and revell then, as we do now,
Upon Master W. Mountague his return from travel.
LEad the black Bull to slaughter, with the Bore
And Lamb, then purple with their mingled gore
The Oceans curled brow, that so we may
The Sea-Gods for their careful waftage pay:
Send grateful lncense up in pious smoke
To those mild spirits, that cast a curbing yoke
Upon the stubborn winds, that calmly blew
To the wished shore, ou longed-for Mountague,
Then whilst the Aromantique odours burn,
In honor of their Darling's safe return
The Muses Quire shall thus with voice and hand,
Bless the fair Gale that drove his ship to land. Sweetly breathing Vernall Air
That with kind warmth do repayr
Winters ruins, from whose breast
All the gums and spice of The East
Borrow their perfumes, whose eye
Gil'ds the morn, and clears the sky,
Whose disheveled tresses shed
Pearls upon the Violet bed,
On whose brow with calm smiles dressed
The Halcion sits and builds her nest,
Beauty, Youth, and endless spring,
Dwell upon thy rosy wing.
Thou, if stormy Boreas throws
Down whole Forests when he blows,
With a pregnant flowery birth
'Canst refresh the teeming Earth;
If he nip the early bud,
If the blast what is fair on good;
If he scatter our choice flowers,
If she shake our hills or bowers,
If his vade breath threaten us,
Thou can stroke great Eolus
And from him the grace obtain
To bind him in an Iron chain.

Thus, whilst you deal your body amongst your friends
And fill their circling arms, my glad soul sends
This her embrace: Thus we of Delphos greet,
As Laymen clasp their hands, we join our feet.
To Master W. Mountague.
SIR, I arest you at your Countries suit,
Who as a debt to her, requires the fruit
Of that rich stock, which she by Natures hand
Gave you in trust, to the use of this whole Land.
Next she endites you of a Felony,
For stealing, what was her Propriety:
Your self, from hence, so seeking to convey
The public treasure of the State away.
More, you are accused of Ostracisme, the Fate
Imposed or old by the Athenian state
On eminent virtue, but the curse which they
Cast on their men, You on your Country lay:
For, thus divided from your noble parts
This Kingdom lives in exile, and all hearts
That relish worth, or honor, being rent
From your perfections, suffer banishment
These are your public injuries; but I
Have a just private quarrel to defy
And call you Coward, thus to run away
When you had pierced my heart, not daring stay
Till I redeemed my honor; but I swear
By Celia's eyes, by the same force to tear
Your heart from you, or not to end this strife,
Till I or find revenge, or lose my life.
But as in single fights it often has been
In that unequal equal trial seen,
That he who had received the wrong at first,
Came from the Combat often too with the worst;
So if you foyl me when we meet, I Will then
Give you fair leave to wound me so again.
On the Marriage of T. K. and C. C. the morning stormy.
SVch should this day be, so the Sun should hide
His bashful face, and let the conquering Bride
Without a Rival shine, whilst He forbeares
To mingle his unequal beams with hers;
Or if sometimes he glance his squinting eye
Between the parting clouds, it is but to spy,
Not emulate her glories, so comes dressed
In veyles, but as a Masquer to the feast.
Thus heaven should lowr, such stormy gusts should blow,
Not to denounce ungentle Fates, but show
The cheerful Bridegroom to the clouds and wind,
Has all his tears, and all his sighs assigned.
Let Tempests struggle in the Air, but rest
Eternal calmes within thy peaceful breast.
Thrice happy Youth; but ever sacrifice
To that fair hand that dried thy blubbred eyes,
That crowned thy head with Roses, and turned all
The plagues of love into a cordial,
When first it joined her Virgin snow to thine,
Which when to day the Priest shall recombine,
From the mysterious holy touch such charms
Will flow, as shall unlock her wreathed arms,
And open a free passage to that fruit
Which thou have toyld for with a long pursuit.
But ere thou feed, that thou may better taste
Thy present joys, think on thy torments past.
Think on the mercy freed thee, think upon
Her virtues, graces, beauties, one by one,
So shall thou relish all, enjoy the whole
Delights of her fair body, and pure soul;
Then boldly to the fight of Love proceed,
It Is mercy not to pity though she bleed,
We Will strew no nuts, but change that ancient form,
For till to morrow we will prorogue this storm.
Which shall confound with its loud whistling noise
Her pleasing shreeks, and fan thy panting joys.
For a Picture where a Queen Laments over the Tomb of a slain Knight.
BRave Youth; to whom Fate in one hour
Gave death, and Conquest, by whose power
Those chains about my heart are wound,
With which the Foe my Kingdom bound,
Freed, and captived by thee, I bring
For either Act an offering;
For victory, this wreath of Bay;
^nsign of thraldom, down I lay
Scepter and Crown: Take from my sight
Those Royal Robes; since fortunes spite
Forbids me live thy Virtues prize,
I Will dye thy Valors sacrifice.
To a Lady that desired I would love her.
I.
NOw you have freely given me leave to love,
What will you do?
Shall I your mirth, or passion move,
When I begin to woo;
Will you torment, or scorn, or love me too?
2.
Each petty beauty can disdain, and I
Spite of your hate
Without your leave can see, and dye;
Dispense a nobler Fate,
It Is easy to destroy, you may create.
3.
Then give me leave to love, and love me too
Not with design
To raise, as Loves cursed Rebels do,
When puling Poets whine,
Fame to their beauty, from their blubbi'd eyri.
4.
Grief is a puddle, and reflects not clear
Your beauties rays;
Joys are pure streams, your eyes appear
Sullen in sadder lays,
In cheerful numbers they shine bright with praise.
5.
Which shall not mention to express you fair
Wounds, flames, and darts,
Storms in your brow, nets in your hair,
Suborning all your parts,
Or to betray, or torture captive hearts,
6.
I Will make your eyes like morning Suns appear,
As mild, and fair;
Your brow as Crystal smooth, and clear,
And your dishevelled hayr
Shall flow like a calm Region of the Air.
7.
Rich Nature's store, (which is the Poet's Treasure)
I Will spend, to dress
Your beauties, if your mine of Pleasure
In equal thankfulness
You but unlock, so we each other bless.
Upon my Lord Chief Justice his election of my Lady A. W. for his Mistress.
1.
HEar this, and tremble all
Usurping Beauties, that create
A government Tyrannical
In Love's free state,
Justice, has to the sword of your edged eyes
His equal balance joined, his sage head lies
In love's soft lap, which must be just and wise.
2.
Hark how the stern Law breathes
Forth amorous sighs, and now prepares
No fetters, but of silken wreathes,
And braded hayrs;
His dreadful Rods and Axes are exiled
Whilst he sits crowned with Roses, Love has filled
His native roughness, Justice is grown mild.
3.
The golden Age returns,
Loves bow, and quiver, useless lie,
His shaft, his brand, nor wounds, nor burns,
And cruelty
Is sunk to Hell, the fair shall all be kind,
Who loves, shall be beloved, the froward mind
To a deformed shape shall be confined.
4.
Astiaea has postest
An earthly seat, and now remains
In Finch's heart, but wentworth's breast
That Guest contains;
With her she dwells, yet has not left the skies,
Nor lost her Sphere, for new-enthron'd she cries
I know no Heaven but fair wentworth's eyes.
To A. D. unreasonable distrustful of her own beauty.
Fair Doris break thy Glass, it has perplexed,
With a dark Comment, beautie's clearest Text;
It has not told thy faces story true,
But brought false Copies to thy jealous view.
No color, feature, lovely air, or grace,
That ever yet adorned a beauteous face,
But thou may read in thine, or justly doubt
Thy Glass has been summoned to leave it our.
But if it offer to thy nice survay
A spot, a stain, a blemish, or decay,
It not belongs to thee, the treacherous light
Or faithless stone, abuse thy credulous sight.
Perhaps the magique of thy face has wrought
Upon th'enchanted Crystal, and so brought
Fantastic shadows to delude thine eyes
With ayrie re-pereussive sorce ries.
Or else th'enamoured Image pines away
For love of the fair Object, and so may
Wax pale and wan, and though the substance grow
Lively and fresh, that may consume with woe;
Give then no faith to the false specular stone,
But let thy beauties by the effects be known.
Look (sweetest Doris) on my lovesick heart,
In that true mirror see how fair thou art.
There, by Love's never-erring Pensill drawn
Shall thou behold thy face, like the early dawn
Shoot through the shady covert of thy hair,
Enameling, and perfuming the calm Air
With Pearls, and Roses, till thy Suns display
Their lids, and let out the imprisoned day.
Whilst Delphique Priests,(enlightened by their Theme)
In amorous numbers count thy golden beam,
And from Love's Altars clouds of sighs arise
In smoking Incense to adore thine eyes.
If then Love flow from Beauty as the effect,
How can thou the resistless cause suspect?
Who would not brand that Fool, that should contend
There were no fire, where smoke and flames ascend?
Distrust is worse than scorn, not to believe
My harms, is greater wrong than not to grieve;
What cure can for my festring sore be found,
Whilst thou beleev'st thy beauty cannot wound?
Such humble thoughts more cruel Tyrants prove
Than all the pride that ever usurped in Love,
For Beauties Herald, here denounces war,
There her false spies betray me to a snare.
If fire disguised in bals of snow were hurled
It unsuspected might consume the world;
Where our prevention ends, danger begins;
So Wolves in Sheep, Lions in Asses skins
Might far more mischief work, because less feared,
Those, the whole stock, these might kill all the herd;
Appear then as thou art, break through this cloud,
Confess thy beauty, though thou thence grow proud,
Be fair, though scornful, rather let me find
Thee cruel, than thus mild, and more unkind;
Thy cruelty does only me defy,
But these dull thoughts thee to thy self deny;
Whether thou mean to barter, or bestow.
Thy self, it is fit thou thine own value know.
I will not cheat thee of thy self, nor pay
Less for thee than thou art worth, thou shall not say
That is but brittle glass, which I have found
By strict enquiry a firm Diamond.
I Will trad with no such Indian fool as sele
Gold, Pearls, and precious stones, for Beads and Bells;
Nor will I take a present from your hand,
Which you, or prize not, or not understand;
It not endeares your bounty that I do
Esteem your gift, unless you do so too;
You undervalew me, when you bestow
On me, what you nor care for, nor yet know.
No (Lovely Doris) change thy thoughts, and be
In love first with thy self, and then with me.
You are afflicted that you are not fair,
And I as much tormented that you are;
What I admire, you seorn, what I love, hate;
Through different faiths, both share an equal Fate.
Fast to the truth, which you renounce, I stick,
I dye a Martyr, you an Heretic.
To my friend G. N. from Wrest.
I Breath (sweet Ghibs:) the temperate air of wrest
Where I no more with raging storms oppressed
Wear the cold nights out by the banks of Tweed,
On the bleak Mountains, where fierce rempests breed,
And everlasting Winter dwells; where mild
Favonius, and the Vernall winds exiled,
Did never spread their wings: but the wild North
Brings sterill Fearn, Thistles, and Brambles forth.
Here steeped in balmy dew, the pregnant Earth,
Sends from her teeming womb a flowrie birth,
And cherished with the warm Sun's quickening heat,
Her porous bosom does rich odor sweat;
Whose perfumes through the Ambient air diffuse
Such native Aromatiques, as we use
No foreign Gums, nor essence, fetched from far,
No Volatile spirits, nor compounds that are
Adulterate, but at Natures cheap expense
With far more genuine sweets refresh the sense.
Such pure and uncompounded beauties, bless
This Mansion with an useful comeliness'
Devoid of Art, for here the Architect
Did not with curious skill a Pile erect
Of carved Marble, Touch, or Porphery'
But built a house for hospitality;
No sumptuous Chimney-peece of shining stone
Invites the strangers eye to gaze upon,
And coldly entertaines his sight, but clear
And cheerful flames, cherish and warm him here:
No Dorique, nor Corinthian Pillars grace
With Imagery this structures naked face,
The Lord and Lady of this place delight
Rather to be in act, than seem in sight;
In stead of Statues to adorn their wall,
They throng with living men, their merry Hall,
Where at large Tables filled with wholesome meats
The servant, Tenant, and kind neighbor eats.,
Some of that rank, spun of a finer thread,
Are with the Women, Steward, and Chaplain fed
With dainties cares; Others of better note
Whom wealth, parts, office, or the Heralds coat
Have severed from the common, freely fit
At the Lords Table, whose spread sides admit
A large access of friends to fill those fears
Of his capacious sickle, filled with meats
Of choycest relish, till his Oaken back
Under the load of pil'd-up dishes crack,
Nor think, because our Pyramids, and high
Exalted Turrets threaten nor the sky,
That therefore wrest of narrowness complains
Or straightened Walls, for she more numerous trains
Of Noble guests daily receives, and those
Can with far more conveniencie dipose
Than prouder Piles, where the vain builder spent
More cost in outward gay Embellishment
Than real use: which was the sole design
Of our contriver, who made things not fine,
But fit for service. Amalthea's Horn
Of plenty is not in Effigy worn
Without the gate, but she within the door
Empties her free and unexhausted store.
Nor, crowned with wheaten wreathes, does Ceres stand
In stone, with a crook'd sickle in her hand:
Nor, on a Marble Tun, his face besmeared
With grapes, is curled uncizard Bacchus reared.
We offer not in Emblemes to the eyes,
But to the taste those useful Deities.
We press the juycie God, and quaff his blood,
And grind the Yellow Goddess into food.
Yet we decline not all the work of Art,
But where more bounteous Nature bears a part
And guides her Handmaid, is she but dispense
Fit matter, she with care and diligence
Employes her skill, for where the neighbor sourse
Powers forth her waters, she directs her course,
And entertaines the flowing streams in deep
And spacious channels, where they slowly creep
In snaky windings, as the shelving ground
Leads them in circles, till they twice surround
This Island Mansion, which in the center placed,
Is with a double Crystal heaven embraced,
In which our watery constellations floate.
Our Fishes, Swans, our Water-man and Boat,
Envied by those above, which with to slake
Their starre-burnt limbs in our refreshing lake,
But they stick fast nayl'd to the barren Spherl'
Whilst our increase in fertile waters here,
Disport, and wander freely where they please
Within the circuit of our narrow Seas.
With various Trees we fringe the waters brink,
Whose thirsty roots the soaking moisture drink.
And whose extended boughs in equal ranks
Yield fruit, and shade, and beauty to the banks.
On this side young Vertumnus sits, and courts
His ruddy-cheek'd Pomono, Zephyre sports
On the other, with loved Flora, yielding there
Sweets for the smell, sweets for the palate here.
But did you taste the high and mighty drink
Which from that Fountain flows, you would think
The God of Wine did his plump clusters bring,
And crush the Falern grape into our spring;
Or else disguised in watery Robes did swim
To Ceres bed, and make her big of Him,
Begetting so himself on Her: for know
Our Vintage here in March does nothing owe
To theirs in Autumn, but our fire boyles here
As lusly liquor as the Sun makes there.
Thus I enjoy my self, and taste the fruit
Of this blessed Peace, whilst toiled in the pursuit
Of Bucks, and Stags, th'emblem of war you strive
To keep the memory of our Arms alive.
A New-yeares gift. To the King.
LOok back old Ianus, and survey
From Time's birth, till this newborn day,
All the successful season bound
With Laurel wreaths, and Trophies crowned;
Turn o'r the Annals past, and where
Happy auspicious days appear,
Marked with the whiter stone, that cast
On the dark brow of the Ages past
^dazeling luster, let them shine
^n this succeeding circles twine,
Till it be round with glories spread,
Then with it crown our CHARLES his head,
That we the ensuing year may call
One great continued festival.
Fresh joys in varied forms apply,
To each distinct captivity.
Season his cares by day with nights
Crowned with all conjugall delights,
May the choice beauties that inflame
His Royal breast be still the same,
And he still think them such, since more
Thou can not give from Natures store
Then as a Father let him be
With numerous issue blessed, and see
The fair and God-like offspring grown
From budding stars to Suns full blown.
Circle wish peaceful Olive boughs,
And conquering Bays, his Regal brows.
Let his strong virtues overcome,
And bring him bloodless Trophies home:
Strew all the pavements, where he treads,
With loyal hearts, or Rebels heads:
But Byfront, open thou no more,
In his blessed reign the Temple door.
To the Queen.
THou great Commandress, that do move
Thy Scepter o'r the Crown of Love,
And through his Empire with the Awe
Of Thy chaste beams, do give the Law,
From his prophaner Altars, we
Turn to adore Thy Deity:
He only can wild lust provoke,
Thou, those impurer flames can choke;
And where he scatters looser fires,
Thou turn'st them into chaste desires:
His Kingdom knows no rule but this,
What ever pleases lawful is;
Thy sacred Lore shows us the path
Of Modesty and constant faith,
Which makes the rude Male satisfied
With one fair Female by his side;
Does either sex to each unite,
And sorme love's pure Hermophradite.
To this Thy faith, behold the wild
Satyr already reconciled,
Who from the influence of Thine eye
Has sucked the deep Divinity;
O free them then, that they may teach,
The Centaur and the Horsman preach
To Beasts and Birds, sweetly to rest
Each in his proper Lare and nest:
They shall convey it to the flood,
Till there Thy law be understood,
So shall thou with thy pregnant fire,
The water, earth, and air, inspire.
To the New year, for the Countess of Carlisle.
GIve Lucinda Pearl, nor Stone,
Lend them light who else have none,
Let Her beauty shine alone.
Gums nor spice bring from the East,
For the Phoenix in Her breast
Builds his funeral Pile, and nest.
No tire thou can invent,
Shall to grace her form be sent,
She adornes all ornament,
Give Her nothing, but restore
Those sweet smiles which heretofore,
In Her cheerful eyes she wore.
Drive those envious clouds away,
Veiles that have o'r-cast my day,
And eclipsed Her brighter ray.
Let the royal Goth mow down
This years harvest with his own
Sword, and spare Lucinda's frown,
Ianus, if when next I trace
Those sweet lines, I in her face
Read the Charter of my grace,
Then from bright Apollo's tree,
Such a Garland wreathed shall be,
As shall Crown both Her and Thee.
To my Honored friend, Master Thomas May, upon his Comedy, The Heir.
THe Heir being born, was in his tender age
Rocked in the Cradle of a private Stage,
There lifted up by many a willing hand,
The child did from the first day fairly stand.
Since having gathered strength, he dares prefer
His steps into the public Theater
The world: where he dispaires not but to find
A doom from men more able, not less kind.
I but his Usher am, yet if my word
May pass, I dare be bound he will afford
Things must deserve a welcome, if well known,
Such as best writers would have wished their own.
You shall observe his words in order meet,
And softly stealing on with equal feet
Slide into even numbers, with such grace
As each word had been molded for that place.
You shall perceive an amorous passion, spun
Into so smooth a web, as had the Sun
When he pursued the swiftly flying Maid,
Courted her in such language, she had staid.
A love so well expressed, must be the same
The Author felt himself from his fair flame:
The whole plot does alike it self disclose
Through the five Acts, as does the Lock that goes
With letters, for till every one be known,
The Lock's as fast, as if you had found none;
And where his sportive Muse does draw a thread
Of mirth, chaste Matrons may not blush to read.
Thus have I thought it fitter to reveal!
My want of art (dear friend) than to conceal
My love. It did appear I did not mean
So to commend thy well-wrought Comick-scene,
As men might judge my aim rather to be,
To gain praise to my self, than give it thee;
Though I can give thee none, but what thou have
Deserved and what must my faint breath out-last.
Yet was this garment (though I skilless be,
To take thy measure) only made for thee,
And if it prove too scant, it is cause the stuff
Nature allowed me was not large enough.
To my worthy friend Master Geo. Sands, on his translation of the Psalms.
I Press not to the Quire, nor dare I greet
The holy place with my unhallowed feet;
My unwasht Muse pollutes not things Divine,
Nor mingles her prophaner notes with thine;
Here, humbly at the porch she stays,
And with glad ears sucks in thy sacred lays.
So, devout Penitents of Old were wont,
Some without door, and some beneath the Font,
To stand and hear the Church's Liturgies,
Yet not assist the solemn exercise:
Suffices her, that she a lay-place gain,
To trim thy Vestments, or but bear thy train;
Though nor in tune, nor wing, she reach thy Lark,
Her Lyrick feet may dance before the Arc.
Who knows, but that her wandering eyes that run,
Now hunting Glowworms, may adore the Sun,
A pure flame may, shot by Almighty power
Into her breast, the earthy flame devour.
My eyes, in penitential dew may steep
That brine, which they for sensual love did weep.
So (though against Natures course) fire may be quenched
With fire, and water be with water drencht;
Perhaps my restless soul, tired with pursuit
Of mortal beauty, seeking without fruit
Contentment there, which has not, when enjoyed,
Quenched all her thirst, nor satisfied, though cloyed;
Weary of her vain search below, Above
In the first fair may find the immortal Love.
Prompted by thy example then, no more
In moulds of clay will I my God adore;
But tear those Idols from my heart, and write
What his blessed Spirit, not fond Love, shall indite;
Then I no more shall court the verdant Bay,
But the dry leaveless Trunk on Golgotha;
And rather strive to gain from thence one Thorn,
Than all the flourishing wreaths by Laureats worn.
To my much honored friend, HENRY Lord CARRY of Lepington, upon his translation
of MALVEZZI.
My Lord,
IN every trivial work it is known
Translators must be masters of their own,
And of their Author's language, but your task
A greater latitude of skill did ask.
For your Malvezzi first required a man
To teach him speak vulgar Italian:
His matter's so sublime, so now his phrase,
So far above the style of Bemboe's days,
Old Varchie's rules, or what the Trusca yet
For current Truscan mintage will admit,
As I believe your Marquess, by a good
Part of his Natives hardly understood.
You must expect no happier fate, it is true
He is of noble birth, of nobler you:
So nor your thoughts, nor words fit common ears,
He writes, and you translate both to your Peers,
To my worthy Friend, Master D'AVENANT, Upon his excellent Play, The Just
Italian.
I WILL not mispend in praise, the narrow room
I borrow in this leaf; the Garlands bloom
From thine own seeds, that crown each glorious page
Of thy triumphant work; the sullen Age
Requires a Satyr. What star guides the soul
Of these our froward times, that date control,
Yet dare not learn to judge? When did thou fly
From hence, clear, candid Ingenuity?
I have beheld, when pearch'd on the smooth brow
Of a fair modest troop; thou did allow
Applause to slighter works; but then the weak
Spectator, gave the knowing leave to spoke.
Now noise prevails, and he is taxed for drowth
Of wit, that with the cry, spends not his mouth
Yet ask him; reason why he did not like;
Him, why he did; their ignorance will strike
Thy soul with scorn, and pity: mark the places
Provoke their smiles, frowns, or distorted faces,
When they admire, nod, shake the head, they will be
A scene of mirth, a double Comedy.
But thy strong fancies (raptures of the brain,
Dressed in Poeticke flames) they entertain
As a bold, impious reach; for they will still slight
All that exceeds Red Bull, and Cockpit flight,
These are the men in crowded heaps that throng
To that adulterate stage, where not a tongue
Of th'untun'd Kennell, can a line repeat
Of serious sense, but like lips, meet like meat;
Whilst the true brood of Actors, that alone
Keep natural unstrain'd Action in her throne,
Behold their Benches bare, though they rehearse
The terser Beaumont's or great Iohnson's verse.
Repine not Thou then, since this churlish fate
Rules not the stage alone; perhaps the State
Has felt this rancour, where men great and good,
Have by the Rabble been mis-understood.
So was thy Play; whose clear, yet lofry strain,
Wisemen, that govern Fate, shall entertain.
To the Reader of Master William Davenant's Play.
IT has been said of old, that Plays are Feasts,
Poets the Cooks, and the Spectators Guests,
The Actors Waitors: From this Similie,
Some have derived an unsafe liberty
To use their judgments as their Tastes, which choose
Without control, this Dish, and that refuse:
But Wit allows not this large Privilege,
Either you must confess, or feel it is edge;
Nor shall you make a current inference
If you transfer your reason to your sense:
Things are distinct, and must the same appear meet:
To every piercing Eye, or well-tuned Ear.
Though sweets with yours, sharpes best with my taste
Both must agree, this meat's, or sharp or sweet:
But if I sent a stench, or a perfume,
Whilst you smell naught at all, I may presume
You have that sense imperfect: So you may
Affect a sad, merry, or humerous Play,
If, though the kind distaste or please, the Good
And Bad, be by your Judgment understood:
But if, as in this Play, where with delight
I feast my Epicurean appetite
With rellishes so curious, as dispense
The utmost pleasure to the ravished sense,
You should profess that you can nothing meet
That hits your taste, either with sharp or sweet,
But cry out, it is insipid; your bold Tongue
May do it is Master, not the Author wrong;
For Men of better Pallat will by it
Take the just elevation of your Wit.
TO MY FRIEND WILL: D' AVENANT.
I Crowded amongst the first, to see the Stage
(Inspired by thee) strike wonder in our age,
By thy bright fancy dazzled; Where each Scene
Wrought like a charm, and forced the audience lean
To'th' passion of thy Pen; thence Ladies went
(Whose absence Lovers sighed for) to repent
Their unkind scorn; And Courtiers, who by art
Made love before, with a converted heart,
To wed those Virgins, whom they wooed to abuse;
Both rendered Hymen's pros'lits by thy Muse.
But others who were proof against Love, did sit
To learn the subtle Dictats of thy Wit;
And as each profited, took his degree,
Master, or Bachelor, in Comedy.
We, of th'adult'rate mixture not complain,
But thence more Characters of Virtue gain;
More pregnant Patterns of transcendent Worth,
Than barren and insipid Fruit brings forth:
So, often the Bastard nobler fortune meets,
Than the dull Issue of the lawful sheere.
The Comparison.
DEarest, thy tresses are not threads of gold,
Thy eyes of Diamonds, nor do I hold
Thy lips for Rubies: Thy fair cheeks to be
Fresh Roses, or thy teeth of Ivory.
Thy skin that does thy dainty body sheath,
Not Alablaster is, nor do thou breath
Arabian odours, those the earth brings forth,
Compared with which, would but impair thy worth.
Such may be others Mistresses, but mine
Holds nothing earthly, but is all divine.
Thy tresses are those rays that do arise
Not from one Sun, but two; Such are thy eyes;
Thy lips congealed Nectar are, and such,
As but a Deity, there is none dare touch;
The perfect crimson that thy cheek does cloth
(But only that it far exceeds them both)
Aurora's blush resembles, or that red
That Iris struts in when her mantle's spread;
Thy teeth in white do Leda's Swan exceed,
Thy skin's a heavenly and immortal weed;
And when thou breathe, the winds are ready strait
To filch it from thee, and do therefore wait
Close at thy lips, and snatching it from thence
Bear it to Heaven, where it is Jove's frankincense.
Fair Goddess, since thy feature makes the one,
Yet be not such for these respects alone;
But as you are divine in outward view,
So be within as fair, as good, as true.
The Enquiry.
AMongst the myrtles as I walked,
Love and my sighs thus intertalk't,
Tell me (said I in deep distress)
Where may I find my shepherdess?
Thou fool (said love) know thou not this
In every thing that is good she is;
In yonder Tulip go and seek,
There thou may find her lip, her cheek.
In you ennammel'd Pansie by,
There thou shall have her curious eye;
In bloom of Peach, in Rosy bud,
There wave the streamers of her blood.
In brightest Lillies that there stands,
The emblems of her whiter hands.
In yonder rising hill there smells
Such sweets as in her bosom dwells.
It Is true (said I) and thereupon
I went to pluck them one by one
To make of parts a union;
But on a sudden all was gone.
With that I stopped, said love these be
(Fond man) resemblances of thee,
And as these flowers, thy joys shall die,
Even in the twinkling of an eye:
And all thy hopes of her shall wither,
Like these short sweets, thus knit together.
The Spark.
MY first love whom all beauties did adorn,
Firing my heart suppressed it with her scorn,
Sun-like, to tinder in my breast it lies,
By every sparkle made a sacrifice.
Each wanton eye now kindles my desire,
And that is free to all that was entire:
Desiring more, by thee (desire) I lost,
As those that in consumptions hunger most,
And now my wandering thoughts are not confind
Unto one woman, but to womankind;
This for her shape of love, that for her face,
This for her gesture, or some other grace,
And where I none of these do use to find,
I choose there by the kernel not the rind:
And so I hope since my first hopes are gone,
To find in many what I lost in one;
And like to Merchants after some great loss,
Trade by retayle, that cannot now in gross.
The fault is hers that made me go astray,
He needs must wander that has lost his way.
Guiltless I am, she did this change provoke,
And made that charcoal which to her was oak,
And as a Looking-glass from the aspect,
Whilst it is whole, does but one face reflect,
But being cracked, or broken, there are shown
Many half faces, which at first were one;
So love unto my heart did first prefer
Her Image, and there planted none but her,
But since 'twas broke and martyred by her scorn,
Many less faces in her face are born;
Thus like to tynder am I prone to catch
Each falling sparkle, fit for any match.
The Complement.
O My dearest I shall grieve thee
When I swear, yet sweet believe me,
By thine eyes the tempting book
On which even crabbed old men look,
I swear to thee, (though none abhor them)
Yet I do not love thee for them.
I do not love thee for that fair,
Rich fan of thy most curious hair;
Though the wires thereof be drawn
Finer than the threads of lawn,
And are softer than the leaves
On which the subtle spinner weaves.
I do not love thee for those flowers,
Growing on thy cheeks (loves bowers)
Though such cunning them has spread
None can paint their white and red:
Loves golden arrows thence are shot,
Yet for them I love thee nor.
I do not love thee for those soft
Red corrall lips I Have kissed so often;
Nor teeth of pearl, the double guard
To speech, whence music still is heard:
Though from those lips a kiss being taken,
Might tyrants melt and death awakens.
I do not love thee (O my fairest)
For that richest, for that rarest)
Silver pillar which stands under
Thy found head, that globe of wonder;
Though that neck be whiter far,
Than towers of pollisht Ivory are.
I do not love thee for those mountains
Hill'd with snow, whence milky fountains,
(Suger'd sweets, as sirropt berries)
Must one day run through pipes of cherries;
O how much those breasts do move me!
Yet for them I do not love thee.
I do not love thee for that belly,
Sleek as satin, soft as jelly,
Though within that Crystal round
Heaps of treasure might be found,
So rich that for the best of them,
A King might leave his Diadem.
I do not love thee for those thighs,
Whose Alablaster rocks do rise
So high and even that they stand
Like Sea-markes to some happy land;
Happy are those eyes have seen them,
More happy they that sail between them.
I love thee not for thy moist palm.
Though the dew thereof be balm:
Nor for thy pretty leg and foot;
Although it be the precious root,
On which this goodly Cedar grows,
(Sweet) I love thee not for those.
Nor for thy wit though pure and quick,
Whose substance no Arithmetic
Can number down: nor for those charms
Masked in thy embracing arms.
Though in them one night to lie,
Dearest, I would gladly die.
I love not for those eyes, nor hair,
Nor cheeks, nor lips, nor teeth so rare;
Nor for thy speech, thy neck, nor breast,
Nor for thy belly, nor the rest:
Nor for thy hand, nor foot so small,
But would thou know (dear sweet) for all.
On sight of a Gentlewomans face in the water.
STand still you floods, do not deface
That Image which you bear:
So Votaries from every place,
To you shall Altars roar.
No winds but Lovers sighs blow here
To trouble these glad streams,
On which no star from any Sphere
Did ever dart such beams.
To Crystal then in haste congeal,
Left you should lose your bliss:
And to my cruel fair reveal,
How cold, how hard she is.
But if the envious Nymphs shall fear
Their beauties will be scorned,
And hire the ruder winds to tear
That face which you adorned,
Then rage and foam amain, that we
Their malice may despise:
And from your froath we soon shall see,
A second Venus rise.
A Song.
ASk me no more where Jove bestows,
When June is past, the fading rose:
For in your beauties orient deep,
These Flowers as in their causes sleep.
Ask me no more whither do stray
The golden Atoms of the day:
For in pure love heaven did prepare
Those powders to enrich your hair.
Ask me no more whither does have
The Nightingale, when May is past:
For in your sweet dividing throat
She winters, and keeps warm her nose.
Ask me no more where those stars light,
That downwards fall in dead of night:
For in your eyes they sit, and there,
Fixed, become as in their sphere.
Ask me no more if East or west,
The Phoenix builds her spicy nest:
For unto you at last she flies,
And in your fragrant bosom dies.
Song.
WOuld you know what is soft? I dare,
Not bring you to the down, or air:
Nor to stars to show what is bright,
Nor to snow to teach you white.
Nor if you would Music hear,
Call the orbs to take your ear:
Nor to please your sense bring forth
Bruised Nard, or what is more worth.
Or on food were your thoughts placed,
Bring you Nector, for a taste:
Would you have all these in one,
Name my Mistress, and it is done.
The Second Rapture.
NO worlding, no, it is not thy gold,
Which thou do use but to behold,
Nor fortune, honor, nor long life,
Children, or friends, nor a good wife,
That makes thee happy; these things be
But shaddows of felicity.
Give me a wench about thirteen,
Already voted to the Queen
Of lust and lovers, whose soft hair,
Fanned with the breath of gentle air,
O'rspreads her shoulders like a tent,
And is her vail and ornament;
Whose tender touch will make the blood
Wild in the aged, and the good;
Whose kisses, fastened to the mouth
Of threescore years and longer flouth,
Renew the age; and whose bright ey
Obscures those lesser lights of sky;
Whose snowy breasts (if we may call
That snow, that never melts at all)
Makes Jove invent a new disguise,
In spite of June's jealousies;
Whose every part does re-invite
The old decayed appetite;
And in whose sweet embraces I
May melt my self to lust, and die.
This is true bliss, and I confess,
There is no other happiness.
The Hue and Cry.
IN love's name you are charged hereby,
To make a speedy Hue and Cry
After a face whicht' other day,
Stole my wandering heart away.
To direct you these (in brief)
Are ready marks to know the thief.
Her hair a net of beams would prove,
Strong enough to captive Jove
In his Eagle shap: Her brow,
Is a comely field of snow;
Her eye so rich, so pure a gray,
Every beam creates a day;
And if she but sleep (not when
The Sun sets) it is night again;
In her cheeks are to be seen,
Of flowers both the King and Queen,
Thither by the graces led,
And freshly laid in nuptial bed,
On whom lips like Nymphs do wait,
Who deplore their virgin star,
Often they blush, and blush for this,
That they one another kiss:
But observe besides the rest,
You shall know this Fellon best,
By her tongue, for if your ear
Once a heavenly music hear,
Such as neither Gods nor Men,
But from that voice, shall hear again,
That, that is she. O strait surprise,
And bring her unto loves Assize:
If you let her go she may,
Antedate the latter day,
Fate and Philosophy control,
And leave the world without a soul.
To his Mistress confined. Song
O Think not Phaebe, 'cause a cloud,
Does now thy silver brightness shroud
My wandering eye
Can stoop to common beauties of the Sky.
Rather be kind, and this Ecclips,
Shall neither hinder eye nor lips,
For we shall meet,
Within our hearts, and kiss, and non shall see it.
Nor can thou in thy prison be,
Without some living sign of me;
When thou do spy
A Sun beam peep into the room, it is I,
For I am hid within a flame,
And thus into thy chamber came,
To let thee see
In what a martyrdom I burn for thee.
When thou do touch thy Lute, thou may
Think on my heart, on which thou playest:
when each sad tone,
Upon the things does show my deeper groan.
when thou do please, they shall rebound
with nimble airs, struck to the sound
Of thy own voye;
O think how much I tremble and rejoice.
There Is no sad picture that does dwell
Upon thy Arras wall, but well
Resembles me;
No matter though our age do not agree,
Love can make old, as well as time,
And be that does but twenty clime,
If he dare prove
As true as I, shows fourscore years in love.
The Primrose.
ASk me why I send you here,
This firstling of the infant year;
Ask me why I send to you,
This Primrose all bepearl'd with dew,
I strait will whisper in your ears,
The sweets of love are washed with tears
Ask me why this flower does show,
So yellow, green, and sickly too;
Ask me why the stalk is weak,
And bending, yet it does not break;
I must tell you these discover
What doubts and fears are in a Lover.
The tinder.
OF what mould did nature frame me?
Or was it her intent to shame me,
That no woman can come near me
Fair, but her I court to hear me?
Sure that mistress to whose beauty
First I paid a Lovers duty,
Burnt in rage my heart to tinder;
That nor prayers, nor tears can hinder.
But where ever I do turn me,
Every spark let fall does burn me,
Women since you thus inflamme,
Flint and steel I Will ever name ye.
A Song.
IN her fair cheeks two pits do lie,
To bury those slain by her eye,
So spite of death this comforts me,
That fairly buried I shall be.
My grave with rose and lilly spread.
Otis a life to be so dead!
Come then and kill me with thy eye
For if thou let me live, I dye.
When I behold those lips again,
Reviving what those eyes have slain,
With kisses sweet, whose balsome pure,
Loves wounds as soon as made, can cure.
Me thinks it is sickness to be sound,
And there is no health to such a wound.
Come then, etc.
When in her chaste breast I behold,
Those downy mounts of snow never cold,
And those blessed hearts her beauty kills,
^^viv'd by climing those fair hills.
He thinks there is life in such a death,
And so t'expire, inspires new breath.
Come then, etc.
Nymph since no death is deadly, where
Such choice of Antidotes are near,
And your keen eyes but kill in vain,
Those that are sound, as soon as slain,
That I no longer dead survive,
Your way's to bury me alive
In Cupids cave, where happy I,
May dying live, and living dye.
Come then and kill me with thy eye.
For if thou let me live, I die.
The Carver. To his Mistress.
A Carver having loved to long in vain,
Hewed out the portraiture of Venus Sunn
In marble rock, upon the which did rain
Small drisling drops that from a fount did runn.
Imagining the drops would either wear
His fury out, or quench his living flame:
But when he saw it bootless did appear,
He swore the water did augment the same.
So I that seek in verse to carve thee out,
Hoping thy beauty will my flame allay,
Viewing my lines impolish't all throughout,
Find my will rather to my love obey:
That with the Carver I my work do blame,
Finding it still th'augmenter of my flame.
To the Painter.
FOnd man that hop'st to catch that face,
With those false colors, whose short grace
Serves but to show the Lookers on
The faults of thy presumption;
Or at the least to let us see,
That is divine, but yet not she.
Say you could imitate the rays
Of those eyes that outshine the days,
Or counterfeit in red and white
That most uncounterfeited light
Of her complexion, yet can thou,
(Great Master though thou be) tell how
To print a virtue? Then desist,
This fair, your Artifice has mist:
You should have markthow she begins
To grow in virtue, not insins;
In stead of that same rosy die,
You should have drawn out modesty,
Whose beauty sits enthroned there,
And learns to look and blush at her.
Or can you color just the same,
When virtue blushes, or when shame,
When sickness, and when innocence,
Shows pale or white unto the sense?
Can such corse varnish ever be sed,
To imitate her white and red?
This may do well els-where in Spain,
Among those faces died in grain,
So you may thrive, and what you do,
Prove the best picture of the two.
Besides (if all I hear be true)
It Is taken ill by some, that you
Should be so insolently vain,
As to contrive all that rich gain
Into one tablet, which alone
May teach us superstition;
Instructing our amazed eyes,
T'admire and worship Imag'ries.
Such as quickly might outshine
Some new Saint, were allowed a shrine,
And turn each wandering looker on,
Into a new Pigmaleon:
Yet your Art cannot equalize
This Picture in her Lovers eyes.
His eyes the pencils are which limb,
Her truly, as hers copy him,
His heart the Tablet, which alone
Is for that portraicture the tru'st stone,
If you would a truer see,
Mark it in their posterity,
And you shall read it truly there,
When the glad world shall see their Heir.
Loves Courtship.
KIss lovely Celia and be kind,
Let my desires freedom find,
Sit there down
And we will make the Gods confess
Mortals enjoy some happiness.
Mars would disain his Mistress charms,
If he beheld thee in my arms,
And descend.
Thee his mortal Queen to make,
Or live as mortal for thy sake.
Venus must lose her title now,
And leave to brag of Cupid's bow;
Silly Queen,
Sweet has but one, but I can spy,
Ten thousand Cupids in thy ey.
Nor may the Sun behold our bliss,
For sure thy eyes do dazzle his.
If thou fear.
That hell betray thee with his light,
Let me eclipse thee from his sight.
And while I shade thee from his ey,
Oh let me hear thee gently cry,
Celia yields.
Maids often lose their Maidenhead,
Ere they set foot in Nuptial bed.
On a Damask rose sticking upon a Ladies breast.
LEt pride grow big my Rose, and let the clear
And damask color of thy leaves appear.
Let scent and looks be sweet, and bless that hand
That did transplant thee to that sacred land.
O happy thou that in that garden rests,
That Paradise between that Ladies breasts.
There Is an eternal spring, there shall thou lie,
Betwixt two Lilly mounts, and never die.
There shall thou spring among the fertile valleys,
By bads like thee that grow in midst of Allies.
There none dare pluck thee, for that place is such,
That but a good divine, there is none dare touch.
If any but approach, strait does arise
A blushing lightning flash, and blasts his eyes.
There'stead of rain shall living fountains flow,
For wind her fragrant breath for ever blow.
Nor now, as erst, one Sun shall on thee shine,
But those two glorious suns, her eyes divine.
O then what Monarch would not think it a grace,
To leave his Regal throne to have thy place.
My self to gain thy blessed seat do vow
Would be transformed into a rose as thou.
The Protestation, a Sonnet.
NO more shall Meads be decked with Flowers,
Nor sweetness dwelt in rosy bowers;
Nor greenest buds on branches spring,
Nor warbling birds delight to sing,
Nor April violets paint the grove,
If I forsake my Celia's love.
The fish shall in the Ocean burn,
And fountains sweet shall bitter ^^rn,
The humble Oak no flood shall know
When floods shall highest hits ore-flow;
Black Laethe shall oblivion leave,
If ever my Celia I deceive.
Love shall his bow and shaft lay by,
And Venus Doves want wings to fly,
The Sun refuse to show his light,
And day shall then be turned tonight,
And in that night no star appear,
If once I leave my Celia dear.
Love shall no more inhabit earth,
Nor Lovers more shall love for worth,
Nor joy above in heaven dwell,
Nor pain torment poor souls in hell;
Grim Death no more shall horrid prove,
If ever I leave bright Celia's Love.
The toothache cured by a kiss.
FAte's now grown merciful to men,
Turning disease to bliss:
For had not kind Rheum vexed me then,
I might not Celia kiss.
Phisicians you are now my corn:
For I have found a way
To cure diseases (when forlorn
By your dull Art) which may
Patch up a body for a time,
But can restore to health,
No more than Chimists can sublime
True Gold, the Indies wealth.
The Angel sure that used to move
The pool, men so admired,
Has to her lip the seat of love,
As to his heaven retired.
To the jealous Mistress.
ADmit (thou darling of mine eyes)
I have some Idol lately framed:
That under such a false disguise,
Our true loves might the less be famed,
Can thou that know my heart suppose,
I Will fall from thee, and worship those.
Remember (dear) how loath and slow
I was to cast a look or smile,
Or one love-line to mis-bestow,
Till thou had changed both face and style,
And art thou grown afraid to see,
That mask put on thou made for me?
I dare not call those childish fears,
Coming from love, much less from thee,
But wash away with frequent tears
This counterfeit Idolatry.
And henceforth kneel at never a shrine,
To blind the world, but only thine.
The Dart.
Often when I look, I may descry
A little face peep through that eye;
Sure that is the boy, which wisely chose
His throne among such beams as those,
Which if his quiver chance to fall,
May serve for darts to kill withal.
The Mistake.
WHen on fair Celia I did spy
A wounded heart of stone,
The wound had almost made me cry,
Sure this heart was my own.
But when I saw it was enthroned
In her celestial breast:
O then! I it no longer owned,
For mine was never so blessed.
Yet if in highest heavens do shine
Each constant Martyrs heart:
Then she may well give rest to mine,
That for her sake does smart.
Where seated in so high a bliss,
Though wounded, it shall live:
Death enters not in Paradise,
The place free life does give.
Or if the place less sacred were,
Did but her saving eye
Bath my sick heart in one kind tear,
Then should I never die.
Slight balms may heal a slighter sore,
No medicin less divine
Can ever hope for to restore
A wounded heart like mine.
To my Lord Admiral, on his late sickness, and recovery.
With joy like ours, the Thracian youth invade
Orpheus, returning from th'Elysian shade,
Embrace the Hero, and his stay implore,
Make it their public suit he would no more
Desert them so, and for his Spouses sake,
His vanished love, tempt the Lethaen Lake;
The Ladies too, the brightest of that time,
Ambitious all his lofty bed to climb,
Their doubtful hopes with expectation feed,
Which shall the fair Euridice succeed;
Euridice, for whom his numerous moan
Makes listening Trees, and savage Mountains groan,
Through all the Air his sounding strings dilate
Sorrow like that, which touched our hearts of late,
Your pining sickness, and your restless pain,
At once the Land affecting, and the Mayn,
When the glad news that you were Admiral,
Scarce through the Nation spread, 'twas feared by all
That our great CHARLES, whose wisdom shines in you,
Should be perplexed how to choose a new:
So more than private was the joy and grief,
That at the worst it gave our souls relief,
That in our Age such sense of virtue lived,
They joy'd so justly, and so justly grieved.
Nature, her fairest light ecclipsed, seems
Her self to suffer in these sad extremes,
While not from thine alone thy blood retires,
But from those checks which all the world admires.
The stem thus threatened, and the sap, in thee
Droop all the branches of that noble Tree,
Their beauties they, and we our love suspend,
Naught can our wishes, save thy health intend;
As Lillies over-charg'd with rain they bend
Their beauteous heads, and with high heaven contend,
Fold thee within their snowy anres, and cry,
He is too faultless, and too young to die:
So like Immortals, round about thee They
Sit, that they fight approaching death away.
Who would not languish, by so fair a train
To be lamented, and rester'd again?
Or thus withheld, what hasty soul would go.
Though to the Blessed? O'r young Adonis so
Fair Venus mourned, and with the precious shower
Of her warm tears cherisht the springing flower.
The next support, fair hope, of your great name,
And second Pillar of that noble frame,
By loss of thee would no advantage have,
But step by step pursues thee to thy grave.
And now relentless Fate about to end
The line, which backward does so far extend,
That Antique stock, which still the world supplies
With bravest spirits, and with brightest eyes,
Kind Phoebus interposing bade me stay,
Such storms no more shall shake that house, but say,
Like Neptune, and his Sea-born Niece shall be
The shining glories of the Land and Sea,
With courage guard, and beauty warm our Age,
And Lovers fill with like Poetique rage.
On Mistress N. to the green sickness.
STay coward blood, and do not yield
To thy pale sister, beauties field,
Who there displaying round her white
Ensigns, has usurped thy night;
Invading thy peculiar throne,
The lip, where thou should rule alone;
And on the cheek, where natures care,
Allotted each an equal share,
Her spreading Lilly only grows,
Whose milky deluge drowns thy Rose.
Quit not the field faint blood, nor rush
In the short salley of a blush
Upon thy sister foe, but strive
To keep an endless war alive;
Though peace do petty States maintain,
Here war alone makes beauty reign.
Upon a Mole in Celia's bosom.
THat lovely spot which thou do see
In Celia's bosom was a Be,
Who built her amorous spicy nest
In The Hyblas of her either breast,
But from close Ivory Hyves, she flew
To suck the Aromatic dew
Which from the neighbor vale distills,
Which parts those two twin-sister hills,
There feasting on Ambrosiall meat,
A rolling file of Balmy sweat,
(As in soft murmurs before death.
Swan-like she sung) chokt up her breath.
So she in water did expire,
More precious than the Phaenix fire;
Yet still her shadow there remains
Confind to those Elizian plains;
With this strict Law, that who shall lay
His bold lips on that milky way,
The sweet, and smart, from thence shall bring
Of the Bees Honey, and her sting.
An Hymeneall Song on the Nuptials of the Lady Ann Wentworth, and the Lord
Lovelace.
BReak not the slumbers of the Bride,
But let the Sun in Triumph ride,
Scattering his beamy light,
When she awakes, he shall resign
His rays: And she alone shall shine
in glory all the night,
For she till day return must keep
An Amorous Vigill, and not steep
Her fair eyes in the dew of sleep.
Yet gently whisper as she lies,
And say her Lord waits her uprise;
The Priests at the Altar s^^y,
With Flowery wreathes the Virgin crew
Attend while some with roses strew,
And Mirtles trim the way.
Now to the Temple, and the Priest,
See her convaid, thence to the Feast;
Then back to bed, though not to rest.
For now to crown his faith and truth,
We must admit the noble youth
To revell in Loves sphere.
To rule as chief Intelligence
That Orb, and happy time dispense
To wretched Lovers here.
For there exalted far abov,
All hope, fear, change, or they to move
The wheel that spins the fates of Love.
They know no night, nor glaring noon
Measure no hours of Sunn or Moon,
Nor mark time's restless Glass.
Their kisses measure as they flaw,
Minutes, and there embraces show
The hower's as they pass.
Their Motions, the years circle make,
And we from their conjunctions take,
Rules to make Love an Almanac.
A married Woman
WHen I shall marry, if I do not find
A wife thus molded, I Will create this mind:
Nor from her noble birth, nor ample dower,
Beauty, or wit, shall she derive a power
To prejudice my Right, but if she be
A subject born, she shall be so to me:
As to the soul the flesh, as Appetite
To reason is, which shall our wills unite
In habits so confirmed, as no rough sway
Shall once appear, if she but learn to obey.
For in habitual virtues, sense is wrought
To that calm temper, as the body's thought
To have nor blood, nor gall, if wild and rude
Passions of Lust, and Anger, are subdued;
When it is the fair obedience to the soul,
Does in the birth those swelling Acts control.
If I in murder steep my furious rage,
Or with Adult'ry my hot lust assuage,
Will it suffice to say my sense, the Beast
Provokt me to it? could I my soul divest,
My plea were good. Lions, and Bulls commit
Both freely, but man must in judgment sit,
And tame this Beast, for Adam was not free,
When in excuse he said, Eve gave it me:
Had he not eaten, she perhaps had been
Unpunished, his consent made hers a sin.
A divine Love.
1.
WHy should dull Art, which is wise Natures Ape,
If she produce a shape
So far beyond all patterns, that of old
Fell from her mold
As thine (admired Lucinda) not bring forth
An equal wonder, to express that worth
In some new way, that has
Like her great work, no print of vulgar path?
2.
Is it because the rapes of Poetry,
Rifeling the spacious sky
Of all his fires, light, beauty, influence,
Did those dispense
On ayrie creations that surpast
The real works of Nature, she at laft
To prove their rapeures vain,
Showed such a light as Poets could not feign?
3.
Or is it 'cause the factious wits did vie
With vain Idolatry,
Whose Goddess was supreme, and so had hurld
Schism through the world,
Whose Priest sung sweetest lays; thou did appear
A glorious mystery, so dark, so clear,
As Nature did intend
All should confess, but none might comprehend?
4.
Perhaps all other beauties share a light
Proportioned to the fight
Of weak mortality, scattering such loose fires,
As stir desires,
And from the brain distill salt amorous rhumes,
Whilst thy immortal flame such dross consumes,
And from the earthy mold
With purging fires severs the purer gold.
5.
If so, then why in Fames immortal scrowl,
Do we their names inroul,
Whose easy hearts, and wanton eyes did sweat
With sensual heat?
If Petrark's unarmed bosom catch a wound
From a light glance, must Laura be renowned?
Or both a glory gain,
He from ill-govern'd Love, she from Disdain?
6.
Shall he more famed in his great Art become,
For wilful martyrdom?
Shall she more title gain to chaste and fair
Through his despair?
Is Troy more noble 'cause to ashes turned?
Than Virgin Cities that yet never burned?
Is fire when it consumes
Temples, more fire, than when it melts persumes?
7.
Cause Venus from the Ocean took her form
Must Love needs be a storm?
Cause she her wanton shrines in Islands reares,
Through seas of tears,
O'r Rocks, and Gulphs, with our own sighs for gales,
Must we to Cyprus, or to Paphos sail?
Can there no way be given,
But a true Hell that leads to her false Heaven.
Loves Force.
IN the first ruder Age, when Love was wild
Not yet by Laws reclam'd, not reconciled
To order, nor by Reason manned, but flew
Full-summ'd by Nature, on the instant view
Upon the wings of Appetite, at all
The eye could fair, or sense delightful call:
Election was not yet, but as their cheap
Food from the Oak, or the next Acorn heap,
As water from the nearest spring or brook,
So men their undistinguisht females took
By chance, not choice; but soon the heavenly spark
That in man's bosom lurkt, broke through this dark
Confusion, then the noblest breast first felt
Itself, for its own proper object melt.
A Fancy.
MArk how this polisht Eastern sheet
Does with our Northern tincture meet,
For though the paper seem to sink,
Yet it receives, and bears the Ink;
And on her smooth soft brow these spots
Seem rather ornaments than blots;
Like those you Ladies use to place
Mysteriously about your face;
Not only to set off and break
Shadows and Eye beams, but to speak
To the skild Lover, and relate
Unheard, his sad or happy Fate:
Nor do their Characters delight,
As careless works of black and white
But 'cause you underneath may find
A sense that can inform the mind;
Divine, or moral rules impart
Or Raptures of Poetic Art:
So what at first was only fit
To fold up silks, may wrap up wit.
Coelum Britannicum.

A MASK AT WHITE HALL IN the Banqueting House, on Shrove-Tuesday-night, the
18. of February, 1633.

The Inventors.

Tho. Carew. Inigo Jones.

Non habet ingenium; Caesar sed jussit: habebo. Cur me posse negem, posse quod
ille putat.

LONDON, Printed for HUM. MOSELEY and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign
of the Princes Arms in St. Pauls-Church-yard. 1651.

THE DESCRIPTION OF THE SCAENE.

THe first thing that presented it self to the sight, was a rich Ornament that
enclosed the Scaene; in the upper part of which were great branches of Foiage
growing out of leaves and husks, with a Coronice at the top; and in the midst
was placed a large Compartiment composed of Grotesk work, wherein were Harpies
with Wings and Lions claws, and their hinder parts converted into leaves and
branches; over all was a broken Frontispice, wrought with krowles and masque
heads of Children, and within this a Table adorned with a lesser Compartiment,
with this Inscription, COELVM BRITANNICVM. The two sides of this Ornament were
thus ordered: First, from the ground arose a square Basement, and on the Plinth
stood a great vaze of gold, richly enchased, and beautified with Sculptures of
great Releine, with frutages hanging from the upper part; At the foot of this
sat two youths naked, in their natural colors, each of these with one arm
supported the Vaze, on the cover of which stood two young women in Draperies,
arm in arm, the one figuring the glory of Princes, and the other Mansuetude:
their other arms bore up an Ovall, in which, to the Kings Majesty was this
Imprese, A Lion with an Imperial Crown on his head; the word, Animum
subpectore forti: On the other side was the like Composition, but the design
of the Figures varied; and in the Ovall on the top, being borne up by Nobility
and Fecundity, was this Imprese to the Queens Majesty, A Lilly growing with
branches and leaves, and three lesser Lillies springing out of the Stem; the
word, Semper inclita Virtus: All this Ornament was heightened with Gold, and for
the Invention, and various composition was the newest and most gracious that
has been done in this place.

The Curtain was watcher, and a pale yellow in panes, which flying up on the
sudden, discovered the Scaene, representing old Arches, old Palaces, decayed
walls, parts of Temples, Theaters, Basilica's and Thermes with confused heaps of
broken Columns, Bases, Coronices and Statues, lying as underground, and
altogether resembling the ruins of some great City of the ancient Romans or
civilized Britains. This strange prospect detained the eyes of the Spectators
sometime, when to a loud Music Mercury descends; on the upper part of his
Chariot stands a Cock in action of crowing: his habit was a Coat of flame
color girt to him, and a white Mantle trimmed with gold and silver; upon his
head a wreath with small falls of white Feathers, a Caduseus in his hand, and
wings at his heels: being come to the ground he dismounts, and goes up to the
State.

Mercury FRom the high Senate of the gods, to You
Bright glorious Twins of Love and Majesty,
Before whose Throne three warlike Nations bend
Their willing knees, on whose Imperial brows
The Regal Circle prints no awful frowns
To fright your Subjects, but whose calmer eyes
Shed joy and safety on their melting hearts
That flow with cheerful loyal reverence,
Come I cyllenius, Jove's Ambassador,
Not as of old, to whisper amorcus tales
Of wanton love, into the glowing ear
Of some choice beauty in this numerous train;
Those days are fled, the rebel flame is quenched
In heavenly breasts, the gods have sworn by Styx,
Never to tempt yielding mortality
To loose embraces. Your exemplar life
Has not alone transfused a zealous heat
Of imitation through your virtuous Court,
By whose bright blaze your Palace is become
The envied pattern of this under world,
But the aspiring flame has kindled heaven;
The Immortal bosoms burn with emulous fires,
Jove rivals your great virtues, Royal Sir,
And Juno, Madam, your attractive graces;
He his wild lusts, her raging jealousies
She lays aside, and through th'Olympique hall,
As yours does here, their great Example spreads,
And though of old, when youthful blood conspired
With his new Empire, prone to heats of lust,
He acted incests, rapes, adulteries
On earthly beauties, which his raging Queen,
Swollen with revengefull fury turned to beast,
And in despite he transformed to Stars,
Till he had styled the crowded Firmament
With his loose Strumpets, and their spurious race,
Where the eternal records of his shame
Shine to the world in flaming Characters;
When in the Crystal myr our of your reign
He viewed himself, he found his loathsome stains;
And now to expiate the infections guilt
Of those detested luxuries he will chase
Th'infamous lights from their usurped Sphere,
And drown in the Laethean flood, their cursed
Both names and memories. In whose vacant rooms,
First you succeed, and of the wheeling Orb
In the most eminent and conspicuo is point,
With dazel ng beams, and spreading magnitude,
Shine the bright Pole star of thy Hemispheare,
Next, by your side, in a triumphant Chair,
And crowned with Ariadnes Diadem,
Sits the fair Consort of your heart, and Throne;
Diffused about you, with that share of light
As they of virtue have derived from you,
He Will fix this Noble train, of either sex;
So to the British stars this lower Globe
Shall owe its light, and they alone dispense
To'th' world a pure refined influence.

Enter Momus attired in a long darkish Robe, all wrought over with ponyards,
Serpents tongues, eyes and ears, his beard and hair party-colored and upon
his head a wreath stuck with Feathers, and a Porcupine in the forepart. Momus.
BY your leave, Mortals. Good Cozen Hermes, your pardon good my Lord
Ambassador: I found the tables of your Arms and Titles, in every Inn betwixt
this and Olympus, where your present expedition is registered your nine
thousandth nine hundred ninety ninth Legation. I cannot reach the policy why
your Master breeds so few States men, it suits not with his dignity, that in
the whole Empyiaeum there should not be a god fit to send on these honorable
errands but your self, who are not yet so careful of his honor or your own,
as might become your quality, when you are itinerant: the Hosts upon the
highway cry out with open mouth upon you for supporting plafery in your
train; which, though as you are the god of petty Larciny, you might protect,
yet you know it is directly against the new orders, and opposes the Reformation
in Diameter.


Merc. Peace Rayler, bridle your licentious tongue.

And let this Presence teach you modesty.

Mom. Let it if it can; in the mean time I will acquaint it with my condition.
Know, (gay people) that though your poets who enjoy by patent a particular
privilege to draw down any of the Deities from Twelf-night till Shrove-tuesday,
at what time there is annually a most familiar enter-course between the two
Courts, have as yet never invited me to these Solemnities, yet it shall appear
by my intrusion this night. that I am a very confiderable person upon these
occasions, and may most properly assist at such entertainments. My name is
Momus ap-Somnus-ap-Erebus-ap-Chaos-ap-Demorgorgon-ap-Eternity, My Offices and
Titles are, The Supreme Theomastix, Hupercritique of manners, protonotary of
abuses, Arch-Informer, Dilator General, Universal Calumniator, Eternal
plaintiff, and perpetual Foreman of the Grand Inquest. My privileges are an
ubiquitary, circumambulatory, speculatory, interrogatory, redargutory, immunity
over all the privy lodgings, behind hangings, doors, curtains, through
key-holes, chinks, windows, about all Venerial Lobbies, Skonces, or Redoubts,
though it be to the surprise of a perdu Page or Chambermald, in, and at all
Courts of civil and criminal judicature, all Counsels, Consultations, and
parliamentary Assemblies, where though I am but a Wool-sack god, and have no
vote in the sanction of new laws, I have yet a praerogative of wresting the
old to any whatsoever interpretation, whether it be to the behoose, or
prejudice, of Jupiter, his Crown and Dignity, for, or against the Rights of
either house of patrician or plebeian gods. My natural qualities are to make
Jove frown, Juno powt, Mars chafe, Venus blush, Vulcan glow, Saturn quake,
Cyuthia pale, Phoebus hide his face, and Mercury here take his heels. My
recreations are witty mischiefs, as when Saturn guelt his Father; The Smith
caught his wife and her Bravo in a net of Cobweb-Iron; and Hebe, through the
lubricity of the pavement stumbling over the Halfpace, presented the Emblem of
the forked tree, and discovered to the tanned Ethiops the snowie cliffs, of
Calabria with the Grotta of Puteolum. But that you may arrive at the perfect
knowledge of me, by the familiar illustration of a Bird of mine own feather,
old Peter Aretine, who reduced all the Scepters and Myters of that Age
tributary to his wit, was my parallel, and Frank Rablais sucked much of my
milk too; but your modern French Hospital of Oratory, is a mere counterfeit,
an arrant Mountebank, for though fearing no other fortunes than his Sciatica,
he discourse of Kings and Queens with as little Reverence as of Grooms and
Chambermaids, yet he wants their fangteeth, and Scorpions tail; I mean that
fellow, who to add to his stature thinks it a greater grace to dance on his
tiptoes like a Dog in a doublet, than to walk like other men on the soles of
his feet.


Merc. No more impertinent Trifeler, you disturb

The great Affair with your rude scurrilous chat.
What does the knowledge of your abject state
Concerue Jove's solemn Message?

Mom. Sir, by your favor, though you have a more especial Commission of
employment from Jupiter, and a larger entertainment from his Exchequer, yet as
a freedom God I have the liberty to travel at mine own charges, without your
pass or countenance Legacine; and that it may appear a sedulous acute
observer, may know as much as a dull flegmatique Ambassador, and wears a
treble key to unlock the mysterious Ciphers of your dark secrecies. I will
discourse the politic state of Heaven to this trim Audience -- At this Scaene
changes, and in the heaven is discovered a Sphere, with Stars placed in their
several Images; born up by a huge naked Figure (only a piece of Drapery
hanging over his thigh) kneeling and bowing forwards; as if the great weight
lying on his shoulders oppressed him, upon his head a Crown, by all which he
might easily be known to be Atlas. -- You shall understand that Jupiter upon
the inspection of I know not what virtuous. Presidents extant (as they say)
here in this Court, but as I more probably guess out of the consideration of
the decay of his natural abilities, has before a frequent convocation of the
Superlunary Peers in a solemn oration recanted, disclaymed, and utterly
renounced all the lascivious extravagancies and riotous enormities of his
forepast licentious life, and taken his oath on Iunos Breviary, religiously
kissing the two-leave'd Book, never to stretch his limbs mor betwixt adutrerous
sheets and has with pathetical remonstrances exhorted and under strict
penalties enjoined, a respective conformity in the several subordinate
Deities; and because the Libertines of Antiquity, the Ribald Poets, to
perpetuate the memory and example of their triumphs over chastity, to all
future imitation, have in their immortal songs celebrated the martyrdom of
those Strumpets under the persecution of the wives, and devolved to posterity
the pedigrees of their whores, bawds, and bastards, it is therefore by the
authority aforesaid enacted, that this whole Army of Constellations be
immediately dis-banded and casheered so to remove all imputation of impiety from
the Caelestiall Spirits, and all lust-full influences upon terrestrial bodies,
and consequently that there be an Inquisition erected to expunge in the
Ancient, and suppress in the modern and succeeding Poems and pamphlets, all
past present and future mention of those abjured heresies, and to take
particular notice of all ensuing Incontinences, and punish them in their high
Commission Court. Am not I in election to be a tall Statesman think you, that
can repeat a passage at a Counsell-table thus punctually?


Merc. I shun in vain the importunity, With which this Snarler vexes all the
gods, Jove cannot escape him: well what else from heaven?


Mom Heaven! Heaven is no more the place it was; a Cloister of Carthusians, a
Monastery of converted gods, Jove is grown old and fearful, apprehends a
subversion of his Empire, and doubts lest Fate should introduce a legal
succession in the legitimate heir by repossessing the Titanian line, and hence
springs all this innovation. We have had new orders read in the presence
Chamber, by the Vi-President of Parnassus, too strict to be observed long,
Monopolies are called in, sophistication of wares punished, and rates imposed
on commodities. Injunctions are gone out to the Nectar Brewers, for the purging
of the heavenly Beverage of a narcotique weed which has rendered the Idaeaes
confused in the Divine intellects, and reducing it to the composition used in
Saturnes Reign. Edicts are made for the restoring of decayed housekeeping,
prohibiting the repayr of Families to the Metropolis, but this did endanger an
Amazonian mutiny, till the females put on a more masculine resolution of
soliciting business in their own persons, and leaving their husbands at home
for stallions of hospitality. Bacchus has commanded all Taverus to be shut,
and no liquor drawn after ten at night. Cupid must go no more so scandalously
naked, but but is enjoyed to make him breeches, though of his mothers
petticoats. Gauimede is forbidden the Bedchamber, and must only Minister in
public. The Gods must keep no Pages, nor Grooms of their Chamber, under the
age of 25. and those provided of a competent stock of beard. Pan may not pipe,
nor Proteus juggle, but by especial permission. Vulcan was brought to an
Oretenus and fined, for driving in a plate of Iron into one of the Suns
Chariot-wheels, and frost-nailing his horses upon the fifth of November last,
for breach of a penal Statute, prohibiting work upon Holi-dayes, that being the
annual celebration of the Gygantomacy. In brief, the whole state of the
Hierarchy suffers a total reformation, especially in the point of
reciprocation of conjugall affection. Venus has confessed all her adulteries,
and is received to grace by her husband, who conscious of the great disparity
betwixt her perfections and his deformities, allows those levities as an
equal counterpoize; but it is the prettiest spectacle to see her stroaking
with her Ivory hand his collied cheeks, and with her snowie fingers combing his
sooty beard. Jupiter too begins to learn to lead his own wife, I left him
practicing in the milky way; and there is no doubt of an universal obedience,
where the Lawgiver himself in his own person observes his decrees so
punctually, who besides, to eternize the memory of that great example of
Matrimonial union which he derives from hence, has on his Bedchamber door
and seeling, fretted with stars in capital Letters, engraven the Inscription
of CARLO-MARIA. This is as much I am sure as either your knowledge or
Instructions can direct you to, which I having in a blunt round tale, without
State, formality, politic inferences, or suspected Rhetorical elegancies,
already delivered, you may now dexterously proceed to the second Part of your
charge, which is the raking of your heavenly sparks up in the Embers, or
reducing the Etheriall lights to their primitive opacity, and gross dark
subsistence; they are all unrivited from the Sphere, and hang loose in their
sockets, where they but attend the waving of your Caduce, and immediately they
re-invest their pristine shapes, and appear before you in their own natural
deformities.


Merc. Momus thou shall prevail, for since thy bold
Intrusion has inverted my resolves,
I must obey necessity, and thus turn
My face, to breath the Thunders just decree
Against this adult rate sphere, which first I purge
Of loathsome Monsters, and misshapen forms;
Down from her azure concave, thus I charm
The Lyrnean Hydra, the rough unlick'd Bear?
The watchful Dragon, the storm-boading Whale,
The Centaur, the horned Goatfish Capricorn,
The Snake-head Gorgon, and fierce Sagittar:
Divested of your gorgeous stany robes,
Fall from the circling Orb, and ever you suck
Fresh venom in, measure this happy earth,
Then to the Fens, Caves, Forests, Deserts, Seas,
Fly, and resume your native qualities.

Thy dance in those monstrous shapes, the first Antimask of natural deformity.
Mom. Are not these fine companions trim Play-fellowes for the Deities? yet
these and their fellows have made up all our conversation for some thousands of
years. Do not you fair Ladies acknowledge your selves deeply engaged now to
those Poets your servants that in the height of commendation have raised your
beauties to a parallel with such exact proportions or at least ranked you in
their spruce society? Has not the consideration of these Inhabitants rather
frighted your thoughts utterly from the contemplation of the place? but now
that these heavenly Mansions are to be void, you that shall hereafter be found
unlodged will become inexusable; especially since virtue alone shall be
sufficient title, fine and rent: yet if there be a Lady not competently stocked
that way she shall not on the instant utterly despair, if she carry a
sufficient pawn of handsomeness for however the letter of the Law runs,
Iupeter notwithstanding his Age and present ansterity, will never refuse to
stamp beauty, and make it current with his own Impression; but to such as are
destitute of both, I can afford but small encouragement. Proceed Cozen Mercury,
what follows?


Merc. Look up, and mark where the bright Zodiac
Hangs like a Belt about the breast or heaven;
On the right shoulder, like a flaming Jewel,
His shell with nine much Topazes adorned,
Lord of this Tropique fits the skalding Crab,
He, when the Sun gallops in full career
His annual race, his ghastly claws uprear'd,
Frights at the confines of the torrid Zone
The fiery team, and proudly stops their course,
Making a solstice, till the fierce Steeds learn
His backward paces, and so retrogade,
Post down hill to th'opposed Capricorn.
Thus I depose him from his lofty Throne;
Drop from the sky, into the briny flood,
There teach thy motion to the ebbing Sea,
But let those fires that beautified thy shell
Take humane shapes, and the disorder show
Of thy regressive spaces here below,

The second Antimasque is danced in retrograde paces, expressing obliquity in
motion Mom. This Crab, I confess, did ill become the heavens; but there is
another that more infests the Earth, and makes such a solstice in the politer
Arts and Sciences, as they have not been observed for many Ages to have made
any sensible advance: could you but lead the learned squadrons with a masculine
resolution past this point of retrogradation, it were a benefit to mankind,
worthy the power of a god and to be paid with Altars; but that not being the
work of this night, you may pursue your purposes: what now succeeds?


Merc. Vice, that unbodied, in the Appetite
Erects his Throne, has yet, in bestiall shapes,
Branded, by Nature, with the Character
And distinct stamp of some peculiar Ill,
Mounted the Sky, and fixed his Trophies there:
As fawning flattery in the little Dog;
In The bigger, churlish Murmur; Cowardice
In The timorous Hare; Ambition in the Eagle;
Rapine and Avarice in th'adventurous Ship
That sailed to Colchos for the golden fleece;
Drunken distemper in the Goblet stowes;
In The Dart and Scorpion, biting Calumny;
In Hercules and the Lion, furious rage;
Vain Ostentation in Cassiope:
All these I to eternal exile doom,
But to this place their Emblem'd Vices summon,
Clad in those proper Figures, by which best
Their incorporeall nature is expressed.

The third Antimasque is danced of these several vices, expressing their
deviation from Virtue. Mom. From henceforth it shall be no more ^id in the
Proverb, when you would express ^^riotous Assembly, That hell but Heaven is
broke ^^ose: this was an arrant Goale-delivery, all the ^^risons of your great
Cities could not have vo^^ed more corrupt matter: but Cozen Cylleni^^, in my
judgment it is not safe that these infe^^ous persons should wander here to the
hazard this Island, they threatened less danger when they were nayl'd to the
Firmament: I should conceive it a very discreet course, since they are provided
of a tall vessel of their own ready rigged, membarque them all together in
that goodship called the Argo, and send them to the plantation in New England,
which has purged more virulent humors from the politic body, than Guai^^m
and all the West-Indian drugs have from the natural bodies of this Kingdom.
Can you devise how to dispose them better?


Merc. They cannot breath this pure and temperate Air
Where Virtue lives, but will with hasty flight,
ongst fogs and vapors, seek unsound abodes.
Fly after them, from your usurped fears,
You foul remainders of that viporous brood:
Let not a Starte of aluxurious race
With his loose blaze stain the skies crystal face.

All the Stars are quenched, and the Sphere darkened. Before the entry of
every Antimasque, the stars in those figures in the Sphere which they were to
represent were extinct; so as by the end of the Antimasques in the Sphere no
more Stars were scene.

Mom. Here is a total Eclipse of the eight Sphere, which neither Booker,
Allestre, nor any of your Prognosticators, no nor their great Master Tico were
aware of; but yet in my opinion there were some innocent and some generous
Constellations, that might have been reserved for Noble uses: as the Skales and
Swordto adorn the statue of Justice, since she resides here on earth only in
Picture and Esfigie. The Eagle had been a fit present for the Germans in
regard their Bird has mewed most of her feathers lately. The Dolphin too had
been most welcome to the French, and then had you but clapped Perseus on his
Pegasus brandishing his sword the Dragon yawning on his back under the horses
feet, with Phthon's dart through his throat there had been a Divine St. George
for his Nation: but since you have improvidently shuffled them altogether, it
now refts only that we provide and immidiate succession and to that purpose I
will instantly proclaim a free Election.

Oyes, Oyes, Oyes,
By the Father of the gods,
and the King of men,
Whereas we having observed a very commendable practice taken into frequent use
by the Princes of these latter Ages, of perpetuating the memory of their famous
enterprises, sieges, battles, victories, in Pictures, Sculpture, Tapistry,
Embroyderies and other manifactures, wherewith they have embellished their
public palaces, and taken into Our more distinct and serious consideration,
^^e particular Christmas hanging of the Guard Chamber of this Court, wherein
the Navall Victory of 88. is to the eternal glory of this Nation exactly
delineated; and whereas We likewise out of a prophetical imitation of this so
laudable custom, did for many thousand years before, adorn and beautify the
eighth room of Our caelestiall Mansion, commonly called the Star Chamber, with
the military adventures, stratagems achievements, feats, and defeats,
performed in Our Own person, whilst yet Our Standard was crected, and we a
Combatant in the Amorous warfare, It has notwthstanding, after mature
deliberation, and long debate, held first in our own inscrutable bosom, and
afterward communicated with Our Privy Counsel, seemed meet to Our
Omnipotency, for causes to Our self best known, to unfurnish and dis-array Our
foresaid Star Chamber of all those Ancient Coustellations which have for so
many Ages been sufficiently notorious, and to admit into their vacant places,
such Persons only as shall be qualified with exemplar Virtue and eminent
Desert, there to shine in indelible Characters of glory to all posterity. It is
therefore Our divine will and pleasure, voluntarily, and out of our own free
and proper motion, mere grace, and special favor, by these presents to
specify and declare to all our loving people, that it shall be lawful for any
Person whatsoever, that conceives him or herself to be really endued with any
Heroical Virtue, or transcendent Merit, worthy so high a calling and dignity,
to bring their several pleas and pretenses before Our Right trusty and
Wel-beloved Cozen and Connsellor, Don Mercury, and god Momus, etc. Our peculiar
Delegates for that affair, upon whom we have transferred an absolute power to
conclude and determine without Appeal or Revocation, accordingly as to their
wisdoms it shall in such cases appear behovefull and expedient. Given at Our
palace in Olympus the first day of the first month, in the first year of the
Reformation, Plutus enters, an old man full of wrinkles, a bald head, a thin
white beard, spectacles on his nose, with a buncht back, and attired in a Robe
of Cloth of gold.


Plutus appears. Merc. Who Is this appears?


Mom. This is a subterranean Friend, Plutus, in this Dialect termed Riches, or
the god of Gold; a poison hid by Providence in the botome of the Seas, and
Navill of the Earth, from man's discovery, where if the seeds begun to sprout
above-ground, the excrescence was carefully guarded by Dragons; yet at last by
humane curiosity brought to light, to their own destruction; this being the
true Pandora's box, whence issued all those mischiefs that now fill the
Universe.


Plut. That I prevent the message of the gods
Thus with my haste, and not attend their summons,
Which ought in lustice call me to the place
I now require of Right, is not alone
To show the just precedence that I hold
Before all earthly, next the immortal Powers;
But to exclude the hope of partial Grace
In all Pretenders, who, since I descend
To equal trial, must by my example,
Waving your favor, claym by sole Desert.
If Virtue must inherit, she is my slave;
I lead her captive in a golden chayn,
About the world: She takes her Form and Being
From my creation; and those barren seeds
That drop from heaven, if I not cherish them
With my distilling dewes, and fotive heat,
They know no vegetation; but exposed
To blasting winds of freezing Poverty,
Or not shoot forth at all, or budding, wither.
Should I proclaim the daily sacrifice
Brought to my Temples by the toyling rout,
Not of the fat and gore of abject Beasts,
But humane sweat, and blood powered on my Altars,
I might provoke the envy of the gods.
Turn but your eyes and mark the busy world,
Climbing steep Mountains for the sparkling stones,
Piercing the Center for the shining Ore,
And The Oceans bosom to rake pearly sands,
Crossing the torrid and the frozen zones
Midst Rocks and swallowing Gulfes for gainful trade,
And through opposing swords, fire, murdering Canon,
Skaling the walled Towns for precious spoils.
Plant in the passage to your heavenly seats,
These horrid dangers, and then see who dares
Advance his desperate foot: yet am I sought,
And often in vain, through these and greater hazards
I could discover how your Deities
Are for my sake slighted, despised, abused,
Your Temples, Shrines, Altars, and Images,
Vncover'd, rifled, robbed, and dis-array'd
By sacrilegious hands: yet is this treasure
To th'golden Mountain, where I sit adored,
With superstitious solemn rights convay'd,
And becomes sacred there, the sordid wreteh
Not daring touch the consecrated Ore,
Or with profane hands lessen the bright heap:
But this might draw your anger down on mortals
For rendering me the homage due to you:
Yet what is said may well express my power
Too great for Earth, and only fit for Heaven.
Now, for your pastime, view the naked root,
Which in the dirty earth, and base mould drowned,
Sends forth this precious Plant, and golden fruit.
You lusty Swains, that to your grazing flocks
Pipe amorous Roundelayes; you toyling Hinds,
That barb the fields, and to your merry Teames
Whistle your passions; and you mining Moles,
That in the bowels of your mother-Earth
Dwell the eternal burden of her womb,
Cease from your labors, when Wealth bids you play,
Sing, dance, and keep a cheerful holy day.

They dance the fourth Antimasque, consisting of Country people, music and
measures. Merc. Plutus, the gods know and confess your power

Which feeble Virtue seldom can resist;
Stronger than Towers of brass, or Chastity
Jove knew you when he courted Danae,
And Cupid wears you on that Arrows head
That still prevails. But the gods keep their Throne,
To enstall Virtue, not her Enemies;
They dread thy force, which even themselves have felt,
Witness Mount-Ida, where the Martial Maid,
And frowning Juno, did to mortal eyes
Naked, for gold, their sacred bodies show;
Therefore for ever be from heaven banished.
But since with toil from undiscovered Worlds
Thou art brought hither, where thou first did breath
The thirst of Empire, into Regal breasts,
And frightedst quiet Peace from her meek Throne,
Filling the world with tumult, blood, and war,
Follow the Camps of the contentious earth,
And be the Conqu'rers slave, but he that can
Or conquer thee, or give thee Virtuous stamp,
Shall shine in heaven a pure immortal Lamp.

Mom. Nay stay, and take my benediction along with you. I could, being here a
Co-Iudge, like others in my place, now that you are condemned, either rayl at
you, or break jests upon you, but I rather choose to lose a word of good
counsel, and entreat you be more careful in your choice of company: for you
are always found either with Misers, that not use you at all; or with fools,
that know not how to use you well. Be not hereafter so reserved and coy to men
of worth and parts, and so you shall gain such credit, as at the next Sessions
you may be heard with better success. But till you are thus reformed, I
pronounce this positive sentence, That wheresoever you shall choose to abide,
your society shall add no credit or reputation to the party, nor your
discontinuance, or total absence, be matter of disparagement to any man; and
whosoever shall hold a contrary estimation of you, shall be condemned to wear
perpetual Motley, unless he recant his opinion, Now you may void the Cout.

Paenia enters, a woman of a pale color, large brims of a hat upon her head,
through which her hair started up like a fury, her Robe was of a dark
colourful of patches, about one of her hands was tied a chain of Iron, to
which was fastened a weighty (tone, which she bore up under her arm.
Merc. What Creature's this?


Mom. The Antipodes to the other, they move like Two Buckets, or as two nails
drive out one another; Of Riches depart, Poverty will enter.


Pov. I nothing doubt (Great and Immortal Powers)
But that the place your wisdom has denied
My foe, your Justice will confer on me;
Since that which renders him incapable,
Proves a strong plea for me. I could pretend,
Even in these rags, a larger Sovereignty
Then gaudy Wealth in all his pomp can boast;
For mark how few they are that share the World:
The numerous Armies, and the swarming Ants
That fight and royle for them, are all my Subjects,
They take my wages, wear my Livery:
Invention too and Wit, are both my creatures,
And the whole race of Virtue is my Offspring;
As many mischiefs issue from my womb,
And those as mighty, as procced from gold.
Often o'r his Throne I wave my awful Scepter,
And in the bowels of his state command,
When 'midst his heaps of coin, and hills of gold,
I pine, and starve the avaritious Fool.
But I decline those titles, and lay claim
To heaven, by right of Divine contemplation;
She is my Darling, I, in my soft lap,
Free from disturbing cares, bargains, accounts,
Leases, Rents, Stewards, and the fear of thieves,
That vex the rich, nurse her in calm repose,
And with her, all the Virtues speculative,
Which, but with me, find no secure retreat.
For entertainment of this hour, I Will call
A race of people to this place, that live
At Natures charge, and not importune heaven
To chayn the winds up, or keep back the storms,
To stay the thunder, or forbid the hayl
To thresh the unreap'd ear; but to all weathers,
The chilling frost, and scalding Sun, expose
Their equal face. Come forth, my swarthy train,
In this fair circle dance, and as you move,
Mark, and foretell happy events of Love.

They dance the fifth Antimasque of Gypsies. Mom. I cannot but wonder that your
perpetual conversation with Poets and Philosophers has furnished you with no
more Logic, or that you should think to impose upon us so gross an inference
as because Plutus and you are contrary therefore whatsoever is denied of the
one must be true of the other; as if it should follow of necessity, because he
is not Jupiter, you are. No, I give you to know, I am better versed in cavils
with the gods, than to swallow such a fallacy, for though you two cannot be
together in one place, yet there are many places that may be without you both,
and such is heaven, where neither of you are likely to arrive: therefore let me
advise you to marry your self to Content, and beget sage Apothegmes, and
goodly moral Sentences in dispraise of Riches, and contempt of the world.


Merc. Thou do presume too much, poor needy wretch,
To claim a station in the Firmament,
Because thy humble Cottage, or thy Tub
Nurses some lazy or Pedantique virtue
In the cheap Sunshine, or by shady springs
With roots and pot herbs, where thy right hand,
Tearing those humane passions from the mind,
Upon whose stocks fair blooming virtues flourish,
Degradeth Nature, and benummeth sense,
And Gorgon-like, turns active men to stone.
We not require the dull society
Of your necessitated Temperance,
Or that unnatural stupidity
That knows nor joy nor sorrow; nor your forced
Falsely exalted passive Fortitude
Above the Active: This low abject brood,
That fix their seats in mediocrity,
Become your servile mind; but we advance
Such virtues only as admit excess,
Brave bounteous Acts, Regal Magnificence,
All-seeing Prudence, Magnanimity
That knows no bound, and that Heroic virtue
For which Antiquity has left no name,
But patterns only, such as Hercules,
Achilles, Theseus. Back to thy loathed cell,
And when thou feast the new enlightened Sphere,
Study to know but what those Worthies were.
Tyche enters, her head bald behind, and one great lock before, wings at her
shoulders, and in her hand a wheel, her upper parts naked, and the skirt of her
Garment wrought all over with Crowns, Scepters, Books, and such other things
as express both her greatest and smallest gifts.
Mom. See where Dame Fortune comes, you may know her by her wheel, and that
vayl over her eyes, with which she hopes like a seel'd pigeon to mount above
the Clouds, and perch in the eighth Sphere: listeen, she begins.


Fort. I come not here (you gods) to plead the Right,
By which Antiquity assigned my Deity,
Though no peculiar station among the Stars,
Yet general power to rule their influence,
Or boast the Title of Omnipotent,
Ascribed me then, by which I rivaled Jove,
Since you have cancelled all those old Records;
But confident in my good cause and merit,
Claim a succession in the vacant Orb;
From since Astraea fled to heaven, I sit
Her Deputy on Earth, I hold her skales
And weigh men's Fates out, who have made me blind
Because themselves want eyes to see my causes;
Call me inconstant, 'cause my works surpass
The shallow fathom of their humane reason;
Yet here, like blinded Justice, I dispense
With my impartial hands their constant lots,
And if desertlesse, impious men engrosse
My best rewards, the fault is yours, you gods,
That scant your graces to mortality,
And niggards of your good, scarce spare the world
One virtuous for a thousand wicked men;
It is no error to confer dignity,
But to bestow it on a vicious man;
I gave the dignity, but you made the vice.
Make you men good, and I Will make good men happy:
That Plutus is refused, dismayes me not,
He is my Drudge, and the external pomp
In which he decks the World, proceeds from me,
Not him; like Harmony, that not resides
In strings, or notes, but in the hand and voice.
The revolutions of Empires, States,
Scepters, and Crowns, are but my game and sport,
Which as they hang on the events of War,
So those depend upon my turning wheel.
You warlike Squadrons, who in battles joined,
Dispute the Right of Kings, which I decide,
Present the model of that martial frame,
By which, when Crowns are staked, I rule the game.

They dance the sixth Antimasque, being the representation of a Battle. Mom.
Madam, I should censure you, pro falso clamore, for preferring a scandalous
crosse-bill of recrimination against the Gods, but your blindness shall excuse
you. Alas! what would it advantage you, if virtue were as universal as vice
is? it would only follow, that as the world now exclaimes upon you for exalting
the vicious, it would then rail as fast at you for depressing the virtuous; so
they would still keep their tune, though you changed their Ditty.


Merc. The mists, in which future events are wrapped,
That often succeed beside the purposes
Of him that works, his dull eyes not descerning
The first great cause, offered thy clouded shape
To his enquiring search; so in the dark
The groping world first found thy Deity,
And gave thee rule over contingencies,
Which, to the piercing eye of Providence,
Being fixed and certain, where past and to come
Are always present, thou do dis-appear,
Losest they being, and art not at all.
Be thou then only a deluding Phantome,
At best a blind guide, leading blinder fools;
Who, would they but survey their mutual wants,
And help each other, there were left no room
For thy vain aid. Wisdom, whose strong-built plot;
Leave naught to hazard, mocks thy futile power,
Industrious labor drags thee by the locks,
Bound to his toyling Car, and not attending
Till thou dispense, reaches his own reward,
Only the lazy sluggard yawning lies
Before thy threshold, gaping for thy dose,
And licks the easy hand that feeds his sloth;
The shallow, rash, and unadvised man
Makes thee his stale, disburdens all the follies
Of his mis guided actions, on thy shoulders,
Vanish from hence, and seek those Idiots out
That thy fantastic godhead has allowed,
And rule that giddy superstitious crowd.
Hedone, Pleasure, a young woman with a smiling face, in a light lascivious
habit, adorned with Silver and gold, her Temples crowned with a Garland of
Roses, and over that a Rainbow circling her head down to her shoulders.
Hedone enters. Merc. What wanton's this?


Mom. This is the sprightly Lady Hedone merry Gamester, this people call her
Pleasure.


Plea. The reasons (equal Judges) here alleged
By the dismissed Pretenders, all concur
To strengthen my just title to the Sphere.
Honor, or Wealth, or the contempt of both,
Have in themselves no simple real good,
But as they are the means to purchase pleasure.
The paths that lead to my delicious Palace;
They for my sake, I for mine own am prized.
Beyond me nothing is. I am the Goal,
The Iourneyes end, to which the swearing world,
And wearied Nature travels. For this, the best
And wisest sect of all Philosophers
Made me the seat of supreme happiness.
And though some more austere, upon my ruins
Did to the prejudice of Nature, raise
Some petty low-built virtues, 'twas because
They wanted wings to reach my soaring pitch;
Had they been Princes born, themselves had proved
Of all mankind the most luxurious:
For those delights, which to their low condition
Were obvious, they with greedy appetite
Sucked and devoured: from offices of State,
From cares of family, children, wife, hopes, fears,
Retired, the churlish Cynick in his Tub
Enjoyed those pleasures which his tongue desam'd.
Nor am I ranked amongst the superfluous goods;
My necessary offices preserve
Each single man, and propagate the kind.
Then am I universal as the light,
Or common Air we breath; and since I am
The general desire of all mankind,
Civil Felicity must reside in me.
Tell me what rate my choycest pleasures bear,
When for the short delight of a poor draught
Of cheap cold water, great Lysmachus
Rendered himself slave to the Scythians.
Should I the curious structure of my seats,
The art and beauty of my several objects,
Rehearse at large, your bounties would reserve
For every sense a proper constellation;
But I present the Persons to your eyes.
Come forth my subtle Organs of delight,
With changing figures please the curious eye,
And charm the ear with moving Harmony.

They dance the seventh Antimasque of the five senses. Merc. Bewitching Siren,
gilded rottenness,
Thou have with cunning artifice displayed
The enameled out side, and the honied verge
Of the fair cup, where deadly poison lurks.
Within, a thousand sorrows dance the round:
And like a shell, Pain circles thee without,
Grief is the shadow waiting on thy steps,
Which, as thy joys 'ginn toward their West decline,
Does to a Giants spreading form extend
Thy Dwarfish stature. Thou thy self art Pain,
Greedy intense Desire, and the keen edge
Of thy fierce Appetite often strangles thee,
And cuts thy slender thread, but still the terror
And apprehension of thy hasty end,
Mingles with Gall thy most refined sweets;
Yet thy Cyrcaean charms transform the world.
Captains, that have resisted war and death,
Nations, that over Fortune have triumphed,
Are by thy Magic made effeminate.
Empires, that knew no limits but the Poles,
Have in thy wanton lap melted away.
Thou were the Author of the first excess
That drew this reformation on the gods.
Can thou then dream, those Powers, that from heaven have
Banished the effect, will there enthrone the cause,
To thy voluptuous Den, fly Witch from hence,
There dwell, for ever drowned in brutish sense.

Mom. I concur, and am grown so weary of these tedious pleadings, as I Will
pack up too and be gone: Besides, I see a crowd of other suitors pressing
hither, I Will stop'em, take their petitions and preferre'em above; and as I came
in bluntly without knocking, and no body bid me welcome; so I Will depart as
abruptly without taking leave, and bid no body farewell.


Merc. These, with forced reasons, and strained arguments,
Urge vain pretenses, whilst your Actions plead,
And with a silent importunity
Awake the drousie Justice of the gods
To crown your deeds with immortality.
The growing Titles of your Ancestors,
These Nations glorious Acts, joined to the stock
Of your own Royal virtues, and the clear
Reflex they take from th'imitation
Of your famed Court, make Honors story full,
And have to that secure fixed state advanced
Both you and them, to which the laboring world,
Wading through streams of blood sweats to aspire.
Those ancient Worthies of these famous Isles,
That long have slept, in fresh and lively shapes
Shall strait appear, where you shall see your self
Circled with modern Heroes, who shall be
In Act, what ever elder times can boast,
Noble, or Great; as they in Prophecy
Were all but what you are. Then shall you see
The sacred hand of bright Eternity
Mould you to Stars, and fix you in the Sphere,
To you, your Royal half, to them shee' Iloyn
Such of this train, as with industrious steps
In the fair prints your virtuous feet have made,
Though with unequal paces, follow you.
This is decreed by Jove, which my return
Shall see performed; but first behold the rude
And old Abiders here, and in them view
The point from which your full perfections grew.
You naked, ancient, wild Inhabitants,
That breathed this Air, and pressed this flowery Earth,
Come from those shades where dwells eternal night,
And see what wonders Time has brought to light.

Atlas, and the Sphere vanished, and a new Scaene appears of mountains, whose
eminent height exceed the Clouds which past beneath them, the lower parts were
wild and woody: out of this place comes forth a more grave Antimasque of Picts,
the natuall Inhabitants of this Isle, ancient Scots and Irish, these dance a
Perica, or Martial dance.

When this Antimasque was past, there began to arise out of the earth the top
of a hill, which by little and little grew to be a huge mountain that covered
all the Scaene; the under part of this was wild and craggy, and above somewhat
more pleasant and flourishing: about the middle part of this Mountain were
seated the three King. domes of England, Scotland, and Ireland; all richly
attired in regal habits, appropriated to the several Nations, with Crowns on
their heads, and Each of them bearing the ancient Arms of the kingdoms they
there presented: At a distance above these sat a young man in a white
embroydered robe, upon his fair hair an Olive Garland, with wings at his
shoulders, and holding in his hand a Cornucopia filled with corn and fruits,
representing the Genius of these kingdoms.

The first Song. GENIUS. RAise from these rockie cliffs your heads,
Brave Sons, and see where Glory spreads
Her glittering wings, where Majesty,
Crowned with sweet smiles, shoots from her eye
Diffusive joy, where good and Fair
United sit in Honors Chayr.
Call forth your aged Priests, and crystal streams.
To warm their hearts, and waves in these bright beams.

KINGDOMS 1. From your consecrated woods
Holy Druids.

2. Silver floods,
From your channels fringed with flowers,

3. Hither move; forsake your bowers,

1. Strewn with hallowed Oaken leaves,
Decked with flags and sedgie sheaves,
And behold a wonder.

3. Say,
What do your duller eyes survay?

CHORUS of DRVIDS and RIVERS. We see at once in dead of night
A Sun appear, and yet a bright
Noonday, springing from Starlight.

GENIUS. Look up, and see the darkened Sphere
Deprived of light, her eyes shine there.

CHORUS. These are more sparkling than those were.

KINGDOMS. 1. These shed a nobler influence,

2. These by a pure Intelligence
Of more transcendent Virtue move,

3. These first feel, then kindle Love,

1. 2. From the bosoms they inspire,
These receive a mutual fire;

1.2.3. And where their flames impure return;
These can quench as well as burn.

GENIUS. Here the fair victorious eyes
Make worth only Beauties prize,
Here the band of Virtue ties
Bout the heart Love's amorous chain,
Captives triumph, Vassals reign,
And none live here but the slain.

CHORUS These are the Hesperian bowers, whose fair trees bear
Rich golden fruit, and yet no Dragon near.

GENIUS. Then, from your impris'ning womb,
Which is the cradle and the tomb
Of British worthies (fair sons) send
A troop of Heroes, that may lend
Their hands to case this laden grove,
And gather the ripe fruits of Love.

KINGDOMS. 1.2.3. Open thy stony Entrails wide,
And break old Atlas, that the pride
Of three famed kingdoms may be spied.

CHORUS. Pace forth thou mighty British Hercules,
With thy choice band, for only thou and these,
May revell here, in Loves Hesperides,

At this the under-part of the Rock opens, and out of a Cave are seen to come
the Masquers richly attyred like ancient Heroes, the Colors yellow,
embroydered with silver, their antique Helmes curiously wrought, and great
plumes on the top; before them a troop of young Lords and Noble-mens sons,
bearing Torches of Virgin-wax, these were apparelled after the old British
fashion in white Coats, embroydered with silver, girt, and full gathered, cut
square coller'd, and round caps on their heads, with a white feather wreathen
about them; first these dance with their lights in their hands: After which,
the Masquers descend into the room, and dance their entry.

The dance being past, there appears in the further part of the heaven coming
down a Pleasant Cloud, bright and transparent, which coming softly down-wards
before the upper part of the mountain, embraces the Genius, but so as through
it all his body is seen; and then rising again with a gentle motion bears up
the Genius of the three kingdoms and being past the Airy Region, piereeth the
heavens, and is no more seen: At that instant the Rock with the three kingdoms
on it sinkes, and is hidden in the earth. This strange spectacle gave great
cause of admiration, but especially how so huge a machine, and of that great
height could come from under the Stage, which was but six foot high.

The Second Song. KINGDOMS. 1. HEre are shapes formed fit for heaven,

2. Those move gracefully and even,

3. Here the Air and paces meet
So just, as if the skillful feet
Had struk the Vials. 1.2.3. So the Ear
Might the tunefull footing bear.

CHORUS. And had the Music silent been,
The eye a moving time had seen.

GENIUS. These must in the unpeopled sky
Succeed, and govern Destiny,
Jove is temp'ring purer fire,
And will with brighter flames attire
These gloriou^ lights. I must ascend
And help the Work.

KINGDOMS. 1. We cannot lend
Heaven so much treasure.

2. Nor that pay,
But rendering what it takes away.
Why should they that here can move
So well, be ever-fix'd above?

CHORUS. Or be to one eternal posture tied,
That can into such various figures slide?

GENIUS. Jove shall not, to enrich the Sky,
Beggar the Earth; their Fame shall fly
From hence alone, and in the Sphere
Kindle new Stars, whilst they rest here.

KINGDOMS. 1.2.3. How can the shaft stay in the quiver,
Yet his the mark?

GENIUS. Did not the River
Eridanus, the grace acquire
In Heaven and Earth to flow,
Above in streams of golden fire,
In silver waves below?

KINGDOMS. 1.2.3. But shall not we, now thou art gone
Who were our Nature, wither?
Or break that triple Union
Which thy soul held together?

GENIUS. In Concords pure immortal spring
I will my force renew,
And a more astive Virtue bring
At my return. Adieu.

KINGDOMS adieu. CHORUS adieu. The Masquers dance their maine dance; which
done, the Scaene again is varied into a new and pleasant prospect, clean
differing from all the other, the nearest part showing a delicious Garden with
several walks and perterra's set round with low trees, and on the sides
against these walks, were fountains and grots, and in the furthest part a
Palace, from whence went high walks upon Arches, and above them open Tarraces
planted with Cypress trees, and all this together was composed of such
Ornaments as might express a princely Villa.

From hence the Chorus descending into the room, goes up to the State.


The third Song. By the Chorus, going up to the Queen. WHilst thus the Darlings
of the gods,
From Honors Temple, to the shrine
Of beauty, and these sweet abodes
Of Love, we guide, let thy Divine
Aspects (Bright Deily) with fair
And Halcyon beams, becalm the Air,
We bring Prince Arthur, or the brave
St. George himself (great Queen) to you,
You Will soon discern him; and we have
A Guy, a Beavis, or some true
Round Table Knight, as ever-sought
For Lady, to each Beauty brought.
Plant in their Martial hands, War's seat,
Your peaceful pledges of warm snow,
And, if a speaking touch, repeat
In Loves known language, tales of woe;
Say, in soft whispers of the Palm,
As eyes shoot darts, so Lips shed Balm.
For though you seem like Captives, led
In triumph by the Foe away,
Yet on the Conqu'rors neck you tread,
And the fierce Victor proves your prey,
What heat is then secure from you,
That can, though vanquished, yet subdue?
The Song done they retire, and the Masquers dance the Revels with the Ladies,
which continued a great part of the night.

The Revels being past, and the Kings Majesty seared under the State by the
Queen; for conclusion to this Masque there appears coming forth from one of
the sides, as moving by a gentle wind, a great cloud, which arriving at the
middle of the heaven, stays; this was of several colors, and so great, that
it covered the whole Scaene. Out of the further part of the heaven begins to
break forth two other clouds, differing in color and shape; and being fully
discovered there appeared sitting in one of them, Religion, Truth, and
Wisdom. Religion was apparelled in white, and part of her face was covered
with a light veil, in one hand a Book, and in the other a flame of fire.
Truth in a Watchet Robe, a Sun upon her forehead, and bearing in her hand a
Palm. Wisdom in a mantle wrought with eyes and hands, golden rays about her
head, and Apollo's Cithera in her hand. In the other cloud sat Concord,
Government, and Reputation. The habit of Concord was Carnation, bearing in her
hand a little faggot of sticks bound together, and on the top of it a Heart, and
a Garland of corn on her head: Government was figured in a coat of Armor,
bearing a shield and on it a Medusa's head; upon her head a plumed helm, and
in her right hand a lance. Reputation, a young man in a purple robe wrought
with gold, and wearing a laurel wreath on his head. These being come down in
an equal distance to the middle part of the Air, the great Cloud began to
break open, out of which broke beams of light; in the midst suspended in the
Air, sat Eternity on a Globe, his Garment was long, of a light blue, wrought
all over with stars of gold, and bearing in his hand a Serpent bent into a
circle, with his tail in his mouth. In the firmament about him, was a troop of
fifteen stars, expressing the stellifying of our British Heroes; but one more
great and eminent than the rest, which was over his head, figured his Majesty.
And in the lower part was seen a far off the prospect of Windsor Castle, the
famous seat of the most honorable Order of the Garter.

The fourth Song. Eternity, Eusebia, Alethia, Sophia, Homonoia, Dicaearche,
Euphemia. ETERNITY. Be fixed rapid Orbs, that bear
The changing seasons of the year
On your swift wings, and see the old
Decrepid spheres grown dark and cold;
Nor did Jove quench her fires, these bright
Flames have eclipsed her sullen light:
This Royal Payr, for whom Fate will
Make Motion cease, and Time stand still:
Since Good is here so perfect, as no Worth
Is left for After-Ages to bring forth.

EVSEBIA. Mortality cannot with more
Religious zeal, the gods adore.

ALETHIA. My Truths, from human^ eyes concealed;
Are naked to their sight revealed.

SOPHIA. Nor do their actions, from the guide
Of my exactest precepts slide.

HOMONOIA. And as their own pure Souls entwined,
So are their Subjects hearts combined.

DICAEARCHE. So just, so gentle is their sway,
As it seems Empire to obey.

EVPHEMIA. And their fair Fame, like incense hur'ld
On Altars has perfumed the world.

SO. wisdom.

AL. Truth.

EVS. Pure Adoration.

HO. Concord.

DI. Rule

EUP. Clear Reputation.

CHORUS. Crown this King, this Queen, this Nation.

CHORUS. Wisdom, Truth, etc.

ETERNITY. Brave Spirits, whose adventrous seet
Have to the Mountains top aspired,
Where fair Desert, and Honor meet,
Here, from the toyling Press retired,
Secure from all disturbing Evil
For ever in my Temple revelt.
With wreathes of stars circled about,
Gild all the spacious Firmament,
And smiling on the panting Rout
That labor in the steep ascent,
With your resistlesse influence guide
Of humane change th'incertain tide.

EVS. ALE. SOP. But oh you Royal Turtles, shed,
When you from Earth remove,
On the ripe fruits of your chaste bed,
Those sacred seeds of Love.

CHORUS. Which no Power can but yours dispense,
Since you the pattern bean from hence.

HOM. DIC. EVP. Then from your fruitful race shall slow
Endless succession.
Scepters shall bud, and Laurels blow
'Bout their Immortal Throne.

CHORUS. Propitious stars shalll crown each birth,
Whilst you rule them and they the Earth.

The song ended, the two clouds, with the persons sitting on them, ascend, the
great cloud closes again, and so passes away overthwart the Scaene; leaving
behind it nothing but a Serene sky. After which the Masquers dance their have
dance, and the curtain was let fall. The Names of the Masquers. The Kings
Majesty.
Duke of Lenox. Lord Fielding. Earl of Devonshire. Lord Digby. Earl of
Holland. Lord Dungarvin. Earl of Newport. Lord Dunluce. Earl of Elgin. Lord
Wharton. Viscount Grandeson. Lord Paget. Lord Rich. Lord Saltine
The names of the young Lords and Noblemens Sons.
Lord Walden. Mr. Thomas Howard Lord Cranborne. Mr. Thomas Egerton. Lord
Brackley. Mr. Charles Cavendish Lord Shandos. Mr. Robert Howard. Mr. William
Herbert. Mr. Henry Spencer.
To his mistress.
1.
GRieve not my Celia, but with have
Obey the fury of thy fate,
It Is some perfection to waste
Discreetly out our wretched state,
To be obedient in this sense,
Will prove thy virtue, though offense.
2.
Who knows but destiny may relent,
For many miracles have bin,
Thou proving thus obedient
To all the griefs she plundgd thee in?
And then the certainty she meant
Reverted is by accident.
3.
But yet I must confess it is much
When we remember what has bin,
Thus parting never more to touch
To let eternal absence in,
Though never was our pleasure yet
So pure, but chance distracted it.
4.
What, shall we then submit to fate,
And dye to one another love?
No, Celia, no, my soul does hate
Those Lovers that inconstant prove,
Fate may be cruel, but if you decline,
The crime is yours, and all the glory mine.
Fate and the Planets sometimes bodies part,
But Cankerd nature only alters the heart
In praise of his Mistress
1.
You, that will a wonder know,
Go with me,
Two suns in a heaven of snow
Both burning be,
All they fire, that but eye them,
Yet the snow's unmelted by them.
2.
Leaves of Crimson Tulips met
Guide the way
Where two pearly rows be set
As white as day
When they part themselves asunder
She breathes Oracles of wonder.
3.
Hills of Milk with Azure mixd
Swell beneath,
Waving sweetly, yet still fixd,
While she does breath.
From those hills descends a valley
Where all fall, that dare to dally.
4.
As fair Pillars under-stand
Statues two,
Whither than the Silver swan
That swims in Poe;
If at any time they move her
Every step begets a Lover.
All this but the Casket is
Which conteynes
Such a Jewel, as the miss
Breeds endless pains;
That Is her mind, and they that know it
May admire, but cannot show it
To Celia, upon Love's Vbiquity.
As one that strives, being sick, and sick to death
By changing places, to preserve a breath,
A tedious restless breath, removes and tryes
A thousand rooms, a thousand policyes,
To cozen pain, when he thinks to find ease,
At last he finds all change, but his disease,
So (like a Ball with fire and powder filled)
I restles am, yet live, each minute killed,
And with that moving torture must retain
(With change of all things else) a constant pain.
Say I stay with you, prensence is to me
Naught but a light, to show my misery,
And parting are as Rackes, to plague love on,
The further stretchd, the more affliction.
Go I to Holland, France, or furthest Jude,
I change but only Countries not my mind.
And though I pass through air and water free,
Despair and hopeless fate still follow me,
Whilst in the bosom of the waves I reel
My heart I Will liken to the tottering keel,
The sea to my own troubled fate, the wind
To your disdayn, sent from a soul unkind:
But when I lift my sad looks to the skies,
Then shall I think I see my Celia's eyes,
And when a Cloud or storm appears between,
I shall remember what her frowns have been.
Thus, whatsoever course my fates allow,
All things but make me mind my business, you.
The good things that I meet I think streams be
From you the fountain, but when bad I see,
How vile and cursed is that thing think I,
That to such goodness is so contrary?
My whole life is bout you, the Center star,
But a perpetual Motion Circular.
I am the dyalls hand, still walking round,
You are the Compass, and I never sound
Beyond your Circle, neither can I show
Ought, but what first expressed is in you.
That wheresoever my tears do cause me move
My fate still keeps me bounded with your love;
Which ere it dye, or be extinct in me,
Time shall stand still, and moist waves flaming be.
Yet, being gone, think not on me, I am
A thing too wretched for thy thoughts to name,
But when I dye, and wish all comforts given,
I Will think on you, and by you think on heaven.
FINIS.
The Songs and Dialogues of this Book were set with apt Tunes to them, by Mr.
Henry Laws, one of His Majesty's Musicians.


