Reports or Causes IN CHANCERY, Collected by Sir GEORGE CARRY one of the Masters
of the Chancery in in Anno 1601. Out of the labors of Master William Lambert.

Whereunto is annexed, the Kings order and decree in Chancery, for a Rule to be
observed by the Chancellor in that Court, exemplified and enrolled for a
perpetual Record there. Anno 1616.

Together with an Alphabeticall Table of all the Cases.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedell. Anno D. 1650.

THE TABLE.
A.
Fol. ATturnament denied but in some Cases, 4 Action of the Case seeks
damages, Subpoena rem ipsam 20 Abating a Bill, 22 Archbishops Certificate taken
for proof, 26 Amending of answers, 30 A guardian admitted to an infant, 38
Attachment against the defendant, and Subpoena against the bearer, 38 Attorney
enjoined not to proceed at Law, 40 Injunction ( si ita sit) 42 Attorney ordered
not to proceed, and yet the defendant proceeds, 44 Award made by Justices of
Assize to be performed, 47 Advowson passes not by livery within view without
deed, 52 Attachment ^or no^ performing a decree, 53 A years value allowed for
surrender of Coppyhold land, 54 A Master and examinor examined witnesses in the
Country, 66 Affidavit for leaving a Subpoena at the defend. lodging, 69
Attachment discharged, and a Bill of perjury put in, 72 Attachment upon the
defendants confession he was served, 73, 81. An English Bill for perjury, 75
Attachment for not appearing, 76 Attachment with Proclamation discharged paying
the Fees, 78 Attorney enjoined in Court not to proced at Law, 80 Affidavit that
he saw a Subpoena served, Attachment, 80 Attachment against a wi^nesse served
to testify, 80 Attachment upon oath ^efo^e the Bayliffes of Mountgo. 84
Attachment upon oath before the Major of Totnes, 85 An action against a drunken
man's words seeks relief, dismissed, 93 Atta^hment discharged by supersedeas,
94 Assumpsit referred to the common Law 97 Attachement for breaking an Order in
Court 103 Attachment upon Oath before the Portrive of Minxhead 103 Attachment
discharged paying the plaint. 10 s. 104 Award ordered to be performed 106
Attachment for not appearing 110 Attachment in putting in Demurrer instead of
an Answer 110, 111 Attachment against witnesses served to testify 111
Attachment for costs 113
B.
Bailment countermanded 9 Bringing in of Evidences into Court 16 Bringing in an
obligation to be cancelled 17 Bill against a Court roll entered indirectly 55
Bill of revivor without cause pays costs ib. Bill against Roger Hall and
another, R.H. served, must show it by plea 61 Bill of praemunire proceeded in
here 63 Bond of such as appear upon contempt to attend a die in diem 70 Bill
for relief after execution dismissed 76 Bill upon a promise to dry clothes
dismissed ib. Bond put in suit for not sealing a release stayed by judgment 78
Bill dismissed, the counselors hand being counterfeited 82 Bill for 6 l.
dismissed. 83 Bill without a Counselors hand dismissed, 89 Bill for tuition of
an infant, 96 Billet in Paper and no Bill in, costs, 100 Bayliffes of
corporation not compellable to make a Lease promised, 102 Bond put in suit for
not performing an award stayed by Injunction, 104, 105
C.
COndition to undo estates in Lands, 1 Copyholders relief in Chancery, 3
Copyhold devise, 6 Copyhold forfeited, 6 Cefti quae use, remedy here, 11
Copartners to join in plea, 15 ^^nuzees fraud helped, 18 Copyhold tailed, 21
Contents of a Manor, as it was 60 years past, 24 Copy good by devise without
mention of surrender, 25 Commission to examine witnesses, 40 Costs for want of
a Bill, the Subpoena lost, 74 Clerk fined for his mistake in a Subpoena, 77
Contempt discharged, and a new Commission, 79 Costs upon oath before the Major
of Totnes, 80 Costs for prosecuting contempts, and none proved, 82 Costs upon a
Billet delivered to a Brother, 83 Commission to take answer, 83 Commission to
examine in perpetual memory, 85 Commission, warning given but to one defend.
91 Costs for a witness served to testify, 97 Commission to answer a demurrer
returned, 100 Councellor not to be examined, 100 Costs for want of a Bill, 101
Commission of rebellion for non payment of costs, 105 Costs for want of a Bill,
the Billet lost, 10 Commission to take answers, being 70. years old, 108
Council to attend concerning an award, 108 Costs allowed the defend* in a
Commission of rebellion, 109 Costs for want of a Bill, the Billet lost, 109
Commission to examine in perpetual memory, 110 Commission to prove the receipt
of rents, etc. 111 Costs in a demurrer, and the Councellor forbid to practice,
27 Cuttings case lands conveyed to two of the six Clerks, 29 Costs for making
Attachmennt before Bill in Court, 33 Commission to examine in perpetual
memory, 34 Costs for a witness served to testify, 35 Commission to take
answer upon a languidus returned, 36 Commission to put the plaintant in
possession. 38 Commission to the examinor of the Court to examine, 43
Certiorare to the Chancellor of Durham, 48 Commission of Rebellion, how the
bonds to be taken, 50 Covenant to repair a house, a demurre, but ordered to
answer. 59 Costs and Attachment for serving a Subpoena indirectly, 61 Costs to
witnesses, served to testify, 62 Costs for want of a Bill, 69 Costs in coming
up to make Affidavit for impotency, 72 Costs for want of a Bill, 72 Commission
to set out ways and passages. 75
D.
DIscharge himself of a Bond 7 s. and modis 14 Deeds brought in Court, 19
Defendant examined as a witness, 21 Decree against infants, 30 Deeds how to be
proved, 31 Defendant enjoined not to proceed at law, 38 Demurrer and not in
person, ordered to make direct answer 40 Defend. appeating gratis, Attach.
being out is committed, 41 Defend. served with Subpoena the day of the return,
41 Decrees entered at large, 43 Defend. examined upon interr. to end the cause,
45 Defend. dismissed, the plaint. not appearing at the hearing, 45 Defend. to
acknowledge satisfaction, 45 Decree for a fould-course, 46 De vilaica
removenda, and Injunction for a personage, 51 Decree for 3 s. 4 d. rent, and
suit of court, 51 Ducens tecum for deeds to be delivered to the Usher, 53
Defend. took a Commission, and returned a demurrer, 53 Def. executors to answer
profits taken by their Fathers, 64 Defend. licensed to depart after issue, 67
Defend. in a Bill of perjury, is to be examined upon inter. 68 Defend. has no
costs, because the Subpoena is lost. 69 Defend. disclaiming, no witnesses to be
examined, 69 Def. bound to pay money at one place, tenders in another, 70
Demurrer to a Bill of revivor ordered to answer, 70 Def. demurres for that
there is remedy at Law, to answer, 71 Decree for Coppyhold lands, 74 Dismissed
being under 40 s. per annum, 74 Day given to the Sheriff to return an
Att^chment, 77 Defend. demurred generally ordered to answer, 87, 88 Defend.
stayed by Injunction from pulling down rooms, 90 Dumb man not to answer upon
Subpoena, 93 Defend. wife examined as a witness, 94 Deeds neglected to be
enrolled Sub. to show cause why not, 97 Decree for the plaintant, and yet put
out of possession by the defendant, 104 Defend. departing without license, an
attach. against him, 104 Def. discharged of the Attach. the Sub. being
counterfeit, 104 Defendant licensed to depart after answer in a Writ of the
privilege, 106 Defend. committed for a rescue, brought his action for a false
return, 92.106 Demurrer without showing any cause, ordered to answer, 107 Debt
for 5 l, dismissed, 108 Dismission for that they have bin in possession 100.
years, 110 Day given to defend. to rejoyne, 111 Def. not to answer till a
counselors hand be to the Bill, 112 Dismissed the lands being under 40 s. per
annum, 112 Demurrer generally ordered to answer, 113 Defend. charged upon
account shall not answer, upon promise shall, 113, 114.
E.
EXtents Law, no relief in Chancery, 5 Equitas sequitur legem, 11 Executor not
to release without his copartners, 15 Executor not to answer without his
copartners, 15 Executors how upon trust, 21 Executors husband ordered to pay
debts, 24 Entering decrees and dismissions, 34
F.
FInes, recoveries, etc. the Lord Chancellor will not question, 4 Feoffees to
use, 10 Feoffee dying, no remedy against his heir, 10 Feoffee shall do acts
for the feoffors good, 10 Fraud in goods, 18 Feoffee to retain the Land to his
own use, 11 Fraud upon fraud, 13 Feoffee punishable for making estate, 13
Forced to sue an obligation, 15 Fines fraudulent, 20 Fines of Copyholds, 27
Fraud by making a Lease after a feoffment, and before livery and seizin, 82
Feme sole sueth out a Subpoena, and the same day is married, dismissed with
costs, 98 Feme covert whose husband is in the Galleys, must answer matter of
equity, 100, 101 Feb. 20. Dyed Sir Nicholas Bacon. 12. April, Sir Thomas
Bromely had the seal delivered, 108 Feme covert sueth for maintenance, 87
G.
GIving day to one, it shall help the other, 1 Greater part of debt paid, and
the rest offered relief here, 2 Goods of felons difficult to prove, a
Subpoena, 15 Grand lease forfeited by coven, relief for it, 18 General
customs reduced to certainty, 21 Grantee distraines one, ordered to sue the
rest, 23
H.
HElp against executors. 12 Heir of purchasor to pay money behind, 25 Husband
appears and demurrs, the wife not, Attachment, 39 Husband appears the wife not,
Attach. against them both, 65 Habeas corpus to the warden of the Fleet, to have
the defend* in Court to be charged with a debt, 71 Heir sued to make a lease,
for which his elder brother took a fine, or to repay the same. 77
I.
Judgment not to be examined here, 3 Iuramentum delatum a part^ 11 Intent
specified in a feoffment, 11 Justifying the detaining of evidences, 16
Joyntenants one taking the profits, 21 Judges called into the Exchequer Chamber
about a lease, 32 Injunction to deliver goods, 34.61 Injunction to stay
proceedings at Law, 36 Injunction for possession as at the time of the Bill, 36
Jurisdiction of Wales, rejected, 36 Injunction to stay suite according to
promise, 37 Injunction with a clause (si ita sit) 37 Injunction for not
appearing, and to stay suits, 40 Injunction to discharge execution, 41
Injunction for possession, 45 Injunction for possession, as at the Bill, and 3
years before, 47 Injunction upon Certificate of Justices of Assize, 49
Injunction dissolved, if cause be not showed, 49 Injunction because the
defendant began first in Chancery, 50 Injunction for Corn sowed upon a Lease
paroll, 51 Jurisdiction of Oxford rejected 55 Jurisdiction of Lancaster
alloweds 56 Injunction disobeyed, an Attachment, 58 Jurisdiction of Chester
allowed, 59 Jurisdiction of Oxford allowed, 65 Jurisdiction of the Exchequer
rejected, 67.68 Injunction against the spiritual court, 73 Jurisdiction of
Oxford allowed, 73 Jurisdiction of Wales allowed, 74 Injunction to stay
Judgment in an action of waste, 76 Injunction to stay suits, because the
Queen was not paid her fine, 77 Jurisdiction of Chester allowed, 82
Jurisdiction of Wales allowed, 84 Injunction for defrauding the Queen of her
fine, 85 Jurisdiction of the Manor of Woodstock overruled, 85 Jurisdiction of
Wales overuled, 89 Jurisdiction of Wales admitted, 92 Jurisdiction of the North
allowed, 95 Jurisdiction of the Exchequer disallowed, 96 Jurisdiction of the
Duchy of Lancaster allowed, 97 Jurisdiction of Wales not allowed for a
promise, 99 Injunction left at the defendants house, and disobeyed an
Attachment, 101 Jurisdiction of Wales allowed, 102 Injunction to stay suit at
common Law, 105 Jurisdiction of Chester allowed, 109 Injunction to stay suit at
common Law, 112 Injunction to stay suit of Quo Minus in Exchequer, 113
Injunction to stay suits at common Law, 113
L.
LEases damages in waste moderated, 2 Lease in paroll, no help in Chancery, 7
Lease for 1000 years, no help, 8 Lands sold in two Counties, livery made in
one, 17 Leassor to have the woods, excepting fireboot, etc. 17 Leases devised
to his wife, to come to his son, 22 Leases conveyed in trust to pay debts, 25
Lease paroll, no help, 27 Lands intended for a School, otherwise given by
will, 28 Leases of corporations, their names mistaken, 31 Leases helped against
Patentees, 32 Leassee of a Copyholder punishable in waste, though the
Copyholder himself be not, 63 Lord Chancellors Letters to a Noble man, that
had broken a decree to perform the same. 73 Leassee not named in the premises,
decreed, 86 Liberty for a common Fishing, 104
M.
MUlier and Bastard, 4 Marriage portion recovered and reversed, helped, 8 Money
given to buy Lands, 10 Money paid upon a single Obligation, 17 Message cum
pertin. carries the Land used with it, 18 Manor demised, except court Baron,
18 Mulier and Bastard Join, 20 Misdemeanor in Courts reformed, 30 Man and wife
plaintants, she dies; no Bill of revivor, but he must answer, 62 Money paid for
a reversion which could not be enjoyed ordered to repay it, 93
N.
NVdum pactum, no help here, 5 No relief against his own deed, 14 No seizin of
rent-seck, no help here, 5 No relief against a voluntary act, 21 No help
touching power to make Leases, 29 No witnesses to be examined till the
defendants have put in their answer, 93 No costs upon a disclaimer, 109 New
Commission to examine witnesses not appearing at a former Commission, 111 Not
to extend one man's Land only, where many are subject, 111 New Commission to
the defendant, and publication staid, 112
O.
ONe Deed by which two claim, 15 Oath for serving a Subpoena before witnesses
examined in perpetual memory, 34 Order for evidences, 43 One Executor sueth
the other, to put in sureties to perform the Will, 79 One Executor gets the
estate and dies, the other sueth his Executor, 86 One Subpoena against two
defendants, and two Bills put in, ordered to answer both, 87
P.
PAyment after the day helped upon bonds, 1 Payment without acquittance, 2
Purchasor of parcel, not subject to the whole rent charge, 2 Possession
sororis for the heir collateral, 5 Possession of the Mother, for the Heir
collater. 6 Payment of creditors out of a Coppyhold, 7 Perpetuities no help, 8
Purchasor better then a surety in case of relief, 13 Power to make Leases, 21
Payment by the surety, 19 Possession bound by decree, 23 Plaintant mistaking
his Title in his Bill, 24 Proceeding where there is no proof, 25 Publication
of witnesses in perpetual memory a year past, 33 Publication of witnesses to
be used in a Court Baron, 35 plaintant in execution at the suit of the King,
delivered by supersedeas; 39 Plaint. bringing 223 l. in Court, execution to
stay for the rest, 47 Plaint. distraineth after replication, therefore an
Injunction 48 Plaint. in execution upon Statute, delivered upon recognizance,
50 Plaint. to take execution for 100 l. of a Judgment of 300 l. 51 Plaint.
married before answer, no Bill of revivor, 52 Plaint. sueth for tokens
delivered as a suitor in marriage, 54 Prosecuting contempts after a general
pardon pays costs, 56 Plaint. to make one a party, whom the defendant prays
in aid, 57 Plaintant requires one to appear in the Queens name, costs, 68
Prohibition for Tithes of Lands held in capite, 79 Plaint. enters upon the
defendants possession, an Injunction or dismissed. 98 Prohibition for tithes,
parcel of the Duchy of Cornwall, consultation. 98 Perjury for making oath,
one of the same name sued and discharged, 99 Plaint. to show where he had his
counterfeit Writs, 107
R.
RAvishment de guard, a Subpoena, 9 Release of Joint feoffee, 14 Relief for a
trust upon a Lease, 76 Rent reserved and paid* the heir ordered to pay it, 92
Rent charge upon several men Lands, and levied upon one, an Injunction is
granted 22
S.
SUing in a wrong County, aid for the plaintant here, 2 Statute Lands,
priority sans coven. 8 Survivor in joint Tenancy, 9 Suer^y, chargeable, and not
in some cases, 12 Supply of true meaning in feoffments, 16 Statute acknowledged
in my name, 22 Statute for charitable uses, 28 Subpoena to appear before the
Major of London, 43 Sheriff amerced for return. non est inventus, 44 Setting
down depositions in a wrong sense, 47 Subpoena delivered to the defendants
wife, 54 Subpoena hanged on a door, where the defend. resorted, 56 Suit to have
the defend. perform an award, 57 Subpoena to testify Attachment for not
appearing, 61 Soliciter served to testify ordered not to be examined, 62
Soliciter served to testify is discharged, 63 Suit to have an award decreed,
64 Suit for common of pasture, 64 Subpoena delived to the defendants servant,
65 Suit retained after Judgment and execution, 74 Subpoena delivered to the
defendants wife, 78 Suit for 10 s. rent per annum dismissed, 80 Suit for a
hawke, and evidences dismissed, 82 Suit stayed in the Kings Bench, removed from
London, 83 Suit for common, 83 Svbpoena served within two days of the Terms
end; 88 Soliciter ordered to be examined with caution, 89 Subpoena left in the
defendants Hall, Attachment, 91 Server of a Subp. imprisoned, attach. against
defend. 91, 92 Subpoena showed and offered, attach. for not appearing, 94 Suit
upon a promise to surrender a Lease, dismissed, 95 Subpoena to testify where
no suit is, discharged, 95 Subpoena cautiously served, attachment against the
plaint. 96 Suit for Hay, etc. not worth 40 s. dismissed, 103 Suit for poor
under 40 s. per annum retained, 103.107
T.
TEnant right fines how paid, 6 Things left to the conscience of the party, 12
Tenant of the land uncertain, a Subpoena, 16 Tenants in common to know the
certainty, 16 Turning of water courses, 26 Two contend for a tenant, the Tenant
paying his rent in court, 46 The server of a Subpoena pays costs, 64 Trustee
to convey the Lands according to the trust, 67 Two joyntenants, the one dies,
the other to make estate, 81 Two executors exhibit two Bills, answer one the
other dismissed, 88
U.
Void limitation del Lease in volunt. 9 Uses of Gavelkind land, 11 Vendee
against one appointed to sell him Land, 14 Variance in a Bill of revivor from
the first Bill disallowed, 55
W.
WArranty Collateral, no remedy, 5 Wager of Law, no help, 5 Where remedy at
Law, no help here, 15 Waste helped here, and no remedy at Law, 19 Waste
forbidden here, and not punishable at Law, 26 Witnesses ad informandum
conscientiam, 27 Witness served to testify, pressed for a Soldier, 41 Writ
of privilege granted to a Suitor, 43, 44 Witnesses examined before answer, 48
Witnesses examined by fraud suppressed, 56 Witnesses taken after publication ad
informand. conscien. 58 Wife after the death of her husband, sueth a Bill of
revivor, 70 Witnesses that answer insufficiently, again examined, 81 Witnesses
examined in perpetual memory, moved to use their testimony, 88 Witnesses
examined before the Town Clarke of York suppressed, 91 Witnesses examined, 1.
and 2. P. and Mary ordered to prefer a Bill for publication, 94 Witness not
able to travel discharged, 99 Writ of privilege disallowed, 102
Reports in Chancery.
IF a man be bound in a penalty to pay money at a day, Payment after the day
upon bonds helped.
and place, by obligation, and intending to pay the same, is robbed by the way;
or has entreated by word some further respite at the hands of the Obligee, or
comes short of the place by any misfortune; and so failing of the payment,
does nevertheless provide and tender the money in short time after; in these
and many such like cases the Chancery will compel the Obligee to take his
principal with some reasonable consideration of his damages ( quantum
expediat) for if this was not, men would do that by covenant, which they do
now by bond.

The like favor is extendable against them that will take advantage upon any
strict condition, Condition to undo estates in Lands.
for undoing the estate of another in lands upon a small or trifling default.

So if two be jointly and severally bound to pay money, Giving day to one, it
shall help the other.
and the obligee will give longer day (or other favor) to the one, and then
will sue the other for the debt, he which is sued shall sue in Chancery 9. E.
4.41.

Payment without acquittance.
A man pays debt upon a single obligation without taking acquittance,
therefore this will not discharge him at the common Law, but he shall be
relieved therein in Chancery (quare 22. F. 4.6. By the parties oath, but not by
witness.

Lessees damages in waste moderated by the death of the Lessor.
If a man fell Trees upon the Lands of a Lessee for life, and the Lessee
recovereth damages amounting to the treble value that he ought to answer to
his Leasor in waste, and the Leasor dies before any recovery in waste, now the
Leassee shall not be suffered to take those damages himself, being so
discharged of them, but shall be restrained in Chancery. Doctor and Student
33.34. and 40.

The greater part of the debt paid, and the rest offered, relieved in Chancery.
If the obligee have received the most part of the money, payable upon the
obligation at the peremptory time and place, and will nevertheless extend the
whole forfeiture, immediately refusing soon after the default, to accept of
the residue tendered unto him, the obligor may find aid in Chancery.

Purchasor of parcel of land not snbject to the whole rent charge.
If a man grant a rent charge out of all his Lands, and afterward sells his
Lands by parcels to diverse persons, and the grantee of the rent will from time
to time levy the whole rent upon one of the purchasors only, he shall be eased
in Chancery by a contribution from the rest of the purchase^s; and the grantee
shall be restrained by order to charge the same upon him only.

Suing in a wrong County.
A man recovered at the common Law a debt in one County, where the obligation
was made in another county against the Stat. 6. R. 2. c. 2. The Defendant sued,
and suggested in Chancery, that by this means he was put from diverse Pleas of
which he might have taken advantage, if the obligation had been sued in the
very County and he had aid there; for the Chancellor said that he sued to hide
the truth and against conscience also, which cannot be so well found in any
place, as in the very County where a thing is done, 9. E. 4.2. and 9. E. 4.15.
A man shall not be prejudiced by formality or mispleading, etc.

Touching Copyholders, Copyholders.
Mr. Fitz-Harbert in his Nature. Brevium fol. 12. notes well that, forasmuch as
he cannot have any writ of false Judgment, nor other remedy at common Law
against his Lord, therefore he shall have aid in Chancery; and therefore if
the Lord will put out his Copyholder that pays his customs and services, or
will not admit him to whose use a surrender is made, or will not hold his Court
for the benefit of his Copyholder, or will exact fines Arbitrary, where they be
customary and certain, the Copyholder shall have a Subpoe* to restrain or
compel him as the Case shall require, Dyer 264. and 124 Fitz. Subpoena 21

First this Court forbeareth directly to examine any Judgment given at the
common Law, Not to examine any Judgment given at the common Law.
to which end the Statutes 27. E. 3. cap. 12.39. E. 3. cap. 14.4. H. 4. cap.
23. and 16. R. 2. cap. 5. were made; and it seems that the common Law used
some power to restrain such examinations of Judgments before all these
Statutes, for 13. E. 3. upon a recovery had upon a Quare impedit, the Defendant
sued for help in the Chancery; and they sent a prohibition, and upon that an
Attachment against him. Fitz-Harbert prohibition 21 the like has been done
upon suits in the courts of requests. But yet 9. E. 4.65. one recovered debt
upon an obligation in one county, whereas the obligation was made in an other
county, and he complained in Chancery because he had lost some advantages,
which he might have taken if the trial had been in the other county, which
thing in effect was made a Law by the Statute, 6. R. 2. c. 2. And in the Case
of Paramore Ann. 3. and 13. Eliz. A fine supposed to be levied by an Infant,
Dyer, ^01. and 301.
was examined in Chancery, after it had been allowed by examination of the
Justices of the com. Pleas; but whether these and such other may seem rather
to examine the manner, then the very matter and substance of the thing
adjudged, it is worthy of consideration.

Atturnement.
Sir Will. Cordall Mr. of the Rols denied to compel one to atturn here that was
at liberty by the common Law, in the Case of Sir John Windham.

Atturnement denied but in some Cases.
Chancellor Bromeley likewise denied such compulsion generally, but where the
party quarrelled with the particular Tenants Estate, or enters iuto some part
of the Lands in demise, or has covenanted for recompense for non atturnment
there he utterly denies to enforce the atturnment. Pasch. 21. Eliz. in Case of
Philips, and Doctor Sandford.

Such assurances as be used for the common repose of men's Estates, Fine^,
Recoveries, etc.
the Chancery will not draw in question; for a fine with Proclamation ought
after the five years, to be a bar in conscience as it is in Law; so shall it
be of a common recovery for docking the intaile, Doctor and Student, 33.155.

Mulier, and Bastard.
So likewise it seems that the continued possession of the Bastard eisne shall
prevail in conscience against the right of the Mulier ^^sne. And albeit a feme
covert may be thought to join with her Husband for fear in a fine of her
l^nds, yet after the five years it shall not be recalled, for the general
inconveniences that may ensue to that highest assurance. Doctor and Student,
154.

And if remedy in Chancery should be extended to a Collateral Warrantye,
Warranty.
the same Saint German says that then all writings shall be examined.

If the extender undervalue the Lands, Extent^, Laws.
as there is no remedy at the common Law, 15. H. 7. Dupleges Case, because the
Debtor may help himself by payment of the debt, so in conscience there ought
to be no relief, unless it were done by Covin. Idem.

Upon Nudum Pactu^ there ought to be no more help in Chancery, Nudum pactum.
Wager of Law.
then there is at the common Law, neither against him that has waged his Law
in debt, though peradventure falsely. Idem.

Where a man made Title to a rent seck of which there was no seizin, No seizin
of a re^t. seck.
nor for which he had any action at the common law, and prayed help here it was
denied upon conference had by the Lord Keeper with the Judges, Michal. 1596.

A Copyholder dies leaving two daughters by diverse Venters, Possessio so oris
in Cop^yhold.
both which do enter and take the profits, without doing fealties, or paying
fine, and without any admittance by the Court, and the eldest dies without
issue: This only possession suffices to order the Copyhold to the collateral
heir of the eldest, and not ^or the sister of the half blood, 12. Eliz. Dyer
291.

Copyhold.
A Copyholder in Fee has issue a daughter and a son by two venters; the Lord
commits the custody of the Land, and of the son to the Mother who takes the
profits, Possession of the Mother for the her Collateral.
and the son dies before any admittance; this Copyhold was ordered also for
the Heir Collateral against the Sister of the half blood, because the
Mothers possession serves for the son, Anno 12. Eliz. Ibid.

Copyhold devise.
The Lord devised a Copyhold to C. for life, and after passed the Freehold of
the soil thereof by livery of seizin thereof to B. for life reserving a rent;
and then by fine levied, does grant the said Land to the said C. ( come ceo que
il ad de son done etc.) And C. accepts the said rent of B. and thereupon it
was questioned whether or no, the Copyhold of C. were gone in conscience 28. H.
8. Dyer 30.

Copyhold forfeited for cutting of Trees, during* minority.
A Copyholder within age is admitted, and the Lord commits the custody to the
Mother of the Infant, whose under-Tenant cutteth down Timber Trees, which being
presented, the Lord seizes the Land for the forfeiture (during still the
nonage) and keeps it till he dies, and it descends to his Heir, who and
his Father had kept it 40 years, and for that the Copyholder moved suite in
the Chancery 29. years since which was now revived, and the forfeiture was
taken during his minority, he was restored to his possession till the Lord
should recover it for the forfeiture by the common Law, Tenant right Fines for
alienation of the Tenant, but not of the Lord.
in the case of Mr. Litton Mich. 41. and 42. Eliz. Justice Clench, and the
Masters.

Tenure by Tenant Right as it is usual toward the borders of Scotland, shall
not pay any uncertain fine or incombe at the change of the Lord by alienation,
but by death which is the Act of God; for otherwise the Lord might weary the
Tenant by frequent alienations; but it may be fine uncertain upon the
alienation of the Tenant as well upon death as descent, for that it is the Act
of the Tenant, and in his power. Sir Thomas Egerton Mich. 1599. Case Manor de
thwaites and les Justices accord, the same holds in Copyholders, for the
custom must be reasonable.

A Copyholder in Fee surrendreth to the use of one, Payment of Creditors out of
a Copyhold forfeited by Morgage.
and to his Heirs upon condition of redemption, writes down his debts, and
wills part of his Copyhold to be sold for payment of his debts after his
death; one of the creditors pays the money at the day to the morgage, who
nevertheless inrolleth the surrender afterward; this other creditor
complains against him, and the Heir in Chancery, and had a decree that the
Copyhold should be sold for the payment of debts, and the remainder of it (if
any were) should descend to the Heir 41. Eliz. For although the devise of the
Copyhold be void, yet to take it from the surrendree, (who held it only for
money to be paid) and to pay him and the other creditors therewith, has good
warrant in equity, and the Heir has no wrong for that it was gone from him by
the surrender lawfully.

Termino Trinitatis 40. Eliz. the Lord Keeper Sir Thomas Egerton pronounced
openly, Lease paroll.
that he for avoiding perjuries and other abuses, would not give help to a
Lease claimed by paroll only.

Marriage po^tion recovered at common Law, and reversed in the Exchequer,
helped in Chancery.
One Cutting brought an action upon Assumpsit for one hundred pound against the
Executors of a Testator that promised the money in marriage with his daughter,
and recovered at the common Law; which judgment was reversed in the Chequer
Chamber, but Cutting sought help in Chancery, where it was proved that the
Executors had Assets for Funerals, Debts, and Legacies with a good overplus to
satisfy the complainant; and therefore after hearing and report thereof by
Doctor Stanhope, and Mr. Lambert, it was decreed for the complainant; but the
Executor exhibited his Bill for remedy; upon which Justice Owen thought he was
not to be heard till he had satisfied the decree; and then also but only upon
new matter; not thus resting, the Executor exhibits a second Bill which was
referred to Master Lambert, but he excused himself, that he was not to judge
in his own cause and recommended it to the censure of the Lord Keeper who
ordered the Executor to perform the first decree, Micha. 40. Eliz. 1598.

Perpetuities.
Trinity 41. Eliz. The Lord Egerton pronounced openly, that he would give none
aid in Chancery, Lease for 1000 years.
^or the maintenance of any perpetuities, nor of any Lease for hundred^, or
thousands of years, made of lands holden in Capite; because the latter be
grounded upon fraud, and the former be fights against God.

Statute lands bought with Money lent, pr^o^ity ^ans Covyn.
A. was bound in a Statute to B. And one C. lends 100 l. to A. with which A.
bought lands, and assured the same to C. for his hundred pound. A, fails in
payment. B. extended that land. C. was denied help in Chancery, although the
land was bought with his money; for B. has priority of right in Law without
Covyn, Crompton. 63. a.

A. delivers twenty pound to B. to the use of C. a woman to be delivered her
the day of her marriage, Bailement sans consideration countermanded.
before her marriage. A countermandeth it, and calls home the money, C. shall
not be aided in Chancery, because there is no consideration why she should have
it. Dyer. 49.

A Term or devised his Term, Void limitation de Lease in vol. Cook lib. 8.95.
and whole Lease to B. Provisoe that if B. dye, living C. Then the Term shall
wholly remain to C. B. sells the Term, and dies, living C. And by the
opinion of the Justices C. shall have no remedy, Dyer, 74.

The Vice Countess Mountague claimed the Wardship of the body of the Heir of
a Tenant of hers, Ravishment de g^rd.
which was esloyned from her (...) she suspecting some of the Heirs friends
exhibited her Bill in Chancery; and it seemed they should not answer to charge
themselves criminally; especially in this Case, where so great a punishment as
abjuration may follow, etc.

Cromer and Peniston married two Sisters jointly possessed of a Lease for
years, Survivor in Joint. Tena^cy de Lease.
the wife of Cromer dyed; Peniston claimed the whole by Survivor, Cromer
exhibited a Bill suggesting that Peniston had in her life time severed the
joyneture by some act ^ecretly: The Lord Keeper overruled that the defendant
should not answer Mich. 39. and 40. Eliz.

Feoffees to use.
As concerning confidence secretly knit to Estates, it has manifold
considerations; first if my Feoffee upon confidence, do infeoffe another bona
fide, Notice of the use.
that knows not of the confidence, I am without remedy. Fitz Harbert sub. 19
But if the second Feoffee have notice of the use, he shall be compelled here to
perform it, 5. E. 4.7.

If my Feoffee dye I have no remedy against his Heir.
So if my Feoffee dye, and the land descend to his Heir, I have no remedy
against him. 8. E. 4.6. All the Justices; and this confidence extends not
only to the taking of the profits, but also that the Feoffees shall do acts
for the good of the Feoffor; and if the Feoffor require him to make an estate
to any other, he o^ght to do it, but thereof he ought to have request in
writing, for he is not to do it upon a bare message, or upon desire by word
only, 37. H. 6.35.36. The Feoffee shall do Acts for the Feoffors good.
And if the Feoffor will have him make an Estate to I. for life, the remainder
in Fee to B. though I. will not take the Estate, yet B. shall compel him to
make Estate to him in the life of I. ibid. 36. Finch. So if the Feoffee be
disseised, the Feoffor shall compel him to sue an Assize* 2: E. 4.7. They may
grant Offices, but not annuities.


Nevertheless those Feoffees might grant necessary Offices as Stewardships,
Bailyweeks, etc. though they may not grant Annuities to learned men to defend
the Land, 8. H. 7.12. They may also as it seems give Fees to Council, Fees
to council.
and shall have allowance thereof, so far as they are from being maintainors.

Money given to buy Lands.
If I give money to one to purchase Lands therewith to him and his Heirs, and to
permit me to take the profits thereof during my life, and he withholds the
profits, he shall be compelled by Subpoena Crompton, Fol. 48. b.

If ( Cesti que use) be attainted of Felony, The Feoffee shall retain the Land
to his own use fur-attain der de felony.
the Lord shall not be aided by Subpoena to have his escheat; and if the Heir
be barred by the corruption of his blood, then the Feoffee as it seems shall
retain the Land to his own use 5. E. 4.7. Feoffments of use, Brook 34.

When the use is to the Feoffee and his Heirs, Intent specified in a Feoffment
to use.
without any other intent, there (Cesti que use) may declare his will thereof
and may vary at his pleasure; but if it be to any intent certain, as to take
back an estate tail, or with remainders to others, then he cannot change it,
for the interest that is in others, 5. E. 4.8. a.

Whether the use of gavell kind Lands should ensue the nature of the land, Uses
of gavell kind at the common Law. 26. H. 8. Die. 6.
and so of Borrough English, or shall be at the common Law, because the
customs do extend to Lands, and not to uses, or rents as is said against Fitz
Harbert.

Although ( Cesti que use) of a term for years be not within the Statute of
uses, Cesti que use) de term de ans.
rather therefore he shall have remedy in Chancery, Crompton 64.

Where the complainant will rest upon the oath of the Defendant, Jurament.
delatum a part.
and be contented to be judged there by, their the oath of bewraying is hardly
granted.

Conscience never resists the Law, AEquitas sequitur legem.
nor adds to it, but only where the Law is directly in it self against the
Law of God, or the Law of reason; for in other things Equitas sequitur legem.
Saint German, Fol. 85.155.

Sometimes equity helps a man to that, for the which there is no Law of man
provided. Things left to the conscience of the party.
fol. 85. ibid. Sometimes equity follows the meaning of the parties in their
contract, 86. Ibid. where a common inconvenience will follow, if the common Law
be broken, there the Chancery shall not help. 155. For albeit the party cannot
with a good conscience take the advantage of sundry things to which he comes,
yet the Court of conscience is not thereby bound to help the other, but must
leave some things to the conscience of the party himself.

Help in Chancery against Executors.
It is reported, 8. E. 4.6. and 22. E. 4.6. year Book, That the Lord
Chancellor, and Judges were of opinion that a Subpoena lies not against the
Heir of a Feoffee in trust; but our time affords that help against Executors
very commonly, as between Ouslowe and Ouslowe, Lord Norris and Lester, Cutting
and Huckford, etc.

At the common Law, if a man were surety for another debt, Surety.
he was chargeable if the debtor failed in payment; but Magna Charta. cap. 8.
orders that the pledge shall not be distrained, if the principal debtor be
sufficient to pay; this grew troublesome to the Creditor, and therefore it fell
in use that the pledge should be bound as principal, and so by the common Law
he is chargeable notwithstanding the sufficiency of the principal; The surety
chargeable.
nevertheless it is now usual in Chancery to help this suerty against
whatsoever default of the principal, To help the surety.
if so be he will offer the principal debt and damages; but in my opinion he
ought to find here no other relief then the principal debtor should find, No
other relief for the surety, then for the principal.
because he is not only a principal by his own Bond, but also was the cause,
for which the money was lent, seeing that without him the principal had not
been credited. And experience bewrays, that this favor to sureties breeds
contempt of Bonds; Nihil est autem (says Cicero) quod vehementius remp.
continet quam fides, quae nulla esse poterit si non erit necessaria solutio
rerum creditarum, fraudandi vero spe sublata, solvendi necessitas consequitur.

But the Case of the purchasor (bona fide) of land subject to a Statute,
Purchasor.
or recognizance, is better then of such a surety; and so is the Case also of
the Heir of the Recognizor, or Obligor; for though the land be charged in
their hand with the debt, yet equity ought to relieve them touching any
penalty, unless they be found in Mora, etc.

If a debtor will Collude with some of his friends in fraud of his Creditors;
Fraud upon fraud.
and the friend break trust with him, this Court will not punish the breach;
yet Green and Cotterells Case to the contrary ( fraus non est fallere
fallentem.) But two Doctors and I took order in such a Case between Woodford,
and Multon, Mich. 42. and 43. Eliz. by our report that the goods so conveyed in
fraud, should be transferred to the benefit of the Creditors. Feoffee
punishable for making Estate at the wives request during the Coverture.


A. Man was enfeoffed to the use of a woman sole which takes an Husband; they
both for money sell to B. The land which pays it to the wife; and she and her
Husband do pray the Feoffee to make Estate to B. Afterward her hu^band dies;
now by the Chancellor and all the Justices, she shall have aid against the
first Feoffee by Subpoena, to satisfy her for the land; and if the second
Feoffee were conusant, a Subpoena shall be against him for the land, for all
that the wife did during the Coverture (as they said) shall be taken to be done
for fear of the husband 7. E. 4.14. Subpoena Fitz-Harbert. 6.

No relief against his own deed.
If A. sell land to B. for 20 l. with confidence, that it shall be to the use of
A. yet A. shall have no remedy here, because the bargain has a consideration
in it self. Dyer 169 per Harpar. and such a consideration in an Indenture of
bargain and sale seems not to be examinable except fraud be objected,
because it is an estopell.

Release of joint Feoffee.
Lands be morgarged to A. and B. where A. only pays the money, and the
intention was that B. should take nothing; now B. shall be compelled to release
to A. 27. Eliz.

Subpoena against one appointed by will to sell.
A. wills that B. shall sell his Land to C. now C shall have a Subpoe. against
B. to compel him to sell the testators land unto him 15. H. 7.12.

Pyers was bound in a Statute to Hawes, and Joan, To discharge himself of a
bond is permitted in equity.
for the behoof of Joan, and Hawes released to Pyers, whereupon she brought a
Subpoena against them both; but Pyers was discharged although he knew the
confidence; because it is permitted in such a case a man should help himself
to be discharged of his bond, and the Subp. stood against Hawes, because he had
deceived Ioane, 11. E. 4.8. a. Tamen quae^. for it is no conscience to be a
partaker in fraud; therefore if my Feoffee in use had made a Feoffment unto one
that knew of the use, the Subpena did lie against them both, 5. E. 4.7. And the
Case precedent kiked not the reporter.

If an Obligation be made to B. to the use of C. now B. shall be compelled here
to sue upon that Obligation, Forced to sue an Obligation.
2. E. 4.2.

If one Executor will release a debt without the consent of his copartner,
Executor shall not release a bond without his Copartner.
whereby the Will cannot be performed, the releasor and the releasee shall be
ordered therefore in Chancery, 4. H. 7.4. By the Chancellor against the opinion
of ^ineux.

If a Subpoena be brought against three Executors, Executors shall not answer
without his Copartners.
and one of them appears, he shall not be compelled to answer till they be
driven to appear also, for they are but one, 8. E. 4.5. By the Chancellor.

So if two Copartners, Copartners to join in Plea or presentment.
or joint Tenants-joyne in a Quare impedit, and the one will plead covenously,
he shall be compelled here to join with the other in Plea or presentment.

And so if lands be severally given by one deed, One deed by which two claim
severally.
to two men; he which has the deed shall be compelled here to show it for the
defense of the others Title, 9. E. 4.41.

A. made a Deed of Feoffment to his own use to B. but gave no livery of seizin.
Where remedy at common Law, no help here.
A. dies, C. his heir brings a Subpoena against B. but by Morton Master of
the Rolls, C. was denied help here, because B. had nothing in the Land; and if
he abate, there is remedy at the common Law against him, 18. E. 4.13.

Where certainty wants, Goods of Felons granted which are difficult to prove.
the common Law fails, but yet help is to be found in Chancery for it; for if
the Queen grant to me the goods of A. that is attainted of Felony, and I know
not the certainty of them, yet shall I compel any man to whose possession any
of them be come to make. Inventory of them here, 36. H. 6.26. Cur.

Bringing evidence into Court.
It is most usual in Chancery to demand evidence concerning the complainants
Lands, to which he makes Title, which are not in Ch^sts, Baggs, or Boxes, and
whereof he knows not the Date, etc.

Justifying detaining of evidences.
And in that Case the Defendant made Title to the Lands, and justified the
detaining of the evidences, for maintenance of his right; whereupon it was
ordered, that the complainant should bring an action for the Land at the common
Law; to which the Defendant should plead in chief; and that he for whom the
verdict should pass, should also have his possession stalled here, 28. Eliz.

Tenants of the Land uncertain.
If a man have cause to demand land by action, and knows not the Tenant of the
land, by reason of the making of secret Estates, it has been lately used to
draw them in by oath, to confess the Tenant; but it is now doubted.

Tenants in common to know the certainty
A Tenant in common, of a Manor for long time, occupied wholly by the other
Tenant in common, which knows not the quantity of the Manor, by reason the
other has also sold Lands intermingled, had the sight of the Court Rolls, and
Writings of his companion, concerning only the quantity of the Manor, but not
concerning the sold Lands, nor his Title to the Manor, and the other was
ordered also to show the like on his part. Capell and Mym. 1599.

Supply of true meanning in Feoffments.
The Chancery also gives help for perfecting of things well meant, and upon
good consideration. As if in a Feoffment of Lands for money the word Heirs be
omitted in the deed, Audeley Chancellor, 9. H. 8. said that he would supply it.

A man bought debts due upon Obligations, To bring in an obligation to be
cancelled.
and gave his own Obligation for the money to be paid for them; and because he
had not ( quod pro quo) but only things in action, and the seller would not
use action upon them for the benefit of the Vendee; It was ordered here by the
assent of the Judges thereto called, that the Vendor should bring in the
Obligation to be cancelled, Money paid upon Obligation single, or single
Statute not compelled here to cancel it.
37. H. 6.14.

But if a man pay money upon an Obligation, or a Statute that is single, the
Obligee, or Counsee shall not be called hither to cancel it, though the other
had no acquittance upon the payment made, 22. E. 4. b. les Justices, and Doctor
and Student 23. who said that a man shall have no aid here to supply his
folly: Yet upon a morgage, he shall be compelled to bring in the indenture to
be cancelled here.
As if he pay a debt upon a single Obligation or Statute without taking
acquittance. But Robert Stillington Episcopus Bathoum said that ( deus est
pro^urator futurus.) I think if money be paid upon a redemption of a morgage
by Indenture without taking an acquittance, the morgage shall bring in the
Indenture to be cancelled here. Lands sold in two counties and livery made
only in one.


So if a man sell lands in two Counties for money, and makes livery in the one
only, he shall be compelled in conscience to perfect the assurance by another
livery, Doctor and Student 37. for the contract fails only in a circumstance
or ceremony. Leassor to have the woods leaving sufficient boote^.


A lease is made of a House and Woods, wherein it is covenanted, that the
Leassee shall have Housboot and Fireboot. By this it is employed and meant that
he shall not have any of the Woods to any other purpose, but that they belong
to the Lessor; and it is usual to help him in the Chancery, to them leaving
sufficient for these boots.

Message cum pertin. carries the land used with it.
A Message was demised ( cum pertinentiis) only but for that sundry Lands had
been occupied therewith for the same rent; and by the same words, the Lord
Chancellor Bromley by advice of the Judges, ordered those Lands should now
pass also; yet in Law they do not pass as some Justices hold.

Manor demised, except the Court Baron.
The Lord North demised a Manor (excepting the Court Baron) and perquisites,
etc. the exception was found void in Law; and the Tenant Lady Dacres would not
make suite to the Court kept by the Lord North. But the Lord Keeper Puckering
assisted with some Judges, decreed her to make suite, for that it was plainly
so intended.

Fraud or covyn in goods.
A man made a gift of his goods of intent to defraud his creditors, and yet
continued the possession of them, and took sanctuary and dyed there; now his
Executors having the goods, were charged toward the Creditors, 16. E. 4.9.

Grand Lease forfeited by covin.
So if a Lessee for years demiseth parcel of the Term to another, and
covenously forfeiteth his whole Lease for any condition broken, and takes the
Land back in Lease again, his Lessee shall find help in Chancery. Laesione
fide^
Crompton, 64.65. And Stillington the Chancellor, 8. E. 4.4. was of opinion
that ( pro laesione fidei) or breach of promise, Canonica I^^uria.
a man was at liberty to sue either in the spiritual Court ( Canonicae
Injuria) or else in the Chancery for the damage accrewed by the breach.

A man had Lands of ancient de^neasne in extent for debt, Conu^ee.
and they were recovered from him by the sufferance of the Vouchee, whereby he
was ousted; in this Case he shall be helped here. Morton Chancellor per Assent.
Bryan, and Hussy Justices, 7. H. 7.11.

If one that is bound with another for the debt of the other pays it at the
day for fear of Arrest; To avoid future perjury.
now if he sue his counter-bond which he has to save him harmless ( non est
damnificatus) is a good Plea at the common Law against it; but yet the Chancery
will give order for his repayment. Mich. 31.32. Eliz. And whereas such a surety
paid the debt, and sued the principal upon his Obligation to save him
harmless; the principal brought a Subpoena, and alleging that he having
delivered goods into the hands of the surety to save him harmless, Payment for
the principal by the surety.
prayed an Injunction to stay his suite; but because the surety made another
title to the goods, the Court would not stay the suit for him, 16. E. 4.9.

Where Deeds and Mynuments do concern as well the defense of the Tenant for
life, Deeds brought into the Court.
his Title who also possesses the Deeds, as the right of another in reversion
or remainder, it is usual to have them brought into this Court for the
avoiding all perils, and the indifferent custody of them, Dixies and Hillary,
40. Eliz.

A Lease is made for life, Waste hol. pen in Chancery.
the remainder for life; the remainder over in Fee; the first Lessee makes
waste; and because he in the Fee has no remedy by the common Law, and waste is
a wrong prohibited, he shall be helped in Chancery, Crompton, 48.6.

Tulier and Bastard Ione ^n suing their livery.
And not every bar or stopell in Law ought also to bind in Chancery: For if a
legitimate daughter, and her sister a Bastard do join in suing of their
livery, this ought not to bar in conscience, howsoever it may estop in Law,
Doctor and Student 34.

Action of the case seeks damages, subpoena rem ^psam.
It is usual in a Bill of Chancery to object, that the Case has proper help at
the common Law, and 21. H. 7.41. where one assumed for 10 l. to Lands to
another. It was said he might have action upon his Case; and not to sue in
Chancery to compel him to make the Estate; but these helps be diverse, and not
the same; for by the one he seeks the Land; and by the other he demands
damages only. And therefore I see not, but that the Petition in Parliament
might have prevailed, if it had stood upon that point only; and at this day,
it is taken for a good cause of dismission in most causes, to say that he has
remedy at the common Law; and where an action upon the Case for a Nusans and
damages only are to be recovered, the party may have help here to remove or
restore the thing it self, quod est idem.

Fines fraudulent.
A Leassed lands for 21. years, and let other lands at twill to B. that had
lands in the same Town, who makes a Lease for life to C. of his own lands, and
of A*s. and then by Fine all is conveyed to B. he pays the rent to A. still
the five years pass by the opinion of all the Judges delivered to the Lord
Keeper; this fine shall not Bar A. quia apparet per le payment del rent and
cest case fit subscribe per Popham and Andersan. 12. Feb. 160 1.40. Eliz.

Nota que Executor non poit estre a trust unless he have an especial gift in
the will, Executors how upon trust.
and that may then be in trust, otherwise the general trust of an Executor is
to pay debts and legacies; and of the surplusage to account to the ordinary in
pios usus, No relief against a voluntary act.
44. Eliz. 8. Iunii 1602.

A woman sole takes consideration for making a Lease for 21. years and then
marries; and she and her husband made the promissed Lease at the 21. years
end, the Lessee surrenders and takes a new Lease for 21 years more, the husband
dies, the wife oustes the Lessee, who sues in Chancery to have the first Lease
continued rest for the first 21 years, and not remedyed here, the surrender
being voluntary, 44. Eliz.

Two Joynt-Tenants, Joint Tenants, one taking the profits.
the one takes the whole profits, no remedy for the other, except it were done
by agreement, or promise of account, 8. Iunii 1602. 44. Eliz.

A defe^* not being a principal defendant, Defendant examined as a witness.
might be read at a witness, if he were examined on the plaintants party in
another suit, between other persons, in Case of Kingston upon Thames, 10.
Iunii 1602. 44. Eliz.

A custom of descent in a Manor, General customs reduced to certainty by
agreement in a manor.
and many other things were in controversy between the Lord and Tenants, and
between the Tenants themselves. And in the tenth Eliz. a general agreement
made by Deed indented, and a Bill in Chancery for establishing the same, but no
Record to be found but the Deed enrolled, though all the Tenants of the said
Manor shall be stopped in the Chancery to speak against this, ( Cac. est quae
le Repes del realm) notwithstanding pretense was made ( Philips being of
council with the defendants, that agreement cannot alter a custom in Law,
that some were infants, some ^eme coverts at the time that the Lord was but
Tenant in tail; of which opinion was Mr. Cook Attorney general, and Justice
Gaudy, 10. Iunii 1602. 44. Eliz.

Statute acknowledged in my name by a stranger.
If a Statute be acknowledged in my name by a stranger, I shall have an action
of disceat against him, but I shall not avoid the Statute or recognizance; but
if it be acknowledged by one of the same name with me, I shall avoid it by
Plea. 23. Iunii 1602. 44. Eliz.

Power to make leasses.
The opinion of the Courts is, that uses may be raised by covenant for
Jointures, but power to make Leasses in that sort cannot pass, but it may be
done by Fine, or transmutation of possession, if the covenant be that the owner
will stand seize to those uses, 27. Iun. 1602. 45. Eliz.

Whether Copyholders may be intailed, and held that they may not by the Statute
( de donis conditionalibus, Coppyhold tayled surrender.
) but by the common law denante; and that surrenders, or plaints in nature of
fines and recoveries may bar these state tails, as well in the Court Baron, as
at the common law, if the custom have been such, which is the rule in these
cases, 3. Feb. 1602. 45. Eliz.

Abating a Bill.
Administrators in nature of a guardian to an infant being Executor, exhibits on
his behalf a Bill in Chancery; the infant (depending the suit) comes of full
age; this abates not the Bill by the opinion of the Lord Chancellor Egerton,
Leases devised to his wife, on confidence to come to his Son not relieved.
7 Feb. 1602. 45. Eliz.

Doctor Ford by his will devised certain lands to his wife in these words (
non per viam fidei co^miss^^) for which his son might sue her; but hoping if
his Son grew thrifty, that at her death she would leave the remnant of these
Leases to him, she married Greysill; but before marriage Greysill wrote unto
her, that she should have the disposing of those Leases at her death; after the
marriage Greysill sells the Leases; Ford brings his suite in Chancery, and had
no help by the opinion of the Court, 31. Maii 1. Jacob. 1603.

Inter Tomley and Clench, Possession bound by decree, and the party prohibited
to sue at common law.
It appeared by testimony of ancient witnesses, speaking of 60 years before,
and account Books and other writings, that Francis Vaughan, from whom Tomley
claimed was mulier; and Anthony from whom Clench claims was a Bastard; and
the possession had gone with Tomley 50 years. In this Case the Lord Egerton
not only decreed the possession with Tomley, but ordered also that Clench
should not have any trial at the common law for his right, till he had showed
better matter in the Chancery, being a thing so long past; it rested not
properly in notice de pais, but to be discerned by Books and Deeds, of which
the Court was better able to judge then a Jury of Ploughmen, notwithstanding
that exceptions were alleged against those ancient writings; Grantee
distrains one who prays relief, ordered he sue the rest, and the Grantee,
the one to contribute, and the other to accept of equality.
and that for the Copyhold-land, the verdict went with Clench upon evidence
given three days before Sergeant Williams, that Anthony was Mulier, 31. Maii.
1. Jacob. 1603.

Sir Edmond Morgan married the widow of Fortescuhe, had his wives lands
distrained alone by the Grantee of a rentcharge from her former Husband, and
therefore sued the Grantee in Chancery, to take a ratable part of the rent,
according to the lands he held subject to the distress; and notwithstanding
the Lord chief Justice Pophams Report, who thought this reasonable, the Lord
Chancellor Egerton will give him on this Bill no relief, but ordered that he
should exhibit his Bill against the rest of the Tenants and Grantee both, the
one to show cause why they should not contribute, the other why he should not
accept of the rent equally; otherwise it was no reason to take away the benefit
of distress from the Grantee, which the Law gave him 7. Iunii Iacobi. 1603.

Contents of ^ Manor as it was 60. years past.
A. In forma pauperis had a decree against C. for the Manor of B. that the
contents of the Manor were doubtful. C. showing Ancient Deeds, that proved
diverse parcels of the Lands, claimed by force of the decree by A. to be of
another Manor, which notwithstanding the Lord Chancellor Egerton ordered that
it should be put to a Jury* and they to find as the contents of the Manor had
gone by usual reputation 60. years last; and not to have it paired, and
defalked by such Ancient Deeds.

Executrix hu^band ^rdered to pay debts.
A. Married a Feme Executrix subject to a devastavit; if A. have nor sufficient
to satisfy, himself shall be imprisoned for the debt.

Plaintant mistaking his Title in his Bill.
A. Plaintant in Chancery for a Lease upon a Bill, that affirmed the Lease to
end at our Lady day, An. 1604. had the same decreed for him; many years after
coming to the Lease it self he finds, that it is not to end till our Lady,
An. 1605. And then moves in Chancery, that he may not be forced to leave the
land, till that time as the decree appointed him ( qui constitutus est
cancel^arius, 24. Iulii ad Coronam Regis) for the first he must perform the
decree; and then exhibit a new Bill upon the special matter, otherwise it were
perilous to blow away decrees upon motions. Hill. 1. Iacobi. Gosset com.
Crowther, fol. 122.

Henry Earl of Darby conveyed certain lands in trust, L^easses conv^yed in
trust to pay debts.
to Doughty his servant for payment of his debts, upon mediation of an end of
controversies between the daughters of Fardinand, eldest son of Henry, and
Will. his younger son now Earl. Articles were set down, that Will. should
discharge all his fathers debts, whereupon Doughty conveyed the Leases to Will.
the creditors sue Doughty in Chancery; and ordered to pursue their remedy
against Earl William. Hill. 1. Iacobi.

Hearle plaintant in Chancery against Bot^lers mo^ther and son, Heir of
purchasor charged with payment of money behind for the land.
whose husband had bought tayled lands of Hearles brother, to which the
plaintant was inheritable; and some of the money due upon a bond unpaid, and
the bond lost. And the opinion of the Lord Chancellor was to charge the son and
the mother, in regard of the land in their possession, with the payment
thereof. Hill. 1, Iac.

Nota in le case Mynn and Cobb, Proceedings in a cause where there is no full
proof.
the trust was not so fully proved as the Lord Chancellor would make a full
decree thereupon, so as it should be a presedent for other causes, and yet so
far forth proved as it satisfied him as a private man; and therefore in this
case, he thought fit to write his letters to the defendant, to conform
himself to reason; and affirmed that if he should find the defendant
obstinate, then would he rule this cause specially against the defendant, sans
la tires consequence. Hill. 1. Iacobi.

Nota in the case of Manwood, that there behooves not a full surrender to be
expressed in the Copy, Copy good by devise without mention of surrender.
but the devise is chiefly to be regarded if the surrender be perfect in the
Roll of the Lord, though there be no mention at all of a surrender good enough*
Hill. 1. Iacobi.

Turning of water courses from Mills. helped.
Inter Swain and Rogers, the case was in effect an Assize of Nusans, for Rogers
disturning the trenches, and plucking up of stakes of Swaynes Mill Leet; and
making a banck, or dam beneath, that made the water reflow so as the wheels
could not go; and exception taken that the Court should not hold Plea thereof
( sed contrarium adjudicatur) many causes of the same manner ended here; and
this specially for Rogers a great man in the country, Swayne a professor of the
Law, who sought hereby to avoid multiplicity of suits per Warburton Justice,
but upon a second hearing at the Rolls, referred to a Commission of Sewers.
Hill. 1. Iacobi.

Waste forbidden in Chancery, where not punishable at Law.
Nota per Egerton Chancellor, where Tenant for life, the remainder for life,
though there lie no action of waste in Chancery, yet he shall be prohibited to
do waste by the Chancellor, for wrong to the inhabitants, and hurt to the
commonwealth. Hill. 1. Iacobi.

Archbishops Certificate against Bloomer for not paying a maids portion.
Bloomer having married the widow of Nanfan, who had forfeited a Recognizance
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, for not paying of her daughters Portion,
entreated the Bishop of Canterbury, to take a new Recognizance, and discharge
the former. Bloomer after finding that his wives lands was intailed, used
means to have her by Fine, or recovery, to put it into Fee, that so it might
be subject to the Recognizance; and hoped to get it from his wife also. One
Bridges his wives kinsman withstood this; now dies the woman, the Portion
unpaid; Bloomer is sued for it in Chancery; and the opinion of the Court
against him; the Bishop of Canterbury had certified against him; and because
his counsel was not ready that day, the Chancellor declared he must take the
Archbishops Certificate, not as a Testimony, but as a judicial proceeding; and
therefore willed Bloomer to satisfy the Archbishop, or else he must decree
against him. Witnesses ad informand. conscientiam.
Hill. 1. Iacobi.

Nota that witnesses ad informand. conscientiam, shall never be appointed to be
taken but upon hearing ( ubi Iudex dubitat) but yet witnesses examined after
publication not fit to be published, may be fit to be ad informandum
conscientiam, if it shall be thought meet upon the hearing. Hill. 1. l.

Daniel Hill having put in for his Clyent a long insufficient demurrer to a
Bill exhibited against his Clyent, Five pound costs given in a demurrer, and
the Councellor prohibited to deal any more in Chancery*
in which supposed demurrer were many matters of fact, and other things
frivolous and vain, The Lord Chancellor Egerton awarded five pound costs
against the party. And ordered that neither Bill, Answer, Demurrer, nor any
other Plea should from henceforth be received under the hand of the said Hill.
27. April. 1. Iacobi.

In the case of Tenant right, Fines of Coppyholds how ordered in Chanry.
between Musgrave and some of his Tenants on the borders, The Lord Chancellor
pronounced, that neither in Tenant right, nor in other Coppyholds would he make
any order for all the Tenants in generality, but for special men in special
cases, nor for any longer time then the present, except it were by agreement
between the Lord and the Tenants, which then he would decree if it appeared
reasonable. 8. Iunii. 1. Iacobi.

Item that he neither would help Leases paroll in Chancery; Lease paroll.
and that it was good for the Commonwealth, Promises.
if no Lease paroll were allowed by the Law, nor promises to be proved by
witnesses considering the plenty of witnesses now a days, Witnesses.
which were testes diabolices qui magis fame quam fama moventur. 8. Iunii 1.
Iacobi.

Proceeding on the Sta^tute for charitable uses.
Lands given ad divina Celebranda by Feoffement, till an Estate should be made
by the Feoffees of them, for founding a Chauntry, and this in the 20. of H. 6.
and held no superstitious use, nor by the Lord Chancellor, if it had been
absolutely given ad divina Celebranda and for saying of Obites, for most part
of the Churches of England are so founded; if it be granted to a Priest;
contra, if it be granted to a particular Priest ad divina Celebranda and saying
Obites, etc. The Case was that those Lands were after given to found a Chapel
of Ease by the Feoffees; and then new come in upon the first grant, would have
had it a concealment, and got a Pattent thereof, and Commissioners upon the
Statute, 39. Eliz. took it from the Pattentee. And note that the Commissioners
make the decree; the Lord Chancellor hears the exceptions against the said
decree, and decreed the possession according to the Commissioners decree,
leaving the Pattentee to exhibit his Bill against the parishioners, and to
show what cause he could for reversing thereof, 18. Iunii 1. Jacob.

Lands intended to be given to a School after otherwise disposed by will.
George Littleton of the Inner Temple, lent money upon bonds taken in other
men's names and had not any in his own name; among the rest he purchased five
marks per annum in two other men's names, with this trust, that he might enjoy
it during his life, and after it should be to the erecting of a School in the
Town where the said George was born and buried, as the Feoffees declared in
their answer; and in his life time after the purchase he repealed his intent of
converting the same to the use of the School to diverse others, but by his will
he gave certain Acres of Land to I. C. and I. H. and then devised all the rest
of his lands to his Brothers Son, who sues Ceux que trust for converting unto
him the five mark land, which Justice Warberton presently decreed for him,
saying his will was his Declaration. But in his words there was but a meaning
only expressed ( me contradicente) for if I. C. make a Feoffement to the Use
over according to Articles annexed, he cannot alter the same by a later will.
contra, if it be to the use of his Will. 19 Iunii 1. Iacobi.

Cutting Cleark of the Outlawries bought lands of Bedwell, Cuttings case,
whereof he was seized as Tenant by courtesy, promising the Heir should assure
at full age; and by morgage assured other lands for performance thereof.
Cutting before full age dies without issue his Heir not known, for some
claims as H^ire on the Fathers side, some as Heir on the Mothers side,
others as assignees, by devise; and another as Executor sued a Statute for
performance of Covenants; Bedwell being willing to assure, brought all into the
Chancery, that he might incur no prejudice till he should know to whom he
should assure; and ordered that he should assure to two of the six Clarks, they
to reassure to the Heir when he should be found. No help in Chancery touching
power to make Leases.
10. October. 1. Iacobi.

Nota that the Lord Chancellor Egerton in the Case of Pigot, that if a power be
reserved to make Leases by a Covenant without transmutation of possession, the
Chancery shall not help, because the first is void in Law, if upon
transmutation of possession, and the power be not precisely followed, that
doubtful and rather most strong against help; for then the Estate works and
the power gone; and upon Wills no help; causa patet antea, fol. 1. and
difference inter will and testament, testament requires Executors, will of
lands. 11. October. 1. Iacobi.

Decree against infants.
Young purchased lands in the name of one Mason to the use of him and his
Heirs, dying without declaring any settled determination of this trust or
confidence; Dethicke a kinsman procures Mason to convey the lands to him, and
he conveyes it over to infants, Mericke a nearer kinsman sues in Chancery as
next Heir, if the benefit of the trust appear to appertain to Mericke,
notwithstanding the conveyance to infants being decreed for them, they shall
hold by the decree during the minority. And a proviso for the infants to assure
at full age, per Cook Attorney veniendo de Westminster; and there appearing no
certain disposing thereof, it was ordered that Mason should repay the money he
had for making the conveyance to Dethicke, and Merick to have the lands ordered
for him. 11. October. 1. Iacobi.

Amending of Answers.
Those who are curious to have the defendants to amend their answers, ordered
first by the Lord Chancellor to put in sureties in Court, for proof of the
contents of their Bills according to the Statute, 15. H. 6. or Iuramentum
Calumniae were better perchance. 13. November. 1. Iacobi.

Misdemeanor in Commissioners how to be reformed.
Commission to examine witnesses, went out to Sir A^exander Brett and others,
who made certificate against Sir Alexander of partial proceedings; Philipps
Sergeant moved at the Rolls for a Commission to others to examine in whom the
misdemeanor was, in Sir Alexander, or in the certifyers, and fuit negatum, for
such collateral certificates are not required of the Commissioners, but let
them certify the matters committed to their charge; and if there be
misdemeanor, let the party wronged thereby make affidavit thereof; and then
take out his Attachment. 13. November. 1. Iacobi.

A release was offered to be deposed, Deeds how to be proved
that it had been seen by some at the Bar, it being affirmed that by casual
means it was lost; but the Lord Chancellor said the oath should be that he saw
it sealed and delivered; and not that he saw it after it was a deed: For in
Munson the Justice his Case, a Deed was brought into the Chancery and a Vidimus
upon it, being but a counterfeit copy; and after the fraud discovered, and the
true Deed produced, therefore none allowance to be given of a Deed, without
producing the Deed, or proving the execution thereof; and here appears what
want we have of Notaries and their Deputies. 16. November. 1. Iacobi.

The Deane and Chapter of Bristoll made sundry Leases misreciting the name of
their Corporation, Leases of Corporations, whe^ein their names are mistaken by
themselves.
and an intricate Case of sundry such Leases made of one thing to diverse men;
wherein the Lord Chancellor said, that it was fit to help such Leases in
Chancery, being for reasonable time, and upon good consideration; contra, of
long Leases, without consideration of fine or good rent; and that Judges might
have done well at the first to have expounded the Law so, with averment that
they were the same parties, and so was the old law till now of late, especially
where the mistaking rose on their part, who had the keeping of the evidences,
the which the Leases could not see, but must take a Lease by the College
Clark, in a writ where you may have a new, no harm to abate it for a misnomer;
and yet in that case sometimes in old times an Averment of Comer per lieu nosme
and^ auter, where they were sued by others, and not named so by themselves. 23.
November. 1. Iacobi.

Leassee to be helped in Chancery against Pattentees.
Haule had a Duchy Lease gotten upon untrue surmises; and the King bestowed
the land upon the Earl of Devon, for his service done in Ireland. This Lease
the Earl sought to avoid by the law; Haule prays to have the matter examined
in Chancery, and to have the suit stayed by Injunction which was denied, for
that the Lease was granted by fraud, and the Fee simple to the Earl in
possession and not in reversion and nota, that the Lord Chancellor said, that
where lands are granted in reversion, if the Grantee will avoid the lease for a
rent paid, but not at the day, in that case he will releeve, but not where the
Lease is granted upon a false suggestion, for that were to relieve fraud in the
Chancery, it was further objected, that this grant was made to the Earl upon
consideration of service done; and the Lord Chancellor said, that the service
done to the Realm was as valuable, as if the Earl had given 500 l. for the
Land, Chancellor calling the Judges into the Exchequer Chamber upon remainders
of a Lease.
but the Earl offered to give the Leassee 1000 l. recompense in honor. 23.
Ian. 1. Iacobi.

In a Case moved by Mr. Chamberlain, where the Lord Chancellor had referred
the matter to be tried at the common Law touching remainders upon a Lease
whether good in law or no, and the Judges had given Judgment upon the case in
another point in the Kings Bench, so as the Lord Chancellor remained still
uncertain of that point, called the Judges into the Exchequer Chamber. 1.
Iacobi.

For as much as the plaintant has served process upon the defendant to appear
in this court return 15. Micha. and exhibited no sufficient Bill against him,
Costs against the defendant, and Clerk tha^ made process before a Bill in
Court.
and further for mere examination, sued out a Writ of Attachment against the
defendant, before the return of the subpoena; it is ordered that the plaintant
shall pay unto the defendant 10 s. costs; and also that Hugh Tildesley, who
made the process against the defendant without a sufficient Bill, shall pay
unto the defendant other 10 s. for his costs; William Garneston plaintant,
Thomas Bradwell defendant. Anno 5. Hen. 6. Philip and Mary fol. 11.

For as much as a Commission to examine witnesses in perpetuam rei memoriam,
Publication of witnesses in perpetuam rei memoriam a year past.
issued out of this Court, and the witnesses examined by virtue thereof, have
remained in court by the space of a year; It is ordered that publication shall
be granted Richard Gravenor, and John Gravenor plaintants, Bryan Brearton
defendant. An. 5. and 6. Phil. and M. fol. 12.

Episcopu Cicestrens. publication of witnesses in perpetuam rei memoriam.
Consil.
An. 5. and 6. Phil. and Mar. fol. 30.

Willington plaintant, Consil.
Agar defendant, publication of witnesses remaining since 33. H. 8. fol. 42.
Anno 5, and 6. Phil. and Mary.

An Injunction is granted against the defendants to deliver to the plaintant
certain Plate contained in their Petition, or else to appear and show cause
in crur. anim. prox. Anno 5. and 6. P. and M. fol. 13. David Geoffry, and John
Geoffry plaintants, and Thomas Davis defendant.

The manner of entering decrees in times past.
A decree is made for the plaintant, as by the Record thereof signed with the
Lord Chancellors hand plainly appears; and the said Record is delivered to
John Millisent Attorney for the plaintant to be enrolled, the Deane and Chapter
of Lincoln plaintant, Bevore and Alice defendants. Anno 5. and 6. Phil. and
Mary fol. 15.

Dismissions and the manner of entri^g them.
Glanffell plaintant, Strickley defendant, a decree is made for the defendant
for dismission of the cause, as by the Record thereof signed with the Lord
Chancellors hand; and the same put to the inrolment. Anno 5. and 6. Phil. and
Mary fol. 22.

Oath made for serving a Subpoena before witnesses examined in perpetual
memory.
James Iervis has made oath for the delivery of a subpoena to the defendant,
whereby he has knowledge that witnesses are to be examined in perpetual
memory; so that he may if he will examine the same witnesses in this court;
therefore the examinors in this court may proceed to the examination of the
said witnesses accordingly; Hatcham plaintiff, Consilio.
Winchcombe defendant. 5. and 6. P. and M. fol. 19.

Porter plaintant, Baker defendant, the examinor may proceed to examination of
witnesses in perpetual memory; Commission to examine in perpe^uall memory.
if the plaintant have served a Subpoena upon the defendant, to give him notice
to examine likewise. An. 5. and 6. P. and M. fol. 32.

Forasmuch as the plaint has taken oath in this court, that there are sundry
witnesses contained in a Schedule exhibited in this court, which he desires to
have examined ^n perpetual memory, so impotent and sick, that they are not
able to travel up to be examined in court, without danger of their lives;
therefore a Commission is awarded to Sir Humfrey B^adburne Knight, to examine
the same witnesses in perpetual memory, Bagshawe plaintant, defendant. An 5.
and 6. P. and M. fol. 22.

Robins plaintant, Consilia.
Foster defendant, a Commission is granted to examine witnesses in the
Country, being impotent, in perpetual memory. Anno 5. and 6. P. and M. fol.
26.

The plaintant is adjudged to pay to the defendant costs three pound, Costs for
a wit^esse served to testify before the Major of London.
for that he was served to appear before the Lord Mayor of London to testify
in a matter depending before the said Lord Mayor, between the plaintant, and
one John Gresham, and others without any precept directed from the Lord Mayor,
unto the said defendant to appear; Row and Alice plaintants, Thomas Guybone
defendant. Anno 5. and 6. P. and M. fol. 24.

John Manlye has taken oath, Publication of witnesses to be used at a Court
Baron.
the deposition of witnesses examined on the behalf of the plaintant, and
remaining in this Court, are to be given in evidence at a Court Baron holden at
Potton in the County of Bedford on M^nday next; therefore publication is
granted, William Manlye Clerk plaintant, Thomas Simcote defendant. Anno 5. and
6. Phil. and Mary. fol. 24.

Injunction to stay proceedings in Judgment, or execution.
An injunction is awarded against the defendant, to stay his proceedings in the
Sheriffs Court of London, or elsewhere upon debt of 100 l. not to proceed to
trial, judgment, or to execution, if judgment be given. John Ayland
plaintiff, Francis Bacon defendant. Anno 5. and 6. P. and M. fol. 29.

Fem^sole takes out a Subpoena, and then marryeth, and serves it, she and her
husband pay costs.
Forasmuch as the plaintant served process upon the defendent, by the name of
Magaret Hastings, and at that instant was married to William Brown; and also
for want of a Bill, therefore the said William Brown, and Margaret are adjudged
to pay to the defendant 20 s. costs, Margaret Hastings plaintant, Nicholas
Iugges defendant. Anno 5. and 6. P. and M. fol. 30.

Commission to take the defendants answer upon a languidus returned.
Forasmuch as the Sheriff of Den^igb has returned a Languidus in prison,
therefore a Commission is awarded to Richard Griffeths and others, to take the
answer of the defendant, John ap Thomas plaintant, Engharard Hoell widow
defendant. An. 5. and. 6. P. and M. fol. 33.

Injunction to put the defendant in such possession as he had at the time of
the Bill exhibited.
Forasmuch as the defendant was in possession of the lands at the time of the
Bill exhibited; and the plaintant has sithence entered, therefore an
injunction is granted to the defendant against the plaintiff, to avoid the
possession. William Hawks, and Ie^nit his wife plaintants, John Champion and
others defendants. An. 5. and 6. P. and M. fol. 35.

Jurisdiction of Wales rejected.
It is ordered the plaintant shall between this and Friday next, bring into this
Court a certificate from the officers of the Queens house, or otherwise;
whereby this Court may credibly understand, that his attendance in Court is
necessary and that he cannot conveniently be absent, or if he cannot so do,
then the matter is remitted to the determination of the Commissioners in the
marches of Wales. Phillip Mannering plaintant, Henry Smallwood, and Alice
defendants. Anno 1. Eliz. fol. 51.

Mannering plaintant, Smallwood and Alice defendants for want of a certificate,
Consil.
that the plaintants attendance in Court is necessary, the cause is dismissed
into the marches of Wales. Anno 1. Eliz. fol. 62.

The plaintants husband was bound in a Statute of 160 l. to pay 160 l. and
after by Indenture the defendant did grant unto the plaintants husband,
Injunction to stay suite of execution of land which he agreed not to do.
that if he failed in the payment of the said 160 l. the same should be levied
of certain lands then the said plaintants husbands lands called Stirbeck, and
some other lands specially named lying in Hawthorne in the County of Lincoln;
the husband dyed, and the defendant sued execution as well of other lands in
the occupation of the plaintants late husband, as of the said lands mentioned
in the Indenture. And Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of
England, granted an injunction against the defendant immediately to remove from
the possession of all the other lands, except of those only contained in the
Indenture; and that he should quietly suffer the plaintant to enjoy the same,
Margaret Pulvertost widow plaintant, and Gilbert Pulvertost defendant. Anno 1.
Eliz. fol. 51.

An Injunction was granted to the plaintant, upon the surmises of his Bill,
Injunction with a clause ( si ita sit)
with this clause ( si ita sit) that the plaintant be in possession by good
conveyance in Law as he alleges, Nota it was then usual to grant
Injunctions upon surmises with a proviso (si ita sit) Fodringham Christopherus
plaintant, Richard Chomeley defendant. Anno 1. Eliz. fol. 67.

A guardian admitted to the defendant infant.
Forasmuch as the defendant is under age, and by inspection not above the age of
fifteen years; therefore George Wyat is by this Court named, and appointed
Guardian to the defendant, Hugh Langley plaintant, and Philip Mark defendant.
Anno 1. Eliz. fol. 73.

A Commission to put the plaintant in possession, Injunction being dissolved or
disobeyed* The defendant enjoined in open Court not to proceed in his action.
A Commission is awarded to the Sheriff of Nottingham* and ^erby, to put the
plaintant in possession of certain lands, for which he formerly had an
Injunction against the defendants, which they have disobeyed, William Boles
plaintant, Richard Walley and Alice defendants. Anno 1. Eliz. fol. 84.

The defendant is enjoined in open court upon pain of 200 l. not to proceed
any further in an action, upon the case by him commenced in the Kings Bench
against the plaintant, nor that he procure the Jury to be sworn in the issue,
but only to record their appearance until to morrow, at which time further
Order shall be taken by the Court, George Rich plaintant, Edmond Foard
defendant. Anno 1. Eliz. fol. 88.

Attachment against the defe^dant, and a subpoena against oue supposed to beat
the server.
Upon information the defendant disobeyed a writ of subpoena brought to be
served against her; and that they which should have served the said writ, were
beaten and wounded, therefore an Attachment was granted against the defendant;
and a subpoena against Edmond Pirton returned immediate, William Rove, and Rose
his wife plaintants, Agnes west widow defendant. Anno 1. Eliz. fol. 90. and 97.

Where the said Edward Pyke has of long time been, The plaintant was in
execution at the suite of the King, and being no just cause therefore, he was
delivered by supersedeas.
and yet is in execution upon a Statute, at the suite of the late King Edward
the 6. Forasmuch as upon the examination of the matter before the Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal of England in open Court, it manifestly appears that there
was not just cause, why the said Pyke should remain in execution, as G^lbert
Gerrard, and Rosewell Esquire, the Queens Majesty's Attorney, and Solliciter
General being present did confess and agree; It is therefore now ordered,
that a Writ of supersedeas be directed to the Warden of the Fleet, in whose
custody the said Pyke now is, commanding him by the same forthwith upon the
receipt thereof, to deliver out of prison the body of the said plaintant,
provided always before his deliverance he be bound to her Majesty by
Recognizance in 100 l. not only to make his further appearance to answer her
Highness any thing hereafter shall happen to be laid to his charge concerning
the said execution; but also to stand to, and obey all such order and
determination as the said Lord Keeper of the Great Seal and this court shall
hereafter take in the matter in variance between him and the said Grant,
Edward Pyke plaintant, Robert Grant defendant. Anno 1. Eliz. fol. 166.

Pakine the Husband only appeared, The Husband and wife defendants, he only
appears and demurs, Attachment against both.
and put in a demurrer in both their names without oath of impotency, or
otherwise for non appearance of Joan his wife; whereupon an Attachment is
awarded against the defendants, Thomas Spicer and Katherine his wise
plaintants, John Pakine and Ioan^ his wife defendants. An. 1. Eliz. fol. 170.

A demurrer put in, and the defendant appeared not in person, a Subpoena to
make direct auswer. Attorney at Law enjoined not to proceed or call for
Judgment.
Thomas Hodge plaintant, William Smith defendant; the defendant demurred by his
Counsel not appearing in person, therefore a Subpoena was awarded against him
to make a direct answer. An. 1. Eliz. fol. 230.

John Iackson Attorney for the defendant at the common Law is in open Court
enjoined, that neither he, nor any other by his means do further proceed in an
action of tresp. commenced against the plaint. and depending at the common law,
nor call for Judgment, until further order shall be therein taken by the Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England, and high Court of Chancery, John
Sedgewick and Alice plaintants, Will. Redman defendant. An. 1. Eliz. fol. 212.

An Injunction granted for not appearing, and to stay proceedings at the common
Law.
The plaintant served the defendant with a Subpoena to appear in Chancery,
whereof he made oath, and because the defendant did not appear, and Injunction
was awarded against the defendant, his Counselors and Attorneyes, upon pain
of 200 l. not to proceed in Judgment in an action of debt of 40 l. in the
common Pleas against the defendant. An. 1. Eliz. fol 213. Thomas Knot
plaintant, Thomas Iackson defendant.

A Commission to examine witnesses upon oath of impotency.
David Air was served with a Subpoena ad testificandum for the plaintant in a
cause depending in this Court, and Thomas Air made oath, that the said David
Air was, at the serving of the said Subpoena upon him, and yet is, so sick,
that he is not able to travel hither to testify; therefore a Commission is
granted to such Commissioners as the plaintant will nominate to examine him,
John Wade plaintanr, Gwye and Alice defendant. An. 1. Eliz. fol. 240.

An Attachment was awarded against the defendant for his not appearance upon
oath, A defendant appearing gratis, an Attachment being out was committed.
he was served with a Subpoena, who now appeared gratis, and would have excused
himself, that he had no notice of the Subpoena, but he that served the
Subpoena, deposed he did hang the same upon the defendants door, and within
half an hour after, saw him abroad with a writ in his hand, which he supposed
to be the Subpoena; therefore he is committed to the Prison of the Fleet,
Bernard Richers plaintant, Tho. Stilman defendant. An. 1. Eliz. fo. 249.

The defendant was served with a Subpoena the day of the return; The defendant
served with a Subpoena the day of the return.
and for his not appearance an Attachment was awarded against him, and upon
oath, that he was served sixscore miles of, so as he could by no possibility
appear, therefore a Commission is awarded to take their Answers in the
Country, paying the plaintant 6 s. 8 p, for his costs; Henry George plaintant,
Henry Bolington, and Ioane Deane defendants, fol. 255.

An Injunction is granted to discharge an execution by Elegit taken by the
defendant out of this Court, An Injunction to discharge an execution for that
the defendant being served did not appear.
for that he being served with a Subpoena did not appear, William Hobby
plaintant, Francis Kemp defendant. Anno 1. Eliz. 274.

The plaintant served one Rolfe with a Subpoena ad testificandum, and after he
was served before he could be examined, A witness served to testify, pressed
for a Soldier, Attachment is stayed.
Rolfe was pressed for a Soldier; upon oath made hereof Attachment was stayed,
Richard Humble and Anne his wife plaintants, William Malbe defendant. Anno
Eliz. fol. 3.

Injunction ( si ita sit) to stay Judgment and Execution.
The plaintant sets forth by his Bill that where there was a suit depending in
the Duchy court, between the defendant and Christopher Aschugh his brother
for certain Lands; It was agreed, and the plaintant was bound to the defendat
in 100 l. that the said Christopher should become bound by Obligation in the
sum of 100 l. the tenth day of June following; and should then also make unto
him a release; and the defendant was also bound by Obligation in 50 l. to pay
the said Christopher a sum of money the 9. of June in the Parish Church of
Da^e. And because both the days of performance of the conditions of the said
several Obligations were so near together, therefore it was agreed, that when
the defendant paid his money, the said Christopher should make his Bond and
release; and shows that the 9. day of June, the defendant came not himself,
but sent his servant to pay the money; and Christopher was there ready to make
the bond and release to the defendant, and offered to deliver the same to the
defendants servants, but they refused to accept thereof; and afterward the said
Christopher offered the same to the defendant, but he likewise refused to
receive the same; and yet puts the plaintants bond of 100 l. in suite in the
Kings Bench; hereupon an Injunction is granted with a clause ( si ita sit) to
stay all further prosecution of any action, in any the Queens Courts at the
common law, or else where, Injunction to stay proceedings before action brought.
upon the bond of 100 l. against the plaintant; and also the taking of any Nisi
prius, or Judgment, or execution upon Judgment, if Judgment be already given
upon the same Bond, until the defendant have made a perfect Answer, and the
Court take other order, Aschughe plaintant, Skeleton defendant. Anno 2. Eliz.
fol. 9. and 12.

A Commission is awarded to Thomas Ward, A Commission to the examinor of the
Court to examine w^tnesses.
one of the examinors of this court of Chance^y, for the examining of witnesses
in perpetual memory, in which Commission the defendants may examine if they
think good, Barentine plaintant, Harbert and Alice defendants. Anno 2. Eliz.
fol. 46.

The defendant was bound by Recognizance to the Chamberlain of London for
payment of diverse sums of money for Orphan^ portions; A Subpoena to appear
before the Major and Aldermen of London for an Orphans Portion.
and departed out of the City, and dwelt in Oxford shire, leaving no Estate
behind him in the City, so as the process of the City cannot take hold;
therefore a subpoena is granted against him upon pain of 100 l. to appear
before the Major, and Aldermen, and to stand to their Order: Major and Aldermen
of London plaintants, John Dormer defendant. Anno 2. Eliz. fol. 5. Afterward
fol. 67. ordered, if he do not appear, an Attachment is granted.

Sr Humphrey Brown Knight one of the Judges of the common Pleas is plaintant
against the defendant; An Order for bringing Evidences into Court.
and an order is made for bringing in and delivery into the court of certain
evidences, Sir Humphrey Brown Knight plaintant, Thomas Smith defendant. Anno
2. Eliz. fol. 53.

Nota that dismissions were entered at large, Decrees and dismissions entered at
large,
Anno. 2. Eliz. fol. 55. and fol. 56. A decree was entered at large in the
Registers Book; which be the first I find entered at large in that kind, and
so after diverse others. A Writ of privilege granted to a suter.


The defendant appeared upon a Subpaena, and answered the plaintants Bill; and
after attended upon the Lord Keeper, for a matter in controversy between him
and one Ellin W^yne, and in the mean time being arrested in London, at the
suite of one Anthony Brisket, contrary to the order and privilege of this
court; it is therefore ordered, that a Subpoena of privilege be granted to the
Major and Sheriffs of London for the discharge of the said arrest, Rich.
Dutton plaint. Will. Alersey defend. An. 2. Eliz. f. 58.

Forasmuch as Thomas Harbert Sheriff of Monmouthshire, The Sheriff amersed 5
l. for return non est inventus, upon an Attachment having bin in presence of
the party.
has returned non est inventus upon an Attachment awarded against Roger
Williams who is a Justice of Peace, and as is informed, was at the last quarter
Sessions holden for the same County; therefore the Sheriff is amercyed five
pound, Sir Thomas Stradling Knight plaintant, William Earl of Pembrooke
defendant. An. 2. Eliz. fol. 84.

The Attorney ordered to stay proceedings, the defendant proceeds; Injunction
to bring in the money levied, and to answer the contempt.
The Defendants Attorney at Law, was enjoined to stay his proceedings at Law
against the plaintant in an action of trespass. And notwithstanding this, the
defendant himself proceeded and got Judgment, and took out a levari facias
against the plaintant, and an Injunction was granted against the defendant
himself, to stay the execution of the same Writ of levari facias, or if he had
executed it, and levied the damage and costs, that then he should bring all
the money thereupon received into the Court of Chancery in Crastina Ascensionis
Domini, to be disposed of as the Court shall think fit, and yet notwithstanding
himself should be then present in Court to answer the contempt, John Segewick
plaintant, William Redman defend. An. 2. Eliz. fol. 92.

The Defendant was in possession at the time of the Bill exhibited and the
plaintant entered upon him after the Bill, Injunction for the defendants
possession.
therefore an Injunction for the defendant against the plaintant, William
Dowche plaintant, John Perrot. defendant. An. 2. Eliz. fol. 99.

An Injunction was granted against the defend. upon pain of 100 l. that he
should not prosecute an Action of debt of 5 l. or any writ of Nisi prius,
Injunction to stay all procee^ings at common Law.
Jury, Judgment, or execution of Judgment, if Judgment be given before the
Justices of either Bench, until special license be given by this Court, The
defen. examined upon Interrogatories, and if the* matter appear not for the
plaintant, then he to pay costs, and the cause dismissed.

Defendant dismissed with costs, the plaintant not appearing at the hearing.

Decreed that the defendant shall acknowledge satisfaction of a Judgment.


Thomas Stanebridge plaintant, Thomas Hales defendant. An. 1. Eliz. fol. 103.

Forasmuch as it is informed the trial of the truth of the matter rests
altogether in the Declaration of the defendant; it is therefore ordered that
the defendant shall be examined upon interrogatories to be ministered by the
plaintant, upon whose examination if the matter fall not out for the plaintant,
then the plaintaint to pay the defendant costs, and the cause to be dismissed,
John Fyfield plaintant, John Vinore and Alice defendants. An. 2. Eliz. fol. 122.

The plaintant at the day appointed for hearing appeared not, therefore the
defendant is dismissed with costs, Richard Fincham plaintant, William Backwood
defendant. An. 2. Eliz. f. 125.

The defendant notwithstanding an Injunction delivered unto him, got a
Judgment upon an action of debt in the common Pleas; and decreed upon the
hearing of the cause that the defendant shall within 14. days next after the
decree resort to the Record in the common Pleas, whereupon the said judgment
is entered, and there to confess of record a full satisfaction of the said
Judgment. Nota the action of debt in the common Pleas was for not delivering
to the defendant a Statute, which by the depositions of witnesses, appeared to
be delivered, and by the Clarke of the Staples cerficate, the record was
discharged, Nicholas Colverwell plaintant, Ralph Bongey defendant. Anno 2.
Eliz. fol. 126.

A dec^ce for a fould-cou^se or common of pasture,
It is decreed the plaintant his heirs and assigns, and his or their Farmors
of the said Farm or Tenement called Stubles, shall from henceforth hold and
enjoy as appendant to the same Farm or Tenement called Stubles, all the same
Fould course, or common of pasture, for the full number of 300 sheep within the
said fields of Wentforth alias Wentford, Basil Fielding and Alice plaintants,
Thomas Wren defendant. Anno 2. Eliz. fol. 137. and 155.

Two defendants contend for a Tenement the Tenant paying his Re^t into the
Cha^cery i^ discharged.
The plaintant exhibited his Bill thereby showing that there is question and
controversy between two defendants, for the reversion of the Manor of
Aldwell, which he holds for years by Lease, made thereof to him by one
Anthony Marmyon, and that he does not know to which of them the rent and
reversion is due, and therefore desires, that upon payment of his rent into
this court according to the Covenants and articles of his lease he may be
discharged, and saved harmless from molestation, suite, and trouble for the
same rents by the defendants or either of them; wherefore it is ordered an
Injunction be awarded against the defendants, not to molest the plaintant for
his said rent during the said contention, so as the plaintant pay his rent into
this Court, John Alnete plaintant, Christopher Bettam, and Edmond Marmyon
defendants. Anno 2. Eliz. fol. 141.

Upon hearing of the matter, Setting down depo^itions in a wrong ^en^e
suppressed, and the witnesses examined again.
three witnesses examined by Commission did in open court depose, that the
commissioners have set down their depositions otherwise then they did depose;
therefore it is ordered those depositions shall be void, and the same witnesses
shall be examined again, John Peacock plaintant, Edward Collens defendant. Anno
2. Eliz. fol. 146.

For that the Court was credibly informed, I^junction for the plaintants
possession as at the time of the Bill, and three yea^es before.

An Award made by Justices of Assize ordered to be performed.


the plaintant was in peaceable possession at the time of the Bill exhibited,
and three years before, an Injunction is awarded, John Sapcote plaintant,
William Newport defendant. Anno 2. Eliz. fol. 173.

The suite was concerning the custom of Tenant right for Lands in Dent in the
County of York; and for that both parties confessed, that Justice Dallison,
and Sergeant Rastall Justices of Assizes in that County had made an award in
the cause between the parties, therefore it was decreed that both parties
should perform it; and an Injunction is granted to either party against the
other for that purpose; and where an Injunction was the last Term granted
against the defendant, for stay of execution upon a Judgment in the common
Pleas; it is ordered the said Injunction shall stand in force, Injunction to
stay suits I^ the plaintant bring 223 l ^^to court; execution to st^y for the
rest.
and the defendant shall obey the same, and the defendant shall answer the
plaintants Bill, William Burtet, and Alice plaintants, William Redman
defendant. An. 2. Eliz. fol. 174.

It is ordere^ the Injunction formerly granted the defendant, for stay of his
action in the Kings Bench be dissolved, and the defendant to be at liberty, to
take Judgment upon his action of bebt of 500 l. Provided if the plaintant do
bring into court on Monday next, 223 l. then execution for the rest is to be
suspended until this Court take other order; Thomas Stanebridge plaintant,
Thomas Hales defendant. An. 2. Eliz. fol. 176.

Witnesses examined by commission before answer, in regard they were old. The
plaintant after Bill, answer, and replication distraineth for which an
Injunction is granted.
The plaintant exhibited his bill in this Court, and before the defendant
answered, had a Commission to examine his witnesses, upon pretense the
witnesses were old and in danger to dye; Sir Radnus Bagnold, Miles plaintant,
Green defendant. An. 2. Eliz. fol. 178.

The defendant first exhibited her Bill in this Court for land conveyed to her
in jointure, and evidences of the same land, and after did molest the same
plaintant by distresses, after answer and replication put into this Court,
therefore an Injunction is granted; Richard Kidnere plaintant, Agnes Harrison
defendant. An. 2. Eliz. fol. 173.

The plaintant sets forth, that his Father and he are jointly seized for
life of the Lordship of Barrington in the County Palatine of Durham; Certiorare
to remove the suite from the Chancery of Durham into this Court.
and that the defendant sues his Father for those lands before the Chancellor
of Durham, and for that it was informed that the plaintant dwells in
Ratcliffe, in the County of Middlesex; and that the plaintants Father is an old
diseased man, and not able to follow his suite; therefore a Certiorare is
granted, directed to the Chancellor of Durham, to certify into this Court the
whole matter depending before him, William Hilton and Alice plaintants, R^^^rt
Lawson, and William Lawson defendants. Anno 2. Eliz. fol. 200 l.

The plaintant being son and heir to his Father, Injunction to stay
judgment upon certificate of the Justices of Assizes.
who dyed intestate, entered into the house whereof his Father dyed seized in
Fee, and possessed himself of certain small parcels of goods, to the value of
5 s. of his Fathers goods who dyed intestate; and the defendant having an
Obligation of 400 l. made by the Father unto him for performing the covenants
of an Indenture, sued the son as Executor to his Father (who dyed intestate)
and upon the testimony of some witnesses, that the plaintant had sold or given
away the said small parcels of goods, a verdict passed for the defendant for
the whole 400 l. which appeared by Certificate of the Justices of Assizes; and
thereupon an Injunction was granted to stay Judgment, and all other actions to
be commenced by the defendant against the plaintant upon the same Obligation,
until the matter be heard, or otherwise determined by the Court; Edward North
plaintant, George Ke^ewich defendant. Anno 2. Eliz. fol. 237.

It is ordered, Injunction dissolved if cause be not showed.
if the defendant show not cause on Friday next, then the Injunction before
granted for the defendant against the plaintant, to stay his Execution in the
Kings Bench, shall be dissolved, or else the money for which the plaintant
lies in Execution at the defendants suite shall remain in his hands, in part
of payment of such money as is due unto him by the defendant; and afterward
upon Friday because the Lord Keeper did not sit in Court to hear such cause a^
was offered, further day was given, and afterward the plaintant was left at
liberty to call for Execution upon the Judgment, because the defendant showed
no cause, Thomas Hales plaintant, Thomas Stanebridge defendant. Anno 2. Eliz.
fol. 244.

Injunction to stay the defendants suit at Law, because he began in Chancery.
The defendant exhibited his Bill into the Chancery, for certain Lands, and
afterward sued the plaintant in the Common Pleas for the same Lands, before
the matter was determined in the Chancery; therefore an Injunction was awarded
against the said Body, to stay his proceedings in the common Pleas; Robert
Bill, and Thomas Gifford plaintants, John Body defendant. Anno 2. Eliz. fol.
263.

The plaintant being in execution upon a Statute, was delivered upon
Recognizance.
The undersheriffe of Middlesex brought into this Court the body of the
plaintant by commandment of the Lord Keeper, in execution upon a Writ of extent
of 300 l. together with the said Writ, at the suite of Sir Edmund Maliverer
Knight; and by order of Court he was taken from the Sheriff of Middlesex, and
delivered in execution to the warden of the Fleet for the 300 l. and because
the defendants showed no good cause to the contrary upon a day given them;
therefore it was ordered that upon Recognizance by the plaintant and good
sureties, to stand to the order of the Court, or else to yield his body
prisoner to the Fleet in execution, and there to remain until the defendant
be satisfied; he the plaintant shall have liberty to go at large; and that the
defendant shall not sue for any manner of Execution, by force of the said
execution; Robert Rosse plaintant, Christopher Lassels, and Alice defendants.
Anno 3. Eliz. fol. 90.

The plaintant had Judgment in the Kings Bench against the defendant upon a
Bond of 200 l. and another Judgment for 300 l upon an action of debt of
arrerages of account in the Kings Bench; The plaintant had execution for 300 l.
and ordered to take execution for 100 l. only.
and ordered they may proceed with execution upon the Bond of 200 l. and also
to take execution of 100 l. parcel of the 300 l. provided always, and it is
ordered the plaintant shall not in any wise proceed, nor take execution of the
200 l. residue of the 300 l recovered upon the account, without special
license of the Court, John Brook, and Katherine his wife plaintants, Thomas
Apprice defendant. Anno 3. Eliz. fol. 233.

The plaintant shows by his Bill, A de vilaica removenda, for part of a
personage and an Injunction for the house.
that the personage of Thekelye was holden by force, whereby the plaintant
could not be inducted, whereupon a Writ of de vilaica removenda was awarded out
of this Court, and thereby the plaintant put in possession by the Sheriff:
nevertheless the defendant keeps the possession of the said house
appertaining to the personage; and for that the plaintant is bound to pay his
first fruits to the Queens Majesty, therefore an Injunction is granted against
him; Thomas Boult Clerk plaintant, Sir George Blunt, Miles and Alice
defendants. An. 3. Eliz. fol. 262.

The plaintant made Title to the lands by a Lease paroll made by the defendant
unto him, Injunction for the corn sowed upon a lease paroll.
whereupon he did sow the ground with Corn, and the defendant entered upon him;
therefore the plaintant had an Injunction for the Corn; Thomas Harrison
plaintant, Richard Chomeley, Miles and Alice defendants. Decree for 3 s. 4 d.
rent service and suite of Court.
An. 3. Eliz. for three hundred pound.

It is decreed, the desendant and his Heirs shall from time to time yearly pay
to the plaintant and his heirs Lords of the Manor of Knebworth, the rent of 3
s. 4 d. for the piece of ground called the Haw^e, together with the arrerages
thereof since the 6. of Ed. the 6: And shall from henceforth do suite and
service to the Court of the plaintant and his Heirs, owners of the said Manor;
and the plaintant and his Heirs shall have and receive the fines and
amercyaments presentable in the Court of the Manor for any trespass, or lack
of service done by the Tenants of the said Hawte; Richard Litton plaintant,
John Couper defendant. An. 6. Eliz fol. 145.

The plaintant marrie^ before answer, and no advantage taken, therefore no Bill
of revivor.
It is Ordered a Subpoena be awarded against the defendant to be examined upon
interrogatories, whether before his Answer he had knowledge that the plaintant
was married, and would take no advantage of the same marriage in his Answer,
then the matter to proceed without Bill of revivor; Christian Fairefield
plaintant, Robert Greenfield defendant. An. 6. Eliz. fol. 150.

Advowson passes not by livery, within view of the Church without deed, there
being incumbent.
The question of the case drawn was, whether the advowson in question did pass
by the livery made in the view of the Church without deed or not (the Church
being full of an incumbent) and resolved by the Lord chief Justice of the
Kings Bench, and Justice Manwood, to whom the same was referred, that the
Advowson could not pass by that livery; Pannell plaintant, Hodgson alias
Hodson defendant. Anno 18. and 19. Eliz.

A Subpoena Ducens tecum was awarded against the defendant to bring in certain
deeds, and to show cause why the same should not be delivered to the plaintant;
A ducens tecum to bring in deeds, but ordered to be delivered to the usher of
the Court not to the plaintant.
the defendant by his council, showed that the Morgage was upon condition for
payment of 40 l. at a day; and before the day, the Morgager sold the same over
to the plaintant, and delivered the Estate by livery and seizin, whereby the
condition was extinct; and yet the defendant offered to give for the same 100
l. It is ordered that the evidences be delivered to the Usher of the Court, but
not to the plaintant, without special order; Wilford plaintant, Denny
defendant. Anno 18. and 19. Eliz.

The plaintant exhibited his Bill to be releived for a promise, The defendant
took a Commission and returned a demurrer, ordered to answer.
supposed to be made by the Lady Lutterell for a Lease of certain lands; and
for stopping certain ways; the defendant had a Commission to take her answer,
and demmurred for that the plaintant may have his remedy by Law, which cause
seems insufficient, and not to be allowed of; and the rather for that the
defendants having a Commission to take their answers in the Co^ntry did
demurre; therefore a Subpoena is awarded against them to make a better answer;
Stukly plaintant, the Lady Lutterell and Aliis defendants. An. 18. and 19. Eliz.

Stephen Smith made oath that he was present, Attachment for not performing a
decree.
when one John Maddock made these persons hereafter named, privy to a Writ of
execution, upon a decree made for the plaintant, viz. John Ward, John Priddo^k,
Henry Pinly, Lawrence Banks, John Kiddermaster, and William Tuttle; And the
said Maddocks left the same Writ with one Thomas Smith, from whom the defendant
confesses the receipt of the said Writ, which said parties have not performed
the said decree; therefore an attachment is awarded against them; Leake
plaintant, Marrow defendant, An. 18. and 19. Eliz.

The defendants executors to their Father being Guardian in Socage to the
plaintant, are ordered to answer for profits taken by him.
The Bill is against the defendants as Executors to their Father, who in his
life time being Guardian in Soccage to the plaintant in right of the plaintants
mother whom he married, for and concerning profits by him taken of the lands of
the plaintant during his minority, for fines of Leases, Woodsales, and wilful
decay of houses, and does a^er assets sufficient to become to their hands; the
defendants demurre, because not privy, nor chargeable by Law, but ordered to
answer; Burgh plaintant, Wentworth defendant Anno 18. and 19 Eliz.

Thomas Staple^on made oath, that he delivered a Subpoena to the defendants
wife, Subpoena delivered to the defendants wife in his house sufficient.
being in the defendants house who has not appeared, therefore an Attachment
is awarded; Barlow plaintant, Baker defendant. Anno 18. and 19. Eliz.

It is decreed by Assent, that the defendant being Lord of the Manor of
Alderswasley, A years value allowed upon surrender of Copy hold Land.
shall have for a fine of a Coppyholder upon a Surrender, one whole years
value, as the same is reasonable worth, according to the usual rates of Lands
in that Country, Blackwall and Alice Tenants of the Manor of Alderswasley
plaintants, The plaintant sueth for tokens he delivered to the defendant as a
suitor in marriage, and obtains them.
Low defendant. An. 18. and 19. Eliz.

The defendant confesses by her answer, the having of a Tablet or Pomander in
Gold demanded by the plaintant; and as to the 20 l. likewise demanded by the
plaintant, by him left with the said d^fendant as a token, at such time as he
was a suter for marriage to the defendant; she confesses the same was left
with her against her will, and she delivered the same over unto one Sydole her
brother, who was a dealer with her on the plaintants behalf, to the end he
should deliver the same over to the plaintant. It is ordered the Tablet be
forthwith delivered by the defendant to the plaintant, which was done presently
in Court; and as to the 20 l. the plaintant shall call in the said Sidole by
process; Young plaintant, Burrell and Elizabeth uxor ejus defendants. Anno 18
and 19. Eliz.

The plaintant by his Bill shows, A Bill against a Copy of Court Roll
indirectly entered, the defendants demurre, but ordered to answer.
that the Copy of the Court ^oll whereby the defendants pretend title, was
indirectly entered by the Stewards Clarke of the manor; the defendants demurre
for that the plaintants shall not be received by surmise to object against, or
impeach the said Court Rols; and alleges further the Copy was found by the
homage to be true, which causes seem to this Court very insufficient: It is
therefore ordered, if cause be not showed before Wednesday for maintenance of
the demurrer, then a Subpoena is awarded against the defendants to make answer;
Holden and Holden plaintants, Cleark and Alice defendants. Anno 18. and 19.
Eliz.

The plaintaint has exhibited his Bill of Revivor against two, Variance in a
Bill of Revivor from the first bill dissolved. Jurisdiction of Oxford rejected,
one of the defendants, being not resident there*
where the first Bill was against three; and the personage in question is named
by another name then in the former Bill; therefore ordered, if cause be not
showed by a day, the defendant shall be discharged, Heines plaintant, William
Day Deane of Windsor, and Hatchines defendants. An. 18. and 19. Eliz.

William Lowgher appeared and answered, but Rob. Lowgher claimed the privilege
of the university of Oxf. but because the said Doct. Lowgher was joined with
William Lowgher in the bill who was not subject to the same Jurisdiction;
therefore ordered process to be awarded against him to show other cause why he
should not answer; White plaintant; Rob. Lowgher Doctor of Divinity, and Will.
Lowgher defend. An. 18. and 19. Eliz.

Prosecuting contempt after a general pardon to pay costs.
The defendant is adjudged to pay to the plaintants 40 s. costs for suing out
process of contempt against him, being discharged by her Majesty's general
pardon; Jones and Parris plaintant, Jones defend. An. 18. and 19. Eliz. There
is more presidents of the like case.

Subpoena hanged on the door of an house, where the defendant resorted.
Walter Ieames made oath, that he hanged a Subpoena on the door of one Stacy
Barry widow; and that the defendant used to resort thither as he heard
reported before that time, who has not appeared; therefore an attachment was
awarded; Ieames plaintant, Morgan defendant. An. 18. and 19. Eliz.

Witnesses examined by fraud suppressed and the practizers to be proceeded
against by Bill.
The plaintant exhibited his Bill against the defendant, by practice of purpose
to examine witnesses, and did examine witnesses accordingly, whereas the cause
chiefly concerned one Thomas Staunton, and Will. Bays; and therefore ordered
that the depositions should be suppressed, and that the said Staunton and
Bayles shall exhibit a Bill into this Court, against all such as they think
to be parties to the fraudulent abusing of this Court; Walford plaintant,
Walford defendant. An. 19. Eliz.

Jurisdiction of Lancaster allowed.
It is informed that the parties dwell in the County Palatine of Lancaster, and
the matter of the Bill is for a supposed trespass, in entering upon the
defendants lands, and consuming his grass and hay upon the same, which this
Court does not use to hold Plea of; therefore ordered if it be true, then the
cause is dismissed, and the plaintant to take his remedy in the County Palatine
of Lancaster; Hame^heson plaintant, Tounstall, Covell, Rigmaden, and Baldwin
defendants. An. 19. Eliz.

The plaintants suit is to have an award made (by Master Tilbey* Suit to have
the defendant perform an award.
and Mr. Chambers Arbitrators indifferently chosen) performed, and both parties
were bound each to other for the performance of the award; and one part of the
award was, that if any question did grow between the parties, the arbitrators
should end it; It is ordered a Subpoena to show cause; Launcellot Barker
plaintant, Peter Barker defend. An. 19. Eliz.

The plaintant exhibiteth a Bill of complaint against Luce and Maulde two of
the defendants; Two defendants, the one takes a husband, the plaintant puts in
a Bill of revivor against husband and wife, and they discharged with cost^*
and after Commission Maulde marries John Bourne the other defendant, and the
plaintant then exhibited a Bill of Revivor against the defendants, which
needs not as it seems to this Court; therefore ordered, if there be no
cause of revivor, that Bourne and his wife who are called up by process to
answer the same Bill are licenced to depart without answer to the Bill of
revivor; and the plaintant to pay him such costs as this Court shall award;
Iackson, and Vxor plaintants, The plaintant o^dered not to proceed, till he
make one a party, whom the defendant prays in aid.
Luce Smith, John Bourne, and Maulde his wife defendants. An. 19. Eliz.

The plaintant by his Bill pretends title to certain lands, and Freehold
Lands, which lands the defend* claims to hold by Copy of court Roll to him and
his heirs of one Thomas Stedolph Esquire. Lord of the manor of Milcklam in the
county of Surrey; whereof the said lands are parcel; and prayed in aid of the
said Stedolph; nevertheless the plaintant served the said Arnold with process
to rejoyne without calling the said Stidolph thereunto, which this Court
thinks not meet; therefore ordered the plaintant shall no further proceed
against the defendant, before he have called the said Stidolph in by process;
Lucas plaintant, Arnold defendant. Anno 19. Eliz.

Injunction left at the defendants house, and disobeyed, an Attachment.
The said Holgate makes oath, he left an injunction in the house of the
defendant; and that the defendant Elizabeth White, Thomas Crimore, and Robert
Watkins have disobeyed the same; therefore an Attachment is awarded against
them; Holgate, and Vxor ejus planitants, Grantham defendant. An. 19. Eliz.

A Commission of rebellion, the bond made to the Commissioners.
The defendant this day made his personal appearance upon a Commission of
Rebellion, for saving his bond made to the Commissioners in that behalf; Brown
plaintant, Derby defendant Anno 19. Eliz.

Commonly it is used to take the Bonds in the name of the Lord Chancellor, The
bond made to the Lord Chancellor, etc.
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, the Master of the Rols, or to any
two of the Masters of the Chancery, all which are good and allowable by the
practice of the Court of Chancery.

Witnesses examined after publication, ad informandum conscientiam Iudicis.
Upon affidavit made by the plaintant, that since publication granted he had
diverse witnesses setting down their names, come to his knowledge, which
formerly he had not knowledge of, therefore ordered he may examine them before
the examinor, ad informandu^ conscientiam Iudicis.

The plaintant coming to the defendant showed him a Writ, Costs for want of a
Bill, showing the Subpoena, but delivering no note of the d^y of appearance,
and attachment for such serving.
but did delive^ him neither note of the day of his appearance, neither did the
same appear unto him by the Sched^le, labell, or any other paper, and the
defendant appearing found no Bill: It is ordered the defendant be allowed good
costs, and an At^achment against the plaintant for such serving; Brightman
plaintant, Powtrell defendant. Anno 19. Eliz.

The plaintant called the de^endant dwelling in the County Palatine of Ch^^ter
by process to an^^er a Bill for lands lyi^g in the said County Palatine
contrary to a general order lately certified into this Court by her Majesty's
appointment, Jurisdiction of Chester allowed.
touching the said County Palatine according to the said general order;
Willoughby plaintant, Brearton defendant. An. 19. Eliz.

The plaintants Bill is that he leassed a house to the defendant; A Covenant to
repair a house, the defendant would not suffer it and demurred, but ordered to
answer.
and did covenant to build and repair it before a day, which being at hand,
and showed that he had prepared Timber and workmen to perform the same, but
the defendant as well to have him break his Covenant, as to free himself from
his Covenant to keep it in reparations, did interrupt and threaten the
workmen, whereby they durst not proceed to repair, and so the houses are
decayed; and the plaintant has no remedy to force the defendant to suffer him
to repair; the defendant demurred upon the Bill alleging the plaintant has
sufficient remedy by Law, which kind of answer this Court allows not;
therefore a Subpoena is awarded against the defendant to answer; Wood
plaintant, Tirrell defendant. Anno 19. Eliz.

Jurisdiction of Chester allowed.
Where it appeared by a Book heretofore presented to the Queens Highness,
under the hands of Sir James Dyer Knight, Lord chief Justice of the commou
Pleas, Mr. Justice Weston late a Justice of the same Court, Mr. Justice Harpar
late another Justice of the same Court; and Mr. Justice Carus late a Justice of
her Majesty's Bench and remaining (by force of her Majesty's Warrant) of Record
in the Court of Chancery, touching the Jurisdiction of the County Palatine of
Chester; that before the reign of King Henry the third, all Pleas of Lands and
Tenements, and all other causes and contracts, and matters residing and growing
within the said County Palatine of Chester are pleadable, and ought to be
pleaded and heard, and judicially determined within the said County Palatine of
Chester; and not elsewhere out of the said County Palatine; and if any be
heard, pleaded, or judicially determined out of the same County then the same
is void, and coram non Iudice (except it be in case of error, Foraign Plea, or
foreign voucher) and also that no inhabitant within the said County Palatine
by the Laws, liberties, and usages of the same, be called or compelled by any
Writ or process to appear, or answer any matter or cause out of the said
County Palatine for any the causes aforesaid (as by the said Book among other
things more at large appears) and where now of late the plaintant has
exhibited a Bill of complaint into this Honorable Court for, and concerning
certain lands and tenements lying within the said County Palatine; and has
taken process against the said defendant in that behalf, who has thereupon
appeared, and by his Council made request to this Court, that for the causes
aforesaid the matter here exhibited against him might be from henceforth
dismissed; wherefore forasmuch as William Sayler has made oath, that the said
lands do lie within the said County Palatine; and that the said defendant is
inhabiting, and dwelling within the said County; therefore the said cause is
from henceforth dismissed, and remitted to the Chamberlain of Chester; and
other her Majesty's Ministers there according to the Tenor of the same Book;
Wllloughby Miles plaintant, Brearton defendant. An. 19. Eliz.

Iearvise Wheatly made oath for the serving of a Subpoena upon the defendant, A
Subpoena served, to testify in the Guildhall, and not appearing an Attachment.
to testify on the behalf of the plaintant at the Guildhall in London, who
has not thereupon appeared; therefore an Attachment is awarded against him,
Batt plaintant, Rookes defendant. An. 19. Eliz.

A Bill was exhibited by the plaintant against Roger Haule, A Bill against
Roger Hall, and another Roger Hall was served, he must show it by Plea, and not
by motion.
supervisor of the last will of Thomas Clifton, and one Roger Haule was served
with process, that was no supervisor of the said Cliftons will, and alleged
that the said Roger Haule who was the supervisor was dead; and ordered the
defendant shall put in his allegation upon oath by way of Answer; and then
desire Judgment, whether he shall be compelled to answer the said Bill or not;
and therein pay his costs for his wrongful vexation, which shall be thereupon
allowed to him, Harrison plaintant, Haule defendant. An. 19. Eliz.

The plaintants are adjudged to pay to the defendants 20 s. Costs to witnesses
served to testify.
costs coming upon process of Subpoena to testify on their behalf; and
having no charges tendered unto them, nor any interrogatories put in for them
to be examined upon; Pearce, and uxor ejus plaintants, Crawthorn and White
defendants. Anno 19. Eliz.

Lawrence Hide gentleman, being called upon by process by the plaintant to
testify, informed this Court, Costs paid to a witness before he be examined.
that he was ready to depose, so that he might first have his costs to him
allowed, which this Court thought reasonable; Belgra^e plaintant, Edward Earl
of Hertford, and William Drury de^endants. An. 19. Eliz.

Thomas Hawtry gent* was served with a Subpoena to testify his knowledge, A
Solliciter served with process to testify, ordered not to be examined.
touching the cause in variance; and made oath that he has been, and yet is a
Solicitor in this suite, and has received several Fees of the defend* which
being informed to the Master of the Rols, it is ordered that the said Thomas
Haw^ry shall not be compelled to be deposed, touching the same; and that he
shall be in no danger of any contempt, touching the not executing of the said
process, Berd plaintant, Lovelace defendant. Anno 19. Eliz.

A man and wife exhibit their Bill, the wife dies, the defendant demurs for
that there is no Bill of revivor, ordered to Answer.
The plaintant exhibited his Bill, as well in his own, as in his wives name,
concerning a promise made by the defendants to the plaintant; and his wife to
make them a Lease of the Manor of Appescourt during their lives, the
defendants demurre, for that the plaintant ought to have a Bill of Revivor
against them, for that his wife is dead since the Bill exhibited; which cause
of demurrer this Court allows not, for that the promise was made during the
Coverture; and the plaintant claims not the same in right of his wife;
therefore the defendants are ordered to answer directly to the Bill; Thorn
plaintant, Brend, Wilkinson and Alice defendants. Anno 19. Eliz.

Austen plaintant, The solicitor served to testify, is discharged.
Vesey defendant; the defendant is served with a Subpoena to testify; and for
that it appeared by Affidavit, that he was Solicitor in the same cause to one
of the parties, he was discharged and not admitted to be examined. An. 19. and
20. Eliz.

Hartford plaintant, Consili^.
Lee and Alice defendants; the solicitor of one of the parties was served with
Subpoena, to testify in the cause in controversy, and the Court discharged
him, by reason he was solliciter in the cause. An. 20. Eliz.

The plaintants Bill was for that he being a Coppyholder Leased to the
defendant for years, The Leasses of a Copyholder is punishable in waste, though
the Copyholder himself be not.
and the defendant has dug gravel, and sold the same away, whereby the
Coppyhold is prejudiced; the defendant justified, for that the Copyholders are
not punishable in waste, which cause this Court allows not of; for though the
Copyholders of the manor are not punishable, yet the Leasses of Copyholders of
the Manor are punishable; therefore a Supoena is awarded to show cause, why an
Injunction shall not be granted, for staying his digging of gravel, and
felling Woods upon the Copyhold Lands; Dalton plaintant, Gill and Pindor
defendants. Anno 19. Eliz.

Whereas the plaintant exhibited his Bill against the defendant for wilful
perjury, A Bill of perjury proceeded in this Court.
the defendant has demurred, which this Court allows not of: It is ordered a
Subpoena be awarded to the defendant, to answer Thomas Woodcock plaintant,
Giles Woodcock defendant. An. 19. Eliz.

Suite to have an award by assent, decreed.
Whereas there was an award in writing exhibited into this Court made between
the said parties, by Sir Christopher Wray Knight, Lord chief Justice of
England, whereunto the Lord chief Justice hand as well as the parties are
subscribed; it was requested by the plaintants the same might be decreed by
this Court, which this Court refused to grant, until the defendants were made
privy; therefore process is awarded; Wakefield, and Vxor, and Aliis
plaintants, Hawson, and Vxor, and Aliis defendants. An. 19. Eliz.

To stay suit in the spiritual court.
The suit was to stay suit in the spiritual Court for a Legacy of 40 l. Joan
Banvill widow plaintant, Guy Banvill defendant. Anno 19. Eliz.

Suite for common of pasture and Turbary.
The suite was for common of pasture, and Turbary; the defendant demurred for
that the plaintant may have remedy at the common law, but ordered to answer;
Lawrence and Moregate, and Aliis plaintants, Windham defendant. An. 19. Eliz.

Subpoena delivered to the defendants servant.
Robert Goodwine made oath that at such time as he came to the house of the
defendant to serve a Subpoena upon him according to an order of the 10. of May
last, one of his servants came forth and told him he was within, who thereupon
delivered the Writ, Subpoena served at the s^^te of a^ unknown man, and no Bill
in Court, the server to pay costs.
to be delivered to the defendant his Master; Goodwine plaintant, Sullyard
defendant. An. 19. Eliz.

The defendant made oath that he was served with a Subpoena by the plaintant in
the name of one William Web utterly unknown to the defendant and now upon his
appearance, no Bill in Court against the defendant, in the name of the said
William Web or of the plaintant; therefore 30 s. cost is awarded against the
plaintants. An. 19. Eliz.

Forasmuch as the said Abel, The husband appears, and the wife not Attachment
against them both.
one of the defendants appeared, and answered the last Term, and his wife did
not; therefore an Attachment was awarded against them both; Monox plaintant,
Abel and his wife defendants. Anno 19. Eliz.

Whereas there was this present day exhibited into this Court a certificate
under the Seal of the university of Oxford on the defendants behalf,
Jurisdiction of Oxford.
testifying and declaring that the Chancellors of the said university, and
their successors from the time, whereof the memory of man is not to the
contrary* as well by grant and consideration of her Majesty, as of her
Majesty's noble progenitors, sometimes Kings of this Realm have had the
cognizance, and final determination of all manner of Pleas, strifes, quarrels
and controversies whatsoever (Felony, Maine, and Franketenant only excepted)
rising and growing as well within the precinct of the said City of Oxford as
without, within the Realm of England; whereas one of the parties within the
said suit, action or plea, is a Master or Schollor, or common Minister of the
same university, or such a person as the Chancellor, Vicechancellor,
Lieutenant, or Commissary will certify, ought to enjoy the privilege of the
same university; and that the same persons upon the showing forth of the said
certificate in any Court where they are impleaded ought to be discharged out of
the same Court, forasmuch as it appears by the said certificate that the said
defendant, who is brought up by a Subpoena, to answer a Bill exhibited by the
plaintant into this Court, is a Bachelor of Law in the same university; and
for that also it appears by the plaintants said Bill of complaint, that the
matter therein contained, is only for certain promises supposed to be made by
the defendant to the plaintant, touching certain Goods, Chattels, and money
therein mentioned, and not Franktenement, or any matter before excepted: It is
therefore ordered, that the said defendant be of, and from the said Bill of
complant, and matters therein contained, from henceforth clearly, and
absolutely dismissed; and the plaintant referred to take his remedy for the
same, before the Chancellor, Vicechancellor, Lieutenant, or Commissary of the
said University of Oxford, according to the Tenor of the said Certificate;
Temple plaintant, Foster Doctor of the Civil Law defen. Anno 19. Eliz.

Consil.
Thomas plaintant, Mounson defendant, produces a Certificate of the
University, claiming jurisdiction of the same University; therefore the cause
is from hence dismissed to be tried and determined there. An. 19. Eliz.

A Mr. and examinor, examined witnesses, publication stayed after granted.
The plaintant in the end of Easter Term, by Master Griffeth his Attorney
required the defendant to proceed to Commission for examining of witnesses, and
the defendant was ready to join, sithence which time the plaintant contrary to
the order of this Court* (as they allege) has produced one of the Masters of
this Court, and one of the examinors to travel to the plaintants house in
Wiltshire 60 miles distant from London, and there has examined witnesses; it
is ordered that publication be stayed until the matter be examined after
publication is granted; Darrall plaintant, and Stukey defendant. An. 19. Eliz.

The plaint. The plain. father seized in Fee, with a condition to reenter
devises for life, A ducens teci^
Father did purchase in Fee-Farm to him and his heirs, the Manor of Long
Eason, in the County of De^y, of one Kymwelmarch rendering 8 l. rent, with a
condition of reentry for non payment of the rent, devises the Land to another
for life: A ducens tecum for the evidences. An. 19. Eliz.

Forasmuch as the defendant has appeared in this court upon an Attachment of
privilege, The defendant licensed to depart after issue.
and attended from day to day according to his Bond made in that behalf; and
has also pleaded an issue to the plaintants Declaration; therefore the
defendant is licensed to depart: Dugdell plaint. Orrell defend. An. 20. Eliz.

The defend. Trustee ordered to co^vey the Lands according to the trust.
by his Answer confesses he was joint purchasor in trust with the plaintants
Father to them two, and to the heirs of the plaintants Father of the Lands in
question; and that he never received any profits thereof; and that he meant at
the plaintants full age to convey the Lands to the plaintant, and his heirs
according to the trust; it is ordered and decreed the defendant shall forthwith
upon notice to him given convey his Estate in the Lands to the plaintant, and
the Heirs of his body begotten with such remainder over as in the last Will
and Testament of the plaintants Father is expressed at the costs of the
plaintant; Young plaintant, Leigh defendant. Anno 20. Eliz.

Bittenson one of the defendants demurred, Jurisdiction of the Excheqner
rejected, for that one of the defendants had no privilege there.
for that he was a Clerk of the Exchequer, and ought to be privileged there;
and the said Mary demurred without showing any cause, forasmuch as it was
openly affirmed by the common voice of the officers of the same, that the said
Bittenson may be impleaded in this Court, notwithstanding any privilege in the
Exchequer; and for that likewise, if there were any such cause of privilege,
yet he could not have the same in this suite, by reason another party who ought
not to have any such privilege is joined with him; therefore a Subpoena is
awarded against the defendants to answer; East and Scudamore plaintant:
Bittenson, and Mary Valence defendants. An. 20. Eliz.

The defend. in a Bill of perjury after answer, ought to be examined upon
interrogatories.
It is ordered that in a Bill of perjury put in against the defendant, he having
put in his answer, should not depart until he be examined upon
interrogatories, according to the general order and course in that behalf
accustomed; for it was affirmed by the Officers of this Court, that by the
order and custom of this Court, he ought to be examined upon interrogatories:
Philips plaintant, Benson defendant. Anno 20. Eliz.

The defendant made oath, the plaintant came to him on Easter day last in
Barrington Church; The plaint. requires the defendant to appear, showing no
writ, and no Bill in Court, has 20 s. costs.
and commanded him in the Queens name to appear in Chancery the 17 day after,
which said defendant demanded the process; and the plaintant answered him he
was to serve another, and therefore would not leave him any note for his
appearance; and yet upon his appeance no Bill found in Court; therefore the
plaintant is adjudged to pay him 20 s. costs; Syers plaintant, Cotts defendant.
Anno 20. Eliz.

Robert Hodgeson made oath, Affidavit for serving a Subpoena.
that he left a Subpoena to make a better answer upon the door of the lodging
of the said defendant, being at the sign of the Maidenhead without Temple bar,
whereas both by the report of diverse of the neighbors thereabouts, as by the
recourse of her servants to and fro at the same time by all presumptions, she
the said defendant was then in the said house; and yet she has not made a
better answer; therefore an attachment is awarded against the defendant; Croker
plaintant, Hampden defendant. An. 20. Eliz.

The said defendant has this present Term appeared upon a Subpoena at the
plaintants suit 15 Pascha and no Bill in Court; The defend. has no cost
because the Subpoena is lost, but Attachment is stayed.
and for that the defendant has lost the said Subpoena, he cannot demand his
charges for want of the said Bill; it is ordered no process of contempt issue
out of this court against the defendant upon the said Subpoena: Blanch Parvy
plaintant, Morgan defendant. Anno 20. Eliz.

The defendant made oath, Costs for want of a Bill.
that one of the plaintants servants showed him a Subpoena tres Pasch. return;
but would not deliver him the Writ or Labell; and now upon the defendants
appearance, there is no Bill against him in court, therefore costs: Gray
plaintant, Gurney defend. An. 20. Eliz.

The defend. by his answer disclaimed of the Clarkship of the Peace in
question, The defend. disclaiming, no witnesses to be examined, touching the
death of another.
and confessed thereby that he delivered all the Records, and Titlelings of
Sessions, which he had, to Master Treutham Custos Rotulor* in the County of
Stafford; and yet the plaintant has replied to the same to examine the manner
of assault, and other matters touching the death of one Ashbrook, and goes
about to examine witnesses thereupon; it is ordered, that if cause be not
showed to the contrary, that no witnesses shall be examined touching the manner
of assault or death of Ashbrook, or circumstances thereof; Archbald plaintant,
Borrold defendant. An. 20. Eliz.

The defen. bound to pay money at one place, pleads payment at another, not
good.
The defendant in a scir. fac. upon a recognizance to pay 100 l. at Martine in
the County of Surrey pleaded payment at Bristow, where the Justice of Assize
without special Commission comes not, to the intent only to delay the
party; therefore it is ordered the defendant shall by Friday next, either be
sworn to his said Plea, or else put in such a sufficient issuable Plea, as he
will stand unto at his peril; Lovell plaintant, Hopkins defendant. An. 20.
Eliz.

A demurrer to a Bill of revivor ordered to answer.
The defendant demurred upon a Bill of Revivor exhibited by the plaintiffes
against her, for that she was a woman Covert during the time the first suit
depended; but ordered to answer for that she was party to the suit with the
said Twynneho^ her husband; Ruthel and uxor ejus plaintants, Dom. Elizabeth
Litton, late wife to Edward Twinnehoe defendant. Anno 20..Eliz.

The wife after the death of her husband, sueth a Bill of revivor and good.
The plaintant and her husband exhibited their Bill against the defendant; the
husband dies, the wife now plaintant, exhibiteth a Bill of Revivor, and goodw.
Alice Parrot widow plaintant, Randall and Cowarden defendants. An. 20. Eliz.

To take bond of such as appear upon contempt, to attend from day to day.
It is ordered that from henceforth no entry be made by any the Attorneyes into
the Registers Book of this Court of any appearance of, or upon any Attachment,
or Commission of rebellion; but that the party so appearing, shall first enter
into sufficient Bond by Obligation to this Court, to be taken by the Register
of this Court, with condition to attend from day to day; and not to depart
before he be specially licensed by this Court. Pascha. 20. Eliz.

The defendant refuses to answer the receipt of rent, The defen. demurres for
that there is remedy at common law, but ordered to answer.
and demurred for that the plaintant may have remedy by Law for the same;
therefore ordered a Subpoena be awarded to make direct answer; Dixe and
Cantrell plaintants, Lintoft defendant. Anno 20. Eliz.

Whereas information was made to this court, on the behalf of George Stidenham
Esquire. now Sheriff of the County of Somersetshire, Habeas corpus to the warden
of the Fleet, to have the defendant in Court, to be charged with a debt upon a
recognizance.
That whereas a Capias upon a Recogn^zance of 133 l. 6 s. 8 d. issued out of
this Court in Hilary Term last, to the Sheriff against the said defendant,
the said Sheriff had a Capias also for a debt due to her Majesty, to him
directed out of the Court of Exchequer, both which Capiasses the Sheriff
returned into the said several Courts the last Term a cepi corpus and
languid^^ in prisona; whereupon a duces tecum issued out of the said Court of
Exchequer to the said Sheriff, for bringing in of the body of the defendant
into the said Court of Exchequer; whereupon the said Sheriff has brought up
the said defendant, and made request this present day to this court, that some
order might be taken by this court, that the defendant may remain in execution
for the debt of the said plaintant, after he has answered his said debt to her
Majesty; so that the said Sheriff may not hereafter be charged by the return
made by the Capias upon the said Recognizance in this court; it is therefore
ordered by the advice of the right honorable the Lord Treasurer, and the Lord
chief Justice of England being present in court, that a Habeas corpus be
awarded to the Warden of the Fleet, to bring the said defendant into this court
on Thursday next, to the end the said Warden may be also charged with the said
defendant by this court, till he have satisfied or taken order for the payment
of the debt due to her Majesty; and that then he shall keep him in his custody,
until he answer unto the plaintant, this said debt of 133 l. 6 s. 8 d. Ward
plaintant, Crouch defendant. Anno 20. Eliz.

Thomas Boulton made oath, that the defend. was served with a Billet in Paper
to appear 15. Trinitat. and no Bill in Court against her at the plaintiffes
suite; Costs for the Solliciters charges, in making Affidavit for serving
process, and the defendants impotency, no Bill being in Court.
therefore the plaintiff is adjudged to pay the defendant 33 s. 4 d. sustained
in sending up the said Boulton who has made oath, that she is so impotent,
that she is not able to travel up hither thereupon personally: Gredlow
plaintant, Prestwich defendant. Anno 20. Eliz.

Costs for want of a Bill upon showing the Writ, but not delivering it.
The plaintant is adjudged to pay to the defendant 40 s. costs, for want of a
Bill, for that the defendant made oath the plaintiff showed him a Subpoena
wherein his name was written, but would not deliver him the same, for that
there were others to serve with the same Writ; Symont plaintiff, Pinsonby
defendant. Anno 20. Eliz.

Attachm. discharged, and a Bill of perju^y for procuring it indirectly.
John Clegge was served with a Subpoena, by the name of Robert Clegge, and John
Warberton made oath, that he served a Subpoena upon Robert Clegge; and an
Attachment was served upon John Clegge, and ordered that he should be
discharged thereof; and might exhibit his Bill into this court, against the
said John Warberton, and call him in by process to answer his perjury; Robert
Clegge plaintant, Thomas Warberton.defendant. An. 20. Eliz.

A Motion for an Attachment against the defendant, The Lord Chancellor writ his
letters to a Noble man, that had broken a decree.
for breach of a decree and injunction, and ordered by the Lord Chancellor
Bromley, that for that time he stayed the granting of the Attachment, and
vouchsafed to write his Letters, requiring him to perform the same, trusting
he would have such regard thereunto, as no Attachment shall after be required
against him: Story plaintant, Dominus Pawlet defendants. 21. and 22. Eliz.

A Motion that where the plaintants had exhibited their Bill to be discharged
of a legacy, Injunction against the spiritual Court.
the defendant since his suit, sued in the spiritual Court; and therefore day
to show cause why an Injunction should not be granted; Parrre and uxor
plaintants, Tipelady and uxor defendant. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

William Smalwood made oath, Attachment upon the defendants confession he was
served.
the defendant confessed he was served with a Subpoena at the plaintants suit,
who not appeared; therefore an Attachment is awarded against the defendant, to
the Sheriff of Essex; Waters plaintaint, and Berd defendant. Anno 21. and 22.
Eliz.

The defendant a Master of Art in Oxford, Jurisdictio of Oxford allowed*
pleaded his privilege of the University under the Seal there, and demanded
judgment whether he should be driven to answer contrary to the privilege; and
the privilege was allowed, and the Attachment discharged; Cotton plaintant,
and Manering defendants. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

Decree for Copyhold lands.
A decree is made for the defendant, to enjoy certain Lands, as well Coppyhold,
as Customary; Bamborow plaintant, Alexander defendant. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

Costs for want of a Bill, the Subpoena being lost.
The defendant made oath that he was served with a Subpoena at the plaintants
suit to appear in this Court; and that he has lost by casualty the Subpoena;
and upon his appearance, there was no Bill in Court against him, at the said
plaintants suite: therefore the plaintant is adjudged to pay the defendant 40
s. costs for want of a Bill; Domina Edith Metham plaintant, Michaell Fayerbanck
defendant. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

Dismission because under 40 s. per annum.
For that it appeared as well by the plaintants Bill, as that Osney one of the
defendants has made oath that the lands in the Bill, is not worth 40 s. per
annum; therefore dismissed generally, and not without costs: Townly and uxor
plaintants, Osney and uxor and Parsons defendants. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

Jurisdiction of Wales allowed, being under five pound.
The defendant made oath, that the plaintant, and defendant are both dwelling
within the jurisdiction of the Marches of Wales; and for that it appears by
the Bill, that the Money complained for is under 10 l. therefore the cause is
dismissed: Eastcourt plaintant, Tanner defendant. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

Suit retained after Judgment and execution.
Debt upon a single Bill satisfied, and the Bill not delivered was sued, and
execution gotten, and yet retained in Chancery, notwithstanding a motion to be
dismissed, because after Judgment and Execution; for it was said the Judgment
and execution may stand, and this suite for that he formerly paid: Owen
plaintant, Ioanes defendant. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

The defendant makes oath, Costs against the plaint. for want of a Bill.
that one Rock served him with a Subpoena in the name of the plaintant; and at
his suit as he affirmed; but would not deliver neither Writ, Labell, nor noat
of the day of appearance, but told him it was to appear the first day of this
Term, and now no Bill in Court; therefore costs is granted against ^he
plaintant: Parsons plaintant, Hilford defend. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

An order for a Commission, Commission to set out meet ways for passages.
to set out meet ways, and Cawsages moved in presence of Mr. Egerton of
Counsel wih the defend. Custos of all Souls College in Oxford plaintant,
Everall and aliis defendants. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

Upon an oath made for impotency of Ienkin the defend. in a former suit by the
said Goose, An English Bill for perjury.
by the name of William ap William, they procured a dedimus potestatem to take
the answer of Ienkin to John Floyd, and William Goose himself, whereas the
party was under 50 years of age and not impotent; hereupon the plaintant
exhibits an English Bill of perjury into this Court against the said Goose for
perjury, and Ienkin for the procuring of it; whereupon they being served with a
Subpoena to answer the perjury, they get a stay of the proceedings from the
counsel of the Marches; where, upon motion, Sir Thomas Bromley Lord
Chancellor, marvelled at such their stay, and writ his Letters to the said
Counsel, and granted a new Subpoena against the defendants to answer the
perjury; Ioane uxor Griffith plaintant, Richard ap Ienkin, and William Goose
defendants. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

Injunction to stay judgment in an action of wast.
The Bill was to be releived against a Judgment, indirectly gotten by Ralfe
Cavend^sh in the name of Thomas Cavendish his brother, by default in an account
of waste; and because it so appeared, an injunction is granted; Galley
plaintant Ralfe Cavendish and Thomas Cavendish defendants. Anno 21. and 22.
Eliz.

Relief for a trust upon a Lease, after it is sold.
The Suite was to be releived upon a lease made to the defendant in trust to the
use of the plaintant: and because it so appeared, it was ordered that the
plaintant should enjoy the lands against the defendant, and all claiming under
him that had notice of the trust: and if the lease were sold to such as had no
notice of the trust, then the defendant shall pay to the plaintant so much money
as the lease was worth, Rooke plaintant, Staples defendant. Anno 21. and 22.
Eliz.

A Bill for relief after Judgment and execution dismissed.
A Bill to be releived upon a bond after Judgment and execution, and because no
material matter alleged for maintainan^e thereof, therefore dismissed: Adams
plaintant, Doddesworth defendant. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

A Bill upon a promise for leave to dry clothes in a garden dismissed.
The Bill was to be releived for egresse and regresse into a garden of the
defendants for drying of clothes, promissed by word only by the defendant to
the plainant: therefore dismissed, for that the Court ought not to be burdened
with such small ma^ers, Hamby plaintant, Northage defendant. Anno 21. and 22.
Eliz.

Attachment for not appearing upon a Subpoena.
Guilliam made oath that he saw a subpoena served on the defendanr who has not
appeared: therefore an attachment; Morgan plaintant, Evon defendant, Anno 21.
and 22. Eliz.

An Attachment was delivered to the Sheriff to execute, Day given to the
Sheriff, to return an Attachment upon pain of 5 l.
who did not return the same; and upon affidavit of the delivery, a day was
given to return the Writ upon pain to be amerced 5 l. Crompton plaintant,
Meridith defendant; Anno 21. and 22. E^iz.

Affidavit made for the delivery of au extent to the Sheriff which he has not
returned: Consil.
therefore a day is given to the Sheriff to return the Writ upon pain of 10
l. Hambey plaintant, Wight defendant. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

Three Bonds put in suite in the Kings Bench and stayed by Injunction by Order,
Injunction to stay suits, because the Queen was deceived of her fine.
because the Queen was hindered of her fine; Pascall plaintant, Smith Miles
defendant. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

Calveley plaintant, Consil.
Philips defendant, Bonds put in suite in the K. Bench stayed by Injunction
because the Queen was hindered of her fine. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

The Bill prays relief against the defendant as brother and Heir, The Heir
is sued to make a lease for which his elder brother took a fine or to repay
the fine.
for that the plaintant paid to his brother deceased* a fine of 34 l. for a
lease, who dyed before the same was made; and therefore desires either to have
the Lease made by the Heir, or his money again; thereupon it is ordered the
defendant shall answer an Injunction: Kreme, Alias Mogge plaintant, Mere
defendant. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

The defendant got costs for want of a Bill, The Clarke is fined 40 s. for his
mistake, in making a Subpoena.
and bespake of Robert Bayles a Clerk a Subpoena for those costs, who made her
a Subpoena ad sectam, whereupon the plaintant got costs; this being moved for
discharge of these costs, so gotten by default of the Clark. It is ordered that
the defendant shall be discharged; and the plaintant also of the costs gotten
by the defendant; and neither of them should have process against the other
for the same, but the defendant might take a Subpoena against the Clark that
made the erroneous process for the 40 s. costs, which she should have had
against the plaintant; Franckblanck plaintant, Domina Metham defend. An. 21.
and 22. Eliz.

Subpoena delivered to the wife, good.
Oath is made for the delivery of a Subpoena to the wife of the defendant at his
house, who has not appeared; therefore an Attachment: Pilgrim plaintant, Read
defendant. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

The plaint^ refusing to seal a release, the defendant puts a bond in suite,
and stayed by Injunction*
The plaintant desires to be relieved against an Obligation of 100 l. which had
an intricate and insensible condition put in suit, for that the plaintant being
desired by the defendant, to Seal a release, desired only time to be advised
thereof, which the defendant would not yield unto, but has put the bond in
suit, though no ways damnified; and now the plaintant is ready to Seal the
release; therefore an Injunction is granted: Rowles plaintant, and Rowles
defendant. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

Attachment with Proclamation discharged paying the ordinary Fee, answer being
in before*
The defendant took out a Commission, to take his answer in the Country, and
thereby answered he could not directly answer without sight of evidences, which
are in Nottinghamshire, far distant from Dorsetshire; the defendant afterward
made a perfect answer; and yet the plaintant took out Attachment, and
Attachment with Proclamation, both which were discharged paying the ordinary
Fees, and 2 s. 6 d. to the Warden of the Fleet: Trussell and aliis plaintants,
Willoughby Miles defendant. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

John Cotton the plaintant, One Executor sueth the other to put in sureties to
perform the Will.
brother devised diverse goods to his two Sons, to be delivered at their full
age, and made the plaintant and defendant Executors. 100 l. of the goods came
to the plaintants hands, 250 l. came to the defendants hands: The plaintant
desires by his Bill, that in respect of the trust, and joint charge which may
survive, that the plaintant and defendant may each be bound to the other, to
pay the children their Portions in their hands at their full age; and if either
plaintant or defendant dye before, then the Executor shall pay that which was
in the testators hands to the survivor, which this Court thought in conscience
to be meet, because the defendant by answer confesses the trust and receipt of
250 l. Therefore a Subpoena is awarded against the defend. to show cause why it
should not be decreed: Cotton plaintant, Causton defend. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

An Attachment and other process of contempt issued out of this Court, The
contempt discharged, and ^ new Commission granted to take the defendants
answers.
for not returning the defendants answer by Commission is discharged, paying
the ordinary Fees, because the plaintant named one Commissioner, who refused to
join with one of the defendants Commissioners in taking the defendants answer;
and a new Commission is granted to indifferent Commissioners named by the
defendant: Marshall plaintant, Harwood defendant. An 21. and 22. Eliz.

It is moved that where a prohibition was six Prohibition for Tithes of Lands
held in Capi^e.
months since granted for stay of a suite in the Ecclesiastical Court at
Herford, upon surmise the lands are held in Capite, whereas it appeared by
Letters Patents thereof the lands holden of Eastgreenwich; therefore
consultation, unless cause showed; and the party to pay double costs according
to the Statute, whereby the prohibition is granted: Wolf plaintant, Merrick
Clums defendant. An.

Costs for want of a Bill, oath made before the Major of Totnes.
Forasmuch as the Major of Totnes has certified under his common Seal, that
the defendant made oath before him, that he was served with a Billet in Paper
at the plaintants suit, and upon his appearance no Bill, therefore costs: White
plaintant, Carpenter defendant. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

Attorney present in Court, enjoined not to proceed at common law.
Brent an Attorney at common Law for the defendant being present in Court, is
enjoined in open Court upon pain of 200 l. not to proceed at common Law, upon
an action of debt upon an Obligation against the plaintant: Bishop plaintant,
Iessop and Wats defendants. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

Suite for ^ent of 10 s.
Forasmuch as the said Thoroughgood made oath that the matter in the Bill is for
a Portion of Rent of 10 s. by year being of small value, it is dismissed;
Knighton plaintant, Allen and Thoroughgood defendant. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

Affidavit the he saw a Subpoena served.
John Vaux made oath that he saw a Subpoena served upon the defend. therefore
for not appearance an Attachment is granted; Vaux plaint. Glasiers
defendant..An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

At^achment against witnesses served to testify.
John Leigh made oath for the serving of a Subpoena on a witness, to testify
on the plaintants behalf before certain Commissioners who has not so done:
Therefore an Attachment is awarded against the defendant; Middleton plaintant,
Speright defendant. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

The plaintant made oath that he heard the defendant confess he was served
with a Subpoena and has not appeared; Atachment upon the defendants confession
he was served.
therefore an Attachment is granted; Stow plaintant, and Maddock defendant. An.
21. and 22. Eliz.

The defend. and one Thomas Butcher, Two joint tenants, the one dies, the
other ordered to make Estate according to the Will.
whose Executors the said Ioane and Alexander have purchased certain lands
jointly; the defend. promised the said Thomas upon his death bed, he would
take no advantage of the survivorship, but that the said Thomas might by his
will dispose them, Thomas by his will devised his part of the lands toward
payment of his deb^s; therefore decreed by the assent of the defen. that the
defe^. should make estate accordingly; Spring and uxor and Alexander Buthcer
plaintants, Vpton defend. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

Robert Medigate Esquire. was served with Subpoena to testify, Witness that
answer insufficien^ again examined*
and has not answered to certain interrogatories administered unto him on the
plaintants behalf, at the time of the executing of the said Commission,
excusing himself that he could not to some for want of certain court Rols,
and to some other interogatories he referred himself to former depositions,
but does not show where they remain, nor when they were taken; it is therefore
ordered that the considerations of the depositions of the said Medigate be
referred to Mr. Doctor Carew, one of the Masters of this Court; and if he
certify that he has not sufficiently answered, then order shall be taken,
that he shall directly answer the same; Fish plaintant, Mountford and aliis
defendants. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

Jurisdiction of Chester allowed.
It is ordered that upon Affidavit made, that the defendants dwell within the
County Palatine of Chester; and the cause of the Bill is to be relieved of
certain debts there, the cause is therefore dismissed into the said Country:
Heyward plaintant, Sherington defend. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

A suit for a Hawk, and evidences dismissed.
The effect of the suit is for a Hawke, and certain evidences supposed to be
come to the defendants hands; and because it seems to the Court, the matter
of evidences was only inserted to give color to the court to hold Plea; and
the matter of the Hawke is no meet matter for this Court; therefore the matter
is dismissed; Glasiers plaintant, Massy defendant. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

The Bill dismissed, because the counselors hand is counterfeit.
The Bill is dismissed because that Mr. Massies name was put to the same, as of
Council without his privity; Gristing plaintant, Hoar and Hoar defendants. An.
21. and 22. Eliz.

The plaintant is adjudged to pay to the defend. 50 s. costs, Costs for
prosecuting contem^ts and none proved.
for prosecuting process of contempt against him, and no contempt proved:
Wrayford plaintant, Weight and Hingeston defendants. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

The Bill sets forth that Gibone, one of the defendants in consideration of
286 l. did bargain and sell unto the plaintaint certain lands in the Bill
mentioned; Fraud by mak^ng a lease after a feoffement and before livery and
seizin.
and made unto him a deed of Feoffement, and a Letter of Attorney to make
livery, and seizin, and before livery, made a Lease to Cateline, who knew of
the bargain, and he Leassed to Brown, who knew also of the bargain, and this
appearing to this Count to be true, an Injunction is granted to the plaintant,
until the cause should be heard and determined: Ireby plaintant, Gibone,
Cateline, and Brown defendants. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

A special Certiorare to remove a cause out of London, Suit stayed in the
Kings Bench, because it was removed from London
the plaintant proves the surmises of his Bill, the defend. begins suit in
the Kings Bench for the same cause; therefore stayed by Injunction; Cliffe
plaintant, Turnor defendant. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

The plaintants suite is to be relieved for a common, Suit for common.
and a Subpoena is awarded against the defend. to show canse why an Injunction
should not be granted to stay the suite at the common Law; Chock plaintant,
Chea and Wast defendants. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

The matter is dismissed, A Bill for 6 l dismissed.
because the suit is for 6. l. only. Marber plaintant, Kempester defendant.
An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

The said Edmund Barker defendant makes oath that he received a Billet of
Paper, Costs upon a Billet delivered to a brother, and no Bill in Court.
of John Barker his brother, who affirms likewise upon his oath, the same
Billet was delivered to him by the plaintant; and because upon the defendants
appearance no Bill is in Court; therefore 26 s. 8 d. is adjudged against the
plaintant; Cook plaintant, Barker defend, An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

The Mayor of Totnes certified under his common Seal, Commission to take the
defendants answer upon oath of impotency before the Mayor of Totnes.
that the defendant made oath before him, that he was impotent, and not able to
travel; therefore a Commission is awarded to take the defendants answer in the
Country; Wotten plaintant, Lewescomb defendant. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

Consil.
Dodderridge plaintant, Lasty defendant upon oath made before the Mayor of
Exeter of the defendants impotency, and unfitness to travel, a Commission is
granted to take his answer in the Country. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

Consil.
Thomas Fursden made oath, the defendant is above 70 years of age; The defen.
70. years old.
therefore a Commission is awarded to take his answer in the Country; Vivean
plaintant, Napper alias Sand defendant. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

Jurisdiction of Wales allowed.
George Elliot made oath, that all the parties are inhabitants, and dwelling
within the Marches of Wales; and that the matter contained in the bill of
complaint, is for no Title of land; therefore the cause is dismissed to the
determination of the said Commissioners: Morgan plaintant, Bithell and Evon
defendants. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

Consil.
Philips alias Phelps, Long and Spincke plaintants, Powell and Singleton
defendants, upon oath made that all the parties dwell within the jurisdiction
of the Marches of Wales, the cause is dismissed to be tried there. An. 21. and
22. Eliz.

Attachment upon oath before the Bayliffes of Mountgomery.
Forasmuch as the Bayliffes of Mountgomery have certified under their common
Seal, that the plaintant made oath before them for the serving of a Subpoena
on the defendant who has not appeared; therefore an Attachment is awarded
against the defendant; Griffeth plaint. Ap Edward Ap John defendants. An. 21.
and 22. Eliz.

Consilio.
Forasmuch as the Major of Exeter has certified under his common Seal, that
the plaintant has made oath before him for the serving of a Subpoena on the
defendants who have not appeared; therefore an Attachment is awarded against
them; Preston plaintant, Smith and uxor defendants. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

Ap Richard makes oath, Dismission because under 40 s. per annum.
the Lands complained of is under 40 s by the year; therefore dismissed;
Morgan plaintant, Ap Richard and Lewis defendants. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

An action upon the case commenced in the Kings Bench to the defendants damage
100 Marks is stayed by Injunction, Injunction for defrauding the Queen of her
fine.
for that her Majesty is hindered of her fine, which should have been paid upon
the original: Brockhurst plaintant, Cotton defend. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

An Action upon the case commenced in the Kings Bench, Consil.
to the damage of the defendant 5 l. is stayed by Injunction, for that her
Majesty's fine was not paid; Ward plaintant, Cobone defendant. An. 21. and 22.
Eliz.

Attachment is granted for not appearing upon a Certificate by the Major of
Totnes, Attachment upon oath before the Major of T^tnes.
under his common Seal, that John King made oath, he saw a Subpoena served
upon the defendant; Dinnis plaintant, Morgan defendant. An. 21. and 22, Eliz.

The plaintants Bill is to be relieved for Copyhold lands, Jurisdiction of the
Manor of Woodstock overruled.
the defendant does demurre for that the lands are Ancient demeasne lands of
her Majesty's Manor of Woodstock, and there only pleadable; it is ordered a
Subpoena shall be awarded to the defendant to make a better answer; Wilkins
plaintant, Gregory defend. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

Upon a Subpoena in perpetual memory, Commission to examine in perpetual
memory.
the defend. appearing assented to join in Commission; so as the Lord Bacons
orders, touching examination of witnesses in perpetual memory might be
observed, but upon motion it was ordered, that the Commission should be made
general, as in like cases where the parties join, for that it seemed to the
Court, the Lord Bacons orders were intended to be observed, where the plaintant
has a Commission alone; Dominus Dacres and uxor plaintants, Southwell defend.
Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

The plaintant desired to be relieved for a Lease made by the defendant to him
for years, Le^ssee not named in the premises decreed for him.
which the defendant endeavors to impeach, because in the premises of the
Lease, there is no Leassee named, but only in the Habendum; and the cause
being referred to the two Lord chief Justices, and the Lord chief Baron, they
certified their opinion in Law, that the Lease was good in Law, notwithstanding
the Leassee was not named in the premises of the Lease, but in the Habendum;
and therefore decreed accordingly, that the plaintant should hold the said
Lease; Butler plaintant, Dodton defendant. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

One Executor gets the estate and dies, the other sueth his Executor, and
ordered for him.
The case is that the Lord Wray, and Sapcotes father were made executors to the
use of Children; Sapcotes father having gotten a great part of the testators
estate into his hands, devises diverse Legacies to strangers; and makes the
defend. his Son Executor, and dies; and the defend. by answer, confesses his
Father had diverse goods of the first testators in his hands, but said that the
defendant had not goods sufficient, more then would satisfy the Legacies given
by his Father; therefore ordered that the defend. shall first pay to the
plaintant the goods which were the first testators; and so much of his Estate,
as came to his Fathers hands; Wray chief Justice plaintant, Sapcote defendant.
Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

The plaintant sets forth in her Bill, Feme covert sueth for maintenance put
into another hands, he demurrs, but orde^ed to answer.
that she joined with her husband in sale of part of her inheritance, and after
some discord growing between them they separate themselves; and one hundred
pound of the money received upon sale of the Lands was allotted to the
plaintant for her maintenance, and put into the hands of Nicholas Mine Esquire;
and Bonds then given for the payment thereof, unto Henry Golding deceased to
the use of the plaintant; which bonds are come to the defendant, as
administrator to the said Henry Golding deceased, who refuses to deliver the
same to the plaintant, and hereupon she prays relief; the defendant does
demurre in Law, because the plaintant sueth without her husband; and it is
ordered the defendant shall answer directly; Mary Sanky, alias Walgrave
plaintant, Goulding defendant. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

The plaintant served the two defendants with one Subpoena, One Subpoena served
on two defendants; two Bills exhibited ordered to answer both.
but exhibited two Bills; the defendants appeared and answered the one, but not
being served with any other Subpoena to answer the second departed; whereupon
an Attachment is awarded against them; and ordered the defendants answering,
the second Bill be discharged of the Attachment; Ap Rice plaintant, Granoe and
Grannoe defendants. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

The defendant demurred generally without showing any manner of cause; The
defend. demurred, generally ordered to answer.
and therefore ordered that a Subpoena be awarded against him to make a perfect
answer; Duffield plaintant, Greaves and aliis defendants. Anno 21. and 22. Eliz.

Two executors exhibit two Bills, ordered to answer the one, the other
dismissed with costs.
The plaintant as sole Executor to Robert Maunder ex^ibited a Bill against the
defendants for the same matter, for which the plaintant and David Gome as
Executors to the same Maunder exhibited another Bill, and ordered that both
Bills should be referred; and if both for one cause, the defendants shall be
dismissed from one of the Bills with costs; John Maunder plaintant, John Wright
and aliis defendants. An. 21. and 22. Eliz.

Witnesses examined in perpetual memory, the one dead, and the other sick,
moved to use their testimony.
Christopher Askame has made oath, that John Bleverhasset being a deponent in
perpetual Memory is dead, and John Harrison another of the deponents is, and
has been of long time sick, and not able to travel without danger of his
life; and that their depositions are very needful for the plaintant to be given
in evidence, in a matter now depending at the common Law; Senhawes plaintant,
Senhawes and aliis defendants. An. 22. Eliz.

The defend. made oath, the plaintant caused him to be served with a Subpoena
the Saturday before the end of the Term, A Subpoena served within two days of
the Terms end, the Attachment discharged answering.
returnable the Thursday following, being but two days before the end of the
Term, he the defendant dwelling in Devonshire, sevenscore miles distant from
London; wherefore the defend. could not conveniently appear, and make answer by
the return of the said Subpoena; and yet nevertheless the plaintant had
procured out an Attachment against the defendant; therefore and for that the
plaintants Bill is but for evidences, it is ordered the defend. be discharged
of the Attachment putting in his answer. Smith plaint. Wear defendant. An. 21.
and 22 Eliz.

Upon certificate of Henry Vgheard, The solliciter of the plaintant ordered to
be examined with caution.
and Thomas West two Commissioners, that Thomas Marshall one of the defendants
witnesses being warned by precept from them, refused to appear before them, and
that Roger Tailor another witness appeared, but refused to be examined,
because he sollicites the plaintants cause; it is therefore ordered that the
defendant shall examine before one of the examinors of this court before the
end of this Term, as well the said Roger Tailor upon any Interrogatory, which
shall not be touching the secrecy of the title, or of any other matter which
he knows as solicitor only, as also the said Marshall, or any other
necessary witness, whereof the defendant shall first set down their names, so
that the plaintant may likewise examine them if he will; Kelway plaintant,
Kelway defendant. An. 22. Eliz.

It is informed that the plaintant exhibited his Bill without a Counselors
hand, A Bill without a counselors hand or Attorney retained dismissed.
or retaining an Attorney; and the same is for matter formerly decreed;
therefore ordered if cause be not showed to the contrary; and if the Bill be to
bring the matter in question that was decreed, then it is ta be dismissed;
Bingham plaintant, Warren defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

The defendant demurred upon the Bill for incertainty, Iurisdicton of Wales
overuled.
which was certain enough; And also for that all the parties are dwelling
within the Jurisdiction of the Marches of Wales, which is no cause of demurrer
for title of Lands; therefore ordered if cause be not showed, a Subpoena is
awarded against the defendant to answer; Keys plaintant, Hill and uxor
Defendants. Anno 22. Eliz.

Jurisdiction of Wales overruled.
The plaintant exhibits his Bill touching a practice and mis-behaviour supposed
by the plaintant to be used by the defendant against him, in bringing him up by
Subpoena, at the suite of one Anthony Hinck, whereas the plaintant never knew
any such man, and for diverse other misdemeanors used by the defendant in this
Court toward the plaintant; the defendant demurred for that both parties dwell
within the jurisdiction of the Marches of Wales, where he supposes the
plaintant is to seek his remedy, which kind of demurrer this court allows
not, for that misdemeanors committed in this court are most meet to be here
examined; Griffeth plaintant, Penrine defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

The defend. stayed by Injunction to pull down rooms to the prejudice of
another rooms.
The plaintant shows by his Bill, that his house and the defendants are
joining together, and supported by one main wall standing partly upon the
Freehold of either of the said parties; and the plaintant having also an entry,
Garret and other necessary rooms standing upon the Kitchen of the defendant,
he the defend. went about to pull down the said Wall, and thereby to overthrow
the said Garret; the defendant made title to some of the upper rooms, and has
pulled down part of the Wall; an Injunction is awarded to stay the defendant,
to pull down any more of the Wall, or any other part of the said house, whereby
the said upper Rooms may be overthrown, or impaired, until the matter be
heard; Bush plaintant, Field defendant. An. 22. Eliz.

A Commission to examine witnesses on both parts upon 14. days warning to be
given to the defendant, Upon a Commission warning given but to one defendant, a
new C^mmission is granted, and the defendants to have the carriage.
Lucy one of the defendants made oath, that neithen he nor Varney had any
warning, but if any warning was given, it was given, to Smith the other
defendant, who is little interessed in the cause, but made a party as the
defendants council supposes to take away his testimony from the other
defendants; Therefore ordered a Commission be awarded, whereof the said Lucy
shall have the carriage directed to the former Commissioners, and 14. days
warning shall be given to the plaintant, and he to examine if he will;
Hollingworth plaintant, Lucy, Varney and Smith defendants. Anno 22. Eliz.

Humphrey Loyde made oath, A Subpoena left in the defendants Hall, an Attachment
that he saw one Lewis leave a Subpoena in the Hall of the defendant, and that
the defendant was at home the same time who has not appeared; therefore an
Attachment is awarded against the defend^nt. Anno 22. Eliz.

A Commission to examine witnesses issued, Witnesses examined before the Town
Clark of Yo^k suppressed.
but the plaintant at the place and day appointed brought not his
Commissioners, nor the Commission, whereby the defendants Commissioners could
not fit to examine, but the plaintant procured certain witnesses to be
examined before one of the Town Clerks of York touching the matter in
variance, but ordered no witnesses so taken* shall be received into this Court,
nor the plaintant take any benefit thereby; and a new Commission is awarded:
Hareforth, and Lowther plaintants, Gates defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

John Davis made oath that his boy served a Subpoena The server of a Subpoena
imprisoned, therefore Attachment against the defendant.
upon the defendant, for the which the said boy was apprehended, and imprisoned
in the Marches of Wales; therefore an Attachment is awarded against the
defendant; Dastoines plaintant, Apprice defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

Jurisdiction of Wales admitted.
The defendant made oath, that both the said parties dwell in the Jurisdiction
of the Marches of Wales; and that the matter of the plaintants Bill, is but for
a lease for years, and no title of Freehold; therefore dismissed, Moore
plaintant, Mashall defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

A rent reserved and paid, the heir ordered to pay it.
John Lord Zouch deceased late Father to the plaintant, did give the Manor of
Winford Eagle with th'appertenances in the County of Dorset, intailed to the
Father of the defendant, reserving 40 l. a year rent to him and his Heirs,
and after about three years last past, granted 25 l. parcel of the said rent
to the plaintants for their lives; and the defendants Father did atturne, and
pay the rent to the plaintants, until about two or three years before his
death, which was about six years since, sithence which time the defendant being
issue in tail and seized, refused to pay the said rent, but ordered by this
court to pay it, if he show not good cause to the contrary; Zouch and uxor
plaintants, Sidden^am defendant..Anno 22. Eliz.

A rent charge upon several men's Lands, and levied upon one, an Injunction.
The plaintant seeks relief by way of contribution, for that one of the
defendants has a rent charge out of this the plaintants lands, and out of one
other of the defendants lands; and yet seeks to lay the whole burden of the
rent charge upon his the plaintants lands; and because the defend* would not
answer; therefore an Injunction is granted for staying of the suits of the
rent; Dolman plaintant, Vavasor and aliis defendants. Anno 22. Eliz.

It appears by oath that the defendant is both senseless and dumb; A dumb
man is not to answer upon Subpoena.
and therefore cannot instruct his Counsel to draw his answer; and therefore
ordered, that no Attachment, or other process of contempt be awarded against
the defendant for not answering without special order of this Court; Altham
plaintant, Smith defendant; An. 22. Eliz.

The plaintant bought of the defendant the reversion of a Copyhold, Money paid
for a reversion, which could not be enjoyed, ordered to repay the same.
which he could not enjoy, confessed by the defendants answer; thereupon a
Subpoena is awarded against the defendant to show cause why he should not repay
the money received upon the bargain. Picketon plaintant, Littecote, and aliis
defendants. An. 22. Eliz.

The defendants were not served with process; No Witnesses to be examined till
the defendants have answered*
and yet the plaintant brought up diverse witnesses to be examined, but ordered
they should not be examined until the defendants have answered; Episcopus
Sallesbury plaintant, Hind and Hind defendants. Anno 22. Eliz.

The plaintant was drawn to drink, An action against a drunken man's words
seeks relief, but is dismissed.
and filled with drink, spoke some words against the defendant, for which he
brought an action upon the case at the common Law; whereupon the plaintant
exhibited his Bill of complaint; and got an Injunction pro non solutione Finis.
It is ordered that the defend. paying the Queens fine shall have liberty to
proceed, and the Bill to be dismissed: Qui peccat ebrius, luat sobrius,
Kendrick plaintant, Hopkins defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

A Subpoena showed and offered, Attachment for not appearing.
Forasmuch as the Major of Barnestable has certified, that John Barker made
oath before him, that he did show and offer to deliver to the defendant a
Subpoena which he would not accept and has not appeared; therefore an
attachment; Peris plaintant, Thomas defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

The plaintants made motion to have publication of witnesses taken 1. and 2.
Philip and Mary, Witnesses examined 1. and 2. P. and M. ordered to prefer a
Bill for publ^cation.
between one Thomas Shrub then plaintant, and now deceased, whose daughters
and Coheires the plaintants wives are, and Henry Barnard then defendant now
likewise deceased, touching lands in the occupation of the defendant; and
ordered the plaintants shall exhibit a Bill for publication against the
defendants, and call them by the Subpoena to answer, and then order shall be
taken: Clarke and uxor Papwell and uxor Stocks plaintants, Eve Mellers, and
Wodham defendants. Anno 22. Eliz.

Attachment discharged by supersedeas, paying the ordinary Fees.
The defendant was served with a Subpoena at the suit of Hanmer, and for want of
a Bill got costs; and the plaintant upon Affidavit that the defendant was
served with a Subpoena at his suit, got an attachment against the defendant*
whereupon he was apprehended, and returned languidus; It is ordered that the
attachment be discharged by supersedeas, the defendant paying 20 s. 6 d. to the
Warden of the Fleet, and the ordinary charges to the plaintant: Brearton
plaintant, Ap Roberts defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

The defendants wife examined as a witness.
It is informed that Coleston one of the defendants examined his own wife as a
witness; It is thereofore ordered the plaintant may take a Subpoena against
her on his behalf, and if Colston will not suffer her to be examined on the
plaintants party, then her examination on the said Colstons party is
suppressed; Bent plaintant, Allot and Colston defendants. Anno 22. Eliz.

Upon the hearing of the cause it appeared that the suit was to be releived of
a promise made by the defendant to the plaintant, Suit upon a promise to
surrender a lease dismissed.
to surrender a lease upon payment of 100 Marks by the plaintant unto him, and
for that the matter is meet for the common Law, therefore dismissed: Grevill
plaintant, Bowker defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

The Court was informed by one Palmer, Subpoena to testify where no cause was
depending discharged.
that the three defendants are his servants, and were served with Subpoena to
be examined before the Town Clark of London, who refused to be there examined,
because the matter is not depending in London, but in her Majesty's Bench; and
yet Attachment is gotten against them, which kind of examination of witnesses,
this Court takes to be unorderly, and therefore ordered the Attachment be
discharged; Price plaintant, Tench Holland and Packhouse defendants. An. 22.
Eliz.

The Earl of Huntingdon, Jurisdictio^ of the North allowed.
Presedent of the North signified by his Letters to the Lord Chancellor, that
the lands for which the Bill is exhibited were ordered for the defendant by the
Counsel of the North parts, where the parties dwell, and land lies; and the
now plaintant upon serving his Subpoena was ordered by the council there to
surcease his suit in this Court, and stand to the order of the said counsel;
and yet the plaintant has procured an Attachment against the defendant;
therefore ordered the Attachment be discharged, and the matter dismissed:
Harrison plaintant, Harrison defendant;.An. 22. Eliz.

Jurisdiction of the Exchequer disallowed.
The defendant demurred because he is the Lord Treasurers man; and therefore
ought to be privileged in her Majesty's court of Exchequer, which cause of
demurrer the Court allowed not for that the defend. can have no privilege,
unless it were in such a case as the plaint. might have remedy in the Court of
Exchequer: Lewin plaintant, Fawdesley defendant. An. 22. Eliz.

A Subpoena cau^elously served, Attachment against the plaintant.
The defendant made oath the plaintant showed him a Subpoena, holding it in his
own hand, and said it was against him, but would not let him have it, or see
it, so that he might read it; neither would he deliver him any note of his
appearance, nor tell him the same, but took witness that he had served the
Subpoena, and about an hour after came again to the defendant, saying you were
desirous to see the Subpoena, here it is, and thereupon showed the labell to
the defendant, but in such sort as he could not see the return; whereupon the
defendant appearing found no Bill; therefore Attachment against the plaintant
for misdemeanor: Mead plaintant, Cross defend. An. 22. Eliz.

A Bill for tuition of an infant.
The plaint* is Grandfather on the Mothers side, to whom the Lands cannot come
by the death of the infant, exhibiteth a Bill against the Grandfather on the
part of the fathers side, to have the education, and bringing up of one Richard
Edge an infant, who is seized of an Estate Tail of Lands, the remainder to the
defendant, and to have the disposing of the profits of the Lands: But ordered
with the defendant, for that it appeared there were diverse remainders between
the defendants and the infants estate: Sweetman plaintant, Edge defendant. An
20. Eliz.

Francis plaintant, Costs for a witness served to testify.
Sacheverill defendant. The defendant is adjudged to pay to John Hide 20 s.
costs, he appearing upon a Subpoena, to testify on his behalf. An. 22. Eliz.

The plaintant purchased Lands of the defend. An. 2. Eliz And had a
Recognizance then acknowledged unto him, Deeds neglected to be enrolled a
Subpoena to show why not.
for performing Covenants of the bargain and sale, and put one in trust to get
both the indenture, and ^ecognizance enrolled, and paid him for the same; and
now being evicted out of the possession of the lands, came to take out a scir.
fac. upon the Recognizance, but finds it not enrolled; and therefore desires
the same might now be enrolled; It is ordered that a Subpoena be awarded
against the defendant, to show cause why it should not; and M. Solliciter who
is present at the motion, is to give notice to some of his Clients, who have
purchased (as he alleged) parcel of the lands to show cause why it shall not
be enrolled: Siddenham plaintant, Harrison defendant. An. 22. Eli.

The defendants inform that the Bill is exhibited for certain Lands parcel
of the Duchy of Lancaster; Jurisdiction of the Duchy of Lancaster allowed.
and therefore ordered that for so much it shall be dismissed; Price plaintant,
Lloyd Owen, and Read defendants. Anno 22. Eliz.

The matter upon hearing appeared to be for a promise, The matter of as^umpsit
re^ered to the common Law.
wherewith the defendant charge the plaintant, and 12 d. in money accepted
upon the said promise, whereupon some trials, or non suits have passed; it is
orded that for the ending of the said matter of promise, that the matter be
referred to the Common Law to be tried; Sutton plaintant, Erington defendant.
An. 22..Eliz.

The defendant informed he was called upon by Subpoena dated the 8. of
February, Feme sole sueth out a Subpoena, and the same day is married,
dismissed with costs.
and by answer says the said Jane Piers was married the 8. of February, and so
at that time purchasing the Writ a woman Covert; therefore the defendant is
dismissed with 13 s. 4 d. costs; Jane Peirs plaintant, John Cawse defendant.
Anno 22. Eliz.

The defendant was in possession at the time of the Bill exhibited, The plaint.
enters upon the defend. possession ordered, either a dismission, or injunction.
the plaintant entered upon him; the defendant desired that either he might
have an Injunction for his possession, or else that the cause might be
dismissed, which the Court thought reasonable; it is ordered the plaintant
shall show cause why it should not be granted; Hill plaintant, Portman
defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

Prohibition for sithes, parcel of the Duchy of Cornwall, but consultation
if cause be not showed.
The plaintant Thomas Hilliar exhibited his Bill against the said William
Kendall, that the said Thomas Hilliar was seized in Fee of two Messuages, 70.
Acres of Pasture, Furzes, and Heath in Lanlivery, parcel of the Queens
Majesty's Duchy of Cornwall; and thereupon a prohibition against the said
Will. Kendall, libelling in the Spiritual Court for Tithes, as Farmer to the
said Batten Vicar there, pretending that right of Tithes for lands holden of
her Majesty, as of her Duchy of Cornwall ought to be determined in this
Court; and also that the said John Hilliar had exhibited the like Bill, and
procured a prohibition out of this Court against the said Batten; It is ordered
a Subpoena be awarded against the plaintant, to show cause why a consultation
should not be granted; Hilliar and Hilliar plainants, Lendall and Batten
defendants. Anno 22. Eliz.

Oath was made in the name of one Edward Jones, Perju^y in m^king oath for
impotency, one of the same name sued for it, and discharged.
that the defendant Eaton was sick, and the rest impotent, and not able to
travel; whereupon a Commission was awarded to take their answers in the
Country; now Edward Jones of Ruthin was called up at the plaintants suite by
process for perjury, and alleged he was not the party that made the oath,
and brought a Certificate to justify he was at Ruthin when the oath was taken;
therefore he is dismissed: Brearton plaint. Eaton and uxor and aliis
defendants. Anno 22. Eliz.

Griffen Price made oath that where the plaintant served a subpoena upon him to
appear before Commissioners, A witness not able to travel, discharged of
contempt.
to testify on the plaintants party, he the said plaintant did not give o^
tender him the said Griffen any money for his charges; and also that he was
sick then and not able to travel; therefore ordered the said Griffen be
discharged of the process of contempt gotten out against him for not being
examined: More plaintant, Woreham defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

The plaintant seeks to have the defendant to assure him certain lands sold
him by the defendant, Jurisdiction of Wales not allowed for a promise.
in consideration of great sums of money already paid for the same, according to
the promise of the defendant made in that behalf; the defendant demurreth for
that the same promise was made within the Jurisdiction of Wales where both
parties are dwelling; but this seems to the Court no sufficient cause of
demurrer; and therefore ordered a Subp. be awarded to the defendant to answer:
Hatton plaintaint, Prince defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

A Commission to answer, he returned a demurrer, therefore Attachment.
The defendant took out a Commission to take his answer in the Country and
returned a demurrer; therefore the plaintant took out an attachment which this
Court liked well, for that the defendant did not directly answer; yet in regard
of an oath made for the defendants impotency a new Commission is granted to
take his answer, and discharged of the Attachment paying the ordinary Fees:
Pain and aliis plaintants, Carew defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

A Councellor not to be examined of any matter, wherein he has been of
Council.
The plaintant seeks to have Master Oldsworth examined touching a matter in
variance, wherein he has been of council; it is ordered he shall not be
compelled by Subpoena, or otherwise to be examined upon any matter concerning
the same, wherein he the said Mr. Oldsworth was of council, either by the
indifferent choice of both parties, or with either of them by reason of any
Annnuity or Fee: Dennis plaintant, Codrington defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

A Billet in paper served, and no Bill in Court costs is awarded.
The said Coleman makes oath the said Porter did deliver him a Billet in Paper,
and did show him a thing in yellow Wax; and told him it was a Subpoena, but did
not declare to him at whose suit; therefore the said Porter is adjudged to pay
to the defendant 20 s. costs for want of a Bill: Porter plaintant, Coleman
defendant. Anno 22. Eliz.

Feme covert, whose husband is in the Galleys must answer matter of equity
wherewith she is charged.
The plaintant showed by his Bill that he fraughted a Ship into Spain which was
there confiscate and all his goods, for the defendants husband being Master of
the Ship had an English Book found in the ship contrary to the Laws there,
which he was forewarned of, and knew the Laws, and the defendants husband was
condemned to the Galleys 14. years; and sithence the plaintant, as well for
his own relief, as for the relief of the defendant devised to obtain license
from her Majesty, for transporting 60. Tuns of Bear, yearly for eight years,
the commodity whereof to be equally between them; and the Bill exhibited to her
Majesty was in both their names, and the party of the charge; but the defendant
cautiously got the same altered into her own name, and has sold the same away
without yielding the plaintant any profit; The defendants does demurre, because
she is a Feme covert; it is ordered a Subpoena be awarded against her to make a
better answer: Castleton plaintant, Alice Fitz-Williams defend. Anno 22. Eliz.

Thomas Jones made oath that a Writ of Injunction was left at the house of the
defendant; Injunction left at the defendants house and disobeyed, an Attachment
is awarded.
and the plaintant makes oath the defendant has proceeded in a suit in the
Kings Bench contrary to an Injunction; therefore an Attachment. Bodnam
plaintant, Morgan defendant. An. 22. Eliz.

Lower plaintant, Crudge defendant, Consil.
and uxor, and aliis defendants. Peter Prowse made oath the R. G. N. G. Io. B.
and others having notice given unto them of an Injunction awarded out of this
Court against the defend have disobeyed the same; therefore an Attachment is
awarded against them. Anno 22. Eliz.

Matthew Davis made oath that the defendant Costs for want of a Bill.
was served with a Billet of Paper at the plaintants suit, and upon his
appearance no Bill in Court against him; therefore the plaintant is adjudged to
pay the defend. 30 s. costs; Griffeth and aliis plaintants, Ap Ienn, Ap Ienkins
defendants. An. 22. Eliz.

Jurisdiction of Wales allowed.
The defendant makes oath that all the parties are inhabiting, and dwelling
within the Jurisdiction of the Marches of Wales; and for that it appears by
the plaintants Bill, that the matter therein contained is for a supposed Lease,
and for no title of land; therefore the cause is dismissed, and the plaintant
referred to take his remedy, before the Commissioners of the Marches of Wales;
Arden plaintant, Veale, and Veale defendants. An. 22. Eliz.

A Writ of privilege disallowed.
The defendant got a Writ of privilege as Servant to the Lord Keeper, and
removed two several suits against him by the plaintant in London; forasmuch as
the Lord Keeper declared in open Court, that the defendant is not now his
servant; therefore ordered that the said two several causes be remaunded into
London, and the defend. not to be allowed privilege of this Court: Warren and
Clerk plaintants, Ralph Maynard defendant. An. 21. Eliz.

Bayliffes of a Corporation not compellable to make a Lease.
The plaintant seeks to compel the defendants to make unto him a lease, by
reason of a promise made by William Allestre, and Anthony Bat, when they were
Bayliffes of the said Town, and ordered that the Corporation, nor any person
which heretofore have been, nor which hereafter shall be Bayliffes of the said
Town, shall in any wise be charged as Bayliffes with the said promise; but the
plaintant if he will may take his remedy against the said Allestre, and Bat,
not as Bayliffes, but as common persons; George Strainger plaintant,
Beynbridge, and Edward Turnos lates Bayliffes of Derby defendants. Anno 21.
Eliz.

Nicholas Dyer made oath that the defendant has broken an order made in this
Court; Attachment for breaking an order in Court.
therefore an Attachment against him; Margaret Stephens plaintant, John Bawden
defend. Anno 21. Eliz.

Christopher Almy, Suit for Hay, Corn, and grass not worth 40 s. dismissed.
Christopher From, James Wood, and aliis inhabitants de Magna Ashley
plaintants, James Pycroft defend. the matter being for Hay, Corn, and Graffe
upon oath not worth 40 s. It is by order dismissed, for that it is of so small
a Value. An. 21. Eliz.

Parrot and aliis plaintants, Suit for the poor of a parish under 40. s. per
annum, ^erained*
Pawlet defendant; The suite being for the benefit of the poor of Drayton; it
is retained though under 40 s. per annum. 21. Eliz.

Forasmuch as Richard S^odard Justice, and Portrive, Attachment upon oath,
before the Portrive of Minxhead.
and others his brethren of the Borough of Minxhead have certified under their
common Seal, that one Nicholas Hooper made oath before them for serving of a
Subpoena on the defend. who has not appeared; therefore an Attachment is
awarded. Hooper and Hooper plaintants, Brace and uxor defendants. Anno 21. Eliz.

Meerefield plaintant, Confil.
Cleverden defend. upon certificate made by the Major of Torrinton of serving a
Subpoena, that Affidavit was made before him, for serving it upon the defendant
who has not appeared; therefore an Attachment is awarded. Anno 21. Eliz.

A decree for the plaint. yet put out of possession by the defendant.
A decree was made for the plaintant for a Coppyhold tenement, and yet the
defendant put the plaintant out of possession, notwithstanding the said decree;
and the Lord Keeper did write his Letters to the defendant, to suffer the
plaintant to enjoy the same Tenement according to the decree: Lane plaintant,
the Lord Howard Viscount Bindon defendant. Anno 21. Eliz.

Defendant departing without license an Attachment.
The defend. was examined upon interrogatories upon the breach of an order of
this Court, and departed without lycense; therefore an Attachment; Boil and
uxor plaintants, Vivean defendant. An. 21. Eliz.

Attachment discharged paying the plaintant 10 s. costs.
The defendant being served with a Subpoena the last Term, and coming up out of
Cornwall to London, heard by common voice, the Term was adjourned, and
therefore did go back again, and the plaintant got an Attachment against him,
who has appeared gratis, and put in his answer; and therefore he shall be
discharged of the Attachment, paying 10 s. to the plaintant for his costs:
Strangman plaintaint, Vivean defendant Anno 21. Eliz.

Liberty for a common Fishing.
The question was for a liberty of common Fishing, and ordered for the
plaintant; and upon Affidavit made the defendants have broken the same, ordered
an Attachment shall go against them; Bayliffes, Burgesses, and Commonalty of
the Town of Yarmouth plaintants, William Paston, and aliis defendants. An. 21.
Eliz.

The plaintant and his Father were bound to the defendant in 500 l. to stand to
the award of Sir James Dyer Knight, A Bond put in suit, for not performing an
award stayed by Injunction.
and Lord chief Justice, who arbitrated that the plaintant, who had the
reversion in Fee, and the Father who had the Estate for life, should make such
assurance as the defendant should reasonably devise.

The defendant did tender an assurance to the Father to be sealed, Injunction
to stay suit at common Law.
who being old and blind, desired time to confer with his friends; the
plaintant upon request sealed the assurance, and his father afterward sent
word to the defendant he was willing to seal it, but the defend. answered he
did not pass whether he did or no, because he had but an estate for his life,
and the defend. had his bond to enjoy it during his life, which he did
accordingly; and yet nevertheless the defendant put the bond in suite upon his
Fathers said refusal, but stayed by Injunction: Knight plaintant, Hartwell
defend. Anno 21. Eliz.

A Commission of Rebellion for not payment of costs was awarded against the
defend. to one John ap David, Commission of Rebellion for not payment of costs.
who did thereupon apprehend the defend. and for his more safe keeping
delivered him to Thomas Moston Esquire. High Sheriff of the County of Fl^nt, who
took charge of the prisoner accordingly, and now refuses either to deliver the
prisoner to the Commissioner, or to bring him himself into the Court at the
day; day is therefore given to the said Thomas Moston the late Sheriff, to
bring into this Court the body of the said defend. by Thursday next upon pain
of 10 l. Evans Clerk Deane of Saint Asaph plaintant, Ap Rees, ap Bennet
defendants. Anno 21. Eliz.

The defendant was served with a counterfeit Subpoena, The defend, discharged
of the Attachment because the Subpoena was counterfeit.
at the plaintants suit, but answered not because he was told the Subpoena was
counterfeit; thereupon an Attach. issued against him ordered, that as well the
defendant be discharged of the Attachment awarded against him as the said
Baily, who as the defendant made oath delivered the countefeit process to him,
to show where, and of whom he had the Subpoena: Baily plaintant, Hawle defend.
Anno 21. Eliz.

An award ordered to be performed.
The Suit was to cause the defendant to perform an award of Arbitrators chosen
by themselves, contrary to which award the defendant has put in suite an
obligation of 100 l. wherefore an Injunction was granted for stay of the suit;
and upon the defendants showing his readiness to perform the award, ordered
that the said award shall be duly performed by both the said parties: Reignolds
plaint. Latham def. A. 21. E.

The defendant licensed to depart after answer in a writ of privilege.
Matthew Carew one of the Masters of this Court plaintant, Thomas Burf^am
defend. The defend. appearing this Term upon an Attachment of privilege at
the plaintants suit has put in bail; and answered to the Declaration of the
plaintant: therefore the defend. is licensed to depart till 15. Paschae next.
An. 21. Eliz.

The defendant commi^ted to the Fleet for a Rescue, brought an action for a
false return.
Richard Champion a Commissioner in a Commission of rebellion returned a Rescue
against Guy Bonvill, whh being examined, and his examination referred to two
Masters of the Court, was found to have confessed the rescue; whereupon he was
committed to the Fleet, and yet afterward brought his action upon the case at
the common law, against the said Champion for his false return; ordered that a
Subpoena be awarded against the said Guy Bonvill, to show cause why an
Injunction should not be awarded against him for stay of his action upon the
Case; but afterward, viz. 21. Eliz. the defendant was allowed to go forward
in his action upon the case at the common Law, because either of the parties
there may plead his matter; Joan Bonvill widow plaintant, Bonvill and Mary
Billinghay defendants. An. 21. Eliz.

The plaintants exhibited a frivilous Bill without a Counselors hand, Subpoena
against the plaintant to show where he had his counterfeit Writs, and answer
his misdemeanor, and pay costs.
and got an Injunction for stay of any suit to be commenced in any of her
Majesty's Courts, but in this, which Subpoena and Injunction being served
seemed to be counterfeit; therefore ordered a Subpoena be awarded against the
plaintants, as well to show of whom they had the said Writ, and to answer their
misdemeanors, as also to pay the defend. costs for his unjust vexation; John ap
Edward, Ap Hugh, and David ap Howel, ap Ienkin plaintants, Ralfe Ienkin
defendant. An. 21. Eliz.

The defendants made oath they were served with Billets of Paper at the
plaintants suit, Costs for want of a Bill.
and upon their appearance no Bill in Court against them; therefore the
plaintant is adjudged to pay the defendants 40 s. costs; Edmund Williams
plaintant, Evan Williams, David Morgan, and Merrick Gran^owe defendants. An.
21. Eliz.

Brown alias Garris, Costs for want of a Bill, the Billet being lost.
alias Pawdy plaintant, Stuit defendant made oath that he was served with a
Billet in Paper, and upon his appearance no Bill in Court, and the defendant
has lost the billet of Paper, and yet costs is awarded. Anno 21. Eliz.

The defendant put in a demurrer to the plaintants Bill, A demurrer without
showing any cause ordered to answer.
without showing any cause of his demurrer; it is therefore ordered that a
Subpoena be awarded against him to make a better answer; Offeley plaintant,
Morgan defendant. Anno 21. Eliz.

Five pound dismissed
The matter complained of by the Bill is for 5 l. debt for Fish, therefore
dismissed; Foord and Foord plaintants, and Richards defendant. Anno 21. Eliz.

Commission to take the defendants answers, they being 70 years old a piece.
Symonds Brocebridge made oath that the said Elizabeth and Anne, two of the
defendants are above the age of 70. years a piece, and that the said William
was coming up to London in his company, and they were both robbed, and William
his horse taken from him, whereby he could not come to make his appearance;
therefore a Commission is granted to take all the said defendants answers in
the country: Hill plaintant, Elizabeth Worley widow, William Stapleton, and
Anne his wife defendants. Anno 21. Eliz.

20. of F^b. Sir Nicholas Bacon dyed, 12 of April, the Seal delivered to Sir
Thomas Bromley.
Memorand. that the 20. day of February last, Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England dyed at York house, and the Seal being
the same day sent for by the Lord Treasurer, remained with the Queens Majesty
till the 12. day of April last, on which day the same was delivered to Sir Tho.
Bromly Knight, Lord Chancellor of England. Paschae. 21. Eliz.

Council on both sides to attend concerning the ratifying of an award.
Whereby an order of the 10. of Feb. last, a Subpoena was awarded against the
defendant, to show cause wherefore an award therein mentioned should not be
ratified: Now Mr. Flowerdew of council on the defendants behalf informs,
that the said award was not made by any order of this court; and therefore
desired that the said defend. may not be compelled to perform the same. It is
ordered that Council on both sides shall attend the morrow sevennight, and
then order shalll be taken; Barkley Miles plaintant, Moore defendant. Anno 21.
Eliz.

The plaintant exhibited his Bill as a privileged man to Sir Francis Kempe,
Jurisdiction of Chester allowed.
Prothonotary of this Court, for Lands lying in the County Palatine of Chester;
and for that it appeared by Letters Patents openle showed in Court, under her
Majesty's Great Seal of England, that this Court by any privilege should not
hold plea of any Lands lying within the said County Palatine, It is therefore
ordered to be dismissed, if the plaintant show not good cause: William Lomley
plaintant, Thomas Green, Thomas Marlow, Robert Tailor, and James Wagge
defend^nts. An. 21. Eliz.

The plaintant was adjudged to pay the defen. No costs to be allowed upon a
disclaimer.
37 s. 6 d. costs, for that he being served with Subpoena in Hillar. Term
appeared, and by his answer disclaimed; and yet after the plaintant served him
with a Subpoena to rejoyne; but afterward the same cost^ were discharged by
motion, for that the defendant had before the costs put in his rejoinder, but
upon a disclaimer no costs is to be allowed: Read plaintant, Hawstead alias
Lane defendants. Anno 21. Eliz.

The defendant was taken upon a Commission of Rebellion at the plaintants
suite, Costs allowed the defendant, being taken upon a Commission of rebellion.
required his costs to be allowed him, the Court asking the opinion of the
Clerks, it was agreed with one consent, that he should have his costs allowed;
therefore ordered accordingly: Morgan plaint. Ap John Gowge defendant. Anno 21.
Eliz.

The defendant makes oath that he was served with a Billet in paper at the
plaintants suit, Costs for want of a Bill the Billet lost.
which Billet he lost by misfortune; and upon his appearance no Bill is in
Court against him; therefore costs is awarded: Brown, alias Garris, alias Pawdy
plaintant, Stoyck defend. Anno 21. Eliz.

A Commission to examine witnesses in perpetual memory.
The plaintant exhibited his Bill to examine witnesses in perpetual memory,
touching a lease of Lands, which he and those by whom he claims, has
enjoyed 40. years; the defendant by answer claims the Lands as Coppyhold of
inheritance to Mr. Sowthwell, who is owner of the inheritance, and within age;
and therefore prayed that no witnesses might be examined, till Mr. Southwell be
of full age; and yet because the witnesses being old, and may dye in the
interim, therefore a Subpoena is awarded against the defend. to show cause why
a Commission should not be granted: Hearing plaintant, Fisher defendant. An.
21. Eliz.

John Budden makes oath that the defendants confessed unto him they were
served with a Subpoena at the plaintants suite and have not appeared;
Attachment for not appearing.
therefore an Attachment is granted: Perry Ar plaintant, Gatter alias Sharde,
and Cole defendants. An. 21. Eliz.

Dismission for that they have been in possession 100. years.
Upon the hearing of the matter for the Manor of Laughtor, and the Advowson of
the Church of Laughton, in the County of Bucking. it appeared that the
defendants and they from whom they claimed, have been in possession 100 years
with diverse discents; therefore the defendants are dismissed: Kinston
plaintant, Pigot and aliis defendants. Anno 21. Eliz.

Attachment for putting in a demurrer instead of an answer.
The defendant in Hillar. Term made oath that he could not answer without sight
of evidences in the Country; and having day given him he now has put in no
answer, but a demurrer contrary to the orders of this Court; therefore an
attachment is awarded against the defendant: Farmer and aliis plaintants, Fox
defendant. Anno 21. Eliz.

John Harry made oath for the serving of a Subpoena on the defendants to
rejoyn; Day given to the defendant to rejoyne.
therefore Monday next is given to the defendants to rejoyne or else to lose
the benefit thereof: Ioanes and aliis plaintants, Whitney, Miles, and aliis
defendants. An. 21. Eliz.

Whereas a Commission issued out to examine witnesses on both parties, A new
commission to examine witnesses, because they appeared not before.
which is returned executed upon oath made by Giles Brever, that he served
precepts from the Commissioners upon W. S. Tho. Lin. T. C. and Io. Peers to be
examined on the defendants behalf before the said Commissioners who appeared
not; it is therefore ordered that a new Commission be awarded to the former
Commissioners at the defendants charge, as well to examine the said four
witnesses as any other: Shepherd plaintant, Shepherd and aliis Defendants.
An. 21. Eliz.

The Duke of Northumberland acknowledged a Recognizance of 1000 Marks to the
Lord Crumwell, Not to extend one man's Lands only, where many are subject.
and after granted certain Lands to the defendant; afterward both the Duke,
and the Lord Cromwell were attainted of Treason, whereby the Recognizance came
to the Queen, and in her name was put in suit by one Lane, to whom her Majesty
had granted the same recognizance, who sought to extend the defendants said
Lands alone, whereas there are diverse other Lands to a great value in other
men's hands liable to the said Recognizance; therefore it is ordered that no
Liberate go out upon the said extent until the Court order the same: The
Queens Majesty plaintant, Colborne defendant, Anno 21. Eliz.

Injunction to stay suit at Common Law.
The plaintant sought to be relieved upon an Obligation of 300 l. which he
entered into to make a joyneture unto his wife, in consideration of 174 l.
promised to him by the defendant in marriage, which was never paid unto him;
therefore an Injunction is awarded, if cause be not showed: Osborne plaintant,
Havers defend. An. 21. Eli.

A new Commission to the defendant, and publication is stayed of witnesses
examined by the plaint. in Court.
The plaintant and defendant both joined in Commission to examine witnesses, and
the plaintant having the carriage of the Commission, did not execute the same,
but did examine witnesses here in Court; therefore ordered the defend. should
have a new Commission to the former Commissioners, wherein the plaintant might
also examine if he list; and at the return thereof publication, and in the
mean time publication is stayed: Mackworth plaintant, Swayefield, and aliis
defendants. An. 21. Eliz.

The defendant not to answer, till a Counselors hand be put to the Bill.
A frivolous Bill was exhibited against the defendant, without a Counselors
hand; and therefore ordered the defendant should not answer, until a
Counselors hand we^e put to the Bill, and the contempt for not answering is
suspended: Farly plaintant, Child defendant. An. 21. Eliz.

Dismission the Lands being under 40 s. per annum.
The defendant made oath that the Lands complained of by the plaintants Bill is
under 40 s. per annum, therefore dismissed: Pottinger plaintiff, Cogayne
defendant. Anno 21. Eliz.

Injunction to stay a suite of Quo minus, in the Exchequer.
The plaintiff sued here to be relieved for a least of one thousand years of
certain Lands, and depending the suite, the defendant by quo minus out of the
Exchequer, being Tenant of other Lands to the Queen, brought an Ejectione
firm against the under Tenants of the plaintant; therefore an injunction to
stay the said suit of Quo minus if cause be not showed: Ioanes and aliis
plaintants, Whitney Miles, and aliis defendants. Anno 21. Eliz.

The plaintant made oath for the serving of a Subpoena on Mary Cavendish,
Attachment against witnesses, served to testifie^
John Gilgate, William Pipe, and Edm^nd Styles, to appear before Commissioners
to be examined on his behalf; therefore an Attachment is awarded against them:
Turnor plaintant, Warren defendant. Anno 21. Eliz.

John Quippe made oath the defendant confessed he was served with a Subpoena
for costs, Attachment for costs.
and has not paid it; therefore an Attachment: Suell plaintant, Rogers
defendant. Anno 21. Eliz.

The defendant since the Bill exhibited, Injunction to stay suits at common Law.
commenced several suites at the common Law for the cause here complained of
against the plain^ant, and his under Tenants; therefore an Injunction is
awarded against him: Thorough good plaintant, May and aliis defendants. Anno
21. Eliz.

The defendant demurred generally without showing any cause of his demurrer: A
demurrer generally ordered to answer.
therefore ordered if he show not, good cause of his demurrer upon F^iday next
a Subpoena is awarded against him to make a better answer: Peachie plaintant
Twyecrosse defendant. Anno 21. Eliz.

It is ordered that if the plaintants do charge the defendants by their Bill
for the issues and profits of Lands, The defendant charged upon account shall
not answer if upon a p^omise, he shall.
which do lie in the County of Lancaster, merely by way of account, then the
defendants shall not be compelled to answer; if the defendants be charged in
respect of their promise, then they are to answer: Wingfield Miles and uxor
plaintants, Fleetwood and aliis defendants. Anno 21. Eliz.

A Commission by consent to prove the receipt of rents, fines, and Woodsales.
The suit was for certain rents, fines, and Woodsales received by the
defendants testator during the plaintants minority. It appeared that if the
plaintant had made good proof, he was to be relieved; therefore a Commission
is awarded by consent: Borrough plaintant, A. B. defendant. Anno 21. Eli.

The Kings Order and Decree in Chancery for a Rule to be observed by the
Chancellor in that Court exemplified and enrolled for a perpetual Record
there. Anno 1616.
James by the grace of God, etc. Whereas our Right Trusty and Welbeloved Sir
Francis Bacon Knight, our Councellor and Attorney general, received a Letter
from our Chancellor of England, Dated the 19. of March, An. Dom. 1615. Written
by our express Commandment, directing him, and requiring him, and the rest of
our learned Council, to peruse such presidents as should be produced unto them
from time of K. Henry the 7. and since of complaints made in the Chancery,
there to be relieved according to equity, and conscience after Judgments in
the Courts of the common Laws, in Cases wherein the Judges of the common Law
could not relieve them: And thereupon to certify us of the truth of that they
shall find, and of their opinions concerning the same, which Letter follows
in these words.

MAster Attorney, His Majesty being informed, That there be many presidents in
the Court of Chancery, in the time of King H. 7. and continually since, that
such as complained there to be relieved according to equity and conscience,
after Judgments in the Courts of the common Law, in Cases where the Judges of
the common Law could not relieve them (being bound by their oath, to observe
the strict rules of the Law) is willing to understand, whether there be such
presidents as he is informed of: And therefore has commanded me to let you
know, that his will and pleasure is, that you call to assist you his Majesty's
Sergeants, and Solicitor, and to peruse such presidents of this kind, as shall
be produced unto you; and thereupon to certify his Majesty of the truth of
that you shall find, and of your opinions concerning the same; and for your
better directions therein, I have sent you here enclosed a note in writing
delivered unto me, mentioning some such presidents in King H. the 7. time and
since. And I am told that there be the like, in former times; his Majesty
expects your proceeding in this with as much speed as conveniently you may:
And so I rest,

Your very assured loving friend. T. Ellesmere Canc.
At York house. 19. Martii, 1615.

ANd whereas our Attorney general, and the rest of our learned Council did
thereupon return unto us their certificate, subscribed withal their hands
according to our commandment, and direction given them by the said Letter,
which Certificate follows in these words;

According to your Majesty's commandment, we have advisedly considered of the
note delivered unto us, of presidents of complaining and proceeding in Chancery
after Judgments in common Law; and also have seen and perused the originals,
out of which the same note was abstracted, upon all which we do find, and
observe the points following.

1. We find that the same note is fully verified, and maintained by the
originals. 2. We find that there has been a strong current of practice of
proceeding in Chancery after Judgment, and many times after execution,
continued from the beginning of H. 7. Reign, unto the time of the Lord
Chancellor that now is, both in the Reigns ( separatim) of the several Kings,
and in the times of the several Chancellors, whereof diverse were great learned
men in the Law: It being in cases, where there is no remedy for the Subject, by
the strict course of the common Law, unto which the Judges are sworn. 3. We
find that these proceedings in Chancery, has been after Judgments, in actions
of several natures, as well real as personal. 4. We find it has been after
Judgments in your Majesty's several Courts, the Kings Bench, common Pleas,
Justice in Oyre, etc. 5. We find it has been after Judgments obtained upon
verdict, demurres, and where Writs of error have been brought. 6. We find in
many of the Cases, That the Judgments are expresjudgementsly mentioned in the
Bills in the Chancery themselves to have been given, and relief prayed
thereupon, sometimes for stay of execution, sometimes after execution, of which
kind we find a great number in King H. the 7. his time. 7. We find the matters
in equity, laid in such Bills in most of the Cases, to have been matter
precedent before the Judgments, and not matter of agreement a^^^^. 8. We find
in the said cases, not only the Bill preferred, but motions, orders,
injunctions, and decrees thereupon, for the discharging, and releasing of the
Judgments, or abiding the possession thereupon obtained, and sometimes for the
mean profits, and the release of the costs, etc. 9. We find in some of the
cases in this very point, that Judgment has been given, has been stood upon
by the defendants, and alleged by them by way of demurrer, and overruled. 10.
We find that the Judges themselves in their own Courts, when there appeared
unto them matter of equity, because they by their oath and office, could not
stay the Judgments, except it be for some small time, have directed the
parties to seek relief in Chancery. 11. We find that this has not only been
in the times of the several Chancellors, but by the Judges themselves, and
that without difficulty, when they sat in Chancery in the vacancy, or absence
of the Chancellor. 12. We find the hands of sundry principal Counselors at
Law^ whereof diverse of them are now Judges, ^^d some in chie^e place in Bills
of this kind. 13. Lastly here were offered to have been showed unto us many
other presidents, whereof we heard some read, and found them to be of like
nature with those contained in the note.
Francis Bacon, Randell Crew. Henry Mountague, Hen. Yelverton.

And whereas also our said Attorney received one other Letter from our said
Chancellor, with a case there enclosed, written likewise by our express
commandment, dated the 27. of March, 1616 directing, and requiring him, and the
rest of our learned Council, together with the Attorney of our dear son the
Prince, to confer together upon the said cause, and to consider advisedly of all the parts thereof; and thereupon to peruse all the the Statutes of Praemunire,
or Provisoes, and all other Statutes^ as they shall conceive to be necessary to
be considered of, for the resolving the question propounded in that case; and
thereupon to report unto us their opinions in writing concerning the same;
which Letter and Case there enclosed follow in these words.

MAster Attorney, His Majesty has perused this case enclosed, and has
commanded me to send it to you; and his will and pleasure is, that you call
unto you Mr. Sarjeant Mountague, Mr. Sarjeant Crew, Mr. Solicitor, and Mr.
Walter the Princes Attorney, and you confer together thereupon, and con^ider
advisedly, and deliberately of all the parts thereof; and thereupon to peruse
all the Statutes of Praemunire or Provisors, and all other such Statutes as you
shall conceive to be necessary to be considered of, for the resolving the
question propounded in this case, this his Majesty would have be done with
mature deliberation, and yet with as much speed as conveniently you can; and
when you have sufficiently informed your selves therein, then to report to him
your opinions in writing; and so I committ you to God and rest,

Your very loving friend, T. Ellesmore Canc.
At York house the 27. of March, 1616.

A. has Judgment and execution in the Kings Bench, or common Pleas, against
B. in an action of debt of 1000 l. And in an ejectione Firmae, of the Manor of
D. B. complains in the Chancery to be relieved against those Judgments
according to conscience and equity, allowing the Judgments to be lawful and
good by the rigor and strict rules of the common Laws; and the matters in
conscience and equity such as the Judges of the common Law (being no Judges in
equity, but bound by their oaths to do the Law) cannot give any remedy or
relief for the same, either by error or attaint, or by any other means.
Question. Whither the Chancery may relieve B. in this or such like cases, or
else leave him utterly remediless and undone; and if the Chancery be
restrained by any Statute of Praemunire, etc. Then by what Statute, or by what
words in any Statute is the Chancery so restrained, and conscience and equity
banished, excluded and damned? and whereas according to our said commandment,
our said learned council, and the Attorney of our dear Son the Prince,
returned unto us a Certificate of their opinions upon the said Statutes under
all their several hands concerning the same case, which Certificate follows
in these words.

According to your Majesty's Commandment, we have deliveratly advised of the
case sent unto us by the Lord Chancellor; and of the Statutes as well those of
Praemunire as others, as far as we take it may concern the case; and for our
better information therein, we have thought fit to send for, and peruse the
original Records themselves remaining in the Tower of London, of those
Statutes not only appearing upon the Roll of Parliament with the Kings
answers, which is the warrant to the Roll of Parliament.

We have also taken into consideration as well Book Laws, as diverse other
Acts of Parliament, which may give light unto the Statutes, whereupon the
question properly grows, together with such ancient Records and presidents as
we could find, as well those which maintain the authority of the Chancery, as
those which seem to impeach the same; and upon the whole matter we are al of
opinion, that the Chancery may give relief to the case in question; and that
no Statute of Praemunire, etc. or other Statute restraines the same.

And because we know not what use your Majesty will be pleased to make of this
our opinion, either for the time present or future; we are willing to give some
reasons of the same, not thinking fit to trouble your Majesty with all those
things whereupon we have grounded our selves, selecting out some principal
things, which moved us to be of this opinion, to the end this same may be a
fuller object of your Majesty's Princely Judgment, whereunto we always submit
our selves.

And first we must lay for a sure foundation, that which was contained in our
former Certificate, concerning the continual practice, by the space now of six
score years, in the times of King Hen. the 7. King Hen. the 8. King Edward the
sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth of this authority; and that in the
time, when the same authority was managed, not only the Bishops which might
be thought less skillful, or less affectionate toward the Laws of the Land,
but also diverse great Lawyers, which could not but know and honor the Law, as
the means of their advancement, Sir Thomas More, and the Lord Audly, the Lord
Rich, Sir Nicholas Bacon, Sir Thomas Bromley, and Sir John Puckering; and
further that most of the late Judges of the Kingdom, either as Judges when
they sat in Chancery by Commission, or as Counselors at Law, when they set
their hands to Bills, have by their judgment and council, upheld the same
authority; and therefore for as much as it is a true ground That optimus legum
interpres consuetudo, especially when the practice or custom passes not
amongst vulgar persons, but amongst the most high and scient Magistrates of the
Kingdom: And when also the practicing of the same should lie under so heavy a
pain as the Praemunire: This is to us a principal and implicit satisfaction;
and those Statutes ought not to be construed to extend to this case; and this
of it self, we know, is of far more force to move your Majesty, then any
opinion of ours, because Kings are fittest to inform Kings, and Chancellors to
teach Chancellors, and Judges to teach Judges; but further out of out own
science and profession, we have thought fit to add those further reasons and
proofs very briefly, because in case of so ancient a possession of
jurisdiction, we hold it not fit to amplify.

The Statutes upon which the question grows, are principally two; whereof one
is a Statute of Praemunire, and the other is a Statute of simple prohibition;
that of Praemunire is the Statute of 27. E. 3. cap. 1. And the Statute of the
simple prohibition is the Statute of 4. H. 4. cap. 23. There are diverse other
Statutes of both kinds; but the question will rest principally upon those two,
as we conceive it.

The en^rance in Seldens discourse fol. 63 b.
For the Statute of 27. E. 3. it cannot in our opinions extend unto the
Chancery, for these reasons.

1. First out of the mischief which the Statute provides and recites, viz.
That such suites and pleas (against which the Statute is provided) were in
prejudice and disinherison of the King and his Crown, which cannot be applied
to the Chancery: for the King cannot be disinherited of jurisdiction, but
either by a forreigner, or by his Subject; but never by his own Court. 2. Out
of the remedy which the Statute points; viz. That the offenders shall be warned
within two months, to be before the King and his Council, or in his Chancery,
or before the Kings Justices of the one Bench, or of the other, etc. By which
words it is opposite in it self, that the Chancery should give both the
offense and the remedy. 3. Out of penalty which is not only severe, but
hastily, namely that the offenders shall be put out of the Kings protection,
which penalty altogether savors of adhering to f^rreine Jurisdictions, and
would never have been inflicted upon an excess only of jurisdiction in any of
the Kings Courts as the Court of Chancery is. 4. Out of the Statutes precedent
and subsequent 25. E. 3. cap. 1. and 16. R. 2. cap. 5. which are of the same
nature and cannot be applied but to foreign Courts; for the word alibi, or
elsewhere is never used, but where Rome is named specially before. 5. The
disjunctive in this Statute (which only gives the color) viz. That they which
draw any out of the Realm in plea, whereof the Cognizance pertains to the
Kings Court (or) of things whereof Judgments be given in the Kings Court, or
which do sue in any other Court, to defeat or impeach the Judgments given to
the Kings Court; this last disjunction we said (which must go farther then
Courts out of the Realm, which are fully provided for by the former branch)
has sufficient matter and effect to work upon in respect of such Courts, which
though they were totally within the Realm, yet in jurisdiction were
subordinate to the fo^reigner such as were the Legates court, the delegates
court, and in general all the Ecclesiastical courts within the Realm at that
time, as it is expressly construed in the Judges, 50. E. 4. fol. 6. 6. In this
the sight of the Record of the Petition does clear the doubt, where the
Subjects supplicate to the King to ordain remedy against those which pursue in
other courts then his own against Judgments given in his court, which
explaines the word (other) to be other then the Kings courts. 7. With this
agrees notably the book of entries, which translates the word (in other court)
not in alia Curia, but in aliena Curia. 8. This Statute of vicesimo septimo, E.
3. being in corroboration of the common Law (as it self recites) we do not
find in the Register any presidents of the Writs of adjura regia, which are
framed upon chief cases that were afterward made penal, by the Praemunire,
but only against the Ecclesiastical courts. 9. Lastly we have not found any
president at all, of any conviction upon the Satutes of Praemunire of this
nature for suits in Chancery, but only two or three Bills of Indictment
preferred, sed nihilinde venit, for ought appears to us. For the Statute of H.
4. that we doubt was made against proceeding within the Realm, and not against
foreign; and therefore has no penalty annexed, nevertheless we conceive
that it extends not to the Chancery in the case delivered, for these reasons.
1. First this Statute recites where the parties are made to come upon grievous
pain, sometimes before the King himself, sometimes before the Kings Council,
and sometimes in the Parliament to answer thereof anew, etc. Where it appears
that the Chancery is not named, which could not have been forgotten, but was
left out upon great reason, because the Chancery is a court of ordinary Justice
for matter of equity; and the Statute meant only to restrain extraordinary
Commissions, and such like proceedings. 2. This appears fully by view and
comparing the two Petitions, which were made the same Parliament of 4. H. 4.
placed immediately the one before the other. The first which was rejected by
the King, and the second, whereupon this Statute was made; whereof the first
was to restrain the ordinary proceedings of Justice, that is to say in the
Chancery by name, in the Exchequer, and before the Kings Council by process
of privy Seal; unto which the King makes a Royal and prudent answer in these
words: The King will charge his Officers to be more sparing, to send for his
Subjects by such process then heretofore they have been; but notwithstanding
it is not his mind, that the Officers shall so far obtain, but that they may
call his Subjects before them, in matters and causes necessary, as it has
been done in the time of his good Progenitors; and then immediately follows
the Petition, whereupon the Act now in question was made, unto which the King
gave his assent, and wherein no mention is made at all of the Chancery or
Exchequer. 3. If the Chancery should be understood to be within the Statute,
yet the Statute extends not to this case; for the words are, that the Kings
Subjects are driven to answer thereof anew, which must be understood, when the
same matter formerly judged, is put in issue or question again, but when the
cause is called into the Chancery only upon point of equity, there as the point
of equity was never in question in the common Law Court, so the point of Law or
of fact (as it concerns the Law) is never in question in the Chancery; so the
same thing is not twice in question, or as answered anew: for the Chancery does
supply the Law, and not cross it. 4. It appears to our understanding, by the
cause of error, and attaint in the same Statute, what Jurisdiction it was that
the Statute meant to restrain, viz. such Jurisdiction as did assume to reverse
and undo the Judgment, as error or attaint does, which the Chancery never
does, but leaves the Judgment in peace, and only meddles with the corrupt
conscience of the party; for if the Chancery should assume to reverse the
Judgment in the point adjudged, it is void as appears 39. E. 3. f. 14. 5. We
find no presidents of any pro^ceeding to conviction or Judgment upon any
indictment framed or grounded upon this Statute, no more then upon the Statute
of Praemunire; and the ^ate Indictments are contra diversa Statuta not
mentioning the particular Statutes. 6. Lastly, it was a great mischief to
force the Subject in all cases to seek remedy in equity, before he knew whither
the Law will help him or no, which oftentimes he cannot do till after
judgment, and therefore he is to seek his salve properly, when he has his
hurt.

There be diverse other things of weight which we have seen and considered of,
whereupon we have grounded our opinion, but we go no further upon that we have
seen.

But because matters of presidents is greatly considerable in this case, and
that we have been attended by the Clerks of the Chancery, with the presidents
of that Court, and have not been yet attended by any officer of the Kings Bench
with any president of judgments, if it shall please your Majesty faithful
report of them, as we have done of the other; all which etc.

Francis Bacon, Hen. Mountague. Randall Crew, Hen. Yelverton. John Walter.

Now forasmuch as Mercy and Justice be the true supports of your Royal Throne;
and that it properly belongs to us in our Princely office, to take care and
provide, that our Subjects have equal and indifferent Justice ministered to
them, and that where their case deserves to be relieved in course of equity by
suit in our Court of Chancery, they should not be abandoned, and exposed to
perish under the Rigor and extremity of our Laws; we in our Princely judgment
having well weighed, and with mature deliberation considered of the said
several reports of our learned Council, and of all the parts of them, do
approve, ratify, and confirm as well the practice of our court of Chancery
expressed in the first Certificate, as their opinions for the Law upon the
Statutes mentioned in their latter Certificate, the same having relation to the
case sent them by our said Chancellor; and do will and command, that our
Chancellor, or Keeper of the Great Seal for the time being, shall not
hereafter desist unto our Subjects upon their several complaints (now or
hereafter to be made) such relief in equity (notwithstanding any former
proceedings at the common Law against them) as shall stand with true merits and
Justice of their cases, and with the former ancient and continued practice and
proceeding of our Chancery; and for that it appertains to our Princely care
and office only to Judge over all our Judges, and to discern and determine
such differences as at any time may or shall arise between our several courts,
touching the jurisdictions, and the same to settle and decide as we in our
Princely wisdom shall find to stand most with our Honor, and the example of
our Royal Progenitors, in the best times, and the general weal and good of
our people, for which we are to answer unto God, who has placed us over them:
Our will and pleasure is, that our whole proceedings herein by the decrees
formerly set down be enrolled in our court of Chancery, there to remain of
record, for the better extinguishing of the like questions or differences that
may arrise in future times.

Per ipsum Regem. Fran. Bacon. Hen. Yelverton.
Decimo octavo Iulii. Anno 14. R. Regis, etc.
FINIS.

