SEVERAL CONSIDERATIONS, Offered to the Parliament concerning the improvement
of Trade, Navigation, and Comerce, more especially, the old draperies and other
woolen manufactures of England: by G. C. a Lover, of his country.
WHereas in former ages, the subjects of England, lived cheifely by pasturage
and tillage, they were necessitated, to transport their wooles, to bring in
bullion, and other commodities, for their support, and pleasures. But after the
invention of gunns and gunpouder. Shipping, and mariners, inereasing so much
in foreign parts (from the product of English woole) both in number and
strenght; England could not be defended any longer, with bows and arrows,
wherefore they slighted many old castles, and trusted to new Ships, and even
at last to think upon trade and comerce, which proved the chiefest fortress,
and support of the King and Kingdom.

After the dissolution of Monasteries and Abbeys, the people multiplying so
fast, they settled several Colonies, and plantations in Asia and America,
finding noe room at home, for all younger brothers to live, and get estates.
Diverse of them, that were naturally adicted to the wars, left the service of
other Princes, and States (where English men sell their skinns, and spinn out
their lives, for brass stivers, and sols marquis) to seek their fortunes in
those Dominions, that were added to the Crown, through the great charges and
industry of several well affected persons (to their King and Country) who
since have not only lost their real possessions, but their original costs, by
bad government, and worse conducts.

When the staple of woole was kept at Midleburgh, in Richard the seconds time,
and at Callais, in Edward the thirds time, it was ordained, that for every sack
of woole, which should be transported out of England, there should be a
competent quantity of silver bullion returned, besides 50 s. a sack for custom
outward to the King. And to prevent all manner of frauds in those days, there
were several offices of the staple errected at West-minster, New Castle,
York, Lincoln, Canterbury, Excester, Bristoll, and other places, so that, a
fleece of woole, could not be exported, without account to the King, and a
return to the Kingdom. The tenth part of all wooles being to come to the
church, their officers served the Crown gratis, for the benefitts they
received of maintenance, and protection, which may be done, now by Parochial,
and Secular persons, as was then by Regulars, without any charge to the crown.

It is the Custom in England for the chiefest lords in Parliament, to sit
upon woole packs, to put them in mind of the natural grows of their
estates, and the best dependence of the Crown, and the common wealth.

A pack of English woole containing 100. weight, Exceeds in value a pack of the
finest flax, Goats hair, or the finest filke, of the same weight, as far as
100. weight of English Tin, or lead, Exceeds 100. weight of Hollands turfe,
dug out of their silver Mines. In regard English woole, is of that absolute
necessity to most nations of the world, for warmth, and clothing, when the
other is for pleasure and delight. 100. weight of fine flax, mohaire, or silk,
may set as many people at work, as a pack of woole, but it is not universally
of the tenth part, for use of apparel, or consumption. And the one being of
English grows, and the other fforraigne, the woole adds to the Kingdom, and
the other deminisheth.

100. Pore men, women, and children, are usually employed, and set at work by
every 100. weight of English woole (viz) Combers, Spinners, Reelers, Weavors,
Kintters, Dyers, Cloathworkers, Rowers, Fullers, Laborers, etc. That consumes
the grain and victuals of England, and so many people must stand still,
begg^, or starve, for want of work at home, for every pack of woole that is
transported from thence, into France, Flanders or Holland. Where there are
great quantities of English, Ir^^h, and Scotch woole, ( Notwithstanding all the
strikt laws to the contrary) Frequently carrie^ over toward the manufacture of
cloth, stuffes, stockings, monmouth capps, Tapistry, Dornick hangings,
Ratines, Bays, Drugetts, etc. Which cannot be wrought alone with their short
staple wooles.

The Kings of France, originally granted liberty, and privileges, to all
nations that would come, and inhabit Flanders, Brabant, etc. Whereupon, those
great, and populous Cities and towns, were suddanly built by strangers, of
all arts and sciences. And many of their best Churches, Monasteries, and
Abbeys, were founded, and erected, by Several Kings of England, and noble men
in the Saxons time; As the records of Flanders, makes appear, Amongst which,
there is a very remarkable History. The Queen of France in her progress,
coming to vissit Brugis and Gant, she found, the people so richly clothed,
that she said she thought, there had been but one Queen in France, but there
she found all the women Queens, and wished she had been a Cloathiers wife also,
most of the inhabitants, being Cloathiers, Weavors, and others, that lived upon
the manufacture of English woole, which so increased their wealth, and beauty,
to wonder, and admiration.

Afterward by several acts of Providence, many thousand Weavors, Felt makers,
Knitters, and Spinners, transported themselves for England, when the great
Council of the land, had prohibited the transportation of woole, and
encouraged the woolen manufactures at home. Then a Charter was granted to the
Merchant adventurers, who maintained several persons, in all the sea Port
towns of England, France and Flanders, to make seizures, and discoveries, of
all wooles, and fullers Earth, that should be conveyed out of his Majesty's
Dominions, to fforraigne parts; But since the Charter of the Company, was
broaken, that trade is decayed, and the old drapery o^ England slighted, in the
Seaventeen Provinces, through the great burdens, new impositions, and
exations, lately laid upon English manufactures, whereby that Comerc^ is
neglected, and interlopers exposing Cloth, Kersies, and Searges, to contempt
by their pedling, and offering them, to sale in como^n tavernes, and tippling
houses. So that the staple commodities of England, will at lenght be
unregarded. Whereof I have spoken more at large, in my remarkable passages,
concerning the Hollanders, since the death of Quee^ Elizebeth. And had prepared
these following considerations (during the lat^ treaty with the States
General) for opening the Scheld, which I leav^ to yover grave wisdoms, and
apprehensions, upon all future events.

CONSIDERATIONS Of the Advantages, which the King of great Brittaigne, and his
subjects, may draw by the opening of the navigation, in the River of the
Scheld, to the city of Antwerpe.
THere is nothing of more importance to the united Provinces, then navigation,
by which they do not only subsist, but are enriched, and render themselves
formidable to all the Princes, and Potentates of Europe.

And to the prejudice of all their neighbors, and their own great profit,
they draw to themselves, the Comerce of the whole world, as well in respect of
the sale of goods, in their own Country, as of what they distribue unto others.

And although their Comerce seem to be interrupted, and deminished by this
war, yet that is only for a time, since that as soon as they shall have peace,
they will imeadiatly setle themselves again, in the trade, to the Exclusion of
all other nations.

Wherefore the only means to weaken the states, and to divert this inundation
of trade (that swells amongst them) without any effusion of blood, or expense
of his Majesty's subjects. It being a Sure and easy conquest, which is got by
peace. A ffree Passage ought to be procured, for his Majesty's subjects and
their Ships in the River of Scheld up to the city of Antwerp.

FIrst the same, being a city very comodious for its situation, environed with
Machelen, Brussells and many other great cities and towns. The entry to the
sea Port, very good and sure in time of winter, the River capable to carry
Ships of 400. Tunn, The inhabitants ^aturaly inclined to trade. The Exchanges
to all other Countries there, the conducts and land ^arriages settled unto
Germany Itally, etc. The many little Channels and Rivers for transpor^ing their
marchandiz, and all other qualities requisite to a town of Comerce.

Thither his Majesty's subjects, might not only carry all sort of wares, and
marchandises of their own, and other countries, for the use of the Provinces
of Brabant, Flanders, Hennow, and others under the obedience of his most
Catholic Majesty, but likewise be distributed, further (...) into the
Country, to the ffrench conquests; Liege, Germany, Itally, etc.

And goods exported in one Bottom, directly from England, Scotland and
Ireland, and ^^her places in the Ships of his Majesty's subjects, might be
sold in Antwerpe, and be trans^^rted from thence more easily, and much cheaper
then any other way what soever Also the ^anufactures of the low countries, the
new conquests of ffrance, as Likewise of Liege, Ger^any, Itally, etc. Might be
carried from Antwerpe into England Scotland and Ire^^nd at ffar less rates.

By the Established laws of England, noe fforraigne Shipp, can bring in any
Merchandise ^ere, but what is the product of that Country from whence they
came. And noe treaty can abro^^te an act of Parliament, or known law of the
land. What comes from Leigh, Germany, Itally, etc. (Now loaded in Holland
Ships) being brought by the Conducts and land Carriages to be loaded at
Antwerpe, Should be transported into England, Scotland, and Ireland, and other
Countries in English Ships, excluding all others.

This alone would so increase navigation, and cause so considerable a trade
to the subjects of England, that the obtaining thereof, ought to be indeavored
without any other consideration.

SEcondly the subjects of England, might establish the staple of English
Cloth, in the Town of Antwerpe, which would be of much more advantage, and
profit to those concerned, then at Dort, in respect it is a manufacture, which
is not made in Antwerpe, nor in other towns thereabouts.

But on the contrary, the Hollanders counterfeit the Manufacture of English
Cloth, a^ Leyden, and other towns nere to Dort, so craftily, and subtily,
making their cloth o^ the same Colors, yet slighter and of less value,
whereby they undersell the English, in a^^ fine Clothes, to the great detriment
of his Majesty, and his subjects, in the sale, and distribution of the English
drapery, in foreign parts.

And the Hollanders being naturally inclined to thrift, and to favor their
own manufactures, they Cloth them selves, in their own Country Cloth, and
endeavor to introduce the same, into other Countries both far and nere, to the
Exclusion of English Cloth.

For which cause the sale of English Cloth in Holland, is very small. But if
the staple were established at Antwerpe it would be far otherwise, as well in
respect of what would be pu^ off in the Provinces belonging to the King of
Spain, as of what would be sold in the Citti^^ and towns of the ffrench
conquests, and further unto Liege, Germany, Itally, etc.

The transportation from Antwerpe is at present more comodious and sure to the
other Countries before mentioned, because the same may be without paying any
imposts, to any oth^^ Prince then the Catholic King, not goeing through any
other territory but his.

VVereas on the contrary goeing from Dort to the aforesaid Countries, they must
pass through several Jurisdictions, and consequently pay the transits, which
how small-soever it be, is burden to the Marchandises. As the thirty several
tolls unto diverse Princes, Landgrav^^ and others upon Rheinish wines, before
they come to Antwerpe by Dort.

THirdly the silks which comes from the hither parts of Itally, by the conducts
to Antwer^^ to be transported from thence into England, Scotland and Ireland,
the same being do^^ by English Ships directly, would be of less charge then
other-wayes; Likewise the Dangers Sea is less in winter, by the comodiousnes,
of the Port and entry of this River.

The Ships of his Majesty's subjects, would also have the benefit of
transporting the sa^^ with other merchandises, and might have the advantage of
many voyages, and loading which at present others have to their loss.

I pass over in silence and leave to the consideration of those that trade, the
infin^^ other profitts, Judging it sufficient to point only in this little
discourse at (...) great advantages, his Majesty's subjects of great Brittaigne
will draw from (...) navigation.

But it must be granted, that both in times of peace and war, that English
Ships be not searched, nor vissited, or obliged to declare unto whom the
Loading, or merchandise belongs. And that a ffree Shipp, shall make ffree
goods, as is condescended on betwixt the Catholiqkue King, and the states of
the united Provinces.

By this means, if the King of Spain, come to a rupture with the said states,
or any other Prince, or common wealth, English Ships not being to be troubled,
either goeing, or coming, will be always preferred, and so shall draw the
navigation to them selves.

If there fall out any misunderstanding, betwixt any other Potentates. And
that the Merchants Ships, need any convoy, there vvil be employment for the
men of war, who may conduct them by flushing or further up the River. And in
that case the King of great Brittaigne after the Example of his most Christian
Majesty, to bring about and Establish this navigation, in favor of his
subjects, might give Convoyes gratis, to attend the Merchants Ships, for at
first they must be incovraged, by good offices.

ALl the difficulty, and opposition, in this affair, will arrise from the
Zelanders, because at present they possess the Entry to this River. The states
having gotten. Breskens in Flanders (over against fflushing) acquitted by
Spain in the treaty at Munster Anno 1648.
BUt seeing, that by other ways and means their Comerce is taken away at Havre
de Grace, Amsterdam, Roterdam, Ostend, Hambourgh, etc. Without being able to
help it, nor draw any profit from thence, which may make them jealous and
resolve not to quitt the profit, they draw by this navigation. In Answer to
that difficulty.

All the great Ships, which are not always able to come up the River for
want of water, or hindered by eontrary winds, being to unloade will do the same
in the vessels of Zeland, whereby the town and inhabitants of Flushing, and
others will reap the profit, of the selling, and buying, and other expenses of
seamen, and passengers, who shall lodge there, both at there loading, and
unloading. The Pylotts will be paid for guiding the Ships, up the River, and
many other profitts.

And if those of that Province, should not permit this passage, without
receiving some small customs, the same may be agreed on, by the tunn, or
Shipp, without being obliged, to pay perticularly for Each merchandise, or to
make declaration of the same.

If they should not consent, his Majesty has the same power in his hands, to
exclude and forbid the Ships of Zeland, and others of the states, from goeing
up the River of Thames, but to unlade in English vessels at Graves End,
obliging them to pay the same imposts, and tolls, which they Exact from his
Majesty's subjects.

It is not just, that for any agreement, the states made with Spain, they
should pretend to Exclude all other nations, from sailing on a River which God
and nature has made ffree. More Especially great Brittaigne. The King being
not concerned in the treaty at Munster, who ought to enjoy the same
previledges, and liberties granted by all the former treaties between the
Dukes of Burgundy and Austria and the Kings of England whereby the 17.
Provinces, hold and enjoy those liberties, benefitts and advantages, of the
Kings Harbors, Havens, Ports, Rivers, and streams at all times and seasons in
England, without which the 7. united Provinces (that were branches of Austria
and Burgundy) could not subsist.

By the treaty, which the usurper Cromwell, made with the states of the united
Provinces, it was indefinitly agreed, that English men, and their Ships, might
freely and without trouble, trade and sail with their merchandise in and
through all parts, and places, of the united Provinces to the tewnes situated
within their jurisdictions, or without, the same. And consequently it was
believed and averred, that that Article did contain the grant of a ffree
passage, for his Majesty's subjects up the River, to Antwerpe, being drawn out
of the treaty concluded in the year 1495. between King Henery the 7. and
Phillip Duke of Burgoundy and Austria. And it ought Ano: 1654. to have been put
in Execution, but was suspended for some reasons Notwithstanding the Hollanders
upon all ocations fly to the treaty Ano: 1495. for their liberty and ffreedome
of ffishing upon the Coast of England.

In this present conjuncture, when the united Provinces are surrounded, and
attacqued, by such Royal powers, the said Provinces must be reducd, to the
extremity that they will be obliged to make what agreement they can have.
However if the Scheld were open to the English, they will still serve the
spanish netherlands with butter Cheese ffresh ffish, salt fish wett, and dry.
And all the 6. states of Zeland, viz Flussing, Midleburgh, Ter-veere,
Zirrick-zee, Ter-goes and Ter-tolen will not be obstructed in any thing of
their other employment (they anciently had) by opening the River of Scheld to
great Brittaigne, that setts open all their Rivers, Havens, and Harbors, to
them in times of storms, and distress, that must otherwise often times perish.

IT is most certain that it is the interest of the King of great Brittaigne,
for the prosperity, and comerce of his subjects, to weaken the force of his
natural Enemies, by a more strickt Amity and good correspondence with the King
of Spain, and for that purpose, this ffree passage, for the Ships of his
Majesty's subjects, ought to be procured and agreed upon in the ensuing treaty
of Peace, and that all English manufactures should have noe greater burden, or
exactions what soever laid upon them, either in the Spanish Netherlands, united
Provinces, or in the ffrench Conquests, then they paid in the times of the
Dukes of Burgoundy, for which the crown of England, granted all the liberties,
and privileges, to those Belgic Provinces in the English Seas, etc.

This generous enterprise, without all peradventure, will find good success, if
the King, and his Parliament, do rightly understand each other, whose Memory
will be Eternal, amongst all nations, for the happy Conclusion of so noble an
undertaking.

SEVERAL WRITERS Upon the Holland Policies, do much comend the states in
stopping up the River Scheld, but they do noe less wonder at the council of
England, that permitted it, seeing it breeds such a vast number of seamen to
the prejudice of great Brittaigne, that ought by all means, to prevent it, by
sending their Ships directly to Antwerpe, that are forced to unlade their
goods in Zeland and Rotterdam, in small vessels of theirs, which is one of the
great Nursereyes of the dutch navigation, and that English men chiefly
maintains by those ffraights, besides the great advantages, the states make by
their tolls, upon English goods in that River, which helps to support their
usurped government, since they fell from the Crown of Spain.

Although there was some reason of state, for England to hinder the growth of
Spain ^y assisting the united Provinces. yet they wanted good consideration,
and foresight, that lessned themselves with their Neighbors, by helping others.

Spain never valued trade, England always valued their pleasures, and Holland
ever valued their profit. Whereby they make it their business, to bafle all
nations, and Kingddomes in Public treaties, for their own interest, to the
prejudice of other men.

The Zelanders are a people, that upon all occations, serves for private men of
war against England, and are so apt for such mischeife, by their natural
inclinations, and situation of their country, that they ought to be bridled,
when there is any opertunity to put curbes into their mouths.

The Hollanders are not contented with ploughing up the English Seas, and
Harrowing the waves, but make marchandises of Gods word, in printing yearly,
many thousand English, bibles, and practices of pyety at Amsterdam and Leyden,
counterfeiting the Kings Arms, and Epistles to the Readers. A forgery not be
fuffered.

The Sabines of old, from whom sprunge the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians,
gave this Motto in all their Ensigns, and Banners S. P. Q. R. signifieing,
Sabino Populo quis resistet. Whereupon the Romans caused the same letters, to
be engraven upon all iheir gates and Posturnes signifying thereby Senatus
Populusque Romanus, which Contracted a teadious and distructive war. The
Hollanders and Zelanders, since the last war with England, have engraven, and
painted the Arms of the King of great Brittaigne upon several of their Fly
Boats, and other Ships amongst the number (that I know) upon one they named
the ffrendshipp of London richly laden in Zeland, bound for Cales, and the
Straights, with dutch, and Spanish goods, under the notion of English, having
procured a master, and other English seamen, to Color their false practices,
which can only be questioned, by S. P. Q. R. (viz) Rex Senatusque Parlamenti
otherwise the united Provinces will keep, the trade, and navigation, unto
themselves as well in times of war, as peace.

As there is nothing more shameful, then a peace, which gives way to the
Enemies to fortify themselves. So there is nothing more infamous, then to ley
still, when the public interest, obliges to take arms; But since victories
depend rather upon fortune, then valor. Its necessary to take all advantages,
to give the Hollanders a rising blow, by some acts of Parliament, that may
dissable them, from fighting with England a fourth time.

Great Brittaigne has the Soueraignity of the Sea; being situated between
Spain and Holland, opposite to France* North westerly to the low Countries,
and More Easterly to norway Danemerke Sweedland, etc. So that all quarters of
the Earth must salute the floating towers of great Brittaigne, that infinitely,
expends vast sums yearly for mayntaining so many harbors, and havens, from
the raging Seas, to preserve the subjects and others. Yett many hundreds of the
native Mariners, were so degenerate, as to serve the states General in the
late wars against their own Prince, and Country, and then by treaties of
state got themselves indempnified against those base actions, which ought by
the act of Parliament, not only to be attainted in blood, but they and their
ffamilies, for ever made slaves, at Tangier, and Iamiaca.

In the same treaties, provisions are made, for all those that find themselves
greived and oppressed in conscience, to transport themselves and their Estates,
which is absolutely repugnant to the common law of England, and distructive to
the very being there^^.

If Barbados, Surrinam, and new England, had been annexed to the Crown by act
of Parliament. Sr. William Courten and his Heirs, had kept their propriety in
the first. The Lord willoughby and his heirs, had not lost the soveraignity of
the second. And the King of great Brittaigne had not lost so many subjects in
the third, by a Charter framed at Leyden by those Professors, when the first
greived and oppressed ffamilies, in their tender consciences, went from
England, to Leyden, and from thence, to new England, with their Estates, as a
people, absolved from their King, to seek an other land. Which will spoil
the trade, and navigation of old England, in many parts of the world, if not
timely prevented.

Some of all nations, left their native Countries, to become Herring-fishers
(...) Carpenters, Roapemakers and S^yle Cloath-weavors, etc. In the united
Provinces, where they are made slaves. And would gladly come now for England,
upon reasonable terms, and better Privileges, to plant themselves, and their
ffamilies in some convenient places of England, or wales, where they may be
settled by act of Parliament, and become subjects to the Crown of England, and
would be contented with small Islelands, or old decayed towns, in suffolk, or
norfolk, etc. Nere the Sea Coast, where they may improve themselves, for the
benefit of the King and the Country.

It is the saying of an Ancient Father in Flanders, that there cannot be any
good confidence between England and Spain, in regard of the great blows, the
Spanish Monarchy has received from England. And that there cannot be any true
ffreindship, between France and England, in regard of the great pretense, that
the King has to the Crown, who quarters the Arms of France in his Scutchion,
but the constitution of times altering, there may be exeptions taken to those
general Rules. However if England can trust themselves, they may contemn all
the world, wherein the insolent and ungrateful Hollanders and Zelanders, (that
gives little reverence to treaties, or respect to laws) wants neither, malice,
nor will, to do all possible Mischeife, to England, when opetunity serves, as
may be well apprehended, by the late Pattent granted by the states, to the
West India Company, (hereunto annexed) whereby they intend, to make as great
progress, and encroachments upon the English, in the West Indies, as they have
done in the East.

To conclude all in a word, with the staple of England, nothing can add more to
the flourishing Estate of the Land, then to preserve the creditt, and
reputation of English Manufactures, and nothing can so much advance them, to
their former Esteem, as good government, both in the making and dispossinge
thereof. And for the better regulation of that trade, and comerce, there is noe
way so propper, as to re-establish the Company of Merchant adventures, by act
of Parliament, with a new Charter of Privileges, admitting all persons, to be
ffree thereof, that shall be quallified thereunto accordingly, who shall have
noe greater, burdens, or impositions laid upon English Manufactures, then were
in the Dukes of Burgoundyes times, conformable to the late treaty. Concluded by
the Earl of Sandwich at Madrid Anno M.DC.LXVII.

Brussels April 13. 1675.

