To the Honorable The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of George Carew Esquire, Administrator of the Goods and
Chattles of Sr. Paul Pyndar, Knight deceased, (with his Will annexed)
unadministred by William Toomes,
Shows;
THAT Sr. John Wolstenholme, Sr. Paul Pyndar, Sr. John Jacob, and Sr. John
Harrison Knights deceased, became bound in the year 1641. to several Persons
for diverse great Sums of money, toward the Fine of 150000 Pound, imposed
upon them by the long Parliament.

That Sr. Paul Pyndar also became bound with Sr. Nicholas Crispe, Sr. John
Jacob, Sr. Job Harby, Sr. John Nulls, and Sr. John Harrison, upon account of
the contracted Farm of the Customs in the year 1640, whereupon they advanced
the Sum of 200000 Pound to his late Majesty, upon that Contract, which they
did not enjoy.

That Sr. Paul Pyndar being reduced by the late troubles, died indebted unto
many Orphants and Widows, that now wants Bread, and left William Toomes his
Kinsman, sole Executor of his last Will, and Testament, who paid none of the
said bebts, nor any of the Legacies given by Sr. Paul Pyndar to his Friends, or
charitable uses.

That his Majesty, soon after his most happy Restoration, in contemplation of
the many Services, and Sufferings of Sr. Paul Pyndar, and his Partners, in the
contracted Farm, was most graciously pleased to grant the Sum of 200000
pound unto Sr. Nicolas Crispe, Sr. John Jacob, and Sr. John Harrison the
surviving Partners, to be paid out of the Customs, (during their Farm of five
years) to be divided amongst all the said respective Partners, their Executors
and Administrators, proportionably according to the equitable interest of each
Partner in the Stock.

That Sr. Paul Pyndar, was bona fide a Creditor to the Stock of 200000 pound
the Sum of 35000 pound Sterling for moneys advanced to his late Majesty upon
the contracted Farm; Besides diverse other great Sums of money (upon the
Allome Farm, and the Earl of Straffords Collections upon Recusants) toward
the ordinary support of the Crown, as by Letters Pattents passed in the years
1638 and 1639 appears.

That at the importunity of Sr. John Wolstenholme and the rest of the Persons
concerned in the Fine debts (whereupon Judgments were obtained) your Petitioner
was persuaded to allow the Sum of ten thousand pounds toward the discharge
thereof, out of the proportionable share of the said 200000 pound due to him
upon the said grant from his Majesty. Provided that 500 pound should be
deposited in trust by Sr. John Wolstenholme, into such hands as your Petitioner
should appoint, to be disposed to some Eminent Persons in Holland, that should
procure satisfaction and reparation for the two Ships Bona Esperanza and Henery
Bona Adventura of London, either from the States of Holland, or the East India
Company of the Netherlands, otherwise to be refunded to your Petitioner.

That in persuance thereof Sr. John Wolstenholme and your Petitioner in the
year 1663 deposited the Sum of 300. pound into the hands of Mr. Woodrofe,
Sr. George Downings Clerk, in the Tellors Office, by direction of Sr. George
Downing, who promised that he would place the said money in Holland, to some
Duch Minister of State, for the purposes aforesaid, and the other 200 pound
your Petitioner placed with Mr. Thomas Hughes of Amsterdam, who returned the
same, in the year following, in regard he could not prevail with the
Directors of the East India Company, to give satisfaction accordingly; but Sr.
George Downing refuses to return the 300 pound with Interest for the same,
although no satisfaction or reparation was gotten for the said Ships, but the
money made use of to his own account, and notwithstanding he was allowed, a
plentiful Salary by the King, for obeying those orders and commands, he had
from his Majesty concerning those Ships.

That in your Petitioners absence in Holland, and Flanders, Sr. Nicholas Crispe
got fifty thousand pounds of the 200000 pound into his hands, out of the
Customs, in persuance of his Majesty's grant, and refused all his life time to
pay the Equitable proportion thereof, to your Petitioner, and since his death,
John Crispe, and Thomas Crispe, his Sons, and Executors, do also deny the
payment thereof, and likewise Sr. Nicholas Crispe his Grandson and Heir;
Pretending they are not responsible for the same. Although it is well known
unto them, and the rest of the Partners, that your Petitioner never received
one penny of the Kings money, but the 10000 pound aforesaid, which Sr. Edmond
Turnor paid away toward satisfaction of the Fine debts, and that Sr. Nicholas
Crispe raised himself upon the ruins of Sr. Paul Pyndars Estate.

Now for as much, as your Petitioner has no Remedy at Law against Sr. George
Downing, who stands upon his Privilege, as a Member of Parliament, nor against
the Heirs and Executors of Sr. Nicholas Crispe, who made such settlements of
his Estate before his death, that the Effects thereof (without the Justice of a
Parliament) will remain out of your Petitioners reach, and avoyde his
Majesty's grant, and most gracious intentions therein declared.

YOur Petitioner therefore most humbly prays, that he may have the order and
permission of this Honorable House, to take his course at Law against Sr.
George Downing, and to bring in a Bill before your Honors to make all such
moneys, and Estate of Sr. Nicolas Crispe deceased, liable to your Petitioners
debt, which the said Sr. Nicholas acquired by force of his Majesty's grant out
of the Customs as aforesaid, resting, or entrusted, in the hands or possession
of any Person or Persons whatsoever (Purchasors bona fide upon valuable
Considerations, and moneys paid upon Bonds, for the contracted Farm debts
excepted) and your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

May 12: 1675.

