THE BELGIC, OR Netherlandish HESPERIDES.

THAT IS* The Management, Ordering, and Use of the LIMON and ORANGE Trees,
Fitted to the Nature and Climate of the Netherlands.

By S. Commelyn.

Made English by G. V. N.

LONDON, Printed for J. Holford Bookseller, at the Grown in the Pallmall, and
are to be Sold by Langly Curtis, 1683.

To the Right Honorable Thomas Belasyse, Lord Viscount Fauconberg, Barron of
Yarome, Lord Lieutenant of the North Riding of Yorkshire, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
THis Belgic Hesperides (in an English Dress) is humbly Dedicated,

By your Lordships, Most Humble, and most Obliged Servant, G. V. N.

THE PREFACE OF THE AUTHOR.
A Small part of Gardening comes here to light, being the Ordering of
outlandish Trees, Loved by many, but known by few; of which some thing has
been Published by some of our Country Writers, but by none perfected as it
ought: It is the Nursing, Raising, and Ordering of the Limon and Orange Tree,
which comes forth under the Name of the Netherlandish Hesperides, and is by the
Experience of many Years Arrived to this, and through the sparing of some
leisure Hours committed to Paper. It was never intended to be made common by
the Press, but that the frequent Importunity of some worthy Friends did promote
it, and to overcome the manifold Difficulties which discovered themselves in
this Work; and the more, because this Practice here in this Country is
undertaken by many eminent Persons, who through self-Ignorance trust all to
their Gardiners, who themselves are but little acquainted therewith.

This Hesperides is opened to every one, and shows it self under a strange
Name, having herein for Patterns the excellent Jovianus Pontanus, and the
Learned Jesuit Joannes Baptista Ferrarius, who both have effected and
performed their Descriptions, under the Name of Hesperides; the one in Verses,
the other in an high styled Prose; yet only according to the Condition of their
Countries, which differs much from ours, so that theirs could not serve us but
in a few things, which we have followed, and have found true by Experience.

Considering the Order, by us Observed, we have borrowed from Ferrarius, being
the same cannot be Amended: But we have further Endeavored to bring and order
the Work into such a Manner, as the Air and Condition of these Northern
Countries does require, which are subject to many intemperate Summers and
Winters. The Report of many Fictions, with their Circumstances which belong to
the Garden of Hesperides, are upon good reason passed by, and whiat is chief,
only touched upon in a few Words, seeing unnecessary Narration is nothing but
useless Labor.

Our only Aim was, chiefly the Description of the Trees, and their Fruits, in
particular; and afterward the Ordering of them, with whatsoever belongs
thereunto, as well of them that are first brought out of Italy, as of them that
are here in these Countries raised from Seeds.

In all this we have Observed, and most clearly Proposed the simplest and
plainest Way, avoiding all Artificial Inventions, which are Communicated to the
World for Wonders, and must justly be Rejected by a true Practitioner; because
Experience has often Taught, that they who followed and used them, have been
much Deceived by them.

The Mischifs and Decays which sometimes happen to these Trees, with the Helps
and Means against them, are likewise duly Noted; and afterward the Use of the
Leaves, Blossoms, and Fruits set down.

This is briefly the Sum of the Hesperides, which does not appear to reprove
what others have already Written thereof; but only to Impart to our Country
that which as yet it wanted, viz. The true Knowledge of this Practice: It is
true indeed, the Netherland has many eminent Persons which are Experienced and
Skilled herein, but yet more who take this Work in hand without Knowledge.

We hope that this our Labor will not be Unacceptable, tho perhaps it may seem
strange to some, that for such small things so much Paper is blotted, as tho it
were of some Concern, being it seems more the Work of an Husbandman then of
some considerable Persons. These Men we send to the ancient Histories, and the
yet daily Experience, which are both sufficient Witnesses, how that Kings,
Princes, and eminent Persons have employed themselves in Gardening, and whereof
our Netherland has not a few Examples.

For which Reason then does the Belgic or Netherlandish Hesperides present her
noble Fruits to every one that shall not be afraid of the Pains and Labor to
undertake the Practice, and duly Perform the same.

THE BFLGICK, OR Netherlandish Hesperides.
CHAP I.
Of the Cause and Order of this Work.
BEing the Ordering or Management of the Limon and Orange Trees is much
Increased within these few Years, by many Inhabitants of our Country, and would
yet Increase more, if Ignorance and unskilfulness were not in the Cause.

To open the Door to this Science, this Hesperides is come to Light, offering
her Golden Apples to every one, tho not without prudent Labor: Which we shall
here Propound in order.

First, A short Introduction shall be given to the Knowledge of the Trees and
Fruits, which are Described every one in their particular Kinds and Parts.

Secondly, The Ordering and Use of the Fruits, with their most excellent Profit
and Usefulness, which are all shortly and plainly Communicated to all Managers,
that whosoever is pleased to Travel in our Hesperides, to Advance this
Husbandry to the higest pitch of Perfection; whereunto every one must show
himself as an Hercules, and bend all his Strength, that he may break through by
the waking Dragon into the most inward Garden, to satisfy the sweetness of his
Invited Desires to this Exercise.

CHAP II.
The Fable of Hesperides.
UNder the Name of Hesperides is nothing else Understood by Modern Authors, but
the Ordering and Management of Citron, Limon, and Orange Trees.

To Rehearse all Fictions made hereof by the Poets, seems unnecessary to us,
because we only intend to be short.

Where this Hesperial Garden was Situated, is as Uncertain as the Truth of the
mentioned Fictions: Even as that the same was Guarded by a Dragon, Aeneid. Lib.
4.
which was Overcome and Slain by Hercules, whereof Virgil makes Mention.

Hesperides is the Name of the Daughters of Hesperus, Diod. Sicul. Rer. antiq.
Lib. 2.
Brother to Atlas King in Africa, and were three, Aeglen, Arethusa, and
Hesperthusa, and called after their Parents, Hesperides, and Attlantides.

That the Place where this Garden was Situate, Hesp. Lib. 1.
is uncertain, as is mentioned above, is also Testified by Ferrarius; for the
Ancient Writers differ about it.

Plinius Describes the same with these Words, Hist. Nature. Lib. 37. C. 2.
by Sertim is the great Garden of Hesperides.

The Garden of Hesperides, Strengel. Hortor. Hist. l. 2. c. 8.
as some say, is Situated in the Mores Country, in which golden Appels grow
and are produced, which is Guarded by the ever waking and vigilant Dragon.

The most common Opinion is, that the Garden of Hesperides was Situated in the
West part of Aethiopia, Ferrarii Lib. Hesp. 1.
or the Mores Country, where now are the Kingdoms of Fetz and Marocco, about
the old River and City of Lixo; and here is, according to the Opinion of many,
the Native Country of the Hesperial Fruits.

Of the City of Marocco is it thus Written; O. Dapper' s Africa.
Near the Walls of the Palace, about half an Hours Journey from the City, lies
a Noble Pleasant Orchard, or Garden of Pleasure belonging to the King, Called
Montferat, planted with above fifty Thousand Limon Trees, and the same Number
of Orange Trees, so that it is not strange that these Countries and Regions are
supposed the Garden of Hesperides. Ferrarii Hesp. l. 9. de Cit.


By the Diligence of Palladius are the Citrons brought over out of Media and
Persia into Italy, there Ordered and Raised; and thence carried further into
Spain, Portugal, and other Countries, till at last our Belgium, or Netherland
got its part and share.

Tho now at that time the different Variations and Kinds of Limons, Citrons,
and Oranges are many, which is caused by the Navigation of the Spaniards,
Portugees, who have brought several strange Sorts and Kinds into Europe.

That both the Indies are plentifully provided and stored with this Fruit,
Testify the Descriptions of those who have Traveled through those Countries.

Linschoten says, Cap. 49.
That in Guinea are Limons, Citrons, and especially very Toothsom Oranges; and
in China there are Oranges that are beyond Sugar in Sweetness.

Baldeus in the Description of Ceilon, That there are the best Oranges, Limons,
and Citrons, which excel others of the whole Indies; yea, even those of Spain
and Portugal, whither, as is said, they are brought by Navigation; and there so
Multiplied, Raised, and bred, that these Trees seem to be become a Native and
Inlandish Plant; and as the daily Experience also shows by the great
quantities of the Fruits which yearly are brought to us out of those Countries.

And except the Ancients had in some measure pointed out unto us the place of
the Garden of Hesperides; who would have ventured to place it any where, A Lake
in Italy not far from Brizia.
but along the Coast of the Mediterranean Sea: and especially the fruitful
Benacus, from whence our Hesperides must be brought with great Diligence and
Pains into our Country.

CHAP. III.
Of the Kinds of the Fruits in General.
ACcording to the Number of the Hesperial Virgins are their Fruits Divided.

Aeglen, the Citron Tree; Arethusa, the Limon Tree; Hesperthusa, the Orange
Tree.

This Appellation is no otherwise used by the Modern Writers, then to Express
the three distinct sorts of Fruits.

Ferrarius has Divided his Hesperides by these three Names; and the Reason why
largely handled.

Under these three Sorts and Kinds are all the Hesperial Trees Comprehended.

The Citron Tree, brought out of Media by Palladius above twelve Hundred Years
ago, Citron Tree.
and Planted and Ordered about Naples, is the first in Order, has some of the
same kind, consisting of Sour and Sweet.

The Sour are only different in the outward Form and Shape; for the one is
Oval, Long, and Roundlike; the other Calabas Fashion; and the other again of an
illshapen Form.

The Sweet Citron Tree has not so much Variety; yet it is to be Lamented, that
the Intemperance of our Netherlandish Climate, does not permit us to Set or
Place Aeglen in our Hesperides: The Cruel Northern Storms she cannot resist,
and the long Winter causes her merry Leaves to fall to the Ground, and loose
all the Beauty of her Head Attire: and therefore it is better to leave this
tender one in her own Country, then to make her dye for Sorrow in this our hard
Country, and severe Climate.

Arethusa, the Limon Tree, is stronger, and will with her Sister Hesperthusa,
the Orange Tree, thrive better in this Netherland; and therefore we shall more
largely speak of their several kinds; because these two do above all other
Plants adorn our Belgic Hesperides.

The Limon Tree has many sorts; Bauhinus reckons them nine, C. Bauhpin. Libr.
11. Sect. 6.
But above all Ferrarius makes them above fifty, Ferrar. Hesp. Libr. 3.
all different from one another, and at this day known in Italy, and noted by
none but himself; Only some few are but as yet and at this day known in our
Gardens; which we shall hereafter decipher and describe in order.

The Orange Tree was unknown to the Ancients; Pinax. Lib, 11. Sect. 6.
and by Bauhinus distinguished into four sorts.

At this day is the same made known to us by Ferrarius under more kinds and are
almost all found in Netherland, Hesp. Lib. 4.
yet the one more fruitful then the other; We shall relate them orderly in
their due place, and whatsoever shall be further necessary thereunto.

Here it might be useful to put down all the particular alterations, changes
and sorts which are observed by Ferrarius.

But being he makes many sorts of such, as are but faulty in their Growth, and
we only purpose to describe those that are found here in our Netherlandish
Gardens, we have judged such long and tedious relalations unnecessary.

CHAP. IV.
Of the First Practicers Or Inventors.
WE have touched before, how that the Citron Tree (and perhaps others) were
brought out of Media into Italy by Palladius, but who raised and ordered them
first in Netherland, is not well known to us.

It is certain that this Work is in few years come to perfection here; that our
Forefathers an hundred Years ago, knew but little of it, appears by the
Writings of Carolus Stevens in his improvement of Land, and others more.

Clusius is, according to my Opinion, among the first, who has brought these
Trees into Netherland: for there be as yet to this day some Limon and Orange
Trees in being in the University Garden at Leyden which were raised by him from
the Seed but only Wild and unfruitful, without any Inoculation.

This Ordering and Managing has been known in Flanders and Brabant these many
Years, Hesp. Lib. 2. Cap. 17.
as Ferrarius relates to us of the Noble Sever Guilielmus de Blasero at Gaunt
in Flaunders, who was most eminent in this Science, and does with Admiration
take notice of it.

And such there are as yet many found at this day in Brabant at Brussels, and
Antwerp, where the most Trees are raised from the Seed, and brought to
perfection.

Pleasant Italy has first furnished our Netherland out of her Hesperides and
communicated to us of her Fruits.

The right knowledge of their Ordering is found out in Holland, by the Sieur
John Roeteis, in his life time Secretary of the City of Amsterdam, whose
knowledge in this Science has excelled above all others, as the truth has
assured to many eyewitnesses; yet by his immature death is this Noble
Amsterdam Hesperides disanulled, whose Fame and Renown spread it self not only
in Netherland, but also in diverse other Countries; so that the same was visited
by many Eminent Princes, and has had the Honor that the most Illustrious
Prince Cosomus de Medicis, Great Duke of Florence, etc. was taken with great
admiration at this Hesperial Plantation, when he beheld the perfect knowledge
of this most Excellent orderer, and manager.

No less Eminent in this Science was the Sieur William Vanden Hewvel Merchant
at Amsterdam, by whose means this affair did much increase, and all Spectators
were stirred up with an inflamed desire of these Golden Fruits, wherewith the
Hesperial Gardens of these Persons abounded; for through may years experience
they attained to the desired end.

We shall give them the Honor, and are certainly persuaded that they must be
numbered among the first Inventors, Viz. among those that have brought this
Work to perfection among us.

And we thought good to insert their names here, To keep them out of the Grave
of Forgetfulness, and to make them flourish among posterity, as Long as the
evergreen Aspect of our Hesperides shall be acceptable, and delightsome to all
true Lovers and Practicers thereof.

CHAP. V.
Of the Citron Tree.
THough the Citron Tree cannot bring her fruit to perfection in Netherland, yet
we shall vouchsafe her the first place in this Hesperides, in hope that some
may yet find out a better means to nurse and raise up this tender Aeglen.

The shape.
This Tree is of a middling bigness, the Stems or Boughs are thin and weak,
armed with many pricks. But with us they are the strongest of all the sorts of
evergreens of those Kinds. The leaves like those of the Bay tree, but much
larger, jagged on the edges, of a deep green, strong scent, and better taste,
the blossoms grow at the end of the boughs, close together, have thick fleshy
Leaves, the out side like Purple, the inside white, under the top light saffron
colored, and hairy, of a weak scent; first sweetish but afterward bitter in
the Taste; We see here an Oval long and roundlike beginning of the young Fruit
in the middle of the Blossom, without which sign they are unfruitful and fall
off, they that hang faster to the Tree produce no unfruitful Excrescence, but
the fruits proceed from that Principle thereunto fastened.

These Citrons are Oval, long and roundlike, swelled and thick in the middle,
and sometimes dinted, running sharp together at the end, and sometimes with
bumps; so that we may observe therein a wonderful display of Nature.

The bigness and weight is not alike, Hesp. Lib. 2. cap. 3.
but very different; in Calabria they commonly weigh from six to nine pound:
But about Genoa they have been seen, according to Ferrarius his saying, of
about thirty: the outward Pill and Rind is of a Gold Color wrinkled and
somewhat warty, the inward Pill is white and sweet, the Pulpe full of sour
Juice and Liquor, stored with many long and roundlike Seeds and Kernels.

This Plant is brought out of Media into Italy, Place.
as we have said, Georg. Lib. 2.
before, and is also described by the Poet Virgil.

The Citron Tree is called in Latin Malus Medica. C. Bauhin. pinax. Lib. 2.
B. P. Citrium (...) Malus Citria, in the Greek (...) Malus Medica and Assyria;
The Citron is which the Hebrews call (...) Hadar, that is fair and goodly; and
they use the same in making of green Bowers: For all they that are of any
ability among them will not neglect to get these Fruits against the Feast of
Tabernacles to adorn the preparations therewith: For it is said, Levit. 23, V.
40. And ye shall take you on the first day boughs of Goodly Trees etc. This
word Hadar is by the Learned in their Law taken for that, and among others also
the Myrthus, Myrtle-Tree, which they desire not, except three Leaves stand over
against one another in the length of five inches at least, thus satisfying
their Superstition without any certain Evidence of truth: Even as they say that
the Citron Apple was the Fruit which Adam did eat in Paradise against the
Command of God.

The kinds of this Tree consist only in the various and different shapes of the
Fruits, except the sweet; and are by Ferrarius thus divided,

1. Malum Citreum Vulgar. 2. Malum Citreum Vulgar belluatum. 3. Malum Citreum
Cucurbitum. 4. Malum Citreum dulci Medulla.
that is 1. The common Citron Apple. 2. The common Citron Apple of a deformed
shape. 3. The common Citron Apple like a Gourd. 4. The sweet Citron Apple.


He does yet further describe one by the name of Malum Citreum Multiforme, a
Citron Apple of many Forms and shapes.

But this is only a Display of Nature, not a certain and particular Kind, as is
found in many Fruits.

Yet seeing we cannot* bring these Trees to perfection in these Countries or
Climates, because the warmth or heat is not sufficient to ripen the Fruits, we
intend to say no more concerning them, but to trimm up and adorn our Hesperides
with such as may by a well ordering and careful management make our Gardens in
Netherland, pleasant and delightful with their fruitfulness.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Limon Tree.
A Rethusa with her Gold-coloured Fruits, shall have the first place in our
Hesperides; as being esteemed nothing inferior to Aeglen in Virtues and
Pleasantness.

Form and Shape.
The Form of the Limon Tree in general, is like that of the Citron Tree.

Diverse ancient Writers have made no difference between these two, because they
are both ascribed to one Country, Ferrar. Hesp. Lib. 3. cap. 1.
Naming the same Trees Malus Medica: Others have held them for one kind with
the Citron.

The Limon Tree grows indifferently high, has many spreading Boughs, set with
Prickles, makes not so close an Head, neither is the Wood so hard as that of
the Orange Tree. The Leaves are longish, like them of the Citron Tree, yet
shorter, running sharp together at the end, interwoven with many small Veins;
the Blossoms are of a weak Sent: Some sorts bring forth Blossoms like to the
Orange Tree, but most like to the Citron Tree. Before the Buds open themselves
they are of a purple Color, within of a fair White, beautified with yellow
Threads or Streaks.

Time.
They blow here in this Country in July, and yield Fruit in Autumn: being come
to the bigness of a Walnut, they continue so till the next Summer, when they
begin to grow anew, and become fully ripe in sixteen or eighteen Months after
their blowing.

The Fruits are of an oval Shape, though somewhat rounder; and more drawn in;
of a pale yellowish Color, weak Sent, somewhat like the Citron Apple, and is
by Art of Ordering and Dressing brought so far in bigness and fairness, that it
needs not to give place to it, and especially in variety of Kinds, in which it
is enlarged and increased by Sowing and Inoculating.

The Limon Tree is distinguished into Limon, Pourin, Adam's Apple, Paradise
Apple, Limia, and Limas.

The Limon Tree is called in Latin Malus Limonia; and the Fruit Limon in Greek,
(...).

They which are found in our Netherlandish Gardens, shall follow in their Order.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Ordering White Limon.
AMong all the Limons, which here in this Country come to Maturity, this is
none of the least.

Shape.
The Tree which produces this Fruit spreads its Boughs (which are set with many
Prickles in many places) wide asunder: The Bark is pale, the Leaves light
Green, broad, running round-like together at the end: The full Shoots are
somewhat of a reddish Color, which afterward become fairly Green: The Blossoms
consist of five, six, or sometimes of more Leaves, which, before they open, are
of a purple Color, and white within. The Fruits are indifferently bigg and
large; of a different Shape, the one roundish, tho long and round-like, and
some also Ill-shapen: The outward Pill is of a fair Yellow, smooth, and of a
pleasant Smell: The inward part of the Pill is thin, the Pulp greenish Yellow,
divided into eight or nine Veins or Partitions off a pleasant Taste, full of
Juice and Liquor, commonly hollow in the middle, and does bear very well.

In the Year 1670, I have cut in one day fourscore ripe Fruits, Limons, of a
little Tree; so that it is in all particulars worthy the Ordering and
Husbanding.

This Limon is called by the Managers and Practisers that Order and Husband
those Plants and Fruits, Hesp. Lib. 3. Cap. 2.
the White Limon: And is the Limon Vulgaris Ferrarii, the common Limon of
Ferrarius.

Has several sorts which differ one from another in Shape, but little in Taste:
the greatest Difference lying herein, that the Leaves of the one are somewhat
more sharp Pointed and jagged then the other; which also observed in the
Fruits, which differ and are distinguished from one another in length and
roundness.

We have at several times taken Notice, that the Fruits of one and the same
Tree were very unlike in Fashion and Shape one to the other.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Limon Sbardonius of Ferrarius.
AMong the kinds of Limons which are found in the Netherlands, this is eminent:
Which, besides the two following, we have seen gathered in the Garden of the
Learned Dr. Arnold Syen Med. and Botan. Professor at Leyden, in the Year 1672.
This Limon Tree has regular and well ordered Boughs, and may be kept with a
fair and round Head: the Leaves are light Green, longish, sharp-pointed at the
End, a little wrinkled, with the Edges somewhat jagged: they are without with
purple Streaks or Stripes, and within White; the Fruits long and round, of an
indifferent bigness, at the end of the Stalk a little dinted, where it seems to
represent the shape of a little Rose, at the Head is many times a little Point
sticking out, as if it were the remnant of the middle Point or Navel of the
Blossom: the outward Pill is of a fair yellow Color, Uneven, Rough, and as it
were with Creases: the Taste Pleasant, with some Bitterness: the inward Pill is
somewhat thin, in the Taste Sweetish: the Pulpe is pleasant Sour, pale Yallow,
divided into ten Veins or Partitions.

Among these Hesperial Plants, this is one of the most patient to endure the
Injuries which are caused by the Low Country Air.

Hesp. Lib. 3* Cap. 15.
This Limon Tree is called by Ferrarius Limon Sbardonius, after an excellent
Practiser of this Husbandry, called Fabritius Sbardonius, who did first produce
the same at Rome out of his own Garden, being without doubt an alteration by
frequent Grafting and Inoculating.

CHAP. IX.
The Deformed or Illshapen Limon Sbardonius.
AMong the Display of Nature, The Limons are not forgotten: We give here an
Instance, which shall sufficiently disannul the Position or Opinion of some
Writers, who make many sorts of Fruits, which only consisting in different
outward Shapes, do nevertheless grow upon one Tree, as this and the following
Description shall show, as being fellow-Fruits of the Limon Sbardonius.

Shape.
Very irregular is this Fruit, of an oblong and oval Fashion, on the one side
wonderfully, or much bumping out with Claws, at the End whereof were four green
Nails, like them of an Hens Foot, two lying cross one another, on the other
side every one single, parted one from another, which is strange to see: Being
cut in the middle, it divided itself into seven Particulars or Partitions, tho
on the misshapen or deformed side wonderfully wound and twisted together. Hisp.
Lib. 3. Cap. 6.


Ferrarius hints of the Limon de Rivo, that he has found on it something grown
out of it, having the shape of a Man's Hand, with the Fingers twisted and shut
one in another, affording a strange Appearance to the Eyes of the Spectators,
but they that inquire and search into the matter, shall find that these Fruits
are to be accounted nothing but imperfect Creatures and Products. Limon
Sbardonius, with Streaks or Furrows.
We have besides seen on the same Tree of Limon Sbardonius of Ferrarius, this
streaked Limon, which is like the first in Fashion, but in the length
interlaced with deep Furrows, which went from one end to the other, having at
the end a Point sticking out: the inward Pill was thin and narrow, and the
Pulpe divided into ten Veins or Partitions. This Alteration is here exhibited
to show the wonderful Works of Almighty God, how that upon one Tree, one sort
of Fruit is brought forth on several ways, and yet are no distinct Sorts, as
many make of them, and communicate to the Ignorant, and Unskilful; which we
have mentioned before, and with Ferrarius looked upon as a Display of Nature:
But nevertheless, put and placed by him with different Descriptions, as
different Kinds, as appears in the Limon Pyri effigy of a Pear fashion, Hesp.
Lib. 3. Cap. 11.
and in the description of the Limon Striatus Vulgatior, Idem. Cap. 14.
that is the common Limon with Ridges, which I have taken Notice of here for
every ones Caution, not to bring presently a thing to a new Division; but first
to search out the Cause of this wonderful alteration, wherein we shall, show
that the Blossoms which produce these Illshapen Fruits, are very imperfect in
their Formation.

CHAP. X.
Of the little Calabrian Limon of Ferrarius.
Hesp. l. 3. cap. 5.
THis Limon, Called of Ferrarius Limon Pusillus Calaber, or the little Calabrian
Limon, after her Country: Shape.
has its Boughs full of little Prickles, the Leaves have the Form at the end
of the Stalk, as that of the Orange Tree, and are of a dark green Color, like
that of the Laurus Leodmensis, round about the Edges a little jagged, the
Blossoms are small, without of a purple Color, within White, of a pleasant
Smell: the Fruits are of the bigness of a small Hen's Egg, of a Fashion Oval,
or Oblong, pointing out at the End, as it were with a little Horn: the Pill is
of a fair yellow Color, Thin, pleasant of Taste without, White within; the
Pulpe is divided by nine Veins or Partitions, of a greenish Color, of a sharp
sour Taste. This Fruit have we gathered ripe in the Month of August 1672, in
the Garden of Sieur Peter de Wolf in the Purmer, and here described to the
Life: This Plant is very Fruitful, and can well endure our severe Air, without
receiving any Injury from it.

Second Sort.
There is yet another of this Sort or Kind, which is likewise a pleasant Fruit;
and I have a little Tree of it in my Garden, and is called of Ferrarius Limon
Pusillus Calaber alter, that is, the second sort of the small Calabrian Limon.
The diversity consisting herein, that this Fruit is in all parts much smaller
then the foregoing, and may very well be taken for a Dwarf, which shows itself
pleasant and delightsom to the Sight. This little Tree has very thin tender
Boughs, full of many Prickles, the Leaves are of a small Form, not unlike the
Phyllerea, of a dark green Color: the Blossoms are like them of the foregoing
Sort, but much smaller, as also the Fruits, which are of somewhat a rounder
Fashion, and fit to be preserved in Pickle, being very pleasant for Food.

CHAP. XI. Shape.

Of the Sweet Limon of Ferrarius. Hesp. Lib. 3. Cap. 19.

Pinax. Lib. 11. Sect. 4.
THE Limon dulci medulla Ferrarii, is malus Limonia Major dulcis of Bauhinus.
The sweet Limon of Ferrarius, is the great sweet Limon of Bauhinus, and grows
on a fair Tree, and pleasant to look upon; whose Boughs are beset with many and
several Prickles, has Leaves somewhat like them of the Orange Tree, only at
the end of the Stalk they want a little Heart.

The Blossoms are also like the Orange Blossoms, fair White, and of a pleasant
Smell, the Fruit is Large, Oval or Long, and Roundlike of Shape; the outward
Pill, fair Yellow, of an Aromatic or Spicy Taste, the inward Pill thick, not
unpleasant; the Pulpe is deep Yellow, divided by nine Veins or Partitions,
pleasant Sweet. These Fruits grow sometimes very large, and much esteemed in
hot Distempers, to use for the refreshing of the Sick. In the famous and
renowned Garden of the Sieur John Roeters, have we seen the same often Ripe and
Eaten them: And is well worthy our Husbandry, as well in regard of the noble
Fruits, as of the fair Plant; pleasant Blossoms, and excellent Fashion and Form
of the Tree: They are rarely found here in these Countries, but only among some
Lovers, who hold the same in great Esteem, because they are hard to be got out
of Italy, being highly valued there, and not often sent over among the common
and ordinary Trees.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Limon Tree of St. Remo.
The Shape.
THE Tree which produces this Fruit, is in our Garden, I have received the same
among others from St. Remo; he makes irregular or disorderly Boughs, brittle
Wood, covered with a dark Green Bark, the Leaves are likewise of a deep Green,
of a longish round Fashion, not sharp, running together at the end; the
Blossoms are mixed throughout with purple Streaks, of a strong Smell, like them
of the Citron Tree: the Fruit is Oval or longish Round, sharp at the End, with
a long Point sticking out, almost like the Nipple of a Woman's Breast) behind,
where they be fast to the Stalk, deep dinted; the outward Pill or Shell is deep
Yellow, Rough, Uneven, and of a bitter Taste, though not of an unpleasant Smell;
the inward Pill is almost a Finger breadth thick, pale-Yellow, and Bitterish;
the Pulpe have we found to be divided by nine Veins or Partitions, Sour,
Sharp, and Harsh. This Fruit grows Large, and I have had them Ripe often: That
which makes this Tree not beloved, is the Tenderness thereof; for he often
sheds and looses his Leaves in the winter, which makes him look Unpleasant: We
judge this to be the first Limon Ligusticus of Ferrarius, Hesp. l. 3. cap. 3.
as agreeing therewith in many Particulars. This Tree does blow very freely,
which continues almost all the Year long, and we are necessitated to pluck off
the Blossoms, to the end the Tree may keep his Strength and Vigor. The same is
related by the forementioned Author also of the second Sort, called by him
Limon Liguriae Ceriesous, which produces both Blossoms and Fruits four times in
a Year.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Pear-Fashion Limon of Ferrarius.
WE have among many other Limons from Genoa received also this most pleasant
Plant; Hesp. l. 3. cap. 11.
being the Limon perellae Con^imilis of Ferrarius, very like the same, or a
Kind and Sort thereof, because there is some difference in the Description of
it.

Shape.
This Tree has tender and little Boughs and Branches; the Leaves are of a pale
Green, sharppointed at the End, the Edges jagged, and behind at the End a thin
longish little Heart, as a particular Stalk whereunto the Leaf seems to be
fastened: The Blossom is of a purple-like Color, like that of the Citron Tree;
the Fruit we have seen ripe in the Year 1672; is of a longish Fashion,
extuberating or rising in the Middle, and runs again somewhat narrow downward,
and above at the Stalk somewhat thick, where the same is a little dinted; the
outward Pill is Yellowish, rough with small Bumps and Knobs, the inward Pill
thin; and the Pulpe great or bigg, full of Juice, of a yellowish Color,
divided by nine Veins or Partitions, where we found some beginnings of Seed,
the Taste was very pleasant, between Sower and Sweet: This abovementioned Limon
Fruit we have first got from the Sieur Boot, Senator in the Court Provincial at
Utrecht, who has a fair Tree of the same in his Garden; we have likewise
afterward received one among other Trees from Genoa; and use yet daily as much
Diligence, as is possible to increase the number of the several Sorts and
Kinds, for the Ornament of our Netherlandish Hesperides.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Lima.
Shape.
AMong the Kinds and Sorts of Limons, called Lima, we have had as yet no other
but the Sweet: the Tree has brittle Wood, the Boughs are light Green, set with
small Prickles in some places, has longish Leaves, as they of the ordinary
Limon, light Green, and the Edges a little jagged; being rubbed give a pleasant
Sent or Smell; the Blossom is smaller then of other Limons, of a white Color,
like unto the Orange Dwarf; the Fruit is round at the end, with a little Nipple
pointing out, of the bigness as an ordinary middle sized Orange; The outward
Pill is very thin and smooth, of a pleasant Smell, Yellowish, with a thin
inward Pill; the Pulp is of a Brimstone Color, and divided by seven, and
sometimes eight Veins or Partitions, of a very sweet Taste: this Fruit we have
often had ripe in these Countries; and it is not to be doubted but other sorts
of Lima would likewise thrive well in Netherland, in regard it does endure and
withstand the common Injuries of this Climate patiently; what makes this Tree
acceptable is its Fruitfulness, and the pleasant Loveliness of its Apples;
which are fit and good to cool the immoderate Heat of Burning-Feavers.

CHAP. XV.
Of Adam's Apple, or the ordinary Black Limon.
Shape.
THE Tree which produces the ordinary Adam's Apple, has his Boughs armed with
many long and strong Prickles; the Wood is brittle and apt to break; grows in
no good Form, and cannot but with great Labor be kept to a good Head; the
Leaves are dark Green, of Fashion Oval or longish Round, a little Curled, and
have many times at the beginning a little Heart or Foot, as the Orange Leaves;
the Blossoms come forth abundantly thereon, larger then the Orange Blossom,
within White, and without with reddish Streaks, weak of Sent; the Fruit is
Roundish, a little dinted at the Top and below, twice as large as the common
Orange, of a perfect Gold Color; the outward Pill is a little rough and
jagged, the inward Pill moderately thick, pleasant of Taste; The Pulp is of a
Brimstone Color, pleasantly Sour, divided by eleven or twelve Veins or
Partitions; These Fruits we have had here in this County in a fair and warm
Summer ripe almost in one Year, as such happened 1670; the Tree is known to us
by the Name of the Black Limon, because the Fruits as soon as they wean, are of
a black Color.

Hesp. Lib. 3. Cap. 24.
It is the Pomum Adami commune of Ferrarius, the common Apple of Adam. Here in
these Countries this Tree is common among the Lovers and Practisers of this
part of Husbandry, and is called in Brabant by the Gardiners the Citron Tree,
but wrongfully, because it has no affinity at all with it: Among all the Sorts
of Limons, this is the hardyest to endure the Cold of these Countries, and very
forward in producing his Fruits, whose Juice is found to be very pleasant in
Meat; though Ferrarius seems to gainsay this in some Measure, yet Experience
has taught us otherwise.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Orange Tree in General.
Shape.
AMong the Hesperial Daughters and Virgins, Hesperthusa, which is the Orange
Tree, has the greatest Commendation and Praise, as well in respect of the
Delightsomness of the Sight, as of the excellent Properties wherewith she is
endued.

This Tree grows to a fit height, though diversely, accordingly to the Place and
Air where the same is planted, the Root is thick and knotty, of a strong Sent,
and Yellowish; divided into many cross-side Branches, the Stock is firm and
hard Wood, within White; the Bark is dark Green, mixed with an Iron-like
Color, the Head spreads itself into many Boughs, which at the ends are divided
into many little Shoots and Spriggs; these Boughs are set with several
prickles, yet they perish through the Fruitfulness, and often Inoculating.

The Leaves are of a fair Green, Large, running sharp together before, behind
at the Stalk is a little Foot, which has the likeness of a little Heart, out of
which the great Leaf seems to come forth, and all full of many small, and
almost invisible Holes, even as the Leaves of the Hypericum; and when they are
rubbed between the Fingers, they give a sweet and pleasant Smell.

The Blossoms are as white as Snow, made up of six or eight Leaves, beautified
in the midst with small Strings, which are yellow at the end, between which the
Product of the Fruit shows itself.

The Blossom which here in this Country appears in June, is strong, yet of a
sweet and lovely Smell, especially in the Morning before the Sun is up, and in
the Evening when the Sun is gone from them.

The Fruit is of a Saffron and deep Gold-Colour, of a round Form, the outward
Pill is somewhat Rough, the inward Pill spungy, White, and of an unpleasant
Taste: the Pulp is by several Films or thin Skins divided into eight Parts or
Partitions.

These Fruits yield here in this Country no perfect ripe Seed, and grow not
ripe in one Year, but require twenty Months for it, and then they are not
inferior to them of Italy.

Hesp. Lib. 4. cap. 1.
That the Orange Tree is Fruitful and Longlived, testifyeth Ferrarius, when he
relates of the Tree which is to be seen at Rome in the Monastery of St.
Balbina, and has stood there five hundred Years: The same Author makes mention
of more such, as among others, of the Orange Tree on Mount Aventinus, in the
Dominican Monastery of St. Sabina, which is above four hundred Years old, and
do yet every Year Blossom, and bring forth many Fruits.

Original*
Touching the place, whence the Orange Trees came first, it cannot well be
related, being they are found in many Countries of the World, as well in the
East as West Indies, and especially throughout all Italy, Spain, Portugal, and
several parts of France.

Name.
The Orange Tree has its Original Denomination according to the Color of the
Fruit, which is a Gold Color, and accordingly with other Hesperial Apples
called Aureum Malum, the Golden Apple, or Malus aurantia major, the great
Golden Orange Apple Tree.

C. Bauhin. Pinax l. 11. Sect. 4.
For they being unknown to the Ancients, have not many strange Names, and they
which be are these, Nerantium, Rauwolf, Arangia. Cord. in Dioscor. Arangius.
Cord. Histor. and thus far enough of this.

What further belongs to the Diversity, we shall describe in Order, for as
much as we have experienced and practiced in our own Gardens.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Common Orange Apple of Ferrarius. Hesp. Lib. 4. Cap. 3.

FErrarius calls this in Latin Aurantium Vulgar, that is, the common Orange
Tree* and has three Sorts, distinct in the Taste.

For the first is Sour, the second Sweet, the third of a Mixed, that is, of a
Taste between Sour and Sweet.

Shape.
The sour Orange, has a sad pale and grainy Pill without, a sharp Smell, the
Pulpe is Yellow, Sour, divided by Skins into eight, and sometimes into nine
Partitions.

I shall say nothing of the Seed here, because, as is mentioned heretofore, it
does not come in Netherland to perfect Maturity.

When these Apples hang on the Tree the Winter over, to the next Spring, they
grow dry within, and the Juice or Sap returns back, to the further Nourishment
of the new Fruits; therefore it is better (as well for the Trees as the Apples)
to cut and take them off in due time.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the sweet Orange Apple.
Shape.
THE Tree which brings forth sweet Oranges, is in Shape not to be
distinguished from the Sour, the Difference lies only in the Fruit, which has
a thin, smooth, deep Yellow, and bitter outside Pill; the inside Pill is
moderately Thick, of a Brimstone Color, the Pulpe is full of sweet and
pleasant Juice, divided into eight Partitions, by particular Skins or Films;
this Juice returns not back again after the Winter, as that of the sour
Orange, but is much longer kept therein.

Hesp. l. 4. cap. 3.
Ferrarius writes, that the Gardiners about Genoa have experienced, that the
place where this Tree is planted or set, is much to be regarded, if it stands
well to the Sun, that then the Fruit shall be of a pleasant sweet Taste; but if
the place be shady, on the contrary Unpleasant, and all shall seem to turn or
change into Bitterness.

The Mixed.
Because the mixed Orange Apples are not to be distinguished by the outward or
inward Form, but only by the Taste; it is thought needless to give a particular
Description of them.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Orange Tree with curled Leaves, of Ferrarius.
Hesp. Lib. 4. Cap. 5.
THis Tree is called by Ferrarius Aurantium crispo folio, that is, the Orange
Tree with curled Leaves, and is described by none before him.

Shape.
The Italians call him, Risse the Poulle: this Tree produces Boughs which at
their further or uttermost Ends are set with many naked Twiggs close thrusted
together, having short thick Leaves curled together, with a little Heart at the
Stalk; (though some have none) at the first coming out of these Leaves, they
are sharp, and become afterward roundish, are of a weak Smell, and of a
pleasant and lovely green Color; at the ends of the Twiggs the Blossoms come
forth thick together as in an Heap; the Leaves of the same are a little curled
to the outside, and have all a sweet pleasant Sent; the Fashion is as those of
the common Sort; the Fruit is like the common Orange Apple, except that the
same is somewhat of a flat Shape at Top and Bottom. The outward Pill is almost
of a Saffron Yellow, Roughish, a little Bitter in the Taste; the inside Pill is
thin, loose, unsavory; the Pulp is Yellow with a moderate Sowreness, pleasant
of Taste, and is by several Skins or Films divided into eight Partitions.

This Tree must be diligently observed and looked unto, because he is apt to
grow fowl, and to decay by reason of the multitude of Boughs growing close
together and cross one another; and brings forth more Boughs and Blossoms, then
he can feed conveniently; wherefore the Pruning Knife must be used about him,
if we will enjoy the Fruits, which are very Fair, and preserve the Tree in its
Vigor and Strength.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Orange Tree with Rosed Fruit.
Shape. Hesp. Lib. 4. Cap. 6.
THis Tree, which is called by Ferrarius Aurantium Rosaeum, the Rose Orange,
does not much differ from the common Orange Tree to look upon, but only the
Leaves are long and narrower; the Blossoms also are like those of the common
Orange Tree.

The Fruit when it is full grown and Ripe, is of a convenient Size and Bigness,
dinted a little before and behind, it shows a little Rose at the top, and about
the Stalk are likewise some raised Particles, like unto a little Star, the
outward Pill is of a pale yellow Color, the inward Pill indifferently thick,
somewhat Bitter; the Pulp of it is of a bright Brimstone Color, divided into
nine Partitions, of a pleasant tart Taste.

Thus have we found the same in our Garden in the Year 1672 exactly to
Correspond with that of Ferrarius, and is here exactly delineated and described
unto you. This Fruit, is by reason of its Beauty worthy to be preserved, being
the Fruitfulness, besides the largness of the Apples, increases the Esteem of
the Tree.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Orange Tree with speckled Fruit.
TO have the several Sorts and Varieties together, as much as is possible, the
tender Plant is well worthy to be joined with the others.

Hesp. Lib. 4. Cap. 7.
This Orange Tree is in respect to the different Color both of the Leaves and
Fruits called by Ferrarius* Aurantium Virgatum* and by us the speckled Orange
Tree: Shape.
It is much tenderer then any other, as being not well able to endure the Cold;
has many tender Boughs which easily break; and spotted in diverse places with
some Brimstone colored Streaks; the Leaves are in many parts lesser then those
of the common Orange Tree, and have also on many of them several Brimstone
colored Spots, which is delightful to the Eye.

The Blossoms are like those of the Common, but smaller; the Fruit is, before
it be ripe, orderly speckled with green and white Brimstone-like Streaks, and
as by certain unequal Lines distinguished; when the Fruit is grown Ripe, then
the green Streaks are Yellow, and the other turned into a Saffron Color.

The outward part of the Pill is somewhat rough, the inward part of the Pill
thick; the Pulpe of a Brimstone Color, distinguished by Skins or Films into
nine Partitions; which is of a pleasant sour Taste; the whole Apple is somewhat
longish-round of Shape.

Here is to be observed, that all the Leaves and Fruits of the Tree are not of
that variety of Color, but only some; and was seen of us first with perfect
ripe Fruits in the Gardens of the Sieur John Roeters, in his Lifetime Secretary
of the City of Amsterdam, and with Will. Vanden Henvell, both the most
experienced and greatest Improvers of this Husbandry of our Time.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Orange Tree with borned Fruit.
Shape.
THis Tree is among all other Orange Trees the Lustiest to look upon, and the
best to be ordered, here in this Country, as being the most hardy against the
Cold, and the most Fruitful; it shoots high and large spreading Boughs; the
Leaves are of a dark Green; larger and sharper at the End then those of the
common Orange Tree; the Blossoms are of a pleasant Smell, and sometimes made up
of many Leaves, even as if they were double; the Fruits have many wonderful
Shapes, with points sticking out, and dinted Corners, representing the Fashion
of a Man's Members, others of a Woman's: Hesp. l. 4. cap. 9.
Wherefore called also by Ferrarius, Aurantium Hermaphroditum, Sive
Corniculatum, that is, the Hermophrodite, or Horned Orange; the outward Pill
has a fair Saffron yellow Color, the inward Pill thick, spungy, of little
Taste; the Pulp is included into ten or twelve, or sometimes more skinny
Partitions, whereof some enclose the rest; the Taste is moderately sour, not
unpleasant; this Kind is desired here by many Lovers; and is found in many
Gardens, where it is known by the Name of Cloister Apple.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of several Ill-shapen Fruits.
Hesp* l. 4. c. 5. 8. 11*
THere are found by Ferrarius several Orange Apples, which are noted by him as
distinct Sorts and Kinds, as the Aurantium dulci flore; Aurantium faemineum,
sive Faetiferum, and Aurantium distortum, all which I judge to be but one and
the same, belonging to the foregoing Tree, viz. with the horned Fruit; for I
have seen the same, and yet more different Shapes upon one Tree, also double
Blossoms; for that happens often, and all this Variation of the Shape is
nothing but a Display of Nature.

We have observed the more the Blossom is doubled, and the more Leaves it has,
that the Fruit appears also in the stranger Shape; and touching the Aurantium
Callosum we have found on the common Orange Tree. The brawny or thick skinny
Orange.


The same must also be Understood of the Limons, as I have showed before in the
ninth Chapter of this Book, in the Limon Sbardonius; so that in all this
Variation, there are no several sorts to be made, but must only be taken for
Ill-shapen Fruits.

Here might have been showed the Diversity and Variety of imperfect Fruits, but
it seemed needless to us, and judge that by this Observation is sufficiently
showed what we are to think of such Fruits*

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Sina Apple, or the Lisbon Orange Tree.
Hesp. Lib. 4. cap. 13.
FErrarius calls this Fruit or Plant Aurantium Olysiponense, or the Lisbon
Orange Tree, because they were first brought by the Portugeeze thither out of
Sina, and were thence sent into Italy, and other Countries besides.

Shape.
This has tender thin prickly Boughs, and Leaves long, running sharp together
toward the End, which being rubbed, smell Sweetly.

The Blossoms are smaller then those of the common Orange Tree; the Fruit is
neatly round, of indifferent Largeness; the outward part of the Pill smooth and
even, of a lovely yellow Color, the inward part of the Pill thin; is for its
pleasant Taste eaten together.

The Pulp, which is divided into nine Partitions, is full of Juice, and
yellowish, of a pleasant Sweetness, mixed with some Sharpness.

It is observed that these Fruits degenerate, as we may see by them that are
sent to us.

They of Portugal are the best in Europe for retaining of the pleasant Taste;
their Gardiners inoculate them on the sweet Citron Tree, and therefore those
Trees, which are from thence brought over hither, will not thrive well: those
of Genoa are less esteemed, and Grafted on Orange Stocks.

We have now some Years since got them, and for certain Understood, that they
have brought forth Fruit perfectly Ripe; and we doubt not but we shall ere long
enjoy the same likewise; because the Lustiness and prosperous Growth of our
Trees gives us great Hopes of it.

The Representation of the Boughs, Leaves, and Blossoms made here, is according
to our own Tree, but that of the Fruit according to the Outlandish Apple.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Orange Tree with sweet Pill.
Shape.
THE sweet pilled Orange Tree produces great and thick Boughs; the Leaves are
large, thick, hard, and shorter then they of the common sort, of a dark green
Color; the Blossoms are large, and spread themselves broad and wide out, and
abound in Multitude; the Fruit is great and weighty; the outward part of the
Pill of a fair Saffron yellow Color, pleasantly Bitter; the inward part of the
Pill is sollid and thick, of a pleasant sweet Bitterness (whence it is
originally called the sweet-pill'd Orange Apple;) the Pulp is of a brimstone
Color, and moderately Sour of Taste, divided by particular Skins or Films into
nine Partitions.

Of the Pulp, outward and inward Pill of this Apple tempered together with
Sugar, is an excellent Remedy made against the Diseases of the Stomach as
Ferrarius reports of it. Hesp. Lib. 4. Cap. 16.


And this Tree is by him first called, Aurantium dulci Cortice, that is, the
Orange with the sweet Pill; C. Bauhin. Pinax. l. 11. Sect. 6.
and is the Malus aurantia cortice dulci Eduli. B. P. and Clus. Hist. The
Orange Tree with sweet Pill: and certainly worthy to be Husbanded, as well in
respect of the Fruit, as also of the Lustiness of the Tree, which is
sufficiently Luxuriant in Growing.

The Brabanders wrongfully call this Apple, Pomum Adami, Adam's Apple, as may
be perceived by the Description of the right given in the fifteenth Chapter of
this Book.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the Orange Tree with small Fruit.
Hesp. l. 4. cap. 15. C. Bauhin. Pinax. l. 11. Sect. 6.
THis small Orange Tree is called by Ferrarius Aurantium Sinense, and is the
Malus Aurantia humilis of Bauhinus and Clusius, commonly called the Dwarf; it
has little short thick Boughs closely growing together. Shape.


The Leaves are like those of the common Orange Tree; but in all their Parts
much smaller, and sharp forward.

The Blossoms (which it produces in abundance,) are also as it were, compacted
and in Clusters; and are in Form like unto those of the other Sorts, though not
so large.

The Fruit is of the bigness of a Walnut; the outward Pill is of a Gold Color,
not very Bitter, the inward Pill thin; and the Pulp is distinguished into eight
Parcels; of a pleasant sour Taste.

This Plant is very delightful to the Eye, and that in respect of its abundant
Fruitfulness, which is also the cause of its being short-Lived, if ye do not
provide against it, by taking away the superfluous Blossoms and Fruits.

Hitherto now have we been busied to describe all sorts of Fruits, which as yet
are to be found in our Netherlandish Gardens, and mentioned by Ferrarius in his
Hesperides, whom we have also followed, as agreeing with our Experience; and
having observed many Variations, whether the same takes Original from our
Ordering, or otherwise, we shall sufficiently know the same if we will compare
our Descriptions and Representations with them of that Author; and hope
further, that by the Diligence of those who Affect or Delight in these Plants,
more new Sorts and Kinds may be brought into our Countries.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Difference in the Ordering of the Limon and Orange Tree.
BEfore we proceed to the common Ordering, I thought fit to show here the
Difference between the Raising, Propagating, and Nourishing of the Limon and
Orange Tree; it has its beginning hence.

First, That the Limon Tree is found less hardy to endure the Injuries and Cold
of our sharp and harsh Air, than the Orange Tree, because the Wood is softer,
and not so firm and close by much: There is also a Difference among the sorts
of Limons.

For there are none which can better endure the Miseries and Hardships of our
Climate, then those we have described by the Name of common white Limons; the
Adam's Apple, called the black Limon, wherefore they are most beloved by our
Affectors of this part of Husbandry, raised and propagated.

Above 1. Book ^ Chap. 7. and v. 15.
But we have showed that yet more sorts of Limon Trees may be brought to
Fertility, as the Description heretofore given does Demonstrate. Further, The
Managing and Ordering is one and the same; besides that the Trees which bear
sweet Fruits, require a place which stands well to the Sun, that the Apples may
thereby come to a better Concoction, and more pleasant Taste, which shall not
be, if we do the contrary.

Secondly, Is yet this, that we in Propagating use none, but the Seed of the
Orange Tree, because it can better endure the Cold of these Countries, as is
said before.

Even in Italy are the Seeds of Limons seldom Sown, because of their tenderness
and weakness: For all Limons, which do readily take in the Orange Stock by
Inoculation, are Fruitful, and more hardy against the Cold, and all other
Injuries, then if they were Grafted on their own Stocks.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How we get these Trees out of others Countries.
IT will not be amiss to show how those Hesperial Trees are come by in these
Countries, for those that have not Patience to stay for them by Sowing of them.

Time.
Here is to be observed Time, and Place, and Manner how we are to handle them.

It is first necessary, that the taking them up and shipping be done in the
Months of December, or at furthest in January; that in May, they may be
Unpackt, and Planted; for if it be later in the Summer, there is great Danger*
and we run great Hazard of losing the Trees, or at least we are much
behind-hand to make them Grow.

Place.
The place whence they must be fetched, is St. Remo, Situated by or upon the
River Nervi, whence they are brought to Genoa.

We must bring no Trees out of any other Climates to Plant or Order here in our
Netherlands, because the Condition of that place, does, above all other places
in Italy, agree best with our Climate, as lying about forty three Degrees
Altitude be-North the Equator.

Secondly, The best and most experienced Gardiners of all Italy are found
there; neither come there streighter Stocks, nor fairer Fruits then out of this
Hesperides.

If Trees be brought out of any other Countries, as Spain, or Portugal, it will
certainly be in Vain and to no Purpose; because they cannot well endure our
cold changeable and uncertain Air.

Ordering.
When now the Orange or Limon Trees are taken up, at the said time, with a good
lump of Earth about the Root, they must be provided with Turf, or earth Moss,
that the Mass may continue whole, and no Earth fall off.

Let them be packt with the whole Head, eight or ten, more or less, according
as they are in Bigness, in a sugar Chest, covered and set into the Ship in an
airy place; and so they may keep good six or eight Weeks; but the shorter the
Voyage is, the better.

Here must we be Cautious, that Care be taken, there be no opening, nor any
Holes made in the Chests, lest the Rats, which often are many in Ships, spoil
the Stocks, for we have had the Experience hereof to our Sorrow, that the Barks
have been eaten round about from off the Trees, whereby our long Expectation
was frustrated: And this is what concerns the Transportation out of Italy,
whereby our Hesper^^^s has taken her first Rise and Beginning in Netherland.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the Placing of the Limon and Orange Trees.
THey that will Order and Husband these Trees aright, must first make a good
Choice of a fit and convenient standing-place, where they must be continued all
the Summer.

To which end we must prepare in the Garden a Convenience to the South, or
South East, and if it be possible, right before the winter Place, or green
House, and in case the Sun be very hot, as sometimes it is in May, make choice
of a Place which has a little Skreen of shady Trees before it; for generally
about that time the Trees be a little Sickish; which if they are, they will not
endure the full heat of the Sun, by which sometimes several Plants have been
lost; for this there must remain a Space of 25, 30, or more Feet wide,
according to the Measure or Largeness of the Ground or Garden.

It will be very Useful that this Place be fenced about foursquare, with an
Elder Hedge, or other Fruit Trees twisted together, and raised high, to prevent
and take away all access of the Wind: In this manner may an open airy Shelter
or warm place be made, which is very acceptable to these tender Strangers,
there to receive the Beams of the Sun, which comes to recreate these Hesperial
Virgins between the fruitful Fences, and cause one with an other, a Mixture
Pleasant and Delightful to the Eye and Sight. The Summer Placing must be taken,
if it be possible, to the South-East; and above all, reject all the West,
South-West, and all the Parts of the North, because many great Storms, filthy
Vapors, and hurtful Winds do frequently proceed thence; which even our own
country Fruit cannot endure, much less these; and therefore must they, as much
as is possible, be shut out; that no Distemper, or loss of Leaves, to the great
Prejudice of the Growth, may be caused; for without such a fit standing Place,
we shall in vain expect to raise and to bring these Trees and their Fruit to
Perfection.

We find by many unskilful Practitioners and Managers in this affair of
Husbandry, who take no care for the standing Place, that they commonly are
furnished with pining and unthrifty Trees; Wherefore then the Warmth and
keeping of the Wind from them is highly necessary, as also the Choice of the
said Situation, which is observed even in Italy, and must therefore much more
in these our Countries.

Ferrar. Hesp. l. 2. cap. 6.
If it be possible, and the Convenience permits, that this placeing of the Trees
may be before the winter or green House: we shall find that these sweet
Perle-Hills shall not only fill the Eyes of their Master with a glorious Sight
in the time of Blowing, but also replenish and fill his Parlour with a most
fragrant and pleasant Smell through the opened Windows.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the Mold, Earth, and Dung.
Diverse sorts of Earth may be used in the Ordering of them, as the daily
Experience teaches, that every one may help himself according to the Condition
of his Habitation.

In Italy about St. Remo is found a yellow, fat, and heavy clay-Ground; the
Brabanders have sandy and gravelly clay Ground, and about Haerlem in Holland
the Gardiners use a well dunged sandy Ground, wherein these Trees do bring
forth their Fruit in too luxuriant a manner.

In short, we may at all times prepare a fit Mold, with Sand, Earth, and Dung,
wherein these Hesperial Plants shall thrive most lustily and petulantly, if old
rotten Dung be not wanting therein.

It is certain, that the purer the Dung is, the better it is; we use a well
dunged Earth, with white and soft Sand mixed together.

For the preparation and fitting of this Ground, all Earth or Sand is not alike
fit; the toffe Clay, because of its Coldness, must be rejected, and another
Earth chosen, which is brown, soft, lusty, sweet, fat, and of a good sweet
Smell, which we may try by letting the Earth stand some hours in sweet Water;
now if the Water keep its sweet Taste and Smell, it is a sign of good and fit
Earth, whereas otherwise it is contrary; and Sand is necessary to it, according
to this Prescript.

White fine and soft Sand duly prepared, Cats. Sorgh. 2. part.

Gives Fruits, when laid on with Reason.
The forementioned Earth, Sand and Dung, diverse times dug together, must lie
the whole Winter, to be frozen thorough: When the Frost is done, it shall be
wrought together diverse times, to use it; which then will be serviceable and
useful for the Work.

Ordering of Plants, l. 11. c. 2.
The Preparation of the Sieur Munting is unnecessary to Rehearse, who makes his
Mixture of sixteen Parts and Ingredients, because it can be done of less.

The Dung that is here required, must be of Cowes, Horses, or Sheep, according
as it can be got; no Man needs to ty himself strictly to it, one of the three
is sufficient; if it be but observed that the same be not too new and fresh,
but old, the sharpness thereof being well spent and rotten.

I know that there are yet other things used for Dung, as of Hens, Doves,
Shavings of Horns, Lupins, and the like; but to us the plainest way seems
best, and Caution every one against the costly Preparation which some make, and
use as one Species, Kind, of Dung to force the Orange Trees out; which is
described by Munting in his Ordering of Plants in these Words. Ibid.


Take Pigeons Dung, or Sheeps Dung, not too old, as much as you will, or of
both a like Quantity, put it into a Glass, set it in the Sun, and pour
Rainwater upon it; when the Strength thereof is drawn and gone into the same,
then pour off that Water, and put a little fresh Rainwater to it, wherein a
little bit of Saltpeter has been steeped or soaked four and twenty Hours:
Water therewith your Trees sometimes, and you shall find a wonderful forceing
Power in the same, etc. Hitherto* Munting.

Certainly I can by no means judge such a forcing about this Work for good;
Whereof we have seen an Instance at Amsterdam in the Year 1662, with the Sieur
Paulo de Rageau, who also used such Water, wherewith he watered his Trees, and
forced them thereby so strongly out, that they blowed abundantly, yet produced
but little Wood and Fruit, and the following Year the good Gentleman found,
that most of his Trees were spoiled, and some quite dead.

We do then with Reason reject these Preparations, which bring more Hurt then
Profit to their Practitioners; but deem it best to follow the ordinary Way,
leaving all artificial Preparation of Dung and Earth, and use a Ground endowed
with all good Properties, which we may sufficiently distinguish by Feeling,
Smelling, and Seeing, from the mean and bad.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Sowing of Trees.
THE Sowing of Orange Kernels does in these cold Countries require much time,
before they come to be Trees, yet this is done by many Lovers with Advantage,
especially in Brabant, where be diverse Persons, who by following this yearly,
have obtained great and fruitful Nurseries, and hereby excited others to the
same Inclination.

To do this Sowing well, we must make Choice for it of the Seed of Oranges, not
of Limons, much less of Citrons, as being too tender, according to the
Testimony of Ferrarius; Hesp. Lib. 3. Cap. 29.
the Limons Seeds are seldom sown in Italy, because they cannot well resist the
Hardships; then is it much more Unimitable in these Climates.

He that will begin this, must make Choice of the fullest, best, and ripest
Seed, of fair perfectly ripe Oranges, as they come out of Italy, Spain, or
Portugal; wash the same with Rainwater, and make them clean from all
Corruption and Dirt, and afterward dry the same three or four Days in the
Shade, in the beginning of May; and according to the saying of Ferrarius, Hesp.
Lib. 2. Cap. 8.
we must sow them two Days before the full of the Moon, after this manner, and
fill to that end a Pot with good fat and sifted Earth, put the Seed therein an
Inch deep, and two good Inches breadth asunder; set the Pot to the South, in an
open airy Warm, and to the Sun standing place, and sprinkle this you have sown
immediately, with lukewarm Rainwater, and also every third Day; yet this Earth
must not be too wet, but only moderately kept moist.

To further the springing out, Glasses must be put upon the Pots, which will
exceedingly forward the Work.

In the springing up of the Seed it happens many times, that the Shoots come
forth double, viz. two together; these Twins must we part, pull out the
weakest, that it may not hinder and take away the Nourishments of the other.

These young Seedlings are frequently troubled with Earwiggs, Ants, Snails,
Woodlice, which eat the same off, and hinder their Growth, wherefore there must
be Provision made against them: At the third Year must every Seedling be
transplanted particularly and singly by itself in a Pot, in good Earth, and put
in a place as before, where they may be free and safe from all bad Winds.
Without any Opposition or Hindrance they shall be at five Years old a Finger
thick, fit for Inoculation; and in the twelfth Year, or less also, bring forth
Fruit.

This is the Ordinary and certainest Way of sowing, whereby we may nurse up and
raise these Trees, and from their beginning use them to the enduring of
Injuries and Hardships, which may happen to them through the Inconstancy of the
Climate.

Against the forcing of Orange Seed.
By the art of Sowing in fresh Horse-dung may these Seeds be made speedily and
strongly to sprout out: When the Seed is first soaked in lukewarm Water,
wherein fresh Dung and a little Saltpeter has lain asteep; as we have seen at
Nortwyok in Holland, at Sieur Borels, that he made Orange Trees grow in one
Year from Seed to the height of two Feet, and a Finger thick, fit to Inoculate
the next or second Year: But as soon as the Sun did recide to the South, and
declared unto us the approaching Winter; these tender Nurslings began to Mourn,
as unaccustomed to the usual Severity of our Harvest and Winter Showers, which
surprised them as being Unarmed and Unprovided against this Evil; and withal
spoiled them of all Health and Thriftiness; whereupon Death at last followed.

This Forcing is good for all Foreign Seeds out of hot Countries, to dry the
Plants that come forth from them to an herbarium Vivum. But is by no means
advisable about the Sowing of Orange Trees, in which we must keep to the Way
and Manner above Mentioned.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Ingrafting.
THE Propagation of Fruit is mostly done on a threefold way, by Ingrafting,
Ablactation, and Buding, otherwise called Inoculating.

To do this well, the Stock which is to be Grafted or Ingrafted, must be strong
and sufficient in Growth, that the Cyon put in may not want Nourishment.

To which end a fit Bough or Branch is to be chosen to cut the Cyon from,
(whether it be a Limon or Orange Tree) which is neither too Old nor too Young;
for the Old is unfit, and the Young too tender.

Time.
That we may not miss here, we must choose Wood of two years Growth, because that
of one year is too tender; cut the Cyon in the Month of May, to the length of
two Buds; part under the lowest Bud shall be cut with a sharp Knife on both
sides somewhat flat, yet so that the most outward part of the Bark may not go
off, being it must again Unite with that of the Stock.

After the cutting of the Cyon, the Stock must be sawed off at a convenient
height; and observe that the Bark be not bruised, but be smooth and even: Then
make a Slit in the top of the Stock, with a sharp Chissel (and put therein a
Box-Tree-wood-Wedg, that the opening may not shut again) put then the Cyon in
from the Top downward to the lowest Bud, so that the same sticks out a little
above the Stock; close the Work together; so that the outmost Bark of the Cyon
does exactly answer to the outmost Bark of the Stock; guard the Slit with good
grafting Wax against the Inwatering, and other Inconveniences: On this manner
may we Graft upon high Stocks, and upon particular Boughs, to make several
sorts of Fruits, as well Limons as Oranges to grow upon one Tree, which may
likewise be done by Inoculating.

Which is most elegantly described by Virgil, Georg. lib. 2.
Then at last Care is to be taken that the new grafted Cyon may have the full
Nourishment, and be not robbed by the wild Sprigs shooting forth.

By means of Grafting we have seen the wild Orange Tree bettered, but it often
fails.

But the Limon Tree grafted into the Orange Stock, is more sure, and will
better Unite.

Grafting is seldom used in these Trees, except out of Curiosity, for it makes
most unhandsom and ill-shapen Stocks, and is therefore by the Practitioners but
little used.

Of Ablactation or grafting by Approach.
Besides the foregoing Grafting, is Grafting by Approach or Ablactation, or of
Sucking, so called because the young Shoot is sucked off from the Mother, or
principal Trees.

We have seen it with Hercules Patronus at Zutphen, who was very experient in
this Ordering and Managing, and has happily performed and executed both these
Ways of Grafting, and Ablactation.

This is done in the Month of May: Make choice for it of an Orange Stock,
lustily Flourishing, and strong in Growth, place him in such manner next to the
Tree from which is to be sucked, or the Ablactation to be made, that the Boughs
or Branches can easily reach, or fully touch with their outmost ends the
uppermost Top of the Stock, placed or posited by; which shall be sawed off even
and smooth, at such an height as we desire; and therein is a Slit to be made,
even as if we would Graft; then shall the Shoot or Twig be cut on both sides,
flatwise, under the second or third Bud, after the same manner as is said
before of the Cyon: Besides it must not be parted from the Bough, but left on,
and joined from behind in the opening of the Stock, so that the outmost Bark of
the cut Graft does rightly correspond and answer with that of the Stock; which
must be secured with grafting Wax, as also against all shaking and moving by
the Wind, that the perfect Union and Cure may be made, which may be helped by
placing a stick or two by it, and by binding the same thereunto this
Inconveniency is prevented, the tender Sucker is saved from breaking, and the
putter-in from Prejudice.

And after this Ingrafting has taken, and is well United, then shall the new
shot Graff be cut off close to the Stock of the Mother, that henceforth it may
suck and draw its own Nourishment.

Inoculatio^.
Among all the sorts or kinds of Grafting which may be used about these Plants
or Trees, there is none more proper to their Nature then Inoculation, or
Grafting with the Bud; and that in respect of the hardness of the Wood;
wherefore they will not well endure the two foregoing ways.

This Work was very famous among the Ancient, whose Prescripts are Collected
together by the learned Mizaldus, Opuscul. de arborum insitione.
and therefore needless here to Rehearse; but only the Modern Handling and Use
which is approved by Experience, and received by every one.

Ferrar. Hesp. Lib. 2. Cap. 8.
To do and perform this, the time must be observed; in the Month of July, in the
Wain of the Moon, in fair Weather, when it is neither misty, nor rainy, must
this work be done.

Make choice of a flourishing Shoot of two or three Years old, of a thrifty
Tree, whereof ye desire to Inoculate, and to cut the Bud or Oculation, whether
it be of a Limon or Apple Sina, seek a Bud which has no Thorns to it.

After the said Twigg or Shoot is cut off, take a sharp little Knife, and give
the Bud chosen on each side a cut to the Wood, and under and above the Bud,
which remains in the middle a Cut likewise, that in Form it is like a longish
square little Shield; lay the same off with the point of the Knife, or with the
Thumb or Forefinger, yet so that the Bud or Eye remains fast to the little
Shield, and the same be not Rent; for otherwise it will not be good; the Leaf
fastened below to the Bud shall be tipped about the middle, to guide the little
Shield in the setting in.

The little Shield may yet in another manner be taken off; when (as is above
said) cut, we shall lift it off with a Knife, so that a little Wood remains to
the Shield, to keep the Bud the more safe; though this seems to be contrary to
the common Rule, yet have we often found it good, and seen it more easily done
then the foregoing.

This was first made known to me by the most experienced Sieur John Roeters.

The little Shield or Oculation lifted off, being approved, we shall keep the
tipped Leaf between our Lips, (yet not so as that it becomes wet) till the
opening of the Stock be made after the following manner.

Choose for it an even smooth place, which has neither Bump nor Knot; make the
Cut or Incision through the Bark to the Wood, a little longer then the bigness
of your little Shield, in the form of a Latin T, or like the modern Italian
Gardeners have in use, as this Sign shows T, as appears by the Limon and
Orange Trees, that come out of those Countties; but which way soever the Cut or
Incision is made, it is all one, because it makes no difference in the Growing.
Afterward lift the Bark up easily with a bony Knife, part the same on both
sides from the Wood, take the Oculation by the Leaf which is left to it, join
the same duly and conveniently between it, within the Cut against the Wood,
thrusting the outmost Bark a little, that the Oculation may be, as it were,
well and evenly clapped to the foresaid Wood.

And it is to be observed, that the top of this little Shield must touch to the
uppermost against the cross Cut, viz. when it is like the Latin T: But if on
the contrary it stands after the Italian way, the lowest part shall touch it,
the little Shield or Oculation being well put, must be carefully tied either
with a dry Rush of a Muscovian Mat, narrow Tape, or any other soft String,
beginning from above the Oculation, and so downwards, making the Binding to
shut before, even under the Bud or the Stalk of the Leaf that is left on: then
wind on till the whole Cut or Incision, besides the Eye, which may not be
covered, be wound up.

We must preserve this Work with great carefulness against Rain and Inwatering,
that it may not be spoiled, because nothing is more hurtful to the new inset
Eye; wherefore those Trees are set under some Shed or Shelter to that end.

The Binding shall stand about three Months, till ye see the Oculation has
taken, and the Bud begins to swell; then the Binding is to be loosened a little.

Let this Work stand all Winter to the Spring, and when in the Month of April
the Oculation is yet Green and Thriving; then it is good, and there is hope of
Growing, and shall doubtless shoot out in May or June; but before it comes thus
far, and as soon as we perceive that the Bud is good, and makes it self ready
to sprout out, we must Cut or Saw the Stock off two Inches above the Oculation,
that all the Sapp and Nourishment may come to the new Nurse-Child, and the
Shoot the more strongly put forth: When the same, the following Year, is
strongly shot, then take the rest of the remaining Stock away to a little above
the Inoculation, and cure the Wound with Grafting Wax.

If the Oculation be put upon an high and straight Stock, we set two or three,
or four Oculations round it, to make a good and regular Head: But if the Stock
be maimed and slight, we put the Oculation at the bottom of the same, not far
above the Ground; for then by means of this Inoculating we may raise straight
and fair Trees; as we see this among the Practitioners in Brabant, who choose
for this those that are flourishing and thrifty, which can shoot in one Year
three Foot high and more.

We must not pluck off the Leaves which stand along the new shot out Sprout, or
Twigg, but leave them on till they fall off themselves; for by the Leaves is
the Sapp kept in full Strength and Vigor from the bottom to the Top.

These tender Shoots may be kept straight, by putting a Stick by them, and with
binding so ordered, that thereby the Platform is laid for the bringing forth of
fair and straight Trees.

For according to the streightness and fairness of the Stock, we do here in
this Country many times esteem the Tree, and this is the means to bring them to
it, from their Youth while they are tender.

To Inoculate is none of the least Delights of this Practice, for we do
something that seems almost unconceiveable, that an whole Tree is forced by
means of a thin little Shell, and a single Bud, to leave and change its own
Nature, and to bring forth other strange Fruits.

It would be convenient here, and suit well to show how this Union is made, and
this great Work performed in a small Compass, how a Tree is composed of little
Particles, which are like many thin Fibers, or thin Strings, along which,
through invisible Pores and Passages, the Nourishment, which partly consists in
Moisture, ascends, where it spreads itself through the Branches, and by means
of the outward Heat of the Sun, and Innate, or natural Warmth within, produces
the effects of Leaves, Blossoms, and Fruits.

These long thin stringlike Passages (whereof the Bark is wholly composed)
being cut asunder, as they also of the Oculation, whose openings coming then
again right upon one another, the Moisture and Nourishment of the Stock is
communicated to the Cyon, and through the growing Virtue joined and united
together. We see the contrary comes to pass, when this Agreement and
Corresponding of the Passages fails, by misplacing of the same. Yet it is not
our Intention and Design here to Reason and Discourse of this Matter; but we
recommend this to the great Wits of Naturalists, and keep our selves to the
simple Ordering.

We may by Inoculating come to much Variety of Fruits, if we be but provided
and furnished with Stocks and Seedlings.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Propagation by Inlaying.
EVen as in all Creatures there is by Nature a Propagating Property, so
likewise is the same in Trees, which are not only multiplied by the Seeds, but
also by the Sproutings out, and Suckers below at the Roots.

To further which, Art has not a little added and Contributed to it, viz. by
Inlaying, or Offlaying.

We have before treated of Sowing; and the other is now our present Talk,
wherein we must know,

First, That an Orange Tree does seldom sprout out at the Roots; and the
Inlaying of the Boughs, by reason of the hardness of their Wood, cannot well be
brought to Shoot and to take Root; Lib. 1. Cap. 2.
though some say that such may be done, and among others the Sieur Munting in
his true and right Exercise of Planting. For me, I could never attain to it.

But this Propagation may more fitly be done to the Limon Tree, which is of a
softer Wood, and is more apt to shoot out at the Roots, especially when the
Oculation stands close by the Ground; whether it be then, that the Inlaying be
done above from the Head, or from beneath near the Ground, give the Bough a Cut
from the Bottom upward; then take a Pot, in the Bottom or Side whereof is an
Hole, put the Bough therethrough, and order that the Cut or Incision may come
into the middle of the Pot; lay between the cutted Opening, or Slit, a little
flat Stone, or something else, that it may not shut too close together, but
keep open, to further the Rooting sooner.

When this is conveniently placed and set, we must fill up the Pot with good
Earth, and keep it moist with moderate Watering: after the second Year we
commonly find that it is rooted; which when it is fit and strong, cut off, to
nourish itself, and then to be Transplanted.

Here is to be observed, when the Pot, whether it stands to the Head, or below
upon the Ground, must be fastened, for the least Motion which happens to it, is
prejudicial, and causes a fruitless and lost Labor.

These of laid Trees, (when they are of a good and fruitful Bough) shall
produce as fair Limons as an Inoculated Tree, as Experience has often taught
us, and likewise withal we may easily multiply Limon Trees on this wise.

There are yet otherways of Propagation described by Ferrarius, Hesp. Lib. 2*
cap. 11.
but the Execution is Unpracticable in Netherland, because of the shortness of
our Summers. We therefore omit all the rest, seeing thus may be done whatsoever
can be desired from the other ways.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of Planting, and Transplanting.
A Double Handling comes here to be Considered; the Planting, and Transplanting.

The first is done to Trees, which are brought to us out of Italy; and the
other to those which stand here in these Countries in full Growth.

Before we come to this, it will be useful, that the necessary Instruments be
proposed, because without them we cannot begin.

Of Tubs and Boxes.
It is not practicable to Plant the Hesperial Trees in these Countries at large
in the free and natural Ground, as they do in warm Climates; wherefore Art has
invented wooden Tubs, Boxes, and earthen Pots, wherein the Trees are Planted,
Removed, and Transported. Though these Trees are by some Lovers planted at
large, or in free Ground, yet it is rejected for these Reasons.

First, Because of the great Charges, which this Work requires, to defend our
tender Plants against the Cold; being there is a winter-place, or green House
required thereunto, which is taken away in the Summer, and in the Winter set up
again; as such an one is described by Ferrarius, and found in the Garden of the
Duke of Parma; but it would be too Chargeable for many to perform and make such.

Secondly, Because the Grounds are here in the winter-Season very Moist, and
accordingly Cold, which is very prejudicial to the Trees and Fruits; Wherefore
we, to avoid all this, shall follow our Predecessors, who have for many Years
found out Tubbs, Boxes, and Potts for this, which are all to be taken according
to the bigness of the Trees.

Tubbs.
The best and fittest Tubbs are made of Rhenish-wine-Fats, or Casks, because
their Matter is hard, thick, firm, and good Oaken Wood; the Hoops must be Iron
Hoops, and have on each side a strong Iron Handle, to carry them, or remove
them conveniently from one place to another; the Depth and Width above is
ordinarily two Foot, but at the Bottom one Foot and an half: so that the
Narrowness must go slenting downward, and lessen by little and little, because
in the Transplanting of the Trees, the whole Mass of Earth may be the more
conveniently taken out; and if we desire Tubbs for lesser Trees, let the Depth
and Width above be one Foot and a half, and the Diameter or middle Line of the
Bottom, one Foot and a quarter: and several Holes must be bored or made in the
Bottoms of the Tubbs, and Pots, and Boxes, to empty the superfluous Moistness,
and to free the Roots of the Trees from rotting.

The Pots must be made of good Earth, glazed within and without, or not so,
according as every one pleases and desires; the Form and Fashion must be
almost like the Tubbs, wider at the Top then at the Bottom, the Foot broad, to
prevent the falling down.

Concerning the spuare Boxes, they are not in all particulars held so good, and
are more chargeable, wherefore we thought it not necessary to say any thing
touching the same; nor of the other things necessary to the Planting, as Spade,
Shovel, Trowel, and the like, in regard they are sufficiently known to every
one as to their Form and Fashion. Only this must be added, that wooden Tubbs
are counted better then earthen Potts, because the Roots shoot round against
the Sides of the Pots and Tubbs, also upon the Bottoms of the same; and so it
is, that the Earth being much colder then the Wood, does consequently hinder
the Trees more, especially in the Winter.

In the beginning of this Chapter is spoken of a twofold Planting; we shall now
treat of the first, viz. Of Trees which are new brought over out of Italy, or
other Countries.

How we are to use those new got Trees,
When we have got them in convenient time; presently after the Unpacking, shall
all the Earth, which is about the Roots be clean taken off, washed, and cleared
from all stifled and dead Fibers and Stumps; and the whole Head sawed off too
within an Hands-breadth above the Inoculation, and the remaining Tops covered
with grafting Wax.

Take then further, a great Tub with Rainwater, made Lukewarm in the Sun, and
let the Trees ly therein one or two Days, that they may, by sucking of the
fresh Moisture, in some measure Revive again, after the long continued Draught
and Hardships they have suffered in the Voyage, and afterward Plant them in
this following Manner.

Planting*
Choose Potts or little Tubs, according as the Bigness of every Tree shall
require; fill them with good Earth two or three Hands Breadth deep, put the
Tree in the middle of it, add more fine sifted Earth to it, pressing the same a
little down; and in the filling up, shake the Stock up and down, to the end the
Earth may the better sink in between the Branches of the Root, and the Tree
stand fast and firm.

When now the Pot is conveniently filled, put the same for some Days in a shady
warm place, on which the Sun does not shine; let the same stand so long there
till the Bud begin to come out: On this manner shall we accustom the Trees to
our Climate, which by degrees are to be set further and further in the open Air
and Sun; in the mean while the Earth is but moderately and not overmuch to be
watered, Watering.
to reduce these sick ones to new Strength again.

As soon as we begin to see the first shooting out, it may be furthered by
putting Glasses over the Oculation; and taking care that no Cobwebs come to it.

It must be further observed to the Nursing up and raising, that the Vermin do
not eat off the tender and first Shoots that sprout out, for hereby is caused
not only a backwardness and retardation in their Growth, but also after a long
pining Consumption, the Death it self of the Trees; but if this Work be managed
after the foresaid manner, the Trees shall be fit at the fifth Year to bring
forth Blossoms and Fruits.

There be several Reasons, Transplanting*
which force us to Transplant the Limon and Orange Trees.

Either because the Pots grow too little, the Tubs rott, or they must of
necessity have fresh Earth; or some Defects about the Roots do require it.

For this make choice of the Months of April, the beginning of May or October,
Hesp. l. 2. cap. 12.
and according to Ferrarius's Doctrine, in the Wain of the Moon, after that the
holes in the Tubs or Pots are secured from being stopped, (which is prevented by
laying over them some round raised pieces of a broken Pot, yet so that the
Water may have sufficient way to run out) lay then beneath upon the Bottom old
rotten Cow Dung, three Fingers thick, and then as much fat good prepared Earth
sifted fine, as is necessary (to set the Tree upon) press the same a little
down with the flat of your Hand, to prevent the sinking down, for it is uncomly
when the Earth is too much below the edge of the Tub or Pot.

After the Tree is loosned round about in the old Tub or Pot, and taken out,
then cut the superfluous Fibers off with a sharp Knife, and see whether there
be yet any other Defect or Fault to be found about it, which then may be
removed. You must keep the Roots from Bruises, for thereby they are hurt, and
are very prejudicial to the Tree, because they easily cause rotting; whence
many times a pining and lingering Sickness arises.

After this done, put the Tree then again right in the middle of the new
prepared Place, fill the same up with the foresaid Earth, and press it down a
little, that the Tree may get firmness; which also must not be set too deep.

After that the Earth is brought to a convenient height, three Fingers breadth
above the Root, then put and set the new planted Tree some Days in a shady warm
Place, and secure the same against all Moving, Shaking, Winds, Thrusting, or
any otherwise.

Neither must ye water this Earth the same Day, but two or three Days after,
and that but moderately, because otherwise it becomes sluddy and Miry, and
cling'd too close together, which does no good.

And thus must we endeavor to reduce the Trees to fresh Strength and Vigor,
which we may discern by the coming forth of new Shoots.

Time of Transplanting*
The right time to Transplant, is in the end of April, or in the beginning of
October, for at both times may this Work be done, though in my Judgment, the
Spring, or forepart of the Year is most fit.

When this Transplanting is done in Autumn, ye must let the Tree stand still
till the Spring, and water the Earth but moderately, till the time it is
brought into the House, and then water no more, except Necessity requires it.

Changing of Tubs or Pots.
When a Pot or Tub becomes too little, or is broken, ye must take the Tree out,
with the Earth that cleaves to it in one Lump: is the Tub perished or decayed,
cut off the Hoopes or Staves round about, and after the impoverished Earth is
taken away an Hands breadth next to the knitted Net of Fibers at the Root,
which are commonly at the Bottom, then order your Business further as is said
above.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of Removing of Trees.
TO Remove tender Trees (which are in these Climates, and maintained in narrow
Tubs and Pots) from one City to another, or places farther remote; it must be
done in the Months of March or April.

If it be done by Water, that is the fittest time.

First, Because the heat of the Sun as then does not cause any Soultryness in
the Vessels, whereby the Trees might be stifled, and lose their Leaves and
Fruits.

Secondly, This time must be observed, that the Trees may be at the place where
ye would have them, before they come to shoot out, and secure them the better
against all Damage; but if the Voyage be long by Sea, the Removal must be
sooner in the forepart of the Year, that the Trees may be at the designed place
before the warm Weather, and not partake of the foresaid Harms.

Against Rats.
In this Removing is yet another Danger, besides the breaking and spoiling of
the Boughs, and stifling of them, viz. that of Rats, against which we must take
Care, that the Stocks and Heads may be kept whole and unspoiled; for it may
happen that this hurtful Vermin, being pinched with great Thirst, eat the
Barks of these Trees, and so spoil, mangle, and Kill them, as has happened to
us.

The best means against this, is, to cause some Pots with fresh Water to be set
in the Ships about the Room where the Trees stand, that this Vermin may quench
their Thirst, and these tender Travelers be brought over in the most comely
manner to their Master. If this removal must be done by Land, ye are to take
Care only that they may be safe in the Wagons from breaking and hitting
against something, or against one another.

Of the time to bring them into, and out of the winter Place or green House.
To this belongs the removing, as into, so also out of the winter Place or green
House; when the Summer begins to draw to an End, and it is come to about the
eight of October, or the twenty eighth of September, the Trees shall be brought
under a Shelter or Cover, in a fair, a clear Day, when the Leaves are well dry,
(whether it be a Gallery, made of Reed or Straw, or otherwise, as a Man has
the Convenience) letting them stand there some Days, till ye see that it begins
to be time to put them into the winter Place or green House, which is
ordinarily about the middle of October, or somewhat later, according as the
Days are fair, and the Weather good.

In the setting of the Trees, you must observe, that they stand Airy, and as
little as is possible into one another, lest, by the hanging of the Heads in
one another, the Leaves and Boughs stifle, neither must they be placed too near
the Stove, or Fireplace, to receive any Hurt by the Heat; and ye must make the
placing so, that ye may easily come to the Trees, to help them upon all
Inconveniency.

In the Spring, about the tenth of May, when it is mild and rainy Weather,
remove the Trees again out of the winter Place or green House, into the open
Air, but not at first into the hot Sunshine, because they cannot so suddenly
endure the same, but lose thereby their Leaves and Fruits; therefore you must
stay for a Day that it rains, or otherwise you shall bring the Trees for some
Days into a shady Place, to use them again by degrees to the Air and Sunshine;
how you are further to Order them in the winter Place, or green House, shall be
said afterward.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of Dunging, Refreshing, and digging about the Trees.
Ferrar. Hesp. l. 2. cap. 13.
THE dunging of Limon and Orange Trees is done according to the Diversity of
Climates; and because we intend to direct this Ordering according to the
Condition of our Belgium, Netherland: this Work must be done in the Month of
May, as soon as the Trees come out of the Winter-Place, or Green-House, and
that every two or three years, according as Necessity requires.

Digg the old Earth one Hands breath or more round, with a sharp Trowel, or
small Spade, out of the Tub or Pot, wherein the Tree stands, as deep as you can
come, withal taking away the old fibrous Roots, spent and worn out Earth; this
being done, fill the Tubs up again with fatdunged light fine sifted Earth,
which has been prepared some time before for it, and often wrought together
with old Cow and Horse-dung, till the same be well mixed and rotten; and after
the said filling up, make the uppermost Earth even, letting the same ly
lightly, to further the Influence or soaking in of the Water, which by Rain or
Watering comes upon it.

By means of this Dunging and Refreshing, can this noble Plant be Nourished in
narrow close Vessels, with great ease, and maintained in Fruitfulness.

We have only propounded the most simple and plain Way, as being the surest,
leaving the Artificial, which some have Invented, and Endeavored to Recommend
to the World for Wonders, but deceives none more than those that use it most,
as we have touched upon before in part, in the Description of the Dung.

Digging about.
The digging about is done yearly in the Spring, against the time that the Trees
come out of the Winter-Place or Green-House, and is nothing else, but a taking
away of the uppermost Earth of the Tubs two or three Fingers breadth deep, and
filling them up again with other Good, instead of the spent and worn out Dung,
thereby, by this maintaining, as much as is possible, to strengthen and bring
Nourishment to the Earth in the Tubs and Pots.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of Watering.
De Meg. Haleluyah. c. 4.
BEing the Nourishment of Trees, and whatsoever Grows out of the Earth, consists
out of the finest Particles of the Earth and Water, which spreads and disperses
itself through small Pores along by little Strings, like Veins, through all
their Parts, and by the natural Warmth, being strengthened with the Heat of the
Sun, which pierces from without, does turn into the Shape and Form of those
Parts to which it is brought; and being Water is Necessary, whithout which no
Tree can Live; for it serves to the loosening and thinning of the said Parts,
that the same may the more conveniently be drawn up through the opened Pores,
and carried to the Place where they are turned into Nourishment.

And seeing our Hesperial Strangers want the free Use of the Earth with us, and
must be contented with small and narrow close Tubs and Pots; it is necessary we
lend them the helping Hand, by bringing Water to them, which by the Rain,
except it be of long continuance, cannot be sufficiently given, or is hindered
through the width and breadth of their Heads, which cause the Rainwater to run
most down by their Sides; wherefore the help of watering is highly requisite
here.

Among all the Parts of this Ordering, this is none of the least, and we must
observe; first, the Choice of Water, and secondly, the time when we shall Water.

What water is to be made choice of. Hesp. l. 2. c. 14.
Ferrarius, (whom we here also follow) puts sweet and constantly running Spring
and River-Water for the best, as being most Piercing, and wholesomest, and next
to the Rainwater, which is gathered and kept in Cisterns, or Tubs: and
thirdly, Well or Pump-Water, which is commonly Cold, has many Defaults and
Properties which it carries with it out of the different Grounds, whence it
Springs.

Much less in Virtue is the Water which comes out of Moorish Places; but worst
of all is that of standing Lakes, and Ponds; also that which is thick, saltish,
brackish, sulphurous, and of gross Parts, which must be rejected for this Use,
and that only be chosen which is here above Approved, viz. that Water which
has a good Smell, sweet Taste, without any Slyminess* which in the VVinter is
somewhat Lukewarm, and in the Summer moderately Cool; for this is judged
wholesome and pleasant, as well for Men as for Trees; but River, and Rain-VVater
excels all other; when enough may be had, we shall keep to it. There be
Persons that prepare several Mixtures, with Dung, Saltpeter, and Water, to
water therewith; but being we rejected that in the thirtieth Chapter, and have
spoken of it before, we shall say no more to it now.

Time.
We must order our selves according to the Difference of the Seasons to water
Orange Trees.

In hot and dry VVeather, it must be done every second or third Day in the
Evening, when the Sun is going down, and Shines no more upon the Trees; for if
they be watered in the heat of the Day, it will cause a great Sickness;
wherefore we stay till the Evening, by reason that the heat of the Sun having
layn upon the Roots all the Day, they may thereby in some measure be Refreshed.

This watering must be done with Care, so that the Earth be kept moderately
moist, and not too wet, and reduced to a dirty Myriness; we must also beware of
the Stocks, lest they chill by the Water which comes against them, grow foul,
mossy, and come to a pining Sickness.

We must especially observe that the Water we shall use in watering, must be
warmed in the Sun before it be used, because cold-Water is very hurtful to the
Trees; therefore we use Casks and Tubs, or wooden Troughs, which stand all the
Day long in the Sun, and wherein the Water is put the Day before it is used.

The time when this watering begins and ends here in these Countries, is
commonly May, to the latter end of August, or somewhat longer, according as the
Days be Wet, Hot, or Cold.

We must observe this general Rule in this Affair, which is above, in some
measure touched upon, viz. that we do not water these Trees too much; for if
they be kept too wet, it cools and chills the Root, and the Leaves grow Yellow;
too much dryness is also hurtful, so that Moderation must be observed here;
which we may sufficiently know by the Earth itself; for these Trees must not be
over-watered.

In winter time.
As long as the Trees stand in the Winter-Place or Green-House, they are seldom
watered, except Necessity requires it; which may be discerned by the shrinking
in of the Leaves, and the limberness of their Fruits, and then the watering
must be but little, till the Faintness ceases, and the Fruits and Leaves return
to their former State.

When this watering is to be done, we shall warm a Pot with Water over the
Fire, and so temper it with cold Water, that it is fitly lukewarm, as if it
had stood a Summers Day in the Sun, for great Cold is very prejudicial to the
Roots.

In the Spring, from April to May, we shall seek to cherish these Trees by a
slowish Feeding, or Refreshing with Water, which is set upon the Tubs, in flat
Pots or Pans, wherein ly longish Pieces of woollen Selveges, which by little
and little suck it in, and so thence distills again into the Earth, which thus
in time begins to moisten, and give Nourishment to the Tree; but if we do water
much in the Spring, the Fruit will Mourn, and fall off, which according to
Ferrarius his Opinion, Hesp. l. 4. cap. 21.
comes to pass, because the Trees have sufficient Moistness and Sap in them,
and ascends from the Root, whereby the Fruits are, as it were, loosned, and
fall off.

Hitherto now, what concerns watering; if it be well observed in the Blowing
time, and swelling of the Fruit, we shall find, that the Trees are Cheerly and
Merry, and shall richly Reward the Master's Labor and Pains with Blossoms,
Fruits, and pleasant Leaves.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of Cutting or Pruning.
A Twofold Cutting or Pruning is used about these Trees.

First, That which is used yearly, by taking away the dead VVood, and
superfluous Branches.

Secondly, The taking or cutting of the whole Head. First,

Limon Trees.
The Pruning, which the Limon Tree requires, is about the superfluous VVood,
which the Tree often makes, and must needs be cut off, as well in regard of the
good Shape of her Head, as of the common welfare of her Fruits; for through
want of this work the Limon Trees get irregular slender Heads, which render
them Ungraceful to the Eye.

Secondly, We must also clear them of the dead VVood, which discovers itself
in the forepart of the Year, while they yet stand in the House; and is caused
through Moistness, which falling down upon the Boughs and Leaves, produces
Stifling and Moldiness, which by a sharp Property, bites and eats out the Life
of the tender VVood and Leaves; and causes a pernicious Deadness, and Infects
the whole Bough in a short time, if we be not careful about it, to stop the
Malady by cutting off; therefore must this be taken away to the Quick, and the
VVounds covered up with grafting-VVax, to prevent further Corruption.

Orange Tree.
The Orange Tree is likewise subject to the forementioned Evil; wherefore he
must be handled as the Limon Tree in this case; But yet he has this peculiar,
that he often produces at the fore-ends of the Boughs very Close, Churlish, and
many small Shoots (and they especially with curled and wrinkled Leaves) which
do the more strongly draw and suck away the Nourishment, and hinder the farther
shooting of young Branches, and make the Trees to Blossom too much, whereby at
last a Consumption is caused.

To prevent which, these superfluous Twiggs or little Shoots are in their
beginning broken or taken off, and but two, or at most three left together; or
if you find that too many of these Shoots or Twiggs are left, they are taken
away at the ordinary time of Pruning, to the end the next new coming, may come
forth the more strongly, and lustily.

The taking off of the Head.
When we observe that the Limon and Orange Trees begin to leave Growing, and
fail to shoot new Branches, which are Signs that the growing Virtue is decayed,
being caused by the abundant Blossoming and Fruit-bearing; then shall ye cut
the whole Head off within an Hands breadth, and Transplant the Tree into fresh
Earth (as is taught before, Cap. 8.) after the Roots are well cleared: Whereby
the same obtains, as it were, a new Life, and we get again likewise, instead of
Trees decayed, young and flourishing ones.

The Time.
This pruning Work must be taken in hand in the Spring, viz. as soon as the Trees
come out of the VVinter Place, or Green House, and according to Ferrarius his
Lesson, Hesp. l. 6. c. 16.
in the VVain of the Moon; but for the cutting away of Sear or dead VVood, no
time is to be observed for the taking off of the whole Head; we can prescribe
no Years, because the forementioned Signs about them must be only observed.

The Instruments, we have need of for this Work, are a pruning Chissel, a
wooden Mallet, small Saw, a crooked pruning Knife, grafting Wax to secure the
made VVound from dripping Moisture, and to further the Cure.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of the Means against many Defaults and Vermin.
EVen as Men and Animals are subject to Sickness, Ails, and Enemies; so also
the Trees and Plants, which must needs by Means be rid of them, and defended
against them, if we will keep them in Prosperity and Health.

The common Distempers, which we find here in these Countries, are Gumms,
growing Yellow, Lice, Rottonness, and Decay.

Gumms.
Concerning the first; The same has, or takes its Original from some ill
natured cold tough Matter, which Nature seeks to throw off, or cast out at one
place or other, in a tough and sharp Moistness, which Cankers and Corrupts
wheresoever it runs or flows; therefore as soon as this Evil is perceived, the
gummy Place shall be cut out with a sharp Knife to the quick Wood, and the
outcut Wound rubbed with Lime and Ashes of Turf, mixed together with
Rainwater, to a convenient Thickness, and then be covered over with Grafting
Wax.

This has been often used with good Advantage on this Occasion, and is the
same Means which Ferrarius Describes or Prescribes against the rotting of them.
Hesp. l. 4. c. 22.


Yellowness of Leaves.
Against the growing Yellow of the Leaves; which takes its Original from the ill
Disposition of the inward Parts, or from the Rottenness of the Roots, and
sometimes also from too much watering, whereby the Tree is Chilled, or from the
long continued Exsiccation of the Earth; So is it that the same Author
Recommends to bury a dead Dog at the Roots of the Trees; and being such cannot
well be done with us, because we must miss the Use of the free Earth, and
behelp our selves with narrow Pots and Tubs; we have seen that instead thereof
is used the Shavings or Scrapings of Neats Horns, rotten before, and scalded,
whereby these Trees seemed to live again anew. But here Care must be taken,
that the Scrapings, or Shavings of Horns, be used moderately, that the Trees
may not be Damnified through the Sharpness they have in them.

But if it proceed from the Rottenness or Corruption of the Roots, it is most
fit to take the Tree up, to put away the old Earth, and to clear the Root of
all corrupt Fibers and Branches, and so Plant him again in new Earth, whereby
the same shall shoot to a more flourishing Growth.

If it be caused by too much Wett, which Chills the Root, then the best means
is that we look to the Tubs and Pots; for it happens sometimes that the Holes
underneath are stopped, whereby the Water cannot run out, but keeps standing
about the Root, and causes this Evil to it; therefore they must be opened, that
there may be a due Course for the Water. Or if it happens through the Earths
being too close cling'd together, or for want of Air, then the Transplanting is
the next Means.

Lice.
What has here the name of Lice, we find to be much rather a Distemper, which
has its Original from the Trees being Foul, which is often caused by Mildew,
too many moist Vapors in the winter Place, or green House, through the little
airing, and too close standing together of the Trees (as well as an Enemy which
comes upon them from without) and is rightly called the lousy Disease; for it
is not enough that one Tree is tainted therewith, but all that stand about it
become Partakers of the same Evil.

This Vermin, or Creature, if we may so call it, is in its beginning of a white
Color, of Shape longish Round; when it is perfect, it is of the bigness of an
ordinary wall-Louse, of a Chessnut Color, upon the Back beset with long Hairs,
but they perish in few Days; within it is full of grayish Moisture, which is of
a sweet Taste, wherefore the Ants are much about it, and like of the Sweetness.

This Wet or Moistness seems to serve this Creature for Nourishment, which it
draws out of the Bark of the Tree: But it sits most upon the Leaves, and most
flourishing Branches, and we cannot easily observe that it moves from its
Place, though it does so very slowly.

When now against the declining of the Summer, this little Animal begins to
dye, and its Sap and Moisture dries up, it voids a multitude of white Matter,
which are Eggs, Nits, or Seed, whereby it is Propagated again.

We have Experienced, that where this white Matter takes place, yea even in
Vines, Peach, Laurel, and Myrtletree, that they were the next Year tainted with
this Evil, and that instead of one, hundreds came to light; so that they by
sucking the natural Nourishment from the Trees, killed them, as has happened
to several Trees.

This Vermin does not dye through Cold, but endures even the coldest Winter;
and what Means soever have been used to drive away this Distemper, the only
Means is found to be, the making of the Trees clean from their Filth and
Foulness, with a Sponge wetted in Rainwater, wherewith we caused the Leaves
and Boughs in the Spring to be washed and wiped, before the same began to shoot
out, and hereby was this Evil quite overcome, which otherwise was sufficient
wholly to destroy the Infected Trees.

We being now freed of this, have thought fit not to hide this easy and
ordinary Means from others, but have been therefore somewhat longer in relating
so dangerous an Ayl, and its Cure.

Rottenness.
Against Rottenness in the Stocks or Boughs of the Trees, nothing else is to be
used but what is said above of the Gumms.

The growing or waxing Old.
When the Trees begin to wax Old, and they produce no young Branches, but dye by
little and little from the Top; then the only Means is to take off the whole
Head in the Spring, within an Hands breadth* above the Inoculation, that they
may sprout out again, and come again by a new Growth to their first Lustiness,
and Vigor, and fresh Strength, as is showed before.

Now we are to consider the outward Enemies, which come to assault and disquiet
these Hesperial Inhabitants, viz. the Aunts, Ear-wiggs, and Spiders.

The two first endammage these Trees, especially in their young Shoots and
Blossoms.

Hesp. l. 2. cap. 18.
Against which many Means are Invented; Ferrarius will, that we strew Ashes
about the Stock, or lay about it Cotton dipped in Oil of Stone, which by its
stench does drive away this Vermin. But in our time we have seen better
Weapons to keep off these ill natured Guests, viz. Leaden or Latin Rings of an
Hands Breadth, which were made or set together round about the Stock, and of an
Inch or two deep, which are kept full of Water, wherewith the Tree being
compassed about, as it were with a Ditch, this Vermin is hindered from climbing
up, and defended also against these Enemies.

This Invention was first brought to light by the Sieur John Roeters, in his
Life time Secretary of Amsterdam, and a great Lover of this Husbandry.

Further, others have set their Trees upon little Benches, or Frames of half a
Foot above Ground, whose Feet being made of little thick short pieces of Wood,
stand in little Troughs, which are kept full of Water, and keep these
Pernicious Creatures from the Trees.

The Earwiggs, which devour and spoil these young tender Shoots, may be caught
with pieces of coarse Linen laid in the Trees, and so kept in and Curbed.

Spiders.
Spiders hurt the Limon and Orange Trees by Spinning the Leaves together, and by
pulling the young Shoots together, whereby the Leaves become Black, Foul, and
are hindered much in their Growth.

The only Remedy against this Evil is to catch the same, and so chasing away
these Tyrants, to make these Plants free from such a filthy Crew.

Against bad Winds.
Concerning other Mischances of Winds, bad Airs, thereof is taught before how
they may be hindered and kept off.

Against Mice and Rats.
When the Trees in the Winter are Housed, they are often troubled with Mice and
Rats, because they cannot come by Water; wherefore it is not amiss to provide
the winter Place, or green House with Traps and Pans of Water, that this
Vermin may either be caught, or their Thirst quenched, to compel them to excuse
and leave the Trees, as we have seen that very much happened to Sieur William
Vanden-Heuvell.

Snails and Caterpillars.
What concerns Snails and Caterpillars, it is not found in this Country, that
they bring any Harm to these Plants, and therefore Unnecessary upon this
Occasion, to Admonish or Mention of them: If they be found on them, the best
Means against them, is to catch them.

CHAP. XL.
Of the winter Place, or green House, and its Use.
BEcause it is impossible to Order these Outlandish Plants well in these
Countries, except we know how conveniently to defend them in the winter Season
against the Frost and Cold, which cannot be done, if there be not a good winter
Place provided.

We see that in Brabant and Flanders they use arched Cellars, to avoid the
inconveniency of making Fire. But thereby they also commonly lose their fruit,
which through or by reason of the little air, and moist Vapors, which the
Trees receive, decay and fall off, except they be again carried out of the
Cellar into a lightsom room, as soon as the frost is over; which is not well to
be done for any one that has a great number of Trees, by reason the labor
would be too great and chargeable, because of the multitude; besides with the
frequent removing we run the hazard to spoil the heads by hitting them against
some thing or other.

To this Work is at least a lightsom Room required, which is free from all Cold
piercing Winds, and has Glass-Windows to the South, that the Sun Shining in
the Winter, may refresh these tender Strangers, with her pleasant and grateful
Beam.

What manner of Winter-place or Green-house soever we prepare, Care must be had
that it stand with the open part as much as is possible to the South.

Here I might give the description and the dimention of several Green houses
set down by the Author, but think it needless, because as the Author says,
every one may and does make them as he thinks good and Convenient.

Yet the Use is one and the same. Viz. for the preservation of tender plants,
which cannot endure and stand out against our Cold Winter storms and Tempests.

; Use of the winter place or Green House.
From the time that the Trees are set into the Green house or Winter place we
must begin to take Care to watch against all Incident inconveniences and
unchanches for through carelessness more harm may be done in one night, then we
can again overcome and repair in an whole year; but on what time such must be
done, cannot be well prescribed in regard of the Months, because the Condition
of the Weather must show it.

For it happens many times here in this Country in some mild Winter that the
Glass-Windows are whole days open, and therefore it serves for a general rule,
that as long as it is fair Weather, and does not freeze, The opening ag
Shutting of the wooden windows or Shutters.
the Wooden Shutters shall be left open day and night to the middle of
November, and then shall they be shut before the Sun goes down; But when it is
misty, misly, and frosty Weather, they shall be kept close, and it must not be
tedious to a practitioner to open and shut the Windows, though often in one
day, for the more the Trees are aired, the better it is to prevent all stifling
and moulding.

Now when it begins to freeze, tho not so hard as that it freezeth within the
house, then open only the Wooden Shutters, to the end, that the Sun shining
into the winter place or green house may refresh the Trees and the Fruits; and
against the evening before the Sun is set, the same must be shut again, that in
the night they may not suddenly be surprised by the Cold.

Now when the Frost begins to increase, the Green house shall be wholly kepr
shut, and we must take Care there be no holes or chinks for the Wind to come in
or through, for where the same does light, it does great harm, and causes
Frost the sooner within doors: Nevertheless when it is a fair Sun shine at noon
day, the same may be let in through the Glass-Windows, and being gone, Shut
them again Close.

The time of making Fire.
Now when it Freezeth so hard, that there is no longer keeping within Doors,
without making Fire; which we may observe by putting some Pans or Pots with
Water here and there in the Green-House, and when we see that Freeze; then is
it time to make Fire in the Stoves; which is commonly done early in the
Morning, and at Night about nine of the Clock. But if it comes to pass, that
these two Fires are not enough in the Day, then also a Fire must be made at
Noonday; and in making, this Fire, keep also this common Rule.

The common Rule to make Fire.
As long as the Water does not Freeze in the Pans; we need not to make a Fire,
and when the Water does Freeze, we must make no greater Fire, then that we see
the Ice to grow loose, and that the Frost can lay no hold thereon; for if we
make too hot a Fire, it shall do more Hurt, then if it came to Freeze once in
the Green-House. It once happened to me, that the Frost took the Trees by
Night, and the Leaves and Fruits were stiff, as if they had been white with the
same; which was caused by the Carelessness of the Gardener. To repair this
Mischance, there was a slow Fire made in the Stove, and not an hot or great one
at first; through which Sweet; pleasantly increasing Warmth, the frozen Leaves
and Fruits began by Degrees to Thaw, and to come to their former Condition;
yea, I had never more ripe Fruits then in that same Year, 1668.

Moistness in the Green-House.
It comes also sometimes to pass, that in the Green-House, or VVinter-Place,
there hang many Drops of Water at the Ceiling (when many Days together a Fire
is made, without opening the wooden Windows, by reason of the continual
Frost,) which falling down upon the Trees, do them great wrong, viz. cause
moulding to the Boughs, and the Fruits and Leaves to fall off; against which
must be provided, and daily be taken off with a Map, and as soon as the Season
does any way permit, to open the wooden Shutters, to make these moist Vapors,
which arise out of the Earth, to go away; for by reason of the Doors and
Windows being long shut close, they continue.

The time to open the Glass-Windows again.
And on this manner must we order our Business in times of Frost; which now
ceasing, the Windows must be opened again, to air the Trees; and further deal
with them as is said above.

But to tie the making of Fire to December, January, and February, as some
Authors hold, is not good in our Judgment; for it happens that whole Winters
pass, and no need to make a Fire, as we have mentioned above; But it is best of
all, that we order our Affairs according to the Weather, and do therein as we
have here showed.

I Remember a certain Accident, which in regard of mentioning the making of
Fire, I cannot omit to Relate.

A certain Person of Quality, coming into the famous Garden of the Sieur
Roeters, and after he had taken Notice of all things, asked that famous
Practitioner and Orderer, how much Turf he burnt in a Winter, in regard his
Trees looked so exceedingly fair? The Sieur Roeters not knowing the reason of
the Question, Answered, that he had preserved and kept all his Trees for two
Years, with about an hundred Baskets full, (which comes to about twenty four
Gilders, which are about forty six, or forty seven Shillings Sterling.) and that
there was some Quantity left.

How is that possible, replied the other? My Servant has spent above two
hundred Baskets of Turf, and yet my Trees are dead.

At which they all Laughed, as perceiving that the overmuch Heat had stifled
and dried up his Trees: Whence we may see, that not the great Charges, but the
right Knowledge, gives the best Fruits.

The time for opening again the Green-House.
When now the Frost is past, and the Spring draws on, the Trees must be used
again to the Air, by the opening and shutting the wooden and glass-Windows, in
convenient and due time, and therein order our Affairs according as the Weather
gives Direction.

For this is sure, that Mist, Vapor, Moistness, and Frost, must not be suffered
in the Green-House.

The time to bring them out again.
In this Work, we must continue to the time that we set these Trees again in the
beginning of May into the open Air, in mild and rainy Weather; above all, take
Care in the bringing of them out, that the Sun does not too suddenly shine upon
on them, but used to it by degrees; and then order them further, with
Watering, Pruning, and other such like Actions, as are showed particularly in
their proper Places, that they may keep their Leaves, and Fruits; and Reward
their Masters Labors with Golden Hesperial-Apples, which no Practitioner shall
obtain, except he has before duly Tamed and Overcome the strong winter-Dragon.

CHAP. XLI.
Of Gathering the Blossoms and Fruits.
Unloading of the Trees.
IT is necessary to the Preservation of the Trees, that we ease them of their
Blossoms and Fruits in due time; for through the abundant Blossoming they are
wasted and spent, lose their Strength, and totally Decay, because it is
impossible to feed them all.

Therefore it is requisite to gather them, and to hasten their Ease, by taking
away all their after, or side-Blossoms, leaving the first heart-Blossoms only
for the Production of Fruit, and them, no more then we judge the Tree can
conveniently Feed, which shall then become the Larger and Fairer; and by this
Ease the young Shoots shall more strongly come forth, and the Trees continue in
a better flourishing Condition.

The gathered Blossoms may be used for several things, as shall be showed more
largely afterward.

The time of gathering the Fruits.
The Fruits, as well Limons as Oranges, must be gathered and taken off at their
Time.

We cannot here, as is done in Italy, prescribe the right Time for every Sort,
by reason of the Inconstancy and Variety of our Summers; for it has sometimes
happened that the Limons and Oranges have been gathered with us in warm
Summers, in the Month of September, having their due Maturity, whereas
ordinarily they must be let hang till the Months of February or March.

Now to be sure, the Fruits shall be gathered when they have their due Bigness
and Color, which may one Year with another differ sometimes some Months,
according as the Summer proves either Cool or Warm.

A twofold Gathering is made about these Fruits, viz. Unripe, and Ripe; the
first being used to make Conserves, and the other to press the Juice out of
them for Food and physical Uses. Therefore, whichsoever we gather, we must go
very warily about it; for to pluck them off with the Hand, would not do well,
as being with Danger to spoil and hurt the Trees, because they stick too fast
to the Boughs, and can hardly be parted from them without danger of Renting;
wherefore we are Necessitated to cut them off with a sharp Knife, in such a
manner, that to every Fruit is left a little Sprigg, which is for its Ornament;
and in this cutting must be observed that we hurt the Tree as little as is
possible: When now this cutting off is done in due time, the new coming on
Fruit shall thrive the better, because they have the Nourishment then alone,
which otherwise they were to share with them that are cut off.

There is nothing better for the Trees, then to Unload and Ease them, if their
Welfare shall be furthered. Some let the Fruits hang long, to make a Show with
them; but doubtless it is prejudicial to them, because we see, that when Limons
are over ripe, they fall off, and the Oranges dry up, even as if the
Nourishment were denied them of the Mother, the Tree, to the old Fruits, to
give it to these young comers on; whence we may clearly observe, that Nature
shows us how needful it is for the Tree and Fruits, that we Ease and Unload
them in due time, that they may both be preserved and secured against Decay and
Death.

CHAP. XLII.
Of the Profit and Use of the Orange Tree.
What is Honest, Profitable, and Pleasant, is Praiseworthy, and may by all
Men, without Scruple be taken in Hand; that these three Properties are to be
found in our Employment, is known to every one, that does groundly understand
the same.

What belongs to delightful Pleasantness and Honesty, that they do
sufficiently testify of themselves, and is needless to show; and therefore we
shall only speak of the Profit and Usefulness of them.

The Benefits these Trees yield, are diverse; for besides that, after they are
come to their due Bigness, they may be sold for much Money, and great Gain be
made by them: They are also of special Use in Physic, Housekeeping, and
Perfuming; whereof we shall Treat.

Many things are prepared of the Orange Tree, as well for Delight as for
necessary Use.

The Leaves.
The Leaves are good for a broken or bruised Shin, and heals it, when they are
laid on fresh twice a Day; these Leaves chewed in the Mouth, cause a sweet
Breath.

R. Dodo^. Herb. l. 18. c. 2.
There is a Water Distilled of Orange Blossoms, which is of a pleasant Smell,
and is useful for many things in Physic; chiefly to cause Sweating, to
strengthen the Heart, and many Distempers more, whereof the Writings of
Physicians and Herbalists are full.

To make this Water, the Orange Blossoms shall be gathered in the Morning
before the Sun has Shone on them, and Distilled in a Pewter Still, with a slow
Fire, that they may not in the least be Burnt, for this Distilling must only be
done by Steaming out; whereby we shall get, though but a little, yet
nevertheless a very Pleasant and strong Water. Ye may likewise, if ye desire a
greater Quantity, Distill them in a Limbeck, but then the Water shall not smell
so Sweet.

The Blossoms of Orange Trees are very good to be laid in a Chest of clean
Linen, to give it a pleasant Smell.

But to draw Oil out of the Blossoms by Distillation, is not well possible here
in these Countries, because the abundance which is hereunto required, is too
great; for six hundred Pounds do scarce yield two or three Ounces: Yet that we
may not be wholly deprived of this pleasant Smell, here is afterward Taught how
we shall Prepare this another way.

Brandy:
To make an Extraction with Brandy from the Orange Blossoms; take to every Pint
two Ounces of Blossoms, set them in the Sun to Distill, fourteen Days long; and
use thereof a spoonful together, against many several cold Distempers and
Aills, and especially against the Cholick or shrinking of the Guts.

To Preserve these Blossoms in Sugar, which is commonly called Confiting; they
shall be gathered just before they open, and boiled in clean Rainwater, till
they be soft, and have in part lost their Bitterness; after boil the Sugar to a
convenient thickness of a Syrop, and pour the same (after it is well Purifyed
with Whites of Eggs, and thoroughly Clear) warm upon the Blossoms, and let them
stand cooling together; if the Syrop be too thin, or becomes so afterward, ye
must boil the same again to its convenient Thickness, that the Blossoms may be
kept and preserved the better: This is a most excellent Remedy against bad
Airs, foul and stinking Vapors, and also an excellent Dainty.

Pastilli.
Furthermore of Orange Blossoms, there are made Pastilli, or little Balls, after
this following Fashion: Take fifty Blossoms which are quite open, pluck them
off by the Stalk, that ye may not touch the Leaves, as little as is possible,
that the Sent may not be spoiled; cut the Leaves with Scissers, very small one
by one. To this take a pound of the best Loaf-Sugar-Candy that may be got, beat
the same fine, and put them in a little brass Basin, and add three Ounces
distilled Water of Orange Blossoms thereunto, stir it with a Spatula, till it
be mingled together, which then set upon Coals, thoroughly kindled, and let it
boil leisurly, till, when taken up between your Fingers, it begins to stick to
them as it were with fine small Threads; then take it from the Fire, and put the
clean cut Orange Blossoms into the boiled Sugar, stirring the same together
with a Spatula, till it be well mixed; then take a Board of hard Wood, which is
full of little hollow Places, and strew it thick with fine beaten Sugar* then
fill all the holes full with a silver Spoon, of this mingled Syrop, which when
cold, and then taken out, the Sugar which hangs about them must be taken off
with a Knife from these little Balls, and then you have Pastilli, which are
very Good, Pleasant, and Useful, for many things, especially to strengthen the
Heart; and against all Faintings. They are also a good. Means against all bad,
unhealthful, and pestilential Airs; the same melted in Rose Water, or
Sorrel-Water, are very usefully* Taken and Used with Benefit in all malignant
Agues, and other Sicknesses, which have their Original from Cold.

Oil.
There is yet an Oil made of these Blossoms, on this manner. Take Nuts of Egypt,
Pistaches, or for want of them, sweet Almonds, the newer the better, press the
Oil out of them, (but without Fire, that it may keep Sweet the longer) then
take white and purified Cotton, which is free from all Spots, foul or musty
Sent, otherwise it must be made Clean on this manner following, viz. It must be
soaked in a Pot of strong Brine, till all bad Scents be drawn out of it, and
being washed again in fresh Water, wet it again in the forementioned Oil; yet
so that the Oil does not drop out of it of it self; take then a new Earthen
Pot, and cover the Bottom with new gathered Orange Blossoms, lay thereon a
Laying of this oyled Cotton, and then Blossoms again, and so on a Laying of the
one, and a Laying of the other, till the Pot be filled; which then cover close
with a Bladder, and put it in a dry Place, not Cold, nor yet too Warm: these
Blossoms shall be changed every Day, taking away the Old, and putting in fresh
ones instead thereof, and that five or six Days one after another, and then
Squeese or Press the oiled Cotton: which Oil gives a most sweet and pleasant
Smell, fit to be used in many Perfumes.

As soon as this has stood some time, the Dirt and Waterishness being settled,
and the Oil Clarified from it, and become clear, you may use it as your
Occasion serves.

Hesp. l. 4. cap. 24.
This kind of Oil of Orange Blossoms is taken out of Ferrarius, who had Learned
it of one Franciscus Dagus, and has been made several times by others
according to this Prescript, and is found very Good.

The same Author Relates yet another much shorter Way, after this manner.

Take a Pound of Oil of Nuts of Egypt, Pistaches, or of sweet Almonds, new
pressed, a Pound of Orange Blossoms, pick off the Leaves of them (which only
must be used) beat them in a stone Mortar, put them in a glass-Bottle, and pour
the Oil on them, and having stood three or four Days, strain the Oil from the
Blossoms through an hairy Strainer, and part it from the watery Moisture which
is mixed therewith; throw the old Blossoms away, and put in fresh ones, and that
to the third time; then separate and draw off your Oil, and make it clear, to
Perfume Gloves and other things: The same may be done with the Blossoms of
Gessamines.

Salve of the Oil of Orange Blossoms.
There is also a Salve made of Orange Blossoms: Take white Wax, Sperma-Caeti, of
each an Ounce; melt them over a soft Fire, and being taken off, put to it of
our above mentioned Oil of Orange Blossoms, as much as is convenient, which
shall be stirred together with a Spatula, or little Ladle, till it be well mixed
together and cold: It shall be cooled as soon as is possible, that through too
much Heat the Oil may not lose its Scent. You may also take instead of Sperma
Caeti, or Parma Cetie, white clear Barrow's-Fat; this Salve is good against
Heats in the Breast, when you Anoint the same therewith; and also against the
hot Inflammations of the Gout, and such like Distempers, which arise from Heats.

Orange Apples.
Orange Apples are likewise for many Uses, and have many Virtues; the Pills are
dried, preserved Wet or Dry; and Oil is also Distilled from them. The small
green Apples, of the bigness of a Pease, are put upon Strings, and worn by
Gentlewomen for Necklaces, and about their Wrists, because of their good and
sweet Scent.

The Pills of Oranges are of great Use in the Art of Physic, and are of a warm
Property: dried and powdered, they are very Useful against the Colic, and
other cold Distempers, taken in a little warm Wine, cause Urine, and Sweat; you
may use this Powder from a Scruple to a Dram. Schrod. in Pharmacop. Med.
Chimic. l. 4. c. 45.


Conf. of Orange-Pills.
To Confite Orange-Pills, or to Preserve them with Sugar: You shall take Pills
of fresh ripe Oranges; take out the inside White, and let them ly a-Soak some
Days in fair Rainwater, that the Bitterness may be most out of them; then boil
them in other Rainwater, till they be soft; the Syrop must be conveniently
boiled, and after the Pills are well drained, put them into it, and keep them
for Use. Will you Confite them dry; take the Pills, after they have layn some
time in the Syrop, out of it again, and put them into a warm place or Stove to
dry.

And to Candy them, you must only boil the Syrop higher, then if you would
preserve them wet.

These preserved Orange-Pills strengthen the Heart against all Faintings, warm
the cold Stomach, and resist all bad and pestilential Airs.

To make an Oil; take of fresh Orange-Pills fifty Pounds, and put them all in a
Vessel, stamp them close together, and let them rot well; put them in a
Limbeck, and pour a good quantity of Water upon them, and being Distilled with
a moderate Fire, there comes over with the Water a clear and strong-scented
Oil, which you must part from the Water, and keep for Use against all cold
Ails, as well of the Stomach, as of other parts of the Body.

The same is also outwardly Applied against Cold, and stifned Sinews, by
Anointing them therewith.

Juice.
The Juice of Oranges has diverse Virtues, according as they are either Sour or
Sweet: the last are Warmest, and are fitly Used in the hot Distempers of the
Lungs, as cooling moderately. They that are of a moderate Taste are very
Pleasant; but the Juice of the Sour is more cooling; and there is a Syrop made
of them to mix among all other Medicines against all malignant Fevers.

The Juice used with Meat, gives it a pleasant Relish; the same is put into
Meat by the Turks instead of Verjuice.

It is also very good against the Scurvy, causes a sweet Breath, as our Seamen
can sufficiently Testify; wherewith we shall conclude this; and touch a little
upon the Use of the Limon Tree.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of the Use of the Limon Tree.
IT may perhaps seem Strange to some, that we place the Use of the Orange Tree
before the Limon Tree, though the last be Described first; it is because the
Orange Tree is more Beloved with us, and commoner, and therefore we give the
same the Precedence.

We come now to the Limon Tree, whose Fruits are not only known in the Art of
Physic, but also in the Housekeeping, and does wholly agree in Virtues with
the Citron Apple, as its Taste shows; being also diverse in Operation, for the
Sweet excel the Sour in Warmth.

Pills.
The Pills of the Limons are Preserved or Confited with Sugar after the same
Manner, as is heretofore said of the Orange Apples, to use them for Physic and
Dainties.

Theat. Fungorum. p. 2. c. 3.
The outside of the Limon Pills is a very good Remedy for those that have eaten
bad Mushrooms or Fungi, as Franciscus van Sterbeeck writes. Being Distilled
with Brandy, it is called in the Shops Limon-Water: As they also do with Orange
Pills; is much drunk in the cold Northen Countries, yet most out of Wantonness,
though it be not Unuseful against cold inward Ails.

And for this Drink are yearly many thousand of Pounds of Orange and Limon
Pills used, which are sent hither into these Countries out of Italy. Oil.
Out of* these Pills is an Oil made, even as that out of the Orange Pills.

S. Bauh. Hist. Plant. l. 1. ^. 28.
You may squeese a sweet smelling Oil with your Hand out of the fresh Limon
Pills, which is exceeding good to strengthen the Heart, and to amend the Sight.

Seed and Juice.
The Seed is also used in many Medicines, but the Juice is best known, as well
in the Cooks, as the Apothecaries Shop; and is experienced with great Benefit
against the Scurvy, and its Concomitants; wherefore it is much used by
Seafaring Men against this Distemper. Of the Juice is a good Syrop made with
Sugar, against hot burning Fevers.

The Water which is distilled out of the Juice of Limons through Balneum
Mariae, in a glazen Still* is good to take away all Spots out of the Skin, as
also the Freckles of the Face, and kills all Worms of the Body, when it is
Drunk, which the Juice does likewise, when ye take an Ounce of it.

Matthiol. in Diosc. l. 1. c. 231.
The Juice of Limons resists all Poison, and venomous Creatures; the Limons are
kept in Pickle, and stewed with Meat, which is a pleasant Sauce.

The small Limon of Calabria is preserved and kept in its own Juice or Liquor,
to be eaten so.

And they are further on several ways Limonaded, which affords a pleasant and
cooling Drink, for which,

Take Barley-Water one Quart.

Squeese therein the Juice of four or five Limons, sweeten it with Sugar as
much as is necessary: This well stirred together, is the most pleasant and
cooling Drink which can be desired.

To make Pastilli of the Juice of Limons; Take

Of the Juice of small Calabrian Limons one Ounce. Ferrar. Hesp. l. 3. c. 1.


Of clear white Sugar Candy, two Ounces.

Of Oil of Cinnamon eight drops.

Let the Juice of the Limons drop through a close piece of Cloth, or Strainer,
that it may be Clear, and boil it with the Sugar to a convenient Thickness,
that so it may be poured out for Pastilli; putting the Oil of Cinnamon last of
all to it.

These Pastilli are a very pleasant Dainty, and cause a sweet Breath.

Out of this Juice of Limons is a Syrop made on this manner;

Take of the Juice of Limons six Pounds; Pharmacop. Augustan. Class. 1.


Of white Sugar, three Pounds.

Make hereof a Syrop by convenient Boiling. This Syrop is much used in Physic,
in hot Distempers, burning Fevers, and Resists all pestilential Infections,
and is used with good Success and Benefit against the Worms in the Belly.

Further, the Virtues of the Limons are altogether like those of the Citron,
and are without any Error, Used promiscuously one for the other.

This is all what was in short to be said of this Matter, leaving what may yet
be brought to light by the diligent Scrutiny and Experience of others, to them,
whose Desire and Mind tends to a farther Enlargement of this Affair whereof I
have Treated.

FINIS.
A TABLE Of the CHAPTERS.
Chap. Page 1. OF the Cause and Order of this Work. 1 2. Of the Fable of
Hesperides. 3 3. Of the Kinds of the Fruits in general. 8 4. Of the first
Practisers or Inventors. 12 5. Of the Citron Tree. 17 6. Of the Limon Tree. 23
7. Of the ordinary white Limon. 26 8. Of the Limon Sbardonius of Ferrarius. 29
9. Of the Deformed, or Ill-shapen Limon Sbardonius. 31 10. Of the little
Calabrian Limon of Ferrarius. 35 11. Of the sweet Limon of Ferrarius. 38 12. Of
the Limon Tree of St. Remo. 40 13. Of the Pear Fashion Limon of Ferrarius. 43
14. Of the Lima. 45 15. Of Adam's Apple, or the ordinary black Limon. 47 16. Of
the Orange Tree in General. 50 17. Of the common Orange Apple of Ferrarius. 55
18. Of the sweet Orange Apple. 57 19. Of the Orange Tree with curled Leaves, of
Ferrarius. 59 20. Of the Orange Tree with rosed Fruit. 61 21. Of the Orange
Tree with speckled Fruit. 63 22. Of the Orange Tree with horned Fruit. 66 23.
Of several Ill-shapen Fruits. 68 24. Of the Sina Apple, or the Lisbon Orange
Tree. 70 25. Of the Orange Tree with sweet Pill. 73 26. Of the Orange Tree with
small Fruit. 75 27. Of the Difference in the Ordering of the Limon and Orange
Tree. 78 28. How we get these Trees out of other Countries. 81 29. Of the
Placing of the Limon and Orange Trees. 84 30. Of the Mold, Earth, and Dung. 88
31. Of the Sowing of Trees. 93 32. Of Ingrafting. 99 33. Of Propagation by
Inlaying. 114 34. Of Planting, and Transplanting. 118 35. Of Removing of Trees
130 36. Of Dunging, Refreshing, and Digging about the Trees. 135 37. Of
Watering. 138 38. Of Cutting or Pruning. 146 39. Of the Means against many
Defaults, and Vermin. 150 40. Of the Winter-Place, or Green-House, and its
Use. 162 41. Of Gathering the Blossoms and Fruits. 172 42. Of the Profit and
Use of the Orange Trees. 176 43. Of the Use of the Limon Tree. 189

FINIS.

