

Joh. Amos Commenii ORBIS SENSVALIVM PICTUS. Hoc est, Omnium fundamentalium in
Mundo Rerum, and in vita Actionum, Pictura and Nomenclatura. JOH. AMOS
COMMENIUS's Visible WORLD. OR, A Picture and Nomenclature of all the chief
Things that are in the world; and of Men's Employments therein.

A Work newly written by the Author in Latin; and High Dutch (being one of his
last Essays, and the most suitable to Childrens capacities of any that he has
hitherto made) and translated into English, By CHARLES HOOLE, Teacher of a
Private Grammar School in Lothbury, LONDON.

For the use of young Latine-Scholars.

Nihil est in intellectu, quod non prius fuit in sensu.

Arist. LONDON, Printed for I. Kirton, at the Kings-Arms, in Saint Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

2 Genesis 19, 20. The Lord God brought unto Adam every Beast of the Field, and
every Fowl of the air, to see what he would call them. And Adam gave names to
all Cattle, and to the Fowl of the air, and to every beast of the Field.

2 Genesis 19, 20. Adduxit Dominus Deus ad Adam cunctas animantes terrae, and
universa volatilia caeli, ut videret quomodo vocaret illa. Appellavitque Adam
nominibus suis cuncta animantia, and universa volatilia caeli, and omnes
bestias agri.

THE Authors PREFACE TO THE READER.
INstruction is the means to expel Rudeness; with which young Wits ought to be
wel-furbished in Schools: But so, as that the Teaching be 1. True, 2. Full, 3.
Clear, and 4. Solid.

1. It will be true, if nothing be taught but such as are beneficial to ones
life; lest there be a cause of complaining afterward. We know not necessary
things, because we have not learned things necessary.

2. It will be full, if the mind be polished for Wisdom, the Tongue for
Eloquence, and the Hands for a neat way of Living. This will be that Grace of
ones life, to be wise, to act, to speak.

3. 4. It will be elear, and by that firm and solid, if whatever is taught and
learned, be not obscure, or confused, but apparent, distinct, and articulate,
as the fingers on the hands.

The ground of this business is that sensual objects be rightly presented to
the senses, for fear they may not be received. I say, and say it again aloud,
that this last is the foundation of all the rest: because we can neither act
nor speak wisely, unless we first rightly understand all the things which are
to be done, and whereof, we are to speak. Now there is nothing in the
understanding which was not before in the sense. And therefore to exercise the
senses well about the right perceiving the differences of things, will be to
lay the grounds for all wisdom, and all wise discourse, and all discreet
actions in ones course of life. Which, because it is commonly neglected in
Schools, and the things that are to be learned are offered to Scholars,
without being understood, or being rightly presented to the senses, it comes
to pass, that the work of teaching and learning goes heavtily onward, and
affords little benefit.

See here then a new help for Schools, A Picture and Nomenclature of all the
chief things in the World, and of men's Actions in their way of living! Which,
that you, good Masters, may not be loath to run over with your Scholars, I will
tell you in short, what good you may expect from it.

It is a little Book, as you see, of no great bulk, yet a brief of the whole
world, and a whole language: full of Pictures, Nomenclatures, and Descriptions
of things.

I. The Pictures are the Representations of all visible things, (to which also
things invisible are reduced after their fashion) of the whole world. And that
in that very order of things, in which they are described in the Ianua Latinae
Linguae and with that fullness, that nothing very necessary or of great
concernment is omitted.

II. The Nomenclatures are the Inscriptions, or Titles set every one over their
own Pictures, expressing the whole thing by its own general Term.

III. The Descriptions are the Explications of the Parts of the Picture, so
expressed by their own proper terms, as that same Figure which is added to
every piece of the Picture, and the term of it, always shows what things
belongs one to another.

Which such Book, and in such a dress may (I hope) serve,

I. To entice witty Children to it, that they may not conceit a torment to be
in the School, but dainty-fare. For it is apparent, that Children (even from
their Infancy almost) are delighted with Pictures, and willingly please their
eyes with these sights, And it will be very well worth the pains to have once
brought it to pass, that scarcrows may be taken away out of wisdoms Gardens.

II. This same little Book will serve to stir up the Attention, which is to be
fastened upon things, and ever to be sharpened more and more; which is also a
great matter. For the senses (being the main guides of Childhood, because
therein the Mind does not as yet raise up it self to an abstracted
contemplation of things) evermore seek their own objects, and if they be away,
they grow dull, and wry themselves hither and thither, out of a weariness of
themselves: but when their objects are present, they grow merry, wax lively,
and willingly suffer themselves to be fastened upon them, till the thing be
sufficiently discerned. This Book then will do a good piece of service in
taking (especially flickering) Wits, and preparing them for deeper studies.

III. Whence a third good will follow; that Children being won hereunto, and
drawn over with this way of heeding, may he furnished with the knowledge of the
Prime things that are in the world, by sport, and merry pastime. In a word,
this Book will serve for the more pleasing using of the Vestibulum, and Ianua
Linguarum, for which end it was even at the first chiefly intended. Yet if it
like any that it be bound up in their native tongues also, it promises three
other good things of it self.

I. First it will afford a Devise for learning to read, more easily than
hitherto; especially having a Symbolical Alphabet set before it, to wit, the
Characters of the several Letters, with the Image of that creature, whose voice
that letter goes about to imitate, pictured by it. For the young A b c Scholar
will easily remember the force of every Character by the very looking upon the
Creature, till the imagination being strengthened by use can readily afford all
things. And then, having looked over a Table of the chief Syllables also (which
yet was not thought necessary to be added to this Book) he may proceed to the
viewing of the Pictures, and the Inscriptions set over them. Where again the
very looking upon the thing Pictured, suggesting the name of the thing, will
tell him how the Title of the Picture is to be read. And thus the whole Book
being gone over by the bare Titles of the Pictures, Reading cannot but be
learned; and indeed too, which thing is to be noted, without using any ordinary
tedious spelling, that most troublesome torture of wits, which may wholly be
avoided by this Method. For the often reading over the Book, by those larger
Descriptions of things, and which are set after the Pictures, will be able
perfectly to beget a habit of reading.

II. The same Book being used in English in English Schools will serve for the
perfect learning of the whole English tongue, and that from the bottom;
because by the aforesaid Descriptions of things, the words and Phrases of the
whole language are found set orderly in their own places. And a short English
Grammar might be added at the end, clearly resolving the Speech already
understood into its parts, showing the declining of the several words, and
reducing those that are joined together undercertain Rules.

III. Thence a new benefit comes, that that very English translation, may
serve for the more ready and pleasant learning of the Latin tongue: as one may
see in this Edition, the whole Book being so translated, that every where one
word answers to the word over against it, and the Book is in all things the
same, only in two idiomes, as a man clad in a double garment. And there might
be also some Observations and Advertisements added in the end, touching those
things only, wherein the Use of the Latin tongue differs from the English.
For, where there is no difference, there needs no advertisement to be given.
But, because the first tasks of Learners ought to be little, and single, we
have filled this first Book of training one up to see a thing of himself with
nothing but rudiments, that is, with the chief of things and words, or with the
grounds of the whole world, and the whole language, and of all our
Understanding about things. If a more perfect description of things, and a
fuller knowledge of a language, and a clearer light of the understanding be
sought after (as they ought to be) they are to be found some where ese, whither
there will now be an easy passage by this our little Encyclopadia of things
subject to the senses, Something remains to be said, touching the more
cheerful use of this Book.

I. Let it be given to children into their hands to delight themselves withal
as they please, with the sight of the Pictures, and making them as familiar to
themselves as may be, and that even at home, before they be put to School.

II. Then let them be examined ever and anon (especially now in the School)
what this thing or that thing is, and is called, so that they may see nothing,
which they know not how to name, and that they can name nothing, which they
cannot show.

III. And let the things named them be showed, not only in the Picture, but
also in themselves; for example, the parts of the Body, Clothes, Books, the
House, Utensils, and e.

IV. Let them be suffered also to imitate the Pictures by hand, if they will,
nay rather, let them be encouraged, that they may be willing: first, thus to
quicken the attention also toward the things; and to observe the proportion of
the parts one toward another; and lastly, to practice the nimbleness of the
hand, which is good for many things.

V. If any things here mentioned, cannot be presented to the eye, it will be to
no purpose at all, to offer them by themselves to the Scholars, as, colors,
relishes, etc. which cannot here be pictured out with ink. For which reason it
were to be wished, that things rare and not easy to be met withal at home,
might be kept ready in every great School, that they may be showed also, as
often as any words are to be made of them, to the Scholars.

Thus at the last this School would indeed become a School of things obvious to
the senses, and an Entrance to the School Intellectual. But enough: let us come
to the thing it self.

The Translator to all judicious, and industrious Schoolmasters.
Gentlemen,
THere are few of you (I think) but have seen, and with great willingness made
use of, (or at lest perused,) many of the Books of this wel-deserving Author
Mr. John Commenius; which, for their profitableness to the speedy attainment of
a Language, have been Translated in several Countries out of Latin into their
own native tongues.

Now the general verdict (after trial made) that has passed, touching those
formerly extant, is this, that, they are indeed of singular use, and very
advantageous to those of more discretion, (especially to such, as have already
got a smattering in Latin) to help their memories to retain what they have
scatteringly gotten here and there, and to furnish them with many words, which
(perhaps) they had not formerly read, or so well observed; but to young Children
(whom we have chiefly to instruct) as those that are ignorant altogether of
most things, and words, they prove rather a more toil and burden, than a
delight, and furtherance.

For to pack up many words in memory, of things not conceived in the mind, is
to fill the head with empty imaginations, and to make the learner more to
admire their multitude, and variety (and thereby to become discouraged;) then
to care to treasure them up, in hopes to gain more knowledge of what they mean.

He has therefore in some of his later works seemed to move retrograde, and
striven to come nearer to the reach of tender wits; and in this present Book,
he has (according to my judgment,) descended to the very Bottom of what is to
be taught, and proceeded (as Nature it self does) in an orderly way; first to
exercise the Senses well, by presenting their objects to them, and then to
fasten upon the Intellect by impressing the first notions of things upon it,
and linking them one to another by a rational discourse. Whereas indeed, We
generally missing this way, do teach children, as we do Parrats, to speak they
know not what, nay, which is worse, we, taking the Way of teaching little ones
by Grammar only at the first, do pusle their imaginations with abstractive
terms and secundary intentions, which, till they be somewhat acquainted with
things, and the words belonging to them, in the language which they learn, they
cannot apprehend what they mean. And this I guess to be the reason, why many
greater persons do resolve sometimes, not to put a Child to School, till he be
at lest eleven, or twelve years of age, presuming that he having then taken
notice of most things, will sooner get the knowledge of the words which are
applied to them in any language. But the gross misdemeanour of such children
for the most part, have taught many Parents to be hasty enough to send their
own to School, if not that they may learn, yet (at lest) that they may be kept
out of harms way; and yet if they do not profit, for the time they have been at
School, (no respect at all, being had of their years,) the Master shall be sure
enough to bear the blame.

So that a Schoolmaster had need to bend his wits to come within the compass
of a Childs capacity of six or seven years of age (seeing we have now such
commonly brought to our Grammar-Schooles to learn the Latin Tongue) and to
make that they may learn with as much delight and willingness, as himself would
teach with dexterity, and ease. And at present I know no better Help to forward
his young Scholars than this little Book, which was for this purpose contrived
by the Author in the German and Latin Tongues.

What profitable use may be made thereof, respecting chiefly that his own
Country and Language, he himself has told you in his Preface; but what use we
may here make of it in our Grammar-Schooles, as it is now translated into
English, I shall partly declare: leaving all other men (according to my wont)
to their own discretion, and liberty, to use it, or refuse it, as they please.
So soon then as a Child can read English perfectly, and is brought us to School
to learn Latin, I would have him together with his Accidence to be provided of
this book, in which he may at least once a day (besides his Accidence) be thus
exercised.

I. Let him look over the Pictures with their general Titles or Inscriptions,
till he be able to turn readily to any one of them, and to tell its name either
in English, or Latin. By this means he shall have the Method of the Book in
his head; and be easily furnished with the knowledge of most things; and
instructed how to call them, when at any time he meets with them elsewhere in
their real forms.

II. Let him read the Description at large, first in English, and afterward in
Latin, till he can readily read, and distinctly pronounce the words in both
Languages, ever minding how they are spelled. And withal, let him take notice
of the Figures inserted, and to what part of the Picture they direct by their
like, till he be well able to find out every particular thing of himself, and
to name it on a sudden, either in English, or Latin. Thus, he shall not only
gain the most primitive words, but be understandingly grounded in Orthography,
which is a thing too generally neglected by us; partly because our
English-Schools think that Children should learn it at the Latin, and our
Latine-Schooles suppose they have already learned it at the English; partly;
because our Common-Grammar is too much defective in this Part, and Scholars so
little exercised therein, that they pass from Schools to the Universities, and
return from thence (some of them) more unable to write true English, than
either Latin, or Greek. Not to speak of our ordinary Tradesmen, many of whom
write such false English, that none but themselves can interpret what they
scribble, in their Bills, and Shop-Books.

III. Then let him get the Tiles and Descriptions by heart, which he will more
easily do by reason of those impressions which the viewing of the Pictures has
already made in his memory. And now let him also learn, 1. To construe, or give
the words one be one, as they answer one another in Latin and English. 2. To
parse, according to the Rules (which I presume by this time) he has learned in
the first part of the Accidence; where I would have him, tell what Part of
Speech any word is, and then what Accidents belong to it; but especially to
decline the Nouns, and Conjugate the Verbs according to the Examples in his
Rudiments; and this doing will enable him to know the end and use of his
Accidence. As for the Rules of Genders of Nounes, and the Praeterperfect-tenses
and Supines of Verbs, or those of Concordance and Construction in the latter
part of the Accidence, I would not have a child much troubled with them, till
by the help of this Book he can perfectly practice so much of Etymology, as
concerns the first Part of his Accidence only. For that, and this Book together
being thoroughly learned by at lest thrice going them over, will much prepare
Children to go cheerfully forward in their Grammar, and School-Authors,
especially, if whilst they are employed herein they be taught also to write a
fair, and legible hand.

There is one thing to be given notice of, which I wish could have been
remedied in this Translation; that the Book being writ in High Dutch, does
express many things in reference to that Country and Speech, which cannot
without alteration of some Pictures, as well as words, be expressed in ours:
for the Symbolical Alphabet is fitted for German Children rather than for ours
And whereas the words of that Language go orderly one for one with the Latin,
our English propriety of Speech will not admit the like. Therefore it will
behoove those Masters, that intend to make use of this Book, to construe it
verbatim to their young Scholars, who will quickly learn to do it of
themselves, after they be once acquainted with the first words of Nounes, and
Verbs, and their manner of variation.

Such a work as this, I observe to have been formerly much desired by some
experienced Teachers, and I my self had some years since (whilst my own Child
lived) begun the like, (having found it most agreeable to the best witted
Children, who are most taken up with Pictures from their Infancy, because by
them the knowledge of things, which they seem to represent (and whereof
Children are as yet ignorant) are most easily conveyed to their Understanding,)
but for as much as the work is now done, (though in somethings not so
completely, as it were to be wished) I rejoice in the use of it, and desist in
my own undertakings, for the present. And because any good thing is the better,
being the more communicated; I have herein imitated a Child, who is forward to
impart to others, what himself has well liked. You then that have the care of
little Children, do not too much trouble their thoughts, and clog their
memories with bare Grammar Rudiments, which to them are harsh in getting, and
fluid in retaining; (because indeed to them they signify nothing, but a more
swimming notion of a general term, which they know not what it means, till
they comprehend also particulars, but by this or the like Subsidiarie, inform
them, first with some knowledge of things, and words wherewith to express them,
and then their Rules of speaking will be better understood, and more firmly
kept in mind. Else, how should a Child conceive, what a Rule means, when he
neither knows what the Latin word imports, nor what manner of thing it is
which is signified to him in his own native Language, which is given him thereby
to understand the Rule? For Rules, consisting of generalities, are delivered
(as I may say) at a third hand, presuming first the things, and then the words
to be already apprehended, touching which they are made. I might indeed enlarge
upon this Subject, it being the very Basis of our Profession, to search into
the way of Childrens taking hold by little and little of what we teach them,
that so we may apply our selves to their reach, but I leave the observation
hereof to your own daily exercise, and experience got thereby,

And I pray God, the fountain and giver of all wisdom, that has bestowed upon
us this gift of Teaching, so to inspire and direct us by his grace, that we may
train up Children in his Fear, and in the knowledge of his Son Jesus Christ our
Lord; and then no doubt our teaching and their learning of other things
subordinate to these, will by the assistance of his blessed Spirit make them
able and willing to do him faithful Service both in Church and Commonwealth,
as long as they live here, that so they may be eternally blessed with him
hereafter. This, I beseech you, beg for me and mine, as I shall daily do for
you and yours, at the throne of Gods heavenly grace, and remain while I live

Ready to serve you, as I truly love and honor you, and labor willingly in
the same Profession with you, CHARLES HOOLE.
From my School, in Lothbury, London, Ian. 25. 1658. N B. Those Heads or
Descriptions which concern things beyond the present apprehension of Childrens
wits, as, those of Geography, Astronomy, or the like, I would have omitted,
till the rest be learned, and a Child be better able to understand them.



The Judgment of Mr. Hezekiah Wood-Ward, sometimes an eminent Schoolmaster in
LONDON, touching a Work of this Nature, in his Gate to Sciences, Chap. 2.
CErtainly the use of Images, or Representations is great: If we could make our
words as legible to Children as Pictures are, their information there from
would be quickened and surer. But so we cannot do, though we must do what we
can. And if we had Books, wherein are the Pictures of all Creatures, Herbs,
Beasts, Fish, Fowls, they would stand us in great stead. For Pictures are the
most intelligible Books, that Children can look upon. They come closest to
nature; nay, says Scaliger, Art exceeds her.

A Particular Advertisement.
WHereas diverse Gentlemen of good quality, have been very earnest heretofore
with Charles Hoole as well to Table as teach their Children; This is to give
notice to all, but especially those of his acquaintance, that he is now fitted
of an House and all things answerable to their meet accommodation, and will be
diligent himself, and maintain an able Usher also in his House to attend their
Teaching, and his Wife and her Servants, ready to see to their wholesome diet,
and cleanly ordering, upon a Rate answerable to so great a Charge and Pains, as
are thereunto required. At the North-East Corner of the New-Buildings in the
Token-house Garden in Lothbury London. Nere the Royal Exchange.

There is now in the Press, a third Edition Corrected and Enlarged. Of the
easy Entrance to the Latin Tongue. Written by Mr. Charles Hoole, containing.

1. The Rudiments of Grammar, with the Examination of the Accidence. 2, A
Vocabulary of common-words, English and Latin: 3: Sundry and short Examples,
applyable to the Rules of Concordance, and Construction. 4. Collections out of
the lowest School Authors. 5. More Elegant Expressions for Children. 6. The
first Principles of Christianity, Which may be had bound altogether, or
severally as directed in the Preface.
Faults, that have escaped the Press, which I desire the Master to correct with
his Pen, before he deliver the Book to his young Scholar to use; are these:
Breaks For breaths. She The Page 4 squealeth squeaketh, 5 burns turns,
13 deer near, 18 from Iron, 25 angulati ungulati, 27 growth grows, 29 ivy
ash, 31 crowtree crowtoes, 32 round round, 33 cask cane, 39 Halicaetus.
Haliaeetus 51 Mil-snake milk-snake, 65 melt milt 71 siliciruium silicernium, 77
Caput and is The head is 78 Hanus Manus 80 quod quos 82 sun sunt 84 in, left
out, l. 8. 94 Manurvia. manuaria, 101 part partly, 107 and or line 9. 26
tumditur tunditur 109 Drewing Brewing, 116 Tibiala Tibialia, 127 Lignar
Lignarius; 131 Ianua Domus Ianua,
to be added line 136 superior superiores, 137 fabric culcitrae fabrica,
culcitris, 149 Sud Suds, 155 magnea magnetica 159 desetat a trusty and deserat
l. 3. 169 is to be added, l. 12. 183 galoam galeam, 186 shap sharp, 191 tabula
tabulae, sticks stinketh, 201 and cipris and cyphris 207 by to be add. l. 25.
235 rribuatur tribuatur, 237 fracer frater, 243 angiporti angiportis, 250
Defen' defendant, 253 bombarduria bombardica, 283 emittuntur emittur. 28^

ORBIS SENSUALIUM PICTUS.
A WORLD of THINGS Obvious to the Senses drawn in PICTURES.
I.
7


Invitatio. Magister and Puer.
M. VEni, Puer! disce Sapere.


P. Quid hoc est, Sapere?


M. Omnia, quae necessaria, recte intelligere, recte agere, recte eloqui.


P. Quis me hoc docebit?


M. Ego, cum DEO.


P. Quomodo?


M. Ducam te, per omnia,

Ostendam tibi omnia.

Nominabo tibi omnia.


P. En adsum; duc me, in nomine DEI.


M. Ante omnia, debes discere simplices Sonos, ex quibus constat Sermo humanus;
quos, Animalia sciunt formare, and tua Lingua scit imitari, and tua Manus
potest piugere.

Postea ibimus in Mundum, and spectabimus omnia.

Alphabetum vivum and vocale habes hic.


Invitation. The Master, and the Boy.
M. COme Boy! learn to be wise.


P. What does this mean, to be wise?


M. To understand rightly, to do rightly, and to speak out rightly, all that
are necesssary.


P. Who will teach me this?


M. I, by Gods help.


P. How?


M. I will guide thee through all,

I will show thee all.

I will name thee all.


P. See, here I am; lead me in the name of God.


M. Before all things, thou ought to learn the plain sounds, of which man's
speech consists; which living Creatures know how to make, and thy tongue
knows how to imitate, and thy hand can picture out.

Afterward we will go into the world, and we will view all things.

Hear thou have a lively and vocal Alphabet.


A a Cornix cornicatur. The Crow cries. a a B b Agnus balat. The Lamb
blaiteth. be e e C c Cicada stridet. The grasshopper chirpeth. ci ci D d Vpupa
dicit. The Whooppoo says. du du E e Infans ejulat. The Infant cries. e e e F
f Ventus flat. The wind blows. fi fi G g Anser gingrit The Goose gaggleth, ga
ga H h Os halat. The mouth breaks out hah hah I i Mus mintrit. She Mouse
chirpeth. i i i K k Anas tetrinnit. The Duck quacketh. kha kha L l Lupus
ululat. The Woolf howleth. lu ulu M m Vrsus murmurat. The Bear grumbleth. mum
mum N n Felis clamat. The Cat cries. nau nau O o Auriga clamat. The Carter
cries. o o o P p Pullus pipit. The Chicken peepeth. pi pi Q q Cuculus cuculat.
The Cuckoo sings cuckoo. kuk ku R r Canis ringitur. The Dog grinneth. err S s
Serpens sibilat. The Serpent hisseth. si T t Graculus clamat. The jay cries.
tac tac U u Bubo ululat. The Owl hooteth. u u W w Lepus vagit. The Hare
squealeth. va X x Rana coaxat. The Frog croaketh. coax Y y Asinus rudit The
Ass brayeth. y y y Z z Tabanus dicit. The Breeze or Horse-flie says. ds ds
II.
2


Deus.
DEVS est ex seipso, ab aeterno in aeternum,

Ens perfectissimum and beatissimum

Essentia Spiritualis and Unus.

Hypostasi, Trinus.

Voluntate, Sanctus, Justus, Clemens, verax,

Potentia, Maximus.

Bonitate, Optimus.

Sapientia, immensus:

Lux inaccessa; and tamen Omnia in omnibus:

Ubique, and nullibi:

Summum bonum, and bonorum omnium Fons solus, and inexhaustus.

Omninm Rerum quas vocamus mundum, ut Creator, ita Gubernator and Conservator.

God.
GOD is of himself, from everlasting to everlasting,

A most perfect and a most blessed Being.

In his Essence Spiritual, and one.

In his Personality, Three.

In his will, Holy, Just, Merciful, and true.

In his power, very great:

In his goodness, very good.

In his wisdom, unmeasurable.

A light inaccessible; and yet all in all:

Every where, and no where:

The chiefest Good, and the only unexhausted fountain of all good things:

As the creator, so the Governor, and preserver of all things, which we call
the world.

III.
3


Mundus.
Coelum 1. habet Ignem, and Stellas.

Nubes 2. pendent in Aere.

Aves 3. volant sub Nubibus.

Pisces 4. natant in Aqua.

Terra habet Montes, 5. Sylvas, 6. Campos, 7. Animalia, 8. Homines, 9.

Ita, sunt plena Habitatoribus suis, quatuor Elementa, Mundi maxima Corpora.

The World.
The Heaven 1. has fire, and Stars.

The Clouds 2. hang in the air.

Birds 3. fly under the Clouds.

Fishes 4. swim in the water.

The earth has Hills 5. Woods 6. Fields 7. Beasts 8. And Men 9.

Thus, the greatest bodies of the World, the four Elements, are full of their
own Inhabitants.

IV.
4


Coelum.
Coelum 1. rotatur, and ambit Terram 2. stantem in medio.

Sol 3. ubi ubi est, fulget perpetuo, ut ut

Nubila 4. eum a nobis er piant; facitque suis Radiis 5. Lucem; Lux Diem.

Ex opposito, sunt Tenebrae 6. inde Nox.

Nocte, splendet Luna, 7. and Stellae 8. micant, scintillant.

Vesperi 9. est Crepusculum: Mane Aurora 10. and Diluculum.

The Heaven.
The Heaven 1. ^s wheeled about, and encompasseth the Earth 2. standing in the
middle.

The Sun 3. wheresoever it is shines perpetually, howsoever dark

Clouds 4. may take it from us; and by its rays 5. ^t causes light, and the
light, Day.

On the other side over against it is Darkness 6. and thence Night.

In the Night, shines the Moon 7. and the Stars 8. glister, and twinckle.

In the Evening 9. ^s Twilight, In the Morning, 10. the breaking, and ^awning
of the Day,

V.
5


Ignis.
Ignis ardet, urit, cremat.

Ejus Scintilla, open Chalybis 1. e Silice (Pyrite) 2. elisa, and in Suscitabulo
3. a Fomite excepta, Sulphuratum 4. and inde Candelam 5 vel Lignum 6. accendit,
and Flammam 7. excitat vel Incendium 8. quod aedificia corripit.

Fumus 9. inde ascendit, qui, adhaerens Camino, 10. abit in Fuliginem.

Ex Torre, (ligno ardente,) fit Titio 11. (lignum extinctum)

Ex Pruna, (candente torris particula) fit Carbo 12. (particula mortua.)

Tandem, quod remanet, est Cinis 13. and Favillae (cinis ardens.)

Fire.
The Fire ^loweth, burns, and consumes to ashes.

A spark of it struck out of a Flint 1 (or Fierstone) 2. by means of a Steel 1.
and taken by tinder in a tinder-box 3. lights a match 4. and after that a
Candle 5, or a Stick, 6. and causes a flame 7. ^ze, 8. which ^tcheth hold ^^
the houses.

Smoke, 9. ^^cendeth there from ^^ich ^^^king to the ^imney 10. ^^rneth into
soot.

Of a Firebrand, (or burning stick,) ^ made a ^ and 11. or quenched ^^ick)

Of a hot Coal red-hot piece (a firebrand) made a Coal 12. (or a dead under.)

That, which remains, ^^at last ^shes 13. ^^d Embers or hot Ashes.)

VI.
6


Aer
Aura 1. spirat leniter.

Ventus 2. flat valide.

Procella 3. sternit arbores.

Turbo 4. se agit in gyrum.

Ventus subterraneus 5. excitat Terrae-motum; Terrae-motus facit Labes
(ruinas.) 6.

The Air.
A cool Air 1 ^^eatheth gently.

The wind 2 ^oweth strongly.

A Storm 3. ^roweth down Trees.

A whirlwind 4. ^^rneth it self in a ^^und compass.

A wind under ^round 5. ^auseth an Earthquake. ^n Earthquake, caus^th gapings
of the ^arth, (and falls of Houses.) 6.

VII.
7


Aqua.
Aqua scatet e Font, 1. defluit in Torrente, 2. manat in Rivo, 3. stat in
Stagno, 4. fluit in Flumine, 5. gyratur in Vortice, 6. facit Paludes 7.

Flumen habet Ripas. 8.

Mare facit Littora, 9. Sinus, 10. Promontoria, 11. Insulas, 12. Peninsulas,
13. Isthmos, 14. Freta, 15. and habet Scopulos, 16.

The Water.
The water springs out of a fountain, 1. flows downwards in a brook, 2.
runs in a beck, 3. stands in a pond, 4. ^uideth ^n the stream, 5. a
whirled about in a whirl-pit 6. and causes ^^ens 7.

The River ^ath banks 8.

The Sea makes shores 9. Bays, 10. Capes 11. Islands 12. Almost Islands 13.
Necks of Land 14. Straights, 15. and has in it Rocks. 16.

VIII.
8


Nubes.
Ex aqua ascendit Vapor. 1.

Inde fit Nubes 2. and prope terram Nebula. 3.

E Nube guttatim stillat Pluvia 4 and Imber.

Quae, gelata, Grando; 5. semigelata, Nix; 6. calefacta, Rubigo est.

In nube pluviosa, Soli opposita, apparet Iris. 7.

Gutta, incidens in aquam, facit Bullam; 8. multae Bullae faciunt Spumam. 9.

Aqua congelata Glacies; 10. Ros congelatus, Pruina, dicitur.

Ex vapore sulphureo fit Tonitru, quod, erumpens e nube cum Fulgure, 11. tonat
and fulminat.

The Clouds.
A vapor 1. ascends from the water.

From it a Cloud 2. is made, and a white Mist 3.

near the Earth.

Rain 4 and a small shower distilleth out of a Cloud, drop by drop:

Which being frozen, is Hail; 5. half-frozen, is snow; 6. being warm is Mel-dew.

In a Rainy Cloud, set over against the Sun, the Rainbow 7. appears.

A drop falling into the water, makes a Bubble. 8 many Bubbles make froth. 9.

Frozen water, is called Ice, 10. Dew congealed, a white Frost.

Thunder is made of a brimstone-like vapor, which breaking out of a cloud with
lightning, 11. thundereth and strikes with lightening.

IX.
9


Terra.
In Terra sunt Montes 1. alti, Valles 2. profundae, Colles 3. elevati,
Speluncae 4. cavae, Campi 5. plani, Sylvae 6. opacae.

The Earth.
In the Earth are high Mountains 1. Deep Valleys, 2. Hills Rising, 3. Hollow
Caves, 4. Plain Fields, 5. Shady Woods, 6.

X.
10


Terrae-Foetus.
Pratum 1. fert Gramina, cum Floribus and Herbis: quae desecta, fiunt Foenum 2.

Arvum 3. fert Fruges and Olera 4.

In Sylvis proveniunt Fungi, 5. Fraga, 6. Myrtilli etc.

Sub Terra nascuntur Metalla, Lapides, Mineralia.

The Fruits of the Earth.
A meadow 1. yields Grass, with Flowers and Herbs, which being cut down, are
made Hay 2.

A Field 3. yields Corn, and Pot-hearbs 4.

Mushroms 5. Straw-berries, 6. Myrtle-trees, etc.

Come up in woods. Metals, Stones, and Minerals grow under the Earth.

XI.
11


Metalla.
Plumbum 1. est molle and grave.

Ferrum 2. est durum, and durior Calybs. 3.

E Stanno, faciunt Cantharos; 4.

e Cupro, Ahena, 5.

ex Orichalco, Candelabra, 6.

ex Argento, Thaleros, 7.

ex Auro, Scutatos, (Ducatos) and Coronatos. 8.

Argentum vivum, semper liquet, and metalla corrodit.

Metals.
Lead 1. ^s soft, and heavy.

From 2. ^s hard, and Steel 3. harder.

They make Tankards (or Kans) 4.

of Tinn; Kettles 5.

of Copper; Candlesticks 6.

of Lattin; Dollers 7.

of Silver; Ducates and Crown pieces 8.

of Gold; Quicksilver, is always liquid, and eats through Metals.

XII.
12


Lapides.
Arena 1. and Sabulum 2. est comminutus Lapis.

Saxum 3. est pars Petrae (Cautis) 4.

Cos, 5. Silex, 6.

Marmor, 7. etc. sunt lapides obscuri.

Magnes 8. adtrahit ferrum.

Gemmae 9. sunt lapilli pellucidi, ut: Adamas candidus, Rubinus rubeus,
Sapphirus caeruleus, Smaragdus viridis, Hyacinthus luteus, etc. and micant
angulati.

Margaritae and Unions 10. crescunt in conchis;

Corallia 11. in Marina arbuscula.

Succinum 12. colligitur e mari.

Vitrum 13. simile est Crystallo.

Stones.
Sand 1. and Gravel 2. is Stone broken into bits.

A great Stone 3. is a piece of a Rock (or Crag) 4.

A whet-stone 5. A Flint, 6.

Marble 7. etc. ^^ ordinary ^^es.

A Lodestone 8. ^^weth Iron to it.

Jewels 9. ^^ clear stones, as, The Diamond white, The Rubie red, The Sapphire
blew, The Emerald green, The Jacinth yellow, etc. And they glister ^^ing cut in
fashion of ^^e nayls of ones hand

Pearls, and Unions 10. grow in Shellfish,

Corals, 11. in a Sea-shrub.

Amber, 12. is gathered from the Sea.

Glass, 13. is like Crystal.

XII.
13


Arbor.
E Semine procrescit Planta, 1.

Planta abit in Fruticem, 2

Frutex in Arborem, 3.

Arborem sustentat Radix 4.

E Radice surgit Stirps (Stemma.) 5.

Stirps se dividit in Ramos 6. and Frondes, 7. factas ex Foliis 8.

Cacumen 9. in summo est.

Truncus 10. adhaeret radicibus.

Caudex, 11. est dejectus Stipes, sine ramis: habens Corticem and Librum, 12.
pulpam and medullam, 13.

Viscum 14. ramis adnascitur: qui etiam Gummi, Re sinam, Picem, etc. sudant.

Tree.
A Plant 1. sroweth from a Seed.

A Plant wareth to a Shoot, 2

A Shoot, to a Tree, 3.

The Root 4 bears up the Trae.

^^e Body or Stem 5. ^^th from the ^^

The Stem ^ideth it self ^o Boughs 6. ^^ green branches 7. ^^de of ^ves 8.

The top 9. ^^ in the height.

The Stock 10. ^^close to the roots.

A Log 11. ^^ the body feld down, without boughs, ^aving ^ark and Rind 12.
Bait and Heart 13.

Bird-lime 14. growth upon the boughs, which also sweat Gumm, Rosin, Pitch, etc.

XIV.
14


Fructus Arborum
Poma ab arboribus fructiferns decerpuntur.

Malum 1. est rotundum.

Pyrum 2. and Ficus 3. sunt oblonga.

Cerasum 4. pendet longo Pediolo;

Prunum 5. and Persicum 6. breviori;

Morum 7. brevissimo.

Nux juglans 8. Avellana 9. and Castanea 10. involuta sunt Cortici and Putamini.

Steriles arbores sunt 11. Abies, Alnus, Betula, Cupressus, Fagus, Fraxinus,
Salix, Tilia, etc. sed pleraeque umbriferae.

At Iuniperus 12. and Laurus 13. ferunt Baccas;

Pinus 14. Strobilos.

Quercus 15 Glandes and Gallas.

Fruits of Trees.
Fruits that have no shells are pulled from fruit-hearing trees.

The Apple 1. is round.

The Pear 2. and Fig 3. are somewhat long.

The Cherry 4. hangs by a long start.

The Plumb 5. and Peach 6. a shorter.

The Mulberry 7. a very short one.

The Wall-nut 8. ^^e Hasel-nut 9. ^^ Chest-nut 10. ^^e wrapped in a ^usk and a
Shell.

^ Barren Trees ^e 11. The Firr, the Elder, the Birch, the Cypress, the Beech,
the Ivy, the Sallow, the Linde tree, etc. But the most of them affording shade.

But the Juniper 12. and Bay Tree 13. yield Berries.

The Pine 14. Pine-Apples.

The Oak 15. Acorns and Galls.

XV.
15


Flores.
Inter Flores, notissimi,

Primo Vere, Viola 1. Hyacinthus 2. Narcissus 3

Tum Lilia, alba, and lutea 4. and coerulea 5.

Tandem Rosa, 6. Caryophyllum, 7. etc.

Ex his vientur Serta 8. and Serviae 9.

Adduntur etiam Herbae odoratae 10. ut, Amaracus, Amaranthus, Ruta, Lavendula,
Rosmarinus (Libanotis) Hyssopus, Nardus, Ocymum, Salvia, Menta, etc.

Inter Campestres, 11. notissimi sunt, Flores: Lilium convallium, Chamaedrys,
Cyanus, Chamaemelum, etc.

and Herbae: Cytisus (Trifolium) Absinthium, Acetosa, Vrtica, etc.

Tulipa 12 Florum decus est, sed odoris expers.

Flowers.
The most noted amongst the Flowers,

In the beginning of the Spring are the Violet 1. the Crow-tree 2. the Daffadil
3.

Then the Lillies white and yellow 4 and blew 5.

and the Rose 6. and Clove-gillow-flowers 7. etc.

Of these Garlands 8. and Nose-gays 9. ^re tied ronnd with ^wigs.

There are also sweet ^erbs added 10. ^s, Marjorum, ^lower-gentle, Rue,
Lavender, Rosemary, Hysop, ^pike, Basil, Sage, Mints, etc.

Amongst Field-flowers 11. the most noted are, the May lilie, the Ground Ivy,
the Blew-bottle, Chamomel, etc.

And amongst herbs, Trefoil, Wormwood, Sorrel, the Nettle, etc.

The Tulip 12. is the grace of flowers, but affording no smell.

XVI.
16


Olera.
In Hortis nascuntur Olera, ut, Lactuca 1. Brassica 2. Cepa 3. Allium 4.
Cucurbita 5. Siser 6. Rapa 7. Raphanus minor 8. Raphanus major 9. Petroselinum
10. Cucumeres 11. Pepones 12.

Pot Herbs.
Pot Herbs grow in Gardens, as, Lettice 1. Colewort 2. Onions 3. Garlike 4.
Gourd 5. The Parsnep 6. The Turnep 7. The Rhadish 8. Horse-Rhadish 9. Perselie
10. Cucumbers 11. and Pompions 12.

XVII.
18


Fruges.
Frumenta, quaedam crescnnt super culmum, distinctum geniculis, ut, Triticum,
1. Siligo, 2. Hordeum; 3. in quibus Spica, habet Aristas, aut est mutica,
fovetque grana in gluma.

Quaedam, pro Spica, habent Paniculam, continentem grana fasciatim, ut, Avena,
4. Milium, 5 Frumuntum Saracenicum 6.

Legumina habent Siliquas, quae grana includunt valvulis, ut, Pisum, 7. Faba,
8. Vicia, 9. and, his minora, Lentes and Cicera.

Corn.
Some Corn, grow upon a Straw, parted by knots, as, Wheat, 1. Rye, 2. Barley,
3. in which the Ear has awnes, or else it is without awnes, and it nourishes
the Corns in the Husk.

Some, in stead of an Ear, have a rizom (or plume) containing the Corns by
bunches, as, Oats, 4. Millit, 5. Turkey-wheat. 6.

Pulse have Cods, which enclose the corns in two shales, as, Pease 7. Beans, 8.
Vetches, 9. and those that are less than these, Lentils and Urles (or Tares.)

XVII
17


Frutices.
Planta, major herba and durior, dicitur Frutex, ut sunt:

In ripis and stagnis, Iuncus, 1. enodis Scirpus [Canna] 2. ferens Typhos, and
nodosa intusque cava Arundo. 3.

Alibi, 4. Rosa, Ribes, Sambucus, Iuniperus.

Item Vitis, 5. quae emittit Palmites, 6. and hi Capreolos, 7. Pampinos, 8. ac
Racemos, 9. quorum Scapo pendent Vvae, continentes Acinos.

Shrubs.
A Plant being greater, and harder than an Herb, is called a Shrub, such as are;

In Banks, and ponds, the Rush, 1, the Bul-rush, 2. or Cask without knots,
bearing Cats tails, and the Reed 3 which is knotly and hollow within

Elsewhere, 4. the Rose, the Bastard-Corinths, the Elder, the Juniper.

Also the Vine 5. which puts forth branches 6. and these tendrels 7.
Vine-leaves, 8. and bunches of grapes 9. on the stalk whereof hang grapes,
which contein Grapestones.

XIX.
19


Animalia. and Primum Aves.
Animal, vivit, sentit, movet se; nascitur, moritur; nutritur, and crescit;
stat, aut sedet, aut cubat, aut graditur.

Avis, (hic Halcyon, 1. in mari nidulans,) tegitur Plumis, 2. volat Pennis, 3.
habet duas Alas, 4. totidem Pedes, 5. Caudam; 6. and Rostrum 7.

Foemella, 8 in Nido 9. ponit Ova, 10. iisque incubans, excludit Pullos. 11.

Ovum tegitur Testa, 12. sub qua est Albumen, 14. in hoc Vitellus. 13.

Living-Creatures, and first Birds.
A living Creature, lives, perceives, moves it self; is born, dies; is
nourished, and grows; stands, or fitteth, or lies, or goes.

A Bird, (here the Kings Fisher 1. making her nost in the Sea) is covered with
Feathers 2. flies with Wings 3. has two pinions 4. and as many Feet 5. A
tail, 6. and a bill, 7.

The She, 8. lays Eggs, 10. in a Nest, 9. and sitting upon them, hatcheth
young-ones 11.

An Egg is covered with a Shell 12. under which is the white 14. in this the
Yolk. 13.

XX.
20


Aves Domesticae.
Gallus 1. (qui mane cantat) habet Cristam, 2. and Calcaria; 3. castratus,
dicitur Capo, and saginatur in Ornithotrophio. 4.

Gallina, 5. ruspatur fimetum, and colligit grana: sicut and Columbae, 6. (quae
educantur in Columbario; 7.) and Gallopavus, 8. cum sua Meleagride. 9.

Formosus Pavo, 10. pennis superbit.

Ciconia, 11. in tecto nidificat.

Hirundo, 12. Passer, 13. Pica, 14. Monedula, 15. and Vespertilio, 16. (Mus
alatus) volitant circa Domus.

Tame Fowl.
The Cock 1. which croweth a morning) ^^th a Comb, 2. ^^ Spurs; 3. ^^ng gelded,
he is ^^led a Capon. ^^ is crammed a Coop 4.

A Hen, 5. ^^capeth the Dunghill, and picketh up Corns, also the Pigeons, 6.
which are brought up a Pigeon-house 7.) the Turkey-Cock 8. ^ith his Turky-Hen.
9.

The gay Peacock 10. ^ideth in his feathers.

The Stork, 11. ^ildeth her nest on the top of the House.

The Swallow, 12. the Sparrow, 13. the Mag-pie, 14. the Jackdaw, 15. and the
Bat, 16. (or Flittermouse) ^se to fly about Houses.

XXI.
21


Oscines.
Luscinia (Philomela 1. cantat suavissime omnium.

Alauda 2 cantillat, volitans in aere;

Coturnix, 3. humi sedens;

Caeterae, in ramis arborum, 4. ut: Luteola peregrina, Fringilla, Carduelis,
Acanthis, Linaria, parvus Parus, Galgulus, Rubecula, Curruca, etc.

Psittacus 5. discolor, Merula, 6. Sturnus, 7. cum Pica and Monedula, discunt
humanas voces formare.

Pleraeque, solent includi Caveis. 8.

Singing-Birds.
The Nightingal 1. ^^eth ^sweetliest of all.

The Lark 2. ^^geth, ^he flies in the air;

The Quail, 3. ^ing on the ground;

Others, 4. the boughs of Trees ^ the Canary-bird, ^e Chaffinch, ^^e Goldfinch,
^^e Siskin, ^^e Linnet, ^he little Titmouse, ^he Wood-wall, ^he
Robin-red-breast, ^^e hedge sparrow, etc.

The party-colored ^arret 5. ^he Blackbird, 6. ^he Stare, 7. ^ith the
Mag-pie, and the Jay, ^arn ^o frame Men's Words:

A great many ^re wont to be shut in Cages. 8.

XXII.
22


Aves Campestres and Sylvestres.
Struthio 1. est ales maximus;

Regulus 2. (Trochilus) minimus;

Noctua 3. despicatissimus;

Vpupa 4. sordidissimus, rescitur enim stercoribus;

Manucodiata 5 rarissimus.

Phasianus 6. Tarda (Otis) 7. Tetrao 8. surdus, Attagen 9. Perdix 10. Gallinago
(Rusticola) 11. and Turdus, 12. in deliciis habentur.

Inter reliquas, potissimae sunt: Grus 13 pervigil, Turtur 14. gemens, Cuculus
15 Palumbes, Picus, Garrulus, Cornix, etc. 16.

Birds that haunt the Fields, and Woods.
The Ostrich 1. the greatest Bird.

The Wren 2. the least.

The Owl 3. ^most despicable.

The Whoophoo 4. most nasty, it eats dung.

^e Bird of Paradise 5. very rare.

The Pheasant 6. Bustard 7. deaf wild Peacock 8. Moor-Hen 9. Partridge 10.
Wood-cock 11. the Thrush 12. accounted dainties.

Amongst the rest, best are the watch* Crane 13. mournful Turtle 14 Cuckoo 15.
Stock-dove, Speight, Jay, Crow, etc. 16.

XXII.
23


Aves Rapaces.
Aquila, 1. Rex avium, Solemn intuetur.

Vultur, 2. and Corvus, 3. pascuntur morticinis [cadaveribus.]

Milvus 4. insectatur pullos gallinaceos.

Falco, 5. Nisus, 6. and Accipitur, 7. captant aviculas;

Astur, 8. columbas, and aves majores.

Ravenous Birds.
The Eagle, 1. the King of Birds, looks upon the Sun.

The Vulture, 2. and the Raven, 3. feed upon Carrion.

The Kite 4. pursues Chickens.

The Falcon, 5 The Hobbie, 6. and the Hawk, 7. catch at little Birds.

The Gerfalcon, 8. Pigeons, and greater Birds.

XXIV.
24


Aves Aquaticae.
Olor 1. candidus, Anser, 2. and Anas, 3. natant.

Mergus, 4, se mergit.

His add Fulicam, Pelecanum, etc. 10.

Halicaetus 5. and Gavia, 6. devolantes; sed Ardea 7. stans in ripis, captant
pisces.

Butio, 8. rostrum aquae inserit, and ut bos mugit.

Motacilla 9. motat caudam.

Water Fowl.
The white Swan, 1. The Goose, 2. and the Duck, 3. swim up and down.

The Cormorant 4. diveth.

Add to these the water-hen, and the Pelecan, etc. 10.

The Osprey, 5. and the Sea-mew, 6. flying down-wards use to catch fish, but
the Heron 7. standing on the Banks.

The Bittern, 8. puts his Bill into the water, and belloweth like an Ox.

The Water-wagtail 9. waggeth the tail.

XXV.
25


Insecta volantia.
Apis 1. facit Mel, quod depascit Fucus. 2.

Vespa, 3. and Crabro, 4. aculeo infestant: and Pecus imprimis, Oestrum
(Asilus;) 5. nos autem, Musca 6. and Culex 7.

Gryllus 8. cantillat.

Papillio 9. est Eruca alata.

Scarabaeus 10. tegit alas Vaginis.

Cicindela [Lampyris] 11. noctu nitet.

Flying-vermin.
The Be 1. makes Honey, which the Drone 2. devoureth.

The Wasp, 3. and the Hornet, 4. ^^olest with a sting; and the Gad-bee (or
Breese) 5. especially Cattle; but the Fly 6. and the Gnat 7. us

The Cricket 8. ^^ngeth.

The Butterfly 9. to a winged Caterpiller.

The Beetle 10, covers her wings with Cases.

The Glowworm 11. shines by night.

XXVI.
26


Quadrupedia, and Primum Domestica.
Canis 1. cum Catello, 2. est custos Domus.

Felis (Catus) 3. domum purgat a Muribus; 4. quod etiam facit Muscipula. 5.

Sciurus, 6. Simia, 7. and Cercopithecus, 8. domi habentur delectamento.

Glis, 9. and caeteri Mures majores, 10. ut, Mustela, Martes, Viverra, domum
infestant.

Four-Footed-Beasts, and first those about the House.
The Dog 1. with the Whelp 2. is the keeper of the House.

The Cat 3. ^iddeth the House of Mice; 4. which also a Mouse-trap, 5. does,

The Squirrel, 6. The Ape, 7. and the Monkey, 8. are kept at home for delight.

The Dormouse, 9. and other greater Mice, 10. as, the Weesell, The Martin, and
the Ferret, trouble the House.

XXVII.
27


Pecora.
Taurus 1. Vacca 2. and Vitulus 3. pilis teguntur.

Aries (Vervex) 4. Ovis 5. cum Agno 6. Lanam gestant. Hircus (Caper) 7. cum
Capra 8. and Haedo 9. habent Villos and aruncos

Porcus (Scrofa) 10. cum Porcellis 11. habent Setas; at non Cornua, sed etiam
Vngulas bisulcas, ut illa.

Heard Cattle.
The Bull 1. ^^e Cow 2. and the Calf 3. ^^e covered with hair.

The Ram, the Weather 4. ^^e Ewe 5. and the Lamb 6. ^ar wool. The Hee-goat, ^^e
gelt-Goat 7. ^ith the Shee-goat 8. and Kid 9. ^^ve ^^ag-hair and beards.

The Hog, the Sow 10. and the Pigs 11. ^ave bristles, at not horns; at cloven
feet too, ^o those other ^ave.

XXVIII.
28


Iumenta.
Asinus 1. and Mulus 2. gestant Onera;

Equus 3. (quem ornat Iuba 4.) nos ipsos;

Camelus 5. mercatorem cum mercibus suis.

Elephas (Barus) 6. pabulum adtrahit Proboscide 7. Dentes duos 8 habet
prominentes, and portare potest etiam triginta Viros.

Laboring Beasts.
The Ass 1. and the Mule 2. carry burdens.

The Horse 3. which a Main 4. graceth) carries us.

The Camel 5. carries the Merchant with his Wares.

The Elephant 6. draws his meat to him with his Trunk 7. He has two Teeth 8.
standing out, and is able to carry full thirty men.

XXIX.
29


Ferae Pecudes.
Vrus 1. and Bubalus 2. sunt feri boves.

Alces major equo, (cujus tergus est inpenetrabilis) habet ramosa cornua; ut
and Cervus 4.

Sed Caprea 5. cum Hinnulo, fere nulla;

Capricornus 6. praegrandia;

Rupicapra 7 minuta, quibus se ad rupem suspendit;

Monoceros 8. unum, sed pretiosum.

Aper 9. dentibus grassatur.

Lepus 10. pavet.

Cuniculus 11. terram perfodit;

ut and Talpa 12 quae grumos facit.

Wild Cattle.
The Buff 1. and the Buffal 2. are wild Bulls.

The Elke 3. being bigger than an horse (whose back is impenetrable) has
knaggy horns; as also the Heart 4.

But the Roe 5. and the Hind Calf almost none;

The Stone-back 6. huge great ones;

The Wilde-goat 7. has very little ones, by which she hangs her self on a
rock.

The Unicorn 8. has but one, but that a precious one

The Boar 9. assaileth one with his tushes.

The Hare 10. is fearful.

The Cony 11. diggeth the earth;

As also the Mole 12. which makes hillocks.

XXX.
30


Ferae Bestiae.
Bestiae habent acutos Ungues and dentes, suntque carnivorae.

Ut, Leo, 1. Rex Qnadrupedum, jubatus, cum Leaena;

Maculosus Pardus (Panthera) 2.

Tygris 3. immanissima omnium;

Villosus Vrsus 4.

Rapax Lupus 5.

Lynx 6. visu pollens.

Caudata Vulpes 7. omnium astutissima.

Erinaceus 8. est aculeatus.

Melis 9. latebris gaudet.

Wild Beasts.
Wild Beasts have sharp paws, and teeth, and are flesh-eaters.

As the Lion 1. the king of four-footed beasts, having a main, with the Lioness;

The spotted Panther 2.

The Tygre 3. the cruellest of all;

The shaggy Bear 4.

The ravenous Wolf 5.

The quick fighted Ounce 6.

The tayled Fox 7. the craftiest of all.

The Hedgehog 8. is prickly.

The Badger 9. delights in holes.

XXXI.
31


Serpents and Reptilia.
Angues, repunt sinuando se:

Coluber 1. in Sylva;

Natrix (hydra) 2. in Aqua;

Vipera 3. in Saxis;

Aspis 4. in Campis;

Boa 5. in Domibus.

Coecilia 6. est coeca.

Lacerta 7. Salamandra 8. in igne vivax, Pedes habent.

Draco 9. Serpens alatus, halitu;

Basiliscus 10. Oculis;

Scorpius 11 venenata cauda, necantes.

Serpents and creeping things.
Snakes creep by winding themselves;

The Adder 1. in the wood;

The Water-Snake 2. in the water;

The Viper 3. among great stones;

The Aspe 4. in the fields;

The Boa (or Mill-Snake 5.) in Houses.

The Slow-worm 6. is blind.

The Lizzard 7. and the Salamander 8. (that lives long in the fire) have feet.

The Dragon 9. a winged Serpent kills with his breath;

The Basilisk 10. with his eyes, and the Scorpion 11. with his poisonous tail.

XXXII.
32


Insecta repentia.
Vermes, res rodunt:

Lumbricus 1. terram;

Eruca 2. plantam;

Cicada 3 fruges;

Curculio 4 frumenta;

Teredo (cossus) 5. ligna;

Tinea 6 Vestem;

Blatta 7. Librum;

Termites 8. carnem and caseum;

Acari, Capillum.

Saltans Pulex 9. Pediculus 10. foetens Cimex 11. nos mordent.

Ricinus 12. sanguisugus est.

Bombyx 13. facit sericum.

Formica 14. est laboriosa.

Aranea 15. texit araneum, muscis retia.

Cochlea 16. testam circumfert.

Crawling Vermin.
Worms gnaw things;

The Earth-worm 1. the earth;

The Caterpiller 2. the Plant;

The Grasshopper 3. the Fruits;

The Mite 4. the Corn;

The Timber-worm 5. Wood;

The Moth 6. a garment;

The Book-worm 7. a Book;

Maggots 8. Flesh and Cheese;

Hand-worms the hair.

The Skipping Flea 9. the Lowse 10. and the stinking Wall-louse 11. bite us.

The Tike 12. is a blood-sucker.

The Silkworm 13. makes silk.

The Pismire 14 is painful.

The Spider 15. weaveth a Cobweb, nets for flies.

The Snail 16. carries about her Snail-horn.

XXXIII.
33


Amphibia.
In terra and aqua viventia sunt,

Crocodilus 1. immanis and praedatrix bestia Nili fluminis;

Castor (Fiber) 2. habens pedes anserinos ad natandum, and caudam squameam;

Lutra 3. and coaxans Rana 4. cum Bufone,

Testudo 5. supra and infra testis, ceu scuto, operta.

Creatures that live as well by Water as by Land.
Creatures that live by land and by water are,

The Crocodile 1. a cruel and preying Beast of the River Nilus;

The Castor or Beaver 2. having seet like a Gooses to swim, and a scaly tail;

The Otter 3. the croaking Frog 4. with the Toad,

The Tortoise 5. covered above and beneath with shells, as with a Target.

XXXIV.
34


Pisces Fluviatiles and Lacustres.
Piscis habet Pinnas, 1. quibus natat; and Branchias, 2. quibus respirat; and
Spinas, loco ossium: praeterea, Mas, lactes; Foemina, Ova.

Quidam habent Squamas, ut Carpio 3 Lucius (Lupus) 4.

Alii sunt glabri, ut, Anguilla 5 Mustela 6.

Accipenser (Sturio) 7. mucronatus, ultra longitudinem viri excrescit;

Silurus 8 bucculentus, major illo est;

Sed maximus Antaceus (Huso;) 9.

Apuae 10. gregatim natantes, sunt minutissimi.

Alii hujus generis sunt, Perca, Alburnus, Mullus (barbus) Thymallns, Trutta,
Gobius, Tinca 11.

Cancer 12. tegitur crusta, habetque chelas, and graditur porro and retro.

Hirudo 13 sugit sanguinem.

River Fish and Pond Fish.
A Fish has Fins 1. with which it swimeth, and Gills 2. by which it takes
breath, and Prickles instead of bones: besides, the Male has a Melt, and the
Female a Row.

Some have Scales, as the Carp 3. and the Luce or Pike 4.

Some are sleek, as the Eele 5. and the Lamprey 6

The Sturgion 7. having a sharp snout, grows longer than a man;

The Sheath-fish 8. having wide cheeks, is bigger then he.

But the Huson 9. is the greatest.

Minewes 10. swimming by shoals, are the least.

Others of this sort, are the Perch, the Bley, the Barbel, the Esch, the Trout,
ye Gudgeon, and Tench 11

The Crab-fish 12. is covered with a shell, and it has claws, and crawleth
forwards and backwards

The Horse-leech 13. sucketh blood.

XXXV.
35


Marini Pisces, and Conchae.
Piscium marinorum maximus est Balaena (Cetus) 1.

Delphinns 2. velocissimus,

Raia 3. monstrosissimus.

Alii sunt, Muraenula, 4. Salmo (Esox) 5.

Dantur etiam Volatiles. 6.

Add Haleces, 7. qui salsi,

and Passeres, 8. cum Asellis, 9. qui arefacti, adferuntur:

and monstra marina, Phocam, 10. Hippopotamum, etc.

Concha 11. habet testas.

Ostrea 12. dat sapidam carnem.

Murex 13. purpuram;

alia, 14. Margaritas.

Seafish, and Shel-Fish.
The Whale 1. is the greatest of the Seafish.

The Dolphin 2. the swiftest;

The Scate 3, the most monstrous,

Others are the Lamprel, 4. The Salmon, and the lax, 5

There are also Fish that fly. 6.

Add Herrings, 7. which are brought

pickled, and Place, 8. and Cods, 9. which are brought dry, and the
Sea Monsters,

the Seal, 10. and the Seahorse, etc.

Shel-fish 11. have shells.

The Oyster 12. affords sweet meat.

The Purple-fish 13. purple;

The other Pearls, 14.

XXXVI.
36


Homo.
Adamus, 1. primus Homo, sexta die Creationis, a Deo, ad imaginem Dei, e gleba
terrae;

and Heva, 2. prima Mulier, e costa viri, formati sunt.

Hi, a Diabolo. sub specie Serpentis, 3. seducti, cum comederent de fructu
arboris vetitae, 4. ad miseriam 5. and mortem, cum omni posteritate sua,
damnati and e Paradiso 6. ejecti sunt.

Man.
Adam, 1. the first Man, was made by God, after the Image of God, the sixth day
of the Creation, of a lump of Earth;

And Eve, 2. the first Woman, was made of a Rib of the Man.

These, being tempted by the Devil, under the shape of a Serpent, 3. when they
had eaten of the fruit of the forbidden Tree, 4. were condemned to misery 5.
and death, with all their posterity, and cast out of Paradise 6.

XXXVII.
37


Septem Aetates Hominis.
Homo est primum Infans, 1. deinde Puer, 2. tum Adolescens, 3. inde Iuvenis, 4.
postea Vir, 5. dehinc Senex, 6. tandem Silicirnium. 7.

Sic etiam in altero Sexu, sunt, Pupa, 8. Puella, 9. Virgo, 10. Mulier, 11.
Vetula, 12. Anus decrepita. 13.

The seven Ages of Man.
A Man is first an Infant, 1. then a Boy, 2. then a Youth, 3. then a Young Man,
4. then a Man, 5. after that, an Elderlyman, 6. and at last, a decrepid old
Man, 7.

So also in the other sex, there are, a Girl, 8. A Damosel, 9. A Maid, 10. A
Woman, 11. an Elderly Woman, 12. and a decrepid old woman. 13.

XXXVIII.
38


Membra Hominis Externa.
Caput 1. est supra, infra, Pedes. 20.

Colli (quod desinit in Axillas 2.) pars anterior, est Jugulum; 3. posterior,
Cervix. 4.

Pectus, 5. est ante; retro, Dorsum: 6. in illo sunt Foeminis, binae Mammae 7.
cum Papillis.

Sub pectore est Venture; 9. in ejus medio, Vmbilicus, 10. subtus Inguen, 11.
and pudenda.

A tergo, sunt Scapulae, 12. a quibus pendent Humeri, 13. ab his, Brachia, 14.
cum Cubito, 15. inde, ad utrumque latus, Manus, Dextera 8. and Sinistra 16.

Humeros, excipiunt Lumbi 17. cum Coxis, 18. and in Podice (culo) Nates. 19.

Pedem absolvunt; Femur, 21. tum Crus, 23. (intermedio Genu 22.) in quo Sura,
24. cum Tibia, 25. abhinc Tali, 26. Calx (Calcaneum) 27. and Solum, 28. in
extremo Hallux 29. cum quatuor Digitis.

The outward parts, of a Man.
Caput, 1. is above, the Feet, 20. below.

The forepart of the Neck, (which ends, at the Arm-holes 2.) is the Throat, 3.
the hinder-part the Crag, 4.

The Breast, 5. and is before; the back: 6. behind; ^omen have in it two Dugs
7. with Nipples.

Under the breast ^^ the Belly, 9. in the middle of it, the Navel, 10.
underneath the groyn, 11. and the privities.

The Shoulder-blades, are behind the Back, 12. ^n which the Shoulders, depend
13. on these the Arms 14. with the Elbow, 15: and then, the hands on either
side, the right, 8. and the left. 16.

The next to the shoulder a* are the Loins 17. with the Hips, 18: and in the
breech, the Buttocks, 19.

These make the Foot; The Thigh, 21. then the Leg, 23. (the Knee being betwixt
them 22.) in which is the Calf, 24. with the Shin, 25. then, the Anckles, 26.
The Heel, 27. and the Sole, 28. in the very end, the great Toe, 29. with four
(other) Toes.

XXXIX.
39


Caput and Hands.
In Capite sunt Capillus, 1. (qui pectitur Pectine 2.) Aures 3. binae, and
Tempora, 4. Facies. 5.

In facie sunt Frons, 6. Oculus 7. uterque, Nasus 8. (duabus Naribus) Os, 9.
Genae (Malae) 10. and Mentum. 13.

Os septum est Mystace, 11. and Labiis; 12. Lingua cum Palato, Dentibus 16 in
Maxilla.

Mentum virile tegitur Barba, 14. Oculus vero, (in quo Albugo and Pupilla)
palpebris and supercilio. 15.

Manus contracta, Pugnus 17. est; aperta, Palma, 18. in medio, Vola, 19.
extremitas, Pollex, 20. cum quatuor Digitis, Indice, 21. Medio, 22. Annulari
23. and Auriculari. 24.

In quolibet sunt articuli tres a. b. c. and totidem Condyli d. e. f. cum
Vngue. 25.

The Head and the Hand.
In the Head are, The Hair, 1. (which is combed with a Comb, 2.) two Ears, 3.
The Temples, 4. and the face, 5.

In the Face are, the Forehead, 6. both the Eyes, 7. The Nose, 8. (with two
Nostrils) The Mouth, 9. the Cheeks 10. and the Chin. 13.

The Mouth is fenced with a Mustacho, 11. and Lips; 12 a Tongue and Palate, and
Teeth 16. in the Cheekbone.

A Man's Chin is covered with a Beard; 14. and the eye, (in which is the white
and the Apple) with eyelids, and an eye-brow 15.

The Hand being closed, is a Fist; 17. being open, is a palm, 18. in the midst,
is the hollow 19. of the Hand; the extremity is the Thumb, 20. with four
Fingers, the forefinger, 21. the middle-finger, 22. the Ring-finger, 23. and
the little-finger, 24.

In every one are three joints a. b. c. and as many knuckles d. e. f. with a
Nayl, 25.

XL.
40


Caro and Viscera.
In Corpore sunt Cut is cum Membranis, Caro cum Musculis, Canales,
Cartilagines, Ossa and Viscera.

Detracta Cute 1. apparet Caro 2. non continua massa, sed distributa, tanquam
in farcimina, quod vocant Musculos, quorum numerantur quadringenti quinque
canales Spirituum ad movendum membra.

Viscera, sunt membra interna:

Ut, in Capite, Cerebrum 3. circumdatum Cranio and Pericranio.

In Pectore, Cor 4. obvolutum Pericardio; and Pulmo 5. respirans.

In Ventre, Ventriculus 6. and Intestina 7. obducta Omento; Iecur (Hepar) 8.
and a sinistro ei oppositus Lien 9. duo Renes 10 cum Vesica 11.

Pectus a Ventre dividitur crassa membrana, quae vocatur Diaphragma 12.

The Flesh and the Bowels.
In the Body are ye Skin with the Membranes, the flesh with ye muscles, the
Channels, the Gristles, ye bones and the bowels.

The Skin being pull do ye flesh 2 appears, not in a continued lump, but
being distributed, as it were into stuff puddings which they call muscles
whereof there are reckoned four hundred and five, being the channels of the
Spirits to move the members.

The Bowels are ye inward members,

as, in ye head ye brain 3. being compassed about with a Skull, and the skin
which covers the Skul.

In the breast, ye heart 4. covered with a thin skin about it, and the Lungs 5.
breathing to and fro.

In the Belly, the Stomach 6. and the Guts 7. covered with a Kell; the Liver 8.
and on the left side opposite against it ye milt 9 the two kidneys 10. and the
bladder 11.

The breast is divided from the belly by a thick membrane, which is called the
Mid-riff 12.

XLI.
41


Canales and Ossa.
Canales Corporis sun Venae, Sanguinem, ex Hepate;

Arteriae, calorem and Vitam, e Cord;

Nervi, Sensum and Motum a Cerebro, per Corpus deferentes.

Haec tria, 1. ubique sociata invenies. Porro, ab ore in Ventriculum, Gula, 2.
via cibi ac Potus; and juxta hanc, ad Pulmonem Guttur, 5. pro respiratione; a
ventriculo ad Anum, Colum 3. ad excernendum Stercus; ab Hepate ad Vesicam,
Vreter 4. reddendae Urinae.

Ossa sunt: in Capite, Caelvaria, 6. duae Maxillae, 7. cum XXXII. Dentibus; 8.

Tum, Spina dorsi, 9. corporis columna, constans ex XXXIV. Vertebris, ut Corpus
se flectere queat;

Costae, 10. quarum viginti quatuor;

Os pectoris, 11. duae Scapulae, 12. Os sessibuli, 13. Lacerti 15. and Vlnae,
Tibiae, 14. Fibula 16. anterior and posterior. 17.

Ossa Manus, 18. sunt triginta quatuor, Pedis, 19. triginta.

In Ossibus est Medulla.

The Channels and Bones
The Channels of the body are, the Veins, carrying the blood from the Liver;

The Arteries carrying heat and life from the heart;

The Nerves carrying sense and motion, throughout the body, from the brain.

You shall find these three 1. every where joined together. Besides, from yt
mouth into the stomach is the Gullet 2. the way of the meat and drink: and by
it to the lights the Wezand 5. for breathing: from the stomach to the arse ^s a
great Gut. 3. to Purge out the Ordure; from the Liver, to the Bladdec, the
Ureter 4. for making water.

The Bones are, in the Head, the Skull, 6. the two Cheek-bones 7. with thirty
two Teeth, 8.

Then the backbone, 9 the Pillar of the body, consisting of thirty four
turning-joynts, that the body may bend it self.

The Ribs, 10. whereof there are XXIV.

The Breast Bone, 11. the two Shoulder-blades, 12 The Buttock-bone, 13. the
bigger Bone in the Arm, 15. and the lesser-bone, in the Arm, the Thigh Bone,
14. the foremost, 16. and the hindmost Bone, in the Leg, 17.

The bones of the Hand 18. are thirty four, and of the Foot, 19. thirty.

The Marrow ^s in the Bones.

XLII.
43


Sensus externi and interni.
Sensus externi sunt quinque;

Oculus 1. videt colores, quid album vel atrum, viride vel coeruleum, rubrum
aut luteum, sit.

Auris 2. audit Sonos, tum naturales, Voces and Verba; tum artificiales, Tonos
Musicos.

Nasus 3. olfacit Odores, and Faetores.

Lingua 4. cum Palato gustat Sappres, quid dulce aut amarum, acre aut acidum,
acerbum aut austerum.

Manus 5. dignoscit tangendo rerum Quantitatem and Qualitatem, calidum and
frigidum, humidum and siccum, durum and molle, laeve and aspetum, grave and
leve.

Sensus interni sunt tres.

Sensus communis 7. sub sincipite, apprehendit a Sensibus externis perceptas
res.

Phantasia 6. sub vertice, dijudicat res istas, cogitat, somniat.

Memoria 8. sub occipitio, singula recondit and depromit: quaedam deperdit, and
hoc est Oblivio.

Somnus est Sensuum requies.

The outward and inward Senses.
There are five outward Senses;

The Eye 1. sees colors, what is white or black, green or blew, red or yellow.

The Ear 2. hears Sounds, both natural, Voices and Words; and artificial,
musical Tunes.

The Nose 3. senteth smells and stinks.

The Tongue 4. with the roof of the mouth tastes savours, what is sweet or
bitter, keen or biting, sour or harsh.

The Hand 5. by touching discerns the quantity and quality of things, the hot
and cold, the moist and dry, the hard and soft, the smooth and rough, the heavy
and light

The inward Senses are three.

The Common-sense 7. under the forepart of the head, apprehends things taken
from the outward Senses.

The Fantasy 6. under the crown of the head ^^dgeth of those things, thinks
and dreameth.

The Memory 8. under the hinder part of the head ^^yeth up every thing and
fetches them out: loses some, and this is forgetfulness.

Sleep, the Rest of the Senses.

XLIII.
42


Anima hominis.
Anima est vita corporis, in toto una:

Tantum Vegetativa, in Plantis;

Simul Sensitiva, in Animalibus;

Etiam Rationalis, in Homine.

Haec consistit in tribus:

In Mente (Intellectu) qua cognoscit and intelligit, Bonum ac Malum, vel verum,
vel apparens;

In Voluntate, qua eligit and concupiscit, aut rejicit and aversatur cognitum;

In Animo, quo prosequitur Bonum electum, vel fugit Malum rejectum.

Hinc Spes, and Timor, in cupidine and aversatione.

Hinc Amor and Gaudium, in fruitione:

Sed Ira ac Dolor, in passione.

Vera rei cognitio, est Scientia; falsa, Error; Opinio, Suspicio.

The Soul of man.
The Soul is the life of the body, one in the whole:

Only Vegetative in Plants. Withal sensitive in Animals;

And also Rational in man.

This consists in three things;

In the understanding whereby it judges, and understands a thing good and
evil, or true or apparent;

In the will, whereby it chooses, and desires, or rejects or misliketh a
thing known.

In the Mind, whereby it pursues the good chosen; or avoideth the evil
rejected.

Hence is hope, and Fear, in the desire and dislike;

Hence is love and joy, in the fruition;

But Anger, and Grief, in suffering.

The true judgment of a thing is Knowledge; the false is Error, Opinion, and
Suspicion.

XLIV.
45


Deformes and Monstrosi.
Monstrosi and Deformes sunt abeuntes corpore a communi forma: ut sunt, immanis
Gigas, 1. nanus Pumilio, 2. Bicorpor, 3. Biceps, 4. and id genus Monstra.

His accensentur: Capito, 5. Naso, 6. Labeo, 7, Bucco, 8. Straho, 2. Obstipus,
10. Strumosus, 11. Gibbosus, 12. Loripes, 13. Cilo; 15. add Calvastrum, 14.

Deformed and Monstrous People.
Monstrous and deformed people, are those which differ in the body from the
ordinary shape; as are, the huge Giant, 1. the little Dwarf, 2. One with two
bodies, 3. One with two heads, 4. and such like Monsters.

Amongst these are reckoned, The jolt headed, 5. The great Nosed, 6. The
blubber-lipped, 7. The blub-cheeked, 8. The goggle-eyed, 9. The wry-necked, 10.
The great-throated, 11. The crump-backed, 12. The crump-footed, 13. the
steeple-crowned, 15 add to these the Bald-pated. 14.

XLV.
44


Hortorum cultura.
Hominem vidimus: Jam pergamus ad Victum hominis, and ad Arts Mechanicas, quae
huc faciunt.

Primus and antiquissimus Victus, Terrae Frnges:

Hinc primus Labor Adami, Horti-cultura.

Hortulanus (Olitor) 1 in Viridario fodit, Ligone 2. aut Bipalio, 3. facitque
Pulvinos 4. ac Plantaria; 5. quibus infert Semina and Plantas.

Arborator 6. in Pomario plantat Arbores, 7. inseritque Surculos 8.
Viviradicibus. 9.

Sepit Hortum, vel Cura, Muro, 10. aut Macerie, 11. aut Vacerra, 12. aut
Plancis, 13. aut Sepe 14. flexa e sudibus and vitilibus;

Vel Natura, Dumis and Vepribus. 15.

Ambulacris 16. and Pergulis 17. ornatur.

Fontanis 18. and Harpagio 19. rigatur.

The Dressing of Gardens.
We have seen Man; Now let us go on to Man's living, and to Handy-craft-Trades,
which tend to it.

The first and most ancient sustenance, were the fruits of the earth.

Hereupon the first labor of Adam, was the dressing of a garden.

The Gardener 1. diggeth in a garden-plot, with a Spade 2. or Mattock, 3. and
makes Beds 4. and places wherein to plant Trees; 5. on which he sets Seeds
and plants.

The Tree Gardener 6. planteth Trees, 7. in an Orchard, and grafteth siens 8.
in Stocks, 9.

He fenceth his Garden, either by Care, with a mound, 10. or a stone-wall, 11.
or a rail, 12. or Pales, 13. or a Hedge, 14. made of Hedge-stakes, and bindings;

Or by Nature, with Brambles and Briars. 15.

It is beautified with Walks 16. and Galleries, 17.

It is watered with Fountains 18. and a watering-pot. 19.

XLVI.
46


Agricultura.
Arator 1. jungit Boves 3. Aratro, 2. and, tenens laeva Stivam, 4. dextra
Rallam 5, qua amovet Glebas, 6. terram scindit Vomere, and Dentali, 7. antea
Fimo 8. Sercoratam, facitque Sulcos. 9.

Tum seminat Semen 10. and inoccat Occa. 1.

Messor 12. metit fruges maturas Falce messorid, 13. colligit Manipulos, 14.
and colligat Mergetes. 15.

Tritor 16. in area Horrei 17. triturat Frumentum Flagello (tribula) 18. jactat
Ventilabro, 19. atque ita, separata Palea and Stramine, 20. congerit in Saccos,
21.

Foeniseca 22, in Prato facit Foenum, desecans Gramen Falce foenaria, 23,
corraditque Rastro, 24. componit Acervos 26. Furca, 25. and convehit Vehibus
27. in Foenile. 28.

Husbandry.
The Plowman 1. yoketh Oxen 3. to a Plough, 2. and holds the Plow-stilt, 4
in his left hand and the Plow-staff 5. his right hand (with which he removes
clods 6.) he cutteth the Land (which was manured before with Dung 8.) with a
share, 7. and a Coulter, and makes furrows 9.

Then he sows the Seed 10. and harroweth it in with a Harrow. 11.

The Reaper 12. sheareth the Ripe Corn with a Sickle, 13. gathers up the
handfuls, 14. and binds the sheaves. 15.

The Thrasher 16. thrasheth Corn on the Barn floor 17. with a flayl, 18,
tosseth it in a winnowing-basket, 19. and so when the chaff, and the straw, 20.
are separated from it, he puts it into Sacks 21.

The Mower 22. makes Hay in a Meadow, cutting down Grass with a Sith, 23. and
raketh it together with a Rake, 24. he makes up cocks, 26 with a fork, 25. and
carries it on cariages 27. into the Hay-Barn. 28.

XLVII.
47


Pecuaria.
Agrorum cultus and res pecuaria, antiquissimis iemporibus, Regum, Heroum;
hodie tantum infimae Plebis, Cura est.

Bubulcus 1. evocat Armenta 2. e Bovilibus 3. Buccina (Cornu) 4. and pastum
ducit. Opilio (Pastor) 5. pascit Gregem, 6. instructus Fistula 7. and Pera, 8
ut and Pede 9. habens secum Molossum 10. munitum, contra Lupos, Millo 11.

Sues 12. ex harae aqualiculo saginantur.

Villica 13. mulget vaccae Vbera 14. ad Praesepe 15. super Mulctra 16. and
facit in Vase butyraceo 17. Butyrum e flore Lactis, and e Coagulo Caseos 18.

Ovibus detondetur Lana 19. ex qua conficiuntur variae Vestes.

Grasing.
Tillage of ground, and keeping Cattle, was in old time the Care of Kings and
Noblemen, at this day only of the meanest sort of People.

The Neat-heard 1. calls out the herds, 2 out of the beasthouses 3 with a
Horn, 4. and drives them to feed. The Shepherd 5. feeds his Flock 6. being
furnished with a Pipe 7. and a Scrip, 8 and a Sheep-hook 9. having with him a
great Dog 10. fenced with a Collar 11. against the Wolves.

Swine 12. are fed out of a Swine-Trough.

The Farmers wife 13. milketh the Udder of the Cow 14. at the Cratch 15. over a
Milk-pale 16. and makes Butter of Cream in a Churn 17. and Cheeses 18. of
Curds.

The Wool 19. is shorn from Sheep, whereof several garments are made.

XLVIII.
48


Mellificium.
Apes emittunt Examen 1 adduntque illi Ducem (Regem) 2

Examen illud, avolaturum, revocatur tinnitu Vasis aeneis 3. and includitur
novo Alveari 4

Struunt Cellulas sexangulares 5 easqne complent melligine, and faciunt Favos
6. e quibus Mel effluit 7.

Crates, igne liquati, abeunt in Ceram 8.

The making of Honey.
The Bees send out a swarm 1 and set over it, a Leader 2.

That swarm, being ready to fly away is recalled by the tinkling of a Brazen
vessel 3. and is put up into a new Hive 4.

They make little Cells with six corners 5 and fill them with Honey-dew, and
make Combs 6. out of which the Honey runs 7.

The Partitions being melted with fire, turn into Wax 8.

XLIX.
49


Molitura.
In Mola 1. currit Lapis 2. super lapidem 3. circumagente

Rota 4. and conterit per Infundibulum 5. infusa Grana, separatque Fursurem 6.
decidentem in Cistam 7. a Farina (Polline) elabente per Excussorium 8.

Talis mola, primum fuit, Manuruia 9.

deinde, Jumentaria 10.

tum aquatica 11. and Navalis 12.

tandem, Alata (pneumatica) 13.

Grinding.
In a Mill 1. A stone 2. runs upon a stone 3

A Wheel 4. turning them about, and grindeth corn poured in by a Hopper 5. and
parts the Bran 6. falling into the Trough 7. from the Meal slipping through a
Boulter 8.

Such a Mill, was first a Hand-mill 9.

then a Horse-Mill 10.

then a Water-Mill 11. and a Ship-mill 12.

and at last, a Windmill 13.

L.
50


Panificium.
Pistor 1. cernit Farinam Cribro 2. pollinario, and indit Mactrae 3.

tum affundit aquam, and facit Massam 4. depsitque spatha 5. lignea;

dein format Panes 6. Placentas 7. Similas 8. Spiras 9. etc.

Post imponit Palae 10. and ingerit Furno 11. per Praefurnium 12.

Sed prius eruit Rutabulo 13. ignem and Carbones, quos infra congerit 14.

Et sic pinsitur Panis, habens extra Crustam 15. intus Micam 16.

Bread-Baking.
The Baker 1. si^teth the Meal in a Rindge 2. and puts it into the
Kneading-trough 3.

Then he powers water to it, and makes Dough 4. and kneadeth it with a wooden
slice 5.

Then he makes Loaves 6. Cakes 7. Cimnels 8. Rolls 9. etc.

Afterward he sets them on a Peel 10. and puts them through ye Oven-mouth
12. into the Oven 11.

But first he pulls out the fire, and the coals with a Coal-Rake 13. which he
lays on a heap underneath 14.

And thus is Bread baked, having the Crust without 15. and ye Crumb within 16

LI.
51


Piscatio.
Piscator 1. captat pisces,

sive, in littore, Hamo, 2. qui ab arundine filo pendet, and cui inhaeret Esca;

sive Funda, 3. quae pendens Pertica, 4. aquae immittitur;

sive, in Cymba, 5. Reti, 6.

sive Nassa, 7. quae per Noctem demergitur.

Fishing.
The Fisherman 1. catches Fish,

either on the shore, with an Hook, 2. which hangs by a line from the
angling-rod, and on which the bait sticks;

or with a Cleek-Net, 3. which hanging on a Pole, 4. is put into the water;

or in a Boat, 5. with a Trammel-Net 6.

or with a Weel, 7. which is laid in the water by Night.

LII.
52


Aucupium.
Auceps 1. exstruit Aream, 2. superstruit illi Rete aucupatorium, 3. obsipat
Escam, 4. and, abdens se in latibulum 5. allicit aves, Cantu Illicum, qui
partim in area currunt, 6. parrim Caveis inclusi sunt; 7. atque ita reti obruit
tranfvolantes aves, dum se demittunt:

aut tendit Tendiculas, 8. quibus seipsas suspendunt and suffocant;

aut exponit viscatos calaemos 9. Amiti, 10. quibus si insident, implicant
Pennas, ut nequeant avolare, and decidunt in terram:

aut captat

Pertica, 11. vel Decipula. 12.

Fowling.
The Fowler 1. makes a bed, 2. spreads a Bird-net. 3. throws bait 4. upon
it, and hiding himself in a Hut 5. he allureth Birds, ^y the chirping of
^ure-birds, which part^op upon the bed, 6. and are partly shut in Cages, 7. and
thus he ^ntangleth Birds that fly over, in his Net, whilst they settle
themselves down;

or he sets Snares, 8. on which they hang, and strangle themselves;

or he sets ^ime-Twigs. 9. on a Perch, 10. upon which if they sit, they
enwrap their Feathers, that they cannot fly away, and fall down to the ground;

or he catches them with a Pole. and a Pit-fall. 12.

LIII.
53


Venatus.
Venator 1. venatur feras, dum sylvam cingit Cassibus, 2. tentis super Varos
(furcillas)

Canis sagax 4. vestigat feram, aut indagat. odoratu; Vertagus 5. persequitur.

Lupus, incidit in Foveam; 6. fugiens Cervus, 7. in plagas.

Aper 8 transverberatur Venabulo. 9.

Vrsus 10. mordetur a canibus, and tumditur Clava. 11.

Si quid effugit, evadit, 12. ut hic Lepus and Vulpes.

Hunting.
The Hunter 1. hunteth wilde-beasts, whilst he besetteth a Wood with Toyls, 2,
fretched out, upon Shoars 3. The Beagle 4. graceth the wildebeast, and finds
him out by the sent; the Tumbler, or Grayhound, 5. pursues it.

The Woolf, falls into a Pit; 6. the Stag, 7. as he runs away, into Toils.

The Boar, 8. is struck through with a Hunting-Spear, 9.

The Bear 10. is bitten by Dogs, and is knocked with a Club, 11.

If any thing get away, it escapes, 12. as here a Hare, and a Fox.

LIVE.
54


Lanionia.
Lanio 1. mactat Pecudem altilem, 2. (Vescula 3. non sunt vesca) prosternit
Clava, 4. vel jugulat Clunaclo, 5. excoriat (deglubit) 6. dissecatque, and
carnes in Macello 7. venum exponit.

Suem 8. glabratigne, vel aqua fervida, 9. and facit Pernas, 10. Petasones 11.
and Succidias: 12.

Praeterea, Farcimina varia, Faliscos, 13. Apexabones, 14. Tomacula, 15.
Botulos (Lucanicas.) 16.

Adeps 17. and Sebum 18. eliquatur.

Butchery.
The Butcher, 1. kills fat Cattle, 2.

(The lean 3. are not fit to eat) he knocks them down with an Ax, 4. or
cutteth their throat with a slaughter-knife 5. he fleaeth them, and cutteth
them in pieces, and hangs out the flesh, to sell in the Shambles 7.

He dresseth a swine 8. with fire, or scalding water, 9. and makes gammous,
10. Pestills 11. and Flitches, 12.

Besides, several Puddings, Chitterlings, 13. Bloodings, 14. Liverings, 15.
Sassadges 16.

The Fat 17. and 18. Tallow are melted.

LV.
55


Coquinaria.
Promus condus 1. profert e Penu 3. Obsonia. 2.

Ea accipit Coquus, 4. and coquit varia esculenta.

Aves 5. prius deplumat and exenterat;

Pisces 6. desquamat and exdorsuat;

Quasdam carnes lardo trajectat, open Creacentri 7.

Lepores 8. exuit.

Tum elixat Ollis 9: and Cacabis 10. in Foco 11. and despumat Ligula 12.

Elixata condit aromatibus, quae comminuit Pistillo 14. in Mortario 13: aut
terit Radula 15.

Quaedam assat Verubus 16. and Automato 17 vel super Craticulam 18.

Vel frigit Sartagine 19. super Tripodem 20.

Vasa Coquinaria praeterea funt Rutabulum 21. Foculus (Ignitabulum) 22. Trua
23. (in qua eluuntur Catini 24. and Patinae 25.) Pruniceps 26. Culter
incisorius 27. Qualus 28. Corbis 29. and Scopae 30.

Cookery.
The Yeoman of the Larder 1. brings forth Provision 2. out of the Larder. 3.

The Cook 4. takes them, and makes several Meats.

He first pulls off the Feathers, and draws the guts out of the Birds 5. he
scaleth, and splitteth Fish. 6.

He draws some flesh with lard, by means of a Larding-Needle 7.

He caseth Hares 8.

Then he boyleth them in Pots 9. and Kettles 10. on the Hearth 11. and scummeth
them with a Scummer 12.

He seasoneth things that are boiled, with Spices, which he poundeth with a
Pestil 14. in a Mortar 13. or grateth with a Grater 15.

He rosteth some on Spits 16. and with a Jack 17. or upon a Grid-iron 18.

Or fryeth them in a Drying Pan 19. upon a Brand-Iron 20.

Kitchen Utensils besides are a Cole-Rake 21. a Chafing Dish 22. a Trey 23. in
which Dishes 24. and Platters 25. are washed; A pair of Tongs 26. a
Shredding-Knife 27. a Colander 28. a Basket 29. and a Bezom 30.

LVI.
56


Vindemia.
Vinum crescit in Vinea, 1. ubi Vites propagantur, and viminibus ad arbores, 2.
vel ad Palos (ridicas) 3. vel ad Iuga, 4. alligantur.

Cum tempus vindemiandi adest, abscindunt Botros, and comportant Trimodiis, 5.
conjiciuntque in Lacum, 6. calcant pedibus, 7. aut tundunt ligneo Pilo, 8. and
exprimunt succum Torculari, 9. qui dicitur Mustum, 11. and, Orca 10. exceptum,
Vasis (Doliis) 12. infunditur, operculatur, 15. and in Cellas super Cantherios
14. abditum, in Vinum abit.

Edolio promitur, Siphone; 13. aut Tubulo, 16. (in quo est Epistomium) Vafe
relito.

The Vintage.
Wine grows in the Vineyard, 1. where Vines are propagated, mid-tied with
Twigs to Trees 2. or to props, 3. or frames, 4.

When the time of grape-gathering is come, they cut off the Bunches, and carry
them in measures of three-bushels 5. and throw them into a Vat, 6. and tread
them with their Feet, 7. or stamp them with wooden Pestill, 8. and squeese out
the juice in the Wine Press, 9. which is called must, 11 and being received in
a great Tub, 10. it is powered into Hogsheads, 12. it is stopped up 15. and
being laid close in Cellars upon settles 14. it becomes wine.

It is drawn out of the Hogshead, with a Cock, 13. or faucet, 16. (in which is
a Spigot) the Vessel being unbunged.

LVII.
57


Zythopoeia.
Ubi non habetur Vinum, bibitur Cerevisia (Zythus) quae ex Byne 1. and Lupulo,
2. in Aheno 3. coquitur; post in Lacus, 4. effunditur, and, frigefactum, Labris
5. defertur in Cellaria 6. and vasibus infunditur.

Vinum sublimatum, efecibus vini in Aheno, 7. cui superimpositum est Alembicum,
8. vi Caloris extractum, destillat per Tubum 9. in Vitrum.

Vinum and Cerevisia, acescens, fit Acetum. Ex Vino and Melle faciunt Mulsum.

Drawing.
Where Wine is not to be had they drink Beer, which is brewed of Malt 1. and
Hops, 2. in a Caldron 3. afterward it is powered into Vatts, 4, and when it is
cold. it is carried in Soes, 5. into the Cellar 6. and is put into Vessels.

Brandi-wine, extracted by the power of heat from dregs of wine in a Pan, 7.
over which a Limbeck 8. is placed, droppeth through a Pipe 9. into a Glass.

Wine and Beer, when they turn sour, become Vinegar.

They make Mede of Wine and Honey.

LVIII.
58


Convivium.
Cum apparatur Convivium, Mensa sternitur Tapetibus 1. and Mappa, 2. a
Triclinariis. qui praeterea apponunt Discos (Orbs) 3. Cochlearia, 4. Cultros
5. cum Fuscinulis, 6. Mappulas, 7. Panem 8. cum Salino. 9.

Fercula inferuntur in Patinis; 10. Artocreas, 19. in Lance.

Convivae, ab Hospite introducti 11. abluunt Manus e Gutturnio 12. vel Aquali,
14. super Malluvium 13. aut Pelvim, 15. terguntque Mantili; 16. tum assident
Mensae per Sedilia. 17.

Structor 18: deartuat dapes and destribuit.

Assaturis interponuntur Embammata in Scutellis. 20.

Pincerna 21. infundit Temetum, ex Vrceo 25, vel Cantharo 26. vel Lagena, 27.
in Pocula 22. and Vitrea 23. quae exstant in Abaco 24. and porrigit
Convivatori, 28. qui Hospitibus propinat.

A Feast.
When a Feast is made ready, the Table is covered with a Carpet 1. and a
Table-Cloth 2. by the Waiters, who besides lay the Trenchers, 3. Spoons, 4.
Knives, 5. with little Forks, 6. Table-Napkins, 7. Bread, 8. with a
Salt-sellar, 9.

Messes are brought in Plattets, 10. a Pie, 19. on a Plate.

The Guests, being brought in by the Host 11. wash their Hands out of a Laver,
12. or Ewer, 14. over a Hand-Basin, 13. or Bowl, 15. and wipe them with a
Hand-Towel, 16. then they fit at the Cable on Chaires. 17.

The Carver 18. breaks up the good cheer and divides it.

Sauces are set amongst Roste-meat in Sawsers. 20.

The Butler 21. fills strong-wine out of a Cruse 25. or Wine-pot 26. or
Flagon, 27. into Cups 22. or Glasses 23. which stand on a Cup-board 24. and he
reaches them to the Master of the Feast, 28. who drinks to his Guests.

LIX.
59


Tractatio Lini.
Linum and Cannabis aquis macerata, rursumque ficcata, 1. contunduntur
Frangibulo ligneo, 2. (ubi Cortices 3. decidunt) tum carminantur Carmine
ferreo, 4. ubi Stupa 5. separatur.

Linum purum alligatur Colo, 6. a Netrice, 7. quae sinistra trahit filum, 8.
dextera 12. Rhombum (girgillum) 9 vel Fusum 10. (in quo Verticillus 11.) versat.

Fila accipit, Volva; 13. inde deducuntur in Alabrum; 14. hinc vel Glomi 15.
glomerantur, vel Fasculi 16. fiunt.

The dressing of Line.
Line and Hemp, being rated in water, and dried again, 1. are braked with a
wooden Brake, 2. where the Shives 3. fall down, then they are heckled with an
Iron Heckle, 4. where the Tow 5. is parted from it.

Flax is tied to a Distaff, 6. by the Spinster, 7. which with her left hand
pulls out the Thread, 8. and with her right hand turns a wheel 9 or a
Spindle 10. upon which is a Wharl 11.

The Spool receives the Thread, 13. which is drawn thence upon a Yarn-windle;
14 hence either Clewes 15. are wound up, or Hanks 16. are made.

LX.
60


Textura.
Textor, diducit in Stamen Glomos, 1. and circumvolvit Iugo, 2. ac sedens in
Textrino, 3. pedibus calcat In silia. 4.

Liciis diducit Stamen, 5. and trajicit Radium, 6. in quo est Trama, ac densat
Pectine, 7. atque ita conficit Linteum. 8.

Sic etiam Pannifex facit Pannum e Lana.

Weaving.
The Webster, undoeth the Clewes, 1. into Warp, and wrappeth it about the Beam,
2. and as he sits in his Loom, 3. he treads upon the Treddles, 4. with his
Feet.

He divides the warp, 5. with yarn, and throws the Shuttle 6. through, in
which is the Woose, and strikes it close with the sley, 7. and so makes
Linen Cloth. 8.

So also the Clothier makes Cloth of Wool.

LXI.
61


Lintea.
Linteamina insolantur, 1. aqua perfusa 2. donec candefiant.

Ex iis Sartrix 3. suit Indusia 4 Muccinia 5. Gollaria 6. Capitia, etc.

Haec, si sordidentur, a Lotrice 7. rursum lavantur aqua five lixivio ac Sapone.

Linnen-Clothes.
Linnen-webs are bleached in ye Sun 1 with water poured on them 2. till they be
white.

Of them the Sempster 3. sows Shirts 4. Hand-kirchers 5. Bands 6. Caps, etc.

These, if they be fouled, are washed again by the Landress 7. in water or Lee,
and Soap.

LXII.
62


Sartor.
Sartor 1. discindit Pannum 2. Forfice 3. consuitque, Acu and filo duplicato 4.

Postea complanat Suturas Ferramento 5.

Sicque conficit Tunic as 6. Plicatas 7. in quibus infra est Fimbria 8. cum
Institis 9.

Pallia 10. cum Patagio 11. and Togas manicatas 12.

Thoraces 13. cum Globulis 14. and Manicis 15.

Caligas 16. aliquando cum Lemniscis 17.

Tibiala 18. Chirothecas 19. Amiculum 20. etc.

Sic Pellio, facit Pellicia, e Pellibus.

The Tailor.
The Tailor 1. cutteth Cloth 2. with Shears 3. and sows it together with a
needle and double thread 4.

Then he presses the Seams with a pressing-iron 5.

And thus he makes Coats 6. with Plaits 7. in which the Border 8. is below
with Laces 9.

Cloaks 10. with a Cape 11. and Sleeve Coats 12.

Doublets 13. with Buttons 14. and Cuffs 15.

Breeches 16. sometimes with Ribbons 17.

Stockings 18. Gloves 19. Muntero Caps 20, etc.

So the Furrier makes Furred garments of Furs.

LXIII.
63


Suitor.
Suitor 1. conficit, open Subulae 2. and fili picati 3. super Modulo 4. e Corio
5. (quod Scalpro sutorio 6. discinditur) Crepidas (Sandalia) 7. Calceos 8. (in
quibus spectatur superne Obstragulum, inferne Solea, and utrinque Ansae) Ocreas
9. and Perones 10.

The Shoo-Maker.
The Shoo-maker 1. makes Slippers 7. Shoes 8. (in which is seen above the
upper-Leather, beneath the Sole, and on both sides the Latchets) Boots 9. and
High-Shooes 10. of Leather, 5. (which is cut with a Cutting-Knife 6.) by means
of an Awl 2. and Lingel 3. upon a Last 4.

LXIII.
63


The Carpenter.
Hominis Victum and Amictum, vidimus: sequitur nunc, Domicilium ejus.

Primo habitabant in Specubus 1. deinde in Tabernaculis vel Tuguriis 2. tum
etiam in Tentoriis 3. demum, in Domibus.

Lignator Securi 4. sternit and truncat Arbores 5 remanentibus Sarmentis 6.

Clavosum Lignum findit Cuneo 7. quem adigit Tudite 8. and componit Strues 9.

Faber Lignarius asciat Ascia 10. Materiam, unde cadunt Assulae 11. and serrat
Serra 12. ubi Scobs 13. decidit;

Post elevat tignum super Canterios 14. open Trochleae 15. affigit Ansis 16. and
lineat Amussi 17.

Tum compaginat Parietes 18. and configit trabes Clavis trabalibus 19.

Faber lignarius.
We have seen Men's Food and clothing; now his dwelling follows.

At first they dwelt in Caves 1. then in Booths or Huts 2. and then again in
Tents 3. at the last in Houses.

The Woodman felleth and heweth down Trees 5. with an Ax 4. the Boughs 6.
remaining.

He cleaves Knotty wood with a Wedg 7. which he forces in with a Beetle 8.
and makes Wood-stacks 9.

The Carpenter squareth Timber with a Chip-Ax 10. whence Chips 11. fall, 12.
and saweth it with a Saw where the Saw-dust 13. falls down.

Afterward he lifts ye beam upon tressels 14. by yt help of a Pulley 15.
fasteneth it with Cramp-irons 16. and marketh it out with a Line 17.

Then he frames the Walls together, and fastneth the great pieces with pins 19.

LXIV.
64


Faber Murarius.
Faber murarius 1. ponit Fundamentum and struit Muros 2.

Sive e Lapidibus quos Lapidarius eruit in Lapicidina 3. and Latomus 4.
conquadrat ad Normam 5.

Sive e Lateribus 6. qui, ex arena and luto, aqua intritis, formantur, and igne
excoquuntur:

Dein crustat Calce, open Trullae 7. and Tectorio vestit 8.

The Mason.
The Mason 1. lays a Foundation, and builds Walls 2.

Either of Stones, which ye Stone-digger, gets out of the Quarry 3. and the
Stone-cutter 4. squareth by a Rule 5.

Or of Bricks 6. which are made of Sand and Clay steeped in water, and are
burned with are.

Afterward he plaistereth it with Lime, by means of a Trowel 7. and garnisheth
it with Rough-cast 8.

LXV.
65


Machinae.
Quantum duo far possunt, Palanga 1. vel Feretro 2. tantum potest unus,
trudendo ante se Pabonem 3. suspensa a collo Aerumna 4.

Plus autem potest, qui molem, Phalangis (Cylindris) 6. impofitam, provolvit,
Vecte 5.

Ergata 7. est columella, quae versatur circumeundo.

Geranium 8. habet Tympanum, cui inambulans quis, pondera navi extrahit, aut in
navem demittit.

Fistuca 9. adhibetur ad pangendum Sublicas 10. adtollitur, fune, tracto per
Trochleas 11 vel manibus, si ans as habet 12.

Engines.
One can carry as much by thrusting a Wheel-Barrow 3. before him, having an
Harness 4. hanged on his neck, as two can carry on a Cole-staff 1. or
Hand-barrow 2.

But he can do more, that rolleth a weight, laid upon Rollers 6. with a Lever 5.

A Wind-Beam 7. is a post which is turned by going about it.

A Crane 8. has a hollow-wheel, in which one walking, draws weights out of a
Ship, or lets them down into a Ship.

A Rammer 9. is used to fasten Piles 10. it is lifted up with a rope drawn by
Pullies 11 or with hands, if it have handles 12.

LXVI.
66


Domus.
Ante Ianuam Domus est Vestibulum 1. Ianua habet Limen 2. and Superliminare 3.
and utrinque Posts 4.

A dextris sunt Cardines 5. a quibus pendent Fores 6. a finistris Claustrum 7.
aut Pessulus 8.

Sub aedibus est Cavaedium 9. pavimento tessellate, 10. fulcitum columnis, 11.
in quibus Pcristylium 12. and Basis. 13.

Per Scalas 14. and Cochlidia 15. ascenditur in superiores contignationes.

Extrinsecus apparent Fenestrae, 16. and Cancelli (clathra) 17. Pergulae, 18.
Suggrundia, 19. and Fulcra 20. fulciendis muris.

In summo est Tectum, 21. [tegulis] 22 contectum Imbricibus vel Scandulis, 23.
quae incumbunt Tigillis, 24. haec Tignis. 25.

Tecto adhaeret Stillicidium. 26. Locus sine tecto dicitur Subdiale. 27.

In tecto sunt Meniana 28. and Coronides. 29.

A House.
The Porch 1. is before the door of yt house.

The door has a threshold 3. and a Lintel 2. and Posts 4. on both sides

The Hindges 5. are on the right hand upon which yt doors 6. hang, the Latch 7.
and the Bolt 8. are on the left hand.

Before the house is a fore-court 9. with a Pavement of square-stones, 10. born
up with pillars, 11 in which is the Chapter 12. and the Base. 13.

They go up into the upper-stories by Greeses, 14. and winding-stairs 15.

The Windows, 16. appear on the outside, and the Grates 17. the Galleries, 18.
the water-Tables, 19. and Butteresses 20. to bear up the Walls.

On the Top is the Roof, 21. covered with Tyles, 22. or Shingles, 23. which lie
upon Laths, 24. and these upon Rafters. 25.

The Eaves, 26. adhere to the Roof.

The place without a Roof is called an open Gallery. 27.

In the Roof are Juttings out 28. (knops) or and Pinnacles 29.

LVII.
68


Metallifodina.
Metalli-fossores 1. ingrediuntur Puteum fodinae, 2. Bacillo, 3. sive Gradibus,
4. cum Lucernis, 5. and effodiunt Ligone, 6. terram Metallicam, quae imposita
Corbibus, 7 extrahitur Fune 8. open Machinae tractoria. and defertur (9. in
Vstrinam, 10. ubi igne urgetur, ut profluat Metallum; 12. Scoriae, 11. seorsim
abjiciuntur.

A Mine.
Miners 1. go into the Grove, 2. by a Stick, 3. or by Ladders, 4. with
Lanthorns, 5. and dig out the Oar, with a Pick, 6. which being put into
Baskets, 7. is drawn out with a Rope 8. by the means of a Turn, 9. and is
carried to the Smelting-house, 10. where it is forced with fire that the Metal
may run out, 12. the Dross, 11. is thrown aside.

LXVII.
67


Faber Ferrarius.
Faber ferrarius 1. in Vstrina (Fabrica) 2. inflat ignem Folle, 3. quem
adtollit Pede, 4. atque ita candefacit Ferrum;

Deinde eximit Forcipe, 5. imponit Incudi, 6. and cudit Malleo, 7. ubi
Stricturae 8. exiliunt.

Et sic excuduntur Clavi, 9. Solea, 10. Canthi, 11. Catenae, 12. Laminae, Serae
cum Clavibus, Cardines, etc.

Ferramenta candentia restinguit in Lacu.

The Blacksmith.
The Blacksmith 1. in his Smithie (or forge) 2. blows the fire with a pair
of Bellows, 3. which he blows with his Feet, 4. and so heateth the Iron;

And then he takes it out with the tongs 5. lays it upon the Anvile, 6. and
strikes it with a Hammer, 7. where the Sparks 8. fly off.

And thus are hammered out Nails, 9. Horshooes, 10, Cart-strakes, 11. Chains,
12. Plates, Locks and Keys, Hindges, etc.

He quenches Hot-Irons in the Cool-trough.

LXIX.
69


Scriniarius and Tornator.
Arcularius 1. edolat Asseres 2. Runcina, 3. in Tabula, 4. deplanat Planula, 5.
perforat (terebrat) Terebra, 6. sculpit Cultro, 7. combinat Glutine and
Subscudibus, 8. and facit Tabulas, 9. Mensas, 10. Arcas (Cistas) 11. etc.

Tornio 12. sedens in Insili, 13. tornat Torno, 15. super Scamno tornatorio 14.
Globos, 16. Conos, 17. Icunculas 18. and similia Toreumata.

The Box-maker, and the Turner.
The Box-maker, 1. smootheth hewen-Boards 2. with a Plain, 3. upon a work
board, 4. he makes them very smooth with a little plain, 5. he boareth them
through with an augre, 6. carveth them with a Knife, 7. fasteneth them together
with Glue, and Cramp-Irons, 8. and makes Tables, 9. Boards, 10. Chests 11. etc.

The Turner 12. sitting over the treddle 13. turns with a throw, 15. upon a
Turners Bench 14., Bowls, 16. Tops, 17. Puppets, 18. and such like Turners work.

LXX.
70


Figulus.
Figulus, 1. sedens super Rota, 2. format ex Argilla, 3. Ollas, 4. Vrceos, 5.
Tripodes, 6. Patinas, 7. Vasa testaeea, 8. Fidelias, 9. Opercula, 10. etc.
postea excoquit in Furno, 11. and incrustat Lithargyro.

Fracta Olla, dat Testas. 12.

The Potter.
The Potter, 1. sitting over a Wheel, 2. makes Pots, 4. Pitchers, 5. Pipkins,
6. Platters, 7. Pudding-Pans, 8. Juggs, 9. Lids, 10. etc. of Potters-clay, 3.
afterward he baketh them in an Oven, 11. and glazeth them with White-Lead.

A broken-Pot, affords Pot-sheards. 12.

LXXI.
71


Parts Domus.
Domus distinguitur in Conclavia, ut sunt, Atrium, 1. Hypocaustum. 2. Culina,
3. Cella penuaria, 4. Coenaculum, 5. Camera, 6. Cubiculum 7. cum adstructo
Secessu (Latrina) 8.

Corbes 9. inserviunt rebus transferendis; Arcae, 10. (quae Clave 11.
recluduntur) adservandis illis.

Sub tecto est Solum [Pavimentum] 12.

In Area, 13, Puteus, 14. Stabulum 15. cum Balneo. 16.

Sub Domo, est Cella. 17.

The Parts of a House.
A House is divided into inner Rooms, such as are, the Entry, 1. the Stove, 2.
the Kitchen, 3 the Buttery, 4. the Dining Room, 5. the Gallery, 6. the
Bedchamber, 7. with a Privy made by it, 8.

Baskets 9. are of use for carrying things to and fro; and Chests, 10. (which
are made fast with a Key) 11. for keeping them.

The Floor is under the Roof 12.

In the Yard, 13. is a Well, 14. a Stable, 15. and a Bath. 16.

Under the House, is the Cellar. 17.

LXXII.
72


Hypocaustum cum Dormitorio.
Hypocaustum 1. ornatur Laqueari 2. and Parietibus, tabulatis, 3.

Illuminatur Fenestris; 4.

Calefit Furnace. 5.

Ejus Utensilia sunt, Scamna, 6. Sellae, 7. Mensae 8. cum fulcris 9. ac
scabellis, 10. and Culcitrae. 11.

Appenduntur etiam Tapetes. 12.

Pro levi cubatu, in Dormitorio, 13. est Lectus, (Cubile) 14. stratus in
Sponda, 15. super Stramentum, 16. cum Lodicibus, 17. and Stragulis 18.

Cervical 19. est sub capite.

Canopeo 20. Lectus tegitur.

Matula 21. est vesicae levandae.

The Stove, with the Bed-Room.
The Stove 1. is beautified with an Arched-Roof 2. and wainscotted walls, 3

It is enlighted with Windows; 4.

It is heated with an Oven. 5.

Its Vtensils are, Benches, 6. Stools, 7. Tables, 8. with Tressels, 9,
Footstools, 10. and Cushions, 11.

There are also Tapestry hanged. 12.

For soft lodging, in a sleeping-room, 13. there is a Bed 14. spread on a
Bed-stead, 15. upon a Straw-pad, 16. with Sheets, 17. and Cover lids, 18.

The Bolster 19. is under ones head.

The Bed is covered with a Canopy 20.

A Chamber Pot, 21. is for making water in

LXXIII.
73


Putei.
Ubi Fontes deficiunt, effodiuntur Putei, 1. and circumdantur Crepidine, 2. ne
quis incidat.

Inde hauritur aqua Vrnis (situlis) 3. pendentibus vel Pertica, 4. vel Fune,
5.) vel Catena; 6. idque aut Tollenone, 7. aut Girgillo, 8 aut Cylindro 9.
manubriato, aut Rota (tympano) 10. aut denique Antlia. 11.

Wells.
Where Springs are wanting, Wells are dug, 1. and they are compassed about
with a Brandrith, 2. lest any should fall in.

Thence is water drawn with Buckets 3. hanging either at a Pole, 4. or a Rope,
5. or a Chain; 6. and that either by a swipe, 7. or a windle, 8. or a Turn 9.
with a handle, or a wheel, 10. or to conclude by a Pump. 11.

LXXIV.
74


Balneum.
Qui lavari cupit aqua frigida, descendit in fluvium 1.

In Balneario 2. abluimus squalores, sive sedentes in Labro 3. sive
conscendentes in Sudatorium 4. and defricamur Pumice 6. aut Cilicio 5.

In Apodyterio 7. vestes exuimus, and praecingimur Castula (Subligari) 8.

Caput tegimus Pileolo 9. and pedes imponimus Pelluvio 10.

Balneatrix 11. ministrat aquam Situla 12. haustam ex Alveo 13. in quem defluit
e Canalibus. 14.

Balneator 15. scarificat Scalpro 16. and applicando Cucurbitas 17. extrahit
sanguinem subcutaneum, quem abstergit Spongia18.

The Bath.
He that desires to be washed in cold water goes down into a river 1.

In a Bathing-house 2. we wash off the filth either sitting in a Tub 3. or
going up into the Hot-house 4. and we are rubbed with a Pumice stone 6. or a
Hair cloth 5.

In ye stripping room 7 we put off our clothes, and have an Apron tied about us
8.

We cover our head with a Cap 9. and put our feet in a Basin 10.

The Bath-Woman 11. reaches water in a Bucket 12. 13. drawn out of ye trough
into which it runs out of Pipes. 14.

The Bath-keeper 15. lanceth with a Lancer 16., and by applying Cupping Glasses
17. he draws the blood betwixt the skin and the flesh, which he wipeth away
with a Sponge 18

LXXV.
75


Tonstrina.
Tonsor 1. in Tonstrina 2. tondet Crines and Barbam Forpice 3. vel radit
Novacula, quam e Theca 4. depromit; and lavat super Pelvim 5. Lixivio defluente
e Gutturnio, 6. ut and Sapone, 7. and tergit Linteo, 8. pectit Pectine 9.
crispat Calamistro 10.

Interdum Venam secat Scalpello 11. ubi Sanguis propullulat. 12.

Chirurgus, curat Vulnera.

The Barbers-shop.
The Barber 1. in the Barbers-shop 2. cutteth off the Hair and the Beard with a
pair of Sizzars 3. or shaveth with a Razor, which he takes out of his Case 4.
and he washes one over a Basen 5. with Sud, running out of a Laver, 6. and
also with Soap, 7. and wipeth him with a Towel, 8. combeth him with a Comb, 9.
and curleth him with a Crisping-Iron 10.

Sometimes he cutteth a vein with a Penknife 11. where the blood spirteth out.
12.

The Surgeon cures Wounds.

LXXVI.
76


Equile.
Stabularius (Equiso 1.) purgat a fimo 2. Stabulum;

Alligat Equum 3. Capistro 4. ad Praesepe, 5. aut, si mordax sit, constringit
Fiscella 6.

Deinde substernit stramenta 7.

Avenam ventilat Vanno 8. (paleis mixta, ac deprompta e cist a pabulatoria) 10.
eaque pascit equum, ut and Foeno 9. Postea aquatum ducit ad Aquarium 11.

Tum detergit Panno 12. depectit Strigili 15. insternit Gausape, 14. and Soleas
inspicit, an Calcei ferrei 13. firmis clavis haereant.

The Stable.
The Horse Keeper 1. cleanses the Stable from Dung; 2.

He tyeth a Horse 3. with a Halter 4. to the Manger, 5. or, if he be apt to
bite, he makes him fast with a Muzzel 6.

Then he streweth Litter 7. under him.

He winnoweth Oats with a Van 8. the Provender being mixed with Chaff, and taken
out of a Chest 10. and feeds the horse with them, as also with Hay 9.
Afterward he leads him to the wateringtrough 11. (to water.

Then he rubbeth him with a Cloth 12. combeth him with a Curry Comb 15.
covers him with an Housing cloth 14. and looks upon his Hoofs, whether the
Shoes 13. be fast with the nayls.

LXXVII.
77


Horologia.
Horologium dimetitur Horas.

Solarium 1. ostendit umbra Gnomonis 2. quota sit hora; sive in pariete, sive
in pyxide magnea 3.

Clepsydra 4. ostendit parts horae quatuor, fluxu arenae, olim aquae.

Automaton 5. numerat etiam nocturnas horas, circulatione rotarum, quarum
maxima trahitur a Pondere 6. and trahit ceteras:

Tum horam indicat, vel Campana 7. sonitu suo, percussa a malleolo: vel extra
Index 8. Circuitione sua.

Dialls.
A Dial measures hours:

A Sun Dial 1. shows by the shadow of the Cock 2. what a clock it is, either
on a wall, or a Compass 3.

An hourglass 4. shows the four parts of an hour, by the running of sand,
heretofore of water.

A Clock 5. numbereth also the hours of the night, by the turning of the
wheels, the greatest whereof is drawn by a weight 6. and draws the rest.

Then either the Bell 7. by its sound, being struck on by the hammer, or the
hand 8. without, by its motion about, shows the hour.

LXXVIII.
78


Pictura.
Picturae 1. oblectant Oculos, and ornant conclavia.

Pictor, 2. pingit effigiem Penicillo, 3. in Tabula, 4. super Pluteo; 5.
sinistra tenens Orbem pictorium, 6. in quo Pigmenta quae terebantur a Puero 7.
in marmore.

Sculptor and Statuarius, exsculpunt Statuas, 8. e Ligno and Lapide.

Caelator and Scalptor insculpit Aeri (Ligno) aliisque Metallis, Figuras 10.
and Characteres, Coelo. 9.

The Picture.
Pictures 1. delight the eyes, and adorn Rooms.

The Painter, 2. painteth an Image with a Pencil, 3. in a Table, 4. upon a
Case-frame; 5. holding his Pollet, 6. in his left hand, on which are the paints
which the Boy 7. ground on a Marble.

The Carver, and Statuarie carve Statues, 8. of Wood and Stone;

The Graver and the Cutter grave shapes 10. and Charracters with a graving
Chesill in Wood, Brass, and other Metals. 9.

LXXIX.
79


Specularia.
Specula 1. parantur, ut homines intueantur seipsos;

Perspicilla, 2. ut acrius cernat, qui habet Visum debilem.

Per Telescopium, 3. videntur remota, ut proxima;

in Microscopio, 4. Pulex apparet ut Porcellus.

Radii Solis accendunt ligna per Vitrum urens. 5.

Looking-glasses.
Looking-Glasses 1. are provided, that Men may see themselves;

Spectacles, 2. that he may see better, who has a weak sight.

Things a far off, are seen in a perspective-glass, 3. as things near at hand;

A Flea appears in a multiplying-glass, 4. like a little Hog.

The rays of the Sun burn Wood through a burningglass. 5.

LXXX.
80


Vietor.
Vietor, 1. amictus Praecinctorio, 2. facit e Virgis colurnis, 3. super Sellam
incisoriam 4. Scalpro bimanubriato, 5. Circulos; and ex ligno Assulas. 6.

Ex assulis conficit Dolia 7. and Cupas, 8. Fundo bino; tum Lacus, 9. Labra,
10. Pitynas 11. and Situlas, 12. fundo uno.

Postea vincit Circulis, 13. quos ligat open Falcis vietoriae, 14. Viminibus,
15. and aptat Tudite 16. ac Trudicula. 17.

The Cooper.
The Cooper, 1. having an Apron 2. tied about him, makes Hoops of Hassel-rods,
3. upon a cutting-block, 4 with a Spoke-shave, 5. and Lags 6. of Timber.

He makes Hogs-heads 7. and Pipes, 8. with two Heads, and Tubs, 9. Soes, 10.
Flaskets, 11. Buckets, 12. with one Bottom, of Lags.

Then he binds them with Hoops, 13. which he tyeth fast with small Twigs, 15.
by means of a Cramp-Iron, 14. and he fitteth them on with a Mallet 16. and a
Driver. 17.

LXXXI.
81


Restio, and Lorarius.
Restio 1. contorquet Funes, 2. agitatione Rotulae, 3. e Stupa, 4. vel Cannabi,
quam sibi circumdat.

Sic fiunt, primo Funiculi, 5. tum Restes, 6. tandem Rudentes. 7.

Lorarius 8. scindit de corio bubulo, 9. Loramenta, 10. Frena, 11. Cingula, 12.
Baltheos, 13. Crumenas, 14. Hippoperas, 15. etc.

The Roper, and the Cordwainer.
The Roper 1. twisteth Cords, 2. of Tow, or Hemp, 4. (which he wrappeth about
himself) by the turning of a Wheel. 3.

Thus there are made, first Cords, 5. then Ropes, 6. and at last Cables. 7.

The Cordwainer 8. cutteth great Thongs, 10. Bridles, 11. Girdles, 12.
Sword-Belts, 13. Pouches, 14. Port-mantles, 15. etc. out of a Beast-hide. 9.

LXXXII.
82


Viator.
Viator, 1. portat Humeris in Bulga, 2. quae non capit Funda 3. vel Marsupium.
4.

Tegitur Lacerna; 5. Manu tenet Baculum, 6. quo se fulciat;

Opus habet Viatico, ut and fido and facundo Comite. 7.

Propter Semitam, 8. nisi sit Callis tritus, non desetat Viam regiam. 9.

Avia 10. and Bivia 11. fallunt, and seducunt in Salebras; 12. non aeque,
Tramites 13. and Compita. 14.

Sciscitetigitur Obvios, 15. qua sit eundum; and caveat Praedones, 16. ut in
via, sic etiam in Diversorio, 17. ubi pernoctat.

The Traveller.
A Traveller 1. bears on his shoulders in a Budget, 2. those things which his
Satchell 3. or Pouch, 4. cannot hold.

He is covered with a Cloak; 5. He holds a Staff 6. In his Hand, wherewith to
bear up himself;

He has need of Provision for the way, as also of a pleasant Companion. 7.

Let him not forsake the High-road, 9. for a Foot-way, 8. unless it be a
beaten-Path.

By-ways, 10. and places where two ways meet 11. deceive, and lead men aside
into unevenplaces, 12. so do not bypath, 13. and crosse-wayes, 14.

Let him therefore enquire of those he meets, 15. which way he must go; and
let him take heed of Robbers, 16. as in the way, so also in the Inn, 17. where
he lodges all Night.

LXXX III.
83


Eques.
Eques 1. imponit Equo 2. Ephippium, 3. idque succingit Cingulo; 4.

Insternit etiam Dorsuale; 5.

Ornat cum Phaleris, Frontali, 6. Antilena, 7. and Postilena. 8.

Deinde insilit in equum, indit pedes Stapedibus, 9. sinistra capessit Lorum
(habenam) 10. Freni, 11. quo equum flecit and retinet;

Tum admovet Calcaria, 12. incitatque Virgula, 13. and coercet Postomide. 14.

Bulgae, 15. pendent ex apice ephipii, 16. quibus inseruntur Sclopi. 17.

Ipse eques induitur Chlamyde; 18. Lacerna a tergo revincta. 19.

Veredarius 20. cursim equo fertur.

The Hors-man.
The Horseman 1. sets a Saddle, 3. on his Horse, 2. and girdeth it on with
a Girth; 4.

He lays a Saddle-Cloth 5. also upon him.

He decketh him with Trappings, a Fore-stall, 6. a Breast-Cloth, 7. and a
Crupper. 8.

Then he gets upon his Horse, puts his Feet into the Stirrops, 9. takes
the Bridlerein, 10, 11, in his left hand wherewith he guides and holds the
Horse;

Then he puts to his Spurs, 12. and sets him on with a Switch, 13. and
holds him in with a Musroll. 14.

The Holsters, 15. hang down from the Pummel of the Saddle, 16. in which the
Pistols are put. 17.

The Rider is clad in a short-Coat, 18. his Cloak being tied behind him. 19.

A Post 20. is carried on Horseback a full Gallop.

LXXXIV.
84


Vehicula.
Traha 1. vehimur super nivibus and Glacie.

Vehiculum unirotum, dicitur Pabo; 2. birotum, Carrus; 3. quadrirotum Currus,
qui vel Sarracum, 4. vel Plaustrum. 5.

Parts Currus sunt, Tomo, 6. Iugum, 7. Compages, 8. Spondae; 9.

Tum Axes, 10. circa quos currunt Rotae, praefixis Paxillis 11. and Obicibus.
12.

Basis Rotae 13 est Modiolus, 14. ex quo prodeunt duodecim Radii; 15.

Hos ambit Orbile, compositum e sex Absidibus 16. and totidem Canthis. 17.

Currui imponuntur Corbes and Crates. 18.

Carriages.
We are carried on a Sled 1. over Snow, and Ice.

A Carriage with one Wheel, is called a Wheel-barrow; 2. with two Wheels a
Cart; 3. with four Wheels a Wagon, which is either a Timber-Wagon, 4. or a
Load-wagon. 5.

The parts of a Wagon are, the Neep, (or draught-tree,) 6. the Beam, 7. the
Bottom, 8. and the sides; 9.

Then the Axle-trees, 10. about which the Wheels run, the Lin-Pins 11. and
Axletree-staves, 12. being fastened before them.

The Nave, 13. is the ground-fast of the Wheel, 14. from which come twelve
Spokes; 15.

The Ring encompasseth these, which is made of six fellows 16 and as many
Strakes. 17

Hampiers, and Hurdles 18 are set in a Wagon.

LXXXV.
85


Vectura.
Auriga, 1. jungit Parippum 2. Sellario, 3. ad Temonem, de Helcio 4.
dependentibus Loris vel Catenis. 5.

Deinde insidet Sellario, agit ante se Antecessores 6. Scutic a, 7. and flectit
Funibus. 8.

Axem un git ex vase unguentario 9. Axungia; and inhibet rotam Sufflamine, 10.
in praecipiti descensu.

Et sic aurigatur per Orbitas. 11.

Magnates vehuntur Sejugibus 12. duobus Rhedariis, Curru pensili qui vocatur
Carpentum [pilentum;] 13.

Alii, Bijugibus, 14. Essedo. 15.

Arcerae 16. and Lecticae 17. portantur a duobus equis.

Per invios montes utuntur, loco Curruum, jumentis Clitellariis. 18.

Carrying to and fro.
The Coachman, 1. joyneth a Horse fit to match a Sadle-horse, 2, 3 to the
Coach-tree, with Thongs or Chains 5. hanging down from the Collar, 4.

Then he sits upon the Saddle-horse, and drives those that go before him 6.
with a whip, 7. and guides them with a String. 8.

He greaseth the Axletree with Axle-tree-grease out of a greasepot 9. and
stops the wheel with a trigen 10. in a steep descent.

And thus the Coach is driven along the wheel-ruts. 11.

Great Persons are carried with six Horses 12. by two Coach-men, in a
hanging-wagon, which a called a Coach; 13.

Others, with two Horses, 14. in a Chariot 15.

Horse-Litters 16, 17. are carried by two Horses.

They use Pack-horses instead of Wagons thorough Hills that are not passable.

LXXXVI.
86


Transitus aquarum.
Trajecturus flumen ne madefiat, excogitati sunt Pontes 1. pro Vehiculis, and
Ponticuli 2. pro Peditibus.

Si flumen hahet Vadum, 3. vadatur. 4. Struuntur etiam Rates, 5 ex compactis
tignis; vel Pontones, 6. ex trabibus consolidatis ne aquam excipiant.

Porro fabricantur Lintres (Lembi) 7. qui aguntur Remo, 8. vel Conto, 9. aut
trahuntur Remulco. 10.

Passing over Waters.
Lest he that is to pass over a River should be all wet, Bridges 1. were
invented for Carriages, and Foot-bridges 2. for Footmen.

If a River have a Foord, 3. it is waded over. 4. Flotes, 5. also are made of
Timber pinned together; or Ferrie-boats, 6. of planks laid close together, for
fear they should receive water.

Besides Scullers 7. are made, which are rowed with an Oar, 8. or a Pole, 9. or
haled with a haleing-rope. 10.

LXXXVII.
87


Natatus.
Solent etiam tranare aquas, super scirpeum fascem, 1 porro super inflatas boum
Vesicas; 2. deinde, libere jactatu manuum pedumque. 3.

Tandem didicerunt calcare aquam, 4. cingulotenus immersi, and vestes supra
caput gestando.

Vrinator, 5. etiam natate potest sub aqua, ut Piscis.

Swimming.
Men are wont also to swim over waters upon a bundle of flags, 1 and besides
upon blown Beast-bladders; 2. and after, by throwing their Hands and Feet 3.
abroad.

At last they learned to tread the water, 4. being plunged up to the
girdle-stead, and carrying their Clothes upon their Head.

A Diver, 5. can swim also under the water, like a Fish.

LXXXVIII.
88


Navis actuaria.
Navis instructa remis 1. est Vniremis 2. vel Biremis, etc. in qua Remiges, 3.
considentes per Transtra ad Scalmos, 4. aquam Remis pellendo, remigant. 5.

Proreta, 6. stans in Prora, and Gubernator 7. sedens in Puppi, tenensque
Clavum, 8. gubernant Navigium.

A Galley.
A Ship furnished with Oars 1. is a Barge 2. or a Foyst, etc. in which the
Rowers, 3. sitting on Seats 4. by the Oar-Rings, Row 5. by striking the water
with the Oars.

The Ship-master 6. standing in the Fore-castell, and the Steers-man 7. sitting
at the Stern and holding the Rudder, 8. steer the Vessel.

LXXXIX.
89


Navis oneraria.
Navigium 1. impellitur, non remis, sed sola vi ventorum.

In illo erigitur Malus, 2. undique ad Oras Navis funibus 3. firmatus; cui
annectuntur Antennae, 4. his, Vela, 5. quae ad Ventum expanduntur 6. and
Versoriis 7. versantur.

Vela sunt, Artemon, 8. Dolon, 9. and Epidromus. 10. In Prora est Rostrum. 11.

In Puppi, Signum (vexillum) 12. ponitur.

In malo est Corbis 13. Navis Specula, and supra galoam Aplustre 14.

Ventorum Index.

Anchora, 15. navis sistitur.

Bolide, 16. profunditas exploratur.

Navigantes deambulant in Tabulato. 17.

Nautae cursitant per Foros. 18.

Atque ita, etiam Maria trajiciuntur.

A Merchants-ship.
A Ship 1. is driven onward, not by Oars, but by the only force of the winds.

In it is a Mast 2. set up, fastened with Shrowds 3. on all sides to the
main-chains, to which the Sail-yards 4.. are tied, and the Sayls 5, to these;
which are spread open 6. to the wind, and are hoysed by bowlings 7.

The Sails are the main-Sayl, 8. the Trinket or fore-Sail, 9. the Misen-Sail,
or Poop-Sail. 10.

The Beak 11. is in the fore-deck.

The Ancient 12. placed in the Stern.

On the Mast is the fore-top 13. the watchtower of the Ship, and over the
foretop a Vane 14. lo show which way the wind stands.

The ship is stayed with an Anchor, 15.

The depth is fathomed with a Plumet. 16.

Passengers walk up and down the Decks, 17

The Seamen run to and fro through the Hatches. 18.

And thus, even Seas are passed over.

XC.
90


Naufragium.
Cum Procella 1. repent oritur, contrahunt Vela, 2. ne Navis ad Scopulos 3.
allidatur, aut in Brevia (Syrtes) 4. incidat.

Si non possunt prohibere, patiuntur Naufragium. 5.

Tum miserabiliter pereunt, Homines, Merces, omnia;

Neque hic quidquam Sacra anc hora, 6. Rudenti jacta.

Quidam evadunt, vel tabula 7. ac enatando, vel Scapha. 8.

Pars Mercium cum mortuis a Mari 9. in littora defertur.

Shipwreck.
When a Storm 1. arises on a sudden, they strike Sail, 2. lest the Ship
should be dashed against Rocks 3 or light upon shelves 4.

If they cannot hinder her, they suffer shipwreck. 5.

And then the Men, the wares, and all things are miserably lost.

Nor does the sheat-anchor, 6. being cast with a Cable, do any good.

Some escape, either on a Plank 7. and by swimming, or in the Boat. 8.

Part of the wares with the dead Folks is carried out of the Sea 9. upon the
shoars.

XCI.
91


Ars Scriptoria.
Veteres scribebant in tabellis ceratis aeneo Stilo, 1. cujus part cuspidata
2. exarabantur literae, plana 3. vero rursum obliterabantur.

Deinde literas pingebant subtili Calamo. 4.

Nos utimur anferina Penna, 5. cujus Caulem 6. temperamus Scalpello, 7. tum
intingimus Crenam in Atramentario, 8. quod obstruitur Operculo, 9. and Pennas
recondimus in Calamario. 10.

Scripturam ficcamus, charta bibula, vel arena scriptoria, ex Theca pulveraria.
11.

Et nos quidem, scribimus, a sinistra dextrorsum; 12. Hebraei a dextera
sinistrorsum; 13. Chinenses and Indi alii, a summo deorsum. 14.

Writing.
The Ancients writ in Tables done over with Wax with a brazen poitrel, 1 with
the shap end 2. whereof Letters were engraven, and rubbed out again with the
broad end 3.

Afterward they writ Letters with a small Reed. 4.

We use a Goose-quill, 5. the Stem 6. of which we make with a Penknife; 7.
then we dip the neb in an Ink-horn, 8. which is stopped with a Stopple, 9. and
we put up our Pens into a Pennar. 10.

We dry a writing with Blotting-paper, or Calis-sand, out of a Sand-box. 11.

And we indeed, write from the left hand, toward the right; 12. the Hebrews
from the right hand toward the left; 13. the Chinois, and other Indians, from
the top downwards. 14.

XCII.
92


Papyrus.
Veteres utebantur Tabulis faginis, 1. aut Foliis 2. ut and Libris 3. Arborum,
praesertim arbusculae Aegyptiae, cui nomen erat Papyrus.

Nunc, est in usu Charta, quem Chartopaeus, in mola papyracea, 4. conficit e
linteis vetustis, 5. in pulmentum contusis, 6. quod, Normulis haustum, 7.
diducit in plagulas, 8. aerique exponit, ut siccentur.

Harum XXV. faciunt Scapum, 9. XX. Scapi Volumen minus, 10. horum X. Volumen
majus. 11.

Diu duraturum, scribitur in Membrana. 12.

Paper.
The ancients used Beech-Bords, 1. or Leaves 2. as alss Barks 3. of Trees,
especially of an Egyptian shrub, which was called Papyrus.

Now Paper is in use, which the Paper-maker makes in a Paper-mill, 4. of
Linnen-rags, 5. stamped to Mash, 6. which being taken up in Frames, 7. he
spreads into Sheets, 8. and sets them in the air that they may be dried.

Twenty five of these make a quire, 9. twenty quires a Ream, 10. and ten of
these a Bale of Paper. 11.

That which is to last long is written in Parchment. 12.

XCIII.
93


Typographia.
Typographus habet aeneos Typos, magno numero, distributos per Loculamenta. 5.

Typotheta 1. eximit illos singulatim, and componit (secundum Exemplar, quod
Retinaculo 2. sibi praefixum habet) verba Gnomone, 3. do nec fiat Versus; hos
indit Formae, 4. do nec fiat Pagina; 6. has iterum tabula compositoriae, 7.
eosque coarctat Marginibu ferreis, 8. open Cochlearum, 9. ne dilabantur; ac
subjicit Prelo. 10.

Tum Impressor, open Pilarum, 11. illinit Atramento impressorio; superimponit,
inditas Operculo 12. Chartas, quas, in Tigello 13. subditas Trochleae, 14. and
Sucula 15. impressas, facit typos imbibere.

Printing.
The Printer has Copper Letters in a great number put into Boxes. 5.

The Compositor 1. takes them out one by one, and (according to the Copy,
which he has fastened before him in a Visorum 2.) composeth words in a
composing-stick, 3. till a Line be made, he puts these in a Gally, 4. till a
Page 6. be made, and these again in a Form, 7. and he locketh them up in Iron
Chases, 8. with coyns, 9. lest they should drop out, and puts them under the
Press, 10.

Then the Presse-man beats it over with Printers-Ink by means of Balls, 11.
spreads upon it the Papers, put in the Frisket, 12. which being put under the
Spindle, 14. on the Coffin, 13. and pressed down with the Bar 15. he makes to
take Impression.

XCIV.
94


Bibliopolium.
Bibliopola 1. vendit Libros in Bibliopolio, 2. quorum conscribit Catalogum. 3

Libri disponuntur per Repositoria, 4. and ad usum, super Pluteum 5. exponuntur.

Multitudo Librorum, vocatur Bibliotheca 6.

The Book-sellars Shop.
The Bookseller 1. sells Books in a Booksellers-shop, 2 of which he writes
a Catalogue. 3.

The Books are placed on Shelves, 4. and are laid open for use upon a Desk 5.

A multitude of Books is called a Library. 6.

XCV.
95


Bibliopegus.
Olim agglutinabant Chartam chartae, convolvebantque eas in unum Volumen. 1.

Hodie compingit Libros Compactor, dum Chartas aqua glutinosa maceratas,
terget; 2. deinde complicat, 3. malleat 4. tum consuit, 5. comprimit Prelo, 6.
(quod habet duas Cochleas 7.) dorso conglutinat, rotundo Cultro 8. demarginat,
tandem Membrana vel Corio 9. vestit, efformat, and affigit Vncinulos. 10.

The Book-binder.
In times past they glued Paper to Paper, and rolled them up together into one
Roll. 1.

At this day the Book-binder binds Books, whilst he wipeth 2. over Papers
steept in Gum-water; and then foldeth them together, 3. beats with a hammer,
4. up, 5. then stitcheth them presses them in a Press, 6. which has two
Scrues 7 glueth them on the back, cutteth off the edges with a round Knife, 8.
and at last covers them with Parchment or Leather, 9. makes them handsome,
and sets on Clasps. 10.

XCVI.
96


Liber.
Liber, quoad formam exteriorem, est vel in Folio, 1. vel in Quarto, 2. in
Octavo, 3. in Duodecimo, 4. vel Columnatus, 5. vel Linguatus, 6. cum Clausuris
aeneis, 7. vel Ligulis, 8. and Bullis angularibus. 9.

Intus sunt Folia 10. duabus Paginis, aliquando Columnis divisa, 11. cumque
notis marginalibus. 12

A Book.
A Book, as to its outward shape is either in Folio, 1. or in Quarto, 2. in
Octavo, 3. in Duodecimo 4. either made to open Side-wise, 5. or Long-wise, 6.
with Brazen Clasps, 7. or Strings, 8. and Square-bosses. 9.

Within are Leaves 10. with two Pages, sometimes divided with Columns 11. and
Marginal Notes. 12.

XCVII.
97


Schola.
Schola 1. est officina, in qua novelli animi ad virtutem formantur, and
distinguitur in Classes.

Praeceptor, 2. sedet in Cathedra; 3. Discipuli, 4. in Subsellies; 5. ille
docet, hi discunt.

Quaedam praescribuntur illis creta in tabella. 6.

Quidam sedent ad mensam, and scribunt: 7. ipse corrigit 8. Mendas.

Quidam stant, and recitant memoriae mandata. 9.

Quidam confabulantur, 10. ac gerunt se petulantes and negligentes: hi
castigantur Ferula (baculo) 11. and Virga. 12.

A School.
A School 1. is a shop, in which Young wits are fashioned to virtue, and it is
distinguished into Forms.

The Master, 2. sits in a Chair; 3. the Scholars, 4. in Forms; 5. he
teaches, they learn.

Some things are writ down before them with Chalk on a Table. 6.

Some sit at a Table, and write: 7. he mendeth 8. their Faults.

Some stand and rehearse things committed to memory. 9.

Some talk together, 10. and behave themselves wantonly, and carelessly; these
are chastised with a Ferula 11. and a Rod. 12.

XCVIII.
98


Museum.
Museum 1. est locus, ubi Studiosus, 2. secretus ab hominibus, solus sedet,
Studiis deditus, dum lectitat Libros, 3. quos penes se super Pluteum 4.
exponit, and ex iliis in Manuale 5. suum optima quaeque excerpit, aut in illis
Litura, 6. vel ad marginem Asterisco, 7. notat.

Lucubraturus, elevat Lychnum (candelam) 8. in Candelabro, 9. qui emungitur
Emunctorio; 10. ante Lychnum collocat Vmbraculum, 11. quod viride est, ne
hebetet oculorum aciem: opulentiores utuntur Cereo, nam Candela sebacea foetet
and fumigat.

Epistola 12. complicatur, inscribitur, 13. and obsignatur. 14.

Noctu prodiens, utitur Laterna 15. vel Face.

The Study.
The Study 1. is a place where a Student, 2. a part from men, sits alone,
addicted to his Studies, whilst he reads Books, 3. which being within his
reach, he lays open upon a Desk 4. and picketh all the best things out of
them into his own Manual, 5. or marketh them in them with a dash, 6. or a
little star, 7. in the Margent.

Being to sit up late, he sets a Candle, 8. on a Candle-stick, 9. which is
snuffed with Snuffers; 10. before the Candle he places a Screen, 11. which is
green, that it may not hurt his eyesight; richer persons use a Taper, for a
Tallow-Candle sticks, and smoaketh.

A Letter 12. is wrapped up, writ upon, 13. and sealed. 14.

Going abroad by night, he makes use of a Lantorn 15. or a Torch. 16.

XCIX.
99


Arts sermonis.
Grammatica, 1. versatur circa Literas, 2. ex quibus componit Voces (verba 3.
easque docet recte eloqui, scribere, 4. construere, distinguere [interpungere]

Rhetorica 5. pingit 6. quasi rudem formam 7. Sermonis Oratoriis Pigmentis, 8.
ut sunt Figurae, Elegantiae, Adagia (Proverbia) Apophthegmata, Sententiae
(Gnomae) Similia Hieroglyphica, etc.

Poesis 9. colligit hos Flores Orationis 10. and colligat quasi in Corollam,
11. atque ita, faciens e prosa ligatam Orationem, componit varia Carmina, and
Hymnos (Odas) ac propterea coronatur Lauru. 12:

Musica 13. componit Notis Melodias, 14. quibus Verba aptat, atque ita cantat
sola vel Concentu (Symphonia) aut voce, aut instrumentis Musicis. 15

Arts belonging to the Speech.
Grammar, 1. is conversant about Letters, 2. of which it makes words 3. and
teaches how to utter write, 4. put together, and part them rightly.

Rhetoric, 5. does as it were paint 6. a rude Form 7. of Speech with Oratory
Flourishes, 8. such as are, Figures, Elegancies, Adagies, Apophthegms,
Sentences, Similies Hieroglyphics, etc.

Poetry 9. gethereth the Flours of Speech 10. and tyeth them as it were into a
little Garland, 11. and so making of Prose a Poem, it makes several sorts of
Verses, and Odes, and is therefore crowned with a Laurel. 12.

Music 13. sets Tunes, 14. with Pricks, to which it sits words, and so
sings alone, or in Consort, or by voice, or Musical Inurument. 15.

C.
100


Instrumenta Musica.
Musica Instrumenta sunt, quae edunt Vocem: Primo, cum pulsantur, ut Cymbalum
1. Pistillo, Tintinnabulum 2. intus globulo ferteo; Crepitaculum, 3.
circumversando; Crembalum, 4. ori admotum, digito; Tympanum 5. and Ahenum, 6.
Clavicula, 7. ut and Sambuca, 8. cum Organo pastoritio; 9. and Sistrum
(Crotalum.) 10.

Secundo, in quibus Chordae intenduntur and plectuntur, ut Nablium, 11. cum
Clavicordio, 12. utraque manu; Dexrera tantum, Testudo (Chelys) 23. (in qua
Jugum, 14. Magadium, 15. and Verticilli, 16. quibus Nervi 17. intenduntur super
Ponticulum 18.) and Cythara; 19. Pandura, 20. Plectto; 21. and Lyra, 23. intus
rota quae versatur: Iu singulis, Dimensiones 22. sinistra tanguntur

Tandem quae inflantur, ut, Ore, Fistula (Tibia) 24. Gingras, 25. Tibiae
utricularis, 26. Lituus, 27. Tuba, 28. Buccina; 29. vel Follibus ut, Organum
pneumaticum. 30

Musical Instruments.
Musical Instruments are those which make a sound: First, when they are beaten
upon, as a Cymball 1. with a Pestill, a little Bell 2. with an Iron Pellet
within; a Rattle, 3. by tossing it about; a Jewes-trump. 4. being put to the
mouth, with the finger; a Drum 5. and a Kettle, 6. with a Drum-stick, 7. as
also the Dulcimer, 8. with the shepheards-harp; 9 and the Tymbrell. 10.

Secondly, upon which strings are stretched, and struck upon, as the Psalteri,
11. and the Virginals, 12. with both hands; the Lute 13. in which is the Neck,
14 the Belly, 15. the Pegs, 16. by which the Strings, 17. are stretched upon
the Bridge, 18. the Cittern; 19. with the right hand only, the Vial, 20. with
a Bow; 21. and the Harp, 23. with a wheel within, which is turned about; the
Stops, 22. in every one are touched with the left hand.

At last, those which are blown, as, with the mouth, the Flute 24. the Shawm,
25. the Bag-pipe, 26. the Cornet, 27. the Trumpet; 28: 29. or with bellows,
as, a pair of Organs: 30.

CI.
101


Philosophia.
Physicus, 1. speculatur omnia Dei Opera in Mundo.

Metaphysicus, 2. perscrutatur rerum Causas and Effecta.

Arithmeticus, computat numeros addendo, subtrahendo, multiplicando, dividendo;
idque vel Cipris 3. in Palimpsesto, vel Calculis 4. super Abaeum:

Rustici numerant 5. Decussibus X. and Quincuncibus V. per Duodenas, Quindenas,
and Sexagenas.

Philosophy.
The Naturalist, 1. vieweth all the works of God in the World.

The Supernaturalist, 2 searches out the Causes, and Effects of things.

The Arithmetician, reckons numbers, by adding, substracting, multiplying,
and dividing; and that either by Ciphers 3. on a slate, or by Counters 4. upon
a Deck:

Countrey-people reckon 5. with Figures of tens X. and Figures of five V. by
twelves, Fifteens, and threescores

CII.
102


Geometria.
Geometra. metitur altitudinem Turris, 1....2. aut distantiam Locorum, 3....4.
sive Quadrante, 5. five Radio. 6.

Figuras rerum designat Lineis, 7. Angulis, 8. and Circulis, 9. ad Regulam, 10.
Normam 11. and Circinum. 12.

Ex his oriuntur Cylindrus, 13. Trigonus, 14. Tetragonus, 15. and aliae figurae.

Geometry.
A Geometrician measures the height of a Tower, 1...2. or the distance of
places, 3....4. either with a Quadrate, 5. or a Jacobs-staff. 6.

He marketh out the Figures of things, with Lines, 7. Angles, 8. and Circles,
9. by a Rule, 10. a Squire, 11. and a pair of Compasses. 12.

Out of these a rise an Oval, 13. a Triangle, 14. a quadrangle 15. and other
Figures.

CIII.
103


Sphaera caelestis.
Astronomia considerat Astrorum motus, Astrologia eorum effectus.

Coeli globus volvitur super Axem 1. circa globum Terrae, 2. spacio XXIV.
horarum.

Axem utrinque finiunt Stellae Polares sive Poli, Arcticus 3. and Antarcticus.
4.

Coelum undique est stellatum: Stellarum fixarum numerantur plus mill; Siderum
vero Septentrionalium, XXI. Meridionalium, XVI. Add Signa XII. Zodiaci, 5.
quodlibet graduum XXX. quorum nomina sunt, Aries, Taurus, Gemini Cancer, Leo,
Virgo, Libra, Scorpius, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces.

Sub hoc, cursitant Stellae errantes VII. quas vocant Planetas, quorum via est,
Circulus in medio Zodiaci, dictus, Ecliptica. 6.

Alii Circuli sunt, Horizon, 7. Meriaianus, 8. Equator; 9, duo Coluri, alter
Aequinoctiorum, 10. (Verni quando ingreditur Autumnalis quando ingreditur)
alter Solstitiorum, 11. (Aestivi quando ingreditur, Hyberni quando ingreditur;)
duo Tropici, Tr. Cancri, 12. Tr. Capricorni; 13. and duo Polares. 14...15.

The celestial sphaere.
Astronomy considers the motion of the Stars, Astrology the effects of them.

The Globe of Heaven is turned about upon an Axle-tree 1. about the globe of
the earth, 2. in the space of XXIV hours

The Polar stars, or Poles, the Arctick 3. and Antartick. 4. conclude the
Axle-tree at both ends.

The Heaven is full of Stars every where. There are reckoned above a thousand
fixed-stars; but of constellations toward the North, XXI. toward the South,
XVI. Add to these the XII. Signs of the Zodiaque, 5. every one of XXX.
degrees, whose names are, Aries, Taurus, Gemini. Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
Scorpius, Sagittarius, Capricor. Aquarius, Pisces.

Under this the seven wandering Stars, VII. which they call Planets, move,
whose way is a circle in the middle of the Zodiac, called the Ecliptic. 6.

Other circles are the Horizon, 7. the Meridian, 8. the Equator; 9. the two
Colures, the one of the Aequinocts, 10 (of the Spring, when the enters into
Autumnal, when it enters into) the other of the Solstices, 11. (of the
Summer, when the enters into of the Winter when it enters into ^) the two
Tropicks, the Tropic of Cancer, 12. the Tropic of Capricorn, 13 and the two
Polar circles. 14...15.

CIV.
104


Planetarum Adspectus.
Luna percurrit Zodiacum singulis Mensibus.

Sol, Anno;

Mercurius and Venus, circa Solemn, ille CXV, haec DLXXXV. Diebus.

Mars, Biennio; Jupiter, fere duodecim; Saturnus, tringinta, annis.

Hinc vary inter se convenient and se mutuo adspiciunt:

Ut hic, sunt and in Conjunctione, and in Oppositione, and in Trigono, and in
Quadra tura, and in Sextili.

The Aspects of the Planets.
The Moon runs through the the Zodiaque every Month.

The Sun, in a year;

Mercury anv Venus, about the Sun, the one in a hundred and fifteen, the other
in 585. days.

Mars, in two years; Jupiter, in almost twelve; Saturn, in thirty years.

Hereupon they meet variously amongst themselves, and have mutual aspects one
toward another.

As here the and are in Conjunction; and in Opposition, and in a Trine,

Aspect, and in a Quartile, and in a Sextile.

CV.
105


Phases Lunae.
Luna, lucet, non sua propria, sed a Sole mutuata Luce.

Nam, altera ejus medietas semper illuminatur, altera manet caliginosa.

Hinc videmus, in conjunctione Solis, 1. obscuram, imo nullam; in Oppositioue,
5. totam and lucidam (and vocamus Plenilunium;) alias dimidiam, (and dicimus
primam 3. and ultimam 7. Quadram)

Caeteroqui crescit 2...4. aut decrescit, 6...8. and vocatur Falcata vel
gibbosa.

The Apparitions of the Moon.
The Moon, shines not by her own Light, but that which is borrowed of the Sun.

For the one half of it is always enlightened, the other remains darkish.

Hereupon we see it in Conjunction with the Sun, 1. to be obscure, almost none
at all; in Opposition, 5. whole and clear, (and we call it the Full-Moon;)
sometimes in the half, (and we call it the ptime 3. and last quarter; 7.

Otherwise it waxes 2....4. or waneth 6....8. and is said to be horned or more
than half round.

CVI.
106


Eclipses.
Sol, est fons Lucis, illuminans omnia: sed non penetrantur Radiis ejus Corpora
opaca, Terra 1. and Luna; 2. nam jaciunt umbram, in locum oppositum.

Ideo, cum Luna incidit in umbram Terrae, 2. obscuratur: quod vocamus Eclipsin
[deliquium] Lunae.

Cum vero Luna currit inter Solemn and Terram, 3. obtegit illum umbra sua: and
hoc vocamus Eclipsin Solis, quia nobis adimit prospectum Solis and lucem ejus;
nec tamen Sol aliquid patitur, sed Terra.

The Eclipses.
The Sun is ye fountain of light, inlightning all things; but the Earth 1. and
the Moon 2. being shady Bodies, are not pierced with its Rays, for they cast a
shadow upon the place just over against them.

Therefore, when ye Moon lights into the shadow of the Earth it is darkened 2.
which we call an Eclipse, or defect.

But when the Moon runs betwixt the Sun and the Earth 3. it covers it with
its shadow: and this we call the Eclipse of the Sun, because it takes from us
the sight of the sun, and its light; neither does the Sun for all that fuffer
any thing, but the Earth.

CVII. a.
107. a


Sphaera terrestris.
Terra est rotunda, fingenda igitur duobus Hemisphaeriu. a...b

Ambitus ejus, est graduum CCCLX. (quorum quisque facit Milliaria Germanica XV)
seu Milliarum VMCCCC: and tamen est Punctum, collata cum Orb, cujus Centrum
est.

Longitudinem ejus dimetiuntur Climatibus, 1. Latitudinem, lineis Parallelis. 2.

Eam ambit Occanus, 3. and perfundunt V Maria, Mediterraneum, 4. Balticum, 5.
Erythraeum, 6. Persicum, 7. Caspium. 8.

The terrestrial Sphere.
The earth is round, and therefore to be represented by two Hemispheres, a...b

The circuit of it is three hundred and sixty degrees (whereof every one makes
fifteen German miles) or 5400 miles; and yet it is but a prick, being compared
with ye world, whereof it is the Center.

They measure the longitude of it by Climates, and the Latitude by Parallels. 2.

The Ocean 3. compasses it about, and five Seas wash it, the Mediterrane Sea,
4. the Baltic Sea, 5. the Red Sea, 6. the Persian Sea, 7. and the Caspian Sea,
8.

CVII. b.
107. b


Sphaera terrestris.
Distribuitur in Zonas V. quarum duae Frigidae, 9..9. sunt inhabitabiles; duae
Temperatae, 10...10. and Torrida, 11. habitantur.

Ceterum divisa est in tres Continentes: Nostram, 12. quae subdividitur in
Europam, 13. Asiam, 14 and Africam, 15 in Americam, 16...16 cujus incolae nobis
sunt Antipodes; and in Terram Australem, 17..17 adhuc incognitam.

Habitantes sub Arcto, 18. semestrales habent Noctes Diesque.

In maribus, Infinitae natant Insulae.

The terrestrial Sphere.
It is divided into 5 Zones, whereof the 2 frigid ones 9. 9 are inhabitable, the
2 Temperate ones, 10...10 and ye Torrid one, 11. habitable.

Besides it is divided into three Continents; this of ours, 12. with is
subdivided into Europe, 13 Asia, 14. Africa, 15. America, 16...16. (whose
inhabitants are Antipodes to us) and the South. land 17...17 yet unknown.

They that dwell under the North Pole, 18. have ye days and nights 6 months long.

Infinite Islands float in the Seas.

CVIII.
108


Europa.
In Europa nostra, sunt Regna primaria,

Hispania, 1.

Gallia, 2.

Italia, 3.

Anglia (Britannia) 4.

Scotia, 5.

Hibernia, 6.

Germania, 7.

Bohemia, 8.

Hungaria, 9.

Croatia, 10.

Dacia, 11.

Sclavonia, 12.

Graecia, 13.

Thracia, 14.

Podolia, 15.

Tartaria, 16.

Lituania, 17.

Polonia, 18.

Belgium, 19.

Dania, 20.

Norvegia, 21.

Suecia, 22.

Lappia, 23.

Finnia, 24.

Livonia, 25.

Borussia, 26.

Moscovia, 27.

Russia, 28.

Europe.
The chief Kingdoms in our Europe, are

Spain, 1.

France, 2.

Italy, 3.

England, 4.

Scotland, 5.

Ireland, 6.

Germany, 7.

Bohemia, 8.

Hungary, 9.

Croatia, 10.

Dacia, 11.

Sclavonia, 12.

Greece, 13.

Thrace, 14.

Podolia, 15.

Tartary, 16.

Lituania, 17.

Poland, 18.

The Netherlands, 19.

Denmark, 20.

Norway, 21.

Swethland, 22.

Lapland, 23.

Finland, 24.

Lifland, 25.

Prussia, 26.

Moscovy, 27.

and Russia, 28.

CIX.
109


Ethica.
Vita haec, est via, sive Bivium, simile Literae Pythagoricae Y; sinistro
tramite latum 1. dextro angustum: 2. ille Vitii 3. est, hic Virtutis 4.

Adverte, juvenis, 5. Herculem imitare. Sinistram linque, Vitium aversare:
speciosus Aditus, sed turpis and praeceps Exitus, 7.

Dextera ingredere, utut spinosa: 8. nulla via invia Virtuti; Sequere, quo
ducit Virtus, per angusta ad augusta, ad arcem Honoris, 9.

Medium tene and rectum tramitem; tutissimus ibis.

Cave excedas ad dextram. 10. Affectus, equum ferocem, 11. compesce freno, 12.
ne praeceps fias.

Cave deficias ad Sinistram, 13. segnitie asinina: 14. sed progredere
constanter, pertende ad finem, and coronaberis. 15.

Moral Philosophy.
This Life is a way, or a place divided into two ways, like Pythagoras 's
letter Y; broad 1. on the left hand track, narrow 2. on the right; that belongs
to Vice 3. this to Virtue, 4.

Mind, Young man, 5. imitate Hercules. leave ye left hand way, turn from Vice.
the Entrance is fair, but the End, 7. is ugly and steep down.

Go on the right hand, though it be thorny: 8. no way is unpassable to Virtue;
follow whither Virtue leads, through narrow places to stately places, to the
tower of honor, 9

Keep the middle and straight path and thou shall go very safe.

Take heed thou do not go too much on the right hand: 10. Bridle in, 12. the
wild horse, 11. of Affection, lest thou fall down headlong.

See thou do not go amiss on the left hand, 13. in an Ass-like sluggishness,
14. but go onwards constantly, persevere to the end, and thou shall be (...),
15.

CX.
110


Prudentia.
Prudentia, 1. omnia circumspectat, ut Serpens, 2. nihilque agit, loquitur, and
cogitat in cassum.

Respicit, 3. tanquam in Speculum, 4. ad Praeterita; and prospicit, 5. tanquam
Telescopio, 7. Futura seu Finem: 6. atque ita perspicit, quid egerit, and quid
agendum restet.

Actionibus suis praefigit Scopum, Honestum, Vtilem, simulque si fieri potest,
Iucundum.

Fine prospecto, dispicit Media, ceu Viam, 8. quae ducit ad Finem; sed certa
and facilia, pauciora potius quam plura: ne quid impediat.

Occasioni 9. (quae, Front capillata, 10 sed Vertice calva, 11 adhaec alata,
12 facile elabitur) attendit, eamque captat.

In via pergit caute (provide) ne impingat aut aberret.

Prudence.
Prudence, 1. looks upon all things as a Serpent, 2. and does, speaks, or
thinks nothing in vain.

She looks backward, 3 as into a lookingglass, 4 to things past; and sees
before her, 5. as with a Perspectiveglass, 7. things to come, or the end; 6.
and so she perceives what she has done, and what remains to be done.

She proposes an Honest, Profitable, and withal, if it may be done, a pleasant
End to her actions.

Having foreseen the End, she looks out Means, as a Way, 8. with leads to the
end; but such as are certain and easy, and fewer rather than more, lest any
thing should hinder.

She watches Opporrtunity, 9. (which having a bushy forehead, 10. and being
bald-pated, 11. and moreover having wings, 12. does quickly slip away) and
catches it.

She goes on her way warily, for fear she should stumble or go amiss,

CXI.
111


Sedulitas.
Sedulitas 1. amat labores, fugit Ignaviam, semper est in opere, ut Formica, 2.
and comportat sibi, ut illa, omnium rerum Copiam. 3.

Non dormit semper, aut ferias agit, ut Ignavus 4. and Cicada; 5. quos tandem
premit Inopia. 6.

Incepta urget alacriter, ad finem usque; nihil procrastinat, nec cantat
cantilenam Corvi, 7. qui ingeminat Cras, cras.

Post labores exantlatos, and lassata, quiescit: Sed, quiet recreata, ne
adsuescat Otio, redit ad Negotia.

Diligens Discipulus, similis est Apibus, 8. qui ex variis Floribus, 9. Mel
congerunt in Alveare 10. suum.

Diligence.
Diligence 1. loves labors, avoideth Sloth, is always at work, like the
Pismire, 2. and carries together, as she does, for her self, store of all
things. 3.

She does not always sleep, or make holidays, as the Sluggard, 4. and the
Grasshopper 5. do; whom Want 6. at the last overtaketh.

She pursues what things she has undertaken cheerfully, even to the end; she
puts nothing off till the morrow, nor does she sing the Crows song, 7. which
says over and over Cras, cras.

After labors undergone, and ended, being even wearied, she rests her self;
but deing refreshed with Rest, that she may not use her self to Idleness, she
falls again to her business.

A diligent Scholar is like Bees, 8. which carry honey from diverse flowers 9.
into their Hive. 10.

CXII.
112


Temperantia.
Temperantia 1. modum praescribit Cibo and Potui, 2. and continet Cupidinem ceu
Freno, 3. and sic omnia moderatur, ne quid nimis fiat.

Heluones (ganeones) inebriantur, 4. titubant, 5. ructant (vomunt) 6. and
rixantur. 7.

E Crapula oritur Lascivia; ex hac, Vita libidinosa inter Fornicatores 8. and
Scorta, 9. Osculaudo (basiando) palpando, amplexando, and tripudiando. 10.

Temperance.
Temperance 1. prescribes a mean to meat and drink, 2. and restrains the
desire as with a Bridle, 3. and so moderateth all things, lest any thing too
much be done.

Revellers are made drunk, 4. they stumble, 5. they spue, 6. and brabble. 7.

From drunkenness proceeds lasciviousness; from this, a lewd life amongst
Whoremasters, 8. and Whores, 9. in kissing, touching, embracing, and dancing.
10.

CXIII.
113


Fortitudo.
Fortitude 1. impavida est in adversis, ut Leo, 2. and confidens; at non tumida
in Secundis: innixa suo Columini, 3. Constantiae; and eadem in omnibus, parata
ad utramque fortunam aequo animo ferendam.

Clypeo 4. Tolerantiae excipit ictus Infortunii; and Gladio 5. Virtutis,
propellit hosts Euthymiae, Affectus.

Fortitude.
Fortitude 1. is undaunted in adversity, and bold as a Lion; 2. but not haughty
in prosperity, leaning on her own Pillar 3. Constancy; and being the same in
all things, ready to undergo both estates with an even mind.

She receives the strokes of misfortune with the Shield 4. of Sufferance; and
keeps off the Passions, the enemies of quietness, with the Sword 5. of Valor.

CXIV.
114


Patientia.
Patientia 1. tolerat Calamitates 2. and Injurias, 3. humiliter ut Agnus, 4.
tanquam paternam Dei ferulam. 5.

Interim innititur Spei anchorae, 6. (ut Navis 7. mari fluctuans) Deo supplicat
8. illacrumando, and exspectat post Nubila 9. Phoebum; 10. ferens mala, sperans
meliora.

Contra Impatiens 11. plorat, lamentatur, in seipsum debacchatur, 12.
obmurmurat ut Canis, 13. and tamen nil proficit; tandem desperate, and fit
Autochir: 14. Injurias vindicare cupit, furibundus.

Patience.
Patience 1. endures Calamities 2. and Wrongs, 3. meekly like a Lamb, 4. as
Gods Fatherly chastisement. 5.

In the mean while she leans upon the Anchor of Hope, 6. (as a Ship 7. tossed
by waves in the Sea) she prays to God 8. weeping, and exspecteth the Sun; 10
after cloudy-weather 9. suffering evils, and hoping better things.

On the contrary the impatient person 11 waileth, lamenteth, rages against
himself, 12. grumbieth like a Dog, 13. and yet does no good; at ye lasi he
despaireth, and becomes his own murderer; 14. being full of rage he desires
to revenge wrongs,

CXV.
115


Humanitas.
Homines facti sunt ad mutua commoda; ergo sint humani.

Sis suavis, and amabilis, Vultu; 1. comis and urbanus, Gestu ac Moribus; 2.
affabilis and verax, Ore; 3. candens and candidus Cord. 4.

Sic ama, sic amaberis; and fiet mutua Amicitia, 5. ceu Turturum, 6. concors,
mansueta, and utrinque benevola.

Morosi homines, sunt odiosi, torvi, illepidi, contentiosi, iracundi, 7.
crudeles 8. ac implacabiles, (magis lupi and leones, quam homines,) and inter
se discordes, hinc confligunt Duello. 9.

Invidia, 10. aliis male cupiendo, seipsam conficit.

Humanity.
Men are made for one another good; therefore let them be kind.

Be thou sweet and lovely in thy countenance; 1. gentle and civil in thy
behavior, and manners; 2. affable and true-spoken with thy Mouth; 3.
affectionate and candid ^ thy heart. 4.

^ So love, and so shall thou ^ loved; ^s there will be a ^^tual friendship, 5.
^ that of ^tle-doves, 6. ^arty, gentle, ^o wishing well a both parts.

Froward men, ^^e hateful, teasty, ^^pleasant, contentious, ^^gry, 7. ^el, 8.
and implacable, (rather Wolves and Lions, than Men) and such as fall out among
themselves, hereupon they fight in a Duel. 9.

Envy, 10. ^ishing ill to others, ^neth away her self.

CXVI.
116


Iustitia.
Iustitia 1. pingitur, sedens in lapide quadrato: 2. nam debet esse immobilis;
obvelatis oculis, 3. ad non respiciendum personas; claudens aurem sinistram, 4.
reservandam alteri parti;

Dextera tenens Gladium, 5. and Fraenum, 6. ad puniendum and coercendum Malos;

Praeterea Stateram, 7 cujus dextrae Lanci 8. Merita, Sinistrae, 9. Praemia
imposita, sibi invicem exaequantur, atque ita Boni ad virtutem, ceu Calcaribus,
10. incitantur.

In Contractibus, 11. candide agatur; Pactis and Promissis stetur; Depositum,
Mutuum, reddantur; nemo expiletur, 12. aut laedatur; 13. suum cuique rribuatur;
haec sunt Praecepta Justitiae.

Talia prohibentur, quinto and septimo Dei praecepto, and merito Cruce ac Rota
14. puniuntur.

Justice.
Justice 1. is painted, sitting on a square Stone; 2. for she ought to be
immovable; with hoodwinked eyes 3 that she may not respect persons; stopping
the left ear, 4. to be reserved for the other party;

Holding in her right hand a sword, 5. and a Bridle, 6. punish and restrain
(...) Men;

Besides ^air of balances, 7. the right scale 8. hereof deserts, 9. ^^d in the
left ^wards being put ^e made ^en one with another, ^^d so good Men ^e incited
to virtue, as were with Spurs, 10.

In Bargains, 11. ^t men deal heartily; ^t them stand to their Covenants and
Promises; ^et that which is given one to keep, and that which is lent 12.
berestored; let no man be pillaged, or hurt; 13. let every one have his own;
these are the precepts of Justice.

Such things as these are for bidden in Gods 5. and 7. Commandment, and
deservedly punished on ye Gallows and the Wheel. 14.

CXVII.
117


Liberalitas.
Liberalitas 1. modum servat circa Divitias, quas honest quaerit, ut habeat
quod largiatur Egenis; 2.

Hos, vestit, 3. nutrit, 4. ditat, 5. Vultu hilari, 6. and Manu alata. 7.

Opes 8. sibi subjicit; non se illis, ut Avarus, 9 qui habet, ut habeat, and
bonorum suorum non Possessor est sed Custos, and, insatiabilis, semper eorradit
10. Unguibus suis.

Sed and parcit and adservat, occludendo, 11. ut semper habeat:

At Prodigus, 12. male disperdit been parta, ac tandem eget.

Liberality.
Liberality, 1. keeps a mean about Riches, which she honestly seeks, that
she may have somewhat to bestow on them that want; 2.

She cloatheth, 3. nourishes, 4. and enricheth, 5. these with a cheerful
countenance, 6. and a winged Hand. 7.

She submits her wealth 8. to her self, not her self to it, as the covetous
man, 9. does, who has, that he may have, and is not the owner, but the keeper
of his goods, and being unsatiable always scrapeth together 10. with his nails.

Moreover he spares, and keeps, Hoarding up 11. that he may always have

But the Prodigal, 12. badly spends things well gotten, and at the last
wants.

CXVIII.
118


Societas Conjugalis.
Matrimonium a Deo est institutum, in Paradiso, ad mutuum Adjutorium, and
Propagationem generis humani.

Vir-Iuvenis (coelebs) conjugium initurus, instructus sit aut Opibus; aut Art
and Scientia, quae sit, de pane lucrando: ut possit sustentare Familiam.

Deinde eligit sibi Virginem hubilem, (aut Viduam) quam adamat: (habenda ubi
tamen major ratio Virtutis and Honestatis, quam Formae aut Dotis.

Posthaec, non clam despondet sibi came, sed ambit, ut Procus, apud Patrem 1.
and Matrem, 2. vel apud Tutores and Cognatos, per Pronubos. 3.

Ea sibi desponsa, fit Sponsus, 4. and ipsa, Sponsa; 5. fiuntque Sponsalia, and
scribitur Instrumentum dotale. 6.

Tandem fiunt Nuptiae, ubi copulantur a Sacerdote, 7. datis ultro eitroque
Manibus 8. and Annulis nuptialibus; 9. tum epulantur cum invitatis Testibus.

Abhinc dicuntur Maritus and Vxor; hac mortua ille fit Vidaus.

The Society betwixt Man and Wife.
Marriage was appointed by God in Paradise, for mutual help, and the
Propagation of man kind.

A yong-man (a single-man being to be married, should be furnished, either with
wealth, or a Trade and Science, which may serve for getting a living; that he
may be able to maintain a Family.

Then he chooses himself a Maid that is marriageable, (or a Widow) whom he
loves; where nevertheless a greater regard is to be had of Virtue and
Honesty, than of Beauty or Portion.

Afterward, he does not betroth her to himself closely, but entreats for her
as a woer, first to the Father 1. and then the Mother, 2. or the Guardians and
Kinsfolks, by such as help to make the match. 3.

When she is esp^used to him he becomes yt bridegroom, 4 and she the Bride, 5.
and yt contract is made, and an Instrument of the Dowry 6. is written.

At the last the wedding is made, where they are joined together by the Priest,
7. giving their Hands 8. one to another, and wedding Rings; 9. then they feast
with the witnesses that are invited.

After this they are called Husband and Wife; when she is dead he becomes a
Widdower.

CXIX.
119


Arbor Consanguinitatis
Hominem 1 Consanguinitate attingunt, in Linea Ascendenti, Pater (Vitricus) 2.
and Matter (Noverca) 3. Avus, 4. and Avia, 5. Proavus 6. and Proavia, 7. Abavus
8. and Abavia, 9 Atavus 10. and Atavia, 11. Tritavus 12. and Tritavia; 13.
Ulteriores dicuntur Majores. 14...14.

In Linea Descendenti, Filius (Privignus) 15 and Filia (Privigna) 16. Nepos 17.
and Neptis, 18. Pronepos 19. and Proncptis, 20. Abnepos 21. and Abneptis, 22.
Atnepos 23. and Atneptis, 24. Trinepos 25. and Trineptis; 26. Ulteriores
dicuntur Posteri. 27...27.

In Linea Collaterali sunt Patruns 28. and Amita, 29. Avunculus 30. and
Matertera, 31. Fracer 32. and Soror, 33. Patruelis 34 Sobrinus, 35. and
Amitinus. 36....36.

The tree of Consanguinity.
In Consanguinity there touch a man 1. in Lineal Ascent, the Father (the Father
in Law) 2. and the Mother (the Mother in Law,) 3. the Grandfather, 4. and the
Grandmother, 5. the great-grandfather 6 and the great-grand-mother, 7. the
great-great-grand-father, 8. the great-great-grand-mother, 9. the
great-great-grand-fathers Faer, 10. the great-great-grand-mothers Mother, 11.
the great-great-grand-fathers-grand-father, 12 the
great-great-grand-mothers-grandmoth. 13 Those beyond these are called
ancestors. 14...14

In a Lineal desce^t, the son (the son in law 15) and the daughter (the
daughter in Law, 16.) the Nephew 17. and the Niece, 18. the Nephews Son 19. and
the Nephews daughter 20 the Nephews Nephew 21. and the Neeces Niece, 22. the
Nephews Nephews Son 23. the Neeces Neeces daughter, 24. the Nephews Nephews
Nephew, 25. the Neeces Neeces Niece, 26. Those beyond these are called
Posterity. 27. 27.

In a Collateral Line are the uncle by the fathers side 28 and the Aunt by the
fathers side, 29. the Uncle by the Mothers side, 30. and the Aunt by the
Mothers side, 31. the Brother 32 and the Sister, 33. the Brothers Son, 34. the
Sisters Son, 35. and the cousin by the brother and sister. 6

CXX.
120


Societas Parentalis.
Conjuges, suscipiunt (ex benedictione Dei) Sobolem (Prolem) and fiunt Parents.

Pater 1. generat, and Matter 2. parit Filios 3. and Filias, 4. (aliquando
Gemellos.)

Infans 5. involvitur Fasciis, 6. reponitur in Cunas. 7. a matre lactatur
Vberibus, 8. and nutritur Pappis. 9.

Deinde, incedere discit Serperastro, 10. ludit Crepundiis, 11. and fari
incipit.

Crescente aetate, Pietati 12. and Labori 13. adsuefit, and castigatur 14. si
non sit morigerus.

Liberi debent Parentibus Cultum and Officium.

Pater, sustentat Liberos, laborando. 15.

The Society betwixt Parents and Children.
Married Persons, (by ye blessing of God) have issue, and become Parents.

The Father 1. begets, and the Mother 2. bears Sons 3. and Daughters, 4.
(sometimes Twins.)

The Infant 5. is wrapped in Swadling-clothes, 6. is laid in a Cradle, 7. is
suckled by the Mother with her breasts, 8 and fed with Pap. 9.

Afterward it learneth to go by a Standing-stool, 10. plays with Rattles, 11
and begins to speak.

As it begins to grow older, it is accustomed to Piety 12. and Labor 13.
and is chastised 14. if it be not dutiful.

Children owe to Parents Reverence, and Service.

The Father maintains his Children by taking Pains* 15.

CXXI.
121


Societas herilis.
Herus (Pater familias) 1. habet Famulos (Servos) 2. Herae (Matter
famili-Ancillas. 4. (as 3)

Illi mandant his Opera, 6. and distribuunt Laborum pensa; 5. quae ab his
fideliter sunt exsequenda, sine Murmr and Dispendio; pro quo praebetur ipsis,
Merces and Alimonia,

Servus olim erat Mancipium, in quem Vitae and necis Domino potestas fuit:

Hodie Serviunt libere pauperiores, mercede conducti.

The Society betwixt Masters and Servants.
The Master (the goodman of the House) 1. has Menservants; 2. the Miflress
(the good wife of the House) 3. Maidens. 4.

They appoint these their Work, 6. and divide them their Tasks; 5. which are
faithfully to be done by them without Murmuring, and loss; for which their
Wages, and Meat and Drink is allowed them.

A Servant was heretofore a Slave, over whom the Master had power of life and
death.

At this day the poorer sort serve in a freemanner, being hired for wages.

CXXII.
122


Vrbs.
Ex multis Domibus fit Pagus, 1. vel Opidum, vel Vrbs. 2.

Istud and haec muniuntur and cinguntur Moenibus (muro) 3. Vallo, 4. Aggeribus
5. and Vallis. 6.

Intra muros, est Pomoerium; 7. extra, Fossa. 8.

In moenibus, sunt Propugnacula 9 and Turres; 10. Specula 11. exstant in
editioribus locis.

In Urbem ingressus fit, ex Suburbio, 12. per Portam, 13. super Pontem. 15.

Porta habet Cataractas, 15. Pontem versatilem, 16. Valvas, 17. Claustra, and
Repagula, ut and Vectes. 18.

In Suburbiis sunt Horti, 19. and Suburbana, 20. ut and Coemeteria. 21.

A City.
Of many Houses is made a Village, 1. or a Town, or a City, 2.

That and this are fenced and begirt with a Wall 3. a Trench, 4. Bulwarks 5.
and Palisadoes. 6.

Within the walls is the void Place; 7. without, the Ditch. 8.

In the walls are Fortresses, 9. and Towers; 10. Watch-towers, 11. are upon the
higher places.

The entrance into a City is made out of the Suburbs, 12. through the Gate, 13.
over the Bridge. 14.

The Gate has a Percullis, 15. a Drawbridge, 16. two-leaved Doors, 17. Locks,
and Bolts, as also Bars, 18.

In the Suburbs are Gardens, 19. and Garden-houses, and also Burying-places. 21.

CXXIII.
123


Interiora Vrbis.
Intra Urbem sunt Plateae (Vici) 1. lapidibus stratae; Fora, 2. (alicubi cum
Porticibus 3.) and Angiporti. 4.

Publica aedificia sunt in medio Urbis, Templum, 5. Schola, 6. Curia, 7. Domus
Mercaturae; 8.

Circa Maenia, and Portas, Armamentarium, 9. Granarium, 10. Diversoria,
Popinae, and Cauponae, 11. Theatrum, 12. Nosodochium; 13.

In recessibus, Foricae (Cloacae) 14. and Custodia (Carcer) 15

In Turre primaria est Horologium, 16. and habitatio Vigilum. 17.

In Plateis sunt Putei. 18.

Fluvius, 19. vel Rivus, Urbem interfluens, inservit sordibus eluendis.

Arx 20. exstat in summo Urbis.

The inward parts of a City.
Within a City are Streets, 1. paved with stones; Marketplaces, 2. (in some
places with Galleries) 3. and narrow Lanes, 4.

The public buildings are in the middle of the City, the Church, 5 the School,
6. the Guild Hall, 7. the Exchange. 8.

About the Walls, and the Gates, are the Magazine, 9. the Granary, 10. Innes,
Alehouses, Cooks-shops, 11. the Playhouse, 12. and the Spittle; 13.

In the by-places are houses of office, 14. and the Prison. 15.

In the chief Steeple is the Clock, 16. and the Watchmens dwelling. 17.

In the Streets are Wells. 18.

The River 19. or Beck running about ye City, serves to wash away the filth.

The Tower 20. stands in the highest part of the City.

CXXIV.
124


Judicium.
Optimum Ius est placida conventio, facta, vel ab ipsis, inter quos Lis est,
vel ab Arbitro.

Haec si non procedit, venitur in Forum, 1. (olim judicabant in Foro, hodie in
Praetorio) cui praesidet Iudex [Praetor]2 cu^ Assessoribus; 3. Dicographus, 4.
Vota calamo excipit.

Actor 5. accusat Reum, 6. and producit Testes 7. contra illum.

Reus excusat se per Advocatum; 8. cui contradicit Actoris Procurator. 9,

Tum Iudex Sententiam pronunciat, absolvens insontem, and damnans sontem ad
Poenam, vel Mulctam, vel ad Supplicium.

Judgment.
The best Law is quiet agreement, made either by themselves, betwixt whom the
suit is, or by an Umpire.

If this do not proceed they come into ye court, I (heretofore they judged in
the Marketplace, at this day in the Moot-hall in with the Judge, 2. sits with
his Assessors, 3 the Clerk 4. takes their votes in writing.

The Plaintiff 5. accuses the Defendant, 6. and produces witnesses 7. against
him.

The Defen' excuses himself by a counselor, 8 whom the Plaintiffs Counselor 9.
co^tradicts

Then the Judge pronounces Sentence, acquitting ye innocent, and condemning
him that is guilty to a punishment, or a fine, or torment.

CXXV.
125


Supplicia Maleficorum.
Malefici 1. per Lictores, 2. e Carcere 3. (ubi torqueri solent) producuntur,
vel equo raptantur, 15. ad locum Supplicii.

Fures 4. in Patibulo 5 suspenduntur a Carnifice; 6.

Moechi decollantur;

Homicidae (Sicarii) ac Latroues (Piratae) vel crurifragio plexi Rotae
imponuntur, 8. vel Palo infiguntur; 9.

Striges (Lamiae) super Rogum 10 cremantur.

Quidam antequam supplicio afficiantur, elinguantur, 11. aut super Cippum 12.
Manu plectuntur, 13. aut Forcipibus 14. uruntur.

Vita donati, Numellis constringuntur, 16. luxantur, 17. Equuleo imponuntur,
18. Auribus truncantur, 19. Virgis caeduntur, 20. Stigmate notantur,
relegantur, damnantur ad triremes, vel ad Carcerem perpetuum.

Perduelles quadrigis discerpuntur.

The tormenting of Malefactors.
Malefactors 1. are brought from the Prison, 3. (where they are wo^t to be
tortured) by Sergeants, 2. or dragd with a horse, 15 to place of Execution.

Thieves 4. are hanged by the Hangman, 6. on a Gallows; 5.

Whore-masters are beheaded; 7.

Murderers and Robbers are either laid upon a Wheel, 8. having their legs
broken, or fastened upon a stake. 9

Witches are burnt in a great Fire. 10.

Some before they be executed have their tongues cut out, 11. or have their
Hand 13. cut off upon a Block, 12 or are burnt with Pincers. 14.

They that have their life given them, are seton the Pillory, 16 are
strapadoed, 17. are set upon a wooden-horse, 18. have their ears cut off, 19.
are whipped, 20. are branded, are banished, are condenned to the galleys, or to
perpetual imprisonment.

Traitors are pulled in pieces with 4 horses.

CXXVI.
126


Mercatura.
Merces aliunde allatae, in domo commerciorum 1 vel commutantur, vel venum
exponuntur in Tabernis mercimoniorum, 2. and venduntur pro pecunia (moneta) 3.
vel mensuratae Vlna, 4. vel ponderatae Libra. 5.

Tabernarii, 6. Circumforanei, 7. and Scrutarii, 8. etiam volunt dici
Mercatores. 9.

Venditor ostentat rem promercalem, and indicat pretium, quanti liceat.

Emptor 10. licitatur, and pretium offert.

Si quis contralicetur, 11. ei res addicitur, qui plurimum pollicetur.

Merchandising.
Wares brought from other places, are either exchanged in an Exchange, 1. or
exposed to sale in Warehouses, 2. and they are sold for Money, 3. being either
measured with an Eln, 4. or weighed in a pair of Balances. 5.

Shopkeepers, 6. Pedlars, 7. and Brokers, 8. would also be called Merchants. 9

The Seller braggeth of a thing that is to be sold, and sets ye rate of it,
and how much it may be sold for.

The Buyer 10. cheapneth, and offers the price.

If any one bid against him, 11. the thing is delivered to him that promises
the most.

CXXVII.
127


Mensurae and Pondera.
Res continuas, metimur Vlna, 1. liquidas, Congio, 2. aridas, Medimno. 3.

Gravitatem rerum experimur Ponderibus, 4 and Libra (bilance) 5.

In hac primo est Iugum (Scapus) 6. in cujus medio Axiculus, 7. superius
Trutina and agina 8. in qua Examen 9. sese agitat; utrinque sunt Lances, 10.
pendentes Funiculis. 11.

Statera 12. ponderatres, suspendendo illas Vnco, 13. and Pondus 14. ex
opposito, quod in a aequiponderat rei, in b bis tantum, in c ter, etc.

Measures and Weights.
We measure things yt hang together with an liquid things (Eln, 1. with a
Gallon, 2: and dry things by a two-bushel measure. 3.

We try the heavines of things by Weights 4 and Balances. 5.

In this is first the Beam; 6. in the midst whereof is a little Axle-tree, 7.
above, the cheeks, and the hole, 8. in which the Needle 9. moves it self to
and fro; on both sides are the Scales, 10. hanging by little Cords. 11.

The Brasiers balance, 12 weighs things, by hanging them on a Hook, 13. and
the Weight 14. opposite to them, with in a weighs just as much as the thing, in
b twice so much, in c thrice so much, etc.

CXXVIII.
128


Ars Medica.
Aegrotans, 1. accersit Medicum 2 qui tangit ipsius Arteriam, 3. and inspicit
Vrinam, 4. tum praescribit Medicamentum in Schedula 5.

Istud paratur a Pharmacopaeo 6. in Pharmacopolio, 7. ubi Pharmaca in Capsulis,
8. Pyxidibus, 9. and Lagenis 10. adservantur.

Estque vel Potio, 11. vel Pulvis, 12. vel Pillulae, 13. vel Pastilli, 14. vel
Electuarium. 15.

Diaeta and Oration, 16. est optima Medicina.

Chirurgus 18. curat Vulnera 17. and Vlcera, Spleniis (emplastris. 19

Physic.
The Patient, 1. sends for a Physician 2. who feels his Pulse, 3. and
looks upon his Water, 4. and then prescribes a Receipt in a Bill 5.

That is made ready by the Apothecary 6. in an Apothecaries shop, 7. where
Drugs are kept in Drawers, 8. Boxes, 9. and Gally-pots 10.

And it is either a Potion, 11. or Powder, 12. or Pills, 13. or Trochisks, 14.
or an Electuary. 15.

Diet and Prayer, 16. is the best Physic.

The Surgeon 18. cures Wounds 17. and Ulcers, with Plasters. 19,

CXXIX.
129


Sepultura.
Defuncti olim cremabantur, and Cineres in Vrna 1. recondebantur.

Nos includimus nostros demortuos, Loculo (Capulo) 2. imponimus Feretro, 3. and
efferri curamus Pompa funebri versus Coemeterium, 4. ubi a Vespillonibus 5.
inferuntur Sepulchro, 6. and humantur; hoc Cippo 7. tegitur, and Monumentis 8.
ac Epitaphiis 9. ornatur.

Funere prodeunte, cantantur Hymni, and Campanae 10. pulsantur.

A Burial.
Dead Folks (burned, heretofore were and their ashes put into an Urn 1.

We enclose our dead Folks, in a Coffin 2. lay them upon a Bier, 3. and see
they be carried out in a Funeral-pomp toward ye Churchyard, 4 where they are
laid into the Grave, 6. by the Bearers 5. and are interred; this is covered
with a Gravestone 7. and is adorned with Tombs, 8. and Epitaphs 9.

As the Corpse go along, Psalms are sung, and the Bells are rung. 10.

CXXX.
130


Ludas Scenicus.
In Theatro, 1. (quod vestitur Tapetibus, 2. and Sipariis 3. tegitur) aguntur
Comoediae vel Tragoediae, quibus repraesentantur res memorabiles; ut hic,
Historia de Filio prodigo, 4. and Patre 5. ipsius, a quo recipitur, domum redux.

Actores (histriones) agunt personati; Morio, 6. dat Jocos.

Spectatorum primarii, sedent in Orchestra; 7. Plebs stat in Cavea, 8. and
plaudit, si quid arridet.

A Stage Play.
In a Playhouse, 1. which is trimmed with Hangings, 2. and covered with
Curtains, 3. Comedies, and Tragedies are acted, wherein memorable things are
represented; as here, the History of the Prodigal Son, 4. and his Father, 5. by
whom he is entertained, being returned home.

The Players act being in disguise; the Fool, 6. makes Jests.

The chief of the Spectators sit in the Gallery, 7. the common sort stand on
the ground, 8. and clap the hands if any thing please them.

CXXXI.
131


Praestigiae.
Praestigiator 1. facit varia Spectacula, volubilitate corpotis, deambulando
manibus, saliendo per Circulum, 2. etc.

Interdum etiam tripudiat 4. larvatus.

Agyrta 3. Praestigias facit, e marsupio.

Funabulus, 5. graditur and saltat super funem, tenens manu Halterem; 6. aut
suspendit se manu vel Pede, 7. etc.

Sleights.
The Tumbler 1. makes several Shows, by the nimblenesse of his body, walking
to and fro on his hands, leaping through a Hoop, 2. etc.

Sometimes also he danceth 4. having on a vizzard.

The Jugler 3. shows sleights, out of a Purse.

The rope-dancer, 5. goes and danceth upon a Rope, holds a Poise, 6. in his
Hand; or hangs himself by the Hand or Foot, 7. etc.

CXXXII.
132


Palaestra.
Pugiles congrediuntur Duello, in Palaestra, decertantes vel Gladiis, 1. vel
Hastilibus 2. and Bipennibus, 3. vel Semispathis, 4. vel Ensibus 5. mucronem
obligatis, ne lethaliter laedant, vel Frameis and Pugione 6. simul.

Luctatores 7. (apud Romanos olim nudi and inuncti oleo) prehendunt se invicem,
and annituntur, uter alterum prosternere possit, praeprimis supplantando. 8.

Andabatae 9. pugnabant Pugnis, ridiculo certamine, nimirum obvelatis oculis.

The Fencing-School.
Fencers meet in a Duel in a Fencing-place, fighting with swords, 1 or Pikes 2.
and Halberds, 3. or Short-swords, 4. or Rapiers 5. having balls at the point
(lest they wound one another mortally,) or with two Edged-swords and a Dagger
6. together.

Wrastlers 7. (among the Romans in times past were naked, and anointed with
Oil) take hold of one another, and strive whether can throw the other,
especially by tripping up his Heels. 8.

Hood-winked fe^cers 9 fought with their fists in a ridiculous strife, to wit,
with their eyes covered.

CXXXIII.
133


Ludus Pilae.
In Sphaeristerio, 1. luditur Pila, 2. quam alter mittit, alter excipit, and
remittit Reticulo; 3. idque est Lusus Nobilium ad co^motionem corporis.)

Follis (pila magna) 4. aere distenta open Epistomii, sub dio Pugno 5.
reverberatur.

Tennis-Play.
In a Tennis-Court, 1. they play with a Ball, 2. which one throws, and
another takes, and sends it back with a Racket; 3. and that is the sport of
Noblemen to stir their body.

A winde-ball 4. being filled with air by a means of a Ventil, is tossed to and
fro with the Fist 5. in the open air.

CXXXIV.
134


Ludus Aleae.
Tesseris (talis) 1. ludimus, vel Plistobolindam; vel immittimus illas per
Fritillum 2. in Tabellam 3. numeris notatam, idque est Ludus Sortilegii
Aleatorum.

Sort and Art luditur Calculis in alveo aleatorio, 4. and Chartis lusoriis. 5.

Abaculis ludimus in Abaco, 6. ubi sola ars regnat.

Ingeniosissimus ludus est, L. Latrunculorum, 7. quo veluti duo exercitus
praelio confligunt.

Dice-Play.
We play with Dice 1. either they that throw the most take up all; or we throw
them through a casting-Box 2. upon a Board 3. marked with Figures; and this is
Dice-players game at casting Lots.

Men play by Luck and Skill at Tables in a pair of Tables, 4. and at Cards. 5.

We play at Chesse on a Chesse-board, 6. where only art bears the sway.

The most ingenious Game, is the game at Chess, 7 wherein as it were two Armies
fight together in Battle.

CXXXV.
135


Cursus Certamina.
Pueri exercent se cursu, sive super Glaciem 1. Diabatris, 2. ubi etiam
vehuntur Trahis; 3. sive in campo designantes Lineam, 4. quam; qui vincere
cupit, adtingere, at non ultra procurrere, debet.

Olim decurrebant Cursores 5. inter Cancellos 6. ad Metam, 7. and qui primum
contingebat eam, accipiebat Brabeum (praeminm) 8. a Brabeuta 9.

Hodie habentur Hastiludia, (ubi Lancea 10. petitur Circulus 11.) loco
Equiriorum quae in desuetudinem abierunt.

Races.
Boys exercise themselves in running, either upon the Ice, 1. in Scrick-shooes,
2. where they are carried also upon Sleds; 3. or in the open field making a
Line, 4. which, he that desires to win, ought to touch, but not to run beyond
it.

Heretofore Runners 5. ran betwixt Railes 6. to the Goal, 7. and he that
touched it first; received the prize 8. from him that gave the prize. 9.

At this day Tilting, (or the quintain) is used, where a Hoop is struck at with
Trunchion, 11. instead of Horse-races, which are grown out of use.

CXXXVI.
136


Ludi Pueriles.
Pueri ludere solent, vel globis fictilibus; 1. vel jactantes Globum 2. ad
Conas; 3. vel Spaerulam. Clava 4. mittentes per Annulum; 5. vel Turbinem 6.
Flagello 7. versantes; vel Sclopo, 8. and Arcu 9. jaculantes; vel Grallis 10.
incedentes; vel super Petaurum 11. se agitantes and oscillantes.

Boyes-Sports.
Boys use to play either with Bowling-stones; 1. or throwing a Bowl 2. at
Nine-pins; 3. or striking a Ball through a Ring, 5. with a Bandy; 4. or
scourging a Top 6. with a Whip; 7. or shooting with a Trunck, 8. and a Bow; 9.
or going upon Stilts; 10. or tossing and swinging themselves upon a
Merry-totter. 11.

CXXXVII.
137


Regnum and Regio.
Multae Vrbes and Pagi faciunt Regionem and Regnum.

Rex, aut Princeps, sedet in Metropoli; 1. Nobiles, Barons, and Comites,
habitant in circumjacentibus Arcibus; 2. Rustici in Pagis. 3.

Juxta Flumina navigabilia 4. and Vias Regias, 5. habet sua Telonia, ubi a
navigantibus and iter-facientibus, Portorium and Vectigal exigitur.

The Kingdom and the Region.
Many Cities and Villages make a Region and a Kingdom.

The King, or Prince, resideth in the chief-City; 1. the Noblemen, Lords, and
Earls, dwell in the Castles 2. that lie round about it, the Countrey-people
dwell in Villages. 3.

He has his toll-places upon navigable Rivers 4 and High-Roads, 5. where
Portage and Tollage is exacted of them that Sail, or Travel.

CXXXVIII.
138


Regia Majestas.
Rex, 1. in splendore regio, sedet in suo Solio, 2. magnifico Habitu, 3.
redimitus Diademate 4. tenens manu Sceptrum, 5. stipatus frequentia Aulicorum

Inter hos, primarii sunt, Cancellarius 6. cum Consiliariis and Secretariis,
Praefectus Praetorii, 7. Aulae-Magister, 8. Pocillator (pincerna) 9. Dapifer,
10. Thesaurarius, 11. Archi-Cubicularius, 12. and Stabuli Magister. 13

His subordinantur Nobiles Aulici, 14. Nobile Famulitium, 15. cum Cubiculariis,
and Cursoribus, 16. Stipatores, 17. cum Satellitio.

Legatis Exterorum 18 praebet aures solenniter.

Aliorsum ablegat Vicarios suos Administratores, Praefectos, Quaestores, and
Legatos, quibus subinde mittit Mandata nova per Veredarios. 19.

Morio 20. ludicris actionibus risum movet.

Regal Majesty.
The King, 1. sits on his throne 2. in Kingly State, with a stately Habit, 3.
crowned with Diadem 4. holding a Scepter, 5. in his Hand, being attended with a
company of Courtiers.

The chief, amongst these, are the Chancellor 6. with the Counselors and
Secretaries, the Lord Marshal, 7. the Comptroller, 8. the Cup Bearer, 9. the
Taster, 10. the Treasurer, 11. the high Chamberlain, 12 and ye Mast. of the
horse. 13

There are subordinate to these, the Noble Courtiers, 14 the Noble Pages, 15.
with the Chamberlains, and Lacquies, 16. the Guard, 17. with their Attendance.

He solemnly gives audience to the Ambassadors of foreign Princes. 18.

He sends his Vicegerents, Deputies, Governors, Treasurers, and Ambassadors
to other places, to whom he sends new Commissions ever and anon by the Posts.
19.

The Fool causes laughter by his toysom actions.

CXXXIX.
139


Miles.
Si bellandum est, scribuntur Milites. 1. Horum Arma sunt, Galca (Cassis) 2.
(quae ornatur Crista) Armatura, cujus parts, Torquis ferreus, 3. Thorax, 4.
Brachialia, 5. Ocreae ferreae, 6. Manicae, 7. cum Lorica 8. and Scuto (Clypeo)
9. haec sunt Arma defensiva.

Offensiva sunt, Gladius, 10. Framea, 11. and Acindces, 12. qui Vagina, 13.
reconduntur, and Cingulo, 14. vel Baltheo, 15. accinguntur; (Fascia militaris
16. inservit ornatui) Romphaea 17. and Pugio. 18.

In his est Manubrium, 19. cum Pomo, 20. and Verutum, 21. Cuspidatum, 22. in
medio Dorsum, 23. and Acics. 24.

Reliqua arma sunt, Hasta, 25. Bipennis, 26. in quibus Hastile 27. and Mucro,
28. Clava, 29. and Caestus. 30.

Eminus pugnatur Bombardis (Sclopetis) 31. and Sclopis, 32. quae onerantur
Globis 33. e Theca bombarduria, 34. and puivere nitrato e Pyxide pulve^arid. 35.

The Soldier.
If we be to make war, Soldiers are listed. 1. Their Arms are, A Headpiece,
2. (which is adorned with a Crest) and the Armor, whose parts are, a Collar,
3. a Breast Plate, 4. Arm-pieces, 5. Leg-pieces, 6. Greaves, 7. with a Coat of
Mail, 8. and a Buckler, 9. these are the defensive Arms.

The offensive are, A Sword, 10. a two-edged Sword, 11. a Falchion, 12. which
are put up into a Scabberd, 13. and are girded with a Girdle, 14. or Belt; 15.
(a Scarf, 16. serves for ornament) a two-hand-Sword, 17. and a Dagger, 18.

In these is the Haft, 19. with the Pummel, 20. and the Blade, 21. having a
Point, 22. in the middle are the Back, 23. and the Edge, 24.

The other weapons are a Pike, 25. a Halbert, 26. in which is the Haft, 27. and
the Head, 28. a Club, 29. and a Whirlebat. 30.

They fight at a distance with Muskers, 31. and Pistols, 32. wc are charged with
bullets, 33. out of a bullet-bag, 34. and with Gunpowder out of a Bandalier.
35.

CXL.
141


Castra.
Expeditione suscepta, Castra 1. locantur, and Tentoria paxillis figuntur, e
Linteis 2. vel Stramentis; 3. eaque circumdant, securitatis gratia, Aggeribus
4. and Fossis; 5. constituuntur etiam Excubiae, 6. and omittuntur Exploratores.
7.

Pabulationis and praedae causa, fiunt Excursiones, 8. ubi saepius cum Hostibus
9. velitando confligitur.

Tentorium summi Imperatoris, 10. est in medio Castrorum.

The Camps.
When a Design is undertaken, the Camp 1. is pitched, and the Tents (of Canvas
2. or Straw 3. are fastened with stakes; and they entrench them about, for
securities sake, with Bulwarks, 4. and Ditches; 5. Sentinels 6. are also set,
and Scouts 7. are sent out.

Sallyings-out 8. are made for forage and plunder-sake, where they often cope
with the Enemy 9 in skirmishing.

The Lord Generals Pavilion is in the midst of the Camp.

CXLI.
140


Acies and Praelium.
Quando pugna committenda est, instruitur Acies, and dividitur in Frontem, 1.
Tergum, 2. and Alas (Cornua.) 3.

Peditatus 4. intermiscetur Equitatui. 5.

Ille distinguitur, in Centurias, hic, in Turmas. illae. in medio ferunt,
Vexilla; 6. hae, Labara. 7.

Eorum Praefecti sunt, Decuriones, Signiferi, Vicarii, Centuriones, 8. Magistri
Equitum, 9. Tribuni, Chiliarchae, and omnium summus Imperator.

Tympanistae 10. and Tympanotribae 11. ut and Tubicines 12. ad arma vocant and
militem inflammant.

Primo conflictu, exploduntur Bombardo 13. and Tormenta. 14.

Postea cominus pugnatur 15. Hastis and Gladiis.

Victi, trucidantur, 16. vel capiuntur, vel aufugiunt. 17.

Succenturiati, 18. superveniunt ex insidiis.

Impedimenta 19.

The Army, and the Fight.
When the Battle is to be fought, the Army is set in order, and divided into
the Front, 1. the Rere, 2. and the Wings. 3.

The Foot 4. are intermixed with the Horse 5.

That is divided into Companies, this into Troops. These carry Banners; 6.
these Flags 7. in the midst of them.

Their Officers are, Coporals, Ensigns, Lieutenants, Captains, 8. Commanders
of the horse, 9 Lieutenant Coronels, Coronels, and he that is the chief of all,
the Generes.

The Drummers 10. and the Drumslades 11. as also the Trumperers 12. call to
Arms, and inflame the Soldier.

At the first onset the Muskets, 13. and Ordinance 14. are shot off.

Afterward they fight 15. hand to hand with Pikes and Swords.

They that are overcome are slain, 16. or taken prisoners, or run away. 17.

They thar are for the reserve, 18. come upon them out of their places where
they lay in wait.

The Carriages are 19.

CXLII.
142


Pugna Navalis.
Navale praelium terribile est, quum ingentes Naves, veluti Arces, concurrunt
Rostris, 1. aut Tormentis 2. se invicem quassant, atque ita perforatae,
perniciem suam imbibunt and submerguntur; 3

Aut, quum igne corripiuntur, and vel ex incendio pulveris tormentarii, 4.
homines in aerem ejiciuntur, vel in mediis aquis exuruntur, vel etiam in mare
desilientes suffocantur.

Navis fugitiva 5. ab insequentibus 6. intercipitur and capitur.

The Sea Fight.
A Sea Fight is terrible, when huge Ships, like Castles, run one upon another
with their Beaks, 1. or shatter one another with their Ordnance 2 and so being
bored through, they drink in their own destruction, and are Sunck; 3.

Or, when they are s^^ on fire, and either by the firing of Gunpowder, 4. men
are blown up into the air, or are burnt in the midst of the waters, or else
leaping into the Sea are drowned.

A Ship that flies away 5, is over taken by those that pursue her, 6. and is
taken,

CXLIII.
143


Obsidium Vrbis.
Urbs obsidionem passura, primum provocatur per Tubicinem, 1. and invitatur ad
Deditionem.

Quod facere si abnuat, oppugnatur ab obsidentibus, and occupatur:

Vel muros per Scalas 2. transcendendo, aut Arietibus 3. diruendo, aut
Tormentis 4. demoliendo; vel Portas Exostra 5. dirumpendo; vel Globos
tormentarios 6. e Mortariis (balistis) 7. per Balistarios, 8. (qui post Gerras
9. latitant) in Urbem ejaculando; vel eam per Fossores 10. Cuniculis
subvertendo.

Obsessi defendunt se de muris, 11. ignibus, lapidibus, etc. aut erumpunt. 12.

Vrbs vi expugnata, diripitur, exciditur, interdum solo aequatur.

The Besieging of a City.
A City that is like to endure a Siege, is first Summoned by a Trumpeter, 1.
and parswaded to Yield.

Which if it refuse to do, it is assaulted by the Besiegers, and taken by
Storm:

Either by climbing over the Walls with Scaling-ladders, 2. or breaking them
down with Battering-engines, 3. or demolishing them with great-Guns; 4. or
breaking through the Gates with a Petarr; 5. or casting Grenades 6. out of
Morter-pieces 7. into the City, by Engineres, 8. who lie behind
Leagure-Baskets; 9. or over throwing it with Mines by Pyoneres 10.

They that are Besieged defend themselves from the Walls, 11. with Fire, and
Stones, etc. or break out by force.

A City that is taken by Storm, is plundered, destroyed, and sometimes laid
even with the ground.

CXLIV.
144


Religio.
Pietas, 1. Virtutum Regina, hausta Notitia Dei, vel ex Libro Naturae, 2. (nam
opus commendat artificem) vel ex Libro Scripturae, 3. colit Deum 4. humiliter;
recolit Mandata ejus comprehensa Decalogo; 5. and Rationem, Canem oblatrantem,
6. conculcans, Fidem 7. and adsensum praebet Verbo Dei, eumque invocat, 8. ut
Opitulatorem, in adversis.

Officia divina fiunt in Templo: 9. in quo est, Penetrale (Adytum) 10. cum
Altari, 11. Sacrarium, 12. Suggestus, 13. Subsellia, 14. Ambones, 15. and
Baptisterium. 16.

Deum esse, sentiunt omnes homines; sed non omnes recte norunt Deum.

Hinc diversae Religiones quarum primariae IV. adhuc numerantur.

Religion.
Godliness, 1. the Queen of Uertues, worshippeth God 4. devoutly, the knowledge
of God being drawn, either from the Book of Nature, 2. (for the Work commends
the work-Master,) or from the Book of Scripture; 3. she meditateth upon his
Commandments contained in the Decalogue; 5, and treading reason under Foot,
that Barking Dog, 6. she gives Faith 7. and Assent to the Word of God, and
calls upon him, 8 as a helper, in adversity.

Divine Services are done in the Church: 9, in which are, the Quire, 10. with
the Altar, 11. the Vestry, 12. the Pulpit, 13. Seats, 14. Galleries, 15. and a
Font. 16.

All Men perceive that there is a God, but all men do not rightly know God.

Hence are diverse Religions, whereof IV. are reckoned yet as the chief.

CXLV.
145


Gentilismus.
Gentiles finxerunt sibi prope XIIM. Numina.

Eorum praecipua erant, Jupiter, 1. Coeli; Neptunus, 2. Maris; Pluto, 3.
Inferni; Mars, 4. Belli; Apollo, 5. Artium; Mercurius, 6. Furum, Mercatorum,
and Eloquentiae; Vulcanus (Mulciber) Ignis and Fabrorum; Aeolus, Ventorum
Praesides and Deastri: and obscaenissimus Priapus.

Habuerunt etiam Muliebria Numina: qualia fuerunt Venus, 7. Dea amorum and
Voluptatum, cum filio^o Cupidine; 8 Minerva (Pallas) cum novem Musis, Artium;
Juno, Divitiarum and Nuptiarum; Vesta, Castitatis; Ceres, Frumentorum; Diana,
Venationum, and Fortuna; quin and Morbona, ac Febris ipsa.

Aegyptii, pro Deo colebant omne genus Animalium and Plantarum, and quicquid
mane primum co^spicabantur.

Philistaei offerebant Molocho (Saturno) 9. Infantes vivos cremandos.

Indi 10. etiamnum venerantur Cacodaemona. 11.

Gentilism.
The Gentiles feigned to themselves near upon XIIM. Deities.

The chief of the^ were Jupiter, 1. President and petty-God of Heaven; Neptune,
2. of the Sea; Pluto, 3. of Hell; Mars, 4. of War; Apollo, 5. of Arts; Mercury,
6. of thieves; Merchants, and eloquence; Vulcan (Mulciber) of Fire, and Smiths;
Aeolus, of Winds; and the most obscene of all the rest Priapus.

They had also Womanly Deities: such as were Venus, 7. the Goddess of loves and
pleasures, with her little son Cupid; 8 Minerva (Pallas) with the nine Muses,
of Arts; Juno, of Riches, and weddings; Vesta, of Chastity; Ceres, of Corn;
Diana, of Hunting, and Fortune; and besides these Morbona, and Febris her self.

The Egyptians, instead of God worshipped all sorts of Beasts and Plants, and
whatsoever they saw first in the Morning.

The Philistines offered to Moloch, 9. their Children to be burnt alive.

The Indians 10. even at this day worship the Devil. 11.

CXLVI.
146


Iudaismas.
Verus tamen Cultus very Dei, remansit apud Patriarchas, qui vixerunt ante and
post Diluvium.

Inter hos, Abrahamo, 1. Iudaeorum Conditori, Patri Credentium, promissus est,
Semen illud Mulieris, Mundi Messiah; and ipse, avocatus a Gentilibus, cum
Posteris, Sacramento Circumcisionis 2. notatus singularem Populum and Ecclesiam
Dei constituit.

Huic populo postea DEUS, per Mosen, 3. in monte Sinai, 4. Legem suam, scriptam
digito suo in Tabulis lapideis, 5. exhibuit.

Porro ordinavit manducatione^ Agni Paschalis; 6 and Sacrificia in Altari 7.
offerenda per Sacerdotes, 8. and Suffitus; 9. and jussit fieri Tabernaculum 10.
cum Arca Foederis; 11 praeterea erigi aeneum Serpentem 12. contra morsum
Serpentum in deserto.

Quae omnia Typi erant venturi Messiae, quem Iudai adhuc exspectant.

Judaism.
Yet the true Worship of the true God, remained with the Patriarchs, who lived
before, and after ye Flood.

Amongst these, that seed of the woman, the Messiah of ye world, was promised
to Abraham, 1. the Founder of the Jews, the Father of them that believe; and
he (being called away from the Gentiles) with his Posterity, being marked with
the Sacrament of Circumsion, 2. made a peculiar People, and Church of God.

AfterwardsGod gave his Law written with his own finger in Tables of Stone, 5.
to this people by Moses, 3. in Mount Sinai. 4.

Furthermore he ordained the eating of ye Paschal Lamb; 6. and Sacrifices to be
offered upon an Altar 7 by Priests, 8. and Incense; 9. and Commanded a
Tabernacle 10. with ye Ark of the Covenant 11 to be made; and besides, a brazen
Serpent 12. to be set up against the biting of Serpents in the wilderness.

An which things were Types of the Messiah to come, whom the Jews yet look for.

CXLVII.
147


Christianismus.
Unigenitus aeternus Dei Filius, 3. promissus Protoplastis in Paradiso, tandem,
impleto tempore, conceptus per Sa. Spiritum in utero sanctissimo Mariae 1.
Virginis de domo regia Davidis, and indutus humana carne, Bethlehemi Iudaeae,
in summa paupertate Stabuli, 2. Anno Mundi 3970. in mundum prodiit, sed mundus
ab omni peccato, eique impositum fuit nomen Jesus, quod significat Salvatorem.

Hic, cum imbueretur sacro Baptismo, 4. (Sacramento Novi Foederis) a Iohanne
praecursore in Iordane, apparuit sacratissimum suo, 5. Mysterium divinae
Trinitatis, Patris voce 6. (qua testabatur, hunc esse Filium suum) and Spiritu
Sancto in specie Columbae, 7. caelitus delabente.

Ab eo tempore, XXX. aetatis suae anno, Verbis and Operibus, prae se ferentibus
Divinitatem, declaravit quis esset, in annum usque quartum: a Iudaeis nec
agnitus nec exceptus ob voluntaria^ paupertate^

Ab his (quum prius instituisset Coenam mysticam 8. Corporis and Sanguinis sui,
in Sigillum novi Foederis. and sui recordationem) captus tandem, ad tribunal
Pilati Praefecti Caesarei raptus, accusatus, and damnatus est, agnus
innocentissimus; actusque in Crucem, 9. in ara ista, pro peccatis mundi
immolatus, mortem subiit.

Sed tertia die, quum revixisset divina sua virtute, resurrexit e Sepulcro, 10.
and post dies XL, de Monte Oliveti 11. sublatus in Coelum 12. and eo rediens
unde venerat, quasi evanuit, aspectantibus Apostolis, 13. quibus decima die
post Adscensum suum, Spiritum Sanctum 14. de Coelo, ipsos vero, hac Virtute
impletos, de se praedicaturos, in Mundum, misit; olim rediturus ad judieium
extremum, interea sedens ad dextram Patris, and intercedens pro nobis.

Ab hoc Christo dicimur Christiani, inque eo solo salvamur.

Christianity.
The only-begotten eternal Son of God, 3. being promised to our first Parents
in Paradise, at the last being conceived by the Holy Ghost, in the most Holy
womb of the Virgin Mary 1. of the Royal House of David, and clad with human
flesh, came into the world at Bethlehem of Judaea, in yt extreme poverty of a
Stable, 2. in ye fullness of time, in the year of the world, ^970. but pure from
all ^in, and ye name of Jesus, was given him, which signifies a Savior,

when he was sprinkled with holy Baptism, 4. (the Sacrament of the New
Covenant) by John his fore-ruuner, 5 in Jordan, ye most sacred Mystery of the
divine Trinity appeared by the Fathers voice 6. (wher-by he testified that this
was his Son) and the Holy Ghost in the shape of a Dove, 7. coming down from
heaven.

From that time being the 30. year of his age, unto the fourth year, he
declared who he was, his words and works manifesting his Divinity; being
neither owned, nor entertained by the Jews, because of his voluntary poverty.

He was at last taken by these (when he had first instituted the Mystical
Supper 8. of his body and blood, for a Seal of the New Covenant, and the
remembrance of himself) carried to the Judgment Seat of Pilate Governor of
Caesarea, accused, and condemned, as an innocent Lamb; and being fastened upon
a Cross, 9 he dyed, being sacrificed upon that Altar^ for the sins of the world.

But when he had revived by his divine power, he arose again the third day out
of the Grave, 10 and forty days after, being taken up from Mount Olivet 11.
into Heaven 12. and returning thither whence he came, he vanished as it were,
whilst the Apostles gazed upon him, 13. to whom he sent his Holy Spirit 14.
from Heaven, the tenth day after his Ascension, and them being filled with this
power, into the world, to preach of him; being henceforth to come again to the
last Judgment, sitting in the mean time at the right hand of the Father, and
interceding for us.

From this Christ we are called Christians, and are saved in him alone.

CXLVIII.
148


Mahometismus.
Mahomed 1. homo bellator, excogitabar sibi novam Religionem, mixtam ex
Iudaismo, Christianismo, and Gentilismo, consilio Iudaei 2. and Monachi Ariani,
3. nomine Sergii; fingens, dum laboraret Epilepsia, secum colloqui Archangelum
Gabrieiem, and Spiritum Sanctum, adsuefaciens Columbam, 4. ut ex aure sua escam
peteret.

Asseclae ejus abstinent se a Vino; circumciduntur; sunt Polygami; exstruunt
Sacella, 5. de quorum Turriculis, non a Campanis sed a Sacerdote 6. ad sacra
convocantur; saepius se abluunt; 7. negant S S. Trinitatem; Christum honorant,
non ut Dei Filium, sed ut magnum Prophetam, minorem tamen Mahomete; Legem suam
vocant Alcoran.

Mahometism.
Mahomet 1. a warlike Man, invented to himself a new Religion, mixed of,
Judaism, Christianity, and Gentilism, by the advice of a Jew 2. and an Arian
Monk, 3. named Sergius; feigning, whilst he had the fit of the falling
sickness, that the Archangel Gabriel and the Holy Ghost talked with him, using
a Pigeon, 4. to fetch meat out of his ear.

His Followers refrain themselves from Wine; are circumcised; have many wives;
build Chapels, 5. from the Steeples whereof they are called to holy Service,
not by Bells, but by a Priest 6. they wash themselves often; 7. they deny the
Holy Trinity; they honor Christ, not as the Son of God, but as a great
Prophet, yet less than Mahomet; they call their Law the Alcoran.

CXLIX.
149


Providentia Dei.
Humana Sorts, non tribuendae sunt Fortunae, aut Casui, aut Siderum Influxui,
(Cometae 1. quidem solent nihil boni portendere) sed provido Dei Oculo 2. and
ejusdem Manui rectrici; 3. etiam nostrae Prudentiae vel Imprudentiae, vel etiam
Noxae.

Deus habet Ministros suos and Angelos, 4. qui Homini, 5. a nativitate ejus, se
associant, ut Custodes, contra Malignos Spiritus, seu Diabolum, 6. qui
minutatim ei insidias struit, ad tentandum vel vexandum.

Vae dementibus Magis and Lamiis, qui Cacodaemoni se dedunt, (inclusi Circulo,
7. eum advocantes incantamentis) cum eo colludunt, and a Deo deficiunt! nam cum
illo mercedem accipient.

Gods Providence:
Men's States, are to be attributed to Portune, or Chance, or the influence of
the Stars (Comets 1. indeed are wont to portend no good) but to the provident
Eye of God 2. and to his Governing Hand; 3. even our sights, or oversights, or
even our Faults.

God has his Ministers and Angels, 4. who accompany a Man 5. from his Birth,
as Guardians, against wicked Spirits or the Devil, 6. who every minute lays
wait for him, to tempt and vex him.

Woe be to the mad wizzards and witches, who give themselves to the Devil
(being enclosed in a Circle, 7. calling upon him with Charms) they dally with
him, and fall from God! for they shall receive their reward with him.

CL.
150


Judicium Extremum.
Nam adveniet Dies novissima, quae Voce Tubae 1. Mortuos 2. resuscitabit, and
cum illis Vivos citabit ad Tribunal Jesus Christi, 3. (apparentis in Nubibus) ad
reddendam rationem omnium actorum.

Ubi pii (justi) and Electi 4. in Vitam aeternam, in locum Beatitudinis and
novam Hierosolymam introibunt: 5.

Impii vero and Damnati 6. cum Cacodaemonibus 7. in Gehennam 8. detrudentur,
ibi aeternum cruciandi.

The last Judgment.
For the last Day shall come, which shall raise up the Dead 2. with the sound
of a Trumpet 1. and summon the quick with them to the Judgment Seat of Christ
Jesus, 3. (appearing in the Clouds) to give an account of all things done.

When the Godly and Elect 4. shall enter into life eternal into the place of
Bliss and the new Jerusalem; 5.

But the wicked and the damned 6. shall be thrust into Hell 8. with the Devils
7. to be there tormented for ever.

Clausula.
Ita vidisti summatim Res omnes, quae ostendi poterunt, and didicisti Voces
primarias Anglicae and Latinae Linguae.

Perge nunc, and lege diligenter alios bonos Libros, ut fias Doctus, Sapiens,
and Pius.

Memento horum; Deum time, and invoca eum, ut largitur tibi Spiritum
Sapientiae. Vale!

The Close.
Thus thou have seen in short all things that can be showed, and have learned
the chief words of the English and Latin Tongue.

Go on now, and read other good Books diligently, and thou shall become
learned, wise, and Godly.

Remember these things; fear God, and call upon him, that he may bestow upon
thee the Spirit of Wisdom. Farewell.

INDEX TITVLORVM
A. CXLI. ACies and Praelium. 286 V. Aer. 14 XLV. Agricultura. 94 XXXII.
Amphibia. 68 XLII. Anima Hominis 88 XVIII. Animalia and primum Aves. 40 VI.
Aqua. 16 XII. Arbor. 28 CXIX. Arbor Consanguinitatis 242 CXXVIII. Ars Medica.
260 XCI. Ars Scriptoria. 186 XCIX. Arts Sermonis. 202 LI. Aucupium. 106 XXIII.
Aves Aquaticae. 50 XXI. Aves Campestres and Sylvestres. 46 XIX. Aves
Domesticae. 42 XXII. Aves Rapaces. 48 B. LXXIV. Balneum, 152 XCV. Bibliopegus.
194 XCIV. Bibliopolium. 192 C. XL. Canales and Ossa. 84 XXXVIII. Caput and
Manus. 80 XXXIX. Caro and Viscera. 82 CXL. Castra. 284 CXLVII. Christianismus.
298 III. Coelum. 10 LVII. Convivium. 118 LIVE. Coquinaria. 112 CXXXV. Cursus
Certamina. 274 D. XLIII. Deformes and Monstrosi. 90 I. Deus. 6 LXVI. Domus. 136
E. CVI. Eclipses. 216 LXXXIII. Eques. 170 LXXVI. Equile. 156 CIX. Ethica. 222
CVIII. Europa. 220 F. LXVIII. Faber Ferrarius. 140 LXIII. Faber lignarius. 130
LXIV. Faber Murarius. 132 XXIX. Ferae Bestiae. 62 XXVIII. Ferae Pecudes. 60
LXX. Figulus. 144 XIV. Flores. 32 CXIII. Fortitudo. 230 XIII. Fructus Arborum.
30 XVI. Fruges. 36 XVII. Frutices. 38 G. CXLV. Gentilismus. 294 CII. Geometria.
208 H. XXXV. Homo. 74 LXXVII. Horologia. 158 XLIV. Hortorum Cultura. 92 CXV.
Humanitas. 234 LXXII. Hypocaustum, cum Dormitorio. 148 I. IV. Ignis. 12 XXXI.
Insecta repentia. 66 XXIV. Insecta volantia. 52 C. Instrumenta Musica. 204
CXXIII. Interiora Urbis. 250 Invitatio. 2 CXLVI. Judaismus. 296 CXXIV.
Judicium. 252 CL. Judicium Extremum. 306 XXVII. Jumenta. 58 CXVI. Justitia. 23^
L. XI. Lapides. 26 LIII. Lanionia. 110 XCVI. Liber. 196 CXVII. Liberalitas. 238
LX. Lintea. 124 CXXXIV. Ludus Aleae. 272 CXXXVI. Ludi pueriles. 276 CXXXIII.
Ludus Pilae. 270 CXXX. Ludus Scenicus. 264 M. LXV. Machinae. 134 CXLIII.
Mahometismus. 302 XXXIV. Marini Pisces and Conchae. 72 XLVII. Mellificium 98
XXXVII. Membra Hominis Externa. 78 CXXVII. Mensurae and Pondera. 258 CXXVI.
Mercatura. 256 LXVII. Metallifodina. 138 X. Metalla. 24 CXXXIX. Miles. 282
XLVIII. Molitura. 100 II. Mundus. 8 XCVIII. Museum. 200 N. LXXXVII. Natatus.
178 XC. Naufragium. 184 LXXXVIII. Navis actuaria. 180 LXXXIX. Navis oneraria.
182 VII. Nubes. 18 O. CXLIII. Obsidium Urbis. 290 XV. Olera. 34 XX. Oscines. 44
P. CXXXII. Palaestra. 268 XLIX. Panificium. 102 XCII. Papyrus. 188 LXXI. Parts
Domus. 146 CXIV. Patientia. 232 XXVI. Pecora. 56 XLVI. Pecuaria. 96 CV. Phases
Lunae. 214 CI. Philosophia. 206 LXXVIII. Pictura. 160 L. Piscatio. 104 XXXIII.
Pisces Fluviatiles. 70 CIV. Planetarum Aspectus. 212 CXXXI. Praestigiae. 266
CXLIX. Providentia Dei. 304 CX. Prudentia. 224 CXLII. Pugna Navalis. 288
LXXIII. Putei. 150 Q. XXV. Quadrupedia and primum Domestica. 54 R. CXXXVIII
Regia Majestas. 280 CXXXVII. Regnum and Regio. 278 CXLIV. Religio. 292 LXXXI.
Restio and Lorarius. 166 S. LXI. Sartor. 126 XCVII, Schola. 198 LXIX.
Scriniarius and Tornator. 142 CXI. Sedulitas. 226 XLI. Sensus externi and
interni. 86 XXXVI. Septem Aetates Hominis. 76 CXXIX. Sepultura. 262 XXX.
Serpents and Reptilia. 64 CXVIII. Societas Conjugalis. 240 CXXI. Societas
Herilis. 246 CXX. Societas Parentalis. 244 LXXIX. Specularia. 162 CIII. Sphaera
coelestis. 210 CVII. Sphaera terrestris. 218. 219 CXXV. Supplicia Maleficorum.
254 LXII. Suitor. 128 T. CXII. Temperantia. 228 ^III. Terra. 20 LX.
Terrae-Foetus. 22 LIX. Textura. 122 LXXV. Tonstrina. 154 LVIII. Tractatio Lini.
120 LXXXVI. Transitus Aquarum. 176 XCIII. Typographia. 190 V. LXXXV. Vectura.
174 LXXXIV. Vehicula. 172 LII. Venatus. 108 LXXXII. Viator. 168 LXXX. Vietor.
164 LV. Vindemia. 114 CXXII. Urbs. 248 Z. LVI. Zythopoeia. 116

An INDEX of the TITLES.
Chapter. Page A. A. XXXVII. THe seven Ages of Man. 76 VI. The Air. 14 XXXIII.
Amphibious Creatures. 68 CV. The Apparitions of the Moon. 214 CXLI. The Army,
and the Fight. 286 XCIX. Arts belonging to the Speech. 202 CIV. The Aspects of
the Planets. 212 B. B. LXXIV. The Bath. 152 LXXV. The Barber's shop. 154
XXVIII. Labouring-Beasts. 58 XXX. Wilde-Beasts. 62 CXLIII. The besieging of a
City. 29^ XIX. Birds. 4^ XXII. Birds, that live in the fields, and woods. 4^
XXII. Ravenous-Birds. 4^ XXI. Singing-Birds. 4^ XLI. The Channels and Bones. 8^
XCVI. A Book. 19^ XCV. The Book-binder. 19^ XCIV. The Book-seller's-shop. 19^
LXIX. The Box-maker. 14^ CXXXVI. Boyes-sports. 27^ L. Bread-baking. 10^ LVII.
Brewing. 11^ CXXIX. A Burial. 26^ LIVE. Butchery. 11^ C. C. CIII. The Celestial
Sphere. 21^ CXL. The Camp. 28^ CXXXIV. Carriages. 17^ CXXXV. Carrying to and
fro. 17^ LXIII. The Carpenter. 13^ XXVII. Herd-Cattel. 5^ XXIX. Wilde-Cattel.
6^ XLI. The Channels and Bones. 84^ CXLVII. Christianity. 298 CXXIII. A City,
248 CXLIII. The besieging of a City. 29^ CXXIII. The inward parts of a City.
250 The Close, 308 VII. The Clouds. 18^ CXIX. The Tree of Consanguinity. 242
LV. Cookery. 112 XXX. The Cooper. 164 XXXI. The Cord wainer. 166 ^VII. Corn 36
^XXII. Crawling-Vermine. 66 ^XXIII. Creatures that live as well by water, as by
land. 68 ^XXI. Creeping things. 64 D. D. LIVE. Deformed and monstrous people. 90
XXVII. Dials. 158 XXXIV. Dice-play. 292 XI. Diligence. 226 LV. The dressing of
Gardens 92 E. E. X. The Earth. 20 VI. The Ecelipses. 216 ^XV. Engines. 134
^VIII. Europe. 220 F. F. ^VIII. A Feast. 118 XXXII. The Fencing-School. 268 ^.
Fire. 12 ^I. Fishing. 104 XXXIV. River-fish, and Pond-fish. 70 XXXV. Seafish,
and Shel-fish. 72 XL. The Flesh and Bowels. 82 XV. Flowers. 32 XXV.
Flying-Vermine. 52 CXIII. Fortitude. 230 XXVI. Four-footed Beasts about the
House. 55 LII. Fowling. 106 XX. Tame-Fowl. 42 XXIV. Waterfowl. 50 X. The
fruits of the earth. 22 XIV. Fruits of Trees. 31 G. G. LXXXVIII. A Galley. 180
CXLV. Gentilism. 294 CII. Geometry. 208 II. God. 2 CXLIX. Gods Providence. 304
XLVII. Grasing, 96 XLIX. Grinding, 100 H. H. XXXIX. The Head, and the Hands, ^^
XVI. Pot herbs, ^^ XXVII. Heard-Cattel, ^^ IV. Heaven, ^^ XLVIII. The making of
Honey, ^^ LXXXIII. The Horseman, ^^ LXVI. A House, ^^ LXXI. The parts of a
House, 2^ CXV. Humanity, 2^ LIII. Hunting, 1^ XLVI. Husbandry, ^^ J. J. I. The
Invitation, ^^ C. Musical Instruments, 20 CXLVI. Judaism, 29 CXXIV. Judgment,
25 CL. The last Judgment, 30 K. K. CXVI. Justice, 23 CXXXVII. The Kingdom and
Region, 2^ L. L. XXVIII Labouring-beasts, 5 CVII. Liberality, 23 XIX. Living
creatures, 4^ LIX. The dresing of Line, 12^ LXI. Linnen-Clothes, 12^ LXXIX.
Looking-glasses, 16^ M. M. CXLVIII. Mahometisin, 30^ CXXXVIII. Kingly-Majesty,
28 XXXVI. Man, 7^ XXXVII. The seven Ages of Man, 7^ XXXVIII. The outward parts
of a Man. 7^ LXIV. The Mason, 13^ CXXVII. Measures and Weights, 25^ CXXVI.
Merchandising, 256 LXXXIX. A Merchants-ship, 18^ XI. Metals, 24 LXVII. A Mine.
138 CV. The apparitions of the Moon, 214 ^x. Moral Philosophy, 220 ^^. Musical
Instruments, 204 P. P. ^cii. Paper, 188 ^xxxvi. Passage over waters, 176 ^xv.
Patience. 232 ^i. Philosophy, 206 ^ix. Moral Philosophy, 220 ^xxviii. Physic.
260 ^xxviii. The Picture, 360 ^xxiv. Pond fish, 70 ^vi. Pot Herbs, 37 ^xx. The
Potter, 144 ^ciii. Printing, 190 ^xlix. Gods Providence, 304 ^x. Prudente, 224
R. R. ^xxxv. Races, 274 ^xii. Ravenous-birds, 48 ^xliv. Religion. 292 ^xxiv.
River-fish, 70 ^xxxi. The Roper, 166 ^xxxviii. Regal Majesty. 280 S. S. Xcvii.
A School, 198 ^xlii. The Sea Fight, 288 Xxxv. Seafish, and Shel-fish. 72 Xlii.
The outward and inward Senses. 86 Xxxi. Serpents, 64 Xc. Shipwreck, 184 Xxiii.
The-Shoo-maker, 128 Xviii. Shrubs, 38 Xxi. Singing-birds, 44 ^xxxi. Sleights,
266 Cxviii. The Society betwixt man and wife, 240 Cxx. The society betwixt
parents and children. 244 Cxxi The society betwixt Master and servant, 240
Xlii. The Soul of man, 88 Cxxxix. The Soldier, 282 Lxvii. She Blacksmith, 140
Cxxxii. Boyes-sports, 276 Ciii. The Celestial Sphere. 210 Cvii. The Terrestial
Sphere. 218 Xcix. Arts belonging to the Speech. 202 Cxxvi. The Stable. 156
Cxxx. A Stage Play. 264 Xii. Stones. 26 Lxxii. The stove with the bed-room. 148
Xcviii. The Study, 200 Lxxxvii. Swimming. 178 T. T. Lxii. The Tailor. 126 Cxii.
Temperance. 228 Cxxxiii. Tennis-play. 270 Cvii. The Terrestrial Sphere. 218
Cxxv. The Torments of Malefactors. 254 Lxxxii. The Traveller. 168 Xii. A Tree.
28 Lxix. The Turner. 142 U. U. Xxv. Flying-Uermin. 52 Xxxii. Crawling-Uermin.
66 Lvi. The Uintage. 114 W. W. Vii. The Water. 16 Lx. Weaving. 122 Lxxiii.
Wells. 150 Xxix. Wilde-Cattel. 60 Xxx. Wilde-Beasts. 62 Iii. The World. 8 Xci.
Writing. 186

Trinuni Deo Gloria.

