VRIM and THVMMIM; OR THE CLERGIES DIGNITY and DVTY Recommended in a Visitation
Sermon Preached at JEWS in Sussex, April 27. 1669.

By Malachi Conant B. D.

S. Ignatius. (...).

S. Hieronymus. Vita jubeat, Lingua persuadeat.

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall, Printer to the University, for James Collins, at
the sign of the King's Head in Westminster Hall. 1669.

Imprimatur

Jo: Fell VICECAN:

Aug. 2, 1669.

ADMODUM Reverendo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Dno HENRICO (Providentia Divina)
Cicestrensi Episcopo Praesuli non minus ob virtutes Heroicas and eruditionem
summam, quam Infulae dignitatem spectatissimo, NECNON Domino, Patrono, ac
Fautori suo, quam plurimis nominibus Colendissimo

Concionem hanc qualem-qualem, ad Clerum Sussexianum haud ita pridem habitam,
Observantiae, and gratitudinis haud exiguae specimen ac (...) exiguum.

L. M. Q. D. D. D.

Humillimus Cliens, Author.

Vrim and Thummim; OR, THE CLERGIES DIGNITY and DUTY Recommended in a
Visitation Sermon Preached at JEWS. April, 27. 1669.
S. Matthew. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father, which is in Heaven.


NO sooner had Almighty God created the Heaven, and the earth, but perceiving
that while this lower World was covered with darkness, the most excellent
objects lost their beauty, and so that it was no better, then a larger dungeon;
that so he might the better extract a beautiful world out of a confused Chaos,
he was pleased immediately by his Omnipotent Word to produce times first born
Issue Light, Genesis 1.3.
and in the invisible World those morning Stars, which were then all Angels of
Light: And accordingly in the New Creation of that little world Man, one of the
first graces, is that of Illumination, whereby men are turned from darkness to
light, Acts 26.18.
and from the power of Satan (that Angel of darkness,) unto God the Father of
Lights. But seeing this light within us is supernatural, it must (like the
other celestial being) be introduced by a light without, viz. that true
primigenial Universal Light, that lights every man that comes into the
world. John 1.9.
And this treasure of light God has put (as Gideon did his lamps) into earthen
vessels, shining upon us by the vicarious borrowed light of his Ministers, whom
in this sense he has made a flaming fire, or as the light of the morning when
the Sun arises; Revel. 1.20.
and therefore calls them Stars, in his right hand.

Hence our blessed Savior in this his excellent Sermon on the Mount (out of
which the Text is taken) directed primarily to his Disciples, though they
receive their charge like a Grand Jury before the multitude, vouchsafes to
dignifie them, besides other titles of the Salt of the earth, and a City set
upon an hill, with the honorable appellation of the Lights of the world, verse.
14. and proceeds from their dignity to infer and urge their duty in the Text.
(...). Let your light so shine, etc. or (as others) So let your light shine,
etc. q. d. seeing you are called to this high, and holy calling, and have the
title of Light attributed unto you, by which God himself is called, and
considering you are in danger by the power of temptation and your own frailty,
with those once blessed Angels to leave your first Station, and fall from your
own stedfastness into supineness of living; let me tell you, this Elogy does
not only entitle you to a benefice and dignity, but likewise oblige you to an
Office, and Duty: and so you are not to sever the Honor of your Sacred
Function from the charge and burden annexed unto it; but so keep your decorum
as to your demeanor both in life and doctrine, that it may be suitable to that
weighty, and transcendent Calling of being my Ministers and Apostles, into
which you are now instated.

And so you have in the words these parts.

First, The Dignity of Christ's Ministers; Implied in Light.

Secondly, Their Duty expressed. Let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works.

Thirdly, The Scope, and end of all. Not the ostentation of our selves (for so
they are reproved, Matthew. 6.1.
that do their works before men to be seen of them.) But, First as a
subordinate end the edification of others, that they may take pattern by us in
seeing our good works:

Secondly, the Supreme and Ultimate, Gods glory, that men may be induced to
glorify him in the day of their visitation, for having provided for them such
excellent instructors, and sure guides.

1. To resume the former of these.

The Ministers of the Gospel have the honor and privilege to be styled
Lights, a Title the more considerable in that ascribed to God himself, 1 John
1.5.
though it is true with some difference, to him as to an Original,
Inaccessible, Incomprehensible Light, to us as secondary lesser mutuatitious
lights: but however it is honor enough that he is pleased to put some of his
glory upon us, as he did on Moses his face, though we shine but with a reflex
and refracted ray. It is enough that though he only be the Father of Lights;
yet we are children of the light, and of the day; and that we have this
Spiritual honor derived to us immediately by this Fountain of all honor. What
though we are not that Son of Righteousness which arises with healing in his
wings, that day spring from on high? Yet are we radiant stars of light. We are
not all perhaps of the same magnitude, nor do we all move, in the same Sphere,
but some in an higher, others in a lower; and one star differs from another
star in glory: but yet still if we be good Pastors, we have the name given us
of Celestial bodies, and so are exalted in our Christian station above the
inferior world of Laymen or Private Christians; and as stars, have not only the
privilege of being illuminated our selves, but that other more obscure
Corporeal beings in our light do see Light.

But to descend to particulars my business shall be to demonstrate briefly some
of that Analogy and proportion that is to be found between the Literal and
Metaphorical, Natural and Supernatural light; and this I shall do in two heads.

1. Lux est speciosissima aspectu.

2. Lux est fortissima effectu.

1. Eccles. 11.7.
It is speciosissima aspectu. Light is sweet and it is a pleasant thing to
behold the Sun, says Solomon. I cannot better descant on those words, than in
the elegant style of the ingenious Author, of the Light of Nature. Culverwel.
c. 17.


Light is (says he) the smile of nature, the gloss of the World, the varnish
of the creation, a bright paraphrase on bodies; whether it discover it self in
the modesty of a morning bl^sh, and open it is fair, and Virgin eyelids in the
dawning day, whether it dart out it is more vigorous and sprightly beams in it is
noonday glory, whether it sport and twinkle in a star, or blaze and glare out
in a Comet, or frisk and dance in a jewel, or dissemble and play the hypocrite
in a Glowworm, or show it is zeal and the ruddiness of it is Complexion in the
yolk of fire, or grow more pale pining and consuming away in a Candle: However
it appears, it carries a commanding luster in it is face, and well deserves the
name of the Lady and Queen of all sensible beauties, The first born of
corporeal beings; The clarifier, and refiner of the Chaos, the unspotted beauty
of the universe.

Now herein Christ's Apostles and Successors bear a resemblance unto it, being
for the spiritual excellency of their Calling denominated not only stars, but
Angels, chosen Vessels, Men of a thousand; Revel 1.20. and 2.1. Acts 9.15. Job
33.23. Romans 10.15. 2 Cor. 8.23.
their very feet are styled beautiful, and they themselves, the Glory of
Christ. We know that the Judaical Priesthood was externally very glorious, and
yet that, being only a Type of ours, is made much inferior by the Apostle to
ours. 2 Cor. 3.9.
If the ministration of condemnation were glorious, much more does the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. Called therefore we are God's
stewards, Messengers, 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor. 5.20.
and Ambassadors. And how indeed can their employment choose but be honorable,
whose business is to menage the affairs of heaven upon earth? No wonder
therefore that Christ himself, though Lord of heaven and earth, did not disdain
to undertake it for our sakes, Romans 15.8.
when he became a Minister of the New Testament. And though it is true, that
this holy function is esteemed now adays Vile and Contemptible by those
earthworms that neither fear God, nor value their own Souls, but esteem of men
according to their external wealth and grandeur, weighing them by the pound,
and measuring them by the Acre, and therefore account of us as for the same
reason they would the Apostles themselves, were they now alive, as the dung and
offscouring of all things; Yet it is no wonder, that these persons judging
according to appearance judge not righteous judgment; 1 Cor. 4.13.
but they measuring themselves by themselves and comparing themselves amongst
themselves are not wise. 2 Cor. 10, 12.
Wherefore we are to turn our just wonder and indignation into Pity and
Commiseration of them, that they will so much stand in their own light, forsake
their own mercy, and show themselves their own greatest enemies. It is but
their weakness and ignorance, that they know not how to prize things or persons
according to their true worth, or discern things that differ, but entertain
wrong notions of excellencies. What if Children prefer their bables before the
Tower of London; or the Cock, the grain of Barley before the Jewel; or Glaucus,
in the story glistering Brass before Massy Gold; or Esau, a Morsel of bread
before his birthright; or the Gadarens, their Swine before their Savior? It is
but men's gross mistakes and vulgar prejudices, Matthew. 13.57.
that prophets are not accepted in their own Country, and that the English
Clergy, which are the admiration of the more Impartial World abroad, are the
scorn and derision of any of their own more ungrateful Countrymen; Or that
they are guilty of the other extreme from that into which they ran in the times
of Popery, defying that Order of Churchmen, which the others then almost
deified and adored, and all for mumbling over a few Oraisons in a strange
tongue, making their Breaden God, Chanting Dirges for the Living, and Requiems
for the Dead, and such like other fopperies. We must for our parts learn from
this their carriage to us, not to think meaner of that Honor which the King of
Heaven thinks fit to put upon us, but rather with the Apostle to magnify Our
Office; Romans 11.13.
and in compliance with our Lord and Masters instructions to his Disciples,
Mark 6.11.
let us bravely shake off the dust of our feet against them, that receive not
us or our Ministry. 1 Cor. 4.3.
Let it be a very small thing with us, to be judged with man's judgment, while
God vouchsafes us such Honor. No, let us rather with an holy and generous
disdain scorn the scorner, trample upon Contempt, despise Affronts and slight
Indignities. Let us show our selves Men of more raised Spirits and Principles,
and let us account that calling Our greatest Honor, which the World may think
Our debasement. Let us learn to leave this base World behind us, let us live
above it, as having ever showed it self false treacherous and disingenuous,
whose guise it has been to be guilty of unworthy fordid and dirty carriage, to
be most injurious to it is greatest benefactors, to set at naught him who came
to save them, and then to Crucify him, to persecute and abuse His Apostles,
and Ministers, that were Content to undergo the loss of all things, that they
might show them the way to Salvation, and to be poor in temporals, that they
may be rich in Spirituals; as if according to that Historians Observation,
Courtesies and kindnesses change their Nature, and are looked upon as injuries,
when they are too great to be repaid, and (as it is here) people owe their own
selves also. Philem. 19.
How indeed can we expect that the World should alter it is Nature for us now in
it is old declining age? Or that the Men of this World, among whom we shine as
lights, Philip. 2.15.
should cease to be a crooked and perverse generation? Our comfort is, the Moon
shines never the less bright, because barked at by Dogs; nor is the light less
glorious in it is Nature, John 1.5.
because the darkness comprehends it not.

2. Lux est fortissima effectu. Light herein discovers it is celestial
Original, and imitates heavenly bodies in it is motion and influence, as well as
in it is enlightening. Whether it be a quality according to the Aristotelians, or
a more subtle body, according to the Epicurean Philosophy, it will be here
impertinent to determine. This is certain, that all things else become visible;
It Is own true nature still remains unintelligible, being in the dark it self,
how sensible soever it is in it is effects, which are (as God himself) rather to
be admired than understood. It is most admirably diffusive of its self, and
with a motion (if not instantaneous yet) insensibly successive, is propagated
in the medium.

Have you never seen one torch in the twinkling of an eye expel the darkness of
an whole Street; One Beacon, or Boonfire discover it self to the whole
Vicinage; All the shadows flying away at the dawning of the day?

Light is the vehicle of the sweet influences of heaven; It is the great guide
and director of Actions: and so it is not only for show, but Service. He that
walks in the Light, John 11.9.
(says Christ who was the true light,) stumbleth not because he sees the
light of this World. Now thus it is with those who are able Ministers of the
New Testament. They are that to the body Mystical, the Church, which the eye is
to the body Natural. They are our Spiritual guides unto Salvation; not only
Mercurial Statues, pointing the way to others, and standing still themselves,
but like the Star that did not only lighten, but lead the wisemen of the East,
till they came to the Child Jesus.

And if we be lights indeed, we shall not think it enough, that we have lamps,
unless we have oil in Our Lamps; Nor that we have oil in them, unless they are
burning and shining, so as to give light unto others, by our holy life and
doctrine, bringing thereby glory to God, credit to Religion, Salvation to our
own Souls, and theirs that hear us. We are not only to be painted, but real
flames, like torches giving Light to others, though at the same time they
consume themselves. But here we must take care, that our Light be not a false
Light not an ignis-fatuus, to draw and seduce men into bogs and precipices, not
an ignis Graecus, a Wildfire, to inflame and heighten their animosities and
passions, nor like that of a glowworm, where there is light without heat, nor
like that of a candle in a Dark Lanthern to give light to none but our selves,
nay nor like that of a fiery Meteore, vanishing as soon as it appears, but
like that of the Sun and Stars, constant perpetual and invariable. And this
unspotted being must not be obscured and overclouded with thick vapors of
lusts: Neither must it burn downwards toward the earth, and be put under a
bushel, but upwards toward heaven. So that it is not sufficient for us to have
light, except our light so shine before men, that they may see our good works,
etc.

2. Which brings me to the second General, from the dignity of the Gospels
Ministers to their duty.

We must not only be lights for glory, and glaring, but for the use and service
of enlightening others: We must not only have those graces, which are radical
and fundamental in the root, but those also which are visible and external in
the fruit; nor those only which are terminated to our selves, but those that
extend to others. It is not enough that our goodness extend unto God the
searcher of hearts, but it must be conspicuous in the world, Psalm. 16.3.
to the Saints that are in the Earth. And so our gifts and knowledge within
must show themselves by giving heed to our doctrine and exhortation without;
James 2.18,
and Our faith within must appear by Our works, and the effects of a transient
charity to others. And we must be as Christ was, Prophets mighty both in word
and deed. Luke 24.19.
We must have, Exodus 28.30.
as the high Priest of old had, both our Urim and Thummim, light of Doctrine,
and perfection of life. Exodus 28.33.
We must not separate Aarons bells from his pomegranates; We must not only have
an empty sound like a tinkling Cymbal in our teaching, but bring forth fragrant
fruit in our living, and in this regard be savours of life unto life. 2 Cor.
6.16.
Our Conversation must preach as well as our discourses, and we must be
Instructors and teachers of babes, not only to their ears, (that is only doing
our work by halves) but to their eyes, and so we shall make religion palpable
to their very senses. When they not only hear our Sermons to practice them, but
behold our honest Conversations to imitate and follow them; then, and not till
then shall we be able with the Apostle to charge them to walk as they have us
for an Example: Philip. 3.19.
and they need not be charged as the Jews were to do after our sayings, but not
after our works. All that I shall say hereon, I may reduce to two heads of Our
Doctrine, and Life.

1. For the Light of our doctrine, which denominateth us Teachers: in which as
in other things, I desire my Reverend Brethren of the Ministry (now I am by the
providence of God, and by the Injunction of my Superiors called hither) to give
me the Liberty of speaking my thoughts, without offense, and mind them of that,
which we know Saint Paul straightly charge Timothy, to take heed unto himself,
and his doctrine, and put them in remembrance, 1 Timothy 4.16. 1 Timothy 4.6. 2 Timothy
2.14.
to stir up the gift of God in them. Ministers of the Gospel should have their
senses exercised to discern Spiritual things that differ, above private
Christians, and being in this regard as stars, the more Dense parts of their
Orbs or Vortices, so as their light be more compacted and united, whereby to
enable them to outshine others.

It is not enough for them to fill the Golden Candlesticks of the Temple,
unless they give light to those who enter in; otherwise they are but as
Antiques under a building, that seem to groan under their burden, whereas in
stead of supporting, they are only supported themselves. Our Savior charge
us therefore, not only to have our loins always girt, Luke 12.35.
i. e. with the girdle of truth and sincerity, or so as to be still in
procinctu, ready for his com^ng, or if you will, by external conformity in our
habit; but we must have Our lights burning, to illuminate and direct others in
their way to heaven, and be to them as the pillar of fire by night was to the
Israelites, in their journey through the wilderness toward Canaan. What good
else does light, if it discover not it is self to them who sit in darkness? No
more than painted fire to those who are benumbed with cold. For the Priests lips
should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, Mal. 2.7.
for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. It will not be enough for us in
the last day when we are to give an account of our stewardship to our Master in
heaven, that we have lived an unprofitable, though Innocent Anchorets life,
that we have laid up our talent in a Napkin. Luke 19.20.
No, we must lay it out for our Lords profit. We are bid to preach the word, to
be instant in season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2.
to reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine. We are not
allowed to lock up a treasure of knowledge in our own breast, or cover our fire
under the Ashes; but it must break out as a fire on the Altar, and we must
still have before our eyes, our solemn promise made when we received holy
Orders, to give faithful diligence, to Minister the Doctrine and discipline of
Christ. We must not be like wandering planets, which are sometimes Stationary,
sometimes Retrograde, much less like vanishing Comets; but as constantly as
well as publicly useful, as those Luminaries are in Lightning and guiding the
lower World.

Now because our Savior seems to propose Saint John the Baptist as our Example
herein, John 5.35.
when he styles him a burning and shining light, I shall therefore give you a
brief character of him, being one, as a Father descants on the place, Ardens
per coeleste desiderium, lucens per verbum. As severe in his life, as he was in
his Doctrine. He was none of those who wore a rough garment to deceive, he was
no Hermit as to loving his ease, and indulging himself, like an Abbey-lubber,
that could satisfy himself with the taking the Milk and the Wool of the flock
without feeding them, and when he had taken on him cure of Souls, by his gross
neglect to make it a sine Cura; but it may be said of him as of that Roman
Emperor that never said to his Soldiers, go thither, but come hither. Now you
may observe these things in his preaching.

1. He preached with Authority. He did not think it enough, that he was a
gifted brother, or could talk fluently, mysterious nonsense, in Scripture
Language wrested; He was none of those in our days who ran before they were
sent, being (as one says) prius indoctorum doctores, quam doctorum discipuli,
which take on them to be teachers of others, and need that one should teach
them, what are the first principles of the Oracles of God, that have never sat
at Gamaliels feet, or stayed at Jericho, at least till their beards be grown.
But before he ventured on that tremendous work of the Ministry, he lived a
retired Contemplative Life in the Wilderness, till he was of those years, which
the Law required of the Priests for the exercise of their Function.

2. He used a (...) a boldness and freedom of speech in his preaching; for he
reproved the Epidemical diseases of the age, and place wherein he lived. He
showed himself to be none of those parasites, that love to sprinkle Court-holy
Water on the Grandees of the World, Jude 16.
as having men's persons in admiration for advantage sake. He did not preach
soft and pleasing things, but was (as Aristotle describes his Hero or Virtuous
man) (...). He was a true Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed, in whom there was no
guile. He was not wont to daub with untempered Mortar, but used open, and plain
dealing, being free and impartial in his Censures, and painted out fin, and
sinners in their own colors. He spared none that came in his way, neither open
profaness of the Publicanes and Soldiers on the one side, nor the hypocrisy,
sly and refined wickedness of the Pharisees and Sadducees on the other side;
Nay, not that Herod himself, though his life lay at stake for it.

3. He preached severely. His doctrine was alike severe as his life, as well
knowing that pure Religion and undefiled consists not in empty names and
words, in being of such a way, party, or separated Church; and therefore he
bids beware of flattering themselves with the outward badge and cognifance of
God's people, Matthew. 3.9.
in being Abraham's Children. Christianity consists not in petty observances
and modules of worship, but in reality and sincerity. Else we are only Nominal
and Equivocal Christians: and therefore he tells us, Matthew. 3.8.
we must bring forth fruits meet for repentance. And this strict doctrine he
might preach with the more confidence, (as our Savior Christ) because he spoke
not only sense and reason, but experience, his life not confuting his doctrine,
but confirming it; and feared not the censure of Antinomians, for a Legal
Preacher, or a man of an Oldtestament Spirit, especially seeing.

4. He Preached Evangelically withal. He not only showed them their desease out
of the Law, but their remedy out of the Gospel. He not only cast them down, by
laying the ax at the root of the tree, but restored them by the laver of
Regeneration, and pointing out unto them their Savior, and so was truly
gracious, both in Name, and Nature, both in Life and Doctrine. And so I come to
the second head.

2. As the light of our Doctrine must shine; so that of our Life and
Conversation: and this must be before men, not only before our brethren, that
they may be built up in their holy faith; but before those also who are
without: That so Religion and the instructors of it may have a good report of
all men, as well as of the truth it self, 2 Cor. 11.12.
that the mouths of unruly and vain talkers may be stopped, and occasion may be
taken away from them who seek occasion, that our observers, who watch for our
halting, may be disappointed, their hearts may be mollified, their hostilities
abated, their prejudices removed, and they may be brought to entertain
honorable thoughts of our profession. Their Pastors and Teachers being more
public persons than others, ought to know above others, 1 Timothy 3.15.
how to behave themselves in the house of God, and show themselves examples to
the flock; and therefore should learn to adorn their Ministry, as becomes those
of so Divine an Order, and by no means to reflect dishonor on so Sacred an
Office, by a sordid sensual and earthly conversation. And therefore (as the
late Lord Bishop of Down and Conner well shows in his advice unto His Clergy)
we are to judge of our duty by more strict and severe measures than those of
our people, and must not allow that in our selves, which we do in them. This
was both the Apostles rule and practice, 1 Cor. 6.3.
to give no offense to any man, that the Ministry be not blamed. And if we will
do the work of an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4.5.
make full proof of our Ministry, we must keep our selves as pure and unspotted
from the world, as humane frailty will permit, abstaining even from the
appearance of evil; least otherwise we defile the priesthood, Ezekiel. 3.1.
and cause the offerings of the Lord to be abhorred. Ezekiel was bid to eat the
roll; and we must labor to masticate and concoct the truths we preach unto
others, in first trying experiment of them upon our selves, and exemplifying
them in our Conversations: whence Saint Paul exhorts Timothy to be an example
unto believers in word, 1 Timothy 4 12.
in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.

Now to excite us hereunto, Consider,

1. How absurd and unfitting a thing it is, that our practice should be
dissonant unto our profession, that we should undo that on the Weekdays, which
we Preach upon the Lord's Day, Romans 14.22.
and so condemn our selves in those things which we allow, Gal. 2.18.
and make Our selves transgressors by building those things which we destroyed,
that it should be said of any of us which that Spartan said of the Athenians
that they knew how to do well, but loved to do ill; 2 Timothy 2.15.
and so we shall make our selves to be Workmen that need to be ashamed, seeing
as he says, Dict a factis deficientibus erubescunt; that it should be said of
any man, that he is the best man in the Pulpit, and the worst out, that he
speaks as well as never man spoke, and lives as ill as never man lived; and
therefore (as a Right Reverend Father of our Church expresses it) It is so far
from being serious piety, Lord Bishop of Norwich.
that it is the worse sort of pageantry, for men to preach Angelical
Sermons,and live Diabolical lives; that it should be cast justly in any ones
teeth. Romans 2.21.
Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self? that their mouths
should speak great swelling words, and yet still walk after their own lusts,
and be like the Stoical Philosophers, who could talk big of virtue till they
came to practice it: whom therefore Lucian derides, (...), Their works
contradicting their words, and their practice giving a lie to their profession.
How foolish, ridiculous, and disparaging must it needs be, to make a long
formal starched harangue about Religion and Virtue, and declame Rhetorically
against vice, which they yet renounter, in the whole course of their lives?
Which made the Comic say, (...). He loathed such Sophisters and pretended
Philosophers, that were unwise for themselves. Turpe est doctori, etc.

2. Consider the bad influence, our example has upon other men: How can we
expect that others should follow our doctrine, when as we our selves forsake
it, as unpracticable or at least uneligible? We see men rather apt to be lead
by precedents than precepts, and go like sheep, Quo itur, non quo cundum, and
especially to imitate their guides and Leaders. Such persons therefore who are
great talkers, and little doers, take the ready way to make more Atheists in
the world, than has been hitherto made by the late licentious times, which
have corrupted Religion in the very foundations. Will not men of loose
principles be ready to look on Religion as a nonentity, a cunning devised
Fable of interested Priests, which go about to persuade that to others, which
they believe not themselves? These persons shine, but in a wrong sense, as if
they understood the words of the Text, so as a Romish Priest profanely applied
them; who being to do Penance for some scandalous offense, by going in
Procession to the Church with a burning Taper in his hand, scoffingly said, sic
luceat Lux vestra coram hominibus, etc. They shine, but it is with the Devils
light, to Light men down to the Chambers of Death, and make more Proselytes for
his Kingdom. He uses them indeed as some ill barbarous people do lights by the
Seaside, which they hang up in dark stormy nights near rocks and quicksands,
to make passengers cast away themselves upon their Coast, that so they may make
a prey of them. What readier course could they take to open men's mouths
against Christianity, and to say as that Indian did to one persuading him to
turn Christian, observing the Spaniards wicked lives, What are Christians? They
are Gamesters, Dicers, wicked blasphemers, backbiters, quarrellers, and
concluded Christians could not be good; and so we shall find it,
proportionably, if we walk Antipodes to our doctrine, and show our selves such
as Tertullian sharply inveighs against, Quibus venture Deus est, and popina
templum, and aqualiculus altar, and sacerdos Coquus, and Spiritus Sanctus
nidor, and condimenta charismata; especially there being more holiness expected
of us then others, and a spot in our Coat making more show, than in others. We
had need be clean who bear the vessels of the Lord, especially in an
hypocritical age, Isaiah 52.11.
wherein people are apt to espy motes in our eyes, and look on all our faults
through a magnifying and multiplying glass; Which may serve for a

3d Consideration, that we have so many enemies in the world, to encounter,
what through the contradiction of sinners and scoffing Atheists on one hand,
and the weakness and peevishness of some, at least, pretended Saints, on the
other; neither are we ignorant of Satan's old devise, of casting Ignominy and
Contempt on Religion by disgracing and disparaging the publishers and
professors of it: Great reason have we therefore to walk circumspectly, Ephesians.
5.
not as fools, but as wise, and to take heed that we defile not our garments.
For we shall meet with but few Constantines in our days so tender of the
Clergies honor, as if he espied them in a fault, to cover them with his
Imperial Robes; but they will rather publish to the world all the evil they
know by us, and more than they know, their own Inventions and misconstructions.
There are too many in the world, that contemn our Calling, envy our Dignities,
gape after our Revenues, censure our most Innocent Actions, and hate our very
Persons. Others separate from our Church as Impure and Antichristian, abhor
our Garments as Babylonish, our Ceremonies as Popish and Superstitious, our
very Worship as Idolatrous, look upon us as no better than Priests of Baal, and
Limbs of Antichrist. Among these I cannot forget a leading high-flown
separatist too well known in this place, who not long since bespake the State
in this Language.

Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed O ye Judges of the earth. Take
away Parishes by Act of State, away with all consecrated places for worship,
away with Patrones or Lay-founders, away I say with all the appurtenances of a
Parish Priest: and again. I profess, quoth he, were I a man in absolute
Authority in a Nation, I would make Scavengers of all the Parish Priests in
England to clean the ways and to rake the Dunghills. And this he confidently
calls a voice from heaven, when alas! it is only such a noise as that of the
(...), proceeding out of it is own belly, and not knowing what Spirit he is of,
mistakes the strange fire in his own brain, for a fire from heaven; and minds
me of the proud Gnostics of old, that arrogated to themselves so great a
measure of knowledge and sanctity, as to dictate to the world and obtrude their
private sentiments on others, as if they were Articles of faith, and themselves
guided by an infallible Spirit. It is opinionativeness and spiritual pride of
men's gifts and graces, that puts men on separation, and confining sanctity, as
the Donatists of old, to their own party in one Corner of Africa: and thus none
must be Saints, but those of their Calendar. This makes them, like sheep
stealers, take members out of other men's flocks, and boast of things in other
men's line made ready to their hand, 2 Cor. 10.16.
mistaking for conversion to God, a bringing men over to their own forms, and
some petty inconsiderable matters, in which the kingdom of God consists not.
These mind me of those in Prove. 30.12. a generation pure in their own eyes, and
yet not cleansed from their filthiness: or of those in Esaias 65.5. that say,
stand off, come not nigh me, for I am holier than thou. These are a smoke in my
nose, a fire that burns all the day: and these may serve for a pregnant
instance to us, how far an (...); and rash misguided Zeal may transport men; so
as to think that, while they endeavor the subversion of a settled Ministry,
they are doing God Service, and may be an Item to us likewise, of the dangerous
consequences of those Principles, which the aforesaid Sectarians so confidently
proceed on, viz. The necessity of abolishing things once abused to Idolatry and
Superstition, and the unlawfulness of using any thing of an indifferent nature,
even as to the Circumstantials of Gods Worship, which is not expressly Commanded
in holy Writ. Let us

4ly Consider the danger of neglecting our duty herein, Ma^th 23 14.
and of giving offense and bad example unto others: Such certainly (as our
Savior said of the Pharisees) shall receive the greater damnation, when they
shall hear it said unto them by God (which so moved Origin) What have thou to
do, Psalm. 50 16.
to take my name into thy mouth, seeing thou batest reproof, and bast cast my
law behind thy back? So that it will not be enough for them at the last day, to
say, Lord, Matthew. 7.12.
Lord, we have prophesied in thy name: And Christ has good reason to take it
ill, if he receives wounds in the house of his friends, and be thus
dishonored and affronted by his own Menial Servants, that wear his Badge and
Livery; and if those that live by the altar, and eat with him, at his Table,
Mal. 2.8.
lift up their heel against him, if they I say, depart out of the way, and
cause others to stumble; If the light that is in you be darkness (as our
Savior says) how great is that Matthew. 6.22.
darkness? What! shall I say, as one; that hell shall be paved with the skulls
of profane Scholars? Questionless it will be more tolerable in the day of
Judgment for others, than for such, who instead of being men of God, show
themselves men of Belial, instead of being Priests of the high God, are Priests
of Bacchus, or Venus; and obscure the light of their Doctrine by works of
darkness. These, though they have the voice of Jacob, have the hands of Esau,
and do by their bad example, but aedificare ad gehennam. Cavendum est itaq,
nobis fratres, ne vel superbia, addam, and luxuria, quae (dicente S. Cypriano)
valde suaviter dormiunt in sacerdotum sinu, denuo florentis Ecclesiae nostrae
ruinam moliantur, and aut paritatem inter Ecclesiasticos, qua nihil imparius
esse dixit Veterum non-nemo, aut quod deterius est, Acephalorum Anarchiam
introducant, ne in Chaos antiquum confundamur, and novas demum in Ecclesia
(quod absit) tragoedias experiamur; dum conformes altas Ecclesiae filii divino
tamen canoni difformes se praestent, and immorigeros, dum ab exterminatis
concionatoribus, aut concionandi assiduitate, aut vitae quadam severitate
superentur, adeoque fanaticae plebis furore, ne dicam justo dei judicio, instar
salis insipidi sint rejectanei; dum histrionum more verbis tantum
Philosophentur, and male vivendo (quod inquit ille) altera manu abripiant, quod
been docendo, altera manu porrigant. Caveamus praesertim, ne quis coronam
nostram abripias coelestem, Minutius Felix.
dum magna potius loquamur, quam vivamus, ne indocti coelum rapiant (quod
exclamat ille) and nos cum doctrinis nostris in infernum detrudamur, ubi

Scelera taxantur modo Majore nostra, Seneca.


Wherefore suffer Brethren, the word of exhortation: Let me entreat and conjure
you, by whatsoever is great, or good, by whatsoever is dear and near unto you,
by that holy Jesus whom you worship, by that holy Religion you profess, by the
love you bear to your own and others Souls, by a judgment which is to come of
condemnation to the evil, and recompense to the good in a Crown of glory, that
your Light shine before men. Phil. 4.8.
Finally brethren whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, or if
there be any praise, think of these things. Be stars, for light, motion, and
influence: And God will make you as stars in his right hand, fixed and unmoved
by any of the sons of violence; and be careful to put in practice that promise
you made solemnly at your Ordination, to frame and fashion both your selves and
families, according to the doctrine of Christ, 1 Pet. 5.3.
and so make your selves and them, as much as in you lies, examples to the
flock. Set this your seal to your Ministry, and let your whole life be a
constant exemplifying of a Christians duty, and so a continual Sermon before
their eyes, that so they may by this silent Rhetoric be induced to approve of
that pure and undefiled Religion, which they see us practice our selves, as
well as profess and Preach to others. Remember your title of Light, and so
labor to resemble the Sunbeams herein, that through whatsoever place you
pass, you may retain your purity. What if you be for a while Ecclipsed, by the
interposition of a variable fickle world, the irrational humors of the
inconstant vulgar? show your selves as the Church in the Revelations is
represented, having the Moon under your feet, Revel. 12.1.
and by an unoffensive walking stop their mouths, and so take an holy revenge
of them, who so far malign your office, as to charge the aberrations of
particular Persons upon the Office it self. And then though you may be darkened
for a while by the clouds of men's passions and prejudices, yet will it be only
to this inferior World, not to the upper starry region; and when you have
finished your course, and accomplished your periodick motion, and so long
shined before others, till (like a lamp or candle) you have consumed your
selves, God has promised to exalt you to an higher Orb, by an happy
Apotheosis, nigh unto himself; even there, where when as others shall shine
only as the brightness of the firmament, they that turn many unto righteousness
shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. Dan. 12.3.


Now that which in my Text is said unto Ministers, our Savior says in a sense
to all Christians. Every one that is of the Light, Ephesians. 5 8.
must walk as a Child of the Light. Tit. 2.^0.
Adorn the Doctrine of our Lord and Savior in all things, bring credit and
honor to Religion by an Holy Life, Co^oss. 1.10.
walk worthy of God to all wellpleasing. The word (...) signifies a man as well
as light, to denote (as some Critics) that men ought to live as lights unto
others. Christians must let the world see, that there is as much difference
between them and others, as between light and darkness, and so they must make
the beauty of holiness, which they heard of only by the hearing of the ear,
visible to their very eyes; that men may become admirers and practisers of our
Religion, and so have reason to glorify God on your behalf: which leads me to
the third and last general, viz.

3d Our end and design in our light shining. We must not shine so as to glaze
and glister for ostentation, like the heathen who knew not what belonged to
humility, but were, as Tertullian calls them, Gloriae animalia, and
negotiatores famae, vainglorious hunters after popular air, and applause; We
must not shine as the Pharisees, by making broad our Phylacteries, praying in a
corner of the street, Matthew. 23.5.
disfiguring our faces, and all to be seen of men; Matthew. 6.16.
we must not suffer pride to interpose and rob God of his just Glory, but all
our shining must be with a design to glorify him, who is the Father of Lights;
Our good actions must be without hypocrisy, not tempered with interest, but
directed to that which should be the chief end of all our actions, as it was of
our beings, viz. Gods honor, that men may see our good works, and glorify,
not us, but our Father which is in heaven. This as it is a duty incumbent upon
all men, so especially upon those who are near unto him, in the Ministry, and
so as his Ambassadors are to be tender of the credit of their Lord and Master.
But now when we are said here to glorify God, it cannot be understood of any
real glory added unto him, who is infinitely and Essentially glorious, and so
neither better for our praises, or the worse for our dispraises; but then we
honor him, when in our thoughts, words, and actions, we set forth his
Excellent glory: or as the Schoolmen will have it, Gods glory may be considered
two ways, either as it is in him, and so it is incapable of having any thing
added to it, or taken from it, as being a confluence and union of those many
transcendent excellencies that are in him; or else it may be considered in
relation, to it is manifestation to the creature, and so we may glorify and
honor him, when we praise him either with our tongue, (which therefore is
called our glory) or by our holy lives, giving occasion unto others to speak
good of his name. That this is our duty, might be more largly showed, by the
express Command of God, who requires this homage and tribure as due unto him,
from all his Creatures, particularly rational, who are the fittest agents for
this work, as being endued with reason, and speech for this very end; but
especially his own people, and among them his Ministers, which makes the
Psalmist to call upon Israel and the house of Aaron to praise the Lord. Psalm.
118.2, 3.
It is indeed but reasonable that we should acknowledge a dependence that we
have on him, the relation that we have to him, and the interest he has in us.
It is but the honor that is due unto his name, who has in this work
complicated our interest with our duty, seeing in glorifying him, we do honor
our selves, as doing the work of Angels here below, and begin those Hallelujahs
to the Lord our God, which will be our happiness to carry on in Heaven, to all
Eternity. Which God of His Mercy grant through Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

