THE Bishop of LONDON's CHARGE TO THE Clergy of his Diocese AT HIS VISITATION:
Begun Ann. 1693: AND Concluded Ann. 1694. LONDON: Printed by Benj. Motte. 1696.

THE Bishop of London's Charge TO THE CLERGY of his Diocese, etc.
BRETHREN,
I Have always thought it my Duty upon these solemn Meetings to say something,
that might be most proper for your Notice: And I believe there has rarely been
a Time that afforded greater Variety of unhappy Circumstances than these we now
labor under. For we are divided into so many and such pernicious Principles;
that without the gracious Assistance of the Almighty to our utmost Care for the
rooting of them out, they will inevitably ruin both Church and State.
Obedience, Truth and Sincerity; Quietness, Peace and Love, are no longer the
measures of Civil and Religious Behavior: but a noisie pretense of Liberty,
has, with too many, broken both the Tables.

If therefore I entertain you a little longer than ordinary with such Discourse
as may call to your minds those good, but forgotten, Rules of former Times, to
encounter so universal a Depravation, as we are at present involved in: I hope
you will bear with me. For it is absolutely necessary, where ye have so many
obstinate Enemies to encounter, that ye muster up all your Forces, and put them
in the best posture of Service for all Occasions.

I shall direct what I have to say by St. Paul's words to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.16.
Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy Doctrine. Which though written to a
Bishop, are as justly applicable to any who minister about holy things.

I. The first of which words, Take heed unto thy self, directs 1. To your
Virtuous and Godly Conversation in general, as well, as 2. To your special duty
of walking orderly in the House of God. 1. And reason good: Since a sober and
good Life is so extremely necessary for the Edification of your Flocks. For
what an Awe and Reverence do we find an Upright Man to gain upon those that
behold his Conversation! The shining Light of a Righteous Man so discovers the
shamefulness of the ways of Sinners; that they are confounded to see their own
Filthiness, and from that time often commence true Penitents. Therefore St.
Peter seems to take it for granted, that it was the sure and tried way to win
the Wicked to a Holy Life, by leading such a one themselves. 1 Pet. 2.12.
Abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the soul; having your
conversation honest amongst the Gentiles. That whereas they speak against you
as evil doers; they may by your good works, which they shall behold, glorify
God in the day of Visitation. According to the words of our blessed Savior;
Let your light so shine before men, Mat. 5.^2.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

And it stands to all Reason in the World that it should be so. For it puts
Life into the Commandment, and makes Religion truly active; it raises it from
the dead Letter to a living Sacrifice, and clothes it through the sanctifying
Spirit with the Beauty of Holiness.

Besides it is natural for them that are habituated to do Evil, to fancy it an
impossible thing to observe the Law, they having never experienced the
Practice, and their minds having been always alienated from the knowledge and
understanding of it. In which opinion they would be mightily confirmed, should
they find the Teachers of the Gospel not walking according to their own Rules.
For they will then cheerfully conclude, that the Precepts of Holiness were
given only for a Testimony of the Gospel Purity, and to hold forth the
Perfection and Excellence of Gods Law: not in the least to oblige Men to the
Observation of it. And they have this ready Answer to put off all such
unsanctified Teachers, Nonne flagitium est, te altis consilium dare, Foris
sapere, tibi non posse auxiliarier? Terent.
Physician heal thy self.

Though ye should lay Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept: if you should not
live up to your own Doctrine, there would be as small hopes of Success, as of
Gods Blessing. For, since all things turn by Providence, with what face can a
sinner, a persevering sinner, expect that either his Prayers should be heard,
or his Endeavors prosper? For the Lord is far from the wicked: Prove. 15.29.
but he hears the prayer of the righteous.

I leave it therefore to you, my Brethren, to consider with your selves,
whether you find people in these days so meek, so gentle, so easy to be
entreated; as not to need the best instructed and disposed Teachers, and the
most artificial in that Guile, with which St. Paul tells the Corinthians he
craftily caught them. 2 Cor. 12.16.
And if ye do not meet with so tractable a Generation as may tempt you to be
remiss; I beseech you for your own sakes, and for theirs that are committed to
your Charge, not to faint in well doing, since your Reward is certain.
Especially since there is no surer a way to put to silence those that dissent
from us; who are too apt to judge of the sincerity of our Doctrine from that of
our Lives.

II. But this is not all your Task, to set an Example of a virtuous and sober
Life. Ye have attained to a good degree, when ye get so far: yet if it be not
attended with an orderly and conformable Behavior; ye will be in danger of
turning your Righteousness into Sin, by making it serve for a Cloak to
Disorderliness and Schism, which are always attended with Uncharitableness, and
for the most part with Confusion and every evil Work. For should ye live never
so strictly up to the general Rules of Morality; 1 Pet. 3.13.
yet if ye submit not your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
ye are Transgressors of the Word, by breaking the Unity of the Spirit and the
Bond of Peace: For it is a Duty of that Importance, I mean the Discipline of
the Church, that if it should not be observed, it would be impossible to
preserve Religion it self.
For Discipline consists of Decency and Order; 1 Cor. 14.40.
which two concur as the Fashion of a Frame does with the Frame it self. The
Word by which Order is expressed in Scripture, is used by the Inspired Writers
sometimes in a confined Sense, and sometimes in a large one, When they use it
in a confined Sense, they take it either for an appointed (...). Act. 12.21
Time, or for (...). 1. Cor. 15.23.
degrees of Men, or for a set Course of performing any (...). Luke 1.8.
Office, or for the Constitution (...). Heb. 5.6.6.20.7.11. etc. Vide etiam
Canones Eccles. Universae a Iustello Edit. und cum Notis ejusd.
of the Office it self. When they take it in a large Sense, they mean the Rule
by which the Church directs and governs her Members, and preserves Order within
the Sanctuary; the discreet and modest Observation of which gives a Luster to
that Decency in which Order is constituted. And of the Word taken in this Sense
ye have several Instances in Scripture, which at the same time set forth the
Value of the thing it self. Let all things be done decently and in (...). 1.
Cor. 14.40.
order. Ioying and beholding your (...). Col. 2.5.
order. We exhort you Brethren, warn them that are (...). 1. Thef. 5.14.
unruly. Now we command you, Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks (...). 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us. We behaved
not our selves (...). ibid. v. 7.
disorderly among you. For by all this ye see what weight the Apostle puts upon
the Order or Discipline of the Church: The measure of which is expressed by the
Word Canon, Let us walk by the same (...). Phil. 3.16.
Rule.

There are two sorts of Proofs that are enough to convince any Man, that the
Apostle had an eye, in a great measure at least, to the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church, when he made use of these words.

First. The first is from Reason, and that a Negative one, which is the great
Mischiefs that attend a remiss Conformity, in You especially. I. For it shakes
the minds of your Flocks, and either encourages them to have an ill opinion of
your Constitution, or at least to think very indifferently of it, and to
observe it accordingly. II. It affords great matter of Triumph to those that
are without; when they find how little ye regard those very things, for the
retention of which too often they are separated from you. III. Whoever is
guilty of this Neglect, and yet continues in the Communion of our Church, must
needs expose himself to the Censure of all sorts of Men. For what can be
imagined to induce him to this Disorderliness, but either that he is not
satisfied in his own Mind to observe the Injunctions of the Church, and is
therefore a Knave for undertaking to do that, which he thinks in Conscience he
ought not to do: or that he fears to displease some People, lest their Favor
and Contributions should fail; whereby he becomes a Traditor in selling his
Duty for a Morsel of Bread: And in both Cases he is a perjured Person by
breaking his Canonical Oath. IV. But the certain effect of drawing several ways
in our course of Worship, will be a coldness of Affection from the difference
of Minds, and that soon improves into Strife and Contention. For when Men set
their Hearts upon any thing that meets with Opposition, they are presently in a
Flame, as not enduring to be thought in the Wrong. This is so evident through
the whole Conversation of Mankind, that he must wink very hard that sees it
not. What Heats, what Animosities, nay many times what Enmities, what
Contentions, what Wars have ensued upon Differences in very Trifles! Now by how
much the greater the Consequence is of the Matter in debate, so much the warmer
prove the train of Passions raised upon it; and the more in earnest a Man is,
the apter is he to be froward, especially if he get into a Wrong way: For,
James 3.16.
Where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work.
Secondly, The Second Proof is from Authority; and such an Authority so clear
and plain, that one would wonder how ever it could enter into the heart of Man,
to question the Observation of an innocent Ceremony or Rite in Worship.
1. For the Holy Scripture is so clear in this Point, that even the Old
Testament, which is made up of Types and Figures, Rites and Ceremonies, and of
Gods own Appointment; yet admitted of Changes, Additions and Alterations: the
Authority of which Practice, our Savior himself confirms by his own Communion
with them. The several Orders and Classes of the Priests and Levites appointed
by the Kings of Judah continued till that day. Exodus 12.11. Mat. 26.20. 1 Mac.
4.59. John 10.22.
The change of Posture in keeping the Passover was observed by him; and he
honored the Feast of Dedication, a new Feast, with his own Presence.

When the Shadows were vanished away and the Substance was come, then were
Rites and Ceremonies no more a part of Religion; but only so far in use, as the
necessity of Decency and Order required, in the Judgment of those who had the
Rule over the Church; so that from a direct Obligation upon the Conscience,
they became only relatively so. For now it is purely in obedience to our
Superiors, and to avoid the scandal of Irregularity: and the duty of the
Observation is no longer lived, than the Will of Man.

But if ye will do your Duty thoroughly, ye must do your diligence to keep your
Flocks to the same Regularity ye observe your selves. And give me leave here to
make a Moral Application of some Texts, which I have already made a critical
use of. Ye know how frequently in other words St. Paul urges this Doctrine, 1.
Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and in order. 1 Cor. 1.10.
With what Earnestness! I beseech you, Brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same things, and that there be no divisions
[Schisms] among you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind
and in the same judgment. For tho this cannot be observed in a Literal and
Overt Sense: yet in a Moral one it may, by Silence and Forbearance for the sake
of Peace and just deference to Authority. And to what an excellent End! Romans
12.18.
If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men. To
the same purpose is that Exhortation to the Hebrews, Let us consider one
another to provoke unto love and to good works. Chapter 10.24.
And that the Opportunity of doing this so necessary a Performance may not be
lost, (...). Ignatii Epist. ad Ephesios.

Which is to this purpose: To frequent the Holy Communion and other Church
Service: For your continued Assemblies overthrow the Powers of Satan, and
render his fiery Darts ineffectual as to Sin; because your Unanimity and
Concord in Faith, is destructive to him and griev^us to all that fight under
him.

-- (...),
(...). Hom. 11. x.

this Warning is given them in the next Words, Not forsaking the assembling of
our selves together, as the manner of some is: but exhorting one another. And
to prevent the counterfeit Pretense of Modesty in keeping back from the
Congregation till a more perfect Knowledge be attained to, the Apostle St. Paul
says, Phil. 3.16.
Nevertheless whereunto we have attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us
mind the same thing. 1 Cor. 3.4.
For while one says, I am of Paul, another, I am of Apollos; are ye not carnal?
Romans 16.17.
Therefore I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and
offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned. And why is he so
earnest in giving caution against such Men? Romans 16.18.
Because such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies: and by
fair words and soft speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. And so Deceive
them, as to draw them into Envy and Strife. For this the Apostle takes for
granted to be the inevitable issue of Schism. 1 Cor. 3.3.
For whereas there is envying, and strife, and division among you --. ver. 4.
For when one says, I am of Paul, another, I am of Apollos, etc. And we know
the constant Companions of Strife and Envying. For There is confusion and every
evil work. Iam. 3.16. 1 Cor. 14.33.
But God is not the author of confusion.

I cannot tell that stronger Words may be given, either by Admonition or from
Reason, than what are here alleged out of Scripture: though much more might be
drawn from the same Fountain, at least as home to the same Purposes. For we see
how carefully the Holy Spirit directs to Union and Unanimity; and with what
severe Characters he stigmatizes the best of Pretenses to the contrary: The
specious color of Edification, and a more holy Worship, is blown off with the
plain Discovery of having Men's Persons in admiration, Jude 16. Phil. 3.^9.
and the shameful minding of Earthly Things.

And yet lest neither Admonition nor Warning with evidence of Reason should
prevail, St. Paul fortifies his Commands from the Example of his own Practice.
Now we command you, 2 These. 3.6, 7.
Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves
from every brother, that walks disorderly (...)
; and not after the tradition which he received from us. For your selves know
how ye ought to follow us: for we behaved not our selves (...).
disorderly among you.

The word Disorderly in the Original is borrowed from the Military Discipline,
as may be seen in the Martial Laws of Athens: amongst which I cannot forbear to
mention Three; because they do so exactly square with the Constitution of
Ecclesiastical Affairs. For if we consider the Church as it is Militant, the
Laws need only be mentioned, to show their fitness for either Discipline.
(...). Petit. leg. Attic. l. 8. Tit. 1.
The first puts a badge of Disgrace upon those that take the Profession upon
them without being sent. (...). ib. Tit. 3. Such were called (...), their
Action (...), and their Crime (...).
The next punishes those that break their Ranks, and do not observe Order. In
the same Law and under the same Penalties, are comprehended such as run away
from their Colors and will serve in their Place no longer, but it may be,
betake themselves to some other Calling; being mentioned under the Title of
(...). etc.
Desertens. (...). ib.
The third Law is against such as cast away their Arms and will not Labor in
their Calling. And Disorderliness seems to take in all the Faults: where the
Law in general prescribes to all Behavior Good and Bad. (...). ib. Vid. Lysiae
Orat. (...).
Let those that have behaved themselves well be advanced, and the disorderly
degraded.

Thus much I have said to demonstrate, that whilst we are in the Flesh, we must
take such Measures as are best suited to our Infirmities, and which are so
absolutely necessary to our Condition here below, that no Proposition in Euclid
can be better made out. For all Vocations and Professions are Practiced by some
agreed and set Rules, which cannot be Transgressed without hurt to the
Constitution: and a great part of this consists in the Behavior of such
Members as make up the Corporation, who for this end ought every one to keep to
his proper Station, and to mind his own Business and not another.

In Matters of Speculation we all agree in the common Rules for supporting the
Truth of Propositions: and look upon it as a Jest, when any one goes about to
question them. The Data in Geometry and the Propositions deduced from them,
have remained uncontested, unless by some vain or wanton Scepticks, from their
first Assertion to this day. Now I think the best Thought, why Moral Maxims and
Proofs do not pass so current, has been; not that these are less evident in
themselves, than those other: but they are engaged with the Affections and
Interests of Men, which oftentimes stifle the most flaming and unquestionable
Truths with the gross Mists of corrupt Prejudices.

After all, a Man may no doubt, and ought to withdraw himself from the
Communion of a Church, which exacts a Consent to false and pernicious
Doctrines, or a Compliance with unlawful Practices. But then he must be sure to
go upon a good Bottom: and not out of a weak and crazy Humor make that Sinful,
which is Indifferent; nor make the Faults of others an Occasion of his
committing a greater by Separation. 1 Cor. 11.
Ye know St. Paul's Opinion in the case of receiving the blessed Sacrament: and
let us see what was the Practice of the greatest and best Men in Aftertimes.
Nullo modo esse propter Communionem malor. ab Ecclesiae unitate recedendum.
August. de Bapt. contra Donat. l. 4. c. 12.
By no means are we to quit the Unity of the Church for fear of Communion with
wicked men. St. Cyprian was fully persuaded that the Church was under a great
Mistake, and that it did grievously err in not Rebaptizing of Heretics, which
Opinion he pursued so far as to call a Provincial Council about it and there
Establish it: and yet all this could not induce him to a Separation from the
rest of the Churches. Nobis objicere soletis Cypriani literas, Cypriani
sententiam, Cypriani concilium. Cur authoritatem Cypriani pro vestroschismate
assumitis, and ejus exemplum pro Ecclesiae pace respuitis lb. l. 2. c. 1.
Ye are used, says St. Augustine to the Donatists, to urge Cyprian' s Letters,
Cyprian' s Opinion; Cyprian' s Council. Why do ye make use of Cyprian' s
Authority to justify your Schism, and reject his Example in preserving the
peace of the Church? Nay he quotes his Authority as well as Practice. Cum n. ad
Antoninum scribens, ostendit ante tempus ultimae separationis justorum and
iniquorum, nullo modo esse propter commixtionem malorum ab Ecclesiae veritate
recedendum, ubi declarat quam sit sanctus, and illa quam meruit martyrii
claritate dignissimus, ait, Quantus arrogantiae tumor est, quanta humilitatis
and lenitatis oblivio, and arrogantiae suae quanta jactatio, ut qu^s audeat aut
facere posse credat, quod nec Apostolis concessit Dominus, ut zizania a
frumento putet se posse disoernere, etc. Ib. l. 4. c. 12.
For, says he, when writing to Antoninus, he held forth to him, that by no
means before the time of the last Separation of the Just and Unjust, are we to
depart from the Unity of the Church by reason of mixed Communion, (whereby he
showed what a Holy Man he was, and how most worthy the renown of that Martyrdom
which he attained to:) He then says, What a swelling of Arrogance is it, what a
forgetfulness of Humility and Gentleness, and how great a boasting of his
Arrogance, that any one should dare or believe that he could do, what the Lord
did not allow so much as to his Apostles, that he should think himself able to
discern between the Tares and the Wheat.

Ye may see then, Brethren, what manner of Spirit they are of, who wittingly
Promote the scandal of Schism. For a great Jude 22.
Difference must be made between poor Simple Souls seduced, and them that
pretend to Knowledge. These latter are those to whom St. Cyprian addresses
himself: and who are so remote from the Meek and Lowly Temper of our blessed
Lord, from that Humility upon which God bestows his Grace. Were we really
clothed with Humility, we should be Subject one to another: 1 Pet. 5.5.
and not blow our selves up with Imaginary Reasons and Self pleasing
Principles, to the subverting of the Churches Peace, for Things that are
entirely in the disposal of Authority, being in themselves Indifferent. So that
he must have a very strong Bias, let him make what Grimace he pleases, that can
be Troublesome upon this account purely for Conscience sake. But ye have so
full Discussions of this Point in Dr. Whitgift's Answer to an Admonition to the
Parliament, and his Vindication of that Answer; Dr. Morton of the Three
Ceremonies, and Dr. Burges his Vindication; and Cassander Anglicanus, written
by Mr. Sprint, 1618. who had been formerly a Nonconformist; that ye will find
better and sounder Store in your Studies, than I can pretend to furnish you
with. The Church History of Ethiopia by Dr. Geddes.
Only give me leave to quote to you one Passage, in an Account of the Habassin
Religion and Customs, composed by Zaga Zaba, the King of Ethiopia's Ambassador
at Lisbon. We do observe nothing but what we find in the Law and the Prophets,
and in the Books of the Synods of the Apostles: or if any thing else is
observed by us, it is done only for the sake of Order, and for the Peace of the
Church, so as not to reckon it a Sin not to observe it; that is, simply in it
self abstract from Scandal or perverse Intention.

II. And to your Doctrine. Which is the other part of the Charge; and is that
Depositum which the Apostle so carefully minds him of. 1 Timothy 6.2^.
O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust. Which Trust is not only
generally agreed by Commentators to be the Doctrine of the Gospel, but is, I
think, evidently so explained from the Words of the same Apostle to the same
Person. 2 Timothy 2.2.
The things that thou have heard of us among many witnesses, the same commit
thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also: Now this is the
Foundation of our whole Religion. For upon this we build our Faith, our Works
and the whole Frame of our Righteousness. By the sound Expression of this we
square all our Religious Thoughts and Actions: avoiding profane and vain
janglings, Ibid.
and opposition of Science falsely so called: which some professing have erred
concerning the Faith.

Our Office for Ordaining Priests takes a just and a wise course to prevent
running after every Spirit, and taking up Doctrines upon too easy Terms; when
it exacts this Promise of those that are to be Ordained: To teach nothing (as
required of necessity to eternal Salvation) but that which you shall be
persuaded may be concluded and proved by the Scripture. All other Writings
derive their Authority from the Author's Veracity or Judgment: the former
qualifies him for a good Witness, and the second for a good Judge; but yet so
as to be Tried by the Touchstone of the Holy Scripture. The four first General
Councils have a particular Weight; 1. From the great Credit of those that sat
in them; and 2. From the Universal Deference paid to them by all Churches in
all Ages. Therefore our Constitutions give no Authority or Power to order, 1
Eliz. c. 1.. 36.
determine or adjudge any Matter or Cause to be Heresy, but only such as
heretofore have been determined, ordered and adjudg'd to be Heresy, by the
Authority of the Canonical Scripture, or by the first Four General Councils, or
any of them; or by any other General Council, wherein the same have been
declared Heresy, by the express and plain Words of the said Canonical
Scripture; or such as hereafter shall be ordered, judged, or determined to be
Heresy, by the High Court of Parliament of this Realm, with the Assent of the
Clergy in their Convocation. By which Words ye see, 1. The sure Foundation our
Church is built upon; the Holy Scripture, and what is Authoritatively delivered
from it and agreeable to it: 2. The just Method for Establishing any Doctrine
so delivered; not by the confused way of setting up private Spirits, but
according to the Mind of that God who is the God of Peace, by submitting to
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13.
whether it be to the King as supreme, etc. that is, by the most Public,
General and Authentic Consent that a Nation is capable of, which with us is
that of Parliament and Convocation. What had the Apostles to justify St. Paul
against the Complaints of the Jews, but by convincing them, that he walked
orderly and kept the law. Act. 21.24.


However there is a Just and Decent Liberty due to all Christians, whereby to
Judge for themselves in the Essentials of Religion. But yet such a Liberty it
is, as is beset on each hand with most dangerous Rocks; such as threaten
Shipwreck to any Vessel that shall Strike upon them. For if on the one hand we
run into that Popish Extreme, to take away all Liberty by an absolutely blind
Obedience and implicit Faith, swallowing down all that is given, without
Tasting or Chewing upon it; we act more like Beasts than Men, and as easily
take down Poison as wholesome Food: but on the other hand, if with the Fanatic
we assume to our selves an unlimited Power of following the Wildgoose-Chase of
our wanton and uncertain Imaginations; we shall Tear the Church in Ten Thousand
Pieces, and expose it to all Uncharitableness. And therefore a Sober Christian
tempers all his Proceedings with Modesty and Humility; and has that discreet
Jealousy of himself, as wherever he breaks Communion, to do it upon so certain
Grounds, that the Grievousness of the Error imposed, or the Wickedness of the
Fact commanded, shall be Notoriously evident. Otherwise, in the Meekness of
Wisdom, he defers to the Judgment of his Neighbors rather than to his own; and
thinks himself in Modesty, in common Discretion, and in Duty bound for the sake
of Peace, Unity and Concord, to submit to the Determination of his Superiors,
especially in Authoritative Assemblies. Prove. 11.14
For in the multitude of counselors there is safety. And we have a Proverb
which is derived from its Authority, He that is his own adviser has a fool to
his counselor.

Indeed it is want either of Judgment or Honesty, that makes Men give in so
much to their own Opinions, and so little to those of others. For it is certain
the chief End of our being Conversable and Sociable Creatures was, that we
might be Assisting one to another; and the more Important and Universal the
Subject is, the greater regard ought to be had to its Determination. So that
not only in Things Indifferent, where it is absolutely our Duty to submit; but
much more in the Weightiest Matters of the Law, where our Eternal Welfare is so
immediately concerned, we ought with the greatest Care and Caution to Proceed,
and never think we can take too much Advice.

That Noted Mark of Catholic Truth, which Vincentius Lirinensis Prescribes, to
Submit to that Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est. Advers.
Haeres. cap. 3.
which has been believed in all places, at all times and by all, goes a great
way with every Modest and truly Humble Christian. Because the Starting of
Doubts and Questions so Confound the Apprehensions of Men oftentimes, that it
is very hard for them to come to a Resolution of themselves. And in that Case
there is no other way to come to the Acknowledgment of the Truth, but by a
Prudent Deference to Authority. For we cannot well imagine it Consistent with
the Divine Goodness and Wisdom, to suffer an Error so to Prevail, or rather to
Reign so absolutely in his Church, as to bear these three Atchievments. I
question whether ever any Heresy attained completely to any one of them. St.
Ierom ye know indeed says, Ingemuit totus orbis, and Arianum se esse miratus
est. Cont. Luciferan. tom. 2. page 143.
The World wondered to find it self become Arian. But this Expression must be
taken, as generally such are, by a Trope of the whole, for the greatest, or at
least most Noisie Part. For it it evident from all the Accounts given us of
those Days, that there were many bore Vid. Faustini and Marcell. libell. precum
ad Imperatores.
Witness for the Truth even to the Death: and more would have done so, if their
Courage would have served. Besides that [at all Times] was wanting. It was an
Upstart Heresy, that lasted no longer than Supported by Force and Violence;
which bears no great Analogy with Gods Methods in Propagating the Gospel. But
Popery seems to lay the greatest Claim to this Character of Orthodoxy; and yet
when thoroughly considered, the largest Part of it goes off in Pomp and Noise.
For its Extent was confined within Europe, all the Churches in Asia and Africa
disowning it: and there still remained in the height of their Triumph, Bodies
of Men that Opposed their Superstitions, and many of them with their Blood
Sealed to the Truth: Besides, its Reign is not near of that Length it pretends
to. The continual Attempts it made upon the Jurisdiction of other Churches and
the aiming at Universality were long in agitation, and never yet settled to
their mind farther than in Italy, and there next door it is rejected in Sicily.
Its Pernicious Errors have generally been Disowned by their soundest Members,
and by their greatest and ablest Writers, and few Established by Authority till
the Council of Trent after the Reformation was begun; as you may see amongst
others in our excellent Dr. Field of the Church. Yet these and all other
Considerations, do not Captivate a good Christian so as to make him lay aside
all his Reason: but in the midst of Miracles and the Power of the Holy Ghost,
Act. 17.11.
with the Noble Bereans, search the Scripture whether Things be so or no. How
suddenly would our Schisms Vanish away, were some among us so Ingenuous, as to
go to the Fountainhead to Search the Scriptures; and not have Men's Persons so
much in Admiration, as to take all for Gospel that they say.

Ye see then the modest Cautiousness, which ought to be used to confirm us in
the Truth: lest either by too much Implicitness we suffer Error to grow upon
us; or by Assuming too much to our selves, we be Misled by our own
Indiscretion. I shall refer my self in this Point, to what St. Augustine says
in a Treatise against the Donatists. De Baptismo contra Donatistas. t. 7. l. 2.
c. 3. Quis nesciat sancta^ scripturam canonicam, tam Vet. quam N. Testamenti,
certis suis terminis contineri, eamque omnibus posterioribus Episcoporum
literis ita praeponi ut de illa omnino dubitariaut disceptari non possit, utrum
verum vel utr. rectum sit, quicquid in ea scriptum esse constiterit?
Episcoporum autem literas, quae post confirmatum canonemvel scriptae sunt vel
scribuntur, and per sermonem forte sapientiorem cujuslibet in ca peritioris,
and per aliorum Episcoporum graviorem authoritatem, doctiorumque prudentiam and
per concilia licere reprehendi, si quid in eis forte a veritate deviatum est:
Et ipsa concilia quae per singulas regiones vel provincias fiunt, plenariorum
Conciliorum authoritati, quae fiunt ex universo orb Christiano, sine ullis
ambagibus cedere, ipsaque plenaria saepe priora posterioribus emendari, cum
aliquo experimento rerum aperitur quod clausum erat, and cognosoitur quod
latebat, sine ullo typho sacrilegae superbiae, sine ulla inflata cervice
arrogantiae, sine ulla contentione lividae invidiae, cum sancta humilitate, cum
pace Catholioa, cum charitate Christiana. Et oap. 4. Quapropter sanctus
Cyprianus, tanto excellentior quanto humilior, quod documentum Petri sic
amavit, ut diceret; documentum scilicet nohis and concordiae and patientiae
tribuens, ut non pertinaciter nostra amemus, sed quae aliquando a fratribus ex
collegis nostris utiliter and salubriter suggerantur, si sint vera and
legitima, ipsa potius nostra ducamus. Satis ostendit facillime se correcturum
fuisse sententiam suam, siquis ei demonstraret baptismum Christi sic dari posse
ab eis qai for as exierunt, quemadmodum amitti non potuit cum for as exirent:
unde multa jam diximus, nec nosipsi tal^ aliquid auderemus asserere, nisi
universae Ecclesiae concordissima authoritate firmati^ cui and ipse sine dubio
cederet, si jam illo tempore quaestionis hujus veritas-eliquata and declarata
per plenarium concilium solidaretur.
Who knows not, that the Holy Canonical Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, are contained within their certain Limits; and are so far Preferred
before all after-Writings of Bishops, that the Truth or Justice of whatever
appears to be Written in them, is not to be doubted or called in question? But
what Episcopal Determinations have been, or are made since the Canon of the
Holy Scriptures has been confirmed, may, if they appear Faulty, be Corrected,
either by a Hand happily more Skilful, or by the Authority and Prudence of more
Bishops and Wiser Men, or by Councils. And Councils themselves, which are held
of particular Nations or Provinces, are, without more ado, to yield to the
Authority of Plenary and General Councils; and they likewise which have gone
before, to submit to the Correction of the later, when any thing is discovered
which was not known before: and that without the least swelling of Pride,
transport of Arrogance, or spiteful Contention; but with a Sanctified Humility,
in Catholic Peace and Christian Charity. Wherefore St. Cyprian, so much the
Greater by being the more Humble; and who was so in love with the Behavior of
St. Peter, that he said, setting it forth as an Instruction to us of Concord
and Patience; that we should not be too fond of our own ways, but rather esteem
those to be ours, if True and Just, which are now and then opportunely
suggested to us by our Brethren and Colleagues. He shows plainly enough how
easily he would have altered his Opinion, if any one had made it appear to him,
that Christian Baptism might be Administered to others by those who left the
Church for the same Reason, that they cannot lose their own by their Departure.
Of which though I have said much, I should not have dared to have uttered one
Word, unless I had been supported by the joint Authority of the Universal
Church; to which I make no doubt he had likewise yielded, if in his time the
Question had been canvased and decided by a plenary Council.

But though the Rule of Discretion and common Prudence, taken from the natural
Course of things, direct this way; yet such is the headstrong Temper of corrupt
Nature, as will break through all. For we see in the very Infancy of
Christianity, when Men's outward Senses were Gratified with continual Miracles;
their Minds taught by the Insallible Guides of the Church, the Apostles. Their
Expectation and Dependence upon Things here below, prevented by incessant
Persecutions and powerful Oppositions; yet would they not retain Sincerity and
Innocence. For we see even in those Days, 1 Timothy 1.20. 3 Job. 9. 2 Timothy 4.10.
there was an Hymeneus, and an Alexander, and a Diotrephes, and diverse others
complained of by the Apostles themselves: there was the Heresy of the
Nicolaitans, and that of the Gnostics too, if some have guessed aright; which
provoked St: Peter to give this Warning, 2 Pet. 2.1.2.
There shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction: And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of
whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of, etc. And St. John thus counsels
Christians upon the same Account; 1 Job. 4.^.
Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of
God: because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. No wonder then,
if the Scripture advertises us of the Mischiefs which should happen to the
Church in after-Days. 1 Timothy 4.1.2,
Now the spirit speaks expressly that in the latter times some shall depart from
the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils; speaking
lies in hypocrisy. But more emphatically have we it from the same hand, in the
Charge given at Miletus to the Clergy of Ephesus. Take heed unto your selves,
Act. 20.28 29, 30.
and to all the flock over the which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to
feed the church of God which he has purchased with his own blood. For I know
this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not
sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse
things, to draw away disciples after them. Which is confirmed by the Mouth of
Truth it self. Mat. 24.11.
Many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many. And that we may be
apprised of the Reason, why it has seemed good to the Divine Wisdom to expose
the Church to these uneasy Trials; 1 Cor. 11.18.19.
we are told, I hear there are divisions among you. -- There must be also
heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you.

Being thus forewarned of those Unnatural Distractions, wherewith our Holy
Profession is to be Visited, and that in all probability they will continue to
the end of the World, because the Reason for them does so: Ye ought always to
be upon a strict Guard against the Incroachment of so Dangerous an Evil. For
the Honor of God, the Support of Truth, the Salvation of Men's Souls, and the
Peace of the Church are all concerned in it.

What is it preserves the Communion of so many Churches, so widely distant in
Place, Discipline and Worship, but the Harmony of Confession, the Consent in
that which is the Life and Soul of our Holy Religion, the Articles of our
Faith? It is our Creed alone that preserves the mutual Confidence between
Churches far and wide. For the Pursuit of which, we have Two infallible
Directions.

1. Hold fast the form of sound words. 2 Timothy 1.13. -- 2.15.
-- 2. -- Rightly dividing the word of truth.
I. From the first I suppose we are directed to keep to the Common Style of the
Church, without, First, Addition; Secondly, Subtraction; or Thirdly, Variation.

First, The Papists are most notoriously Guilty of the first; notwithstanding
that they generally hold all the Fundamentals, by superinducing so many false
Articles of Faith, Vid. Symbol. Pii iv. annex. Council. Trident.
Idolatrous Worship, grievously Superstitious Practices, and setting up their
own Laws under greater Penalties, if not above the very Law of God: thus
shamefully Defiling his Worship, and with the Rubbish of their own Inventions,
and the Doctrines of Men, Perverting and Smothering the Truth of the Gospel.
Prove. 30.6.
Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee and thou be found a liar.
Secondly, They are likewise Guilty of a Sacrilegious Subtraction, by
withdrawing the Cup of Blessing entirely from the Laity, and holding back the
Word of Life, the Holy Scripture from the People, and deceitfully amusing them
with Legends in its stead. But they whose great Business it has been to Narrow
the Word of God, to Enervate the Power of Godliness, and to Destroy the
Efficacy of Saving Faith, are the Pelagians, the Socinians, and their
Harbingers. These do it with a witness, whilst they attack the Essential
Foundations of our Hope, by denying the Meritorious Purchase of Christ's Death
in our Redemption; the Imputation of his Righteousness, Sealed to us by his
Blood, and Confirmed to us by his Resurrection for our Justification; shutting
the Gates against the King of Glory and his Divine Majesty, disowning the
inward Assistance and Comfort of the Holy Ghost, and the Blessed Effects of the
Gospel Sacraments. To such as these had the Author to the Hebrews an eye, when
he says, He that despised Moses law died without mercy, Heb. 10.28 29.
under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall
he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the son of God, and has
counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing, and has done despite to the spirit of grace? Now both to the
Superstitious and Profane, to him that would add, and to him that would take
away has God given this Charge; Deuteronomy. 12.32.
What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shall not add thereto,
nor diminish from it. And this is St. John's Witness in God's Name; Rev. 22,
18.19.
I testify unto every man that hears the prophecy of this book, if any man
shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are
written in this bock: And if any man shall take away from the words of the book
of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, etc.

Thirdly, The Variation though in it self not so Malicious, is yet of dangerous
Consequence. It may, I confess, proceed from a Luxuriant Fancy, and a Heedless
Affectation. But there is a Fault even in this. For it is an unmannerly
Trespass upon our Governors and Superiors, to pretend to correct their Style,
and in a Private Capacity to be wiser than the multitude of Counselors.
Besides the Confusion and Uncertainty it creates in the Apprehension of the
Sense of Doctrines thus delivered. For every Art and Science, has its peculiar
Terms and Expressions confined to one peculiar Sense and Meaning, so fixed by
long Use and Experience; and if that be once passed by, and a Liberty taken by
the several Professors, to use the Various Words and Loose Expressions of
Common Conversation and Entertainment, or which may otherwise be the Original
Propriety of the Language; all Points and Cases will become Unintelligible,
through Ambiguities and Difference of Acceptance. Should we put Coetus for
Ecclesia in the different Senses applied in our Ecclesiastical Style, what a
Confusion would it make; the former being never otherwise understood than for a
Company of Men met together, whereas the latter is extended to the utmost
Meaning it can bear: For sometimes it is taken for the Material Church,
sometimes for a Congregation; and that either of one Parish or Collectively of
many, as the Church of England; or farther, for the whole Body of Christians
throughout the World; or yet more extensively, for the Church Triumphant as
well as Militant. Should we Change the English Word Church into any other
Expression, what Work would it make! For though it properly signify the
Material Edifice or Building, as being Derived from the Greek Word (...), yet
by a most extended Metonymie, is it used in as large a Sense as Ecclesia in the
Latin. Were Comitia applied instead of Concilium, how uncoothly and strangely
would it, for want of Use, suit with the Epithets of Provincial, National,
Patriarchal, Ecumenical, and the like. Castalio has Translated the Bible into a
Ciceronian Style; but he is blamed for it by all who have weighed the
Inconvenience of such a Novelty.
And yet there would not be so much Hurt in this, if the Mischief reached no
farther than an Affected Singularity. But they who stop here, serve only for
Blinds to give a more easy Introduction to Heresy. For under New and Unusual
Terms, the Heretics Equivocate their Meaning; and are contented to Manage the
Simple-hearted in the best Manner they can, till they find a proper Season to
speak out. Thus did the Heretics of old, couch their Errors under Dubious
Expressions and Colorable Words. So did the Arians, Pelagius, Nestorius and
Eutyches; as may be seen in the Records of the Church.

II. I come now to the other Direction, Rightly dividing the word of truth. And
I take this Translation of ours to come the fullest up to the Sense of the
Original, (...)
of any in what Language soever. The Import of which Words I take to be, 1. An
Advice of Discretion, to Administer the Word according to the Capacity and
Strength of the Hearer. 2. An Advice of Justice; to make known the whole Mind
of God, concealing no Part, but giving to every Portion its due Weight.


I. In the first Sense, the Expression seems to have relation to the
Distribution of a Sacrifice cut of divided into due Proportions. For we know
the Body of the Church is likened to the Body Natural, which consists of
several Members under different Dispositions according to their respective
Uses. Therefore as in the Natural, so in the Politic. Body there must be
regard had to the different Office and Constitution of each Member. Some are
more of less Honouraable, some more or less Necessary, some more or less
Powerful; each is to be Treated in that way which is most suitable to its
Disposition; and if any Member be Sick or Weak, proper Remedies must be
applied. And I am sure however it be Practiced, it is one of the most necessary
Duties incumbent upon our Calling.

The Truth of it is, where there is a Cure of Souls, by which a constant
Attendance upon the Word in one certain Place is Required; nothing can more
express the True and Earnest Concern for their Good, than a diligent
Observation of what sort of Treatment, Gentle or Severe; or what sort of Diet
may be most Proper for them, Milk or strong Meat. For that which is one Man's
Meat may prove another Man's Poison. Men of sober and serious Spirits, well
Exercised in Pious Meditations, may safely be Entertained with the stronger
Meats; and Doctrines of high Speculations, and Mysteries may be Trusted with
some of them: but such Fare would make the Ordinary sort of Mankind, who for
want of Education or Leisure are not used to such Sublime Thoughts, run Mad and
become Enthusiasts. It is therefore an unpardonable Imprudence in those that
Preach to their People at all Adventures. It is as if a Physician should
Prescribe to his Patient the first Medicine that came into his Head, without
Examining Disease or Temper; whereby it would be infinite Odds that he did more
Hurt than Good.

What then shall we say to such, as out of a base Awe of losing either Favor
or Profit, avoid declaring Useful and Necessary Truths? What shall we think of
those, who Amuse People with Notional and Mysterious Doctrines, holding back
such Practical Duties as would keep the Conscience awake; and all this to carry
on Factious and Seditious Ends? No doubt an indifferent Person will say, they
are of the number of those that handle the word of God deceitfully.

II. Wherefore to avoid the Imputation, either of Heedlesness, or Corrupt and
Sinister Designs; as Faithful Stewards ye ought to Acquaint those that are
committed to your Charge with the whole Mind of God, lest any thing be wanting
to prevent Error or Mistake. Another Method may rid our hands of some Work, but
will certainly render our Labor very Defective if not Pernicious. The Church,
which is the Body of Christ, is, ye know, compared to the Natural Body, which
has its Members of different Value and Consideration; and as its Members, so
have the several Rules and Directions of its Constitution their respective
Weight and Importance: so that neither in the one Case nor in the other, is
there a complete Body where any Part is wanting. Remember the fatal Case of
Ananias and Saphira: For if for keeping back a Portion of Temporal Things,
which Perish in the Usage, the Punishment was so Severe; of how much greater
Infliction shall they be found Worthy, who withold Spiritual Things, which are
Eternal! In this Case therefore Comparison is very Odious, where the Value of
the greater Articles of our Religion, are applied wholly to Eclipse the lesser:
For to repeat our Savior's Rule once more upon this Occasion, These things
ought ye to do, and not to leave the other undone. Which makes it far more Wise
to follow the Example of that great Apostle of the Gentiles, alleged in his
Farewell Charge at Miletus, to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Act. 20.20,
verse. 27.
I kept back nothing that was profitable to you. I have not shamed to declare
unto you all the counsel of God.

Thus are ye to Instruct the People committed to your Charge. 1. In the more
weighty Matters of the Law, thereby to make sure the Foundation. 2. With more
especial Earnestness in those Points, where ye find a failure either through
Ignorance or Prejudice. 3. And Lastly, in the whole Mind of God, that they may
be Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works.

2. As to the Practical part of Doctrine, one would think the suitableness of
all Virtue to the whole Frame and Constitution of Gods Creation, would convince
Men of the Reasonableness of it; and the Good it does from its very Nature not
only to Particulars, but to the happy Support of the Whole, would make Men in
love with it: Eos, quos nunquam vidimus propter probitatem and virtutem
quodammodo diligimus. Cic. de Amicitia.
And yet for all this, such is our Corruption and the Power of it, that neither
the Light of Nature nor Instruction, Fear nor Favor, Interest nor Danger, can
stop the Career of Sin, or turn the Sinner into the Right way. If Conscience
cannot be Hardened, at least it shall be laid Asleep with deceitful Promises of
Peace and Indulgence. Therefore ye ought earnestly to press the Practice of all
Virtues in Holiness of Life: But this ye must be careful to do in such a
Christian Style, as may not Offend the Gospel either, I. In coming short of its
Precepts; or II. In setting too great a Value upon the Practice of them.


First. For if you Narrow them to the private Dealings betwixt Man and Man, or
the Sober Conduct of our own Persons; do we not see the Sons of Tumult and
Sedition, in show at least, justify the Duty of such a Behavior? Neither the
Moral Schemes of Philosophers, nor Crellius's Ethics will furnish you with a
sufficient Institution in this Matter: No. The Scripture instructs us moreover
in those Noble and Generous Virtues, which bring our Actions nearer to the
Likeness of that diffusive and universal Goodness of God, by such a Peaceable
and Submissive Deportment, as makes the Wheels of Government go easy and whole
Nations Happy.

Secondly. But yet we must not be so Lifted up, even with the Best of our
Actions, as to bring them in Competition with the Grace of God, or impute any
real Merit to them. Our Church, and the sound Writers of it Teach us, after we
have done all we can, not to Value our own Righteousness, but that of Christ.
And surely it would be a malapert Confidence in any of her Members, to Conceit
themselves so much Wiser than Seven Men that can render a Reason, as to Lower
the Attributes of God's Righteousness, for the Exaltation of our own Merits;
and grudge his Grace a free Passage through the Means of our Salvation. There
are therefore Three Rocks especially to be Avoided in the Consideration of our
Practical Duty.

I. The First is that of Antinomianism; which casts off all Obligation to the
Moral Law, and in the Teeth of St. Paul, abuses the Goodness of God in
Derogation to his Holiness, by saying, Let us continue in sin, Romans 6.1.
that grace may abound. And this we do not learn only from what is passed, but
woeful Experience teaches us every Day how much it has diffused it self through
all our Sects, at least to some Degree; and they that pretend to be free from
Sin, prove in effect to do it, that they may Sin the more freely. II. There are
that impose upon Practical Duty, and offer Indignity to the Divine Precepts.
Some prefer their own Commandments before those of God; making it more Criminal
to Disobey their own Laws than to break the Law of the Lord. Matt 15.19.
Thus did the Pharisees of Old, Teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.
And just so do the Papists now; while they generally impose a greater Penance
upon the Breach of their Oanons, than upon a Sin directly against the Will of
God. Romans 13.10.
But whereas the Law is Fulfilled by Love, being made up of Peace, Gentleness
and Concord: there is another sort of People who pervert the very Nature of it;
and though not with so good a Heart as Moses, yet with as good a Will, break
the Two Tables one against the other. Out of a pretended Zeal for one Duty they
will Overthrow another, and expect that their Abhorring Idols will excuse their
Sacrilege. But the Charac ter of such Men is too obvious to deceive the
Sincere; having been always found Unstable, Unquiet, Tumultuous, Seditious,
Insolent and Disobedient to Superiors, False and Treacherous to their
Neighbors, full of all Hypocrisy, Clamorous for Justice and Religion, and
having neither. III. Then there is the Proud Pelagian; who scorns to
acknowledge his own Infirmities, and denying Original Sin, chooses rather to
impute the filthy State he is in to Gods Workmanship than his own Folly. He
Boasts out of Vanity, rather to be what he is not, by Establishing his own
Righteousness, than submit to be a New Creature of God's Making.
These Desperate Diseases ye ought to Cure by your Moderation, and to continue
earnestly to Preach up Good Works. For without holiness no man shall see the
Lord: And tho it be the Holy Ghost that Sanctifies, yet they must be Good
Works, wrought by the Grace of God, that procure such Sanctification. So that
ye are to urge to your People, the Necessity of Pleasing God by Good Works; but
at the same time that they do not depend upon them, to assure them, that their
Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord; but that likewise they humbly Confess,
that it is God alone that gives the Increase.

Thirdly. It is of great Consequence, that ye press the Observation of the Two
Sacraments, as well as their Power and Efficacy; they being so shamefully
neglected and undervalued in these Days. For the generality of Religionaries
lay them aside, out of a Contemptuous Conceit that they have no Worth in them;
or at least not such as can add any thing to their Perfection. This was the
Conceit of the Cathari, Condemned by the African Church; which probably was
derived from the Montanists, who might at least be some of those Animadverted
upon by Origin; (...),. 12.
and has been the certain Effect of Spiritual Pride, as well as of Profaneness
in all Ages.

But a truly humble Spirit will readily acknowledge, that the Wisdom of God is
above all; and that what God has Consecrated by his Institution is to be
observed with Reverence and Submission. A Man of just Sense and Reason will
ask, what Familiarity or Communication our Gross Beings here upon Earth should
have with Spiritual Things, were there not some visible Medium, in some manner
to Qualify and Reconcile the Invisible Operations of God to our Weak
Understandings. I would have Men but to consider for what Reason Christ came in
the Flesh, Heb. 2.17.
before they reject the Elementary part of the Sacraments, and so vainly
despise an Outward and Visible Sign. Naaman's Cure, if duly considered, is
likewise a pregnant Instance.

I shall Conclude with Two Cautions; which tho already touched upon, I do
presume again to lay before you: For I am persuaded, that the careful
Observation of them will contribute much to the Establishment of Peace and
Truth in our Church.

1. In your Sermons and other Discourses, ye ought to treat Men of different
Persuasions with that prudent Charity as not to expose the Truth, and with that
Christian Prudence in asserting the Truth as not to forget Charity. For to
Preach universal Safety to all that live Soberly and Virtuously, without
observing the Defectiveness of our best Obedience, and the Means we are to lay
hold on for the Reparation of our Breaches; is to encourage all the Wild
Opinions of Heretics and afford a great cover for Hypocrisy: because it puts
so gross a Slight upon the Articles of our Faith, as to render them in a
manner Ridiculous; and by Cloaking their Heresies with such a seemingly
Meritorious Piety, puts a greater Value upon Crellius's Ethics than upon the
Gospel. Therefore to affect such an unlimited Charity, does highly derogate
from the Honor of God in our Redemption. Vid. Praefat. Ioh. Fox contra Osorium
de Iustificatione, etc. 1 Timothy 5.22.
As then ye must not Judge your Brother in pronouncing Damnation upon his
Person, that is peculiar to God; so ye must and ought to Damn his pernicious
Errors, lest ye be found Partakers of his Sins. Should ye see a Poor Honest Man
wandering in untrodden Paths, whether were it more Charity to tell him he may
get to his Journey's end well enough the Way he is in; or to let him know the
Danger he runs of being lost, if he comes not into the right Way? By the first
Method ye please Men in Humouring them in the Error of their Ways, by the other
ye uphold the Truth of God: by the one way ye run Men upon a Rock, by the other
bring them into a Safe Harbor. So that real Charity is to tell our Brother of
his Mistakes, and not by Extenuation to flatter him into the hazard of his Ruin.

II. A careful Distinction should be observed in treating those that are in a
wrong Way. If an Erring Brother be found Humble and of a Quiet Spirit, ye
cannot be too Gentle toward such a one. For there must be a good Principle in
him; however through Prejudice of Education, the Deceitfulness of Instructors
or Weakness of Judgment he may be misled. Whereas a Turbulent Spirit that seeks
to propagate his Follies though at the Cost of breaking the Peace both of
Church and State, deserves to be handled in a brisker manner, with a Style
sharp enough to pierce the Hardiness of his Temper. But whomever ye have to
deal with in any Case of this Nature; Compassion ought to be the Ground of your
whole Proceeding, that according to the Example of our Blessed Savior, the end
of all your Actions may be to do Good.

Let me therefore again conjure each of you in the Name of God, and in the
Words of St. Paul to Timothy, Take heed unto thy self, 1 Timothy 4.16.
and unto thy doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this thou shall save thy
self and them that hear thee. And that God who is pleased to suffer you to be
encompassed with so many Difficulties, grant you Courage to Resist, and the
Power of his Grace to Overcome so many Contradictions of Sinners; and make you
Diligent to continue Faithful in your Ministry, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 13. in Margin lin. penult. for quos, read quis. Page 18. lin. 23. and 24.
for with the greatest care and caution to proceed, read to proceed with the
greatest care and caution.


