THE Complaining Testimony of some (though weak, and of the least) of Sions
Children in this day of their sore Calamity; occasioned at their Meeting to
seek the Lord at Abingdon in Barkeshire, the second day of the eighth MONTH,
1656.

Being a short NARRATIVE Of the inhumane dealings of some OFFICERS and
SOLDIERS, who said, They had Order from their LORD for so doing.

Mal. 3. 15, 16. And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work
wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt God are delivered. Then they that
feared the Lord spoke often one to another: and the Lord hearkened, and heard,
and a book of remembrance was written for them that feared the Lord, and
thought upon his Name. Act. 7. 34. I have seen, I have seen the afflictions of
my people; I have heard their groanings, and am come down to deliver them.
LONDON: Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley, 1656.

To the faithful Remnant of the Woman's seed, who keep the Commandments of God,
and the Testimony of Jesus: together with every Impartial Reader.
WHen the Lord did first engage our hearts to wait upon him according to the
ensuing Relation, it was much upon some of our spirits, that we should see the
glory of God, though we could not apprehend the manner of his appearance; much
less could we in the least suppose his answer would be as after was manifest.
But the onely-wise God, who knows how to order all things for his glory, can
make the wrath of man praise him, and the remainder thereof rest^ain: upon
which account, the ensuing Relation being thought necessary to be published, is
presented to your perusal; hoping, that as experience of his goodness has been
some refreshment unto us, (who have subscribed the same, being all of us
personally present, some at the one part, others at the other part of the
transactions therein mentioned, and sufferers in some degree or other in the
same) it will administer some refreshment unto you also; that we may be thereby
united with on^ heart in one common Cause, though contemned, despised, and
reproached, by those who did formerly walk with us hand in hand therein, from
which they have so openly Apostatized; and also, what you and we must expect
from them, unless the Lord should leave us to betray him with a kiss, as they
have done: But we trust, that relying upon his grace, he will keep us by his
mighty power through faith unto the day of salvation, when we shall with
rejoicing say, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him: we will be glad and
rejoice in his salvation.

Your poor unworthy brethren, desirous to be found faithful in this day of
Zions tribulation: Of the Chapter at Abi. John Tomkins, John Combs, Simon Mayo,
Edw. Stennet, Plalip Lockton, William White, Rich. Green, Rich. Terrel, Simon
Peck.
Of the Chapter at Oxf. Rich. Tidmarsh, Rich. Quelch.
Of Hull. Thom. Cann, Pet. Tindal.
Of London. John Pugh, John Green, Fran. Walton, Joseph Neat, Tho. Buttivan,
Ric. Parnham, John Rye, Rich. Denton, Tho. Whe^ler, John Tusucl, Ioh. Portmans,
John Clark, John Armiger, John Woodly, Fran: Young, David Parry, John Clements.
John Iones^ John Waters,
Hen. Forty of Tatnes, Churches Rich. Steed of Dartmouth, Churches George Allom
of Exeter, Churches
Of Northwalsham^ Hen. Simmons Thomas Ruddock, Tho. Hide, Tho. Helsden.
William Wainsord, of Norwich. Fran: Langden of Cornwall, Hen. Preston.



A Word to such of the Army, especially those of (...) Troops as are in any
measure sensible of the (...) this DAY, and mourning for the same.
IT was, and is still upon our hearts, that the Lo(...) grieved for the great
transgressions of the Sodomitish generation among whom they live, might be
delivered, before the judgments of the Lord break forth: for, if his wrath be
kindled (yea) but a little, blessed are all they that trust in him: and
therefore for your sakes was this short Epistle penned, to the end, that, if
the Lord so please, you might be no longer deceived with vain words, by those
from whom you do suppose that the great things you first engaged for on the
behalf of Christ and his people might be attained, and that they might return
from whence they are fallen, and do their first works; though the bottom upon
which they now stand, seems to us to give little ground of hopes for any such
thing: for men do not gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles. Besides,
they persecute that Spirit appearing in any of those who are but enquiring the
way to Zion, with their faces thitherward: witness the many prisoners now
suffering for the Cause of our Lord Jesus, besides the cruel usage of others
mentioned in this ensuing Relation. This therefore we desire to leave with you,
in the fear of the Lord, That you would flee out from the midst of them, and
deliver every man his soul, that you may escape the judgments of God, and be
free from the blood of your brethren; which you will unavoidably be involved
in, so far as we can discern, if you continue in your present station, as some
have been already in these last transactions: and if so, as you partake of
their sins, you will partake of their plagues. Thus leaving you to the perusal
of this Relation, hoping that it may be of some use, either to convince, or
else to leave this further Testimony, That if you perish, your blood will be
upon your own heads: though it be otherwise longed for, and prayed for, by

Your unworthy brethren, mourning with you, and praying for your return: Of
Northwalsham. Hen. Simons. Thomas Ruddock. Robert Hide. Tho. Helsden.
Of Norwich. Will. Waynford.
Of Cornwall, Fran: Langden.
Of Hull, Tho. Cann, Peter Tindal.
Of London, John Pugh, John Green. Fran: Walton. Jos. Neat. Tho. Buttivant.
Rich: Parnham. John Rye. Rich: De^^^. Tho: Whce^^^ John Tu^^d. John Portmans.
John Clarke. John Armiger. John Woodly. David (...)

(...)

The complaining Testimony of some of Sions children, though most unworthy; or,
A short Narrative of the inhumane dealings of some Officers and Soldiers at
Abingdon, the second day of the eighth Month, 1656.
IT having pleased the Lord to take unto himself a choice and eminent Servant
of his, to wit, Joh. Pendarves, Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of that
Congregation at Abingdon; whose interring we did meet to solemnize the 30th of
the 7th Month, that being one end of our coming together: judging it our duty
to perform the last office of love to so faithful a Servant as he was, indeed a
Prince in Israel, who did in his life time naturally care for Sions welfare,
wholly giving himself up unto the Lord's work: and hereby a price and
opportunity was put into our hands to bring many of the Lord's people together,
from several parts of the Nation, in this dark and gloomy day, to seek his face
for the understanding of his mind and will, what his Remnant (remaining
faithful in this great day of Apostasy) ought to do. To which end, there were
several heads agreed upon; according to which they might seek his face with
understanding, as by these particulars here mentioned, will more plainly appear:

1. That we humble our selves before the Lord for all our sins and iniquities,
wherein we have justly provoked the eyes of his holiness, through our
lukewarmness, indifferency of Spirit, rashness, and want of love i^ this great
day of open Apostasy and backsliding; wherein, it is to be feared, we have much
added to the measure of the iniquity of this day.

2. That notwithstanding all the complaints of the Lord's people, there has
not been that diligent heart-searching into the mind and will of the Lord,
what his people ought to do.

3. To remember before the Lord with mourning, that there is not that natural
care for Sion, as there ought to be, especially, when he has chastened us by
taking away such choice Instruments as he has done of late: but most men now,
seeking their own, and building their own cieled houses, saying, The time is
not yet: the time that the Lord's house should be built.

4. To entreat earnestly of the Lord, that he would be pleased so to own this
present Meeting, that the light which he has given in amongst the body of his
people inquiring after his mind and will in this day might be so gathered into
one as that we might be able to read his mind and will, together with our
duty, in this dark and gloomy day: And, that he would pour forth a plentiful
portion o^ his Spirit upon the Remnant of his faithful ones, whereby they may
be enabled t^ prosecute his mind and will so made known unto them.

5. To remember the afflictions of Joseph in all the parts and quarters of the
world, and particularly in this Nation, wherein the Saints are imprisoned,
especially by those that are under so great a profession of Light.

6. That God would be pleased to deliver them that are ensnared with the
Apostasy of the times, and remove them that stand in the way of his work.

Nevertheless, leaving the Spirit of the Lord to breath in his people as he
should please to minister unto them.

And accordingly upon the day above mentioned, we met together at Abingdon, in
the house of the late deceased Servant of the Lord; and we may with a holy
boldness declare. That we did in some measure behold the light of his
countenance that day breathing through such of his servants, whose hearts were
stirred up to speak unto and from the Lord. The next day being the first
instant, we were again met together and spent the whole day in waiting upon
him: where we desire to acknowledge with humility and thankfulness, That
(though we were unworthy to receive any thing from our Father, yet) some of us
and many others did behold such tokens of his presence, by his smiling
countenance through our Lord Jesus Christ, such quicknings of his Spirit, such
melting and brokenness of heart, such tastes of his peace and joy, such
renewings of first-love, such endearing of Saints to each other, such longings
after the glory of God, and groanings for the prosperity of Sion; as some
ancient Professors ^ffirmed, they seldom experienced the like: diverse of the
Soldiers and others (though adversaries to this Meeting) were forced to
acknowledge God was amongst us of a truth; and in particular, when the party
came on with violence upon our friends, one of the Soldiers had this word,
Psalm. 105. 15. set upon his spirit with much power, (as he professed) Touch not
mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: he was a Brother, and promised to
break his sword when he came home.

For which we desire to bless and praise the Name of the most High our Father,
because he has not forsaken them that seek him, nor is it a vain thing to wait
at his posts.

The next morning, being the second instant, we intended to have met again, the
former refreshings having thereunto sweetly engaged us: but being prevented, we
shall give a plain account thereof, and bless Jehovah for the worst men have or
can do to us, seeing our God will turn that also to his praise, and the same
does and will work together for the exceeding good of them that sincerely love
him.

About seven in the morning, several of us lodging at the sign of the Lamb in
Abingdon, were in the Inn-yard, some looking to their horses, others getting
themselves ready, the better to be prepared for the meeting intended, had the
Lord pleased to have afforded it unto us: about which time three Troopers came
into the Inn; and after they had put up their horses, went up stairs to another
of their company who had continued in the Inn (most part of the time that we
were there) as a spy, to take notice, and give information of what he could
hear and see done amongst us. Presently after, they went into several of our
chambers, and took away a Hawking-bag belonging to one George Allom of Exceter,
being a Messenger of the Church there; and took out of it all his writings,
being as we understand of private concernment only: whereupon it was asked by
what authority they did it: to which they replied, That they had order: but the
question being again put, Where their order was, they put their hands upon
their swords, and said, There was their order: to which some of us said, That
if they could produce no other order, a High-way-man, demanding our purses,
could produce as good a commission for his action as they did. Upon this,
another came in, being, as we afterward understood, Commander of the party
then in the Town, Lieutenant Barker by name: some of our Friends asked him also
by what authority this search was made: to which he replied. That it was
sufficient he said he had order for what he did, and that he was not bound to
show his order if he had any, to every one that asked him. But our Friends
still pressing for a sight of his order, with words spoken to the same purpose
aformentioned, by which the said Lieutenant was much enraged, riding suriously
about the Inn-yard striking several of our Friends violently with his Cane,
endeavoring to ride over them with his horse, using many uncivil words toward
us, commanding us to go up to our chambers, saying, That we should know, if he
commanded us to go up, we must go, without any farther inquiry.

Soon after this, some of us went out of the Inn to the meeting place,
intending to have gone in, but two Troopers keeping sentinel at the door
refused to give liberty to any man, presenting Pistols to their breasts to
hinder them from going into the place, and in particular our Brother Mayo, who
lived there, was so far hindered from coming in, that they cocked their
Pistols, and presented them to his breast, so that he was forced suddenly to
step back, fearing lest they should fire upon him. From thence, our Friends
being disappointed of their meating ^ent into the Marketplace: one of our
Brethren began in prayer, another seconded him in speaking, after him our
Brother Jones of Longworth in Barkshire, an ancient grave Christian, who was
formerly persecu^ed by the Bishops proc^rded with a word of exhortation: then
our Brother Austen a member of ^h^ Church at Oxford, who was late a member of
the Army, exercising. The Soldiers drew ^ound about us, and after a short time
made an attempt upon u^, hoping to have scattered us; which the Lord prevented,
though no opposition was made on our parts: then the Trumpet sounding, they
drew off, and came on ^gain in a body with much violence: the Commander of the
party came in, and broke through violently with his sword drawn (having first
broken his Cane) he cut diverse, one of our hats being sl^shed in three or four
places; and most of the Soldiers, some with drawn swords, others with swords
in their scabbards, violently smiting, and driving us one from another, whereby
we were forced to desist from our duty unto God the Lord of hosts, before whose
throne we were in prayer, and continued, till pulled down by force: one was
forced to tumble over stones to shift their strokes to his hurt, by another
Note, that the Officers carried themselves more uncivilly then the common
Troopers.
Officer endeavoring to ride over him, spurring and beating his horse to that
purpose; but the Lord suffered it not to be. Some had their Garments rent and
torn on their backs: some offering to go and see their friends (seized upon in
the tumult) were threatened to have their swords thrust through their howels:
several being haled about the Marketplace so long, that one of their ow^:
company cried out, For shame drag not a man thus. Moreover one speaking to a
soldier, that he must answer this one day before the Lord: he replied. He would
answer our God well enough. At this time also, the ancient Brother before
mentioned had many blows made at him; but through the goodness of the Lord
received a^ hurt; though diverse others, men and women, were shamefully beaten
at this time: and after this, riding about where they saw any together, fell in
amongst them to disperse them taking several as prisoners, and afterward
letting several loose in a private manner, laying nothing to their charge,
somewhat like that in Act. 16. 37. After this, that party of horse which had
been so insolent and inhumane, drew out of the Town, and within a short time
after, came in with them about seven or eight Troops more, who suddenly divided
themselves into several Inns where we lay, shutting up the gates, and securing
such as they could find. Soon after this, one whom they call Major Genesis
Bridges, with several others, came into the Town, and at the new Inn proceeded
to examination of such whom they had taken, and such also whom they had
detained in the several Inns as prisoners but in the end, they were all
dismissed except five, who were carried away to Windsor-Castle: of whose
particular charge, we can give little account, only thus much we are c^edibly
informed, that one of them was charged only for making an appeal to God (...)
prayer between us and them; there being little against any as spoke or done at
them ^ting.

That which was chiefly the ground of their commitment, was drawn so^^ by
insnaring questions asked them when they were examined against themselves (...)
of their judgment and conscience: which we leave to every unbiass^d person to
judge o^.

And this we desire further to mention, That one of the subscribers, Joh.
^omk^n^, an Elder of the Church at Abingdon, being well known for his grace,
cautions and very sparing in his expressions at all times, had this laid to his
charge when he was examined, That he challenged one of the Soldiers to fight
with him upon Sal^ lu^y plain; also, that he should say we had thirty thousand
men more to come to us: ^n^ the soldier that spoke there words, proferred to
bring three men to swear to the truth of ^t, though it is well known there were
no such words spoken by him directly or indirectly: by which the Reader may
observe what sons of Belial they have amongst them, who dare adv^nture to swear
any thing: likewise to advise the Reader not to give much credit to reports
contrary hereunto.

This Relation is presented to public view, to prevent any false Informasion
that may come from any particular person, or from our enemies, who may endeavor
to possess men, that there was a design of rising at this meeting, which we do
hereby declare against, as well as testisie to the truth of this Relation.

Of the Chapter at Abi. John Tomkins, John Comb^s, Simon Mayo, Edw. St^nnet, Philip
Lockton, William White, Rich. Green, Rich. Perrel, Simon Pe^k.
Of the Chapter at Oxf. Rich. ^i^marsh, Rich. Qu^lch.
Of Hull. Thom. Cann, Pet. Tindal.
Of London. John Pugh, John Green, Fran. Walton, Joseph Neat, Tho. Buttivan,
Ric. Parnham, John Rye, Rich. D^nton, Tho. Whe^ler, John Tusnel, Ioh. Portmans,
John Clark, John Armiger, John Wood^y, Fran: Young, David Parry, John Clements.
John Jones. John Waters.
Hen. Forty of Tatnes, Churches. Rich. Steed of Dartmouth, Churches. George
Allom of Exeter, Churches.
Of Northwalsham. Hen. Simmons Thomas Ruddock, Tho. Hide, Tho. Helsden.
William Wainsord, of Norwich. Fran: Langden of Cornwall. Hen. Preston.


Had there been an opportunity to get friends together, there would have been
many more Subscribers.
FINIS.

