The COMPLAINT of the Kingdom against the evil Members of both Houses, who
have upon design brought in Ruin under a pretense of Reformation. Relating to
that former Complaint made by the City and Counties adjacent.
WE are glad our brethren are so well recovered out of their Lethargy, as to
be able to inform us, that they are grown sensible of their miseries. We
confess, our selves lay stupefied in a too unhappy dream or tamenesse, till
this Alarm did awaken us; and now besides the sympathy and compassion that we
have of the afflictions of our neighbors, the sense of our own sufferings is
so sharp, that we are forced to circumflect the sad accents of their just
Complaint. More need not be added to that Relation by way of supplement, to
perfect the horrible Anatomy of our miseries: Yet we conceive it will not be in
vain to discover who they were that (pretending to reform even our
happiness, and then to secure that happiness by such impregnable
fortifications, as God never yet vouchsafed to defense in temporal blessings
withal) did at the same time nothing else but make that interruption and
breach of our sweet rest, which betrayed us unto all these distempers which
have succeeded; and how our repose, which should be prevalent to restore us, is
now discontinued, as it was at first disturbed, by the very same men against
our wills.

Under the pretense of the work of God these distractions crept in upon us,
and what ever the design be (we shall examine that anon) Gods title is made so
strong to it, as well by States men as Divines, that they think his omnipotency
as deeply engaged, as their own dear interests, or seduced consciences to go
through with it. But we must profess, that what that great work of God is,
which their actions aim at, has never been sufficiently, can never be
unanimously (by themselves) declared. God has many works, and some that are
fit to go through none, but those accursed hands of Judas; and if they would
prevail with us for our patience and submission, they must produce some
prophecy; that infallibly makes them the ruin of their King and Country. But
yet we should take leave to tell them, that it is not such a comfortable
employment to be made the rod of Gods anger, because though his wisdom uses,
his goodness loves not the instrument of his childrens correction: The rod is
always burnt for doing malicious execution.

Was the work to chastise the pride of the King (as some have intimated) with
a greater; or as some thought and expressed freely, to root out Episcopacy,
Deanes, and Chapters, that they might establish establish their own preaching
Ministry, or themselves in their Revenues? This would have been a glorious
Reformation of those grand errors of their forefathers charity, when that
true Devotion that had expatiated their hearts, opened their treasures to, and
made them too lavish in their expenses upon Gods worship. Now the effects of
that zeal which burns in our Worthies, are to bring down the price of our
Religion, to serve God at a cheaper rate, and to offer Sacrifice of that which
cost them nothing. What ever the work was, we see what work it has made
amongst us; and if we observe the stepes by which it has ascended, we shall
easily perceive, the Authors thought it could not succeed otherwise then by
violence. What ever the model be, the structure was not likely to be set up,
as the holy Temple was, without any sound of Axe or Hammer but with confused
noise, and garments rolled in blood. The truth is, desparing of Gods speed, we
have cause to believe they resolved to take the Devils. Hence were those
Tumults raised, Riots justified, some whereof were of that disperate nature,
that the Ringleaders of them made it the emphasis of their enraged passion, to
cry out, The King is the Traitor: The King is not fit to live: The Prince would
govern better. Those that heard these things, and are ready to make proof of
them, have good reason to think His Majesty was driven from London, and not
much missed by those evil Counselors that advertised him of the danger.

Thus was the King and many of His Subjects little better entertained in the
streets: And did His Majesty's friends find any better welcome in both
Houses? were not those Houses made a Sanctuary to the most desperate
Delinquents, if they had learned to tune their Votes to the prevailing, because
violent partly; whilst gallant sober gentlemen, who preferred solid reason and
their own conscience, before any popular Arguments, were posted up and
banished from them? For examples of the former. I need add no more to the
Instances in the Complaint, then Master Griffith, who being guilty of a
barbarous attempt upon the Lady Sidlyes chastity, and complained of for the
same, yet the House was so far from suffering it self to be purged of this
able Member, that they were pleased to advance him to an honorable office (if
any office may be styled honorable) in their Holy Army: And this is the man
that was lately sent out in so much pomp with his silver Trumpets.

On the other side, because some worthy Members of both Houses were privy to
more of their designs, then they could with a clear heart assent unto; it is
probable (though for no other reason) if this violent party could have
construed their actions (by any rules or exceptions) into Treason, they should
have lost their heads to secure their memories from betraying Close-Committee
secrets. Thus many Gentlemen of known integrity were deprived of those
privileges wherewith they were invested as well by the Authority of the King as
the suffrage of their Country; and exposed to the rage of a rude multitude,
causelessly incensed: and yet if they fled after their Sovereign, to seek that
security at a distance, which (retaining a good conscience) they could not
promise themselves under the influence of both Houses, they were presently
declared Delinquents, as if they could not be friends to themselves, nor loyal
to their King, without peril to the Kingdome^ and after the power of the
Country refused to bring them up, (finding no just ground for it) an Army is
voted to be levied to apprehend them; and then all their miscarriages (possibly
but of humane frailty) being summed up together, if the total would have
amounted (as it easily might have done) to a constructive Treason, their life's
had been rendered a prey to a Legislative, that is, an unlimited power, as
blind as a man's self-will or malice, and their fortunes an oblation to these
men's ambition.

Thus having cast out the great ones, who were not like to fall into, or
continue in their own hands, and cunningly shuffled with the rest; they soon
packt their Cards so, as the die should never be carried (in any matter of
consequence, for in trivial things they could differ upon design) against
them, The violent course they took made a strong side quickly, and indeed the
stream grew too violent to be interrupted; and whatsoever was done by the
wisdom of His Majesty to turn the Torrent, that it might not bring this
Inundation, which it has now brought upon His Royal Government; such was the
power and reputation that these men had purchased amongst the people, not by
their own merit, but His Majesty's Acts of grace conveyed through their
hands to them, that it was easily made use of to His Majesty's disadvantage.

His Majesty upon a timely discovery of the first rising of this proud
malignant tumor, applied nothing but the gentle lenitives of his favor to
assuage and allay it: At last after the emptying of a whole treasury of acts of
grace unto his people, finding them ineffectuall to stop the current of their
blind fury, and desirous to prevent those inconveniences, which we now by that
means groan under (justice being denied to his Ministers on this behalf) was
drawn into a necessity of going into the House of Commons in his own person,
to demand the principal Engineers (as His Majesty had then good reason to
conceive, and all men now to suspect) of this destructive stratagem. And seeing
what we now see, and feeling what we now feel, we might have had a just
occasion to have given that mistake the Title of an happy error, as being a
likely means, if it had taken effect, to have prevented these distempers that
have insued, and settled our peace and truth to the general contentment of the
whole Kingdom, and all this without any prejudice to those men's reputation, if
that charge had not been proved against them. But this error was a weapon
they have made much use of in all their Remonstrances and Declarations, and
indeed the only one that has been with any color alleged to their
advantage. As for the bringing up of the English Army, that was but a leaden
Dagger that never wounded the Kings honor amongst them that understood it
truly. But this error in His Majesty was reckoned a crime of a greater
magnitude, then the Treason it self whereof the Members were accused, and His
Majesty is endighted for it in every pamphlet before the bar of every vulgar
Judgment, where usually the charge is not sooner read, then the sentence of
condemnation pronounced.

After they had raised their greatness to this height upon those prejudices,
which they had laid against His Majesty (especial upon this mistake for which
he has done penance so often in their foul sheets) they resolved either to
settle what their fond ambition had designed, or else to sacrifice the peace
and happiness of the Kingdom to their own fury. And having failed (God be
praised) of success hitherto, they continue as far distant in heart from any
inclinations to our redress, as the means is which they have propounded to
effect it.

When they seized upon the Kings Milit^a they made fast addresses to our Ruin.
And since we know by a sad a very sad experience what a long and effectual
progress they have made in it. It cannot but seem strange that they should
presume with so much confidence to derive a power of taking Arms to
themselves, and ground it upon the fundamental laws of the Kingdom, and yet
(having set up as strict an inquisition for presidents as for Delinquents) now
after so many months elucubrations, not one fragment of Law produced to that
purpose. Nay, if our-owne skill and the opinion of learned and honest Judges,
(who must not be consulted with in this controversy) deceive us not, it is an
attempt which the Law provides against under no lower Title then high treason.
And yet a circulation of reports had so charmed us, and breathed so many cold
fears and jealousies upon us, and these so pressed by the weight of that
Authority, which (whiles it moved upon its own Center) we highly reverenced,
that growing deaf to our own duty at home, we userpt the office of our
Sovereign, for our protection against pretended foreign dangers. But after a
little succession of time had undeceived us, we perceived no other dangers
threatening us, then such as were now a casting in that very mould, which (we
were told) was made for our security.

The hedge of our Government (because some Weeds accidentally sprung up in it,
or else fot that it had many thorns, as all good fences should have, to
afflict transgressors that run over it) was cried quite down, and pulled as low
as libertinisme could lay it, so that our fair and fruitful enclosure was
laid into a wild and waste Common. Indeed they had very provedently designed a
new paile, but the chife workmen could not agree in what fashion to saw it out.

And in the interim most men (as they were engaged or encouraged) had quitted
those Trenches, which Almighty God had dug for them in his holy Ordinances,
and waited to take Sanctuary iu the Fortifications of their projecting. Now to
raise these (because they ware to encounter with many difficuties) they must
have the Sword as well as the Trewell, that (if need were) they might build and
fight together. To this end (the Scots who had been kept long upon this
design, being dismissed) they attempted to wrest the sword out of the hand of
the King, the proper owner. A fatal attempt that presaged peril to the
assailants; for he that (thus) takes the sword (against that authority that
has the sole power of it) shall perish by the sword. And truly God has
miraculously made it evident, that his Vicegerent bears not the sword in
vain. Not that His Majesty delights to unsheath the sword of Justice, more
then for exemplary punishment, though he has lately met with such extreme
provocations, as were enough to exasperate the softest nature into fury. We
find a sweet strain of grace and mercy run through the whole Tragedy of his
sufferings, and doubtless had there been a suitable correspondence in the
inclinations of others, the Kingdom had not at this day been stained in so
deep a die of blood. How much of his undoubted rights did His Majesty freely
sacrifice for the satisfaction of his people? If we should reckon up all his
acts of grace (as well those which have been abused to our disadvantage, as
those whereof we are in hope to reap the fruit hereafter) they will abuudantly
recompense all those pressures which evil connsellours had formerly brought
upon us. And (as if he could deny his people nothing whilst they suffered him
to keep any thing for himself) he graciously offered to commit to hands of
their own choosing, so large a share of the Militia, as might have rendered
them secure, if security (in a just and legal way) had been all they sought
for. But some of them having gotten too great an interest, as well in the
faith; as in the affections of the people, (who could not prevail with
themselves to be persuaded, they aimed less at His Majesty's Honor, then at
the public good) in confidence of their strength came roundly to the
business, and seized upon that by force, which (their very petitions can
witness, for these were not petitions of right) was not due unto them. And now
the King has as much reason to exhibit a petition of right for the securing
of his property, as ever the Subject had. His Forts and Towns are kept by
violence, his goods arrested, and his own Arms taken up to resist him to his
face, and these will not be restorid, till he condescend to a composition.
Nineteen propositions are sent down to him, that His Majesty would be content
with a twentieth part, whilst the rest of the Crown is shared between both
Houses. These seemed to be very strange propositions, in the opinion of Loyal
Subjects, who wished their King as much glory, as these men had promised him.
Yet these were so far from altering His Majesty's desires of peace, that he
vouchsafed to answer them; and to give either the thing demanded, or a reason
of his denial, which was better; and yet so far from satisfaction, that wise
men did equally admire the Kings grace, and their unthankefulnesse.

What should His Majesty do? It was high time (after so many threatening votes,
and hostility actually exercised at Hull against His Royal Person) to provide
for the defense of Himself, and His good Subjects that attended Him, lest
their loyalty should betray them to inevitable destruction. Hence a guard was
raised for the safety of His Majesty's Royal Person, and that consisted of the
chief Gentry, that could not reasonably be presumed to contribute assistance
to the enslaving of themselves and their posterity. And yet this small guard is
presently declared to be raised for the subversion of Parliament and in that of
all our native liberties. His Majesty was not so happy in His means of
undeceiving His good people, (as He has been since) the reputation of His
Royal Word being blasted (to gain credit to themselves) by their
black-mouthed Remonstrances. And yet all these reports (though their credit was
much improved by the Authority of both Houses) had a very ample and sufficient
confutation by several messages of peace sent from Nottingham. Now if we look
to the reception, it was nothing suitable to the errand; which (if we may
conclude from the entertainment) was so far from finding a compliance of
inclinations, that it met with very little Civility or good nature amongst
them. For interpreting all these Acts of grace but instances of his weakness,
they were more desperately bent, and urged by new votes, that their Army might
advance to make a speedy assault upon them. Where by the way let me hint thus
much: If those several messages proceed out of weakness, we may take notice
of a special Providence, that so suddenly increased His Majesty's Forces even
to admiration. But if the said proposals were the genuine offspring of a
gracious Prince, then they were extremely unthankful to slight the noble
messengers, and so scornfully to cast so many offers of a peace behind them. As
weak as His Majesty was, Almighty God preserved him from their fury, and was
his safe convoy to Edgehill; where (having been formerly advertised of a
petition) he might very well have expected some handsome address before an
alarm from them. It Is true, they say a very humble Petition (subscribed with a
deal of Ceremony by both Houses) was committed to the hands of the General
(the Earl of Essex,) but it seems it was ordered (if they conceived it for
their advantage, which they supposed they had then gotten) to be delivered and
made report of by the mouth of a Cannon. Well, these men, who were too mighty
to embrace an offered peace (as Gods providence would have it) were so
discomfited (if we may have leave to speak the truth) that by that time His
Majesty was advanced to Colebrooke, their weakness had inclined them (and in
good time be it spoken, it was the first step they set) to an Accommodation.
And His Majesty (not triumphing in the ruin of His worst subjects, being a
losing Conqueror in so sad a victory, nor desirous to improve the use of His
sword, beyond the recovering of His just rights; and settling that law by which
He holds them) met them with a gracious and ready cheerfulness to accomplish
it. But in the interim, whilst the Messengers are making their addresses to
His Majesty, the soldiers pursuing their sad though just and necessary
employment, advanced to Brainceford, and because they put the Red Regiment and
some others (as is conceived) to the worst, they are accused of treachery. Nay
the King Himself must be slandered, though (if the matter be well examined)
they had no reason to complain, but that the day went against them: For can a
soldier expect quarter before he asks it? Or an Army imagine to be at truce
in the view of the enemy before a truce be moved? In other places upon Treaties
of this nature, Courts of Guard are doubled; and were they so unacquainted with
the customs of war, as not to provide against all advantages of the enemy? I
know not what they expected from His Majesty, but I am sure His Majesty never
found more fair play from them, (though His subjects) nor so much as he might
have done from a foreign Enemy. Admit they did upon second thoughts send a
Messenger to desire a Cessation from all hostile acts; we know the business
was put in execution before the Messengers arrival, nay, it stopped him in the
midst of his journey. If they had been desirous to prevent all further
effusion of blood, the motion should have been made more seasonably (as it
might have been by their first Messengers) to His Majesty. What Revelations
other men may go upon, we know not; but we are sure His Majesty does not
pretend to be acquainted with their desires by inspiration. And His Majesty's
forces had great reason to use all means to frustrate the advantage which
their enemies had taken. We know how their Soldiers had almost on all sides
environed him, and new forces raised in London, advanced with speed toward
them, and why might not his Majesty advance forward, as well as His
Adversaries? If they say, their General did but pursue their order, which was
given the night before their Messengers set forth, they do but tell us in
effect, that they had laid the design so cunningly, that themselves might take
any advantage freely; but if the King did the like, it was predestined to be
called Treachery.

We could tell of gracious Letters directed to the House at that time, but
intercepted by their Army, and committed close prisoners to the Earl of Essex
pockets, for no other crime then bringing peaceable intimations. The truth is,
the mannagery of this War was committed to such hands as were glad of any
occasion, colourably to decline the way of peace: For what did they say; His
Majesty is yet too strong to be dealt withal by a Treaty; which implies,
they must endeavor to secure His Royal Person by the ruin of those whose
loyalty has raised them up to guard it, that they may the better subvert his
Government before their own design could be effected.

Whilst all their preparations are for battle, His Majesty labors still for
peace; to which He once again invites them by a Message sent from Reading: But
they are now grown deaf on both ears to Propositions of that nature; and the
very name of Accommodation (for we know the man that said he hated it) is
become odious and malignant. They breath forth nothing but challenge and
defiance against His Majesty; and these men that could cheerfully entertain
suitors of any condition, or any man's procuring: whilst their Courtship was
taught to woo them not to embrace what was-fit or profitable for the Kingdom,
but what their own affections had made choice of, in order to the satisfying of
their ambition. Now they grow coy, and frown upon all such as solicit them
in the name of peace; as if she were so far from being an ingredient in it,
that she were the only obstacle to our happiness.

First, the bleeding miseries of the Kingdom of Ireland (which must wholly be
laid upon the score, who have obstructed their relief through these distempers
of their own raising) spurred them on to frame their sad Complaints into
Supplications, to which his Majesty lent a gracious ear, and offered to
contribute assistance in any way that could be propounded to Him: but the two
Houses (who were formerly very angry, that they might not have all the honor
of reducing that wretched Kingdom) afforded little pity, less aid unto them;
many bitter discontented spirits raising seruples and murmurings at the
Petition, instead of applying themselves to the relief of their distresses for
the present, or to make a peace with His Majesty, (as was desired) whereby they
might be enabled to assist them for the future.

Then the many prodigious tokens of our ruin here at home began to awaken us,
and make us sollicitous for our own safety. The most substantial Citizens
meeting together in no other ominous or formidable posture, then with gloves on
their hands to move a Petition for peace; and they are accused for committing a
riot, and imprisoned, whilst forces sent to assault and murder them, are
interpreted (by their great Doctors of the Law) to keep the peace of the
Kingdom.

These men that have so long beguiled the people with false Alarmes, and never
more then by pretending to have bent all their endeavors to work a good
understanding and reconciliation with His Majesty, have been so far from
giving countenance to Petitions of that nature, that all their endeavors have
been (and sometimes by Messengers directed on purpose) to strangle them; and
such Gentlemen as have been employed in their Country on such errands, have
for that service-sake been plundered, their Horses taken from them, (as our
neighbors of Essex are able to depose;) and the authority of the Houses by
which they were taken, either cannot or will not be effectually exercised to
recover them, but an appeal must be made from them unto the close-Committee.

But what! is there no excuse to be alleged to take off the blemish of this
action? Truly, their web is not of so plain a spinning, but they have many
pretty colored threads run through it. They Will tell us, ' It Is no more needful
for the people to spur them on to their duty, then lawful to direct them in
it; such Petitions are saucy breaches of their Privileges: They have the sole
power to judge of sense and reason, and the dangers of the Kingdom. Indeed
they have most reason to be acquainted with the nature of those dangers, that
were first premeditated, and since of their own actual forging. Certainly, as
these men have labored to thrust out both our eyes, that we might not see; so
they would extinguish our memories, that we might remember nothing. They should
engage some of their instruments to teach us an Art of forgetfulness, in
behalf of many Acts in the time of their own reign, as well as an Art of
memory, in behalf of some sufferings under the reign of our Sovereign: at
least, they shall have voted an oblivion, that their own late practices of
encouraging Petitioners of another strain, as bold and directory, might not
rise up to their condemnation.

But why should it be reputed a breach of good manners for Petitioners to
suggest the means of their own redress? Every man knows best where his own
shoe pinches. Necessity stands not upon Ceremonies, and doubtless Beggars may
be choosers, when the choice is, Whetherthey will submit to their own ruin
against Law and Equity, or maintain those Rights wherewith they are legally
invested, under the Protection of a gracious Sovereign, against the spoil and
rapine of an, Arbitrary power.

Well! if men that have lived under the dominion of Mars and Sol, (being taught
by their effects to put a difference betwixt them) finding the first to be
incomparably most malignant, begin to desire to be looked upon with a more
propitious influence. If it be imputed for a crime to these men to Petition,
that the storm (without doubt raised by spirits, in whom the Prince of the air
works, who works in all the children of disobedience) might be calmed, that
they might enjoy their old comfortable Sunshine: Yet methinks a motion for
Peace (which no State till our days condemned for an ill Minister) made by one
of their own Members, might have past without exception. That grand Assertor
of the public liberty, who in civility gave the King the title of a
Sovereign, when he kept the Authority to himself, and confounded the
undoubted Rights of the Crown, with the never-heard-of Privileges of
Parliament, we mean Sir John Hotham, (who out of a remorse of conscience, that
he had been the prime instrument of this combustion, or out of an apprehension
of an unlikelihood of prevailing, cursed himself) moved no less then three
main wheels at once, to set forward the work of an Accommodation. (Those
Letters of his to the Earls of Northumberland and Holland, and to the Speaker
of the House of Commons, had been as well worth the peoples reading (if they
had had a purpose to let the people see any thing tending to their peace and
happiness) as those from the Earl of Stamford, of the total defeat which he
had given Sir Ralph Hopton; (of the truth of which the Houses have since been
sufficiently informed:) Or those other of the Lord Fairefax, interlined with an
ordinary gloss, and so printed for the benefit of the setters forth. But these
from Sir John Hotham did not speak to the sense of the Lords and Commons, that
use to sit in Merchant Tailors Hall at midnight, and therefore were not fit to
be communicated. And if we enquire how they were accepted, we shall find that
they had but little better welcome then the Retitions of peace had to both
Houses. Such a jealousy is presently raised against him, that though he had
committed Treason against his King, to become their faithful servant, he
begins to fear he shall be suffered to play Rex no longer, and complains of
it: and many think if they had not more feared their own then his perishing by
water, they had cast him out of his Arc, for bringing this Olive branch to
them.

As they were averse to motions of peace themselves, so were they strangely
opposite to the tendering of such supplications to His Majesty. Indeed they had
reason; for (wanting competent evidence to speak for them) they had often
commended their own endeavors for peace, and made us believe that their
frequent suits found His Majesty's ear inexorable. They were loath this device
(which they had improved to some advantage amongst the ordinary and less
knowing sort of people, where most of their game lies) should be discovered by
any Petitioners personal attendance upon His Majesty. Hence the Messengers
that carried the Petition of Westminster, etc. (though they had obtained a
warrant from the House for their free and safe passage) were surprised in the
way; and upon search made, some scandalous Pamphlets (as they called them for
speaking the truth) which in all probability had been committed to the
Coachman, by that setting-Dogge that discovered them; for the business was a
deep mystery, and a very riddle to the Gentlemen: these were quickly found,
(the searchers being pre-instructed in the plot) and so the Messengers were
brought back again, that they might not present their prayers to His Majesty.

But His Majesty's Grace, as it invited all, so it found supplicants from other
parts of the Kingdom, whose distance from them was their best, if not their
only privilege from interruption and imprisonment: (We say nothing of the
usage of the Hartfordshire Petitioners.) And after these men perceived that no
art or industry could prevent it, but the Court would be frequented with
solicitations of this nature, as long as it had a gracious ear, that took so
much pleasure to entertain them; they directed a contrivall of a plausible
Petition to be carried to the King in the name of the Common Council. His
Majesty (never wanting to any thing that might repair our unhappy breaches)
vouchsafed a gracious answer; and such as (if it had been duly followed) had
led us the way to very just, and no less easy terms of Accommodation. But
observe how careful these men are to work a good understanding between the
King and His Subjects: They break through all the Liberties and Privileges of
the City (when we see the Rights of the Crown trampled on, we cannot expect
that any Privilege should stand before that of committing Treason.) And the
people must not read the Kings pleasure, unless they will put on Spectacles
of Master Pyms making; nor hear His Majesty speak to them, unless His
authentic Text be first corrupted by false Comments.

Was any County willing to be dis-ingaged, desirous (because they could not
avoid it) to be sad Spectators, rather then wild Actors in this bloody Tragedy.
Why such a neutrality is voted to be malignant, such a peace destructive?
Though Articles be concluded, and ratified by their subscriptions, the mutual
pledges of their faith, yet this must not atone those neighbors, that knew not
why, nor wherein they differed. These men can find Principles in the Schools
of Jesuits, (and such as are no where else to be found) that Faith is not to
be kept with Heretics, with Malignants, and men Popishly affected; (they run
parallel with them a great deal further) and hereupon they use those new
Parliamentary Keys of their own making, to reverse all the bolts of these
engagements, as if they had the same power to dispense with consciences, which
they pretend to have in dispensing with the Laws of the Kingdom. Thus those
two Counties of York and Cheshire, when they had set their hands to the happy
bonds of peace, and might have sat quietly under their own vines, were by
Votes, (and nothing else) provoked (like creatures without reason) to worry one
another. These men that have so much of the public faith, how little would
they have of public charity?

Have many Gentlemen put themselves into a posture of War, and obtained their
Commission only to stalk by them, that they might the better furnish
themselves for His Majesty's service, which they aimed at? Have others, not a
few, (and some of their nearest and dearest creatures) out of a late sense of
the weakness of their cause, or party, or both, played the Soldiers indeed,
and turned faces about, with a resolution and zeal to recompense His Majesty
by their good service, for the opposition which they had too long, but
ignorantly made against him? Have others (who by the loss of a good fore-game,
are taught to play an after-one) delivered up those Commissions, that enabled
them to fight against their own honor, and spill all their noble blood?
These, though they may prove dangerous forerunners of a grand Apostasy from
the good work, yet we must be persuaded they do more animate unto the cause,
then discourage them. The work is looked upon, as if God himself had actually
cut it out, and appointed a select company, (though never so few, if
desperately enough seditious) by an especial and immediate designation to
finish it.

Hence those Propositions for Accommodation, which most part of the Kingdom
had sued for; and themselves (finding a necessity in it, to take off that
dislike that began generally to fall upon them) had promised should be
prepared, were delayed ten or twelve weeks together; and before they are
carried, are taught to speak such a language as does but beg their just
denial. To answer these, His Majesty is allowed but ten days, and (willing to
cut the sufferings of His people as short as He could) He graciously dispatched
an answer almost in as few hours. He offers Propositions that a modest
Conqueror would have accounted reasonable, and yet submits them together with
their own, and a cessation to a Treaty. These are brought to the Lords House,
and the violent party there not able to hinder it by Votes, endeavor to
entangle it by intricacies. The hint is given to the leading men of the House
of Commons; and instead of voting a Cessation in order to the Treaty, they
require an absolute disbanding of all Forces, and yet no terms of peace
concluded on: so that the result of all would be but this, the King must quit
His Martial attendants, and resign Himself up once again into the hands of
seditious Tumults; (for those must not be spoken against) and then they shall
be prepared for their Treaty. Some were so taken with this piece of Sophistry,
that they openly boasted; They had played their game too cunningly for His
Majesty: Truly a masterpiece of his Policy, whose designs (if they be not
made frustrate by a higher power) can find no period but in utter ruin. Some
14 days were spent upon this plot, and yet it was not ripened for His
Majesty, which occasioned another gracious Message to prevent all mistakes,
(for His Majesty must be very punctual, or else He is sure to be Declared
Traitor) touching the limits of the Cessation; (which, as His Majesty was
informed, they had at last voted.) What fruit all this seed will bring forth,
perhaps the Spring may show us; in the meane-while we are in a longing
expectation, and must needs wonder, that having confined their King to so short
a time, (which His Majesty in compassion of the miseries of His people, made
nine parts shorter too) themselves should not be ashamed to spin out their
debates, when it lies in them only (if they were not wanting to their duty,
both to King and people) to put a present end to our calamities. At last
(whiles we are penning these Observations) news is brought of their
condescension to a Treaty, and (to show what real affections they have to
peace, or what a plentiful number they have all this while had against it) one
of the two appointed by the Lords must needs be the Lord Say, whose
long-practised principles of Schism have led him so far in the advancement of
Sedition, that he is deservedly proscribed a Traitor by His Majesty, so that
(not able to do more to obstruct the way to our peace and happiness) they
have brought the business to this Dilemma; His Majesty must either treat (and
that face to face too) with a grand Rebel, (in all probability employed on
purpose to give a defeat to the whole Treaty) or else must expect to have the
Odium of refusing peace cast upon Him.

Well! to draw a conclusion from these, but too true and too sad premises: If
neither the gracious Messages and Invitations of His Majesty; nor the
sorrowful prayers and supplications of the distressed, as well in England as
Ireland, nor the earnest persuasions of their own discouraged, or relenting
party; nor the frequent returns unto their alleagiance, of such as are daily
undeceived amongst them, If neither the bleeding miseries actually ruinating in
two Kingdoms at home, nor the invied dangers threatening from abroad, If none
of these can, or if all these, with our Religion, Laws, Lives and Fortunes,
likely to be buried in the ashes of this imminent destruction, cannot prevail
one whit upon these fierce spirits, to soften their hard and (hitherto)
unrelenting hearts, and incline them to thoughts of Peace and Accommodation;
what can the inference amount unto less, then what we promised to make good in
the beginning? viz. That the firebrands of this pestilent faction are in a
desperate travail for the birth of some monstrous design, which cannot be
ushered into the world but by confusion^ We all know whose expression it was, I
hate the name of Accommodation; and the spirit of contradiction and dissension
was not raised in them, as they raised it in the people, by the conjuration of
Plots and Conspiracies, (underground works, which no body could discover but
their own Artists, that invented them to imbitter the minds of men against His
Majesty.) But all this was the fruit of that Spirit of contention, which they
first brought with them to the service (though it had proved the disservice) of
the Kingdom; witness that prodigious Omen that long ago presaged
ourapproaching ruin. When that potent Gentleman put Moderation into the
Catlogue of his vices, he left us to expect nothing else but those bitter
fruits of violence, which we have since too sufficiently tasted.

Now the said accounts of War have taught the people the price of Peace;
what, do they oppose to stop the current of their solicitations? 1. They make
speeches in the House, in disgrace of Peace; and from that common sense, a
sense must be derived unto the whole Kingdom. Till they have spilt all the
blood of the ungodly, or malignant, (as they term them) they plead an
impossibility of enjoying peace with her due investitures, as if (because they
have begun such a War) they could not conclude any other Peace, but what is a
stranger unto truth and righteousness. The Lord Brooks and others have made
great use of their talents this way, to their great honor amongst the
brethren of the Separation. When these prevailed to thrust peace out of the
Houses, there was anot her plot to cut the throat of it in the City. A
multitude (as they had sound by long experience) is good at a dead lift; and if
they be set upon it, to have all matters tried by club law, there is no
appealing from them. Well! such forces must be levied as offer up their prayers
unto both Houses by an implicit faith in a language they understand not,
thinking any thing a blessing that such a heavenly man as Doctor Burgess
invites them to petition for, and so poor fools are earnest suitors to be
wedded to the miseries of a civil war, from which other Nations long to be
redeemed. If shame, or discretion, or conscience makes men backward to this
hellish design then the Pulpit must be turned into a Mount Ebal. from whence
the Emissaries of the House of Commons curse them. Lest sedition should not
thrive fast enough, they suborne these Preachers, and obtrude them upon
(almost) every Parish, to sow the seeds thicker; and these men though not of so
long a standing, have improved their stock of impudence beyond the Devil
himself. He came whiles the servants slept, but these disperse their tares in
the field whiles they look upon them. These are the Bellows to this fire, the
Trumpets to this war, that boggle nor at blasphemy, to persuade the people
that God is engaged in their conspiracy against his Anointed; and to this end
their prayers are of a more saguine complexion, then Esaus pottage, These are
they that have taken this advantage of stirring up the people to spoil and
rapine, that they may (this way) root out a regular Ministry, and be planted in
their places: Insomuch as one of them tells us in his Plain English, He has a
great deal of reason to be confident, that scarce any considerable man (he
speaks of the Clergy) who has been engaged in this quarrel on the
Parliament part, if he retains his integryty, (he should have changed that
word for sedition) dares abide the issue of a present Accommodation. Certainly
there can be nothing but their own guilt that should move them to distrust the
protection of that Law which they have been bred and borne to. These men can
have no fishing but in troubled waters* and therefore when they have done
sweating in the persecution of Peace in the Pulpet, they assault her in the
Press; and in both they have a great advantage: for they wrestle at liberty,
whiles the Champions of Peace have their hands tied behind them. They speak
plain English, whiles the other have their tongues clipped; or if they speak
out, are imprisoned: So that Peace is first awed into silence, and then by
these men pressed to death, because she does not plead to her endightment. These
are the instruments so destructive to our peace, so industrious in fomenting
this execrable War. These are the very Becons, that (being set on fire
themselves) with their prodigious blazes have raised so many Countries in
Arms, to their own ruin, These are the grand Projectors to raise men and
money, making their Ministry but a Pander to Rebellion. Their stratagemes have
been to awaken them by sounding this Alarm in their ears: That Gods cause,
the Protestant Religion, Laws. Liberties, Properties, Privileges of
Parliament, yea their lives, with the lives of their dear wives and children,
ly all at the stake. They went a step higher in the beginning, persuading them
they were to fight for the defense of the Kings Rights, and to rescue His
Sacred Person from the hands of the Cavaliers; (so in a disgrace they termed
His Majesty's Illustrious Nephews, with the chief Nobility and Gentry of the
Kingdom) who (as they said) had surprised Him.

When they were supplied with men, (animated by these devices) what course did
they leave unattempted to raise money to maintain them? Under the name of the
public faith (a chest that is bottomless and insatiable) they have erected a
new lotterie; (to cheat our faith, and beggar the public.) From hence the
adventurers were sure to carry away nothing but blankes, the prizes being
designed for themselves, and the Officers that were near them; some of which
are not ashamed to sound the Trumpet for it. When the free Contrbutions were
exhausted from Volunteers, men came to be pressed to these prodigal expenses.
After they had lent some, they were justly paid the use by having the rest
taken from them. Men were not only forced to part with their own, but to
disburse others money also, or committed to prison for their refusal. This was
^angh^rne and Vivians case, who were committed to Colchester Goal, for denying
to pay 2000l. which was due to the Prince from them, and yet the Receiver
plundered of the money. These men are no less careful for the maintenance of
the Kings children then of his Majesty, provided it may be done by taking away
their Revenues; and thus all the Rights as well of King as People, have been
secured by an Antiphrasis of Parliament. When the Merchants were in dispute
about the lading of the Ship called Sancta Clara, these charitable men (that
love no strife between brethren) umpir'd in the business, and to reconcile
the difference, seized upon the goods, which must not be redeemed to the use of
the right owner, under the loan of 20000l. I pray God they have not this trick
to comprimise all the differences of the Kingdom. To raise money they have
robbed both the Church and the Spittle, six thousand pounds being collected for
the repairing of S, Andrews Holborne, were fetched away by the Earl of
Manchester and others, in the night. If this Church fall, they have engaged
themselves to build God a new house in blood. We read of Hezek^ah, that he
gave all the silver that was found in the house of the Lord to make his peace
with a foreign and idolatrous King: but for subjects to take Gods money to
wage War against a pious Prince. we believe this may be made one of the first
precedents; They have not been more favorable to the mystical then to the
material Temples of God. A great collection was made for the relief of the
poor Protestants in London Derry, and (besides those vast sums raised by
Subsidy for the Armies there) this was all converted to the use of this bloody
War, whilst those our miserable brethren are ready to perish (as many that
went before them) in their distresses. To recompense them from this wrong, they
have employed their Preachers to advance another collection for them; which
coming into the same hands, we suspect will be conveyed the same way. They
took like care for the disposal of that collection made for Brainceford, for
the poor of the Parish have not been a farthing the better for it hitherto,
and we believe the Spring will have so well recovered them, that their
Physicians will think it needless to administer what was so long ago
provided for them. Whether these men, that would have no sum pass by their
own bag, care more to relieve the poor then Judus did, may appear by
diverse instances: amongst the rest they brake into the Hospital at Gilford in
Surrey, and took 400l, from them: and a fine device was lately set on foot to
raise another sum. There is a pretense for poor children to be sent over to
get good breeding in New England, a collection must be made for them, and this
must be committed to the hands of their trusty and well-beloved Alderman
Pennington, which is like to be employed to the use for which it was pretended,
as faithfully as those sums gathered for London Derry and Branceford were.

Now, lest the peoples zeal should wast with their purses, they keep them
warm by a continual breathing of reports upon them. If Letters come that
speak but upon hearsay, they first expunge so much of the relation as might
tend to the discouraging of their party, and then publish them as the History
of some great defeat; and (if need be, as there is need enough) they have their
Observatour to write Commentaries upon them, lest the people should mistake the
rare passages of Gods providence on their side. Another while they declaime
against the Kings Army as Popish, (forgetting that their good wroke is
supported by men of any Nation or Religion; and that the Lord Say and the Lord
Brooks, two leading Cards of that faction, have often protested they would
dispense with all sorts of Religions, (though now they make an exception of the
true Protestant) so they might exercise their own freely; and that such a
general Toleration ought to be granted is their avowed opinion; and indeed,
their independency cannot consist otherwise, for if I be accountable to none, I
will use what Religion I please, without control.) It has been well
observed, that when there has been any business of consequence to be debated
in the Houses, they have still had the good fortune to be encouraged by the
news of some strange success, or exasperated by some great provocation,
suggested by such as made the discovery for advantage: But they have been so
provident as to lay reports of this nature at a considerable distance, that
they might not be confuted before the present turn were served. Thus we were
made believe, whilst His Majesty's Army was in Yorkeshore, and in those remote
parts, that they consisted of none but Papists and Delinquents; but this mist
cast before the peoples eyes to blind them, was soon dispelled by the rays of
our Sovereigns piety, as He drew near us. And however the Earl of Newcastles
Forces lie all under the same scandal now, yet as great a cloud as this has
vanished into nothing; and it is possible they may draw so near us, that
(notwithstanding their duty and alleagiance have brought some Papists into that
Army) we may distinctly understand, that the Mass, which they say is so
commonly used, will prove no other then the Book of Common Prayer.

With these juggling and slight-of-hand tricks we have been long amazed, but
they have been played so often over that every man who is not wilfully blind
discovers them; and now they serve for no use but for wise men to lament, and
boys to laugh at; we may justly wonder what springs they move by, that drive
them on so furiously against the stream of truth, law, and reason: and yet we
may cease to wonder, for we have been sufficiently informed, that some of this
violent party are spurred on by the law of their own necessities. A Captains
pay per annum is More money then five of their prime Instruments were ever
owners of. The Honest Letter has told us on which side the beggarly Lords and
Gentlemen are of; and it is easily concluded, if we consider who they are that
take the present pay out of a public stock, whilst their Cure is served by
their underofficers and who they are that serve in their own persons; and
besides the hazard of their residence raise and maintains Forces at their own
charges. Others we know pursue this design out of an inveterate malice unto
Majesty. It was an expression of but little loyalty, (and not the further
from truth because uttered in a Tavern) that They would make the King as poor
as Job, unless he did comply with them. That Champion that wrestled so stoutly
with his Sov^raigne at Law, in the case of Ship Money. might have come off with
honor, if he had staid there: But seeing him (after satisfaction) one of the
first in the field, desperately provoking His Majesty to the sharp, we suspect
malice, though we hope he will be deceived in the length of the Kings weapon,
and so perish by it. Others know and have protested the King cannot in honor
pardon them; and if they should submit to the Law, they are too sure that would
prove a killing letter to them, and therefore they dare not abide the issue of
an Accommodation. Others having transformed themselves into Angels of light,
possessed the people, that they were of a nearer communion* even of the
Cabinet-Councell with God himself, and broached their illusiions for divine
Revelations. These men could see, that God had plainly chalked out a way in his
holy Word, which our forefathers for 1500 years together could never see:
That Jesus Christ had sat all this while besides his Throne, and they must
dispossess Antichrist (whose spirit and manner of working by lying wonders,
etc, they are very well acquainted with) before our Saviors government can be
established. These men being canonized for Saints by the ignorant multitude,
(that understand not the depth of Satan's delusions) think it too great a
disgrace to be stigmatized with an ignominious death for Sedition, which they
know they are by Law guilty of.

Those men that began the War upon such unwarrantable gronnds, and have
purused it to the murdering of so many thousands, will undoubtedly drive it (if
it be possible) to the last pinch: For although, we hope, they shall never
comprimise differences to their own personal safety and preferment, and out
irrevocable slavery, as one of their Clerks (in his frivolous paper) says
they may do; yet they will drive it on as long as they have any hopes to get
so great a pawn into their hands, as shall enable them to make their own
conditions. If this fail, having shipped away so much of the Treasury of the
Kingdom as may make them considerable and welcome guests to New England, or
such other places, they care not how miserable they make this Land before they
leave it. And here by the way we could wish, that our own money (that was
ordered to be transported in Trunkes without searching) might not be brought
back to buy our goods withal; for our stock being plundered by them, if they
may have the liberty (as they take liberty to do any thing) to prize it for
themselves, we may presume they will afford good penny-worths, and never leave
us till they have removed both the Exchanges, with the Kings Exchequer and the
Chamber of London, into the Earl of Warwickes new Liberties. It Is time to look
about us, for we are to play our game with the greatest Cheaters in
Christendom, who think they have as good a Warrant to spoil such as they have
called Mal^gnant, (for no other reason then their loyalty) as ever Israel had
to spoil the Egyptians.

Let us no longer suffer our selves to be abused, and misled by those false
lights which they have hung out to deceive us. Do not all their practices
run counter to their pretenses? Do we not perceive them look one way, and
steer the contrary? Let us learn to know their aims, not by their words, but
by their actions. If we trace them through all their proceedings* we shall find
they have given the lie to every particular pretense, though never so
speciously alleged for their justificaon in this war.

Who was more cried up then the defense of the true Protestant Religion? This
was the very shield and buckler of their Army. This is made the Generalismo of
all their Arguments, and marches in the front of all the battle. If this
were not at the stake, most men conclude the war absolutely unlawful. But
how a quarrel can be justly made to defend a Religion, that condemns such a
quarrel and such a defense, (as the true Protestant Religion does) I profess
I understand not. If our Religion did run an aparent hazard, I am confident
this scandalous and offensive defense cannot be justified, but by such
I^fuitidall principles, as all the Schools of Protestants (except the Scots,
and not all of them neither, for the Ministers of Aberden have declared
themselves clearly and solidly of this opinion in their Duplies) have
unansmously exploded. But we have sufficient grounds of suspicion, that the
Religion which is so barbarously militant in a Buffe-coat, is not the same
Religion which was peaceably obedient in a Surplice. We read in Plain
English of hopes they have, not only of reforming, that is, rooting out our
Discipline, but also of purging our Doctrine: notwithstanding they have bound
themselves by a solemn Protestation, (if any such thing can bind them, for
they have done as much for the Kings Person, Rights and Dignity) to maintain
it. We had thought they would have made their new experiments only upon our
old Governmnet; but it seems that wise College of State-Physicians think it
fit to make the Doctrine of our Church their Patient, and we are afraid they
will let too much blood there too; and their purge, if they be suffered to
administer, will be strong enough to overthrow it. Well! whether the
maintenance of the true Protestant Religion be the Argument of this
sword-dispute, may be decided by a speedy trial: Let them reduce the Fabric
of our Religion according to the Model of Queen Elisabeths time, in which those
foundations were laid, which made the Church of England the most eminent and
glorious of all Protestant Churches: If His Majesty consents not to all this,
and to something more (upon the advice of a grave and learned Synod) for the
satisfaction of tender consciences, but recedeth from His many free and
gracious offers to that purpose, then let those bitter and scandalous
imputations of inclining unto Popery be never washed away from Him. But if this
be one of the maine Arguments of His Majesty's taking up just, necessary, and
defensive Arms against Anabaptists, Brownists, and Sectaries, who have already
thrown down the hedge, and now fall to pillaging of the grapes of the Lords
Vineyard, and that with countenance and encouragement from a party in both
Houses; then we may conclude we approach very fast unto Atheism and
Profaneness, and are fallen into those times which Sir Walter Raleigh speaks
of in his History of the Word, B. 2. Chapt. 5. sect. 1. speaking of the care
that Moses had of all things that concerned the worship and service of God;
which care of his all ages have in some degree imitated: Yet (says he, and we
may say so more truly) it is now so forgotten, and cast away in this super fine
age, by those of the family; By the Anabaptists, Brownists, and other
Sectaries, as all cost and care bestowed and had of the Church, wherein God is
to he served and worshipped, is accounted a kind of Popery, and as proceeding
from an Idolatrous disposition; insomuch as time would soon bring to pass (if
it were not resisted) that God would be turned out of Churches into Barnes, and
from thence again into the Fields and Mountains, and under the Hedges; and
the offices of the Ministers (robbed of all dignity and respect) be as
contemptible, as these places: All Order, Discipline, and Church Government,
left to newness of opinion, and men's fancies: yea, and soon after, as many
kinds of Religion would spring up, as their are Parish Churches within
England: Every contentious and ignorant person clothing his fancy with the
Spirit of God, and his imagination with the gift of Revelation; insomuch, as
when the Truth, which is but one, shall appear to the simple multitude* no
less variable then contrary to it self, the faith of men will soon after die
away by degrees, and alll Religion held in scorn and contempt. Does not this
directly hit the temper of our times, wherein the conformable ministry is
generally discountenanced, ignorant and seditious persons, men of all qualities
and professions, s^t up like Jeroboams Calves to outface rhem? Wherein all
sorts of Conventicles (forbidden by Law) are tolerated and frequented by those
that ought to punish them: wherein men will take upon them to be Magistrates,
and declaime against the public worship and service of God, as it has stood
ever since the Reformation in the Church of England, and shut up the doors of
the Mother Church, (if it be lawful to use any name of reverence and
authority, besides the name of a Parliament) that the solemn service of God
may not be administered, as it has been, for a president to other Churches:
wherein men are imprisoned and cannot be enlarged, unless they will promise to
forbear the use of the Common Prayer, the Cross in Baptism, and kneeling at
the holy Communion; wherein the holy Apostles of our Savior are unsainted, as
if we now doubted of their salvation: all this, and more then this, can be
proved against Alderman Pennington, If we look into the House, lest their
Members should not be infected fast enough with this pestilent disease, the
Preachers of their choosing were for the most part notorious, schismatic
Separtists. And for the Synod (of their own setting forth, after a new
translation) for fear the Clergy should have sent men that were too
orthodoxall, they deprived them of their rights, (forgetting their
Protestation, or taking them to be not the Subjects intended in it) and made
choice of as many men as they could get, under no remarkable character, but for
their ignorant novelty, and factious singularity of opinion. If we look upon
the men they most confide in, we shall find them of the same stamp, or else
their prisoners must not be committed to them. Doctor Leyton an old Scottish
Preacher, stigmatized long since for Sedition, Jailer at Lambeth House.
Dillingham a notorious Brownist, with his wife and family, Jailer at
London-House. Devenish the Keeper, and Randall the Porter, both
Conventicle-Preachers, at Winchester-House: and the Porter at Ely-House can
deliver as much extemporary Sedition as the best of them. If we look into their
Army, we shall find their intemperate zeal (not without encouragement from
some great ones) has transported them, not only to the profanation of
Churches, defacing of Monuments, tearing of holy Books, and decent Vestments,
but even to the murdering of the true sons of the Church for joining in her
devotions, as the late example at Lambeth evidenceth.

We see then what is done for the defense of the true Protestant Religion, as
it stands reformed and established in the Church of England. This Religion is
pretended, but another is practiced; and in order to this new one, (for the old
has consisted with the old government) Episcopacy must be rooted out: and to
this end, they have used the most Reverend Bishops, (for no other crime then
for being of that function) as whilome the enemies of the Gospel did the holy
Martyrs of Jesus Christ, when they clothed them in the skins of wild beasts,
to animate the dogs to tear them: so the Fathers of the Church have been set
forth under the most scandalous and ignominious character, to inrage the people
against them. And although they are as far from discovering, as from agreeing
what they would have in the room of it, yet this must down, that is concluded;
and though a Synod be desired, as the most competent Judge of such
Controversies, yet this is to be convened only for color fake; the work must
be done, or rather undone, before they be consulted with, or assembled. We may
expostulate, though they will not allow their Votes, how unreasonable soever,
to be disputed. How came Episcopacy, that has stood so long a pillar in the
house of God, to grow so diametrically opposite to the truth or peace of the
Gospel? Was not our Religion reformed under that Government, and has not our
Church and State flourish't (to the envy of our neighbors) under it? If some
tares have sprung up under it, have they not sprung up much faster, and spread
further under other forms of Government beyond the Seas? If inconveniences
have crept in through that wall, which, if not of Christ's own, is doubtless of
his Apostles building: much more through those low hedges of their setting up,
who hhve no grounds besides their own fancies to plant them on. There is a
necessity of emerging offenses, and tares will grow amongst the Wheat until
the Harvest, or else our Savior has deceived us. His wisdom sees, that the
very chafe may contribute something to the benefit of the good grain in this
life, and therefore has reserved the thorow-purging of his floor till his
own coming unto Judgment. A little breaking in of the salt waters makes our
helds more fruitful: Our chief care must be to keep out Inundations, and the
way to do that is to keep the banks up and to keep them sound, not to level
them.

The Houses did once think it convenient to declare by Votes (which we see
religiously observed in other things) that they intended the abolishing,
neither of the Liturgy* nor of the Church Government: And truly if we
perceive Vote^ (which have presumed ^o challenge so much respect and veneration
from us) created only to serve turns upon occasion, and carried Pro and Con,
as emergent advantages are administered, they will presently lose their
repu^ation (amongst us) of being infallible, and gives us hopes, that upon the
more mature deliberation of second thoughts, at least all groundless Votes,
apparently and experimentally d^structive to the Kingdom, shall be recalled.
And for the Government of the Church (being purged of some abuses) we profess
we like the Preachers ^dvice so well, and have found their principles so
pestilent, that we would not willingly meddle with them that are given to
change, unl^sse we can see better Arguments produced (though this last of the
sword has been the strongest) to move us. We are of their opinion, that having
drank old Wi^e, cannot desire new, for they know the old is better. And it is
not an idle observation, that since they fell from pruning to rooting up, their
endeavors have been almost miraculously blasted, by an immediate and
remarkable curse upon them.

If there be any that thinks this order in the Church is not worth the strife
about it, and that our Religion may consist without it, let them with a sad and
serious heart ponder these Considerations. 1. That instead of these, by the
independent way, a Pope, and however, a Bishop will be set up in every Parish.
2. That there was no other Government (though perhaps some other qualifications
in it) heard of in the Church of God; till about 100 years since, insomuch as
some (of no small note for learning and piety) stand in great doubt, whether
there can be any lawful Ordination, and consequently any lawful Ministry
without it. These (who make up a far more considerable party in this Church,
then those who have already separated, and therefore ought* in the first place
by all the rules of Christian charity, to have their scruples satisfied) upon
the rooting out of this Ancient Government, must needs abandon our Communion.
3. That the true Protestant Religion established in the Church of England, was
never so much undermined and blemished whilst some of the Bishops slept; and
others were too active, as it has been by new sprung up Sects, and monstrous
opinions, since their office was suspended. 4. That the next Orders like to be
quarreled at (if it be not too evident they are quarreled at already) will be
the Nobility and the Gentry; and if we should allow the argument against the
Order of Bishops, that the Protestant Religion, and the general safety of the
Kingdom may consist without them: may not the same argument with as good
reason be taken up against the other by the meaner sort of people (who shall
have hopes to share their estates amongst them) till all degrees be levelled?
Lastly, That the argument of the dispute is not so much, whether Bishops, or no
Bishops: as wheth^r a King, or no King: for we must hold the negative, if
Subjects may be allowed by force of Arms, when they cannot get the Kings
consent, to pull down any piece of his settled Government.

With the Fathers they pretend to thrust out the Children and those are
commonly deciphered under the notion of scandalous Ministers. The truth is, it
were well for the Church of God, if all that were such were thrust out of her
bosom: But they have stretched the Word to such a latitude, that if they should
go on, there would scarce be found an Orthodox man in the Kingdom out of this
Catalogue. For there are a company of scorners and terrible ones, That watch
for iniquity, that make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him
that reproves in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of naught,
Isa. 29. 20, 21. Is he loyal according to the obligation of diverse oaths
sundry times repeated by him? He is a scandalous Minister. Is he a man well
affected to the present Government, etc. or to peace? he is a dangerous man,
and scandalous. In the interim they set up their railing Rabshachaes, that
blaspheme God, and slander the footsteps of his Anointed in such sort, as
their Prayers and Preaching are a very scandal, (except enmities, seditions,
reviling of Gods Ordinances and Ministers, when practiced by them, with the
countenance of a party in both Houses cease to be works of the flesh.) If we
should form comparisons, we should find moates in some men's eyes, made
greater by the multiplyingglasse of malice, (which they make too much use of)
then the b^ames, that are most conspicuous in the eyes of others. In some men
they persecute their humane frailties and indiscretions, whilst they protect
others, whose offenses are died in grain. Master Pigott (amongst other such
like Articles) was accused by some few seditious men of the Parish of S.
Sepulchers, for drinking a Beer glass of White Wind, with a Lemmon and Sugar:
and though vindicated by the testimony of 600 of the a^^est men, had his
reputation blasted (with no credit to his witnesses) by Master Corbet, who sat
then in the chair of Examinations,? I had like to have called it the seat of
the scornful) and gave his hand afterward that he was unworthy to exercise
his Ministry, by which means he has since been put by two Lectures, at
Alhallowes Berking, and Broad-street. I make no question they have met with
some scandalous enough: I do not excuse them. But others they have prosecuted,
whom they might with much more honor have acquitted, and given a check to
their too officious and troublesome neighbors. Look we upon such as are in
most favor and esteem with them, we shall find they have trod their shoes
awry, as well as others. We may ^et Doctor Burgess in the front, and because he
was so busy to pick holes in the coats of his brethren, and rackt up, the
very ash^s of the dead to discover their corruptions, we shall be the bolder to
remember him, not only of a man that was a Pluralist, but of one that the
High Commission looked upon for Adultery; And of one that with continual
suites of Law vexed two Parishes and must have been calculated in the
Black-bill, if he had not taken himself off by his good service against
Bishops. Doctor Downing a reputed weathercock, that turns which way soever the
wind of his own humor, or ambition blows him; sometimes a great suitor to be
the Earl of Straffords Chaplain, thinking that the readiest way to a
Bishopric; and whilst he had hopes of the preferment, writ stoutly in
justification of that calling, Master Calamy, another great Evangelist of the
new way, sometimes complied with Bishop Wren, preached frequently in his
surplice and Hood, read Prayers at the Railes, bowed at the name of Jesus, and
undertook to satisfy and to reduce such as scupled at these Ceremonies,
insomuch as the Earl of Warwick said, He would be lost if he were not taken
off, and so removed him to a living in Essex. This was all the Physic that was
given him, to purge him from that which he now styles Superstition, though it
was never so before he left it. Master Harding another great Apostle for that
way, if he had not secured himself by complying with that faction, had been
complained of for his vicious life, being a notorious fornicatour, often taken
by the Watch in a disguise with Harlots; and since he engaged himself for the
good work, attempted a rape upon a Vintners wife in Southwarke; yet he has
made up all these breaches in his life, by making a greater in the Church,
Master Bridge of Norwich being called to an account by the Bishop (as we are
credibly informed) for keeping another man's wife, left his Cure, and then
pretended he was driven away, because he would not submit to Innovations.
Master Goodwin of Coleman-street in great esteem amongst some of them, yet (let
him spin his opinion into never so fine a thread) a Socinian. Maste^ John
Sedgewi^ke of London-wall, a simoniacke and perjured, both upon Record. And
every one has heard of that light and profane speech of M. Evans; that he
did break the poor women's hearts with preaching of damnation, and carried the
pieces in his pocket. And (if we may touch the apple of their eye) we have
heard (for our eyes are not every where to see them) that Master Marshall has
a powerful faculty of persuasion with the weaker sex, (and all seducers after
their old master go that way) to draw the affections, and then the estates
from brothers children unto his own. By these instances it is evident, that
notwithstanding their zeal for a through reformation, they can dispense with
offenses, as well in the Clergy as in the Laity, if they will become serviceable
unto the present design.

Another thing pretended to be reformed in the Church, was Pluralities and
Non-residence; and this was not so much, because they thought these things
unlawful, as to make room for their own Emissaries. Who would think that
men, who have voted it a thing unlawful and unconscionable to hold two
Livings* or but one and not reside upon it* should practice it themselves.
Nothing has been cried down more by diverse Lords and Commons, since the
sitting of this Parliament, and yet we find many late examples of their own
making. Master Goodricke of little Houghton has been taken from his residence
at his Cure, and made Lecturer at Tottenham, by the means of Sir Edward
Barkeham and Master Stroude. Master Theodor Graves Parson of great Linford, in
the County of Bucks, made non-resident by an Order of Parliament. Master George
Horiford of Stutsbury, in the Diocese of Peterborough, made Vicar of Banbury
by the Lord Say; it seems his Lordship can dispense with a double Benefice in
his own Chaplains. Doctor Wincop (whose new preferment has made him forget
some of his old principles) though he had the fleece of a good flock before,
the House of Commons has given him Institution and Induction into Doctor
Brayes living, S. Martines in the fields; but whether they can vote him into
the profits, as they have done into the pains, is doubtful. Many other
Pluralists have been made this Parliament, (and some since the Bill was drawn
up against them.) Master Henry Trewman, Rector of Cornwall and Newarke, by the
Earl of Clare. Master Tho: Caril of Slindon and Harting, by the Lord
Saint-Iohns. Master John Dixon of Glenfold and Baynes, by the Lord Hastings.
Who can think that these men were in earnest, and not rather upon design, when
they cried out so bitterly against Pluralities? We would feign know what gift
of Vbiquity has been voted into Master Marshall, that he should be able to
officiate at S. Margaret Westminster, Windsor, or any where, and yet not
neglect his Cure at Finchinfield in Essex. Master Case officiates at London,
and leaves his Cure in Cheshire to be supplied by Rawbone an illiterate Layman.

Another thing pretended for the advancement of Religion, was the establishing
of a Preaching Ministry throughout the Kingdom. Certainly a very pious work,
if Orthodox men be planted in all Parishes: But if such be rooted out as are of
^^lest parts to instruct, and men of desperate principles and factious spirits
thrust into their places; this (as by too woeful an experience is now made
evident) will prove destructive both to Church and Commonwealth. Yet this is
the great work for which way must be made (says the Author of Plain English)
by displacing idle, scandalous, superstitious, ignorant persons: And how must
these be displaced? Why says he, If this advantage against them of stirring up
the people to spoil and rapine were taken* it were a good likely means (very
warrantable and honest means surely, according to Wa^ Tylers and Jack Strawes
Doctrine) of rooting out them who had shuffled their Cards so cunningly, as to
be out of the reach of the Law in other respects. This puts me in mind of that
which Colonel Cromwell said to Master Gatford at Cambridge, (when he took away
his book out of the Press, for speaking for obedience unto Magistrates,
against the Anabaptists:) He told him he had been a great opposer of the
Archbishops Innovations, but carried himself so cunningly, that the Law could
not lay hold upon him, and so (he told him) he had behaved himself now; (in
opposition to the Anabaptists) but though the Law could not lay hold upon him,
they had a power could reach him; and this was the power of the Dragooneers,
which brought him up a Prisoner forthwith to Ely-House. The truth is, what ever
they say, their aim is not so much at the idle and ignorant, for the one
winkes at all their false and odious principles, and the other concur with
them in the practice of them. Their chief envy is at the most learned and most
painful Preachers (if they keep not silence at their faction.) Why is the Lord
Primate of Ireland, Bishop Morton, Bishop Hall, Bishop Prideaux, Bishop
Brownrigg, Doctor Hildsworth, Doctor Featly, Master Shute, and others of
singular learning and piety, under a cloud with them, and some of them ordered
to be imprisoned? Why are so many Prisons full of men that are Preachers, as
well by their Examples as their Sermons? Master Squire, Master Stone, Master
Swadlin, that are scarce allowed straw to lie on, (whilst His Majesty is
exclaimed against, when he affords Rebels better usage.) Master Reading of
Dover, Master Griffith of London, Master Ingolds by of Wa^ton in Hartfordshire,
Master Wilcocks of Goudhurst in Kent. These, and many others, having done
nothing worthy of death, or of bonds, are inserted i^to the bl^ck ^ill of
scandalous and superstitious Ministers, for preaching nothing but obedience to
Sovereign Authority, and points consonant to the Holy Scriptures, and the
Doctrine of the Church of England, as it stands established by Act of
Parliament. I confess Master In golds by aggravated his crime of preaching for
obedience, by setting forth the Doctrine of our Church (in six Homilies
established by Parliament, for the use of every Parish) against Rebellion, and
the oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, with the Protestation, and an Epistle
prefix^ to light the people unto their duty; for which he was sent for up (the
second time) with a Troop of Horse: but escaping from them, he came of his
own accord to his prison, desirous to make his answer, which they ^^nd no
leisure yet to hearken (...) Nay, they will not permit that holy man Master
Thrushcrosse, to t^ach White Hall to continue loyal, and Protestant. He seemed
to task the Justice of this bloody War, with reflection upon this new
design, and presently an inquisition is made after him, and the Sunday
following a Guard is set upon every Gate* (if no^ for other malicious ends
likewise) to fright him from the Pulpit. This is their account of scandalous
Ministers, whom they would have, either rooted out, or silenced.

Another project to advance Religion was, the taking the Clergy off from
Temporal employments; and this is stretched so far, that they are reputed
Excentrickes, as moving out of the sphere of their calling, if they study to
preach down Rebellion and disobedience. And yet all the world knows, their
own Clergy have been as active instruments here, as Mr Henderson in the State
affairs of Scotland. Doctor Burgess (we find him at every turn) and Mr John
Sedgewicke, must be made Members of a Sub-Committee, for advancement of moneys.
Nay, the Doct^r^ (who has obtained the Title of a Colonel this Military
Commencement, for riding to encourage the work, with his case of Pistols) was
so officious as to assist Plundering at the Globe Tavern in Holborne. And
there is not a design* but th^se men have a singer in it, and of their tongues
more then their share.

We have seen how faithful they have fought for the Church? they promised and
protested they did as much (and they have done no less) for the King and
Kingdom. That this wa^^e was for the defense of the Kings Person is such a
pretense as honest men are ashamed of, and all men la^gh at, unless you can
persuade them, you teach your bullets to distinguish as nicely as your selves,
between the Kings Personal commands, and his Person. Those that have heard it
delivered for sound doctrine (and without control) that the King might have
been killed in the crowd with a good Conscience, and have seen what Regiments
and Troops were most aimed at (according to Captain Blagues directions) at
Keinton battle, and heard the bullets sing about His Majesty's ears, cannot
believe you did more then complement, when you styled His royal person Sacred;
unless you can change the property of Sacred Persons, as well as of Sacred
things, which you go about (though all men account it Sacrilege) to alienate.
And how should we believe you would fight for the defense of His Person, when
you seize upon all His provision, that if you cannnot do it by the sword, you
may murder him by famine? But admit they fight not for the defense of his
royal person, yet they may fight for his Crown and Dignity: this has been
much pretended to, and that they did so in some sense, may very well be
believed. But in earnest, how can we be persuaded they tender the Honor of the
Crown, when they employ their Rabbis to satisfy (if it were possible) men's
consciences in a wilful and groundless disobedience, by returning ill
languages to sober and solid arguments against it? How do they maintain
Prerogative, when they pretend to a power Coordinate with their Sovereign, and
set up men to clear the Title for them, though they have no evidence, but such
as was never seen by our wise Ancestors? The very name of Monarch implies a
soleship of Government, to them that understand it. If the Monarchy be mixed,
it is not so, as if the Sovereignty were shared amongst diverse, for that were a
meer^ Bull: But this mixture consists of these two ingr^dients, viz. settled
law, and (where a law is not settled) the discretion and prudence of the
Governor. In making laws (wherein their chief power consists) they may
propound and consent, but it lies still in the Kings power to refuse, or
ratify. If the power of the three Estates be Coordinate, and the rule hold (as
the Fuller answer will have it) Coordinata se invicem supplent, Coordinates
supply one another, he presently brings the three Estates into the House of
Commons (and they delegate the power to a close Committee) and so makes them a
Court of Record to give oath, commit, and sentence at their pleasure (as they
have done too many) and every Vote of theirs (though the King and the Lords
dissent from it) by virtue of this power of Supplying inherent in them, shall
be made an Act of Parliament. And if the King be brought thus low, shall he
stand there? shall he not from Coordinate be brought a step lower, and be made
subordinate? why, yes, that is another Doctrine, He is Vniversis minor, a
Subject to all his Subjects; and those mistakes, which were so often condemned
as breaches of their privilege, were nothing else but so many acts of His
Majesty's disobedience. And His people being greater then he, and above him,
may take his own Forts and Arms, to reduce and compel him. Was there ever
any Jesuit out-went them in defending the rights of Kings? Some are so tender
of His Majesty's Crown, that they are not ashamed to say, the oath of
Alleagiance was never made to bind the Protestants, but the Papists only.

If they fight not for the rights of the Crown, perhaps they fight for the
rights of Parliament. That has been pretended too, yet who ever broke the
Privileges thereof more, then tumults of their own countenancing and raising?
The carriages which themselves only have managed, have brought Parliaments
under so much prejudice and disparagement, that the ceremony of a due
reverence, will be as much denied unto them as unto any thing else, till some
other course be taken to restore them to their Ancient reputation.

Their Plea for the Laws of the Land is no less vain: for if they had any
Law for their proceedings, there should be no need of so many strange wild,
and never-before-heard of Ordinances. Insomuch as the Contra-Replicant
confes^esseth on their behalf, in this manner. Nothing has done us more harm
of late, then this opinion of adhering to law only for our preservation. It
would be good to add more (arbitrary) power to the Earl of Essex for (says
he) till I see him looked upon and served as a temporary Dictator, and the
bounds of his Commission to be only thus; Ne quid detrimenti cap^^t Respublica
cavere: I shall never think the Parliaments safety sufficiently provided for.
The Law then is not the thing you fight for, for you fight against it. And the
Judges sit in the House for Ciphers, as the Clergy in the Convocation.

Do you fight to maintain the Liberty of the Subject? Indeed you stand deeply
engaged to do your best for that; for it was never so infringed since the
Conquest, as it has been by your selves since you have taken the charge of the
Militia. If we calculate the number of Prisoners, who have been committed this
year, we shall find hundreds restrained of their liberty most unjustly; for
Master Pym told us in the name, and as the sense of both Houses (in that speech
at Guild Hall) That it is against the rules of justice, that any men should be
imprisoned upon a general charge, when no particulars are proved against them;
and yet we know no particulars were proved or alleged against the Lord of
Middlesex, the Lord of Portland, etc. How many men petitioning for enlargement,
when no charge could be brought against them, have notwithstanding been
detained in prison, because they had not contributed to the maintenance of the
war? And if it be so far from truth, that any particulars have been proved,
that not so much as a general charge has been produced, then either Master
Pym in the name of the House abuses the sense of the House, or else th^^
imprisonment is against the rules of justice. But perhaps these rules of
justice are made in favor of Isaac Pennington, and his three fellow-Citizens,
Kimbolton, and the five members. Such men as these, that are members of the
House, or engaged in their service, these men may not be imprisoned upon a
general charge, though it be a charge of High Treason. And yet I must tell
you, if this be a true maxim of State, it is the greatest Soloecisme that can
be imagined, and I am sure, contrary to the practice of all Indiciall
proceedings upon criminal causes; For if there should be no imprisonment upon
a general charge before particulars are proved, then there can be no
Commitment before some kind of trial, and ^ Constable could not apprehend a
felon, (though he had a warrant for it) without offending against the rules of
Justice; for his apprehension is an imprisonment, and yet no particulars
proved; which says Mr Pym, speaking the sense of both Houses) is against the
rules of Justice. Well! if such an imprisonment be against the rules of
Justice, we are taught from the prisons, the way to the unjustest Court extant.
And if those rules had been as well observed on* the behalf of all His
Majesty's good subjects, as they have been soundly preached to some of them,
there had not been that need (as we see there is) of a Monthly conse^ration of
new prisons. But perhaps the fence of the House is, that the King cannot commit
to prison upon a general charge, when no particulars are proved (His Majesty's
power has been cut very short of late.) But the Houses being more indulgent to
their own privileges, may Carve themselves a power of a greater latitude (and
they have carved themselves very freely of the prerogative of the Crown) and
as occasion serve declare and use it. They may commit upon a due information,
without any proof of particulars* (and this is a new created privilege of the
House of Commons, which heretofore could commit none but their own Members)
Master Pym in his said speech declares the practice of the House, That they
never have committed any man, but such men as by due information (and perhaps
not so due neither) they conceived to be seditious persons, and like to trouble
the peace of the State. What ^ against the rules of Justice to imprison any men
upon a general charge (though of high treason) when no particulars are proved,
and in his next observation but one, men committed upon Informations and
conceits? what is become of the rules of justice now* or what is become of the
Gentleman's memory? If he has forgot his owner rules of Justice so suddenly, we
may cease to wonder, that he has forgot the rule of our law, which he so much
magnified in his speech upon the Attainder of the Earl of Strafford. But what!
have they committed no man but such as by due information they conceived
seditious? I believe none but such as they conceived seditious. Conceit does
much: and if they conceive a man so, they never travail long, before their
Sergeant plays the Mid wife, and assists them to bring him forth such as they
had conceived him to be. But we much doubt. whether this were always by due
information; for we know some, that after three weeks imprisonment (and no
hearing) put in bail, and within a forthnight returned out of the Country,
continued in prison a good while longer; and at last, the information was found
so undue, that they were dismissed. And we have seen an Order under Master
Lawrence Whitakers hand, that such Gentlemen should be moved to bring in the
accusation against such prisoners; and if none could be ^ound, that then they
might be discharged. When the high Sheriff of Essex pleaded, he had done
nothing; (knowing innocence was wont to be a fair excuse) the Speaker told
him, They did commit him for prevention. Where is the due information now, upon
which prisoners are committed? Nay, these great Assertors of the subjects
liberty, have restrained the gray hairs to their great hazard. Alderman
Backhouse, not so rich as honest. And Archdeacon Hilliar, though above 80.
years of age, and so infirm, that he had been a long time bedridden, for
refusing to pay down 800. 1. was carried five miles from Exceter to be shipped
away, to the endangering of his life. And Sir George Whitmore, very aged, was
shipped away for Yarmouth, and could not have the liberty of a Coach for his
health, though he promised to be at the charge of any guard they should think
fit to send down with him. Have not some Parliament men come upon the Bench,
and forbad the Judges granting of Habeas Corpusses? Can we then think these to
be the practices of men, that stand for the liberty of the Subject?

If they have forborne us in the liberty of our Persons, they have paid us in
the property of our Goods. Since they have applied the sword, we are so far
from recovery, that the Incision they have made renders our cure worse then
ever our disease was. Our property received a little scratch by the point of
prerogative before, but now by the privilege of Parliament the point of the
sword has made the wound desperate. When we read this question propounded by
one of their great Clerks (in his answer to the friv^lous paper, for so he is
pleased to style the Petition for Peace*) Have they (the two Houses) not us as
at such advantage, that they may undo us every hour? Truly, till we had found
they had made so ample proof of their ability that way, we had thought it had
been but a Paradox, or at most but an Article of their State-Creed; We never
dreamed it would have been made a piece of their Commandments. We must
confess you sweetened the cup before you gave us our bane in it. Our restraint
is mollified by the fine term of securing our persons, (we pray this securing
may not be extended to cutting of our throats.) And for our estates, you are
too merciful to destroy them at one blow; you will have but a twentieth part
at once, that they may consume and bleed to death gently. What comes freely
from us you accept of kindly, and we had thought you had given us the public
faith for an Acquittance, (till we see you come now again) that we might not
have been couzened to pay the same score twice over. But we must tell you, when
we are come to our ruin, it will be all one to us, whether we were led by the
back stairs with Ceremony, or thrown down headlong to it. And we take it more
unkindly to be led down by those we put in trust, then if we had been
maliciously precipitated by others. And if you have forgotten the Antidote you
gave us, we mean the Protestation, it works too much upon us to be forgotten,
and by virtue of that we shall join our selves to repel that violence, which
has been too long offered to the property of our estates, and liberty of our
persons.

Having taken this strict view of so many particular pretenses, and finding
them but colourably alleged, what aires can we imagine, they should hear so
pleasing in the sound of the Drum and Trumpet, to be witch them to continue
this most unnatural and most bloody War? And what advantage will accrue to
the whole Kingdom (for we would not be engaged further in the quarrel for
particular men's ends and benefit) to countervaile the charge of our expenses?
Is it the Militia that we fight for, and will nothing make you forbear the use
of the sword, till you have gotten the full power of it? then we must profess
His Majesty has not given so much as a colorable ground for this quarrel;
unless it be thought ground enough for his subjects to quarrel on, that His
Majesty does not as unreasonably resign up all his just rights, as you demand
them of Him. If His Majesty delights in Peace, and to see His Subjects flourish
under it, (as the long experience of His gracious disposition shows) what use
have you for a Militia? I pray God restore us to that happiness which we
enjoyed, when the sword and sheath too were both in the Kings own keeping. Is a
War the way to conquer the Kings affections? and do we think to force Acts
of grace from Him? Your sword is like to be the way which God has appointed
for you to make Him glorious; but remember you may have need enough to find Him
gracious, and therefore provoke His Majesty no further unto a just severity.

Is the quarrel continued for Delinquents? then you should have done well to
have the set King a precedent, in delivering Alderman Ponnington and the rest
to a legal trial. That would have been a fair invitation to His Majesty to
have resigned up those that are about Him, to the proof of their innocence.
And whatever the Author of Plain English, and other seditious and
schismatic Clergymen, (that cannot be preferred for their merit, and
therefore seek it by faction) what ever these men are afraid of, if you have
retained the integrity of honest men, and worthy Patriots, you may dare to
abide the issue of a present Accommodation. And let me tell you, if those about
His Majesty laying down their relation to the House of Parliament, (the
privileges whereof, if any were to this purpose, are as common and beneficial
to them, as to your selves) offer to submit to a legal trial (as Subjects
should do) when the Government and known Laws may have their free course;
and you being under as high a charge, can plead nothing but privilege of
Parliament for your justification, and in the interim refuse to submit to the
like legal trial, you must needs be reputed Delinquents indeed, whilst they
are cleared by the verdict of every impartial Judgment. And if you have gone
so far beyond and against the Law, that you are grown afraid to be tried by
it, what shall we conclude from hence but this, that you have undertaken this
War in the prosecution of some new design, and not (as has been all this
while pretended) for the security of our old Protestant Religion, Rights, and
Liberties?

That this design was the subversion of the ancient Government of the Church
and Kingdom, is upon these grounds more then probable.

That a change was aimed at in the Church, no man can deny; and it is made
evident, 1. By the suspending of all Ecclesiastical Laws and Censures,
(according to ancient Constitutions) insomuch as Incest, Rapes, and all Vices
have gone unpunished: and this Jubilee of Indulgence has drawn all offender's
to comply with them. 2. By setting the people a-worke (for some Close-Committee
was the first wheel that moved this business) to petition against the present
Government and Service of the Church. 3. By the Bill long debated, and since
concluded on, for the abolishing of that Government. 4. By the chief persons
countenanced and employed in the business, who were Brownists, Anabaptists,
and all sorts of Sectaries and Schismatics.

The Patrimony of the Church was to be alienated under a pretense of
establishing a preaching Minister throughout the Kingdom: but the truth is, if
their zeal had been but in a seventh degree so hot for that good work, as it
was for fighting for a bad one, they might have finished it for a twentieth part
of that charge, which they have in a desperate fury put the Kingdom to. Now we
believe, if the Revenue of the Church were at their disposal, they would
change those colors, (which they have worn so long for fashion-sake) and make
the religious charity of their Ancestors for the advancement of Gods worship,
under a learned Ministry, serve only to dis-ingage their public faith, which
is not like to be a saving faith otherwise.

When the Government of the Church had been subverted, the design then was to
be put in execution upon Monarchy: This is not a groundless conjecture, if we
consider there evidences.

1. That Declaration upon the Earl of Straffords suffering, with this caution,
that it might not be drawn into example for the future. Certainly this was
with an eye to that subversion of Government which themselves (I mean the
Projectors of this design) intended; that being more guilty of the same crime,
by virtue of such a Declaration, they might be secured from the punishment.

2. The pulling down of so many Courts of Justice, (which were thought to be
of very good use, in the time of our wise Ancestors; and if there be no way of
Reformation left, when exorbitances are crept into Courts and Callings, but
their extirpation, as their practice has been of late, what will the doom be
of the Supreme Court, and the several callings of the Kingdom?) with a
notable blow at the Councell-Table. These may relieve a part of the Subjects
from some pressures; but if something be not settled in their room; may
encourage others in lioenciousnesse, and prove the Prodromes (as we see by
these beginnings) to the ruin of our Monarchy.

3. The nineteen Propositions, whereby the King was demanded to lay down His
Crown, to compound for His Peace with them.

4. That expression (so little understood, and so much talked of in many of
their papers) of a power of resuming the trust, which is falsely pretended to be
derived unto His Majesty by the mere humane pactions and agreements of the
politic body of the people. And,

5. According to this Doctrine, their pretending to, and usurping of the power
of the Militia, both by Sea and Land.

6. Their actual exercising of this power in disposing of offices, having made
their Speaker Master of the Rolls.

Lastly, that expression of the Gentlemen to Sir Edward Deering, (when he was
privy to some of their Cabinet consultations) That if they could bring down
the Lords to the House of Commons, and make the King as one of the Lords, the
work were done. It seems they intended to reserve the honor of the Chair
for His Majesty, when they had taken down His Throne; and it might have been
His good fortune to have had a casting voice, though he is now denied His
negative one amongst them. This plot was laid, and this design in agitation
(though it be a night-piece, which few have hitherto discovered fully) before
the War commenced; and in order to this work, without doubt the Militia was
first exercised, and the Scots a second time invited. (But we hope their
Commissioners that tasted so much of the late feast, will not encourage their
brethren to the fray.)

When we consider these things, adding to them those bloody Treasons uttered
publicly (without check) as well against the whole Line of the Blood Royal,
as against the sacred Person of our Sovereign, and those several assaults
made upon them; our hair begins to stand upright on our heads, and our
consciences often reflect upon our oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
together with our late Protestation; whereby we stand obliged, to our utmost
power, to maintain His Majesty's Royal Person, Crown and Dignity, against
all treacherous practices, that may ruin, dishonor, or impair them, and so
by Gods help we will do. And finding His Majesty's late Propositions (as His
Messages formerly) so just and reasonable, as nothing can be more, and yet so
little listened after for our peace: We advise all our Knights and Burgesses to
vote no more against our gracious Sovereign, or the peace of the Kingdom,
that they make no further use of our own trust to murder us; for it is not our
sense that they should proceed to shed the blood of the ungodly, (as they term
them) when they mean all such as dissent from their wild opinions. And as we
do protest against such Ordinances as are made against the King, or without
His consent, so shall we withdraw our trust and power of representation from
such as shall go on to abuse it. And finding no possibility of peace, till the
pack (that contrived this new design, and this War in order to the
effecting of it) be new shuffled, we shall jointly labor to shuffle that
pack, and dissolve that knot wherein we see our miseries are tried; and (after
due election of new Members into their places) resolve to call them to a strict
account for betraying our trust, interrupting our peace, and violating all our
ancient liberties, and shall not doubt of the assistance of all good men to
effect it.

PSALM. 5. 6. Thou, O God, shall destroy them that speak lies: The Lord will
abhor both the bloodthirsty and deceitful man.
FINIS.

