I Do appoint THOMAS FOX to Print this my Information, Given in Writing to the
Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS, the 15th of November 1680. and that no other Person
Print the same.

EVSTACE COMYNE.
Nov. 24. 1680.
THE INFORMATION OF Eustace Comyne, Servant to Mr. Keadagh Magher TREASURER To
the PAPISTS in Ireland, of their Money to carry on this Horrid PLOT; who was
Barbarously Murdered for Discovering the same, and turning PROTESTANT.

Given in Writing to the HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS, the 15th of this present
November. 1680.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Fox, and are to be Sold at his Shop, at the Sign of
the Angel in Westminster Hall, 1680.

THE INFORMATION OF Eustace Comyne, etc.
THis Informant says, that he lived with one Keadagh Magher being his relation
in Carrignisury in the County of Tipperrary in the Kingdom of Ireland for
Fourteen Years and during that time was privy to all his cencerns.

Says that he did observe and see one Peter Kehow and Thomas Kehow of
Carignisury Merchants who dealt constantly for France, and the said Thomas
constantly going too and fro between France and Ireland, bring several
considerable Sums of Money from France, and delivered it to the said Keadagh
Magher, he being appointed Treasurer by Doctor Oliver Plunket titular Primate
of Ireland; John Brenane titular Archbishop of Cashell, and the rest of the
Bishops of Ireland, and those great and vast Sums of Money were to be
distributed to such persons as the said Plunket, Brenane and Robert Power Dean
of Waterford should direct the same to be paid for the carrying on of that
Horrid Plot of the Papists in Ireland, for to introduce the French into his
Majesty's Dominions, and to suppress the Protestant Religion in these three
Kingdoms.

The distribution of a great part of the said Money was as follows, viz. to
Sir John Pounsonby for to stand firm to that wicked and ungodly design Two
hundred pounds, and a great deal more was promised when ever there came more
Money over from France, to the Earl of Tyrone Two hundred pound, to Peter
Cranisborough of Waterford Merchant Two hundred pound, to John VValsh the Duke
of Ormonds Lawyer in the County of Tipperrary Four hundred pound, to John
Mandevile of the same County Three hundred pound, to Michael Guyn of the same
County One hundred pound, to Robert Low Justice of the Peace of the same County
Two hundred pound, to Francis Alcock another Justice of the same County Two
hundred pound to Michael Kearney, James Kearney, John Kearney, Morris Kearney,
and Bryan Kearney, One hundred pound a piece, to Richard Purcell of Thurles in
the County of Tipperrary Merchant Two hundred pound.

This Informant says, that there was a meeting of Four and twenty of the
Romish Clergy, at a place called Cloughnecully in the County of Tipperrary, who
went from thence to wait on the titular Primate Plunket to the aforesaid John
VValsh, the Lawyers house at Ballyneiry in the County of Tipperrary aforesaid,
and consulted together and agreed to give every Judge that would go the Circuit
Two hundred pound, if they would take it to stand their friends, and to be
Surveyors against any discoverers, and to every Justice of the Peace that would
take it One hundred pound.

And it was also concluded by the aforesaid John Walsh, Francis Alcock, Robert
Low, two Justices of the Peace, that whoever should from Sun setting to Sun
rising destroy any of the Discoverers of that Wicked and Horrid Plot, should
have Twenty pound and their pardons, and also an Absolution from the Romish
Church.

He says that there was Two hundred pound, given or secured to Sir William
Davis by Peter Lynsey, and Patrick Commerford for the design aforesaid, he
being then Judge at Clonmell, this Informant being an Eye Witness how the Two
hundred pound, was secured to be paid to Sir William Davis, and being
satisfied on what account the rest of the forementioned Sums, were paid to
the forenamed persons was touched in Conscience, and was resolved to Discover
all their Villainy, and in order thereunto went unto the aforesaid Alcock and
Low being two Justices of the Peace, and demanded a Warrant from them in the
presence of the Mayor of Clonmell, for to apprehend Primate Plunket, the
Archbishop of Cashel and Robert Power the Dean of Waterford, the said Plunket
and the Bishop of Cashel, being then at the aforesaid John VValsh's House, the
said Justices refused this Informant, until the said Justices sent word to
Plunket and the other Bishop to be gone, and then gave this Informant a
Warrant, who pursued the said Plunket and the Bishop of Cashell to the County
of Kilkeney, to one Mr. Walter Butlers House a Nephew of the Duke of Ormonds,
who meeting with this Informant threatened him at a high rate and asked him how
he durst come upon his Land, that the said Mr. Butler gave his Pistols to one
George Lee with a design to Kill this Informant, who narrowly escaped with his
Life. Soon after this Informant came to Dublin, and applied himself to his
Grace the Duke of Ormond, and informed him of that horrid and wicked design of
the Papists, who promised this Informant a Protection.

And though this Informant Petitioned often for the same, yet he was refused
insomuch that he was necessitated to go disguised in a beggars habit to the
North of Ireland, for the safety of his life, but being pursued by Sir William
Davis, Plunket and Archbishop of Cashel, to all Parrish Priests for to make a
diligent inquiry after this Informant. who finding him at Carrigfergus above
Fourscore Miles distant from Dublin he was there committed to Goal by one
Captain Davis a Justice of the peace, where he remained for three weeks, until
this Informant sent him the said Davis word, that he was taking the advice of
the Friar that was in his House for to destroy the Kings Evidence. Upon which
he discharged this Informant.

And this Informant coming at least Eighty Miles distant, an other way
backwards for to shelter himself to one Esquire Lamberts, in the County of
Mead, where he worked for his living about a Months time, and understanding
the design of the Papists going on apace went to one Sergeant Osborne one of
the Kings Council, and discovered to him a great deal of the said Plot, but
instead of acting as the Kings Council or Loyal Subject, he to the contrary
sent this Informant to the Goal of Trinn in the County of Mead, where he
remained for 3 weeks in a starving condition in Irons, until he was removed
from thence to Dublin, and his Legs tied under the Horses belly, and then was
brought before Sir John Davis Secretary of State, who at the first sight called
this Informant a Rogue, and said that he was in Prison at Carrickfergus; this
Informant replied that it was by the unjust means of his Brother for
discovering the Truth against him; This Informant being brought to the Council
Board, the Lord Chancellor and Sir John Davis came to examine this Informant,
who told them, he was not willing to be examined by them, by reason the one was
Sir William Davis his Brother and the other his Father in Law; yet however to
avoid all that they should pretend, this Informant told and discovered more to
them than they were willing to hear; for which they returned this Informant to
Prison, who was discharged the next day, but by whose means he cannot tell,
neither could he get any protection or safety; but exposed to the Malice of his
Enemies, this Informant went to another remote part of the Kingdom in the
County of Limerick, with an intent to take Shipping and to come for England,
for to discover all their villainy, but being there discovered was apprehended
and brought to Justice Crocker, who sent this Informant to Sir William King,
who committed him to the Marshalsea at Limerick, until such time as he would
send to Dublin to know how he was discharged there; But Sir William Davis
coming Judge of that Circuit, and coming to Limerick, Ordered this Informant to
be sent to the Dungeon, where he continued for Eight Months in a perishing
condition, until such time as the Lord Chief Baron Hinne came that Circuit, and
coming to Limerick, this Informant could not get a Petition delivered to him,
but was forced to tie it on the top of a staff, and as the Judge was passing by
reached it to him out of a window, and the Judge having perused it, and
understanding the cause of his Commitment was to suppress his Evidence, which
this Informant declared often, that would sooner suffer Death than conceal such
a bloody design, though he was often tempted by offering him great Sums of
Money to conceal what he knew.

The Popish party, to prosecute their bloody intent, did most barbarously
Murder the said Keadagh Meagher, who was their Treasurer, when they understood
he detested their design, and turned Protestant, and was resolved to discover
all their horrid and bloody designs.

This Informant has more to discover, but first humbly desires that he may
have his Pardon and Security.

EVSTACE COMYNE.

FINIS

