A VINDICATION Of the several Actions at Law, brought against the Heirs of
Sr. Peter Courten Knight, and Peter Boudaen, Merchants deceased, by George
Carew Esqr; James Boeve Merchant, and Hester de Weyer. With the Arraignment of
a most scandalous Pamphlet, called, De quade Minees en Practiken van seeckeren
George Carew, ontdeckt en opengeleght / tot onderrichtingh en waerschouw aen
Nederlandt, door d' Erfgenamen van P. B. C. Zalr. 1675. privately given out to
the Magistrates in Zeeland.

Veritas non quaerit angulos. Printed at Middelburgh, by Thomas Berry. 1675.

To His Highness THE Prince of Orange.
Sir,
IT was given for a Maxim (amongst other Policies of Government) to the States
of the United Provinces, by Prince William of Nassaw, your great Grandfather,
that they should do Justice unto all Strangers; It being the greatest support
of a Nation, and the want of it, the chiefest cause of their fall. I am grieved
that such occasions are given me, to write upon this Subject, or to say that
these Netherlands, have long mourned for the transgressions of evil doers.

Before the Law of Property, there was noe theft, all things remained in common
to every man; but after the Laws of Nations were established, all men's rights,
became distinguished and preserved, by certain Rules and order of good
Government.

May it please your Highness, I am obleiged as an Englishman, a Gentleman, and
a Subject, of the King of Great BRITTAIGNE, publicly to vindicate my self, my
Country, and the Judicature of England, since several Advocates and their
Clyants in Middelburgh, have taken the boldness, and liberty, publicly to
scandalize and reproach all three, by belching out their calumnies and
aspersions, against us, in the ordinary Courts of Justice there.

And since your Highness by a wonderful Providence, is not only restored, to
the ancient Offices, and Dignities, of your most Noble and Princely Ancestors,
but that the chief Office of Statholder, in Holland and Zeeland is intailed
upon your Highness and your Heirs for ever, as a remarkable testimony of your
personal merits, and the common gratitude of the people, for the many and
great Services, that your Ancestors had done for these Provinces. I shall
therefore implore your Highness to recommend my Causes, that I may at last find
common Justice, in these Netherlands, without respect of Persons: And that in
the mean time, your Highness would give your self the trouble of reading this
short Narative of them; wherein I have not offered any thing, impertinent to
the business in hand. So leaving the scope of the whole matter, unto your
Highness most serious considerations; submitting the same to your great wisdom
and judgment, as the chief President of all Judicature, in these Provinces.

Great Sr. I remain your Highness most humble Servant, GEORGE CAREW.
Middelburgh in Zeeland, September 2. 1675.
A Preface to the Reader.
VIrtue, and honorable Actions, make all men truly noble; and on the contrary,
wicked and abominable practices render them, unworthy and base. It is not
business here to recriminate the vices, of these Provinces, or to make a
retrospect into the Pedegrees of those particular Inhabitants, that have lived
upon the spoils of other Nations, but only into my parties and their
Advocates, who have not been ashamed to publish most false and libellous
discourses, reflecting upon my self, and several others of his Majesty's good
Subjects of England, Scotland, and Ireland; I should therefore betray my own
innocence, the merits of my causes, and the deserts of my own Family. If I
should continue silent, after so many indignities, and reproaches cast upon us,
that are reduced into writing by John, and Peter Boudaen, by whose directions,
they were also Printed by the States Printer, in Middelburgh: and the Books
given under hand to the Magistrates, to get good opinions of their bad Causes,
to the prejudice of my self, and other Englishmen.

Miracles are now ceased, and men cannot have moneys drop into their lapps out
of the clouds. All things mentioned in this following Treatise, are matters of
record. And if shame and infamy had not attended the Family of old Peter
Boudaen (as he himself in a letter to his Mother long before his death
prognosticated) his Children might have covered their Fathers infirmities, and
suffered him to rest quiet in his grave, by giving better attention, unto those
timely insinuations, and friendly addresses, that were made unto all the four
brothers, John, Peter, Walter, and Henery Boudaen, respectively, who follows
the stepps of their Father (not restoring what was injustly gotten,) yet I
cannot without regret speak evil of the dead; wherefore I have modestly and
briefly set forth the Characters, and Extractions, of the persons concerned, as
a most necessary introduction to what follows: then comes a Relation of the
Partnership in Trade and Commerce, between Sr. William Courten, Sr. Peter
Courten, and Mr. John Moncy, together with the several transactions of their
Heirs, Executors, and Assigns; adding some Observations and Remarques
thereupon, I come to the vindication of my self and Family; justifying my
Administrations in England, and my proceedings in the several Cases depending
in Holland and Zeeland, ever since the year 1650. which I leave also to your
candid apprehensions, and the whole World to be competent Judges thereof.

Vale. Middelburgh September. 3. 1675.
It Was the Saying of an ancient Philosopher, that lived in a very serene Air,
Quod, gaudiant qui been nati; The words being spoken as to the temperature of
those men's bodies, from whence followed the generous disposition of their minds.
IN the year 1567. Phillip the Second, King of Spain, having sent Olivaris
Duke of Alva, to be Governor of the Seventeene Provinces, the Spanish
Inquisition, was then put in execution. Where amongst others, William Courten a
Tailors Son at Menen in Flanders, was imprisoned, from whence he made his
escape, and remained sometime privately about Courtrick, having married Margriet
Casier from thence a Linnen-weavers daughter, by whom he had one daughter named
Margiret, that married with Matthias Boudaen, a Macklaers Son of Antwerpe: These
People having very tender consciences, they transported themselves, some for
Holland, and others for England, with all the moneys and credit they could make.

William Courten and Margeret his wife being arived at London, in the year
1568. they took a small house in Abchurch-laine, where both of them followed
the trade of making French Hoods, that were much used in those days, and sold
their work to the shops, that retayled the same out again. After some time
expired, they took a house in Pudding-laine, in the Parish of St. Mary Hill,
where they had two Sons, the eldest named William, who was borne in the year
1572. (yet within the memory of the living) and the other named Peter, that was
born in the year 1581. who were both brought up to School, to lea^ne to read,
write, and cast Accounts.

William Courtens the Son after his Fathers death, was sent unto Mr. Peter
Cromelincx, a Linen Merchant at Harlem, (that had also fled out of Courtrick
for Religion) to be instructed in Trafficque and Linen Manifactures, where the
said William Courten became intimate with one of the deaf and dumb Daughters
of Mr. Cromelincx, and afterward married her (with the consent of her Father)
by whom he had a good fortune, and one Son named Peter, that died without
Issue. And after the death of Mr. Peter Cromelin^x Daughter, William Courten
being settled at London, he married the Daughter of one Mr. Moses Tryan, by whom
he had several children.

Peter Courten the second brother was sent to Cologne in Germany, to be a
Correspondent there for his brother William and other friends, where he became
familiar with the Widow of Mr. Fromenois, who was the Daughter of Monsieur Del
Prato, and married her, that had a Son and Daughter by her former Husband, but
died without Issue by Peter Courten, leaving her two children named Walter and
Katharine Fromenois, to his care and education.

Matthias Boudaen had planted himself and his family at Rotterdam, where he
became insolvent, but was set up again, by the assistance of his friends, and
not long after died, leaving his Widow Margret Courten with two children a Son
and a Daughter, named Peter and Anna Boudaen. The widow then transported her
self and her children for England, to seek better preferment.

Jacob Pergens a Cologner borne, that was made a Free Denizon of England, at
the instance of William Courten, he married the said Anna Boudaen, who died
without Issue.

Peter Boudaen the only Son of Matthias was bred in England, and made also a
Free Denizon, and afterward married Katharine Fromenois, the Daughter in Law of
Peter Courten, that was settled in Middelburgh in Zeeland; but Walter Fromenois
the Son married a Sempstris, and died without Issue, leaving a great part of his
Estate to his Widow.

On the 24. of April 1606. John Moncy of London Merchant, a Brabander borne,
and a Schoolmasters Son, being made likewise a Free Denizon of England, he
contracted a marriage with the said Margret Boudaen, the Widow of Matthias,
whereupon William Courten, Peter Courten, and John Moncy entered into a Trade of
Partnership with a joint Stock, whereof the half-part belonged to William
Courten, and a quarter-part to each of the other two, which Trade continued for
15. years together very profitable to all the Partners: then the Accounts
thereof were liquidated, and all things set even and right.

Now William Courten, and Peter Courten, being made Knights, they raised their
credit and esteem in the World, and also continued their Trade in Partnership
during their lives; but that Stock was chiefly managed by Sr. Peter Courten and
John Moncy, Sr. William Courten dealing as a Bankere in London, besides upon
his own particular account, where he took up what Moneys he pleased; purchased
several Lordships, and Tenements. And transported vast Sums of Money, in Gold,
out of England to Middelburgh, and other places to negotiate Bills of Exchange,
whereupon he was questioned in the Star Chamber, committed to the Prison of the
Fleet, and fined for the said offense of exporting the Treasure of England into
foreign parts, against the Law of the Land, as by the Records in the
Crowne-Office appears.

Sr. Peter Courten having married a second wife named Elizabeth Hennich, he died
without Issue in the year 1630. at Middelburgh, where he had built a great
House in the North-street, but left the Accounts of the Trade in Partnership
open, which had not been liquidated within the space of nine years before his
death, and made Peter Boudaen his Heir and sole Executor, giving only 100
Pound sterling to Sr. William Courten his Brother, and other small Legacies to
his children, (that were his Heirs at Law,) to exclude them from the Estate,
which raised the first dissentions in those Families.

John Moncy died without Issue in the year 1631. when he was at Peter Boudaens
House in Middelburgh, upon the view of all the Accounts, in the general Books
of Trade, that were kept by Sr. Peter Courten; and by his pretended Will, gave
a great part of his Estate away in Legacies to the children of Sr. William
Courten and Peter Boudaen, from his own and only Sisters children, Hester and
Su^^nna de Wire, that he brought up as his own, and made Margret his wife, his
Heir, by whom he had noe child.

Sr. Willim Courten died in the year 1636, in the 64. year of his age,
leaving one Son, and three Daughters, named William, Hester, Mary, and Anna,
being all very much troubled concerning the Accounts lying open between Sr.
William Courten, Sr. Peter Courten, and John Moncy, Wherein they esteemed the
greatest part of their Fathers Estate to be in that Stock: Which raised many
jealousies in the Family of Sr. William Courten, and more amongst the
Creditors, who had lent their own moneys, and the Portions of many Orphants,
and Widows, upon the credit of Sr. William Courten, and his Son and Heir, who
Sr. William appointed the sole Executor of his last Will and Testament.

It is to be remarqued, that Sr. William Courten died indebted 146300 Pound
principal Sterling Money, borrowed at intrest, upon the Obligations of himself
and his Son, as by a Schedule of the debts appears. And that for 112500. Pound
thereof, there remains no Effects in England, or visibly in any parts of the
World, but what rests either in the hands of the Sons and Daughters of the said
Peter Baudaen, viz. of John Boudaen, Peter Boudaen, Walter Boudaen, Henry
Boudaen, Constance and Katharine Boudaen, that call themselves the Heirs of
Sr. Pieter Courten and John Moncy, or in the hands of Sr. Jacob Cats, Jacob
Pergens, or the East India Company of the Netherlands, as by the 36. Articles
annexed to a Petition in the Parliament of England, hereafter mentioned more
plainly appears.

It is now necessary to give some account of the Administration of Sr. William
Courtens Estate by his Son and Heir and Sole Executor, that administered upon
his Fathers Lands and goods, from the year 1636, unto the year 1643, when he
became insolvent and absented himself from his Creditors, and also left his
dwelling house in London, and frequented the Exchange no more, which was most
notoriously known to all the World.

Sr. William Courten in the year before his death, borrowed the Sum of
36000. Pound Sterling of Sr. Paul Pyndar upon his own and his Sons Obligations,
and set out several Ships (in Company with other men) to the East Indies,
China, and Japan; And Sr. Paul Pyndar being the greatst Creditor, he earnestly
called for his money, in the year after Sr. William Cour^en died, but was
persuaded to wait in expectation of Returns from the East Indies, to get his
satisfaction from thence (if possible) where his money was employed.

Diverse other Creditors for several great Sums of Money, daily Solicited
William Courten, the Son and Heir for payment of their debts, or to have other
security for their Moneys, which forced Mr. Courten to sell the Lordships of
Laxton and Kneesall in the County of Nottingham unto Mr. P^rpoint, to satisfy
some persons that were very importunate for their Moneys. Soon after the said
William Courten was necessitated to morgage all his other Lands and Lordships
unto Mr. Daniell Harvy, Mr. John Rushout, and Mr. Thomas Coppin, which went but
a little way toward satisfaction of the great debts and Interest Money grown
due thereupon, the rents and profits of the Lands being consumed by the Armies
of the King and Parliament. After all this was done, the said William Courten,
further to preserve his Fathers reputation, prevailed with Sr. Edward
Littleton, his Brother in Law, and the Earl of Bridgwater with David Goubard
to become bound unto diverse Creditors, that renewed their Bonds, and also unto
several other persons, that lent Moneys, toward payment of old debts.

Thus William Courten the Son and Heir of Sr. William Courten continued in
paying some Creditors with borrowing of others, until the year 1642. then he
granted and assigned all his Ships, and Stock in the East Indies, and the
reversions of his Morgaged Lands in England, by several Deeds and Conveyances
unto Sr. Edward Littleton, dated the 26. of April 1642, to save him harmless
and indempnified from the said debts, wherein he stood obliged.

William Courten and Sr. Edward Littleton then for further security unto Sr.
Paul Pyndar, for the remainder of his debt, which was at that time the Sum of
24800. Pound Sterling, did by their Deed and Assignment bearing date the 19. of
September 1642. grant and assign several Sums of Money upon the said Ships
and their Fraights, in the East Indies, for satisfaction of the said debt and
damages, to Sr. Paul Pyndar, his Executors or Administrators, as by the said
several Deeds enrolled in Chancery, and the Admiralty of England appears.

In the year 1646. the Lady Katharine Courten the Sons Wife, by whom she had
two children, a Son and a Daughter, named William and Kathartne, both yet
living, having conveyed away the Books of Accounts of the Trade in Partnership,
that were kept in England, she caused Authentic Coppies to be made thereof,
and sent the Original Books unto Peter Boudaen of Middelburgh, to the end and
purpose, that the Accounts might be stated and settled, that some portion of
Moneys might be preserved if possible for her Children (after the Companies
debts were paid) out of the reach of the Commissioners, that executed the
Statutes made against Banckrupts, as by the Attestations of John Moon, James
Boeve, and several others appears.

John Moons Deposition before the Commissioners upon the Statutes against
Banckrupts, on the 25. of Febr. 1656.
COPIA, Extracted out of the Register of Commissioners of Banckrupt.
John Moon of London Merchant, Commissioners.
Ia. Winstanley. Tho. Bayles. Richard Nortan. Antho. Boys.

sworn and reexamined the 25. day of February 1656. upon his Oath says, That
in or about the Years 1646, or 1647. this Deponent was desired by the Lady
Katherine Courten, Wife of William Courten, the party against whom the
Commission is awarded, to draw out an Account out of the Books of Sr. William
Courten, concerning the Charge and Disbursments of the said Sr. William, in
setting out Ships, Men and Provisions for the Discovery and planting of the
Island of Barbados; And accordingly this Deponent did draw out an Account of
his said Disbursments, which did amount unto the Sum of twelve or thirteen
thousand pounds or thereabouts, which said Account this Deponent delivered unto
the said Lady.

John Moon.
And the said John Moon also deposes, that heretofore about 1646. he this
Deponent, by the appointment and direction of the said William Courten and his
wife, did send to Middelborrow unto one Peter Boudaen Courten, several Books
of Accounts, as Journalls, Ledgers, and Cash-bookes; but what is now become of
the said Books, this Deponent knows not.

John Moon.
Concordat Original. verbatim. Copia vera,

Quod attesttor rogatus and requisitus. I. DANIELL. Notaris Publ.



ATTESTATIEN Van Mr. James Boeve, rakende de Boecken die gehouden wierden by
Sir William Courten, Koopman tot Londen. Den 16. July 1675.
OP huyden den 16. July 1675. compareerde voor my Abraham Huyssens, openbaer
Notaris by den Hove van Hollandt geadmitteert, binnen Vlissinge residerende,
end den Getuygen naergenoemt, Sr. Jaques Boeve, Koopman van Engelandt in
Londen, gewoont hebbende binnen Middelburgh, my Notaris seer well bekent, de
welcke op sijn Manne waerheyt, in plaets van Eede, ten versoecke van d' Here
George Carew Schilt-knaep, by den Prerogativen Hove van Engelandt gestelt tot
Administrateur van all de ongeadministreer de Goederen end Effecten van
wijlen Willem Courten Ridder, in sijn leven woonachtigh tot Londen, end
verklaer de waerachtigh te zijn dat hy Deponent in den Iare 1628. is komen
woonen als Comptoirknecht by Jan de Moncy Koopman tot Londen voorsz. in
Huywelijck hebbende Iuffrouw Margrieta Courten, de welcke in Compagnie handelde
met de voornoemde Here Willem Courten, end Pieter Courten Ridder, woonende tot
Middelburgh, end dat hy in dien dienst is gebleven tot den Iare 1638. in
welcke tijdt hy ettelijcke Iaren de Boecken wegens de Negotie van de gemelde
Compagnie binnen Engelandt heeft gehouden, end voor sijn afscheyt (naer dat de
selve volkomentlijck waren overgedragen door last van Iuffrouw Margrieta
Courten, Weduwe van den voornoemden Jan de Moncy, gelevert in handen van Willem
Courten, Sone van den voornoemden Willem Courten Ridder, welcke Boecken sedert
door last end order van Willem Courten end sijn Huysvrouwe, in often ontrent
den Iare 1646. gesonden zijn geweest aen Pieter Boudaen Courten, als Erfgenaem
van Pieter Courten, door John Moon, gelijck hem Deponent gebleken is uyt even
be-eedighde verklaringe door gemelte Moon gedaen in handen van Commissarisen
van desolate Boedels binnen Londen, op den 25. February 1656. item dat David
Goubard gewesen Boeck-houder eerst van Pieter Courten, end nader^andt van
Willem Courten, aen hem Deponent verklaert heeft in den Hage dat de selve
Compagnie Boecken die tot Londen waren gehouden, gekomen waren in handen van
Pieter Boudaen Courten, end die aldaer gesien te hebben: voorts dat de
generale Boecken, nopende de Negotie op all gewesten buyten Engelandt,
gehouden wierden door Pieter Courten tot Middelburgh, end desselfs Erfgenaem
Pieter Boudaen Courten, end dat de Rekeningen van gemelte Compagnie by sijnen
tijdt noyt en zijn vereffent, end noch openstaen voor so veel hem bekent is,
't selve gevende voor redenen van wetenschappe, presenterende all 't selve des
noodt end daer toe versocht zijnde met solemnelen Eede te bevestigen. Aldus
gedaen end gepasseert binnen Vlissingen voorn^. present Joannis end Engel
Huyssens, als Getuygen hier toe versocht.

Quod Attestor Rogatus. A. HUYSSENS, Notaris Publ.

After the Creditors had prosecuted the said Commission for several months
together, they procured the Commissioners to make an Assignment, and
repartition of William Courtens Estate, that was discovered, and to divide the
same amongst the Creditors, conformable to the Statutes made against
Banckrupts. And notwithstanding all possible inquiries, and examinations were
made at the great costs, and charges of the Creditors; yet there could not be
found, any more Estare, in England, then 13. ^ in the Pound, which was divided
toward the principal debt of 112300 L that still remained due, unto the
Creditors of Sr. William Courten and his Son, (besides the debt of Sr. Paul
Pyndar) although Sr. Edward Littleton, the Earl of Bridgwater, and David
Goubard became bound, as aforesaid. Who also absented themselves, and died
without giving satisfaction, as hereafter is mentioned.

These transactions made all men stand amazed, in regard they could not
discover any losses, that Sr. William Courten had sustained in his life time;
and they were the more astonished, in respect that those very individual
sums of Money, for which they sought relief upon the Obligations of Sr.
William Courten and his Son, were contracted by Sr. William Courten, 14* or 15.
years before his death, and continued at Intrest, which was constantly paid
out of design to get what other Moneys he could into his hands, as by the sadd
consequences thereof appears.

Upon several other meetings, and examinations, the Commissioners were
informed, that David Goubard, who was Book-keeper unto Sr. Peter Courten, and
Sr. William Courten, and had made his Escape into Holland, (where the States
General gave him a Protection) could discover much of Sr. William Courtens
Estate, and that also Jacob Pergens of Amsterdam and Peter Boudaen of
Middelburgh, could likewise contribute very much thereunto. The said
Commissioners sent several Letters subscribed by themselves and many of the
Principal Creditors, unto Pergens, Boudaen, and Goubard respectively,
earnestly entreating them to give their best assistance therein toward the
relief of many Orphants and Widows; but neither of them would send any
answers to the purpose, only Pergens writ unto Mr. Richard Norton one of the
Commissioners, that as for the Moneys which they had desired him to pay, which
the East India Company had paid concerning the Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry
Bona Adventura, Jonas Abels of Amsterdam by Procuration from Sr. Paul Pyndar
had claymed and arrested the same in the year 1648, therefore he could not do
them any service therein.

The Controversy concerning those Ships is formerly set forth at large, called
a Continuation of the Ca^e between the Heirs and assigns of Sr. William
Courten and the East India Company of the Netherlands, unto which I refer you;
Yet for a further aggrevation of that Cause, I shall make these following
remarkes thereupon.

That it was a most abominable practice, and Combination, between Jacob
Pergens, Peter Boudaen, David Goubard, and several Directors of the East India
Company, who had special notice, of the several grants, and Bills of Sale
unto Sr. Edward Littleton, and Sr. Paul Pyndar, which were also insinuated unto
them by Jonas Abeels, on the 25. of May 1648. who likewise arrested the Money
in their hands, which the Scheepens of Amsterdam had declared valid, on the
first of October 1648. yet after all insinuations, prohibitions, protests, and
arrests, this pretended Agreement following was made.

Het Accoort tusschen de Oost-Indische Compagnie en Mr. Pergens. Den 18.
Septembris 1649.
ALsoo differenten ontstaen zijn tusschen de E. Bewinthebberen van de
Nederlants^he Geoctroyeerde Oost-Indische Compagnie ter eenre / mitsgaders d'
E. Jacob Pergens end David Goubart, so voor hem selven / end als Procuratie
hebbende van d' E. William Courten, end andere Ge-interesseerdens in de
gemelte differenten tot Londen ter andere zijden: ter saecke van seecker Schip
genaemt l'Esperance, in den Iare 1643. voorleden ontrent de Stadt Malacca van
de Ministers van de gemelte Compagnie om redenen daer toe dienende, met sijn
ingeladen Goederen aengehouden, midtsgaders eenige ge^erghde Goederen uyt het
Schip Henry Bon Adventura op 't Eylandt Mauritius verongeluckt / end van daer
op Batavia gebracht: So is it / dat de voornoemde Jacob Pergens end Goubart ter
Vergaderinge van de Seventhiene / de gemelte hare pretensien (om eenmael van de
selve af te zijn) eyndelijck begroot hebbende op even Sum van hondert duysent
Guldens, end daer op gehoort zijnde de presentatie van de gemelte Vergaderinge
van tseventigh duysent Guldens, na dat hare Ed. de resterende differerende
dertigh duysent Guldens al end geheel aen de uytspake van dese Vergaderinge
gesubmitteert hadden, a^n de voornoemde Pergens end Goubart voor all de
gemelte hare pretensien end aenkleven van dien / egeene uytgesondert of
gereserveert / by desen toegeleyt hebben de Sum van tachtigh duysent Guldens,
mits voor den ontfangh van de gemelte Penningen stellende suffisante Cautie
voor all namaninge. All 't welcke by de gemelte E. Pergens end Goubart
gehoort zijnde daer mede contentement genomen hebben / alles ter goeder trouwen
sonder argh of list / zijn daer van gedaen maken twee al-eens-luydende Acten /
end wederzijts tusschen gemelte Parthyen geteyckent binnen Middelburg in
Zeelandt, den 18. Septembris 1649. Was met verscheyden handen ouderteeckent.

Jacob Pergens. I. C. Hayman 1649. David Goubard. Jacob Roch. P. Boudaen
Courten. P. Carpentier. Pieter van Santen. Adriaen Besemer. Ian Vaericksz
Abbekerck Hercke Iansz Noortlant.

Na gedane Collatie is dese Copye jegens den principale van word tot word
bevonden te accorderen / sulcx betuyge ick ^eyserlijcken / en by den Ed. Hove
van Hollandt / mitsgaders den Groot Achtbaren Magistraet der Stadt Amsterdam,
geadmiteerden openbaer Notaris binnen de selve Stadt residederende / end hebbe
in oirkonde van dien mijnen Notariale Signature hier onder gestelt /

desen 27. January 1651. J. vande VEN, Notaris Publ.

It was a double iniquity and robbery in Pergens, Boudaen, and Goubard, that
knew William Courten became insolvent in the year 1643. and that he had no
property left in him after the grants and Bills of Sale to Sr. Edward Littleton
and Sr. Paul Pyndar.

Such Frauds in France, are punished with death, and the persons absent are
hanged in Effigies.

The very freight, that the Portugals, by contract were to give for the
Passengers, and goods taken aboard the Ship Bona Esperanza for Maccao, and for
90. Lasts, of the Ships Lading, back again for Goa, amounted unto much more
Money, then what Pergens, and Goubard, had by their pretended agreement, gotten
of the Company upon Caution.

SOLOMON says, that opression makes the wise man mad, Sr. Paul Pyndar, that had
served King James, and the Turkey Company in the quallity of an Ambassador, for
the space of Eleaven years, and had advanced the greatst part of his Estate
unto Sr. William Courten, as aforesaid, and the rest of all his Means unto the
late King Charles, toward the ordinary charge of the Crown. This Sr. Paul
Pyndar, upon the news that the East India Company of the Netherlands had dealt
so unkindly by him, he retired himself to his Chamber, and died of grief in the
year 1650.

Then William Toomes his Executor, made some further inspection into the said
Cause, and found upon Examinations, that the Officers of the East India Company
had not only surprised the Bona Esperanza, and spoiled the Voyage in her
passage by Malacca, but had also taken away the Charterparties, Bills of
Lading, Books of Account, Journals and all other writings whatsoeve^, in the
Ship, and sent them to Batavia, with the Ships and goods, which were there kept
without any proceedings at Law, or color of right. At the very apprehension of
this spoil and loss sustained by William Toomes, in such an age, that he could
not expect any Justice, where frauds and oppression, were added unto force and
violence; he therefore laid violent hands upon himself and died.

It is very remarkable, that Sr. William Courtens Son and Heir died a fugetive
in Italy, and insolvent, his Lady the Earl of Bridgwaters Daughter died
miserable, his Daughter Katharine Courten married a Millers Son that was her
own Footboy, and William Courten the Grandchild lives in Exile, while a
Commission upon the Statutes concerning Banckrupts remains in force against his
Fathers Estate. Yet the Sons and Heirs of Peter Boudaen and their Advocates
say, that William Courten, the Grandchild ought to administer the Estate as
Heir at Law, additione Hereditatis, both of the Father and Grandfather, after
he has renounced the same, and cannot appropriate any thing unto himself, the
Father and Grandfather being indebted more then ten times the value of their
goods.

Although Dionisius Rextoot, is a Schoolmasters Son, he has as little manners
as wit, and less Law then both; otherwise such rude Expressions, had not come
out of his black mouth, in pleadings, when he wanted matter of defense, in his
Cases, to fall upon the persons of his Adversaries, with railing, and base
language, as hereafter is mentioned; but it is convenient first to show his
ignorance, in the Laws of England, and Secondly, that the force and strength of
reason and argument is against him here, if the cause were to be judged by the
Laws of this Country.

By the Statutes made concerning Banckrupts in the 13. year of Queen
Elizabeth, and the 19. of King James, the Commissioners or the major part of
them, have power to grant, bargain and sell the goods, debts, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments of Banckrupts, and to bar the issue in tail, of
all such Estates, in reversion or remainder, that the said Banckrupts were any
ways possessed of, or seized at the time, when they become Banckrupts.
Whereupon a question did arise between the Commissiners, and William Courten,
the Grandchild, concerning Lands, that was settled upon his Mother, at her
marriage, as a Ioynture, and after her death, upon the Heirs male of William
Courten, by her for ever, in consideration of the Marriage portion, that she
brought, being a Person of Honor, and the Daughter of an Earl.

The Case was in short thus.

WIlliam Courten, Tenant in Tail, bargains and sells his Manors and Lands of
Pirton Annton, and Evesham, in the County of Worcester, Anno 1642. unto Sr.
Edward Littleton, and his Heirs, for payment of debts, and in the year 1643.
becomes Banckrupt, the Question was, whether the Estate Tail, which passed not
by the bargain and sale, should not be preserved by the Law, for the Heirs of
William Courten, the Banckrupt, or not.

It was resolved, by all the Judges, that during the life of William Courten
the father, Sr. Edward Littleton had a good Estate in the Lands, but was
determinable upon the death of Courten, And that after his death, the
Commissioners grant, would opperate upon the Lands, for the benefit of the
Creditors, and bar the Heirs in tail; but the Wife should have had, and
enjoyed the Lands, only during her life (if she had survived her Husband) in
recompense of her Dower.

If there were any separation of goods, admitted in England, as there is in
these Netherlands, between man and wife, frauds would abound there, as they do
in Holland and Zeeland, where, upon Contracts of Marriages, men that are
indebted, and have gotten other men's Estates into their hands* they do usually
secure their goods, and moneys, to their Wives and Children, to the prejudice
of other men, which is a most ungodly practice, and distructive to credit and
Commerce.

The Statutes are very severe in England, to prevent all such kind of
fraudulent practices. And I do presume Banckrupts in the United Netherlands,
that have forfited their Estates to Creditors, can have no Heirs at Law, to
enjoy their goods. And that the Courts of Judicature in the Netherlands, cannot
set up an Heir of William Courten, as they did an Executor of John Moncy.

It is a most horrid abuse, for Advocates here, to controvert the Laws of
England, and to make their own constructions of such things, that they do not
understand. Contracts in England, by Subjects of the Crown of England,
touching their own Interest* are not to be interpreted by the people of
another Nation. Although Pergens and Boudaen, with their Confederates, have
endeavored to defraud the Kings Subjects, of their goods, yet they cannot
defend themselves from the reach of the Kings Laws and Statutes of his
Kingdoms. It is not very material whether the Sons and Heirs of Peter
Boudten, do account with George Carew, as Administrator, appointed by the
Prerogative Court of England, or as he is empowered by the Commissioners upon
the Statutes aforesaid. They must make a discovery by one means or another
what is become of the 122139 L sterling, that Sr. Peter Courten is charged with
by the Books of Sr. William Courten, and the account thereof taken out of the
Books that were kept by Mr. John Moncy, wherein it is most evident, that Sr.
Peter Courten died much indebted to the Stock in Partnership, which came into
the hands of Peter Boudaen deceased.

Now follows the Vindication of George Carew, in his Quality, and Caracter, and
the several proceedings, upon his Administratons and Assignments on the
Estates of Sr. Edward Littleton, Sr. William Courten, and Sr. Paul Pyndar.

Altho^gh it be not very material to the Cause, to say any thing in the
vindication of my self and Family, or to answer those false allegations that
Rextoot and Schotte used in their pleadings, by instructions of the Boudaens,
viz.

That my Obligations were false, and informations upon them.

That I had no just pretense against Sr. William Courten or Company.

That all the Actions brought against the Boudaens were vexations.

That I had no quallity as Administrator of Sr. Will. Courten.

That I was an Enemy to the States General, and particularly to Zeeland.

That I was a Person of noe consideration or Family of worth.

And finally that the Oaths of English Men, and Scotch Men could be gotten for
four stivers a piece.

All which being more of malice then matter, nevertheless, I shall truly
demonstrate my condition and quallity as follow, viz.

THat I am lineally de^ended from the Carews of Anthony, a Family from whence
several branches have continued Knights in Devonshire and Cornwall ever since
the Conquest.

That my great Grandfather settled himself at Wickham Brook, in the County of
Suffolk, at the desire of his Wife, where he purchased 800. pound per annum to
be near her Relations.

That my Father was educated at Oxford, and had his own Election after he was
Master of Art, to follow what study he pleased, who chose Divinity, and then
married with Mrs. Frances Gosnold my Mother, who was the Daughter of Robert
Gosnold of Otley Hall, in the County of Suffolk Esqr. that married with the
Daughter of Robert Forth, of Butley Abbey, in the same County Esqr. where those
two Families had continued in honor and reputation in the Service of their King
and Country 500. years and upward.

That at the earnest request of the Aldermen and Common Council of London, (who
were upon the view and sale of several Lands in Suffolk, which King James had
granted for satisfaction of Money, lent by the City) my Father was invited to
accept the Benefice of St. Michaell in Cornhill, over against the Royal
Exchange, where he died, whose memory is very much esteemed throughout the City
of London.

That I was the second Son of my Father, after whose death my Mother left me to
my own choice, either to go to the University, or to follow any other
employment: Whereupon I made several Essays in the City of London, and spent
diverse Sums of Money to noe purpose, being averse to Trade. Then I admitted my
self a studient of Graeys Inn, where I spent my time during the space of nine
years in the exercise of the Common Law.

That my first Wife was the only Daughter of William Walton, a Turkey-Merchant,
who had lent at several times to Sr. William Courten and Sr. Paul Pyndar, the
Sum of 7000. pound Sterling. And she was (Bona fide) worth 5000. Pound, besides
all the Obligations due unto her Father, which were assigned to me by William
Walton Esqr. her only Brother, in satisfaction of her right.

That my second Wife was the Daughter of John Cole of Whichampton, Esqr.
Principal Register unto Sr. Julius Caesar, that was Master of the Rolls. Her
Portion was 900. Pound Sterling, and 80. Pound per Annum in Lands, and
Tenements for ever.

That upon the Kings Restoration Anno 1660. I was admitted and sworn one of
the Gentlemen of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Chamber, being actually
seized and possessed of an Estate of Inheritance to the valve of 500. pound per
Annum, as by the Certificates following all these particulars more plainly
appears.

That all the Obligations under which I claim, and all the prosecutions
thereupon, are matters of Record, and such Judicial ^cts, that vindicates my
Person and Quality to all the World, as hereafter is also further declared by
the very Records extant.

Wherefore the said Advocates, and their Clyants, ought to be condemned in good
Damages, for those National affronts, and personal Injuries, that in other
Countries, are not committed without most severe Chastisements.

OP huyden den xxiv. July 1675. Compareerde voor my Arnoldus Rijcx openbare
Notaris by den Hoogen Raade in Hollandt geadmiteert / ter Vere in Zeelandt
residerende / de Here George Carew Schiltknaap van Richmond in het Graafschap
van Surrey, in het Koninckrijck van Engeland, ^e kennen gevende / dat Mr. John
Moncy Koopman in Londen / by sijn Testament end uytterste Will gedateert
binnen Middelburgh in Zeelant den 17. October 1631. heeft gegeven end
naergelaten (gelijck breeder daer in is te sien) eene sum van duysent Ponden
Sterlinex / aen Willem Courten Schilt-knaap / Soon end Erfgenaem van den
overleden Sr. William Courten Ridder / welcke tot noch toe niet en is beta^lt
by de gepretendeerde Executeuren van den voorsz. John Moncy often yemant van de
selve / ter oorsake van diversche differenten die ontstonden wegens het
Capitael en Rekeninge van de vernootschap in den handel ongeliquideert tusschen
Sir William Courten, Sir Peter Courten, end John Moncy, ten tijde van haer
overlijden respectivelijck / waer in de voorsz. Sir Peter Courten schuldigh was
op Rekeninge aen her Capitael / eene sum van even hondert twintigh duysent
Ponden Sterlinex en daer boven / zijnde Penningen gelicht op Intrest / op het
Credit van Sir William Courten, en sijn Soon / mitsgaders Mr. John Moncy, 't
welck by Wissel was geremitteert aen de voorsz. Sir Peter Courten, gelijck by
de Copyen authentijck van de selve Rekeninge blijckt / blijvende de selve
Penningen als noch onvoldaen aen vele Weduwen en Weesen in Groot Brittange / en
in andere plaetsen van Sijn Majesteyts Koninckrijcken. En nademacl Peter
Boudaen Zalr. Koopman binnen Middelburgh, noemende hem selven Erfgenaem van den
Staet often Boedel van meergemelten Sir Peter Courten end John Moncy, hem
selven verbonden heeft (ac h^ervolgens eene Sententie ges^reckt end
gepronuncieert voor den Hoogen Raade in Hollant in den Iare 1657.)
aensprekelijck te zijn voor het voorsz. Legaet en Intrest / mitsgaders all
andere pretentien van wat nature die soude mogen wesen / ^ en gemaeck^ werden
op de nalatenschappen van gedachten John Moncy, en werdende den voorsz. William
Courten de Jonge in het Jaer 1643. insolvent / end doot in Rechte / so hebben
de Commissarisen / genomineert end gestelt zijnde tot uytvoeringe van even
Commissie onder het groot Zegel van Engeland / gegrontvest op de Wetten en
Statuten gemaeckt aengaende Banckeroetiers / by hare Act in geschrift van dato
den 30. April 1662. het voorsz. Legaet van duysent Ponden en all andere sommen
van Penningen / Schulden / Rechten / en Pretentien / hoe die soude mogen wesen
den voorsz. William Courten aenkomende / geassigneert en getransporteert aen
Sir John Ayton, voornaemste Edelman en Kamer-bewaerder van Sijn Majesteyt van
Groot Brittanje / en Meester van de swarte Roede / Charles Whitaker, en aen den
Here Comperant George Carew Schilt-knaap / gelijck de selve Acten klaerlijck
end in 't breed uytwijsen / zijnde die geregistreert ten Comptoire van Major
Wright end John Daniel, openbare Notarisen tot Londen.

Wijders / dat aengesien de Heeren Johan Boudaen, Pieter Boudaen, Walter
Boudaen, Hendrick Boudaen, Abraham Biscop in Huwelijck hebbende Vrouw Catharina
Boudaen, end Constantia Boudaen, Sonen end Dochters van meergemelten Here
Pieter Boudaen aensprekelijck zijn als Erfgenamen van haren Here Vader Zaliger
/ voor het gedachte Legaet metten Intrest van dien / so heeft den Here
Comparant my Notario versocht / dat ick my soude willen vervougen aen
welgemelte Heeren often yemandt van den selve / end haer Ed. uyt sijn Here
Comparants naem end van sijnent wege / mitsgaders als gemachtigde end
geauthoriseert by welgemelten Sir John Ayton end Charles Whitaker, afvorderen
betalinge van de voorsz. even duysent Ponden Sterlinex metten Intrest van dien
jegens vijf per Cto. in 't Iaer sedert den Iare 1632. bedragende te samen ter
sum van dry duysent even hondert en vijftigh Ponden Sterlinex / often in cas
van refuys / suffisante redenen waeromme de voorsz. sum in maniere als
voorsz. niet en behoorde betaelt te werden / end by weygeringe van dien / dat
ick Notaris jegens de selve soude protesteren / gelijck den Here Comparant in
sijne qualiteyt well expresselijck is protesterende by desen / van all Kosten /
Schaden end Intresten daer door geleden end noch te lijden / omme all de
selve te verhalen daer end so hy Here Comparant te rade werden sal.

Verder heeft den Here Comparant my Notario versocht dat ick de opgemelte
Heeren soude insinueren end bekent maken / als dat by Comparant begeerigh en
genegen is / om even eynde te hebben van all verschillen / rakende de Boedels
van Sir William Courten, Sir Edward Littleton, end Sir Paul Pyndar, en te
vermijden all verdere onheylen end moeyelijckheden / die daer uyt noch soude
mogen spruyten / en daer toe bereyt en gewilligh is om all de differenten en
dispuyten de selve Boedels rakende / te refereren aen twee neutrale / bequame
end eerelijcke Luyden / uyt yder Natie om de selve te arbitreren / composeren
end finalijck te determineren / geduerende dese jegenwoordige Vacantie / end
in cas van verwerpinge van dese billicke presentatie / dat ick Notaris in
maniere als vooren jegens de selve soude protesteren van all Kosten / Schaden
end Intressen / die daer door soude mogen werden veroirsaeckt / versouckende
hier af te hebben Act in forma om sijne bereytwilligheyt ten go^de / en
onwilligheyt tot verdere Proceduyren / te toonen daer en so hy te rade werden
sal / benevens het relaes van mijn wedervaren / in kennisse der waerheyt dese
geteyckent

binnen Middelburgh, date als boven. En was geteyckent, GEORGE CAREW.

OP den voorsz. 24. July 1675. hebbe ick Arnoldus Rijcx my getransporteert
(geassisteert met de ondergeschreven Getuygen) ten Huyse end aen den Per^oon
van de Here Pieter Boudaen. en sijn Edelheyt de voorenstaende Insinuatie by
lecture gedaen, die my Notaris tot antwoorde gaf, ick hoore en sie, en ick
versoecke Copye vande selve Insinuatien end protesteren, die ick sijn Edelht.
oock hebbe behandight, en jegens den selven Here Boudaen geprotesteert, conform
de voorenstaende last, zijnde dit alsoo mijn relaes end wedervaren. Aldus
gepasseert binnen Middelburgh, present Johannes Vinckaert, en Aaron Wright als
Getuygen, die de menute behoorlijck hebben onderteyckent, date als boven.

Quod Attestor Arnoldus Rijcx, Notaris Publ.
A en den Hoogen Rade in 's Gravenhage.
VErtoont met all behoorlijck respect end eerbiedigheyt George Carew
Schiltknaep van Richmond in het Graafschap van Surrey, in het Koninckrijck van
Engeland, Administrateur van all de Goederen, Effecten, Haven, Vee, Rechten,
Schulden, end Crediten, van Sir William Courten Zaliger Ridder, (gelijck by
sijne uytterste Will hier annex blijckt.)

Hoe dat hy Suppliant in sijne voorsz. qualiteyt als Administrateur, (tot sijn
groote schade end verlies) vele Jaren achter den anderen Process heeft gevoert
voor de ordinare Vierschare voor B B, en S S. der Stadt Middelburgh, (in der
tijdt zijnde) op end jegens de Here Pieter Boudaen zaliger, gewesen Koopman
end Bewinthebber van de Geoctroyeerde Oost-Indische Compagnie tot Middelburgh,
en des selfs Erfgenamen, omme sekere Rekeningen gestatueert end geliquideert
te hebben, die als noch zijn openstaende end ongesloten tusschen den Suppliant
end de Erfgenamen van den voorsz. Pieter Boudaen, wegens de Societeyt in den
Handel end Commercie die geweest is tusschen Sir William Courten, Sir Pieter
Courten, end John Moncy, all Koopluyden, gelijck by het vertoogh hier annex
op den 8. February 1675. aen Burgemeesters end Schepenen der selver Stadt
Middelburgh gepresenteert, naerder te sien is. Wijders, dat niet jegenstaende
den Suppliant had geexhibeert sijne Brieven van administratie onder 't Zegel
van den Prerogativen Hove van Engeland (zijnde even so wettigen Act end
bewijs de welcke by all andere Recht-bancken van de gansche weereld were
geapprobeert) so hebben de gemelte Heeren Burgemeesters end Schepenen op den
20. February laestleden, geordonneert dat den Suppliant moeste verzorgen andere
Acten authentijcke uyt het Register van den Prerogativen Hove van Engeland
voornoemt, behelsende dat William Courten Soons-soon van Sir William Courten
had geconsenteert in de gemelte Brieven van administratie, end die in Rechte
van waerden verklaert, als mede dat de Rechters van de Prerogativen Hove de
selve hadden geratificeert, en insgelijks, dat den Suppliant daer by was
gemachtight end geauthoriseert omme de goederen end effecten van Sir William
Courten op te lichten end te ontfangen, welcke Acten den Suppliant met de
explicatie daer over van den Prerogativen Hove vervolgens heeft geprocureert
end versorght, end op den 19. Juny daer aen volgende versocht dat Sententie
daer op soude werden gedecerneert, waer op Abraham Smith Procureur van de
Verweerders heeft versocht prolongatie voor den tijt van veerthien dagen, dat
by de Heeren Commissarisen is gegeven, op dat als dan sonder eenigh verder
dilay by de Heeren van Wette mochte werden Recht gedaen end Sententie gevelt.

Niet jegenstaende all 't selve end naer expiratie vanden gelimiteerden tijt,
so is it, dat ( Ian van Rijmsdijck des Suppliants Procureur versoeckende Recht)
den meergemelten Abraham Smith op den vijfden laestleden, even andere frivoleuse
end impertinente exceptie heeft geproponeert, seggende, dat alhoewel het by de
selve Acten van den Prerogativen Hove van Engeland konde blijcken dat des
Eygenaers qualiteyt suffisant was, niet te min so en konde hy egeene Actie
institueren omme de goederen van den voornoemden Sir William Courten d'oude te
recouvreren, vermits des selfs Soon, die in sijn leven vele Jaren achter den
anderen als Executeur had geadministreert, mitsgaders dat den selven Sir
William Courtens Staat is gedescendeert op sijn Soons-soon William Courten, den
welcken daer over sijn Recht behoorde te vervolgen, willende alsoo de Wetten
end Rechten van Engeland dooden end te niete done, end de Administrateuren
benemen het Recht tot het recouvreren van de goederen end middelen uyt de
handen van hunne Debiteuren, strijdigh jegens de eygenschappen van de Wetten
end gemeene Recht, en dienende tot verdervinge van all onderlinge
gemeynschap, end in it particulier tot ruin van vele Engelsche, die diversche
groote sommen van Penningen hebben geleent aen meergemelten Sir William
Courten, die in het Capitael van den handel in societeyt often vermintschap
generalijck zijn geemployeert, waer vooren oock de Boedels van Sir William
Courten, Sir Pieter Courten, en John Moncy (berustende in de handen van de
Erfgenamen van opgemelte Pieter Boudaen) aensprekelijck zijn, met welcke end
diergelijcke andere impertinente voorgevingen den Suppliant van tijt tot tijt
is afgestelt, sonder Sententie te konnen bekomen, die well had behoort over
vele Jaren by den voornoemden Gerechte uytgesproken te zijn geweest, echter
blijven sy van sulcx te done in gebreke, niet jegenstaende all des Suppliants
sollicitatien en vruntlijke aenmaningen ten dien eynde gedaen.

Derhalven keert hy Suppliant sich tot U Ed: Mog: versoeckende U Ed: Mog:
mandament van evocatie in communi Forma, end Burgemeesters end Schepenen der
Stadt Middelburgh, om de saack sonder uytstel ten eynde te brengen, often in cas
van geen terminatie van de voorsz. saack van gemelte Gerechte sekere dagh
binnen even korten gelimenteerde tijt te prefigeren, dat dage gedaen zijnde
Parthyen mogen werden gehoort voor U Ed: Mog:, en alsoo by U Ed: Mog: match
werde Recht gedaen, naer bewint van saaken.

Den 2 September 1675. 't Welck doende, etc.
Aen de Ed. Achtbare Heeren Regerende Burgemeesters end Schepenen der Stadt
Middelburgh in Zeelandt.
Vertoont met aller ootmoet George Carew Schilt-knaap by den Prerogative Hove
van Engeland, gestelt tot Administrateur van all de ongeadministeerde Goederen
end Effecten van William Courten, Ridder, in sijn leven woonende tot Londen,
als by de Brieven daer van zijnde, met sijn Testament daer annex.
1 DAt Willem Courten, end Pieter Courten Ridder / in sijn leven gewoont
hebbende binnen deser Stadt Middelburgh, mitsgaders Jan de Moncy in sijn leven
Koopman tot Londen voorsz / over de dartigh Iaren t'samen genegotieert hebben
in Compagnie / op verscheyde gewesten des Weerelts

2. Dat de Reeckeningen van de voorsz. Negotie / in geen veerthien Iaren voor
het overlijden van de geseyde Compagnons en zijn geliquideert / noch eenigh
sloth daer van gemaeckt t'sedert het overlijden van gemelte Willem Courten, die
daer inn de helft was heriderende / end op sijn uytterste verklaerde / dat
even groot gedeelte van sijn Middelen wa^en berustende onder Pieter Boudaen
Koopman als Erfgenaem van Pieter Courten, die de generale Boecken van de selve
Negotie heeft gehouden / end waer van den voornoemden Pieter Boudaen hem heeft
gepossedeert / mitsgaders van all de Middelen.

3. Dat den Suppliant George Carew in sijn voorsz. qualiteyt in den Iare 1662.
by procuratie machtigh gemaeckt heeft Jaques Boeve Koopman als done woonachtigh
hier ter Stead / omme de geseyde Yekeningen te liquideren / end te ontfangen
soodanige sum van Penningen als bevonden mochten werden aen de voornoemde
Willem Courten toebehoorende / tot wel^ken ey^de hem geaddresseert hebbende aen
de voornoemde Pietet Boudaen, met versoeck van sulcks te willen laten done tot
gemeyne Kosten / maer 't selve weygerende / so was hy genootdruckt op den 6.
September 1662. hem voor desen Achtb. Gerechte als done te betrecken / end te
concluderen / dat den voornoemden Pieter Boudaen soude werden gecondemneert
all de Boecken / Reeckeningen end andere Bescheyden rakende de voorsz.
Compagnie / te consigneren ter Secretary / often andere neutrale plaetse / omme
inspectie daer van genomen / end Reeckeninge te formeren tot gemeene Kosten /
waer op alvooren t'Antwoorden / Cautie ge-eyscht zijnde / so had gemelte
Boeve Notariale Act daer van gemaeckt / end niet jegenstaende hy als done
Burger end ^nwoonder tot Middelburgh was / so hebben Burgemeesters end
Schepenen gelieven te ordouneren dat naerder Cautie soude werden gestelt / 't
welck niet gedaen zijnde / end den ^or^logh nagevolght / is d'Heer Boudaen
korts daer aen komen t'overlijden.

4. Dat naer 't overlijden vanden voornoemden Pieter Boudaen, de^ Suppliant
verscheydemalen metter minne hem geaddresseert heeft / aen Johan end Pieter
Boudaen, Sonen / end Erfgenamen / van den voor^s. Pieter Boudaen haren Vader /
ten eynde de voorsz. Rekeningen gestateert en geliquideert mochten worden tot
gemeene Kosten / die 't selve mede geweygert hebben te done / waer door den
Suppliant genootdruckt is geworden in de maent van Mey laestleden sich
erpresselijck te transsporteren alhier binnen Middelburgh, omme de voorsz.
saecke voor V E. Achtbaerheden hangende te vervolgen / end dien volgende / op
den 18 Iuny 1674. hun (te weten / de Kinderen end Erfgenamen van Pieter
Boudaen voornoemt) 't gunt voorsz. done insinueren door den Notaris Johan
Duyvelaer, nochmaels versoeckende dat de geseyde Reeckeningen mochten werden
vereffent / 't zy metter minne / often gerechtelijck / dewijle hy Suppliant
expresselijck daerom alhier was gekomen / protesterende (in cas van
obstinaetheyt) van all Kosten / Schaden / end Interessen alreede geleden /
noch te hebben / end te lijden / op all de welcke den voornoemden Johan end
Pieter Boudaen alleen voor antwoort gaven dat zy hoorden eude sagen.

5. Dat den Suppliant als done de voorsz saecke door sij^ Procureur Jan van
Rijmsdi^ck wettel^ck heeft done vervolgen / tegens Johan end Pieter Boudaen,
mitsgaders de vordere Erfgenamen / end voorts Cautie gestelt / end by V E.
Achtbaerheden aengenomen / voor de ^osten.

6. Dat den voornoemden Johan end Pieter Boudaen, cum suis naer Citatie
ge^ompareert he^bende / so heeft den Suppliant (naer exhibtie van Brieven van
Administratie onder 't ^egel van den Prerogative Hove van Engelandt / met het
Testament van Willen Courten, Ridder / daer annex / omme te done blijcken van
sijn Qualiteyt) dagelijcx gesolisiteert dat Sy-luyhen so^den Antwoorden ten
principalen.

7 Dat naer veel aenhouden den voornoemdedn Johan end Pieter Boudaen, cum
suis, door haer Procureur Abraham de Smit op den 16 September 1674. omme de
saecke slepende te houden / seer inpertinent in scriptis ontkent hebben dat den
Suppliant als Eysscher is hebbende de Qualiteyt so hy ^^ch ten Process
adscribeert / end mit^dien geproponeert exceptie van non Qualiteyt /
strijdende ^egens d'Ordonnantie op het procederen voor de Weth dseer Stadt
Middelburgh Art. 47.

8. Dat den Suppliant daer op even expres naer Engelant heeft gesonden / end
aen den Rechter van den Prerogative Hove verthoont Copye van de voorsz Exceptie
/ die gehouden wiert ^seer irregulier te zijn / end omme V E. Achtbaerheden
buyten twij^^el te stellen van de Wettige Qualiteyt van den Suppliant / omme te
administreren all de Effecten van den Boedel van den voornoemden Willen
Courten, Ridder / so is dien aengaende superabundanti geproduceert even
Certificatie geteyckent door verscheyde Practiznus end Notarisen vanden
voorsz. Hove in date den 9. O^ober 1674.

9 Dat in gevolge den Suppliant dagelijex gesoli^iteert heeft ten eynde V E
Achtbaerheden gelieve de geproponeerde Exceptie als frivool te reje^teren end
de Gedaeghdens te condem^eren omme all de voorsz. Boecken / Reeckeningen end
andere Bescheyden rakende de voorsz. Compagnie wae^inne hy so merekelijck in
sijn Qualiteyt is ge^n^ereffeert / alhier ter Greffie often op even neutrale
plaets te consigneren / end des te mere / nademael den Supplant twee ervaren
Boeck-houders expresselijck alhier heeft done komen / omme de selve te
inspecteren end even Reeckeninge daer uyt te formeren

End alsoo verscheyde onderdanen van Sijne Majesteyt van Groot Brittannien,
merckelijck hier in Ge-intresseert zijn, end particulierlijck de Crediteuren
van Sr Paul Pindar, die aen Sr. Willem Courten Ridder, korts voor sijn
overlijden verstreckt had dartigh duysent Ponden Sterlinx Capitael omme sijn
Equipagie op Oost-Indien voort te setten, doch dese dillayen beswaert, met noch
andere onwaerdigheden de Judicature van Engelandt aengedaen (gelijck sy berecht
zijn door Rechts-geleerden) in de saecke van Hester White, die Wettelijck
gestelt is tot Adminstratice over den Boedel by Jan Moncy naergelaten.

Dieshalven versoockt den Suppliant seer ootmoedelijck dat U E. Achtbaerheden
gelieve op 't gunt voorsz. Expiditie end Recht te willen administreren, naer
merit van de Saecke, tot satisfactie van all ge-interesseerde Persoonen, 't
welck doende, etc.

Actum binnen Middelburgh den 8. February 1675. Door my GEORGE CAREW.

The Earl of Arlingtons Certificate.
THese are to certify, that George Carew Esqr. is sworn and admitted His
Majesty's Servant, in the Place and Quality of one of the Gentlemen of His
Majesty's most honorable Privy Chamber, to enjoy all Rights, Privileges,
advantages, and Preheminences thereunto belonging:

Given under my hand and Seal this 25th day of February 1974/5. in the 27th
year of his Majesty's Reign. ARLINGTON.

Translaet.
DEsen dient om te certificeren, dat George Carew Schiltknaep, is beedight,
end geadmitteert tot sijn Majesteyts dienaer in de plaets en qualiteyt van even
vande Edel-luyden van sijn Majesteyts alder eerwaerdighste Secreete Kamer, omme
te genieten all Rechten, Privilegien, Voordeelen en Uytnementheden daer toe
dienende en behoorende.

Gegeven onder mijn Handt en Zegel desen 25. dagh van February 1674/5. in het
27ste jaer van Sijn Majesteyts Regeringe. Was geteyckent ARLINGTON.

In margin stont even Signet gedruckt in Rooden Lack.

Getranslateert uyt het Engelsch inde Nederduytsche Taal, en bevonden met
Originele in Substantie te accorderen,

Binnen VERE, den 27. Iuny 1675. Per me Arnold Rijcxs Not. Pub.

A Certificate concerning Mr. Carews Estate, From his Steward, and Servant.
THese are to testify unto all People, unto whom this writing shall come, that
George Carew, of Richmond in the County of Surry, in the Kingdom of England,
Esqr. at present residing in Middelburgh in Zeeland, upon several Suits and
Process at Law there depending, has several Lands, Houses, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, in the County of Suffolk, Essex, London, Dorsetshire, and
Surry, whereof he is seized, and possessed to the value of 530. pound per
Annum, besides the improvments, that may be made thereuppon.

In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands, at London this 26th of
March 1675. in the 27th year of our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the Second.
John Exall. Aaron Wright.


A Certificate from the Reader and Benchers of Grays Inn.
THese are to certify unto all Persons whom it may any ways concern, that
George Carew of Richmond in the County of Surry, Esquire, oue of the Gentlemen
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Chamber; was admitted into this Society
of Grayes Inn, on the 23. of June 1653.

in testimony whereof we have hereunto set our hands this 26. of February
1674/5. and in the 27th. year of King CHARLES the Second. Thomas Holt Lect^r.
Robert Raworth. John Otway. Fr. Luttrell.


IT is expedient, to give a more particular Narrative of my Proceedings, with
Sr. Edwad Littleton, and the Commissioners upon the Statutes against Mr.
Courten, from the year 1650. unto the year 1660. And after the Kings
Restauraton, to give an account of my Administration to this day, since Mr.
Rextoot (as he says) was instructed to declare, that I had noe pretense against
the Estate of Courten, or the Executors of Peter Boudaen, but upon false
actions.

In the year 1651. Sr. Edward Littleton being retired, and resolved to end his
days, silently amongst the Mountains in Wales, I found him out at Phinant in
Montgomeryshire, by the directions of Dr. Littleton his Brother. And after some
time spent with him, where he was lamenting his Misfortune, how he became
engaged with his Brother in Law, William Courten, for 60000 Pound Sterling and
upwards, Principal Debts. And that he was sequestered by the Parliament, for
serving the King. That his own unsettled Estate, was ordained to be sold, by a
Committee at Worcester House, for want of Friends, to Compound, or to redeem
it.

Sr. Edward Littleton then offered to assign over unto me all his right and
intrest in the Lands, Ships, and Stock in India, that William Courten had
granted him for his indemnity; provided I would covenant to pay
proportionably, with my own debt, such other particular Friends of his, that
had continued their Moneys at Intrest, in the Family of Courten, or lent other
Moneys upon Sr. Edward Littletons Credit, and Obligations, which amounted unto
30000. Pound or thereabouts, which I promised to do, after I should be well
informed of the value of the Ships, and Lands; and the encumbrances thereupon.

In the year 1652. I spent three months time amongst the Tenants and others,
in the Counties of Worcester, and Gloucester, where the Lands and Tenements
were situate, and found upon inquiry, that every Acre was preingaged and
mortgaged, before that Mr. Courten, had granted them unto Sr. Edward Littleton,
and by computation, also found, that most of the Persons, unto whom the Lands
were mortgaged (exceping the Joynture-Land) demanded more Principal Money,
Interest, and Damages, than the Lands were really worth. And that the Ships and
Stock in India, was engaged to Sr. Paul Pyndar, as a further security for
payment of 24800. L. part of the Money lent unto Sr. William Courten, in the
year 1635. when he first entered upon the East India Trade.

In the year 1653. at the request of Sr. Edward Littleton, I made another
Journey into Wales, where I made a Contract, and Agreement with Sr. Edward
Littleton, concerning the said Lands, Ships, and Stock, that they should be
granted unto me, or such Persons as I should appoint, toward satisfaction of
the debts, unto my self and the Persons following, provisionally, that such
grants, should not prejudice me, nor the other Creditors in our further right,
against any other Person, or Persons whatsoever, that were any ways obliged,
or liable to satisfy the said Debts, or any part thereof: (excepting only the
Heirs of Sr. Edward Littleton) Whereupon several grants and coveyances of Sr.
Edward Littletons Right, and Equity of Redemption, were made, on the 23. of
April 1653. unto me the said Goerge Carew, and my Trustees, of and in the
Manors, Lands, and Tenements of Severne Stoke, Pyrton, Annton, Eversham, Upper
Swell and Lower Swell, and all other Lands, in the Counties of Worcester, and
Gloucester, to them belonging, that were granted to Sr. Edward Littleton, by
William Courten, as aforesaid, and several other Deeds declaring the Trust,
Covenants, and Agreements, were also then Executed accordingly, with a Schedule
of the principal Debts annexed the^eunto, as follows, A Cattalogue (of some
part) of Sr. Edward Littletons Creditors.
L To Sr. Robert Thorold for the principal Debt of 2000. To Sr. Peter Richaut
for the principal debt of 1000. To Sr. David Watkins, 1500. To Eusebius
Mathews, 2000. To the Earl of Shrewsbury 2500. To Iosina Calf. 1500. To Sr.
Anthony van Dijke, 1500. To Sr. George Whitemore, 1000. To Sr. William
Whitmore, 0500. To Thomas Abberly, 1500. To Robert Davies, 0600. To Edmond
Hamond, 1600. To William, and Susanna Walton, 3000. To Thomas More, 2400. To
John Gifford, 1000. To William Bagott, 0600. To Alice Walcott, 1000. To Jeremy
Elwes, 1250. To Sr. Robert Ayton, 2500. To Sr. Peter van Lore, 1500. 30450.

Memorandum, that several of these Sums of Money were the proper Debts of
the Company, for which the Stock is liable, that rests in the hands, of the
Heiret of Peter Boudaen deceased.

Then Mr. Carew entered his Claim before the Commitee at Worcester House, on
the behalf, of himself and the Creditors, to have an allowance thereof, for
that it was not an Estate subject to any forfeiture, for any delinquency of Sr.
Edward Littleton, which, with much difficulty, and expenses, was exempted by
special order of the said Committee.

Then James Winstanley, George Cotton, Richard Norton, and the rest of the
Commissioners, appointed to execute the Commission against William Courten,
entered upon the Lands, and brought their Writts of Ejectment, on the behalf of
the General Creditors; pretending that William Courten was within the compass,
true meaning, or intent of the Statutes against Banckrupts, before he had
granted the said Lands, or any right or interest therein, unto Sr. Edward
Littleton, and therefore, that the right and equity of Redemption belonged to
them.

In the year 1654. George Carew, to avoyde all disputes and controversies,
contracted with the said Commissioners, to give them 2000. Pound Serling, for
their pretended Title and Interest, which they claimed, on the bebalfe of the
General Creditors, that sought relief by the said Commission, whose debts
amounted unto 128000. pound Sterling, which was granted and conveyed by the
consent of the major part of them, unto the said George Carew accordingly, but
withal they engaged the said George Carew, in Articles and Covenants, that he
should at his own proper costs and charges, bring the Heirs, and Executors of
Sr. Peter Courten, and John Moncy, (Partners with Sr. William Courten,) to
account for the Stock that was in the Trade of Partnership, that belonged to
Sr. William Courten, and to recover the same, which should be divided, in
equal shares and proportions, between the General Creditors, and those
particular Creditors that Mr. Carew was entrusted for, by Sr. Edward Littleton
as aforesaid.

In the same year 1654. Mr. Carew contracted with the Lord Coventry, and
others for the Purchase of the said Lands, and to procure, a Fine from William
Courten, the Son and Heir that was in Italy, for which 4000. L was to be given
out of the Purchase Money; but before the Commission was re^urned out of Italy,
and the Fine executed, William Courten died in Florence, in the year 1655.
Then all things by agreement rested in Statu quo, until William Courten, the
Grandchild came to age, who afterward, joined in Fines to the Lord Coventry,
to Mr. Carew, and others, which paid Courten considerable Sums of Money, to
end all debates, although he had no right thereunto.

Soon after, several of his Fathers, and Grandfathers Creditors (comeing to
the knowledge thereof) brought Actions against him, as Heir at Law, and
arrested him; others exhibited Bills in Chancery against him, unto all which he
pleaded, that he was neither Heir, Executor, or Administrator, or claimed any
thing from their Estates; What was paid to him, was ex dono and g^atia, and not
ex Iure. Yet to avoid all further Cavills, he absented himself, out of England,
and is resolved to live upon that money, in a strange Land, and not to demand
any thing, Additione Haereditatis, as Heir to his Father, or Grandfather.

An Account of the Moneys raised by Sale of the Lands.
L The Equity of Redemption of Severne Stoke, (that was mortgaged to Mr. Daniel
Harvey) sold unto Thomas Lord Coventry, for 1200. The Equity of Redemption of
Upper Swell and other Lands (that were mortgaged to Mr. John Rushout) sold to
Sr. James Rushout his Son, for 0300. The Equity of Redemption of Lower Swell,
(that was mortgaged to Mr. Giles Carter) sold to Sr. Robert Atkins, for 1600.
The Manor of Pyrton, in possession sold to Thomas Lord Coventry, for 7500. The
Manor of Evesham in possession sold to Mr. Rudge, for 7500. The Manor of
Annton in po^^ession sold to Mr. Thomas Folly, for 3600. 21700. L Whereof Mr.
Carew deducted, that he paid to the Commissioners 2000. And 7400 L paid to Mr.
Courten, with all other incident Charges 7400. 9400.

Mr. Carew, addressed himself again in the year 1656. unto Sr. Edward
Littleton, with a report of all his Proceedings, who then delivered Mr. Carew,
the Original Bill of Sale (dated 26th. of April 1642.) of the Ships, Goods,
and Fraights, transferred unto him by Mr. Courten, as aforesaid. And assigned,
all his Right, and Equity, therein unto the said George Carew, for further
satisfaction of the Persons aforesaid, after the several Assignations, should
be discharged unto Sr. Paul Pyndar, according to the Deed, dated the 19. of
December 1642. before mentioned.

After these Transactions, all things continnued without further prosecution,
in regard of the several Changes of Government, until the Kings most happy
Restoration. Then the Creditors renewed the Commission (against the Estate of
William Courten) under the great Seal of England; Whereupon Mr. Carew, and the
Commissioners had several meetings, and Consultations together, who took new
measures from all the former inquiries, and examinations, made after the Estate
of Mr. Courten.

Then diverse debates did arise concerning such a vast Corporation of Credi^ors,
who valued their De^ts. Interests, and Damages (of sevrrall natures) to amount
unto 400000. Pound, and upwards, many of them being Executors, that could not
abate any thing of their Principal and Interest.

And some Persons having lent their Moneys upon the Credit of Sr. Will.
Courten, and Company (long before the death of Sr. Peter Courten, and John
Moncy) insisted to have satisfaction out of the Estates of the Company. Others
that had the Colaterall security of the Earl of Bridgwater, and David Goubard,
would not contribute to the Commission against Courten, but expected
satisfaction, from the Earl of Bridgwater, which proved otherwise: for that
upon their addresses unto him, for their Money, he excused himself, that it
was none of his Debt. That he was deceived in the Estate of Mr. Courten, and
expressed himself in these very words, at his house in Barbican. That he would
not fry in Hell for his own Debts, wherefore he had taken care, and settled
some Lands for the payment of them; but as for Mr. Courtens debts, he would not
concern himself therewith: Yet his Son, the Earl of Bridgwater, that now is,
has had much trouble, concerning the same.

Now the King of Great Brittaigne being Crowned at Westminster, all his
Subjects made no doubt of procuring satisfaction for civil Actions at Law,
against the Inhabitants of Holland and Zeeland, upon private differences; as
also for Damages, that they had suffered by Spoils and Depredations. Whereupon
they made their applications, expecting respective Protections, and relief,
from his Majesty accordingly.

Brief Relations whereof are mentioned / in the Continuation of the Case
between Sr. W. Courten, his Heirs and Assigns, and the East India Company of
the Netherlands. And the Peticion of George Carew, James Boeve, and John White,
to the Commons in Parliament, with the 36. Articles annexed. Which are placed
in order at the latter end of this Book, unto which I refer you.

In the mean time I will give you some positions of Law, with the particular
proceedings, in the Case depending upon the Accounts, and also several Copies
of Letters, and Answers relating thereunto: And likewise some special
Remarkes, of fraud and malice, in the practices of Boudaens, and Pergens, and
then conclude.

Many Debates still arising between the Creditors, concerning the different
natures of their Debts. It was agreed, that Administration, of Sr. William
Courtens Estate not Administered, should be taken out by Mr. Carew, to
prosecute those Persons that enjoyed the Effects thereof, beyond the Seas:
Whereupon William Courten the Grandchild was cited to appear, who refused. So
Administration was granted, on the fourth of July 1660. to the said George
Carew, with the Will annexed.

Then Mr. John Madden of Westminster, addressed himself, to Mr. Carew, to be
satisfied a Debt of 1000. Pound, due from Sr. William Courten, upon a Judgment
obtained in the Kings Bench Court, in the name of Henery Bringhurst, (Mr.
Maddens Father in Law) in the year 1625. which very much surprised Mr. Carew,
in regard he had some Land liable thereunto: Wherefore he agreed with the said
Madden, to have the Debt assigned unto him, that others might pay their
proportions, who had any of Courtens Lands. Whereupon Richard Dowdeswell an
Atturny, and Steward to the Lord Coventry, maliciously combined with some other
Persons to question Mr. Carew, concerning the said Judgment, and also to join
with William Courten the Grandchild, to question Mr. Carews administration of
Sr. William Courtens Estate. And in order thereunto brought an Information
against Mr. Carew, in the Crown Office, pretending that he fyled the
Declaration, and Bail Irregularly, that was to warrant the said Judgment:
which upon a full hearing, in Court, and the verdict of twelve able sufficient
men, Mr. Carew was acquitted, and found not guilty.

Soon after Mr. Carew brought his Actions against the said Dowdeswell, for
Conspiracy and Slander, who insisted upon his Privilege, as a Member in
Parliament, to avoyde any appearance; whereupon Mr. Carew posted him (upon the
Pillory, in Worcester, and several other market towns, in the said County,
where he lived) for a false Accuser, a Liar, and a most malicious person, that
durst not appear, to justify himself, or his Actions. And William Courten
the Grandchild, upon Mr. Carews Appeal to the King, in the Case of his
Administration, (whereupon a Commission under the Great Seal of England was
awarded, to Deligates) The said Courten personally appeared, before the Judge
of the Prerogative Court, and there openly agreed, and consented unto Mr.
Carews Administration, and was also present in Court, to see the same ratified,
and Judicially confirmed accordingly: All which proceedings, remains upon
Record. and were very well known, both to the Boudaens, and Rextoot, who
notwithstanding were so audacious, most falsely, maliciously, and
impertinently, to allege the contrary, in open Court, before the Magistrates
of Middelburgh, on the 20th of February 1675. where exemplifications of the
said Records, were extant, to manifest the same.

Sr. William Powell Baronet, having administration of Sr. Paul Pyndars Estate,
as a Principal Creditor, he applied himself to Mr. Carew, in the year 1662.
for satisfaction, of the Money, that Sr. William Courten was indebted to
Pyndar, but he refused to prosecute jointly with Mr. Carew, against Pergens, or
the East India Company of the Netherlands, for the Damages concerning the
Ships, Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bona Adventura, although Mr. Carew was a
Creditor to the Estate of Sr. Paul Pyndar, and also had Sr. Edward Littletons
Equitable Interest in the said Ships. Wherefore Mr. Carew was necessitated to
comply with Sr. William Powell, and Mr. John Whitfield, either to pay them,
2500. pound Sterling, in ready Money, to assign the Administration, or to
acquit his Prosecution, that he had begun at the Hague, for those Ships, upon
the Kings recommendation. Then upon Sr. William Powells resignation, Letters of
Administration, were de novo, granted on the 21th of March 1661/3. to Mr.
Carew, and afterwasds confirmed by decree in Chancery. Whereby Mr. Carew became
Legally entitled in right of himself and other Creditors, unto all the Goods,
and Chattells, Debts, and Credits of Sr. Paul Pyndar, unto whom Sr. William
Courten died indebted Thirty thousand Pound Sterling, and upwards: Yet the Sons
of Peter Boudaen, and Rextoot, had the impudence to plead, and publish in
Print, that Mr. Carew has no just pretense to any part of S. William Conrtens
Estate, or any quality to administer the Effects thereof, and also, that all
his Estate was gotten by false Actions.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IF it may be freely spoaken, what judicious and impartial men do apprehend,
concerning the proceedings in this case. ( It is thus.) They do no less admire
Mr. Carews patience, then they do commend his constancy, in prosecution of his
right. And at the same time they cannot approve, the righteousness of the
Boudaens ^^use, that have not in so many years, triumphed in their
Justification against Carews Process. Yet they do blame some persons, in
appearing to vindicate such frivolous Exceptions of the Boudaens, only to delay
common justice. Nay it is observable, that Mr. Carew does all things
publicly, in the face of the Sun, while the Lords Boudaens works underhand
in darkness, by Printing such Lybels, that dare not appear in the light;
Although they are given to some Magistrates, conjuring them not to part with
the same, nor even to let them be seen, but by such persons, that are of their
own confederacy. These carriages, have taken such an Impression in
M^ddelburgh, amongst the Burgers there, that all good Men, who have come to the
knowledge thereof, do look upon Mr. Carew, with as much passion for his
sufferings, as they look upon the Boudaens with regret for their ungodly
dealings. Saying, that Iniquity would come to the height, if he that does
wrong, should sit upon the Cushon, to do right; or an offender become a
Burgermeester, to make the City of Middelburgh, a Privileged place, as Viana,
and Ceulenburgh, to harbor Evil doers.

POSITIEN, Often Stellingen in de Wett, inde Saeck van Carew, contra Boudaens.
1. WIlliam Courten de Jonge, en kan niet / noch en magh sigh niet bemoeyen /
met de Middelen van zijne Groot-Vader de Ridder Willem Courten, Additione
Haereditatis, om redenen / dat hy Ridder / is gestorven veel mere schuldigh aen
diversche Persoonen dan al zijne Middelen importeerden; en schoon den
Prerogativen Hove van Engelant, hem Courten de jonge / als Administrateur had
geadmitteert gehadt; so most het nootsaeckelijck wesen in Autre Droit, ten
behoeve vande Ridder Paul Pynder, en andere Crediteuren / aen wien het
ongeadministreerde deel vande Middelen vande Ridder Courten, eygentlijck zijn
toebehoorende.

2. Noch en match Willem Courten de Ionge / zigh bemoeyen met de Middelen van
sijn Vader van dien naem die insolvent gestorven is / naelatende hondert en
acht-en-^wintigh duysent Pondt Starlinx Schult: vermidts even Resolutie of
Commissie volgens de Wetten of Statuten / jegens Banckroeten (even eens gelijck
de Kamer der Desolate Boedels hier to Land) in volle kracht en vigeur is
blijvende / tegens all de Middelen van zijn Vader Zalr. in conformireyt vande
Wetten van Engelant, derhalven en kan Willem Courten de Ionge / sigh selfs niet
intituleren Additione Haereditatis, daer waerlijck in Rerum Natura, geen
erfelijcke overblij^^els en zijn.

3. d'Achtbare Magistraet der Stadt Middelburgh, konnen onder correctie haer
selven niet aensien of stellen / als competente Rechters van de Wetten en
Decreten van den Prerogativen Hove van Engelant; Sy en konnen oock (behoudens
respect) g^en andere Constructien maken van de Ordonnantien en Costuymen van
even Souverayn^ Prins / anders / dan bekent zijn / en aldaer onder zijn^ ^ygen
Onderdanen gepractiseert werden: en alsoo daer thien Duysent Exempelen zijn /
van Brieven van Administratte die in diergelijcke voorvallen / zijn gegunt en
geprefereert: so behoorden de Verweerders Erfgenamen drymaels over te be^alen
de Costen van 't Process / en dat voor de taedieuse end niet min moeyelijicke
delayen / wegens de flechte en frivole exceptien door hun ingebracht.

Salmen hun niet culperen, die sinisterlijck aen het goet van even ander soeckt
te komen? Jae salmen hun voor onreedelijcke en oneerlijcke niet achten, die
andere luyden hare goederen zijn houdende en gebruyckende, sonder d'Eygenaers
van de profijten te geven, of ten minsten Rekeninge daer van gedaen te hebben?
En salmen met infamy niet teeckenen en brandmerken, al sulcke persoonen, die
naer datse de Middelen van andere onrechtveerdigh hebben gepossedeert, en tegen
will en danck Dertigh Jaeren langh gebruyckt gehadt, hebben noch al d'impudentie
om niet alleenlijck sulx te loochenen en t'ontkennen, maer dat mere is, durven
de Justitie met getaende troonien in 't aengesicht kijcken, end by haer boose
Resolutien persisteren, tegens positive bewijsen, en ware getuygenissen:
soeckende met frivoole exceptien en gecontinueerde delaeyen tijt te winnen,
daer 't nochtans onmogelijck is, de waerheyt, het Recht en Justitie te konnen
overtuygen en wederstaen.

De Ridder Willem Courten, de Ridder Pieter Courten, John Moncy, en Pieter
Boudan Saliger, waeren allegaer Ingesetenen en vrye Denizons van Engelant: end
gelijck bewesen kan werden, so hebbenze uyt Engelant getrocken en geremitteert
L 125000. Starlincx, het welcke noch aen de Onderdanen van Engelant schuldigh
is blijvende; welcke Crediteuren sonder hulp en remedy zijn, in the ordinary
way of Justice, so by aldien de Wetten van Engelant alhier tot Middelburgh
niet en sullen erkent en toegestaen werden.


Sr. William Courten, Sr. Peter Courten and John Moncy, raised their Credit by
trading in Company, and what moneys were lent to the Company, the whole Stock
in Trade is liable to discharge the debts, before any repartition can be made
of the Stock; and Sr. Peter Courten dying indebted L 122139-10-6. Sterling to
the Account, it must be found and made good by those that are Heirs to his
Estate.

If C. a Stranger institutes his Action at Law against B. in Amsterdam, before
the Magistrates in the ordinary Court of Justice, and requires by his Process,
to have an account of L 100000. that rests in the hands of B. a Burger in
Amsterdam, where Justice was denied, or delayed, so long that B. and his Heirs
became insolvent.

Quaere, Whether the Magistrates of Amsterdam, are not liable by the Law of
Nations, to make restitution to C. for the said L 100000. deb^and damages or
not?

Fiat Justitia, periat mundus.
Eysch gedaen by Mr. George Carew ter ordinaris Roll, contra d'Heeren
Boudaens, den 17. Iuny 1675.
Extract uyt d'ordinaire Vroug-rolle deser Stadt Middelburgh in Zeelandt.
DEn Procureur Abraham de Smit, over d'Heeren Ian, Pieter, Henricus Boudaen, en
Abraham Bisschop, versoeckt dagh, behoudens de exceptie in defentie.

Commissarisen fiat op versteecken, en voorts authorisatie om de vordere
Gedaeghdens te daghvaerden by Missive te bestellen door Coopmans Boode, op aght
dagen na de receptie.

Actum den 27. Juny 1674. Iacobus Peckius junior.

GEorge Carew, by den Praerogativen Hove van Engelandt gestelt tot
Administrateur van all de ongeadministreerde Goederen, van wijlen d'Heer
Willem Courten, in sijn leven woonachtigh in de Parochie van St. Gabriel
Fanchurch tot Londen, en in dier qualiteyt advojeerende de Proceduren by Jaques
Boeve, als gemaghtight by Procuratie van hem George Carew, in dese sake
gehouden, end sulcx Eyscher contra d'Heeren Johan, Pieter en Mr. Henricus
Boudaen, end Mr. Abraham Buscop, in Huywelijck hebbende Catarina Boudaen, all
woonende binnen deser Stadt. Item d'Heer Mr. Walterus Boudaen, Bedienaer des
Goddelijcken Woorts tot Amsterdam, en Vrouw Constantia Boudaen, mede woonende
tot Amsterdam, te samen Kinderen end Erfgenamen van wijlen d'Heer Pieter
Boudaen Courten hun Vader Zaliger, die Erfgenaem is gebleven, van wijlen d'Heer
Pieter Courten Ridder, in dier qualiteyt Gedaegdens, omme gecondemneert te
werden de arnementen van den voorschreven Process te moeten aenvaerden, en tot
dien eynde te moeten stellen Procureur Acceptant, en dien volgende met den
Eyscher in sijn voorsz. qualiteyt te moeten voort procederen, volgens de laeste
retroacten, cum expensis, in cas van debat.

Extract uyt de ordinare Roll der Stadt Middelburgh in Zeelandt.
George Carew qualitate qua Eyscher, contra d'Heer Johan Boudaen cum suis, Fol.
136.
DEn Procureur Abraham de Smit proponeert exceptie in scriptis.

Den Procureur Abraham de Smit ontkent dat den Eyscher is hebbende de
qualiteyt, so hy sich ten Process adscribeert, proponeert mitsdien de
exceptie van non qualiteyt, concludeert tot admissie van de selve, end
absolutie van de instantie cum expensis.

Den Procureur Rijmsdijck dagh 26. September. 1674.

Extract uyt de ordinaris Pleyt-rolle der Stadt Middelburgh in Zeelandt.
George Carew qualitate qua Eyscher, contra d'Heer Johan Boudaen Courten, cum
suis.
BUrgemeesters en Schepenen alvorens te disponeren op de geproponeerde
exceptie, ordonneren den Eyscher te exhiberen en overleggen even Extract
authentijcq uyt het Register van het Prerogatijf Hof tot Cantelberch, daer by
blijcke dat Willem Courten Soons-Soon van de Here Ridder Willem Courten op de^
15. Juny 1664. voor het Hof is gecompareert end vrywilligh erkent end bekent
heeft, dat de Brieven van administratie van de Goederen, Actien end Crediten
van den voorsz. Ridder Willem Courten ongereddet naergelaten, aen George Carew
Eyscher in desen, wettelijck end met volkomen kennisse van de saecke zijn
overgegeven en toegekomen, end dat daer op den Rechter van het voorsz.
Prerogative Hof de voorsz. Brieven van Administratie heeft geratificeert en
geconformeert, end dat de voorsz. George Carew de macht end authoriteyt daer
by is gegeven om te eyschen, afvorderen end ontfangen all en yegelijcke
goederen van den voorsz. Willem Courten, mitsgaders om all Processen over all
en yegelijck der selver goederen te mogen institueren, end om het selve gedaen
naeder ten principalen te werden gedisponeert so als men sal bevinden te
behooren.

Actum den twintighsten February sesthien hondert vijf-en-tseventigh. Absente
Secretario, Johan Pieter vanden Brande.

Extract uyt de ordinare Vroug-rolle der Stadt Middelburgh in Zeelandt.
George Carew qualitate qua Eyscher, contra d' Heeren Johan end Pieter Boudaen
Courten, cum suis.
DEn Procureur Smitt versoeckt noch dagh van veerthien dagen.

Den Procureur Rijmsdijck, dat het versoeck sal werden ontseght.

Commissarisen fiat veerthien dagen voor all dilay.

Actum den 19. Juny 1675. Absente Secretario, Johan Pieter vanden Brande.

Extract uyt de ordinaris Vroug-rolle der Stadt Middelburgh in Zeelandt.
George Carew qualitate qua Eyscher, contra d'Heeren Johan end Pieter Boudaen
Courten cum suis, F. 136.
DEn Procureur Abraham de Smitt over d'Heeren Verweerders en Excipitien, gesien
hebbende de naeder bescheyden in voldoeninge van het appointement van desen Ed:
Achtbaren Gerechte in dato den 20. February laestleden by den Eyscher
ge-exhibeert, seght dat schoon genomen by de selve eenighsints mochte
consteren, dat de selve waren suffisant tot adstructie van de qualiteyt, die
den Eyscher sich als Executeur van de pretense ongeadministreerde goederen
Wijlen Willem Courten den ouden bestaet te adscriberen, dat echter den Eyscher
uyt den hoofde van den selven Willem Courten den ouden geen judicium interderen
kan, alsoo Willem Courten de jonge, desselfs gewesen Soon, Erfgenaem en
Executeur van den Boedel van den voorsz. VVillem Courten den ouden is gebleven,
en den voorsz. Boedel vele Jaren heeft beseten, en geadministeert, end den
selven Boedel van VVillem Courten den ouden, additione haereditatis alsoo
gevallen in den voorsz. VVillem Courten de jonge sijnen Sone, uyt wiens hoofde
alleenigh souw konnen end moeten werden geageert, concludeert midtsdien onder
benefitie van de voorsz. middelen, en andere in tijden en wijlen nader, is it
noodt, ten Process te deduceren, tot absolutie van de instantie cum expensis.

Den Procureur Rijmsdijck debatteert de middelen by die exceptie geallegeert
frivool en impertinent, concludeert tot rejectie van de geproponeerde exceptie,
en dat de excipitien sullen werden geordonneert illico nader en ten principalen
te moeten antwoorden cum expensis.

Den Procureur de Smit persisteert voor replijcque.

Rijmsdijck voor duplijcque.

Actum den 5. July 1675. End was geteyckent, Iacobus P^ckius Junior.

If Advocates or Procureurs in England or France, should plead any thing
maliciously or impertinently (in a Process) reflecting upon the persons of
their Parties or their Nations, which did not concern the matter in Issue;
They would have their Ears cut of their Empty heads, or their Tongues cut out
of their black mouths, when they come forth of the Court.

Copye van Sententie van den Hoogen Rade, in date 19. Mey 1657.
Hester White alias de Weyer, contra Pieter Boudaen Courten.
OP de differenten geresen voor den Hoogen Rade in Hollant, tusschen Hester
With alias de Weyer, als by de Bewaerders vande Vryheyt van Engelant, by
authoriteyt van 't Parliament aldaer / als Administratrice gestelt zijnde /
over den Boedel end naergelaten Goederen / Actien / end Crediten / van wijlen
Jan de Moncy, in sijn leven Koopman inde Parochie van Maria Hill tot Londen,
inde selve qualiteyt / end voor so veel des noots / Gemaghtichde van Johan
With, impetrante van mandament in cas van reformatie / end Verweerderesse ter
eenre / End Pieter Boudaen Courten woonende tot Middelburgh in Zeelant,
Gederghde in 't voorsz. cas / end Requirant van twee Requesten Civil / beyde
by voorgaende appointementen van desen Rade geinterineert ter andere zijden. 't
Hof gehoort 't Raport van Commissarisen / daer vooren Parthyen gecompareet zijn
geweest / gesien Process verbael / Stucken end Munimenten onder hen geexhibeert
/ end op alles rijpclijck geleth / doende recht uyt den naem / end van wegen
de Hooge Overigheyt end Graeffelijckheyt / van Hollant, Zeelant, end
Vrieslant, mits by den Gedaeghde binnen den tijt van ses Weecken / voor even
Commissaris van desen Rade catagorice verklaert werdende / dat hy bereyts is in
qualiteyt als uytten Hoofde van sijne Moeder Erfgenamen van wijlen Jan de Moncy
sijnen S^ief-vader te rechte te staen / aen allen den genen die tot last
vanden S^erf-huyse often Boedel vanden selven Jan de Moncy, als Crediteuren /
Legatarisen / often anders yets soude mogen hebben t'eysschen often te
pretenderen / behoudens hem Gedaeghde soodanige exceptien / end befensien /
als hem daer jegens soude mogen competeren; welverstaende hy den selven
Eysscher often pretendenten niet en sal vermogen af te wijsen / onder pretext
van de Wetten end Coustuymen van Engelant, often anders op eenige Executeurs
often Administrateurs / die over de naergelaten Boedel vande voornoemde Jan de
Moncy soude moghen zijn gestelt / often op der selver Erfgenamen / end dat hy
oock bereyt is aende voorschreven Pretendenten end Eyschers te voldoen 't gene
henlieden ter saecke voorschreven soude mogen werden geadjudiceert / Verklaert
in sulcken gevalle d'Impetrante by 't Vonnisse in questie te wesen niet
bezwaert / end in cas van weygeringhe often gebreecke vanden Gedaeghde de
voorschreve verklaringe in voeghen als-boven te done end te presteren / doet
te niete het Vonnisse in questie / end doende in dien gevalle wijders Recht /
Condemneert den Gedaeghde ter Griffie der Stadt Middelburgh te consigneren de
Boecken / Reeckeningen end Bescheyden / onder hem Gedaeghde berustende /
aengaende de Compagnie die geweest is tusschen de voornoemde Jan de Moncy end
Pieter Courten mitsgaders Willem Courten, omme daer van by de Impetranten end
die van haren Rade inspectie genomen / end cen R^ecke geformeert te werden /
in sulcken gevalle onvermindert end ongeprejudicieert blijvende soodanigh
Recht als de Gedaghde often yemant a^ders soude moghen hebben uyt krachte van
alsulcke Testamentaire dispositie als by de voorsz Jan de Moncy We^^eliijck
souden moghn wesen gemaeckt / alsmede het Recht vanden genen dewelcke ter
contrary soude willen sustineren den selven Jan de Moncy ab intestato end
sonder We^^ige Testamentaire dispositie Ovrrleden te zijn / End compenseert de
kosten vanden Process om redenen.

Gepronuncieert den XIXden. Mey XVIC. seven-en-vijftigh. In Kennisse van My, J.
COENEN.

DEn President end Rade, vanden Hoogen-Rade, over Hollandt, Zeelandt, end
West-Vrieslandt, Allen den genen die desen sullen sien, often hooren lesen
Saluyt, Done te weten, dat de voorenstaende Sententie by den voorschreven
Hoogen-Rade, tusschen de Parthyen inde selve genomineert, op den xix. Mey 1657.
is gewesen. Des ten oirconde hebben Wy desen mettet Cachet vanden Op-gemelten
Hoogen-Rade bekrachtight, end onsen voorsz Griffier geodonneert desen te
Onderteyckenen op den xxvj. Augustij in 't Jaer ons Heeren duysent ses-hondert
tseventigh.

J. COENEN.

A Copy of a Letter writ by Mr. George Carew, in LONDON, the 15th of September
1670. unto Mr. Mark^ Fletcher Merchant of Middelburgh.
Sir,
I Received yours of the 29. of August last, wherein I understand that my
Procuration and Papers are come to your hands. Under your good favor, I did not
send for your advice, nor for the opinions of any of your Advocates in
Middelburgh. I am better able to inform my self in those points of Law, then
either you, or your Advocates can resolve me. Sir, I desired you, upon the
recommendation of your good Friends, Alderman Backwell and others, to make a
demand of 3000. pound Sterling, assigned upon the Ship Bona Esperanza, and
2500. upon the Ship Henry Bona Adventura, with Interest for the same at 5. L
per Cent, since the year 1649. in persuance of those Assignations made unto
Sr. Paul Pyndar, by Sr. Edward Littleton and Mr. Courten, in the year 1642.
Which money is come to the hands of Jacob Pergens of Amsterdam, who is
responsible to me for the same by his own Acts; and if he should deny payment,
then to commence a Suite against him for the Debt, etc.

What you discourse concerning the Treaty relates to matter of State, and not
of Law, or unto any man's particular rights in civil Causes. No Prince in the
World can hinder his Subjects from the ordinary course of Justice. In the
extraordinary way, I shall take other measures, before other Courts, as time
shall serve.

As to the Accounts unliquidated, concerning Sr. William Courtens Trade in
Company with Sr. Peter Courten and Mr. Moncy, It is the Interest of the
Boudaens to produce Sr. Peter's Books of the General Trade, to discharge what
they may; for I can give them a sufficient charge to the value of 122000.
pound, that Sr. Peter Courten stands indebted by the Account. The plain truth
is, the greatest part of the Stock in that Trade, was with Momes taken up at
Interest in England, and remitted from time to time unto Sr. Peter Courten, for
which the Company had Credit. And there cannot be any repartition of the Stock,
until the Debts of the Company are paid, which are yet standing out to vast
Sums: Neither can Sr. Peter Courtens Heirs, take the benefit of other men's
Capitalls, without accounting for the same.

It seems very strange to a Corporation of Creditors in England, that the
Boudaens should have their great Houses, Castles, and Estates, when the
Courtens are Banckrupts, leaving the Debts of the Company unpaid. What ill
consequences they brought upon others by their fraudulent practices, about the
Ships, are obvious unto all wise men. And I fear these Accounts will prove
fatal to the Boudaens and their Family in the event, if they be brought into
the House of Commons, where there are many Creditors of Courten and Company,
who will not acquiesse to see so many thousand Pounds Sterling fraudulently
drawn out of England by such People, to make up their fortunes, to kick
against the Kingdom.

What concerns Mr. Boeve and Mr. White, I leave to their own care and
conduct; but what concerns the General Creditors of Courten and Company, and
the particular Creditors of Sr. William Courten and his Son, I have double
obligations upon me, to use my utmost diligence therein, as Administrator for
the one part, and assignee of the Commissioners against Banckrupts for the
other: and I shall be true to my own resolution in both quallities, to drive
on the business as far as it will go.

Sir, I perceive you apprehend, it may be prejudicial unto your own affairs,
or inconvenient, to appear against the Boudaens (in so just a Cause) that are
of so base and dirty dispositions. But though I find so many arguments from
you, to dissuade me from prosecuting them. Justice must be done, although they
perish. Melior unus quam unitas. The Cause concerning the Accounts, is
aggrevated with so many circumstances of shifts, and delays, for 25. years
together, that cannot be parralleld in the World.

There wants now only a good Advocaet, and Procureur, to proceed in the Process
Mr. Boeve begun for me in the year 1662. which must be revived, against the
Sons, and Daughters of Peter Boudaen, as Heirs of Sr. Peter Courten. Pray let
me know your good inclinations therein. You will not only oblige the Alderman,
and many of his Friends, with diverse Members in Parliament; but you will merit
the Prayers of many Orphans and Widows* whose bread have been eaten so long by
strangers of another Land. What Books and abstracts of Accounts are needful,
shall be sent when occasion requires. Pray consider of it, and let me hear
from you by the next opportunity, wherein you will infinitely oblige him that
is,

Sir, Your most affectionate Friend and humble Servant GEORGE CAREW.


Copye van even Brief te LONDEN geschreven, door George Carew, den 15. September
1670. aen Mark Fletcher Coopman tot MIDDELBURGH.
Getranslateert uyt het Engelsch in 't Nederduytsch.
U E.
MIssive van den 29. Augusty lest-leden is my well geworden / waer ^yt verstaen
/ als dat mijn Procuratie en Papieren U E. well ter hand gekomen zijn. U E.
gelieve te weten / hoe dat ick niet en hebbe gesonden gehad om u advijs / noch
om de opmien van eenige van uwe Middelburgsche Advocaten / alsoo ick mijn
selven beter wete te onderrichten in die Poincten van de Rechten / als U E. en
U E. Advocaten my l^^^nen raden. Ick hebbe (ter instantit / en op recommandatie
/ vanden Alderman Backwell, end andere van U E. goede Vrienden) versocht / dat
U E. gelief de even Eysch te done / van L 3000. Starlinex / geassigneert op het
Schip genaemt de Bona Esperanza, als mede van L 2500. Starlin^x / op het Schip
de Henry Bona Adventura, nevens den Interest van dese Sum / t'sedert Anno
1649. jegens 5. per Cento's Iaers: in gevolge vande Assignatien end
Transporten / aen de Ridder Paul Pyndar, gepasseert / door de Ridder Edward
Littleton, end Monsr. Courten, in Anno 1642. welcke Penningen in handen zijn
van Mo^sr. Jacob Pergens, tot Amsterdam, die de selve aen my moet responderen
(gelijck door sijn eygen done is blijckende) en in cas van refuis / gelieft
tegens hem Pergens te procederen / end die schult van hem af te vorderen.

Het geen U E. gelieft te zeggen wegens het Tractaet van Vrede / dat siet
immers mere op Stae^se Handelingen / als op particuliere Wetten / en yemants
Recht in Civil Saecken: En konnen geen Princen inde Werelt haer eygen
Onderda^en / depriveren van de gemeene Procedupren in de Rechten: moet ick dan
extraordinaire middelen gebruycken? So sal ick ter zijner tijd thoonen / wat
ick voor andere Hoven sal te done hebben.

Wat de ongeliquideerde Rekeningen belanght / raeckende de Negotie van de
Ridder Willem Courten, in Company met de Ridder Pieter Courten, end Mo^sr.
Jan Moncy: it is waerlijck de Heeren Boudaens haer Interest / om de Boecken van
de Ridder Pieter Courten (de gemeenen Handel concernerende) voor den dagh te
brengen / en haer selven t'ontschuldigen; want ick kan met suffisante bewijsen
thoonen / dat de Ridder Pieter Courten, voor L 122000. Starlinex by Rekeninge
debet staet. De rechte waerhe^t is / dat het grootsie gedeelte van 't Capitael
(waer mede die Negotie is gedreven geweest /) was met Gelt in Engelant op
Interest genomen / en van tijt tot tijt aen de Ridder Pieter Courten
geremitteert / en dat op 't Credit vande Compagnie: derhalven en kan geen
repartitie van 't Capitael volgen / voor en al eer dat de Schulden van de
Compagnie betaelt zijn / die noch al blijven uytstaen voor excessive Sommen
Gelts: So dat de Erfgenamen van de Ridder Pieter Courten niet vermogen te
gebruycken het voordeel van de Penningen en Cappitalen van andere / ten zp (dat
zy Erfgenamen) daer voren comptabel willen wesen.

Het geeft oorsaeck van wonderlijcke bedencken / aen de veele Crediteuren in
Engelant, (die als cenlichaem zijn) dat de Heeren Boudaens souden hebben sulcke
groote Huysen / Casteelen / en Middelen / daer en tegen / dat de Courtens
Banckroct souden zijn / latende de schulden vande Compagnie onbetaelt. De quade
consequentien die door haer bedriegelijcke practijcken (ontrent haer Schepen)
op andere zijn gevallen / is genoeghsaem bekent / aen die de minste wetenschap
hebben: ^n ick beduchte / dat dese Rekeninge eyndelijck fataal voor de Boudaens
en hare Family fullen wesen / voornamentlijck / so de Saecken voor 't
Parliament alhier gebracht werden; alwaer diversche vande Crediteuren van de
Courtens zijn sittende: die niet en sullen toe laten / dat so veel duysende
van Ponden Starlinex / so Fieltachtigh uyt Engelant sullen getrocken zijn /
door even Volck / die door dat middel soecken haer selve te verrijcken / om des
te beter tegens het Rijck te konnen schoppen.

Wat de Saecken van Monsr. Boeve en Monsr. White belaught / ick laete sul^x
aende sorge en directie van dito Messieurs. Maer wat aengaet de Generaele
Crediteuren van de Courtens en Compagnie / en de particuliere Crediteuren van
de Ridder Willem Courten en Zoon / ick ben in even sonderlinge manier verplicht
mijn uytters^e devoir en diligentie daer ontrent in it werck te stellen; zijnde
Adminis^rateur aen d'eene zijde / en geauthoriseert van de Kamer der Desolate
Boedels aen d'andere zijde: en ben geresolveert mijn selven in beyde die
qualiteyten oprechtelijck te dragen / en de saecke so verre te brengen / als
well doenlijck sal zijn.

Ick bespeure / datter by U E. weynigh lust is / in dese Saecke te treden /
vermits U E. Affairs sulex niet toe laten will: oock dat U E. met gaerene sich
in oppositie wild stellen tegens de Boudaens: daer nochtans U E even gereghtige
Sake voor hebt / en ten ander / met Luyden te done / die geen respect en
meriteren / (als zijnde persoonen van verfoeyelijke humeuren en slechte
comportementen hebbende) en alhoewel U E. gelieft eenige Argumenten te
gebruyken / om my mijn voornemens te divertren: nochtans moet Recht gefchieden
/ jae al fouden zy vergaen / (Melior unus quam unitas) het gene de Rekeningen
concerneert / dat is door de menichvuldige circumstantien / uytvluchten en
dwerse delaeyen / voor 25. jaeren la^gh gepractiseert / foodanigh door hem
gedraeyt en verergert; dat noyt so langh als de Werelt gestaen heeft isser
dierdelijcke exempel geweest.

Daer manqueert alleenlijck even ervaren Advocaet end Procureur / om met het
Process / dat in 't Iaer 1662. door Mr. Boeve begonnen is geweest / voort te
gaen: het welcke jegens de Soons en Dochters van Pieter Boudaen Salr.
gerenoveert moet wesen. Gelieft my dan U E. genegentheyt te laten weten / het
welcke niet alleenlijck even Obligatie sal zijn gedaen aen den Alderman / en
veele van zijn Vrienden / en diversche Leden van 't Parliament; nemaer U E. sult
meriteren de Gebeden van veele Weduwen en Weesen; wiens Brood (so veel Iaren
na malkander) door Vremdelingen van even ander Land is gegeten. Al sulcke
Boecken en Extracten van Rekeningen als noodigh geoordeelt sullen werden / sal
ick niet nalaten te senden / wanneer de selve gerequireert werden. Gelieft dan
hierop te considereren / end my met d'cerste gelegenthept te schrijven. Waer
door U E. sult ten hooghsten verplichten die gene die is /

MONSIEUR, U E. geaffectioneerden Vriendten ootmoedigen Dienaer, GEORGE CAREW.

Copye van seecker Missive, geschreven door Pieter Boudaen Courten, aen sijn
Moeder Iuffrouw Margrieta Courten, Weduwe van Sr. Jan de Moncy Zalr. In date
den 4den April xvjC. Seven-en-dartigh, waer onder anderen, staet als volght.
WEgens, I. White, Verstae zijne Middelen niet veel te bedieden zijn, end zijn
done streckt niet gelijck het behoort; in even Versouck; so dat my dunckt, even
ongeraden Huwelijck is, gelijck aen Cousin Courten schrijve: Derhalven indien
Hester konde gedisswadeert worden, seer geraden ware; Nichte Beck soude daer in
veel konnen done; door U L. geinformeert zijnde: oock Nichts Margrietje neffens
U L. Is It mogelijck dient ontranen, end achter-gehouden, End alzoon mijn
Huys-Vrouw nu heel swanger wort, t'eynde dese maent rekent, end zy beneffens
my, well wenschte U L. presentie: end alsoo daer goede Compagnie is, als Cousin
Casteele, end Nichte de Wael, so konde U L. sonder achterdencken, beyde de
Dochters mede brengen, dat Godt gave dat ick sien moghte.

Is het niet mogelijck, end moet het voort-gaen, so bid Ick U L. met Cousin
Courten end Sr. Ru^^out te beraden, end yets laten maken, daer inn zy
verbonden zijn, in sulcke vougen, dat in geen moeyte mogen komen, waer op
vertrouw Cousin Courten well letten sal; alsoo hem end sijne Susters aengaet;
de moeyte end schande is het meest; anders wete niet of zy veele voordeel
souden done, als U L. Contract magh stant grijpen; maer het is beter niet
gedisputeert.

Mijnent halven, ick ben well te vreden, dat geen Burge gestelt en word, daer U
L. vry in consentere: end wat de Penningen aengaet, Ick hope dat desen Somer
alles sal konnen tot effeninge brengen: en dan blijcken, gelijk vastelijk
vertrouwe end U L. gheschreven hebbe, alles onder Cousin sal gevonden werden:
derhalven onnoodigh sich te belasten, end vertrouwe, Cousin Courten well sal
konnen aen I. White Contentement geven, dat so lange wachte, daer op zy
billeken oock niet en behoorden te excipieren. U L. gelieve doch niet verder te
enlargeren als simpelijck het Capitaell sonder eenigh Interest, haer
onderhoudinge, tegen den Interest stellende, dies noch swaer genoegh valt, etc.
Onder stont, U E. onderdanigen Zoon, was geteyckent Pieter Boudaen Courten. Het
Op-schrif was Eerbaere, Voorsienige Joffr. Margrieta Courten, Weduwe van Sr.
Ian de Moncy tot Londen.

Copye uyt seecker andere Missive, geschreven door den voorsz. Pieter Boudaen
Courten, aen sijn Moeder Ioffr. Margrieta Courten, Weduwe wijlen Sr. Jean de
Moncy, in date Seven-en-twintigh April xvjc. seven-en-dertigh, with Middelburg,
waer in onder anderen staet als volght.
CApiteyn Tiessen 'k sie van Susan bescheet heeft; aengaende John White, Eerw.
Moeder, souder geen middel wesen om Hester te disswaderen? voorwaer die maniere
van proceduren en staet my niet aen; ick vreese dat schade end schande daer
uyt o^tstaen sal; end sal Mon Pere Moncys Capitael niet gevonden worden datmen
meynt: de quade schulden end verliesen, zijn in menighte Jaren niet
af-geschreven; so dat mijn heart clempt als daer aen duncke, dat die gene door
wiens Vader de Compagnie sulcken Crock gecregen heeft, en voor de welcke U E.
so veel gedaen heeft als voor U L. eygen in het op-brengen, dat zy so
ondanckbaer souden zijn. in U L. ouden dagh quellinge aen te done: soude Hester
door d'een often d'ander Predikant niet koneen ontraden worden? of door Nichte
Beck; want ick verstae behalven 't voorsz. dat noch al even slecht Houwelijck
is, hy weyeigh of niet hebbende in geen Beroep gestilleert, wat kanse slechter,
end t'principale achte die maniere van proceduren het querelleren van de
Will: daerom had gewenscht dat hier met U L. ware gekomen. Dit Moeder als
coutenantie, dat by U L. end die vertrouwt niet verder seggen sal. Is It nu
so, die preuve van ontradinge gedaen zijnde, niet belet en kan worden; so
bid dat uytstel mochte lijden tot dat Monsr. Pergens en ick over-kome. Ick
meyne dat well eenigen wegh souden vinden, dat gerustheyt en contentement soude
konnen geven. Mijn Huys-vrouwens gelegentheyt, de vexatie met Monsr.
Fourmenois, end dat voorgenomen hebbe de Boecken te oversien, so well mijn
particuliers als de Compagnie aengaende, end so tot even hooft te brengen,
belet my dat niet komen kan; maer hope dat Monsr. Pergens niet lange wachten
sal; de Here geve goede uytkomste.

Die saecke geen uytstel willende lijden, so hope Cousin Courten U L.
assisteren, en den besten raet geven sal, gelijck ick op den vierden deses aen
hem versochte, daer by Sr. Rushout, and Sr. Godschalck die sullen U L.
assisteren. Aengaende Interest, meyne niet gehouden zijt, end magh
gecompenseert blijven tegen d'onkosten door U L. voor hun gedaen in 't
onderhouden, etc. Onder stont, U E. onderdanigen Zoone, was geteyckent Pr.
Boudaen Courten. Het Op-schrift was, E. Voorsienige discrete Joffr. Mrgrieta
Courten Weduwe van Sr. Ian de Moncy, in eygen handen tot Londen.

Naer collatie is bevonden met d'Originele Missiven van word tot word
t'accorderen, Middelburg den 25. April 1650. Quod attestor, was geteyckent L.
Doutreleau Not. Pub.

Translated out of Dutch.
The Copy of a certain Letter writ by Mr. Peter Boudaen Courten, unto his
Mother Mrs Margiret Courten, Widow of Mr. John Moncy, dated the fouth of April
1637. wherein stands as follows.
TOuching J. White, I understand his means are small, and his doings tend not
as they ought, in a Suite; So that I think it an unadvised Match, as I have
writ unto Cousin Courten; wherefore if Hester could be dissuaded, it would be
good. Cousin Beck could do much therein, being instructed by you: as also
Cosen Margiret, and you: if possible, it ought to be dsswaded, and broake off.
And whereas my Wife is very bigg, and reckons the end of this month, she and
I wishing your presence. And Whereas there is good Company, viz. Cousin
Casteele, and Cousin de Wael, you might without suspicion, bring both the
Maidens with you; which God grant I may see.

If it be ^^possible, and must go forward, then I pray you to advise with
Cousin Courten, and Mr. Rushout, and let something be made, whereby they may be
bound in such sort, that we come to no trouble; whereon I trust Cousin Courten
will have regard, NB.
for that it concerns him and his Sisters. The tronble and shame is the most,
otherwise I know not if they would proffit thereby, if your Contract took
place, but it is better not disputed.

For my part I am content, that no security be given, wherein you have my
consent, and touching the Moneys, I hope I shall be able to even all things
this Summer, and will appear as I have writ, and do firmly believe, that all
will be found under Cousin Courten. And therefore unneedfull to charge my
self, believing that Consin Courten can satisfy J. White, who may stay so
long, against which, they ought not in reason to except. You may please not to
enlarge further then the bare Capital, without any Interest, accounting their
allimentation against the Interest, which falls heavy enough. Lower stood,
Your obedient Son, and was Signed Peter Boudaen Courten. The Superscription
was, Honored and discreet Mrs. Margaret Courten, Widow of Mr. John Moncy in
London.

The Copy of another Letter, writ by the aforesaid Peter Boudaen Conrten, unto
his Mother M Margiret Courten, Widow of Mr. John Moncy, dated the 27th. of
April 1637. in Middelburg, wherein stands as follows.
CAptain Tiessen I see has his Answer from Susan; touching John White,
Honored Mother; is there no means to dissuade Hester, in truth that manner of
proceeding does not please me; NB.
I fear that loss and shame will ensue, and my Father Moncys Estate will not
be found as is though: the bad Debts and losses have not been writ off these
many Years; so that my heart aketh to think, that they whose Father has
caused so great a loss to the Company, and for whom you have done as much as
for your own in their Education; that they should be so ungrateful to vex you
in your old age. Could Hester not be dissuaded by some Minister or other, or by
Cousin Beck; for (setting aside what is aforesaid) I understand its a mean
Match, he having little or nothing, and settled in no calling, how can she do
wors? and principally am sensible of the manner of proceeding, questioning the
Will: wherefore I wished she were come hither with you; NB.
this also Mother by way of discourse, in confidence that you will not report
it to any.

If it be so (the trial of persuasion being done) that it cannot be hindered, I
pray that it may be deferred until my Brother Pergens and I come over: I think
we may find a way which may give satitfaction and quiet. My Wifes condition,
the vexation with my Brother Fourmenois, and the resolvtion of Examining the
Books, as well my particular as touching the Company, and to bring them to a
head, hinders me that I cannot come; but I hope my Brother Pergens will not
stay long, God grant a good issue.

That matter admitting no delay, I hope Cousin Courten will assist and give you
the best council, even as I desired him the fourth present, as also Mr.
Rushout, and Mr. Godskalk will assist you: touching Interest, I think you are
not obliged, and may remain compensed against the charge of Maintenance by
you, etc. Lower stood, Your obedient Son* and was signed, Pieter Boudaen
Courten. The Superscription was, Honored and discreet Mrs. Margiret Courten,
Widow of Mr. John Moncy, in her own hands in London.

That these Translations agree in Substance with the Original Letters writ by
Mr. Peter Boudaen Courten, as aforesaid I do Attest.

J. BOEVE.



The Coppie of a Letter sent from the Court of Aldermen and Common Council of
the City of London, to the Magistrates of Middelburgh.
The Superscription was thus,
These,

To the ever Honored, and our worthy good Friends, the Magistrates, and Judges
of the City of Middelburgh in Zeeland,

Present,

^ight Worthy and our Honored good Friends,
HAving received a Petition from George Carew of Richmond in the County of
Surrey Esquire, wherein he declares, that he is duly and legally constituted
Administrator, of all and singular the Goods, Chattels, Rights and Credits,
both of Sr. William Courten, late of this City of LONDON, Knight, with his Will
annexed; as also of Sr. Paul Pyndar Knight deceased, yet unadministred by their
respective Executors, on behalf of himself, and very many others, Widows, and
Orphants, of this City, who were Creditors to the said Sr. William Courten, and
Sr. Paul Pyndar; and that He was constrained very many Years since, to
commence a Suite in that Capacity against Peter Boudaen, the Heir and Executor
of Sr. Peter Courten, late of your City Knight deceased, who in his life time
did Trade in Partnership (with the before-named Sr. William Courten, and Mr.
John Moncy, late of this City Merchant deceased,) and kept the General Books,
and Accounts of all their said Trade; which Books remained in the Hands of his
Children, and Heirs, and have never yet been liquidated; to the end that he
might have free Access thereunto; and that the Accounts thereof might be
stated at their common charge. And that having lately revived his said Suite,
against the Children and Heirs of the said Peter Boudaen, they have excepted
against his Quality, as Administrator to the Persons above mentioned, with
Design only to vex and tire him out, with a long and chargeable Suite; and
therefore He besought us to recommend Him and His cause to your Favor. We
were easily prevailed upon, by the Justice and Meritts of his cause to answer
His Request: And do therefore hereby certify unto You, that the said George
Carew, having Letters of Administration to him granted, under the Seal of the
Prerogative Court of CANTERBURY, in this Kingdom of ENGLAND, is Legally
invested in, and intiteled to all the Goods, Chattells, Rights, and Credits,
belonging to the said Sr. William Couren, which had not been before administered
by the said Sr. Williams Executors; and therefore do desire on His behalf,
that you will be pleased not to listen to any such frivolous and dilatory
Exceptions, made by His Adversaries; but cause them to answer to the Matter of
Fact, and administer Justice with all possible expedition, according as the
Meritts of His cause shall require, which will be a means to incourag^, and
promote Trade, and Commerce, between you and us; promising the like Assistance,
and dispatch, to all your Citizens, who shall at any time have occasion to
prosecute Suite before us in any of our Courts of Justice.

And so we remain, Your assured Friends to serve you, The Mayor and Aldermen
of the City of LONDON. By their Command, WAGSTAFFE.
London 13. Sept. 1675.
TRANSLAET, Uyt d'Engelsche Taele.
Recht Waerdigh, end Onse Ge-eerde Goede Vrunden, etc.
ONtfangen hebbende de Supplicatie van George Carew van Richmond in 't
Graefschap van Surrey Schilt-knaep, Waer inn hy verklaert Wettelijck
geconstitueert te zijn tot Administrateur van all end yegelijcke de Goederen,
Chatteilen, Actien end Crediten van Sr. Willem Courten Ridder, in sijn Leven
woonende binnen dese Stadt Londen met sijn Testament annex, Alsmede van Sr.
Paul Pindar Ridder Over-leden, noch ongeadministreert by hun respective
Executeurs, voor sijn selven, end seer veele Weduwen end Weesen van dese
Stadt, Crediteuren vande voornoemde Sr. Willem Courten end Paul Pindar, end
dat hy genootdruckt is geweest over veele Jaeren in die qualiteyt Process
t'Institueren jegens Pieter Boudaen als Erfgenaem end Executeur van Sr. Pieter
Courten Ridder, in sijn Leven woonachtigh binnen Uwe Stadt (die by sijn Leven
in Compagnie Genegotieert heeft met de voornoemde Sr. Willem Courten end Ian
de Moncy, in sijn Leven Koopman woonende binnen dese Stadt) end de generale
Boecken end Reeckeningen van hun voorschreve Negotie gehouden heeft, welcke
Boecken gebleven sijn in handen vande voornoemde Pieter Boudaen tot sijn
Over-lijden, end naderhandt gekomen in handen van sijne Kinderen end
Erfgenamen, end tot noch toe ongeliquideert sijn, ten eynde hy daer toe mocht
hebben vry Acces, end dat Reeckeningen daer uyt mochte werden gestateert tot
gemeene kosten; End dat onlancx 't voorschreve Process weder levendigh gemaeckt
hebbende jegens de Kinderen end Erfgenamen vande voornoemde Pieter Boudaen,
hebben sy jegens sijn qualiteyt als Administrateur vande voornoemde persoonen
geexcipieert, met voornemen alleen omme hem te quellen end moede te maeken
door even langh end kostelijck vervolgh, end daerom ons ver^oght heeft hem
end sijne saecken te recommanderen in U Ed. faveur. So zijn wy beweeght
geweest, door de Justitie end merit van sake sijn versoeck toe te staen, end
derhalven verseeckeren wy U Ed. mitsdesen, dat de voornoemde George Carew
Brieven van Administratie hebbende, aen hem verleent onder 't Zegel van den
Prerogativen Hove van Cantelburgh in dese Koninckrijcke van Engelandt, hy
Wettelijck gestelt end geintituleert is tot all de Goederen, Chatteilen,
Actien end Crediten aende voornoemde Sr. Willem Courten toebehoorende, die te
vooren niet en zijn geadministreert by d'Executeurs van de voornoemde Sr.
Willem Courten, end daerom versoecken Wy sijnent halven dat, dat U Ed. gelieve
niet te willen luysteren na sulcke frivole end dillatoire exceptien by sijne
parthyen geproponeert, maer hun ordonneren ten principalen te Antwoorden, end
Justitie t'Administreren met all mogelijcke Expeditie na merit vande saecke,
't welck even middel we^en sal omme de Negotie end commercie tusschen U Ed.
end Ons te incourageren end verbreyden, belovende gelijcke Assistentie, end
Expeditie, aen all Uwe Ingesetenen die t'eenigen tijde occasie sullen hebben
omme Process voor Ons te vervolgen in eenige van Onse Hoven van Justitie. Onder
staet, waer mede verblijven, noch lager, U Ed. versekerde Vrunden om U te
dienen den Major end Aldermannen vande Stadt Londen, Ter Ordonnantie van
deselve end Onderteyckent Wagstaffe, Ter zijdenstaet Londen 13. September
1675. End onder op 't spacium gedruckt den Stadts-Zegel in Rooden Wassche
onder even Papiere Ruyte. d'Op-schrift was, Aende altijt Ge-eerde, end Onse
waerde goede Vrunden de Magistraten end Rechters vande Stadt Middelburgh in
Zeelandt.

Concordat substancialiter cum suo Originali

quod Attestator rogatus and requisitus JO. MARIUS, Not. Pub.
Land. 15. Sept. 1675.


Memorandum.
CE seroit certainement une dangereuse concequence a tous les Anglois de
Nation, si en cas les Loyx peculieres d' Angliterre, les Statutes and Loyx
dudit Royaume, comme auss^ les Coustumes dudit lieu, nestant en aucune estime,
and n'avoient aucune Virtue ni force, touchant leurs propres Interestz pour les
deffendre. Et quant a la Judicature de horse la Cour, le Droit est la Vie de la
Loy, and Expedition la Vie du Droit; Mais ou le Droit and la Justice est
refus^, and dilaie, la ily a proprement un Appel au Prince de tells Sujects
injurieux pour y chercher le Remede.

Lors qu'on ne peut obtenir l' advantage de Loy, il faut de failler de tout,
and demeure toute en la puissance de ceux seulement qui la scavent avoir en
possession -- S'il y a quelqun qui vieut a souffrier injustice, and en demeure
la acquiescant. Il est horse de Droit de ses propres Raisons, trahit son propre
Droit and abandonne son propre Interest. A Rejetter les Lettres
d'Administration, qui sont passees par la Cour Prerogative d' Anglaterre. Tout
ainsi comme si on nioit le Droit and puissance de la Souverainte du Roy, pour
proteger ses Sujects, le Ravisant and frustrant de ses Ordonnances and Loys,
aussibien que ses Sujects de leur biens. Et ce^uy ne merit en quelque facon
qui ce soit le nom d' Anglois, qui veut souffrier tant de mecontement, quand il
a un Prince qui a le pouvoir de maintenier les Loyx de sa propre Couronne, and
maintenir les Proprietez de ses Sujects.

God save the King, and prosper the City of LONDON.

REQUEST AEN d'Edele Achtbare Heeren Bailliu, Burgemeesters end Schepenen Der
Stadt MIDDELBURGH in ZEELANDT.
VErtoont reverentelijck George Carew Schilt-Knaep, Administrateur van all de
Goederen en nalatenschappen, so roerende als onroerende, Actien, Schulden en
Crediten, van wijlen Sir William Courten, en Sir Paul Pyndar, in hun leven
Ridders, ongeadministreert gelaten by William Courten, en William Tomes.

1. Hoe dat hy Suppliant in den Iare 1662. voor V Ed. Achtb. Process heeft
gemoveert op end jegens Pieter Boudaen Zaliger gewesen Koopman, end na sijn
overlijden, 't selve wederom op nieuws geinstitueert jegens sijne Kinderen en
Erfgenamen; omme te hebben rekeninge end bewijs van diversche notable sommen
van Penningen (berustende in hun handen) aenkomende den Boedel van Sir William
Courten, en vervolgens oock aen Sir Paul Pyndar, en den Suppliant die geduerigh
is opgehouden, met vele frivoleuse en inpertinente exceptien, end andere
dilayerende practijcquen tot sijn Suppliants groote schade en vexatie,
strijdigh jegens de regulen van Iustitie, end rechtmatigheydt.

2. Dat alhoewel het seer well kennelijk is, dat den Suppliant was geadmitteert
in de Eerweerde Societeyt van Grays Inn, alwaer hy vele Iaren achter den
anderen in de Rechten van Engelant heeft gestudeert, en in den Iare 1660. was
beedight en gesworen tot even van de Edelluyden van Sijn Majesteyts
Eerwaerdighste Secreet-kamer, tot welcke Digniteyt niemandt were geadmitteert,
als die gene, die af-komstigh zijn van honorable Familien, levende in seer
goede reputatie; effectivelijck besittende end possiderende even Staat often
inkomen waerdigh L 500 Sterling per annum, gelijck blijckt by de Attestatien
daer van zijnde, hier geannexeert.

3. Evenwel so hebben de Heeren Johan en Pieter Boudaen me^ hare consoorten,
niet alleen de vrymoedigheyt en onbeschaemtheyt gehadt, h^^ne Advocaten seer
leelijck, nijdelijck, valschelijck, en onbehoorlijck te institueren, omme in
hare Pleydoyen voor V Ed. Achtb. Vyerschare voor te brengen, sulcke infameuse
en snoode dingen (geensints ter materie dienende) waer door de Omstanders
schaemroot wierden, om sijnent will, die sich niet en schaemde sulcke reflectien
op den Koninck van Groot Brittannien Sijn E. Onderdanen, end particulierlijck
op den Suppliant te leggen: Nemaer hebben oock de selve done drucken, en
heymelijck uytgegeven aen diversche Persoonen, met intentie omme door soodanige
Libellen en valsche Pampheletten (die behoorde door den Beul often
Scherp-Rechter verbrandt te werden, ter oorsa^ck van het Affront die Natie
aengedaen, in tijde van Vrede, en goede correspondentie ^usschen den Koninck
van Groot Brittannien end de Heeren Staten Generael) hare gruwsam^ Actien te
wreken in 't stellen van hem Suppliant odieus voor Ed. Achtbare en misdadigh
voor het Volck.

4. Oversulcx kan den Suppliant hem selfs niet langer loochenen, often sijn
rechtma^igh gevoelen verswijgen, wegens de ongeschickte en onbeleefde
practijcquen van de voorsz. Boudaens end hare Advocaten; nochte oock vergeten
V Ed. Achtbare bekent te maken, dat de fraudeleuse handelingen van den ouden
Pieter Boudaen end Jacob Pergens, wegens Sir Edward Littletons Intrest in de
twee Schepen de Bona Esperanza end Henry Bona Adventura, en Sir Paul Pyndars
Assignatien, by andere Volckeren soude hebben gestraft geworden, als Criminele
misdaden.

5. Dat alhoewel de Boudaens geen meerder kennisse, nochte bel^eftheyt hadden,
so hadden nochtans hun Advocaten, mere wetenschap end geleertheyt behooren te
hebben, die by manequement van andere saaken, V Ed. Achtbaerheden, en andere
hebben moeyelijck gevallen met dese ongerijmtheden, welcke, by aldien 't selve
in Engelandt had geschiet by eenigen Advocaet aldaer jegens even Vremdelinck,
(gelijck als Mr. Dionisius Rexstoot hier heeft gedaen) so soude die
schandeleuse end onbehoorlijcke daedt, hem ontrent sijn hersenloos Hooft
gespelt geworden hebben, en gesententieert daer mede ontrent de Zael van
West-munster te wandelen, mitsgaders gesuspendeert van meerder voor eenige
Vyerscharen te Pleyten: alwaer oock Parthyen niet is geadmitteert so vermetigh
te zijn om te blijven sitten in de Rechtbanck (gelijsk Johan Boudaen op den 7.
October deses Iaers heeft gedaen,) als de saeck jegens hem bepleyt wiert.

Om all welcke redenen den Suppliant seer ootmoedelijck versoeckt, dat U Ed.
Achtb. hem gelieven te admitteren, om voor U Ed. Achtb. Vyerschare Process te
mogen institueren op end jegens Johan Bo^daen. Pieter Boudaen, end Abraham
Biscop, ten eynde dat hy Suppliant reparatie match verkrijgen van de schandale
end injury hem aengedaen: mitsgaders dat U Ed. Achtb. de sake wegens de
Rekeninge (dienende op d'ordinaire Roll voor U Ed. Achtb.) geliefden te
expedieren, achtervolgens den Brief van recommandatie door den Here Major end
Alder-Mannen der Stadt Londen, aen U Ed. Achtb. onlangs gepresenteert; te mere
alsoo binnen Londen de Vremdelingen in sulcken cas voor de Borgers end
Ingesetenen werden geprefereert, 't welck oock selfs binnen Constantinopolen en
al andere Gewesten in Turckyen were gepractiseert, alwaer geen Process daer
Vremdelingen in zijn geintresseert langer is hangende, als den tijdt van
achtien weecken.

't Welck doende, etc.
Translaet uyt de Engelsche Taal.
Cereificatie van den Grave Arlington.
DEsen dient om te certificeren, dat George Carew Schilt knaep, is beedight,
end geadmitteert tot Sijn Majesteyts Dienaer, in de plaets en in de qualiteyt
van even van de Edelluyden van Sijn Majesteyts aldereerweerdighste Secreete
Kamer, omme te genieten all Rechten, Privilegien, Voordeelen en Uytnementheden
daer toe dienende en behoorende.

Gegeven onder mijn Handt en Zegel desen 25. dagh van February 1674/5. in het
27ste Jaer van Sijn Majesteyts Regeringe. Was geteyckent Arlington. In Margin
stont even Signet gedruckt in ^ooden Lack.



Certificatie wegens Mr. Carews Staet van sijn Rentmeester en Dienaer.
KEnnelijck zy even yeder by desen, dat George Carew van Richmond, in het
Grafschap van Surrey, in het Koninckrijck van Engeland, Schilt-Knaep,
jegenwoordigh residerende binnen de Stadt Middelburgh in Zeelandt, (ter oirsake
van diversche Processen end Rechten aldaer hangende) heeft verscheyden Landen,
Huysen, Hof-Steden, en Erf-goederen gelegen in het Graefschap van Suffolk,
Essex, Londen, Dorsetshiere, end Surrey, waer van hy als wettige Possesseur
Jaerlijcks treckt de Sum L 530. over end boven de opgelden, die daer op
mogen verkregen werden.

In kennisse der waerheyt dese met onse handen geteyckent binnen Londen desen
26. Marty 1675. in het 27ste Jaer van onsen Souverainen Here Koninck Carolus de
Tweede, Was geteyckent, John Exall, Aaron Wright.


Certificatie van de Leser end Benchers van Grays Inn.
DEsen dient omme even yegelijck te certificeren dien 't aengaen match, dat
George Carew van Richmond in het Graefschap van Surrey, Schiltknaep, even van de
Edelluyden van Sijn Majesteyts Eerweerdighste Secreet-Kamer; was geadmitteert
in dese Societeyt van Grayes Inn op den 23 Juny 1653.

In kennisse der waerheyt hebben wy hier onder gestelt on^e Handtteyckens,
desen 26. February 1674/5. en in het 27ste Jaer van Koninck Carolus de Tweede,
Was geteyckent Thomas Holt Lector, Robert Raworth, John Otway, Fr. Luttrel.

Dese dry voorsz. Certificatien zijn Getranslateert door den Notaris Marinus
Smallegangh.



12. Instantien en Positien in de Wet observabel, RAKENDE De Saecken tuss chen
Carew end Boudaens.
1. All Erfgenamen / Executeuren en Administrateuren zijn verplicht en
gehouden / so welte betalen als t'ontfangen; gelijck ymant / die kennisse van
zaecken heeft / ^oet bekennen den Advocaet Rextoot in sijn Ple^doyen / socckt
dese saecke confuselijck te verwerren / en wild gaern de selve faeck anders
uytleggen / sustinerende / dat de Zoons Zoon vande Ridder Willem Courten, in
soodanigen Casu blijft verobligeert / daer nochtans hy niet alleenelijck heeft
gerefuseert gehad / om Brieven van Administratie van's Broot-vaders zijde te
lichten / neen maer het Recht van Engelant soude niet geleden hebben gehadt /
dat hy de selve op hem soude genomenhebben vande Vaderlijcke zijde / schoon hy
sulex had soccken te done.

2. Willem Courten de Soon / die Erfgenaem en Executeur was van de Ridder
Willem Courten sijn Vader / en konde geen van sijn eygen schulden betalen / met
de middelen van dito sijn Vader Zaliger terwijl sijn Vaders Crediteuren niet
waren voldaen / de ^amer van de disolate Boedels en kon op haer niet nemen om
cenigh gedeelte van de Soons schulden te betalen u^t de middelen van de Vader
de ^idder Willem Courten, hy Soon hebbende de selve schulden gemaeckt / en
insolvent (...) zijnde.

3. Will^m Courten de Soon (die Erfgenaem en Executeur was van sijn Vader) en
kan niet gheseght worden te hebben geadministreert de Middelen van dito sijn
Vader / voor en aleer hy geliquideert had gehadt de Rekeningen / die de
Compagnie aengmgen / en de schulden van dien betaelt / maer dat noch mere is /
daer zijn diversche particuliere schulden van de ^idder Willem Courten
uptstaende / die hy selfs moe^ hebben / so well als betalen / die noyt door
sijn Soon zijn geadministreert geweest / en konnen die schulden / die hy hebben
most / niet wettelijck ingemaent of gevordert werden / als door kracht van de
Brieven van Administratie aen Carew gegunt / sonder wiens eygentlijck niet
betaelt of ontfangen kan worden.

4. Willem Courten de Soon na de doot van de Ridder Willem Courten de Vader /
heeft verscheyde schulden van sijn eygen Rekeninge gemaeckt / door even
particuliere handel op Oost-Indien / (en daerom als even Koopman aengesien) is
hy de ^amer van de disolate Boedels onderworpen geweest / dat anders niet konde
wesen / ten zy even Negotiant waer geweest / en moet verstaen werden / so
wanneer hy selfs absenteerde sonder te blijven in de administratie van sijn
Vaders Middelen / dat de selve als dan waren blijvende in Averance de la Loy,
dat is under protextie van de Wet / tot hoedanigen tijdt dat de Brieven van
Administratie waren verleent aen Carew, om volgens de Wetten en Usantien van
Engelant te ageren.

5. Moet oock genotificeert werden / dat die gene die Executeur is van cen
ander Executeur / niet en kan betalen de schulden van de lest Testateur met de
Middelen van den eersten Testateur / maer moeten all schulden betaelt werden
de bonis propriis Testatoris.

6. Indien 't gebeurt dat even Executeur of Administrateur Pleyt tegens eenige
van de Crediteuren / als dat hy ten vollen heeft geadministreert de Goederen /
roerende end onroerende van den Intestaet / en so 't daer na gevonden werdt /
dat hy even gedeelte daer van qualijck heeft gebruyckt / of ten ourechte betaelt
/ maeckt hy als dan sich selfs schuldigh om all die schulden uyt sijn eygen
Goederen te betalen* de reden daer van is / vermits het in sijn eygen keur was
/ of hy wild administreren of niet / en die na dat hy had geaccepteert
gehadt voor soodanigen Administratie behoorde onder Eedt even ware en perfect
Inventaris ge-exhibeert te hebben en niet te persisteren op valsche en
impertinente Pleydoyen.

7. Vorders is 't sulex / dat so by aldien even Erfgenaem Plept / dat hy geen
Landeryen heeft van sijn Voorsaet de^cendente / die voor sijne schulden
aensprekelijck zijn / end dat de Crediteuren daer na vinden eenige Middelen En
fief, de Er^genamen aensprekelijck zijn / end die schulden nyt sijn Middelen
betaelt werden / om redenen / dat hy even valsche Pleydoy heeft gemaeckt.

8. Yemandt / die sich bemoeyt met de Goederen van overleden Vrient of
Bloet-Verwant sonder Brieven van Administratie te hebben / sal aengesien wesen
als cen Executeur in sijn eygen prejuditie / en is aensprekelijck om all de
schuldeu van den Intestaet te betalen / want het is even presumptie in Rechten /
dat niemandt so^ willen aenvaerden de Middelen van even ander in soodanigen cas
/ ten zy hy versekert was / dat'er genoegh en over soude wesen / om all de
schulden te betalen.

9. Voor en aleer de Statuten van West-munster de Tweede (so ghenaemt) zijn
gemaeckt geweest / all Landerpen / van wat Nature de selve mochten wesen /
waren aensprekelijck voor de schulden / en konde geen Entaillementen selfs
gheschieden van de Middelen toebehoorende Heeren die van haer Landt-goederen /
te beleteen om van haer Crediteuren niet aengesproken en gemaent te werden /
maer naderhandt zijnde ^eer schadelijck gevonden voor de Negotie / waren nieuwe
Statuten in Koninck Jacobus tijdt gemaeckt / waer door de Landeryen van
^oop-Luyden waren aensprekelijck voor hare schulden / niet jegenstaende dat er
Entaillementen waren gepasseert op hare Kinderen / daer ter contrary / die op
haer Inkomsten leven / en geen Negotie en done / Entaillementen konnen maken.

10. De Wetten van Engelandt, ja de Wetten van Natien / zijn seer teer in saken
rakende de ^ekeningen en Persoonen van Koopluyden / doende in Compagnie / die
gewoonelijck haer Credijt extenderen en verbreeden in all gedeelten des
Weerelts / tot voortsettinge van de Negotie. Het ware dan even van de groote
malheuren / die men konde bedencken / indie^ dry Persoonen in Compagnie
handelende / datse dan allegaer (...) en ^ouden verobligeert wesen / en haer
Middelen verplicht om de schulden van de Compagnie te betalen. 't Is tot dien
eynde dat ^e Statuyten van Engelandt hebben specialijck gedecriteert en
geprovideert / om all Exceptien in de Rekeniugen van Kooplu^den te voorkomen /
dat geen limitatie van that altoos kan vermind^^en of echaperen Actien in de
Rechten in saken van Koopluyden haer ^ekeningen / of Luyden uytlandigh
gestorven.

11. Even Koopman in Engelant, die L 500 Sterlinex 's Iaers inkomste heest van
sijn Landeryen / en daer-en-boven noch L 5000 Sterlincx in Contanten / die
verobligeert alles / so wanneer hy even Negotie aengaet met ^mant in Compagnie
/ en wat den eenen Compagnion komt te done / in wat sake het soude mogen wesen
/ de Compagnie aengaende / sulcx verbint d'andere Compagnions mede. Pieter
Boudaen Zaliger heeft het mede ge-experimenteert gegad in de sake met Iuffrouw
Josina Hobell, end Mr* Johan East, die twee Crediteuren waren van de Compagnie
/ en met wien hy even Accoort maeckte / wegens de schulden van de Compagnie /
wanneer dan Pieter Boudaen Zaliger sich embarqueerde in 't Schip of Bodem van
de Ridder Pieter Courten, so begaf hy hem op even Voyagie niet min desperaet /
gelijck h^ en Jacob Pergens deden met de Schepen de Bon Esperance en Henry Bon
Adventura, die Executeuren waren in de sake tot haer eygen nadeel / en sullen
bevinden hier namaels / datse het dier moeten kosten / mits datse haer selven
bemoeyt hebben met Nolime tangere, 't welck haer / en hare Familien sal
Schip-breuck done lijden / ten zy het Schip na even ander streeck van 't Compass
gestiert werdt.

12. De schulden der Koopluyden sont plus Sacre, als zijn de schulden van
andere Persoonen in de Weerelt / de reden is / om datse gefondeert zijn op Gods
voorsienighept / en even Koopmans personeel Credijt en weer digheyt.
Particuliere Heeren in Engelant, die van haer eygen Landen en Inkomsten leven /
en konnen geen considerabile sommen Gelts leenen / sonder even visibel Pant of
Cautie van Huysen of Landen te stellen / zijnde niet onderworpen de Commissien
van die Statuyten en Ordonnantien / gelijck Koopluyden zijn / en konnen
d'Erfgenamen van Pieter Boudaen Zaliger / en de Ridder Pieter Courten niet
seggen dat dit Huys of dat Landt haer eygen is / voor en al eer de schulden van
de Compagnie betaelt zijn / en dat de ongeadministreerde Effecten van de Ridder
Willem Courtens Middelen onder haer berustende / zijn gerestaureert aen de
Administrateur / die wettelijck de selve komt eyschen / met ^osten / Schaden /
Intresten / geleden in dit Process so veel Iaren na malkander.

ADVERTISSEMENT.
DE Ridders Willem Courten, Pieter Courten, end Johan Moncy, Koopman waren
all Engelschen / en handelden in Compagnie. Den Ridder Willem Courten storf in
't Iaar 1636. tot Londen, schuldigh. aen diversche Persoonen 125000 Ponden
Sterline^ / benessens 36000 Ponden Sterlinex aen de Ridder Paul Pyndar. Welcke
schulden niet en zijn voldaen / alhoewel den Ridder Willem Courten op sijn
Doodtbedde ernstelijck vegeerde op al sijn Vrienden (alwaer Jacob Pergens
present was) te adsisteren sijn Soon Willem Courten, wien hy ordineerde tot
sijn Executeur in 't stellen van de Rekeningen van de Compagnie op dat de
schulden mochten werden betaeit / waer op Willem Courten was d'Admini^tratie
vergunt by den Prerogativen Hove in Londen, met Macht omme te innen de Effecten
van sijn Vaders Boedel: maer en konde in sijn gansche leven de Erfgenamen van
den Ridder Pieter Courten niet brengen tot^ ^enige reden. Welcke hielt de
generale Boecken end Reeckeningen van al de Koopmanschappen / end storf
schuldigh wesende ae^ de^ Ridder Willem Courten op de Reeckeninge 122139: 10:
6. als blijckt by de Reeckeninge.

Waerom de Crediteuren van de Ridders Willem Courten en Paul Pyndar souden
wesen miserabel indien de Letteren van Administratie van den Praerogativen Hove
van Engelandt, binnen Middelburgh niet en souden krachtigh zijn. We send
nochtans sulcken Juditielen Act van get^ygenisse, dat de Authori^eyt derselve
aller wegen goet ensufficient is, in all andere Recht-bancken van de Weerelt,
omme te recoevereeren de o^geadministreerde Effecten van den Boedel, van den
Ridder Willem Courten, dewelcke ^oo lange zijn onthouden van so menige Weduwe
end Weese die Broot hebben gegeten by de vremde.

Korts na de Doot van den Ridder Willem Courten zijn de Inlantsche Troubelen
end Burgerlijcke Oorlogen in Engelandt geresen: Willem de Soon end Executeur
absentcerde hem selven / end wiert Insolv^nt / done interposeerde en
adviseerde Jacob Pergens sijnen Schoon-Broeder Pieter Boudaen, end de rest
van sijn Confraters te houden war sy in hare handen ghekregen hadden / seggende
dat de Possessie was elf deelen van de Wet.

In 't Iaer 1648. korts na dat Karolus de Eerste Koninck van Groot Brittangien
was gedoot / zijnder in Hollandt dissentien geresen. In 't Iaer 1653 is 'er even
Oorlogh gekomen tusschen het Lange Parliament / end de Vereenighde Provintlen.
Korts naer dat Karolus de Tweede was gerestaureert / wiert even ander Oorlogh
gepro^lameert tusschen Syn Ma^esteyt end de Staten Generael. In It Iaer 1672.
is'er even derde Oorlogh geresen tusschen den Koniuck en de Staten.

Nochtans all dese Revolutie van tijdt, end Gouvernement, niet jegenstaende
al de Eysschen van de Crediteuren, van de Last-hebbe^s, van de Executcurs, van
de Administrateurs, addressen van Vrinden, end Ministers van Staet, en Process
in Rechte, niets en konde prevaleren om met Pieter Boudaen, end sijn Sonen,
often have Confraters te liquideren de Reeck^ninge van de Koopmanschap in
Compagnie, o^^e te maken eenige restitutie van't Gelt end Goederen verkregen
in Possessie, behoorende tot de Boedels van de Ridders Willem Courten, en Paul
Pyndar, etc.

It would be an Example, without any president in Christendom, if Mr. George
Carew should be rejected in his quality, to Administer the Effects of Sir
William Courtens Estate, or that any Judicature in the World, should give Laws
unto England, in such Cases, to render the Prerogative Court insufficient, or
defective toward obtaining the Debts and Credits belonging to the Subjects of
the Crown of England, who would be left without remedy, if the Goods of Sir
William Courten should be given Additione Haereditatis to William Courten the
Grandchild, that has abandonned the same, and lives in obscurity, having
sequestered himself out of England, to end his days in France, out of the
reach of his Fathers, and Grandfathers Creditors, that have questioned him, for
intermedling with the Ioynture Lands of his Mother, before the Debts are paid.

D E Insinuatie, Interdictie en Protest, Gedaen aen de Oost-Indische Compagnie
ter Kamer van ZEELANT, aengaende de Erfgenamen van de Here Pieter Boudaen
Zaliger.
OP huyden den iv. November 1675. hebbe ick Henry van Rijckegem openbaer
Notaris by den Hove Provintiael van Hollandt, Zeelandt end West-Vrieslandt
geadmitteert, binnen Middelburgh in Zeelant residerende, my ten versoecke van
d'Heer George Carew Schilt-knaep van Richmond in het Graefschap van Surrey, in
't Koninckrijck van Engelant, ( qualitate qua) vervoegt ter Vergaderinge van de
Heeren Bewinthebberen van de Oost-Indische Compagnie ter Kamer tot Middelburgh,
end de Heeren aldaer vergadert, voorgelesen de navolgende Insinuatie en
Protestatie.

KEnnelijck zy even yegelijck die dit sullen sien often hooren lesen, dat ick
George Carew Schilt-knaep van Richmond in het Graefschap van Surrey, in het
Koninckrijck van Engelant, in Qualiteyt als Administrateur van all Goederen,
Haven, Effecten, Actien end Crediten van Sir William Courten end Sir Paul
Pyndar Zaligers, in hun leven Ridders woonachtigh tot Londen, end Assignatie
hebbende van Sir Edward Littleton Baronet, mitsgaders van de Commissarisen
gestelt zijnde over de Statuyten, gemaeckt jegens de Banckroettiers, daer onder
den voornoemden William Courten, Soon end Executeur van sijnen Vader Zalr. is
begrepen, done kond end make bekent,

1. Dat Sir William Courten, Sir Pieter Courten end Mr. John de Moncy,
gesamentlijck vele Jaren achter den anderen in Compagnie hebben genegotieert,
so in zijde als linen Manifacturen end andere Koopmanschappen, welcken
handel well voornamentlijck is gevoert geworden, met Penningen op Intrest
gelicht binnen Londen, die aen Sir Pieter Courten tot Middelburgh door Wissel
zijn geremitteert, of over Zee getransporteert, houdende hy Courten de generale
Boecken van den voornoemden handel en Negotie, den welcken schuldigh was aen
Sir William Courten, op de Rekeningen ten tijde van sijn overlijden, de Sum
van L 122139: 10: 6. Sterlincx, gelijck by 't slot der selver rekeningen
blijckt, bedragende in 't geheel met den verloopen Intrest tot dato deses ter
sum van L 350000. Sterlincx, en mere.

2. Als mede dat Sir William Courten is komen te overlijden schuldigh zijnde
aen diversch van Sijn Majesteyts Onderdanen van Engelandt eene sum van L
160000 Sterlincx en daer boven aen contante Penningen op Intrest gelicht, waer
van het grootste deel geduyrighlijck is geimployeert in de voorsz. Compagnie,
en in de selve Compagnies Boecken gebracht als hun eygen en propre schulden,
daer van den Intrest betaelt wiert uyt het gemeene Capitael van de meergemelte
Compagnie.

3. Item dat Sir Pieter Courten diversche groote sommen van de voorsz.
Penningen (aen hem geremitteert end getransporteert by sijn Broeder Sir
William) heeft verandert end verkeert in Oost end West-Indische Capitale
Actien op de respective Kamers van Middelburgh, zijnde die Penningen betaelt in
Gout, de selve eygene end onverscheydene Spetien die de Crediteuren binnen
Londen, hebben geleent, waer vooren Sir William Courten (naer gedaen ondersoeck
van den Procureur generael) in gevanckenis in Engelant was gestelt, end in even
boete geslagen van twintigh duysent ponden Sterlincx, voor het transporteren
van de schatten van het Koninckrijck naer even uytheemsche Natie, strijdigh
jegens de Wetten van de Kroon, als blijckt by het Register daer van gesonden.

4. Insgelijcx dat Sir Pieter Courten is komen te overlijden, stellende sijn
Neef Pieter Boudaen Zaliger, Koopman tot Middelburgh, tot sijnen Erfgenaem,
end John Moncy mede overlijdende, stelde often maeckte mentie van den voorsz.
Pieter Boudaen end Sir William Courten te stellen tot sijne Executeurs, end
Sir William Courten oock stervende, stelde en appointeerde, sijn Soon William
Courten tot sijnen eenigen Executeur, die insolvent gestorven is, hebbende
niemant van hun allen ter deser uyre de minste zorge gedragen, om eenige van de
Compagnies propre schulden te betalen, (uytgenomen de schulden van John East
end Iosina Hobell, daer over den ouden Boudaen is veraccordeert, mitsgaders de
schulden van M^s. John Casteel en Deremontius, dewelke met de Curateuren van
den desolaten Boedel van William Courten de Jonge, zijn over-een-gekomen voor
17 Pence per Pont) nochte oock de particuliere schulden van Sir William
Courten, ja selfs niet de Legaten gelegateert by Sir Pieter Courten, Sir
William Courten, end Mr. John Moncy, de welcke als noch seer schandelijck
onvoldaen blijven, strijdigh niet alleen jegens de Goddelijcke end Weereltsche
Wetten, maer selfs tegen all billigheyt, Recht end redenen, als wanneer de
Sonen end Erfgenamen van Pieter Boudaen (segge Verraders te zijn, die hun met
recht voor 't gunt sy schuldigh zijn aenspreken) de selve Penningen en Effecten
in hunne handen hebben gekregen die met de voorsz. schulden en Legaten belast
zijn, zijnde de voornoemde Sonen en Erfghenamen sulcke Sprinck-hanen voor het
Koninckrijck van Engelandt, dat haer's gelijck niet te vinden is, willende de
onrechtveerdigheyt door de Weth rechtveerdigen, by aldien niet yets over hare
quade practijcken en heerschte.

5. Dat ick George Carew verbonden by diversche Obligatien en Contracten aen
end met de Crediteuren en Geassigneerdens van Sir William Courten end sijn
Soon; als mede dat ick voor den Prerogativen Hove van Engelant, den Eedt van
getrouwigheyt heb gedaen voor de administratie van de respective Boedels van
Sir William Courten, end Sir Paul Pyndar, hebbende oock vervolgens in den
meergemelten Hove, Borge daer vooren gestelt, waer door ick gedwongen ben Staet
Inventarisen van de selve over te leveren, mitsgaders mijn uytterste diligentie
en neerstigheyt aen te wenden om die te recouvreren, gelijckerwijs oock van de
Effecten van den Boedel van William Courten, Soon van Sir William Courten, de
welcke insolvent was als voorsz. is: tot welcken eynde ick mijne Qualiteyt,
Recht, Eygendom en Eysch, verscheyden reysen door even Publijck Notaris aen de
Eerweerde Heeren Bewinthebberen der Geoctroyeerde Oost-Indische Compagnie ter
Kamer van Amsterdam, en ter Kamer van Middelburgh hebbe done bekent maken end
insinueren, ja selfs oock aen Pieter Boudaen de Oude, end sijn Sonen
respectivelijck met protestatie wegens all geledene Kosten, Schaden end
Intresten, alles blijckende by de hier aen geannexeerde Insinuatien end
Protesten.

6. En voor so verre als Pieter Boudaen d'oude, end sijn Erfgenamen so
langen tijdt d'Administratie end directie hebben gehadt, van sulcken notabele
sum van Penningen (aenkomende de Onderdanen van Engelandt, die verandert end
verkeert zijn in Capitale Actien end Obligatien op de Oost end West-Indische
Compagnie der Vereenighde Nederlanden, so ben ick geensints vermoedende dat de
Eerweerde Heeren Bewinthebberen der voorsz. Compagnien, in dese ongeredderde
saeck, de Middelen, Staet of Effecten van de Boudaens sullen willen beschermen
often protegeren, omme alsoo even bekommernisse op de meergemelte Compagnien te
brengen, maer liever daer in te voorsien, op dat hy Insinuant alsoo mochte
geraken aen sijne gerechtigheyt; end te mere om dat volgens de Wetten end
Costuymen van Engelant, end diversche andere Natien (gefondeert op de grootste
redenen) wannneer Koopluyden gebruyck maken van eenige frivoleuse often
inpertinente Pleydoyen, of exceptien, om hare Crediteuren te delayeren, ipso
facto, so werden de selve gerekent als Insolvent, end in het hooghste Hof van
Recht en Equiteyt, indien eenigh Edelman, hoedanigh hy zy, sal refuseren
t'Antwoorden op den principalen Eysch, so wert'er even Sequestratie gegunt op
sijne Landen end Renten; andersints souden sommige menschen de gemeene
Justitie verkeeren, end andere vlieden de kracht van de Wett, end daer door
verwerren all Burgerlijcke Societeyt.

7. Oversulcx zijnde vorder geimportuneert van diversche considerabelste
Crediteuren, soeckende hunne achterstallige Penningen van my ondergeschreven
als Administrateur, te weten van Sir Thomas Mears, end Sir Richard Mauleverer,
Leden van het Lager-Huys des Parlements, en Gilbert Crouch, als mede van de
Erfgenamen, Executeuren end Administrateuren van wijlen Francis, in sijn leven
Graef van Shrewsbury, Sir George VVhitmore, Sir Robert Ayton, Sir James
Cambell, Sir David Watkins, Sir William Whitmore, Edmond Hammond, Iozina Calfe,
John Gifford, Sir Peter van Lore, Hester Styles, Charles Whitaker, John
Beadle, William Morehead, Sir John Gore, Sir Hugh Windham, Sir Peter Richaut,
Elizebeth Bartlett, end verscheyde andere, omme te verbieden, beletten end
kennisse te geven aen all end even yegelijck die 't aengaen match, end
specialijck aen de Heeren Bewinthebberen der Oost end West-Indische Compagnien
op de respective Kamers binnen Middelburgh, gelijck ick do by desen, dat gene
van all de Actien en Obligatien in de Geoctroyeerde Oost-Indische Compagnie,
aenkomende d'Erfgenamen van Pieter Boudaen voornoemt, of aen yemant van hun in
't particulier, niet en mogen often souden werden verkocht, getransporteert,
betaelt of veralieneert, aen niemant wie het soude mogen wesen, tot ter tijdt
end wijlen dat de saecken end Proceduyren tusschen My en d'Heeren Johan,
Pieter, VValterus end Hendrick Boudaen, mitsgaders d'Heer Abraham Biscop, als
in Huywelijck hebbende Juffr. Catharina Boudaen, end Vrouw Constantia Boudaen,
Erfgenamen van den voorsz. Pieter Boudaen, sullen zijn gedetermineert end
afgedaen, versoeckende dat d'Eerw. Heeren Bewinthebberen der voorsz.
Oost-Indische Compagnie, niet en sullen toelaten dat eenige der selver Capitale
Actien of Obligatien op yemant anders naem often namen, sullen werden gestelt,
often veranderinge op de Boecken der meergemelte Compagnie sal werden gemaeckt,
met protestatie in sulcken cas jegens de opgemelte Heeren Bewinthebberen der
meergedachte Compagnie, end allen anderen, van allen Kosten, Schaden end
Intresten daer door geleden end te lijden, omme all de selve te verhalen daer
mijnen goeden raedt sal bevinden te behooren.

Geteeckent binnen Middelburgh datum ut supra, was geteykent George Carew.

WElcken volgende ten selven dage heb ick den voorsz. Notaris my vervoeght ter
Kamer van de voorsz. Oost-Indische Compagnie, alwaer vergadert waren d'Heeren
Burgemeesters Gillis Mueninx, Jacob van Hoorn, Mr. Daniel Fannius en Alexander
de Munck, end Haer Ed. in de voorsz. Qualiteyt de voorenstaende Insinuatie
end Protestatie by Lecture gedaen, die my tot antwoorde gaven, dat Haer E.
vermits to onsterck wa^ en niet en konden voor als noch Antwoorden, end
derhalven dat ick my Notaris jegens naest-komende ter voorsz. Ramer konde laten
vinden, end dat Haer Ed. als dan souden Antwoorden. 't Welckick relatere te
wesen mijn wedervaren.

Quod Attestor, H. v. Rijckegem, Not. Pub.


