THE COMMISSION OPENED. OR THE POSITION, That it is not only lawful, but also
the duty and Allegiance of all and every English man, to join and endeavor,
for the restitution of his sacred Majesty, to his Throne and Dignity, though
without Commission for the same, cleared and explained; and that it is to be
performed, By 1. Council and advice. 2. Supplies with men, money, and other
necessaries. 3. Bearing of Arms.
And that whosoever does the contrary is guilty of Treason.

By a Lover of Peace and Truth.

And thsy all helped David against the band of the Rovers, for they were all
mighty men of valor.

1 Chro. 12.21. London, Printed in the Year, 1648.

THE COMMISSION OPENED.
OR The Position, that it is not only lawful, but also the Duty and Allegiance
of all and every Englishman, to join and endeavor, for the restitution of his
sacred Majesty, unto his Throne and Dignity, though without Commission for the
same, is explained.
I Have In Com^^^sion o^ Posit^^^
formerly (Country men) let you understand, that it is not only lawful, but
also the bounden duty of all and every English man, to join, and endeavor for
the Restitution, of his sacred Majesty, unto his Throne and Dignity, though
without Commission for the same, which because of their authority and
protection, for their undertaking, proved from the word of God, and the Law of
the Land, and the light of reason I called a Commission, but least the said
truth should be neglected or misunderstood, now I will explain the same, which
therefore I will call The opening of the Commission: In both which, understand
the end, and scope; to be the Restitution of our gracious Sovereign, unto his
Throne and Dignity: wherein for the effecting of the same, men are not tied
only to taking up of Arms, but to ioyn and use their best endeavors to
restore his Majesty, whether it be by war, or Treaty, or otherwise: and therein
in every thing to perform our best Allegiance, in Faith, Truth and obedience.

All which is to be done by all Englishmen, with wisdom, discretion and
alacrity, to the utmost of their abilities, though without Commission for the
same. I observed page 5. That by the Law of the Land, when Treason, and Felony
is committed, it is lawful for every subject, who suspects the offender, to
apprehend and secure him, etc. which makes it lawful for every English man to
take up Arms for the restitution of our gracious Sovereign, which though it
may be to every man lawful, yet it is not to every man though in this case
expedient, as the Apostle Paul speaks in another case. For that would cause a
total neglect of Trade, and Tillage, neither would there be any rule or
Government of the Common wealth, all which would tend to subversion of the
Nation, which would be too prejudicial both unto King and kingdom. Wherefore
that we may effect this duty and trust with safety, profit and benefit unto
all, it will be worth our pains, to look our Commission over again as it is
delivered, St. 7. Ed. 1. which is to aid the King as our Sovereign Lord, at all
seasons when need shall be, in his Majesty's defense of Force of Armor, and
all other force against the Kings peace, at all times when it shall please him,
and to punish them who shall do contrary according to the Laws and usages of
this Realm. Our Commission then is to aid the King as our Sovereign Lord, at
all seasons when need shall be: Aid is the same with aid in French, and
Auxilium in Latin, which we call help in English, which by the law of God is
due unto every one that stands in need thereof, Relieve the oppressed, Isa.
1.17. Comfort the feeble minded, support the weak, 1 These. 5.14. ye ought to
support the weak, Acts 20.35. And if this be a due unto every weak and and
distressed man, how much more unto an imprisoned Christian King. This is the
law of God, if thy Brother be waxen poor, and fallen into decay with thee, thou
shall relieve him, Lev. 25.35. And if we must relieve a decayed brother, how
much more are we bound to set at liberty an abused King, which is all the help
we can give where observe, help is given in this case three ways.

By 1. Council and advice. 2. Supplies, with men, money, and other
necessaries. 3. By bearing of Arms.


All these as I have showed in my Commission, are at all seasons when need
shall be due from us unto his sacred Majesty, as we are enjoined the same, by
our Oaths, both of Supremacy and Allegiance, and the Statute Law of this Land,
and they are to be performed in Faith, Truth, and obedience, doing good and
lawful service unto the King and his people. Therefore are all these, by every
man to be discharged in a way answerable unto case and opportunity: And that
with the best abilities.

1. By Council and Advice; all men are not herein bound to sight, no the old
Adage is observable, seniores ad honores, iuniores ad labores, it is not to be
understood, that the honorable hoar head, is to undergo the weight and
hardship of Military affairs, wherefore it is the old man's duty, as much as he
is able, to give good Council, and advice or otherwise to assist them, who
either have or shall engage herein: Sometimes this may be all that Martial
Soldiers can do, as Benhadads servants, who by their advice saved both their
own lives, and the life of their Master, 1 King 20.31.32. Council and advice
may do more good then the sword, therefore herein must it needs be the duty of
every wise English man as much as in him lies, by wholesome advice to endeavor
the Restitution of his sacred Majesty.

2. All those who are with holden from a martial engagement herein, either by
age or some otherlawfull and reasonable impediment, are bound if they are able,
to join and labor therein, by supplies of men, money and other necessaries, in
assistance of the said undertaking: in the rebuilding of the Material temple
of Jerusalem, this duty was strictly charged by Cirus, and put in execution,
Let the men of this place help him [who had oversight of the work] with silver,
and with Gold, and with goods, and with beasts, besides the free will offering
for the house of God, which is in Jerusalem. Ezr. 1.4. And if this was
requisite, and just for the building of a material Temple, how much more for
the relief, and restaurat on of any living Temple of the Holy Ghost, but
especially for the enlargement of agracious, and pious imprisoned Prince, which
is a defender of the truly Christian Faith, not only lege terrae, by the law of
the Land, but also praxi Christiani, by his Christian practice, whose virtues
makes him worth ten thousand of his people, 2 Samuel 18.3. Therefore must it must
be their parts and duty, who are Christians in the Kingdom, that (if need shall
be) cannot engage in Martial service, to ioyn and endeavor, for the
restitution of his gracious Majesty, by sending of men, money, arms, and other
necessaries, toward the maintenance of so religious an undertaking, wherefore
let not Covetousness, and self love, hinder so good and godly a cause; this is
that has already undone both King and Kingdom, for questionless half of that
money and treasure which his Majesty's friends have paid in Composition, and
other taxes unto the two houses, would have made up a competent maintenance, of
a greater Army, then ever his Majesty had, and kept them in good order, the
want whereof carried away the hearts of the multitude undid the Army, and lost
the war. Whosoever therefore is endued with any fear of God, or love of his
Country, let him know that if his Majesty be not restored, he cannot escape
ruin, beggary, and all other miseries, which Tyranny, and Oppression can
impose: Whereas if his Majesty be restored to his Crown and dignity, we shall
enjoy all happiness and prosperity both in Church, and Common wealth; in
Religion, and policy. Therefore is it the Husbandmans part and duty, if he
cannot attend an Army in person to labor as much as in him lies, by Cattle
and Tillage of the field, for the support of this religious undertaking: for
The King himself is served by the field, Eccl. 5.9. And all Common wealths have
been careful to preserve the Plow. Malmutius sometimes a King in England, made
a Law that the Plow should not be arrested for debt, and the Laws of England,
have ever been careful to preserve Husbandry, and seeing that both the life of
the Law, which is the King, and the Letter of the Law, in the several Statutes
of the Land, has been thus careful for the good of Husbandry, how does
gratitude and their own good, enjoin all Husbandmen which do not in their
persons engage for the restitution of his Majesty, to relieve and assist them
who shall undertake therein, with such provisions as make the staff of life,
which will be an acceptable joining, and endeavoring for the restitution of
their Sovereign, so likewise all Merchants and Tradesmen, which cannot leave
their homes, to follow their callings, with greater care and diligence then
ever, that they may assist them, who shall venture: their lives therein, with
coin which is nervus belli, the sineiwes of war, to recover him from traitorous
hands, unto whom God inioyns us to give all Allegiance, Homage, and subjection.

3. The third way to join and endeavor for the restitution of his sacred
Majesty (if necessity drive thereunto which God divert) is by bearing of Arms,
which ought to be seconded by all English men. The fear of one Mordecai was so
prevalent with Ahasuerus his Nobles, that they all joined to help the Jews.
And all the Rulers of the Provinces, and the Lievtenants, and the Deputies, and
the Officers of the King helped the Jews, because the fear of Mordecai feli
upon them, Est. 9.3. O Country men how much more ought the sear of God, a
greater then Mordecai, to fall upon all men in England, Noble men, and
Gentlemen, Magistrates, and Officers throughout the Realm, and to cause them
to help their King and Country, almost ruined and destroyed, out of the hands
of Tyranny, Oppression, and Usurpation: wherein all men that want employment,
or others who upon good and sound principles, are induced thereunto by
conscience, ought to join, and endeavor though without Commission for the
same, of which men at this time certainly there are enough in the Kingdom,
(with Gods blessing,) able to perform a more difficult business then the
Restitution of our gracious Sovereign, if with wisdom, and discretion, they
would stoutly, resolutely, and unanimously join therein, ever having a Christan
care to use serpentine Wisdom, and Columbine Innocence, For this we have a
sufficient pattern in Scripture. Thus in the same case men came to help David
in his distress till he had an Army like the Host of God, at that time day by
day there came [men] to David to help him till it was a great host, like the
Host of God 1 Chro. 12.22. Read the whole: Chapter.
If all those of our Kingdom who are wise, wealthy, honorable, and martial,
would freely according to their duty, come unto his Majesty as they of Israel
did unto David then questionless would they be recorded worthyes-unto eternity
as well as them.

Thus (dear Country men) you see that both the word of God, of the Land; and
the light of Reason enjoins every English man to labor join and endeavor,
for the restitution of his Majesty though with out Commission for the same,
either by Council, and advice, or by assistance with supplies, of men, money,
Arms, or other necessaries: Or (if need be which God avert) by bearing and
Arms or all of them. And that whosoever undertakes herein has the Law of the
Land for their protection.

But on the contrary, all those that join and endeavor, in any or of all these
ways against his Majesty or the undertakers for the restitution of his Majesty,
are guilty of treason, and let them observe what sentence is recorded in the
word of God, to be given by Solomon, upon Abiathar and Ioab in such a case, for
taking part with Adonijah 1 King 17. and chapter 2. v. 26 27 28 29. and let them
know to adhere unto an other State, then the King in this Kingdom is high
Treason 3. Jacob 4. and to aid or comfort them who war against our Lord the
King is Treason Stat. 25. Edw. 3, 2. The words are these, If any man leavy War
against the King in his Realm, or be adherent unto the Kings enemies in his
Realm or else where etc. ought to be judged Treason, where mark but to adhere
to the Kings Enemies is Treason. And the two Houses their bulls, wherewith they
would seem to affright good Christians from their allegiance, with that
horrible name of Treason, are but bugbeares, which can prevail upon none but
Knaves or Fools. Therefore good English Christians labor and endeavor, by
all means, to the utmost of your power to restore his Majesty, to his Throne,
and dignity; and that will beget favor with God, and honor with men.

God save the King.
FINIS.

