The Common Interest OF KING and Kingdom, In this Confused Conjuncture, Truly
Stated: And to consist in the Speedy Calling of A Free Parliament.
IT is a frequent Observation upon Polemical Debates, whether they be in the
Philosophical Speculations of the Schools, or what is almost the same, in the
Scholastic Disputes among the School-Divines; That when the Disputants come to
understand one another, they are soon agreed. This, though but a Theorem among
the Scholars, may pass for a good Maxim among Politicians too, and in this
juncture very applicable to our present Perplexities, and the Differences and
Disagreements that the State lies under; it has been Agreed on all hands, that
a Parliament can only Compose the Distractions of the People; and yet some
People seem as much Distracted at the Apprehension of this Parliament, and
perhaps for that reason have influenced the King so long from Calling Any: This
certainly was No kindness to the Crown, to reduce it to those Extremities,
which with more Honor to it self, and Safety to them, it could have granted
before: For as Necessity, in Matters of Right, is said to have no Law, so in
respect of Favors it will have no Thanks too. And this I urge only as an Error
that has been observable in our late Councils, which I am persuaded the
Inclinations of the King would have otherwise rec^ity'd, and for which the
Unhappy Advisers will hardly have reason to thank themselves.

On the other hand, the Declaration of the Prince of Orange has no other
Pretense, but the Calling of this Parliament; which (upon the Faith of a King,
that ought to be esteemed Inviolate) has been (...) to the People, shall be
Called; and the difference all the ^^^le consisting only in this, That His
Majesty would willingly Call ^^e as soon as the Prince with his Forces was
retired out of England, ^ut this Prince was unlikely to leave this England,
with his Forces, till this ^arliament was Called.

I do with all the regard and tenderness to the Crown, presume to offer, That a
Speedy Parliament, in spite of these Pretensions of the Prince, (which I hope
are not to attempt it) is the only Expedient to Preserve it is just Rights, and
to pacify the Peoples Rage.

I. It is a Parliament that will certainly consist of the same Loyal Persons,
that against so much Opposition, A Resistance, even to Blood, placed this Crown
upon the Head of the Prince that wears it, and who, I am persuaded, will never
suffer an Hair of That Head to fall to the Ground.

II. It is a Parliament that will do His Majesty more Service in this
Conjuncture, than those Military Men that have Deserted him by what I see, ever
designed to do; and instead of his Standing Army, I hope he will have Reason to
make This his Standing Parliament.

The First Proposition I shall thus plainly prove: Those Persons that Adhered
to the Crown, and its unalterable Succession, are men of the best Fortunes and
Estates that their Counties can afford us, and who, it is known, by that
Interest they had in them, Established the Throne; by this their Interest they
will as certainly be elected again, and for ought I see, the P. of O. proposes
it as his Interest to have them chosen too; so that here is a Common Interest
again, in which we all agree, if People would without passion give themselves up
to understand it.

To these men this dreadful Declaration of the P. must be entirely submitted,
and he himself determined by it* Their Ordered and Resolved will certainly be
the Decretum Finale; and as it is the hig^^ ^^ Court, from whence there is no
Appeal, so has the Prince oblig^ himself by Appealing to it.

To this can only be Objected these two things: 1. That the Prince's Army may
hinder the Election of these Men. 2. That he may influence their Debates when
Elected.


That it cannot, and will not do either of these, will appear not only
probable, but plain; he has no Power to regulate Corporations, and must ruin
the very Foundation of his Design if he pretends to it; it is a contradiction to
what he declares, and a Design upon the Crown which he renounces, and which is
his visible Interest not to Attemp^ He knows too well the Temper of those Men,
whom only the common Cause of Religion, has made his Adherents, to be no
D^po^er* of Crowns and Scepters; which like the King's Heart, are said to b^
only in God's Hand, and who have asserted too much of a Divine Right, to set up
now for the Doctrine of Deposing. He must need* know too, that the offering to
exclude such Men from being duly Elected, would raise the just Indignation not
only of these Men, (upon whom some will say he has most depended) but of the
whole Kingdom, of which they make the greatest part, and in all probability
make a greater Defection in his Army, than his Cause has done in the King's.

In the next place, If Elected, he cannot influence their Debates. He has no
Ministers of State to make their Courts to the House of Commons; and I am
persuaded is too thrifty to allow any Pensions to purchase their Votes. The
Members that will be chosen, will be too Wealthy for a Bribe, and will no more
Sell their King, than they would their Country; and in what concerns
Succession, and a Right Heir, have given such proofs of their Sincerity, that
as it is the most ungrateful Distrust, where the Descent is owing, so to
Contradict it, is to deny a Postulate, or a Piece of Demonstration.

And since of these Men the Parliament must cons^^, it is ea^^e to prove, that
His Majesty, Their Anointed cannot be touched; and ^om^ wi^h I could add, they
would do his Prophets no harm. The (...)tive has been Advanced by them, as some
think, even to a (...) as themselves find, to their own damage and Danger; ^o
that (...) such Members, his Sacred Person, as well as his just Rights, must
meet with the greatest Security.

The Second Proposition is, That such a Parliament in this very Juncture, will
do the King more Service than any Army, or his own has done.

The Foreign Forces that were brought into the Kingdom were not so few, but
what without such a Defection might have shaken the Throne, I dare not say
overturned it; I shall not insist upon any Excuse or Justification of what some
will call a Revolt from Allegiance, others only an Asserting of Religion; but
take the matter as it stands, we'll suppose it once for Fact; That what for
foreign Troops, and the Defection of his own, the King's Affairs in his Army
are very declining, and Himself unlikely to keep the Field: What is there
possible, left to oppose the unlimited Demands of the Prince (should he extend
them to Extravagancy) but such a Parliament, to which even a sort of Conquerors
seem to submit? The Nation has such an expectancy from it, that it unanimously
agrees to be guided by it; and should it disagree with this so Powerful Prince,
(as certainly it will, if he designs the least Alt^^ation of Government, or any
Injury to the Crown, much more to the Person of the King) its Resolutions would
soon make him find a Force within those Walls, to transcend even that he has in
the Field, and even those he has there as soon to forsake him. This is no piec^
^^ ^eculation in Politics, but what the event will as certainly prove to be
Matter of Fact: if Futurity can have any relation to what is past? if we'll
only believe with our Ears, what our Eyes have seen^ if the Relating Presidents
be any probable Proof of a things possibility? I can give some instances, where
Parliaments have helped to oppose even the Violence of Arms; which though they use
to silence Laws, such Laws at any time may here turn to flight an Army of the
Aliens.

It was a Parliaments pure Interest with the People, that had Power enough upon
the Restoration of the late King, to Disband all the Forces then, though much
more formidable than what are now afoot, and under such an Engagement, that
their Oaths as well as their Interest, had obliged all the Officers of that
Army, never to forsake one another, or suffer themselves to be Disbanded; and
that when Religion was as much the cause, and they had Sworn to fight the
Battles of the Lord, whereas the Princes Promises here supersede the pains of
such a proof, declare he will never bring it to that Extremitv, but send away of
his own accord, all his Foreign Troops as soon as this Parliament shall be
called; and I am sure it is his Interest to be as good as his Word.

For another Instance, That Votes of Parliament are sometimes as good as Canon
proof: and it is that more modern Experience we had of their efficacy in
Influencing the People upon Monmouth's Rebellion; I am sure His Majesty found
no little benefit then from their Sitting, their Attaindure, and setting so
much upon his Head, did not a little help to bring it in, and kept numbers out,
that otherwise would have made his Army much more formidable; and though the
King's Forces had then the Good Luck to Defeat them, yet I crave leave to
observe, that the Army Conquered by chance, but the Parliament by Deliberation.

To this Parliament, (and what should endear it the more to all Men) to the
very same Persons that composed it, (who for the most part will certainly be
returned) are all Matters on all sides agreed to be referred; the Prince
Declares for it, the Lords Petition for it, and the King as passionately
desires for it? and what then, for God sake, should hinder the calling for it;
if it be answered, that the Evil Counselors, whom the Prince so Criminates,
only oppose its Sitting: I will satisfy them, it is not their Interest so to
do, they being already made so Obnoxious, (if they have not made themselves so)
will by opposing this the general desire, only incense the People more, make
them to be believed Guilty of all those Crimes for which they stand accused,
some of which, perhaps, they are Innocent of, and will have a fair opportunity,
when it is assembled, to clear themselves from I have observed upon several of
our Revolutions, that nothing has made our Ministers of State more odious, than
their being thought guilty of putting off Parliaments; that occasioned the Act
in Ed. 3. for their Sitting once a year at least; that the Triennial in Car. 1.
that at last the unhappy, and Perpetual one in the same Reign, that was made
Matter of Impeachment in Rich. 2d's Reign; that was one of the Articles that
cost Strafford his Head in Car. 1, that was the Clamor of all the Discontented
Party in Car. 2. And since its Sitting now is so generally desired, and the
King's Safety, and the Peoples Peace seem to depend upon it; the Nations
resentment will certainly fall more heavy upon their Heads that are thought to
have opposed it, and aggravate those Crimes, of which they only may be
mistrusted; insomuch, that I seriously profess, were I a Public Minister, that
was certainly designed for a Public Sacrifice; for the King's sake, for the
Peoples satisfaction, and for the only Expedient to divert somewhat of that
Odium I lay under; I would zealously be concerned for its Sitting, though I were
sure to suffer when it Sat.

Neither can I see what His Majesty can reasonably fear at present from such a
Loyal Assembly's being legally convened, they will certainly (and of which I am
in my Conscience persuaded) resolve to retain to themselves all the Liberty of
Debate, since they will be now more than ever disingaged from any Merit they may
expect from Compliance and Obedience; they will be so far from being Influenced
by the Prince of O. or his Army from being free, that the first thing they will
consider, will be the Establishing of the King's Throne, which no confidence
can deny, but that the Persons who will compose it, have always been ready to
support; they will confirm, that Established Religion, which the King has so
often promised to maintain: And to come to the only two tender Points, that
some People will think can touch the King, or the Court; or what has occasioned
much (perhaps) this Attempt of the Prince of O. and his States;

They Will be the best Arbitrators in the Birth of our Prince of Wales. And the
greatest Opposers of the Growth of the King of France.

In both these Points, with all submission, I did ever conceive, and shall now
as humbly show, It is His Majesty's Interest to admit them to be Judges.

First, he cannot have better Judges of a Royal Descent, and a right Line, than
those that so Loyally maintained his own against so much Opposition, and who
must be as much engaged to maintain it in his Lawful Issue, as ever they did in
his own Person and Blood; the perpetuating of this Line, and the Derivation of
this Blood depends in all probability, upon an Heir Male, and a Prince of
Wal^s; of whose Birth, when once they are satisfied, they will certainly be the
best of Asserters. To this very Parliament the Prince of O. has fairly, even in
this very Point Appealed, and so by his own Act concluded himself. So that if
this Legitimacy which he Questions, should by them be affirmed, he must and
will acquiesce; and His Majesty can desire nothing more, than such an
affirmation; now there are probable reasons to induce us to believe, that this
Parliament may affirm this Son to be his, which the King, with a great many
Witnesses has aver'd to be His own: No Man can Condemn the Prince of O. for
doubting it, since it concerns himself, and especially his Consort, so near;
but it may be observed, That when his Declaration was penned, (as himself there
says) though many People doubted of the Queen's Bigness, and the Birth of the
Child, there was not any one thing done to satisfy them, or to put an end to
their Doubts; so that we cannot tell how far the Prince now may be satisfied
himself, or a Parliament think it satisfactory, since so much has been done of
late in the Council Chamber, as may perhaps give the great Council of the
Nation much of satisfaction; and they that stood up so stoutly for the
Succession of the Duke of ^ork, may not be so soon brought to disinherit a
Prince of Wales.

Secondly, what concerns the Growth of France, I always thought must very much
affect England, and none sure then so proper to Judge of the Nations safety, as
those who are sent to be her Peoples Representatives: It Is certain, or at least
very probable, that the same Justice by which he detains Lorrain, and has
seized the Palatinate; the same power by which he defies all the Electoral
Princes, and all the Forces of the Emperor, will one time warrant him to claim
Holland, as one of the Appendancies to his Pays Conqui de Flandre, and the
Chamber of Metz can always give even faster than he Conquers; and then perhaps
it may be too late for England to look about for her self: and it is plain, it is
for this reason the Dutch, ('tho I believe truly in the first place for their
own Preservation,) would now engage the English into a War with the French; and
though that I think too would have been more honestly done, if it could have been
compast without force of Arms, and to be wished the P. might have had no need of
his; It Is granted on all sides, that the King is the sole Arbitrator of War and
Peace: But yet it has been as constant a Practice in Parliament, to move the
King to the one, and incline him to the other, and to offer one thing more, it
is known, that their Growth of France, and our Growth of Popery, has for above
this Ten Years been so beaten into peoples Heads to be the same thing, that
nothing almost but a Breach with that Crown, can make them think well of our
Court, and I think that has broke with us; and made already a War, if we are
any thing concerned in a late famous Peace; and it is but with an ill Grace that
this French Declaration reminds the Dutch of the Treaty of Nimmeguen; which by
their Invading the Palatinate, they first took care to violate: I am not
infatuated with those Foolish Fears that affect the Vulgar; no more afraid at
present of the French Army here, than the Spanish Pilgrims; but will not
promise for futurity, should their Growth meet with no opposition, and (unless
it be Religion) I could never apprehend what should incline our Ministers so
much to that Government, since that very thing, has created so many
Disturbances in our own, much less should it influence the King, or the Court
at this time, since the only season, to recover some of that Kingdom, of which
His Majesty's Ancestors were once possessed in another Field, than that of a
Coat of Arms.

These I think are the chief things that will come before this Parliament, of
which they will bethe most Competent Judges, even to the Composing of the
Distractions between King and People; and this Parliament will be more
conveniently now called than ever, since nothing less than that Convention can
Compose them; and therefore those rude Reflections in a Late imprudent paper
(that were so uncharitably made upon the Worthy Lords that so conscientiously
Petitioned for it) were very unseasonably, very unadvisedly set forth;
especially since it appeared, His Majesty was pleased to receive it so
Graciously, as to tell them, he passionately desired it; and since all sides,
after so much Alteration seem now to agree in this one thing necessary, may it
answer too the expectation of all, may their moderation be known to all Men,
may People be surprised to see their prudent Administrations, and that this
Revolution alone is that which will not run into Extremes: Lastly,

May the King's Enemies be clothed with shame, but upon his Head let his Crown
flourish.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by T. M. 1688.


