THE Commissioners Proposals TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE Prince of Orange. With
his HIGHNES's ANSWER.
SIR,
THE King commanded Us to acquaint You, That He observes all the Differences
and Causes of Complaint alleged by Your Highness, seem to be referred to a
Free Parliament.

His Majesty, as He has already declared, was resolved before this to call
One, but thought that in the present State of Affairs, it was advisable to
deferr it, till things were more composed: Yet seeing that His People still
continue to desire it, He has put forth his Proclamation in order to it, and
has issued forth His Writs for the calling of it.

And to prevent any Cause of Interruption in it, He will consent to every thing
that can be reasonably required, for the Security of all those that come to it.

His Majesty has therefore sent us to attend Your Highness for the adjusting
of all Matters that shall be agreed to be necessary to the Freedom of
Elections, and the Security of Sitting, and is ready to enter immediately into
a Treaty in order to it.

His Majesty proposes that in the mean time the respective Armies may be
retained within such Limits, and at such a distance from London, as may prevent
the Apprehensions, that the Parliament may be in any kind disturbed, being
desirous that the meeting of it may be no longer delayed than it must be by the
usual and necessary Forms.

Hungerford the 8th of December. 1688. Hallifax. Nottingham. Godolphin.


HIS Royal Highness THE Prince of Orange's ANSWER.
WE with the Advice of the Lords and Gentlemen Assembled with Us, have in
Answer made these following Proposals.

^. That all Papists, and such Persons as are not qualified by Law* (...)
Disarmed, Disbanded, and Removed from all Employments Civil and Military.

II. That all Proclamations that Reflect upon Us, or at any that have come to
Us, or Declared for Us, be Recalled; and that if any Persons for having
Assisted Us, have been Committed, that they be forthwith set at Liberty.

III. That for the Security and Safety of the City of London, the Custody and
Government of the Tower be immediately put into the Hands of the said City.

IV. That if His Majesty should think fit to be in London* during the Sitting
of the Parliament, that We may be there also, with an equal number of Our
Guards; and if His Majesty shall be pleased to be in any place from London what
ever distance He thinks fit, that We may be the same distance, and that the
Respective Armies be from London forty Miles, and that no further Forces be
brought into the Kingdom.

And that for the security of the City of London and their Trade, Tilbury Fort
be put into the hands of the said City.

That a sufficient part of the Public Revenue be assigned Us, for the Support
and Maintenance of Our Troops, until the Sitting of a Free Parliament.

That to prevent the Landing of French or other Foreign Troops, Portsmouth may
be put into such Hands, as by His Majesty and Us shall be agreed on.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley in Russel Street in Covent Garden. 1688.


