Comparatis Comparandis: THE SECOND PART. OR, A PARALLEL of the former, and
later Force, upon the two Houses of Parliament.

Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee. Luke 19. 22. Therefore art thou
inexcusable, oh Man, whomsoever thou art that judge: for wherein thou judge
another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou that judge, do the same
things. Romans 2. 1. Terrena potestas caput Regem. Hugo de Sanct. Vict. l. 3. de
sacr. p. 2. cap. 4. Regem in temporalibus neminem superiorem recognoscere.
Innocent. 3. cap. Novit. Neque enim pietatem subvertit ista subjectio.
Chrysostom. Printed in the Year 1647.

Reader:
THis Treatise is spent wholly upon the tumults raised, and the Militia of the
Kingdom controverted in this Parliament, and that thou may the better judge
of the following discourse:

First, consider, what that Oracle of the Law has delivered concerning such
Tumults. By the Ancient Law and Cook 4. pats inst it. l. 1. of the High Court
of Parliament.
Custom of Parliament, a Proclamation ought to be made in Westminster in the
beginning of the Parliament; that no man upon pain to lose all that he has,
should during the Parliament in London, Westminster, or the Suburbs, etc. wear
any privy coat of Plate, or go armed during the Parliament, and the reason
hereof was that the high Court of Parliament should not thereby be disturbed,
nor the Members thereof (which are to attend the arduous and urgent business
of the Church, and Commonwealth) should be withdrawn.

Secondly, consider what his Majesty has declared concerning The Kings Dec. of
July 1. 1642. Husb. Collect of Remon. and Orders. 398.
the Militia: The Kingdom of England in its Fundamental Policy (as well) for
his own assurance against the danger of foreign Invasions, as the bad use
that might be made of great constant Forces (whether Foreign or Native) is
defended by it self; every man (according to his ability) providing arms,
horses, and men, for that purpose; and those horse, and arms so provided,
being still their own proper goods, and remaining in the custody of each man
respectively: And these are the trained Bands, or the Militia of the Kingdom:
The calling together of whom, and the training, exercising, and conducting of
them, belongs to the King (as the supreme Governor) for maintaining the Laws
of the Land, and preserving his own just Rights and Prerogatives, and
protecting the Subject in matter of property, and liberty, whether against
private injury or common oppression, or invasion, and so for conserving both
the private and public peace of the Kingdom.

These things premised, I shall stay thee no longer in the Porch, but give thee
leave to enter upon the discourse it self, at pleasure.

THere was published not long since, a book entitled, Prima Pars de
Comparatis Comparandis, or a parallel of the Kings government (as it is set
sorth in the Remonstrance Husb. collect. by order of Parliament Remons. Page 3.
of Dec. 15. 1641) with the present Government of the two Houses of Parliament,
and in pursuance of that conception, is this Secunda Pars, etc. Wherein I shall
proceed to compare, and parallel the late force and violence of the Army and
City, upon the two Houses, with the former tumults and outrages upon the King,
and his Parliament, which followed immediately upon, and from that
Remonstrance. The first occasion of the tumults, was this:

A factious and seditious Party in Parliament, complying Husb. p. 521.
with the same Party in the City, brought in a Bill, to take away Bishops,
root and branch.

And a seditious and traitorous Party, brought in another Husb. pa. 530. 543.
See Parall. 4. of this book
Bill, to take the Militia by Sea, and Land, from the King, and to settle it in
others.

These Bills being rejected in a full, and free Convention of Parliament, they
resolved to revive, and promote them by tumults, force, and violence; and to
that end, they declared in the Remonstrance premised, that the House of Commons
had prepared diverse good Bills, for a through reformation, both in Church and
State; but they were hindered in the House of Peers, by the Bishops, Husb. p.
18, 19.
and Popish Lords, their number and prevalency there. Hereupon the tumultuous
people in and about See parallel. 34
London (of their Party and Confederacy) resort to Westminster with swords and
clubs, crying no Bishops, no Bishops, Husb. p. 41. 42. and 533.
no Popish Lords. And they threatened to pull down the Lodgings where diverse of
the Bishops lay, and assaulted some in their Coaches, chased others with Boats
by water, and laid violent hands on the Bishop See par. 30.
of York in his passing to the House; also they misused several other Members
of either House, who they were Husb. p. 533.
informed favored not their desperate and seditious ends; proclaiming the
names of several of the Peers, as evil and rotten hearted Lords, and
assaulting, and evil entreating some of the Members of the House of Commons,
Husb. p. 531. See par. 30.
even at the door of that House, resolving either to force Husb. 531. 547.
their votes, or to hinder them from voting: And this was done at several
times, and upon several occasions, when any thing was likely to be carried
against them.

Whereupon the House of Peers twice very earnestly Husb. p. 531.
desired the House of Commons that they would for the dignity of Parliament
join with them in a Declaration for suppressing such Tumults; but instead
thereof speeches Husb. p. 532. See par. 37.
were made in justification of them. And afterward when the Lords by the
direction of the Judges had given Husb. 532.
order to the Justices of the Peace, and other Officers about Westminster, to
endeavor the suppressing of Tumults, one of the Justices for doing his duty
therein was sent to the Tower. Justice Long.


And as that Remonstrance inflamed the people against the Bishops, and several
members of both Houses of Parliament: So did it incense and inrage them also
against the King, and his Government. And those tumultuous Rioters utter
traitorous speeches against his Majesty, Husb. 533.
as they pass along the streets to Westminster; and in their return from
thence they make a stand at White hall Gate, and say,

They will have no more Porters Lodges, but would speak with the King when they
pleased.

Hereupon his Majesty, sensible of his own, and the Parliaments great
disturbance and danger, by those Tumults, Husb. p. 30.
sent a Message to the Lord Mayor of London, requiring him for the time to come
to take special care for the preventing the like tumults, as far as in him
lay; and when none of these courses could prevail; but the people grew more
and more outrageous and insolent, his Majesty (well knowing who they were that
first raised and invited the tumultuous people to Westminster, and seeing to
what end they were raised, by force to compel the Parliament to order, limit,
and dispose their votes, and proceedings in such manner as might best conduce
to their factious and traitorous designs) exhibiteth Articles of high treason
against the Lord Kimbolton, (now Earl Husb. p. 34.
of Manchester) and against the five Members, Mr. Pim, Mr. Hampden, Mr. Hollis,
Sr. Arthur Haslerigge, and Mr. Stroode.

1. That they have traitorously endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws,
and Government of this Kingdom, and to deprive the King of his Regal Power,
See par. 18.
and to place in Subjects an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power.

2. That they have endeavored by many false aspertions upon his Majesty, and
upon his Government, to alienate the affections of his people, and to make his
Majesty odious unto them.

3. That they have traitorously endeavored to subvert the Rights and very
beings of Parliaments.

4. That for the completing of their traitorous designs they have endeavored
as far as in them lay, by See par. 30.
force and terror to compel the Parliament to join with them in their
traitorous designs, and to that end have actually raised, and countenanced
tumults against the King and Parliament.

And upon these Articles, his Majesty expected, that either House would have
sequestered its Members, and committed them to safe custody, that they might
have been brought to a legal and speedy trial.

But the Houses did nothing less, and the accused Members remove themselves
into the City, and as they not long before maintained the tumultuous Citizens
against the Lords; so those Citizens maintain the traitorous Members against
the King. And the Commoncounsell Husb. 537.
of London, now altered by undue practices, place unusual Watches, and Guards
in the City, under the command of Sergiant Major General Skippon, (as is
pretended) for the safety of the City, and protection of the Members: Nor so
only, but (Ian. 11.) the trained Husb. 538.
bands of London, and Westminster, guard those accused See par. 32.
Members from their residence in the City in an hostile and warlicke manner to
Westminster, and near one hundred Lighters, and long Boats were set out by
water, laden with Sakers, and Murdering Pieces, and other Ammunition, dressed
up with waste clothes and streamers. as ready to fight: And in this Array, the
Mariners by water, and the Soldiers by Land, as they pass at Whitehall,
asked what was become of the King, where was he

And now maugre his Majesty's accusation of high treason, they take courage
again, and revive the matter of the Bill exhibited, for transferring the Kings
Power by Sea and Land, into other hands; and the House of Commons desire the
Lords to join with them in petitioning Husb. 59.
his Majesty, that the Militia of the Kingdom may be put into such hands, as
both Houses did confide in; but it was twice carried Negatively, by the votes
of much the major part of Lords: Hereupon (Ian. 31.) the poor people about
London petitioned the House of Commons Husb. 548.
against, those Lords, as Malignants and Disturbers of their Peace, and desire
to know their names, and threaten to remove them; and Mr. Hollis made a speech
to the Lords, See par. 30. 36. 37
enforcing the Petition at a conference; Whereupon diverse Lords being
discontented went away, and the vote in order to the Militia passed, being at
least twice before rejected by double their number who consented to it, when
there was no Popish Lords present, and 12 Bishops in the Tower. And since that
time, they have been able See par. 30.
to carry any thing upon the matter, the resolution of the House of Commons
have been wholly guided by those persons, who had given so plain evidence,
that they had the Multitude at their command, and has wholly guided the House
of Peers, who have for the most part submitted to whatsoever has been brought
to them.

Thus have I showed the Rise, progress, and success of the tumults, in
December. and Ian. 1641: And now I shall compare them with the forcible practices
of the City, and the Army upon the two Houses in 1647. And you shall see, how
in this case the City charge the Army in their Declaration of July 31. And
how the Army charge the City in their Remonstrance of August 18. And how
whilst they accuse one another of those latter, they condemn themselves of the
former Tumults.

A Parallel of diverse Passages in the Cities Declaration of July 31. 1947.
We for our parts, shall not presume to deliver any thing of Parallel 1.
our sense upon that which has been altered, acted, or consented unto by bosh
Houses, at the iustance, interposition, or importunity of the Army.

You mean, the revocation of the Remonstrance against the Armies Petition; the
continuance of the Army under a settled pay, after their votes for disbanding
it; the owning this Army for their own, notwithstanding their tumultuary
proceedings; the putting of the Militia, and all forces of the Kingdom under
Sir Thomas Fairefax his command; after his and the Armies refusal to be
commanded by the Houses, or to obey their votes: The removal, and disposal of
the Kings Person, as the Army shall direct; the discountenancing, and
disperfing of those Officers and Soldiers, who, in obedience to their votes
deserted the Army; the Declaration against the introducing of Foreign Forces;
the Impeachment, Charge, and dismission of the eleaven Members, and the
altering of the Militia of London.

And were not things in like manner altered, acted, or consented unto by both
Houses, at the instance, interposition, or importunity, of the City formerly?

Then you tell us particularly.

What violation the Privileges of the House of Commons suffered, when the
eleaven accused Members were enforced Par. 2.
by the Army to withdraw themselves; after it was declared upon the Question.
That by the Laws of the Land no judgment can be given to suspend those
Members, nor any of them from sitting in the House upon the Papers presented
from the Army, before particulars produced and proofs made.

And were not the Privileges of the House of Peers, and the Laws of the Land
violated in like manner, when the Earl of Strafford, the Arch B shop of
Canterbury, and the 12 B shops were suspended from sitting in that House, and
committed first to the Black Rod, and afterward to the Tower, upon a general
charge only, and before particulars produced, and proofs made?

And is it not remarkable, that Mr. Glin, who accused those Bishops, and
desired the Lords that they might be Husb. p. 43.
forthwith sequestered from Parliament, and put into safe custody, should now be
sequestered, and committed upon the like accusation?

It is evident, what great influence the Army has throughout Pat. 3.
had upon the Counsels of the Parliament.

And has not the City had the like influence throughout, until of late they
were mastered by the power of the Army?

Although this Army be invested with the whole power of Par. 4.
the Land Forces of this Kingdom, under pay of the Parliament: And there is
nothing left that can probably make any considerable resistance: Yet they
demand the change of the Militia of the City of London, after it had been
established by Ordinance of Parliament, and desire it to be put into other
hands.

And although his Majesty offered to grant Commissions to those that they had
nominated to be Lords Lievtenants of the several Counties, for calling
together, Husb. 73. 91.
training, exercising, and conducting the Militia, or Trained See. par. 28.
Bands of the Kingdom, to resist invasions from abroad, and to suppress
Rebellions and insurrections at home, and so to defend, and secure the
Kingdom, then pretended by them to be in danger; yet the two Houses of
Parliament were not content therewith. Nor will the chief Authors, and
Promoters of the design now in Husb. 1^2.
hand, submit any longer to the Ancient form of Government, and administration
in this kind; but (aiming See par. 17.
rather to put the two Houses into a posture of inresistable power, then the
Kingdom into posture of sure defense) they require for them in effect the
whole power both in the disposition and in the execution of the Militia See the
Ord. for settling the Militia. Husb. 88.
of the Kingdom.

And (whatsoever they pretended) this their demand of the Militia, was not to
oppose any present insurrection, rebellion, or invasion; but to set up their
affected and See par. 18. 22. 32.
intended Domination. And their alteration of the settled order of the Militia
was not for the better securing See par. 7.
of the Kingdom, but for their better entering upon the Government, first in
the Militia, and afterward in other See the 19. Propositions. Husb. 307.
Witness their protection of Sir Jo. Hotham in the business of Hull. Husb.
152. 162
particulars by the power, and means of the Militia. And so have they to this
day executed the Militia accordingly, not to the suppressing of any
insurrections, rebellions, or invasions, attempted and made against the King,
and the Laws of the Land, and the established government of the Kingdom, (for
which at first it was ordained and instituted.) But to the settling, and
establishing of a pretended Sovereignty in the two Houses of Parliament, and to
the enforcing subjection to them, and obedience to their Votes, and Ordinanecs,
and submission to their usurped Dominion; and to the suppressing of all
opposition, Witness the Hothams, Mr. Carew, eleven Members. See par. 17.
whether at home, or from abroad, attempted, and made against them, their
design, their State, and government. And for these reasons, at first they
desired the Militia, and endeavored from time to time, to possess themselves
of it, and resolved not to give over, till by some means or other, they had
attained it, and rue modelled it, and the Government, and the Kingdom by See
the Propositions aforesaid.
it.

And having experience, how formerly the Army have ever Par. 5.
insisted upon any thing they once demanded, etc.

And have we not had the like experience of the City formerly?

And therefore being thus awakened by the unexpected and Far. 6.
undeserved interposition of the Army, in the Militia of the City etc.

As his Majesty was awakened by your interposition in Husb. 61. 94
the Militia of the Kingdom, which is the only safeguard and security of his
Person and Crown.

We could not in honor do less, than we have done to Par. 7.
preserve our interest in so great a part of our Government.

Nor could the King in honor do less then he did to preserve his interest in
so great a part of his government, as is the Militia of the Kingdom, which
indeed is nothing else but the power of the sword, which God has put into his
hands for the discharge of his Kingly Office, in protecting and governing his
people.

But if this vindication of our Right in the Militia of this Par. 8.
City, shall be thought by the Army to be a just cause to cast themselves upon
extraordinary courses; let God, the Kingdom, and the whole world be Judges
between them and us.

And let God, the Kingdonme, and the whole world be Judges between his
Majesty, and your Party, whether the vindication of his Right in the Militia of
the Kingdom, were a just cause to cast them upon those extraordinary courses
that they have taken.

Neither can we see why the Army should take notice of Par 9.
our Petition, and engagement, it being only intended to the Common Hall, but
never presented; even as the Petition of their Soldiery was to their General,
which being taken notice of by the Parliament, as it was in agitation, was then
so deeply resented by the Soldiery.

Neither can we see why the Parliament did take notice Husb. 563.
of Captain Legs Petition, heretofore prepared and intended only.

We declare unto the whole Kingdom the bottom of our hearts and affections,
as in relation to his Majesty, whom we Par. 10.
have always, and shall ever acknowledge to be our true and only Sovereign,
although his Royal Person has been divided from us.

Being driven away first by tumult, and afterward kept away by force of Arms,
and so not suffered either to stay with you in sasety, or return to you with
security.

We have with much longing attended what the Army Par. 11.
would propound concerning his Majesty in particular, according to the great
expectation which they have raised in the people, from that which they have
hinted in their Declaration, or representation, and other Papers of their
intentions toward his Majesty. But hitherto the time has been spent, and
nothing done, but to get the whole power of the Kingdom, and City into their
hands.

And did not the two Houses at the beginning in their Declarations pretend as
much for the King, only to get the power of the Kingdom into their hands?

We therefore do in the presence of Almighty God profess, that there is
nothing in the world that we more desire Par. 12.
then that his Majesty may be put and left free in such honorable condition and
capacity, as his Person may appear to be at liberty to receive, and treat,
upon such Propositions, as shall be presented unto him. For our consciences
tells us, that whilst his Royal Person is environed by an Army, and remains
under the power thereof we cannot expect that either his Majesty's Princely
heart can give that free assent unto those things which shall be propounded
unto him, as is requisite, or if he do, we cannot hope with good reason, that
we and our Posterity shall without alteration enjoy them.

And why is not the King as free to these intents, and purposes, under the
power of the Army, as when he was at Newcastle, or Holmby, or would have been,
had he been sent to Warwick Castle?

We cannot omit also to declare unto the Kingdom, how Par. 13.
we have sadly observed since the eleaven accused Members withdrew themselves,
that the Army has daily grown upon the Parliament.

Just as the City grew upon it, after they had driven away the King, and his
Party by tumults.

And we shall particularly insist upon the readmission of the eleaven Members
lately driven out of the House of Commons, Par. 14.
by the violent pursuit of the Army.

And why not for the readmission of the Members of both Houses pursued, and
driven away by tumults formerly?

We should express our selves farther to vindicate this Par. 15:
City before the Kingdom, from the aspersions that have been cast upon us, to
have been the first promoters and contrivers of this unnatural War.

And did not your money and plate (brought in upon Husb. 339. See par. 26.
the Propositions) raise the first Army, June 10 1642? And did not that Army
consist principally of Apprentices and others, living in, and about the City of
London?

But God is our witness, how desirous we have been at all Par. 16.
times and still are of a safe and well grounded peace. Witness your Petition
in August 1643. The story is this:

The House of Peers resolved on Propositions of See Par. 30.
peace to be sent to his Majesty, and they sent them to the House of Commons;
where they were carried by 29 voices; hereupon a Petition was framed By
Alderman Pennington, and others, and presented to the House of Commons, and the
Petitioners censure the Propositions as destructive of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties; and the Petition is attended by a great multitude of mean Persons,
who menaced, and reproached the Members of both Houses. And so the Propositions
formerly received, were rejected, and all thoughts of Peace laid aside.

And thus we have herein truly stated the matter of Par. 17.
difference (if it can be called any) between us and the Army, to wit this
alone, that we could not submit the Militia of the City to be altered at the
pleasure of an Army.

And this also was the matter of difference betwixt the King, and the two
Houses, to wit, that his Majesty could not submit the Militia of the Kingdom,
which is See Par, 4
inherent in the Crown, to be altered at the pleasure of a Party of Lords, and
Commons, abiding at Westminster, after that a Bill in the House of Commons, and
several motions to the Lords for that alteration, had been rejected, when
there was a full and free Convention of Parliament.

A Parallel of diverse passages in the Armies Remonstrance, of August 18. 1647.
When the adverse Forces and Garrisons within this Par. 18.
Kingdom, were dissipated and reduced, we found immediately the cross working
of a strong and prevalent party in the Parliament and Kingdom, who being men
of corrupt and private ends and interests, made use of their power to drive on
designs, to set up a party, and faction in the Parliament, and Kingdom, and
(by the advantage of a perpetual Parliament) to domineere over, and inslave
the Kingdom to posterity.

And did not his Majesty immediately after the Parliament assembled, find the
cross working of the same party? And did not he Declare them to be men of
corrupt and private ends, and to make use of their power to drive on designs,
to overthrow Monarchy, and to set up their Party, and to domineere over us, and
to inslave us to posterity? And did not his Majesty impeach them accordingly?
And did not you of the Independent way join with them in their Designs? And
are not some of your Party joined also in the Articles of impeachment? And at
this day is there not emulation between them and you for Pre-eminence; and
contention for the Rule and Government?

To which ends, as before this Parliament the ignominious Par. 1^.
names of Puritan, and Non conformists, were made use of; so they have used the
odious name of Brownists, Anabaptists, Independents, etc.

And for compassing of your ends, did not you and they, make use of the odious
and ignominious names of Malignants, ill affected, enemies to the State etc. to
blast those men who stood for the Laws of the Land, the right of the Crown,
the Legal Liberty of the Subject, and the just Privileges of Parliament?

In pursuance of their designs, they endeavored and prevailed Par. 20.
to put out of all places of power or public trust, the most sober and
conscientious men: and closing with a very powerful party in the City of
London, they first endeavored and prevayled to new model the Common Council,
and form it to their own Party.

And did not you and they, do the same from the beginning? Husb. 537.


By their continual violent and pressing importunity at the Par. 21.
Parliament doors, they wrung from the Parliament an Ordinance for altering
the Militia of the City, which has special influence upon the City, and
Kingdom, and Parliament itself.

And did not the like violence and importunity, at first extore the altering
the Militia of the Kingdom?

They cause the Militia of London to be put into the hands Par. 22.
of men given up and engaged to the private interest and designs of a factious
party. They designed, and went about to put the Kingdom to the expense and
trouble of raising and forming a new force, (under pretense) as for the service
of Ireland but indeed to serve their own ends, and purposes aforesaid, in
England.

And did nor you and they so from the beginning? Husb. 537.


Their endeavor was not only to put the Army off without Par. 23.
the honor and satisfaction due to it, for the service it had done, but to
disband it on such terms as to subject and expose them and their party unto
oppression and undoing.

And I wish that your not disbanding tend only to your own preservation, and
not to others oppressions and undoing.

Before our disbanding we desired also the settling of the peace Par. 24.
of the Kingdom, and the securing the common rights and liberties thereof,
which we were called out to defend and vindicate

And are not those common rights and liberties found in Magna Charta, and in
the Petition of Right? And do you defend and vindicate them? And is not Peace
the tranquillity of Order, Political peace the tranquillity of Political Order,
and of Monarchical in a Monarchy? And do you endeavor to settle the peace of
the Kingdom accordingly?

We hold most just equal, and necessary, the positive suspension Par. 25.
of those impeached Members, from sitting in the Houses as Judges in their own
cause, and from their power in Committees, whereby they had advantage to raise
war against us.

But you held the contrary in the case of the Members impeached by his Majesty.

And finding the impeached Members continue, in, and about Par. 26.
London, very active, and busy, to raise war, and make disturbances in the
Kingdom: and that the Committee of the Militia there did comply with them
therein etc.

And were not the five Members equally active and busy, and was there not the
like compliance between them and the City, in raising war against the King,
and disturbing the Kingdom?

We made a particular address to the Parliament: for Par. 27.
the restoring of the City Militia into those hands, in which it was before the
Ordinance of the fourth of May last, and for Repealing that Ordinance, by which
it had been changed.

And were not your addresses for restoring the Militia such as the Cities, for
altering it? I appeal to your own See Par. 21.
consciences, whether you made that proposal, with submission to a free
debate, and determination of Parliament, or not rather with a full resolution
to have it passed, and granted? And if need were, to Importune and press, the
passing and granting of it? I appeal also to the consciences of those that
passed it, whether they did not more look upon the parties interessed in the
business, then the business it self? And whether they did repeal their
former Act for any injustice in the Ordinance or not rather out of affections,
or cowardly compliance with the Army, then more prevalent then the City?

For the reasonableness of our desires, wherein we dare Par. 2^.
confidently appeal to all men, whether for the present safety and quiet of
the City, upon such a change, and to prevent those dangers, or disturbances,
to, or in the City, which the want of a Militia during the Intervall (betwixt
the ceasing of one, and new forming of another) might give occasion, and
advantage unto. And whether at a time when jealousies and disturbs were both so
rife and hurtful, there could be any proposal more reasonable, or hopeful, to
beget a confidence, and acquiescence, both in the Parliament, City, and Army,
then, etc,

And I dare confidently appeal to all men, whether for the safety and quiet,
of the Kingdom at that time, to prevent those dangers, or disturbances, to, or
in the Kingdom, which the want of a Militia, during intervall betwixt ceasing
of one, and new forming of another, might give occasion, and advantage unto:
And at that time, when jealousies and distrusts were rife, between the King
and the Parliament mutually, and really greater, Husb. 103.
on the Kings side, then on the Parliaments, there could be any Proposal more
reasonable, or hopeful to See Par. 4.
beget a confidence and acquiescence on both sides, then that which his
Majesty made, viz. To put the Militia of Husb. 91. 92. 134. 158.
the Kingdom into the hands of those, they had recommended to him; promising
also to continue the same, to such time as there should be cause. Besides, his
Majesty would have passed an Act, not to have done any thing, in the execution
of the Militia, without the advice of both Houses of Parliament, for a year,
hoping in that time, their Business might be done, for which at first, they
seemed to desire it, which was, that they might securely Husb. 54. 64.
consider of his Majesty's Message, of Jan. 20.

They did contrive and set on foot, in the City, and many Par. 23.
of them entered into a mischievous, and desperate Vow and Engagement, tending
to the subversion of the freedom of Parliament, and liberties of this Nation.

And have not you, and they, managed all your Vows, Protestations, and
Covenants, accordingly? For all those See par. 38.
ties and obligations, have not you invaded our freedom and libertyes,
whenever they stood in your way, and were opposite too, or hindrances of
your Designs? And when at any time, you undertook the vindication of them,
was it not done merely for your better advantage, and in order to your
Designs only?

On Monday, July 26. A Petition was brought to the Parliament Par. 30.
by the Sheriffs etc. for the returning of the Militia into those hands, in
which it was put by the Ordinance of the fourth of May which Petition was
imediately followed and backed with a tumultuous confidence of Apprentices, and
other dissolute and desperate persons, who committed most horrid and unheard of
violence upon both Houses etc. Neither did the Guard from the City, that then
attended the Houses, nor the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, nor any Authority in the
City, take any course to suppress the said Tumult, etc. And July 30. there
were printed Tickets fixed upon posts, in and about the City; inciting the same
persons to the like confluence at Westminster, against the Houses next sitting.
By which means, the Speakers of both Houses, together with most of the Lords,
and a very great number of the Members of the House of Commons, were driven
away, so as they could not with safety attend their service in Parliament, nor
with freedom discharge their Trust, to the Kingdom therein.

And were not Petitions attended and backed in like manner, and were there not
the like violencies and confluences formerly? And was there not as little care
taken by the City for suppressing them? And were there not Tickets fixed upon
posts, inviting the Multitude, to See par. 16.
accompany the aforesaid Petition, in August 1643? at the delivery whereof,
were not diverse Members of both Houses assaulted, viz. The Earls of
Northumberland, Holland, etc. And thereupon did not the Earls of Bedford, and
Holland, go away to Oxford, and Northumberland to Petworth? And did not
diverse other Members of both Houses withdraw themselves, because they could
not with safety attend their service in Parliament, nor with freedom discharge
their trust to the Kingdom therein?

Notwithstanding, diverse Members of both Houses, to Par. 31.
carry on their Designs, when very few were left, but of their own Party, did
continue to meet, in the usual places at Westminster, and took upon them the
name of both Houses of Parliament, and did proceed to Vote and Act as a
Parliament.

But have we not just such a Parliament, ever since the Tumults, 1541?

And first the said Members of the House of Commons, Par. 32.
called in as to the service of the House, the eleaven impeached Members: and
with this pretended House of Commons, and four or five Lords of the same
Model, for an House of Peers, they proceeded to set up a Committee for
safety, whereof all, or most of the impeached Members, were a part; and they
appoint themselves to join with the Committee of the City Militia, and they
gave them large powers for raising of Forces, appoynting chief Commanders, and
other Officers; and raising a new War in this Kingdom, in justification,
prosecution, and maintenance of their Treasonable Engagement, and of the forces
and violence done to the Parliament: and to oppose and hinder the Restitution
of the Houses of Parliament to their honor and freedom (though the pretenses
were for the defense of the King, Parliament, and See par. 37.
City, then alleged to be in danger, when indeed, none were in danger, but
only the authors, actors, and abettors, of the traiterous practices
aforesaid.) And this farther appeared hereby. That those very Apprentices,
Reformadoes, and others about the City, who were the chief actors in the said
Engagement, and Tumult, were afterward, most trusted, and employed, and most
active in their preparations for War.

And were not yours and their proceedings, in every circumstance, the same
formerly? After you had engaged your selves in the two treasonable Bills, to
take away from the King, the government of the Church, by Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. and to take out of his hand the Militia of the Kingdom, Did not you in
the first place endeavor to new model both Houses of Parliament? And did you
not raise tumults to that purpose? And did you not raise a war afterward, in
justification, prosecution, and maintenance of your Treasonable engagements,
and of the force and violence done to the Parliament, and to oppose and hinder
the restitution of the Houses of Parliament, to their honor and freedom, and
of his Majesty to his just Rights, Power, and Government, (though at that time
you pretended the defense of the King, Parliament, and City, then alleged to
be in danger, when indeed none were in danger, but only the authors actors,
and abettors of the traitorous practices aforesaid) and those very men, in, and
about the City, who were the chief actors in those engagements, and tumults,
were they not afterward most trusted, and employed, and most active in the
first preparations for war?

The true ends of all their proceedings were the same with Par. 33.
the said Treasonable engagement and tumult against the Parliament: all of them
conce^^ring (as in other things) so especially in this (viz.) to have the King
brought up to London, without delay, or any nearer approach of the Army.

As all their and your proceedings formerly concentred in this. To drive him
away from London, that so you might enter upon the government: and as at
present, your proceedings concenter in this, to keep him from London, and from
his government. But I see no reason why (if you please) his Majesty may not
forthwith return to London, for ought you remonstrate. For I suppose, you
insist not on the Resolutious of both Houses, and both Kingdoms in that case,
since they also Resolved that his Majesty should abide at Holmby, but you
seized his sacred person, and brought him thence. They resolved also, that his
Majesty should remove to Richmond, but you would not suffer him to go thither.
And whereas you proposed, That the King might not come nearer, then the
Quarters of the Army, to the City. You have now the City under your power, and
may Quarter in it at pleasure. Besides there is no doubt, upon the terms you
propose, but that the King will come to the Parliament, as you desire, not so
much in place, as in affection and agreement. Upon such terms as may render
both him and the Kingdom safe, quiet, and happy. And it is not likely, that his
coming upon these terms can produce greater disturbances and distractions,
but peace indeed, if you keep to your Remonstrance, and bottom your peace on
grounds of common and public welfare and security, and not shape and mould
it, only to the private advantage of a particular party, or faction.

And herein be sure to avoid what you charged upon the Presbyterians, That
they would make such a Peace with the King (if any) as would only serve to set
up and stablish their own greatness, and the affected domination of
themselves and their party over all others.

But to return to our purpose:

By what has been declared and published from us, and from the speakers, and
aforesaid Members of both Houses it may appear how maliciously, treacherously
and unworthily, we have been dealt withal by those our enemies, and by a
factious and powerful party (especially) in the Parliament and City combining
with them.

And to what has been published by his authority, and by the Lords and Commons
at Oxford (in their Diclaration of the 9 Mart. 1643. setting forth the reasons
of their going away from Westminster) it may appear, how they were dealt
withal, by both parties in the Parliament and City combining together.

The Houses being thus restored to a condition of present Par. 35.
safety, honor, and freedom, It is absolutely necessary that there be speedy
and exemplary justice done upon (at least) the chief authors and abettors of
the said treasonable engagement, and of the said force done to the Parliament,
and upon the chief actors, in maintenance and prosecution thereof.

Or rather upon the chief authors, abettors, and maintayners of the former
engagements, force and violence, which till done, the Houses cannot be restored
to their native and primitive safety, honor, and freedom.

The Right Honorable the House of Peers, have since their Par. 36.
Restitution, begun and proceeded to declare null and void all that was done in
the name of both Houses, while they lay under the power of the tumultuous
violence.

And consequently, they declare null and void all that has been done in the
name of both Houses, from Dec. 1641. to this present day, since the Parl. as it
was first convened, has all this time layen under the power of violence,
tumultuous or military.

Yet the House of Commons has not only not concurred Par. 37.
with the Lord, in any of those things, but rather seem to have cast them
aside: and the Members of that House, who after the violence done, and in the
absence of the Speakers, and others proceeding in the name of that House made
the pretended Votes Orders, and Ordinances aforesaid, and were the chief actors
thereupon, for levying of war, in prosecution and maintenance of the
engagements and tumults, being conscious of their own guilt and danger
thereby, and presuming on their interest in the House, endeavor to obstruct and
avoid the bringing of any to justice, who have acted under their pretended
authority, knowing it to be their own case and concernment, in See par. 32.
point of impunity, as well as conducing to their faction and interest: for that
cause they labor (as for life) to uphold the things past and done, and the
authorities given by them and their faction (in their and the Apprentices
Parliament,) yea and those very Votes wrested by force July 26. And they are
strengthened by the concurrence of diverse other Members also, who having
perhaps with harmless intentions) continued to sit with them, may yet fear
themselves to be involved in the same case and danger, by having sat with
them: And thus by the concurrence of both these parties, we find an absolute
obstruction to the bringing to justice or questioning of any who have acted as
aforesaid, but all seem to be either justified, or at least protected from
justice, by the power and prevalence of those Members in Parliament who are
many of them as we can make appear) equally guilty of, and others) in some
kind obnoxious for the same things.

And in point of the tumults, did not the same House in like manner refuse the
Motions, and oppose the Order of the House of Peers for repressing them? and
did not the guilty Members by their interest in the House, obstruct the
questioning of those that had acted in those Tumults, knowing it to be their
own case and concernment, in point of impunity, as well as conducing to their
faction and interest? and did not both your parties labor (as for life) to
uphold what was past and done in those tumults? yea and that very Vote in the
Lords House concerning the Militia Jan. 31. when that insolent and minatory
Petition of the poor people, in and about London, was after a more insolent
and minatory manner by M. Hollis enforced upon that House?

I should now or hereafter (while the Parliament sits) draw Par. 38.
off the Army from about the City, without exemplary justice upon some, would
not the same, or more dangerous tumults and violence probably return upon the
Parliament, especially. when they shall have before their eyes, the
encouragement of that impunity and protection which they have hitherto found
from within the Parliament it self, in the past practices before mentioned.

And is exemplary Justice to be now first done in this Husb. 531. 537. 561.
kind? did not his Majesty require it of you, and them, again and again,
many years since? And probably, may not the late force and violence fall upon
the Parliament, for want of exemplary Justice formerly, and by reason of that
encouragement of impunity and protection, which they evermore found within the
Parliament it self? And I wish you had been as careful in preserving the
freedom of Parliament heretofore, as you seem to be at present; or that you
had not been as industrous in violating it then, as you seem to be studious
in preserving it now: But that was done for the promoting, and this for the
advancing of your cause, and party, See par. 29.
and so this be done, whether with, or without the freedom of Parliament,
whether by the preservation, or violation of it, it matters not.

But what hopes of justice, or a timely dispatch, can we Par. 39.
have, whilst such a prevailing party of men interessed, and concerned in the
same things, shall in the House of Commons continue to be judges thereof, or at
least be ready to avow, and justify the offenders therein.

And for the same reason was not the King without hope of justice, against
those that were the authors and abettors of the former tumultuous practices and
proceedings?

We appeal to all men, whether it be just or tolerable, that Par. 40.
any privilege of Parliament should (centrary to the Law of Nature) make any
man judge in his own cause and concernment.

And yet have not you and they, merely by the privilege of Parliament,
contrary to the Law of Nature, made your selves Judges in all Causes from the
beginning, between the King, the two Houses of Parliament, and your selves?

And we do protest and declare that if any of those Members, Par. 41.
who during the absence of the Speakers, and the rest of the Members of both
Houses (forced away by the tumultuous violence aforesaid) did sit in the
pretended Houses, then continuing at Westminster, and Vote for the raising a
new War, or for the Kings coming forthwith to London shall hereafter intrude
themselves to fit in Parliamenc, we cannot any longer suffer the same.

And O that you had the like resentment, of the former force and violence, done
upon the Members of both Houses of Parliament: And that you had the like
indignation and resolution against those that drove them away from Westminster,
and afterward continued to sit and Vote there, for raising an Army, and
imbroyling the Kingdom in a most unnatural and bloody War: And observe,
whilst you bring to condign punishment, the chief Authors and Abettors of
the late Tumults, how divine Justice punishes the authors and abettors of the
first Tumults, (viz.) M. Hollis, M. Glyn, M. Long, etc. And you who have
followed the conduct of Divine providence, in some of your undertakings, and
from thence only seem to warrant them, why will you not follow that Divine
conduct in this also? Which as it is in it self warrantable, so it cannot but
be commendable in you, as tending merely to the execution of Justice, and not
to the advancing and promoting of a Party and Faction; nor is the hand of God
seen more in punishing of these Offenders, then it is in the composing of your
Remonstrance, which does set forth the first Tumults, to the life, in every
circumstance, and so you have a second call from God himself, as you prosecure
the late Tumults; so to undertake the prosecution of the former, so lively
represented, by your selves, to your selves, and to the whole World.

But we shall do that right to the Speakers and Members of Pat. 42.
both Houses, who were driven away to us, and to our selves with them, as to
take some speedy and effectual course, whereby to restrain them from being
their own, and our Judges in those things, wherein they have made themselves
Parties, and so to make way, that both they, and others that are guilty of, and
Parties to the aforesaid Treasonable and destructive practices, and
proceedings, against the freedom of Parliament, and peace of the Kingdom, may
be brought to condign punishment, and that at the judgment of a free
Parliament.

And O that you would make way that those who were guilty of, and Parties to,
the first Treasonable and destructive practices and proceedings, against the
freedom of Parliament, and peace of the Kingdom, may be brought to condign
punishment, by the due course of Law, which is the only true, and proper Judge
in this Case; And which your selves also intimate, in the foregoing Parallel
next but one. And whereas you speak of the judgment of a Free Parliament, for
my part, I think we have not had a Free Parliament, for almost these six years
last past, nor have at this day, not only in regard of the aforesaid Practices
and Proceedings, but also in regard of your Military, and Minatory Protestation
and Declaration in the preceding Parallel.

And in my observation, within these seven years last past, we have had four
Parliaments (such as they are.)

1. The Kings Parliament, assembled by his Majestyes Writ, Nov. 3. 1640. and
enjoying freedom of Vote till Dec. 1641.

2. The Cities Parliament, made by their tumults, and governed by their
Propositions and Petitions, from Dec. 1641. to Dec. 1643.

3. The Scots Parliament, made and governed, by their League and Covenant, from
Dec. 1643. to June 1647. all which time, the Presbyterians had the
predominancy; And of this constitution also was that which you call the
Apprentices Parliament.

4. Sir Thomas Fairfax Parliament, (lastly,) made and governed by his Army,
their Addresses, Declarations, and Proposals; wherein the Independents
predominate; and which may be called the Agitators Parliament.

Now of all these, the first only, was a Legal Parliament, and all the others
were Factious Assemblies only, conspiring against the Government of the
Church, and State; and in this conspiracy, the Presbyterians and the
Independents, joined together, till they had overthrown the King and his Party:
which done, they fell in pieces; and first, the Presbyterians strived to Out
the Independents, and to advance their faction in Parliament: And now the
Independents take their turn, and labor to Out the Presbyterians, and to
advance their Faction in Parliament; and each goes the very same way to Out the
other, as both at first did, to out the third party; and hence are their
latter, so suitable to their former proceedings: if yet, their latter forcible
practices may be called violations of the freedom of Parliament, or not rather
mutual counterworkings of the two factions to undermine and ruin one another.

But whether they agree or differ amongst themselves, they still pursue their
common cause against the King and Church, and prosecute those Members that
opposed them from the beginning, and oppress them daily more and more, and so
the Legal Parliament lies under the power of a continued force and violence to
this day.

And that not only in respect of those Members of Parliament, but also in
respect of the King the Head of the Parliament, whom they drove away by
Tumults, together with those Members; and afterward sent him those Bills to
Pass, touching the Bishops and the Militia, together with other Propositions
which they had passed in their pretended Houses of Parliament: and took up
Arms afterward to enforce him to submit to their Propositions, and to sign
their Bills: and (being resolved on their Design) would not accommodate upon
any other terms with his Majesty, but continue and pursue their war, until
they had overthrown the King, and his Party. Which done, his Majesty was first
at Newcastle under Custody of the Scots Army, then removed to Holmby, and there
guarded by a party, and now at last under the power of Sir Thomas Fairfax his
Army, and pursued and pressed continually, with the same Bills and Propositions
as formerly. Which if his Majesty shall James. 4. 1, 2, 3.
finally refuse (as in Honor and conscience grant them he cannot) then (which
God avert) they are likely to make further use of their power and force upon
his Majesty, and so make up the measure of their iniquity. Which done, they will
turn their force upon the people, and set up their Government over them, and
(having now got the whole strength of the Kingdom) compel them to submit to
it, and to pay such Taxes as they shall impose, and undergo such Services, as
they shall enjoine, and do whatsoever they shall please to command, for the
settling and establishing their Government, and so make up the measure of their
tyrany. And an evidence of their intentions, and resolutions in this kind, we
have in their late proceedings with the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen, and Citizens
of London, and that breach made upon the City, what does it else but portend an
inundation of slavery upon the whole Kingdom?

Thus their whole action has been forcible, and violent, tumultuary, and
military, and destructive of Monarchy, and of the freedom of Parliaments, and
of the Liberty of the English Nation: and Monarchy and Liberty are determining
together, and Poliarchy and Slavery coming in together. Let our strength be the
Law of justice. 2. Wis. 11. Read the Chap.

But the people hoped when Cornet Joyce and his Company first obtained his
Majesty, and expected that those Champions of Liberty, and of the freedom of
Parliament, would forthwith have brought his Majesty to his two Houses of
Parliament, with freedom, honor, and safety, according as they intimated See
Par. 11.
in their Declarations, Representations, Remonstrances, and other Papers.

So spoke ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty.
Ia. 2. 12
And because fears and jealousies are rife, by reason of your innate and
avowed Principles, and extraordinary Military preparations, Let me propose (for
the satisfaction and security of the People, both in point of Regality and
Liberty) that in the mean time, till peace be settled, the several Countyes
and Corporations in the Kingdom, may elect and nominate the Commissioners for
their respective Militia's: And that such their choice and nomination, may be
free and absolute, without the interposition of the Parliament or Army, or any
member of either, because they are the parties against whom the security is
demanded: And heerby they shall be assured of your good intentions to the
public, and of your loyalty and fidelity to the King and Kingdom, and of
peace indeed by the Treaty.

FINIS.

