A REFORMATION OF SCHOOLS, DESIGNED IN two excellent Treatises: The first
whereof Summarily shows, The great necessity of a general Reformation of
Common Learning. What grounds of hope there are for such a Reformation. How it
may be brought to pass.

The second answers certain objections ordinarily made against such
undertakings, and describes the several Parts and Titles of Works which are
shortly to follow.

Written many years ago in Latin by that Reverend, Godly, Learned, and
famous Divine Mr. JOHN AMOS COMENIUS, one of the Seniours of the exiled Church
of Moravia: And now upon the request of many translated into English, and
published by Samuel Hartlib, for the general good of this Nation.

LONDON, Printed for MICHAEL SPARK senior, at the Blew Bible in Green Arbor,
1642.

A REFORMATION OF SCHOOLS.
To all those that love Wisdom, Light, and Truth, Health, and Peace from
Christ, the fountain of them all.
Wisdom is said (by Aristotle) to be the knowledge of many and by mavelous
things: (Cicero) the knowledge of divine and humane things, as also of the
causes in which they are contained: (by Solomon) the maker and teacher of all
things: which with how great praises it has of old been celebrated, those who
have spent any endeavors in the study of it, cannot be ignorant. The wisest of
men says, It is more precious than Rubies, and all the things thou can
desire are not to be compared unto it. Length of days are in her right hand,
and in her left hand riches and honor. Her ways are ways of pleasantness,
and all her paths are peace. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold on
her, and happy is every one that retains her, Prove. 3. 15. Cicero says,
There neither is, nor can be any better gift bestowed upon mankind. But Horace
goes further: Ad summum, sapiens uno minor est Jove, dives,
Liber, honoratus, pulcher, Rex denique Regum.
I Will speak't at once. The wiseman yields to Jove above or none,
He Is rich, and free, esteemed, and fair, and King of Kings alone.


If you ask the cause, why this one virtue is so much magnified, Seneca will
answer, That without the study of wisdom it is impossible to lead an happy, or
even an indifferent life. And Cicero says, That wisdom is the mother of all
Arts, teaching us first how to worship God, then how to observe justice in
humane society, and also framing our minds to modesty and magnanimity: She
drives away darkness from our mind's, as it were from our eyes, that we may
discern all things both above us, and below us, and things of all orders,
natures, and degrees whatsoever: and lastly, that she is the only sovereign
medicine of the mind. And Solomon adds, that Wisdom strengthens the wise
man more than ten mighty men, that are in the City, Eccles. 7. 19. And that
wisdom is a treasure unto men that never fails, which they that use, become
the friends of God, being commended for the gifts, that come from learning. For
God loves not any, but him that dwells with wisdom, Wisd. 7. 14, 28.

Not without good cause therefore have the most excellent men in all ages,
neglected the care of transitory things, as of riches, pleasures, and honors,
applying their desires, and endeavors to this end, that by a serious
contemplation of all things, they might comprehend whatsoever the mind of man
is capable of, and so bring the whole world into a kind of subjection unto
themselves: which kind of men in respect of others, are indeed (as the gift of
wisdom all we owe unto his goodness; for he has moreover preserved unto this
our age the knowledge of humane learning, by which the study of wisdom is
cherished, and transmitted unto us from our Progenitors; yea and has made it
to flourish more now, than ever heretofore. So that this present age may in
respect of learning justly take content, and pleasure in its self, expecting
still a further discovery of its light, and luster. For it must needs be in the
world, as it is with man, that wisdom comes not before old age, which we may
easily see, if we consider the nature of it. For wisdom is gained by much
experience: and experience requires length of time, and variety of
occurrences. Now the longer a man lives, the more varieties still pass by
him, whence his experience is increased the more, and by his experience his
wisdom, according to that of Jesus the son of Syrach, A man of experience
will think of many things: And that of the Poet, Per casus varios Ariem
experientia fecit,
Chance hinteth many useful things,
Which to an Art experience brings.


We therefore in this presentage being so well stored with experiences, as no
former ages could have the like, why should we not raise our thoughts unto some
higher aim? For not only by the benefit of Printing (which Art God seems,
not without some Mystery, to have reserved to these latter times) what soever
was ingeniously invented by the Ancients (though long buried in obscurity) is
now come to light: but also modern men being stirred up by new occasions, have
attempted new inventions: and Wisdom has been, and is daily miraculously
multiplied with variety of experiments. According as God has foretold of these
latter times, Dan. 12. 4. Whereunto may be added the erecting of Schools every
where more, then any Histories record of any former ages: whereby books are
grown so common in all Languages and Nations, that even common country
people, and women themselves are familiarly acquainted with them; whereas
formerly the learned, and those that were rich, could hardly at any price
obtain them. And now at length the constant endeavor of some breaks forth to
bring the Method of studies to such a perfection, that whatsoever is found
worthy of knowledge, may with much less labor, then heretofore, be attained
unto. Which if it shall succeed (as I hope) and that there be an easy way
discovered of teaching all men all things, I see not what should hinder us from
a thankful acknowledgment, and hearty embracing of that Golden Age

To the attaining whereunto one matter of special moment seems yet to be
wanting, that as a more compendious, useful, and easy way of teaching the
tongues has lately been found out, and published (in the Janua Linguarum;) so
also some means should be thought of for the making of an open gate unto the
things themselves, whereby men's minds may find an easy entrance into all Arts
and Sciences whatsoever. Which how necessary, and worthy of our most serious
thoughts it is, (if we tender as we ought, the good of mankind) I will first
demonstrate: next I will consider of the means for accomplishing so worthy a
design: and lastly I will discover upon what occasion, and with what success
I my self have attempted so rare a work.

And first I take it for granted, that the studies of learning, to which Youth
is every where set, ought to be the dressing and culturing of their minds
toward the attaining of Wisdom, without which end it can be nothing else but
mere vanity. For whether we seek knowledge for curiosity, or to please, and
delight our mind, or to raise our selves in esteem, and credit in the world,
or as the means to better our outward estates, and fortunes, we are too
grossly minded to propose so base, and temporary ends to a gift so high, and
so divine. It must therefore be agreed upon, Wisdom 7. 22. it is evident, that
learning ought to be used, and improved as the means to bring us unto the
universal knowledge of all things, (unto Pansophie, that is, a Wisdom every
way complete, both in the largeness of its extent, and in its perfect
agreement with it self) that we be not ignorant of any thing which is secret,
or known, Wisd. 7. 21. That so man's mind may become indeed, as it ought to be,
the image of God, who knows all things.

Secondly, whereas Wisdom is said to give unto the young man ^nowledge and
discretion, Prove. 1. 4. and that her ways are ways (...)easantnesse, Prove. 3.
17. it is manifest, that the studies of Wis(...)ght not to be involved in any
intricate, and thorny difficulties, but plain, and easy to be apprehended by
all; yea, delightful to their minds.

Thirdly, whereas the ways of Wisdom are said to be a shining light, Pro. 4.
18. it follows that they ought to be free from all darkness of errors.

Fourthly, Wisdom is said to be useful unto men for the understanding of
their ways, (Prove. 4. 18, 19.) and all things that they do, Deuteronomy. 29. 9. It
follows therefore, that the studies of Wisdom ought to prepare men's minds for
doing, and suffering of all things incident to this life.

Lastly, Wisdom is said to make men happy, Prove. 3. 13. because

Now then let us examine whether the common course of studies be suitable to
these ends, that if we find any defects therein, we may thereby know the better
what is to be amended.

It is the common complaint of many, that the learning which is now taught in
Schools, is a thing too tedious, and long in regard of the shortness of life,
too laborious for common capacities, too narrow in respect of the amplitude of
things, and in regard of the subtilty, and solidity of their truth many ways
defective. And the wiser sort have noted, that it is not answerable to the
proposed end; seldom attaining to any substantial uses of life, but rather
ending in the smoke of opinionative brawlings, and contentions: which that
they are not idle sayings and surmises, but even real defects, we must first
declare, before we undertake to seek remedies to redress them. We must, I
say, make it good, that the studies of learning, as they are now managed, and
commonly taught in Schools, are not well proportioned.

1. To our life: in regard of their tedious prolixity. 2. To our capacities: in
regard of their difficulty. 3. To things themselves: in regard of often
mistakings. 4. To the Use of life: because of the great difficulty of reducing
things therein taught into practice, and of reconciling and applying them to
things that are to be done in this life. 5. To God himself: they being not
sufficiently subordinate to the scope of eternity.
The first argument of their prolixity I take from the common confession of
all. For who is there that has not usually in his mouth that saying of
Hippocrates, Life is short, but Art is long? The second argument is from the
greatness of the books, in which things are described. Good God! what vast
volumes are compiled almost of every matter, which if they were laid together,
would raise such heaps, that many millions of years would be required to
peruse them? Thirdly, it is manifest enough, that learning is too far
diffused, and scattered about, beyond the model, and reach of men's capacities,
seeing that among so many learned men, with which the world is replenished,
scarce one of an hundred, or of a thousand is to be found, who has tasted of
Universal learning, and is able to give any reasonable account of all
occurrents that are to be found in divine works, and humane affairs. So rare
is the generality of learning, even in those that are held to be learned, that
a man of much learning, or of much reading, is reputed almost for a miracle.
Hence comes that (so commonly used) parcelling and tearing of learning into
pieces, that men making their choice of this, or that Art, or Science, take no
care so much, as to look into any of the rest. Divines there are, that will
not vouchsafe to cast an eye upon Philosophy: and Philosophers again, that
things, but that I rest well assured, that every one may, and should, as be
eminent in his own profession, so also know all things that are necessary.

II. The difficulty (I mean, that it is not easy for men to attain, even
unto such particular parcels of learning, as they make choice of for
themselves) is too notorious by frequent testimonies. First, by the common
complaints, not only of youth, who are learners, but even of their Masters,
and Teachers. Then by those stripes, lashings, and outcries, wherewith Schools
continually ring. Whereas the holy Scripture commends Wisdom, and the study
thereof to be delightful: and the Ancients seem to have so esteemed them,
terming Schools (...) Otium.
Scholas, and ludos literarios, meaning, that the study of learning was but a
pleasant paines-taking, or serious recreation. What a monstrous thing is it
then, that such pleasures are turned into pressures, and such pastimes into
torments? Whence, I say, can this proceed, but from the difficulty of making
any progress according to our present method of teaching? For it is that which
makes the study of learning, not only laborious, but even nauseous, that the
greater part of such as are set unto it, abandon it, and forsake it, never
minding to return there to gather flowers, where they have encountered with so
many thorns. And common practice also will prove the same: For who can be
ignorant how much easier it is to learn a Language by use among those that
speak it, then in the Schools (which is the common way) where it is hardly
learned in many years? And even the same advantage might we make use of in
attaining of knowledge in things themselves, which yet has not hitherto been
put in practice.

III. Many wise men have long since observed, that the truth of the Sciences is
but lame, and unperfect, and thereupon have vented forth frequent complaints of
those deep gulfes, wherein it is plunged: Yea, some over-conscious of their
imperfections, have Nihil sciri posse (i. certo and sine errore) That nothing
could be certainly known. Which saying, they that (upon confidence of their
own firm, and stable knowledge) did deride, and hiss at, as a dotage, and
folly, yet have in the event themselves almost confirmed it to be true. For
whatsoever any one of them affirmed, others were presently ready to gainsay
it. And even unto this day there is no end of their perplexities. For Learning
is full of nothing but dissentions, contradictions, and wranglings. Which, what
can it be else, but astrong testimony, that the truth thereof every where
staggers, and is unstable For by this very argument Josephus (against Apion)
asserteth the truth of the Wisdom of the Hebrews, and proves the vanity of
that of the Greeks, because the former continued always one and the same, but
the other was divided into many Sects. For Truth always retains one simple,
and native form: but errors walk in a thousand shapes. Seeing therefore, that
in this our age also there arise so many Sects, both in Divinity, and
Philosophy, and so many contrary opinions are tooth and nail defended, which
differ from themselves, as much as light from darkness; what is it but a most
certain testimony, that all the learning our age can yet make boast of, is
deeply plunged in the darkness of ignorance? Since the judgment of Charity
presupposes, that none does err willingly contrary to his knowledge, or
rebelleth against the light, as Job speaks, chap. 24. verse. 13. The last
testimony hereof shall be those many

IV. Learning as it is commonly taught, is not enough accommodated to the uses
of our life; and of this we have notable witnesses. Philosophy, says a famous
man, is imprisoned in the Schools, neither is there any man that brings it
forth to common use: for it is full of thorns, and busied altogether in tying
of such knots which cannot be loosed, and in raveling out, what her self has
woven. She feeds men with nothing but gravelly bread, such as breaks the
teeth, and tireth out men's wits with trifles, and vanities, which are full of
stings. Another says, that the study of Philosophy is nothing else but (otium
occupatum, and impeditum) a busy, and distracted vacation to no purpose. And
like as Squirrels that are shut into a turning cage, how fast soever they
tumble forward, yet are they no farther then they were: so is it with us
Philosophers: we learn but little, though we take great pains, and that
little seldom makes us better, but worse. That which common experience proves
to be true: For not only do the learned seldom excel those that are
illiterate in the study of Virtue (which is the Basis of civil conversation)
but also in the dextrous managing of businesses they are for the most part
excelled by them. I speak it not only of a few odd Grammarians, for the most
part the deepest Philosophers, and Divines, though they seem Eagles to
themselves, with their abstracted speculations, yet are they as blind as Moles
in matters of this life, and of humane society. Hence arose that scoffing
proverb, Bonus Scholasticus, malus Politicus, A good Scholar, and a bad
Common-wealths-man: whereas indeed the School ought to prepare us for things
incident to our lives.

But to particularize a little: every one knows how the study of Metaphysics
is praised, and even extolled unto Heaven, as the firmest groundwork and
highest accomplishment of all Learning. And if we consider aright of it, so it
is. Yet because this Queen of Sciences is so beset with thorns, and so
involved in obsurity, that few can reach unto those subtilties, and those that
understand them, know not how to make any use of them in inferior Sciences, it
comes to pass, that it rests, and dies with it self, and, except a little
momentary and tickling pleasure which it yields to those that do affect it, it
is of very little use in humane affairs. Whereupon, some do not only forsake
it, and utterly exclude it out of the compass of Philosophy, (as the Ramists
do) but even out of Universities, as an unprofitable, and fruitless vanity.
For Johannes Angelius Werdenbagen witnesses, that the King of Sweden, Gustavus
Adolphus, of famous memory (whose exploits testify, that he was not borne to
trifling, but to serious action) did by a public edict exterminate all studies
of the Metaphysickes out of his Kingdom, so that no Booksellers might cause
any such books to be imported upon pain of confiscation, nor any of his
subjects might read them, lest his Kingdom should be bewitched with a new
kind of Barbarism, and himself served with disputers, and glossers in stead
of such, as would thoroughly follow his affairs.

The study of Logic and Rhetoric should indeed be more appropriated unto
the affairs of our life, seeing they are intended as directors of reason, and
speech, on which two bonds all humane things so much depend. But the testimony
of Jacobus Acontius is too truly verified: There is every where, says he, a
great number of Logicians, but if you observe their writings, and disputations;
you will find but little Logic in them. And again, You may observe many well
seen in Rhetoric, whose speeches and orations, though they be copious,
elegant, well trimmed, and significant, yet you will find the strength and
power of persuasion wanting. And we may pass the same judgment of the other
Arts and Sciences: that we are rather busied and detained about them, than that
they do any ways promote the business of our life.

V. Lastly, to prove that our studies of learning are not yet so ordered, as to
lead us the true, and certain way toward our end, which is God, what need is
there of any witnesses? The profaneness, Jer. 14. 22. And to such their
wisdom is but a guide unto destruction: Hence is that voice from God, that
not many wise are chosen, because the wisdom of this world is foolishness
with God. Indeed that this sentence may not fall flat upon our selves, we use
to interpret it of the wisdom of the Gentiles, but yet we our selves seek
not for any farther wisdom. For that which the Schools have hitherto
commended to us, is derived from Gentilisme, and infected with serpentine
venom, affecting only the knowledge of good and evil, which puffs up, but
not conducing to charity, which edifieth. And because we are according to our
hereditary perverseness readier always to excuse, than to amend our faults; we
grow moreover, by pretending the corruption of our nature, to flatter and
content our selves; as if it were impossible to be again transformed, since we
are thus depraved. As if the fear of the Lord ought not to be an antidote
against that corruption, which God has so often pronounced to be both the
beginning, and the end of

I. A business never coming to an end. II. A most troublesome distraction of
men's minds. III. A road of perpetual by-waies, and errors. IV. An hindrance
to the affairs of our lives. V. And lastly, an occasion of our manifold
wanderings out of the ways of God, which is most to be lamented.
Many worthy men have in former times been much affected with this hard
condition of learning, and learned men, and according to their several fancies
have sought several ways to salve this sore: some being of opinion, that all
that ancient learning borrowed from the Gentiles, was to be quite rejected:
others, that Philosophy, and the other Arts were to be used sparingly, and
with much care, and choice: some have attempted the transforming, and altering
of all the Sciences, one after this manner, another after that. And indeed it
is more than necessary, that all such, as are able to afford any aid or
counsel in this matter, should put to their helping hands. First, that that
little knowledge, which common learning supplies us with, may not cost us so
much sweat and pains, or if we are willing to employ our labors therein, that
they may be more beneficial and profitable to us.

And again, that we may vindicate our selves and learning from the reproach of
the illiterate rout, who (while they behold such as

But because it is a rash thing to undertake the cure of any disease, before we
have found the true cause of it, let us now make trial, whether we can epsy,
and make discovery of the true roots and grounds of this so great a mischief
that learning groaneth under: that so we may the more safely apply fit remedies
thereto: I will therefore give you a true account of those things which I
conceive to be the causes of the forementioned evils, and withal what may be
done for the rectifying thereof.

I. The Prolixity of studies, as they are commonly ordered, seems Prolixity.
to arise from three grounds; First, because there is not care enough taken to
leave out unnecessary things from among those which are necessary; for thence
according to Seneca's complaint, we are ignorant of necessary things, because
we busy our selves too much in learning those things, which are not necessary.

And if these things should be sequestered from our studies, we should have
twice as much time, (to speak at the least) or but half as much task to do.
Now these things are to be accounted unnecessary. First, whatsoever is not of
the essence of learning, of which sort are the most part of the vanities of the
Gentiles, the name of their petty Deities, together with their lying histories,
and fables. Next, such things as weary out men's brains to little benefit, of
which sort are most of the rules of Grammar, which overburden childrens minds,
and consume their years, and other things of like nature, which have no use
but only in Schools. Lastly, all circumlocutions, and windings, and turnings
of expressions, which fetch not out the kernel, but only make a few assayes
upon the shell. Such kind of stuff is it, wherewith most of our books of
learning swell, which must needs both detain and strain the minds of youth
with unnecessary, and unprofitable things; what wonder then can it be, that so
few attain unto any solid, and substantial learning?

The remedy for these things will be to compose a Seminary of learning of such
things, and words, as are of solid, true, and certain use: For you shall have
as great increase of one acre of ground sown with clean wheat, as if you
should mix ten times as much chafe therewith, and sow it in ten acres.

II. Secondly, because the study of learning is such an intricate, and
confounding labyrinth, that few can find the way out of it; such a sea as
swallows up those, who would go about to empty it; which proceeds from hence,
that those things which are to be learned, are not yet reduced into any clear
and certain order. Now these things which being collected together make but a
small heap, if they be scattred in sunder, seem very many, and breed a great
confusion.

The remedy for this will be to bring all things both great, and small, which
are to be learned, into such a perspicuous order, that students may have them
before their face, as plain as their own fingers, and that they may from the
first beginning have somelight of that, which follows unto the end, and be
assured that this one ship which they lanch forth in, will carry them over the
whole Sea of learning unto the ports of desired perfection.

III. Thirdly, another ground of the vastness, and prolixity of the study of
learning is that needless diligence of some in following all sorts of vain,
and trifling nicities. For there is no end, nor measure of such things, either
in things themselves, or words, seeing the chances, and sports both of wit, and
nature are infinite, therefore such as set themselves about the particular
descriptions of things in whatsoever Science or Art it be, whether it be to
take pains therein, or to please and humor their own fancies, they may indeed
take a pleasant and delightful journey to their minds, but of necessity, it
will hinder them in, if not lead them out of the way of universal wisdom:
yea, and there will be scarce any room left for other things, when their minds
are thus possessed with particulars of one kind.

The Remedy hereof is to frame such a book, wherein by a true Anatomy of the
universe, all things that can be thought of may be reduced to their general
kinds and species: and so, that whatsoever is to be said of any thing, may at
once be said of all things, whereof it can be said. By this means we shall
find all things both better grounded and more contracted, even beyond our
hopes: because the understanding being by a few rules freed from an infinite
number of hops and bars, will run through and dive into all things of its
own accord. Seneca says truly, Precepts of wisdom need not to be many, but
rather efficacious; they are to be used as seed, which though it be small, yet
if it find a fit soil, it quickly displayes it is own virtue, in a numerous,
and vigorous increase from one only small grain.

As for the difficulty and roughness of the ways of study, I think
Difficulty.
the causes thereof are these.

I. First, because there has not been used a due preparation of the minds of
youth, for the readier embracing of learning, neither has profit and pleasure
been sufficiently proportioned, and mixed together for the winning of them, but
every one is taken in as he comes without farther care. And for their
entertainment, they have of their method; which will cause the studies of
learning to be nothing else, but enticing baits, and mere recreations.

II. Secondly, a great part of this difficulty lies herein, that things are not
presented unto the very eyes and hands of those that are learners, but rather
delivered to them in vast, and dull narrations, which make little impression
upon the understanding, and are hardly retained by the memory: so that they
either easily vanish again, or only a confused species of them remains.

The remedy hereof will be to represent every thing to its proper sense,
visible things to the eyes, things that may be tasted to the palate, and so for
the rest. For by once looking upon an elephant, or at least, upon his picture,
a man shall more easily, and firmly apprehend The eyes make true report unto
the mind,
But ears are duller, and come far behind.


III. The third and chiefest part of this difficulty lies in the common method
of teaching the Arts, and Sciences, which is neither well proportioned to
things themselves, nor to humane understanding. It is indeed the common voice
of all, that we ought according to the order of nature to proceed from those
things, which are first, to those that follow, from generals to those which
are more special, from things known to those which are more obscure. But who
is there, that takes this course? For as yet no such thing has been practiced.
Except but only the Mathematics, and all other Arts and Sciences are
confounded by (...). It is easy for him that is but provided of feet, to
clime to the top of the highest mountain, if there be steps cut out in it: and
if those books, which are extant, did but lead our minds by degrees without
any interruption from known things to those which are more obscure, it would
be as easy for all those that bend their endeavors to learning, to attain to
the most difficult, and excellent knowledge. Indeed some have the prerogative
of able parts, and can by maine strength raise themselves, and pierce into
things by the sharpness of their native wits; others by often inculcation of
the same things, at last begin to see things, as through a cloud: but if we
cast up the general sum, we shall find very few, that can make any thing to
purpose of those

The remedy hereof will be by laying such a platform of all the Arts and
Sciences, that we may always begin with such things as are known, making a
gentle progress unto those that are unknown; I mean, that every thing may
shine upon, and give light to that which follows, even as in a chain, every
link receives and draws its fellow after it, which if we can but prescribe a
right order for the due effecting of it, we shall think our time to be
bestowed to very good purpose.

The reason why Truth is so estranged, and scarcely to be found Want of Truth.
in the whole compass of the Sciences, seems to be threefold.

1. The tearing of Sciences into pieces. 2. Want of due fitting of the method
unto the things themselves. 3. The carelessness, and extravagancies of
expressions and style.
For first, I profess seriously, that as yet in all the books that ever I
saw, I could never find any thing answerable unto the amplitude of things; or
which would fetch in the whole universality of them within its compass:
whatsoever some Encyclopaedias, or Syntaxes, or books of Pansophy, have
pretended to in their titles. Much less could together. For while every one
follows his own fancy in this manner there is as much hope of agreement, as
there is in a company of Musicians, when every one sings his several song
without respect of common time or melody: and who would believe a Commonwealth
to be well ordered, wherein there are no public laws established, but every
one lives as he lists? We see the boughs of a tree will quickly wither, and
die, except they receive nourishment from the common stock, and roots: and can
the fair branches of Wisdom be thus rent and torn in sunder with safety of
their life, that is their truth? Can any man be a good Naturalist, that is not
seen in the Metaphysics? or a good Moralist, who is not a Naturalist? (at
least in the knowledge of humane nature) or a Logician, who is ignorant of
real Sciences? or a Divine, a Lawyer, or Physician, that is no Philosopher? or
an Orator, or Poet, who is not accomplished with them all? He deprives
himself of hands, and eyes, and rules, that neglects, or rejects any thing
which may be known. Astronomers (for example sake) would never have had the
faces to introduce, and maintain such contrary, and absurd hypotheses, or
positions, if they had been to raise them upon the same ground of Truth:
neither would other things be, or at least seem to be so slippery, and
uncertain. For the common fate of all learning Plato's philosophy seemed most
elegant, and divine: but the Peripateticks accused it of too much vain
speculation. And Aristotle thought his Philosophy complete, and trim enough:
but Christian Philosophers have found it neither agreeing with the holy
Scriptures, nor answerable enough to the Truth of things. Astronomers for many
ages carried away the bell with their Spheres, Eccentricks, and Epicycles, but
Copernicus explodes them all. Copernicus himself framed a new and plausible
Astronomy out of his Optic grounds, but such as will no way be admitted by the
unmovable principles of natural Truth. Gilbertus being carried away with the
speculation of the Loadstone, would out of it have deduced all Philosophy: but
to the manifest injury of natural principles. Campanella triumphs almost in
the principles of the ancient Philosopher Parmenides, which he had reassumed to
himself in his natural Philosophy, but is quite confounded by one Optic
glass of Galilaeus Galilaei. And why should we reckon any more?

Truly, if every one would ground their judgments upon the same common
principles, it could not be, that they should rush into such contradictions,
not only to the hinderance of their hearers, but even to the detriment of
Truth, which for the most part in such contentions falls to the ground. For
when needles, obscure, and ambiguous things are propounded, they cannot but
breed distaste, and thwarting in the minds of those that hear them. And when
for the gaining of their assents, principles are assumed, (whatsoever trash
they be) which are neither known, nor yielded, nor of undoubted truth, but
rather obnoxious to several limitations, and exceptions (of which sort are
most of the Canons of common Philosophy and Divinity) what can ensue from
hence, but most tedious contradictions, and contentions? that a man would be
weary to hear such doubts, and differences, in things perhaps clear enough of
themselves.

Another course therefore must herein be taken, and care must be had, that Truth
approaching us in a most clear light, may not be mired in doubts, nor wounded
with contradictions, but may over come all errors: which we think cannot be
effected, unless the beams thereof dispersed over all things, be united into
one, that so there may be one and the same symmetry of all things, both
sensual, intellectual, and revealed. Now this we cannot behold without a
perfect squaring, and unseparable consolidation of the principles of knowledge
(Sense, Reason, and Divine Revelation) which alone will make it

2. The second cause, why Truth is so staggering, and uncertain, I before
declared to be the looseness of Method, that Writers do not wholly tie
themselves unto the things themselves, to deliver them, as they are constantly
in themselves, but rather draw them unto some trim and neat conceits of their
own to express them by, abusing them a thousand ways: which is nothing else,
but to wrest and transfigure things from their native, into strange forms,
even in face of the mind: and what then can it behold, but monsters in stead of
things themselves? Again, it is impossible to find any Method parallel unto
things, unless all things be reduced unto the

I wish therefore that all these straggling methods fancied by luxuriant
brains might be quite removed out of the way, that at last all things might be
handled in one order, and method. For such is our Christian Philosophy, or
rather Pansophy, which we labor to promote, that therein all things arise out
of unmovable principles, unto unmovable, and stable Truth, so knitting and
clasping one another with the arms of their perpetual harmony, that this
work of the mind is as little subject to fall in sunder, as the world it
self. So that as the world is not ordered at our discretion, but proceeds on
immutably according to the laws implanted in it: in like manner Pansophy,
which is nothing but the glass or mirror of the Universe should be delivered
in such a method, from which there is no starting aside, if a man would even
burst himself with desire of change, or disagreement. Which will be effected
if all things be delivered demonstratively by their proper causes and effects.
But hereto it will be requisite not to trust to external testimonies, and
traditions, held for Oracles, but that rejecting all false spectacles, we may
look nearly unto things themselves, and by a diligent-search discover, what
they will own themselves to be. For wise, and able men have many times uttered
such things as sound of levity, and vanity, which notwithstanding men-admirers
admit promiscuously, and adore. It were easy enough to produce many examples
hereof, but I forbear, hoping, that when once a clearer light of Truth is
kindled, abundance of such things will lie open of themselves.

3. The third thing whereby Truth is prejudiced, is, as I said, either the
carelessness, or luxuriance of the style wherein things are expressed. We call
that a luxuriating style, when in the explication of things, improper,
tropicall, hyperbolicall, and allusive words or sentences, and expressions are
used: especially when Poets, or Orators (and sometimes Philosophers and
Divines acting their parts) falling upon any subject, which they would
amplify, or extenuate

I may therefore boldly affirm, that the original, and continual cause of
errors in learning, is that unhappy Triplicity whereof I have spoken, I mean
that diverse sundring; that diverse transplacing, and changing; and lastly, that
diverse moulding and mixing of things. For who can understand things as they
are, while they are presented but in snatches and pieces? while they are out of
their proper Series and order? while they are under a strange form? For it is
easy to err in any particular object, while the general symmetry of all
things is unknown; and while their Series, or order Chaos of books, that the
world is scarce able to contain them. Hence is that penury, and want of light
in this enlightened age, (as it will be termed) that as Tantalus in the water
seeks for water; so we seek for light in light, and in books, want books,
yea, and learning in the learned. I will not insist upon that too fruitful
mother of errors, partiality, and siding with Sects. For Galen has bestowed a
true and deserved Character upon them, That those who addict themselves to
Sects, become both deaf and blind, so that they neither hear, nor see those
things, which others easily both hear and see, yea, and dumb also, that they
will not speak what is true, but rather oppose those that teach it; like the
drunken Lapithae, who with their fists, and kickings, drove away the
Surgeon, that would have applied remedies to their wounds.

The next thing is, that learning is not enough accommodated to the uses of our
life, to teach us how to behaveour selves in the occurrences Learning not
fitted the use life.
thereof. The fault whereof must be laid upon that inveterate custom, or
rather disease of Schools, whereby all the time of youth is spent in
Grammatical, Rhetorical, and Logical toys; those things which are real,
and fit to enlighten men's minds, and to prepare them for action, being reserved
for the Universities, that forsooth, their judgments being more ripe, and they
able to undertake such things, they may make the more happy progress. But it
comes to pass for the most part, that as soon as the heat of

The way to remedy this, will be to propound all things seasonably unto youth,
and to make serious exercises the preparatives of serious employments. For
seeing no man becomes a Smith, but by hammering, nor a Scribe, but by writing,
nor a Disputant, but by disputing; children also must be framed to be men by
handling humane things; and by having all manner of occurrences of this life
represented both to their notice, and practice while they are in Schools. Yea,
and all Philosophy in general must be so ordered, that it may be a lively
image of things, and a secret fitting and dressing of men's minds for the
businesses of this life.

And for the last thing, what wonder can it be that learning does Learning not
leading us to Go
not enough advance youth toward God? For it is not yet purged, and cleared of
the profaneness of the Gentiles, which treats rashly of God, and of his
works, without any knowledge, or due reverence of him, changing the glory of
the incoruptible God into Romans 1. But even unto this day the like Gentilisme is
in practice: The most part of those that are esteemed wise, are, as the others,
wise without God, neither deriving their wisdom from him, nor directing it to
him, but beginning, and ending in the creatures, without any thought of God;
and regarding, and serving only themselves, and other corruptible things. God
has said, that he is Alpha, and Omega, the Beginning, and the End of all, from
whom, by whom, and in whom are all things. But who is there that makes him
(that is, his fear) the beginning of his Wisdom? who makes him (that is, his
word and spirit) his conductor unto wisdom? who is there that terminates his
wisdom in him, devoting himself, and all his endeavors to his glory? These
things are hidden from most men's eyes. Our selves are all in all unto us: We
begin in confidence of our selves, we go on by our strength, and light, and
we intend all for our selves, for our own profit and reputation. Thus are we
drawn about through the Vanities of the creatures, slipping about by our
selves, to our selves, a sacred ladder for our minds to clime up by all visible
things, unto the invisible top of all things, the Majesty of the highest God
(which by its splendour will show us, how all inferior things are but the shadow
of the true light) there at last to repose our selves in that center of rest,
and end of all our desires, and to bath in that fountain of life, from which
all the streams of bliss and pleasure flow for evermore.

Unless this end may be obtained (with the other) our selves, and all our
actions, and endeavors are but vain: Wits will be still wandering in their
perplexed labyrinths, Schools will be still rolling of their Sisyphean stones,
yea, and the whole world will go on in

Now, seeing it is a matter so thoroughly serious, as wherein the glory of God,
and the safety of mankind consists, we ought to solicit God with ardent
supplications, that he would take pity upon us, and open our dim eyes, that
in his light we may see light. And because Christ said not only, Ask, and
ye shall receive, but also, Seek, and ye shall find; Knock, and it shall be
opened unto you, Matthew. 7. 7. Our desires, and prayers must be seconded with
unwearied, and constant endeavors, that all veiles may be plucked off from
things, and men may of all sides be prepared to behold in open, and clear
light all those wondrous things of God wherewith we are encompassed.

And now behold! I my self, the least of all, come forth to bring either a new
light into the world, or some few sparks to kindle it withal: Conscious
indeed of my too much weakness, yet by Gods grace encouraged in humble
expectation, that aid from heaven shall be supplied upon these my endeavors,
which are intended for Gods glory, and much peoples good. God is privy to the
secrets of my heart, and knows that it was not confidence of mine own
abilities, which led me hither, but that I was, and am forced on by the pricks
of mine own conscience, that if I be any way able to profit others, I should
desire and endeavor it, at least if I may but stir up others, who are able
to effect greater matters. For indeed this is the time above all ages that are
past, both to hope, and to attempt greater things.

For if the Reader will but consider, he will easily see, that those hitherto
have been made or published, are nothing else, but the materials of learning
sought, as it were, out of every wood, and quarrey throughout the world, thence
diversely wrought by diverse workmen, and so brought together into various
heaps, which yet lie severed, and not united. What then remains, but that now
at last we should use a skillful hand in bringing these heaps of materials
into their due form and order? That so there may be erected some Universal
Temple of Wisdom, truly glorious, and refulgent with the ornaments of Harmony,
and the light of Truth: Such as we might justly apply that of Lucretius unto
it, Sed nil dulcius est been quam munita tenere
Edita Doctrina sapientum Templa serena,
Despicere unde queas alios, passimque videre
Errare, atque vias palantis quaerere vitae.


Thus in English. No worldly pleasures may compare
With this: well fenced to possess
Fair Wisdoms Temples (beauties rare)
High raised on learnings solidnesse.
Thence you may see, how others go astray
As men bewildred, groping for the way.


Or rather, that of Solomon, Wisdom has builded her house, She has hewn out
her seven pillars; She has killed her beasts; She has mingled her wine:
She has also furnished her table: She Prove. 9. Unless such a Palace of true
Wisdom be attempted by the followers of Wisdom, they will be like a slothful
builder, who is always doing something about his building, but never drawing
it toward an end. Yea, and it is to be feared, that learning it self will at
length fall with its own weight, and be overwhelmed with such a vast flood of
writers, if no dams be opposed thereunto. But in deed such skill in Architecture
is hereto requisite, as is not to be expected in any humane wit. For none but
Wisdom her self, can build an house fit for her self to dwell in. But where
shall Wisdom be found, and where is the place of Understanding? God alone
understands the way thereof, and he knows the place thereof: He which
looks to the ends of the Earth, and sees under the whole Heaven; which
makes a weight for the winds, and spreads out the waters in measure; which
sets laws for the rain, and makes way for the lightning of thunder: He
alone sees it, and declares it, because he has prepared, and searched it
out, Job. 28. 12, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Therefore MOSES could not build a
Tabernacle for God, until he was instructed of God himself, Look, says God,
and do according to all the pattern which was showed thee in the Mount, Exodus
25. 40. And praised be thou, O

I desire the learned to pardon me, of whose labors I now presume to show my
judgment. The most exact Encyclopaedias, or sums of Art, which I could ever
lay my eyes upon, seemed to me like a chain neatly framed of many linkes, but
nothing comparable to a perpetual mover, so artificially made with wheels,
that it turres it self: or like a pile of wood, very neatly laid in order,
with great care, and diligence, but nothing like unto a tree arising from its
living roots, which by its inbred virtue spreads it self into boughs, and
leaves, and yields fruit. But that which we desire, is to have a living tree,
with living roots, and living fruits of all the Arts, and Sciences, I mean
Pansophy, which is a lively image of the Universe, every way closing, and
agreeing with it self, every where quickening it self, and covering it self
with fruit. That is (to reflect a little to our former intentions) we would
have such a book of Pansophy compiled, which might be,

I. A solid breviary of universal learning. II. A clear light for humane
understanding. III. An exact, and stable rule of Truth. IV. A certain and
directive Register of the affairs of our life. V. And lastly, an happy ladder
leading us to God himself.
Or (that I may otherwise express my desires) I think that seeing God has
ordered all things in number, measure, and weight, we ought also to take care,

I. That all things that are, were, or shall be throughout the world, may be
numbered, and summed up, that nothing escape our II. That the just proportion of
all things, as well in respect of the Universe, as also among themselves may be
laid open before our eyes. III. That the weights of causes may be evident, and
extant among us, whereby we may make exact trial of the truth of all things.
The first will make learning to be universal, which is our first intention.
The second will make it clear, and distinct, which we also earnestly seek.
And the third will be a means to have it true and solid, which is our chief
desire.

I say, we would have such a book compiled, which alone, instead of all,
should be the Spense, and Storehouse of Universal Learning: in which nothing
should be wanting, and by reading whereof, Wisdom should of its own accord,
spring up in men's minds, by reason of the clear, distinct, and perpetual
coherence of all things arising out of their true veins, and roots, that
every thing may plainly appear to be, as it is said to be, and that it can be
no otherwise then it is, in regard of the immutable truth of things every where
interwoven with it self. But all this we would

O how much are these things to be desired! what an improvement and bettering
would this be of our mortality! For seeing books are the instruments of
transplanting Wisdom, and an instrument perfectly good, or a rule without any
default, keeps the workemans hand from going awry; if such an instrument of
learning, and teaching universal Wisdom, as we have projected, and described,
were extant among us, it would be beneficial, not only for the dextrous
fashioning and instructing of youth, (which MELANCHTON in one place says is an
harder matter then the taking of Troy) but also for the opening of a way,
whereby all the sons of men may readily attain unto the true knowledge, and
conceptions of things, that they may be wise both in beholding the works of
God, and ordering of their own.

As for the darkness of errors, it would flee amain from the face of so
clear a light: and men, being busied only about solidities, and bending
through assured and certain ways unto serious ends, would easier leave off
those dissentions, strifes, and wars, wherewith the world is now consumed.
For a disordered, and straggling search of the truth of things must needs breed
difference in opinions, and that again will as easily produce a mutual
crossing of men's wills, and inclinations, which, when it comes to irritate, and
exasperate their minds, breaks forth into open strife, and conflicts. But
these occasions of differences, and contentions, and all by ways of error,
would of themselves vanish away, if that one, and only way of things, which is
the way of Truth, were but enough discovered. For by Gods goodness this would
be the means to heal up those wounds in Schools, Churches, and
Commonwealths, and to restore peace to the Christian world, that not only all
Christian nations might flourish in the studies of true Wisdom, and Piety; but
even Infidels themselves might partake of the same light, and be won to the
embracing of Christianity in this divinely revealed way of Truth. And so at
last we should see (what Gods sacred Oracles have Isa. 11. 9. And that the Lord
shall be King over all the Earth, and there shall be but one Lord, and his name
one, Zach 14. 9. And that the way of SION shall be so plain, that even fools
shall not err therein, Isa. 35. 8. Which is the same that another Prophet has
foretold, That in the last days the mountain of the house of the Lord shall
be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the
hills, and people shall flow unto it. And many Nations shall come and say, Come
and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, that he may teach us of his
ways. And afterward: And they shall beat their Swords into Plough-shares, and
Spears into Pruning-hookes: Nation shall not lift up a Sword against Nation,
neither shall they learn war any more, Micah. 4. 1. Take pity upon us, O
Lord, and let thy peace rest upon Jerusalem: Let thy glory arise over us, that
the Nations may walk in thy light.

But may such things be hoped for? Certainly we must not despair of them, if
this guide and director of humane understanding be once framed, whereby men's
minds may be infallibly led by continual degrees, and in open light from the
groundworks, and fundamentalls unto the highest tops of things. For if we come
once by this means to behold the Theater of Gods wisdom, men's minds cannot
but be filled with joy, and gladness, so that

First, although things may seem infinite and innumerable in respect of their
multitude, not to be measured in regard of their diverse disproportions: and
unsearchable, by reason of that depth wherein Truth is plunged: Yet it is most
certain that all things are beneath man and subject to his understanding. For
all things are made for his sake, but in an inferior degree: he therefore
being the last accomplishment of the creation, and the most absolute Image of
his Creator, containing in himself only the perfections of all other things,
why should he not at last habituate himself to the contemplation of himself,
and all things else? For seeing God has appointed him to be a spectator of his
wisdom, it is most certain that he has made him suitable to that e d: which
would not be if he had made either Things unproportionable to his
understanding, or his understanding incapable of the Things. It may then be
concluded that God alone is great over all, and his greatness is unsearchable,
Psalm. 145. 3. all things else are made in number, weight and measure, Wisd. 11.
20. Isay 40. 12. They are therefore to be numbered, measured,

Secondly, God has made all things well, as the Scripture says, but every
thing in his time, that is, by degrees. Is it then in vain, that God has set
the world in men's hearts, that is, a desire to find out those things which he
works from the beginning to the end? Eccles. 3. 11. It would be in vain, if
that desire could not obtain its end. But we must not ascribe any frustraneous
actions unto that Sovereign wisdom.

Thirdly, we have already great store of provision hereto, those books and
monuments of men's diligence, compiled with great care and industry. Can we
think that all these have done nothing? That cannot be in regard (as I have
showed already) of the supreme governor of all things, who will not suffer any
thing, even errors themselves to be in vain. Let us grant therefore that they
have erred, and been deceived in most things, yet God who is the eternal, and
unchangeable foundation of Truth, will surely order the matter so, that even
errors themselves will at last perforce be made subservient to the farther
discovering and establishing of Truth. Now it is manifest, that many things are
already found out, and why should we not hope, that the rest will follow? It it
no small matter that Euclides, Archimedes, and others have brought the
knowledge of Quantities to such evidence, and perfection, that even miracles
may be effected by numbers, measures, and weights. It is Novum Organum, where
he shows the infallible way of making a narrow search into the natures of
things: and that which JUNGIUS the Saxon is now about, who labors to bring
the Art of Logic to such perfection, that the truth of propositions may be
upheld, and all fallacies avoided, with as much certainty as any of EUCLIDES's
Problemes can be demonstrated: Why should I add any more? as one pin drives
out another, so does one invention thrust another forward, especially in this
age so fruitful of wits: and why should we not hope for some invention of
inventions, whereby the several inventions, and endeavors of so many wits,
may not only in their matter, but even in their manner of discovery be united
into one, and made common to mankind? It would surely be an excellent thing.

For if every one has formerly had his own sharpness of wit, his own rules
of proceeding, and his own weights of judgment; what might not be effected,
if all these wits were united into one, their laws into one, and their
judgments into one? The more candles, the greater light. If only the way be
found out; how all these lights may be united into one: that is, how those
diverse and infinite devises, inventions, and known truths, may be reduced unto

And why may it not be found out? we are already possessed of more than a
contemptible store of known truths; and for our farther progress, we are
provided of such light of method, as we need not fear walking in the dark.
Only let us press forward unto the utmost bounds of Method, and of things
themselves. For where there is a progress, there will at last be an end.
Eternity only, to which we are appointed, does bound our minds, but all
temporary things are within the bounds, and compass of our minds: if only we
be but acquainted with their roots, and grounds, those immutable, constant and
eternal conceptions, and laws of things, by which all things are first made,
and so continue.

We have also an express promise concerning the latter times, that Many shall
run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased, Dan. 12. 4. Many have
already passed to and fro, and have searched out (in this our age more than
ever) both Heaven, and Earth, Seas, and Islands, even the whole Kingdom of
Nature; as also the holy Scriptures,

But let us now at length come up closer with the thing in hand, I mean, the
means whereby so great a design may be duly accomplished: which though it may
somewhat appear from that, which has been already said concerning both the
causes, and the remedies of that confusion, which is in learning; yet we will
enter into a more express, and particular discourse of them.

I think therefore that we can never attain unto the Universal Knowledge,
Possession, and Use of all things, unless by a new and Universal,

I. Revising of all our goods, with all the inventories of them. II. Comparing
of those Inventories, with the things themselves, to see whether they are so
indeed, as our registers, and accounts relate unto us. III. By a new and
universal Disposing of those things, which we find certain, unto new, and
universal uses.
The revising of our goods shall be to this purpose, that we be not ignorant,
what is our proper inheritance, and what is worthy for us to employ our minds
about. For it is too true, that men know not their own goods; I mean, that
the whole world, and the creatures thereof are their possession, and that they
partake of eternity with God himself. The little thought and knowledge, or
belief whereof, is the cause that most men casting themselves into vain,
base, and pernicious courses, are at last disherited for their unworthiness.
Therefore Christians must be taught thoroughly to consider, what is meant by
that of the Apostle; whether the world, or life, or death, or things present or
things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor.
3. 22. Neither was it any word of course, when I said, that we must revise our
Inventories: for our Riches are so abundant, and so various, that few know what
names to give them, much less do they comprehend, what they are, and what care
is fitting for us to bestow upon them. All those things are therefore to be
described to men very plainly, and clearly, like the Law, Deuteronomy. 27. 8. And
because they must be accurately described, we must have a special care, that
nothing be left out; we must therefore search all former Registers, both
general and particular, old and new, by whomsoever set forth. For although
there is a vast number of them, yet he, who will undertake to make a true
survey, and synopsis of all things, must of necessity undergo this task. And
it is greatly to be wished, that more were extant. But many famous monuments of
learning are utterly lost, among which are the histories of living creatures,
and plants compiled by SOLOMON the wisest of Kings, which seeing it is in vain
to hope for; or desire: we must make use of such as we have, especially Gods
own book, the holy Scriptures, which are nothing else but Gods own
commentary upon those things which God bestows upon us in this life, and
reserveth for us in the future. And because Gods Spirit scarcely descends
unto things of a lower nature, but chiefly teaches us that which concerns our
spiritual estate, we must therefore make use of those which treat of inferior
matters, as Philosophers, Physicians, Historians, Cosmographers, Lawyers,
Mechanics, and all such as are happy in various inventions, that out of all
particular Sciences may at last result one universal Science of Sciences, and
Art of Arts, which is Pansophy.

But our intention is not, that the various opinions of several Authors should
be heaped up in this book, as their practice is, who esteem of learning by
much reading, and who take no further care, if they can but recite the diverse
opinions of diverse men, or spread their names a little by publishing some
botcherly mingle-mangle of collections out of others. Nor do we drive so much
at this, that several opinions may be collected and compared among themselves,
as they do, that fill up large volumes with handling questions to and fro, on
both sides, and confuting such as agree not with themselves. But our maine aim
is, that all who have written any thing concerning Piety and good manners, or
concerning the Arts and sciences, not respecting whether they be Christians, or
Mahumetans, Jews or Pagans, and of what sect soever, Pythagoreans, Acadmians,
Peripateticks, Stoics, Esseans, Greeks, Latins, Ancient or Modern Doctors,
or Rabbis, every Church, Synod, and Council, that all, I say, be admitted,
and heard to see what they will bring in for the compiling of this
Philosophical work.

And this we advise for these reasons,

I. Because that which we go about, is an universal Treasury of Wisdom for
the common interest, and behoof of mankind, therefore it is just that all
Nations, Sects, Ages, and Wits, should contribute toward it.

II. All of us, as soon as we come into this world, sit as spectators in this
common Amphitheater of Gods wisdom: and we Christians have moreover, the
light of divine revelation equally granted unto us all: and why should not the
very meanest have liberty, if he thinks that he sees any thing worthy of
observation, to point it out, and show it unto others.

III. It is not likely, that any one alone, or some few men of an Age or two,
have had the privilege to see all things, and others to see nothing: but as no
soil yields all kind of fruits, and yet every one yields something in their
seasons year after year: so God also scatters in men's minds various sparks
of his light respectively, in diverse Nations, and Ages. The wind blows where
it lists, says Christ, speaking of the holy Ghost, and his operations. And
there want not examples of some, out of the bounds of the Church, whom the
spirit of Wisdom has severally inspired: as Job, Elephaz, Elihu, Mercurius
Trismegistus, Socrates, Epictetus, Cicero. Therefore none must be contemned,
especially in such things, wherein the light of nature may guide us: For,
Quandoque est Olitor satis opportuna locutus:
The delving gardner often hits aright
Upon those things, which flee our soaring sight.


The Lord VERULAM says very well, that the diverse opinions of men concerning
the nature of things, are like diverse glosses upon the same Text, whereof one
is more exact in one part, another in another, each of them helping you to
something observable. Let it therefore be agreed: That there is no book so
bad, wherein some good thing or other may not be found: and if nothing else,
yet it may occasion us to amend some error.

IV. It is certain that no man would willingly err (for to what end should he
do it) but then men err, when they are deceived by some similitude of truth.
For errors also have their pretenses of reasons to maintain them, which must
therefore be heard, because we have to do with man a reasonable creature. So by
collation of reason, the false colors will easily be discovered, and the
shadow will fly away before the light.

V. When any one is condemned before he be heard, how just soever his
condemnation be, yet justice her self suffers violence thereby: for it is
possible that the case may be otherwise, than it was Racha to his brother?
Matthew. 5. 22.

VI. Let it be granted that some men have committed great errors in this, or
that matter: yet who knows not, that wisemen by seeing others errors, learn
to avoid them? Many useful things will be continually suggested from former
errors, and their occasions, to those that will be undertakers in this work
of Pansophie, for the better trimming and polishing of it.

VII. It is to be wished, that men may once at last be unburdened of their
troublesome dissentions, and that Sects and strife may cease, but that will
never be, unless first all suspicions be left off, wherein men are entangled
one with another. Now suspicions cannot be avoided, where either part is
unsatisfied in their own, or the others meaning, and doubts. And these things
can never be cleared, unless both opinions be mildly heard, and compared
together, and then examined by the same laws of clear and undeniable truth,
which both sides shall consent upon.

VIII. Lastly, it is very observable, that at the building of the Tabernacle by
MOSES, and of the Temple by SOLOMON, the Israelites Libanus, at the building of
the Temple, all making for the glory of the God of Israel, and the splendor of
his house. As also in the re-edifying of the Temple by ZOROBABEL, God stirred
up the heart of CYRUS the King, that he not only offered of his own royal
treasure, but also gave commandment to his subjects through all his dominions,
to help the Israelites every one in his own place of dwelling, with silver,
and gold, and substance, and cattle, Ezra 1. v. 3, 4, 7. And why should not
the builders of the Temple of wisdom accept of every thing from what hand
soever, which may make for the beauty and ornament of it? Even the Gibeonites
themselves, though accursed, may be employed for the hewing of wood, and
drawing of water for the house of our God, Josh. 9. 23.

If any man tax me, that I have formerly been of another mind, that I have
inclined to partiality, and sided with a particular sect, instilling into
others a dislike of ARISTOTLE, and the Heathen Authors. I will not deny but
that I have been carried away by the example of those, who with NEHEMIAH were
piously zealous, because the children of the Israelites running up and down
Jerusalem, Nehem. 13. 24. I mean, because the wisdom and eloquence of the
Gentiles bear more sway in our Schools, than true Christian, and saving
knowledge, which is abominable, and better it is a thousand times, that Heathen
wisdom should be utterly stripped of all her enticing dresses, and
allurements, then that any soul, which Christ would have to be filled with his
spirit, should be thereby endangered, or subverted. But seeing, that we meddle
not here concerning the sway, which Paganism bears, or of the dangerous
mixture of it with Christianity; but only how to make all the earth tributary
unto Christ the King of all the world, and how all those rivulets, which have
any way dispersed themselves from this fountain of wisdom may with the loss
only of their filth, be returned to their fountain head; Let even the
Gentiles, and Arabians therefore be admitted to furnish us with such ornaments,
as they are able for the beauty of this house of God. Especially seeing not
only the maine business of our salvation is regarded in our Pansophie, but
even the affairs of this life also, wherein seeing the Gentiles chiefly
employed themselves, they cannot but have observed profitable things, which to
loath, and reject for their sakes, would be but fond, and superstitious vanity.
We will therefore give them admittance, but upon this condition, that
whatsoever they have thought, written, or found out, which appears to be true,
considerate, and pious, shall be applied to common use, and benefit: but
wherein soever they are convicted to have done, or said any thing unmeet, or
contrary to truth, or

But herein we had need to deal fairly with much judgment, and moderation,
lest we be too facile in passing censure upon others. For if we be
prepossessed with suspicion, or carried away with affection, we oftentimes are
ready to fasten errors upon others, which they themselves will not own, and
to wrest their expressions, and words contrary to their meaning: whereas every
one is, and ought to be his own best interpreter. ARISTOTLE himself in this
regard has not the best report, for his practicing to raise the credit of his
own works, by his confuting of the ancient Philosophers without making any
true and just report of their opinions. Which if it be true (as I will not
determine) it may be a warning for all the undertakers of Pansophy, where no
partial victory, but an universal harmony is to be sought) that as much as
may be, all differences in opinions may be reconciled, and brought to
consonancie, by reducing them to the mean and certain truth.

Thus far concerning a Review of all Things, and their Registers. I told you
moreover, that it is needful we should compare them one with the other to see
whether all things, that are to be found in nature, are duly entered, and
whether all things that are entered, can any where be found, and whether things
are so indeed, according particular things, have met with such knots, and rubs,
that their endeavors have for the most part sat down, and rested themselves
upon that grand complaint of the intricate subtilty of nature, of the
unsearchable complication, and intervening of causes, of the implacable
hostility of contraries every where occurrent, and lastly, of the great
weakness, and insufficiency of humane understanding for the compassing of
them all: what then may he expect that shall go about to rip them all up from
the very bottom? But we must not utterly despair. Art many times helps us to
effect that which no strength is able to perform: which seems not to have
been enough observed by those which have hitherto searched into the nature of
things, who have strained to break through those great lets, only by the
force and strength of wit, and the assaults of continual diligence; whereas
notwithstanding the understanding left unto it self, like a naked and empty
hand, is able to do no great matters: but every thing is more easily and
certainly accomplished with helps, and instruments. Therefore herein it will be
requisite to be furnished with some Rules, by application whereof unto things
themselves, and to all opinions, and decrees concerning them, we may be able to
discern necessary things, from such as are not necessary, profitable things
from unprofitable, and truth from falsehood. Such a kind of rule, for the
searching out of nature, seems to have been found out by the famous Lord
VERULAM: A certain artificial induction, which indeed is the only way to
pierce through into the most abstruse secrets of Nature. But because this
requires the continual industry of many men, and ages, and so is not only
laborious, but seems also to be uncertain in the event and success thereof;
hence it comes to pass, that though it be a most excellent invention, yet the
most part of men neglect it as unprofitable. Yet notwithstanding it is of no
great use, or advantage toward our design of Pansophy, because (as I said
before) it is only intended for the discovery of the secrets of Nature, but
we drive and aim at the whole universality of things. It will be therefore
requisite for us to search out some other more universal Rule, which perhaps
God of his great mercy will upon our diligent endeavor vouchsafe to reveal
unto us: who therefore hides himself, that he may be sought, and therefore
will be sought that he may be found, Esaias 45. 14, 15, 19. He which has
inflamed thine heart to seek him (says Beatus Fulgentius ad Monimum) will by
no means suffer thee to lose thy end of seeking; for his faithful promise can
by no means be made void, which says, Ask, and ye shall receive, Seek, and
ye shall find, Knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Being now therefore
about to unfold, what God has revealed unto us, and given us to see upon our
asking, seeking, and knocking. I first crave, and humbly beg the pious
attention of all such as are able to judge of things of this nature. And for
the thing it self I will briefly dispatch it in a few Aphorisms. 1. There are
three things which accomplish that knowledge which is possible for our
condition, yea, which rather raise it to a kind of Omniscience, the knowledge
of God, Nature, and Art.



By art we understand whatsoever is compassed by humane industry, as our
thoughts, words, and actions: by Nature we mean whatsoever comes to pass of
its own accord by those dispositions implanted in things: by God, all that
power, wisdom, and goodness, which lying hid from eternity, has hitherto
displayed it self unto us, either in divine words or works: he that knows
these 2. A perfect knowledge of these three ought to be sought for.



Lest we should think we have enough, if we know something of God, something
of Nature, and something of Art, (for so much may be said of the veriest fools
and idiots) but that we may have a full and perfect understanding of all things
that may be known. 3. Knowledge is then only perfect, when it is true.



For if it be not true, in stead of realities, it exhibits phantasmes, and ends
in a mere mockery. 4. Knowledge is true, when things are known as they are.



For if they be otherwise apprehended then they are, it is no knowledge, but
error. 5. Things are known as they are, when they are known according as
they were made.



For every thing is so as it was made, or else things must have degenerated
from that they were. 6. Every thing was made according to its proper Idea, that
is according to to such a conception, by which it might be such as it is.



For unless things could be, they should not be, and unless they 7. Therefore
all things that are, are made according to their Idea's, whether they be works
of God, of Nature, or of Art.



For seeing an Idea is a certain rule of things, God cannot be thought to do
any thing without Idea's, that is, without a certain rule, as who is of
himself the rule of all rules: So likewise Nature when she effects most
orderly works, cannot work without a rule; as neither can Art, which is
natures Ape. 8. Art borrowes the Ideas of its works from Nature, Nature from
God, but God has them only from himself.



It is commonly enough known, that Art is lame without Nature, that Art is the
daughter, follower, and imitator of Nature; and Romans 1. 20. Was it that he
might manifest the depth of his wisdom by that looking off from himself?
Neither; for this would prove a diminution of the fullness of his glory, if he
could find out any perfection, which was not in himself, which is impossible.
Therefore it is most certain, that both the creatures, and their Idea's have
issued from this one fountain. And seeing that among the creatures every agent
naturally labors to assimilate its object unto it self, why should we not
acknowledge the same in God, who has imprinted this property in the creatures?
especially seeing God can find nothing fit to be the end of his works, but
himself. Therefore we conclude that God takes from himself the rule of his
works, as well at the end of them, 9. God therefore in framing of the world,
figureth out himself so as the creature is wholly proportioned to the Creator.



Even as the impression answers always to the stamp, although sometimes it
be more, sometimes less evident; whence arise diverse degrees of this
proportion. So the Son of God is called the express image of his Father,
Heb. 1. 3. And yet man is said to be made after the image of God, Genesis 1. 26. 1
Cor. 11. 6. Yea, and all other things are said to resemble him in some sort;
for it is said, that the invisible things of God are seen from the beginning
of the world in those things which are made, Romans 1. 20. and that in the
greatness and beauty of created things their Creator may be proportionably
known, Wisd. 13. 5. And hereupon it was that the Gentiles entitled Nature not
only the Daughter of God, but said that its self was God. Nature is nothing
else, says SENECA, but God, and divine Law implanted in the whole world, and
all its parts, de Benef. 4. c. 7. 10. And because all things are partakers of
divine Ideas, hence also it comes to pass that they partake one of another,
and are proportioned one to the other.



For those things that agree in any third thing, agree among themselves. 11.
Therefore the conceptions of all things are the same, nor is there any
difference, but in the manner of their existence, because in God they are as in
their Vt in Archetypo,
Original, in Nature as in the Ectypo,
Copy, in Art as in the Antitypo.
counterfeit.



Even as in a Seal the form is one and the same, which is first conceived in
the mind of him, that graves it, or commands it to be graven: then as it is
engraven in metal; and lastly, as it is stamped upon wax: For although it be
threefold, yet it is the same, because the second is formed by the first, the
third by the second, each of them after the resemblance of that which is next
before it in order. So these Ideas being first conceived in God, imprint their
likeness in the creatures; and likewise the reasonable creatures in things,
which they themselves effect. 12. Therefore the ground as of the framing, so of
the knowledge of all things



That which the Musicians call harmony, is a sweet consonancie of diverstones:
the like exact agreement is to be found in the eternal perfections of God,
with those which are created in Nature, and those which are expressed in Art:
for each of them is harmonious in it self, as also in mutual respect one to
the other. Nature is the image of divine Harmony, and Art of Nature. 13. The
first thing required in Harmony, is that there he nothing dissonant.



Musical Harmony is composed of most different, and contrary tones, and yet
there is a certain consonancie to be found in their contrariety: So the whole
world is composed of contraries; (because without them the Truth, and order,
and essence of the world would fall) as also the Scripture contains many
things in it, which seem to oppose one another, all which notwithstanding have
a perfect agreement in themselves, and so are to be disposed in our
understandings toward a perfect Harmony; that so there may be an universal
consent, as in Divine, so in humane works and words, all seeming dissonancies
vanishing of themselves. The want of the understanding 14. The second thing
required in Harmony, is that all things have a perfect consonancie and
agreement.



It is manifest both in natural, and artificial things, that all are framed
according to Harmony: So in a beast, a tree, a musical instrument, a ship, a
book, an house, all the parts are necessarily proportionate, as to the whole,
so to one another. But some men may make a question, whether divine things have
any proportion with things natural, and artificial? for it may be thought,
that it best becomes the divine Majesty to have nothing common with the
creatures. But we must observe, that whatsoever is to be found in the
counterfeit, is first, and by way of excellency in the pattern: so the river
proceeds from the fountain, the shadow from the body, and the image in a
glass from the thing it represents. Again, if the works of nature are so
absolute, and exact, that there is no place lib. 6. de usu part. cap. 1.) and
if the nature of Nature be unchangeable, and unalterable (as TERTULLIAN
witnesses against Valent. cap. 9. 29.) what then is Nature, but a lively image
of him in whom all things are first, and by way of excellency, good, perfect,
and unchangeable? Lastly, in the Scripture God attributes to himself ears,
eyes, a mouth, hands, feet, an heart, a face, and back parts: also he styles
himself, fire, a rock, a tower, an anchor: To what purpose is all this, if
these things cannot represent God? but if on the otherside they can, and do
represent him, then it is certainly no otherwise then he is, seeing the word
of God is the rule of Truth. We are not ignorant, that all these things are
spoken figuratively, (for we will not go a madding with the Anthropomorphites)
but no man can deny, but that all these figures have their ground, and
foundation in the proportion, and identity of the things themselves: For every
thing must first be, before it can be predicated. Therefore as artificial
things are proportioned unto things natural, so are natural things unto
divine. 15. The third property of Harmony is, that though the variety of sounds
and melodies be infinite, yet all arises out of some few principles, and



For all different harmonies, whatsoever have, or can be invented, arise only
from seven notes, and three concords. All corporeal things that are contained
in the world, are composed of those few elements, and some few differences of
qualities: and so of the rest: So that the multitude and variety of things is
nothing else but the various iteration of the same things: As for example upon
a tree, though there are millions of leaves, yet all are of the same figure,
color, and virtue; yea, and all trees of the same kind through the whole world
grow after the same sort, and have the same active and passive dispositions. So
also the trees of several kinds agree in many things among themselves. 16.
Therefore all things will be known, if their principles, and the manner of
their differences be discovered.



For as in Music, he that knows the nature of the several tones, and moods,
will easily be able both to sing, and compose any kind of melody; yea, such a
way is found out, that players on Instruments, are able by looking upon one
only general Base, to play many parts at once without any kind of discord: so
also it is infinite, 17. Now these common natures of things are to be
abstracted from the things themselves, and to be laid for the common rules of
all things.



As for example, the nature of fair, good, perfect, profitable of life, sense,
etc. is to be sought for in things which are fair, good, perfect, etc. And
this must be done by a prudent, and diligent separating of those things which
are not of the essence of beauty, goodness, or perfection; until the forms
and natures of them remain cleared from all other conceptions. For all things
that are, have their common nature, or conception, whereby they are: therefore
18. But these rules of Truth must be abstracted from such things as cannot be
otherwise then they are, and such as are obvious to every one for making
experiments in them all, I mean from natural things.



For Divine things are of themselves unsearchable, and are known only so
far, as they are shadowed but in nature, or revealed by the word of God: on
the other side, Art borrowes all its reason and certainty from Nature, and is
often deceived. Therefore the field of Nature chiefly is that, wherein we must
search for these Idea's,

Thus far have we proceeded in the laying down of rules for the revising of
all things anew: It follows now, that we declare the manner how they are to be
disposed of. For we think such a method is necessary for our Pansophy, as is
absolutely perfect, whereunto nothing may be added, and such an one as may so
knit men's minds unto the things themselves, that they may find no end, but in
the end, and may first reap some solid fruit of their endeavors, before they
perceive any difficulties therein; which we conceive may be attained,

1. By an accurate Anatomizing of the whole Universe, if all the veins, and
joints thereof be so cleared, and laid bare, that there may nothing lie hid
from our sight, but every thing may appear in his proper place without any
confusion.

2. It is necessary, that the true signification of words (especially such as
are of more general use) be fully agreed upon, that homonymies,

3. Next after the divisions and definitions of things shall follow their
Rules, Laws, and Canons, with their demonstrations annexed.

4. It is also requisite, that both divisions, definitions, and Canons, should
be 1. very clear and perspicuous, 2. of certain use and benefit, 3.
altogether true (...).
, in themselves, in all times and places. For the want of these three
conditions, has not without cause been hitherto excepted against, both in the
writings of Philosophers, and Divines. Many things are set down so obscurely,
that even Mercury himself would want another Mercury to explain them. Many
things again of very little, or no use, and some things which are only
accidentally true. For example, that Metaphysicall Theoreme Substantia non
recipit magis and minus, is neither true, nor if it be true, is it of any use.
For he that is fully grown up is more a man then an Embryo, or infant in the
womb: An Eagle is more a bird then a bat: The Sun is more light then the
Moon. And is

5. The general precepts of Pansophy ought to be nothing but real and
practical axioms, that is, sentences gaining credit of themselves, not to be
demonstrated (a priori) but only to be illustrated by examples: as which, so
soon as they are understood, cannot but be allowed by all men for a rule of
truth. For such general notions naturally stamped upon our minds, will be like
firebrarnds to kindle the light of truth, that it may shine unto us in all
particulars, and withal will be the first moving wheels in all our
operations. But we must have a special care, lest we admit any things for
axioms, which are not so indeed. For it is not without cause that the L.
VERULAM, STRESO, and others complain, That the vulgar Canons in Logic are so
far from being exact rules of truth, or useful in demonstrations, that they
serve only for disputation, which is performed by excepting, distinguishing,
limiting, instancing, and retorting, and indeed appears to be nothing else but
a learned brangling.

6. All particular theorems throughout the whole Pansophy, must be only
special diductions of those generals, which went before, without any new
addition; as we see it comes to pass in the growth of trees, and living
creatures, new boughs, or members are not brought forth ever year, but the
former only grow toward perfection. Pansophy being prepared after this sort
will be, 1. Easy to be apprehended, for one thing will issue out of the
mirror, wherein to behold the natures and grounds of all things that can be
known: And indeed such a book would not only prove a Nursery for all sort of
knowledge, but it would also water it, and make it take the deeper root: so
that learners should no more be allured by persuasions, but rather compelled by
demonstrations to assent to that which is truth, which is the only way to make
one firmly grounded in knowledge.

As it is not usual therefore among Mathematicians to say, PYTHAGORAS
affirms, that three times three are nine, or EUCLIDES makes three sorts of
continual quantity, a line, a superficies, and a solid body. All Geometricians
agree in this, That the three angles of a triangle, are equal to two right
angles; and he would be hissed at, that should in such things vouch their
authorities; but their manner has been to prove by demonstration, that those
things are so, and can be no otherwise, though there had never been any such
as EUCLIDES or PYTHAGORAS: So we would have men ashamed to allege authorities
hereafter, either in Metaphysics, Physics, Ethics, or Politics, wheresoever
reason may suffice.

Now we have designed this in such a method, as that the whole work of
Pansophy may proceed on without any repetitions, and that the succinctnesse,
and brevity thereof may not (though the work be full of closely-couched
solidities) make it the more obscure:

But in matters of greater moment, the authority of the holy Scripture will be
requisite to be added, as the witness of God himself: as also such things
must be showed, and manifested to the very senses, that every man may have
liberty to make experiment himself of their truth: that, as among
Mathematicians upon the demonstration of a Theoreme necessarily ensues the
perfect knowledge thereof, and also a Problem being demonstrated the effect
certainly follows: so the precepts of Pansophy may supply us with a certainty
both of knowledge and operation.

7. But if there remain any thing, which cannot be so certainly demonstrated,
and yet is profitable to be known, let such things be referred among those
that are farther to be enquired of, or else the reasons of both parts may be
set down; that every one may have liberty to use his own judgment in
enclining to either part; as also that an occasion may be prepared for some or
other afterward to dissolve those doubts, and to find out the certain truth of
them. For God communicates his light unto men, but by degrees, and we

Now between this book of Pansophy (if it be once perfected) and other books
of continual use amongst us, there would be as great difference, as there is
between a musical instrument exactly framed for a full harmony, and many
others that are bounded in compass of a few notes, and out of tune: or as
there is between a tune accurately set, or pricked (by looking on which alone
an Organist or other Musician is able to express most various melody) and
those Sets of Musical books in parts, which can only be made use of by many
together, and perhaps many times are full of discords.

Which book so often as I consider with my self, how greatly it would advance
the study of Wisdom, I have not, nor do not cease to put up my humble
requests unto God, that he would please according to that little which God has
bestowed upon me, that by that small taste, I might be the better understood,
and others also whom God shall please to excite thereunto, may have an example
for to follow.

But I may not pass over in silence, what the occasion was, which set me upon
so great a work, as also what order, and method I

It is now above twenty years since I was first touched with this desire of
searching out some means for the easing of those difficulties, that are usual
in the study of learning, and that by occasion of mine own unhappiness,
which, alas! deprived me of the most part of my youth. For loosing both my
parents, while I was yet a child, I began through the neglect of my guardians,
but at sixteen years of age, to taste of the Latin tongue. Yet by the
goodness of God, that taste bred such a thirst of desire in me, that I ceased
not from that time by all means and endeavors, to labor the repairing of my
lost years: and now not only for my self, but for the good of others also.
For I could not but pity others also in this respect, especially in my own
nation, which is too too sloathfull, and careless in matter of learning.
Thereupon I was continually full of thoughts for the finding out of some
means, whereby more might be enflamed with the love of learning, and whereby
learning it self might be made more compendious both in matter of the charge,
and cost, and of the labor belonging thereunto, that so youth might be brought
in a more easy method unto some notable proficiencie in learning. But being
shortly after at the age of 24. called to the service of the Church, because
that divine function COECILIUS, and who indeed should have had the first place,
JOANNES VALENTINUS ANDREAE, a man of a nimble and clear brain: as also
COMPANELLA, and the Lord VERULAM, those famous restorers of Philosophy: By
reading of whom I was raised in good hope, that at last those so many various
sparks would conspire into a flame: yet observing here and there some defects,
and gaps as it were, I could not contain my self from attempting something
that might rest upon an unmovable foundation, and which if it could be once
found out, should not be subject to any ruin. Therefore after many workings,
and tossings of my thoughts, by reducing every thing to the immovable laws,
and rules of Nature, I Didactica magna, which shows the art of readily, and
solidly teaching all men all things.

According to the Canons and rules whereof, when I had assayed a compendious
way of teaching the Languages, and had published it (under the title of Janua
Linguarum reserata) that so I might see how others would approve of it: it
happened that it was accepted A Gate of Languages.
with much applause, and unanimously approved by the learned, as the true, and
most genuine way of teaching the languages. Whereupon I apprehended a new
occasion to be offered me of attempting to make an open gate unto the things
themselves, or if you will, a key of humane understanding, whereby it might
have access unto all sorts of things. From which work, if it proved
successful, I thought there was so much more benefit to be hoped for, by how
much it is better to be wise, than to be able to prattle a few Latin words.

There wanted not some indeed, who were of opinion, that such a Gate or Key of
the things themselves, was altogether impossible: for I did communicate my
intentions with my friends: yet that persuasion which I had conceived of the
universal, and constant harmony of things, did encourage me very much to
think that all such things as come in the compass of humane understanding,
might be reduced unto some certain rules, which being finite, and perhaps not
very many in number, yet should be of infinite use. For thus I reasoned with my
self: If the tongue, that nimble intepreter of the mind, when it does most
luxuriate in variety of expressions, in themselves may seem to have a certain
infinity in them, yet is it not so indeed: for the world it self (that
admirable work of God) is framed of a few elements, and some few kinds of
forms: and all Arts whatsoever have been invented, may easily be reduced unto
a summary and general method. Because therefore things themselves, and their
Conceptions, and Words the expressions of those Conceptions are parallel one to
the other, and in each of them there are certain fuodamentalls from which the
rest of them result: I thought that it is not impossible, to collect also the
fundamentalls of Things themselves, and their conceptions, as well as has been
done already in Words. Also the practice of the Chemists came into my mind, who
have found out a way so to clear, and unburden the essences, and spirits of
things from the surcharge of matter, that one small drop extracted out of
Mineralls, or Vegetables contains more strength, and virtue in it, and is used
with better success, and efficacy, then can be hoped for from the whole, and
entire lump. And is there no means to be found out, thought I with my self,
whereby the precepts of wisdom (so divided in the several enclosures of
Sciences, yea and infinitely dispersed out of their due bounds) may be united
and concentred together? why should I despair? All despair is a dishonor to
God, who has promised to hearken unto all, such as ask, and seek, and
knock. Therefore I concluded with my self, that it was possible to plant such
an universal Nursery of learning.

And then in the name of God I set upon this work, observing the same method
herein, which I used in composing the Gate of Languages. First, that (as I did
there with all the words of the Latin tongue, so here also) all things worthy
of man's knowledge should be collected together, as into a treasury. Secondly,
that nothing should be set down above once, unless only such, as by reason
of their connection, and relation with others were necessary for the others
explication. Thirdly, that nothing should be set down but in its own place,
and proper sense, according to the most natural order of things, and in most
clear expressions, that herein might be summarily, and clearly learned all
things that are contained in all books, and libraries, and in the whole world
it self. Which if we had so effectually performed, as to set open a Gate to
the understanding of all things, and all books, without the help of others to
guide men therein, it may be we might have shared of that praise which TIMOTHY
BRIGHT ascribes unto such, as are inventors of brevity, and perspicuity. For
says he, Among all the parts of Philosophy, wherein such as are lovers of
Truth, and of the best things, have taken pains, there is none more profitable
for life, or which gives the mind a more real content, then that which helps
the other Arts with brevity and perspicuity. Therefore we ought thankfully to
acknowledge their endeavors, who have bestowed their pains to this end, that
learners may be eased of all tediousmesse and prolixity, and freed from all
ambiguous labyrinths, and thorny difficulty. (super Scribonii Phys. cap. 1.)

It suiteth very near with the present case, for when we first attempted this
work, our intentions aimed no farther than only at a short and perspicuous
comprehension of all things that are to be known. But in the progress of the
work, Gods goodness suggested a more sublime care, and thought into our
minds, that we should labor to rectify all things so, as we might have them
truer, and better, and more fitted (for us Christians) for the intents both of
this present, and the future life. Of the necessity of which intention, I have
already discoursed sufficiently. That therefore this work might indeed prove a
Gate, not only into the reading of Authors, but rather into the whole
universality of things, I referred hither all things, that I could find extant
either in divine or humane works or writings: not by an unprofitable, and
superstitious diligence, making Catalogues of all, and singular things, but
rather by a true discovery of the grounds of all things,

And to the end that this book might also prove a door into the holy
Scriptures, I have endeavored to insert all the decrees of holy Writ every one
in his place among the rules of Pansophy, and to bring most of the histories
thereof for examples: to this intent, that Youth being acquainted with all
those great, and precious promises bestowed upon us, by which we are partakers
of the divine nature, (2 Pet. 1. 4.) may not only be fore-armed against the
infection of profane authors, when time shall require the reading of them, but
also against all other stumbling blocks in the whole course of their lives. 2.
I have labored to bring in all the most obscure passages of Scripture in their
proper places, that so the due citation, and alleging of them might be as a
Comment, and clear apprehension of their meaning, (of which kind of places of
Scripture there may be annexed a particular table.) 3. I have labored so to
make use of the Phrases, and acute expressions in holy Scripture throughout my
book, that youth may be acquainted both with the matter, and style of the holy
Spirit, and may not easily meet with any thing in the whole body of the Bible,
which they knew not formerly. Neither do we addict our selves unto any
particular Philip. 3. 15, 16.) Although I hope our grounds, and fundamentals
are so well fitted, and so firmly closed, that the understanding Reader will
easily judge, that there remains little danger of by-ways, and errors, most
part of stumbling blocks being removed out of the way. For as it is impossible
for him, which in two contradictory propositions (of which many may be found in
the Scripture according to the letter) addicts himself irreconciliably unto
the one, but that the other will urge, and strain him very far: so also it is
impossible, but that they being reconciled, and combined together in a true,
and middle sense, all difficulties, scandals, and doubts will vanish of
themselves to the great rejoicing of our minds. For by this means whatsoever
truth there is in either opinion, it groneth sweetly into one, and whatsoever
is vain, or erroneous on either part, presently it disappeareth; which that it
is the only means of uniting all truths in the center of harmony, and of

For our order of handling the Sciences, we hope that by Gods grace we have
attained so far as that men may find here an handful of such a method, as
does divide and dispose things for our sight, according as they are. For I
trust we have discovered the true veins of things in our Metaphysickes, which
if we follow them will most easily conduct us unto all individuals, and to the
true nature of the least and nicest conceptions and words: so that we may
hereby make a new Anatomy of the Universe, and truer than any has hitherto
been seen. Neither do they consist of such intricate subtilties, as can be
discerned only by the learned, and those that are already versed in such
matters, but they are so plain and pervious unto any, though but of moderate
apprehension, that even children of eight years of age may easily conceive of
our whole Metaphysickes, and (by benefit thereof) of all the inferior Arts,
and Sciences with very little pains, but with much delight, and contentation.
That which is the strength, and nerves of Science, I frame it into Aphorisms,
or Axioms, but, as I hope, into such as are true and solid, not such as are
trifling, and exposed to the blows of contrary instances and exceptions, not
such as must be defended with the weak shields of limitations, but such as
will persist unmovable of themselves, by the luster and force of their
universal Truth. Neither in the delivery of these things, though evidently
Praecognita) we could not observe this course, by reason of the causes of
things not yet delivered. Therefore there we deal with humane understanding,
as horse-riders do with colts, when they first break them. For at first they
use easy bits, such as will rather delight then trouble them, and run them
first on smooth and pleasant grounds, before they use them to the ring.

One thing is singular, and even wonderful in our Method, that all the
chiefest divisions of things are made by a Trichotomie, which I protest I
sought not by any superstitious affectation, but that it offered it self
freely unto me in things of greatest moment, even from the first attributes of
things (One, True, Good) that I was for Unum, Verum, Bonum
a while at a stand, being amazed with the newness of the thing. But being
erected in expectation by those examples that I first lighted on, I began to
try it other where, and found it every where to proceed. fully persuaded) but
even as they divide themselves of their own accord. And I thought this would
be very profitable for learners also: First, in regard of their memory, which
uses to proceed methodically, both in bestowing, and reviving of things.
Secondly, for the understanding of the things themselves, because their nature
does for the most part discover it self most clearly in this way; wherein I
appeal unto the judgment of all such as shall piously, and seriously, and in
the fear of God, weigh these things: being confident, that thereby they shall
perceive not any vain fancies, but even the truth of things themselves. Let
therefore this Christian Pansophy, unfolding the Ternary mysteries be sacred
unto that eternal Trinity, JEHOVAH, God only wise, Almighty, most good, and
ever to be worshipped.

Let no man be offended with the word Pansophy; we know there is but one truly
(...), the only wise God, Romans 16. 27. That which we profess, is humane
Pansophy, or the knowledge of such things as God will have us to know, together
with a discreet ignorance of such things, as our great Master has concealed
from us. Secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but such things as are
revealed, unto us, and to our children, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. and we counsel men not
to neglect these things by a careless, and unthankful ignorance of them. And
because in Christ are hidden all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge,
Coloss. 2. 3. and we chiefly labor to unfold the mysteries of Christ, that
men may understand how by him, the eternal wisdom, and power of God, all
things have been, and are to be made, until the end come (when he shall have
delivered the Kingdom to his Father, and shall have put down all rule, and all
authority, and power, 1 Cor. 15. 24.) and that they may yield themselves to the
guidance of his Spirit; seeing, I say, we teach such things, why may we not
justly assume unto our selves the teaching of the true and saving knowledge of
all things? It becomes us Christians, and none others, to profess Pansophy,
for out of Christianity, there neither is, nor can be any Pansophy. Which
AUGUSTINE of old mantained (lib. 3. contra Acad. cap. 19.) proving that only
Christianity is true Philosophy. And not without cause, for seeing divine
revelation is no where to be met withal, out of the Church, and without it our
understandings can reach no farther, then this present life, and our lives
themselves are so short, that we begin even to die, when we begin to live;
what can there be considerable in such wisdom as is gathered only from the
senses, and from natural reason, which is not much before them? It may in deed
for a few days feed us with some painted joncates, and afterward Christians
only may be said to know, because they have it from God, all others do but
trifle, because they have it of themselves. And I will add, that true Pansophy
is the only way to holy ignorance, because it alone teaches us, how all our
knowledge is but like a shadow, if it be compared with the splendour of that
eternal wisdom which is in God. We have therefore a threefold ground, why
this manner of study, which we counsel others to, and which we are now about,
should be called Pansophy, or Universal Wisdom. First, in regard of the
proportion of the things themselves to humane understanding, for we would not
have them torn asunder one from another, seeing the understanding is capable
of them all. Secondly, in respect of the Sciences themselves, which we propose
not as several, and diverse, but as one Science comprehending all things within
its own compass. Thirdly, in regard of those, for whose benefit it is
intended, I mean of all Christians in general: so that the fruit of this
work may be reaped by three sorts: by the learned; by Youth in Schools; and
by all the vulgar in general among Christians.

But because we have not undertaken to write a perfect Pansophy, but only the
Gate thereof, we do not prosecute all things, (which I may justly determine
that that high, and excellent learning, which men for the large extent of it,
call Polymathie, is exceedingly beholden to Divinity, and not a little to
Physic, but the Law only contributes very little toward it.

Therefore I do not go about to excuse the matter, that I being a Divine
should attempt to circumscribe this Polymathy, I will rather rejoice, that God
pleases to honor me by making use of me (how mean an instrument soever) for
the discovering of his goodness unto men. I account the Gospel, which Christ
has committed to me, most sacred, and dearer then my own life, neither do I
desire or endeavor any other thing, then to be found a faithful dispenser of
his mysteries. But because I know, that Christ has said unto PETER not only,
Feed my Sheep, but also, Feed my Lambs, John 21. 15. I am most confident that
it is the duty of all Divines to take care, that as well these, as the other,
may be brought back unto the rich pastures upon the high mountains of Israel,
where they may lie in a good fold, and feed in a fat pasture, Ezech. 34. 13,
14, 15. that those Sheep, and Lambs of Gods flock, may be gathered together
again, especially then when the beasts of the field cause them to be scattered
one from another. Therefore with the Prophet, I will bless the Lord, who
wakeneth mine ear, that I should be, as he that attends and learneth.

Neither will I stand to excuse the rudeness of my style; as for tickling of
men's ears, neither can I, nor will I do it. There are more then enough of
such kind of men in the world: and there is more need of composing men's minds,
that they may embrace pure, and untinctur'd wisdom, which may the better be
effected, if things be nakedly delivered without any plaistring, or bravery of
expressions. I desire nothing, but to express the sense, and therefore with
PLINY, will rest upon the wisdom of such, as are good and learned, that they
will prefer real benefit and profit, before graceful pleasing, and esteem
better of a compendious, and close wrought serious matter, then of a lavish,
and flashing style.

This is rather my desire and request, that men would not out of a
precipitancie of judgment condemn things before they understand them, which I
have great cause to fear. For I know there are many, that being bewitched with
the great fame, and report of antiquity, will presently, though not without
some blemish of indiscretion, reject whatsoever is new, as merely
fantastical, and vain, not so much as daigning to give it the hearing, or
perusal. But such men should remember that of SOLOMON, He that answers a
matter before he hears it, it is a folly, and shame unto him, Prove. 18. 13. I
desire not that any man should yield his assent to a thing he knows not, for
to do me a pleasure, but that men would consider whether that which I offer,
will impart unto them any clear light in things, and afford them the
infallible rules of virtue, to which it does pretend. For my own part, I am
verily so persuaded by the testimony of the things themselves. Yet because the
thoughts of mortal men are fearful, and their devices uncertain, Wisd. 9.
14. I do hereby cheerfully invite all such unto the trial of it, whom God
has made so apprehensive and judicious, as that they are able to judge of the
Universality, brevity, and Truth of things. Such I entreat, that laying aside
the false glasses of former opinions, they would with free minds, and in open
light behold this small Theater of the world, and not to judge of things
according to what they have formerly had by hearsay, but according to the
things themselves, which we hold forth to be handled and seen. For unless
they do thus, they will cast a cloud, not so much upon the things, as upon
themselves: as he that looks through colored glass, does not color, or
alter the things he sees, but deceives his own sight. Therefore it is a thing
worthy of men's care, that they hinder not themselves by heeding their own
opinions more, then the truth of things. And I think that all discreet persons
will take pleasure in it, if we once attain (according to the privilege which
is common to us all) to look into things without any overseers, and that
learners be not distracted with opinions of things, but have the things
themselves, freely laid before them to see, and handle, and peruse. Neither let
any man suspect that we remove other men's decrees out of the way, to make room
for our own. We detest such kind of vanities. We neither have, nor do intend
any other thing, but only simply to transcribe out of Gods books, Nature, and
Scripture, into a table for our own use, such things as concern this present,
and the future life, according as they present themselves unto us; which if we
do not fitly enough effect, it shall be our failing, and not our fraud. We are
not of such account, that we should think to make Disciples to our selves, yet
daring enough to seek them for Nature, and for God. For this only end have we
endeavored this new Anatome of the Universe, that all such as love truth
better then opinions, might be led away from other books, unto the greatest
book of all: not that we slight all authorities; but because we know, that they
are abused to the hurt and prejudice of the freedom of until there be liberty
of piercing sufficiently into the things themselves. In deed in our first and
second book of Pansophy, we cite some things out of Philosophers, for to
establish the grounds of Pansophy, yet not in it self, but only in their
minds, who being fore-clad with opinions, are to be stripped of them, even by
persuasion of the same men, whom they have hitherto followed as their leaders.
But more rarely afterward, and in matters of great consequence only, we cite
some others, who have heretofore observed the same truths: yet not as Judges,
but as witnesses, from whose testimony it may appear, that whatsoever has
been heretofore rationally concluded by any men, is necessarily coincident
with those things which are wrought out of the bowels of Truth.

Secondly, to the end, that a perfect, and solid judgment may pass upon this
our design, it will be requisite, that all things be survayed from the
beginning to the end. For unless a man understand upon what ground all things
arise, and what coherence they have together, it will be in vain for him to
think to give censure upon it by that which he has snatched here, and there.
For the most easy gradation of things being interrupted, causes a stop, and
difficulty. Every man is able to get up to the top of an high Tower, and to
come down again, if there be steps for him

And lastly, whether I have reached or not, unto that which I have propounded,
yet I earnestly entreat the learned Readers, that they will not suffer me to
fail of my end, which is, that these things may serve to the improvement of
our age. For either I understand nothing at all, or else those things, which I
make offer of, are really such, as may open the eyes of many to take better
order for the studies of learning, and consequently for schools, Churches, and
all mankind. Which shall be the first use of this our work, pertaining to
those that are learned: that being excited by this new draught of true, solid,
and universal learning, they may adventure upon some more perfect pieces then
have yet been seen in learnings treasury. The mark which we have pitched, is
such, that all men's Jerusalem. God, that he might excite them thereunto,
commands the Prophet thus to expostulate with them, This people say, The time
is not yet come, that the Lords house should be built. But is it time for you
to dwell in your fieled houses, and this House lie wast? Now therefore thus
says the Lord of hosts, Consider your ways. Ye have sown much, and bring in
little; ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled
with drink; ye cloth you, but ye are not warm; and he that earneth wages,
puts it into a broken bag. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your
ways, Haggai 1. Hear ye this also O ye, that are Leaders among Christians
in Learning, and Wisdom, for it is even your own case. It is a frequent
saying, This is no time for aspiring unto any higher sort of wisdom, that is
reserved for the future life. And too many there are, that contenting
themselves with these thoughts, set up their rest in a partial, and obscure
knowledge of things, joined with a few private delights, and seek no farther.
But what benefit ensues? Ye have sown much, it is the voice of God himself,
(that is, ye have taken great pains in the polishing of your parts) but you
bring in little: Ye eat, yea, ye devour books, and are not satisfied: Ye
drink of every water you meet withal, and yet are not Matthew. 9. 17.). So the
minds of Children; like new, and pure vessels, not yet filled with vain
apprehensions

And thirdly, our intention is, that this Amphitheater of Gods Wisdom, being
thus raised, should be made common for all mankind, by inviting all Christian
people of what rank, age, sex, or language soever, and bringing them in to
see, and behold what admirable sights and pastime, that ever to be adored
Wisdom of God exhibits unto all men in all times, and places. For every
mothers child that comes into this world, is to be directed to the same end of
Gods glory, and his own eternal bliss: none ought to be excluded, neither
man, nor woman, neither old man, nor child, neither noble, nor ignoble, neither
crafts-man, nor plough-man, etc. For we are all alike, the offspring of God,
Acts 17. 28. And it Psalm. 46. 8. And lastly, all of us are to pass a tedious,
and troublesome life, which breaks, and afflicts the spirit (as SOLOMON
witnesses) so that all have great need of preservatives against vanity, and
refreshings in their weariness, which helps can no where be found, but in the
possession of true wisdom. We therefore desire, and entreat, that learning may
not any longer be confined to the Latin tongue, and imprisoned in Schools, as
has hitherto been practiced to the great prejudice, and contempt both of
vulgar people, and languages: but that it may be communicated unto all Nations
in their own languages, that all men may have occasion of exercising
themselves in such honest, and good things, rather then, as is commonly used,
to weary out themselves with the cares of this life, with ambition,
drunkenness, and other like vain courses, and so to mispend, and lose both
their parts, and lives. By this means also, languages themselves will be
polished, as well as the Arts, and Sciences. To which ends we our selves intend
also, if God so please, to publish these our endeavors both in the Latin, and
in our native tongue. For no man lights a candle to put it Matthew. 5. 25. And
what profit is there in Wisdom, which is hid, and treasure, which is hoarded
up? Ecclesiastious 20. 30. Those therefore that bend their studies to the
seeking of Wisdom, ought to make it their endeavor, that they may herein
follow the steps of Wisdom, which says, Behold, that I have not labored for
my self only, but for all them that seek Wisdom.

And upon this ground we have somewhat altered our title from that which was in
our former work, calling this a Gate, rather then a Door. It was enough that we
called our entrance into the Latin tongue a Door, in this matter the word Gate
seems to drive more nearly at our intentions. For one by one enters in at a
Door, but whole troops through a Gate. A Door is shut as every one is entered
in: but Gates in peaceable Cities, stand always open. And so the study of the
Latin tongue, which we first endeavored to open, is peculiar unto some few;
but the desire of Wisdom is common unto all mankind. Those that will, or are
necessitated thereto, enter in there: but it is the duty of all men living to
come in hither, as we have already made it clear. Therefore let it be an open,
and wide Gate which leads unto Wisdom. Grant O Lord, that we may on
Jerusalem, that the Gates of it may not at all be shut by day, and there may
be no more night there, Revel. 21. v. 25.

Amen.
A DILVCIDATION, ANSWERING CERTAIN OBJECTIONS, MADE AGAINST THE ENDEAVOVRS AND
Means of REFORMATION in Common Learning, expressed in the foregoing Discourse.

By Mr. JOHN AMOS COMENIUS.

JOH. 3. 20, 21. Every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.

But he that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest that they are wrought in God.

LONDON, Printed for MICHAEL SPARK senior, at the Blew Bible in Green Arbor,
1642.

TO THE JUDICIOUS, AND LEARNED READERS, LOVERS of Truth and Light, and
Survayers of this DESIGN, All true happiness in CHRIST our Truth and Light.
IT was a discreet and wise discourse, which the mother of those seven brethren
Martyrs (2 Maccab. 7. 22, 23.) used to them: I cannot tell how you came into my
womb, for I neither gave you breath, nor life; neither was it I, that formed
the Members of every one of you: But the Creator of the world, who formed the
generation of man, and found out the beginning of all things. The like may they
say of the offspring of their minds, who out of a pious disposition to God,
offer up, and sacrifice themselves, and their endeavors to him, to wit, that
themselves are not the Authors of those things, which succeed well, but that
it is God, who has found out all the way of knowledge, and has given it (by
what instruments soever) unto Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved, as
Baruch says, Chap. 3. Verse. 36. And God himself ascribes to himself the
bestowing and conferring of wisdom, for the performance of his own commands,
(Exodus 31. 6.) Now God commands not only when he speaks from heaven, and
expressly declares, what he will have done, as he did to the Prophets: but
also when inwardly he enlightens the mind, or outwardly ministers, and presents
occasions of action (1 King. 17. 4, 9.) such as may be easily observed by any
one, who will but carefully heed, and note the footsteps, and guidance of
Divine Providence in things both great and small. My self (though the least of
all) am not without some experience of the effectual concurrence, and sweet
disposition of all things, by that admirable wisdom of our God: That we must
needs confess every useful apprehension, or invention to proceed from God,
and not from our selves, and thereupon we may solace our selves, though malice
rage, and tear both us and our issue, which we have consecrated to God,
because it is not chiefly our, but Gods cause that is in agitation.

Not many years since occasion was offered me by Gods providence to compose a
work for direction in teaching the Latin tongue, (as other languages also)
more compendiously, according to the true series and order of Things, which by
the persuasion of my friends, and approbation of superiors, I published under
the Title of Linguarum janua (following therein the example of the Irish
Fathers, of the College of Salamanca in Spain, who first gave me the hint
thereof, which being commonly received into Schools with great applause,
encouraged me to intend my thoughts for the framing of a Janua rerum: an
entrance to the knowledge of things themselves. For I thought it not enough to
teach what is called white, black, hot, cold, a plant, a man, an Angel,
Heaven, God, Christ, etc. there is more need of teaching, what those things
are, that the understanding may be rather acquainted with the essence of
things, than with their names; which when I had assayed by some small
endeavors, I was easily invited to the hope of a prosperous success of them.
In the mean while D. PETER LAURENBERG sets out under the Title of General
knowledge, or wisdom.
Pansophia, an Encyclopaedia, or general comprehension of all the arts, which
having viewed with great desire, and expectation, and not finding it answerable
to the amplenesse of the title (for nothing was therein contained of the object
and fountain of true wisdom, which is Christ, nothing of the life to come,
and the way thereto, etc. wherein to be wise is wisdom indeed) I thought it a
fit occasion to supply, what was there wanting: that whatsoever is fit to be
taught, and learned in Christian Schools, might be comprised in one Summary,
and in such a method, which might instill the knowledge of all things into
youth, more suddenly, and soundly, and more suitablely to the intents both of
the present, and the future life. For (to tell you by the way) my intent was to
epitomize those books of God, Nature, Scripture, and man's Conscience, that
what things soever are, they might be all here digested into one continued
series and order, Divine Revelations might be applied to illustrate them
withal, and the common and inbred notions and apprehensions of humane minds
might be referred to their several uses. By this means we intended,

1. To make the holy Scripture more familiar among Christians then formerly it
has been.

2. To put into men's hands a Clavis, or Key, wherewith they might unlocke most
of the greatest mysteries, both in Nature and Scripture.

3. To draw men more and more from the studies and cares of this life, to the
serious thoughts of life eternal, and that by such means, as which those, who
have been privy to the depth of our intentions, have and do still judge may
be profitable for the bettering of men.

There wanted not some (some five years since) who persuaded and urged me to
the publishing of this work, as I had done the former. But in this I being not
so adventurous, as before, nothing more could be obtained of me, than only
for the discovery of men's judgments hereupon to publish the title thereof in
the Frankford Catalogue of such books as were to come forth the next Mart.

Hereupon it came to pass more then once, that this Title of Janua rerum, or
Christian Pansophie, was sold publicly, which soon after I recalled, not
thinking it meet to blow the Trumpet before my self, especially in such
things, wherein delay is necessary: yet being desired by an intimate friend
(one that is piously ardent in his affections to the public good) to
communicate some Idea, or Description of the work in hand, I sent him a
careless draught of that, which I intended afterward to premise in manner of a
preface to the work, which beyond my expectation, and without my knowledge,
was printed at Oxford, (entitled Conatuum Comenianorum praeludia) with a good
intent indeed (that so the Learned might partake of it, and pass their
judgments on it) yet with an event not fully answerable to that good man's
hope. For though many learned and worthy men, forecasting much good from such a
work, encouraged us very much, and still persist to press us, not to
relinquish the design, and some of more excellent spirits, and abilities, do
promise their helping hands, and endeavors. Yet some there were, who thought
us not excusable of strange and unusual rashness for attempting of things so
impossible, and above the reach of humane understanding. And some also, which
is worse, who from some words (used as they thought, not in an orthodoxe sense)
gathered suspicions more than enough, fearing that some poison was mingled, or
some monster lurked under the trimnesse of the method. Lastly, there were some,
who seeing we deferred the publishing (though we had good reason so to do,
lest the birth, which we desired might be vital, should prove abortive, by
coming before the time) thought that we had fastened a cheat upon the world by
promising that which was so much wanting, and pretending it as already near
effected: or else that we had fallen under the burden, and all our promises
were turned into smoke. All which laid together set us on work a fresh to
write that which here thou find (Christian Reader) for the better clearing,
and discovering of our wishes, intentions, and endeavors. This was written by
us, and printed, by the approbation and injunction of the Patrons of our
Churches here (after a serious deliberation thereupon in a late solemn
assembly) not to be made common, but to be communicated to those whom it may
concern. Hence therefore you may know:

1. That our draught of Pansophie is no dream, but a real work.

2. That here lurkes no Monster, but that our intent is to unvaile before all
men's eyes, the true and amiable faces of Things, as they were formed by that
eternal wisdom, and imprinted in Things, that so they may be won, and
instructed to reject those wicked and devilish disguises of false doctrine,
and ill manners. For my purpose was not to coin any new Tenets, nor to burnish
over old errors, but to collect together scattered Truths, both Natural,
Artificial, Moral, and Divine; to digest them in such a continued order (that
there might be no end, but in the end; and so digested to direct, and fit them
for the ready use of Schools, or of any, who would desire to take a
compendious view of the amphitheater of Gods wisdom. When I therefore was
thus minded, did I use lightness? or the things that I purpose, do I purpose
according to the fiesh? as says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 17. If any ill suiting
expression has passed, I wish it were unspoken, for I submit my self and mine
to the Churches judgment. But let wise men judge whether it be fitting to
reject a fair, and well proportioned body for one small spot or blemish. He
that knows all things know, this, that my desires tend to no other end, than
for the kindlings of an universal light in men's minds, which God has made me
to find possible to be effected, by a certain well composed method borrowed
from nature, whereby all the rivulets of humane observations, as also the
greater streams of divine works, and words, are all reduced to their proper
fountains, and again dispersed in their true veins, for the easier deriving
of a more universal knowledge into men's minds than could formerly be compassed
by such means, as have been used. For while prolixe and tedious things are
reduced to brevity, confused things cleared by distinction, obscurity
manifested by light, all things become pervious, and transparent to the
understanding.

Yet here, because the deeper we dive into these things, the more does the
splendour of Gods wisdom dazzle, and the multitudinous variety of his ways,
and works distract us, the judicious Readers, and examiners of this design,
may please to take notice, that we cannot but doubt of attaining so excellent
an end (as is an exact, and lively representation answerable to, and worthy of
the majesty, and dignity of the Universe) unless some do appear to lend us
their helping hands, that else may sink under the burden of such a structure;
which we think may justly be both expected and desired in a thing of common
benefit.

But indeed it is much to be lamented, that men's inconsiderateness should
discover it self so far, as purposely to affront, rail upon, and reproach,
yea even to wound such, as in a friendly way hold forth not a sword, but a
branch of olive, being ready in stead of tumultuous opinion, s to exhibit and
tender something toward more real, and exquisite science. Some examples
hereof our age has been acquainted with, and we our selves have had
experience of it, from such as had small cause so to do. Miserable, and
lamentable! that men cannot remember, what difference uses to be put between
Learning and Arms! Is it not enough, that the world almost, is consumed by the
sword, unless pens also, and tongues be turned to swords? Let Arms bear
that character of wrath, which an angry God imprints upon them, when he sends
them into the world to be like that great and strong wind renting the
mountains, 1 King 19. 11, 12. 13.
and breaking the rocks in pieces with earthquakes, and flames of fire: yet it
is fit, that learning which is the instrument of wisdom, should be stamped
with the the Character of divine presence, which comes in a still small voice,
without tumultuous noise. Neither is there any thing more fitting, than that
wise and pious men, wrapping up their faces, as it were in a mantle, should
with Elias, stand waiting at the entrance of the Cave, to see, what favorable
breath of God may blow from any part. Otherwise, what will the world be the
better for those odious disputations, wherewith it has so long contested?
Wherefore laying aside that preposterous, and too long continued spirit of
contradiction and opposition, let us with common endeavors search out the
ways of Gods wisdom, that so getting a taste of it, as it is sweetly diffused
on every side, we may the more comfortably pass this mortal life, and be
more fitted and prepared for that which is immortal. My desire is not to beg
men's assents to this design, before it be understood, but that affection, and
prejudice may not over-sway reason. I wish it may be examined; but fairly, and
by free and impartial minds: because anticipated thoughts, and respect of men
more than of things themselves, to gether with the humor of defending old
opinions, rather than of searching for the Truth, do keep in bondage, and
enslave even the nimblest wits. I oppose no man, why then should I be opposed?
I declare the means of reconciling those, who are any ways devoted to Truth,
why should any be irreconcilable toward me? Although I confess, -- Monitis
sum minor ipse meis,


I am not able fully to effect what I pretend, yet am I therefore worthy to be
hated? It was not confidence of any extraordinary learning, or strength of
parts which moved me to attempt to describe the bounds of universal wisdom:
but because I know, that that which God has put into my mind, will be most
profitable to the world, I thought that no occasion ought to be lost, for the
inciting of others, who are more able to set about such a great work: so that
I chose rather to venture my self into the view of the world, than to reserve
in mine own breast that, which might be for others encouragement. For seeing
the mark, whereat I aim, is so high, and so to be desired of all mankind, if
I come short of effecting it, I shall deserve pity rather than hatred. It is
great inhumanity to inflict punishment on him, that labors to do good, but
most just, that he who goes along the public road, should enjoy public
security, and that the promoter of the common good, should be partaker of
common safety and protection. But let us proceed to the matter it self, that
we may once more publish our desires, for the flourishing estate of the Church.
I will therefore conclude this Preface in Saint AUGUSTINES words: My speech
shall be directed to thy presence, O my God, to them, who yield those things to
be true, which thy truth continually testifies in my mind. For, for those who
gainsay them, let them rustle as they list, I will endeavor to persuade them
to be quiet, and not to resist thy word, when it approaches to them. Which if
they refuse, and repel me from them, yet I beseech thee, O my God, not to
hold thy peace from me: speak thou the truth in mine hear: for thy word is
so powerful, that I shall send them away blowing on the ground, and raising up
the dust in their own eyes, etc. O Lord God have compassion, and suffer not
this unfeathered foul to be quashed under feet by those who pass by: send
thine Angel to return it to its nest, that it may live till it be able to
fly. (August. lib. 12. Confess. Cap. 16. and 27.)

It has been the endeavor of many worthy men in times past, to collect a
Summary, or general Comprehension of all learning, because they saw well
enough, that the light of the mind is very uncertain, unless the beams of
the Truth of Things be from every side concentred in it. ARISTOTLE himself
says, That a wise man should Know all Things, as far as it is possible: And
that such principles must be laid, by which all demands may be satisfied: and
that he must begin from such things as are best known, and therefore from
Universals, and that we must attain a strong certainty of things, and that not
of any sort, but from their causes; (as JOH. BELLARINUS has gathered out of
ARISTOTLE in his Praxis Scientiarum, lib. 4. Distinct. 1. Number. 1) So that, for
that omniscience which is possible for a man to attain, the Philosopher
requires these three things:

1. Universality of Principles. 2. A true ordered Method. 3. Infallible
certainty of Truth.
According to which rules not only ARISTOTLE himself, and others of the
ancients strived to frame their works, and writings, but also many late
writers (who have composed their Encyclopedias, Polymatheias, Panepistemonas,
Arts Cyclognomicas, Syntaxes Artis mirabilis, Instaurationes magnas,
Transformationes Scientiarum, Theatra Sapientiae humanae, Omniscientias
Christianas, Pansophias, Panangias, Panarchias, Pancosmias, and many other
entitled in the like manner) whose endeavors though they have been all
commendable, yet their success has been diverse, according as their
intentions also were. The purpose of some was to digest into one body all the
variety of learning, which is to be found in Libraries only scattered and
intermingled. Others would do it, but not without choice, some of subtilties,
some of elegancies, some of things for use of life, and some again in a method
more strict, and tied to the things themselves, others have taken more liberty
of discourse according to their own humors. But whatsoever was either
purposed or performed by any of them, yet we may justly apply SENECA'S Speech
unto them all. Our Predecessors have performed many things, but not perfected
them. There is much work still behind, and still will be, and he that shall be
borne a thousand years hence, shall have his turn to add something (Epist.
65.) And why should not others also be heard, who bring any thing that is
beneficial? and we among the rest, who would persuade, that a work might be
composed every way Universal: not only for the use of youth in schools, and
of the learned, but even of all vulgar Christians; that all of them in general
may be instructed in wisdom: even as we have expressed our desires (in that
Praeludium of our Pansophicall endeavors) that a book might be written, which
might be a solid Breviary of Universal learning; A clear light for humane
understanding; An exact and stable rule of Truth; A certain and directive
Register of the affairs of our life; and lastly, an happy ladder toward God
himself. The grounds and reasons whereof, are there so in general unfolded,
that many have consented with us, that no doubt need be made either of the
necessity, or possibility of it: But because some have been jealous, that by
this means divine and humane wisdom would be confounded together, I have
taken occasion to propound these things more distinctly, and upon such a
ground, which should also alter the title of the book. By making this
Inscription. THE TEMPLE OF CHRISTIAN General wisdom.
PANSOPHIE to be erected and framed according to the rules, and laws of
Almighty God the supreme Architect, and to be consecrate to the use of the
Christian Catholic Church, which is already gathered, or which shall
hereafter be gathered out of all Nation, Tribes, People, and Tongues.



And because our present consultation is about a most exact form of Method, it
will be necessary to render a reason, why we would have such a Book
entitled, The Temple of Christian Pansophie? and why we would have it framed
according to the Rules, Laws, and Idea's of God the Supreme Architect? and
lastly, why we would have it consecrate to the use of the Christian Catholic
Church gathered, and to be gathered out of all peoples and tongues? Of every
one in their order.

The Ancient I atines used the word Templum, to signify any open place, whence
there was a fair prospect on every side, as it were Tu-emplum (i. ad intuendum
amplum spatium) a large space for beholding. Whence the word Contemplari (i. to
contemplate) signifies to behold any thing without impediments. In which sense
the word Temple chiefly suiteth to Heaven, because it every way lies open to
our sight, and because God from thence freely beholds all things: as DAVID
says (Psalm. 11. 4. and 33. 13.) The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lords
Throne is in Heaven, his eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men. SO
LUCRETIUS, Lucida coeli Templa.
Heavens bright Temple.


And ENNIUS: Contremuit Templum magnum Jovis Altitonantis.
The mighty Temple shook amain,
Where Thundering Jove on high does reign.


But because the Ancients usually chose the higher places, as hills, and
risings of the ground, which yielded pleasant prospects, to consecrate to the
worship of their Gods, and by erecting of Altars thereon separated them to
sacred uses, which Altars at last they encompassed with walls: it came to pass
that the word Temple began properly to signify a building reared for divine
worship, in which sense it is now chiefly used. Yet it appears by CICERO, that
the Senate House (whither the Senate assembling for consultation, came as it
were, into Gods presence) was graced with the name of a Temple; The
Senate House is the seat, and Temple of public Council, says he: and in
another place (Pro Milone) he calls the Senate House, the Temple of holiness.
The Poet also speaking of the inward recesses, and secrets of the mind (chiefly
in those that are wise) calls them the Temples of the mind; from whence the
mind, as from an high watch-towre, beholds all things, and determines of
them according to that which it discovers in them. Whence LUCRETIUS again
terms the very learning of wise men High-reared Temples, in that commonly
known verse, Sed nil duloius est, been quam munita tenere,
Edita Doctrina Sapientum Templa serena,
Despicere unde queas alios, passimque videre
Errare, atque vias palantes quaerere vitae.


Thus in English: No worldly pleasure may conspire
With this: well fenced to possess
Fair Wisdoms Temple (beauties rare)
High raised on learnings solidnesse;
Thence you may see, how others go astray;
As men bewildred groping for the way.


And this is the first reason, why we have thought fit to entitle this our new
Encyclopaedie, or general comprehension of knowledge, with the name Temple,
because preparation is here made of an universal structure, as it were, from
whence man's mind turning to every side, may with pleasing contemplation look
upon every thing in the world, visible and invisible, temporal and eternal,
so far as they are revealed.

Another reason there is of far higher consideration, which the holy
Scripture it self suggests unto us. Because whatsoever that eternal Wisdom
has styled his Temple, his Habitation, his House, his Tabernacle and
Sanctuary, is all here represented. Now God has called by the name of his
Habitatation,

1. His eternity, Isaiah 57. 15. 2. This world consisting of the Heaven and the
Earth, Esaias 66. 1. 3. The house which was built unto his Name, 1 King. 5. 5. 4.
The humble and contrite heart, Esaias 57. 15. 5. The Church, 1 Timothy 3. 15. 6.
Christ's humanity, in which the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, Coloss.
2. 9. That all which may be here truly represneted is our earnest endeavor.
We will add a third reason also of no small moment. Because there may, and
ought to be the same ends, and uses of this Temple of Christian wisdom, which
were of that material Temple in the old Testament. Now we may observe in the
Scripture a fivefold end, which God had in his appointing of the Tabernacle by
MOSES and the Temple by SOLOMON, which are,

1. That Gods people might be kept in the unity of faith, that is, in the
worship of that one God, by that solemn assembling into one place, which God
himself had chosen.

2. That by hearing the law taught, and beholding the outward grace of the
ceremonies, they might be brought to learn the reasonable and inward worship
of God.

3. That by solemn rehearsal of Gods many favors, they might be incited to
love God, and praise his Name. Thence it is that they were commanded to enter
into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts with praise, and to
bless his Name, Psalm. 100. 4.

4. That they might kindle and nourish mutual concord, and charity among
themselves, as fellow servants of the same God.

5. Lastly, that by this means also they might have their minds the more
erected in hope of the life to come; where God shall be for ever praised in
that great assembly of elect, both Angels and men, before his Throne. Now this
fabric of the Temple of wisdom tends to the very same ends.

1. That all Christians may the easier meet in, and maintain a mutual consent
among themselves in one Catholic and saving faith: being instructed the same
way, upon the same grounds, concerning the same God, and to the same end. For
that holy way of Sion, which is so plain in it self, that even fools cannot
err in it, Esaias 35. 8. is here most plainly taught.

2. That by a rational contemplation, and comparing of Gods words, and works
together, all might learn to observe the greatness of all the works of God,
and how wisely they are made, (Psalm. 104. 24.) to the end, that we who are
Gods Image, may learn to express wisdom in all our actions.

3. Care, as it may, ought to be taken, for those, who desire to behold this
Temple of wisdom, that they may not want helps for the stirring up the like
affection in them, that DAVID had, when the contemplation of Gods works moved
him to say, The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever, the Lord shall rejoice
in his works: I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live, I will sing praise
to my God, while I have my being, (Psalm. 104. v. 31. 33.) 4. Neither is there
any reason why we should despair of greater concord among men, if they could
be brought to a more general consent in their opinions concerning the same
things. For if all men would well consider of this, that they are all directed
to the same end, by the same Creator, and led along in the same common ways
(although there be some variety in particulars) it is likely enough that they
would be more ready to commit their course to this divine Providence, rather
than by fruitless reluctancie to disturb it, which will produce no other
issue, than that at last, whether they will or no, they must be brought into
order in their eternal confusion. 5. Lastly, this Temple of wisdom may be
also fitted for the stirring up both of the hope, and desire of the life to
come, if in this general survey of things it be plainly manifested, how all
things spring out of eternity, and return thither, and consequently that those
who settle their affections here, do nothing else, than catch at a vain shadow.

Thus far have we showed, why this Theater of wisdom may well pass under
the name of a Temple. The next is, why we entitle it not wisdom simply, but
universal wisdom, and Pansophie (according to the Greek.) I will not here
produce examples of others (as of LAURENBER GIUS, and ALSTEDIUS, who commends
five sorts of things to be known, to him that desires to be, and to be
accounted generally wise and knowing Archilog. cap. 1.) Our own ground is
sufficient, which is threefold, taken from the subject of this wisdom, the
object of it, and the manner of teaching it. As for the subject, it has been
the custom of former ages, not to suffer the mysteries of wisdom to be
published in vulgar languages, for every ones understanding, but in strange and
foreign languages (as the Latin and Greek) which must be of purpose learned
for them: by which means wisdom it self was esteemed the peculiar treasure
of such only, as had access unto those fountains: But we claim it as the
public possession granted unto all mankind, which ought to be recovered to
their common use and behoof. And our earnest desire and suit is, even by the
glory of God, that some course may be sought, and discovered, that all in
general, even the meanest sort of people, may be able to behold, and adore the
prints, and footsteps of the goodness of their Creator, expressed even in all
things, which they either see, hear, taste, touch, do, speak, or think. And
this is the first reason, why we call it not (simply) wisdom, but wisdom
general for all men. Concerning the object of wisdom, it has hitherto for
the most part been parted among the learned, one undertaking Philosophy,
another Divinity, a third Physic, and some the Laws, rejecting all other
care, or respect of common Truth. And again, in Philosophy one chooses this
part, another that, to busy their thoughts about, not so much as coming near
the threshold where the others dwell. Whence it comes to pass, that most men's
knowledge is but particular, yea and partial too, which is far worse. For
they must needs sever into parts, that agree not in the whole, and they easily
become the founders of Sects, who understand not how Truth, which differs not
from it self, spreads it self upon the same stock. But we protest to the
world, that neither order the bond, nor truth the soul of things, can be
perfectly known, unless from a general comprehension of all things. The
order or things cannot be perceived by those, that bounding themselves in the
compass of one or two, neglect their coherence one with another. Neither can
he comprehend the full Truth of Things, who observes not, how Truth still
retains its own form in its infinite diffusions. We wish therefore, that the
whole orb of Things and humane knowledge being taken, the true centers of
essences may be found, by an exact measuring of the proportion of all things
among themselves: that so venerable Truth discovering its amiable face to us in
abstract forms, we may be the so oner acquainted with it, when we meet it
concrete in particular Things. And hence may easily be gathered, how little
that divorcing of Divinity from Philosophy, and of Philosophy from Divinity,
which is every where to be found, likes us. For Divines for the most part
think it their duty to intend nothing, but Divinity: and on the other side
Philosophers fix themselves so to the speculation of nature, that they forget
Divinity, yea even God himself. Hence it comes to pass that many Philosophers
through disuse of God, and religion fall into mere Atheism; again, some
Divines loath and detest Philosophy, which is very injurious, as the other is
horribly impious. For God, who is the Author as well of his works, as of his
words, will (as he may well be) be acknowledged and honored in them both. And
he instructs us both by his words, and also by his works, which we here meet
withal in this present life, that he may prepare us for that which is to come.
Therefore he does not only injoyne us to hearken to his voice; but also to
behold his works. That we may therefore reconcile Philosophy to Divinity
(that is, Gods works to his words, or Truth impressed in Things to Truth
expressed in words) and so may make reason subordinate to faith; Our Counsel
is, that among Christians, neither Philosophy, nor Divinity may be taught
severally, but both Omni sapientia.
jointly, which is Pansophie. For this will be our perfect wisdom, to be wise
for the life to come, and to avoid folly here: to have an eye to God, and the
life to come, and yet to observe, how we are here encircled with his Majesty
diffused over all.

But some may say (and some have already vented such speeches against us) By
this your Pansophie, Divinity will be confounded with Philosophy, Divine
wisdom with humane, and a medley will be made of heaven and earth I answer,
1. Seeing they are not confounded in learned men's understandings (there being
many excellent spirits, that are deeply insighted both in sacred and profane
knowledge) what reason have we to fear, that they will be confounded in
books? 2. Distinct things may be so distinctly handled, that though they go
together, they may still remain inconfused. 3. How comes it to pass that they
are not confounded in the sacred Scripture, seeing it does not only declare
heavenly and eternal things, but oftentimes falls upon things of this life?
You will say, But this is subordinately to the life to come. True; and this is
the same, which we would have done in this book of Pansophie, that all things
contained in the world may be put in subordination to heaven, and that all
humane knowledge may be subservient to that, which is according to Godliness.
And this for a threefold end. 1. That the children of God may not be ignorant
of those things, which the wise men of this world so much admire, and set up
their rest upon: and that worldlings themselves may be unsettled from them,
when they see, that though we understand them, yet we find other more
excellent things, which are stronger attractives of our affections. 2 Because
the works of Nature, and the various mysteries, which lie couched therein, are
not intended so much for wicked and profane men, that they only should feed on
such dainties: but rather that they should delight the children of God, Angels
and Men, for whom this so admirable Theater of his power, wisdom, and
goodness is discovered. Let us therefore make use of this our right, and
rather sit ourselves in this Theater in a rational contemplation of all
things, than surrendering our places to suffer it wholly to be possessed by such
as are profane. Lastly, we would have all things ordered together, and
respectively subordinated one to the other, that by all inferior things the
mind may by degrees be raised to all things more sublime. For it is certain,
that there can be no commodious assent unto the height of things, but by
degrees; and this is as certain that all Natural things (as also artificial)
are as Alphabeticall elements to the children of God, whereby they are prepared
for to read, and understand better the higher dictates of the Law of God. Which
DAVID shows, where he tells us, that much is to be learned out of the
ordinary course of Heaven and Nature, but much more by the prescript of divine
Law, Psalm. 19. The third reason why we would have the word Pansophie used, is
drawn from the more ample way of handling things, than can be used either in
Philosophy, or Divinity several by themselves. For that which ARISTOTLE
required in a wise man, (who should as much as is possible, know all things)
the same is necessary in Pansophie. I mean universality of Principles, A
continual and well ordered series of Things without interruption, from the
beginning to the end, and infallibility of Truth. The Principles which are here
laid, are truly universal, whereby all demands may be satisfied, Sense,
Reason, and Divine Revelation. The method, which is here taught, is as easy as
may be, beginnnig from things most certainly known, until it end in those
which are most obscure, yet with such a perpetual gradation, as is without
either gap, or breach. Whence the third issues of it self, I mean, certainty
of knowledge, and Truth, whereby the learner, being always in the light, sees
assuredly, that he goes forward, and not backward, without either stay or
doubt, and knowing he knows, that he knows, and that he is not deceived.

Seeing therefore that we teach, how all men may be altogether wise in All
things ((...)) why may not that which Omnes circa omnia, omnino.
we teach be called, and esteemed Pansophie?

But what is the reason, why we call it not only Pansophie, but Christian
Pansophie? First, because they only can frame Pansophie, or reap fruit by it,
who are furnished with sufficient principles, such as are Sense, Reason, and
Faith in Divine Revelations. But Christians only have the world in their eyes,
Gods word in their mouths, and his Spirit in their hearts, according to the
promise, Isaiah, 59. 21. And therefore AUGUSTINE argues very strongly, that
only Christianity is true Philosophy, (lib. 3. contra Academ. cap. 19.)
Secondly, all pious and faithful Christians, even the simplest of them, in as
much as they are good Christians, are possessed of this Pansophie. Because they
relish heaven more than earth, eternal things more than temporary, and do
possess Christ, (in whom all the treasures of wisdom are hid) mystically
indeed, yet truly in like manner, as every seed does truly contain in it self
the whole tree, or herb, with their fruit. But perhaps this might have rather
been called Humane Pansophie, because (according to the intention Doubt. 1.
of it, which is universal instruction, leading from universal, and easy
Principles to those things which are more obscure) it ought not to be
appropriated to Christians only, but so disposed, that all men may partake of
it, that (if God so please) it may be a means of enlightening, and convincing
the minds of unbeleevers: As also to clear our selves from all imputations of
inconsiderateness in attempting 2.
things above the Sphere of humane abilities; Though indeed we urge nothing but
humane, that is, things possible, and due to man. To conclude, whether this or
the former Title pleases Solut.
best, it mattereth not much: for our part, we thought fit to use the word
Pansophie for this only end, because we desired to sharpen men's appetites
toward wisdom, that All men in All things may altogether seek to fill their
minds with Truths and realities, rather than with the smoke of fancies and
opinions. Laying aside this consideration, we care not though it be called
Aristosophie, or Chrestosophie, (i. excellent and choice wisdom, or about
such things as are excellent) yea even ignorance: For we are very willing with
SOCRATES to profess, that we know this only, that we know nothing: As the
Apostle says, If any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing
yet as he ought to know, 1. Corinthians. 8. 2.

The next thing we are to speak of is, why we say, that the structure of this
Temple of Pansophie, is framed according to the Rules, Laws, and Idea's of God
the supreme Architect? The Reason is at hand: Because we follow in the general
dimensions, the several parts, their situation and use, the very pattern which
Gods wisdom it self did before delineate. First to MOSES for the erecting of
the Tabernacle: then for SOLOMON in the building of the Temple: Lastly, to
EZEKIEL for the glorious restoration of the Temple, that was demolished. For
first God speaks thus to MOSES, Exodus 25. 8, 9. Let them make me a Sanctuary
that I may dwell amongst them, according to all that I show thee, etc. and
verse. 40. And look that thou make them after the pattern which was showed
thee in the Mount. Again, God sent (by the Prophet Nathan, as is probably
held) the pattern of the Temple, and all the parts thereof to David, who
delivering it to Solomon, charged him not to depart from the form thereof,
protesting thus to him, 1 Chronicles. 28. 19. All this the Lord made me understand
in writing by his hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern. Lastly,
he showed to Ezekiel the form of the mystical Temple; that is, of the new
Church under Christ, with express charge to be attentive in the receiving of
it, and to declare it all unto the house of Israel, Ezekiel. 40. 4. Now we must
observe, that every latter draught was more full and perfect than the former.
Not as if God gained skill by continuance of time, and practice for the mending
of his works (as is common with men in building, that their latter devises
please them more, and are better than the former) but because he would therein
prefigure the State of the Church, as it was to improve with time. For it was
for our sakes, not his own, that these things were figured out to us. The
Tabernacle of Moses therefore consisted of three parts, the Court, the
Sanctuary, and the Holy of Holies, as appears in the 40. Chapter of Exodus The
Temple of Solomon contained without the inward, and last space, (the Holy of
Holies) three outward spaces, the Court of the Common people, the Court of the
Levites, and the Court of the Priests: and lastly, the Holy of Holies, which
might be entered by the high Priest only once every year. The structure of
Ezekiels Temple consisted of the same number of parts (though of more walls and
gates) but of a diverse situation. For Solomon's Temple was built upon Mount
Moriah, but only on the plain thereof: but the outward parts of Ezekiels
Temple, were situate on the side of the hill, every more inward Court being
raised certain degrees above the other, so that the Temple it self, that is,
the Holy of Holies being pleasantly seated on the very top, yielded every way a
most refulgent splendour. Which diverse structures of Gods dwelling places
amongst men, did typifie the various increases, and enlargements of God Church,
as well in regard of its spreading among many peoples, and tongues, as also in
respect of knowledge, which was to be increased according to the Churches ages.
For the Church has its ages as well as the world, infancy, youth, middle age,
declining, and old age: which last, as it brings decay of bodily strength, so
also it perfects the vigor of the mind: in regard that then the temper of the
body declines to dryness, whereby the animal spirits become more fixed, and
the mind more sedate, and quiet in its motions. Seeing therefore it is very
fitting, that the Church of the New Testament should be of ripe understanding,
especially now the world is drawing toward old age, (1 Cor. 14. 20. Ephesians. 4.
14.) We have therefore borrowed for this Temple of Christian wisdom the form
of the draught of the last Temple given to EZEKIEL: distinguishing the whole
work of Pansophie into seven several parts, in every one whereof several
things may be presented to the beholders view, that so men's minds being raised
from baser things to those which are more sublime, may at last attain to its
Holy of Holies, that is, Gods blessed eternity. But how this may be drawn from
the form of EZEKIEL's Temple, remains now to be explained.

I. First, EZEKIEL declares briefly, and in general, what he saw in the
visions of God; to wit, 1. A City situate upon a Mountain, the place of that
most magnificent Temple, which he was about to describe, chap. 40. verse. 2. 2.
A man standing by him provided with measures, and rules, who should show him
all those things, exhorting him to listen, and behold, and to set his heart
upon those things which should be showed him, verse. 3. 4. 3. The compass of
the Temple, or the outward wall, with the measures of its breadth, and height,
v. 5.

II. Next he describes the gate of the Temple, which was only one in the
whole compass of the Temple, and that on the Eastern side thereof, v. 6. to
the 17.

III. The first or outward Court, which was called the Court of the people,
because all the people might come into it, is described, v. 17. to the 28.
which had three gates, through which the ascent was by seven steps unto the
pavement of that Court, v. 6, 19, 22, 26.

IV. Then he describes the middle Court, where the holy instruments were
kept, and preparation made by the Levites, as was fitting, for legal
sacrifices, and oblations: the description whereof may be found from the 28.
verse. to the 44. And we must observe, that it was higher by eight steps, than
the first Court, as appears by the Description of the Gates thereof, v. 31,
34, 35.

V. Then follows the inward Court, wherein was the Altar of burnt-offerings,
with other necessaries for making of atonement; wherefore it is called, the
Court of the Priests. The Description thereof is, v. 44. to 48.

VI. The Temple it self, called the Holy of Holies (chap. 41. v. 4.) is
described, from the 48. verse. of the 40. chap. to the end of the 41. chap. and
the situation thereof upon the very top of the Hill, chap. 43. v. 12.
Therefore in the Description of the Porch thereof (chap. 40. v. 49.) mention is
made of steps, yet without any express number, how many there were. In the
Temple it self, or House of the Lord, nothing is mentioned besides the
Cherubims, and Palme-trees (chap. 41. verse. 20, 21.) and the Table which is
before the Lord, (v. 24.)

VII. Lastly, after the setting down of the Ordinances for Gods worship in
this new Temple (chap. 43, and 44.) and the form of political government
among Gods people (chap. 45, and 46.) he comes at the beginning of the 47.
chap. to describe the river of waters issuing out of Gods Temple through those
three Courts, and from a small beginning rising to a very great depth, and how
from thence it was diffused over all the earth, giving life and fruitfulness
unto all things.

Now if we form the divisions of the structure of wisdoms Temple according
to this pattern, it will also consist of seven parts.

I. In the first part shall be generally handled by way of preface, 1. What
manner of book this Pansophie is, and what end, and use there is thereof. 2.
What are those helps which Gods goodness has supplied us withal, for the
furnishing of universal wisdom. 3. What is the general form thereof.

II. In stead of the Eastern gate, we will have a Systeme, and collection of
such common Notions, as are of themselves obvious to all men's understandings.
For our mind being the image of that high God, from whom all things derive
their essence, is composed of harmony, and furnished with inbred rules, for the
discerning of Truth from falsehood. And these Rules are certain common Truths,
which need no proof, because as soon as they are uttered, every sound
understanding does admit them freely. But other particular things, which are
subject to any question, are examined by these, and either allowed or rejected.
Now a sufficient store of such common and obvious notions will prove a truly
sacred Gate for our easy, safe, and speedy entrance into the knowledge of all
things.

III. The Court of the people suggesteth to us the third part of Pansophie,
which treats of such things, as fall under our senses, the visible world, with
all visible creatures therein contained; and such things as are by Nature
effected in them, or with relation to them. For the Gate of common Notions
opens hither immediately, that common truth being already tasted of, may be
farther sought, and found in such things as are near at hand, and may be
seen, and felt: which is a very easy and certain step to the discovery of
things more remote. And here men shall learn the knowledge of natural life,
and of such things, as are requisite for the prolongation of it, that so they
may have skill, and ability to preserve, and draw it out by natural means, as
long as their destiny suffers them.

IV. The middle Court shall be paralleld by the fourth part of Pansophie, which
explaines such things as are subject to reason, or the Intellectual world,
that is, all humane works, which are, and may be effected by wit and Art, and
all things which humane understanding reaches unto. The nearest entrance
hither is out of the Court of Nature: for all that our art and wisdom can
effect, is either to imitate the course, or amend the defects, or supply the
wants of Nature. In this Theater men may learn wherein they excel brute
beasts, to wit, in the right use of Reason, in prudent disposing all sorts of
affairs, and in the benefit of speech. In a word, here they may find how to
live a true rational life, as well in respect of themselves, and other men
with whom they converse, as of all other creatures also.

V. The innermost Court supplies us with the fifth part of Pansophie, wherein
men shall be brought acquainted with themselves in their inward man, and taught
to lead a divine, and spiritual life. For here man shall behold that part of
himself, wherein he most resembled God, that is, the absolute freedom of his
will. So as being beforehand stored with provision from his senses, for the
knowing of all things, and the light of reason to direct his judgment in them,
he might now like a King of unbounded power, freely embrace, or refuse things
according as they were represented, or concealed by the senses, and either
approved or rejected by reason. For this is the greatest height of dignity,
that creatures can be raised unto by their Creator: as God expresses in his
consultation concerning the creation of man: Let us make man according to our
Image, who may have dominion over the fish and birds, etc. that is, that he may
do according to his own will. For it was requisite for the perfection of the
world, that besides elements, stones, plants, and brute beasts, and such like,
which have their actions assigned them by nature, and act only according to
the force of their natural instincts, there should be also some more noble
Creature, who should be master of his own, both actions and inclinations.
Besides it makes much for the glory of God, whose wisdom discovers it self
far more conspicuously in overruling such creatures, as are acted by their
own wills, than in such as are by nature determined to their actions. And
hereby God prepared a way to manifest the depth of his goodness in rewarding
voluntary obedience, of his justice in punishing of sin, and lastly of his
clemency in restoring this most excellent Creature after his fall. Therefore
he is the adequate object of the full discovery of Gods wisdom, MAN: who
bethinking himself of his former height of dignity, will the easier
acknowledge the grosnesse of his fall into that bottomless gulf of misery:
from whence there was no other recovery, or restitution to his former dignity,
unless God himself should condescend to tie him to himself by a stronger
bond, in a new and eternal union.

In this part of Pansophie therefore, Man shall behold those great and profound
mysteries, which are hid from the eyes of the world, of his internal
Generation, Degeneration, and Regeneration: together, with those admirable
secrets of God, in man's creation, redemption, and sanctification, in Gods
governing him, or giving him over, in his salvation or damnation: and shall
learn (being drawn out of the depth of perdition, and restored to God, and to
himself) hereafter to deny himself, that is, by resigning his liberty of will
unto God, to commit himself to the rule, and guidance of his spirit: in a
word, to adhere close unto God, and to live a true spiritual life. Therefore
the content of this part of Pansophie shall be that knowledge, which is
described (Prove. 30. 3.) to be the wisdom of the holy, and (Psalm. 51. 6.)
hidden wisdom, and is made to be the abstract sum of all wisdom (Job 28.
28. Eccles. 12. 13.) which is hidden from the wisemen of this world (Matthew. 11.
25.) that so it may plainly appear, how far the knowledge conferred upon the
Church, excels all the learning of Philosophers, and how high Gods house is
raised upon the top of other mountains, Isaiah, 2. 2.

VI. The last, and most secret part of the Temple, called the Holy of Holies,
shall be here answered by the sixth part of Pansophie, wherein the GOD of GODS
shall be seen in habiting his own eternity: so far I mean, as in this life
he discovers himself, and his infinite and eternal Majesty, and Glory, to
such as he predestinates, and invites unto the eternal fruition of himself.
In this Theater, Man by beholding his own, and the worlds original draught,
shall find how truly all Gods works do represent him, though in their several
manner and measure: and yet how every thing, that can be found in the creature,
either good, beautiful, pleasant, or desirable, is in God in an infinitely
more excellent manner. The fruit whereof will be, that being ravished with the
taste, and sweetness of that eternal bliss, he may know how to do nothing
else, but even to melt in delight and love of his God, and to yield himself
wholly to be his habitation, that so passing comfortably this present life, he
may by the gate of death enter into eternity.

VII. Lastly, from that River of waters issuing out of the Temple, and
diffusing themselves over all the earth, we will derive the last part of
Pansophie, which unfolds the right use of the waters of true wisdom. I am not
ignorant that by those waters proceeding out of EZEKIELS Temple, the course of
the Gospel is disciphered to us, which was but still and calm at the
beginning, afterward by degrees receiving such large increases, as it was not
to be stayed by any opposition, like a river, that breaks over, and washes
away all dammes, and ramparts, that can be raised against it. Yet it plainly
appears also, that wisdom is compared to waters, The law of the wise is a
fountain of life, says SOLOMON, (Prove. 13. 14 and 14. 27.) and chap. 18. 4.
The words of a man's mouth, are as deep waters, and the welspring of wisdom
as a flowing brook. The Son of SYRACH brings in wisdom, thus speaking of
her self, I came out as a brook from a river, and as a conduit into a garden;
I said, I will water my best garden, and will water abundantly my garden-bed:
and lo my brook became a river, and my river became a Sea, Ecclesiast. 24.
30, 31. Therefore in this last part of Pansophie it will be our work to
consider of, and design such fit channels, as may convey these waters abroad
on every side, that so the vast Commons of humane affairs, together with the
private garden-plots of every ones soul, and the whole Paradise of the Church
may be therewith watered.

And this among others is the reason, why we said, this Temple of wisdom was
to be consecrate to Christ's Catholic Church gathered, and to be gathered out
of all nations, to wit, 1. Because she as a mother may justly challenge from
her children, whatsoever they are able to invent, or do for her honor and
comfort.

2. Christ says, Matthew. 5. 19. Men do not light a candle, that they may set it
under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, that it may give light to all that
are in the house. Now this light of universal wisdom) which puts every thing
in subordination to its true end) is as it were Gods candle, and must therefore
be set up in his house, which is the Church, that it may give light to all.

3. This house of the living God, the Church (as it is called, 1 Timothy 3. 15.)
is built after the same pattern, according to which this Temple of wisdom is
reared: so that by beholding hereof, she may be advanced much in knowledge of
her self. According to to that in Cantic. 1. 8. If thou know not thy self, O
thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock,
etc. For here by these continually deduced footsteps of Things, the Church is
guided the right way to the discovery of her own, and her eternal Spouses
comeliness. And seeing that the manifold wisdom of God is made known unto
Angels by the Church (Ephesians. 3. 10.) we ought also to take special care, that
the Church in contemplation of her self, Angels, and of God, may have all
advantages supplied her, for her promoting in the knowledge of this manifold
wisdom of God.

4. But chiefly because God has foretold, that the Glory of his new Temple
(the Church of the New Testament) should be most conspicuous in the last times,
and has promised a large affluence of light and blessing to it. For thus has
God declared by the Prophets, ISAIAH and MICAH, and by diverse others, at
several times, and twice in the same words, that he might manifest the
certainty of his decree: It shall come to pass in the last days, that the
mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow
unto it, etc. (Isaiah 2. 2. Micah 4. 1.) And it shall come to pass in that
day, that the mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow
with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters, and a fountain
shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of the
choice Cedars (Joel 3. 18.) For living waters shall go out from Jerusalem,
half of them toward the former Sea, and half of them toward the hinder Sea,
in Summer, and in winter shall it be. And the Lord shall be King over all the
earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one. Now because these
things remain yet to be most certainly fulfilled, men should be stirred up, by
all means possible, not only to behold, but also to promote, as much as in
them lies, this glory of the house of God, to enlarge the Churches bounds, and
to derive such rivulets from Gods stream, as may water even dry places, which
were never yet moystned with this heavenly dew, that at last all with one
accord, standing (as it were) upon a Sea of glass with harpes of God in their
hands, might begin to sing the song of MOSES the servant of the Lord, and the
song of the Lamb saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear
thee O Lord, and glorify thy Name? for thou only art holy, for all Nations
shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments are made manifest,
Revel. 15. 2, 3, 4.

And now I believe it appears sufficiently what manner of book it is, that
we would have compiled, and what are our reasons for the urging of it. Let
therefore all fear, and suspicion of confounding sacred and profane things
together be utterly banished: For first, all things are pure to those that are
pure (Tit. 1. 15.) The gold and silver which was gotten away from those impure
Egyptians, did not at all defile the Israelites, or the Tabernacle. Again here
is no confounding of things together, but provision is made of remedies against
those confusions, which so much distract men's minds by a distinct and graduall
knowledge of all things, which may, or ought, or are worthy to be known.
Therefore first we declare such general and known truths, as are clear of
themselves by the testimony of common sense: next such things as fall under the
outward senses to be seen, or felt without any error, or mistake: afterward
such things, as are rationally, and certainly deduced from sensual
apprehensions, but with an application of their truth also to sensible Objects:
Lastly, those things, which Divine revelation imparts to us, and faith only
receives; but so, that Sense and Reason may also bear record unto God, and the
truth of things invisible revealed to us, may be acknowledged in the analogy
of such things as are visible, that the voice of eternal Truth uttered from
all sorts of things, may be found to agree in one eternal harmony. This
confusion therefore, being so harmonious, is nothing else but perfect order.

But they object, Christ taught no such matter, he only declared the way of
Salvation. Answ. 1. Why do you then by your selves, or by others take care to
have your children instructed in the meaner things of this life, as in
Arithmeticke, Logic, and other sorts of learning? 2. Be it so, that Christ
taught not these things, it is most certain he forbad them not, but rather
signifies unto us, that we ought not to be ignorant of them, in that he so
often borrowes from things natural, and artificial, both the occasion, and
the manner of unfolding spiritual mysteries; thereby declaring to us, that
there is such proportion between things visible and invisible, that these
cannot be easier understood than in reference unto them. Therefore they would
be wiser than Christ himself, who restraining themselves only to spiritual,
and heavenly things, reject from the study of Christianity, all such things,
wherewith (as they term them) worldlings employ themselves. If indeed they do
so employ themselves, and settle their rest hereupon, yet we (always mindful
of our plus ultra) will not be employed therein, but employ them as steps and
degrees for our more easy and speedy attaining unto things of an higher
value. 3. If Christ taught not such things himself, yet he has taught them by
others: and if not then, yet now at least he teaches them. For, he is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, (Heb. 13. 8.) to wit, that wisdom of God by
which all things are made, (Prove. 8. v. 22, etc.) Therefore whatsoever
wisdom, light, or order, is any where, or in any time, or person to be found,
it all comes from him, and is derived out of his treasury. When he came into
the world, his work was not to speed forward these things of smaller moment,
but that he might give his life a ransom for many (Matthew. 20. 28.) Therefore
he committed the writing of the Gospels, and constituting of outward order in
his Church unto his Disciples care, promising to be with them, and their
successors, even unto the end of the world. Therefore this work, if
profitable, or what ever good thing otherwise shall at any time break forth,
even unto the worlds end, must be all accounted to proceed from Christ, who
makes every thing beautiful in his time, Eccles. 3. 11.

Now if our design for the rearing up this Temple of Universal wisdom do go
forward, it will be meet for us to consider,

1. That (according to DAVID'S instructions to SOLOMON) the Temple to be builded
must be great, and magnificall, of fame and glory throughout all countries (1.
Chron. 2. 5.) Therefore workmen should be sought out, who are worthy of such
employment, and who are skillful to find out every thing that is thereto
necessary, 2 Chronicles. 2. 7. 14.

2. SOLOMON'S Temple was builded by Gods command upon the mount Moriah, which
signifies the vision of God: and the groundwork of wisdoms Temple shall
likewise be the vision of God; that is, all visible things shall be used as
Perspectives for our minds, to behold the invisible Ruler of the universe, with
his power, wisdom, and goodness, richly mantling over all things.

3. The matter whereof SOLOMON'S Temple was built, was of three sorts, stones,
wood, and metals: the stones were all of great value, as marble, and precious
stones: the woods were fat, and odoriferous, as the fur and the cedar: the
metals most pure, as gold perfectly refined. The matter of wisdoms Temple
shall be supplied out of the store of three sorts of principles, Sense, Reason,
and divine Revelation; of which Sense resembles the nature of stones in the
grossness of its perception; Reason for its ever flouring quality, may well
be compared to the spreading of trees: and Gods word, which remains for ever,
is like unto pure and incorruptible gold.

4. Of the stones were made the walls; of the woods seeling for to cover the
walls: and the seeling was over-laid with plates of gold, (2 Chr n. 3. 5, 6,
7.) Moreover, the marble floor there of; (2 Chr. 3. 6.) was over-laid with
gold, (1 King. 6. 30.) but the sacred vessels, the Altar, the Table, the
Candlestickes, the Lamps, the Censers, all were made of most pure gold, (2 Chronicles. 4 19, etc.) So the foundation, and walls of wisdoms Temple shall be
reared only of such Truths, as are palpable and evident to the sense, to
which reason shall supply the causes, why every thing must needs be so, as it
is: and lastly, the luster of divine testimony shall thereto be added, that
truth may every where retain its native majesty. But the sacred furniture
hereof, which has reference to the mysteries of faith, and salvation, shall be
the most pure gold of the Oracles of God.

5. SOLOMON'S Temple was built of stones, that were hewed perfectly aforehand,
so that there were neither hammer, nor axe, nor any iron tool heard, while it
was in building, (1 King. 6. 7.) So in the building of wisdoms Temple, it
will be very unseemly, to have the noise of disputes, and brawles heard; it is
more fitting, that it should be reared of Truth already squared; that is, not
of such tenets, and opinions, as are promiscuously taken upon trust, and when
they come to be laid in the building must then be new hewed, and squared to fit
them for the understanding, and to bring them to some similitude of Truth; but
such as being exactly wrought in the shop of Principles, come forth without any
crackes, ruggedness, or other inequality, so that being applied, they fit
fully on every side, with things going before, with, and after them. By this
only means can Truth be settled in the light, and recovered from contradiction.

6. The parts of that material Temple were of most exact proportion, and
therefore in the story of the building thereof, you may find every where
mention made of numbers, and measures, (1 King. 6.) And the Angel, which was to
imforme the Prophet concerning the building of the mystical Temple, came
provided of a line of flax, and a measuring reed (Ezekiel. 40. 3.) In like
manner, in this Temple of wisdom all things must be reduced to such an
universal Symmetrie, that the wandering thoughts of our minds may be contained
in their just, certain, and immovable bounds.

7. There were added artificial ornaments by graving, and embossing of
Cherubims, Palme-trees, and Flowers, (1 King. 6. 29.) Answerable thereunto this
Temple of wisdom must be framed in an apt method, and elegant style, that so
the outward palate may be therewith delighted, as much as may be.

8. All things contained in the compass of that Temple were holy, (for the
outward wall thereof only, was to separate the sacred from that which was
profane) Ezekiel. 41. 20. So let every thing that comes into the content of
wisdoms Temple be holy, erther in it self, or else in reference to sacred
uses, I mean, as a step for our easier finding, and attaining our ends, which
are Gods glory, and our eternal bliss in him, to which all things, both great
and small, every one in their several order are here directed.

9. And as God for the encouragement of those who did reedifie the ruined
Temple of Jerusalem, promised them abundance of blessings together with his
presence, and assistance, (Hagg. 1. and 2.) the same may the builders of
wisdoms Temple be confident of, according to that promise of Wisdom from
above, I love those that love me, and I will fill their treasures, (Prove. 8.
17, 21.)

10. Lastly, according as when the builders laid the foundation of that
material Temple, the Priests and Levites stood in their apparel with
Trumpets, and Cimbals to praise the Lord, and all the people shouted with a
great shout, while they praised the Lord: (Ezra 3. 10, 11.) So it will well
become all good Christians that are any way privy to this pious design, to add
their good desires, and prayers, while the foundation of Wisdoms Temple is in
laying, that this work begun in Gods name and fear may happily go forward
unto his praise, saying, Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth,
and for evermore, from the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same
the Lords Name be praised, (Psalm. 113. 2, 3.)

THE SEVERAL TITLES OF THE SEVEN PARTS OF THE TEMLPE OF CHRISTIAN PANSOPHIE
I. THE THRESHOLD OF THE TEMPLE OF WISDOM.
Representing unto us the fore-parts, and outward structure thereof, together
with the necessity, possibility, and easy way both of the rearing thereof, and
entering thereunto.

II. THE GATE OF THE TEMPLE OF WISEDDOE.
Through which lies the first and readiest entrance unto the true knowledge of
all things, which are to be known.

OR,

WISDOMS GENERAL STORE:

Wherein the general kinds of all things, together with their frames, and laws
are represented to us: and that chiefly by the help of such common Notions, as
are inbred in humane minds, and being once illustrated by examples are easily
admitted thereinto, without farther proof. From which notwithstanding all the
rivulets of particular knowledge are to be derived, as from the original
fountain of truth.

III. THE OUTWARD COURT OF THE TEMPLE OF WISDOM.
Wherein the visible world, and all things therein contained, with the course
of Nature incident thereto, are laid before our view: to the end that man may
learn to know the fabric, and necessaries of his natural life, and with
reverence to magnify the wisdom of his Creator.

IV. THE MIDDLE COURT OF THE TEMPLE OF WISDOM.
Wherein the reasonable creature MAN, stands forth to be seen with all things,
that either are or may be effected by humane understanding. To the end that Man
may be brought to know the abilities of his own mind, and to use them to the
honor of God, who has endued him therewith, and so to live A TRUE RATIONAL
LIFE.

V. THE INNERMOST COURT OF THE TEMPLE OF WISDOM.
Wherein the more inward part of MAN, by which he approaches nearest unto God,
is unveiled: to wit, his FREE, AND UNLIMITED WILL, together with the horrible
abuse thereof, and the mischief ensuing thereupon, as also our recovery into
the state of Salvation by Christ both God and Man. To the end that Man being
restored to God, and to himself, may begin to lead a divine and spiritual
life.

VI. THE LAST AND MOST SECRET PART OF THE TEMPLE OF WISDOM, CALLED THE HOLY
OF HOLIES.
Wherein is to be seen, as far as he has pleased to reveal himself, the
high, and ever-to-be-adored Governor of the world, Lord of Angels and Men,
JEHOVAH, God of Gods, reigning in his eternal Kingdom, and shining with
infinite Majesty and Glory. To the end that Man, being brought nearer unto God
by all things, and by most ardent love closing with him the center of eternal
bliss, and rest, may yield up himself, as an holy, and living Temple for him
to dwell in for ever.

VII. THE FOUNTAIN OF LIVING WATERS OF THE TEMPLE OF WISDOM, THAT IS,
Of the use of true WISDOM, flowing out of the Temple of God: to wit, that it
may stream forth, and run over all the earth, to fill it with the knowledge
of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea.

PSALM. 43. 3. Send forth thy LIGHT, and thy TRUTH, O Lord, that they may lead
me, and bring me unto thine Holy Hill.
THE GREAT Art of Teaching.
DIDACTICK, SHOWING THE UNIVERSAL MEANS TO TEACH ALL MEN ALL THINGS: OR, A
certain and exquisite way for the erecting of such Schools in all the Cities,
Towns, and Villages of any particular Christian Kingdom, as that all young
ones, whether males or females, none excepted, may be brought up in learning,
polished in manners, and grounded in piety, and so may be prepared in their
minority for all things concerning this present life, and that which is to come.
The GROUNDS of which design are drawn from the very nature of the things
themselves.

The TRUTH is cleared by instances answerable hereunto in Mechanicke Arts.

The ORDER is by assigning taskes for Years, Months, Days, and Hours.

And lastly, an easy and certain WAY is declared of happily efecting these
things.

THE MAINE DRIFT OF THIS OUR DIDACTICK SHALL BE
To discover a way, whereby

Teachers may teach less, and learners may learn more.

Schools may have less noise, tediousness, and fruitless toil, but more
ease, delight, and real profit.

The Christian State less darkness, confusion and dissentions, but more
light, order, peace and tranquillity.

PSALM. 67. 1, 2. God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause his face to
shine upon us, and be merciful unto us.

That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all Nations.


THE TITLES OF THE SEVERAL CHAPTERS OF THE GREAT DIDACTICK.
In the Preface thereof, Magistrates, Parents, and Schoolmasters are
earnestly exhorted to the diligent education of children by diverse reasons and
examples. The work it self contains as follows.

Chap. I. Wherein is proved, that Man is the last, most absolute, and excellent
of all creatures. II. That man's chief good, and last end is not here, but in
another life. III. That this life is but a preparation for life eternal. IV.
That there are 3. degrees of this preparation for eternity; 1. to know; 2. to
order and govern; 3. to direct to Gods Glory, as our selves, so all other
things respectively. V. That there are some seeds of those three (Knowledge,
Morality, and Religion) naturally implanted in us. VI. That it is requisite for
to make a perfect man, to for me him anew. VII. That this forming of man may
best be effected while he is young, and very hardly afterward. Chap. VIII.
That youth may best be formed, or instructed in company (...) of another: and
that Schools are necessary. IX. That youth of both sexes should be put to
School. X. That instruction in Schools should be universal, and that all
should be taught in every thing. XI. That we have hitherto wanted perfect
Schools. XII. That Schools may be reformed, and brought to a better pass.
XIII. That the groundworke of reforming Schools is the observing of an
accurate order in all things. XIV. That this accurate order in Schools, must be
borrowed from nature. Therefore XV. Are declared out of Nature the grounds of
the prolongation of life And XVI. Such things as are generally requisite, both
for teaching, and learning: that is, such a certain way both of Teaching, and
Learning, that there cannot but follow a good effect. XVII. The grounds of
easiness both in Teaching, and Learning. XVIII. The grounds of solidity both
in teaching and learning. Chap. XIX. The grounds of the most compendious, and
speedy way of teaching, where among other things is cleared, how one
Schoolmasters may suffice for a Quantovis discipulorum, etc.
very great number of Scholars. XX. Is set down the true method of the
several Sciences. XXI. The method of the Arts. XXII. The method of Languages.
XXIII. The method of Morality. XXIV. The method of instilling Piety. XXV. It is
plainly demonstrated, that, (if we would have such a reformation of Schools,
as is according to the rules of true Christianity) Profane, and Heathen Authors
must be either quite rejected, or used with more choice and caution. XXVI. Is
set down a fourefold division of Schools, according to the age, and ripeness
of youth. XXVII. The description of the first School under the Mother. XXVIII.
The manner of the next School in teaching to read their Mother tongue. XXIX. A
draught of the Latin School. XXX. Of the University. XXXI. Of an universal,
and very accurate order of Schools. XXXII. Of such things as are necessarily
required for the bringing of this universal method into practice.
FINIS.

